










































Automatic Collocation Suggestion in Academic Writing


Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, pages 115–119,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Collocation Suggestion in Academic Writing 

 
Jian-Cheng Wu1 Yu-Chia Chang1,* Teruko Mitamura2 Jason S. Chang1 

1 National Tsing Hua University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan 

{wujc86, richtrf, jason.jschang} 
@gmail.com 

2 Carnegie Mellon University  
Pittsburgh, United States            
teruko@cs.cmu.edu 

 

Abstract 

In recent years, collocation has been 
widely acknowledged as an essential 
characteristic to distinguish native speak-
ers from non-native speakers. Research 
on academic writing has also shown that 
collocations are not only common but 
serve a particularly important discourse 
function within the academic community. 
In our study, we propose a machine 
learning approach to implementing an 
online collocation writing assistant. We 
use a data-driven classifier to provide 
collocation suggestions to improve word 
choices, based on the result of classifica-
tion. The system generates and ranks 
suggestions to assist learners’ collocation 
usages in their academic writing with sat-
isfactory results. * 

1 Introduction 

The notion of collocation has been widely dis-
cussed in the field of language teaching for dec-
ades. It has been shown that collocation, a suc-
cessive common usage of words in a chain, is 
important in helping language learners achieve 
native-like fluency. In the field of English for 
Academic Purpose, more and more researchers 
are also recognizing this important feature in 
academic writing. It is often argued that colloca-
tion can influence the effectiveness of a piece of 
writing and the lack of such knowledge might 
cause cumulative loss of precision (Howarth, 
1998). 

Many researchers have discussed the function 
of collocations in the highly conventionalized 
and specialized writing used within academia. 
Research also identified noticeable increases in 
the quantity and quality of collocational usage by 
                                                             
* Corresponding author: Yu-chia Chang (Email address: 
richtrf@gmail.com) 

native speakers (Howarth, 1998). Granger (1998) 
reported that learners underuse native-like collo-
cations and overuse atypical word combinations. 
This disparity in collocation usage between na-
tive and non-native speakers is clear and should 
receive more attention from the language tech-
nology community. 

To tackle such word usage problems, tradi-
tional language technology often employs a da-
tabase of the learners' common errors that are 
manually tagged by teachers or specialists (e.g. 
Shei and Pain, 2000; Liu, 2002). Such system 
then identifies errors via string or pattern match-
ing and offer only pre-stored suggestions. Com-
piling the database is time-consuming and not 
easily maintainable, and the usefulness is limited 
by the manual collection of pre-stored sugges-
tions. Therefore, it is beneficial if a system can 
mainly use untagged data from a corpus contain-
ing correct language usages rather than the error-
tagged data from a learner corpus. A large corpus 
of correct language usages is more readily avail-
able and useful than a small labeled corpus of 
incorrect language usages. 

For this suggestion task, the large corpus not 
only provides us with a rich set of common col-
locations but also provides the context within 
which these collocations appear. Intuitively, we 
can take account of such context of collocation to 
generate more suitable suggestions. Contextual 
information in this sense often entails more lin-
guistic clues to provide suggestions within sen-
tences or paragraph. However, the contextual 
information is messy and complex and thus has 
long been overlooked or ignored. To date, most 
fashionable suggestion methods still rely upon 
the linguistic components within collocations as 
well as the linguistic relationship between mis-
used words and their correct counterparts (Chang 
et al., 2008; Liu, 2009).  

In contrast to other research, we employ con-
textual information to automate suggestions for 
verb-noun lexical collocation. Verb-noun collo-
cations are recognized as presenting the most 

115



challenge to students (Howarth, 1996; Liu, 
2002). More specifically, in this preliminary 
study we start by focusing on the word choice of 
verbs in collocations which are considered as the 
most difficult ones for learners to master (Liu, 
2002; Chang, 2008). The experiment confirms 
that our collocation writing assistant proves the 
feasibility of using machine learning methods to 
automatically prompt learners with collocation 
suggestions in academic writing.  

2 Collocation Checking and Suggestion 

This study aims to develop a web service, Collo-
cation Inspector (shown in Figure 1) that accepts 
sentences as input and generates the related can-
didates for learners. 

In this paper, we focus on automatically pro-
viding academic collocation suggestions when 
users are writing up their abstracts. After an ab-
stract is submitted, the system extracts linguistic 
features from the user’s text for machine learning 
model. By using a corpus of published academic 
texts, we hope to match contextual linguistic 
clues from users’ text to help elicit the most rele-
vant suggestions. We now formally state the 
problem that we are addressing: 

Problem Statement: Given a sentence S writ-
ten by a learner and a reference corpus RC, our 
goal is to output a set of most probable sugges-
tion candidates c1, c2, ... , cm. For this, we train a 
classifier MC to map the context (represented as 
feature set f1, f2, ..., fn) of each sentence in RC to 
the collocations. At run-time, we predict these 
collocations for S as suggestions. 

2.1 Academic Collocation Checker Train-
ing Procedures 

Sentence Parsing and Collocation Extraction: 
We start by collecting a large number of ab-
stracts from the Web to develop a reference cor-
pus for collocation suggestion. And we continue 
to identify collocations in each sentence for the 
subsequent processing. 

Collocation extraction is an essential step in 
preprocessing data. We only expect to extract the 
collocation which comprises components having 
a syntactic relationship with one another. How-
ever, this extraction task can be complicated. 
Take the following scholarly sentence from the 
reference corpus as an example (example (1)): 

(1) We introduce a novel method 
for learning to find documents 
on the web. 

 
Figure 1. The interface for the collocation suggestion  

nsubj (introduce-2, We-1) 
det (method-5, a-3) 
amod (method-5, novel-4) 
dobj (introduce-2, method-5) 
prepc_for (introduce-2, learning-7) 
aux (find-9, to-8) 
… … 

Figure 2. Dependency parsing of Example (1) 
 

Traditionally, through part-of-speech tagging, 
we can obtain a tagged sentence as follows (ex-
ample (2)). We can observe that the desired col-
location “introduce method”, conforming to 
“VERB+NOUN” relationship, exists within the 
sentence. However, the distance between these 
two words is often flexible, not necessarily rigid. 
Heuristically writing patterns to extract such verb 
and noun might not be effective. The patterns 
between them can be tremendously varied. In 
addition, some verbs and nouns are adjacent, but 
they might be intervened by clause and thus have 
no syntactic relation with one another (e.g. “pro-
pose model” in example (3)). 

(2) We/PRP  introduce/VB  a/DT  
novel/JJ  method/NN  for/IN  
learning/VBG  to/TO  find/VB  
documents/NNS  on/IN  the/DT  
web/NN  ./.  

(3) We proposed that the web-
based model would be more ef-
fective than corpus-based one. 

A natural language parser can facilitate the ex-
traction of the target type of collocations. Such 
parser is a program that works out the grammati-
cal structure of sentences, for instance, by identi-
fying which group of words go together or which 

116



word is the subject or object of a verb. In our 
study, we take advantage of a dependency parser, 
Stanford Parser, which extracts typed dependen-
cies for certain grammatical relations (shown in 
Figure 2). Within the parsed sentence of example 
(1), we can notice that the extracted dependency 
“dobj (introduce-2, method-4)” meets the crite-
rion. 
 
Using a Classifier for the Suggestion task: A 
classifier is a function generally to take a set of 
attributes as an input and to provide a tagged 
class as an output. The basic way to build a clas-
sifier is to derive a regression formula from a set 
of tagged examples. And this trained classifier 
can thus make predication and assign a tag to any 
input data. 

The suggestion task in this study will be seen 
as a classification problem. We treat the colloca-
tion extracted from each sentence as the class tag 
(see examples in Table 1). Hopefully, the system 
can learn the rules between tagged classes (i.e. 
collocations) and example sentences (i.e. schol-
arly sentences) and can predict which collocation 
is the most appropriate one given attributes ex-
tracted from the sentences. 

Another advantage of using a classifier to 
automate suggestion is to provide alternatives 
with regard to the similar attributes shared by 
sentences. In Table 1, we can observe that these 
collocations exhibit a similar discourse function 
and can thus become interchangeable in these 
sentences. Therefore, based on the outputs along 
with the probability from the classifier, we can 
provide more than one adequate suggestions. 
 
Feature Selection for Machine Learning: In 
the final stage of training, we build a statistical 
machine-learning model. For our task, we can 
use a supervised method to automatically learn 
the relationship between collocations and exam-
ple sentences. 
We choose Maximum Entropy (ME) as our train-
ing algorithm to build a collocation suggestion 
classifier. One advantage of an ME classifier is 
that in addition to assigning a classification it can 
provide the probability of each assignment. The 
ME framework estimates probabilities based on 
the principle of making as few assumptions as 
possible. Such constraints are derived from the 
training data, expressing relationships between 
features and outcomes.  

Moreover, an effective feature selection can 
increase the precision of machine learning. In our 
study, we employ the contextual features which  

Table 1. Example sentences and class tags (colloca-
tions) 
Example Sentence  Class tag   

We introduce a novel method for learning 
to find documents on the web.  introduce  

We presented a method of improving Japa-
nese dependency parsing by using large-
scale statistical information.  

present  

In this paper, we will describe a method of 
identifying the syntactic role of antece-
dents, which consists of two phases  

describe  

In this paper, we suggest a method that 
automatically constructs an NE tagged cor-
pus from the web to be used for learning of 
NER systems.  

suggest  

 
consist of two elements, the head and the ngram 
of context words: 
 

Head: Each collocation comprises two parts, 
collocate and head. For example, in a given verb-
noun collocation, the verb is the collocate as well 
as the target for which we provide suggestions; 
the noun serves as the head of collocation and 
convey the essential meaning of the collocation. 
We use the head as a feature to condition the 
classifier to generate candidates relevant to a 
given head. 

 
Ngram: We use the context words around the 

target collocation by considering the correspond-
ing unigrams and bigrams words within the sen-
tence. Moreover, to ensure the relevance, those 
context words, before and after the punctuation 
marks enclosing the collocation in question, will 
be excluded. We use the parsed sentence from 
previous step (example (2)) to show the extracted 
context features1 (example (4)): 

(4) CN=method UniV_L=we 
UniV_R=a UniV_R=novel UniN_L=a 
UniN_L=novel UniN_R=for 
UniN_R=learn BiV_R=a_novel 
BiN_L=a_novel BiN_R=for_learn 
BiV_I=we_a BiN_I=novel_for  

                                                             
1 CN refers to the head within collocation. Uni and Bi indi-
cate the unigram and bigram context words of window size 
two respectively. V and N differentiate the contexts related 
to verb or noun. The ending alphabets L, R, I show the posi-
tion of the words in context, L = left, R = right, and I = in 
between. 

117



2.2 Automatic Collocation Suggestion at 
Run-time 

After the ME classifier is automatically trained, 
the model is used to find out the best collocation 
suggestion. Figure 3 shows the algorithm of pro-
ducing suggestions for a given sentence. The 
input is a learner’s sentence in an abstract, along 
with an ME model trained from the reference 
corpus.  

In Step (1) of the algorithm, we parse the sen-
tence for data preprocessing. Based on the parser 
output, we extract the collocation from a given 
sentence as well as generate features sets in Step 
(2) and (3). After that in Step (4), with the 
trained machine-learning model, we obtain a set 
of likely collocates with probability as predicted 
by the ME model. In Step (5), SuggestionFilter 
singles out the valid collocation and returns the 
best collocation suggestion as output in Step (6). 
For example, if a learner inputs the sentence like 
Example (5), the features and output candidates 
are shown in Table 2. 

(5) There are many investiga-
tions about wireless network 
communication, especially it is 
important to add Internet 
transfer calculation speeds.  

3 Experiment 

From an online research database, CiteSeer, we 
have collected a corpus of 20,306 unique ab-
stracts, which contained 95,650 sentences. To 
train a Maximum Entropy classifier, 46,255 col-
locations are extracted and 790 verbal collocates 
are identified as tagged classes for collocation 
suggestions. We tested the classifier on scholarly 
sentences in place of authentic student writings 
which were not available at the time of this pilot 
study. We extracted 364 collocations among 600 
randomly selected sentences as the held out test 
data not overlapping with the training set. To 
automate the evaluation, we blank out the verb 
collocates within these sentences and treat these 
verbs directly as the only correct suggestions in 
question, although two or more suggestions may 
be interchangeable or at least appropriate. In this 
sense, our evaluation is an underestimate of the 
performance of the proposed method. 
   While evaluating the quality of the suggestions 
provided by our system, we used the mean recip-
rocal rank (MRR) of the first relevant sugges-
tions returned so as to assess whether the sugges-
tion list contains an answer and how far up the 
answer is in the list as a quality metric of the sys-  

Procedure CollocationSuggestion(sent, MEmodel)   
(1)   parsedSen = Parsing(sent) 
(2)   extractedColl = CollocationExtraction(parsedSent) 
(3)   features = AssignFeature(ParsedSent)   
(4)   probCollection = MEprob(features, MEmodel)    
(5)   candidate = SuggestionFilter(probCollection) 
(6)   Return candidate  
Figure 3. Collocation Suggestion at Run-time 

 
Table 2. An example from learner’s sentence 
Extracted 
Collocation Features 

Ranked 
Candidates 

add speed 

CN=speed 
UniV_L=important 
UniV_L=to 
UniV_R=internet 
UniV_R=transfer 
UniN_L=transfer 
UniN_L=calculation 
BiV_L=important_to 
BiV_R=internet_transfer 
BiN_L=transfer_calcula-
tion 
BiV_I=to_intenet 

improve 
increase 
determine 
maintain 
… … 

 
Table 3. MRR for different feature sets 
Feature Sets Included In Classifier MRR  
Features of HEAD 0.407 
Features of CONTEXT 0.469 
Features of HEAD+CONTEXT 0.518 
 
tem output. Table 3 shows that the best MRR of 
our prototype system is 0.518. The results indi-
cate that on average users could easily find an-
swers (exactly reproduction of the blanked out 
collocates) in the first two to three ranking of 
suggestions. It is very likely that we get a much 
higher MMR value if we would go through the 
lists and evaluate each suggestion by hand. 
Moreover, in Table 3, we can further notice that 
contextual features are quite informative in com-
parison with the baseline feature set containing 
merely the feature of HEAD. Also the integrated 
feature set of HEAD and CONTEXT together 
achieves a more satisfactory suggestion result. 

4 Conclusion 
Many avenues exist for future research that are 
important for improving the proposed method. 
For example, we need to carry out the experi-
ment on authentic learners’ texts. We will con-
duct a user study to investigate whether our sys-
tem would improve a learner’s writing in a real 
setting. Additionally, adding classifier features 
based on the translation of misused words in 
learners’ text could be beneficial  (Chang et al., 

118



2008). The translation can help to resolve preva-
lent collocation misuses influenced by a learner's 
native language. Yet another direction of this 
research is to investigate if our methodology is 
applicable to other types of collocations, such as 
AN and PN in addition to VN dealt with in this 
paper. 

In summary, we have presented an unsuper-
vised method for suggesting collocations based 
on a corpus of abstracts collected from the Web. 
The method involves selecting features from the 
reference corpus of the scholarly texts. Then a 
classifier is automatically trained to determine 
the most probable collocation candidates with 
regard to the given context. The preliminary re-
sults show that it is beneficial to use classifiers 
for identifying and ranking collocation sugges-
tions based on the context features.  

Reference 
Y. Chang, J. Chang, H. Chen, and H. Liou. 2008. An 

automatic collocation writing assistant for Taiwan-
ese EFL learners: A case of corpus-based NLP 
technology. Computer Assisted Language Learn-
ing, 21(3), pages 283-299. 

S. Granger. 1998. Prefabricated patterns in advanced 
EFL writing: collocations and formulae. In Cowie, 
A. (ed.) Phraseology: theory, analysis and applica-
tions. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pages 145-
160. 

P. Howarth. 1996. Phraseology in English Academic 
Writing. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag. 

P. Howarth. 1998. The phraseology of learner’s aca-
demic writing. In Cowie, A. (ed.) Phraseology: 
theory, analysis and applications. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford, pages 161-186. 

D. Hawking and N. Craswell. 2002. Overview of the 
TREC-2001 Web track. In Proceedings of the 10th 
Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2001), pages 25-
31. 

L. E. Liu. 2002. A corpus-based lexical semantic in-
vestigation of verb-noun miscollocations in Taiwan 
learners’ English. Unpublished master’s thesis, 
Tamkang University, Taipei, January. 

A. L. Liu, D. Wible, and N. L. Tsao. 2009. Automated 
suggestions for miscollocations. In Proceedings of 
the Fourth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for 
Building Educational Applications, pages 47-50. 

C. C. Shei and H. Pain. 2000. An ESL writer’s collo-
cational aid. Computer Assisted Language Learn-
ing, 13, pages 167-182. 

119


