










































Demonstration of a Prototype for a Conversational Companion for Reminiscing about Images


Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations, pages 72–77,
Uppsala, Sweden, 13 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Demonstration of a prototype for a Conversational Companion for  
reminiscing about images 

 
Yorick Wilks 
IHMC, Florida 

ywilks@ihmc.us 

Roberta Catizone 
University of Sheffield, UK 

r.catizone@dcs.shef.ac.uk 
Alexiei Dingli 

University of Malta, Malta 
alexiei.dingli@um.edu.mt 

Weiwei Cheng 
University of Sheffield, UK 

w.cheng@dcs.shef.ac.uk 
 

Abstract 

This paper describes an initial prototype demonstrator 
of a Companion, designed as a platform for novel 
approaches to the following:  1) The use of Informa-
tion Extraction (IE) techniques to extract the content 
of incoming dialogue utterances after an Automatic 
Speech Recognition (ASR) phase, 2) The conversion 
of the input to Resource Descriptor Format (RDF)  to 
allow the generation of new facts from existing ones, 
under the control of a Dialogue Manger (DM), that 
also has access to stored knowledge and to open 
knowledge accessed in real time from the web, all in 
RDF form, 3) A DM implemented as a stack and net-
work virtual machine that models mixed initiative in 
dialogue control, and 4) A tuned dialogue act detector 
based on corpus evidence. The prototype platform 
was evaluated, and we describe this briefly; it is also 
designed to support more extensive forms of emotion 
detection carried by both speech and lexical content, 
as well as extended forms of machine learning. 

1. Introduction 
This demonstrator Senior Companion (SC) was 
built during the initial phase of the Companions 
project and  aims to change the way we think 
about the relationships of people to computers 
and the internet by developing a virtual conver-
sational 'Companion that will be an agent or 
'presence' that stays with the user for long peri-
ods of time, developing a relationship and 'know-
ing its owners’ preferences and wishes. The 
Companion communicates with the user primar-
ily through speech, but also using other tech-
nologies such as touch screens and sensors. 

This paper describes the functionality and system 
modules of the Senior Companion, one of two 
initial prototypes built in the first two years of 
the project. The SC provides a multimodal inter-
face for eliciting, retrieving and inferring per-
sonal information from elderly users by means of 
conversation about their photographs. The Com-
panion, through conversation, elicits life memo-

ries and reminiscences, often prompted by dis-
cussion of their photographs; the aim is that the 
Companion should come to know a great deal 
about its user, their tastes, likes, dislikes, emo-
tional reactions etc, through long periods of con-
versation. It is assumed that most life informa-
tion will soon be stored on the internet (as in the 
Memories for Life project: 
http://www.memoriesforlife.org/) and we have 
linked the SC directly to photo inventories in 
Facebook (see below). The overall aim of the SC 
project (not yet achieved) is to produce a coher-
ent life narrative for its user from conversations 
about personal photos, although its short-term 
goals, reported here, are to assist, amuse and en-
tertain the user.  

The technical content of the project is to use a 
number of types of machine learning  (ML) to 
achieve these ends in original ways, initially us-
ing a methodology developed in earlier research: 
first, by means of an Information Extraction (IE) 
approach to deriving content from user input ut-
terances; secondly, using a training method for 
attaching Dialogue Acts to these utterance and, 
lastly, using a specific type of dialogue manager 
(DM) that uses Dialogue Action Forms  (DAF) 
to determine the context of any utterance. A 
stack of these DAFs is the virtual machine that 
models the ongoing dialogue by means of shared 
user and Companion initiative and generates ap-
propriate responses. In this description of the 
demo, we shall: 

• describe the current SC prototype’s func-
tionality; 

• set out its architecture and modules, fo-
cusing on the Natural Language Under-
standing module and the Dialogue Man-
ager. 

A mini-version of the demo running in real time 
can be seen at:  URL   

72



http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Xx5hgjD-Mw 

2. The Senior Companion System 
The Senior Companion prototype (Wilks, 2010)  
was designed to make a rapid advance in the first 
two years of the project so as to be basis for a 
second round of prototypes embodying more 
advanced ML. This strategy was deliberately 
chosen to avoid a well-known problem with ex-
perimental AI systems: that a whole project is 
spent in design so that a prototype never emerges 
until the very end, but which is then never fully 
evaluated and, most importantly, nothing is ever 
built on the experience obtained in its construc-
tion. The central function of the SC is engaging 
the user in discussion about their photographs: 
where and when they were taken, details about 
the people in them and their relationship to the 
user and each other.  

Once a photo is loaded, it is processed with face 
recognition software to identify any faces in it. 
The recognition software, OpenCV, provides 
positional information by identifying the face 
coordinates and this information is exploited in 
the Dialogue Manager by making explicit refer-
ence to the position of people in the photograph 
(the person on the left, right, center, etc.) as well 
as recognizing when there are groups of people. 
The system discusses properties of the photo as 
well as properties and relationships of the people 
in the photos.  
 
The news reading feature adds an interesting ac-
companiment to the photo domain and demon-
strates the ability of the system to handle more 
than one kind of application at a time, and news 
has, of course, an unconstrained vocabulary. The 
following is a fairly typical example of its cur-
rent capacity, depending of course on the images 
loaded, and comes from the middle part of a 
sample dialogue generated by the system when 
discussing a group photo from a vacation in Zan-
zibar, and after the system had already stored, 
from an earlier conversation, that the user has a 
daughter Zoe (using researchers’ children to 
avoid any problems): 
 
SC: What is your relationship to the doctor? 
User: There is no relationship. 
SC: Please tell me how you know the doctor 
U: Uh, he's a friend. 
SC: How old was the doctor when this photo was 
taken? 
U: I'm not sure but I think about 30. 

SC: How do you know Octavia? 
U: She's my daughter. 
SC: Aha! I see. Octavia's sister is Zoe. 
SC: How old was your daughter Octavia when 
this photo was taken? 
U: Octavia was 19 years old. 
SC: What was the occasion of this photo? 
U: This was another family holiday. 
SC: Where was this photo taken? 
U: This photo was taken in Tanzania. 
SC: have you ever been to Zanzibar? 
U: Yes, I have. 
SC: Great place, I hope you saw the beaches. 
When was this photo taken? 
U: last year. 
 
It is a key feature of the SC that it can make sim-
ple inferences from family relationships it al-
ready knows (e.g. that daughters of the same par-
ent are siblings) and that it can access real-time 
information about places to show that it has some 
knowledge of what is being talked about, in this 
case the beaches on Zanzibar, and how this is 
done is discussed below. This real time access to 
unconstrained place information on the internet 
is an attempt to break out of classic AI systems 
that only know the budget of facts they have 
been primed with. 
 
This basic system provides the components for 
future development of the SC, as well as its main 
use as a device to generate more conversation 
data for machine learning research in the future. 
Key features of the SC are listed below followed 
by a description of the system architecture and 
modules. The SC: 

• Contains a visually appealing multi-
modal interface with a character avatar 
to mediate the system’s functionality to 
the user. 

• Interacts with the user using multiple 
modalities – speech and touch. 

• Includes face detection software for 
identifying the position of faces in the 
photos. 

• Accepts pre-annotated (XML) photo in-
ventories as a means for creating richer 
dialogues more quickly.  

• Engages in conversation with the user 
about topics within the photo domain: 
when and where the photo was taken, 
discussion of the people in the photo in-
cluding their relationships to the user. 

• Reads news from three categories: poli-
tics, business and sports. 

73



• Tells jokes taken from an internet-based  
joke website. 

• Retains all user input for reference in re-
peat user sessions, in addition to the 
knowledge base that has been updated by 
the Dialogue Manager on the basis of 
what was said. 

• Contains a fully integrated Knowledge 
Base for maintaining user information 
including: 

o Ontological information which 
is exploited by the Dialogue 
Manager and provides domain-
specific relations between fun-
damental concepts.  

o A mechanism for storing infor-
mation in a triple store (Subject-
Predicate-Object) - the RDF 
Semantic Web format - for han-
dling unexpected user input that 
falls outside of the photo do-
main, e.g. arbitrary locations in 
which photos might have been 
taken. 

o A reasoning module for reason-
ing over the Knowledge Base 
and world knowledge obtained 
in RDF format from the internet; 
the SC is thus a primitive Se-
mantic Web device (see 
refernce8, 2008) 

• Contains basic photo management capa-
bility allowing the user, in conversation, 
to select photos as well as display a set 
of photos with a particular feature. 

 

 
Figure 1: The Senior Companion Interface 

 

3. System Architecture 
 
In this section we will review the components of 
the SC architecture. As can be seen from Figure 
2, the architecture contains three abstract level 
components – Connectors, Input Handlers and 
Application Services –together with the Dialogue 
Manager and the Natural Language Understander 
(NLU). 

 
 

Figure 2: Senior Companion system architecture 
 
Connectors form a communication bridge be-
tween the core system and external applications. 
The external application refers to any modules or 
systems which provide a specific set of function-
alities that might be changed in the future. There 
is one connector for each external application. It 
hides the underlying complex communication 
protocol details and provides a general interface 
for the main system to use. This abstraction de-
couples the connection of external and internal 
modules and makes changing and adding new 
external modules easier. At this moment, there 
are two connectors in the system – Napier Inter-
face Connector and CrazyTalk Avatar Connec-
tor. Both of them are using network sockets to 
send/receive messages. 
 
Input Handlers are a set of modules for process-
ing messages according to message types. Each 
handler deals with a category of messages where 
categories are coarse-grained and could include 
one or more message types. The handlers sepa-
rate the code handling inputs into different places 
and make the code easier to locate and change. 
Three handlers have been implemented in the 
Senior Companion system – Setup Handler, 
Dragon Events Handler and General Handler. 
The Setup Handler is responsible for loading the 
photo annotations if any, performing face detec-
tion if no annotation file is associated with the 
photo and checking the Knowledge Base in case 

74



the photo being processed has been discussed in 
earlier sessions. Dragon Event Handler deals 
with dragon speech recognition commands sent 
from the interface while the General Handler 
processes user utterances and photo change 
events of the interface. 
 
Application Services are a group of internal 
modules which provide interfaces for the Dia-
logue Action Forms (DAF) to use. It has an easy-
to-use high-level interface for general DAF de-
signers to code associated tests and actions as 
well as a low level interface for advanced DAFs. 
It also provides the communication link between 
DAFs and the internal system and enables DAFs 
to access system functionalities. Following is a 
brief summary of modules grouped into Applica-
tion Services. 
 
News Feeders are a set of RSS Feeders for fetch-
ing news from the internet. Three different news 
feeders have been implemented for fetching 
news from BBC website Sports, Politics and 
Business channels. There is also a Jokes Feeder 
to fetch Jokes from internet in a similar way. 
During the conversation, the user can request 
news about particular topics and the SC simply 
reads the news downloaded through the feeds. 
 
The DAF Repository is a list of DAFs loaded 
from files generated by the DAF Editor.  
 
The Natural Language Generation (NLG) mod-
ule is responsible for randomly selecting a sys-
tem utterance from a template. An optional vari-
able can be passed when calling methods on this 
module. The variable will be used to replace spe-
cial symbols in the text template if applicable.  
 
Session Knowledge is the place where global 
information for a particular running session is 
stored. For example, the name of the user who is 
running the session, the list of photos being dis-
cussed in this session and the list of user utter-
ances etc. 
 
The Knowledge Base is the data store of persis-
tent knowledge. It is implemented as an RDF 
triplestore using a Jena implementation. The tri-
plestore API is a layer built upon a traditional 
relational database. The application can 
save/retrieve information as RDF triples rather 
than table records. The structure of knowledge 
represented in RDF triples is discussed later. 
 

The Reasoner is used to perform inference on 
existing knowledge in the Knowledge Base (see 
example in next section). 
 
The Output Manager deals with sending mes-
sages to external applications. It has been im-
plemented in a publisher/subscriber fashion. 
There are three different channels in the system: 
the text channel, the interface command channel 
and the avatar command channel. Those chan-
nels could be subscribed to by any connectors 
and handled respectively.  

4. Dialogue understanding and inference 
Every utterance is passed through the Natural 
Language Understanding (NLU) module for 
processing. This module uses a set of well-
established natural language processing tools 
such as those found in the GATE (Cunningham, 
et al., 1997) system. The basic processes carried 
out by GATE are: tokenizing, sentence splitting, 
POS tagging, parsing and Named Entity Recog-
nition. These components have been further en-
hanced for the SC system by adding 1) new and 
improved gazetteers including family relations 
and 2) accompanying extraction rules .The 
Named Entity (NE) recognizer is a key part of 
the NLU module and recognizes the significant 
entities required to process dialogue in the photo 
domain: PERSON NAMES, LOCATION 
NAMES, FAMILY RELATIONS and DATES. 
Although GATE recognizes basic entities, more 
complex entities are not handled. Apart from the 
gazetteers mentioned earlier and the hundreds of 
extraction rules already present in GATE, about 
20 new extraction rules using the JAPE rule lan-
guage were also developed for the SC module. 
These included rules which identify complex 
dates, family relationships, negations and other 
information related to the SC domain. The fol-
lowing is an example of a simple rule used to 
identify relationship in utterances such as “Mary 
is my sister”: 
 
Macro: RELATIONSHIP_IDENTIFIER 
( 
({To-
ken.category=="PRP$"}|{Token.category=="PR
P"}|{Lookup.majorType=="person_first"}):pers
on2 
({Token.string=="is"}) 
({Token.string=="my"}):person1  
({Lookup.minorType=="Relationship"}):relation
ship) 

75



Using this rule with the example mentioned ear-
lier, the rule interprets person1 as referring to the 
speaker so, if the name of the user speaking is 
John (which was known from previous conversa-
tions), it is utilized. Person 2 is then the name of 
the person mentioned, i.e. Mary. This name is 
recognised by using the gazetteers we have in the 
system (which contain about 40,000 first names). 
The relationship is once again identified using 
the almost 800 unique relationships added to the 
gazetteer.  With this information, the NLU mod-
ule identifies Information Extraction patterns in 
the dialogue that represent significant content 
with respect to a user's life and photos. 
  
The information obtained (such as Mary=sister-
of John) is passed to the Dialogue Manager 
(DM) and then stored in the knowledge base 
(KB). The DM filters what to include and ex-
clude from the KB. Given, in the example above, 
that Mary is the sister of John, the NLU knows 
that sister is a relationship between two people 
and is a key relationship. However, the NLU also 
discovers syntactical information such as the fact 
the both Mary and John are nouns. Even though 
this information is important, it is too low level 
to be of any use by the SC with respect to the 
user, i.e. the user is not interested in the parts-of-
speech of a word. Thus, this information is dis-
carded by the DM and not stored in the KB. The 
NLU module also identifies a Dialogue Act Tag 
for each user utterance based on the DAMSL set 
of DA tags and prior work done jointly with the 
University of Albany (Webb et al., 2008). 
 
The KB is a long-term store of information 
which makes it possible for the SC to retrieve 
information stored between different sessions. 
The information can be accessed anytime it is 
needed by simply invoking the relevant calls. 
The structure of the data in the database is an 
RDF triple, and the KB is more commonly re-
ferred to as a triple store. In mathematical terms, 
a triple store is nothing more than a large data-
base of interconnected graphs. Each triple is 
made up of a subject, a predicate and an object. 
So, if we took the previous example, Mary sister-
of John; Mary would be the subject, sister-of 
would be the predicate and John would be the 
object. The inference engine is an important part 
of the system because it allows us to discover 
new facts beyond what is elicited from the con-
versation with the user.  
 
 

Uncle Inference Rule:   
(?a sisterOf ?b), 
(?x sonOf ?a), 
(?b gender male) -> (?b uncleOf ?x)   
 
Triples: 
(Mary  sisterOf  John) 
(Tom   sonOf   Mary) 
 
Triples produced automatically by ANNIE (the 
semantic tagger): 
(John  gender   male) 
 
Inference: 
(Mary  sisterOf  John) 
(Tom   sonOf   Mary) 
(John  gender   male)  
-> 
 (John uncleOf Tom) 
 
This kind of inference is already used by the SC 
and we have about 50 inference rules aimed at 
producing new data on the relationships domain. 
This combination of triple store, inference engine 
and inference rules makes a system which is 
weak but powerful enough to mimic human rea-
soning in this domain and thus simulate basic 
intelligence in the SC. For our prototype, we are 
using the JENA Semantic Web Framework for 
the inference engine together with a MySQL da-
tabase as the knowledge base. However, this sys-
tem of family relationships is not enough to 
cover all the possible topics which can crop up 
during a conversation and, in such circum-
stances, the DM switches to an open-world 
model and instructs the NLU to seek further in-
formation online.  

5. The Hybrid-world approach 
When the DM requests further information on a 
particular topic, the NLU first checks with the 
KB whether the topic is about something known. 
At this stage, we have to keep in mind that any 
topic requested by the DM should be already in 
the KB since it was preprocessed by the NLU 
when it was mentioned in the utterance. So, if the 
user informs the system that the photograph was 
taken in Paris, (in response to a system question 
asking where the photo was taken), the utterance 
is first processed by the NLU which discovers 
that “Paris” is a location using its semantic tag-
ger ANNIE (A Nearly New Information Extrac-
tion engine). The semantic tagger makes use of 
gazetteers and IE rules in order to accomplish 

76



this task. It also goes through the KB and re-
trieves any triples related to “Paris”. Inference is 
then performed on this data and the new informa-
tion generated by this process is stored back in 
the KB.  
 
Once the type of information is identified, the 
NLU can use various predefined strategies: In 
the case of LOCATIONS, one of the strategies 
used is to seek for information in Wiki-Travel or 
Virtual Tourists. The system already knows how 
to query these sites and interpret their output by 
using predefined wrappers. This is then used to 
extract relevant information from the mentioned 
sites webpages by sending an online query to 
these sites and storing the information retrieved 
in the triple-store. This information is then used 
by the DM to generate a reply. In the previous 
example, the system manages to extract the best 
sightseeing spots in Paris. The NLU would then 
store in the KB triples such as [Paris, sight-
seeing, Eiffel Tower] and the DM with the help 
of the NLG would ask the user “I’ve heard that 
the X is a very famous spot. Have you seen it 
while you were there?” Obviously in this case, X 
would  be replaced by the “Eiffel Tower”. 
 
On the other hand, if the topic requested by the 
DM is unknown, or the semantic tagger is not 
capable of understanding the semantic category, 
the system uses a normal search engine (and this 
is what we call “hybrid-world”: the move outside 
the world the system already knows). A query 
containing the unknown term in context is sent to 
standard engines and the top pages are retrieved. 
These pages are then processed using ANNIE 
and their tagged attributes are analyzed. The 
standard attributes returned by ANNIE include 
information about Dialogue Acts, Polarity (i.e. 
whether a sentence has positive, negative or neu-
tral connotations), Named Entities, Semantic 
Categories (such as dates and currency), etc. The 
system then filters the information collected by 
using more generic patterns and generates a reply 
from the resultant information. ANNIE’s polarity 
methods have been shown to be an adequate im-
plementation of the general word-based polarity 
methods pioneered by Wiebe and her colleagues 
(see e.g. Akkaya et al., 2009). 

6. Evaluation  
The notion of companionship is not yet one with 
any agreed evaluation strategy or metric, though 
developing one is part of the main project itself.  

Again, there are established measures for the as-
sessment of dialogue programs but they have all 
been developed for standard task-based dia-
logues and the SC is not of that type: there is no 
specific task either in reminiscing conversations, 
nor in the elicitation of the content of photos, that 
can be assessed in standard ways, since there is 
no clear point at which an informal dialogue 
need stop, having been completed.  Conventional 
dialogue evaluations often use measures like 
“stickiness” to determine how much a user will 
stay with or stick with a dialogue system and not 
leave it, presumably because they are disap-
pointed or find it lacking in some feature. But it 
is hard to separate that feature out from a task 
rapidly and effectively completed, where sticki-
ness would be low not high. Traum (Traum et al., 
2004) has developed a methodology for dialogue 
evaluation based on “appropriateness” of re-
sponses and the Companions project has devel-
oped a model of evaluation for the SC based on 
that (Benyon et al., 2008). 
 
Acknowledgement  
This work was funded by the Companions project  
(2006-2009) sponsored by the European Commission 
as part of the Information Society Technologies (IST) 
programme under EC grant number IST-FP6-034434. 
 
References 
David Benyon, Prem Hansen and Nick Webb, 2008. 

Evaluating Human-Computer Conversation in 
Companions. In: Proc.4th International Workshop 
on Human-Computer Conversation, Bellagio, Italy. 

Cem Akkaya, Jan Wiebe, and Rada Mihalcea,. 2009. 
Subjectivity Word Sense Disambiguation, In:  
EMNLP 2009. 

Hamish Cunningham, Kevin Humphreys, Robert Gai-
zauskas, and Yorick Wilks, 1997. GATE -- a TIP-
STER based General Architecture for Text Engi-
neering. In: Proceedings of the TIPSTER Text Pro-
gram (Phase III) 6 Month Workshop. Morgan 
Kaufmann, CA. 

David Traum, Susan Robinson, and Jens Stephan. 
2004.  Evaluation of multi-party virtual reality dia-
logue interaction, In: Proceedings of Fourth 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC 2004), pp.1699-1702 

Yorick Wilks (ed.) 2010. Artificial Companions in 
Society: scientific, economic, psychological and 
philosophical perspectives. John Benjamins: Am-
sterdam. 

 

77


