










































WebLicht: Web-Based LRT Services for German


Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations, pages 25–29,
Uppsala, Sweden, 13 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

WebLicht: Web-based LRT services for German 

 
Erhard Hinrichs,  Marie Hinrichs, Thomas Zastrow 

Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft, University of Tübingen 
firstname.lastname@uni-tuebingen.de 

 
 
 

Abstract 

This software demonstration presents WebLicht (short 
for: Web-Based Linguistic Chaining Tool), a web-
based service environment for the integration and use 
of language resources and tools (LRT). WebLicht is 
being developed as part of the D-SPIN project1. We-
bLicht is implemented as a web application so that 
there is no need for users to install any software on 
their own computers or to concern themselves with 
the technical details involved in building tool chains. 
The integrated web services are part of a prototypical 
infrastructure that was developed to facilitate chaining 
of LRT services.   WebLicht allows the integration 
and use of distributed web services with standardized 
APIs. The nature of these open and standardized 
APIs makes it possible to access the web services 
from nearly any programming language, shell script 
or workflow engine (UIMA, Gate etc.)  Additionally, 
an application for integration of additional services is 
available, allowing anyone to contribute his own web 
service. 

 

1 Introduction 
Currently, WebLicht offers LRT services that 
were developed independently at the Institut für 
Informatik, Abteilung Automa-
tische Sprachverarbeitung at the University of 
Leipzig (tokenizer, lemmatizer, co-occurrence 
extraction, and frequency analyzer), at 
the Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung 
at the University of Stuttgart (tokenizer, tag-
ger/lemmatizer, German morphological analyser 
SMOR, constituent and dependency parsers), 
at the Berlin Brandenburgische Akademie 
der Wissenschaften (conversion of plain text to 
D-Spin format, tokenizer, taggers, NE recog-
                                                
1 D-SPIN stands for   Deutsche SPrachressourcen 
INfrastruktur;   the D-SPIN project is partly financed 
by the BMBF; it is a national   German complement 
to the EU-project CLARIN. See the URLs   
http://www.d-spin.org and http://www.clarin.eu for   
details 

nizer) and at the Seminar für Sprachwissen-
schaft/Computerlinguistik at the University of 
Tübingen (conversion of plain text to D-Spin 
format, GermaNet, Open Thesaurus syno-
nym service, and Treebank browser). They cover 
a wide range of linguistic applications, like 
tokenization, co-occurrence extraction, POS 
Tagging, lexical and semantic analysis, and sev-
eral laguages (currently German, English, Italian, 
French, Romanian, Spanish and Finnish). For 
some of these tasks, more than one web service 
is available.  As a first external partner, the Uni-
versity of Helsinki in Finnland contributed a set 
of web services to create morphological anno-
tated text corpora in the Finnish language.  With 
the help of the webbased user interface, these 
individual web services can be combined into 
a chain of linguistic applications.  
 

2 Service Oriented Architecture 

WebLicht is a so-called Service Oriented Archi-
tecture (Binildas et. al., 2008), which means that 
distributed and independent services (Tanen-
baum et al, 2002) are combined together to a 
chain of LRT tools. A centralized database, the 
repository, stores technical and content-related 
metadata about each service. With the help of 

Figure 1: The Overall Structure of WebLicht 

25



this repository, the chaining mechanism as de-
scribed in section 3 is implemented. The We-
bLicht user interface encapsulates this chaining 
mechanism in an AJAX driven web application. 
Since web applications can be invoked from any 
browser, downloading and installation of indi-
vidual tools on the user's local computer is 
avoided. But using WebLicht web services is not 
restricted to the use of the integrated user inter-
face. It is also possible to access the web services 
from nearly any programming language, shell 
script or workflow engine (UIMA, Gate etc.). 
Figure 1 depicts the overall structure of We-
bLicht. 
An important part of Service Oriented Architec-
tures is ensuring interoperability between the 
underlying services. Interoperability of web serv-
ices, as they are implemented in WebLicht, re-
fers to the seamless flow of data between them. 
To be interoperable, these web services must first 
agree on protocols defining the interaction be-
tween the services (WSDL/SOAP, REST, XML-
RPC). They must also use a shared and standard-
ized data exchange format, which is preferably 
based on widely accepted formats already in use 
(UTF-8, XML). WebLicht uses the RESTstyle 
API and its own XML-based data exchange for-
mat (Text Corpus Format, TCF).  

 

3 The Service Repository 
Every tool included in WebLicht is registered in 
a central repository, located in Leipzig. Also re-
alized as a web service, it offers metadata and 
processing information about each registered 
tool. For example, the metadata includes infor-
mation about the creator, name and the adress of 
the service. The input and output specifications 
of each web service are required in order to de-
termine which processing chains are possible. 
Combining the metadata and the processing in-
formation, the repository is able to offer func-
tions for the chain building process. 
 

Wrappers: TCF, 0.3 / TCF, 0.3 
Inputs Outputs 

lemmas 
postags 
     -tagset: stts 

sem_lex_rels 
     -source: GermaNet 

Table 1: Input and Output Specifications of 
Tübingen's Semantic Annotator 
 
A specialized tool for registering new web serv-
ices in the repository is available. 
  

Figure 2: A Screenshot of the WebLicht Webinterface 

1 

2 

3 4 

26



4 The WebLicht User Interface 

 
Figure 2 shows a screenshot of the WebLicht 
web interface, developed and hosted in Tübin-
gen. Area 1 shows a list of all WebLicht web 
services along with a subset of metadata (author, 
URL, description etc.). This list is extracted on-
the-fly from a centralized repository located in 
Leipzig.  This means that after registration in the 
repository, a web service is immediatley avail-
able for inclusion in a processing chain.  
The Language Filter selection box allows the 
selection of any language for which tools are 
available in WebLicht (currently, German, Eng-
lish, Italian, French, Romanian, Spanish or Fin-
nish). The majority of the presently integrated 
web services operates on German input. The 
platform, however, is language-independent and 
supports LRT resources for any language.  
Plain text input to the service chain can be speci-
fied in one of three ways: a) entered by the user 
in the Input tab, b) file upload from the user's 
local harddrive or c) selecting one of the sample 
texts offered by WebLicht (Area 2). Various 
format converters can be used to convert up-
loaded files into the data exchange format (TCF) 
used by WebLicht.  Input file formats accepted 
by WebLicht currently include plain text, Micro-
soft Word, RTF and PDF. 

In Area 3, one can assemble the service tool 
chain and execute it on the input text. The Se-
lected Tools list displays all web services that 
have already been entered into the web service 
chain. The list under Next Tool Choices then of-
fers the set of tools that can be entered as next 
into the chain. This list is generated by inspect-
ing the metadata of the tools which are already in 
the chain. The chaining mechanism ensures that 
this list only contains tools, that are a valid next 
step in the chain. For example, a Part-of-Speech 

Tagger can only be added to a chain after a to-
kenizer has been added. The metadata of each 
tool contains information about the annotations 
which are required in the input data and which 
annotations are added by that tool. 
As Figure 3 shows, the user sometimes has a 
choice of alternative tools - in the example at 
hand a wide variety of services are offered 
as candidates.  Figure 3 shows a subset of web 
service workflows currently available in We-
bLicht. Notice that these workflows can combine 
tools from various institutions and are not re-
stricted to predefined combinations of tools. This 
allows users to compare the results of several 
tool chains and find the best solution for their 
individual use case. 
The final result of running the tool chain as well 
as each individual step can be visualized in a Ta-
ble View (implemented as a seperate frame, Area 
4), or downloaded to the user's local harddrive in 
WebLicht's own data exchange format TCF. 

 

5 The TCF Format 
The D-SPIN Text Corpus Format TCF (Heid et 
al, 2010) is used by WebLicht as an internal data 

exchange format. The TCF format allows the 
combination of the different linguistic annota-
tions produced by the tool chain.  It supports in-
cremental enrichment of linguistic annotations at 
different levels of analysis in a common XML-
based format (see Figure 4).  

Figure 3: A Choice of Alternative Services 

Figure 4: A Short Example of a TCF Document, 
Containing the Plain Text, Tokens and POS Tags 
and Lemmas 

27



The Text Corpus Format was designed to effi-
ciently enable the seamless flow of data between 
the individual services of a Service Oriented 
Architecture.  
Figure 4 shows a data sample in the D-SPIN 
Text Corpus Format.    Lexical tokens are identi-
fied via token IDs which serve as 
unique identifiers in different annotation layers. 
From an organizational point-of-view, tokens can 
be seen as the central, atomic elements in TCF to 
which  other annotation layers refer. For exam-
ple, the POS annotations refer to the token IDs in 
the token annotation layer via the attribute tokID.  
The annotation layers are rendered in a stand-off 
annotation format. TCF stores all linguistic anno-
tation layers in one single file. That means that 
during the chaining process, the file grows (see 
Figure 5). Each tool is permitted to add an arbi-
trary number of layers, but it is not allowed to 
change or delete any existing layer. 
Within the D-SPIN project, several other XML 
based data formats were developed beside the 
TCF format (for example, an encoding for lexi-
con based data). In order to avoid any confusion 
of element names between these different for-
mats, namespaces for the different contextual 
scopes within each format have been introduced. 
At the end of the chaining process, converter 
services will convert the textcorpora from the 

TCF format into other common and standardized 
data formats, for example MAF/SynAF or TEI. 

6 Implementation Details 

The web services are available in RESTstyle and 
use the TCF data format for input and output. 
The concrete implementation can use any com-
bination of programming language and server 
environment. 
The repository is a relational database, offering 
its content also as RESTstyle web services. 
The user interface is a Rich Internet Application 
(RIA), using an AJAX driven toolkit. It incorpo-
rates the Java EE 5 technology and can be de-
ployed in any Java application server. 
  

7 How to Participate in WebLicht 
Since WebLicht follows the paradigm of a Serv-
ice Oriented Architecture, it is easily extendable 
by adding new services. In order to participate in 
WebLicht by donating additional tools,  one must 
implement the tool as as RESTful web service 
using the TCF data format. You can find further 
information including a tutorial on the D-SPIN 
homepage2.  

 

8 Further Work 
The WebLicht platform in its current form 
moves the functionality of LRT tools from the 
users desktop computer into the net (Gray et al, 
2005). At this point, the user must download the 
results of the chaining process and deal with 
them on his local machine again. In the future, an 
online workspace has to be implemented so that 
annotated textcorpora created with WebLicht can 
also be stored in and retrieved from the net. For 
that purpose, an integration of the eSciDoc re-
search environment3 into Weblicht is planned. 
The eSciDoc infrastructure enables sustainable 
and reliable long-term preservation of primary 
research and analysis data. 
To make the use of WebLicht more convenient 
to the end user, there will be predefined process-
ing chains. These will consist of the most com-
monly used processing chains and will relieve 
the user of having to define the chains manually.  
In the last year, WebLicht has proven to be a re-
alizable and useful service environment for the 
humanities. In its current state, WebLicht is still 
a prototype: due to the restrictions of the under-
lying hardware, WebLicht cannot yet be made 
available to the general public. 
 

9 Scope of the Software Demonstration 

This demonstration will present the core func-
tionalities of WebLicht as well as related mod-
ules and applications. The process of building 
language-specific processing tool chains will be 
shown. WebLichts capability of offering only 
appropriate tools at each step in the chain-
building process will be demonstrated. 

                                                
2 http://weblicht.sfs.uni-
tuebingen.de/englisch/weblichttutorial.shtml 
3 For further information about the eSciDoc 
platform, see https://www.escidoc.org/ 

Figure 5: Annotation Layers are Added to the 
TCF Document by Each Service 

28



The selected tool chain can be applied to any 
arbitrary uploaded text. The resulting annotated 
text corpus can be downloaded or visualized us-
ing an integrated software module. 
All these functions will be shown live using just 
a webbrowser during the software demonstra-
tion.Demo Preview and Hardware Requirements  
 
The call for papers asks submitters of software 
demonstrations to provide pointers to demo pre-
views and to provide technical details about 
hardware requirements for the actual demo at the 
conference.  
The WebLicht web application is currently 
password protected. Access can be granted by 
requesting an account (weblicht@d-spin.org). 
If the software demonstration is accepted, inter-
net access is necessary at the conference, but no 
special hardware is required. The authors will 
bring a laptop of their own and if necessary also 
a beamer. 
 
Acknowledgments 

WebLicht is the product of a combined effort 
within the D-SPIN projects (www.d-spin.org).  
Currently, partners include:  Seminar für 
Sprachwissenschaft/Computerlinguistik, Univer-
sität Tübingen, Abteilung für Automatische 
Sprachverarbeitung, Universität Leipzig, Institut 
für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Universität  
Stuttgart and Berlin Brandenburgische Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.  

 

References  
 

Binildas, C.A., Malhar Barai et.al. (2008). Service 
Oriented Architectures with Java. PACKT Publish-
ing, Birmingham – Mumbai 

Gray, J., Liu, D., Nieto-Santisteban, M., Szalay, A., 
DeWitt, D., Heber, G. (2005). Scientific Data Man-
agement in the Coming Decade. Technical Report 
MSR-TR-2005-10, Microsoft Research.  
 

Heid, U., Schmid, H., Eckart, K., Hinrichs, E. (2010). 
A Corpus Representation Format for Linguistic 
Web Services: the D_SPIN Text Corpus Format 
and its Relationship with ISO Standards. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC 2010, Malta.  

Tanenbaum, A., van Steen, M. (2002). Distributed 
Systems, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 
1st Edition. 

 

29


