










































Preferences versus Adaptation during Referring Expression Generation


Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, pages 55–59,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Preferences versus Adaptation during Referring Expression Generation

Martijn Goudbeek
University of Tilburg

Tilburg, The Netherlands
m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl

Emiel Krahmer
University of Tilburg

Tilburg, The Netherlands
e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl

Abstract

Current Referring Expression Generation
algorithms rely on domain dependent pref-
erences for both content selection and lin-
guistic realization. We present two exper-
iments showing that human speakers may
opt for dispreferred properties and dispre-
ferred modifier orderings when these were
salient in a preceding interaction (without
speakers being consciously aware of this).
We discuss the impact of these findings for
current generation algorithms.

1 Introduction

The generation of referring expressions is a core
ingredient of most Natural Language Generation
(NLG) systems (Reiter and Dale, 2000; Mellish et
al., 2006). These systems usually approach Refer-
ring Expression Generation (REG) as a two-step
procedure, where first it is decided which prop-
erties to include (content selection), after which
the selected properties are turned into a natural
language referring expression (linguistic realiza-
tion). The basic problem in both stages is one of
choice; there are many ways in which one could
refer to a target object and there are multiple ways
in which these could be realized in natural lan-
guage. Typically, these choice problems are tack-
led by giving preference to some solutions over
others. For example, the Incremental Algorithm
(Dale and Reiter, 1995), one of the most widely
used REG algorithms, assumes that certain at-
tributes are preferred over others, partly based on
evidence provided by Pechmann (1989); a chair
would first be described in terms of its color, and
only if this does not result in a unique charac-
terization, other, less preferred attributes such as
orientation are tried. The Incremental Algorithm
is arguably unique in assuming a complete pref-
erence order of attributes, but other REG algo-

rithms rely on similar distinctions. The Graph-
based algorithm (Krahmer et al., 2003), for ex-
ample, searches for the cheapest description for
a target, and distinguishes cheap attributes (such
as color) from more expensive ones (orientation).
Realization of referring expressions has received
less attention, yet recent studies on the ordering of
modifiers (Shaw and Hatzivassiloglou, 1999; Mal-
ouf, 2000; Mitchell, 2009) also work from the as-
sumption that some orderings (large red) are pre-
ferred over others (red large).

We argue that such preferences are less stable
when referring expressions are generated in inter-
active settings, as would be required for applica-
tions such as spoken dialogue systems or interac-
tive virtual characters. In these cases, we hypothe-
size that, besides domain preferences, also the re-
ferring expressions that were produced earlier in
the interaction are important. It has been shown
that if one dialogue participant refers to a couch as
a sofa, the next speaker is more likely to use the
word sofa as well (Branigan et al., in press). This
kind of micro-planning or “lexical entrainment”
(Brennan and Clark, 1996) can be seen as a spe-
cific form of “alignment” (Pickering and Garrod,
2004) between speaker and addressee. Pickering
and Garrod argue that alignment may take place
on all levels of interaction, and indeed it has been
shown that participants also align their intonation
patterns and syntactic structures. However, as far
as we know, experimental evidence for alignment
on the level of content planning has never been
given, and neither have alignment effects in modi-
fier orderings during realization been shown. With
a few notable exceptions, such as Buschmeier et
al. (2009) who study alignment in micro-planning,
and Janarthanam and Lemon (2009) who study
alignment in expertise levels, alignment has re-
ceived little attention in NLG so far.

This paper is organized as follows. Experi-
ment I studies the trade-off between adaptation

55



and preferences during content selection while Ex-
periment II looks at this trade-off for modifier
orderings during realization. Both studies use a
novel interactive reference production paradigm,
applied to two domains – the Furniture and People
domains of the TUNA data-set (Gatt et al., 2007;
Koolen et al., 2009) – to see whether adaptation
may be domain dependent. Finally, we contrast
our findings with the performance of state-of-the-
art REG algorithms, discussing how they could be
adapted so as to account for the new data, effec-
tively adding plasticity to the generation process.

2 Experiment I

Experiment I studies what speakers do when re-
ferring to a target that can be distinguished in a
preferred (the blue fan) or a dispreferred way (the
left-facing fan), when in the prior context either
the first or the second variant was made salient.

Method

Participants 26 students (2 male, mean age = 20
years, 11 months), all native speakers of Dutch
without hearing or speech problems, participated
for course credits.
Materials Target pictures were taken from the
TUNA corpus (Gatt et al., 2007) that has been
extensively used for REG evaluation. This cor-
pus consists of two domains: one containing pic-
tures of people (famous mathematicians), the other
containing furniture items in different colors de-
picted from different orientations. From previous
studies (Gatt et al., 2007; Koolen et al., 2009) it
is known that participants show a preference for
certain attributes: color in the Furniture domain
and glasses in the People domain, and disprefer
other attributes (orientation of a furniture piece
and wearing a tie, respectively).
Procedure Trials consisted of four turns in an in-
teractive reference understanding and production
experiment: a prime, two fillers and the experi-
mental description (see Figure 1). First, partici-
pants listened to a pre-recorded female voice re-
ferring to one of three objects and had to indi-
cate which one was being referenced. In this sub-
task, references either used a preferred or a dis-
preferred attribute; both were distinguishing. Sec-
ond, participants themselves described a filler pic-
ture, after which, third, they had to indicate which
filler picture was being described. The two filler
turns always concerned stimuli from the alterna-

Figure 1: The 4 tasks per trial. A furniture trial is
shown; people trials have an identical structure.

tive domain and were intended to prevent a too
direct connection between the prime and the tar-
get. Fourth, participants described the target ob-
ject, which could always be distinguished from its
distractors in a preferred (The blue fan) or a dis-
preferred (The left facing fan) way. Note that at-

56



Figure 2: Proportions of preferred and dispre-
ferred attributes in the Furniture domain.

tributes are primed, not values; a participant may
have heard front facing in the prime turn, while
the target has a different value for this attribute (cf.
Fig. 1).

For the two domains, there were 20 preferred
and 20 dispreferred trials, giving rise to 2 x (20 +
20) = 80 critical trials. These were presented in
counter-balanced blocks, and within blocks each
participant received a different random order. In
addition, there were 80 filler trials (each following
the same structure as outlined in Figure 1). During
debriefing, none of the participants indicated they
had been aware of the experiment’s purpose.

Results

We use the proportion of attribute alignment as
our dependent measure. Alignment occurs when
a participant uses the same attribute in the target
as occurred in the prime. This includes overspeci-
fied descriptions (Engelhardt et al., 2006; Arnold,
2008), where both the preferred and dispreferred
attributes were mentioned by participants. Over-
specification occurred in 13% of the critical trials
(and these were evenly distributed over the exper-
imental conditions).

The use of the preferred and dispreferred at-
tribute as a function of prime and domain is shown
in Figure 2 and Figure 3. In both domains, the
preferred attribute is used much more frequently
than the dispreferred attribute with the preferred
primes, which serves as a manipulation check. As
a test of our hypothesis that adaptation processes
play an important role in attribute selection for
referring expressions, we need to look at partic-
ipants’ expressions with the dispreferred primes
(with the preferred primes, effects of adaptation
and of preferences cannot be teased apart). Cur-
rent REG algorithms such as the Incremental Al-
gorithm and the Graph-based algorithm predict
that participants will always opt for the preferred

Figure 3: Proportions of preferred and dispre-
ferred attributes in the People domain.

attribute, and hence will not use the dispreferred
attribute. This is not what we observe: our par-
ticipants used the dispreferred attribute at a rate
significantly larger than zero when they had been
exposed to it three turns earlier (tfurniture [25] =
6.64, p < 0.01; tpeople [25] = 4.78 p < 0.01). Ad-
ditionally, they used the dispreferred attribute sig-
nificantly more when they had previously heard
the dispreferred attribute rather than the preferred
attribute. This difference is especially marked
and significant in the Furniture domain (tfurniture
[25] = 2.63, p < 0.01, tpeople [25] = 0.98, p <
0.34), where participants opt for the dispreferred
attribute in 54% of the trials, more frequently than
they do for the preferred attribute (Fig. 2).

3 Experiment II

Experiment II uses the same paradigm used for
Experiment I to study whether speaker’s prefer-
ences for modifier orderings can be changed by
exposing them to dispreferred orderings.

Method
Participants 28 Students (ten males, mean age =
23 years and two months) participated for course
credits. All were native speakers of Dutch, without
hearing and speech problems. None participated
in Experiment I.
Materials The materials were identical to those
used in Experiment I, except for their arrangement
in the critical trials. In these trials, the participants
could only identify the target picture using two at-
tributes. In the Furniture domain these were color
and size, in the People domain these were having a
beard and wearing glasses. In the prime turn (Task
I, Fig. 1), these attributes were realized in a pre-
ferred way (“size first”: e.g., the big red sofa, or
“glasses first”: the bespectacled and bearded man)
or in a dispreferred way (“color first”: the red big
sofa or “beard first” the bespectacled and bearded

57



Figure 4: Proportions of preferred and dispre-
ferred modifier orderings in the Furniture domain.

man). Google counts for the original Dutch mod-
ifier orderings reveal that the ratio of preferred to
dispreferred is in the order of 40:1 in the Furniture
domain and 3:1 in the People domain.
Procedure As above.

Results

We use the proportion of modifier ordering align-
ments as our dependent measure, where alignment
occurs when the participant’s ordering coincides
with the primed ordering. Figure 4 and 5 show the
use of the preferred and dispreferred modifier or-
dering per prime and domain. It can be seen that
in the preferred prime conditions, participants pro-
duce the expected orderings, more or less in accor-
dance with the Google counts.

State-of-the-art realizers would always opt for
the most frequent ordering of a given pair of mod-
ifiers and hence would never predict the dispre-
ferred orderings to occur. Still, the use of the dis-
preferred modifier ordering occurred significantly
more often than one would expect given this pre-
diction, tfurniture [27] = 6.56, p < 0.01 and tpeople
[27] = 9.55, p < 0.01. To test our hypotheses con-
cerning adaptation, we looked at the dispreferred
realizations when speakers were exposed to dis-
preferred primes (compared to preferred primes).
In both domains this resulted in an increase of the
anount of dispreferred realizations, which was sig-
nificant in the People domain (tpeople [27] = 1.99,
p < 0.05, tfurniture [25] = 2.63, p < 0.01).

4 Discussion

Current state-of-the-art REG algorithms often rest
upon the assumption that some attributes and some
realizations are preferred over others. The two ex-
periments described in this paper show that this
assumption is incorrect, when references are pro-
duced in an interactive setting. In both experi-
ments, speakers were more likely to select a dis-

Figure 5: Proportions of preferred and dispre-
ferred modifier orderings in the People domain.

preferred attribute or produce a dispreferred mod-
ifier ordering when they had previously been ex-
posed to these attributes or orderings, without be-
ing aware of this. These findings fit in well with
the adaptation and alignment models proposed by
psycholinguists, but ours, as far as we know, is
the first experimental evidence of alignment in at-
tribute selection and in modifier ordering. Inter-
estingly, we found that effect sizes differ for the
different domains, indicating that the trade-off be-
tween preferences and adaptions is a gradual one,
also influenced by the a priori differences in pref-
erence (it is more difficult to make people say
something truly dispreferred than something more
marginally dispreferred).

To account for these findings, GRE algorithms
that function in an interactive setting should be
made sensitive to the production of dialogue part-
ners. For the Incremental Algorithm (Dale and Re-
iter, 1995), this could be achieved by augmenting
the list of preferred attributes with a list of “previ-
ously mentioned” attributes. The relative weight-
ing of these two lists will be corpus dependent,
and can be estimated in a data-driven way. Alter-
natively, in the Graph-based algorithm (Krahmer
et al., 2003), costs of properties could be based
on two components: a relatively fixed domain
component (preferred is cheaper) and a flexible
interactive component (recently used is cheaper).
Which approach would work best is an open, em-
pirical question, but either way this would consti-
tute an important step towards interactive REG.

Acknowledgments

The research reported in this paper forms part
of the VICI project “Bridging the gap between
psycholinguistics and Computational linguistics:
the case of referring expressions”, funded by the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
(NWO grant 277-70-007).

58



References
Jennifer Arnold. 2008. Reference produc-

tion: Production-internal and addressee-oriented
processes. Language and Cognitive Processes,
23(4):495–527.

Holly P. Branigan, Martin J. Pickering, Jamie Pearson,
and Janet F. McLean. in press. Linguistic alignment
between people and computers. Journal of Prag-
matics, 23:1–2.

Susan E. Brennan and Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Con-
ceptual pacts and lexical choice in conversation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 22:1482–1493.

Hendrik Buschmeier, Kirsten Bergmann, and Stefan
Kopp. 2009. An alignment-capable microplan-
ner for Natural Language Generation. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation (ENLG 2009), pages 82–89,
Athens, Greece, March. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter. 1995. Computational
interpretations of the gricean maxims in the gener-
ation of referring expressions. Cognitive Science,
19(2):233–263.

Paul E. Engelhardt, Karl G. Bailey, and Fernanda Fer-
reira. 2006. Do speakers and listeners observe the
gricean maxim of quantity? Journal of Memory and
Language, 54(4):554–573.

Albert Gatt, Ielka van der Sluis, and Kees van Deemter.
2007. Evaluating algorithms for the generation of
referring expressions using a balanced corpus. In
Proceedings of the 11th European Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Generation.

Srinivasan Janarthanam and Oliver Lemon. 2009.
Learning lexical alignment policies for generating
referring expressions for spoken dialogue systems.
In Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation (ENLG 2009), pages
74–81, Athens, Greece, March. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ruud Koolen, Albert Gatt, Martijn Goudbeek, and
Emiel Krahmer. 2009. Need I say more? on factors
causing referential overspecification. In Proceed-
ings of the PRE-CogSci 2009 Workshop on the Pro-
duction of Referring Expressions: Bridging the Gap
Between Computational and Empirical Approaches
to Reference.

Emiel Krahmer, Sebastiaan van Erk, and André Verleg.
2003. Graph-based generation of referring expres-
sions. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):53–72.

Robert Malouf. 2000. The order of prenominal adjec-
tives in natural language generation. In Proceedings
of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 85–92.

Chris Mellish, Donia Scott, Lynn Cahill, Daniel Paiva,
Roger Evans, and Mike Reape. 2006. A refer-
ence architecture for natural language generation
systems. Natural Language Engineering, 12:1–34.

Margaret Mitchell. 2009. Class-based ordering of
prenominal modifiers. In ENLG ’09: Proceedings of
the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, pages 50–57, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Thomas Pechmann. 1989. Incremental speech produc-
tion and referential overspecification. Linguistics,
27:89–110.

Martin Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. Towards
a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioural
and Brain Sciences, 27:169–226.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

James Shaw and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 1999. Or-
dering among premodifiers. In Proceedings of the
37th annual meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics on Computational Linguistics,
pages 135–143.

59


