










































Paraphrase Lattice for Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, pages 1–5,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Paraphrase Lattice for Statistical Machine Translation

Takashi Onishi and Masao Utiyama and Eiichiro Sumita
Language Translation Group, MASTAR Project

National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
3-5 Hikaridai, Keihanna Science City, Kyoto, 619-0289, JAPAN

{takashi.onishi,mutiyama,eiichiro.sumita}@nict.go.jp

Abstract

Lattice decoding in statistical machine
translation (SMT) is useful in speech
translation and in the translation of Ger-
man because it can handle input ambigu-
ities such as speech recognition ambigui-
ties and German word segmentation ambi-
guities. We show that lattice decoding is
also useful for handling input variations.
Given an input sentence, we build a lattice
which represents paraphrases of the input
sentence. We call this a paraphrase lattice.
Then, we give the paraphrase lattice as an
input to the lattice decoder. The decoder
selects the best path for decoding. Us-
ing these paraphrase lattices as inputs, we
obtained significant gains in BLEU scores
for IWSLT and Europarl datasets.

1 Introduction

Lattice decoding in SMT is useful in speech trans-
lation and in the translation of German (Bertoldi
et al., 2007; Dyer, 2009). In speech translation,
by using lattices that represent not only 1-best re-
sult but also other possibilities of speech recogni-
tion, we can take into account the ambiguities of
speech recognition. Thus, the translation quality
for lattice inputs is better than the quality for 1-
best inputs.

In this paper, we show that lattice decoding is
also useful for handling input variations. “Input
variations” refers to the differences of input texts
with the same meaning. For example, “Is there
a beauty salon?” and “Is there a beauty par-
lor?” have the same meaning with variations in
“beauty salon” and “beauty parlor”. Since these
variations are frequently found in natural language
texts, a mismatch of the expressions in source sen-
tences and the expressions in training corpus leads
to a decrease in translation quality. Therefore,

we propose a novel method that can handle in-
put variations using paraphrases and lattice decod-
ing. In the proposed method, we regard a given
source sentence as one of many variations (1-best).
Given an input sentence, we build a paraphrase lat-
tice which represents paraphrases of the input sen-
tence. Then, we give the paraphrase lattice as an
input to the Moses decoder (Koehn et al., 2007).
Moses selects the best path for decoding. By using
paraphrases of source sentences, we can translate
expressions which are not found in a training cor-
pus on the condition that paraphrases of them are
found in the training corpus. Moreover, by using
lattice decoding, we can employ the source-side
language model as a decoding feature. Since this
feature is affected by the source-side context, the
decoder can choose a proper paraphrase and trans-
late correctly.

This paper is organized as follows: Related
works on lattice decoding and paraphrasing are
presented in Section 2. The proposed method is
described in Section 3. Experimental results for
IWSLT and Europarl dataset are presented in Sec-
tion 4. Finally, the paper is concluded with a sum-
mary and a few directions for future work in Sec-
tion 5.

2 Related Work

Lattice decoding has been used to handle ambigu-
ities of preprocessing. Bertoldi et al. (2007) em-
ployed a confusion network, which is a kind of lat-
tice and represents speech recognition hypotheses
in speech translation. Dyer (2009) also employed
a segmentation lattice, which represents ambigui-
ties of compound word segmentation in German,
Hungarian and Turkish translation. However, to
the best of our knowledge, there is no work which
employed a lattice representing paraphrases of an
input sentence.

On the other hand, paraphrasing has been used
to enrich the SMT model. Callison-Burch et

1



Input sentence 

Paraphrase Lattice

Output sentence 

Paraphrase

List

SMT model

Parallel Corpus

(for paraphrase)

Parallel Corpus

(for training)

Paraphrasing

Lattice Decoding

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed method.

al. (2006) and Marton et al. (2009) augmented
the translation phrase table with paraphrases to
translate unknown phrases. Bond et al. (2008)
and Nakov (2008) augmented the training data by
paraphrasing. However, there is no work which
augments input sentences by paraphrasing and
represents them in lattices.

3 Paraphrase Lattice for SMT

Overview of the proposed method is shown in Fig-
ure 1. In advance, we automatically acquire a
paraphrase list from a parallel corpus. In order to
acquire paraphrases of unknown phrases, this par-
allel corpus is different from the parallel corpus
for training.

Given an input sentence, we build a lattice
which represents paraphrases of the input sentence
using the paraphrase list. We call this lattice a
paraphrase lattice. Then, we give the paraphrase
lattice to the lattice decoder.

3.1 Acquiring the paraphrase list

We acquire a paraphrase list using Bannard and
Callison-Burch (2005)’s method. Their idea is, if
two different phrases e1, e2 in one language are
aligned to the same phrase c in another language,
they are hypothesized to be paraphrases of each
other. Our paraphrase list is acquired in the same
way.

The procedure is as follows:

1. Build a phrase table.
Build a phrase table from parallel corpus us-
ing standard SMT techniques.

2. Filter the phrase table by the sigtest-filter.
The phrase table built in 1 has many inappro-
priate phrase pairs. Therefore, we filter the

phrase table and keep only appropriate phrase
pairs using the sigtest-filter (Johnson et al.,
2007).

3. Calculate the paraphrase probability.
Calculate the paraphrase probability p(e2|e1)
if e2 is hypothesized to be a paraphrase of e1.

p(e2|e1) =
∑

c

P (c|e1)P (e2|c)

where P (·|·) is phrase translation probability.

4. Acquire a paraphrase pair.
Acquire (e1, e2) as a paraphrase pair if
p(e2|e1) > p(e1|e1). The purpose of this
threshold is to keep highly-accurate para-
phrase pairs. In experiments, more than 80%
of paraphrase pairs were eliminated by this
threshold.

3.2 Building paraphrase lattice

An input sentence is paraphrased using the para-
phrase list and transformed into a paraphrase lat-
tice. The paraphrase lattice is a lattice which rep-
resents paraphrases of the input sentence. An ex-
ample of a paraphrase lattice is shown in Figure 2.
In this example, an input sentence is “is there a
beauty salon ?”. This paraphrase lattice contains
two paraphrase pairs “beauty salon” = “beauty
parlor” and “beauty salon” = “salon”, and rep-
resents following three sentences.

• is there a beauty salon ?
• is there a beauty parlor ?
• is there a salon ?

In the paraphrase lattice, each node consists of
a token, the distance to the next node and features
for lattice decoding. We use following four fea-
tures for lattice decoding.

• Paraphrase probability (p)
A paraphrase probability p(e2|e1) calculated
when acquiring the paraphrase.

hp = p(e2|e1)

• Language model score (l)
A ratio between the language model proba-
bility of the paraphrased sentence (para) and
that of the original sentence (orig).

hl =
lm(para)
lm(orig)

2



0 -- ("is"     , 1, 1, 1, 1)

1 -- ("there"  , 1, 1, 1, 1)

2 -- ("a"      , 1, 1, 1, 1)

3 -- ("beauty" , 1, 1, 1, 2) ("beauty" , 0.250, 1.172, 1, 1) ("salon" , 0.133, 0.537, 0.367, 3)

4 -- ("parlor" , 1, 1, 1, 2)

5 -- ("salon"  , 1, 1, 1, 1)

6 -- ("?"      , 1, 1, 1, 1)

Paraphrase probability (p)

Language model score (l)

Paraphrase length (d)

Distance to the next node Features for lattice decodingToken

Figure 2: An example of a paraphrase lattice, which contains three features of (p, l, d).

• Normalized language model score (L)
A language model score where the language
model probability is normalized by the sen-
tence length. The sentence length is calcu-
lated as the number of tokens.

hL =
LM(para)
LM(orig) ,

where LM(sent) = lm(sent)
1

length(sent)

• Paraphrase length (d)
The difference between the original sentence
length and the paraphrased sentence length.

hd = exp(length(para)− length(orig))

The values of these features are calculated only
if the node is the first node of the paraphrase, for
example the second “beauty” and “salon” in line
3 of Figure 2. In other nodes, for example “par-
lor” in line 4 and original nodes, we use 1 as the
values of features.

The features related to the language model, such
as (l) and (L), are affected by the context of source
sentences even if the same paraphrase pair is ap-
plied. As these features can penalize paraphrases
which are not appropriate to the context, appropri-
ate paraphrases are chosen and appropriate trans-
lations are output in lattice decoding. The features
related to the sentence length, such as (L) and (d),
are added to penalize the language model score
in case the paraphrased sentence length is shorter
than the original sentence length and the language
model score is unreasonably low.

In experiments, we use four combinations of
these features, (p), (p, l), (p, L) and (p, l, d).

3.3 Lattice decoding
We use Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) as a decoder
for lattice decoding. Moses is an open source

SMT system which allows lattice decoding. In
lattice decoding, Moses selects the best path and
the best translation according to features added in
each node and other SMT features. These weights
are optimized using Minimum Error Rate Training
(MERT) (Och, 2003).

4 Experiments

In order to evaluate the proposed method, we
conducted English-to-Japanese and English-to-
Chinese translation experiments using IWSLT
2007 (Fordyce, 2007) dataset. This dataset con-
tains EJ and EC parallel corpus for the travel
domain and consists of 40k sentences for train-
ing and about 500 sentences sets (dev1, dev2
and dev3) for development and testing. We used
the dev1 set for parameter tuning, the dev2 set
for choosing the setting of the proposed method,
which is described below, and the dev3 set for test-
ing.

The English-English paraphrase list was ac-
quired from the EC corpus for EJ translation and
53K pairs were acquired. Similarly, 47K pairs
were acquired from the EJ corpus for EC trans-
lation.

4.1 Baseline
As baselines, we used Moses and Callison-Burch
et al. (2006)’s method (hereafter CCB). In Moses,
we used default settings without paraphrases. In
CCB, we paraphrased the phrase table using the
automatically acquired paraphrase list. Then,
we augmented the phrase table with paraphrased
phrases which were not found in the original
phrase table. Moreover, we used an additional fea-
ture whose value was the paraphrase probability
(p) if the entry was generated by paraphrasing and

3



Moses (w/o Paraphrases) CCB Proposed Method
EJ 38.98 39.24 (+0.26) 40.34 (+1.36)
EC 25.11 26.14 (+1.03) 27.06 (+1.95)

Table 1: Experimental results for IWSLT (%BLEU).

1 if otherwise. Weights of the feature and other
features in SMT were optimized using MERT.

4.2 Proposed method
In the proposed method, we conducted experi-
ments with various settings for paraphrasing and
lattice decoding. Then, we chose the best setting
according to the result of the dev2 set.

4.2.1 Limitation of paraphrasing
As the paraphrase list was automatically ac-
quired, there were many erroneous paraphrase
pairs. Building paraphrase lattices with all erro-
neous paraphrase pairs and decoding these para-
phrase lattices caused high computational com-
plexity. Therefore, we limited the number of para-
phrasing per phrase and per sentence. The number
of paraphrasing per phrase was limited to three and
the number of paraphrasing per sentence was lim-
ited to twice the size of the sentence length.

As a criterion for limiting the number of para-
phrasing, we use three features (p), (l) and (L),
which are same as the features described in Sub-
section 3.2. When building paraphrase lattices, we
apply paraphrases in descending order of the value
of the criterion.

4.2.2 Finding optimal settings
As previously mentioned, we have three choices
for the criterion for building paraphrase lattices
and four combinations of features for lattice de-
coding. Thus, there are 3 × 4 = 12 combinations
of these settings. We conducted parameter tuning
with the dev1 set for each setting and used as best
the setting which got the highest BLEU score for
the dev2 set.

4.3 Results
The experimental results are shown in Table 1. We
used the case-insensitive BLEU metric for eval-
uation. In EJ translation, the proposed method
obtained the highest score of 40.34%, which
achieved an absolute improvement of 1.36 BLEU
points over Moses and 1.10 BLEU points over
CCB. In EC translation, the proposed method also
obtained the highest score of 27.06% and achieved

an absolute improvement of 1.95 BLEU points
over Moses and 0.92 BLEU points over CCB. As
the relation of three systems is Moses < CCB <
Proposed Method, paraphrasing is useful for SMT
and using paraphrase lattices and lattice decod-
ing is especially more useful than augmenting the
phrase table. In Proposed Method, the criterion for
building paraphrase lattices and the combination
of features for lattice decoding were (p) and (p, L)
in EJ translation and (L) and (p, l) in EC transla-
tion. Since features related to the source-side lan-
guage model were chosen in each direction, using
the source-side language model is useful for de-
coding paraphrase lattices.

We also tried a combination of Proposed
Method and CCB, which is a method of decoding
paraphrase lattices with an augmented phrase ta-
ble. However, the result showed no significant im-
provements. This is because the proposed method
includes the effect of augmenting the phrase table.

Moreover, we conducted German-English
translation using the Europarl corpus (Koehn,
2005). We used the WMT08 dataset1, which
consists of 1M sentences for training and 2K sen-
tences for development and testing. We acquired
5.3M pairs of German-German paraphrases from
a 1M German-Spanish parallel corpus. We con-
ducted experiments with various sizes of training
corpus, using 10K, 20K, 40K, 80K, 160K and 1M.
Figure 3 shows the proposed method consistently
get higher score than Moses and CCB.

5 Conclusion

This paper has proposed a novel method for trans-
forming a source sentence into a paraphrase lattice
and applying lattice decoding. Since our method
can employ source-side language models as a de-
coding feature, the decoder can choose proper
paraphrases and translate properly. The exper-
imental results showed significant gains for the
IWSLT and Europarl dataset. In IWSLT dataset,
we obtained 1.36 BLEU points over Moses in EJ
translation and 1.95 BLEU points over Moses in

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt08/

4



20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

10 100 1000

Corpus size (K)

B
L
E
U

 s
c
o
re

 (
%
)

Moses

CCB

Proposed

Figure 3: Effect of training corpus size.

EC translation. In Europarl dataset, the proposed
method consistently get higher score than base-
lines.

In future work, we plan to apply this method
with paraphrases derived from a massive corpus
such as the Web corpus and apply this method to a
hierarchical phrase based SMT.

References
Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Para-

phrasing with Bilingual Parallel Corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
597–604.

Nicola Bertoldi, Richard Zens, and Marcello Federico.
2007. Speech translation by confusion network de-
coding. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 1297–1300.

Francis Bond, Eric Nichols, Darren Scott Appling, and
Michael Paul. 2008. Improving Statistical Machine
Translation by Paraphrasing the Training Data. In
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation (IWSLT), pages 150–157.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, and Miles Os-
borne. 2006. Improved Statistical Machine Trans-
lation Using Paraphrases. In Proceedings of the
Human Language Technology conference - North
American chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (HLT-NAACL), pages 17–24.

Chris Dyer. 2009. Using a maximum entropy model
to build segmentation lattices for MT. In Proceed-
ings of the Human Language Technology confer-
ence - North American chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (HLT-NAACL), pages
406–414.

Cameron S. Fordyce. 2007. Overview of the IWSLT
2007 Evaluation Campaign. In Proceedings of the
International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation (IWSLT), pages 1–12.

J Howard Johnson, Joel Martin, George Foster, and
Roland Kuhn. 2007. Improving Translation Qual-
ity by Discarding Most of the Phrasetable. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL), pages 967–975.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexan-
dra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses:
Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), pages 177–180.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the 10th Machine Translation Summit (MT Summit),
pages 79–86.

Yuval Marton, Chris Callison-Burch, and Philip
Resnik. 2009. Improved Statistical Machine
Translation Using Monolingually-Derived Para-
phrases. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 381–390.

Preslav Nakov. 2008. Improved Statistical Machine
Translation Using Monolingual Paraphrases. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence (ECAI), pages 338–342.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training
in Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 160–167.

5


