










































A Unified Graph Model for Sentence-Based Opinion Retrieval


Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1367–1375,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Unified Graph Model for Sentence-based Opinion Retrieval 

 

 

Binyang Li, Lanjun Zhou, Shi Feng, Kam-Fai Wong 
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management 

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
{byli, ljzhou, sfeng, kfwong}@se.cuhk.edu.hk 

 

 

Abstract 

There is a growing research interest in opinion 
retrieval as on-line users’ opinions are becom-
ing more and more popular in business, social 
networks, etc. Practically speaking, the goal of 
opinion retrieval is to retrieve documents, 
which entail opinions or comments, relevant to 
a target subject specified by the user’s query. A 
fundamental challenge in opinion retrieval is 
information representation. Existing research 
focuses on document-based approaches and 
documents are represented by bag-of-word. 
However, due to loss of contextual information, 
this representation fails to capture the associa-
tive information between an opinion and its 
corresponding target. It cannot distinguish dif-
ferent degrees of a sentiment word when asso-
ciated with different targets. This in turn se-
riously affects opinion retrieval performance. 
In this paper, we propose a sentence-based ap-
proach based on a new information representa-
tion, namely topic-sentiment word pair, to cap-
ture intra-sentence contextual information be-
tween an opinion and its target. Additionally, 
we consider inter-sentence information to cap-
ture the relationships among the opinions on 
the same topic. Finally, the two types of infor-
mation are combined in a unified graph-based 
model, which can effectively rank the docu-
ments. Compared with existing approaches, 
experimental results on the COAE08 dataset 
showed that our graph-based model achieved 
significant improvement. 

1 Introduction 
In recent years, there is a growing interest in 
sharing personal opinions on the Web, such as 
product reviews, economic analysis, political 
polls, etc. These opinions cannot only help inde-
pendent users make decisions, but also obtain 
valuable feedbacks (Pang et al., 2008). Opinion 
oriented research, including sentiment classifica-

tion, opinion extraction, opinion question ans-
wering, and opinion summarization, etc. are re-
ceiving growing attention (Wilson, et al., 2005; 
Liu et al., 2005; Oard et al., 2006). However, 
most existing works concentrate on analyzing 
opinions expressed in the documents, and none 
on how to represent the information needs re-
quired to retrieve opinionated documents. In this 
paper, we focus on opinion retrieval, whose goal 
is to find a set of documents containing not only 
the query keyword(s) but also the relevant opi-
nions. This requirement brings about the chal-
lenge on how to represent information needs for 
effective opinion retrieval. 

In order to solve the above problem, previous 
work adopts a 2-stage approach. In the first stage, 
relevant documents are determined and ranked 
by a score, i.e. tf-idf value. In the second stage, 
an opinion score is generated for each relevant 
document (Macdonald and Ounis, 2007; Oard et 
al., 2006). The opinion score can be acquired by 
either machine learning-based sentiment classifi-
ers, such as SVM (Zhang and Yu, 2007), or a 
sentiment lexicons with weighted scores from 
training documents (Amati et al., 2007; Hannah 
et al., 2007; Na et al., 2009). Finally, an overall 
score combining the two is computed by using a 
score function, e.g. linear combination, to re-rank 
the retrieved documents. 

Retrieval in the 2-stage approach is based on 
document and document is represented by 
bag-of-word. This representation, however, can 
only ensure that there is at least one opinion in 
each relevant document, but it cannot determine 
the relevance pairing of individual opinion to its 
target. In general, by simply representing a 
document in bag-of-word, contextual informa-
tion i.e. the corresponding target of an opinion, is 
neglected. This may result in possible mismatch 
between an opinion and a target and in turn af-
fects opinion retrieval performance. By the same 
token, the effect to documents consisting of mul-

1367



tiple topics, which is common in blogs and 
on-line reviews, is also significant. In this setting, 
even if a document is regarded opinionated, it 
cannot ensure that all opinions in the document 
are indeed relevant to the target concerned. 
Therefore, we argue that existing information 
representation i.e. bag-of-word, cannot satisfy 
the information needs for opinion retrieval. 

In this paper, we propose to handle opinion re-
trieval in the granularity of sentence. It is ob-
served that a complete opinion is always ex-
pressed in one sentence, and the relevant target 
of the opinion is mostly the one found in it. 
Therefore, it is crucial to maintain the associative 
information between an opinion and its target 
within a sentence. We define the notion of a top-
ic-sentiment word pair, which is composed of a 
topic term (i.e. the target) and a sentiment word 
(i.e. opinion) of a sentence. Word pairs can 
maintain intra-sentence contextual information to 
express the potential relevant opinions. In addi-
tion, inter-sentence contextual information is also 
captured by word pairs to represent the relation-
ship among opinions on the same topic. In prac-
tice, the inter-sentence information reflects the 
degree of a word pair. Finally, we combine both 
intra-sentence and inter-sentence contextual in-
formation to construct a unified undirected graph 
to achieve effective opinion retrieval. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
In Section 2, we describe the motivation of our 
approach. Section 3 presents a novel unified 
graph-based model for opinion retrieval. We 
evaluated our model and the results are presented 
in Section 4. We review related works on opi-
nion retrieval in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6, 
the paper is concluded and future work is sug-
gested.  

2 Motivation 
In this section, we start from briefly describing 
the objective of opinion retrieval. We then illu-
strate the limitations of current opinion retrieval 
approaches, and analyze the motivation of our 
method.  

2.1 Formal Description of Problem 
Opinion retrieval was first presented in the 
TREC 2006 Blog track, and the objective is to 
retrieve documents that express an opinion about 
a given target. The opinion target can be a “tradi-
tional” named entity (e.g. a name of person, lo-
cation, or organization, etc.), a concept (e.g. a 
type of technology), or an event (e.g. presidential 

election). The topic of the document is not re-
quired to be the same as the target, but an opi-
nion about the target has to be presented in the 
document or one of the comments to the docu-
ment (Macdonald and Ounis, 2006). Therefore, 
in this paper we regard the information needs for 
opinion retrieval as relevant opinion. 

2.2 Motivation of Our Approach 
In traditional information retrieval (IR) 
bag-of-word representation is the most common 
way to express information needs. However, in 
opinion retrieval, information need target at re-
levant opinion, and this renders bag-of-word re-
presentation ineffective. 

Consider the example in Figure 1. There are 
three sentences A, B, and C in a document di. 
Now given an opinion-oriented query Q related 
to ‘Avatar’. According to the conventional 
2-stage opinion retrieval approach, di is 
represented by a bag-of-word. Among the words, 
there is a topic term Avatar (t1) occurring twice, 
i.e. Avatar in A and Avatar in C, and two senti-
ment words comfortable (o1) and favorite (o2) 
(refer to Figure 2 (a)). In order to rank this doc-
ument, an overall score of the document di is 
computed by a simple combination of the rele-
vant score ( ) and the opinion score 
( ), e.g. equal weighted linear combination, 
as follows. 

     
For simplicity, we let , and 

 be computed by using lexicon-based 
method: ℎ ℎ . 
 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1: A retrieved document di on the target 
‘Avatar’. 

Although bag-of-word representation achieves 
good performance in retrieving relevant docu-
ments, our study shows that it cannot satisfy the 
information needs for retrieval of relevant opi-
nion. It suffers from the following limitations: 

(1) It cannot maintain contextual information; 
thus, an opinion may not be related to the target 
of the retrieved document is neglected. In this 
example, only the opinion favorite (o2) on Avatar 
in C is the relevant opinion. But due to loss of 
contextual information between the opinion and 
its corresponding target, Avatar in A and com-

A. 阿凡达明日将在中国上映。 
Tomorrow, Avatar will be shown in China. 
B. 我预订到了 IMAX影院中最舒服的位子。
I’ve reserved a comfortable seat in IMAX. 
C. 阿凡达是我最喜欢的一部 3D 电影。 
Avatar is my favorite 3D movie.  

1368



fortable (o1) are also regarded as relevant opi-
nion mistakenly, creating a false positive. In re-
ality comfortable (o1) describes “the seats in 
IMAX”, which is an irrelevant opinion, and sen-
tence A is a factual statement rather than an opi-
nion statement. 

    
     

  (a)                (b)        

Figure 2: Two kinds of information representa-
tion of opinion retrieval. (t1=‘Avatar’ o1= ‘com-
fortable’, o2=‘favorite’) 

(1) Current approaches cannot capture the re-
lationship among opinions about the same topic. 
Suppose there is another document including 
sentence C which expresses the same opinion on 
Avatar. Existing information representation 
simply does not cater for the two identical opi-
nions from different documents. In addition, if 
many documents contain opinions on Avatar, the 
relationship among them is not clearly 
represented by existing approaches.  

In this paper, we process opinion retrieval in 
the granularity of sentence as we observe that a 
complete opinion always exists within a sentence 
(refer to Figure 2 (b)). To represent a relevant 
opinion, we define the notion of topic-sentiment 
word pair, which consists of a topic term and a 
sentiment word. A word pair maintains the asso-
ciative information between the two words, and 
enables systems to draw up the relationship 
among all the sentences with the same opinion 
on an identical target. This relationship informa-
tion can identify all documents with sentences 
including the sentiment words and to determine 
the contributions of such words to the target 
(topic term). Furthermore, based on word pairs, 
we designed a unified graph-based method for 
opinion retrieval (see later in Section 3). 

3 Graph-based model 
3.1 Basic Idea 
Different from existing approaches which simply 
make use of document relevance to reflect the 
relevance of opinions embedded in them, our 
approach concerns more on identifying the re-
levance of individual opinions. Intuitively, we 
believed that the more relevant opinions appear 
in a document, the more relevant is that docu-
ment for subsequent opinion analysis operations. 

Further, since the lexical scope of an opinion 
does not usually go beyond a sentence, we pro-
pose to handle opinion retrieval in the granularity 
of sentence. 

Without loss of generality, we assume that 
there is a document set , , , , , and 
a specific query  , , , , , where 

, , , ,  are query keywords. Opinion re-
trieval aims at retrieving documents from  
with relevant opinion about the query . In ad-
dition, we construct a sentiment word lexicon  
and a topic term lexicon  (see Section 4). To 
maintain the associative information between the 
target and the opinion, we consider the document 
set as a bag of sentences, and define a sentence 
set as , , , , . For each sentence, we 
capture the intra-sentence information through 
the topic-sentiment word pair.  
Definition 1. topic-sentiment word pair   con-
sists of two elements, one is from , and the 
other one is from .  

, |  , . 
The topic term from  determines relevance 

by the query term matching, and the sentiment 
word from  is used to express an opinion. We 
use the word pair to maintain the associative in-
formation between the topic term and the opinion 
word (also referred to as sentiment word). The 
word pair is used to identify a relevant opinion in 
a sentence. In Figure 2 (b), t1, i.e. Avatar in C, is 
a topic term relevant to the query, and o2 (‘favo-
rite’) is supposed to be an opinion; and the word 
pair < t1, o2> indicates sentence C contains a re-
levant opinion. Similarly, we map each sentence 
in word pairs by the following rule, and express 
the intra-sentence information using word pairs. 

For each sentiment word of a sentence, we 
choose the topic term with minimum distance as 
the other element of the word pair: 

, | min ,  for each  
According to the mapping rule, although a 

sentence may give rise to a number of word pairs, 
only the pair with the minimum word distance is 
selected. We do not take into consideration of the 
other words in a sentence as relevant opinions 
are generally formed in close proximity. A sen-
tence is regarded non-opinionated unless it con-
tains at least one word pair. 

In practice, not all word pairs carry equal 
weights to express a relevant opinion as the con-
tribution of an opinion word differs from differ-
ent target topics, and vice versa. For example, 
the word pair < t1, o2> should be more probable 
as a relevant opinion than < t1, o1>. To consider 

1369



that, inter-sentence contextual information is ex-
plored. This is achieved by assigning a weight to 
each word pair to measure their associative de-
grees to different queries. We believe that the 
more a word pair appears the higher should be 
the weight between the opinion and the target in 
the context. 

We will describe how to utilize intra-sentence 
contextual information to express relevant opi-
nion, and inter-sentence information to measure 
the degree of each word pair through a 
graph-based model in the following section. 

3.2 HITS Model 
We propose an opinion retrieval model based on 
HITS, a popular graph ranking algorithm 
(Kleinberg, 1999). By considering both in-
tra-sentence information and inter-sentence in-
formation, we can determine the weight of a 
word pair and rank the documents.  

HITS algorithm distinguishes hubs and au-
thorities in objects. A hub object has links to 
many authorities. An authority object, which has 
high-quality content, would have many hubs 
linking to it. The hub scores and authority scores 
are computed in an iterative way. Our proposed 
opinion retrieval model contains two layers. The 
upper level contains all the topic-sentiment word 
pairs , | , . The lower 
level contains all the documents to be retrieved. 
Figure 3 gives the bipartite graph representation 
of the HITS model.  

 
Figure 3: Bipartite link graph. 

For our purpose, the word pairs layer is consi-
dered as hubs and the documents layer authori-
ties. If a word pair occurs in one sentence of a 
document, there will be an edge between them. 
In Figure 3, we can see that the word pair that 
has links to many documents can be assigned a 
high weight to denote a strong associative degree 
between the topic term and a sentiment word, 
and it likely expresses a relevant opinion. On the 
other hand, if a document has links to many word 
pairs, the document is with many relevant opi-
nions, and it will result in high ranking. 

Formally, the representation for the bipartite 
graph is denoted as , , , where 

 is the set of all pairs of topic words 

and sentiment words, which appear in one sen-
tence.   is the set of documents. 

| ,  corresponds to the 
connection between documents and top-
ic-sentiment word pairs. Each edge  is asso-
ciated with a weight 0,1  denoting the 
contribution of  to the document . The 
weight  is computed by the contribution of 
word pair  in all sentences of  as follows: 

| |
∑ · , 1 ,  1  

 | | is the number of sentences in ; 
  is introduced as the trade-off parameter to 

balance the ,  and , ; 
 ,  is computed to judge the relevance 

of   in  which belongs to ; 
, ,               (2) 

where ,  is the number of  appears in , 
and 

log
.                    (3) 

where  is the number of sentences that the 
word  appears in. 
 ,  is the contribution of  in  

which belongs to . 

,
,

, 0.5 1.5       (4) 
where  is the average number of sentences in 

; ,  is the number of  appears in  (Al-
lan et al., 2003; Otterbacher et al., 2005). 

It is found that the contribution of a sentiment 
word   will not decrease even if it appears in 
all the sentences. Therefore in Equation 4, we 
just use the length of a sentence instead of  
to normalize long sentences which would likely 
contain more sentiment words. 

The authority score  of 
document  and a hub score  
of  at the 1  iteration are computed 
based on the hub scores and authority scores in 
the  iteration as follows. 

∑  (5) 
∑  (6) 

We let , | | | | denote the adjacency 
matrix.  

                 (7) 
                (8) 

where | |  is the vector 
of authority scores for documents at the  ite-
ration and | |  is the 
vector of hub scores for the word pairs at  
iteration. In order to ensure convergence of the 
iterative form,  and  are normalized in each 
iteration cycle.  

1370



For computation of the final scores, the initial 
scores of all documents are set to √ , and top-
ic-sentiment word pairs are set to √ . The 
above iterative steps are then used to compute 
the new scores until convergence. Usually the 
convergence of the iteration algorithm is 
achieved when the difference between the scores 
computed at two successive iterations for any 
nodes falls below a given threshold (Wan et al., 
2008; Li et al., 2009; Erkan and Radev, 2004). In 
our model, we use the hub scores to denote the 
associative degree of each word pair and the au-
thority scores as the total scores. The documents 
are then ranked based on the total scores. 

4 Experiment 
We performed the experiments on the Chinese 
benchmark dataset to verify our proposed ap-
proach for opinion retrieval. We first tested the 
effect of the parameter  of our model. To 
demonstrate the effectiveness of our opinion re-
trieval model, we compared its performance with 
the same of other approaches. In addition, we 
studied each individual query to investigate the 
influence of query to our model. Furthermore, 
we showed the top-5 highest weight word pairs 
of 5 queries to further demonstrate the effect of 
word pair. 

4.1 Experiment Setup  

4.1.1 Benchmark Datasets 
Our experiments are based on the Chinese 
benchmark dataset, COAE08 (Zhao et al., 2008). 
COAE dataset is the benchmark data set for the 
opinion retrieval track in the Chinese Opinion 
Analysis Evaluation (COAE) workshop, consist-
ing of blogs and reviews. 20 queries are provided 
in COAE08. In our experiment, we created re-
levance judgments through pooling method, 
where documents are ranked at different levels: 
irrelevant, relevant but without opinion, and re-
levant with opinion. Since polarity is not consi-
dered, all relevant documents with opinion are 
classified into the same level. 

4.1.2 Sentiment Lexicon  
In our experiment, the sentiment lexicon is 
composed by the following resources (Xu et al., 
2007):  
(1) The Lexicon of Chinese Positive Words, 

which consists of 5,054 positive words and 
the Lexicon of Chinese Negative Words, 
which consists of 3,493 negative words; 

(2) The opinion word lexicon provided by Na-
tional Taiwan University which consists of 
2,812 positive words and 8,276 negative 
words; 

(3) Sentiment word lexicon and comment word 
lexicon from Hownet. It contains 1836 posi-
tive sentiment words, 3,730 positive com-
ments, 1,254 negative sentiment words and 
3,116 negative comment words. 

The different graphemes corresponding to 
Traditional Chinese and Simplified Chinese are 
both considered so that the sentiment lexicons 
from different sources are applicable to process 
Simplified Chinese text. The lexicon was ma-
nually verified.  

4.1.3 Topic Term Collection 
In order to acquire the collection of topic terms, 
we adopt two expansion methods, dictio-
nary-based method and pseudo relevance feed-
back method.  

The dictionary-based method utilizes Wikipe-
dia (Popescu and Etzioni, 2005) to find an entry 
page for a phrase or a single term in a query. If 
such an entry exists, all titles of the entry page 
are extracted as synonyms of the query concept. 
For example, if we search “绿坝” (Green Tsu-
nami, a firewall) in Wikipedia, it is re-directed to 
an entry page titled “花季护航” (Youth Escort). 
This term is then added as a synonym of “绿坝” 
(Green Tsunami) in the query. Synonyms are 
treated the same as the original query terms in a 
retrieval process. The content words in the entry 
page are ranked by their frequencies in the page. 
The top-k terms are returned as potential ex-
panded topic terms. 

The second query expansion method is a 
web-based method. It is similar to the pseudo 
relevance feedback expansion but using web 
documents as the document collection. The 
query is submitted to a web search engine, such 
as Google, which returns a ranked list of docu-
ments. In the top-n documents, the top-m topic 
terms which are highly correlated to the query 
terms are returned. 

4.2 Performance Evaluation 

4.2.1 Parameter Tuning 

We first studied how the parameter  (see Equ-
ation 1) influenced the mean average precision 
(MAP) in our model. The result is given in Fig-
ure 4. 

1371



 
Figure 4: Performance of MAP with varying . 

Best MAP performance was achieved in 
COAE08 evaluation, when  was set between 
0.4 and 0.6. Therefore, in the following experi-
ments, we set 0.4. 

4.2.2 Opinion Retrieval Model Comparison 
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed 
model, we compared it with the following mod-
els using different evaluation metrics: 
(1) IR: We adopted a classical information re-
trieval model, and further assumed that all re-
trieved documents contained relevant opinions. 
(2) Doc: The 2-stage document-based opinion 
retrieval model was adopted. The model used 
sentiment lexicon-based method for opinion 
identification and a conventional information 
retrieval method for relevance detection.  
(3) ROSC: This was the model which achieved 
the best run in TREC Blog 07. It employed ma-
chine learning method to identify opinions for 
each sentence, and to determine the target topic 
by a NEAR operator. 
(4) ROCC: This model was similar to ROSC, 
but it considered the factor of sentence and re-
garded the count of relevant opinionated sen-
tence to be the opinion score (Zhang and Yu, 
2007). In our experiment, we treated this model 
as the evaluation baseline. 
(5) GORM: our proposed graph-based opinion 
retrieval model. 

Approach COAE08 Evaluation metrics 
Run id MAP R-pre bPref P@10
IR 0.2797 0.3545 0.2474 0.4868
Doc 0.3316 0.3690 0.3030 0.6696
ROSC 0.3762 0.4321 0.4162 0.7089
Baseline 0.3774 0.4411 0.4198 0.6931
GORM 0.3978 0.4835 0.4265 0.7309

Table 1: Comparison of different approaches on 
COAE08 dataset, and the best is highlighted. 

Most of the above models were originally de-
signed for opinion retrieval in English, and 
re-designed them to handle Chinese opinionated 
documents. We incorporated our own Chinese 
sentiment lexicon for this purpose. In our expe-
riments, in addition to MAP, other metrics such 
as R-precision (R-prec), binary Preference (bPref) 

and Precision at 10 documents (P@10) were also 
used. The evaluation results based on these me-
trics are shown in Table 1. 

Table 1 summarized the results obtained. We 
found that GORM achieved the best performance 
in all the evaluation metrics. Our baseline, ROSC 
and GORM which were sentence-based ap-
proaches achieved better performance than the 
document-based approaches by 20% in average. 
Moreover, our GORM approach did not use ma-
chine learning techniques, but it could still 
achieve outstanding performance. 

To study GORM influenced by different que-
ries, the MAP from median average precision on 
individual topic was shown in Figure 5. 

Figure 5: Difference of MAP from Median on 
COAE08 dataset. (MAP of Median is 0.3724) 

As shown in Figure 5, the MAP performance 
was very low on topic 8 and topic 11. Topic 8, i.e. 
‘成龙’ (Jackie Chan), it was influenced by topic 
7, i.e. ‘李连杰’ (Jet Lee) as there were a number 
of similar relevant targets for the two topics, and 
therefore many word pairs ended up the same. 
As a result, documents belonging to topic 7 and 
topic 8 could not be differentiated, and they both 
performed badly. In order to solve this problem, 
we extracted the topic term with highest relevant 
weight in the sentence to form word pairs so that 
it reduce the impact on the topic terms in com-
mon. 24% and 30% improvement were achieved, 
respectively. 

As to topic 11, i.e. ‘指环王’ (Lord of King), 
there were only 8 relevant documents without 
any opinion and 14 documents with relevant 
opinions. As a result, the graph constructed by 
insufficient documents worked ineffectively.  

Except for the above queries, GORM per-
formed well in most of the others. To further in-
vestigate the effect of word pair, we summarized 
the top-5 word pairs with highest weight of 5 
queries in Table 2. 

 

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1

M
A

P

λ

COAE08

‐0.4
‐0.3
‐0.2
‐0.1

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920

D
iff

er
en

ce

Topic

Difference from Median Average Precision per 
Topic

1372



Table 2: Top-5 highest weight word pairs for 5 queries in COAE08 dataset. 

Table 2 showed that most word pairs could 
represent the relevant opinions about the corres-
ponding queries. This showed that inter-sentence 
information was very helpful to identify the as-
sociative degree of a word pair. Furthermore, 
since word pairs can indicate relevant opinions 
effectively, it is worth further study on how they 
could be applied to other opinion oriented appli-
cations, e.g. opinion summarization, opinion 
prediction, etc. 

5 Related Work 
Our research focuses on relevant opinion rather 
than on relevant document retrieval. We, there-
fore, review related works in opinion identifica-
tion research. Furthermore, we do not support the 
conventional 2-stage opinion retrieval approach. 
We conducted literature review on unified opi-
nion retrieval models and related work in this 
area is presented in the section. 

5.1 Lexicon-based Opinion Identification 
Different from traditional IR, opinion retrieval 
focuses on the opinion nature of documents. 
During the last three years, NTICR and TREC 
evaluations have shown that sentiment lex-
icon-based methods led to good performance in 
opinion identification.  

A lightweight lexicon-based statistical ap-
proach was proposed by Hannah et al. (2007). In 
this method, the distribution of terms in relevant 
opinionated documents was compared to their 
distribution in relevant fact-based documents to 
calculate an opinion weight. These weights were 
used to compute opinion scores for each re-
trieved document. A weighted dictionary was 
generated from previous TREC relevance data 
(Amati et al., 2007). This dictionary was submit-
ted as a query to a search engine to get an initial 
query-independent opinion score of all retrieved 

documents. Similarly, a pseudo opinionated 
word composed of all opinion words was first 
created, and then used to estimate the opinion 
score of a document (Na et al., 2009). This me-
thod was shown to be very effective in TREC 
evaluations (Lee et al., 2008). More recently, 
Huang and Croft (2009) proposed an effective 
relevance model, which integrated both 
query-independent and query-dependent senti-
ment words into a mixture model. 

In our approach, we also adopt sentiment lex-
icon-based method for opinion identification. 
Unlike the above methods, we generate a weight 
to a sentiment word for each target (associated 
topic term) rather than assign a unified weight or 
an equal weight to the sentiment word for the 
whole topics. Besides, in our model no training 
data is required. We just utilize the structure of 
our graph to generate a weight to reflect the as-
sociative degree between the two elements of a 
word pair in different context. 

5.2 Unified Opinion Retrieval Model 
In addition to conventional 2-stage approach, 
there has been some research on unified opinion 
retrieval models.  

Eguchi and Lavrenko proposed an opinion re-
trieval model in the framework of generative 
language modeling (Eguchi and Lavrenko, 2006). 
They modeled a collection of natural language 
documents or statements, each of which con-
sisted of some topic-bearing and some senti-
ment-bearing words. The sentiment was either 
represented by a group of predefined seed words, 
or extracted from a training sentiment corpus. 
This model was shown to be effective on the 
MPQA corpus.  

Mei et al. tried to build a fine-grained opinion 
retrieval system for consumer products (Mei et 
al., 2007). The opinion score for a product was a 
mixture of several facets. Due to the difficulty in 

Top-5 MAP 
陈凯歌 

Chen Kaige 
国六条 

Six States 
宏观调控 

Macro-regulation 
周星驰 

Stephen Chow 
Vista 
Vista 

<陈凯歌 支持> 
Chen Kaige Support 

<陈凯歌 最佳> 
Chen Kaige Best 
<《无极》 骂> 
Limitless Revile 
<影片 优秀> 

Movie Excellent 
<阵容 强大的> 

Cast Strong 

<房价 上涨> 
Room rate Rise 
<调控 加强> 

Regulate Strengthen
<中央 加强> 

CCP Strengthen 
<房价 平稳> 

Room rate Steady 
<住房 保障> 

Housing Security 

<经济 平稳> 
Economics Steady 

<价格 上涨> 
Price Rise 

<发展 平稳> 
Development Steady

<消费 上涨> 
Consume Rise 
<社会 保障> 
Social Security 

<电影 喜欢> 
Movie Like 

<周星驰 喜欢> 
Stephen Chow Like 

<主角 最佳> 
Protagonist Best 

<喜剧 好> 
Comedy Good 
<作品 精彩> 

Works Splendid 

<价格 贵> 
Price Expensive 
<微软 喜欢> 
Microsoft Like 
 <Vista 推荐> 

Vista Recommend
<问题 重要> 
Problem Vital 

<性能 不> 
Performance No 

1373



associating sentiment with products and facets, 
the system was only tested using small scale text 
collections.  

Zhang and Ye proposed a generative model to 
unify topic relevance and opinion generation 
(Zhang and Ye, 2008). This model led to satis-
factory performance, but an intensive computa-
tion load was inevitable during retrieval, since 
for each possible candidate document, an opinion 
score was summed up from the generative prob-
ability of thousands of sentiment words. 

Huang and Croft proposed a unified opinion 
retrieval model according to the Kullback-Leib- 
ler divergence between the two probability dis-
tributions of opinion relevance model and docu-
ment model (Huang and Croft, 2009). They di-
vided the sentiment words into query-dependent 
and query-independent by utilizing several sen-
timent expansion techniques, and integrated them 
into a mixed model. However, in this model, the 
contribution of a sentiment word was its corres-
ponding incremental mean average precision 
value. This method required that large amount of 
training data and manual labeling. 

Different from the above opinion retrieval ap-
proaches, our proposed graph-based model 
processes opinion retrieval in the granularity of 
sentence. Instead of bag-of-word, the sentence is 
split into word pairs which can maintain the 
contextual information. On the one hand, word 
pair can identify the relevant opinion according 
to intra-sentence contextual information. On the 
other hand, it can measure the degree of a rele-
vant opinion by considering the inter-sentence 
contextual information. 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this work we focus on the problem of opinion 
retrieval. Different from existing approaches, 
which regard document relevance as the key in-
dicator of opinion relevance, we propose to ex-
plore the relevance of individual opinion. To do 
that, opinion retrieval is performed in the granu-
larity of sentence. We define the notion of word 
pair, which can not only maintain the association 
between the opinion and the corresponding target 
in the sentence, but it can also build up the rela-
tionship among sentences through the same word 
pair. Furthermore, we convert the relationships 
between word pairs and sentences into a unified 
graph, and use the HITS algorithm to achieve 
document ranking for opinion retrieval. Finally, 
we compare our approach with existing methods. 

Experimental results show that our proposed 
model performs well on COAE08 dataset.  

The novelty of our work lies in using word 
pairs to represent the information needs for opi-
nion retrieval. On the one hand, word pairs can 
identify the relevant opinion according to in-
tra-sentence contextual information. On the other 
hand, word pairs can measure the degree of a 
relevant opinion by taking inter-sentence con-
textual information into consideration. With the 
help of word pairs, the information needs for 
opinion retrieval can be represented appropriate-
ly. 

In the future, more research is required in the 
following directions: 
(1) Since word pairs can indicate relevant opi-

nions effectively, it is worth further study on 
how they could be applied to other opinion 
oriented applications, e.g. opinion summa-
rization, opinion prediction, etc. 

(2) The characteristics of blogs will be taken 
into consideration, i.e., the post time, which 
could be helpful to create a more time sensi-
tivity graph to filter out fake opinions. 

(3) Opinion holder is another important role of 
an opinion, and the identification of opinion 
holder is a main task in NTCIR. It would be 
interesting to study opinion holders, e.g. its 
seniority, for opinion retrieval. 

Acknowledgements: This work is partially 
supported by the Innovation and Technology 
Fund of Hong Kong SAR (No. ITS/182/08) and 
National 863 program (No. 2009AA01Z150). 
Special thanks to Xu Hongbo for providing the 
Chinese sentiment resources. We also thank Bo 
Chen, Wei Gao, Xu Han and anonymous re-
viewers for their helpful comments. 

References 
James Allan, Courtney Wade, and Alvaro Bolivar. 

2003. Retrieval and novelty detection at the sen-
tence level. In SIGIR ’03: Proceedings of the 26th 
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on 
Research and development in information retrieval, 
pages 314-321. ACM. 

Giambattista Amati, Edgardo Ambrosi, Marco Bianc-
hi, Carlo Gaibisso, and Giorgio Gambosi. 2007. 
FUB, IASI-CNR and University of Tor Vergata at 
TREC 2007 Blog Track. In Proceedings of the 15th 
Text Retrieval Conference. 

Koji Eguchi and Victor Lavrenko. Sentiment retrieval 
using generative models. 2006. In EMNLP ’06, 
Proceedings of 2006 Conference on Empirical Me-
thods in Natural Language Processing, page 
345-354. 

1374



Gunes Erkan and Dragomir R. Radev. 2004. Lexpa-
gerank: Prestige in multi-document text summariza-
tion. In EMNLP ’04, Proceedings of 2004 Confe-
rence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing. 

David Hannah, Craig Macdonald, Jie Peng, Ben He, 
and Iadh Ounis. 2007. University of Glasgow at 
TREC 2007: Experiments in Blog and Enterprise 
Tracks with Terrier. In Proceedings of the 15th Text 
Retrieval Conference. 

Xuanjing Huang, William Bruce Croft. 2009. A Uni-
fied Relevance Model for Opinion Retrieval. In 
Proceedings of CIKM. 

Jon M. Kleinberg. 1999. Authoritative sources in a 
hyperlinked environment. J. ACM, 46(5): 604-632. 

Yeha Lee, Seung-Hoon Na, Jungi Kim, Sang-Hyob 
Nam, Hun-young Jung, Jong-Hyeok Lee. 2008. 
KLE at TREC 2008 Blog Track: Blog Post and Feed 
Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 15th Text Retrieval 
Conference. 

Fangtao Li, Yang Tang, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan 
Zhu. 2009. Answering Opinion Questions with 
Random Walks on Graphs. In ACL ’09, Proceedings 
of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 

Bing Liu, Minqing Hu, and Junsheng Cheng. 2005. 
Opinion observer: Analyzing and comparing opi-
nion s on the web. In WWW ’05: Proceedings of the 
14th International Conference on World Wide Web. 

Craig Macdonald and Iadh Ounis. 2007. Overview of 
the TREC-2007 Blog Track. In Proceedings of the 
15th Text Retrieval Conference. 

Craig Macdonald and Iadh Ounis. 2006. Overview of 
the TREC-2006 Blog Track. In Proceedings of the 
14th Text Retrieval Conference. 

Qiaozhu Mei, Xu Ling, Matthew Wondra, Hang Su, 
and Chengxiang Zhai. 2007. Topic sentiment mix-
ture: Modeling facets and opinions in weblogs. In 
WWW ’07: Proceedings of the 16 International 
Conference on World Wide Web. 

Seung-Hoon Na, Yeha Lee, Sang-Hyob Nam, and 
Jong-Hyeok Lee. 2009. Improving opinion retrieval 
based on query-specific sentiment lexicon. In 
ECIR ’09: Proceedings of the 31st annual European 
Conference on Information Retrieval, pages 
734-738. 

Douglas Oard, Tamer Elsayed, Jianqiang Wang, Ye-
jun Wu, Pengyi Zhang, Eileen Abels, Jimmy Lin, 

and Dagbert Soergel. 2006. TREC-2006 at Mary-
land: Blog, Enterprise, Legal and QA Tracks. In 
Proceedings of the 15th Text Retrieval Conference. 

Jahna Otterbacher, Gunes Erkan, and Dragomir R. 
Radev. 2005. Using random walks for ques-
tion-focused sentence retrieval. In EMNLP ’05, 
Proceedings of 2005 Conference on Empirical Me-
thods in Natural Language Processing. 

Larry Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry 
Winograd. 1998. The pagerank citation ranking: 
Bringing order to the web. Technical report, Stan-
ford University. 

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and 
sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in In-
formation Retrieval, 2(1-2): 1-135.  

Ana-Maria Popescu and Oren Etzioni. 2005. Extract-
ing product features and opinion s from reviews. In 
EMNLP ’05, Proceedings of 2005 Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing. 

Xiaojun Wan and Jianwu Yang. 2008. Mul-
ti-document summarization using cluster-based link 
analysis. In SIGIR ’08: Proceedings of the 31th an-
nual international ACM SIGIR conference on Re-
search and development in information retrieval, 
pages 299-306. ACM. 

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. 
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in 
phrase-level sentiment analysis. In EMNLP ’05, 
Proceedings of 2005 Conference on Empirical Me-
thods in Natural Language Processing.  

Ruifeng Xu, Kam-Fai Wong and Yunqing Xia. 2007. 
Opinmine - Opinion Analysis System by CUHK for 
NTCIR-6 Pilot Task. In Proceedings of NTCIR-6.  

Min Zhang and Xingyao Ye. 2008. A generation 
model to unify topic relevance and lexicon-based 
sentiment for opinion retrieval. In SIGIR ’08: Pro-
ceedings of the 31st Annual International ACM SI-
GIR conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval, pages 411-418. ACM. 

Wei Zhang and Clement Yu. 2007. UIC at TREC 
2007 Blog Track. In Proceedings of the 15th Text 
Retrieval Conference. 

Jun Zhao, Hongbo Xu, Xuanjing Huang, Songbo Tan, 
Kang Liu, and Qi Zhang. 2008. Overview of Chi-
nese Opinion Analysis Evaluation 2008. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Chinese Opinion Analysis 
Evaluation. 

 

1375


