










































Cognitively Plausible Models of Human Language Processing


Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, pages 60–67,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cognitively Plausible Models of Human Language Processing

Frank Keller
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

keller@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

We pose the development of cognitively
plausible models of human language pro-
cessing as a challenge for computational
linguistics. Existing models can only deal
with isolated phenomena (e.g., garden
paths) on small, specifically selected data
sets. The challenge is to build models that
integrate multiple aspects of human lan-
guage processing at the syntactic, seman-
tic, and discourse level. Like human lan-
guage processing, these models should be
incremental, predictive, broad coverage,
and robust to noise. This challenge can
only be met if standardized data sets and
evaluation measures are developed.

1 Introduction

In many respects, human language processing is
the ultimate goldstandard for computational lin-
guistics. Humans understand and generate lan-
guage with amazing speed and accuracy, they are
able to deal with ambiguity and noise effortlessly
and can adapt to new speakers, domains, and reg-
isters. Most surprisingly, they achieve this compe-
tency on the basis of limited training data (Hart
and Risley, 1995), using learning algorithms that
are largely unsupervised.

Given the impressive performance of humans
as language processors, it seems natural to turn
to psycholinguistics, the discipline that studies hu-
man language processing, as a source of informa-
tion about the design of efficient language pro-
cessing systems. Indeed, psycholinguists have un-
covered an impressive array of relevant facts (re-
viewed in Section 2), but computational linguists
are often not aware of this literature, and results
about human language processing rarely inform
the design, implementation, or evaluation of artifi-
cial language processing systems.

At the same time, research in psycholinguis-
tics is often oblivious of work in computational

linguistics (CL). To test their theories, psycholin-
guists construct computational models of hu-
man language processing, but these models of-
ten fall short of the engineering standards that
are generally accepted in the CL community
(e.g., broad coverage, robustness, efficiency): typ-
ical psycholinguistic models only deal with iso-
lated phenomena and fail to scale to realistic data
sets. A particular issue is evaluation, which is typ-
ically anecdotal, performed on a small set of hand-
crafted examples (see Sections 3).

In this paper, we propose a challenge that re-
quires the combination of research efforts in com-
putational linguistics and psycholinguistics: the
development of cognitively plausible models of
human language processing. This task can be de-
composed into a modeling challenge (building
models that instantiate known properties of hu-
man language processing) and a data and evalu-
ation challenge (accounting for experimental find-
ings and evaluating against standardized data sets),
which we will discuss in turn.

2 Modeling Challenge

2.1 Key Properties
The first part of the challenge is to develop a model
that instantiates key properties of human language
processing, as established by psycholinguistic ex-
perimentation (see Table 1 for an overview and
representative references).1 A striking property of
the human language processor is its efficiency and
robustness. For the vast majority of sentences, it
will effortlessly and rapidly deliver the correct
analysis, even in the face of noise and ungrammat-
icalities. There is considerable experimental evi-

1Here an in the following, we will focus on sentence
processing, which is often regarded as a central aspect of
human language processing. A more comprehensive answer
to our modeling challenge should also include phonological
and morphological processing, semantic inference, discourse
processing, and other non-syntactic aspects of language pro-
cessing. Furthermore, established results regarding the inter-
face between language processing and non-linguistic cogni-
tion (e.g., the sensorimotor system) should ultimately be ac-
counted for in a fully comprehensive model.

60



ModelProperty Evidence Rank Surp Pred Stack
Efficiency and robustness Ferreira et al. (2001); Sanford and Sturt (2002) − − − +
Broad coverage Crocker and Brants (2000) + + − +
Incrementality and connectedness Tanenhaus et al. (1995); Sturt and Lombardo (2005) + + + +
Prediction Kamide et al. (2003); Staub and Clifton (2006) − ± + −
Memory cost Gibson (1998); Vasishth and Lewis (2006) − − + +

Table 1: Key properties of human language processing and their instantiation in various models of sentence processing (see
Section 2 for details)

dence that shallow processing strategies are used
to achieve this. The processor also achieves broad
coverage: it can deal with a wide variety of syntac-
tic constructions, and is not restricted by the do-
main, register, or modality of the input.

Human language processing is also word-by-
word incremental. There is strong evidence that
a new word is integrated as soon as it is avail-
able into the representation of the sentence thus
far. Readers and listeners experience differential
processing difficulty during this integration pro-
cess, depending on the properties of the new word
and its relationship to the preceding context. There
is evidence that the processor instantiates a strict
form of incrementality by building only fully con-
nected trees. Furthermore, the processor is able
to make predictions about upcoming material on
the basis of sentence prefixes. For instance, listen-
ers can predict an upcoming post-verbal element
based on the semantics of the preceding verb. Or
they can make syntactic predictions, e.g., if they
encounter the word either, they predict an upcom-
ing or and the type of complement that follows it.

Another key property of human language pro-
cessing is the fact that it operates with limited
memory, and that structures in memory are subject
to decay and interference. In particular, the pro-
cessor is known to incur a distance-based memory
cost: combining the head of a phrase with its syn-
tactic dependents is more difficult the more depen-
dents have to be integrated and the further away
they are. This integration process is also subject
to interference from similar items that have to be
held in memory at the same time.

2.2 Current Models

The challenge is to develop a computational model
that captures the key properties of human language
processing outlined in the previous section. A
number of relevant models have been developed,
mostly based on probabilistic parsing techniques,
but none of them instantiates all the key proper-
ties discussed above (Table 1 gives an overview of

model properties).2

The earliest approaches were ranking-based
models (Rank), which make psycholinguistic pre-
dictions based on the ranking of the syntactic
analyses produced by a probabilistic parser. Ju-
rafsky (1996) assumes that processing difficulty
is triggered if the correct analysis falls below a
certain probability threshold (i.e., is pruned by
the parser). Similarly, Crocker and Brants (2000)
assume that processing difficulty ensures if the
highest-ranked analysis changes from one word to
the next. Both approaches have been shown to suc-
cessfully model garden path effects. Being based
on probabilistic parsing techniques, ranking-based
models generally achieve a broad coverage, but
their efficiency and robustness has not been evalu-
ated. Also, they are not designed to capture syntac-
tic prediction or memory effects (other than search
with a narrow beam in Brants and Crocker 2000).

The ranking-based approach has been gener-
alized by surprisal models (Surp), which pre-
dict processing difficulty based on the change in
the probability distribution over possible analy-
ses from one word to the next (Hale, 2001; Levy,
2008; Demberg and Keller, 2008a; Ferrara Boston
et al., 2008; Roark et al., 2009). These models
have been successful in accounting for a range of
experimental data, and they achieve broad cover-
age. They also instantiate a limited form of predic-
tion, viz., they build up expectations about the next
word in the input. On the other hand, the efficiency
and robustness of these models has largely not
been evaluated, and memory costs are not mod-
eled (again except for restrictions in beam size).

The prediction model (Pred) explicitly predicts
syntactic structure for upcoming words (Demberg
and Keller, 2008b, 2009), thus accounting for ex-
perimental results on predictive language process-
ing. It also implements a strict form of incre-

2We will not distinguish between model and linking the-
ory, i.e., the set of assumptions that links model quantities
to behavioral data (e.g., more probably structures are easier
to process). It is conceivable, for instance, that a stack-based
model is combined with a linking theory based on surprisal.

61



Factor Evidence
Word senses Roland and Jurafsky (2002)
Selectional re-
strictions

Garnsey et al. (1997); Pickering and
Traxler (1998)

Thematic roles McRae et al. (1998); Pickering et al.
(2000)

Discourse ref-
erence

Altmann and Steedman (1988); Grod-
ner and Gibson (2005)

Discourse
coherence

Stewart et al. (2000); Kehler et al.
(2008)

Table 2: Semantic factors in human language processing

mentality by building fully connected trees. Mem-
ory costs are modeled directly as a distance-based
penalty that is incurred when a prediction has to be
verified later in the sentence. However, the current
implementation of the prediction model is neither
robust and efficient nor offers broad coverage.

Recently, a stack-based model (Stack) has been
proposed that imposes explicit, cognitively mo-
tivated memory constraints on the parser, in ef-
fect limiting the stack size available to the parser
(Schuler et al., 2010). This delivers robustness, ef-
ficiency, and broad coverage, but does not model
syntactic prediction. Unlike the other models dis-
cussed here, no psycholinguistic evaluation has
been conducted on the stack-based model, so its
cognitive plausibility is preliminary.

2.3 Beyond Parsing
There is strong evidence that human language pro-
cessing is driven by an interaction of syntactic, se-
mantic, and discourse processes (see Table 2 for
an overview and references). Considerable exper-
imental work has focused on the semantic prop-
erties of the verb of the sentence, and verb sense,
selectional restrictions, and thematic roles have all
been shown to interact with syntactic ambiguity
resolution. Another large body of research has elu-
cidated the interaction of discourse processing and
syntactic processing. The most-well known effect
is probably that of referential context: syntactic
ambiguities can be resolved if a discourse con-
text is provided that makes one of the syntactic
alternatives more plausible. For instance, in a con-
text that provides two possible antecedents for a
noun phrase, the processor will prefer attaching a
PP or a relative clause such that it disambiguates
between the two antecedents; garden paths are re-
duced or disappear. Other results point to the im-
portance of discourse coherence for sentence pro-
cessing, an example being implicit causality.

The challenge facing researchers in compu-
tational and psycholinguistics therefore includes

the development of language processing models
that combine syntactic processing with semantic
and discourse processing. So far, this challenge is
largely unmet: there are some examples of models
that integrate semantic processes such as thematic
role assignment into a parsing model (Narayanan
and Jurafsky, 2002; Padó et al., 2009). However,
other semantic factors are not accounted for by
these models, and incorporating non-lexical as-
pects of semantics into models of sentence pro-
cessing is a challenge for ongoing research. Re-
cently, Dubey (2010) has proposed an approach
that combines a probabilistic parser with a model
of co-reference and discourse inference based on
probabilistic logic. An alternative approach has
been taken by Pynte et al. (2008) and Mitchell
et al. (2010), who combine a vector-space model
of semantics (Landauer and Dumais, 1997) with a
syntactic parser and show that this results in pre-
dictions of processing difficulty that can be vali-
dated against an eye-tracking corpus.

2.4 Acquisition and Crosslinguistics

All models of human language processing dis-
cussed so far rely on supervised training data. This
raises another aspect of the modeling challenge:
the human language processor is the product of
an acquisition process that is largely unsupervised
and has access to only limited training data: chil-
dren aged 12–36 months are exposed to between
10 and 35 million words of input (Hart and Ris-
ley, 1995). The challenge therefore is to develop
a model of language acquisition that works with
such small training sets, while also giving rise to
a language processor that meets the key criteria
in Table 1. The CL community is in a good posi-
tion to rise to this challenge, given the significant
progress in unsupervised parsing in recent years
(starting from Klein and Manning 2002). How-
ever, none of the existing unsupervised models has
been evaluated against psycholinguistic data sets,
and they are not designed to meet even basic psy-
cholinguistic criteria such as incrementality.

A related modeling challenge is the develop-
ment of processing models for languages other
than English. There is a growing body of ex-
perimental research investigating human language
processing in other languages, but virtually all ex-
isting psycholinguistic models only work for En-
glish (the only exceptions we are aware of are
Dubey et al.’s (2008) and Ferrara Boston et al.’s

62



(2008) parsing models for German). Again, the
CL community has made significant progress in
crosslinguistic parsing, especially using depen-
dency grammar (Hajič, 2009), and psycholinguis-
tic modeling could benefit from this in order to
meet the challenge of developing crosslinguisti-
cally valid models of human language processing.

3 Data and Evaluation Challenge

3.1 Test Sets

The second key challenge that needs to be ad-
dressed in order to develop cognitively plausible
models of human language processing concerns
test data and model evaluation. Here, the state of
the art in psycholinguistic modeling lags signif-
icantly behind standards in the CL community.
Most of the models discussed in Section 2 have not
been evaluated rigorously. The authors typically
describe their performance on a small set of hand-
picked examples; no attempts are made to test on
a range of items from the experimental literature
and determine model fit directly against behavioral
measures (e.g., reading times). This makes it very
hard to obtain a realistic estimate of how well the
models achieve their aim of capturing human lan-
guage processing behavior.

We therefore suggest the development of stan-
dard test sets for psycholinguistic modeling, simi-
lar to what is commonplace for tasks in computa-
tional linguistics: parsers are evaluated against the
Penn Treebank, word sense disambiguation sys-
tems against the SemEval data sets, co-reference
systems against the Tipster or ACE corpora, etc.
Two types of test data are required for psycholin-
guistic modeling. The first type of test data con-
sists of a collection of representative experimental
results. This collection should contain the actual
experimental materials (sentences or discourse
fragments) used in the experiments, together with
the behavioral measurements obtained (reading
times, eye-movement records, rating judgments,
etc.). The experiments included in this test set
would be chosen to cover a wide range of ex-
perimental phenomena, e.g., garden paths, syntac-
tic complexity, memory effects, semantic and dis-
course factors. Such a test set will enable the stan-
dardized evaluation of psycholinguistic models by
comparing the model predictions (rankings, sur-
prisal values, memory costs, etc.) against behav-
ioral measures on a large set of items. This way
both the coverage of a model (how many phenom-

ena can it account for) and its accuracy (how well
does it fit the behavioral data) can be assessed.

Experimental test sets should be complemented
by test sets based on corpus data. In order to as-
sess the efficiency, robustness, and broad cover-
age of a model, a corpus of unrestricted, naturally
occurring text is required. The use of contextual-
ized language data makes it possible to assess not
only syntactic models, but also models that capture
discourse effects. These corpora need to be anno-
tated with behavioral measures, e.g., eye-tracking
or reading time data. Some relevant corpora have
already been constructed, see the overview in Ta-
ble 3, and various authors have used them for
model evaluation (Demberg and Keller, 2008a;
Pynte et al., 2008; Frank, 2009; Ferrara Boston
et al., 2008; Patil et al., 2009; Roark et al., 2009;
Mitchell et al., 2010).

However, the usefulness of the psycholinguis-
tic corpora in Table 3 is restricted by the absence
of gold-standard linguistic annotation (though the
French part of the Dundee corpus, which is syn-
tactically annotated). This makes it difficult to test
the accuracy of the linguistic structures computed
by a model, and restricts evaluation to behavioral
predictions. The challenge is therefore to collect
a standardized test set of naturally occurring text
or speech enriched not only with behavioral vari-
ables, but also with syntactic and semantic anno-
tation. Such a data set could for example be con-
structed by eye-tracking section 23 of the Penn
Treebank (which is also part of Propbank, and thus
has both syntactic and thematic role annotation).

In computational linguistics, the development
of new data sets is often stimulated by competi-
tions in which systems are compared on a stan-
dardized task, using a data set specifically de-
signed for the competition. Examples include the
CoNLL shared task, SemEval, or TREC in com-
putational syntax, semantics, and discourse, re-
spectively. A similar competition could be devel-
oped for computational psycholinguistics – maybe
along the lines of the model comparison chal-
lenges that held at the International Conference
on Cognitive Modeling. These challenges provide
standardized task descriptions and data sets; par-
ticipants can enter their cognitive models, which
were then compared using a pre-defined evalua-
tion metric.3

3The ICCM 2009 challenge was the Dynamic Stock and
Flows Task, for more information see http://www.hss.
cmu.edu/departments/sds/ddmlab/modeldsf/.

63



Corpus Language Words Participants Method Reference
Dundee Corpus English, French 50,000 10 Eye-tracking Kennedy and Pynte (2005)
Potsdam Corpus German 1,138 222 Eye-tracking Kliegl et al. (2006)
MIT Corpus English 3,534 23 Self-paced reading Bachrach (2008)

Table 3: Test corpora that have been used for psycholinguistic modeling of sentence processing; note that the Potsdam Corpus
consists of isolated sentences, rather than of continuous text

3.2 Behavioral and Neural Data

As outlined in the previous section, a number of
authors have evaluated psycholinguistic models
against eye-tracking or reading time corpora. Part
of the data and evaluation challenge is to extend
this evaluation to neural data as provided by event-
related potential (ERP) or brain imaging studies
(e.g., using functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing, fMRI). Neural data sets are considerably more
complex than behavioral ones, and modeling them
is an important new task that the community is
only beginning to address. Some recent work has
evaluated models of word semantics against ERP
(Murphy et al., 2009) or fMRI data (Mitchell et al.,
2008).4 This is a very promising direction, and the
challenge is to extend this approach to the sentence
and discourse level (see Bachrach 2008). Again,
it will again be necessary to develop standardized
test sets of both experimental data and corpus data.

3.3 Evaluation Measures

We also anticipate that the availability of new test
data sets will facilitate the development of new
evaluation measures that specifically test the va-
lidity of psycholinguistic models. Established CL
evaluation measures such as Parseval are of lim-
ited use, as they can only test the linguistic, but not
the behavioral or neural predictions of a model.

So far, many authors have relied on qualita-
tive evaluation: if a model predicts a difference
in (for instance) reading time between two types
of sentences where such a difference was also
found experimentally, then that counts as a suc-
cessful test. In most cases, no quantitative evalu-
ation is performed, as this would require model-
ing the reading times for individual item and in-
dividual participants. Suitable procedures for per-
forming such tests do not currently exist; linear
mixed effects models (Baayen et al., 2008) pro-
vide a way of dealing with item and participant
variation, but crucially do not enable direct com-
parisons between models in terms of goodness of
fit.

4These data sets were released as part of the NAACL-
2010 Workshop on Computational Neurolinguistics.

Further issues arise from the fact that we of-
ten want to compare model fit for multiple experi-
ments (ideally without reparametrizing the mod-
els), and that various mutually dependent mea-
sures are used for evaluation, e.g., processing ef-
fort at the sentence, word, and character level. An
important open challenge is there to develop eval-
uation measures and associated statistical proce-
dures that can deal with these problems.

4 Conclusions

In this paper, we discussed the modeling and
data/evaluation challenges involved in developing
cognitively plausible models of human language
processing. Developing computational models is
of scientific importance in so far as models are im-
plemented theories: models of language process-
ing allow us to test scientific hypothesis about the
cognitive processes that underpin language pro-
cessing. This type of precise, formalized hypoth-
esis testing is only possible if standardized data
sets and uniform evaluation procedures are avail-
able, as outlined in the present paper. Ultimately,
this approach enables qualitative and quantitative
comparisons between theories, and thus enhances
our understanding of a key aspect of human cog-
nition, language processing.

There is also an applied side to the proposed
challenge. Once computational models of human
language processing are available, they can be
used to predict the difficulty that humans experi-
ence when processing text or speech. This is use-
ful for a number applications: for instance, nat-
ural language generation would benefit from be-
ing able to assess whether machine-generated text
or speech is easy to process. For text simplifica-
tion (e.g., for children or impaired readers), such a
model is even more essential. It could also be used
to assess the readability of text, which is of interest
in educational applications (e.g., essay scoring). In
machine translation, evaluating the fluency of sys-
tem output is crucial, and a model that predicts
processing difficulty could be used for this, or to
guide the choice between alternative translations,
and maybe even to inform human post-editing.

64



References

Altmann, Gerry T. M. and Mark J. Steedman.
1988. Interaction with context during human
sentence processing. Cognition 30(3):191–238.

Baayen, R. H., D. J. Davidson, and D. M. Bates.
2008. Mixed-effects modeling with crossed ran-
dom effects for subjects and items. Journal of
Memory and Language to appear.

Bachrach, Asaf. 2008. Imaging Neural Correlates
of Syntactic Complexity in a Naturalistic Con-
text. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Brants, Thorsten and Matthew W. Crocker. 2000.
Probabilistic parsing and psychological plau-
sibility. In Proceedings of the 18th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics. Saarbrücken/Luxembourg/Nancy, pages
111–117.

Crocker, Matthew W. and Thorsten Brants. 2000.
Wide-coverage probabilistic sentence process-
ing. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research
29(6):647–669.

Demberg, Vera and Frank Keller. 2008a. Data
from eye-tracking corpora as evidence for theo-
ries of syntactic processing complexity. Cogni-
tion 101(2):193–210.

Demberg, Vera and Frank Keller. 2008b. A psy-
cholinguistically motivated version of TAG. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop
on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related For-
malisms. Tübingen, pages 25–32.

Demberg, Vera and Frank Keller. 2009. A com-
putational model of prediction in human pars-
ing: Unifying locality and surprisal effects. In
Niels Taatgen and Hedderik van Rijn, editors,
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Cognitive Sci-
ence Society, Amsterdam, pages 1888–1893.

Dubey, Amit. 2010. The influence of discourse on
syntax: A psycholinguistic model of sentence
processing. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. Uppsala.

Dubey, Amit, Frank Keller, and Patrick Sturt.
2008. A probabilistic corpus-based model of
syntactic parallelism. Cognition 109(3):326–
344.

Ferrara Boston, Marisa, John Hale, Reinhold
Kliegl, Umesh Patil, and Shravan Vasishth.

2008. Parsing costs as predictors of reading dif-
ficulty: An evaluation using the Potsdam Sen-
tence Corpus. Journal of Eye Movement Re-
search 2(1):1–12.

Ferreira, Fernanda, Kiel Christianson, and An-
drew Hollingworth. 2001. Misinterpretations of
garden-path sentences: Implications for models
of sentence processing and reanalysis. Journal
of Psycholinguistic Research 30(1):3–20.

Frank, Stefan L. 2009. Surprisal-based compar-
ison between a symbolic and a connectionist
model of sentence processing. In Niels Taat-
gen and Hedderik van Rijn, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cog-
nitive Science Society. Cognitive Science Soci-
ety, Amsterdam, pages 1139–1144.

Garnsey, Susan M., Neal J. Pearlmutter, Elisa-
beth M. Myers, and Melanie A. Lotocky. 1997.
The contributions of verb bias and plausibility
to the comprehension of temporarily ambiguous
sentences. Journal of Memory and Language
37(1):58–93.

Gibson, Edward. 1998. Linguistic complexity:
locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition
68:1–76.

Grodner, Dan and Edward Gibson. 2005. Conse-
quences of the serial nature of linguistic input.
Cognitive Science 29:261–291.

Hajič, Jan, editor. 2009. Proceedings of the 13th
Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning: Shared Task. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Boulder, CO.

Hale, John. 2001. A probabilistic Earley parser as
a psycholinguistic model. In Proceedings of the
2nd Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Pittsburgh, PA, volume 2, pages 159–166.

Hart, Betty and Todd R. Risley. 1995. Meaning-
ful Differences in the Everyday Experience of
Young American Children. Paul H. Brookes,
Baltimore, MD.

Jurafsky, Daniel. 1996. A probabilistic model of
lexical and syntactic access and disambigua-
tion. Cognitive Science 20(2):137–194.

Kamide, Yuki, Gerry T. M. Altmann, and Sarah L.
Haywood. 2003. The time-course of prediction
in incremental sentence processing: Evidence

65



from anticipatory eye movements. Journal of
Memory and Language 49:133–156.

Kehler, Andrew, Laura Kertz, Hannah Rohde, and
Jeffrey L. Elman. 2008. Coherence and coref-
erence revisited. Journal of Semantics 25(1):1–
44.

Kennedy, Alan and Joel Pynte. 2005. Parafoveal-
on-foveal effects in normal reading. Vision Re-
search 45:153–168.

Klein, Dan and Christopher Manning. 2002. A
generative constituent-context model for im-
proved grammar induction. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. Philadelphia, pages
128–135.

Kliegl, Reinhold, Antje Nuthmann, and Ralf Eng-
bert. 2006. Tracking the mind during reading:
The influence of past, present, and future words
on fixation durations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 135(1):12–35.

Landauer, Thomas K. and Susan T. Dumais. 1997.
A solution to Plato’s problem: The latent se-
mantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction
and representation of knowledge. Psychologi-
cal Review 104(2):211–240.

Levy, Roger. 2008. Expectation-based syntactic
comprehension. Cognition 106(3):1126–1177.

McRae, Ken, Michael J. Spivey-Knowlton, and
Michael K. Tanenhaus. 1998. Modeling the in-
fluence of thematic fit (and other constraints)
in on-line sentence comprehension. Journal of
Memory and Language 38(3):283–312.

Mitchell, Jeff, Mirella Lapata, Vera Demberg, and
Frank Keller. 2010. Syntactic and semantic fac-
tors in processing difficulty: An integrated mea-
sure. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. Uppsala.

Mitchell, Tom M., Svetlana V. Shinkareva, An-
drew Carlson, Kai-Min Chang, Vicente L.
Malave, Robert A. Mason, and Marcel Adam
Just3. 2008. Predicting human brain activity as-
sociated with the meanings of nouns. Science
320(5880):1191–1195.

Murphy, Brian, Marco Baroni, and Massimo Poe-
sio. 2009. EEG responds to conceptual stimuli
and corpus semantics. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural

Language Processing. Singapore, pages 619–
627.

Narayanan, Srini and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. A
Bayesian model predicts human parse prefer-
ence and reading time in sentence processing. In
Thomas G. Dietterich, Sue Becker, and Zoubin
Ghahramani, editors, Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 14. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pages 59–65.

Padó, Ulrike, Matthew W. Crocker, and Frank
Keller. 2009. A probabilistic model of semantic
plausibility in sentence processing. Cognitive
Science 33(5):794–838.

Patil, Umesh, Shravan Vasishth, and Reinhold
Kliegl. 2009. Compound effect of probabilis-
tic disambiguation and memory retrievals on
sentence processing: Evidence from an eye-
tracking corpus. In A. Howes, D. Peebles,
and R. Cooper, editors, Proceedings of 9th In-
ternational Conference on Cognitive Modeling.
Manchester.

Pickering, Martin J. and Martin J. Traxler. 1998.
Plausibility and recovery from garden paths: An
eye-tracking study. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition
24(4):940–961.

Pickering, Martin J., Matthew J. Traxler, and
Matthew W. Crocker. 2000. Ambiguity reso-
lution in sentence processing: Evidence against
frequency-based accounts. Journal of Memory
and Language 43(3):447–475.

Pynte, Joel, Boris New, and Alan Kennedy. 2008.
On-line contextual influences during reading
normal text: A multiple-regression analysis. Vi-
sion Research 48(21):2172–2183.

Roark, Brian, Asaf Bachrach, Carlos Cardenas,
and Christophe Pallier. 2009. Deriving lex-
ical and syntactic expectation-based measures
for psycholinguistic modeling via incremental
top-down parsing. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Singapore, pages 324–333.

Roland, Douglas and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Verb
sense and verb subcategorization probabilities.
In Paola Merlo and Suzanne Stevenson, editors,
The Lexical Basis of Sentence Processing: For-
mal, Computational, and Experimental Issues,
John Bejamins, Amsterdam, pages 325–346.

Sanford, Anthony J. and Patrick Sturt. 2002.

66



Depth of processing in language comprehen-
sion: Not noticing the evidence. Trends in Cog-
nitive Sciences 6:382–386.

Schuler, William, Samir AbdelRahman, Tim
Miller, and Lane Schwartz. 2010. Broad-
coverage parsing using human-like mem-
ory constraints. Computational Linguistics
26(1):1–30.

Staub, Adrian and Charles Clifton. 2006. Syntac-
tic prediction in language comprehension: Evi-
dence from either . . . or. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
tion 32:425–436.

Stewart, Andrew J., Martin J. Pickering, and An-
thony J. Sanford. 2000. The time course of the
influence of implicit causality information: Fo-
cusing versus integration accounts. Journal of
Memory and Language 42(3):423–443.

Sturt, Patrick and Vincenzo Lombardo. 2005.
Processing coordinated structures: Incremen-
tality and connectedness. Cognitive Science
29(2):291–305.

Tanenhaus, Michael K., Michael J. Spivey-
Knowlton, Kathleen M. Eberhard, and Julie C.
Sedivy. 1995. Integration of visual and linguis-
tic information in spoken language comprehen-
sion. Science 268:1632–1634.

Vasishth, Shravan and Richard L. Lewis. 2006.
Argument-head distance and processing com-
plexity: Explaining both locality and antilocal-
ity effects. Language 82(4):767–794.

67


