










































From Bilingual Dictionaries to Interlingual Document Representations


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 147–152,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

From Bilingual Dictionaries to Interlingual Document Representations

Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi
University of Maryland

College Park, USA
jags@umiacs.umd.edu

Hal Daumé III
University of Maryland

College Park, USA
hal@umiacs.umd.edu

Raghavendra Udupa
Microsoft Research India

Bangalore, India
raghavu@microsoft.com

Abstract

Mapping documents into an interlingual rep-
resentation can help bridge the language bar-
rier of a cross-lingual corpus. Previous ap-
proaches use aligned documents as training
data to learn an interlingual representation,
making them sensitive to the domain of the
training data. In this paper, we learn an in-
terlingual representation in an unsupervised
manner using only a bilingual dictionary. We
first use the bilingual dictionary to find candi-
date document alignments and then use them
to find an interlingual representation. Since
the candidate alignments are noisy, we de-
velop a robust learning algorithm to learn
the interlingual representation. We show that
bilingual dictionaries generalize to different
domains better: our approach gives better per-
formance than either a word by word transla-
tion method or Canonical Correlation Analy-
sis (CCA) trained on a different domain.

1 Introduction

The growth of text corpora in different languages
poses an inherent problem of aligning documents
across languages. Obtaining an explicit alignment,
or a different way of bridging the language barrier,
is an important step in many natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) applications such as: document re-
trieval (Gale and Church, 1991; Rapp, 1999; Balles-
teros and Croft, 1996; Munteanu and Marcu, 2005;
Vu et al., 2009), Transliteration Mining (Klementiev
and Roth, 2006; Hermjakob et al., 2008; Udupa et
al., 2009; Ravi and Knight, 2009) and Multilingual
Web Search (Gao et al., 2008; Gao et al., 2009).

Aligning documents from different languages arises
in all the above mentioned problems. In this pa-
per, we address this problem by mapping documents
into a common subspace (interlingual representa-
tion)1. This common subspace generalizes the no-
tion of vector space model for cross-lingual applica-
tions (Turney and Pantel, 2010).

There are two major approaches for solving the
document alignment problem, depending on the
available resources. The first approach, which
is widely used in the Cross-lingual Information
Retrieval (CLIR) literature, uses bilingual dictio-
naries to translate documents from one language
(source) into another (target) language (Ballesteros
and Croft, 1996; Pirkola et al., 2001). Then stan-
dard measures such as cosine similarity are used to
identify target language documents that are close to
the translated document. The second approach is to
use training data of aligned document pairs to find a
common subspace such that the aligned document
pairs are maximally correlated (Susan T. Dumais,
1996; Vinokourov et al., 2003; Mimno et al., 2009;
Platt et al., 2010; Haghighi et al., 2008) .

Both kinds of approaches have their own strengths
and weaknesses. Dictionary based approaches treat
source documents independently, i.e., each source
language document is translated independently of
other documents. Moreover, after translation, the re-
lationship of a given source document with the rest
of the source documents is ignored. On the other
hand, supervised approaches use all the source and
target language documents to infer an interlingual

1We use the phrases “common subspace” and “interlingual
representation” interchangeably.

147



representation, but their strong dependency on the
training data prevents them from generalizing well
to test documents from a different domain.

In this paper, we propose a technique that com-
bines the advantages of both these approaches. At a
broad level, our approach uses bilingual dictionaries
to identify initial noisy document alignments (Sec.
2.1) and then uses these noisy alignments as train-
ing data to learn a common subspace. Since the
alignments are noisy, we need a learning algorithm
that is robust to the errors in the training data. It is
known that techniques like CCA overfit the training
data (Rai and Daumé III, 2009). So, we start with an
unsupervised approach such as Kernelized Sorting
(Quadrianto et al., 2009) and develop a supervised
variant of it (Sec. 2.2). Our supervised variant learns
to modify the within language document similarities
according to the given alignments. Since the origi-
nal algorithm is unsupervised, we hope that its su-
pervised variant is tolerant to errors in the candidate
alignments. The primary advantage of our method is
that, it does not use any training data and thus gen-
eralizes to test documents from different domains.
And unlike the dictionary based approaches, we use
all the documents in computing the common sub-
space and thus achieve better accuracies compared
to the approaches which translate documents in iso-
lation.

There are two main contributions of this work.
First, we propose a discriminative technique to learn
an interlingual representation using only a bilingual
dictionary. Second, we develop a supervised variant
of Kernelized Sorting algorithm (Quadrianto et al.,
2009) which learns to modify within language doc-
ument similarities according to a given alignment.

2 Approach

Given a cross-lingual corpus, with an underlying un-
known document alignment, we propose a technique
to recover the hidden alignment. This is achieved
by mapping documents into an interlingual repre-
sentation. Our approach involves two stages. In the
first stage, we use a bilingual dictionary to find ini-
tial candidate noisy document alignments. The sec-
ond stage uses a robust learning algorithm to learn a
common subspace from the noisy alignments iden-
tified in the first step. Subsequently, we project all

the documents into the common subspace and use
maximal matching to recover the hidden alignment.
During this stage, we also learn mappings from the
document spaces onto the common subspace. These
mappings can be used to convert any new document
into the interlingual representation. We describe
each of these two steps in detail in the following two
sub sections (Sec. 2.1 and Sec. 2.2).

2.1 Noisy Document Alignments

Translating documents from one language into an-
other language and finding the nearest neighbours
gives potential alignments. Unfortunately, the re-
sulting alignments may differ depending on the di-
rection of the translation owing to the asymmetry
of bilingual dictionaries and the nearest neighbour
property. In order to overcome this asymmetry, we
first turn the documents in both languages into bag
of translation pairs representation.

We follow the feature representation used in Ja-
garlamudi and Daumé III (2010) and Boyd-Graber
and Blei (2009). Each translation pair of the bilin-
gual dictionary (also referred as a dictionary en-
try) is treated as a new feature. Given a docu-
ment, every word is replaced with the set of bilin-
gual dictionary entries that it participates in. If
D represents the TFIDF weighted term × docu-
ment matrix and T is a binary matrix matrix of size
no of dictionary entries× vocab size, then convert-
ing documents into a bag of dictionary entries is
given by the linear operation X(t) ← TD.2

After converting the documents into bag of dic-
tionary entries representation, we form a bipartite
graph with the documents of each language as a
separate set of nodes. The edge weight Wij be-

tween a pair of documents x(t)i and y
(t)
j (in source

and target language respectively) is computed as the
Euclidean distance between those documents in the
dictionary space. Let πij indicate the likeliness of

a source document x(t)i is aligned to a target doc-

ument y(t)j . We want each document to align to at
least one document from other language. Moreover,
we want to encourage similar documents to align
to each other. We can formulate this objective and
the constraints as the following minimum cost flow

2Superscript (t) indicates that the data is in the form of bag
of dictionary entries

148



problem (Ravindra et al., 1993):

arg min
π

m,n∑

i,j=1

Wijπij (1)

∀i
∑

j

πij = 1 ; ∀j
∑

i

πij = 1

∀i, j 0 ≤ πij ≤ C

where C is some user chosen constant, m and n
are the number of documents in source and target
languages respectively. Without the last constraint
(πij ≤ C) this optimization problem always gives an
integral solution and reduces to a maximum match-
ing problem (Jonker and Volgenant, 1987). Since
this solution may not be accurate, we allow many-to-
many mapping by setting the constant C to a value
less than one. In our experiments (Sec. 3), we
found that setting C to a value less than 1 gave bet-
ter performance analogous to the better performance
of soft Expectation Maximization (EM) compared
to hard-EM. The optimal solution of Eq. 1 can be
found efficiently using linear programming (Ravin-
dra et al., 1993).

2.2 Supervised Kernelized Sorting

Kernelized Sorting is an unsupervised technique to
align objects of different types, such as English and
Spanish documents (Quadrianto et al., 2009; Ja-
garalmudi et al., 2010). The main advantage of this
method is that it only uses the intra-language doc-
ument similarities to identify the alignments across
languages. In this section, we describe a supervised
variant of Kernelized Sorting which takes a set of
candidate alignments and learns to modify the intra-
language document similarities to respect the given
alignment. Since Kernelized Sorting does not rely
on the inter-lingual document similarities at all, we
hope that its supervised version is robust to noisy
alignments.

Let X and Y be the TFIDF weighted term ×
document matrices in both the languages and let
Kx and Ky be their linear dot product kernel ma-
trices, i.e. , Kx = XT X and Ky = Y T Y .
Let Π ∈ {0, 1}m×n denote the permutation matrix
which captures the alignment between documents of
different languages, i.e. πij = 1 indicates docu-
ments xi and yj are aligned. Then Kernelized Sort-

ing formulates Π as the solution of the following op-
timization problem (Gretton et al., 2005):

arg max
Π

tr(KxΠKyΠ
T ) (2)

= arg max
Π

tr(XT X Π Y T Y ΠT ) (3)

In our supervised version of Kernelized Sorting,
we fix the permutation matrix (to say Π̂) and mod-
ify the kernel matrices Kx and Ky so that the ob-
jective function is maximized for the given permu-
tation. Specifically, we find a mapping for each lan-
guage, such that when the documents are projected
into their common subspaces they are more likely to
respect the alignment given by Π̂. Subsequently, the
test documents are also projected into the common
subspace and we return the nearest neighbors as the
aligned pairs.

Let U and V be the mappings for the required sub-
space in both the languages, then we want to solve
the following optimization problem:

arg max
U,V

tr(XT UUT X Π̂ Y T V V T Y Π̂T )

s.t. UT U = I & V T V = I (4)

where I is an identity matrix of appropriate size. For
brevity, let Cxy denote the cross-covariance matrix
(i.e. Cxy = XΠ̂Y T ) then the above objective func-
tion becomes:

arg max
U,V

tr(UUT CxyV V
T CTxy)

s.t. UT U = I & V T V = I (5)

We have used the cyclic property of the trace func-
tion while rewriting Eq. 4 to Eq. 5. We use alterna-
tive maximization to solve for the unknowns. Fixing
V (to say V0), rewriting the objective function using
the cyclic property of the trace function, forming the
Lagrangian and setting its derivative to zero results
in the following solution:

CxyV0V
T
0 C

T
xy U = λu U (6)

For the initial iteration, we can substitute V0V T0 as
identity matrix which leaves the kernel matrix un-
changed. Similarly, fixing U (to U0) and solving the
optimization problem for V results:

CTxyU0U
T
0 Cxy V = λv V (7)

149



In the special case where both V0V T0 and U0U
T
0

are identity matrices, the above equations reduce to
CxyC

T
xy U = λu U and C

T
xyCxy V = λv V . In

this particular case, we can simultaneously solve for
both U and V using Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) as:

USV T = Cxy (8)

So for the first iteration, we do the SVD of the cross-
covariance matrix and get the mappings. For the
subsequent iterations, we use the mappings found by
the previous iteration, as U0 and V0, and solve Eqs.
6 and 7 alternatively.

2.3 Summary

In this section, we describe our procedure to recover
document alignments. We first convert documents
into bag of dictionary entries representation (Sec.
2.1). Then we solve the optimization problem in Eq.
1 to get the initial candidate alignments. We use the
LEMON3 graph library to solve the min-cost flow
problem. This step gives us the πij values for every
cross-lingual document pair. We use them to form
a relaxed permutation matrix (Π̂) which is, subse-
quently, used to find the mappings (U and V ) for
the documents of both the languages (i.e. solv-
ing Eq. 8). We use these mappings to project both
source and target language documents into the com-
mon subspace and then solve the bipartite matching
problem to recover the alignment.

3 Experiments

For evaluation, we choose 2500 aligned docu-
ment pairs from Wikipedia in English-Spanish and
English-German language pairs. For both the data
sets, we consider only words that occurred more
than once in at least five documents. Of the words
that meet the frequency criterion, we choose the
most frequent 2000 words for English-Spanish data
set. But, because of the compound word phe-
nomenon of German, we retain all the frequent
words for English-German data set. Subsequently
we convert the documents into TFIDF weighted vec-
tors. The bilingual dictionaries for both the lan-
guage pairs are generated by running Giza++ (Och
and Ney, 2003) on the Europarl data (Koehn, 2005).

3https://lemon.cs.elte.hu/trac/lemon

En – Es En – De
Word-by-Word 0.597 0.564
CCA (λ = 0.3) 0.627 0.485
CCA (λ = 0.5) 0.628 0.486
CCA (λ = 0.8) 0.637 0.487

OPCA 0.688 0.530
Ours (C = 0.6) 0.67 0.604
Ours (C = 1.0) 0.658 0.590

Table 1: Accuracy of different approaches on the
Wikipedia documents in English-Spanish and English-
German language pairs. For CCA, we regularize the
within language covariance matrices as (1−λ)XXT+λI
and the regularization parameter λ value is also shown.

We follow the process described in Sec. 2.3 to re-
cover the document alignment for our method.

We compare our approach with a dictionary based
approach, such as word-by-word translation, and
supervised approaches, such as CCA (Vinokourov
et al., 2003; Hotelling, 1936) and OPCA (Platt
et al., 2010). Word-by-word translation and our
approach use bilingual dictionary while CCA and
OPCA use a training corpus of aligned documents.
Since the bilingual dictionary is learnt from Eu-
roparl data set, for a fair comparison, we train su-
pervised approaches on 3000 document pairs from
Europarl data set. To prevent CCA from overfitting
to the training domain, we regularize it heavily. For
OPCA, we use a regularization parameter of 0.1 as
suggested by Platt et al. (2010). For all the systems,
we construct a bipartite graph between the docu-
ments of different languages, with edge weight be-
ing the cross-lingual similarity given by the respec-
tive method and then find maximal matching (Jonker
and Volgenant, 1987). We report the accuracy of the
recovered alignment.

Table 1 shows accuracies of different methods on
both Spanish and German data sets. For comparison
purposes, we trained and tested CCA on documents
from same domain (Wikipedia). It achieves 75% and
62% accuracies for the two data sets respectively
but, as expected, it performed poorly when trained
on Europarl articles. On the English-German data
set, a simple word-by-word translation performed
better than CCA and OPCA. For both the language
pairs, our model performed better than word-by-
word translation method and competitively with the

150



supervised approaches. Note that our method does
not use any training data.

We also experimented with few values of the pa-
rameter C for the min-cost flow problem (Eq. 1).
As noted previously, setting C = 1 will reduce the
problem into a linear assignment problem. From
the results, we see that solving a relaxed version of
the problem gives better accuracies but the improve-
ments are marginal (especially for English-German).

4 Discussion

For both language pairs, the accuracy of the first
stage of our approach (Sec. 2.1) is almost same as
that of word-by-word translation system. Thus, the
improved performance of our system compared to
word-by-word translation shows the effectiveness of
the supervised Kernelized sorting.

The solution of our supervised Kernelized sorting
(Eq. 8) resembles Latent Semantic Indexing (Deer-
wester, 1988). Except, we use a cross-covariance
matrix instead of a term × document matrix. Effi-
cient algorithms exist for solving SVD on arbitrarily
large matrices, which makes our approach scalable
to large data sets (Warmuth and Kuzmin, 2006). Af-
ter solving Eq. 8, the mappings U and V can be
improved by iteratively solving the Eqs. 6 and 7 re-
spectively. But it leads the mappings to fit the noisy
alignments exactly, so in this paper we stop after
solving the SVD problem.

The extension of our approach to the situation
with different number of documents on each side is
straight forward. The only thing that changes is the
way we compute alignment after finding the projec-
tion directions. In this case, the input to the bipar-
tite matching problem is modified by adding dummy
documents to the language that has fewer documents
and assigning a very high score to edges that connect
to the dummy documents.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we have presented an approach to re-
cover document alignments from a comparable cor-
pora using a bilingual dictionary. First, we use the
bilingual dictionary to find a set of candidate noisy
alignments. These noisy alignments are then fed into
supervised Kernelized Sorting, which learns to mod-
ify within language document similarities to respect

the given alignments.
Our approach exploits two complimentary infor-

mation sources to recover a better alignment. The
first step uses cross-lingual cues available in the
form of a bilingual dictionary and the latter step
exploits document structure captured in terms of
within language document similarities. Experimen-
tal results show that our approach performs better
than dictionary based approaches such as a word-
by-word translation and is also competitive with su-
pervised approaches like CCA and OPCA.

References

Lisa Ballesteros and W. Bruce Croft. 1996. Dictio-
nary methods for cross-lingual information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on Database and Expert Systems Applications, DEXA
’96, pages 791–801, London, UK. Springer-Verlag.

Jordan Boyd-Graber and David M. Blei. 2009. Multilin-
gual topic models for unaligned text. In Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence.

Scott Deerwester. 1988. Improving Information Re-
trieval with Latent Semantic Indexing. In Christine L.
Borgman and Edward Y. H. Pai, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 51st ASIS Annual Meeting (ASIS ’88), vol-
ume 25, Atlanta, Georgia, October. American Society
for Information Science.

William A. Gale and Kenneth W. Church. 1991. A pro-
gram for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. In
Proceedings of the 29th annual meeting on Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 177–184,
Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Wei Gao, John Blitzer, and Ming Zhou. 2008. Using
english information in non-english web search. In iN-
EWS ’08: Proceeding of the 2nd ACM workshop on
Improving non english web searching, pages 17–24,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Wei Gao, John Blitzer, Ming Zhou, and Kam-Fai Wong.
2009. Exploiting bilingual information to improve
web search. In Proceedings of Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2009 Conference of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL-IJCNLP ’09, pages
1075–1083, Morristown, NJ, USA. ACL.

Arthur Gretton, Arthur Gretton, Olivier Bousquet, Olivier
Bousquet, Er Smola, Bernhard Schlkopf, and Bern-
hard Schlkopf. 2005. Measuring statistical depen-
dence with hilbert-schmidt norms. In Proceedings of
Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages 63–77. Springer-
Verlag.

151



Aria Haghighi, Percy Liang, Taylor B. Kirkpatrick, and
Dan Klein. 2008. Learning bilingual lexicons from
monolingual corpora. In Proceedings of ACL-08:
HLT, pages 771–779, Columbus, Ohio, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin Knight, and Hal Daumé III. 2008.
Name translation in statistical machine translation -
learning when to transliterate. In Proceedings of ACL-
08: HLT, pages 389–397, Columbus, Ohio, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

H. Hotelling. 1936. Relation between two sets of vari-
ables. Biometrica, 28:322–377.

Jagadeesh Jagaralmudi, Seth Juarez, and Hal Daumé III.
2010. Kernelized sorting for natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.

Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi and Hal Daumé III. 2010. Ex-
tracting multilingual topics from unaligned compara-
ble corpora. In Advances in Information Retrieval,
32nd European Conference on IR Research, ECIR,
volume 5993, pages 444–456, Milton Keynes, UK.
Springer.

R. Jonker and A. Volgenant. 1987. A shortest augment-
ing path algorithm for dense and sparse linear assign-
ment problems. Computing, 38(4):325–340.

Alexandre Klementiev and Dan Roth. 2006. Weakly
supervised named entity transliteration and discovery
from multilingual comparable corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the 21st International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL-44,
pages 817–824, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In MT Summit.

David Mimno, Hanna M. Wallach, Jason Naradowsky,
David A. Smith, and Andrew McCallum. 2009.
Polylingual topic models. In Proceedings of the 2009
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing: Volume 2 - Volume 2, EMNLP ’09,
pages 880–889, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Comput. Linguist., 31:477–
504, December.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Ari Pirkola, Turid Hedlund, Heikki Keskustalo, and
Kalervo Jrvelin. 2001. Dictionary-based cross-
language information retrieval: Problems, methods,
and research findings. Information Retrieval, 4:209–
230.

John C. Platt, Kristina Toutanova, and Wen-tau Yih.
2010. Translingual document representations from
discriminative projections. In Proceedings of the
2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP ’10, pages 251–261,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Novi Quadrianto, Le Song, and Alex J. Smola. 2009.
Kernelized sorting. In D. Koller, D. Schuurmans,
Y. Bengio, and L. Bottou, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 21, pages 1289–1296.

Piyush Rai and Hal Daumé III. 2009. Multi-label pre-
diction via sparse infinite cca. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Vancouver, Canada.

Reinhard Rapp. 1999. Automatic identification of word
translations from unrelated english and german cor-
pora. In Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’99, pages 519–526,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Sujith Ravi and Kevin Knight. 2009. Learning phoneme
mappings for transliteration without parallel data. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: The
2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 37–45, Boulder, Colorado, June.

K. Ahuja Ravindra, L. Magnanti Thomas, and B. Orlin
James. 1993. Network flows: Theory, algorithms, and
applications.

Michael L. Littman Susan T. Dumais, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer. 1996. Automatic cross-linguistic information
retrieval using latent semantic indexing. In Working
Notes of the Workshop on Cross-Linguistic Informa-
tion Retrieval, SIGIR, pages 16–23, Zurich, Switzer-
land. ACM.

Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics.
J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), 37:141–188.

Raghavendra Udupa, K. Saravanan, A. Kumaran, and Ja-
gadeesh Jagarlamudi. 2009. Mint: A method for ef-
fective and scalable mining of named entity transliter-
ations from large comparable corpora. In EACL, pages
799–807. The Association for Computer Linguistics.

Alexei Vinokourov, John Shawe-taylor, and Nello Cris-
tianini. 2003. Inferring a semantic representation
of text via cross-language correlation analysis. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 1473–1480, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.

Thuy Vu, AiTi Aw, and Min Zhang. 2009. Feature-based
method for document alignment in comparable news
corpora. In EACL, pages 843–851.

Manfred K. Warmuth and Dima Kuzmin. 2006. Ran-
domized pca algorithms with regret bounds that are
logarithmic in the dimension. In Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 1481–1488.

152


