










































Reordering Metrics for MT


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1027–1035,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Reordering Metrics for MT

Alexandra Birch Miles Osborne
a.birch@ed.ac.uk miles@inf.ed.ac.uk

University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street

Edinburgh, EH8 9AB, UK

Abstract

One of the major challenges facing statistical
machine translation is how to model differ-
ences in word order between languages. Al-
though a great deal of research has focussed
on this problem, progress is hampered by the
lack of reliable metrics. Most current metrics
are based on matching lexical items in the
translation and the reference, and their abil-
ity to measure the quality of word order has
not been demonstrated. This paper presents
a novel metric, the LRscore, which explic-
itly measures the quality of word order by
using permutation distance metrics. We show
that the metric is more consistent with human
judgements than other metrics, including the
BLEU score. We also show that the LRscore
can successfully be used as the objective func-
tion when training translation model parame-
ters. Training with the LRscore leads to output
which is preferred by humans. Moreover, the
translations incur no penalty in terms of BLEU
scores.

1 Introduction

Research in machine translation has focused broadly
on two main goals, improving word choice and im-
proving word order in translation output. Current
machine translation metrics rely upon indirect meth-
ods for measuring the quality of the word order, and
their ability to capture the quality of word order is
poor (Birch et al., 2010).

There are currently two main approaches to eval-
uating reordering. The first is exemplified by the
BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002), which counts

the number of matching n-grams between the refer-
ence and the hypothesis. Word order is captured by
the proportion of longer n-grams which match. This
method does not consider the position of match-
ing words, and only captures ordering differences
if there is an exact match between the words in the
translation and the reference. Another approach is
taken by two other commonly used metrics, ME-
TEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) and TER (Snover
et al., 2006). They both search for an alignment be-
tween the translation and the reference, and from
this they calculate a penalty based on the number
of differences in order between the two sentences.
When block moves are allowed the search space is
very large, and matching stems and synonyms in-
troduces errors. Importantly, none of these metrics
capture the distance by which words are out of order.
Also, they conflate reordering performance with the
quality of the lexical items in the translation, making
it difficult to tease apart the impact of changes. More
sophisticated metrics, such as the RTE metric (Padó
et al., 2009), use higher level syntactic or semantic
analysis to determine the grammaticality of the out-
put. These approaches require annotation and can be
very slow to run. For most research, shallow metrics
are more appropriate.

We introduce a novel shallow metric, the Lexical
Reordering Score (LRscore), which explicitly mea-
sures the quality of word order in machine trans-
lations and interpolates it with a lexical metric.
This results in a simple, decomposable metric which
makes it easy for researchers to pinpoint the effect
of their changes. In this paper we show that the
LRscore is more consistent with human judgements

1027



than other metrics for five out of eight different lan-
guage pairs. We also apply the LRscore during Mini-
mum Error Rate Training (MERT) to see whether in-
formation on reordering allows the translation model
to produce better reorderings. We show that hu-
mans prefer the output of systems trained with the
LRscore 52.5% as compared to 43.9% when train-
ing with the BLEU score. Furthermore, training with
the LRscore does not result in lower BLEU scores.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes the reordering and lexical metrics
that are used and how they are combined. Section 3
presents the experiments on consistency with human
judgements and describes how to train the language
independent parameter of the LRscore. Section 4 re-
ports the results of the experiments on MERT. Fi-
nally we discuss related work and conclude.

2 The LRscore

In this section we present the LRscore which mea-
sures reordering using permutation distance metrics.
These reordering metrics have been demonstrated to
correlate strongly with human judgements of word
order quality (Birch et al., 2010). The LRscore com-
bines the reordering metrics with lexical metrics to
provide a complete metric for evaluating machine
translations.

2.1 Reordering metrics
The relative ordering of words in the source and tar-
get sentences is encoded in alignments. We can in-
terpret alignments as permutations which allows us
to apply research into metrics for ordered encodings
to measuring and evaluating reorderings. We use dis-
tance metrics over permutations to evaluate reorder-
ing performance. Figure 1 shows three permutations.
Each position represents a source word and each
value indicates the relative positions of the aligned
target words. In Figure 1 (a) represents the identity
permutation, which would result from a monotone
alignment, (b) represents a small reordering consist-
ing of two words whose orders are inverted, and (c)
represents a large reordering where the two halves
of the sentence are inverted in the target.

A translation can potentially have many valid
word orderings. However, we can be reasonably cer-
tain that the ordering of the reference sentence must
be acceptable. We therefore compare the ordering

(a) (1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10)
(b) (1 2 3 4 •6 •5 •7 8 9 10)
(c) (6 7 8 9 10 •1 2 3 4 5)

Figure 1. Three permutations: (a) monotone (b) with a
small reordering and (b) with a large reordering. Bullet
points highlight non-sequential neighbours.

of a translation with that of the reference sentence.
Where multiple references exist, we select the clos-
est, i.e. the one that gives the best score. The un-
derlying assumption is that most reasonable word
orderings should be fairly similar to the reference,
which is a necessary assumption for all automatic
machine translation metrics.

Permutations encode one-one relations, whereas
alignments contain null alignments and one-many,
many-one and many-many relations. We make some
simplifying assumptions to allow us to work with
permutations. Source words aligned to null are as-
signed the target word position immediately after
the target word position of the previous source word.
Where multiple source words are aligned to the same
target word or phrase, a many-to-one relation, the
target ordering is assumed to be monotone. When
one source word is aligned to multiple target words,
a one-to-many relation, the source word is assumed
to be aligned to the first target word. These simplifi-
cations are chosen so as to reduce the alignment to a
bijective relationship without introducing any extra-
neous reorderings, i.e. they encode a basic monotone
ordering assumption.

We choose permutation distance metrics which
are sensitive to the number of words that are out
of order, as humans are assumed to be sensitive to
the number of words that are out of order in a sen-
tence. The two permutations we refer to, π and σ,
are the source-reference permutation and the source-
translation permutation. The metrics are normalised
so that 0 means that the permutations are completely
inverted, and 1 means that they are identical. We re-
port these scores as percentages.

2.1.1 Hamming Distance
The Hamming distance (Hamming, 1950) mea-

sures the number of disagreements between two per-
mutations. It is defined as follows:

dh(π, σ) = 1−
∑n

i=1 xi
n

, xi =

{
0 if π(i) = σ(i)
1 otherwise

1028



Eg. BLEU METEOR TER dh dk
(a) 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
(b) 61.8 86.9 90.0 80.0 85.1
(c) 81.3 92.6 90.0 0.0 25.5

Table 1. Metric scores for examples in Figure 1 which are
calculated by comparing the permutations to the identity.
All metrics are adjusted so that 100 is the best score and
0 the worst.

where n is the length of the permutation. The
Hamming distance is the simplest permutation dis-
tance metric and is useful as a baseline. It has no
concept of the relative ordering of words.

2.1.2 Kendall’s Tau Distance
Kendall’s tau distance is the minimum number

of transpositions of two adjacent symbols necessary
to transform one permutation into another (Kendall,
1938). It represents the percentage of pairs of ele-
ments which share the same order between two per-
mutations. It is defined as follows:

dk(π, σ) = 1−

√∑n
i=1

∑n
j=1 zij

Z

where zij =

{
1 if π(i) < π(j) and σ(i) > σ(j)
0 otherwise

Z =
(n2 − n)

2

Kendalls tau seems particularly appropriate for
measuring word order differences as the relative or-
dering words is taken into account. However, most
human and machine ordering differences are much
closer to monotone than to inverted. The range of
values of Kendall’s tau is therefore too narrow and
close to 1. For this reason we take the square root
of the standard metric. This adjusted dk is also
more correlated with human judgements of reorder-
ing quality (Birch et al., 2010).

We use the example in Figure 1 to highlight the
problem with current MT metrics, and to demon-
strate how the permutation distance metrics are cal-
culated. In Table 1 we present the metric results for
the example permutations. The metrics are calcu-
lated by comparing the permutation string with the
monotone permutation. (a) receives the best score
for all metrics as it is compared to itself. BLEU
and METEOR fail to recognise that (b) represents a
small reordering and (c) a large reordering and they

assign a lower score to (b). The reason for this is that
they are sensitive to breaks in order, but not to the
actual word order differences. BLEU matches more
n-grams for (c) and consequently assigns it a higher
score. METEOR counts the number of blocks that
the translation is broken into, in order to align it with
the source. (b) is aligned using four blocks, whereas
(c) is aligned using only two blocks. TER counts the
number of edits, allowing for block shifts, and ap-
plies one block shift for each example, resulting in
an equal score for (b) and (c). Both the Hamming
distance dh and the Kendall’s tau distance dk cor-
rectly assign (c) a worse score than (b). Note that
for (c), the Hamming distance was not able to re-
ward the permutation for the correct relative order-
ing of words within the two large blocks and gave
(c) a score of 0, whereas Kendall’s tau takes relative
ordering into account.

Wong and Kit (2009) also suggest a metric which
combines a word choice and a word order compo-
nent. They propose a type of F-measure which uses
a matching function M to calculate precision and
recall. M combines the number of matched words,
weighted by their tfidf importance, with their posi-
tion difference score, and finally subtracting a score
for unmatched words. Including unmatched words
in the M function undermines the interpretation of
the supposed F-measure. The reordering component
is the average difference of absolute and relative
word positions which has no clear meaning. This
score is not intuitive or easily decomposable and it is
more similar to METEOR, with synonym and stem
functionality mixed with a reordering penalty, than
to our metric.

2.2 Combined Metric
The LRscore consists of a reordering distance met-
ric which is linearly interpolated with a lexical score
to form a complete machine translation evaluation
metric. The metric is decomposable because the in-
dividual lexical and reordering components can be
looked at individually. The following formula de-
scribes how to calculate the LRscore:

LRscore = αR+ (1− α)L (1)

The metric contains only one parameter, α, which
balances the contribution of the reordering metric,
R, and the lexical metric, L. Here we use BLEU as

1029



the lexical metric. R is the average permutation dis-
tance metric adjusted by the brevity penalty and it is
calculated as follows:

R =

∑
s∈S dsBPs

|S|
(2)

Where S is a set of test sentences, ds is the reorder-
ing distance for a sentence and BP is the brevity
penalty.

The brevity penalty is calculated as:

BP =

{
1 if t > r
e1−r/t if t ≤ r (3)

where t is the length of the translation, and r is the
closest reference length. If the reference sentence is
slightly longer than the translation, then the brevity
penalty will be a fraction somewhat smaller than
1. This has the effect of penalising translations that
are shorter than the reference. The brevity penalty
within the reordering component is necessary as the
distance-based metric would provide the same score
for a one word translation as it would for a longer
monotone translation. R is combined with a system
level lexical score.

In this paper we apply the BLEU score as the lex-
ical metric, as it is well known and it measures lexi-
cal precision at different n-gram lengths. We experi-
ment with the full BLEU score and the 1-gram BLEU
score, BLEU1, which is purely a measure of the pre-
cision of the word choice. The 4-gram BLEU score
includes some measure of the local reordering suc-
cess in the precision of the longer n-grams. BLEU
is an important baseline, and improving on it by in-
cluding more reordering information is an interest-
ing result. The lexical component of the system can
be any meaningful metric for a particular target lan-
guage. If a researcher was interested in morpholog-
ically rich languages, for example, METEOR could
be used. We use the LRscore to return sentence level
scores as well system level scores, and when doing
so the smoothed BLEU (Lin and Och, 2004) is used.

3 Consistency with Human Judgements

Automatic metrics must be validated by compar-
ing their scores with human judgements. We train
the metric parameter to optimise consistency with
human preference judgements across different lan-
guage pairs and then we show that the LRscore is

more consistent with humans than other commonly
used metrics.

3.1 Experimental Design
Human judgement of rank has been chosen as the of-
ficial determinant of translation quality for the 2009
Workshop on Machine Translation (Callison-Burch
et al., 2009). We used human ranking data from this
workshop to evaluate the LRscore. This consisted
of German, French, Spanish and Czech translation
systems that were run both into and out of English.
In total there were 52,265 pairwise rank judgements
collected.

Our reordering metric relies upon word align-
ments that are generated between the source and the
reference sentences, and the source and the trans-
lated sentences. In an ideal scenario, the transla-
tion system outputs the alignments and the refer-
ence set can be selected to have gold standard hu-
man alignments. However, the data that we use to
evaluate metrics does not have any gold standard
alignments and we must train automatic alignment
models to generate them. We used version two of
the Berkeley alignment model (Liang et al., 2006),
with the posterior threshold set at 0.5. Our Spanish-,
French- and German-English alignment models are
trained using Europarl version 5 (Koehn, 2005). The
Czech-English alignment model is trained on sec-
tions 0-2 of the Czech-English Parallel Corpus, ver-
sion 0.9 (Bojar and Zabokrtsky, 2009).

The metric scores are calculated for the test set
from the 2009 workshop on machine translation. It
consists of 2525 sentences in English, French, Ger-
man, Spanish and Czech. These sentences have been
translated by different machine translation systems
and the output submitted to the workshop. The sys-
tem output along with human evaluations can be
downloaded from the web1.

The BLEU score has five parameters, one for each
n-gram, and one for the brevity penalty. These pa-
rameters are set to a default uniform value of one.
METEOR has 3 parameters which have been trained
for human judgements of rank (Lavie and Agarwal,
2008). METEOR version 0.7 was used. The other
baseline metric used was TER version 0.7.25. We
adapt TER by subtracting it from one, so that all

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt09/results.html

1030



metric increases mean an improvement in the trans-
lation. The TER metric has five parameters which
have not been trained.

Using rank judgements, we do not have absolute
scores and so we cannot compare translations across
different sentences and extract correlation statistics.
We therefore use the method adopted in the 2009
workshop on machine translation (Callison-Burch et
al., 2009). We ascertained how consistent the auto-
matic metrics were with the human judgements by
calculating consistency in the following manner. We
take each pairwise comparison of translation output
for single sentences by a particular judge, and we
recorded whether or not the metrics were consistent
with the human rank. I.e. we counted cases where
both the metric and the human judge agreed that one
system is better than another. We divided this by the
total number of pairwise comparisons to get a per-
centage. We excluded pairs which the human anno-
tators ranked as ties.

de-en es-en fr-en cz-en
dk 73.9 80.5 80.4 81.1

Table 2. The average Kendall’s tau reordering distance
between the test and reference sentences. 100 means
monotone thus de-en has the most reordering.

We present a novel method for setting the
LRscore parameter. Using multiple language pairs,
we train the parameter according to the amount of
reordering seen in each test set. The advantage of
this approach is that researchers do not need to train
the parameter for new language pairs or test do-
mains. They can simply calculate the amount of re-
ordering in the test set and adjust the parameter ac-
cordingly. The amount of reordering is calculated
as the Kendall’s tau distance between the source
and the reference sentences as compared to dummy
monotone sentences. The amount of reordering for
the test sentences is reported in Table 2. German-
English shows more reordering than other language
pairs as it has a lower dk score of 73.9. The language
independent parameter (θ) is adjusted by applying
the reordering amount (dk) as an exponent. θ is al-
lowed to takes values of between 0 and 1. This works
in a similar way to the brevity penalty. With more re-
ordering, the dk becomes smaller which leads to an
increase in the final value of α. α represents the per-
centage contribution of the reordering component in

the LRscore:

α = θdk (4)

The language independent parameter θ is trained
once, over multiple language pairs. This procedure
optimises the average of the consistency results
across the different language pairs. We use greedy
hillclimbing in order to find the optimal setting. As
hillclimbing can end up in a local minima, we per-
form 20 random restarts, and retaining only the pa-
rameter value with the best consistency result.

3.2 Results
Table 3 reports the optimal consistency of the
LRscore and baseline metrics with human judge-
ments for each language pair. The LRscore vari-
ations are named as follows: LR refers to the
LRscore, “H” refers to the Hamming distance and
“K” to Kendall’s tau distance. “B1” and “B4” refer
to the smoothed BLEU score with the 1-gram and
the complete scores. Table 3 shows that the LRscore
is more consistent with human judgement for 5 out
of the 8 language pairs. This is an important result
which shows that combining lexical and reordering
information makes for a stronger metric than the
baseline metrics which do not have a strong reorder-
ing component.

METEOR is the most consistent for the Czech-
English and English-Czech language pairs, which
have the least amount of reordering. METEOR lags
behind for the language pairs with the most reorder-
ing, the German-English and English-German pairs.
Here LR-KB4 is the best metric, which shows that
metrics which are sensitive to the distance words are
out of order are more appropriate for situations with
a reasonable amount of reordering.

4 Optimising Translation Models

Automatic metrics are useful for evaluation, but they
are essential for training model parameters. In this
section we apply the LRscore as the objective func-
tion in MERT training (Och, 2003). MERT min-
imises translation errors according to some auto-
matic evaluation metric while searching for the best
parameter settings over the N-best output. A MERT
trained model is likely to exhibit the properties that

1031



Metric de-en es-en fr-en cz-en en-de en-es en-fr en-cz ave
METEOR 58.6 58.3 58.3 59.4 52.6 55.7 61.2 55.6 57.5

TER 53.2 50.1 52.6 47.5 48.6 49.6 58.3 45.8 50.7
BLEU1 56.1 57.0 56.7 52.5 52.1 54.2 62.3 53.3 55.6
BLEU 58.7 55.5 57.7 57.2 54.1 56.7 63.7 53.1 57.1

LR-HB1 59.7 60.0 58.6 53.2 54.6 55.6 63.7 54.5 57.5
LR-HB4 60.4 57.3 58.7 57.2 54.8 57.3 63.3 53.8 57.9
LR-KB1 60.4 59.7 58.0 54.0 54.1 54.7 63.4 54.9 57.5
LR-KB4 61.0 57.2 58.5 58.6 54.8 56.8 63.1 55.0 58.7

Table 3. The percentage consistency between human judgements of rank and metrics. The LRscore variations (LR-*)
are optimised for average consistency across language pair (shown in right hand column). The bold numbers represent
the best consistency score per language pair.

the metric rewards, but will be blind to aspects of
translation quality that are not directly captured by
the metric. We apply the LRscore in order to im-
prove the reordering performance of a phrase-based
translation model.

4.1 Experimental Design
We hypothesise that the LRscore is a good metric
for training translation models. We test this by eval-
uating the output of the models, first with automatic
metrics, and then by using human evaluation. We
choose to run the experiment with Chinese-English
as this language pair has a large amount of medium
and long distance reorderings.

4.1.1 Training Setup

The experiments are carried out with Chinese-
English data from GALE. We use the official test
set of the 2006 NIST evaluation (1994 sentences).
For the development test set, we used the evalu-
ation set from the GALE 2008 evaluation (2010
sentences). Both development set and test set have
four references. The phrase table was built from
1.727M parallel sentences from the GALE Y2 train-
ing data. The phrase-based translation model called
MOSES was used, with all the default settings. We
extracted phrases as in (Koehn et al., 2003) by run-
ning GIZA++ in both directions and merging align-
ments with the grow-diag-final heuristic. We used
the Moses translation toolkit, including a lexicalised
reordering model. The SRILM language modelling
toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) was used with interpolated
Kneser-Ney discounting. There are three separate 3-
gram language models trained on the English side
of parallel corpus, the AFP part of the Gigaword
corpus, and the Xinhua part of the Gigaword cor-

LR-HB1 LR-HB4 LR-KB1 LR-KB4
26.40 07.19 43.33 26.23

Table 4. The parameter setting representing the % impact
of the reordering component for the different versions of
the LRscore metric.

pus. A 4 or 5-gram language model would have
led to higher scores for all objective functions, but
would not have changed the findings in this paper.
We used the MERT code available in the MOSES
repository (Bertoldi et al., 2009).

The reordering metrics require alignments which
were created using the Berkeley word alignment
package version 1.1 (Liang et al., 2006), with the
posterior probability to being 0.5.

We first extracted the LRscore Kendall’s tau dis-
tance from the monotone for the Chinese-English
test set and this value was 66.1%. This is far more re-
ordering than the other language pairs shown in Ta-
ble 2. We then calculated the optimal parameter set-
ting, using the reordering amount as a power expo-
nent. Table 4 shows the parameter settings we used
in the following experiments. The optimal amount of
reordering for LR-HB4 is low, but the results show
it still makes an important contribution.

4.1.2 Human Evaluation Setup

Human judgements of translation quality are nec-
essary to determine whether humans prefer sen-
tences from models trained with the BLEU score
or with the LRscore. There have been some recent
studies which have used the online micro-market,
Amazons Mechanical Turk, to collect human anno-
tations (Snow et al., 2008; Callison-Burch, 2009).
While some of the data generated is very noisy, in-
valid responses are largely due to a small number
of workers (Kittur et al., 2008). We use Mechanical

1032



Turk and we improve annotation quality by collect-
ing multiple judgements, and eliminating workers
who do not achieve a certain level of performance
on gold standard questions.

We randomly selected a subset of sentences from
the test set. We use 60 sentences each for compar-
ing training with BLEU to training with LR-HB4
and with LR-KB4. These sentences were between
15 and 30 words long. Shorter sentences tend to have
uninteresting differences, and longer sentences may
have many conflicting differences.

Workers were presented with a reference sen-
tence and two translations which were randomly
ordered. They were told to compare the transla-
tions and select their preferred translation or “Don’t
Know”. Workers were screened to guarantee reason-
able judgement quality. 20 sentence pairs were ran-
domly selected from the 120 test units and anno-
tated as gold standard questions. Workers who got
less than 60% of these gold questions correct were
disqualified and their judgements discarded.

After disagreeing with a gold annotation, a worker
is presented with the gold answer and an expla-
nation. This guides the worker on how to perform
the task and motivates them to be more accurate.
We used the Crowdflower2 interface to Mechanical
Turk, which implements the gold functionality.

Even though experts can disagree on preference
judgements, gold standard labels are necessary to
weed out the poor standard workers. There were 21
trusted workers who achieved an average accuracy
of 91% on the gold. There were 96 untrusted work-
ers who averaged 29% accuracy on the gold. Their
judgements were discarded. Three judgements were
collected from the trusted workers for each of the
120 test sentences.

4.2 Results
4.2.1 Automatic Evaluation of MERT

In this experiment we demonstrate that the re-
ordering metrics can be used as learning criterion in
minimum error rate training to improve parameter
estimation for machine translation.

Table 5 reports the average of three runs of MERT
training with different objective functions. The lexi-
cal metric BLEU is used as an objective function in

2http://www.crowdflower.com

MetricsPPPPPObj.Func. BLEU LR-HB4 LR-KB4 TER MET.
BLEU 31.1 32.1 41.0 60.7 55.5

LRHB4 31.1 32.2 41.3 60.6 55.7
LRKB4 31.0 32.2 41.2 61.0 55.8

Table 5. Average results of three different MERT runs for
different objective functions.

isolation, and also as part of the LRscore together
with the Hamming distance and Kendall’s tau dis-
tance. We test with these metrics, and we also report
the TER and METEOR scores for comparison.

The first thing we note in Table 5 is that we would
expect the highest scores when training with the
same metric as that used for evaluation as MERT
maximises the objective function on the develop-
ment data set. Here, however, when testing with
BLEU, we see that training with BLEU and with
LR-HB4 leads to equally high BLEU scores. The
reordering component is more discerning than the
BLEU score. It reliably increases as the word order
approaches that of the reference, whereas BLEU can
reports the same score for a large number of different
alternatives. This might make the reordering metric
easier to optimise, leading to the joint best scores
at test time. This is an important result, as it shows
that by training with the LRscore objective function,
BLEU scores do not decrease, which is desirable as
BLEU scores are usually reported in the field.

The LRscore also results in better scores when
evaluated with itself and the other two baseline met-
rics, TER and METEOR. Reordering and the lexi-
cal metrics are orthogonal information sources, and
this shows that combining them results in better per-
forming systems. BLEU has shown to be a strong
baseline metric to use as an objective function (Cer
et al., 2010), and so the LRscore performance in Ta-
ble 5 is a good result.

Examining the weights that result from the dif-
ferent MERT runs, the only notable difference is
that the weight of the distortion cost is considerably
lower with the LRscore. This shows more trust in
the quality of reorderings. Although it is interesting
to look at the model weights, any final conclusion on
the impact of the metrics on training must depend on
human evaluation of translation quality.

1033



Type Sentence
Reference silicon valley is still a rich area in the united states. the average salary in the area was us

$62,400 a year, which was 64% higher than the american average.
LR-KB4 silicon valley is still an affluent area of the united states, the regional labor with an average

annual salary of 6.24 million us dollars, higher than the average level of 60 per cent.
BLEU silicon valley is still in the united states in the region in an affluent area of the workforce,

the average annual salary of 6.24 million us dollars, higher than the average level of 60 per
cent

Table 7. A reference sentence is compared with output from models trained with BLEU and with the LR-KB4 lrscore.

Prefer LR Prefer BLEU Don’t Know
LR-KB4 96 79 5
LR-HB4 93 79 8

Total 189 (52.5%) 158 (43.9%) 13
Table 6. The number of the times human judges preferred
the output of systems trained either with the LRscore or
with the BLEU score, or were unable to choose.

4.2.2 Human Evaluation

We collect human preference judgements for out-
put from systems trained using the BLEU score and
the LRscore in order to determine whether training
with the LRscore leads to genuine improvements in
translation quality. Table 6 shows the number of the
times humans preferred the LRscore or the BLEU
score output, or when they did not know. We can see
that humans have a greater preference for the out-
put for systems trained with the LRscore, which is
preferred 52.5% of the time, compared to the BLEU
score, which was only preferred 43.9% of the time.

The sign test can be used to determine whether
this difference is significant. Our null hypothesis
is that the probability of a human preferring the
LRscore trained output is the same as that of prefer-
ring the BLEU trained output. The one-tailed alter-
native hypothesis is that humans prefer the LRscore
output. If the null hypothesis is true, then there is
only a probability of 0.048 that 189 out of 347
(189 + 158) people will select the LRscore output.
We therefore discard the null hypothesis and the hu-
man preference for the output of the LRscore trained
system is significant to the 95% level.

In order to judge how reliable our judgements are
we calculate the inter-annotator agreement. This is
given by the Kappa coefficient (K), which balances
agreement with expected agreement. The Kappa co-
efficient is 0.464 which is considered to be a moder-
ate level of agreement.

In analysis of the results, we found that output

from the system trained with the LRscore tend to
produce sentences with better structure. In Table 7
we see a typical example. The word order of the
sentence trained with BLEU is mangled, whereas
the LR-KB4 model outputs a clear translation which
more closely matches the reference. It also garners
higher reordering and BLEU scores.

We expect that more substantial gains can be
made in the future by using models which have more
powerful reordering capabilities. A richer set of re-
ordering features, and a model capable of longer
distance reordering would better leverage metrics
which reward good word orderings.

5 Conclusion

We introduced the LRscore which combines a lexi-
cal and a reordering metric. The main motivation for
this metric is the fact that it measures the reorder-
ing quality of MT output by using permutation dis-
tance metrics. It is a simple, decomposable metric
which interpolates the reordering component with
a lexical component, the BLEU score. This paper
demonstrates that the LRscore metric is more con-
sistent with human preference judgements of ma-
chine translation quality than other machine trans-
lation metrics. We also show that when training a
phrase-based translation model with the LRscore as
the objective function, the model retains its perfor-
mance as measured by the baseline metrics. Cru-
cially, however, optimisation using the LRscore im-
proves subjective evaluation. Ultimately, the avail-
ability of a metric which reliably measures reorder-
ing performance should accelerate progress towards
developing more powerful reordering models.

1034



References
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An

automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Workshop on
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT
and/or Summarization.

Nicola Bertoldi, Barry Haddow, and Jean-Baptiste Fouet.
2009. Improved Minimum Error Rate Training in
Moses. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics, 91:7–16.

Alexandra Birch, Phil Blunsom, and Miles Osborne.
2010. Metrics for MT Evaluation: Evaluating Re-
ordering. Machine Translation, 24(1):15–26.

Ondrej Bojar and Zdenek Zabokrtsky. 2009. CzEng0.9:
Large Parallel Treebank with Rich Annotation.
Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 92:63–
84.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, and
Josh Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009 Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 1–28, Athens, Greece, March. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, cheap, and cre-
ative: evaluating translation quality using Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk. In Proceedings of the 2009 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 286–295, Singapore, August. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Daniel Cer, Christopher D. Manning, and Daniel Juraf-
sky. 2010. The best lexical metric for phrase-based
statistical MT system optimization. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 555–563, Los An-
geles, California, June.

Richard Hamming. 1950. Error detecting and er-
ror correcting codes. Bell System Technical Journal,
26(2):147–160.

Maurice Kendall. 1938. A new measure of rank correla-
tion. Biometrika, 30:81–89.

A. Kittur, E. H. Chi, and B. Suh. 2008. Crowdsourcing
user studies with Mechanical Turk. In Proceeding of
the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, pages 453–456. ACM.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Sta-
tistical Phrase-Based translation. In Proceedings of
the Human Language Technology and North Ameri-
can Association for Computational Linguistics Con-
ference, pages 127–133, Edmonton, Canada. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of MT-
Summit.

Alon Lavie and Abhaya Agarwal. 2008. Meteor,
m-BLEU and m-TER: Evaluation metrics for high-
correlation with human rankings of machine transla-
tion output. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation at the Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2008),
pages 115–118.

Percy Liang, Ben Taskar, and Dan Klein. 2006. Align-
ment by agreement. In Proceedings of the Human
Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Main
Conference, pages 104–111, New York City, USA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Och. 2004. ORANGE: a
method for evaluating automatic evaluation metrics for
machine translation. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Computational Linguistics, pages 501–507.

Franz J. Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 160–
167, Sapporo, Japan.

Sebastian Padó, Daniel Cer, Michel Galley, Dan Jurafsky,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2009. Measuring ma-
chine translation quality as semantic equivalence: A
metric based on entailment features. Machine Trans-
lation, pages 181–193.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic evalu-
ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–
318, Philadelphia, USA.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, R. Schwartz, L. Micciulla,
and J. Makhoul. 2006. A study of translation edit
rate with targeted human annotation. In Proceedings
of Association for Machine Translation in the Ameri-
cas, pages 223–231.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast—but is it
good?: Evaluating non-expert annotations for natural
language tasks. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 254–263. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of Spoken Language
Processing, pages 901–904.

Billy Wong and Chunyu Kit. 2009. ATEC: automatic
evaluation of machine translation via word choice and
word order. Machine Translation, 23(2-3):141–155.

1035


