










































Joint Annotation of Search Queries


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 102–111,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Joint Annotation of Search Queries

Michael Bendersky
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts

Amherst, MA
bemike@cs.umass.edu

W. Bruce Croft
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts

Amherst, MA
croft@cs.umass.edu

David A. Smith
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts

Amherst, MA
dasmith@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

Marking up search queries with linguistic an-
notations such as part-of-speech tags, cap-
italization, and segmentation, is an impor-
tant part of query processing and understand-
ing in information retrieval systems. Due
to their brevity and idiosyncratic structure,
search queries pose a challenge to existing
NLP tools. To address this challenge, we
propose a probabilistic approach for perform-
ing joint query annotation. First, we derive
a robust set of unsupervised independent an-
notations, using queries and pseudo-relevance
feedback. Then, we stack additional classi-
fiers on the independent annotations, and ex-
ploit the dependencies between them to fur-
ther improve the accuracy, even with a very
limited amount of available training data. We
evaluate our method using a range of queries
extracted from a web search log. Experimen-
tal results verify the effectiveness of our ap-
proach for both short keyword queries, and
verbose natural language queries.

1 Introduction

Automatic mark-up of textual documents with lin-
guistic annotations such as part-of-speech tags, sen-
tence constituents, named entities, or semantic roles
is a common practice in natural language process-
ing (NLP). It is, however, much less common in in-
formation retrieval (IR) applications. Accordingly,
in this paper, we focus on annotating search queries
submitted by the users to a search engine.

There are several key differences between user
queries and the documents used in NLP (e.g., news

articles or web pages). As previous research shows,
these differences severely limit the applicability of
standard NLP techniques for annotating queries and
require development of novel annotation approaches
for query corpora (Bergsma and Wang, 2007; Barr et
al., 2008; Lu et al., 2009; Bendersky et al., 2010; Li,
2010).

The most salient difference between queries and
documents is their length. Most search queries
are very short, and even longer queries are usually
shorter than the average written sentence. Due to
their brevity, queries often cannot be divided into
sub-parts, and do not provide enough context for
accurate annotations to be made using the stan-
dard NLP tools such as taggers, parsers or chun-
kers, which are trained on more syntactically coher-
ent textual units.

A recent analysis of web query logs by Bendersky
and Croft (2009) shows, however, that despite their
brevity, queries are grammatically diverse. Some
queries are keyword concatenations, some are semi-
complete verbal phrases and some are wh-questions.
It is essential for the search engine to correctly an-
notate the query structure, and the quality of these
query annotations has been shown to be a crucial
first step towards the development of reliable and
robust query processing, representation and under-
standing algorithms (Barr et al., 2008; Guo et al.,
2008; Guo et al., 2009; Manshadi and Li, 2009; Li,
2010).

However, in current query annotation systems,
even sentence-like queries are often hard to parse
and annotate, as they are prone to contain mis-
spellings and idiosyncratic grammatical structures.

102



(a) (b) (c)
Term CAP TAG SEG
who L X B
won L V I
the L X B
2004 L X B
kentucky C N B
derby C N I

Term CAP TAG SEG
kindred C N B
where C X B
would C X I
i C X I
be C V I

Term CAP TAG SEG
shih C N B
tzu C N I
health L N B
problems L N I

Figure 1: Examples of a mark-up scheme for annotating capitalization (L – lowercase, C – otherwise), POS tags (N –
noun, V – verb, X – otherwise) and segmentation (B/I – beginning of/inside the chunk).

They also tend to lack prepositions, proper punctu-
ation, or capitalization, since users (often correctly)
assume that these features are disregarded by the re-
trieval system.

In this paper, we propose a novel joint query an-
notation method to improve the effectiveness of ex-
isting query annotations, especially for longer, more
complex search queries. Most existing research fo-
cuses on using a single type of annotation for infor-
mation retrieval such as subject-verb-object depen-
dencies (Balasubramanian and Allan, 2009), named-
entity recognition (Guo et al., 2009), phrase chunk-
ing (Guo et al., 2008), or semantic labeling (Li,
2010).

In contrast, the main focus of this work is on de-
veloping a unified approach for performing reliable
annotations of different types. To this end, we pro-
pose a probabilistic method for performing a joint
query annotation. This method allows us to exploit
the dependency between different unsupervised an-
notations to further improve the accuracy of the en-
tire set of annotations. For instance, our method
can leverage the information about estimated parts-
of-speech tags and capitalization of query terms to
improve the accuracy of query segmentation.

We empirically evaluate the joint query annota-
tion method on a range of query types. Instead of
just focusing our attention on keyword queries, as
is often done in previous work (Barr et al., 2008;
Bergsma and Wang, 2007; Tan and Peng, 2008;
Guo et al., 2008), we also explore the performance
of our annotations with more complex natural lan-
guage search queries such as verbal phrases and wh-
questions, which often pose a challenge for IR appli-
cations (Bendersky et al., 2010; Kumaran and Allan,
2007; Kumaran and Carvalho, 2009; Lease, 2007).

We show that even with a very limited amount of
training data, our joint annotation method signifi-
cantly outperforms annotations that were done in-
dependently for these queries.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we demonstrate several examples of an-
notated search queries. Then, in Section 3, we in-
troduce our joint query annotation method. In Sec-
tion 4 we describe two types of independent query
annotations that are used as input for the joint query
annotation. Section 5 details the related work and
Section 6 presents the experimental results. We draw
the conclusions from our work in Section 7.

2 Query Annotation Example

To demonstrate a possible implementation of lin-
guistic annotation for search queries, Figure 1
presents a simple mark-up scheme, exemplified us-
ing three web search queries (as they appear in a
search log): (a) who won the 2004 kentucky derby,
(b) kindred where would i be, and (c) shih tzu health
problems. In this scheme, each query is marked-
up using three annotations: capitalization, POS tags,
and segmentation indicators.

Note that all the query terms are non-capitalized,
and no punctuation is provided by the user, which
complicates the query annotation process. While
the simple annotation described in Figure 1 can be
done with a very high accuracy for standard docu-
ment corpora, both previous work (Barr et al., 2008;
Bergsma and Wang, 2007; Jones and Fain, 2003)
and the experimental results in this paper indicate
that it is challenging to perform well on queries.

The queries in Figure 1 illustrate this point. Query
(a) in Figure 1 is a wh-question, and it contains

103



a capitalized concept (“Kentucky Derby”), a single
verb, and four segments. Query (b) is a combination
of an artist name and a song title and should be inter-
preted as Kindred — “Where Would I Be”. Query (c)
is a concatenation of two short noun phrases: “Shih
Tzu” and “health problems”.

3 Joint Query Annotation

Given a search query Q, which consists of a se-
quence of terms (q1, . . . , qn), our goal is to anno-
tate it with an appropriate set of linguistic structures
ZQ. In this work, we assume that the setZQ consists
of shallow sequence annotations zQ, each of which
takes the form

zQ = (ζ1, . . . , ζn).

In other words, each symbol ζi ∈ zQ annotates a
single query term.

Many query annotations that are useful for IR
can be represented using this simple form, includ-
ing capitalization, POS tagging, phrase chunking,
named entity recognition, and stopword indicators,
to name just a few. For instance, Figure 1 demon-
strates an example of a set of annotations ZQ. In
this example,

ZQ = {CAP,TAG,SEG}.

Most previous work on query annotation makes
the independence assumption — every annotation
zQ ∈ ZQ is done separately from the others. That is,
it is assumed that the optimal linguistic annotation
z
∗(I)
Q is the annotation that has the highest probabil-

ity given the query Q, regardless of the other anno-
tations in the set ZQ. Formally,

z
∗(I)
Q = argmax

zQ

p(zQ|Q) (1)

The main shortcoming of this approach is in the
assumption that the linguistic annotations in the set
ZQ are independent. In practice, there are depen-
dencies between the different annotations, and they
can be leveraged to derive a better estimate of the
entire set of annotations.

For instance, imagine that we need to perform two
annotations: capitalization and POS tagging. Know-
ing that a query term is capitalized, we are more

likely to decide that it is a proper noun. Vice versa,
knowing that it is a preposition will reduce its proba-
bility of being capitalized. We would like to capture
this intuition in the annotation process.

To address the problem of joint query annotation,
we first assume that we have an initial set of annota-
tions Z∗(I)Q , which were performed for query Q in-
dependently of one another (we will show an exam-
ple of how to derive such a set in Section 4). Given
the initial set Z∗(I)Q , we are interested in obtaining

an annotation set Z∗(J)Q , which jointly optimizes the
probability of all the annotations, i.e.

Z
∗(J)
Q = argmax

ZQ

p(ZQ|Z
∗(I)
Q ).

If the initial set of estimations is reasonably ac-
curate, we can make the assumption that the anno-
tations in the set Z∗(J)Q are independent given the

initial estimates Z∗(I)Q , allowing us to separately op-

timize the probability of each annotation z∗(J)Q ∈

Z
∗(J)
Q :

z
∗(J)
Q = argmax

zQ

p(zQ|Z
∗(I)
Q ). (2)

From Eq. 2, it is evident that the joint an-
notation task becomes that of finding some opti-
mal unobserved sequence (annotation z∗(J)Q ), given
the observed sequences (independent annotation set
Z
∗(I)
Q ).
Accordingly, we can directly use a supervised se-

quential probabilistic model such as CRF (Lafferty
et al., 2001) to find the optimal z∗(J)Q . In this CRF

model, the optimal annotation z∗(J)Q is the label we
are trying to predict, and the set of independent an-
notations Z∗(I)Q is used as the basis for the features
used for prediction. Figure 2 outlines the algorithm
for performing the joint query annotation.

As input, the algorithm receives a training set of
queries and their ground truth annotations. It then
produces a set of independent annotation estimates,
which are jointly used, together with the ground
truth annotations, to learn a CRF model for each an-
notation type. Finally, these CRF models are used
to predict annotations on a held-out set of queries,
which are the output of the algorithm.

104



Input: Qt — training set of queries.
ZQt — ground truth annotations for the training set of queries.
Qh — held-out set of queries.

(1) Obtain a set of independent annotation estimates Z∗(I)Qt
(2) Initialize Z∗(J)Qt ← ∅

(3) for each z∗(I)Qt ∈ Z
∗(I)
Qt

:

(4) Z ′Qt ← Z
∗(I)
Qt
\ z

∗(I)
Qt

(5) Train a CRF model CRF(zQt) using zQt as a label and Z
′
Qt

as features.

(6) Predict annotation z∗(J)Qh , using CRF(zQt).

(7) Z∗(J)Qh ← Z
∗(J)
Qh
∪ z

∗(J)
Qh

.

Output: Z∗(J)Qh — predicted annotations for the held-out set of queries.

Figure 2: Algorithm for performing joint query annotation.

Note that this formulation of joint query anno-
tation can be viewed as a stacked classification, in
which a second, more effective, classifier is trained
using the labels inferred by the first classifier as fea-
tures. Stacked classifiers were recently shown to be
an efficient and effective strategy for structured clas-
sification in NLP (Nivre and McDonald, 2008; Mar-
tins et al., 2008).

4 Independent Query Annotations

While the joint annotation method proposed in Sec-
tion 3 is general enough to be applied to any set of
independent query annotations, in this work we fo-
cus on two previously proposed independent anno-
tation methods based on either the query itself, or
the top sentences retrieved in response to the query
(Bendersky et al., 2010). The main benefits of these
two annotation methods are that they can be easily
implemented using standard software tools, do not
require any labeled data, and provide reasonable an-
notation accuracy. Next, we briefly describe these
two independent annotation methods.

4.1 Query-based estimation

The most straightforward way to estimate the con-
ditional probabilities in Eq. 1 is using the query it-
self. To make the estimation feasible, Bendersky et
al. (2010) take a bag-of-words approach, and assume
independence between both the query terms and the
corresponding annotation symbols. Thus, the inde-
pentent annotations in Eq. 1 are given by

z
∗(QRY )
Q = argmax

(ζ1,...,ζn)

∏

i∈(1,...,n)

p(ζi|qi). (3)

Following Bendersky et al. (2010) we use a large
n-gram corpus (Brants and Franz, 2006) to estimate
p(ζi|qi) for annotating the query with capitalization
and segmentation mark-up, and a standard POS tag-
ger1 for part-of-speech tagging of the query.

4.2 PRF-based estimation

Given a short, often ungrammatical query, it is hard
to accurately estimate the conditional probability in
Eq. 1 using the query terms alone. For instance, a
keyword query hawaiian falls, which refers to a lo-
cation, is inaccurately interpreted by a standard POS
tagger as a noun-verb pair. On the other hand, given
a sentence from a corpus that is relevant to the query
such as “Hawaiian Falls is a family-friendly water-
park”, the word “falls” is correctly identified by a
standard POS tagger as a proper noun.

Accordingly, the document corpus can be boot-
strapped in order to better estimate the query anno-
tation. To this end, Bendersky et al. (2010) employ
the pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF) — a method
that has a long record of success in IR for tasks such
as query expansion (Buckley, 1995; Lavrenko and
Croft, 2001).

In the most general form, given the set of all re-
trievable sentences r in the corpus C one can derive

p(zQ|Q) =
∑

r∈C

p(zQ|r)p(r|Q).

Since for most sentences the conditional proba-
bility of relevance to the query p(r|Q) is vanish-
ingly small, the above can be closely approximated

1http://crftagger.sourceforge.net/

105



by considering only a set of sentences R, retrieved
at top-k positions in response to the query Q. This
yields

p(zQ|Q) ≈
∑

r∈R

p(zQ|r)p(r|Q).

Intuitively, the equation above models the query as
a mixture of top-k retrieved sentences, where each
sentence is weighted by its relevance to the query.
Furthermore, to make the estimation of the condi-
tional probability p(zQ|r) feasible, it is assumed that
the symbols ζi in the annotation sequence are in-
dependent, given a sentence r. Note that this as-
sumption differs from the independence assumption
in Eq. 3, since here the annotation symbols are not
independent given the query Q.

Accordingly, the PRF-based estimate for indepen-
dent annotations in Eq. 1 is

z
∗(PRF )
Q = argmax

(ζ1,...,ζn)

∑

r∈R

∏

i∈(1,...,n)

p(ζi|r)p(r|Q).

(4)
Following Bendersky et al. (2010), an estimate of

p(ζi|r) is a smoothed estimator that combines the
information from the retrieved sentence r with the
information about unigrams (for capitalization and
POS tagging) and bigrams (for segmentation) from
a large n-gram corpus (Brants and Franz, 2006).

5 Related Work

In recent years, linguistic annotation of search
queries has been receiving increasing attention as an
important step toward better query processing and
understanding. The literature on query annotation
includes query segmentation (Bergsma and Wang,
2007; Jones et al., 2006; Guo et al., 2008; Ha-
gen et al., 2010; Hagen et al., 2011; Tan and Peng,
2008), part-of-speech and semantic tagging (Barr et
al., 2008; Manshadi and Li, 2009; Li, 2010), named-
entity recognition (Guo et al., 2009; Lu et al., 2009;
Shen et al., 2008; Paşca, 2007), abbreviation disam-
biguation (Wei et al., 2008) and stopword detection
(Lo et al., 2005; Jones and Fain, 2003).

Most of the previous work on query annotation
focuses on performing a particular annotation task
(e.g., segmentation or POS tagging) in isolation.
However, these annotations are often related, and
thus we take a joint annotation approach, which

combines several independent annotations to im-
prove the overall annotation accuracy. A similar ap-
proach was recently proposed by Guo et al. (2008).
There are several key differences, however, between
the work presented here and their work.

First, Guo et al. (2008) focus on query refine-
ment (spelling corrections, word splitting, etc.) of
short keyword queries. Instead, we are interested
in annotation of queries of different types, includ-
ing verbose natural language queries. While there
is an overlap between query refinement and annota-
tion, the focus of the latter is on providing linguistic
information about existing queries (after initial re-
finement has been performed). Such information is
especially important for more verbose and gramat-
ically complex queries. In addition, while all the
methods proposed by Guo et al. (2008) require large
amounts of training data (thousands of training ex-
amples), our joint annotation method can be effec-
tively trained with a minimal human labeling effort
(several hundred training examples).

An additional research area which is relevant to
this paper is the work on joint structure model-
ing (Finkel and Manning, 2009; Toutanova et al.,
2008) and stacked classification (Nivre and Mc-
Donald, 2008; Martins et al., 2008) in natural lan-
guage processing. These approaches have been
shown to be successful for tasks such as parsing and
named entity recognition in newswire data (Finkel
and Manning, 2009) or semantic role labeling in the
Penn Treebank and Brown corpus (Toutanova et al.,
2008). Similarly to this work in NLP, we demon-
strate that a joint approach for modeling the linguis-
tic query structure can also be beneficial for IR ap-
plications.

6 Experiments

6.1 Experimental Setup

For evaluating the performance of our query anno-
tation methods, we use a random sample of 250
queries2 from a search log. This sample is manually
labeled with three annotations: capitalization, POS
tags, and segmentation, according to the description
of these annotations in Figure 1. In this set of 250
queries, there are 93 questions, 96 phrases contain-

2The annotations are available at
http://ciir.cs.umass.edu/∼bemike/data.html

106



CAP
F1 (% impr) MQA (% impr)

i-QRY 0.641 (-/-) 0.779 (-/-)
i-PRF 0.711∗(+10.9/-) 0.811∗(+4.1/-)
j-QRY 0.620†(-3.3/-12.8) 0.805∗(+3.3/-0.7)
j-PRF 0.718∗(+12.0/+0.9) 0.840∗†(+7.8/+3.6)
TAG

Acc. (% impr) MQA (% impr)
i-QRY 0.893 (-/-) 0.878 (-/-)
i-PRF 0.916∗(+2.6/-) 0.914∗(+4.1/-)
j-QRY 0.913∗(+2.2/-0.3) 0.912∗(+3.9/-0.2)
j-PRF 0.924∗(+3.5/+0.9) 0.922∗(+5.0/+0.9)
SEG

F1 (% impr) MQA (% impr)
i-QRY 0.694 (-/-) 0.672 (-/-)
i-PRF 0.753∗(+8.5/-) 0.710∗(+5.7/-)
j-QRY 0.817∗†(+17.7/+8.5) 0.803

∗
†(+19.5/+13.1)

j-PRF 0.819∗†(+18.0/+8.8) 0.803
∗
†(+19.5/+13.1)

Table 1: Summary of query annotation performance for
capitalization (CAP), POS tagging (TAG) and segmenta-
tion. Numbers in parentheses indicate % of improvement
over the i-QRY and i-PRF baselines, respectively. Best
result per measure and annotation is boldfaced. ∗ and †
denote statistically significant differences with i-QRY and
i-PRF, respectively.

ing a verb, and 61 short keyword queries (Figure 1
contains a single example of each of these types).

In order to test the effectiveness of the joint query
annotation, we compare four methods. In the first
two methods, i-QRY and i-PRF the three annotations
are done independently. Method i-QRY is based on
z
∗(QRY )
Q estimator (Eq. 3). Method i-PRF is based

on the z∗(PRF )Q estimator (Eq. 4).
The next two methods, j-QRY and j-PRF, are joint

annotation methods, which perform a joint optimiza-
tion over the entire set of annotations, as described
in the algorithm in Figure 2. j-QRY and j-PRF differ
in their choice of the initial independent annotation
set Z∗(I)Q in line (1) of the algorithm (see Figure 2).
j-QRY uses only the annotations performed by i-
QRY (3 initial independent annotation estimates),
while j-PRF combines the annotations performed by
i-QRY with the annotations performed by i-PRF (6
initial annotation estimates). The CRF model train-
ing in line (6) of the algorithm is implemented using
CRF++ toolkit3.

3http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/

The performance of the joint annotation methods
is estimated using a 10-fold cross-validation. In or-
der to test the statistical significance of improve-
ments attained by the proposed methods we use a
two-sided Fisher’s randomization test with 20,000
permutations. Results with p-value < 0.05 are con-
sidered statistically significant.

For reporting the performance of our meth-
ods we use two measures. The first measure is
classification-oriented — treating the annotation de-
cision for each query term as a classification. In case
of capitalization and segmentation annotations these
decisions are binary and we compute the precision
and recall metrics, and report F1 — their harmonic
mean. In case of POS tagging, the decisions are
ternary, and hence we report the classification ac-
curacy.

We also report an additional, IR-oriented perfor-
mance measure. As is typical in IR, we propose
measuring the performance of the annotation meth-
ods on a per-query basis, to verify that the methods
have uniform impact across queries. Accordingly,
we report the mean of classification accuracies per
query (MQA). Formally, MQA is computed as

∑N
i=1 accQi

N
,

where accQi is the classification accuracy for query
Qi, and N is the number of queries.

The empirical evaluation is conducted as follows.
In Section 6.2, we discuss the general performance
of the four annotation techniques, and compare the
effectiveness of independent and joint annotations.
In Section 6.3, we analyze the performance of the
independent and joint annotation methods by query
type. In Section 6.4, we compare the difficulty
of performing query annotations for different query
types. Finally, in Section 6.5, we compare the effec-
tiveness of the proposed joint annotation for query
segmentation with the existing query segmentation
methods.

6.2 General Evaluation

Table 1 shows the summary of the performance of
the two independent and two joint annotation meth-
ods for the entire set of 250 queries. For independent
methods, we see that i-PRF outperforms i-QRY for

107



CAP Verbal Phrases Questions Keywords
F1 MQA F1 MQA F1 MQA

i-PRF 0.750 0.862 0.590 0.839 0.784 0.687
j-PRF 0.687∗(-8.4%) 0.839∗(-2.7%) 0.671∗(+13.7%) 0.913∗(+8.8%) 0.814 (+3.8%) 0.732∗ (+6.6%)

TAG Verbal Phrases Questions Keywords
Acc. MQA Acc. MQA Acc. MQA

i-PRF 0.908 0.908 0.932 0.935 0.880 0.890
j-PRF 0.904 (-0.4%) 0.906 (-0.2%) 0.951∗ (+2.1%) 0.953∗ (+1.9%) 0.893 (+1.5%) 0.900 (+1.1%)

SEG Verbal Phrases Questions Keywords
F1 MQA F1 MQA F1 MQA

i-PRF 0.751 0.700 0.740 0.700 0.816 0.747
j-PRF 0.772 (+2.8%) 0.742∗(+6.0%) 0.858∗(+15.9%) 0.838∗(+19.7%) 0.844 (+3.4%) 0.853∗(+14.2%)

Table 2: Detailed analysis of the query annotation performance for capitalization (CAP), POS tagging (TAG) and
segmentation by query type. Numbers in parentheses indicate % of improvement over the i-PRF baseline. Best result
per measure and annotation is boldfaced. ∗ denotes statistically significant differences with i-PRF.

all annotation types, using both performance mea-
sures.

In Table 1, we can also observe that the joint anno-
tation methods are, in all cases, better than the cor-
responding independent ones. The highest improve-
ments are attained by j-PRF, which always demon-
strates the best performance both in terms of F1 and
MQA. These results attest to both the importance of
doing a joint optimization over the entire set of an-
notations and to the robustness of the initial annota-
tions done by the i-PRF method. In all but one case,
the j-PRF method, which uses these annotations as
features, outperforms the j-QRY method that only
uses the annotation done by i-QRY .

The most significant improvements as a result of
joint annotation are observed for the segmentation
task. In this task, joint annotation achieves close to
20% improvement in MQA over the i-QRY method,
and more than 10% improvement in MQA over the i-
PRF method. These improvements indicate that the
segmentation decisions are strongly guided by cap-
italization and POS tagging. We also note that, in
case of segmentation, the differences in performance
between the two joint annotation methods, j-QRY
and j-PRF, are not significant, indicating that the
context of additional annotations in j-QRY makes up
for the lack of more robust pseudo-relevance feed-
back based features.

We also note that the lowest performance im-
provement as a result of joint annotation is evi-
denced for POS tagging. The improvements of joint

annotation method j-PRF over the i-PRF method are
less than 1%, and are not statistically significant.
This is not surprising, since the standard POS tag-
gers often already use bigrams and capitalization at
training time, and do not acquire much additional
information from other annotations.

6.3 Evaluation by Query Type

Table 2 presents a detailed analysis of the perfor-
mance of the best independent (i-PRF) and joint (j-
PRF) annotation methods by the three query types
used for evaluation: verbal phrases, questions and
keyword queries. From the analysis in Table 2, we
note that the contribution of joint annotation varies
significantly across query types. For instance, us-
ing j-PRF always leads to statistically significant im-
provements over the i-PRF baseline for questions.
On the other hand, it is either statistically indistin-
guishable, or even significantly worse (in the case of
capitalization) than the i-PRF baseline for the verbal
phrases.

Table 2 also demonstrates that joint annotation
has a different impact on various annotations for the
same query type. For instance, j-PRF has a signif-
icant positive effect on capitalization and segmen-
tation for keyword queries, but only marginally im-
proves the POS tagging. Similarly, for the verbal
phrases, j-PRF has a significant positive effect only
for the segmentation annotation.

These variances in the performance of the j-PRF
method point to the differences in the structure be-

108



Annotation Performance by Query Type
F

1

Verbal Phrases Questions Keyword Queries

60
65

70
75

80
85

90
95

10
0

CAP

SEG

TAG

Figure 3: Comparative performance (in terms of F1 for
capitalization and segmentation and accuracy for POS
tagging) of the j-PRF method on the three query types.

tween the query types. While dependence between
the annotations plays an important role for question
and keyword queries, which often share a common
grammatical structure, this dependence is less use-
ful for verbal phrases, which have a more diverse
linguistic structure. Accordingly, a more in-depth
investigation of the linguistic structure of the verbal
phrase queries is an interesting direction for future
work.

6.4 Annotation Difficulty

Recall that in our experiments, out of the overall 250
annotated queries, there are 96 verbal phrases, 93
questions and 61 keyword queries. Figure 3 shows a
plot that contrasts the relative performance for these
three query types of our best-performing joint an-
notation method, j-PRF, on capitalization, POS tag-
ging and segmentation annotation tasks. Next, we
analyze the performance profiles for the annotation
tasks shown in Figure 3.

For the capitalization task, the performance of j-
PRF on verbal phrases and questions is similar, with
the difference below 3%. The performance for key-
word queries is much higher — with improvement
over 20% compared to either of the other two types.
We attribute this increase to both a larger number
of positive examples in the short keyword queries
(a higher percentage of terms in keyword queries is
capitalized) and their simpler syntactic structure (ad-

SEG F1 MQA
SEG-1 0.768 0.754
SEG-2 0.824∗ 0.787∗

j-PRF 0.819∗ (+6.7%/-0.6%) 0.803∗ (+6.5%/+2.1%)

Table 3: Comparison of the segmentation performance
of the j-PRF method to two state-of-the-art segmentation
methods. Numbers in parentheses indicate % of improve-
ment over the SEG-1 and SEG-2 baselines respectively.
Best result per measure and annotation is boldfaced. ∗

denotes statistically significant differences with SEG-1.

jacent terms in these queries are likely to have the
same case).

For the segmentation task, the performance is at
its best for the question and keyword queries, and at
its worst (with a drop of 11%) for the verbal phrases.
We hypothesize that this is due to the fact that ques-
tion queries and keyword queries tend to have repet-
itive structures, while the grammatical structure for
verbose queries is much more diverse.

For the tagging task, the performance profile is re-
versed, compared to the other two tasks — the per-
formance is at its worst for keyword queries, since
their grammatical structure significantly differs from
the grammatical structure of sentences in news arti-
cles, on which the POS tagger is trained. For ques-
tion queries the performance is the best (6% increase
over the keyword queries), since they resemble sen-
tences encountered in traditional corpora.

It is important to note that the results reported in
Figure 3 are based on training the joint annotation
model on all available queries with 10-fold cross-
validation. We might get different profiles if a sep-
arate annotation model was trained for each query
type. In our case, however, the number of queries
from each type is not sufficient to train a reliable
model. We leave the investigation of separate train-
ing of joint annotation models by query type to fu-
ture work.

6.5 Additional Comparisons

In order to further evaluate the proposed joint an-
notation method, j-PRF, in this section we compare
its performance to other query annotation methods
previously reported in the literature. Unfortunately,
there is not much published work on query capi-
talization and query POS tagging that goes beyond
the simple query-based methods described in Sec-

109



tion 4.1. The published work on the more advanced
methods usually requires access to large amounts of
proprietary user data such as query logs and clicks
(Barr et al., 2008; Guo et al., 2008; Guo et al., 2009).

Therefore, in this section we focus on recent work
on query segmentation (Bergsma and Wang, 2007;
Hagen et al., 2010). We compare the segmentation
effectiveness of our best performing method, j-PRF,
to that of these query segmentation methods.

The first method, SEG-1, was first proposed by
Hagen et al. (2010). It is currently the most effective
publicly disclosed unsupervised query segmentation
method. SEG-1 method requires an access to a large
web n-gram corpus (Brants and Franz, 2006). The
optimal segmentation for query Q, S∗Q, is then ob-
tained using

S∗Q = argmax
S∈SQ

∑

s∈S,|s|>1

|s||s|count(s),

where SQ is the set of all possible query segmenta-
tions, S is a possible segmentation, s is a segment
in S, and count(s) is the frequency of s in the web
n-gram corpus.

The second method, SEG-2, is based on a success-
ful supervised segmentation method, which was first
proposed by Bergsma and Wang (2007). SEG-2 em-
ploys a large set of features, and is pre-trained on the
query collection described by Bergsma and Wang
(2007). The features used by the SEG-2 method are
described by Bendersky et al. (2009), and include,
among others, n-gram frequencies in a sample of a
query log, web corpus and Wikipedia titles.

Table 3 demonstrates the comparison between the
j-PRF, SEG-1 and SEG-2 methods. When com-
pared to the SEG-1 baseline, j-PRF is significantly
more effective, even though it only employs bigram
counts (see Eq. 4), instead of the high-order n-grams
used by SEG-1, for computing the score of a seg-
mentation. This results underscores the benefit of
joint annotation, which leverages capitalization and
POS tagging to improve the quality of the segmen-
tation.

When compared to the SEG-2 baseline, j-PRF
and SEG-2 are statistically indistinguishable. SEG-2
posits a slightly better F1, while j-PRF has a better
MQA. This result demonstrates that the segmenta-
tion produced by the j-PRF method is as effective as

the segmentation produced by the current supervised
state-of-the-art segmentation methods, which em-
ploy external data sources and high-order n-grams.
The benefit of the j-PRF method compared to the
SEG-2 method, is that, simultaneously with the seg-
mentation, it produces several additional query an-
notations (in this case, capitalization and POS tag-
ging), eliminating the need to construct separate se-
quence classifiers for each annotation.

7 Conclusions

In this paper, we have investigated a joint approach
for annotating search queries with linguistic struc-
tures, including capitalization, POS tags and seg-
mentation. To this end, we proposed a probabilis-
tic approach for performing joint query annotation
that takes into account the dependencies that exist
between the different annotation types.

Our experimental findings over a range of queries
from a web search log unequivocally point to the su-
periority of the joint annotation methods over both
query-based and pseudo-relevance feedback based
independent annotation methods. These findings in-
dicate that the different annotations are mutually-
dependent.

We are encouraged by the success of our joint
query annotation technique, and intend to pursue the
investigation of its utility for IR applications. In the
future, we intend to research the use of joint query
annotations for additional IR tasks, e.g., for con-
structing better query formulations for ranking al-
gorithms.

8 Acknowledgment

This work was supported in part by the Center for In-
telligent Information Retrieval and in part by ARRA
NSF IIS-9014442. Any opinions, findings and con-
clusions or recommendations expressed in this ma-
terial are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the sponsor.

110



References

Niranjan Balasubramanian and James Allan. 2009. Syn-
tactic query models for restatement retrieval. In Proc.
of SPIRE, pages 143–155.

Cory Barr, Rosie Jones, and Moira Regelson. 2008. The
linguistic structure of english web-search queries. In
Proc. of EMNLP, pages 1021–1030.

Michael Bendersky and W. Bruce Croft. 2009. Analysis
of long queries in a large scale search log. In Proc. of
Workshop on Web Search Click Data, pages 8–14.

Michael Bendersky, David Smith, and W. Bruce Croft.
2009. Two-stage query segmentation for information
retrieval. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 810–811.

Michael Bendersky, W. Bruce Croft, and David A. Smith.
2010. Structural annotation of search queries using
pseudo-relevance feedback. In Proc. of CIKM, pages
1537–1540.

Shane Bergsma and Qin I. Wang. 2007. Learning noun
phrase query segmentation. In Proc. of EMNLP, pages
819–826.

Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-gram
Version 1.

Chris Buckley. 1995. Automatic query expansion using
SMART. In Proc. of TREC-3, pages 69–80.

Jenny R. Finkel and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
Joint parsing and named entity recognition. In Proc.
of NAACL, pages 326–334.

Jiafeng Guo, Gu Xu, Hang Li, and Xueqi Cheng. 2008.
A unified and discriminative model for query refine-
ment. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 379–386.

Jiafeng Guo, Gu Xu, Xueqi Cheng, and Hang Li. 2009.
Named entity recognition in query. In Proc. of SIGIR,
pages 267–274.

Matthias Hagen, Martin Potthast, Benno Stein, and
Christof Braeutigam. 2010. The power of naive query
segmentation. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 797–798.

Matthias Hagen, Martin Potthast, Benno Stein, and
Christof Bräutigam. 2011. Query segmentation re-
visited. In Proc. of WWW, pages 97–106.

Rosie Jones and Daniel C. Fain. 2003. Query word dele-
tion prediction. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 435–436.

Rosie Jones, Benjamin Rey, Omid Madani, and Wiley
Greiner. 2006. Generating query substitutions. In
Proc. of WWW, pages 387–396.

Giridhar Kumaran and James Allan. 2007. A case for
shorter queries, and helping user create them. In Proc.
of NAACL, pages 220–227.

Giridhar Kumaran and Vitor R. Carvalho. 2009. Re-
ducing long queries using query quality predictors. In
Proc. of SIGIR, pages 564–571.

John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando C. N.
Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilis-
tic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data.
In Proc. of ICML, pages 282–289.

Victor Lavrenko and W. Bruce Croft. 2001. Relevance
based language models. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 120–
127.

Matthew Lease. 2007. Natural language processing for
information retrieval: the time is ripe (again). In Pro-
ceedings of PIKM.

Xiao Li. 2010. Understanding the semantic structure of
noun phrase queries. In Proc. of ACL, pages 1337–
1345, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Rachel T. Lo, Ben He, and Iadh Ounis. 2005. Auto-
matically building a stopword list for an information
retrieval system. In Proc. of DIR.

Yumao Lu, Fuchun Peng, Gilad Mishne, Xing Wei, and
Benoit Dumoulin. 2009. Improving Web search rel-
evance with semantic features. In Proc. of EMNLP,
pages 648–657.

Mehdi Manshadi and Xiao Li. 2009. Semantic Tagging
of Web Search Queries. In Proc. of ACL, pages 861–
869.

André F. T. Martins, Dipanjan Das, Noah A. Smith, and
Eric P. Xing. 2008. Stacking dependency parsers. In
Proc. of EMNLP, pages 157–166.

Joakim Nivre and Ryan McDonald. 2008. Integrating
graph-based and transition-based dependency parsers.
In Proc. of ACL, pages 950–958.

Marius Paşca. 2007. Weakly-supervised discovery of
named entities using web search queries. In Proc. of
CIKM, pages 683–690.

Dou Shen, Toby Walkery, Zijian Zhengy, Qiang Yangz,
and Ying Li. 2008. Personal name classification in
web queries. In Proc. of WSDM, pages 149–158.

Bin Tan and Fuchun Peng. 2008. Unsupervised query
segmentation using generative language models and
Wikipedia. In Proc. of WWW, pages 347–356.

Kristina Toutanova, Aria Haghighi, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2008. A global joint model for semantic
role labeling. Computational Linguistics, 34:161–191,
June.

Xing Wei, Fuchun Peng, and Benoit Dumoulin. 2008.
Analyzing web text association to disambiguate abbre-
viation in queries. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 751–752.

111


