










































Effects of Noun Phrase Bracketing in Dependency Parsing and Machine Translation


Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 Student Session, pages 69–74,
Portland, OR, USA 19-24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Effects of Noun Phrase Bracketing in Dependency Parsing and Machine
Translation

Nathan Green
Charles University in Prague

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
green@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

Flat noun phrase structure was, up until re-
cently, the standard in annotation for the Penn
Treebanks. With the recent addition of inter-
nal noun phrase annotation, dependency pars-
ing and applications down the NLP pipeline
are likely affected. Some machine translation
systems, such as TectoMT, use deep syntax
as a language transfer layer. It is proposed
that changes to the noun phrase dependency
parse will have a cascading effect down the
NLP pipeline and in the end, improve ma-
chine translation output, even with a reduc-
tion in parser accuracy that the noun phrase
structure might cause. This paper examines
this noun phrase structure’s effect on depen-
dency parsing, in English, with a maximum
spanning tree parser and shows a 2.43%, 0.23
Bleu score, improvement for English to Czech
machine translation.

1 Introduction

Noun phrase structure in the Penn Treebank has up
until recently been only considered, due to under-
specification, a flat structure. Due to the annota-
tion and work of Vadas and Curran (2007a; 2007b;
2008), we are now able to create Natural Language
Processing (NLP) systems that take advantage of the
internal structure of noun phrases in the Penn Tree-
bank. This extra internal structure introduces ad-
ditional complications in NLP applications such as
parsing.

Dependency parsing has been a prime focus of
NLP research of late due to its ability to help parse

languages with a free word order. Dependency pars-
ing has been shown to improve NLP systems in
certain languages and in many cases is considered
the state of the art in the field. Dependency pars-
ing made many improvements due to the CoNLL X
shared task (Buchholz and Marsi, 2006). However,
in most cases, these systems were trained with a flat
noun phrase structure in the Penn Treebank. Vadas’
internal noun phrase structure has been used in pre-
vious work on constituent parsing using Collin’s
parser (Vadas and Curran, 2007c), but has yet to be
analyzed for its effects on dependency parsing.

Parsing is very early in the NLP pipeline. There-
fore, improvements in parsing output could have an
improvement on other areas of NLP in many cases,
such as Machine Translation. At the same time, any
errors in parsing will tend to propagate down the
NLP pipeline. One would expect parsing accuracy
to be reduced when the complexity of the parse is in-
creased, such as adding noun phrase structure. But,
for a machine translation system that is reliant on
parsing, the new noun phrase structure, even with re-
duced parser accuracy, may yield improvements due
to a more detailed grammatical structure. This is
particularly of interest for dependency relations, as
it may aid in finding the correct head of a term in a
complex noun phrase.

This paper examines the results and errors in pars-
ing and machine translation of dependency parsers,
trained with annotated noun phrase structure, against
those with a flat noun phrase structure. These re-
sults are compared with two systems: a Baseline
Parser with no internally annotated noun phrases and
a Gold NP Parser trained with data which contains

69



gold standard internal noun phrase structure anno-
tation. Additionally, we analyze the effect of these
improvements and errors in parsing down the NLP
pipeline on the TectoMT machine translation sys-
tem (Žabokrtský et al., 2008).

Section 2 contains background information
needed to understand the individual components of
the experiments. The methodology used to carry out
the experiments is described in Section 3. Results
are shown and discussed in Section 4. Section 5
concludes and discusses future work and implica-
tions of this research.

2 Related Work

2.1 Dependency Parsing

Dependence parsing is an alternative view to the
common phrase or constituent parsing techniques
used with the Penn Treebank. Dependency relations
can be used in many applications and have been
shown to be quite useful in languages with a free
word order. With the influx of many data-driven
techniques, the need for annotated dependency re-
lations is apparent. Since there are many data sets
with constituent relations annotated, this paper uses
free conversion software provided from the CoNLL
2008 shared task to create dependency relations (Jo-
hansson and Nugues, 2007; Surdeanu et al., 2008).

2.2 Dependency Parsers

Dependency parsing comes in two main forms:
Graph algorithms and Greedy algorithms. The
two most popular algorithms are McDonald’s MST-
Parser (McDonald et al., 2005) and Nivre’s Malt-
Parser (Nivre, 2003). Each parser has its advantages
and disadvantages, but the accuracy overall is ap-
proximately the same. The types of errors made
by each parser, however, are very different. MST-
Parser is globally trained for an optimal solution and
this has led it to get the best results on longer sen-
tences. MaltParser on the other hand, is a greedy al-
gorithm. This allows it to perform extremely well on
shorter sentences, as the errors tend to propagate and
cause more egregious errors in longer sentences with
longer dependencies (McDonald and Nivre, 2007).
We expect each parser to have different errors han-
dling internal noun phrase structure, but for this pa-
per we will only be examining the globally trained

MSTParser.

2.3 TectoMT

TectoMT is a machine translation framework based
on Praguian tectogrammatics (Sgall, 1967) which
represents four main layers: word layer, morpho-
logical layer, analytical layer, and tectogrammatical
layer (Popel et al., 2010). This framework is pri-
marily focused on the translation from English into
Czech. Since much of dependency parsing work
has been focused on Czech, this choice of machine
translation framework logically follows as TectoMT
makes direct use of the dependency relationships.
The work in this paper primarily addresses the noun
phrase structure in the analytical layer (SEnglishA
in Figure 1).

Figure 1: Translation Process in TectoMT in which
the tectogrammatical layer is transfered from English to
Czech.

TectoMT is a modular framework built in Perl.
This allows great ease in adding the two different
parsers into the framework since each experiment
can be run as a separate “Scenario” comprised of dif-
ferent parsing “Blocks”. This allows a simple com-
parison of two machine translation system in which
everything remains constant except the dependency
parser.

2.4 Noun Phrase Structure

The Penn Treebank is one of the most well known
English language treebanks (Marcus et al., 1993),
consisting of annotated portions of the Wall Street
Journal. Much of the annotation task is painstak-
ingly done by annotators in great detail. Some struc-
tures are not dealt with in detail, such as noun phrase
structure. Not having this information makes it dif-
ficult to tell the dependencies on phrases such as

70



“crude oil prices” (Vadas and Curran, 2007c). With-
out internal annotation it is ambiguous whether the
phrase is stating “crude prices” (crude (oil prices))
or “crude oil” ((crude oil) prices).

crude   oil   prices crude   oil   prices

Figure 2: Ambiguous dependency caused by internal
noun phrase structure.

Manual annotation of these phrases would be
quite time consuming and as seen in the example
above, sometimes ambiguous and therefore prone
to poor inter-annotator agreement. Vadas and Cur-
ran have constructed a Gold standard version Penn
treebank with these structures. They were also
able to train supervised learners to an F-score of
91.44% (Vadas and Curran, 2007a; Vadas and Cur-
ran, 2007b; Vadas and Curran, 2008). The addi-
tional complexity of noun phrase structure has been
shown to reduce parser accuracy in Collin’s parser
but no similar evaluation has been conducted for de-
pendency parsers. The internal noun phrase struc-
ture has been used in experiments prior but without
evaluation with respect to the noun phrases (Galley
and Manning, 2009).

3 Methodology

The Noun Phrase Bracketing experiments consist of
a comparison two systems.

1. The Baseline system is McDonald’s MST-
Parser trained on the Penn Treebank in English
without any extra noun phrase bracketing.

2. The Gold NP Parser is McDonald’s MSTParser
trained on the Penn Treebank in English with
gold standard noun phrase structure annota-
tions (Vadas and Curran, 2007a).

3.1 Data Sets

To maintain a consistent dataset to compare to pre-
vious work we use the Wall Street Journal (WSJ)
section of the Penn Treebank since it was used in
the CoNLL X shared task on dependency parsing
(Buchholz and Marsi, 2006). Using the same com-
mon breakdown of datasets, we use WST section

02-21 for training and section 22 for testing, which
allows us to have comparable results to previous
works. To test the effects of the noun phrase struc-
ture on machine translation, ACL 2008’s Workshop
on Statistical Machine translation’s (WMT) data are
used.

3.2 Process Flow

Figure 3: Experiment Process Flow. PTB (Penn Tree
Bank), NP (Noun Phrase Structure), LAS (Labeled Ac-
curacy Score), UAS (Unlabeled Accuracy Score), Wall
Street Journal (WSJ)

We begin the the experiments by constructing two
data sets:

1. The Penn Treebank with no internal noun
phrase structure (PTB w/o NP structure).

2. The Penn Treebank with gold standard noun
phrase annotations provided by Vadas and Cur-
ran (PTB w/ gold standard NP structure).

From these datasets we construct two separate
parsers. These parsers are trained using McDonald’s
Maximum Spanning Tree Algorithm (MSTParser)
(McDonald et al., 2005).

Both of the parsers are then tested on a subset of
the WSJ corpus, section 22, of the Penn Treebank
and the UAS and LAS scores are generated. Errors
generated by each of these systems are then com-
pared to discover where the internal noun phrase
structure affects the output. Parser accuracy is not
necessarily the most important aspect of this work.

71



The effect of this noun phrase structure down the
NLP pipeline is also crucial. For this, the parsers are
inserted into the TectoMT system.

3.3 Metrics
Labeled Accuracy Score (LAS) and Unlabeled
Accuracy Score (UAS) are the primary ways to eval-
uate dependency parsers. UAS is the percentage of
words that are correctly linked to their heads. LAS is
the percentage of words that are connected to their
correct heads and have the correct dependency la-
bel. UAS and LAS are used to compare one system
against another, as was done in CoNLL X (Buch-
holz and Marsi, 2006).

The Bleu (BiLingual Evaluation Understudy)
score is an automatic scoring mechanism for ma-
chine translation that is quick and can be reused as a
benchmark across machine translation tasks. Bleu is
calculated as the geometric mean of n-grams com-
paring a machine translation and a reference text
(Papineni et al., 2002). This experiment compares
the two parsing systems against each other using the
above metrics. In both cases the test set data is sam-
pled 1,000 times without replacement to calculate
statistical significance using a pairwise comparison.

4 Results and Discussion

When applied, the gold standard annotations
changed approximately 1.5% of the edges in the
training data. Once trained, both parsers were tested
against section 22 of their respective annotated cor-
pora. As Table 1 shows, the Baseline Parser obtained
near identical LAS and UAS scores. This was ex-
pected given the additional complexity of predicting
the noun phrase structure and the previous work on
noun phrase bracketing’s effect on Collin’s parser.

Systems LAS UAS
Baseline Parser 88.12% 91.11%
Gold NP Parser 88.10% 91.10%

Table 1: Parsing results for the Baseline and Gold NP
Parsers. Each is trained on Section 02-21 of the WSJ and
tested on Section 22

While possibly more error prone, the 1.5% change
in edges in the training data did appear to add more
useful syntactic structure to the resulting parses as
can be seen in Table 2. With the additional noun

phrase bracketing, the resulting Bleu score increased
0.23 points or 2.43%. The improvement is statis-
tically significant with 95% confidence using pair-
wise bootstrapping of 1,000 test sets randomly sam-
pled with replacement (Koehn, 2004; Zhang et al.,
2004). In Figure 4 we can see that the difference be-
tween each of the 1,000 samples was above 0, mean-
ing the Gold NP Parser performed consistently bet-
ter given each sample.

Systems Bleu
Baseline Parser 9.47
Gold NP Parser 9.70

Table 2: TectoMT results of a complete system run with
both the Baseline Parser and Gold NP Parser. Both are
tested on WMT08 data. Results are an average of 1,000
bootstrapped test sets with replacement.

Figure 4: The Gold NP Parser shows statistically signif-
icant improvement with 95% confidence. The difference
in Bleu score is represented on the Y-axis and the boot-
strap iteration is displayed on the X-axis. The samples
were sorted by the difference in bleu score.

Visually, changes can be seen in the English side
parse that affect the overall translation quality. Sen-
tences that contained incorrect noun phrase structure
such as “The second vice-president and Economy
minister, Pedro Solbes” as seen in Figure 5 and Fig-
ure 6 were more correctly parsed in the Gold NP
Parser. In Figure 5 “and” is incorrectly assigned to
the bottom of a noun phrase and does not connect
any segments together in the output of the Baseline
Parser, while it connects two phrases in Figure 6
which is the output of the Gold NP Parser. This shift
in bracketing also allows the proper noun, which is
shaded, to be assigned to the correct head, the right-
most noun in the phrase.

72



Figure 5: The parse created with the data with flat struc-
tures does not appear to handle noun phrases with more
depth, in this case the ’and’ does not properly connect the
two components.

Figure 6: With the addition of noun phrase structure in
parser, the complicated noun phrase appears to be better
structured. The ’and’ connects two components instead
of improperly being a leaf node.

5 Conclusion

This paper has demonstrated the benefit of addi-
tional noun phrase bracketing in training data for use
in dependency parsing and machine translation. Us-
ing the additional structure, the dependency parser’s
accuracy was minimally reduced. Despite this re-
duction, machine translation, much further down
the NLP pipeline, obtained a 2.43% jump in Bleu
score and is statistically significant with 95% confi-
dence. Future work should examine similar experi-
ments with MaltParser and other machine translation
systems.

6 Acknowledgements

This research has received funding from the Euro-
pean Commissions 7th Framework Program (FP7)
under grant agreement n◦ 238405 (CLARA), and
from grant MSM 0021620838. I would like to thank
Zdeněk Žabokrtský for his guidance in this research
and also the anonymous reviewers for their com-
ments.

References

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. Conll-x shared
task on multilingual dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the Tenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning, CoNLL-X ’06, pages 149–
164, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Michel Galley and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
Quadratic-time dependency parsing for machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the
47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing of the AFNLP, pages 773–781, Suntec, Singapore,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Extended
constituent-to-dependency conversion for English. In
Proceedings of NODALIDA 2007, pages 105–112,
Tartu, Estonia, May 25-26.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for
machine translation evaluation. In Dekang Lin and
Dekai Wu, editors, Proceedings of EMNLP 2004,
pages 388–395, Barcelona, Spain, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beat-
rice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of english: the penn treebank. Comput. Linguist.,
19:313–330, June.

73



Ryan McDonald and Joakim Nivre. 2007. Charac-
terizing the errors of data-driven dependency parsing
models. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and Computational Natural Language Learning
(EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 122–131.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajič. 2005. Non-projective dependency parsing
using spanning tree algorithms. In Proceedings of the
conference on Human Language Technology and Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, HLT
’05, pages 523–530, Morristown, NJ, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Joakim Nivre. 2003. An efficient algorithm for projec-
tive dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the 8th In-
ternational Workshop on Parsing Technologies (IWPT,
pages 149–160.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL ’02, pages 311–318, Morris-
town, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Martin Popel, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, and Jan Ptáček. 2010.
Tectomt: Modular nlp framework. In IceTAL, pages
293–304.

Petr Sgall. 1967. Generativnı́ popis jazyka a česká dek-
linace. Academia, Prague, Czech Republic.

Mihai Surdeanu, Richard Johansson, Adam Meyers,
Lluı́s Màrquez, and Joakim Nivre. 2008. The
conll-2008 shared task on joint parsing of syntactic
and semantic dependencies. In Proceedings of the
Twelfth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, CoNLL ’08, pages 159–177, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

David Vadas and James Curran. 2007a. Adding noun
phrase structure to the penn treebank. In Proceedings
of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 240–247, Prague, Czech
Republic, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

David Vadas and James R. Curran. 2007b. Large-scale
supervised models for noun phrase bracketing. In
Conference of the Pacific Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (PACLING), pages 104–112, Mel-
bourne, Australia, September.

David Vadas and James R. Curran. 2007c. Parsing in-
ternal noun phrase structure with collins’ models. In
Proceedings of the Australasian Language Technol-
ogy Workshop 2007, pages 109–116, Melbourne, Aus-
tralia, December.

David Vadas and James R. Curran. 2008. Parsing noun
phrase structure with CCG. In Proceedings of ACL-
08: HLT, pages 335–343, Columbus, Ohio, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Jan Ptáček, and Petr Pajas. 2008.
Tectomt: highly modular mt system with tectogram-
matics used as transfer layer. In Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
StatMT ’08, pages 167–170, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ying Zhang, Stephan Vogel, and Alex Waibel. 2004. In-
terpreting bleu/nist scores: How much improvement
do we need to have a better system. In In Proceedings
of Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2004, pages 2051–2054.

74


