










































Simple English Wikipedia: A New Text Simplification Task


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 665–669,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Simple English Wikipedia: A New Text Simplification Task

William Coster
Computer Science Department

Pomona College
Claremont, CA 91711

wpc02009@pomona.edu

David Kauchak
Computer Science Department

Pomona College
Claremont, CA 91711

dkauchak@cs.pomona.edu

Abstract

In this paper we examine the task of sentence
simplification which aims to reduce the read-
ing complexity of a sentence by incorporat-
ing more accessible vocabulary and sentence
structure. We introduce a new data set that
pairs English Wikipedia with Simple English
Wikipedia and is orders of magnitude larger
than any previously examined for sentence
simplification. The data contains the full range
of simplification operations including reword-
ing, reordering, insertion and deletion. We
provide an analysis of this corpus as well as
preliminary results using a phrase-based trans-
lation approach for simplification.

1 Introduction

The task of text simplification aims to reduce the
complexity of text while maintaining the content
(Chandrasekar and Srinivas, 1997; Carroll et al.,
1998; Feng, 2008). In this paper, we explore the
sentence simplification problem: given a sentence,
the goal is to produce an equivalent sentence where
the vocabulary and sentence structure are simpler.

Text simplification has a number of important ap-
plications. Simplification techniques can be used to
make text resources available to a broader range of
readers, including children, language learners, the
elderly, the hearing impaired and people with apha-
sia or cognitive disabilities (Carroll et al., 1998;
Feng, 2008). As a preprocessing step, simplification
can improve the performance of NLP tasks, includ-
ing parsing, semantic role labeling, machine transla-
tion and summarization (Miwa et al., 2010; Jonnala-

gadda et al., 2009; Vickrey and Koller, 2008; Chan-
drasekar and Srinivas, 1997). Finally, models for
text simplification are similar to models for sentence
compression; advances in simplification can bene-
fit compression, which has applications in mobile
devices, summarization and captioning (Knight and
Marcu, 2002; McDonald, 2006; Galley and McKe-
own, 2007; Nomoto, 2009; Cohn and Lapata, 2009).

One of the key challenges for text simplification
is data availability. The small amount of simplifi-
cation data currently available has prevented the ap-
plication of data-driven techniques like those used
in other text-to-text translation areas (Och and Ney,
2004; Chiang, 2010). Most prior techniques for
text simplification have involved either hand-crafted
rules (Vickrey and Koller, 2008; Feng, 2008) or
learned within a very restricted rule space (Chan-
drasekar and Srinivas, 1997).

We have generated a data set consisting of 137K
aligned simplified/unsimplified sentence pairs by
pairing documents, then sentences from English
Wikipedia1 with corresponding documents and sen-
tences from Simple English Wikipedia2. Simple En-
glish Wikipedia contains articles aimed at children
and English language learners and contains similar
content to English Wikipedia but with simpler vo-
cabulary and grammar.

Figure 1 shows example sentence simplifications
from the data set. Like machine translation and other
text-to-text domains, text simplification involves the
full range of transformation operations including
deletion, rewording, reordering and insertion.

1http://en.wikipedia.org/
2http://simple.wikipedia.org

665



a. Normal: As Isolde arrives at his side, Tristan dies with her name on his lips.
Simple: As Isolde arrives at his side, Tristan dies while speaking her name.

b. Normal: Alfonso Perez Munoz, usually referred to as Alfonso, is a
former Spanish footballer, in the striker position.

Simple: Alfonso Perez is a former Spanish football player.
c. Normal: Endemic types or species are especially likely to develop on islands

because of their geographical isolation.
Simple: Endemic types are most likely to develop on islands because

they are isolated.
d. Normal: The reverse process, producing electrical energy from mechanical,

energy, is accomplished by a generator or dynamo.
Simple: A dynamo or an electric generator does the reverse: it changes

mechanical movement into electric energy.

Figure 1: Example sentence simplifications extracted from Wikipedia. Normal refers to a sentence in an English
Wikipedia article and Simple to a corresponding sentence in Simple English Wikipedia.

2 Previous Data

Wikipedia and Simple English Wikipedia have both
received some recent attention as a useful resource
for text simplification and the related task of text
compression. Yamangil and Nelken (2008) examine
the history logs of English Wikipedia to learn sen-
tence compression rules. Yatskar et al. (2010) learn
a set of candidate phrase simplification rules based
on edits identified in the revision histories of both
Simple English Wikipedia and English Wikipedia.
However, they only provide a list of the top phrasal
simplifications and do not utilize them in an end-
to-end simplification system. Finally, Napoles and
Dredze (2010) provide an analysis of the differences
between documents in English Wikipedia and Sim-
ple English Wikipedia, though they do not view the
data set as a parallel corpus.

Although the simplification problem shares some
characteristics with the text compression problem,
existing text compression data sets are small and
contain a restricted set of possible transformations
(often only deletion). Knight and Marcu (2002) in-
troduced the Zipf-Davis corpus which contains 1K
sentence pairs. Cohn and Lapata (2009) manually
generated two parallel corpora from news stories to-
taling 3K sentence pairs. Finally, Nomoto (2009)
generated a data set based on RSS feeds containing
2K sentence pairs.

3 Simplification Corpus Generation

We generated a parallel simplification corpus by
aligning sentences between English Wikipedia and
Simple English Wikipedia. We obtained complete
copies of English Wikipedia and Simple English
Wikipedia in May 2010. We first paired the articles
by title, then removed all article pairs where either
article: contained only a single line, was flagged as a
stub, was flagged as a disambiguation page or was a
meta-page about Wikipedia. After pairing and filter-
ing, 10,588 aligned, content article pairs remained
(a 90% reduction from the original 110K Simple En-
glish Wikipedia articles). Throughout the rest of this
paper we will refer to unsimplified text from English
Wikipedia as normal and to the simplified version
from Simple English Wikipedia as simple.

To generate aligned sentence pairs from the
aligned document pairs we followed an approach
similar to those utilized in previous monolingual
alignment problems (Barzilay and Elhadad, 2003;
Nelken and Shieber, 2006). Paragraphs were iden-
tified based on formatting information available in
the articles. Each simple paragraph was then aligned
to every normal paragraph where the TF-IDF, co-
sine similarity was over a threshold or 0.5. We ini-
tially investigated the paragraph clustering prepro-
cessing step in (Barzilay and Elhadad, 2003), but
did not find a qualitative difference and opted for the
simpler similarity-based alignment approach, which
does not require manual annotation.

666



For each aligned paragraph pair (i.e. a simple
paragraph and one or more normal paragraphs), we
then used a dynamic programming approach to find
that best global sentence alignment following Barzi-
lay and Elhadad (2003). Specifically, given n nor-
mal sentences to align to m simple sentences, we
find a(n, m) using the following recurrence:

a(i, j) =

max



a(i, j − 1)− skip penalty
a(i− 1, j)− skip penalty
a(i− 1, j − 1) + sim(i, j)
a(i− 1, j − 2) + sim(i, j) + sim(i, j − 1)
a(i− 2, j − 1) + sim(i, j) + sim(i− 1, j)
a(i− 2, j − 2) + sim(i, j − 1) + sim(i− 1, j)

where each line above corresponds to a sentence
alignment operation: skip the simple sentence, skip
the normal sentence, align one normal to one sim-
ple, align one normal to two simple, align two nor-
mal to one simple and align two normal to two sim-
ple. sim(i, j) is the similarity between the ith nor-
mal sentence and the jth simple sentence and was
calculated using TF-IDF, cosine similarity. We set
skip penalty = 0.0001 manually.

Barzilay and Elhadad (2003) further discourage
aligning dissimilar sentences by including a “mis-
match penalty” in the similarity measure. Instead,
we included a filtering step removing all sentence
pairs with a normalized similarity below a threshold
of 0.5. We found this approach to be more intuitive
and allowed us to compare the effects of differing
levels of similarity in the training set. Our choice of
threshold is high enough to ensure that most align-
ments are correct, but low enough to allow for vari-
ation in the paired sentences. In the future, we hope
to explore other similarity techniques that will pair
sentences with even larger variation.

4 Corpus Analysis

From the 10K article pairs, we extracted 75K
aligned paragraphs. From these, we extracted the
final set of 137K aligned sentence pairs. To evaluate
the quality of the aligned sentences, we asked two
human evaluators to independently judge whether or
not the aligned sentences were correctly aligned on
a random sample of 100 sentence pairs. They then
were asked to reach a consensus about correctness.

91/100 were identified as correct, though many of
the remaining 9 also had some partial content over-
lap. We also repeated the experiment using only
those sentences with a similarity above 0.75 (rather
than 0.50 in the original data). This reduced the
number of pairs from 137K to 90K, but the eval-
uators identified 98/100 as correct. The analysis
throughout the rest of the section is for threshold
of 0.5, though similar results were also seen for the
threshold of 0.75.

Although the average simple article contained ap-
proximately 40 sentences, we extracted an average
of 14 aligned sentence pairs per article. Qualita-
tively, it is rare to find a simple article that is a direct
translation of the normal article, that is, a simple ar-
ticle that was generated by only making sentence-
level changes to the normal document. However,
there is a strong relationship between the two data
sets: 27% of our aligned sentences were identical
between simple and normal. We left these identical
sentence pairs in our data set since not all sentences
need to be simplified and it is important for any sim-
plification algorithm to be able to handle this case.

Much of the content without direct correspon-
dence is removed during paragraph alignment. 65%
of the simple paragraphs do not align to a normal
paragraphs and are ignored. On top of this, within
aligned paragraphs, there are a large number of sen-
tences that do not align. Table 1 shows the propor-
tion of the different sentence level alignment opera-
tions in our data set. On both the simple and normal
sides there are many sentences that do not align.

Operation %
skip simple 27%
skip normal 23%
one normal to one simple 37%
one normal to two simple 8%
two normal to one simple 5%

Table 1: Frequency of sentence-level alignment opera-
tions based on our learned sentence alignment. No 2-to-2
alignments were found in the data.

To better understand how sentences are trans-
formed from normal to simple sentences we learned
a word alignment using GIZA++ (Och and Ney,
2003). Based on this word alignment, we calcu-
lated the percentage of sentences that included: re-

667



wordings – a normal word is changed to a different
simple word, deletions – a normal word is deleted,
reorderings – non-monotonic alignment, splits – a
normal words is split into multiple simple words,
and merges – multiple normal words are condensed
to a single simple word.

Transformation %
rewordings 65%
deletions 47%
reorders 34%
merges 31%
splits 27%

Table 2: Percentage of sentence pairs that contained
word-level operations based on the induced word align-
ment. Splits and merges are from the perspective of
words in the normal sentence. These are not mutually
exclusive events.

Table 2 shows the percentage of each of these phe-
nomena occurring in the sentence pairs. All of the
different operations occur frequently in the data set
with rewordings being particularly prevalent.

5 Sentence-level Text Simplification

To understand the usefulness of this data we ran
preliminary experiments to learn a sentence-level
simplification system. We view the problem of
text simplification as an English-to-English transla-
tion problem. Motivated by the importance of lex-
ical changes, we used Moses, a phrase-based ma-
chine translation system (Och and Ney, 2004).3 We
trained Moses on 124K pairs from the data set and
the n-gram language model on the simple side of this
data. We trained the hyper-parameters of the log-
linear model on a 500 sentence pair development set.

We compared the trained system to a baseline of
not doing any simplification (NONE). We evaluated
the two approaches on a test set of 1300 sentence
pairs. Since there is currently no standard for au-
tomatically evaluating sentence simplification, we
used three different automatic measures that have
been used in related domains: BLEU, which has
been used extensively in machine translation (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002), and word-level F1 and simple
string accuracy (SSA) which have been suggested

3We also experimented with T3 (Cohn and Lapata, 2009)
but the results were poor and are not presented here.

System BLEU word-F1 SSA
NONE 0.5937 0.5967 0.6179
Moses 0.5987 0.6076 0.6224
Moses-Oracle 0.6317 0.6661 0.6550

Table 3: Test scores for the baseline (NONE), Moses and
Moses-Oracle.

for text compression (Clarke and Lapata, 2006). All
three of these measures have been shown to correlate
with human judgements in their respective domains.

Table 3 shows the results of our initial test. All
differences are statistically significant at p = 0.01,
measured using bootstrap resampling with 100 sam-
ples (Koehn, 2004). Although the baseline does well
(recall that over a quarter of the sentence pairs in
the data set are identical) the phrase-based approach
does obtain a statistically significant improvement.

To understand the the limits of the phrase-based
model for text simplification, we generated an n-
best list of the 1000 most-likely simplifications for
each test sentence. We then greedily picked the sim-
plification from this n-best list that had the highest
sentence-level BLEU score based on the test exam-
ples, labeled Moses-Oracle in Table 3. The large
difference between Moses and Moses-Oracle indi-
cates possible room for improvement utilizing better
parameter estimation or n-best list reranking tech-
niques (Och et al., 2004; Ge and Mooney, 2006).

6 Conclusion

We have described a new text simplification data set
generated from aligning sentences in Simple English
Wikipedia with sentences in English Wikipedia. The
data set is orders of magnitude larger than any cur-
rently available for text simplification or for the re-
lated field of text compression and is publicly avail-
able.4 We provided preliminary text simplification
results using Moses, a phrase-based translation sys-
tem, and saw a statistically significant improvement
of 0.005 BLEU over the baseline of no simplifica-
tion and showed that further improvement of up to
0.034 BLEU may be possible based on the oracle
results. In the future, we hope to explore alignment
techniques more tailored to simplification as well as
applications of this data to text simplification.

4http://www.cs.pomona.edu/∼dkauchak/simplification/
668



References

Regina Barzilay and Noemie Elhadad. 2003. Sentence
alignment for monolingual comparable corpora. In
Proceedings of EMNLP.

John Carroll, Gido Minnen, Yvonne Canning, Siobhan
Devlin, and John Tait. 1998. Practical simplification
of English newspaper text to assist aphasic readers. In
Proceedings of AAAI Workshop on Integrating AI and
Assistive Technology.

Raman Chandrasekar and Bangalore Srinivas. 1997. Au-
tomatic induction of rules for text simplification. In
Knowledge Based Systems.

David Chiang. 2010. Learning to translate with source
and target syntax. In Proceedings of ACL.

James Clarke and Mirella Lapata. 2006. Models for
sentence compression: A comparison across domains,
training requirements and evaluation measures. In
Proceedings of ACL.

Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Sentence com-
pression as tree transduction. Journal of Artificial In-
telligence Research.

Lijun Feng. 2008. Text simplification: A survey. CUNY
Technical Report.

Michel Galley and Kathleen McKeown. 2007. Lexical-
ized Markov grammars for sentence compression. In
Proceedings of HLT/NAACL.

Ruifang Ge and Raymond Mooney. 2006. Discrimina-
tive reranking for semantic parsing. In Proceedings of
COLING.

Siddhartha Jonnalagadda, Luis Tari, Jorg Hakenberg,
Chitta Baral, and Graciela Gonzalez. 2009. To-
wards effective sentence simplification for automatic
processing of biomedical text. In Proceedings of
HLT/NAACL.

Dan Klein and Christopher Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of ACL.

Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2002. Summarization
beyond sentence extraction: A probabilistic approach
to sentence compression. Artificial Intelligence.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of ACL.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for
machine translation evaluation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Ryan McDonald. 2006. Discriminative sentence com-
pression with soft syntactic evidence. In Proceedings
of EACL.

Makoto Miwa, Rune Saetre, Yusuke Miyao, and Jun’ichi
Tsujii. 2010. Entity-focused sentence simplication for
relation extraction. In Proceedings of COLING.

Courtney Napoles and Mark Dredze. 2010. Learn-
ing simple Wikipedia: A cogitation in ascertaining
abecedarian language. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL
Workshop on Computation Linguistics and Writing.

Rani Nelken and Stuart Shieber. 2006. Towards robust
context-sensitive sentence alignment for monolingual
corpora. In Proceedings of AMTA.

Tadashi Nomoto. 2007. Discriminative sentence com-
pression with conditional random fields. In Informa-
tion Processing and Management.

Tadashi Nomoto. 2008. A generic sentence trimmer with
CRFs. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL.

Tadashi Nomoto. 2009. A comparison of model free ver-
sus model intensive approaches to sentence compres-
sion. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The alignment tem-
plate approach to statistical machine translation. Com-
putational Linguistics.

Franz Josef Och, Kenji Yamada, Stanford U, Alex Fraser,
Daniel Gildea, and Viren Jain. 2004. A smorgasbord
of features for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of HLT/NAACL.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL.

Emily Pitler. 2010. Methods for sentence compression.
Technical Report MS-CIS-10-20, University of Penn-
sylvania.

Jenine Turner and Eugene Charniak. 2005. Supervised
and unsupervised learning for sentence compression.
In Proceedings of ACL.

David Vickrey and Daphne Koller. 2008. Sentence sim-
plification for semantic role labeling. In Proceedings
of ACL.

Elif Yamangil and Rani Nelken. 2008. Mining
Wikipedia revision histories for improving sentence
compression. In ACL.

Mark Yatskar, Bo Pang, Critian Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2010. For the sake of simplic-
ity: Unsupervised extraction of lexical simplifications
from Wikipedia. In HLT/NAACL Short Papers.

669


