










































MACAON An NLP Tool Suite for Processing Word Lattices


Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 System Demonstrations, pages 86–91,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 21 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

MACAON
An NLP Tool Suite for Processing Word Lattices

Alexis Nasr Frédéric Béchet Jean-François Rey Benoı̂t Favre Joseph Le Roux∗
Laboratoire d’Informatique Fondamentale de Marseille- CNRS - UMR 6166

Université Aix-Marseille
(alexis.nasr,frederic.bechet,jean-francois.rey,benoit.favre,joseph.le.roux)

@lif.univ-mrs.fr

Abstract

MACAON is a tool suite for standard NLP tasks
developed for French. MACAON has been de-
signed to process both human-produced text
and highly ambiguous word-lattices produced
by NLP tools. MACAON is made of several na-
tive modules for common tasks such as a tok-
enization, a part-of-speech tagging or syntac-
tic parsing, all communicating with each other
through XML files . In addition, exchange pro-
tocols with external tools are easily definable.
MACAON is a fast, modular and open tool, dis-
tributed under GNU Public License.

1 Introduction

The automatic processing of textual data generated
by NLP software, resulting from Machine Transla-
tion, Automatic Speech Recognition or Automatic
Text Summarization, raises new challenges for lan-
guage processing tools. Unlike native texts (texts
produced by humans), this new kind of texts is the
result of imperfect processors and they are made
of several hypotheses, usually weighted with con-
fidence measures. Automatic text production sys-
tems can produce these weighted hypotheses as n-
best lists, word lattices, or confusion networks. It is
crucial for this space of ambiguous solutions to be
kept for later processing since the ambiguities of the
lower levels can sometimes be resolved during high-
level processing stages. It is therefore important to
be able to represent this ambiguity.

∗This work has been funded by the French Agence Nationale
pour la Recherche, through the projects SEQUOIA (ANR-08-
EMER-013) and DECODA (2009-CORD-005-01)

MACAON is a suite of tools developped to pro-
cess ambiguous input and extend inference of in-
put modules within a global scope. It con-
sists in several modules that perform classical
NLP tasks (tokenization, word recognition, part-of-
speech tagging, lemmatization, morphological anal-
ysis, partial or full parsing) on either native text
or word lattices. MACAON is distributed under
GNU public licence and can be downloaded from
http://www.macaon.lif.univ-mrs.fr/.

From a general point of view, a MACAON module
can be seen as an annotation device1 which adds a
new level of annotation to its input that generally de-
pends on annotations from preceding modules. The
modules communicate through XML files that allow
the representation different layers of annotation as
well as ambiguities at each layer. Moreover, the ini-
tial XML structuring of the processed files (logical
structuring of a document, information from the Au-
tomatic Speech Recognition module . . . ) remains
untouched by the processing stages.

As already mentioned, one of the main charac-
teristics of MACAON is the ability for each module
to accept ambiguous inputs and produce ambiguous
outputs, in such a way that ambiguities can be re-
solved at a later stage of processing. The compact
representation of ambiguous structures is at the heart
of the MACAON exchange format, described in sec-
tion 2. Furthermore every module can weight the
solutions it produces. such weights can be used to
rank solutions or limit their number for later stages

1Annotation must be taken here in a general sense which in-
cludes tagging, segmentation or the construction of more com-
plex objets as syntagmatic or dependencies trees.

86



of processing.

Several processing tools suites alread exist for
French among which SXPIPE (Sagot and Boullier,
2008), OUTILEX (Blanc et al., 2006), NOOJ2 or UNI-
TEX3. A general comparison of MACAON with these
tools is beyond the scope of this paper. Let us just
mention that MACAON shares with most of them the
use of finite state machines as core data represen-
tation. Some modules are implemented as standard
operations on finite state machines.

MACAON can also be compared to the numerous
development frameworks for developping process-
ing tools, such as GATE4, FREELING5, ELLOGON6

or LINGPIPE7 that are usually limited to the process-
ing of native texts.

The MACAON exchange format shares a cer-
tain number of features with linguistic annotation
scheme standards such as the Text Encoding Initia-
tive8, XCES9, or EAGLES10. They all aim at defining
standards for various types of corpus annotations.
The main difference between MACAON and these
approaches is that MACAON defines an exchange for-
mat between NLP modules and not an annotation
format. More precisely, this format is dedicated to
the compact representation of ambiguity: some in-
formation represented in the exchange format are
to be interpreted by MACAON modules and would
not be part of an annotation format. Moreover,
the MACAON exchange format was defined from the
bottom up, originating from the authors’ need to use
several existing tools and adapt their input/output
formats in order for them to be compatible. This is in
contrast with a top down approach which is usually
chosen when specifying a standard. Still, MACAON
shares several characteristics with the LAF (Ide and
Romary, 2004) which aims at defining high level
standards for exchanging linguistic data.

2www.nooj4nlp.net/pages/nooj.html
3www-igm.univ-mlv.fr/˜unitex
4gate.ac.uk
5garraf.epsevg.upc.es/freeling
6www.ellogon.org
7alias-i.com/lingpipe
8www.tei-c.org/P5
9www.xml-ces.org

10www.ilc.cnr.it/eagles/home.html

2 The MACAON exchange format

The MACAON exchange format is based on four con-
cepts: segment, attribute, annotation level and seg-
mentation.

A segment refers to a segment of the text or
speech signal that is to be processed, as a sentence,
a clause, a syntactic constituent, a lexical unit, a
named entity . . . A segment can be equipped with at-
tributes that describe some of its aspects. A syntac-
tic constituent, for example, will define the attribute
type which specifies its syntactic type (Noun Phrase,
Verb Phrase . . . ). A segment is made of one or more
smaller segments.

A sequence of segments covering a whole sen-
tence for written text, or a spoken utterance for oral
data, is called a segmentation. Such a sequence can
be weighted.

An annotation level groups together segments of
a same type, as well as segmentations defined on
these segments. Four levels are currently defined:
pre-lexical, lexical, morpho-syntactic and syntactic.

Two relations are defined on segments: the prece-
dence relation that organises linearly segments of a
given level into segmentations and the dominance
relation that describes how a segment is decomposed
in smaller segments either of the same level or of a
lower level.

We have represented in figure 2, a schematic rep-
resentation of the analysis of the reconstructed out-
put a speech recognizer would produce on the in-
put time flies like an arrow11. Three annotation lev-
els have been represented, lexical, morpho-syntactic
and syntactic. Each level is represented by a finite-
state automaton which models the precedence rela-
tion defined over the segments of this level. Seg-
ment time, for example, precedes segment flies. The
segments are implicitly represented by the labels of
the automaton’s arcs. This label should be seen as
a reference to a more complex objet, the actual seg-
ment. The dominance relations are represented with
dashed lines that link segments of different levels.
Segment time, for example, is dominated by seg-
ment NN of the morpho-syntactic level.

This example illustrates the different ambiguity
cases and the way they are represented.

11For readability reasons, we have used an English example,
MACAON, as mentioned above, currently exists for French.

87



thyme

time

flies
like

liken

an arrow

a row

JJ IN

VB

DT NN

DT NN

VB

NN

NN

VBZ

VB VB

VP

VP

NP

NP

VP

NP

VP

VP

PP

NP

NP

Figure 1: Three annotation levels for a sample sentence.
Plain lines represent annotation hypotheses within a level
while dashed lines represent links between levels. Trian-
gles with the tip up are “and” nodes and triangles with
the tip down are “or” nodes. For instance, in the part-of-
speech layer, The first NN can either refer to “time” or
“thyme”. In the chunking layer, segments that span mul-
tiple part-of-speech tags are linked to them through “and”
nodes.

The most immediate ambiguity phenomenon is
the segmentation ambiguity: several segmentations
are possible at every level. This ambiguity is rep-
resented in a compact way through the factoring of
segments that participate in different segmentations,
by way of a finite state automaton.

The second ambiguity phenomenon is the dom-
inance ambiguity, where a segment can be decom-
posed in several ways into lower level segments.
Such a case appears in the preceding example, where
the NN segment appearing in one of the outgoing
transition of the initial state of the morpho-syntactic
level dominates both thyme and time segments of the
lexical level. The triangle with the tip down is an
“or” node, modeling the fact that NN corresponds to
time or thyme.

Triangles with the tip up are “and” nodes. They
model the fact that the PP segment of the syntac-
tic level dominates segments IN, DT and NN of the
morpho-syntactic level.

2.1 XML representation
The MACAON exchange format is implemented in
XML. A segment is represented with the XML tag

<segment> which has four mandatory attributes:

• type indicates the type of the segment, four dif-
ferent types are currently defined: atome (pre-
lexical unit usually referred to as token in en-
glish), ulex (lexical unit), cat (part of speech)
and chunk (a non recursive syntactic unit).

• id associates to a segment a unique identifier in
the document, in order to be able to reference
it.

• start and end define the span of the segment.
These two attributes are numerical and repre-
sent either the index of the first and last char-
acter of the segment in the text string or the
beginning and ending time of the segment in
a speech signal.

A segment can define other attributes that can be
useful for a given description level. We often find
the stype attribute that defines subtypes of a given
type.

The dominance relation is represented through the
use of the <sequence> tag. The domination of the
three segments IN, DT and NN by a PP segment,
mentionned above is represented below, where p1,
p2 and p3 are respectively the ids of segments IN,
DT and NN.

<segment type="chunk" stype="PP" id="c1">
<sequence>
<elt segref="p1"/>
<elt segref="p2"/>
<elt segref="p3"/>

</sequence>
</segment>

The ambiguous case, described above where seg-
ment NN dominates segments time or thyme is rep-
resented below as a disjunction of sequences inside
a segment. The disjunction itself is not represented
as an XML tag. l1 and l2 are respectively the ids
of segments time and thyme.

<segment type="cat" stype="NN" id="c1">
<sequence>
<elt segref="l1" w="-3.37"/>

</sequence>
<sequence>
<elt segref="l2" w="-4.53"/>

</sequence>
</segment>

88



The dominance relation can be weighted, by way
of the attribute w. Such a weight represents in the
preceding example the conditional log-probability
of a lexical unit given a part of speech, as in a hidden
Markov model.

The precedence relation (i.e. the organization
of segments in segmentations), is represented as a
weighted finite state automaton. Automata are rep-
resented as a start state, accept states and a list of
transitions between states, as in the following exam-
ple that corresponds to the lexical level of our exam-
ple.
<fsm n="9">

<start n="0"/>
<accept n="6"/>
<ltrans>
<trans o="0" d="1" i="l1" w="-7.23"/>
<trans o="0" d="1" i="l2" w="-9.00"/>
<trans o="1" d="2" i="l3" w="-3.78"/>
<trans o="2" d="3" i="l4" w="-7.37"/>
<trans o="3" d="4" i="l5" w="-3.73"/>
<trans o="2" d="4" i="l6" w="-6.67"/>
<trans o="4" d="5" i="l7" w="-4.56"/>
<trans o="5" d="6" i="l8" w="-2.63"/>
<trans o="4" d="6" i="l9" w="-7.63"/>

</ltrans>
</fsm>

The <trans/> tag represents a transition, its
o,d,i and w features are respectively the origin, and
destination states, its label (the id of a segment) and
a weight.

An annotation level is represented by the
<section> tag which regroups two tags, the
<segments> tag that contains the different segment
tags defined at this annotation level and the <fsm>
tag that represents all the segmentations of this level.

3 The MACAON architecture

Three aspects have guided the architecture of
MACAON: openness, modularity, and speed. Open-
ness has been achieved by the definition of an ex-
change format which has been made as general as
possible, in such a way that mapping can be de-
fined from and to third party modules as ASR, MT
systems or parsers. Modularity has been achieved
by the definition of independent modules that com-
municate with each other through XML files using
standard UNIX pipes. A module can therefore be re-
placed easily. Speed has been obtained using effi-
cient algorithms and a representation especially de-

signed to load linguistic data and models in a fast
way.

MACAON is composed of libraries and compo-
nents. Libraries contain either linguistic data, mod-
els or API functions. Two kinds of components are
presented, the MACAON core components and third
party components for which mappings to and from
the MACAON exchange format have been defined.

3.1 Libraries

The main MACAON library is macaon common.
It defines a simple interface to the MACAON ex-
change format and functions to load XML MACAON
files into memory using efficient data structures.
Other libraries macaon lex, macaon code and
macaon tagger lib represent the lexicon, the
morphological data base and the tagger models in
memory.

MACAON only relies on two third-party libraries,
which are gfsm12, a finite state machine library and
libxml, an XML library13.

3.2 The MACAON core components

A brief description of several standard components
developed in the MACAON framework is given be-
low. They all comply with the exchange format de-
scribed above and add a <macaon stamp> to the
XML file that indicates the name of the component,
the date and the component version number, and rec-
ognizes a set of standard options.

maca select is a pre-processing component: it adds
a macaon tag under the target tags specified by
the user to the input XML file. The follow-
ing components will only process the document
parts enclosed in macaon tags.

maca segmenter segments a text into sentences by
examining the context of punctuation with a
regular grammar given as a finite state automa-
ton. It is disabled for automatic speech tran-
scriptions which do not typically include punc-
tuation signs and come with their own segmen-
tation.

12ling.uni-potsdam.de/˜moocow/projects/
gfsm/

13xmlsoft.org

89



maca tokenizer tokenizes a sentence into pre-
lexical units. It is also based on regular gram-
mars that recognize simple tokens as well as a
predefined set of special tokens, such as time
expressions, numerical expressions, urls. . . .

maca lexer allows to regroup pre-lexical units into
lexical units. It is based on the lefff French lex-
icon (Sagot et al., 2006) which contains around
500,000 forms. It implements a dynamic pro-
gramming algorithm that builds all the possible
grouping of pre-lexical units into lexical units.

maca tagger associates to every lexical unit one or
more part-of-speech labels. It is based on a
trigram Hidden Markov Model trained on the
French Treebank (Abeillé et al., 2003). The es-
timation of the HMM parameters has been re-
alized by the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002).

maca anamorph produces the morphological anal-
ysis of lexical units associated to a part of
speech. The morphological information come
from the lefff lexicon.

maca chunker gathers sequences of part-of-speech
tags in non recursive syntactic units. This com-
ponent implements a cascade of finite state
transducers, as proposed by Abney (1996). It
adds some features to the initial Abney pro-
posal, like the possibility to define the head of
a chunk.

maca conv is a set of converters from and to the
MACAON exchange format. htk2macaon
and fsm2macaon convert word lattices from
the HTK format (Young, 1994) and ATT
FSM format (Mohri et al., 2000) to the
MACAON exchange format. macaon2txt and
txt2macaon convert from and to plain text
files. macaon2lorg and lorg2macaon
convert to and from the format of the LORG
parser (see section 3.3).

maca view is a graphical interface that allows to in-
spect MACAON XML files and run the compo-
nents.

3.3 Third party components
MACAON is an open architecture and provides a rich
exchange format which makes possible the repre-

sentation of many NLP tools input and output in the
MACAON format. MACAON has been interfaced with
the SPEERAL Automatic Speech Recognition Sys-
tem (Nocera et al., 2006). The word lattices pro-
duced by SPEERAL can be converted to pre-lexical
MACAON automata.

MACAON does not provide any native module for
parsing yet but it can be interfaced with any already
existing parser. For the purpose of this demonstra-
tion we have chosen the LORG parser developed at
NCLT, Dublin14. This parser is based on PCFGs
with latent annotations (Petrov et al., 2006), a for-
malism that showed state-of-the-art parsing accu-
racy for a wide range of languages. In addition it of-
fers a sophisticated handling of unknown words re-
lying on automatically learned morphological clues,
especially for French (Attia et al., 2010). Moreover,
this parser accepts input that can be tokenized, pos-
tagged or pre-bracketed. This possibility allows for
different settings when interfacing it with MACAON.

4 Applications

MACAON has been used in several projects, two of
which are briefly described here, the DEFINIENS
project and the LUNA project.

DEFINIENS (Barque et al., 2010) is a project that
aims at structuring the definitions of a large coverage
French lexicon, the Trésor de la langue française.
The lexicographic definitions have been processed
by MACAON in order to decompose the definitions
into complex semantico-syntactic units. The data
processed is therefore native text that possesses a
rich XML structure that has to be preserved during
processing.

LUNA15 is a European project that aims at extract-
ing information from oral data about hotel booking.
The word lattices produced by an ASR system have
been processed by MACAON up to a partial syntactic
level from which frames are built. More details can
be found in (Béchet and Nasr, 2009). The key aspect
of the use of MACAON for the LUNA project is the
ability to perform the linguistic analyses on the mul-
tiple hypotheses produced by the ASR system. It is
therefore possible, for a given syntactic analysis, to

14www.computing.dcu.ie/˜lorg. This software
should be freely available for academic research by the time
of the conference.

15www.ist-luna.eu

90



Figure 2: Screenshot of the MACAON visualization inter-
face (for French models). It allows to input a text and see
the n-best results of the annotation.

find all the word sequences that are compatible with
this analysis.

Figure 2 shows the interface that can be used to
see the output of the pipeline.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we have presented MACAON, an NLP
tool suite which allows to process native text as well
as several hypotheses automatically produced by an
ASR or an MT system. Several evolutions are cur-
rently under development, such as a named entity
recognizer component and an interface with a de-
pendency parser.

References

Anne Abeillé, Lionel Clément, and François Toussenel.
2003. Building a treebank for french. In Anne
Abeillé, editor, Treebanks. Kluwer, Dordrecht.

Steven Abney. 1996. Partial parsing via finite-state cas-
cades. In Workshop on Robust Parsing, 8th European
Summer School in Logic, Language and Information,
Prague, Czech Republic, pages 8–15.

M. Attia, J. Foster, D. Hogan, J. Le Roux, L. Tounsi, and
J. van Genabith. 2010. Handling Unknown Words in
Statistical Latent-Variable Parsing Models for Arabic,
English and French. In Proceedings of SPMRL.

Lucie Barque, Alexis Nasr, and Alain Polguère. 2010.
From the definitions of the trésor de la langue française
to a semantic database of the french language. In EU-
RALEX 2010, Leeuwarden, Pays Bas.

Frédéric Béchet and Alexis Nasr. 2009. Robust depen-
dency parsing for spoken language understanding of
spontaneous speech. In Interspeech, Brighton, United
Kingdom.

Olivier Blanc, Matthieu Constant, and Eric Laporte.
2006. Outilex, plate-forme logicielle de traitement de
textes écrits. In TALN 2006, Leuven.

Nancy Ide and Laurent Romary. 2004. International
standard for a linguistic annotation framework. Nat-
ural language engineering, 10(3-4):211–225.

M. Mohri, F. Pereira, and M. Riley. 2000. The design
principles of a weighted finite-state transducer library.
Theoretical Computer Science, 231(1):17–32.

P. Nocera, G. Linares, D. Massonié, and L. Lefort. 2006.
Phoneme lattice based A* search algorithm for speech
recognition. In Text, Speech and Dialogue, pages 83–
111. Springer.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning Accurate, Compact, and In-
terpretable Tree Annotation. In ACL.

Benoı̂t Sagot and Pierre Boullier. 2008. Sxpipe 2:
architecture pour le traitement présyntaxique de cor-
pus bruts. Traitement Automatique des Langues,
49(2):155–188.

Benoı̂t Sagot, Lionel Clément, Eric Villemonte de la
Clergerie, and Pierre Boullier. 2006. The lefff 2 Syn-
tactic Lexicon for French: Architecture, Acquisition,
Use. In International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Genoa.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. Srilm - an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In International Conference on Spo-
ken Language Processing, Denver, Colorado.

S.J. Young. 1994. The HTK Hidden Markov Model
Toolkit: Design and Philosophy. Entropic Cambridge
Research Laboratory, Ltd, 2:2–44.

91


