










































Social Network Extraction from Texts: A Thesis Proposal


Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 Student Session, pages 111–116,
Portland, OR, USA 19-24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Social Network Extraction from Texts: A Thesis Proposal

Apoorv Agarwal
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
apoorv@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

In my thesis, I propose to build a system that
would enable extraction of social interactions
from texts. To date I have defined a compre-
hensive set of social events and built a prelim-
inary system that extracts social events from
news articles. I plan to improve the perfor-
mance of my current system by incorporating
semantic information. Using domain adapta-
tion techniques, I propose to apply my sys-
tem to a wide range of genres. By extracting
linguistic constructs relevant to social interac-
tions, I will be able to empirically analyze dif-
ferent kinds of linguistic constructs that peo-
ple use to express social interactions. Lastly, I
will attempt to make convolution kernels more
scalable and interpretable.

1 Introduction

Language is the primary tool that people use for es-
tablishing, maintaining and expressing social rela-
tions. This makes language the real carrier of social
networks. The overall goal of my thesis is to build a
system that automatically extracts a social network
from raw texts such as literary texts, emails, blog
comments and news articles. I take a “social net-
work” to be a network consisting of individual hu-
man beings and groups of human beings who are
connected to each other through various relation-
ships by the virtue of participating in social events.
I define social events to be events that occur be-
tween people where at least one person is aware
of the other and of the event taking place. For ex-
ample, in the sentence John talks to Mary, entities
John and Mary are aware of each other and of the

talking event. In the sentence John thinks Mary is
great, only John is aware of Mary and the event is
the thinking event. My thesis will introduce a novel
way of constructing networks by analyzing text to
capture such interactions or events.

Motivation: Typically researchers construct a so-
cial network from various forms of electronic in-
teraction records like self-declared friendship links,
sender-receiver email links and phone logs etc. They
ignore a vastly rich network present in the content
of such sources. Secondly, many rich sources of
social networks remain untouched simply because
there is no meta-data associated with them (literary
texts, new stories, historical texts). By providing a
methodology for analyzing language to extract in-
teraction links between people, my work will over-
come both these limitations. Moreover, by empiri-
cally analyzing large corpora of text from different
genres, my work will aid in formulating a compre-
hensive linguistic theory about the types of linguistic
constructs people often use to interact and express
their social interactions with others. In the follow-
ing paragraphs I will explicate these impacts.

Impact on current SNA applications: Some
of the current social network analysis (SNA) ap-
plications that utilize interaction meta-data to con-
struct the underlying social network are discussed
by Domingos and Richardson (2003), Kempe et al.
(2003), He et al. (2006), Rowe et al. (2007), Lin-
damood et al. (2009), Zheleva and Getoor (2009).
But meta-data captures only part of all the interac-
tions in which people participate. There is a vastly
rich network present in text such as the content of
emails, comment threads on online social networks,
transcribed phone calls. My work will enrich the

111



social network that SNA community currently uses
by complementing it with the finer interaction link-
ages present in text. For example, Rowe et al. (2007)
use the sender-receiver email links to connect peo-
ple in the Enron email corpus. Using this network,
they predict the organizational hierarchy of the En-
ron Corporation. Their social network analysis for
calculating centrality measure of people does not
take into account interactions that people talk about
in the content of emails. Such linkages are relevant
to the task for two reasons. First, people talk about
their interactions with other people in the content of
emails. By ignoring these interaction linkages, the
underlying communication network used by Rowe
et al. (2007) to calculate various features is incom-
plete. Second, sender-receiver email links only rep-
resent “who talks to whom”. They do not represent
“who talks about whom to whom.” This later infor-
mation seems to be crucial to the task presumably
because people at the lower organizational hierarchy
are more likely to talk about people higher in the hi-
erarchy. My work will enable extraction of these
missing linkages and hence offers the potential to
improve the performance of currently used SNA al-
gorithms. By capturing alternate forms of commu-
nications, my system will also overcome a known
limitation of the Enron email corpus that a signifi-
cant number of emails were lost at the time of data
creation (Carenini et al., 2005).

Impact on study of literary and journalistic
texts: Sources of social networks that are primar-
ily textual in nature such as literary texts, historical
texts, or news articles are currently under-utilized
for social network analysis. In fact, to the best of
my knowledge, there is no formal comprehensive
categorization of social interactions. An early effort
to illustrate the importance of such linkages is by
Moretti (2005). In his book, Graphs, Maps, Trees:
Abstract Models for a Literary History, Moretti
presents interesting insights into a novel by looking
at its interaction graph. He notes that his models
are incomplete because they neither have a notion
of weight (number of times two characters interact)
nor a notion of direction (mutual or one-directional).
There has been recent work that partially addresses
these concerns (Elson et al., 2010; Celikyilmaz et
al., 2010). They only extract mutual interactions
that are signaled by quoted speech. My thesis will

go beyond quoted speech and will extract interac-
tions signaled by any linguistic means, in particular
verbs of social interaction. Moreover, my research
will not only enable extraction of mutual linkages
(“who talks to whom” ) but also of one-directional
linkages (“who talks about whom”). This will give
rise to new applications such as characterization of
literary texts based on the type of social network that
underlies the narrative. Moreover, analyses of large
amounts of related text such as decades of news ar-
ticles or historical texts will become possible. By
looking at the overall social structure the analyst or
scientist will get a summary of the key players and
their interactions with each other and the rest of net-
work.

Impact on Linguistics: To the best of my knowl-
edge, there is no cognitive or linguistic theory that
explains how people use language to express social
interactions. A system that detects lexical items and
syntactic constructions that realize interactions and
then classifies them into one of the categories, I de-
fine in Section 2, has the potential to provide lin-
guists with empirical data to formulate such a the-
ory. For example, the notion of social interactions
could be added to the FrameNet resource (Baker and
Fillmore, 1998) which is based on frame semantics.
FrameNet records possible semantic frames for lexi-
cal items. Frames describe lexical meaning by speci-
fying a set of frame elements, which are participants
in a typical event or state of affairs expressed by the
frame. It provides lexicographic example annota-
tions that illustrate how frames and frame elements
can be realized by syntactic constructions. My cate-
gorization of social events can be incorporated into
FrameNet by adding new frames for social events
to the frame hierarchy. The data I collect using
the system can provide example sentenctes for these
frames. Linguists can use this data to make gen-
eralizations about linguistic constructions that real-
ize social interactions frames. For example, a pos-
sible generalization could be that transitive verbs in
which both subject and object are people, frequently
express a social event. In addition, it would be in-
teresting to see what kind social interactions occur
in different text genres and if they are realized dif-
ferently. For example, in a news corpus we hardly
found expressions of non-verbal mutual interactions
(like eye-contact) while these are frequent in fiction

112



texts like Alice in Wonderland.

2 Work to date

So far, I have defined a comprehensive set of social
events and have acquired reliable annotations on a
well-known news corpus. I have built a preliminary
system that extracts social events from news articles.
I will now expand on each of these in the following
paragraphs.

Meaning of social events: A text can describe
a social network in two ways: explicitly, by stat-
ing the type of relationship between two individuals
(e.g. Mary is John’s wife), or implicitly, by describ-
ing an event which initiates or perpetuates a social
relationship (e.g. John talked to Mary). I call the
later types of events “social events” (Agarwal et al.,
2010). I defined two broad types of social events:
interaction, in which both parties are aware of each
other and of the social event, e.g., a conversation,
and observation, in which only one party is aware
of the other and of the interaction, e.g., thinking of
or talking about someone. For example, sentence
1, contains two distinct social events: interaction:
Toujan was informed by the committee, and observa-
tion: Toujan is talking about the committee. I have
also defined sub-categories for each of these broad
categories based on physical proximity, verbal and
non-verbal interactions. For details and examples of
these sub-categories please refer to Agarwal et al.
(2010)

(1) [Toujan Faisal], 54, {said} [she] was
{informed} of the refusal by an [Interior
Ministry committee] overseeing election
preparations.

As a pilot test to see if creating a social network
based on social events can give insight into the so-
cial structures of a story, I manually annotated a
short version of Alice in Wonderland. On the man-
ually extracted network, I ran social network anal-
ysis algorithms to answer questions like: who are
the most influential characters in the story, which
characters have the same social roles and positions.
The most influential characters in the story were de-
tected correctly. Another finding was that characters
appearing in the same scene like Dodo, Lory, Ea-
glet, Mouse and Duck were assigned the same social
roles and positions. This pointed out the possibility

of using my method to identify separate scenes or
sub-plots in a narrative, which is crucial for a better
understanding of the text under investigation.

Motivated by this pilot test I decided to anno-
tate social events on the Automatic Content Extrac-
tion (ACE) dataset (Doddington et al., 2004), a well
known news corpus. My annotations extend previ-
ous annotations for entities, relations and events that
are present in the 2005 version of the corpus. My an-
notations revealed that about 80% of the times, en-
tities mentioned together in the same sentence were
not linked with any social event. Therefore, a sim-
ple heuristic of connecting entities that are present
in the same sentence with a link will not reveal a
meaningful network. Hence I saw a need for a more
sophisticated analysis.

Extraction of social events: To perform such an
analysis, I built models for two tasks: social event
detection and social event classification (Agarwal
and Rambow, 2010). Both were formulated as bi-
nary tasks: the first one being about detecting ex-
istence of a social event between a pair of entities
in a sentence and the second one being about dif-
ferentiating between the interaction and observation
type events (given there is an event between the en-
tities). I used tree kernels on structures derived from
phrase structure trees and dependency trees in con-
junction with Support Vector Machines (SVMs) to
solve the tasks. For the design of structures and type
of kernel, I took motivation from a system proposed
by Nguyen et al. (2009) which is a state-of-the-art
system for relation extraction. I tried all the kernels
and their combinations proposed by Nguyen et al.
(2009). I used syntactic and semantic insights to de-
vise a new structure derived from dependency trees
and showed that this plays a role in achieving the
best performance for both social event detection and
classification tasks. The reason for choosing such
representations is motivated by extensive studies
about the regular relation between verb alternations
and meaning components (Levin, 1993; Schuler,
2005). This regularity provides a useful generaliza-
tion that helps to overcome lexical sparseness. How-
ever, in order to exploit such regularities, there is a
need to have access to a representation which makes
the predicate-argument structure clear. Dependency
representations do this. Phrase structure represen-
tations also represent predicate-argument structure,

113



but in an indirect way through the structural config-
urations. These experiments showed that as a result
of how language expresses the relevant information,
dependency-based structures are best suited for en-
coding this information. Furthermore, because of
the complexity of the task, a combination of phrase-
based structures and dependency-based structures
perform the best. To my surprise, the system per-
formed extremely well on a seemingly hard task of
differentiating between interaction and observation
type social events. This result showed that there are
significant clues in the lexical and syntactic struc-
tures that help in differentiating mutual and one-
directional interactions.

3 Future Work

Currently I am working on incorporating semantic
resources to improve the performance of my prelim-
inary system. I will work on making convolution
kernels scalable and interpretable. These two steps
will meet my goal of building a system that will ex-
tract social networks from news articles. My next
step will be to survey and incorporate domain adap-
tation techniques that will allow me port my system
to other genres like literary and historical texts, blog
comments, emails etc. These steps will allow me to
extract social networks from a wide range of textual
data. At the same time I will be able to empirically
analyze the types of linguistic patterns, both lexi-
cal and syntactic, that perpetuate social interactions.
Now I will expand on the aforementioned future di-
rections.

Adding semantic information: Currently I am
exploring linguistically motivated enhancements of
dependency and phrase structure trees to formulate
new kernels. Specifically, I am exploring ways of in-
corporating semantic information from VerbNet and
FrameNet. This will help me reduce data sparse-
ness and thus improve my current system. I am
interested in modeling classes of events which are
characterized by the cognitive states of participants–
who is aware of whom. The predicate-argument
structure of verbs can encode much of this infor-
mation very efficiently, and classes of verbs express
their predicate-argument structure in similar ways.
Levin’s verb classes, and Palmer’s VerbNet (Levin,
1993; Schuler, 2005), are based on syntactic simi-
larity between verbs: two verbs are in the same class

if and only if they can realize their arguments in the
same syntactic patterns. By the Levin Hypothesis,
this is because they share meaning elements, and
meaning and syntactic realizations of arguments are
related. However, this does not mean that verbs in
the same Levin or VerbNet class are synonyms; for
example, to deliberate and to play are both in Verb-
Net class meet-36.3-1. But from a social event per-
spective, I am not interested in exact synonymy, and
in fact it is quite possible that what I am interested
in (awareness of the interaction by the event partici-
pants) is the same among verbs of the same VerbNet
class. In this case, VerbNet will provide a useful ab-
straction. Future work will also explore FrameNet,
which provides a different type of semantic abstrac-
tion and explicit semantic relations that are not di-
rectly based on syntactic realizations.

Scaling convolution kernels: Convolution ker-
nels, first proposed by Haussler (1999), are a con-
venient way of “naturally” combining a variety of
features without having to do fine-grained feature
engineering. Collins and Duffy (2002) presented a
way of successfully using them for NLP tasks such
as parsing and tagging. Since then they have been
used for various NLP tasks such as relation extrac-
tion (Zelenko et al., 2002; Culotta and Jeffrey, 2004;
Nguyen et al., 2009), semantic role labeling (Mos-
chitti et al., 2008), question-answer classification
(Moschitti et al., 2007) etc. Convolution kernels cal-
culate the similarity between two objects, like trees
or strings, by a recursive calculation over the “parts”
(substrings, subtrees) of objects. This calculation
is usually made computationally efficient by using
dynamic programming. But there are two limita-
tions: 1) the computation is still quadratic and hence
slow and 2) the features (or parts) that are given high
weights at the time of learning remain inaccessible
i.e. interpretability of the model becomes difficult.

One direction I will explore to make convolution
kernels more scalable is the following: The deci-
sion function for the classifier (SVM in dual form)
is given in equation 1 (Burges, 1998, Eq 61). In
this equation, yi denotes the class of the ith support
vector (si), αi denotes the Lagrange multiplier of
si, K(si, x) denotes the kernel similarity between si
and a test example x, b denotes the bias. The kernel
definition proposed by Collins and Duffy (2002) is
given in equation 2, where hs(T ) is the number of

114



times the sth subtree appears in tree T . The kernel
function K(T1, T2) therefore calculates the similar-
ity between trees T1 and T2 by counting the common
subtrees in them. By combining equations 1 and 2
I get equation 3 which can be re-written as equation
4.

f(x) =
Ns∑
i=1

αiyiK(si, x) + b (1)

K(T1, T2) =
∑

s

hs(T1)hs(T2) (2)

f(x) =
Ns∑
i=1

αiyi
∑

s

hs(si)hs(x) (3)

f(x) =
∑

s

Ns∑
i=1

αiyihs(si)hs(x) (4)

The motivation for exchanging these summation
signs is that the contribution of larger subtrees to
the kernel similarity is strictly less than the contri-
bution of the smaller subtrees. I will investigate the
possibility of approximating the decision function of
SVM without having to compare all subtrees, in par-
ticular large subtrees. I will also investigate if this
summation can be calculated in parallel to make the
calculation more scalable. Pelossof and Ying (2010)
have done recent work on speeding up the Percep-
tron by stopping the evaluation of features at an early
stage if they have high confidence that the example
will be classified correctly. Another relevant work to
improve the scalability of linear classifiers is due to
Clarkson et al. (2010). However, to the best of my
knowledge, there is no work that addresses approxi-
mation of kernel evaluation for convolution kernels.

Interpretability of convolution kernels: As
mentioned in the previous paragraph, another dis-
advantage of using convolution kernels is that inter-
pretability of a model is difficult. Recently, Pighin
and Moschitti (2009) proposed an algorithm to lin-
earize convolution kernels. They show that by ef-
ficiently encoding the “relevant” fragments gener-
ated by tree kernels, it is possible to get insight into
the substructures that were given high weights at the
time of learning a model. But their system currently
returns thousands of such fragments. I will inves-
tigate if there is a way of summarizing these frag-
ments into a meaningful set of syntactic and lexical

classes. By doing so I will be able to empirically see
what types of linguistic constructs are used by peo-
ple to express different types of social interactions
thus aiding in formulating a theory of how people
express social interactions.

Domain adaptation: To be able to extract social
networks from literary and historical texts, I will ex-
plore domain adaptation techniques. A notable work
in this direction is by Daumé III (2007). This work is
especially useful for me because Daumé III presents
a straightforward kernelized version of his domain
adaptation approach which readily fits the machine
learning paradigm I am using for my problem. I will
explore the literature to see if better domain adap-
tation techniques have been suggested since then.
Domain adaptation will conclude my overall goal of
creating a system that can extract social networks
from a wide variety of texts. I will then attempt to
extract social networks from the increasing amount
of text that is becoming machine readable.

Sentiment Analysis:1 A natural step to try once I
have linkages associated with snippets of text is sen-
timent analysis. I will use my previous work (Agar-
wal et al., 2009) on contextual phrase-level senti-
ment analysis to analyze snippets of text and add
polarity to social event linkages. Sentiment analy-
sis will make the social network representation even
richer by indicating if people are connected with
positive, negative or neutral sentiments. This will
not only give us information about the protagonists
and antagonists in the text but will also affect the
analysis of flow of information through the network.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by NSF grant IIS-0713548. I
would like to thank Dr. Owen Rambow and Daniel
Bauer for useful discussions and feedback.

References

Apoorv Agarwal and Owen Rambow. 2010. Automatic
detection and classification of social events. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing.

Apoorv Agarwal, Fadi Biadsy, and Kathleen Mckeown.
2009. Contextual phrase-level polarity analysis using

1I do not mention sentiment analysis anywhere else in my
proposal since I will simply use my earlier work.

115



lexical affect scoring and syntactic n-grams. Proceed-
ings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter
of the ACL (EACL 2009), pages 24–32.

Apoorv Agarwal, Owen C. Rambow, and Rebecca J. Pas-
sonneau. 2010. Annotation scheme for social network
extraction from text. In Proceedings of the Fourth Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop.

C. Baker and C. Fillmore. 1998. The berkeley framenet
project. Proceedings of the 17th international confer-
ence on Computational linguistics, 1.

Chris Burges. 1998. A tutorial on support vector
machines for pattern recognition. Data mining and
knowledge discovery.

G. Carenini, R. T. Ng, and X. Zhou. 2005. Scalable dis-
covery of hidden emails from large folders. Proceed-
ing of the eleventh ACM SIGKDD international con-
ference on Knowledge discovery in data mining, pages
544–549.

Asli Celikyilmaz, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Hua He, Greg
Kondrak, and Denilson Barbosa. 2010. The actor-
topic model for extracting social networks in literary
narrative. NIPS Workshop: Machine Learning for So-
cial Computing.

K. L. Clarkson, E. Hazan, and D. P. Woodruff. 2010.
Sublinear optimization for machine learning. 51st An-
nual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science, pages 449 –457.

M. Collins and N. Duffy. 2002. Convolution kernels for
natural language. In Advances in neural information
processing systems.

Aron Culotta and Sorensen Jeffrey. 2004. Dependency
tree kernels for relation extraction. In Proceedings of
the 42nd Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL’04), Main Volume, pages 423–429,
Barcelona, Spain, July.

G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki, L. Ramshaw,
S. Strassel, and R. Weischedel. 2004. The automatic
content extraction (ace) program–tasks, data, and eval-
uation. LREC, pages 837–840.

P. Domingos and M. Richardson. 2003. Mining the net-
work value of customers. In Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 57–66.

David K. Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen R. McK-
eown. 2010. Extracting social networks from literary
fiction. Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
138–147.

David Haussler. 1999. Convolution kernels on discrete
structures. Technical report, University of California
at Santa Cruz.

Jianming He, Wesley W. Chu, and Zhenyu (Victor) Liu.
2006. Inferring privacy information from social net-

works. Intelligence and Security Informatics, pages
154–165.

Hal Daume III. 2007. Frustratingly easy domain adapta-
tion. Annual Meeting-Association For Computational
Linguistics.

D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and E. Tardos. 2003. Maximiz-
ing the spread of influence through a social network.
Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining,
pages 137–146.

Beth Levin. 1993. English verb classes and alterna-
tions: A preliminary investigation. The University of
Chicago Press.

J. Lindamood, R. Heatherly, M. Kantarcioglu, and
B. Thuraisingham. 2009. Inferring private informa-
tion using social network dataset. WWW.

Franco Moretti. 2005. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract
Models for a Literary History. Verso.

A. Moschitti, S. Quarteroni, and R. Basili. 2007. Ex-
ploiting syntactic and shallow semantic kernels for
question answer classification. Proceedings of the
45th Conference of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL).

A. Moschitti, D. Pighin, and R. Basili. 2008. Tree ker-
nels for semantic role labeling. Computational Lin-
guistics, 34.

Truc-Vien T. Nguyen, Alessandro Moschitti, and
Giuseppe Riccardi. 2009. Convolution kernels on
constituent, dependency and sequential structures for
relation extraction. Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing.

Raphael Pelossof and Zhiliang Ying. 2010. The attentive
perceptron. CoRR, abs/1009.5972.

D. Pighin and A. Moschitti. 2009. Reverse engineering
of tree kernel feature spaces. Proceedings of the Con-
ference on EMNLP, pages 111–120.

Ryan Rowe, German Creamer, Shlomo Hershkop, and
Salvatore J Stolfo. 2007. Automated social hierar-
chy detection through email network analysis. Pro-
ceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007
workshop on Web mining and social network analysis,
pages 109–117.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2005. Verbnet: a broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
AAI3179808.

D. Zelenko, C. Aone, and A. Richardella. 2002. Kernel
methods for relation extraction. In Proceedings of the
EMNLP.

Elena Zheleva and Lise Getoor. 2009. To join or not
to join: the illusion of privacy in social networks with
mixed public and private user profiles. Proceedings of
the 18th international conference on World wide web,
pages 531–540.

116


