










































Subjective Natural Language Problems: Motivations, Applications, Characterizations, and Implications


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 107–112,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Subjective Natural Language Problems:
Motivations, Applications, Characterizations, and Implications

Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm
Department of English
College of Liberal Arts

Rochester Institute of Technology
coagla@rit.edu

Abstract

This opinion paper discusses subjective natu-
ral language problems in terms of their mo-
tivations, applications, characterizations, and
implications. It argues that such problems de-
serve increased attention because of their po-
tential to challenge the status of theoretical
understanding, problem-solving methods, and
evaluation techniques in computational lin-
guistics. The author supports a more holis-
tic approach to such problems; a view that
extends beyond opinion mining or sentiment
analysis.

1 Introduction

Interest in subjective meaning and individual, inter-
personal or social, poetic/creative, and affective di-
mensions of language is not new to linguistics or
computational approaches to language. Language
analysts, including computational linguists, have
long acknowledged the importance of such topics
(Bühler, 1934; Lyons, 1977; Jakobson, 1996; Halli-
day, 1996; Wiebe et al, 2004; Wilson et al, 2005). In
computational linguistics and natural language pro-
cessing (NLP), current efforts on subjective natural
language problems are concentrated on the vibrant
field of opinion mining and sentiment analysis (Liu,
2010; Täckström, 2009), and ACL-HLT 2011 lists
Sentiment Analysis, Opinion Mining and Text Clas-
sification as a subject area. The terms subjectivity or
subjectivity analysis are also established in the NLP
literature to cover these topics of growing inquiry.

The purpose of this opinion paper is not to pro-
vide a survey of subjective natural language prob-

lems. Rather, it intends to launch discussions about
how subjective natural language problems have a vi-
tal role to play in computational linguistics and in
shaping fundamental questions in the field for the
future. An additional point of departure is that a
continuing focus on primarily the fundamental dis-
tinction of facts vs. opinions (implicitly, denotative
vs. connotative meaning) is, alas, somewhat limit-
ing. An expanded scope of problem types will bene-
fit our understanding of subjective language and ap-
proaches to tackling this family of problems.

It is definitely reasonable to assume that problems
involving subjective perception, meaning, and lan-
guage behaviors will diversify and earn increased at-
tention from computational approaches to language.
Banea et al already noted: “We have seen a surge
in interest towards the application of automatic tools
and techniques for the extraction of opinions, emo-
tions, and sentiments in text (subjectivity)” (p. 127)
(Banea et al, 2008). Therefore, it is timely and use-
ful to examine subjective natural language problems
from different angles. The following account is an
attempt in this direction. The first angle that the pa-
per comments upon is what motivates investigatory
efforts into such problems. Next, the paper clarifies
what subjective natural language processing prob-
lems are by providing a few illustrative examples of
some relevant problem-solving and application ar-
eas. This is followed by discussing yet another an-
gle of this family of problems, namely what some
of their characteristics are. Finally, potential im-
plications for the field of computational linguistics
at large are addressed, with the hope that this short
piece will spawn continued discussion.

107



2 Motivations

The types of problems under discussion here are
fundamental language tasks, processes, and phe-
nomena that mirror and play important roles in peo-
ple’s daily social, interactional, or affective lives.
Subjective natural language processing problems
represent exciting frontier areas that directly re-
late to advances in artificial natural language be-
havior, improved intelligent access to information,
and more agreeable and comfortable language-based
human-computer interaction. As just one example,
interactional systems continue to suffer from a bias
toward ‘neutral’, unexpressive (and thus commu-
nicatively cumbersome) language.

From a practical, application-oriented point of
view, dedicating more resources and efforts to sub-
jective natural language problems is a natural step,
given the wealth of available written, spoken or mul-
timodal texts and information associated with cre-
ativity, socializing, and subtle interpretation. From
a conceptual and methodological perspective, auto-
matic subjective text analysis approaches have po-
tential to challenge the state of theoretical under-
standing, problem-solving methods, and evaluation
techniques. The discussion will return to this point
in section 5.

3 Applications

Subjective natural language problems extend well
beyond sentiment and opinion analysis. They in-
volve a myriad of topics–from linguistic creativity
via inference-based forecasting to generation of so-
cial and affective language use. For the sake of illus-
tration, four such cases are presented below (bearing
in mind that the list is open-ended).

3.1 Case 1: Modeling affect in language

A range of affective computing applications apply
to language (Picard, 1997). One such area is au-
tomatically inferring affect in text. Work on auto-
matic affect inference from language data has gener-
ally involved recognition or generation models that
contrast a range of affective states either along af-
fect categories (e.g. angry, happy, surprised, neu-
tral, etc.) or dimensions (e.g. arousal and pleasant-
ness). As one example, Alm developed an affect
dataset and explored automatic prediction of affect

in text at the sentence level that accounted for differ-
ent levels of affective granularity (Alm, 2008; Alm,
2009; Alm, 2010). There are other examples of the
strong interest in affective NLP or affective interfac-
ing (Liu et al, 2003; Holzman and Pottenger, 2003;
Francisco and Gervás, 2006; Kalra and Karahalios,
2005; Généreux and Evans, 2006; Mihalcea and Liu,
2006). Affective semantics is difficult for many au-
tomatic techniques to capture because rather than
simple text-derived ‘surface’ features, it requires so-
phisticated, ‘deep’ natural language understanding
that draws on subjective human knowledge, inter-
pretation, and experience. At the same time, ap-
proaches that accumulate knowledge bases face is-
sues such as the artificiality and limitations of trying
to enumerate rather than perceive and experience hu-
man understanding.

3.2 Case 2: Image sense discrimination

Image sense discrimination refers to the problem of
determining which images belong together (or not)
(Loeff et al, 2006; Forsyth et al, 2009). What counts
as the sense of an image adds subjective complex-
ity. For instance, images capture “both word and
iconographic sense distinctions ... CRANE can re-
fer to, e.g. a MACHINE or a BIRD; iconographic
distinctions could additionally include birds stand-
ing, vs. in a marsh land, or flying, i.e. sense distinc-
tions encoded by further descriptive modication in
text.” (p. 547) (Loeff et al, 2006). In other words,
images can evoke a range of subtle, subjective mean-
ing phenomena. Challenges for annotating images
according to lexical meaning (and the use of verifi-
cation as one way to assess annotation quality) have
been discussed in depth, cf. (Alm et al, 2006).

3.3 Case 3: Multilingual communication

The world is multilingual and so are many human
language technology users. Multilingual applica-
tions have strong potential to grow. Arguably, future
generations of users will increasingly demand tools
capable of effective multilingual tasking, communi-
cation and inference-making (besides expecting ad-
justments to non-native and cross-linguistic behav-
iors). The challenges of code-mixing include dy-
namically adapting sociolinguistic forms and func-
tions, and they involve both flexible, subjective
sense-making and perspective-taking.

108



3.4 Case 4: Individualized iCALL
A challenging problem area of general interest
is language learning. State-of-the-art intelligent
computer-assisted language learning (iCALL) ap-
proaches generally bundle language learners into a
homogeneous group. However, learners are individ-
uals exhibiting a vast range of various kinds of dif-
ferences. The subjective aspects here are at another
level than meaning. Language learners apply per-
sonalized strategies to acquisition, and they have a
myriad of individual communicative needs, motiva-
tions, backgrounds, and learning goals. A frame-
work that recognizes subjectivity in iCALL might
exploit such differences to create tailored acquisition
flows that address learning curves and proficiency
enhancement in an individualized manner. Counter-
ing boredom can be an additional positive side-effect
of such approaches.

4 Characterizations

It must be acknowledged that a problem such as
inferring affective meaning from text is a substan-
tially different kind of ‘beast’ compared to predict-
ing, for example, part-of-speech tags.1 Identifying
such problems and tackling their solutions is also
becoming increasingly desirable with the boom of
personalized, user-generated contents. It is a use-
ful intellectual exercise to consider what the gen-
eral characteristics of this family of problems are.
This initial discussion is likely not complete; that is
also not the scope of this piece. The following list is
rather intended as a set of departure points to spark
discussion.

• Non-traditional intersubjectivity Subjective
natural language processing problems are gen-
erally problems of meaning or communication
where so-called intersubjective agreement does
not apply in the same way as in traditional
tasks.

• Theory gaps A particular challenge is that sub-
jective language phenomena are often less un-
derstood by current theory. As an example, in
the affective sciences there is a vibrant debate–
indeed a controversy–on how to model or even
define a concept such as emotion.

1No offense intended to POS tagger developers.

• Variation in human behavior Humans often
vary in their assessments of these language be-
haviors. The variability could reflect, for exam-
ple, individual preferences and perceptual dif-
ferences, and that humans adapt, readjust, or
change their mind according to situation de-
tails. Humans (e.g. dataset annotators) may
be sensitive to sensory demands, cognitive fa-
tigue, and external factors that affect judge-
ments made at a particular place and point in
time. Arguably, this behavioral variation is part
of the given subjective language problem.

• Absence of real ‘ground truth’? For such
problems, acceptability may be a more useful
concept than ‘right’ and ’wrong’. A partic-
ular solution may be acceptable/unacceptable
rather than accurate/erroneous, and there may
be more than one acceptable solution. (Rec-
ognizing this does not exclude that acceptabil-
ity may in clear, prototypical cases converge
on just one solution, but this scenario may not
apply to a majority of instances.) This central
characteristic is, conceptually, at odds with in-
terannotator agreement ‘targets’ and standard
performance measures, potentially creating an
abstraction gap to be filled. If we recog-
nize that (ground) truth is, under some circum-
stances, a less useful concept–a problem reduc-
tion and simplification that is undesirable be-
cause it does not reflect the behavior of lan-
guage users–how should evaluation then be ap-
proached with rigor?

• Social/interpersonal focus Many problems in
this family concern inference (or generation)
of complex, subtle dimensions of meaning and
information, informed by experience or socio-
culturally influenced language use in real-
situation contexts (including human-computer
interaction). They tend to tie into sociolin-
guistic and interactional insights on language
(Mesthrie et al, 2009).

• Multimodality and interdisciplinarity Many
of these problems have an interactive and hu-
manistic basis. Multimodal inference is ar-
guably also of importance. For example, writ-
ten web texts are accompanied by visual mat-

109



ter (‘texts’), such as images, videos, and text
aesthetics (font choices, etc.). As another ex-
ample, speech is accompanied by biophysical
cues, visible gestures, and other perceivable in-
dicators.

It must be recognized that, as one would expect,
one cannot ‘neatly’ separate out problems of this
type, but core characteristics such as non-traditional
intersubjectivity, variation in human behavior, and
recognition of absence of real ‘ground truth’ may be
quite useful to understand and appropriately model
problems, methods, and evaluation techniques.

5 Implications

The cases discussed above in section 3 are just se-
lections from the broad range of topics involving
aspects of subjectivity, but at least they provide
glimpses at what can be done in this area. The list
could be expanded to problems intersecting with the
digital humanities, healthcare, economics or finance,
and political science, but such discussions go be-
yond the scope of this paper. Instead the last item on
this agenda concerns the broader, disciplinary im-
plications that subjective natural language problems
raise.

• Evaluation If the concept of “ground truth”
needs to be reassessed for subjective natural
language processing tasks, different and al-
ternative evaluation techniques deserve care-
ful thought. This requires openness to alterna-
tive assessment metrics (beyond precision, re-
call, etc.) that fit the problem type. For ex-
ample, evaluating user interaction and satis-
faction, as Liu et al (2003) did for an affec-
tive email client, may be relevant. Similarly,
analysis of acceptability (e.g. via user or anno-
tation verification) can be informative. MOS
testing for speech and visual systems has such
flavors. Measuring pejoration and ameliora-
tion effects on other NLP tasks for which stan-
dard benchmarks exist is another such route.
In some contexts, other measures of quality
of life improvements may help complement
(or, if appropriate, substitute) standard evalua-
tion metrics. These may include ergonomics,
personal contentment, cognitive and physical

load (e.g. counting task steps or load bro-
ken down into units), safety increase and non-
invasiveness (e.g. attention upgrade when per-
forming a complex task), or. Combining stan-
dard metrics of system performance with alter-
native assessment methods may provide espe-
cially valuable holistic evaluation information.

• Dataset annotation Studies of human annota-
tions generally report on interannotator agree-
ment, and many annotation schemes and ef-
forts seek to reduce variability. That may
not be appropriate (Zaenen, 2006), consid-
ering these kinds of problems (Alm, 2010).
Rather, it makes sense to take advantage of
corpus annotation as a resource, beyond com-
putational work, for investigation into actual
language behaviors associated with the set of
problems dealt with in this paper (e.g. vari-
ability vs. trends and language–culture–domain
dependence vs. independence). For exam-
ple, label-internal divergence and intraannota-
tor variation may provide useful understand-
ing of the language phenomenon at stake; sur-
veys, video recordings, think-alouds, or inter-
views may give additional insights on human
(annotator) behavior. The genetic computation
community has theorized concepts such as user
fatigue and devised robust algorithms that in-
tegrate interactional, human input in effective
ways (Llorà et al, 2005; Llorà et al, 2005).
Such insights can be exploited. Reporting on
sociolinguistic information in datasets can be
useful properties for many problems, assuming
that it is feasible and ethical for a given context.

• Analysis of ethical risks and gains Overall,
how language and technology coalesce in so-
ciety is rarely covered; but see Sproat (2010)
for an important exception. More specifically,
whereas ethics has been discussed within the
field of affective computing (Picard, 1997),
how ethics applies to language technologies re-
mains an unexplored area. Ethical interroga-
tions (and guidelines) are especially important
as language technologies continue to be refined
and migrate to new domains. Potential prob-
lematic implications of language technologies–

110



or how disciplinary contributions affect the lin-
guistic world–have rarely been a point of dis-
cussion. However, there are exceptions. For
example, there are convincing arguments for
gains that will result from an increased engage-
ment with topics related to endangered lan-
guages and language documentation in compu-
tational linguistics (Bird, 2009), see also Ab-
ney and Bird (2010). By implication, such ef-
forts may contribute to linguistic and cultural
sustainability.

• Interdisciplinary mixing Given that many
subjective natural language problem have a hu-
manistic and interpersonal basis, it seems par-
ticularly pivotal with investigatory ‘mixing’ ef-
forts that reach outside the computational lin-
guistics community in multidisciplinary net-
works. As an example, to improve assess-
ment of subjective natural language process-
ing tasks, lessons can be learned from the
human-computer interaction and social com-
puting communities, as well as from the digi-
tal humanities. In addition, attention to multi-
modality will benefit increased interaction as it
demands vision or tactile specialists, etc.2

• Intellectual flexibility Engaging with prob-
lems that challenge black and white, right vs.
wrong answers, or even tractable solutions,
present opportunities for intellectual growth.
These problems can constitute an opportunity
for training new generations to face challenges.

6 Conclusion

To conclude: there is a strong potential–or, as this
paper argues, a necessity–to expand the scope of
computational linguistic research into subjectivity.
It is important to recognize that there is a broad fam-
ily of relevant subjective natural language problems
with theoretical and practical, real-world anchoring.
The paper has also pointed out that there are certain
aspects that deserve special attention. For instance,
there are evaluation concepts in computational lin-
guistics that, at least to some degree, detract atten-

2When thinking along multimodal lines, we might stand a
chance at getting better at creating core models that apply suc-
cessfully also to signed languages.

tion away from how subjective perception and pro-
duction phenomena actually manifest themselves in
natural language. In encouraging a focus on efforts
to achieve ’high-performing’ systems (as measured
along traditional lines), there is risk involved–the
sacrificing of opportunities for fundamental insights
that may lead to a more thorough understanding of
language uses and users. Such insights may in fact
decisively advance language science and artificial
natural language intelligence.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank anonymous reviewers and col-
leagues for their helpful comments.

References
Abney, Steven and Steven Bird. 2010. The Human Lan-

guage Project: Building a Universal Corpus of the
worlds languages. Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Uppsala, Sweden, 8897.

Alm, Cecilia Ovesdotter. 2009. Affect in Text and
Speech. VDM Verlag: Saarbrcken.

Alm, Cecilia Ovesdotter. 2010. Characteristics of high
agreement affect annotation in text. Proceedings of the
LAW IV workshop at the 48th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Uppsala,
Sweden, 118-122.

Alm, Cecilia Ovesdotter. 2008. Affect Dataset. GNU
Public License.

Alm, Cecilia Ovesdotter and Xavier Llorá. 2006.
Evolving emotional prosody Proceedings of INTER-
SPEECH 2006 - ICSLP, Ninth International Confer-
ence on Spoken Language Processing, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA, 1826-1829.

Alm, Cecilia Ovesdotter, Nicolas Loeff, and David
Forsyth. 2006. Challenges for annotating images for
sense disambiguation. Proceedings of the Workshop
on Frontiers in Linguistically Annotated Corpora, at
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Sydney, 1-4.

Banea, Carmen, Rada Mihalcea, Janyce Wiebe, and
Samer Hassan. 2008. Multilingual subjectivity anal-
ysis using machine translation. Proceedings of the
2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 127-135.

Bird, Steven. 2009. Last words: Natural language pro-
cessing and linguistic fieldwork. Journal of Computa-
tional Linguistics, 35 (3), 469-474.

111



Bühler, Karl. 1934. Sprachtheorie: Die Darstellungs-
funktion der Sprache. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Ver-
lag.

Forsyth, David, Tamana Berg, Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm,
Ali Farhadi, Julia Hockenmaier, Nicolas Loeff, and
Gang Wang. Words and pictures: categories, modi-
fiers, depiction, and iconography. In S. J. Dickinson,
et al (Eds.). Object Categorization: Computer and Hu-
man Vision Perspectives, 167-181. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press.

Francisco, Virginia and Pablo Gervás. 2006. Explor-
ing the compositionality of emotions in text: Word
emotions, sentence emotions and automated tagging.
AAAI-06 Workshop on Computational Aesthetics: Ar-
tificial Intelligence Approaches to Beauty and Happi-
ness.

Généreux, Michel and Roger Evans. 2006. Distinguish-
ing affective states in weblog posts. AAAI Spring
Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analyz-
ing Weblogs, 40-42.

Halliday, Michael A. K. 1996. Linguistic function and
literary style: An inquiry into the language of William
Golding’s The Inheritors. Weber, Jean Jacques (ed).
The Stylistics Reader: From Roman Jakobson to the
Present. London: Arnold, 56-86.

Holzman, Lars E. and William Pottenger. 2003. Classifi-
cation of emotions in Internet chat: An application of
machine learning using speech phonemes. LU-CSE-
03-002, Lehigh University.

Jakobson, Roman. 1996. Closing statement: Linguistics
and poetics. Weber, Jean Jacques (ed). The Stylistics
Reader: From Roman Jakobson to the Present. Lon-
don: Arnold, 10-35.

Karla, Ankur and Karrie Karahalios. 2005. TextTone:
Expressing emotion through text. Interact 2005, 966-
969.

Liu, Bing. 2010. Sentiment analysis and subjectivity.
Handbook of Natural Language Processing, second
edition. Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau (Eds.).
Boca Raton: CRC Press, 627-666.

Liu, Hugo, Henry Lieberman, and Ted Selker. 2003.
A model of textual affect sensing using real-world
knowledge International Conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces, 125-132.

Llorà, Xavier, Kumara Sastry, David E. Goldberg, Abhi-
manyu Gupta, and Lalitha Lakshmi. 2005. Combating
user fatigue in iGAs: Partial ordering, Support Vec-
tor Machines, and synthetic fitness Proceedings of the
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.

Llorà, Xavier, Francesc Alı́as, Lluı́s Formiga, Kumara
Sastry and David E. Goldberg. Evaluation consis-
tency in iGAs: User contradictions as cycles in partial-
ordering graphs IlliGAL TR No 2005022, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Loeff, Nicolas, Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, and David
Forsyth. 2006. Discriminating image senses by clus-
tering with multimodal features. Proceedings of the
21st International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and the 44th ACL, Sydney, Australia, 547-554.

Lyons, John. 1977. Semantics volumes 1, 2. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Mesthrie, Rajend, Joan Swann, Ana Deumert, and
William Leap. 2009. Introducing Sociolinguistics,
2nd ed. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Mihalcea, Rada and Hugo Liu. 2006. A corpus-based ap-
proach to finding happiness. AAAI Spring Symposium
on Computational Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs,
139-144.

Picard, Rosalind W. 1997. Affective Computing. Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Sproat, Richard. 2010. Language, Technology, and Soci-
ety. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Täckström, Oscar. 2009. A literature survey of methods
for analysis of subjective language. SICS Technical
Report T2009:08, ISSN 1100-3154.

Wiebe, Janyce, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce,
Matthew Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learning
subjective language. Journal of Computational Lin-
guistics 30 (3), 277-308.

Wilson, Theresa, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffman.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference and Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 347-
354.

Zaenen, Annie. 2006. Mark-up barking up the wrong
tree. Journal of Computational Linguistics 32 (4),
577-580.

112


