










































Domain Adaptation for Machine Translation by Mining Unseen Words


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 407–412,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Domain Adaptation for Machine Translation by Mining Unseen Words

Hal Daumé III
University of Maryland

Collge Park, USA
hal@umiacs.umd.edu

Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi
University of Maryland

College Park, USA
jags@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

We show that unseen words account for a
large part of the translation error when mov-
ing to new domains. Using an extension of
a recent approach to mining translations from
comparable corpora (Haghighi et al., 2008),
we are able to find translations for otherwise
OOV terms. We show several approaches
to integrating such translations into a phrase-
based translation system, yielding consistent
improvements in translations quality (between
0.5 and 1.5 Bleu points) on four domains and
two language pairs.

1 Introduction

Large amounts of data are currently available to
train statistical machine translation systems. Un-
fortunately, these training data are often qualita-
tively different from the target task of the transla-
tion system. In this paper, we consider one specific
aspect of domain divergence (Jiang, 2008; Blitzer
and Daumé III, 2010): the out-of-vocabulary prob-
lem. By considering four different target domains
(news, medical, movie subtitles, technical documen-
tation) in two source languages (German, French),
we: (1) Ascertain the degree to which domain di-
vergence causes increases in unseen words, and the
degree to which this degrades translation perfor-
mance. (For instance, if all unknown words are
names, then copying them verbatim may be suffi-
cient.) (2) Extend known methods for mining dic-
tionaries from comparable corpora to the domain
adaptation setting, by “bootstrapping” them based
on known translations from the source domain. (3)

Develop methods for integrating these mined dictio-
naries into a phrase-based translation system (Koehn
et al., 2007).

As we shall see, for most target domains, out of
vocabulary terms are the source of approximately
half of the additional errors made. The only excep-
tion is the news domain, which is sufficiently sim-
ilar to parliament proceedings (Europarl) that there
are essentially no new, frequent words in news. By
mining a dictionary and naively incorporating it into
a translation system, one can only do slightly bet-
ter than baseline. However, with a more clever inte-
gration, we can close about half of the gap between
baseline (unadapted) performance and an oracle ex-
periment. In most cases this amounts to an improve-
ment of about 1.5 Bleu points (Papineni et al., 2002)
and 1.5 Meteor points (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005).

The specific setting we consider is the one in
which we have plentiful parallel (“labeled”) data in a
source domain (eg., parliament) and plentiful com-
parable (“unlabeled”) data in a target domain (eg.,
medical). We can use the unlabeled data in the tar-
get domain to build a good language model. Finally,
we assume access to a very small amount of parallel
(“labeled”) target data, but only enough to evaluate
on, or run weight tuning (Och, 2003). All knowl-
edge about unseen words must come from the com-
parable data.

2 Background and Challenges

Domain adaptation is a well-studied field, both in the
NLP community as well as the machine learning and
statistics communities. Unlike in machine learning,
in the case of translation, it is not enough to simply

407



adjust the weights of a learned translation model to
do well on a new domain. As expected, we shall
see that unseen words pose a major challenge for
adapting translation systems to distant domains. No
machine learning approach to adaptation could hope
to attenuate this problem.

There have been a few attempts to measure or per-
form domain adaptation in machine translation. One
of the first approaches essentially performs test-set
relativization (choosing training samples that look
most like the test data) to improve translation per-
formance, but applies the approach only to very
small data sets (Hildebrand et al., 2005). Later
approaches are mostly based on a data set made
available in the 2007 StatMT workshop (Koehn and
Schroeder, 2007), and have attempted to use mono-
lingual (Civera and Juan, 2007; Bertoldi and Fed-
erico, 2009) or comparable (Snover et al., 2008) cor-
pus resources. These papers all show small, but sig-
nificant, gains in performance when moving from
Parliament domain to News domain.

3 Data

Our source domain is European Parliament
proceedings (http://www.statmt.org/
europarl/). We use three target domains: the
News Commentary corpus (News) used in the MT
Shared task at ACL 2007, European Medicines
Agency text (Emea), the Open Subtitles data
(Subs) and the PHP technical document data,
provided as part of the OPUS corpus http:
//urd.let.rug.nl/tiedeman/OPUS/).
We extracted development and test sets from each
of these corpora, except for news (and the source
domain) where we preserved the published dev and
test data. The “source” domain of Europarl has 996k
sentences and 2130k words.) We count the number
of words and sentences in the English side of the
parallel data, which is the same for both language
pairs (i.e. both French-English and German-English
have the same English). The statistics are:

Comparable Tune Test
sents words sents sents

News 35k 753k 1057 2007
Emea 307k 4220k 1388 4145
Subs 30k 237k 1545 2493
PHP 6k 81k 1007 2000

Dom Most frequent OOV Words
News
(17%)

behavior, favor, neighbors, fueled, neigh-
boring, abe, wwii, favored, nicolas, fa-
vorable, zhao, ahmedinejad, bernanke,
favorite, phelps, ccp, skeptical, neighbor,
skeptics, skepticism

Emea
(49%)

renal, hepatic, subcutaneous, irbesartan,
ribavirin, olanzapine, serum, patienten,
dl, eine, sie, pharmacokinetics, riton-
avir, hydrochlorothiazide, erythropoietin,
efavirenz, hypoglycaemia, epoetin, blis-
ter, pharmacokinetic

Subs
(68%)

gonna, yeah, f...ing, s..., f..., gotta, uh,
wanna, mom, lf, ls, em, b....h, daddy, sia,
goddamn, sammy, tyler, bye, bigweld

PHP
(44%)

php, apache, sql, integer, socket, html,
filename, postgresql, unix, mysql, color,
constants, syntax, sesam, cookie, cgi, nu-
meric, pdf, ldap, byte

Table 1: For each domain, the percentage of target do-
main word tokens that are unseen in the source domain,
together with the most frequent English words in the tar-
get domains that do not appear in the source domain. (In
the actual data the subtitles words do not appear cen-
sored.)

All of these data sets actually come with parallel
target domain data. To obtain comparable data, we
applied to standard trick of taking the first 50% of
the English text as English and the last 50% of the
German text as German. While such data is more
parallel than, say, Wikipedia, it is far from parallel.

To get a better sense of the differences between
these domains, we give some simple statistics about
out of vocabulary words and examples in Table 1.
Here, for each domain, we show the percentage of
words (types) in the target domain that are unseen in
the Parliament data. As we can see, it is markedly
higher in Emea, Subs and PHP than in News.

4 Dictionary Mining

Our dictionary mining approach is based on Canon-
ical Correlation Analysis, as used previously by
(Haghighi et al., 2008). Briefly, given a multi-view
data set, Canonical Correlation Analysis is a tech-
nique to find the projection directions in each view
so that the objects when projected along these di-

408



rections are maximally aligned (Hotelling, 1936).
Given any new pair of points, the similarity between
the them can be computed by first projecting onto
the lower dimensions space and computing the co-
sine similarity between their projections. In general,
using all the eigenvectors is sub optimal and thus
retaining top eigenvectors leads to an improved gen-
eralizability.

Here we describe the use of CCA to find the trans-
lations for the OOV German words (Haghighi et al.,
2008). From the target domain corpus we extract the
most frequent words (approximately 5000) for both
the languages. Of these, words that have translation
in the bilingual dictionary (learnt from Europarl) are
used as training data. We use these words to learn
the CCA projections and then mine the translations
for the remaining frequent words. The dictionary
mining involves multiple stages. In the first stage,
we extract feature vectors for all the words. We
use context and orthographic features. In the sec-
ond stage, using the dictionary probabilities of seen
words, we identify pairs of words whose feature vec-
tors are used to learn the CCA projection directions.
In the final stage, we project all the words into the
sub-space identified by CCA and mine translations
for the OOV words. We will describe each of these
steps in detail in this section.

For each of the frequent words we extract the con-
text vectors using a window of length five. To over-
come data sparsity issue, we truncate each context
word to its first seven characters. We discard all the
context features which co-occur with less than five
words. Among the remaining features, we consider
only the most frequent 2000 features in each lan-
guage. We convert the frequency vectors into TFIDF
vectors, center the data and then binarize the vec-
tors depending on if the feature value is positive of
not. We convert this data into word similarities us-
ing linear dot product kernel. We also represent each
word using the orthographic features, with n-grams
of length 1-3 and convert them into TFIDF form and
subsequently turn them into word similarities (again
using the linear kernel). Since we convert the data
into word similarities, the orthographic features are
relevant even though the script of source and tar-
get languages differ. Where as using the features
directly rending them useless for languages whose
script is completely different like Arabic and En-

waste blutdruckabfall 0.274233
bleeding blutdruckabfall 0.206440
stroke blutdruckabfall 0.190345
dysphagia dysphagie 0.233743
encephalopathy dysphagie 0.215684
lethargy dysphagie 0.203176
ribavirin ribavirin 0.314273
viraferonpeg ribavirin 0.206194
bioavailability verfgbarkeit 0.409260
xeristar xeristar 0.325458
cymbalta xeristar 0.284616

Table 2: Random unseen Emea words in German and
their mined translations.

glish. For each language we linearly combine the
kernel matrices obtained using the context vectors
and the orthographic features. We use incomlete
cholesky decomposition to reduce the dimension-
ality of the kernel matrices. We do the same pre-
processng for all words, the training words and the
OOV words. And the resulting feature vectors for
each word are used for learning the CCA projections

Since a word can have multiple translations, and
that CCA uses only one translation, we form a bipar-
tite graph with the training words in each language
as nodes and the edge weight being the translation
probability of the word pair. We then run Hungar-
ian algorithm to extract maximum weighted bipar-
tite matching (Jonker and Volgenant, 1987). We
then run CCA on the resulting pairs of the bipartite
matching to get the projection directions in each lan-
guage. We retain only the top 35% of the eigenvec-
tors. In other relevant experiments, we have found
that this setting of CCA outperforms the baseline ap-
proach.

We project all the frequent words, including the
training words, in both the languages into the lower
dimensional spaces and for each of the OOV word
return the closest five points from the other language
as potential new translations. The dictionary min-
ing, viewed subjectively and intrinsically, performs
quite well. In Table 2, we show four randomly se-
lected unseen German words from Emea (that do not
occur in the Parliament data), together with the top
three translations and associated scores (which are
not normalized). Based on a cursory evaluation of
5 randomly selected words in French and German

409



by native speakers (not the authors!), we found that
8/10 had correct mined translations.

5 Integration into MT System

The output of the dicionary mining approach is a list
of pairs (f, e) of foreign words and predicted En-
glish translations. Each of these comes with an as-
sociated score. There are two obvious ways to in-
tegrate such a dictionary into a phrase-based trans-
lation system: (1) Provide the dictionary entries as
(weighted) “sentence” pairs in the parallel corpus.
These “sentences” would each contain exactly one
word. The weighting can be derived from the trans-
lation probability from the dictionary mining. (2)
Append the phrase table of a baseline phrase-based
translation model trained only on source domain
data with the word pairs. Use the mining probability
as the phrase translation probabilities.

It turned out in preliminary experiments (on Ger-
man/Emea) that neither of these approaches worked
particularly well. The first approach did not work
at all, even with fairly extensive hand-tuning of the
sentence weights. It often hurt translation perfor-
mance. The second approach did not hurt transla-
tion performance, but did not help much either. It
led to an average improvement of only about 0.5
Bleu points, on development data. This is likely be-
cause weight tuning tuned a single weight to account
for the import of the phrase probabilities across both
“true” phrases as well as these “mined” phrases.

We therefore came up with a slightly more com-
plex, but still simple, method for adding the dic-
tionary entries to the phrase table. We add four
new features to the model, and set the plain phrase-
translation probabilities for the dictionary entries to
zero. These new features are:

1. The dictionary mining translation probability.
(Zero for original phrase pairs.)

2. An indicator feature that says whether all Ger-
man words in this phrase pair were seen in
the source data. (This will always be true for
source phrases and always be false for dictio-
nary entries.)

3. An indicator that says whether all German
words in this phrase pair were seen in target
data. (This is not the negation of the previous

feature, because there are plenty of words in the
target data that had also been seen. This feature
might mean something like “trust this phrase
pair a lot.”)

4. The conjunction of the previous two features.

Interestingly, only adding the first feature was
not helpful (performance remained about 0.5 Bleu
points above baseline). Adding only the last three
features (the indicator features) alone did not help at
all (performance was roughly on par with baseline).
Only when all four features were included did per-
formance improve significantly. In the results dis-
cussed in Section 6.2, we report results on test data
using the combination of these four features.

6 Experiments

In all of our experiments, we use two trigram lan-
guage models. The first is trained on the Gigaword
corpus. The second is trained on the English side of
the target domain corpus. The two language models
are traded-off against each other during weight tun-
ing. In all cases we perform parameter tuning with
MERT (Och, 2003), and results are averaged over
three runs with different random initializations.

6.1 Baselines and Oracles

Our first set of experiments is designed to establish
baseline performance for the domains. In these ex-
periments, we built a translation model based only
on the Parliament proceedings. We then tune it us-
ing the small amount of target-domain tuning data
and test on the corresponding test data. This is row
BASELINE in Table 3. Next, we build an oracle,
based on using the parallel target domain data. This
system, OR in Table 3 is constructed by training
a system on a mix of Parliament data and target-
domain data. The last line in this table shows the
percent improvement when moving to this oracle
system. As we can see, the gains range from tiny
(4% relative Bleu points, or 1.2 absolute Bleu points
for news, which may just be because we have more
data) to quite significant (73% for medical texts).

Finally, we consider how much of this gain we
could possible hope to realize by our dictionary min-
ing technique. In order to estimate this, we take
the OR system, and remove any phrases that con-
tain source-language words that appear in neither

410



BLEU Meteor
News Emea Subs PHP News Emea Subs PHP

BASELINE 23.00 26.62 10.26 38.67 34.58 27.69 15.96 24.66
German ORACLE-OOV 23.77 33.37 11.20 39.77 34.83 30.99 17.03 25.82

ORACLE 24.62 42.77 11.45 41.01 35.46 36.40 17.80 25.85
BASELINE 27.30 40.46 16.91 28.12 37.31 35.62 20.61 20.47

French ORACLE-OOV 27.92 50.03 19.17 29.48 37.57 39.55 21.79 20.91
ORACLE 28.55 59.49 19.81 30.15 38.12 45.55 23.52 21.77

ORACLE-OOV CHANGE +2% +24% +11% +5% +0% +12% +6% +7%
ORACLE CHANGE +4% +73% +15% +2% +2% +29% +13% +6%

Table 3: Baseline and oracle scores. The last two rows are the change between the baseline and the two types of
oracles, averaged over the two languages.

German French
BLEU Meteor BLEU Meteor

News 23.80 35.53 27.66 37.41
+0.80 +0.95 +0.36 +0.10

Emea 28.06 29.18 46.17 37.38
+1.44 +1.49 +1.51 +1.76

Subs 10.39 16.27 17.52 21.11
+0.13 +0.31 +0.61 +0.50

PHP 38.95 25.53 28.80 20.82
+0.28 +0.88 +0.68 +0.35

Table 4: Dictionary-mining system results. The italicized
number beneath each score is the improvement over the
BASELINE approach from Table 3.

the Parliament proceedings nor our list of high fre-
quency OOV terms. In other words, if our dictio-
nary mining system found as-good translations for
the words in its list as the (cheating) oracle system,
this is how well it would do. This is referred to
as OR-OOV in Table 3. As we can see, the upper
bound on performance based only on mining unseen
words is about halfway (absolute) between the base-
line and the full Oracle. Except in news, when it
is essentially useless (because the vocabulary differ-
ences between news and Parliament proceedings are
negligible). (Results using Meteor are analogous,
but omitted for space.)

6.2 Mining Results

The results of the dictionary mining experiment, in
terms of its effect on translation performance, are
shown in Table 4. As we can see, there is a mod-
est improvement in Subtitles and PHP, a markedly

large improvement in Emea, and a modest improve-
ment in News. Given how tight the ORACLE results
were to the BASELINE results in Subs and PHP, it is
quite impressive that we were able to improve per-
formance as much as we did. In general, across
all the data sets and both languages, we roughly
split the difference (in absolute terms) between the
BASELINE and ORACLE-OOV systems.

7 Discussion

In this paper we have shown that dictionary mining
techniques can be applied to mine unseen words in
a domain adaptation task. We have seen positive,
consistent results across two languages and four do-
mains. The proposed approach is generic enough to
be integrated into a wide variety of translation sys-
tems other than simple phrase-based translation.

Of course, unseen words are not the only cause
of translation divergence between two domains. We
have not addressed other issues, such as better es-
timation of translation probabilities or words that
change word sense across domains. The former is
precisely the area to which one might apply do-
main adaptation techniques from the machine learn-
ing community. The latter requires significant ad-
ditional work, since it is quite a bit more difficult
to spot foreign language words that are used in new
senses, rather that just never seen before. An alter-
native area of work is to extend these results beyond
simply the top-most-frequent words in the target do-
main.

411



References

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An
automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In In Proceed-
ings of Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation
Measures for MT and/or Summarization at ACL.

Nicola Bertoldi and Marcello Federico. 2009. Do-
main adaptation for statistical machine translation with
monolingual resources. In StatMT ’09: Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation.

John Blitzer and Hal Daumé III. 2010. Do-
main adaptation. Tutorial at the International
Conference on Machine Learning, http:
//adaptationtutorial.blitzer.com/.

Jorge Civera and Alfons Juan. 2007. Domain adap-
tation in statistical machine translation with mixture
modelling. In StatMT ’07: Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.

Aria Haghighi, Percy Liang, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick,
and Dan Klein. 2008. Learning bilingual lexicons
from monolingual corpora. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL).

Almut Silja Hildebrand, Matthias Eck, Stephan Vogel,
and Alex Waibel. 2005. Adaptation of the translation
model for statistical machine translation based on in-
formation retrieval. In European Association for Ma-
chine Translation.

H. Hotelling. 1936. Relation between two sets of vari-
ables. Biometrica, 28:322–377.

J. Jiang. 2008. A literature survey on domain
adaptation of statistical classifiers. Available at
http://sifaka.cs.uiuc.edu/jiang4/
domain_adaptation/survey.

R. Jonker and A. Volgenant. 1987. A shortest augment-
ing path algorithm for dense and sparse linear assign-
ment problems. Computing, 38(4):325–340.

Philipp Koehn and Josh Schroeder. 2007. Experiments in
domain adaptation for statistical machine translation.
In StatMT ’07: Proceedings of the Second Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL).

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the

Conference of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL), Sapporo, Japan, July.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Conference of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL), pages 311–318.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, and Richard Schwartz.
2008. Language and translation model adaptation us-
ing comparable corpora. In Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP).

412


