










































Latent Semantic Word Sense Induction and Disambiguation


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1476–1485,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Latent Semantic Word Sense Induction and Disambiguation

Tim Van de Cruys
RCEAL

University of Cambridge
United Kingdom

tv234@cam.ac.uk

Marianna Apidianaki
Alpage, INRIA & Univ Paris Diderot

Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMRI-001
75013 Paris, France

marianna.apidianaki@inria.fr

Abstract

In this paper, we present a unified model for
the automatic induction of word senses from
text, and the subsequent disambiguation of
particular word instances using the automati-
cally extracted sense inventory. The induction
step and the disambiguation step are based on
the same principle: words and contexts are
mapped to a limited number of topical dimen-
sions in a latent semantic word space. The in-
tuition is that a particular sense is associated
with a particular topic, so that different senses
can be discriminated through their association
with particular topical dimensions; in a similar
vein, a particular instance of a word can be dis-
ambiguated by determining its most important
topical dimensions. The model is evaluated on
the SEMEVAL-2010 word sense induction and
disambiguation task, on which it reaches state-
of-the-art results.

1 Introduction

Word sense induction (WSI) is the task of automati-
cally identifying the senses of words in texts, with-
out the need for handcrafted resources or manually
annotated data. The manual construction of a sense
inventory is a tedious and time-consuming job, and
the result is highly dependent on the annotators and
the domain at hand. By applying an automatic proce-
dure, we are able to only extract the senses that are
objectively present in a particular corpus, and it al-
lows for the sense inventory to be straightforwardly
adapted to a new domain.

Word sense disambiguation (WSD), on the other
hand, is the closely related task of assigning a sense

label to a particular instance of a word in context,
using an existing sense inventory. The bulk of WSD
algorithms up till now use pre-defined sense inven-
tories (such as WordNet) that often contain fine-
grained sense distinctions, which poses serious prob-
lems for computational semantic processing (Ide
and Wilks, 2007). Moreover, most WSD algorithms
take a supervised approach, which requires a signifi-
cant amount of manually annotated training data.

The model presented here induces the senses of
words in a fully unsupervised way, and subsequently
uses the induced sense inventory for the unsuper-
vised disambiguation of particular occurrences of
words. The induction step and the disambiguation
step are based on the same principle: words and
contexts are mapped to a limited number of topical
dimensions in a latent semantic word space. The
key idea is that the model combines tight, synonym-
like similarity (based on dependency relations) with
broad, topical similarity (based on a large ‘bag of
words’ context window). The intuition in this is that
the dependency features can be disambiguated by
the topical dimensions identified by the broad con-
textual features; in a similar vein, a particular in-
stance of a word can be disambiguated by determin-
ing its most important topical dimensions (based on
the instance’s context words).

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents some previous research on distributional
similarity and word sense induction. Section 3 gives
an overview of our method for word sense induction
and disambiguation. Section 4 provides a quantita-
tive evaluation and comparison to other algorithms
in the framework of the SEMEVAL-2010 word sense

1476



induction and disambiguation (WSI/WSD) task. The
last section draws conclusions, and lays out a num-
ber of future research directions.

2 Previous Work

2.1 Distributional similarity

According to the distributional hypothesis of mean-
ing (Harris, 1954), words that occur in similar con-
texts tend to be semantically similar. In the spirit
of this by now well-known adage, numerous algo-
rithms have sprouted up that try to capture the se-
mantics of words by looking at their distribution in
texts, and comparing those distributions in a vector
space model.

One of the best known models in this respect is
latent semantic analysis — LSA (Landauer and Du-
mais, 1997; Landauer et al., 1998). In LSA, a term-
document matrix is created, that contains the fre-
quency of each word in a particular document. This
matrix is then decomposed into three other matrices
with a mathematical factorization technique called
singular value decomposition (SVD). The most im-
portant dimensions that come out of the SVD are said
to represent latent semantic dimensions, according
to which nouns and documents can be represented
more efficiently. Our model also applies a factoriza-
tion technique (albeit a different one) in order to find
a reduced semantic space.

Context is a determining factor in the nature of
the semantic similarity that is induced. A broad con-
text window (e.g. a paragraph or document) yields
broad, topical similarity, whereas a small context
yields tight, synonym-like similarity. This has lead
a number of researchers to use the dependency rela-
tions that a particular word takes part in as contex-
tual features. One of the most important approaches
is Lin (1998). An overview of dependency-based
semantic space models is given in Padó and Lapata
(2007).

2.2 Word sense induction

The following paragraphs provide a succinct
overview of word sense induction research. A thor-
ough survey on word sense disambiguation (includ-
ing unsupervised induction algorithms) is presented
in Navigli (2009).

Algorithms for word sense induction can roughly

be divided into local and global ones. Local WSI
algorithms extract the different senses of a word on
a per-word basis, i.e. the different senses for each
word are determined separately. They can be further
subdivided into context-clustering algorithms and
graph-based algorithms. In the context-clustering
approach, context vectors are created for the differ-
ent instances of a particular word, and those con-
texts are grouped into a number of clusters, repre-
senting the different senses of the word. The con-
text vectors may be represented as first or second-
order co-occurrences (i.e. the contexts of the target
word are similar if the words they in turn co-occur
with are similar). The first one to propose this idea
of context-group discrimination was Schütze (1998),
and many researchers followed a similar approach
to sense induction (Purandare and Pedersen, 2004).
In the graph-based approach, on the other hand, a
co-occurrence graph is created, in which nodes rep-
resent words, and edges connect words that appear
in the same context (dependency relation or context
window). The senses of a word may then be discov-
ered using graph clustering techniques (Widdows
and Dorow, 2002), or algorithms such as HyperLex
(Véronis, 2004) or Pagerank (Agirre et al., 2006). Fi-
nally, Bordag (2006) recently proposed an approach
that uses word triplets to perform word sense induc-
tion. The underlying idea is the ‘one sense per col-
location’ assumption, and co-occurrence triplets are
clustered based on the words they have in common.

Global algorithms take an approach in which the
different senses of a particular word are determined
by comparing them to, and demarcating them from,
the senses of other words in a full-blown word space
model. The best known global approach is the one
by Pantel and Lin (2002). They present a global
clustering algorithm – coined clustering by commit-
tee (CBC) – that automatically discovers word senses
from text. The key idea is to first discover a set of
tight, unambiguous clusters, to which possibly am-
biguous words can be assigned. Once a word has
been assigned to a cluster, the features associated
with that particular cluster are stripped off the word’s
vector. This way, less frequent senses of the word
may be discovered.

Van de Cruys (2008) proposes a model for sense
induction based on latent semantic dimensions. Us-
ing an extension of non-negative matrix factoriza-

1477



tion, the model induces a latent semantic space
according to which both dependency features and
broad contextual features are classified. Using the
latent space, the model is able to discriminate be-
tween different word senses. The model presented
below is an extension of this approach: whereas the
model described in Van de Cruys (2008) is only able
to perform word sense induction, our model is ca-
pable of performing both word sense induction and
disambiguation.

3 Methodology

3.1 Non-negative Matrix Factorization

Our model uses non-negative matrix factorization –
NMF (Lee and Seung, 2000) in order to find latent
dimensions. There are a number of reasons to prefer
NMF over the better known singular value decompo-
sition used in LSA. First of all, NMF allows us to min-
imize the Kullback-Leibler divergence as an objec-
tive function, whereas SVD minimizes the Euclidean
distance. The Kullback-Leibler divergence is better
suited for language phenomena. Minimizing the Eu-
clidean distance requires normally distributed data,
and language phenomena are typically not normally
distributed. Secondly, the non-negative nature of the
factorization ensures that only additive and no sub-
tractive relations are allowed. This proves partic-
ularly useful for the extraction of semantic dimen-
sions, so that the NMF model is able to extract much
more clear-cut dimensions than an SVD model. And
thirdly, the non-negative property allows the result-
ing model to be interpreted probabilistically, which
is not straightforward with an SVD factorization.

The key idea is that a non-negative matrix A is
factorized into two other non-negative matrices, W
and H

Ai×j ≈Wi×kHk×j (1)

where k is much smaller than i, j so that both in-
stances and features are expressed in terms of a few
components. Non-negative matrix factorization en-
forces the constraint that all three matrices must be
non-negative, so all elements must be greater than or
equal to zero.

Using the minimization of the Kullback-Leibler
divergence as an objective function, we want to

find the matrices W and H for which the Kullback-
Leibler divergence between A and WH (the multipli-
cation of W and H) is the smallest. This factoriza-
tion is carried out through the iterative application
of update rules. Matrices W and H are randomly
initialized, and the rules in 2 and 3 are iteratively ap-
plied – alternating between them. In each iteration,
each vector is adequately normalized, so that all di-
mension values sum to 1.

Haµ ← Haµ

∑
iWia

Aiµ
(WH)iµ∑

k Wka
(2)

Wia ←Wia

∑
µHaµ

Aiµ
(WH)iµ∑

v Hav
(3)

3.2 Word sense induction
Using an extension of non-negative matrix factoriza-
tion, we are able to jointly induce latent factors for
three different modes: words, their window-based
(‘bag of words’) context words, and their depen-
dency relations. Three matrices are constructed that
capture the pairwise co-occurrence frequencies for
the different modes. The first matrix contains co-
occurrence frequencies of words cross-classified by
dependency relations, the second matrix contains
co-occurrence frequencies of words cross-classified
by words that appear in the noun’s context window,
and the third matrix contains co-occurrence frequen-
cies of dependency relations cross-classified by co-
occurring context words. NMF is then applied to the
three matrices and the separate factorizations are in-
terleaved (i.e. the results of the former factorization
are used to initialize the factorization of the next ma-
trix). A graphical representation of the interleaved
factorization algorithm is given in figure 1.

The procedure of the algorithm goes as follows.
First, matrices W, H, G, and F are randomly initial-
ized. We then start our first iteration, and compute
the update of matrix W (using equation 3). Matrix
W is then copied to matrix V, and the update of
matrix G is computed (using equation 2). The trans-
pose of matrix G is again copied to matrix U, and
the update of F is computed (again using equation 2).
As a last step, matrix F is copied to matrix H, and
we restart the iteration loop until a stopping criterion
(e.g. a maximum number of iterations, or no more
significant change in objective function; we used the

1478



= xW
H

= xV
G

= xU
F

j

i

s

k

i

j

k

A
words x

dependency relations

B
words x

context words

C
context words x

dependency relations

k

k

k

k

i

j

i

s

j

s s

Figure 1: A graphical representation of the interleaved
NMF algorithm

former one) is reached.1 When the factorization is
finished, the three different modes (words, window-
based context words and dependency relations) are
all represented according to a limited number of la-
tent factors.

Next, the factorization that is thus created is used
for word sense induction. The intuition is that a par-
ticular, dominant dimension of an ambiguous word
is ‘switched off’, in order to reveal other possible
senses of the word. Formally, we proceed as follows.
Matrix H indicates the importance of each depen-
dency relation given a topical dimension. With this
knowledge, the dependency relations that are respon-
sible for a certain dimension can be subtracted from
the original noun vector. This is done by scaling
down each feature of the original vector according
to the load of the feature on the subtracted dimen-
sion, using equation 4.

t = v(u1 − hk) (4)

Equation 4 multiplies each dependency feature of
the original noun vector v with a scaling factor, ac-
cording to the load of the feature on the subtracted
dimension (hk – the vector of matrix H that corre-
sponds to the dimension we want to subtract). u1 is
a vector of ones with the same length as hk. The re-
sult is vector t, in which the dependency features rel-

1Note that this is not the only possibly way of interleaving
the different factorizations, but in our experiments we found that
different constellations lead to similar results.

evant to the particular topical dimension have been
scaled down.

In order to determine which dimension(s) are re-
sponsible for a particular sense of the word, the
method is embedded in a clustering approach. First,
a specific word is assigned to its predominant sense
(i.e. the most similar cluster). Next, the dominant
semantic dimension(s) for this cluster are subtracted
from the word vector, and the resulting vector is
fed to the clustering algorithm again, to see if other
word senses emerge. The dominant semantic dimen-
sion(s) can be identified by folding vector c – repre-
senting the cluster centroid – into the factorization
(equation 5). This yields a probability vector b over
latent factors for the particular centroid.

b = cHT (5)

A simple k-means algorithm is used to com-
pute the initial clustering, using the non-factorized
dependency-based feature vectors (matrix A). k-
means yields a hard clustering, in which each noun
is assigned to exactly one (dominant) cluster. In the
second step, we determine for each noun whether
it can be assigned to other, less dominant clusters.
First, the salient dimension(s) of the centroid to
which the noun is assigned are determined. The cen-
troid of the cluster is computed by averaging the fre-
quencies of all cluster elements except for the tar-
get word we want to reassign. After subtracting the
salient dimensions from the noun vector, we check
whether the vector is reassigned to another cluster
centroid. If this is the case, (another instance of) the
noun is assigned to the cluster, and the second step
is repeated. If there is no reassignment, we continue
with the next word. The target element is removed
from the centroid to make sure that only the dimen-
sions associated with the sense of the cluster are sub-
tracted. When the algorithm is finished, each noun
is assigned to a number of clusters, representing its
different senses.

We use two different methods for selecting the fi-
nal number of candidate senses. The first method,
NMFcon , takes a conservative approach, and only
selects candidate senses if – after the subtraction of
salient dimensions – another sense is found that is
more similar2 to the adapted noun vector than the

2We use the cosine measure for our similarity calculations.

1479



dominant sense. The second method, NMFlib , is
more liberal, and also selects the next best cluster
centroid as candidate sense until a certain similarity
threshold φ is reached.3

3.3 Word sense disambiguation

The sense inventory that results from the induction
step can now be used for the disambiguation of in-
dividual instances as follows. For each instance of
the target noun, we extract its context words, i.e. the
words that co-occur in the same paragraph, and rep-
resent them as a probability vector f . Using matrix
G from our factorization model (which represents
context words by semantic dimensions), this vector
can be folded into the semantic space, thus represent-
ing a probability vector over latent factors for the
particular instance of the target noun (equation 6).

d = fGT (6)

Likewise, the candidate senses of the noun (repre-
sented as centroids) can be folded into our seman-
tic space using matrix H (equation 5). This yields
a probability distribution over the semantic dimen-
sions for each centroid. As a last step, we com-
pute the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the
context vector and the candidate centroids, and se-
lect the candidate centroid that yields the lowest di-
vergence as the correct sense. The disambiguation
process is represented graphically in figure 2.

3.4 Example

Let us clarify the process with an example for the
noun chip. The sense induction algorithm finds the
following candidate senses:4

1. cache, CPU, memory, microprocessor, proces-
sor, RAM, register

2. bread, cake, chocolate, cookie, recipe, sand-
wich

3. accessory, equipment, goods, item, machinery,
material, product, supplies

3Experimentally (examining the cluster output), we set φ =
0.2

4Note that we do not use the word sense to hint at a lexico-
graphic meaning distinction; rather, sense in this case should be
regarded as a more coarse-grained and topic-related entity.

G'

k

s

s
context vector

k

cluster centroid

j

cluster centroid

j

cluster centroid

j

H'

k

j

k

k

k

Figure 2: Graphical representation of the disambiguation
process

Each candidate sense is associated with a centroid
(the average frequency vector of the cluster’s mem-
bers), that is folded into the semantic space, which
yields a ‘semantic fingerprint’, i.e. a distribution
over the semantic dimensions. For the first sense,
the ‘computer’ dimension will be the most impor-
tant. Likewise, for the second and the third sense the
‘food’ dimension and the ‘manufacturing’ dimension
will be the most important.5

Let us now take a particular instance of the noun
chip, such as the one in (1).

(1) An N.V. Philips unit has created a com-
puter system that processes video images
3,000 times faster than conventional systems.
Using reduced instruction - set comput-
ing, or RISC, chips made by Intergraph of
Huntsville, Ala., the system splits the im-
age it ‘sees’ into 20 digital representations,
each processed by one chip.

Looking at the context of the particular instance of
chip, a context vector is created which represents
the semantic content words that appear in the same
paragraph (the extracted content words are printed
in boldface). This context vector is again folded
into the semantic space, yielding a distribution over
the semantic dimensions. By selecting the lowest

5In the majority of cases, the induced dimensions indeed
contain such clear-cut semantics, so that the dimensions can be
rightfully labeled as above.

1480



Kullback-Leibler divergence between the semantic
probability distribution of the target instance and the
semantic probability distributions of the candidate
senses, the algorithm is able to assign the ‘computer’
sense of the target noun chip.

4 Evaluation

4.1 Dataset

Our word sense induction and disambiguation
model is trained and tested on the dataset of the
SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task (Manandhar et al.,
2010). The SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task is based
on a dataset of 100 target words, 50 nouns and 50
verbs. For each target word, a training set is pro-
vided from which the senses of the word have to
be induced without using any other resources. The
training set for a target word consists of a set of
target word instances in context (sentences or para-
graphs). The complete training set contains 879,807
instances, viz. 716,945 noun and 162,862 verb in-
stances.

The senses induced during training are used for
disambiguation in the testing phase. In this phase,
the system is provided with a test set that consists
of unseen instances of the target words. The test
set contains 8,915 instances in total, of which 5,285
nouns and 3,630 verbs. The instances in the test
set are tagged with OntoNotes senses (Hovy et al.,
2006). The system needs to disambiguate these in-
stances using the senses acquired during training.

4.2 Implementational details

The SEMEVAL training set has been part of speech
tagged and lemmatized with the Stanford Part-Of-
Speech Tagger (Toutanova and Manning, 2000;
Toutanova et al., 2003) and parsed with Malt-
Parser (Nivre et al., 2006), trained on sections 2-
21 of the Wall Street Journal section of the Penn
Treebank extended with about 4000 questions from
the QuestionBank6 in order to extract dependency
triples. The SEMEVAL test set has only been tagged
and lemmatized, as our disambiguation model does
not use dependency triples as features (contrary to
the induction model).

6http://maltparser.org/mco/english_
parser/engmalt.html

We constructed two different models – one for
nouns and one for verbs. For each model, the matri-
ces needed for our interleaved NMF factorization are
extracted from the corpus. The noun model was built
using 5K nouns, 80K dependency relations, and 2K
context words (excluding stop words) with highest
frequency in the training set, which yields matrices
of 5K nouns × 80K dependency relations, 5K nouns
× 2K context words, and 80K dependency relations
× 2K context words. The model for verbs was con-
structed analogously, using 3K verbs, and the same
number of dependency relations and context words.
For our initial k-means clustering, we set k = 600
for nouns, and k = 400 for verbs. For the under-
lying interleaved NMF model, we used 50 iterations,
and factored the model to 50 dimensions.

4.3 Evaluation measures
The results of the systems participating in the
SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task are evaluated both
in a supervised and in an unsupervised manner.

The supervised evaluation in the SEMEVAL-2010
WSI/WSD task follows the scheme of the SEMEVAL-
2007 WSI task (Agirre and Soroa, 2007), with some
modifications. One part of the test set is used as a
mapping corpus, which maps the automatically in-
duced clusters to gold standard senses; the other part
acts as an evaluation corpus. The mapping between
clusters and gold standard senses is used to tag the
evaluation corpus with gold standard tags. The sys-
tems are then evaluated as in a standard WSD task,
using recall.

In the unsupervised evaluation, the induced
senses are evaluated as clusters of instances which
are compared to the sets of instances tagged with
the gold standard senses (corresponding to classes).
Two partitions are thus created over the test set of
a target word: a set of automatically generated clus-
ters and a set of gold standard classes. A number of
these instances will be members of both one gold
standard class and one cluster. Consequently, the
quality of the proposed clustering solution is evalu-
ated by comparing the two groupings and measuring
their similarity.

Two evaluation metrics are used during the unsu-
pervised evaluation in order to estimate the quality
of the clustering solutions, the V-Measure (Rosen-
berg and Hirschberg, 2007) and the paired F-

1481



Score (Artiles et al., 2009). V-Measure assesses the
quality of a clustering by measuring its homogeneity
(h) and its completeness (c). Homogeneity refers to
the degree that each cluster consists of data points
primarily belonging to a single gold standard class,
while completeness refers to the degree that each
gold standard class consists of data points primarily
assigned to a single cluster. V-Measure is the har-
monic mean of h and c.

VM =
2 · h · c
h+ c

(7)

In the paired F-Score (Artiles et al., 2009) eval-
uation, the clustering problem is transformed into a
classification problem (Manandhar et al., 2010). A
set of instance pairs is generated from the automati-
cally induced clusters, which comprises pairs of the
instances found in each cluster. Similarly, a set of in-
stance pairs is created from the gold standard classes,
containing pairs of the instances found in each class.
Precision is then defined as the number of common
instance pairs between the two sets to the total num-
ber of pairs in the clustering solution (cf. formula 8).
Recall is defined as the number of common instance
pairs between the two sets to the total number of
pairs in the gold standard (cf. formula 9). Preci-
sion and recall are finally combined to produce the
harmonic mean (cf. formula 10).

P =
|F (K) ∩ F (S)|
|F (K)|

(8)

R =
|F (K) ∩ F (S)|
|F (S)|

(9)

FS =
2 · P ·R
P +R

(10)

The obtained results are also compared to two
baselines. The most frequent sense (MFS) baseline
groups all testing instances of a target word into one
cluster. The Random baseline randomly assigns an
instance to one of the clusters.7 This baseline is exe-
cuted five times and the results are averaged.

7The number of clusters in Random was chosen to be
roughly equal to the average number of senses in the gold stan-
dard.

4.4 Results

4.4.1 Unsupervised evaluation
In table 1, we present the performance of a number
of algorithms on the V-measure. We compare our
V-measure scores with the scores of the best-ranked
systems in the SEMEVAL 2010 WSI/WSD task, both
for the complete data set and for nouns and verbs
separately. The fourth column shows the average
number of clusters induced in the test set by each
algorithm. The MFS baseline has a V-Measure equal
to 0, since by definition its completeness is 1 and its
homogeneity is 0.

NMFcon – our model that takes a conservative ap-
proach in the induction of candidate senses – does
not beat the random baseline. NMFlib – our model
that is more liberal in inducing senses – reaches bet-
ter results. With 11.8%, it scores similar to other
algorithms that induce a similar average number of
clusters, such as Duluth-WSI (Pedersen, 2010).

Pedersen (2010) has shown that the V-Measure
tends to favour systems producing a higher number
of clusters than the number of gold standard senses.
This is reflected in the scores of our models as well.

VM (%) all noun verb #cl

Hermit 16.2 16.7 15.6 10.78
UoY 15.7 20.6 8.5 11.54
KSU KDD 15.7 18.0 12.4 17.50
NMFlib 11.8 13.5 9.4 4.80
Duluth-WSI 9.0 11.4 5.7 4.15
Random 4.4 4.2 4.6 4.00
NMFcon 3.9 3.9 3.9 1.58
MFS 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.00

Table 1: Unsupervised V-measure evaluation on SE-
MEVAL test set

Motivated by the large divergences in the sys-
tem rankings on the different metrics used in the
SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task, Pedersen evaluated
the metrics themselves. His evaluation relied on
the assumption that a good measure should assign
low scores to random baselines. Pedersen showed
that the V-Measure continued to improve as random-
ness increased. We agree with Pedersen’s conclu-
sion that the V-Measure results should be interpreted
with caution, but we still report the results in order

1482



to perform a global comparison, on all metrics, of
our system’s performance to the systems that partic-
ipated to the SEMEVAL task.

Contrary to V-Measure, paired F-score is a fairly
reliable measure and the only one that managed to
identify and expose random baselines in the above
mentioned metric evaluation. This means that the
random systems used for testing were ranked low
when a high number of random senses was used.

In table 2, the paired F-Score of a number of al-
gorithms is given. The paired F-Score penalizes sys-
tems when they produce a higher number of clusters
(low recall) or a lower number of clusters (low pre-
cision) than the gold standard number of senses. We
again compare our results with the scores of the best-
ranked systems in the SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD
TASK.

FS (%) all noun verb #cl

MFS 63.5 57.0 72.7 1.00
Duluth-WSI-SVD-Gap 63.3 57.0 72.4 1.02
NMFcon 60.2 54.6 68.4 1.58
NMFlib 45.3 42.2 49.8 5.42
Duluth-WSI 41.1 37.1 46.7 4.15
Random 31.9 30.4 34.1 4.00

Table 2: Unsupervised paired F-score evaluation on SE-
MEVAL testset

NMFcon reaches a score of 60.2%, which is again
similar to other algorithms that induce the same av-
erage number of clusters. NMFlib scores 45.3%, in-
dicating that the algorithm is able to retain a rea-
sonable F-Score while at the same time inducing a
significant number of clusters. This especially be-
comes clear when comparing its score to the other
algorithms.

4.4.2 Supervised evaluation
In the supervised evaluation, the automatically in-
duced clusters are mapped to gold standard senses,
using the mapping corpus (i.e. one part of the test
set). The obtained mapping is used to tag the evalu-
ation corpus (i.e. the other part of the test set) with
gold standard tags, which means that the methods
are evaluated in a standard WSD task.

Table 3 shows the recall of our algorithms in the
supervised evaluation, again compared to other algo-

rithms evaluated in the SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD
task.

SR (%) all noun verb #S

NMFlib 62.6 57.3 70.2 1.82
UoY 62.4 59.4 66.8 1.51
Duluth-WSI 60.5 54.7 68.9 1.66
NMFcon 60.3 54.5 68.8 1.21
MFS 58.7 53.2 66.6 1.00
Random 57.3 51.5 65.7 1.53

Table 3: Supervised recall for SEMEVAL testset, 80%
mapping, 20% evaluation

NMFlib gets 62.6%, which makes it the best scor-
ing algorithm on the supervised evaluation. NMFcon
reaches 60.3%, which again indicates that it is in the
same ballpark as other algorithms that induce a sim-
ilar average number of senses.

Some doubts have been cast on the representative-
ness of the supervised recall results as well. Accord-
ing to Pedersen (2010), the supervised learning al-
gorithm that underlies this evaluation method tends
to converge to the Most Frequent Sense (MFS) base-
line, because the number of senses that the classi-
fier assigns to the test instances is rather low. We
think these shortcomings indicate the need for the
development of new evaluation metrics, capable of
providing a more accurate evaluation of the perfor-
mance of WSI systems. Nevertheless, these metrics
still constitute a useful testbed for comparing the per-
formance of different systems.

5 Conclusion and future work

In this paper, we presented a model based on latent
semantics that is able to perform word sense induc-
tion as well as disambiguation. Using latent topi-
cal dimensions, the model is able to discriminate be-
tween different senses of a word, and subsequently
disambiguate particular instances of a word. The
evaluation results indicate that our model reaches
state-of-the-art performance compared to other sys-
tems that participated in the SEMEVAL-2010 word
sense induction and disambiguation task. Moreover,
our global approach is able to reach similar perfor-
mance on an evaluation set that is tuned to fit the
needs of local approaches. The evaluation set con-

1483



tains an enormous amount of contexts for only a
small number of target words, favouring methods
that induce senses on a per-word basis. A global
approach like ours is likely to induce a more bal-
anced sense inventory using an unbiased corpus, and
is likely to outperform local methods when such an
unbiased corpus is used as input. We therefore think
that the global, unified approach to word sense in-
duction and disambiguation presented here provides
a genuine and powerful solution to the problem at
hand.

We conclude with some issues for future work.
First of all, we would like to evaluate the approach
presented here using a more balanced and unbiased
corpus, and compare its performance on such a cor-
pus to local approaches. Secondly, we would also
like to include grammatical dependency information
in the disambiguation step of the algorithm. For now,
the disambiguation step only uses a word’s context
words; enriching the feature set with dependency in-
formation is likely to improve the performance of
the disambiguation.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the Scribo project, funded
by the French ‘pôle de compétitivité’ System@tic,
and by the French national grant EDyLex (ANR-09-
CORD-008).

References

Eneko Agirre and Aitor Soroa. 2007. SemEval-2007
Task 02: Evaluating word sense induction and discrim-
ination systems. In Proceedings of the fourth Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval),
ACL, pages 7–12, Prague, Czech Republic.

Eneko Agirre, David Martı́nez, Ojer López de Lacalle,
and Aitor Soroa. 2006. Two graph-based algo-
rithms for state-of-the-art WSD. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-06), pages 585–593, Syd-
ney, Australia.

Marianna Apidianaki and Tim Van de Cruys. 2011. A
Quantitative Evaluation of Global Word Sense Induc-
tion. In Proceedings of the 12th International Con-
ference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computa-
tional Linguistics (CICLing), published in Springer
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), volume
6608, pages 253–264, Tokyo, Japan.

Javier Artiles, Enrique Amigó, and Julio Gonzalo. 2009.
The role of named entities in web people search. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-09), pages
534–542, Singapore.

Stefan Bordag. 2006. Word sense induction: Triplet-
based clustering and automatic evaluation. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL-06), pages 137–144, Trento, Italy.

Zellig S. Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(23):146–162.

Eduard Hovy, Mitchell Marcus, Martha Palmer, Lance
Ramshaw, and Ralph Weischedel. 2006. Ontonotes:
the 90% solution. In Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology / North American Association of
Computational Linguistics conference (HLT-NAACL-
06), pages 57–60, New York, NY.

Nancy Ide and Yorick Wilks. 2007. Making Sense About
Sense. In Eneko Agirre and Philip Edmonds, editors,
Word Sense Disambiguation, Algorithms and Applica-
tions, pages 47–73. Springer.

Thomas Landauer and Susan Dumais. 1997. A solution
to Plato’s problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis the-
ory of the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychology Review, 104:211–240.

Thomas Landauer, Peter Foltz, and Darrell Laham. 1998.
An Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Dis-
course Processes, 25:295–284.

Daniel D. Lee and H. Sebastian Seung. 2000. Algo-
rithms for non-negative matrix factorization. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 13, pages 556–562.

Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic Retrieval and Clustering
of Similar Words. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics and 17th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING-ACL98), volume 2, pages
768–774, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Suresh Manandhar, Ioannis P. Klapaftis, Dmitriy Dligach,
and Sameer S. Pradhan. 2010. SemEval-2010 Task
14: Word Sense Induction & Disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of the fifth International Workshop on Seman-
tic Evaluation (SemEval), ACL-10, pages 63–68, Upp-
sala, Sweden.

Roberto Navigli. 2009. Word Sense Disambiguation: a
Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 41(2):1–69.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, and Jens Nilsson. 2006. Malt-
parser: A data-driven parser-generator for dependency
parsing. In Proceedings of the fifth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-06), pages 2216–2219, Genoa, Italy.

1484



Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Dependency-
based construction of semantic space models. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 33(2):161–199.

Patrick Pantel and Dekang Lin. 2002. Discovering word
senses from text. In ACM SIGKDD International Con-
ference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 613–619, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Ted Pedersen. 2010. Duluth-WSI: SenseClusters Ap-
plied to the Sense Induction Task of SemEval-2. In
Proceedings of the fifth International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations (SemEval-2010), pages 363–366,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Amruta Purandare and Ted Pedersen. 2004. Word
Sense Discrimination by Clustering Contexts in Vec-
tor and Similarity Spaces. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL), pages 41–48, Boston, MA.

Andrew Rosenberg and Julia Hirschberg. 2007. V-
measure: A conditional entropy-based external clus-
ter evaluation measure. In Proceedings of the Joint
2007 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 410–420,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Hinrich Schütze. 1998. Automatic Word Sense Discrim-
ination. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97–123.

Kristina Toutanova and Christopher D. Manning. 2000.
Enriching the Knowledge Sources Used in a Maxi-
mum Entropy Part-of-Speech Tagger. In Proceedings
of the Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and Very Large
Corpora (EMNLP/VLC-2000), pages 63–70.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Manning,
and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-Rich Part-of-
Speech Tagging with a Cyclic Dependency Network.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
/ North American Association of Computational Lin-
guistics conference (HLT-NAACL-03, pages 252–259,
Edmonton, Canada.

Tim Van de Cruys. 2008. Using Three Way Data for
Word Sense Discrimination. In Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING-08), pages 929–936, Manchester,
UK.

Jean Véronis. 2004. Hyperlex: lexical cartography for
information retrieval. Computer Speech & Language,
18(3):223–252.

Dominic Widdows and Beate Dorow. 2002. A Graph
Model for Unsupervised Lexical Acquisition. In Pro-
ceedings of the 19th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (COLING-02), pages 1093–
1099, Taipei, Taiwan.

1485


