










































Multi-Modal Annotation of Quest Games in Second Life


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 171–179,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multi-Modal Annotation of Quest Games in Second Life  

 
Sharon Gower Small, Jennifer Stromer-Galley and Tomek Strzalkowski 

ILS Institute 
State University of New York at Albany 

Albany, NY 12222 
small@albany.edu, jstromer@albany.edu, tomek@albany.edu  

 
 
 

Abstract 

We describe an annotation tool developed to as-
sist in the creation of multimodal action-
communication corpora from on-line massively 
multi-player games, or MMGs. MMGs typically 
involve groups of players (5-30) who control 
their avatars1, perform various activities (quest-
ing, competing, fighting, etc.) and communicate 
via chat or speech using assumed screen names. 
We collected a corpus of 48 group quests in 
Second Life that jointly involved 206 players 
who generated over 30,000 messages in quasi-
synchronous chat during approximately 140 
hours of recorded action. Multiple levels of co-
ordinated annotation of this corpus (dialogue, 
movements, touch, gaze, wear, etc) are required 
in order to support development of automated 
predictors of selected real-life social and demo-
graphic characteristics of the players. The anno-
tation tool presented in this paper was developed 
to enable efficient and accurate annotation of all 
dimensions simultaneously. 

 

1 Introduction 
The aim of our project is to predict the real world 
characteristics of players of massively-multiplayer 
online games, such as Second Life (SL). We sought 
to predict actual player attributes like age or educa-
tion levels, and personality traits including leader-
ship or conformity. Our task was to do so using 
only the behaviors, communication, and interaction 
among the players produced during game play. To 
do so, we logged all players’ avatar movements, 

                                                           
1 All avatar names seen in this paper have been changed to 
protect players’ identities.  

“touch events” (putting on or taking off clothing 
items, for example), and their public chat messages 
(i.e., messages that can be seen by all players in the 
group). Given the complex nature of interpreting 
chat in an online game environment, we required a 
tool that would allow annotators to have a synchro-
nized view of both the event action as well as the 
chat utterances.  This would allow our annotators to 
correlate the events and the chat by marking them 
simultaneously. More importantly, being able to 
view game events enables more accurate chat anno-
tation; and conversely, viewing chat utterances 
helps to interpret the significance of certain events 
in the game, e.g., one avatar following another.  For 
example, an exclamation of: “I can’t do it!” could 
be simply a response (rejection) to a request from 
another player; however, when the game action is 
viewed and the speaker is seen attempting to enter a 
building without success, another interpretation 
may arise (an assertion, a call for help, etc.).  

The Real World (RW) characteristics of SL 
players (and other on-line games) may be inferred 
to varying degrees from the appearance of their 
avatars, the behaviors they engage in, as well as 
from their on-line chat communications. For exam-
ple, the avatar gender generally matches the gender 
of the owner; on the other hand, vocabulary choices 
in chat are rather poor predictors of a player’s age, 
even though such correlation is generally seen in 
real life conversation.  

Second Life2 was the chosen platform because 
of the ease of creating objects, controlling the play 
environment, and collecting players’ movement, 
chat, and other behaviors. We generated a corpus of 
chat and movement data from 48 quests comprised 
of 206 participants who generated over 30,000 

                                                           
2 An online Virtual World developed and launched in 2003, by 
Linden Lab, San Francisco, CA.  http://secondlife.com 

171



messages and approximately 140 hours of recorded 
action. We required an annotation tool to help us 
efficiently annotate dialogue acts and communica-
tion links in chat utterances as well as avatar 
movements from such a large corpus.  Moreover, 
we required correlation between these two dimen-
sions of chat and movement since movement and 
other actions may be both causes and effects of 
verbal communication. We developed a multi-
modal event and chat annotation tool (called RAT, 
the Relational Annotation Tool), which will simul-
taneously display a 2D rendering of all movement 
activity recorded during our Second Life studies, 
synchronized with the chat utterances. In this way 
both chat and movements can be annotated simul-
taneously: the avatar movement actions can be re-
viewed while making dialogue act annotations.  
This has the added advantage of allowing the anno-
tator to see the relationships between chat, behav-
ior, and location/movement. This paper will 
describe our annotation process and the RAT tool. 

2 Related Work 
Annotation tools have been built for a variety of 
purposes. The CSLU Toolkit (Sutton et al., 1998) is 
a suite of tools used for annotating spoken lan-
guage. Similarly, the EMU System (Cassidy and 
Harrington, 2001) is a speech database management 
system that supports multi-level annotations.  Sys-
tems have been created that allow users to readily 
build their own tools such as AGTK (Bird et al., 
2001).  The multi-modal tool DAT (Core and Al-
len, 1997) was developed to assist testing of the 
DAMSL annotation scheme.  With DAT, annota-
tors were able to listen to the actual dialogues as 
well as view the transcripts. While these tools are 
all highly effective for their respective tasks, ours is 
unique in its synchronized view of both event ac-
tion and chat utterances. 

Although researchers studying online communi-
cation use either off-the shelf qualitative data anal-
ysis programs like Atlas.ti or NVivo, a few studies 
have annotated chat using custom-built tools. One 
approach uses computer-mediated discourse analy-
sis approaches and the Dynamic Topic Analysis 
tool (Herring, 2003; Herring & Nix; 1997; Stromer-
Galley & Martison, 2009), which allows annotators 
to track a specific phenomenon of online interaction 
in chat: topic shifts during an interaction. The 
Virtual Math Teams project (Stahl, 2009) created a 

ated a tool that allowed for the simultaneous play-
back of messages posted to a quasi-synchronous 
discussion forum with whiteboard drawings that 
student math team members used to illustrate their 
ideas or visualize the math problem they were try-
ing to solve (Çakir, 2009).  

A different approach to data capture of complex 
human interaction is found in the AMI Meeting 
Corpus (Carletta, 2007). It captures participants’ 
head movement information from individual head-
mounted cameras, which allows for annotation of 
nodding (consent, agreement) or shaking (dis-
agreement), as well as participants’ locations within 
the room; however, no complex events involving 
series of movements or participant proximity are 
considered. We are unaware of any other tools that 
facilitate the simultaneous playback of multi-modes 
of communication and behavior.  

3 Second Life Experiments 
To generate player data, we rented an island in 
Second Life and developed an approximately two 
hour quest, the Case of the Missing Moonstone.  In 
this quest, small groups of 4 to 5 players, who were 
previously unacquainted, work their way together 
through the clues and puzzles to solve a murder 
mystery. We recruited Second Life players in-game 
through advertising and setting up a shop that inter-
ested players could browse. We also used Facebook 
ads, which were remarkably effective.  

The process of the quest experience for players 
started after they arrived in a starting area of the 
island (the quest was open only to players who 
were made temporary members of our island) 
where they met other players, browsed quest-
appropriate clothing to adorn their avatars, and re-
ceived information from one of the researchers. 
Once all players arrived, the main quest began, 
progressing through five geographic areas in the 
island. Players were accompanied by a “training 
sergeant”, a researcher using a robot avatar, that 
followed players through the quest and provided 
hints when groups became stymied along their in-
vestigation but otherwise had little interaction with 
the group.  

The quest was designed for players to encounter 
obstacles that required coordinated action, such as 
all players standing on special buttons to activate a 
door, or the sharing of information between players, 
such as solutions to a word puzzle, in order to ad-
vance to the next area of the quest (Figure 1). 

172



Slimy Roastbeef: “who’s got the square gear?” 

Kenny Superstar: “I do, but I’m stuck” 

Slimy Roastbeef: “can you hand it to me?” 

Kenny Superstar: “i don’t know how” 

Slimy Roastbeef: “open your inventory, click 
and drag it onto me” 

 
Figure 1: Excerpt of dialogue during a coor-

dination activity 

Quest activities requiring coordination among the 
players were common and also necessary to ensure 
a sufficient degree of movement and message traf-
fic to provide enough material to test our predic-
tions, and to allow us to observe particular social 
characteristics of players. Players answered a sur-
vey before and then again after the quest, providing 
demographic and trait information and evaluating 
other members of their group on the characteristics 
of interest. 

3.1 Data Collection 
We recorded all players’ avatar movements as they 
purposefully moved avatars through the virtual 
spaces of the game environment, their public chat, 
and their “touch events”, which are the actions that 
bring objects out of player inventories, pick up ob-
jects to put in their inventories, or to put objects, 
such as hats or clothes, onto the avatars, and the 
like. We followed Yee and Bailenson’s (2008) 
technical approach for logging player behavior. To 
get a sense of the volume of data generated, 206 
players generated over 30,000 messages into the 
group’s public chat from the 48 sessions.  We com-
piled approximately 140 hours of recorded action. 
The avatar logger was implemented to record each 
avatar’s location through their (x,y,z) coordinates, 
recorded at two second intervals. This information 
was later used to render the avatar’s position on our 
2D representation of the action (section 4.1).   

4 RAT 
The Relational Annotation Tool (RAT) was built to 
assist in annotating the massive collection of data 
collected during the Second Life experiments.  A 
tool was needed that would allow annotators to see 
the textual transcripts of the chat while at the same 

time view a 2D representation of the action.  Addi-
tionally, we had a textual transcript for a select set 
of events: touch an object, stand on an object, at-
tach an object, etc., that we needed to make avail-
able to the annotator for review.  

These tool characteristics were needed for 
several reasons. First, in order to fully understand 
the communication and interaction occurring be-
tween players in the game environment and accu-
rately annotate those messages, we needed 
annotators to have as much information about the 
context as possible. The 2D map coupled with the 
events information made it easier to understand. 
For example, in the quest, players in a specific 
zone, encounter a dead, maimed body. As annota-
tors assigned codes to the chat, they would some-
times encounter exclamations, such as “ew” or 
“gross”. Annotators would use the 2D map and the 
location of the exclaiming avatar to determine if the 
exclamation was a result of their location (in the 
zone with the dead body) or because of something 
said or done by another player. Location of avatars 
on the 2D map synchronized with chat was also 
helpful for annotators when attempting to disam-
biguate communicative links. For example, in one 
subzone, mad scribblings are written on a wall. If 
player A says “You see that scribbling on the 
wall?” the annotator needs to use the 2D map to see 
who the player is speaking to. If player A and 
player C are both standing in that subzone, then the 
annotator can make a reasonable assumption that 
player A is directing the question to player C, and 
not player B who is located in a different subzone. 
Second, we annotated coordinated avatar move-
ment actions (such as following each other into a 
building or into a room), and the only way to read-
ily identify such complex events was through the 
2D map of avatar movements. 

The overall RAT interface, Figure 2, allows 
the annotator to simultaneously view all modes of 
representation.  There are three distinct panels in 
this interface. The left hand panel is the 2D repre-
sentation of the action (section 4.1).  The upper 
right hand panel displays the chat and event tran-
scripts (section 4.2), while the lower right hand por-
tion is reserved for the three annotator sub-panels 
(section 4.3).   
 

173



Figure 2: RAT interface 

4.1 The 2D Game Representation 
The 2D representation was the most challenging of 
the panels to implement.  We needed to find the 
proper level of abstraction for the action, while 
maintaining its usefulness for the annotator.  Too 
complex a representation would cause cognitive 
overload for the annotator, thus potentially deterio-
rating the speed and quality of the annotations.  
Conversely, an overly abstract representation would 
not be of significant value in the annotation proc-
ess.   

There were five distinct geographic areas on our 
Second Life Island: Starting Area, Mansion, Town 
Center, Factory and Apartments. An overview of 
the area in Second Life is displayed in Figure 3. We 
decided to represent each area separately as each 
group moves between the areas together, and it was 
therefore never necessary to display more than one 
area at a time.  The 2D representation of the Man-
sion Area is displayed in Figure 4 below.  Figure 5 
is an exterior view of the actual Mansion in Second 
Life. Each area’s fixed representation was rendered 
using Java Graphics, reading in the Second Life 
(x,y,z) coordinates from an XML data file. We rep-
resented the walls of the buildings as connected 

solid black lines with openings left for doorways.  
Key item locations were marked and labeled, e.g. 
Kitten, maid, the Idol, etc. Even though annotators 
visited the island to familiarize themselves with the 
layout, many mansion rooms were labeled to help 
the annotator recall the layout of the building, and 
minimize error of annotation based on flawed re-
call. Finally, the exact time of the action that is cur-
rently being represented is displayed in the lower 
left hand corner. 

 

 
 

Figure 3: Second Life overview map 
  

174



 
 
Figure 4: 2D representation of Second Life action 

inside the Mansion/Manor 
 
 

 
 

Figure 5: Second Life view of Mansion exterior 
 
Avatar location was recorded in our log files as an 
(x,y,z) coordinate at a two second interval.  Avatars 

were represented in our 2D panel as moving solid 
color circles, using the x and y coordinates. A color 
coded avatar key was displayed below the 2D rep-
resentation.  This key related the full name of every 
avatar to its colored circle representation. The z 
coordinate was used to determine if the avatar was 
on the second floor of a building.  If the z value 
indicated an avatar was on a second floor, their icon 
was modified to include the number “2” for the du-
ration of their time on the second floor. Also logged 
was the avatar’s degree of rotation.  Using this we 
were able to represent which direction the avatar 
was looking by a small black dot on their colored 
circle. 

As the annotators stepped through the chat and 
event annotation, the action would move forward, 
in synchronized step in the 2D map.  In this way at 
any given time the annotator could see the avatar 
action corresponding to the chat and event tran-
scripts appearing in the right panels.  The annotator 
had the option to step forward or backward through 
the data at any step interval, where each step corre-
sponded to a two second increment or decrement, to 
provide maximum flexibility to the annotator in 
viewing and reviewing the actions and communica-
tions to be annotated.  Additionally, “Play” and 
“Stop” buttons were added to the tool so the anno-
tator may simply watch the action play forward ra-
ther than manually stepping through. 

4.2 The Chat & Event Panel 
Avatar utterances along with logged Second Life 
events were displayed in the Chat and Event Panel 
(Figure 6). Utterances and events were each dis-
played in their own column.  Time was recorded for 
every utterance and event, and this was displayed in 
the first column of the Chat and Event Panel. All 
avatar names in the utterances and events were 
color coded, where the colors corresponded to the 
avatar color used in the 2D panel. This panel was 
synchronized with the 2D Representation panel and 
as the annotator stepped through the game action on 
the 2D display, the associated utterances and events 
populated the Chat and Event panel. 

 

175



 
 

Figure 6: Chat & Event Panel  

4.3 The Annotator Panels  
The Annotator Panels (Figures 7 and 10) contains 
all features needed for the annotator to quickly 
annotate the events and dialogue. Annotators could 
choose from a number of categories to label each 
dialogue utterance. Coding categories included 
communicative links, dialogue acts, and selected 
multi-avatar actions.   In the following we briefly 
outline each of these. A more detailed description 
of the chat annotation scheme is available in 
(Shaikh et al., 2010).   

4.3.1 Communicative Links 
One of the challenges in multi-party dialogue is to 
establish which user an utterance is directed to-
wards. Users do not typically add addressing in-
formation in their utterances, which leads to 
ambiguity while creating a communication link be-
tween users. With this annotation level, we asked 
the annotators to determine whether each utterance 
was addressed to some user, in which case they 
were asked to mark which specific user it was ad-
dressed to; was in response to another prior utter-
ance by a different user, which required marking 
the specific utterance responded to; or a continua-
tion of the user’s own prior utterance.  

Communicative link annotation allows for accu-
rate mapping of dialogue dynamics in the multi-
party setting, and is a critical component of tracking 
such social phenomena as disagreements and lead-
ership. 

4.3.2 Dialogue Acts 
We developed a hierarchy of 19 dialogue acts for 
annotating the functional aspect of the utterance in 

the discussion.  The tagset we adopted is loosely 
based on DAMSL (Allen & Core, 1997) and 
SWBD (Jurafsky et al., 1997), but greatly reduced 
and also tuned significantly towards dialogue 
pragmatics and away from more surface character-
istics of utterances. In particular, we ask our anno-
tators what is the pragmatic function of each 
utterance within the dialogue, a decision that often 
depends upon how earlier utterances were classi-
fied. Thus augmented, DA tags become an impor-
tant source of evidence for detecting language uses 
and such social phenomena as conformity. Exam-
ples of dialogue act tags include Assertion-Opinion, 
Acknowledge, Information-Request, and Confirma-
tion-Request. 

Using the augmented DA tagset also presents a 
fairly challenging task to our annotators, who need 
to be trained for many hours before an acceptable 
rate of inter-annotator agreement is achieved. For 
this reason, we consider our current DA tagging as 
a work in progress. 

4.3.3 Zone coding 
Each of the five main areas had a correspond-

ing set of subzones. A subzone is a building, a 
room within a building, or any other identifiable 
area within the playable spaces of the quest, e.g. the 
Mansion has the subzones: Hall, Dining Room, 
Kitchen, Outside, Ghost Room, etc. The subzone 
was determined based on the avatar(s) (x,y,z) coor-
dinates and the known subzone boundaries. This 
additional piece of data allowed for statistical 
analysis at different levels: avatar, dialogue unit, 
and subzone. 

 

176



 
 

Figure 7: Chat Annotation Sub-Panel

4.3.4 Multi-avatar events 
As mentioned, in addition to chat we also were in-
terested in having the annotators record composite 
events involving multiple avatars over a span of 
time and space.  While the design of the RAT tool 
will support annotation of any event of interest with 
only slight modifications, for our purposes, we 
were interested in annotating two types of events 
that we considered significant for our research hy-
potheses. The first type of event was the multi-
avatar entry (or exit) into a sub-zone, including the 
order in which the avatars moved.  

Figure 8 shows an example of a “Moves into 
Subzone” annotation as displayed in the Chat & 
Event Panel. Figure 9 shows the corresponding se-
ries of progressive moments in time portraying en-
try into the Bank subzone as represented in RAT. In 
the annotation, each avatar name is recorded in or-
der of its entry into the subzone (here, the Bank).  
Additionally, we record the subzone name and the 
time the event is completed3.  

The second type of event we annotated was the 
“follow X” event, i.e., when one or more avatars 
appeared to be following one another within a sub-
zone. These two types of events were of particular 
interest because we hypothesized that players who 
are leaders are likely to enter first into a subzone 
and be followed around once inside.  

In addition, support for annotation of other types 
of composite events can be added as needed; for 
example, group forming and splitting, or certain 

                                                           
3 We are also able to record the start time of any event but for 
our purposes we were only concerned with the end time. 

joint activities involving objects, etc. were fairly 
common in quests and may be significant for some 
analyses (although not for our hypotheses). 

For each type of event, an annotation subpanel is 
created to facilitate speedy markup while minimiz-
ing opportunities for error (Figure 10).  A “Moves 
Into Subzone” event is annotated by recording the  
ordinal (1, 2, 3, etc.) for each avatar.  Similarly, a 
“Follows” event is coded as avatar group “A” fol-
lows group “B’, where each group will contain one 
or more avatars. 
 

 
 
Figure 8: The corresponding annotation for Figure 

9 event, as displayed in the Chat & Event Panel 

5 The Annotation Process 
To annotate the large volume of data generated 
from the Second Life quests, we developed an an-
notation guide that defined and described the anno-
tation categories and decision rules annotators were 
to follow in categorizing the data units (following 
previous projects (Shaikh et al., 2010). Two stu-
dents were hired and trained for approximately 60 
hours, during which time they learned how to use 
the annotation tool and the categories and rules for 
the annotation process. After establishing a satisfac-
tory level of interrater reliability (average Krippen-
dorff’s alpha of all measures was <0.8. 
Krippendorff’s alpha accounts for the probability of 

177



chance agreement and is therefore a conservative 
measure of agreement), the two students then anno-
tated the 48 groups over a four-month period. It 
took approximately 230 hours to annotate the ses-
sions, and they assigned over 39,000 dialogue act 

tags. Annotators spent roughly 7 hours marking up 
the movements and chat messages per 2.5 hour 
quest session. 

 
 

Figure 9: A series of progressive moments in time portraying avatar entry into the Bank subzone 
  

 
 
Figure 10: Event Annotation Sub-Panel, currently showing the “Moves Into Subzone” event from 

figure 9, as well as: “Kenny follows Elliot in Vault”

5.1 The Annotated Corpus 
The current version of the annotated corpus consists 
of thousands of tagged messages including: 4,294 
action-directives, 17,129 assertion-opinions, 4,116 
information requests, 471 confirmation requests, 
394 offer-commits, 3,075 responses to information 
requests, 1,317 agree-accepts, 215 disagree-rejects, 
and 2,502 acknowledgements, from 30,535 pre-
split utterances (31,801 post-split). We also as-
signed 4,546 following events.  

6 Conclusion 
In this paper we described the successful imple-
mentation and use of our multi-modal annotation 

tool, RAT.  Our tool was used to accurately and 
simultaneously annotate over 30,000 messages and 
approximately 140 hours of action.  For each hour 
spent annotating, our annotators were able to tag 
approximately 170 utterances as well as 36 minutes 
of action. 

The annotators reported finding the tool highly 
functional and very efficient at helping them easily 
assign categories to the relevant data units, and that 
they could assign those categories without produc-
ing too many errors, such as accidentally assigning 
the wrong category or selecting the wrong avatar. 
The function allowing for the synchronized play-
back of the chat and movement data coupled with 
the 2D map increased comprehension of utterances 

178



and behavior of the players during the quest, im-
proving validity and reliability of the results. 
 
Acknowledgements  
This research is part of an Air Force Research 
Laboratory sponsored study conducted by Colorado 
State University, Ohio University, the University at 
Albany, SUNY, and Lockheed Martin. 
 

References  
Steven Bird, Kazuaki Maeda, Xiaoyi Ma and Haejoong 

Lee. 2001. annotation tools based on the annotation 
graph API.  In Proceedings of ACL/EACL 2001 
Workshop on Sharing Tools and Resources for Re-
search and Education. 

M. P. Çakir. 2009. The organization of graphical, narra-
tive and symbolic interactions. In Studying virtual 
math teams (pp. 99-140). New York, Springer. 

J. Carletta. 2007. Unleashing the killer corpus: experi-
ences in creating the multi-everything AMI Meeting 
Corpus. Language Resources and Evaluation Journal 
41(2): 181-190. 

Mark G. Core and James F. Allen. 1997. Coding dia-
logues with the DAMSL annotation scheme.  In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI Fall 1997 Symposium. 

Steve Cassidy and Jonathan Harrington.  2001. Multi-
level annotation in the Emu speech database man-
agement system.  Speech Communication, 33:61-77. 

S. C. Herring. 2003. Dynamic topic analysis of synchro-
nous chat. Paper presented at the New Research for 
New Media: Innovative Research Symposium. Min-
neapolis, MN. 

S. C. Herring and Nix, C. G. 1997. Is “serious chat” an 
oxymoron? Pedagogical vs. social use of internet re-
lay chat. Paper presented at the American Association 
of Applied Linguistics, Orlando, FL. 

Samira Shaikh, Strzalkowski, T., Broadwell, A., Stro-
mer-Galley, J., Taylor, S., and Webb, N. 2010. MPC: 
A Multi-party chat corpus for modeling social phe-
nomena in discourse. Proceedings of the Seventh 
Conference on International Language Resources and 
Evaluation. Valletta, Malta: European Language Re-
sources Association. 

G. Stahl. 2009. The VMT vision. In G. Stahl, (Ed.), 
Studying virtual math teams (pp. 17-29). New York, 
Springer. 

Stephen Sutton, Ronald Cole,  Jacques De 
Villiers,  Johan Schalkwyk,  Pieter Vermeulen,  Mike 
Macon,  Yonghong Yan,  Ed Kaiser,  Brian Run-

Rundle,  Khaldoun Shobaki,  Paul Hosom,  Alex 
Kain,  Johan Wouters,  Dominic Massaro,  Michael 
Cohen. 1998. Universal Speech Tools: The CSLU 
toolkit. Proceedings of the 5th ICSLP, Australia. 

 

Jennifer Stromer-Galley and Martinson, A. 2009. Coher-
ence in political computer-mediated communication: 
Comparing topics in chat. Discourse & Communica-
tion, 3, 195-216. 

 
N. Yee and Bailenson, J. N. 2008. A method for longitu-

dinal behavioral data collection in Second Life. Pres-
ence, 17, 594-596. 

 
 

179


