










































EdIt: A Broad-Coverage Grammar Checker Using Pattern Grammar


Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 System Demonstrations, pages 26–31,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 21 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

EdIt: A Broad-Coverage Grammar Checker Using Pattern Grammar

Chung-Chi Huang Mei-Hua Chen Shih-Ting Huang Jason S. Chang

Institute of Information Systems and Department of Computer Science,
Applications, National Tsing Hua University, National Tsing Hua University,

HsinChu, Taiwan, R.O.C. 300 HsinChu, Taiwan, R.O.C. 300
{u901571,chen.meihua,koromiko1104,Jason.jschang}@gmail.com{u901571,chen.meihua,koromiko1104,Jason.jschang}@gmail.com

Abstract

We introduce a new method for learning to 
detect grammatical errors in learner’s writ-
ing and provide suggestions. The method 
involves parsing a reference corpus and 
inferring grammar patterns in the form of a 
sequence of content  words, function words, 
and parts-of-speech (e.g., “play ~ role in 
Ving” and “look forward to  Ving”). At run-
time, the given passage submitted by the 
learner is matched using an extended 
Levenshtein algorithm against  the set  of 
pattern rules in order to detect  errors and 
provide suggestions. We present a proto-
type implementation of the proposed 
method, EdIt, that  can handle a broad range 
of errors. Promising results are illustrated 
with three common types of errors in non-
native writing.

1 Introduction

Recently, an increasing number of research has  
targeted language learners’ need in editorial assis-
tance including detecting and correcting grammar 
and usage errors in texts written in a second lan-
guage. For example, Microsoft  Research has de-
veloped the ESL Assistant, which provides such a 
service to ESL and EFL learners.

Much of the research in this area depends on 
hand-crafted rules and focuses on certain error 
types. Very little research provides a general 

framework for detecting and correcting all types of 
errors. However, in the sentences of ESL writing, 
there may be more than one errors and one error 
may affect the performance of handling other er-
rors. Erroneous sentences could be more efficiently 
identified and corrected if a grammar checker han-
dles all errors at  once, using a set of pattern rules 
that reflect the predominant usage of the English 
language.

Consider the sentences, “He play an important 
roles to close this deals.” and “He looks forward to 
hear you.” The first  sentence contains inaccurate 
word forms (i.e., play, roles, and deals), and rare 
usage (i.e., “role to close”), while the second sen-
tence use the incorrect verb form of “hear”. Good 
responses to these writing errors might  be (a) Use 
“played” instead of “play.” (b) Use “role” instead 
of “roles”,  (c) Use “in closing” instead of “to 
close” (d) Use “to hearing” instead of “to hear”, 
and (e) insert  “from” between “hear” and “you.” 
These suggestions can be offered by learning the 
patterns rules related to “play ~ role” and “look 
forward” based on analysis of ngrams and collo-
cations in a very large-scale reference corpus. With 
corpus statistics, we could learn the needed phra-
seological tendency in the form of pattern rules 
such as “play ~ role in  V-ing) and “look forward 
to V-ing.” The use of such pattern rules is in line 
with the recent  theory of Pattern Grammar put 
forward by Hunston and Francis (2000).

We present  a system, EdIt, that automatically 
learns to provide suggestions for rare/wrong usages 
in non-native writing. Example EdIt  responses to a 

26



text are shown in Figure 1. EdIt has retrieved the 
related pattern grammar of some ngram and collo-
cation sequences given the input  (e.g., “play ~ role 
in V-ing1”, and “look forward to V-ing”). EdIt 
learns these patterns during pattern extraction 
process by syntactically analyzing a collection of 
well-formed, published texts.

At run-time, EdIt first processes the input  pas-
sages in the article (e.g., “He play an important 
roles to close ”) submitted by the L2 learner. And 
EdIt  tag the passage with part  of speech informa-
tion, and compares the tagged sentence against  the 
pattern rules anchored at  certain collocations (e.g., 
“play ~ role” and “look forward”). Finally, EdIt 
finds the minimum-edit-cost  patterns matching the 
passages using an extended Levenshtein’s algo-
rithm (Levenshtein, 1966). The system then high-
lights the edits and displays the pattern rules as 
suggestions for correction. In our prototype, EdIt 
returns the preferred word form and preposition 
usages to the user directly (see Figure 1); alterna-
tively, the actual surface words (e.g., “closing” and 
“deal”) could be provided.

Input:

Related pattern rules
play ~ role in Noun
play ~ role in V-ing
he plays DET
he played DET
look forward to V-ing
hear from PRON ...

Suggestion:
He played an important role in closing this deal. He looks 
forward to hearing from you.

He play an important roles to close this 
deals. He looks forward to hear you.

Figure 1. Example responses to the non-native writing.

2 Related Work

Grammar checking has been an area of active re-
search. Many methods, rule-oriented or data-
driven, have been proposed to tackle the problem 

of detecting and correcting incorrect grammatical 
and usage errors in learner texts. It is at  times no 
easy to distinguish these errors. But Fraser and 
Hodson (1978) shows the distinction between these 
two kinds of errors.

For some specific error types (e.g., article and 
preposition error), a number of interesting rule-
based systems have been proposed. For example, 
Uria et al. (2009) and Lee et  al. (2009) leverage 
heuristic rules for detecting Basque determiner and 
Korean particle errors, respectively. Gamon et  al. 
(2009) bases some of the modules in ESL Assistant 
on rules derived from manually inspecting learner 
data. Our pattern rules, however, are automatically 
derived from readily available well-formed data, 
but nevertheless very helpful for correcting errors 
in non-native writing.

More recently, statistical approaches to develop-
ing grammar checkers have prevailed. Among un-
supervised checkers, Chodorow and Leacock 
(2000) exploits negative evidence from edited tex-
tual corpora achieving high precision but low re-
call, while Tsao and Wible (2009) uses general 
corpus only. Additionally, Hermet et al. (2008) and 
Gamon and Leacock (2010) both use Web as a 
corpus to detect  errors in non-native writing. On 
the other hand, supervised models, typically treat-
ing error detection/correction as a classification 
problem, may train on well-formed texts as in the 
methods by De Felice and Pulman (2008) and Te-
treault et  al. (2010), or with additional learner texts  
as in the method proposed by Brockett et al. 
(2006). Sun et  al. (2007) describes a method for  
constructing a supervised detection system trained 
on raw well-formed and learner texts without error 
annotation. 

Recent work has been done on incorporating 
word class information into grammar checkers. For  
example, Chodorow and Leacock (2000) exploit 
bigrams and trigrams of function words and part-
of-speech (PoS) tags, while Sun et al. (2007) use 
labeled sequential patterns of function, time ex-
pression, and part-of-speech tags. In an approach 
similar to our work, Tsao and Wible (2009) use a 
combined ngrams of words forms, lemmas, and 
part-of-speech tags for research into constructional 
phenomena. The main differences are that  we an-
chored each pattern rule in lexical collocation so  
as to avoid deriving rules that  is may have two 

1 In the pattern rules, we translate the part-of-speech tag to labels that are commonly used in learner dictionaries. For 
instance, we use V-ing for the tag VBG denoting the progressive verb form, and Pron and Pron$ denotes a pronoun 
and a possessive pronoun respectively.

27



consecutive part-of-speech tags (e.g, “V Pron$ 
socks off”). The pattern rules we have derived are 
more specific and can be effectively used in detect-
ing and correcting errors.

In contrast  to the previous research, we intro-
duce a broad-coverage grammar checker that ac-
commodates edits such as substitution, insertion 
and deletion, as well as replacing word forms or 
prepositions using pattern rules automatically de-
rived from very large-scale corpora of well-formed 
texts.

3 The EdIt System

Using supervised training on a learner corpus is not 
very feasible due to the limited availability of 
large-scale annotated non-native writing. Existing 
systems trained on learner data tend to offer high 
precision but low recall. Broad coverage grammar 
checkers may be developed using readily available 
large-scale corpora. To detect  and correct errors in 
non-native writing, a promising approach is to 
automatically extract  lexico-syntactical pattern 
rules that  are expected to distinguish correct and in 
correct sentences.

3.1 Problem Statement
We focus on correcting grammatical and usage 
errors by exploiting pattern rules of specific collo-
cation (elastic or rigid such as “play ~ rule” or 
“look forward”). For simplification, we assume 
that there is no spelling errors. EdIt provides sug-
gestions to common writing errors2  of the follow-
ing correlated with essay scores3.
(1)  wrong word form

(A) singular determiner preceding plural noun
(B) wrong verb form: concerning modal verbs (e.g., 
“would said”), subject-verb agreement, auxiliary 
(e.g., “should have tell the truth”), gerund and in-
finitive usage (e.g., “look forward to see you” and 
“in an attempt to helping you”)

(2) wrong preposition (or infinitive-to)
(A) wrong preposition (e.g., “to depends of it”)
(B) wrong preposition and verb form (e.g., “to play 
an important role to close this deal”)

(3) transitivity errors
(A) transitive verb (e.g., “to discuss about the mat-
ter” and “to affect to his decision”)
(B) intransitive verb (e.g., “to listens the music”)

The system is designed to find pattern rules related 
to the errors and return suggestionst. We now for-
mally state the problem that we are addressing.

Problem  Statement: We are given a reference 
corpus C and a non-native passage T. Our goal is 
to detect  grammatical and usage errors in T and 
provide suggestions for correction. For this, we 
extract a set of pattern rules, u1,…, um from C  
such that the rules reflect the predominant usage 
and are likely to distinguish most errors in non-
native writing. 

In the rest  of this section, we describe our solu-
tion to this problem. First, we define a strategy for 
identifying predominant  phraseology of frequent 
ngrams and collocations in Section 3.2. Afer that, 
we show how EdIt proposes grammar correc-
tionsedits to non-native writing at  run-time in Sec-
tion 3.3.

3.2 Deriving Pattern Rules
We attempt  to derive patterns (e.g., “play ~ role in 
V-ing”) from C expected to represent the immedi-
ate context  of collocations (e.g., “play ~ role” or 
“look forward”). Our derivation process consists of 
the following four-stage:

Stage 1. Lemmatizing, POS Tagging and Phrase 
chunking. In the first  stage, we lemmatize and tag 
sentences in C. Lemmatization and POS tagging 
both help to produce more general pattern rules 
from ngrams or collocations. The based phrases are 
used to extract collocations.

Stage 2. Ngrams and Collocations. In the second 
stage of the training process, we calculate ngrams 
and collocations in C, and pass the frequent 
ngrams and collocations to Stage 4.

We employ a number of steps to acquire statisti-
cally significant collocations--determining the pair 
of head words in adjacent base phrases, calculating 
their pair-wise mutual information values, and fil-
tering out candidates with low MI values. 

Stage 3. onstructing Inverted Files. In the third 
stage in the training procedure, we build up in-
verted files for the lemmas in C for quick access in 
Stage 4. For each word lemma we store surface 
words, POS tags, pointers to sentences with base 
phrases marked.

2 See (Nicholls, 1999) for common errors.

3 See (Leacock and Chodorow, 2003) and (Burstein et al., 2004) for correlation.

28



procedure GrammarChecking(T,PatternGrammarBank)
(1) Suggestions=“”//candidate suggestions
(2) sentences=sentenceSplitting(T)

for each sentence in sentences
(3)   userProposedUsages=extractUsage(sentence)

for each userUsage in userProposedUsages
(4)     patGram=findPatternGrammar(userUsage.lexemes, 

PatternGrammarBank)
(5)     minEditedCost=SystemMax; minEditedSug=“”

for each pattern in patGram
(6)        cost=extendedLevenshtein(userUsage,pattern)

if cost<minEditedCost
(7)            minEditedCost=cost; minEditedSug=pattern

if minEditedCost>0
(8)       append (userUsage,minEditedSug) to Suggestions
(9) Return Suggestions

Figure 2. Grammar suggestion/correction at run-time

Stage 4. Deriving pattern rules. In the fourth and 
final stage, we use the method described in a pre-
vious work (Chen et al., 2011) and use the inverted 
files to find all sentences containing a give word 
and collocation. Words surrounding a collocation 
are identified and generalized based on their corre-
sponding POS tags. These sentences are then trans-
formed into a set  of n-gram of words and POS 
tags, which are subsequently counted and ranked to 
produce  pattern rules with high frequencies. 

3.3 Run-Time Error Correction
Once the patterns rules are derived from a corpus 
of well-formed texts, EdIt utilizes them to check 
grammaticality and provide suggestions for a given 
text via the procedure in Figure 2.

In Step (1) of the procedure, we initiate a set 
Suggestions to collect grammar suggestions to the 
user text T according to the bank of pattern gram-
mar PatternGrammarBank. Since EdIt  system fo-
cuses on grammar checking at  sentence level, T is 
heuristically split (Step (2)).

For each sentence, we extract ngram and POS 
tag sequences userUsage in T. For the example of 
“He play an important  roles. He looks forword to 
hear you”,  we extract ngram such as he V DET, 
play an JJ NNS, play ~ roles to V, this NNS, look 
forward to VB, and hear Pron. 

For each userUsage, we first access the pattern 
rules related to the word and collocation within 
(e.g., play-role  patterns for “play ~ role to close”) 
Step (4). And then we compare userUsage against 
these rules (from Step (5) to (7)). We use the ex-
tended Levenshtein’s algorithm shown in Figure 3 
to compare userUsage and pattern rules.

Figure 3. Algorithm for identifying errors

If only partial matches are found for userUsage, 
that could mean we have found a potential errors. 
We use minEditedCost and minEditedSug to con-
train the patterns rules found for error suggestions  
(Step (5)). In the following, we describe how to 
find minimal-distance edits.

In Step (1) of the algorithm in Figure 3 we allo-
cate and initialize costArray to gather the dynamic 
programming based cost  to transform userUsage 
into a specific contextual rule pattern. Afterwards, 
the algorithm defines the cost of performing substi-
tution (Step (2)), deletion (Step (3)) and insertion 
(Step (4)) at  i-indexed userUsage and j-indexed 
pattern. If the entries userUsage[i] and pattern[j] 
are equal literally (e.g., “VB” and “VB”) or gram-
matically (e.g., “DT” and “Pron$”), no edit  is 
needed, hence, no cost  (Step (2a)). On the other 
hand, since learners tend to select wrong word 
form and preposition, we set a lower cost  for  sub-
stitution among different word forms of the same 
lemma or lemmas with the same POS tag (e.g., 
replacing V with V-ing or replacing to with in”. In 
addition to the conventional deletion and insertion 
(Step (3b) and (4b) respectively), we look ahead to 
the elements userUsage[i+1] and pattern[j+1] con-
sidering the fact that  “with or without preposition” 
and “transitive or intransitive verb” often puzzles 
EFL learners (Step (3a) and (4a)). Only a small 
edit cost is counted if the next  elements in use-
rUsage and Pattern are “equal”. In Step (6) the 
extended Levenshtein’s algorithm returns the 
minimum edit  cost of revising userUsage using 
pattern.

Once we obtain the costs to transform the use-
rUsage into a similar, frequent pattern rules, we 
propose the minimum-cost rules as suggestions  for 

procedure extendedLevenshtein(userUsage,pattern)
(1) allocate and initialize costArray

for i in range(len(userUsage))
for j in range(len(pattern))

if equal(userUsage[i],pattern[j]) //substitution
(2a)       substiCost=costArray[i-1,j-1]+0

elseif sameWordGroup(userUsage[i],pattern[j])
(2b)       substiCost=costArray[i-1,j-1]+0.5
(2c)     else substiCost=costArray[i-1,j-1]+1

if equal(userUsage[i+1],pattern[j+1]) //deletion
(3a)       delCost=costArray[i-1,j]+smallCost
(3b)     else delCost=costArray[i-1,j]+1

if equal(userUsage[i+1],pattern[j+1]) //insertion
(4a)        insCost=costArray[i,j-1]+smallCost
(4b)      else insCost=costArray[i,j-1]+1
(5)        costArray[i,j]=min(substiCost,delCost,insCost)
(6) Return costArray[len(userUsage),len(pattern)]

29



correction (e.g., “play ~ role in V-ing” for revising 
“play ~ role to V”) (Step (8) in Figure 2), if its 
minimum edit  cost  is greater than zero. Otherwise, 
the usage is considered valid. Finally, the Sugges-
tions accumulated for T are returned to users (Step 
(9)). Example input  and editorial suggestions re-
turned to the user are shown in Figure 1. Note that 
pattern rules involved flexible collocations are de-
signed to take care of long distance dependencies  
that might be always possible to cover with limited 
ngram (for n less than 6). In addition, the long pat-
ter rules can be useful even when it  is not  clear 
whether there is an error when looking at a very 
narrow context. For example, “hear” can be either 
be transitive or intransitive depending on context. 
In the context of “look forward to” and person 
noun object, it is should be intransitive and  require 
the preposition “from” as suggested in the results 
provided by EdIt (see Figure 1).

In existing grammar checkers, there are typically 
many modules examining different types of errors  
and different module may have different  priority 
and conflict  with one another. Let  us note that this 
general framework for error detection and correc-
tion is an original contribution of our work. In ad-
dition, we incorporate probabilities conditioned on 
word positions in order to weigh edit  costs. For 
example, the conditional probability of V to imme-
diately follow “look forward to” is virtually  0, 
while the probability of V-ing  to do so is approxi-
mates 0.3. Those probabilistic values are used to 
weigh different edits. 

4 Experimental Results

In this section, we first present the experimental 
setting in EdIt (Section 4.1). Since our goal is to 
provide to learners a means to efficient  broad-
coverage grammar checking, EdIt  is web-based 
and the acquisition of the pattern grammar in use is 
offline. Then, we illustrate three common types of 
errors, scores correlated, EdIt 4 capable of handling.

4.1 Experimental Setting
We used British National Corpus (BNC) as our 
underlying general corpus C. It is a 100 million 
British English word collection from a wide range 
of sources. We exploited GENIA tagger to obtain 
the lemmas, PoS tags and shallow parsing results 
of C’s sentences, which were all used in construct-

ing inverted files and used as examples for GRASP 
to infer lexicalized pattern grammar.

Inspired by (Chen et al., 2011) indicating EFL 
learners tend to choose incorrect  prepositions and 
following word forms following a VN collocation, 
and (Gamon and Leacock, 2010) showing fixed-
length and fixed-window lexical items are the best 
evidence for correction, we equipped EdIt with 
pattern grammar rules consisting of fixed-length 
(from one- to five-gram) lexical sequences or VN 
collocations and their fixed-window usages (e.g., 
“IN(in) VBG” after “play ~ role”, for window 2).

4.2 Results
We examined three types of errors and the mixture 
of them for our correction system (see Table 1). In 
this table, results of ESL Assistant  are shown for 
comparison, and grammatical suggestions are un-
derscored. As suggested, lexical and PoS informa-
tion in learner texts is useful for a grammar 
checker, pattern grammar EdIt  uses is easily acces-
sible and effective in both grammaticality and us-
age check, and a weighted extension to Leven-
shtein’s algorithm in EdIt  accommodates substitu-
tion, deletion and insertion edits to learners’ fre-
quent mistakes in writing.

5 Future Work and Summary 

Many avenues exist  for future research and im-
provement. For example, we could augment  pat-
tern grammar with lexemes’ PoS information in 
that the contexts of a word of different PoS tags 
vary. Take discuss for instance. The present tense 
verb discuss is often followed by determiners and 
nouns while the passive is by the preposition in  as 
in “… is discussed in Chapter one.” Additionally, 
an interesting direction to explore is enriching pat-
tern grammar with semantic role labels (Chen et 
al., 2011) for simple semantic check.

In summary, we have introduced a method for 
correcting errors in learner text based on its lexical 
and PoS evidence. We have implemented the 
method and shown that the pattern grammar and 
extended Levenshtein algorithm in this method are 
promising in grammar checking. Concerning EdIt’s 
broad coverage over different  error types, simplic-
ity in design, and short  response time, we plan to 
evaluate it more fully: with or without  conditional 
probability using majority voting or not.

4 At http://140.114.214.80/theSite/EdIt_demo2/

30



Erroneous sentence EdIt suggestion ESL Assistant suggestion

Incorrect word formIncorrect word formIncorrect word form
… a sunny days … a sunny N a sunny day

every days, I … every N every day

I would said to … would V would say

he play a … he V-ed none

… should have tell the truth should have V-en should have to tell

… look forward to see you look forward to V-ing none

… in an attempt to seeing you an attempt to V none

… be able to solved this problem able to V none

Incorrect prepositionIncorrect prepositionIncorrect preposition
he plays an important role to close … play ~ role in none

he has a vital effect at her. have ~ effect on effect on her

it has an effect on reducing … have ~ effect of V-ing none

… depend of the scholarship depend on depend on

Confusion between intransitive and transitive verbConfusion between intransitive and transitive verbConfusion between intransitive and transitive verb
he listens the music. missing “to” after “listens” missing “to” after “listens”

it affects to his decision. unnecessary “to” unnecessary “to”

I understand about the situation. unnecessary “about” unnecessary “about”

we would like to discuss about this matter. unnecessary “about” unnecessary “about”

MixedMixedMixed
she play an important roles to close this deals. she V-ed; an Adj N;

play ~ role in V-ing; this N
play an important role;
close this deal

I look forward to hear you. look forward to V-ing;
missing “from” after “hear”

none

Table 1. Three common score-related error types and their examples with suggestions from EdIt and ESL Assistant.

References
C. Brockett, W. Dolan, and M. Gamon. 2006. Correcting ESL 

errors using phrasal SMT techniques. In Proceedings of the 
ACL.

J. Burstein, M. Chodorow, and C. Leacock. 2004. Automated 
essay evaluation: the criterion online writing  service. AI 
Magazine, 25(3):27-36.

M. H. Chen, C. C. Huang, S. T. Huang, H. C. Liou, and J. S. 
Chang. 2011. A cross-lingual pattern retrieval framework. 
In Proceedings of the CICLing.

M. Chodorow and C. Leacock. 2000. An unsupervised method 
for detecting grammatical  errors. In Proceedings of the 
NAACL, pages 140-147.

R. De Felice and S. Pulman. 2008. A classifer-based approach 
to  preposition and determiner error correction in  L2 Eng-
lish. In COLING.

I. S. Fraser and L. M. Hodson. 1978. Twenty-one kicks at the 
grammar horse. English Journal.

M. Gamon, C. Leacock, C. Brockett, W. B. Bolan, J. F. Gao, 
D. Belenko, and A. Klementiev.  Using statistical tech-
niques and web search to correct ESL errors. CALICO, 
26(3): 491-511.

M. Gamon and C. Leacock. 2010. Search right and thou shalt 
find … using web queries for learner error detection. In 
Proceedings of the NAACL.

M. Hermet, A. Desilets, S. Szpakowicz. 2008. Using the web 
as a linguistic resource to automatically correct lexico-
syntatic errors. In LREC, pages 874-878.

S. Hunston and G. Francis. 2000. Pattern grammar: a corpus-
driven approach to the lexical grammar of English.

C. M. Lee, S. J. Eom, and M. Dickinson. 2009. Toward ana-
lyzing Korean learner particles. In CALICO.

V. I. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of correcting 
deletions, insertions and reversals. Soviet Physics Doklady, 
10:707-710.

C. Leacock and M. Chodorow. 2003. Automated grammatical 
error detection.

D. Nicholls. 1999. The Cambridge Learner Corpus – error 
coding and analysis for writing dictionaries and other 
books for English Learners.

G. H. Sun, X. H. Liu, G. Cong, M. Zhou, Z. Y. Xiong, J. Lee, 
and C. Y. Lin. 2007. Detecting erroneous sentences using 
automatically mined sequential patterns. In ACL.

J. Tetreault, J. Foster, and M. Chodorow. 2010. Using parse 
features for prepositions selection and error detection. In 
Proceedings of the ACL, pages 353-358.

N. L. Tsao and D. Wible. 2009. A method for unsupervised 
broad-coverage lexical error detection and correction. In 
NAACL Workshop, pages 51-54.

31


