










































Scaling up Automatic Cross-Lingual Semantic Role Annotation


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 299–304,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Scaling up Automatic Cross-Lingual Semantic Role Annotation

Lonneke van der Plas
Department of Linguistics

University of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland

Paola Merlo
Department of Linguistics

University of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland

{Lonneke.vanderPlas,Paola.Merlo,James.Henderson}@unige.ch

James Henderson
Department of Computer Science

University of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland

Abstract

Broad-coverage semantic annotations for
training statistical learners are only available
for a handful of languages. Previous ap-
proaches to cross-lingual transfer of seman-
tic annotations have addressed this problem
with encouraging results on a small scale. In
this paper, we scale up previous efforts by us-
ing an automatic approach to semantic anno-
tation that does not rely on a semantic on-
tology for the target language. Moreover,
we improve the quality of the transferred se-
mantic annotations by using a joint syntactic-
semantic parser that learns the correlations be-
tween syntax and semantics of the target lan-
guage and smooths out the errors from auto-
matic transfer. We reach a labelled F-measure
for predicates and arguments of only 4% and
9% points, respectively, lower than the upper
bound from manual annotations.

1 Introduction

As data-driven techniques tackle more and more
complex natural language processing tasks, it be-
comes increasingly unfeasible to use complete, ac-
curate, hand-annotated data on a large scale for
training models in all languages. One approach to
addressing this problem is to develop methods that
automatically generate annotated data by transfer-
ring annotations in parallel corpora from languages
for which this information is available to languages
for which these data are not available (Yarowsky et
al., 2001; Fung et al., 2007; Padó and Lapata, 2009).

Previous work on the cross-lingual transfer of se-
mantic annotations (Padó, 2007; Basili et al., 2009)

has produced annotations of good quality for test
sets that were carefully selected based on seman-
tic ontologies on the source and target side. It has
been suggested that these annotations could be used
to train semantic role labellers (Basili et al., 2009).

In this paper, we generate high-quality broad-
coverage semantic annotations using an automatic
approach that does not rely on a semantic ontol-
ogy for the target language. Furthermore, to our
knowledge, we report the first results on using joint
syntactic-semantic learning to improve the quality
of the semantic annotations from automatic cross-
lingual transfer. Results on correlations between
syntax and semantics found in previous work (Merlo
and van der Plas, 2009; Lang and Lapata, 2010) have
led us to make use of the available syntactic anno-
tations on the target language. We use the seman-
tic annotations resulting from cross-lingual transfer
combined with syntactic annotations to train a joint
syntactic-semantic parser for the target language,
which, in turn, re-annotates the corpus (See Fig-
ure 1). We show that the semantic annotations pro-
duced by this parser are of higher quality than the
data on which it was trained.

Given our goal of producing broad-coverage an-
notations in a setting based on an aligned corpus,
our choices of formal representation and of labelling
scheme differ from previous work (Padó, 2007;
Basili et al., 2009). We choose a dependency repre-
sentation both for the syntax and semantics because
relations are expressed as direct arcs between words.
This representation allows cross-lingual transfer to
use word-based alignments directly, eschewing the
need for complex constituent-alignment algorithms.

299



Train a French 
syntactic
parser

 Transfer semantic 
annotations

from EN to FR 
using word
alignments

EN
 syntactic­
semantic

annotations

EN­FR
 word­
aligned

data

FR
 syntactic

annotations

FR
 semantic

annotations

ev
al

ua
tio

n

Train French
joint syntactic­

semantic parser

ev
al

ua
tio

n

FR
 syntactic

annotations

FR
 semantic

annotations

Figure 1: System overview

We choose the semantic annotation scheme defined
by Propbank, because it has broad coverage and in-
cludes an annotated corpus, contrary to other avail-
able resources such as FrameNet (Fillmore et al.,
2003) and is the preferred annotation scheme for a
joint syntactic-semantic setting (Merlo and van der
Plas, 2009). Furthermore, Monachesi et al. (2007)
showed that the PropBank annotation scheme can be
used for languages other than English directly.

2 Cross-lingual semantic transfer

Data-driven induction of semantic annotation based
on parallel corpora is a well-defined and feasible
task, and it has been argued to be particularly suit-
able to semantic role label annotation because cross-
lingual parallelism improves as one moves to more
abstract linguistic levels of representation. While
Hwa et al. (2002; 2005) find that direct syntactic de-
pendency parallelism between English and Spanish
concerns 37% of dependency links, Padó (2007) re-
ports an upper-bound mapping correspondence cal-
culated on gold data of 88% F-measure for in-
dividual semantic roles, and 69% F-measure for
whole scenario-like semantic frames. Recently, Wu
and Fung (2009a; 2009b) also show that semantic
roles help in statistical machine translation, capi-
talising on a study of the correspondence between
English and Chinese which indicates that 84% of
roles transfer directly, for PropBank-style annota-
tions. These results indicate high correspondence
across languages at a shallow semantic level.

Based on these results, our transfer of semantic
annotations from English sentences to their French
translations is based on a very strong mapping hy-

pothesis, adapted from the Direct Correspondence
Assumption for syntactic dependency trees by Hwa
et al. (2005).

Direct Semantic Transfer (DST) For any
pair of sentences E and F that are transla-
tions of each other, we transfer the seman-
tic relationship R(xE , yE) to R(xF , yF ) if
and only if there exists a word-alignment
between xE and xF and between yE and
yF , and we transfer the semantic property
P (xE) to P (xF ) if and only if there exists
a word-alignment between xE and xF .

The relationships which we transfer are semantic
role dependencies and the properties are predicate
senses. We introduce one constraint to the direct se-
mantic transfer. Because the semantic annotations in
the target language are limited to verbal predicates,
we only transfer predicates to words the syntactic
parser has tagged as a verb.

As reported by Hwa et al. (2005), the direct cor-
respondence assumption is a strong hypothesis that
is useful to trigger a projection process, but will not
work correctly for several cases.

We used a filter to remove obviously incomplete
annotations. We know from the annotation guide-
lines used to annotate the French gold sentences that
all verbs, except modals and realisations of the verb
être, should receive a predicate label. We define a
filter that removes sentences with missing predicate
labels based on PoS-information in the French sen-
tence.

2.1 Learning joint syntactic-semantic
structures

We know from previous work that there is a strong
correlation between syntax and semantics (Merlo
and van der Plas, 2009), and that this correla-
tion has been successfully applied for the unsuper-
vised induction of semantic roles (Lang and Lap-
ata, 2010). However, previous work in machine
translation leads us to believe that transferring the
correlations between syntax and semantics across
languages would be problematic due to argument-
structure divergences (Dorr, 1994). For example,
the English verb like and the French verb plaire do
not share correlations between syntax and seman-
tics. The verb like takes an A0 subject and an A1

300



direct object, whereas the verb plaire licences an A1
subject and an A0 indirect object.

We therefore transfer semantic roles cross-
lingually based only on lexical alignments and add
syntactic information after transfer. In Figure 1, we
see that cross-lingual transfer takes place at the se-
mantic level, a level that is more abstract and known
to port relatively well across languages, while the
correlations with syntax, that are known to diverge
cross-lingually, are learnt on the target language
only. We train a joint syntactic-semantic parser
on the combination of the two linguistic levels that
learns the correlations between these structures in
the target language and is able to smooth out errors
from automatic transfer.

3 Experiments

We used two statistical parsers in our transfer of
semantic annotations from English to French, one
for syntactic parsing and one for joint syntactic-
semantic parsing. In addition, we used several cor-
pora.

3.1 The statistical parsers
For our syntactic-semantic parsing model, we use
a freely-available parser (Henderson et al., 2008;
Titov et al., 2009). The probabilistic model is a joint
generative model of syntactic and semantic depen-
dencies that maximises the joint probability of the
syntactic and semantic dependencies, while building
two separate structures.

For the French syntactic parser, we used the de-
pendency parser described in Titov and Hender-
son (2007). We train the parser on the dependency
version of the French Paris treebank (Candito et al.,
2009), achieving 87.2% labelled accuracy on this
data set.

3.2 Data
To transfer semantic annotation from English to
French, we used the Europarl corpus (Koehn,
2003)1. We word-align the English sentences to the
French sentences automatically using GIZA++ (Och

1As is usual practice in preprocessing for automatic align-
ment, the datasets were tokenised and lowercased and only sen-
tence pairs corresponding to a one-to-one sentence alignment
with lengths ranging from one to 40 tokens on both French and
English sides were considered.

and Ney, 2003) and include only intersective align-
ments. Furthermore, because translation shifts are
known to pose problems for the automatic projection
of semantic roles across languages (Padó, 2007), we
select only those parallel sentences in Europarl that
are direct translations from English to French, or
vice versa. In the end, we have a word-aligned par-
allel corpus of 276-thousand sentence pairs.

Syntactic annotation is available for French. The
French Treebank (Abeillé et al., 2003) is a treebank
of 21,564 sentences annotated with constituency an-
notation. We use the automatic dependency conver-
sion of the French Treebank into dependency format
provided to us by Candito and Crabbé and described
in Candito et al. (2009).

The Penn Treebank corpus (Marcus et al., 1993)
merged with PropBank labels (Palmer et al., 2005)
and NomBank labels (Meyers, 2007) is used to train
the syntactic-semantic parser described in Subsec-
tion 3.1 to annotate the English part of the parallel
corpus.

3.3 Test sets

For testing, we used the hand-annotated data de-
scribed in (van der Plas et al., 2010). One-thousand
French sentences are extracted randomly from our
parallel corpus without any constraints on the se-
mantic parallelism of the sentences, unlike much
previous work. We randomly split those 1000 sen-
tences into test and development set containing 500
sentences each.

4 Results

We evaluate our methods for automatic annotation
generation twice: once after the transfer step, and
once after joint syntactic-semantic learning. The
comparison of these two steps will tell us whether
the joint syntactic-semantic parser is able to improve
semantic annotations by learning from the syntactic
annotations available. We evaluate the models on
unrestricted test sets2 to determine if our methods
scale up.

Table 1 shows the results of automatically an-
notating French sentences with semantic role an-
notation. The first set of columns of results re-

2Due to filtering, the test set for the transfer (filter) model is
smaller and not directly comparable to the other three models.

301



Predicates Arguments (given predicate)
Labelled Unlabelled Labelled Unlabelled

Prec Rec F Prec Rec F Prec Rec F Prec Rec F
1 Transfer (no filter) 50 31 38 91 55 69 61 48 54 72 57 64
2 Transfer (filter) 51 46 49 92 84 88 65 51 57 76 59 67
3 Transfer+parsing (no filter) 71 29 42 97 40 57 77 57 65 87 64 74
4 Transfer+parsing (filter) 61 50 55 95 78 85 71 52 60 83 61 70
5 Inter-annotator agreement 61 57 59 97 89 93 73 75 74 88 91 89

Table 1: Percent recall, precision, and F-measure for predicates and for arguments given the predicate, for the four
automatic annotation models and the manual annotation.

ports labelling and identification of predicates and
the second set of columns reports labelling and iden-
tification of arguments, respectively, for the predi-
cates that are identified. The first two rows show
the results when applying direct semantic transfer.
Rows three and four show results when using the
joint syntactic-semantic parser to re-annotate the
sentences. For both annotation models we show re-
sults when using the filter described in Section 2 and
without the filter.

The most striking result that we can read from
Table 1 is that the joint syntactic-semantic learning
step results in large improvements, especially for
argument labelling, where the F-measure increases
from 54% to 65% for the unfiltered data. The parser
is able to outperform the quality of the semantic
data on which it was trained by using the infor-
mation contained in the syntax. This result is in
accordance with results reported in Merlo and Van
der Plas (2009) and Lang and Lapata (2010), where
the authors find a high correlation between syntactic
functions and PropBank semantic roles.

Filtering improves the quality of the transferred
annotations. However, when training a parser on the
annotations we see that filtering only results in better
recall scores for predicate labelling. This is not sur-
prising given that the filters apply to completeness in
predicate labelling specifically. The improvements
from joint syntactic-semantic learning for argument
labelling are largest for the unfiltered setting, be-
cause the parser has access to larger amounts of data.
The filter removes 61% of the data.

As an upper bound we take the inter-annotator
agreement for manual annotation on a random set
of 100 sentences (van der Plas et al., 2010), given
in the last row of Table 1. The parser reaches an

F-measure on predicate labelling of 55% when us-
ing filtered data, which is very close to the up-
per bound (59%). The upper bound for argument
inter-annotator agreement is an F-measure of 74%.
The parser trained on unfiltered data reaches an
F-measure of 65%. These results on unrestricted
test sets and their comparison to manual annotation
show that we are able to scale up cross-lingual se-
mantic role annotation.

5 Discussion and error analysis

A more detailed analysis of the distribution of im-
provements over the types of roles further strength-
ens the conclusion that the parser learns the corre-
lations between syntax and semantics. It is a well-
known fact that there exists a strong correlation be-
tween syntactic function and semantic role for the
A0 and A1 arguments: A0s are commonly mapped
onto subjects and A1s are often realised as direct ob-
jects (Lang and Lapata, 2010). It is therefore not
surprising that the F-measure on these types of ar-
guments increases by 12% and 15%, respectively,
after joint-syntactic semantic learning. Since these
arguments make up 65% of the roles, this introduces
a large improvement. In addition, we find improve-
ments of more than 10% on the following adjuncts:
AM-CAU, AM-LOC, AM-MNR, and AM-MOD that to-
gether comprise 9% of the data.

With respect to predicate labelling, comparison
of the output after transfer with the output after
parsing (on the development set) shows how the
parser smooths out transfer errors and how inter-
lingual divergences can be solved by making use
of the variations we find intra-lingually. An exam-
ple is given in Figure 2. The first line shows the
predicate-argument structure given by the English

302



EN (source) Postal [A1 services] [AM-MOD must] [CONTINUE.01 continue] [C-A1 to] be public services.
FR (transfer) Les [A1services] postaux [AM-MOD doivent] [CONTINUE.01rester] des services publics.
FR (parsed) Les [A1 services] postaux [AM-MOD doivent] [REMAIN.01rester] des [A3 services] publics.

Figure 2: Differences in predicate-argument labelling after transfer and after parsing

syntactic-semantic parser to the English sentence.
The second line shows the French translation and
the predicate-argument structure as it is transferred
cross-lingually following the method described in
Section 2. Transfer maps the English predicate la-
bel CONTINUE.01 onto the French verb rester, be-
cause these two verbs are aligned. The first oc-
currence of services is aligned to the first occur-
rence of services in the English sentence and gets
the A1 label. The second occurrence of services
gets no argument label, because there is no align-
ment between the C-A1 argument to, the head of
the infinitival clause, and the French word services.
The third line shows the analysis resulting from the
syntactic-semantic parser that has been trained on a
corpus of French sentences labelled with automat-
ically transferred annotations and syntactic annota-
tions. The parser has access to several labelled ex-
amples of the predicate-argument structure of rester,
which in many other cases is translated with remain
and has the same predicate-argument structure as
rester. Consequently, the parser re-labels the verb
with REMAIN.01 and labels the argument with A3.

Because the languages and annotation framework
adopted in previous work are not directly compara-
ble to ours, and their methods have been evaluated
on restricted test sets, results are not strictly com-
parable. But for completeness, recall that our best
result for predicate identification is an F-measure
of 55% accompanied with an F-measure of 60%
for argument labelling. Padó (2007) reports a 56%
F-measure on transferring FrameNet roles, know-
ing the predicate, from an automatically parsed and
semantically annotated English corpus. Padó and
Pitel (2007), transferring semantic annotation to
French, report a best result of 57% F-measure for
argument labelling given the predicate. Basili et
al. (2009), in an approach based on phrase-based
machine translation to transfer FrameNet-like anno-
tation from English to Italian, report 42% recall in
identifying predicates and an aggregated 73% recall
of identifying predicates and roles given these pred-

icates. They do not report an unaggregated number
that can be compared to our 60% argument labelling.
In a recent paper, Annesi and Basili (2010) improve
the results from Basili et al. (2009) by 11% using
Hidden Markov Models to support the automatic
semantic transfer. Johansson and Nugues (2006)
trained a FrameNet-based semantic role labeller for
Swedish on annotations transferred cross-lingually
from English parallel data. They report 55% F-
measure for argument labelling given the frame on
150 translated example sentences.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we have scaled up previous efforts of
annotation by using an automatic approach to se-
mantic annotation transfer in combination with a
joint syntactic-semantic parsing architecture. We
propose a direct transfer method that requires nei-
ther manual intervention nor a semantic ontology for
the target language. This method leads to semanti-
cally annotated data of sufficient quality to train a
syntactic-semantic parser that further improves the
quality of the semantic annotation by joint learning
of syntactic-semantic structures on the target lan-
guage. The labelled F-measure of the resulting an-
notations for predicates is only 4% point lower than
the upper bound and the resulting annotations for ar-
guments only 9%.

Acknowledgements

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the EU FP7 programme (FP7/2007-
2013) under grant agreement nr 216594 (CLAS-
SIC project: www.classic-project.org), and from the
Swiss NSF under grant 122643.

References

A. Abeillé, L. Clément, and F. Toussenel. 2003. Building
a treebank for French. In Treebanks: Building and
Using Parsed Corpora. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

303



P. Annesi and R. Basili. 2010. Cross-lingual alignment
of FrameNet annotations through Hidden Markov
Models. In Proceedings of CICLing.

R. Basili, D. De Cao, D. Croce, B. Coppola, and A. Mos-
chitti, 2009. Computational Linguistics and Intelli-
gent Text Processing, chapter Cross-Language Frame
Semantics Transfer in Bilingual Corpora, pages 332–
345. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.

M.-H. Candito, B. Crabbé, P. Denis, and F. Guérin. 2009.
Analyse syntaxique du français : des constituants
aux dépendances. In Proceedings of la Conférence
sur le Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles
(TALN’09), Senlis, France.

B. Dorr. 1994. Machine translation divergences: A for-
mal description and proposed solution. Computational
Linguistics, 20(4):597–633.

C. J. Fillmore, R. Johnson, and M.R.L. Petruck. 2003.
Background to FrameNet. International journal of
lexicography, 16.3:235–250.

P. Fung, Z. Wu, Y. Yang, and D. Wu. 2007. Learn-
ing bilingual semantic frames: Shallow semantic pars-
ing vs. semantic role projection. In 11th Conference
on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine
Translation (TMI 2007).

J. Henderson, P. Merlo, G. Musillo, and I. Titov. 2008. A
latent variable model of synchronous parsing for syn-
tactic and semantic dependencies. In Proceedings of
CONLL 2008, pages 178–182.

R. Hwa, P. Resnik, A. Weinberg, and O. Kolak. 2002.
Evaluating translational correspondence using anno-
tation projection. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting of the ACL.

R. Hwa, P. Resnik, A.Weinberg, C. Cabezas, and O. Ko-
lak. 2005. Bootstrapping parsers via syntactic projec-
tion accross parallel texts. Natural language engineer-
ing, 11:311–325.

R. Johansson and P. Nugues. 2006. A FrameNet-based
semantic role labeler for Swedish. In Proceedings of
the annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).

P. Koehn. 2003. Europarl: A multilingual corpus for
evaluation of machine translation.

J. Lang and M. Lapata. 2010. Unsupervised induction
of semantic roles. In Human Language Technologies:
The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 939–947, Los Angeles, California, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

M. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M.A. Marcinkiewicz.
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English:
the Penn Treebank. Comp. Ling., 19:313–330.

P. Merlo and L. van der Plas. 2009. Abstraction and gen-
eralisation in semantic role labels: PropBank, VerbNet

or both? In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the
47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing of the AFNLP, pages 288–296, Suntec, Singapore.

A. Meyers. 2007. Annotation guidelines for NomBank
- noun argument structure for PropBank. Technical
report, New York University.

P. Monachesi, G. Stevens, and J. Trapman. 2007. Adding
semantic role annotation to a corpus of written Dutch.
In Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop
(LAW), pages 77–84, Prague, Czech republic.

F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison of
various statistical alignment models. Computational
Linguistics, 29:19–51.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Cross-lingual
annotation projection of semantic roles. Journal of Ar-
tificial Intelligence Research, 36:307–340.

S. Padó and G. Pitel. 2007. Annotation précise du
français en sémantique de rôles par projection cross-
linguistique. In Proceedings of TALN.

S. Padó. 2007. Cross-lingual Annotation Projection
Models for Role-Semantic Information. Ph.D. thesis,
Saarland University.

M. Palmer, D. Gildea, and P. Kingsbury. 2005. The
Proposition Bank: An annotated corpus of semantic
roles. Computational Linguistics, 31:71–105.

I. Titov and J. Henderson. 2007. A latent variable model
for generative dependency parsing. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Parsing Technologies
(IWPT-07), pages 144–155, Prague, Czech Republic.

I. Titov, J. Henderson, P. Merlo, and G. Musillo. 2009.
Online graph planarisation for synchronous parsing of
semantic and syntactic dependencies. In Proceedings
of the twenty-first international joint conference on ar-
tificial intelligence (IJCAI-09), Pasadena, California,
July.

L. van der Plas, T. Samardz̆ić, and P. Merlo. 2010. Cross-
lingual validity of PropBank in the manual annotation
of French. In In Proceedings of the 4th Linguistic An-
notation Workshop (The LAW IV), Uppsala, Sweden.

D. Wu and P. Fung. 2009a. Can semantic role labeling
improve SMT? In Proceedings of the Annual Confer-
ence of European Association of Machine Translation.

D. Wu and P. Fung. 2009b. Semantic roles for SMT:
A hybrid two-pass model. In Proceedings of the
Joint Conference of the North American Chapter of
ACL/Human Language Technology.

D. Yarowsky, G. Ngai, and R. Wicentowski. 2001. In-
ducing multilingual text analysis tools via robust pro-
jection across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Human Language Tech-
nology (HLT).

304


