










































Dr Sentiment Knows Everything!


Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 System Demonstrations, pages 50–55,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 21 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Dr Sentiment Knows Everything! 

 

Amitava Das and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering 

Jadavpur University 

India 

amitava.santu@gmail.com sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 

 

 

Abstract 

Sentiment analysis is one of the hot de-

manding research areas since last few dec-

ades. Although a formidable amount of 

research have been done, the existing re-

ported solutions or available systems are 

still far from perfect or do not meet the sa-

tisfaction level of end users’. The main is-

sue is the various conceptual rules that 

govern sentiment and there are even more 

clues (possibly unlimited) that can convey 

these concepts from realization to verbali-

zation of a human being. Human psycholo-

gy directly relates to the unrevealed clues 

and governs the sentiment realization of us. 

Human psychology relates many things 

like social psychology, culture, pragmatics 

and many more endless intelligent aspects 

of civilization. Proper incorporation of hu-

man psychology into computational senti-

ment knowledge representation may solve 

the problem. In the present paper we pro-

pose a template based online interactive 

gaming technology, called Dr Sentiment to 

automatically create the PsychoSenti-

WordNet involving internet population. 

The PsychoSentiWordNet is an extension 

of SentiWordNet that presently holds hu-

man psychological knowledge on a few as-

pects along with sentiment knowledge. 

1 Introduction 

In order to identify sentiment from a text, lexical 

analysis plays a crucial role. For example, words 

like love, hate, good and favorite directly indicate 

sentiment or opinion. Previous works (Pang et al., 

2002; Wiebe and Mihalcea, 2006; Baccianella et. 

al., 2010) have already proposed various tech-

niques for making dictionaries for those sentiment 

words. But polarity assignment of such sentiment 

lexicons is a hard semantic disambiguation prob-

lem. The regulating aspects which govern the lexi-

cal level semantic orientation are natural language 

context (Pang et al., 2002), language properties 

(Wiebe and Mihalcea, 2006), domain pragmatic 

knowledge (Aue and Gamon, 2005), time dimen-

sion (Read, 2005), colors and culture (Strapparava 

and Ozbal, 2010) and many more unrevealed hid-

den aspects. Therefore it is a challenging and 

enigmatic research problem. 

The current trend is to attach prior polarity to 

each entry at the sentiment lexicon level. Prior po-

larity is an approximation value based on heuristics 

based statistics collected from corpus and not ex-

act. The probabilistic fixed point prior polarity 

scores do not solve the problem completely rather 

it places the problem into next level, called contex-

tual polarity classification.  

We start with the hypothesis that the summation 

of all the regulating aspects of sentiment orienta-

tion is human psychology and thus it is a multi-

faceted problem (Liu, 2010). More precisely what 

we mean by human psychology is the union of all 

known and unknown aspects that directly or indi-

rectly govern the sentiment orientation knowledge 

of us. The regulating aspects wrapped in the 

present PsychoSentiWordNet are Gender, Age, 

City, Country, Language and Profession.  

The PsychoSentiWordNet is an extension of the 

existing SentiWordNet 3.0 (Baccianella et. al., 

2010) to hold the possible psychological ingre-

dients and govern the sentiment understandability 

of us. The PsychoSentiWordNet holds variable 

prior polarity scores that could be fetched depend-

ing upon those psychological regulating aspects. 

50



An example with the input word ‘High’ may illu-

strate the definition better:  

 

Aspects (Profession)   Polarity 

Null     Positive 

Businessman    Negative 

Share Broker    Positive 

 

In this paper, we propose an interactive gaming 

(Dr Sentiment) technology to collect psycho-

sentimental polarity for lexicons. This technology 

has proven itself as an excellent technique to col-

lect psychological sentiment of human society 

even at multilingual level. Dr Sentiment presently 

supports 56 languages and therefore we may call it 

Global PsychoSentiWordNet. The supported lan-

guages by Dr Sentiment are reported in Table 1. 

In this section we have philosophically argued 

about the necessity of developing PsychoSenti-

WordNet. In the next section 2 we will describe the 

technical details of the proposed architecture for 

building the lexical resource. Section 3 explains 

about some exciting outcomes of PsychoSenti-

WordNet. The developed PsychoSentiWordNet(s) 

are expected to help automatic sentiment analysis 

research in many aspects and other disciplines as 

well and have been described in section 4.The data 

structure and the organization are described in sec-

tion 5. The conclusion is drawn in section 6. 

2 Dr Sentiment 

Dr Sentiment
1
 is a template based interactive on-

line game, which collects player’s sentiment by 

asking a set of simple template based questions and 

finally reveals a player’s sentimental status. Dr 

Sentiment fetches random words from Senti-

WordNet synsets and asks every player to tell 

about his/her sentiment polarity understanding re-

garding the concept behind the word fetched by it.  

There are several motivations behind developing 

the intuitive game to automatically collect human 

psycho-sentimental orientation information.  

In the history of Information Retrieval research 

there is a milestone when ESP game
2
 (Ahn et al., 

2004) innovated the concept of a game to automat-

ically label images available in the World Wide 

Web. It has been identified as the most reliable 

strategy to automatically annotate the online im-

                                                           
1 http://www.amitavadas.com/Sentiment%20Game/index.php 
2 http://www.espgame.org/ 

ages. We are highly motivated by the success of 

the Image Labeler game.  

A number of research endeavors could be found 

in the literature for creation of Sentiment Lexicon 

in several languages and domains. These tech-

niques can be broadly categorized into two classes, 

one follows classical manual annotation techniques  

(Andreevskaia and Bergler, 2006);(Wiebe and Ri-

loff, 2006) while the other follows various auto-

matic techniques (Mohammad et al., 2008). Both 

types of techniques have few limitations. Manual 

annotation techniques are undoubtedly trustable 

but it generally takes time. Automatic techniques 

demand manual validations and are dependent on 

the corpus availability in the respective domain. 

Manual annotation techniques require a large num-

ber of annotators to balance one’s sentimentality in 

order to reach agreement. But human annotators 

are quite unavailable and costly. 

Sentiment is a property of human intelligence 

and is not entirely based on the features of a lan-

guage. Thus people’s involvement is required to 

capture the sentiment of the human society. We 

have developed an online game to attract internet 

population for the creation of PsychoSentiWord-

Net automatically. Involvement of Internet popula-

tion is an effective approach as the population is 

very high in number and ever growing (approx. 

360,985,492)
3

. Internet population consists of 

people with various languages, cultures, age etc 

and thus not biased towards any domain, language 

or particular society. A detailed statistics on the 

Internet usage and population has been reported in 

the Table 2. 

The lexicons tagged by this system are credible 

as it is tagged by human beings. It is not a static 

sentiment lexicon set [polarity changes with time 

(Read, 2005)] as it is updated regularly. Around 

10-20 players each day are playing it throughout 

the world in different languages. The average 

number of tagging per word is about 7.47 till date. 

The Sign Up form of the “Dr Sentiment” game 

asks the player to provide personal information 

such as Sex, Age, City, Country, Language and 

Profession. These collected personal details of a 

player are kept as a log record in the database. 

The gaming interface has four types of question 

templates. The question templates are named as 

Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4. 

                                                           
3 http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm 

51



Languages 

Afrikaans Bulgarian Dutch German Irish Malay Russian Thai 

Albanian Catalan Estonian Greek Italian Maltese Serbian Turkish 

Arabic Chinese Filipino Haitian Japanese Norwegian Slovak Ukrainian 

Armenian Croatian Finnish Hebrew Korean Persian Slovenian Urdu 

Azerbaijani Creole French Hungarian Latvian Polish Spanish Vietnamese 

Basque Czech Galician Icelandic Lithuanian Portuguese Swahili Welsh 

Belarusian Danish Georgian Indonesian Macedonian Romanian Swedish Yiddish 

Table 1: Languages
 

WORLD INTERNET USAGE AND POPULATION STATISTICS 

World Regions 
Population 

( 2010 Est.) 

Internet Users 

Dec. 31, 2000 

Internet Users 

Latest Data 

Penetration 

(Population) 

Growth 

2000-2010 

Users % 

of Table 

Africa 1,013,779,050 4,514,400 110,931,700 10.9 % 2,357.3 % 5.6 % 

Asia 3,834,792,852 114,304,000 825,094,396 21.5 % 621.8 % 42.0 % 

Europe  813,319,511 105,096,093 475,069,448 58.4 % 352.0 % 24.2 % 

Middle East  212,336,924 3,284,800 63,240,946 29.8 % 1,825.3 % 3.2 % 

North America 344,124,450 108,096,800 266,224,500 77.4 % 146.3 % 13.5 % 

Latin America/Caribbean  592,556,972 18,068,919 204,689,836 34.5 % 1,032.8 % 10.4 % 

Oceania / Australia  34,700,201 7,620,480 21,263,990 61.3 % 179.0 % 1.1 % 

WORLD TOTAL 6,845,609,960 360,985,492 1,966,514,816 28.7 % 444.8 % 100.0 % 

Table 2: Internet Usage and Population Statistics 
 

To make the gaming interface more interesting 

images have been added. These images have been 

retrieved by Google image search API
4
 and to 

avoid biasness we have randomized among the 

first ten images retrieved by Google. 

2.1 Gaming Strategy 

Dr Sentiment asks 30 questions to each player. 

There are predefined distributions of each question 

type as 11 for Q1, 11 for Q2, 4 for Q3 and 4 for 

Q4. These numbers are arbitrarily chosen and ran-

domly changed for experimentation. The questions 

are randomly asked to keep the game more inter-

esting. For word based translation Google transla-

tion
5
 service has been used. At each Question (Q) 

level translation service has been used to display 

the sentiment word into player’s own language. 

Google API provides multiple senses for word lev-

el translation and currently only the first sense has 

been picked automatically.  

2.2 Q1 

An English word from the English SentiWordNet 

synset is randomly chosen. The Google image 

search API is fired with the word as a query. An 

image along with the word itself is shown in the 

Q1 page of the game.  

                                                           
4 http://code.google.com/apis/imagesearch/ 
5 http://translate.google.com/ 

Players press the different emoticons (Figure 1) 

to express their sentimentality. The interface keeps 

log records of each interaction. 
Extreme 

Positive 
Positive Neutral Negative 

Extreme 

Negative 

     
Figure 1: Emoticons to Express Player’s Senti-

ment 

2.3 Q2 

This question type is specially designed for relative 

scoring technique. For example: good and better 

both are positive but we need to know which one is 

more positive than other. Table 3 shows how in 

SentiWordNet relative scoring has been made. 

With the present gaming technology relative polar-

ity scoring has been assigned to each n-n word pair 

combination. 

Randomly n (presently 2-4) words have been 

chosen from the source SentiWordNet synsets 

along with their images as retrieved by Google 

API. Each player is then asked to select one of 

them that he/she likes most. The relative score is 

calculated and stored in the corresponding log ta-

ble. 

Word Positivity Negativity 
Good 0.625 0.0 

Better 0.875 0.0 

Best 0.980 0.0 

Table 3: Relative Sentiment Scores in Senti-

WordNet 

52



2.4 Q3 

The player is asked for any positive word in his/her 

mind. This technique helps to increase the cover-

age of existing SentiWordNet. The word is then 

added to the existing PsychoSentiWordNet and 

further used in Q1 to other users to note their sen-

timentality about the particular word. 

2.5 Q4 

A player is asked by Dr Sentiment about any nega-

tive word. The word is then added to the existing 

PsychoSentiWordNet and further used in Q1 to 

other users to note their sentimentality about the 

particular word. 

2.6 Comment Architecture 

There are three types of Comments, Comment type 

1 (CMNT1), Comment type 2 (CMNT2) and the 

final comment as Dr Sentiment’s prescription. 

CMNT1 type and CMNT2 type comments are as-

sociated with question types Q1 and Q2 respective-

ly. 

2.6.1 CMNT1 

Comment type 1 has 5 variations as shown in the 

Comment table in Table 4. Comments are random-

ly retrieved from comment type table according to 

their category: 
 

• Positive word has been tagged as negative (PN) 
• Positive word has been tagged as positive (PP) 
• Negative word has been tagged as positive (NP) 
• Negative word has been tagged as negative (NN) 
• Neutral. (NU) 

2.6.2 CMNT2 

The strategy here is as same as the CMNT 1. 

Comment type 2 has only two variations as. 
• Positive word has been tagged as negative (PN) 
• Negative word has been tagged as positive (NP) 

2.7 Dr Sentiment’s Prescription 

The final prescription depends on various factors 

such as total number of positive, negative or neu-

tral comments and the total time taken by any 

player. The final prescription also depends on the 

range of the accumulated values of all the above 

factors.  

This is the most important appealing factor to a 

player. The motivating message for players is that 

Dr Sentiment can reveal their sentimental status: 

whether they are extreme negative or positive or 

very much neutral or diplomatic etc. It is not 

claimed that the revealed status of a player by Dr 

Sentiment is exact or ideal. It is only to make the 

players motivated but the outcomes of the game 

effectively helps to store human sentimental psy-

chology in terms of computational lexicon. 

A word previously tagged by a player is avoided 

by the tracking system during subsequent turns by 

the same player. The intension is to tag more and 

more words involving Internet population. We ob-

serve that the strategy helps to keep the game in-

teresting as a large number of players return to 

play the game after this strategy was implemented. 

3 Senti-Mentality 

PsychoSentiWordNet gives a good sketch to un-

derstand the psycho-sentimental behavior of the 

human society depending upon proposed psycho-

logical dimensions. The PsychoSentiWordNet is 

basically the log records of every player’s tagged 

words.  

3.1 Concept-Culture-Wise Analysis 

The word “blue” gets tagged by different players 

around the world. But surprisingly it has been 

tagged as positive from one part of the world and 

negative from another part of the world. The 

graphical illustration in Figure 2 may explain the 

situation better. The observation is that most of the 

negative tags are coming from the middle-east and 

especially from the Islamic countries. 

PN PP NP NN NU 

You don’t like 

<word>! 

Good you have a good 

choice! 
Is <word> good! 

Yes <word> is too 

bad! 

You should speak out 

frankly! 

You should like 

<word>! 
I love <word> too! 

I hope it is a bad 

choice! 
You are quite right! 

You are too diplomat-

ic! 

But <word> is a good 

itself! 
I support your view! 

I don’t agree with 

you! 

I also don’t like 

<word>! 

Why you hiding from 

me? I am Dr Senti-

ment. 

Table 4: Comments 

53



We found a line in Wiki
6
 (see in Religion Section) 

that may provide a good explanation: “Blue in Is-

lam: In verse 20:102 of the Qur’an, the word زرق 

zurq (plural of azraq 'blue') is used metaphorically 

for evil doers whose eyes are glazed with fear”. 

But other explanations may be there for this situa-

tion. This is an interesting observation that sup-

ports the effectiveness of the developed 

PsychoSentiWordNet. This information could be 

further retrieved from the developed source by giv-

ing information like (blue, Italy), (blue, Iraq) or 

(blue, USA) etc. 

 
Figure 2: Geospatial Senti-Mentality 

3.2 Age-Wise Analysis 

Another interesting observation is that sentimental-

ity may vary age-wise. For better understanding we 

look at the total statistics and the age wise distribu-

tion of all the players. Total 533 players have taken 

part till date. The total number of players for each 

range of age is shown at the top of every bar.  

 
Figure 3: Age-Wise Senti-Mentality 

In Figure 3 the horizontal bars are divided into two 

colors (Green depicts the Positivity and Red de-

picts the negativity) according to the total positivi-

ty and negativity scores, gathered during playing. 

                                                           
6 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue 

This sociological study gives an idea on the varia-

tion of sentimentality with age.  This information 

may be retrieved from the developed source by 

giving information like (X, 36-39) or (X, 45-49) 

etc where X denotes any arbitrary lexicon synset. 

3.3 Gender-Wise Analysis 

It is observed from the collected statistics that 

women are more positive than men! The variations 

in sentimentality among men and women are 

shown in the following Figure 4.  

 
Figure 4: Gender Specific Senti-Mentality 

3.4 Other-Wise 

We have described several important observations 

in the previous sections and there are other impor-

tant observations as well. Studies on the combina-

tions of the proposed psychological dimensions, 

such as, location-age, location-profession and 

gender-location may reveal some interesting re-

sults.  

4 Expected Impact of the Resource 

Undoubtedly the generated PsychoSentiWord-

Net(s) are important resources for senti-

ment/opinion or emotion analysis task. Moreover 

the other non linguistic psychological dimensions 

are very much important for further analysis as 

well as for several newly discovered sub-

disciplines such as: Geospatial Information retriev-

al (Egenhofer, 2002), Personalized search (Gaucha 

et al., 2003), Recommender System (Adomavicius 

and Tuzhilin, 2005), Sentiment Tracking (Tong, 

2001) etc. 

5 The Data Structure and Organization 

Deciding on the data structure for the PsychoSen-

tiWordNet was not trivial. Presently RDBMS (Re-

lational Database Management System) has been 

54



used. Several tables are being used to keep user’s 

clicking log and their personal information.  

As one of the research motivations was to gen-

erate up-to-date prior polarity scores across various 

dimensions, we decided to generate web service 

API through which the people can access latest 

prior polarity scores. The developed PsychoSenti-

WordNet is expected to perform better than a static 

sentiment lexicon. 

6 Conclusion and Future Directions 

In the present paper the development of the Psy-

choSentiWordNet for 56 languages has been de-

scribed. No evaluation has been done yet as there 

is no data available for this kind of experimenta-

tion and to the best of our knowledge this is the 

first endeavor where sentiment analysis meets AI 

and psychology.  

Our present goal is to collect such corpus and 

carry out experiments to check whether variable 

prior polarity scores of PsychoSentiWordNet excel 

over the fixed point prior polarity score of Senti-

WordNet. 

Automatically picked first sense from Google 

translation API may cause difficulties for cross 

lingual projection of sentiment synsets. Erroneous 

outputs from API may also cause some problems. 

But these problems lead to another research issue 

that may be termed as cross lingual sentiment syn-

set linking. Presently we are giving a closer look to 

the qualitative analysis of developed multilingual 

psycho-sentiment lexicons. 

Acknowledgment 

The work reported in this paper was supported by a 

grant from the India-Japan Cooperative Program 

(DST-JST) Research project entitled “Sentiment 

Analysis where AI meets Psychology” funded by 

Department of Science and Technology (DST), 

Government of India. 

References  

Adomavicius Gediminas and Alexander Tuzhilin. To-

ward the Next Generation of Recommender Systems: 

A Survey of the State-of-the-Art and Possible Exten-

sions. In the Proc. of IEEE Transactions on Know-

ledge and Data Engineering, VOL. 17, NO. 6, June 

2005. ISSN 1041-4347/05. Pages 734-749. 

Ahn Luis von and Laura Dabbish. Labeling Images with 

a Computer Game.In the Proc. of ACM CHI 2004. 

Andreevskaia Alina and Bergler Sabine. CLaC and 

CLaC-NB: Knowledge-based and corpus-based ap-

proaches to sentiment tagging. In the Proc. of the 4th 

SemEval-2007, Pages 117–120, Prague, June 2007. 

Aue A. and Gamon M., Customizing sentiment classifi-

ers to new domains: A case study. In the Proc. Of 

RANLP, 2005. 

Baccianella Stefano, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-

tiani. SENTIWORDNET 3.0: An Enhanced Lexical 

Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-

ing. In the Proc. of LREC-10. 

Bo Pang, Lee Lillian, and Vaithyanathan Shivakumar. 

Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using machine 

learning techniques. In the Proc. of EMNLP, Pages 

79–86, 2002. 

Egenhofer M.. Toward the Semantic Geospatial Web. 

ACM-GIS 2002, McLean, VI A. Voisard and S.-C. 

Chen (eds.), Pages. 1-4, November 2002. 

Gaucha Susan, Jason Chaffeeb and Alexander Pret-

schnerc. Ontology-based personalized search and 

browsing. In Proc. of Web Intelligence and Agent 

Systems: An international journal. 2003. Pages 219–

234. ISSN 1570-1263/03. 

Liu Bing . Sentiment Analysis: A Multi-Faceted Prob-

lem.In the IEEE Intelligent Systems, 2010. 

Read Jonathon. Using emoticons to reduce dependency 

in machine learning techniques for sentiment classi-

fication. In the Proc. of the ACL Student Research 

Workshop, 2005. 

Richard M. Tong. An operational system for detecting 

and tracking opinions in online discussion. In the 

Proc. of the Workshop on Operational Text Classifi-

cation (OTC), 2001. 

Saif Mohammad, Dorr Bonnie and Hirst Graeme. Com-

puting Word-Pair Antonymy. In the Proc. of 

EMNLP-2008. 

Strapparava, C. and Valitutti, A. WordNet-Affect: an 

affective extension of WordNet. In Proc. of LREC 

2004, Pages 1083 – 1086 

Wiebe Janyce and Mihalcea Rada. Word sense and sub-

jectivity. In the Proc. of COLING/ACL-06. Pages 

1065-1072. 

55


