










































French TimeBank: An ISO-TimeML Annotated Reference Corpus


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 130–134,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

French TimeBank: An ISO-TimeML Annotated Reference Corpus

André Bittar
Alpage

Univ. Paris Diderot
andre.bittar@linguist.jussieu.fr

Pascal Amsili
LLF

Univ. Paris Diderot
amsili@linguist.jussieu.fr

Pascal Denis
Alpage
INRIA

pascal.denis@inria.fr

Laurence Danlos
Alpage

Univ. Paris Diderot
danlos@linguist.jussieu.fr

Abstract
This article presents the main points in the cre-
ation of the French TimeBank (Bittar, 2010),
a reference corpus annotated according to the
ISO-TimeML standard for temporal annota-
tion. A number of improvements were made
to the markup language to deal with linguistic
phenomena not yet covered by ISO-TimeML,
including cross-language modifications and
others specific to French. An automatic pre-
annotation system was used to speed up the
annotation process. A preliminary evaluation
of the methodology adopted for this project
yields positive results in terms of data quality
and annotation time.

1 Introduction

The processing of temporal information (events,
time expressions and relations between these enti-
ties) is essential for overall comprehension of nat-
ural language discourse. Determining the temporal
structure of a text can bring added value to numer-
ous NLP applications (information extraction, Q&A
systems, summarization...). Progress has been made
in recent years in the processing of temporal data,
notably through the ISO-TimeML standard (ISO,
2008) and the creation of the TimeBank 1.2 cor-
pus (Pustejovsky et al, 2006) for English. Here we
present the French TimeBank (FTiB), a corpus for
French annotated in ISO-TimeML. We also present
the methodology adopted for the creation of this re-
source, which may be generalized to other annota-
tion tasks. We evaluate the effects of our methodol-
ogy on the quality of the corpus and the time taken
in the task.

2 ISO-TimeML

ISO-TimeML (ISO, 2008) is a surface-based lan-
guage for the marking of events (<EVENT> tag) and
temporal expressions (<TIMEX3>), as well as the
realization of the temporal (<TLINK>), aspectual
(<ALINK>) and modal subordination (<SLINK>)
relations that exist among these entities. The tags’
attributes capture semantic and grammatical features
such as event class, tense, aspect and modality, and
the type and normalized interpretative value of tem-
poral expressions. The <SIGNAL> tag is used to an-
notate relation markers, such as before and after. A
set of resources for English has been developed over
the years, including an annotated corpus, TimeBank
1.2 (TB1.2)1, which has become a reference for tem-
poral annotation in English.

3 Improving ISO-TimeML

We propose a number of improvements to ISO-
TimeML to deal with as yet untreated phenom-
ena. These include both cross-language annotation
guidelines, as well as guidelines specific to French.
All these guidelines are implemented in the FTiB.

Cross-language Improvements : ISO-TimeML
currently provides for the annotation of event
modality by capturing the lemma of a modal on
a subordinated event tag in the modality at-
tribute. Inspired by the fact that in French, modal-
ity is expressed by fully inflected verbs, we pro-
pose that those verbs be tagged as modal, and we

1Annotated according to the TimeML 1.2 specification, as
opposed to the more recent ISO-TimeML.

130



provide a set of normalized values for the modal-
ity attribute, within a manual annotation context,
that reflect the classic classes of linguistic modality
(Palmer, 1986): NECESSITY and POSSIBILITY
(epistemic), OBLIGATION and PERMISSION (de-
ontic). We also provide a way of capturing the dif-
ference between support verb constructions with
a neutral aspectual value (mener une attaque (carry
out an attack)) and those with an inchoative as-
pectual value (lancer une attaque (launch an at-
tack)). ISO-TimeML encodes the relation between
the verb and its nominal argument via a <TLINK>
of type IDENTITY. We encode aspectual variants
in the FTiB by using an <ALINK>. A signifi-
cant proportion (13/36) of the annotated <ALINK>
tags in the FTiB (36%) are used in this case. A
third improvement we propose is the introduction of
the event class EVENT CONTAINER2 to distinguish
predicates that take an event nominal as subject.
In TB1.2, these predicates were sometimes marked,
but not distinguished from the OCCURRENCE class.
The distinction is appropriate as these predicates
have events as arguments, unlike OCCURRENCEs.
The relative frequency of this class (19 occurrences)
compared to the standard PERCEPTION class (10)
also justifies its use. Although not yet dealt with
in ISO-TimeML, aspectual periphrases, such as
en train de + Vinf (akin to the English progres-
sive -ing), adding an aspectual value to an event,
are captured in the FTiB in the aspect attribute
for events. We also propose a new value for as-
pect, PROSPECTIVE, encoding the value of the
construction aller + Vinf (going to + Vinf ), as in
le soleil va exploser (the sun is going to explode).

Improvements for French : a correspondence had
to be made between the ISO-TimeML schema and
the grammatical tense system of French, in particu-
lar, to account for tenses such as the passé composé
(PAST tense value, as opposed to the present per-
fect used in English) and imparfait (IMPERFECT,
not present in English as a morphological tense).
French modal verbs behave differently to English
modal auxiliaries as they can be conjugated in all
tenses, fall within the scope of aspectual, negative
polarity and other modal operators. Unlike in TB1.2,

2After the terminology of (Vendler, 1967)

modal verbs (and adjectives), are marked <EVENT>
in FTiB and have the class MODAL. 72 events (3.4%)
are annotated with this class in the FTiB.

4 Methodology

Text sampling : the source texts for the FTiB were
selected from the Est Républicain corpus of journal-
istic texts.3 The journalistic genre was chosen for
its relatively high frequency of events and temporal
expressions. Texts were sampled from 7 different
sub-genres4, the distributions of which are shown in
Table 1. Certain sub-genres appear in higher pro-
portions than others, for two main reasons. Firstly,
to favor comparison with TB1.2 (which is made up
of news articles). Secondly, because the news gen-
res are relatively diverse in style compared to the
other sub-genres, which follow a certain format (e.g.
obituaries). We present some of the correlations be-
tween sub-genre and linguistic content in Section 5.

Sub-genre Doc # Doc % Token # Token %
Annmt. 22 20.2% 1 679 10.4%
Bio. 1 0.9% 186 1.1%
Intl. news 32 29.4% 5 171 31.9%
Loc. news 19 17.5% 4 370 27.0%
Natl. news 25 22.9% 3 347 20.7%
Obituary 2 1.8% 313 1.9%
Sport 8 7.3% 1 142 7.0%
Total 109 100% 16 208 100%

Table 1: Proportions of sub-genres in the FTiB.

Automatic pre-annotation : To speed up the an-
notation process, we carried out an automatic pre-
annotation of markables (events, temporal expres-
sions and some relation markers), followed by man-
ual correction. Relations were annotated entirely by
hand, as this task remains very difficult to automate.
Below we describe the two modules developed for
pre-annotation.
The TempEx Tagger marks temporal expressions
<TIMEX3> and sets the tag’s attributes, and anno-
tates certain <SIGNAL> tags. This module con-
sists of a set of Unitex (Paumier, 2008) transduc-
ers that are applied to raw text. We adapted and

3Available at http://www.cnrtl.fr.
4These are announcement, biography, international news,

local news, national news, obituary and sport.

131



EVENT 
correction

Adjudication Adjudication

Coherence 
check

TIMEX3 
correction

SIGNAL 
correction

Pre-
annotated 

text

Annotated 
Markables

Annotated 
Markables + 

LINKs

Gold 
Standard

LINK 
annotation

Figure 1: Schema of the annotation strategy.

enriched a pre-existing set of transducers for anno-
tating temporal expressions in French (Gross, 2002)
for our purposes. Marked expressions are classified
according to their ISO-TimeML type5 and the val-
ues of certain attributes are calculated. The value
attribute is only set during normalization, carried out
after the detection phase. A script calculates normal-
ized values for marked expressions, including index-
icals, such as lundi dernier (last Monday) or l’année
prochaine (next year) (with the article’s publication
date as reference point). A comparative evaluation
with the DEDO system of (Parent et al, 2008) shows
very similar performance (for exact match on tag
span and for the value attribute) over the same
evaluation corpus (Table 2).

System Prec. Rec. F-sc.
Match TempEx 84.2 81.8 83.0

DEDO 83.0 79.0 81.0
Value TempEx 55.0 44.9 49.4

DEDO 56.0 45.0 50.0

Table 2: Comparative evaluation of the TempEx Tagger
for exact match on tag span and value calculation.

The Event Tagger marks up events (<EVENT> tag)
and certain relation markers through the application
of a sequence of rules acting on the local chunk con-
text. The rules eliminate unlikely candidates or tag
appropriate ones, based on detailed lexical resources
and various contextual criteria. Input is a text pre-
processed with POS tags, morphological analysis
and chunking (carried out with the Macaon process-

5DATE (e.g. 15/01/2001, le 15 janvier 1010, jeudi, demain),
TIME (ex. 15h30, midi), DURATION (ex. trois jours, un an) ou
SET (ex. tous les jours, chaque mardi)

ing pipeline (Nasr et al, 2010)). A reliable com-
parison with the DEDO system, to our knowledge
the only other system for this task in French, was
unfortunately not possible. Evaluations were made
on different, yet comparable, corpora, so results are
merely indicative. For event tagging, our system
scored a precision of 62.5 (62.5 for DEDO), recall
of 89.4 (77.7) and an F-score of 75.8 (69.3). There
is room for improvement, although the system still
yields significant gains in total annotation time and
quality. An experiment to evaluate the effects of the
pre-annotation showed a near halving of annotation
time compared to manual annotation, as well as a
significant reduction of human errors (Bittar, 2010).
Unfortunately, it was not possible to reliably com-
pare the performance of the Event Tagger with the
similar module by (Parent et al, 2008) (DEDO), to
our knowledge the only other system developed for
this task for French. Evaluations of each system
were carried out on different, although similar, cor-
pora. Thus, results remain merely indicative. For the
task of event recognition, our system scored a preci-
sion of 62.5 (62.5 for DEDO), recall of 89.4 (77.7)
and an F-score of 75.8 (69.3).

Manual annotation and validation : after pre-
annotation of markables, texts were corrected by 3
human annotators (2 per text), using the Callisto6

and Tango7 tools, designed for this task. Figure 1
shows the process undergone by each document.
The final step of the process is a coherence check
of the temporal graph in each document, carried out

6http://callisto.mitre.org/
7http://timeml.org/site/tango/tool.html

132



via application of Allen’s algorithm (Allen, 1983)
and graph saturation (Tannier & Muller, 2008). Us-
ing the same method, we found 18 incoherent graphs
among the 183 files of the TB1.2 corpus for English.
At this stage, the corpus contained 8 incoherencies,
which were all eliminated by hand. Manually elim-
inating incoherencies is an arduous task, and per-
forming an online coherence check during annota-
tion of relations would be extremely useful in a man-
ual annotation tool. All files were validated against
a DTD, provided with the corpus.

5 French TimeBank

Our aim for the FTiB is to provide a corpus of
comparable size to TB1.2 (approx. 61 000 to-
kens). Version 1.0 of FTiB, presented here and
made available online8 in January 2011, represents
about 14 of the target tokens. Figure 2 shows that
proportions of annotated elements for French are
mostly very similar to those in TB1.2. This sug-
gests the annotation guidelines were applied in a
similar way in both corpora and that, for the journal-
istic genre, the distributions of the various marked
elements are similar in French and English. By far
the most common relation type in the French corpus
is the <TLINK>. Among these, 1 175 are marked
between two event arguments (EVENT-EVENT),
722 between an event and a temporal expression
(EVENT-TIMEX3), and 486 between two temporal
expressions (TIMEX3-TIMEX3).

Figure 2: Annotated content of the FTiB and TB1.2.

Inter-annotator agreement was measured over the
entire FTiB corpus and compared with reported
agreement for TB1.2.9. F-scores for agreement

8Via the INRIA GForge at https://gforge.inria.
fr/projects/fr-timebank/.

9Available at http://www.timeml.org/site/
timebank/documentation-1.2.html Note that fig-

DATE TIME DURATION SET

Genre

T
I
M
E
X
3 

T
y
p
e 

%

Figure 3: Distribution of <TIMEX3> types by sub-genre.

C
l
a
s
s 

%

I_STATE
ASPECTUAL

I_ACTION
PERCEPTN

STATE
MODAL
CAUSE

OCCURRENCE
REPORTING
E.CONTAINER

bio.intl.localnatl.obit.sportann.

Figure 4: Distribution of <EVENT> classes by sub-genre.

are significantly higher for the French corpus on
<EVENT> and <TIMEX3> tag spans than for
TB1.2, and very slightly lower for <SIGNAL>. Fig-
ures for tag attributes are higher for TB1.2, as a
much looser metric10 was used for agreement, so
comparison is not yet possible. The same measure
will need to be implemented to afford an accurate
comparison.

ures were only calculated for a small subset of the entire
corpus, unlike for the FTiB, for which all data was used.

10Agreement for TB1.2 was only calculated over tags with
matching spans and wrong attributes on non-matching spans
were not penalized. For the FTiB, all tags were considered and
all attributes for non-matching tag spans were penalized.

133



Corpus <TIMEX3> <EVENT> <SIGNAL>Span Attr Span Attr Span
FTiB .89 .86 .86 .85 .75
TB 1.2 .83 (.95) .78 (.95) .77

Table 3: Inter-annotator agreement (F-scores).

Sub-genre and linguistic content : a preliminary
study showed correlations between the various sub-
genres chosen for the corpus and the annotations
in the texts. For example, Figure 3 shows a high
proportion of TIMEs in announcement texts (46%
of the corpus total)11, while DURATIONs are in-
frequent (2%), but appear in higher proportions in
news (21–32%) and sports (13,5%). DATEs are by
far the most frequently marked (80%), with SETs
being the least. In Figure 4, the preponderance of
the OCCURRENCE class is obvious (62.1% of all
events). REPORTING is most frequent in local and
international news. Announcements stand out yet
again, with the highest number and highest propor-
tion of the class EVENT CONTAINER. These ini-
tial observations argue in favor of text sampling to
achieve a diversity of temporal information in a cor-
pus and suggest such features may prove useful in
text classification.

6 Conclusion

Our experiences show ISO-TimeML is a stable lan-
guage and, with some modification, is applicable
to French. The FTiB is a valuable resource that
will surely stimulate development and evaluation of
French temporal processing systems, providing es-
sential data for training machine learning systems.
An initial survey of the data suggests temporal in-
formation may be useful for text classification. Our
methodology is time-efficient and ensures data qual-
ity and usability (coherence). It could be adopted to
create temporally annotated corpora for other lan-
guages as well as being adapted and generalized to
other annotation tasks.

11This is particularly significant given the low proportion of
the total corpus tokens in this sub-genre.

References
ISO 2008. ISO DIS 24617-1: 2008 Language Resource
Management - Semantic Annotation Framework - Part 1:
Time and Events. International Organization for Stan-
dardization, Geneva, Switzerland.
André Bittar 2010. Building a TimeBank for French:
a Reference Corpus Annotated According to the ISO-
TimeML Standard.. PhD thesis. Université Paris Diderot,
Paris, France.
André Bittar 2009. Annotation of Temporal Informa-
tion in French Texts.. Computational Linguistics in the
Netherlands (CLIN 19).
Sébastien Paumier 2008. Unitex 2.0 User Manual..
Université Paris Est Marne-la-Vallée, Marne-la-Vallée,
France.
Gabriel Parent, Michel Gagnon and Philippe Muller
2008. Annotation d’expressions temporelles et
d’événements en français. Actes de TALN 2008.
Avignon, France.
Alexis Nasr, Frédéric Béchet and Jean-François Rey
2010. MACAON : Une chaı̂ne linguistique pour le trait-
meent de graphes de mots. Actes de TALN 2010. Mon-
treal, Canada.
James F. Allen. 1983. Maintaining Knowledge About
Temporal Intervals. Communications of the ACM. 26:11
832-843.
Xavier Tannier and Philippe Muller 2008. Evalua-
tion Metrics for Automatic Temporal Annotation of Texts.
Proceedings of the Sixth International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’08) Marrakech, Mo-
rocco.
Frank Robert Palmer 1986. Mood and Modality Cam-
bridge University Press Cambridge, UK.
James Pustejovsky, Marc Verhagen, Roser Saurı́, Jes-
sica Littman, Robert Gaizauskas, Graham Katz, Inderjeet
Mani, Robert Knippen and Andrea Setzer 2006. Time-
Bank 1.2 Linguistic Data Consortium
Nabil Hathout, Fiammetta Namer and Georgette Dal
2002. An Experimental Constructional Database: The
MorTAL Project Many Morphologies 178–209 Paul
Boucher ed. Somerville, Mass., USA
Zeno Vendler 1967 Linguistics and Philosophy Cornell
University Press Ithaca, NY, USA
Maurice Gross 2002 Les déterminants numéraux, un
exemple : les dates horaires Langages 145 Larousse
Paris, France

134


