










































How do you pronounce your name? Improving G2P with transliterations


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 399–408,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

How do you pronounce your name? Improving G2P with transliterations

Aditya Bhargava and Grzegorz Kondrak
Department of Computing Science

University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G 2E8

{abhargava,kondrak}@cs.ualberta.ca

Abstract

Grapheme-to-phoneme conversion (G2P) of
names is an important and challenging prob-
lem. The correct pronunciation of a name is
often reflected in its transliterations, which are
expressed within a different phonological in-
ventory. We investigate the problem of us-
ing transliterations to correct errors produced
by state-of-the-art G2P systems. We present a
novel re-ranking approach that incorporates a
variety of score and n-gram features, in order
to leverage transliterations from multiple lan-
guages. Our experiments demonstrate signifi-
cant accuracy improvements when re-ranking
is applied to n-best lists generated by three
different G2P programs.

1 Introduction

Grapheme-to-phoneme conversion (G2P), in which
the aim is to convert the orthography of a word to its
pronunciation (phonetic transcription), plays an im-
portant role in speech synthesis and understanding.
Names, which comprise over 75% of unseen words
(Black et al., 1998), present a particular challenge
to G2P systems because of their high pronunciation
variability. Guessing the correct pronunciation of a
name is often difficult, especially if they are of for-
eign origin; this is attested by the ad hoc transcrip-
tions which sometimes accompany new names intro-
duced in news articles, especially for international
stories with many foreign names.

Transliterations provide a way of disambiguating
the pronunciation of names. They are more abun-
dant than phonetic transcriptions, for example when
news items of international or global significance are
reported in multiple languages. In addition, writing

scripts such as Arabic, Korean, or Hindi are more
consistent and easier to identify than various pho-
netic transcription schemes. The process of translit-
eration, also called phonetic translation (Li et al.,
2009b), involves “sounding out” a name and then
finding the closest possible representation of the
sounds in another writing script. Thus, the correct
pronunciation of a name is partially encoded in the
form of the transliteration. For example, given the
ambiguous letter-to-phoneme mapping of the En-
glish letter g, the initial phoneme of the name Gersh-
win may be predicted by a G2P system to be ei-
ther /g/ (as in Gertrude) or /Ã/ (as in Gerald). The
transliterations of the name in other scripts provide
support for the former (correct) alternative.

Although it seems evident that transliterations
should be helpful in determining the correct pronun-
ciation of a name, designing a system that takes ad-
vantage of this insight is not trivial. The main source
of the difficulty stems from the differences between
the phonologies of distinct languages. The mappings
between phonemic inventories are often complex
and context-dependent. For example, because Hindi
has no /w/ sound, the transliteration of Gershwin
instead uses a symbol that represents the phoneme
/V/, similar to the /v/ phoneme in English. In ad-
dition, converting transliterations into phonemes is
often non-trivial; although few orthographies are as
inconsistent as that of English, this is effectively the
G2P task for the particular language in question.

In this paper, we demonstrate that leveraging
transliterations can, in fact, improve the grapheme-
to-phoneme conversion of names. We propose a
novel system based on discriminative re-ranking that
is capable of incorporating multiple transliterations.
We show that simplistic approaches to the problem

399



fail to achieve the same goal, and that translitera-
tions from multiple languages are more helpful than
from a single language. Our approach can be com-
bined with any G2P system that produces n-best lists
instead of single outputs. The experiments that we
perform demonstrate significant error reduction for
three very different G2P base systems.

2 Improving G2P with transliterations

2.1 Problem definition

In both G2P and machine transliteration, we are in-
terested in learning a function that, given an input
sequence x, produces an output sequence y. In the
G2P task, x is composed of graphemes and y is
composed of phonemes; in transliteration, both se-
quences consist of graphemes but they represent dif-
ferent writing scripts. Unlike in machine translation,
the monotonicity constraint is enforced; i.e., we as-
sume that x and y can be aligned without the align-
ment links crossing each other (Jiampojamarn and
Kondrak, 2010). We assume that we have available a
base G2P system that produces an n-best list of out-
puts with a corresponding list of confidence scores.
The goal is to improve the base system’s perfor-
mance by applying existing transliterations of the in-
put x to re-rank the system’s n-best output list.

2.2 Similarity-based methods

A simple and intuitive approach to improving G2P
with transliterations is to select from the n-best list
the output sequence that is most similar to the cor-
responding transliteration. For example, the Hindi
transliteration in Figure 1 is arguably closest in per-
ceptual terms to the phonetic transcription of the
second output in the n-best list, as compared to
the other outputs. One obvious problem with this
method is that it ignores the relative ordering of the
n-best lists and their corresponding scores produced
by the base system.

A better approach is to combine the similarity
score with the output score from the base system, al-
lowing it to contribute an estimate of confidence in
its output. For this purpose, we apply a linear combi-
nation of the two scores, where a single parameter λ,
ranging between zero and one, determines the rela-
tive weight of the scores. The exact value of λ can be
optimized on a training set. This approach is similar

to the method used by Finch and Sumita (2010) to
combine the scores of two different machine translit-
eration systems.

2.3 Measuring similarity

The approaches presented in the previous section
crucially depend on a method for computing the
similarity between various symbol sequences that
represent the same word. If we have a method
of converting transliterations to phonetic represen-
tations, the similarity between two sequences of
phonemes can be computed with a simple method
such as normalized edit distance or the longest com-
mon subsequence ratio, which take into account the
number and position of identical phonemes. Alter-
natively, we could apply a more complex approach,
such as ALINE (Kondrak, 2000), which computes
the distance between pairs of phonemes. However,
the implementation of a conversion program would
require ample training data or language-specific ex-
pertise.

A more general approach is to skip the tran-
scription step and compute the similarity between
phonemes and graphemes directly. For example, the
edit distance function can be learned from a training
set of transliterations and their phonetic transcrip-
tions (Ristad and Yianilos, 1998). In this paper, we
apply M2M-ALIGNER (Jiampojamarn et al., 2007),
an unsupervised aligner, which is a many-to-many
generalization of the learned edit distance algorithm.
M2M-ALIGNER was originally designed to align
graphemes and phonemes, but can be applied to dis-
cover the alignment between any sets of symbols
(given training data). The logarithm of the probabil-
ity assigned to the optimal alignment can then be
interpreted as a similarity measure between the two
sequences.

2.4 Discriminative re-ranking

The methods described in Section 2.2, which are
based on the similarity between outputs and translit-
erations, are difficult to generalize when multiple
transliterations of a single name are available. A lin-
ear combination is still possible but in this case opti-
mizing the parameters would no longer be straight-
forward. Also, we are interested in utilizing other
features besides sequence similarity.

The SVM re-ranking paradigm offers a solution

400



Gershwininput

/ɡɜːʃwɪn//d͡ʒɜːʃwɪn/ /d͡ʒɛɹʃwɪn/n-best outputs

गश�िवन ガーシュウィン Гершвинtransliterations
(/ɡʌrʃʋɪn/) (/ɡaːɕuwiɴ/) (/ɡerʂvin/)

Figure 1: An example name showing the data used for feature construction. Each arrow links a pair used to generate
features, including n-gram and score features. The score features use similarity scores for transliteration-transcription
pairs and system output scores for input-output pairs. One feature vector is constructed for each system output.

to the problem. Our re-ranking system is informed
by a large number of features, which are based on
scores and n-grams. The scores are of three types:

1. The scores produced by the base system for
each output in the n-best list.

2. The similarity scores between the outputs and
each available transliteration.

3. The differences between scores in the n-best
lists for both (1) and (2).

Our set of binary n-gram features includes those
used for DIRECTL+ (Jiampojamarn et al., 2010).
They can be divided into four types:

1. The context features combine output symbols
(phonemes) with n-grams of varying sizes in a
window of size c centred around a correspond-
ing position on the input side.

2. The transition features are bigrams on the out-
put (phoneme) side.

3. The linear chain features combine the context
features with the bigram transition features.

4. The joint n-gram features are n-grams contain-
ing both input and output symbols.

We apply the features in a new way: instead of be-
ing applied strictly to a given input-output set, we
expand their use across many languages and use all

of them simultaneously. We apply the n-gram fea-
tures across all transliteration-transcription pairs in
addition to the usual input-output pairs correspond-
ing to the n-best lists. Figure 1 illustrates the set of
pairs used for feature generation.

In this paper, we augment the n-gram features by
a set of reverse features. Unlike a traditional G2P
generator, our re-ranker has access to the outputs
produced by the base system. By swapping the input
and the output side, we can add reverse context and
linear-chain features. Since the n-gram features are
also applied to transliteration-transcription pairs, the
reverse features enable us to include features which
bind a variety of n-grams in the transliteration string
with a single corresponding phoneme.

The construction of n-gram features presupposes
a fixed alignment between the input and output se-
quences. If the base G2P system does not provide
input-output alignments, we use M2M-ALIGNER
for this purpose. The transliteration-transcription
pairs are also aligned by M2M-ALIGNER, which at
the same time produces the corresponding similarity
scores. (We set a lower limit of -100 on the M2M-
ALIGNER scores.) If M2M-ALIGNER is unable to
produce an alignment, we indicate this with a binary
feature that is included with the n-gram features.

3 Experiments

We perform several experiments to evaluate our
transliteration-informed approaches. We test simple

401



similarity-based approaches on single-transliteration
data, and evaluate our SVM re-ranking approach
against this as well. We then test our approach us-
ing all available transliterations. Relevant code and
scripts required to reproduce our experimental re-
sults are available online1.

3.1 Data & setup

For pronunciation data, we extracted all names from
the Combilex corpus (Richmond et al., 2009). We
discarded all diacritics, duplicates and multi-word
names, which yielded 10,084 unique names. Both
the similarity and SVM methods require transliter-
ations for identifying the best candidates in the n-
best lists. They are therefore trained and evaluated
on the subset of the G2P corpus for which transliter-
ations available. Naturally, allowing transliterations
from all languages results in a larger corpus than the
one obtained by the intersection with transliterations
from a single language.

For our experiments, we split the data into 10%
for testing, 10% for development, and 80% for
training. The development set was used for initial
tests and experiments, and then for our final results
the training and development sets were combined
into one set for final system training. For SVM re-
ranking, during both development and testing we
split the training set into 10 folds; this is necessary
when training the re-ranker as it must have system
output scores that are representative of the scores on
unseen data. We ensured that there was never any
overlap between the training and testing data for all
trained systems.

Our transliteration data come from the shared
tasks on transliteration at the 2009 and 2010 Named
Entities Workshops (Li et al., 2009a; Li et al., 2010).
We use all of the 2010 English-source data plus the
English-to-Russian data from 2009, which makes
nine languages in total. In cases where the data
provide alternative transliterations for a given in-
put, we keep only one; our preliminary experiments
indicated that including alternative transliterations
did not improve performance. It should be noted
that these transliteration corpora are noisy: Jiampo-
jamarn et al. (2009) note a significant increase in

1http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/˜ab31/
g2p-tl-rr

Language Corpus size Overlap

Bengali 12,785 1,840
Chinese 37,753 4,713
Hindi 12,383 2,179
Japanese 26,206 4,773
Kannada 10,543 1,918
Korean 6,761 3,015
Russian 6,447 487
Tamil 10,646 1,922
Thai 27,023 5,436

Table 1: The number of unique single-word entries in the
transliteration corpora for each language and the amount
of common data (overlap) with the pronunciation data.

English-to-Hindi transliteration performance with a
simple cleaning of the data.

Our tests involving transliterations from multiple
languages are performed on the set of names for
which we have both the pronunciation and translit-
eration data. There are 7,423 names in the G2P cor-
pus for which at least one transliteration is available.
Table 1 lists the total size of the transliteration cor-
pora as well as the amount of overlap with the G2P
data. Note that the base G2P systems are trained us-
ing all 10,084 names in the corpus as opposed to
only the 7,423 names for which there are transliter-
ations available. This ensures that the G2P systems
have more training data to provide the best possible
base performance.

For our single-language experiments, we normal-
ize the various scores when tuning the linear com-
bination parameter λ so that we can compare values
across different experimental conditions. For SVM
re-ranking, we directly implement the method of
Joachims (2002) to convert the re-ranking problem
into a classification problem, and then use the very
fast LIBLINEAR (Fan et al., 2008) to build the SVM
models. Optimal hyperparameter values were deter-
mined during development.

We evaluate using word accuracy, the percentage
of words for which the pronunciations are correctly
predicted. This measure marks pronunciations that
are even slightly different from the correct one as in-
correct, so even a small change in pronunciation that
might be acceptable or even unnoticeable to humans
would count against the system’s performance.

402



3.2 Base systems
It is important to test multiple base systems in order
to ensure that any gain in performance applies to the
task in general and not just to a particular system.
We use three G2P systems in our tests:

1. FESTIVAL (FEST), a popular speech synthe-
sis package, which implements G2P conver-
sion with CARTs (decision trees) (Black et al.,
1998).

2. SEQUITUR (SEQ), a generative system based
on the joint n-gram approach (Bisani and Ney,
2008).

3. DIRECTL+ (DTL), the discriminative system
on which our n-gram features are based (Ji-
ampojamarn et al., 2010).

All systems are capable of providing n-best output
lists along with scores for each output, although for
FESTIVAL they had to be constructed from the list
of output probabilities for each input character.

We run DIRECTL+ with all of the features de-
scribed in (Jiampojamarn et al., 2010) (i.e., context
features, transition features, linear chain features,
and joint n-gram features). System parameters, such
as maximum number of iterations, were determined
during development. For SEQUITUR, we keep de-
fault options except for the enabling of the 10 best
outputs and we convert the probabilities assigned to
the outputs to log-probabilities. We set SEQUITUR’s
joint n-gram order to 6 (this was also determined
during development).

Note that the three base systems differ slightly in
terms of the alignment information that they pro-
vide in their outputs. FESTIVAL operates letter-by-
letter, so we use the single-letter inputs with the
phoneme outputs as the aligned units. DIRECTL+
specifies many-to-many alignments in its output. For
SEQUITUR, however, since it provides no informa-
tion regarding the output structure, we use M2M-
ALIGNER to induce alignments for n-gram feature
generation.

3.3 Transliterations from a single language
The goal of the first experiment is to compare sev-
eral similarity-based methods, and to determine how
they compare to our re-ranking approach. In order to

find the similarity between phonetic transcriptions,
we use the two different methods described in Sec-
tion 2.2: ALINE and M2M-ALIGNER. We further
test the use of a linear combination of the similar-
ity scores with the base system’s score so that its
confidence information can be taken into account;
the linear combination weight is determined from
the training set. These methods are referred to as
ALINE+BASE and M2M+BASE. For these experi-
ments, our training and testing sets are obtained by
intersecting our G2P training and testing sets respec-
tively with the Hindi transliteration corpus, yielding
1,950 names for training and 229 names for testing.

Since the similarity-based methods are designed
to incorporate homogeneous same-script translitera-
tions, we can only run this experiment on one lan-
guage at a time. Furthermore, ALINE operates on
phoneme sequences, so we first need to convert the
transliterations to phonemes. An alternative would
be to train a proper G2P system, but this would re-
quire a large set of word-pronunciation pairs. For
this experiment, we choose Hindi, for which we
constructed a rule-based G2P converter. Aside from
simple one-to-one mapping (romanization) rules,
the converter has about ten rules to adjust for con-
text.

For these experiments, we apply our SVM re-
ranking method in two ways:

1. Using only Hindi transliterations (referred to as
SVM-HINDI).

2. Using all available languages (referred to as
SVM-ALL).

In both cases, the test set is restricted to the same
229 names, in order to provide a valid comparison.

Table 2 presents the results. Regardless of the
choice of the similarity function, the simplest ap-
proaches fail in a spectacular manner, significantly
reducing the accuracy with respect to the base sys-
tem. The linear combination methods give mixed re-
sults, improving the accuracy for FESTIVAL but not
for SEQUITUR or DIRECTL+ (although the differ-
ences are not statistically significant). However, they
perform much better than the methods based on sim-
ilarity scores alone as they are able to take advan-
tage of the base system’s output scores. If we look
at the values of λ that provide the best performance

403



Base system

FEST SEQ DTL

Base 58.1 67.3 71.6
ALINE 28.0 26.6 27.5
M2M 39.3 36.2 36.2
ALINE+BASE 58.5 65.9 71.2
M2M+BASE 58.5 66.4 70.3
SVM-HINDI 63.3 69.0 69.9
SVM-ALL 68.6 72.5 75.6

Table 2: Word accuracy (in percentages) of various meth-
ods when only Hindi transliterations are used.

on the training set, we find that they are higher for
the stronger base systems, indicating more reliance
on the base system output scores. For example,
for ALINE+BASE the FESTIVAL-based system has
λ = 0.58 whereas the DIRECTL+-based system has
λ = 0.81. Counter-intuitively, the ALINE+BASE
and M2M+BASE methods are unable to improve
upon SEQUITUR or DIRECTL+. We would expect
to achieve at least the base system’s performance,
but disparities between the training and testing sets
prevent this.

The two SVM-based methods achieve much bet-
ter results. SVM-ALL produces impressive accu-
racy gains for all three base systems, while SVM-
HINDI yields smaller (but still statistically signifi-
cant) improvements for FESTIVAL and SEQUITUR.
These results suggest that our re-ranking method
provides a bigger boost to systems built with dif-
ferent design principles than to DIRECTL+ which
utilizes a similar set of features. On the other hand,
the results also show that the information obtained
by consulting a single transliteration may be insuf-
ficient to improve an already high-performing G2P
converter.

3.4 Transliterations from multiple languages

Our second experiment expands upon the first; we
use all available transliterations instead of being re-
stricted to one language. This rules out the sim-
ple similarity-based approaches, but allows us to
test our re-ranking approach in a way that fully uti-
lizes the available data. We test three variants of our
transliteration-informed SVM re-ranking approach,

Base system

FEST SEQ DTL

Base 55.3 66.5 70.8
SVM-SCORE 62.1 68.4 71.0
SVM-N-GRAM 66.2 72.5 73.8
SVM-ALL 67.2 73.4 74.3

Table 3: Word accuracy of the base system versus the re-
ranking variants with transliterations from multiple lan-
guages.

which differ with respect to the set of included fea-
tures:

1. SVM-SCORE includes only the three types of
score features described in Section 2.4.

2. SVM-N-GRAM uses only the n-gram features.

3. SVM-ALL is the full system that combines the
score and n-gram features.

The objective is to determine the degree to which
each of the feature classes contributes to the overall
results. Because we are using all available transliter-
ations, we achieve much greater coverage over our
G2P data than in the previous experiment; in this
case, our training set consists of 6,660 names while
the test set has 763 names.

Table 3 presents the results. Note that the base-
line accuracies are somewhat lower than in Table 2
because of the different test set. We find that, when
using all features, the SVM re-ranker can provide
a very impressive error reduction over FESTIVAL
(26.7%) and SEQUITUR (20.7%) and a smaller but
still significant (p < 0.01 with the McNemar test)
error reduction over DIRECTL+ (12.1%).

When we consider our results using only the score
and n-gram features, we can see that, interestingly,
the n-gram features are most important. We draw
a further conclusion from our results: consider the
large disparity in improvements over the base sys-
tems. This indicates that FESTIVAL and SEQUITUR
are benefiting from the DIRECTL+-style features
used in the re-ranking. Without the n-gram fea-
tures, however, there is still a significant improve-
ment over FESTIVAL, demonstrating that the scores
do provide useful information. In this case there is

404



no way for DIRECTL+-style information to make
its way into the re-ranking; the process is based
purely on the transliterations and their similarities
with the transcriptions in the output lists, indicat-
ing that the system is capable of extracting use-
ful information directly from transliterations. In the
case of DIRECTL+, the transliterations help through
the n-gram features rather than the score features;
this is probably because the crucial feature that
signals the inability of M2M-ALIGNER to align a
given transliteration-transcription pair belongs to the
set of the n-gram features. Both the n-gram fea-
tures and score features are dependent on the align-
ments, but they differ in that the n-gram features
allow weights to be learned for local n-gram pairs
whereas the score features are based on global infor-
mation, providing only a single feature for a given
transliteration-transcription pair. The two therefore
overlap to some degree, although the score fea-
tures still provide useful information via probabili-
ties learned during the alignment training process.

A closer look at the results provides additional
insight into the operation of our re-ranking system.
For example, consider the name Bacchus, which DI-
RECTL+ incorrectly converts into /bækÙ@s/. The
most likely reason why our re-ranker selects instead
the correct pronunciation /bæk@s/ is that M2M-
ALIGNER fails to align three of the five available
transliterations with /bækÙ@s/. Such alignment fail-
ures are caused by a lack of evidence for the map-
ping of the grapheme representing the sound /k/
in the transliteration training data with the phoneme
/Ù/. In addition, the lack of alignments prevents any
n-gram features from being enabled.

Considering the difficulty of the task, the top ac-
curacy of almost 75% is quite impressive. In fact,
many instances of human transliterations in our cor-
pora are clearly incorrect. For example, the Hindi
transliteration of Bacchus contains the /Ù/ conso-
nant instead of the correct /k/. Moreover, our strict
evaluation based on word accuracy counts all sys-
tem outputs that fail to exactly match the dictio-
nary data as errors. The differences are often very
minor and may reflect an alternative pronunciation.
The phoneme accuracy2 of our best result is 93.1%,

2The phoneme accuracy is calculated from the minimum
edit distance between the predicted and correct pronunciations.

# TL # Entries Improvement

≤ 1 111 0.9
≤ 2 266 3.0
≤ 3 398 3.8
≤ 4 536 3.2
≤ 5 619 2.8
≤ 6 685 3.4
≤ 7 732 3.7
≤ 8 762 3.5
≤ 9 763 3.5

Table 4: Absolute improvement in word accuracy (%)
over the base system (DIRECTL+) of the SVM re-ranker
for various numbers of available transliterations.

which provides some idea of how similar the pre-
dicted pronunciation is to the correct one.

3.5 Effect of multiple transliterations

One motivating factor for the use of SVM re-ranking
was the ability to incorporate multiple transliteration
languages. But how important is it to use more than
one language? To examine this question, we look
particularly at the sets of names having at most k
transliterations available. Table 4 shows the results
with DIRECTL+ as the base system. Note that the
number of names with more than five transliterations
was small. Importantly, we see that the increase in
performance when only one transliteration is avail-
able is so small as to be insignificant. From this, we
can conclude that obtaining improvement on the ba-
sis of a single transliteration is difficult in general.
This corroborates the results of the experiment de-
scribed in Section 3.3, where we used only Hindi
transliterations.

4 Previous work

There are three lines of research that are relevant to
our work: (1) G2P in general; (2) G2P on names; and
(3) combining diverse data sources and/or systems.

The two leading approaches to G2P are repre-
sented by SEQUITUR (Bisani and Ney, 2008) and
DIRECTL+ (Jiampojamarn et al., 2010). Recent
comparisons suggests that the former obtains some-
what higher accuracy, especially when it includes
joint n-gram features (Jiampojamarn et al., 2010).
Systems based on decision trees are far behind. Our

405



results confirm this ranking.
Names can present a particular challenge to G2P

systems. Kienappel and Kneser (2001) reported a
higher error rate for German names than for general
words, while on the other hand Black et al. (1998)
report similar accuracy on names as for other types
of English words. Yang et al. (2006) and van den
Heuvel et al. (2007) post-process the output of a
general G2P system with name-specific phoneme-
to-phoneme (P2P) systems. They find significant im-
provement using this method on data sets consisting
of Dutch first names, family names, and geograph-
ical names. However, it is unclear whether such an
approach would be able to improve the performance
of the current state-of-the-art G2P systems. In addi-
tion, the P2P approach works only on single outputs,
whereas our re-ranking approach is designed to han-
dle n-best output lists.

Although our approach is (to the best of our
knowledge) the first to use different tasks (G2P and
transliteration) to inform each other, this is concep-
tually similar to model and system combination ap-
proaches. In statistical machine translation (SMT),
methods that incorporate translations from other lan-
guages (Cohn and Lapata, 2007) have proven effec-
tive in low-resource situations: when phrase trans-
lations are unavailable for a certain language, one
can look at other languages where the translation
is available and then translate from that language.
A similar pivoting approach has also been applied
to machine transliteration (Zhang et al., 2010). No-
tably, the focus of these works have been on cases in
which there are less data available; they also modify
the generation process directly, rather than operating
on existing outputs as we do. Ultimately, a combina-
tion of the two approaches is likely to give the best
results.

Finch and Sumita (2010) combine two very dif-
ferent approaches to transliteration using simple lin-
ear interpolation: they use SEQUITUR’s n-best out-
puts and re-rank them using a linear combination
of the original SEQUITUR score and the score for
that output of a phrased-based SMT system. The lin-
ear weights are hand-tuned. We similarly use linear
combinations, but with many more scores and other
features, necessitating the use of SVMs to determine
the weights. Importantly, we combine different data
types where they combine different systems.

5 Conclusions & future work

In this paper, we explored the application of translit-
erations to G2P. We demonstrated that transliter-
ations have the potential for helping choose be-
tween n-best output lists provided by standard G2P
systems. Simple approaches based solely on sim-
ilarity do not work when tested using a single
transliteration language (Hindi), necessitating the
use of smarter methods that can incorporate mul-
tiple transliteration languages. We apply SVM re-
ranking to this task, enabling us to use a variety
of features based not only on similarity scores but
on n-grams as well. Our method shows impressive
error reductions over the popular FESTIVAL sys-
tem and the generative joint n-gram SEQUITUR sys-
tem. We also find significant error reduction using
the state-of-the-art DIRECTL+ system. Our analy-
sis demonstrated that it is essential to provide the
re-ranking system with transliterations from multi-
ple languages in order to mitigate the differences
between phonological inventories and smooth out
noise in the transliterations.

In the future, we plan to generalize our approach
so that it can be applied to the task of generating
transliterations, and to combine data from distinct
G2P dictionaries. The latter task is related to the no-
tion of domain adaptation. We would also like to ap-
ply our approach to web data; we have shown that it
is possible to use noisy transliteration data, so it may
be possible to leverage the noisy ad hoc pronuncia-
tion data as well. Finally, we plan to investigate ear-
lier integration of such external information into the
G2P process for single systems; while we noted that
re-ranking provides a general approach applicable to
any system that can generate n-best lists, there is a
limit as to what re-ranking can do, as it relies on the
correct output existing in the n-best list. Modifying
existing systems would provide greater potential for
improving results even though the changes would be
necessarily system-specific.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Sittichai Jiampojamarn and Shane
Bergsma for the very helpful discussions. This re-
search was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada.

406



References

Maximilian Bisani and Hermann Ney. 2008. Joint-
sequence models for grapheme-to-phoneme conver-
sion. Speech Communication, 50(5):434–451, May.

Alan W. Black, Kevin Lenzo, and Vincent Pagel. 1998.
Issues in building general letter to sound rules. In The
Third ESCA/COCOSDA Workshop (ETRW) on Speech
Synthesis, Jenolan Caves House, Blue Mountains, New
South Wales, Australia, November.

Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Machine trans-
lation by triangulation: Making effective use of multi-
parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual
Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 728–735, Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-Rui
Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR: A li-
brary for large linear classification. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 9:1871–1874.

Andrew Finch and Eiichiro Sumita. 2010. Translitera-
tion using a phrase-based statistical machine transla-
tion system to re-score the output of a joint multigram
model. In Proceedings of the 2010 Named Entities
Workshop (NEWS 2010), pages 48–52, Uppsala, Swe-
den, July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sittichai Jiampojamarn and Grzegorz Kondrak. 2010.
Letter-phoneme alignment: An exploration. In Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 780–788,
Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Grzegorz Kondrak, and Tarek
Sherif. 2007. Applying many-to-many alignments
and hidden Markov models to letter-to-phoneme con-
version. In Human Language Technologies 2007: The
Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics; Proceedings
of the Main Conference, pages 372–379, Rochester,
New York, USA, April. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Aditya Bhargava, Qing Dou,
Kenneth Dwyer, and Grzegorz Kondrak. 2009. Di-
recTL: a language independent approach to translitera-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2009 Named Entities Work-
shop: Shared Task on Transliteration (NEWS 2009),
pages 28–31, Suntec, Singapore, August. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Colin Cherry, and Grzegorz Kon-
drak. 2010. Integrating joint n-gram features into a
discriminative training framework. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for

Computational Linguistics, pages 697–700, Los An-
geles, California, USA, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Thorsten Joachims. 2002. Optimizing search engines us-
ing clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the Eighth
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 133–142, Ed-
monton, Alberta, Canada. Association for Computing
Machinery.

Anne K. Kienappel and Reinhard Kneser. 2001. De-
signing very compact decision trees for grapheme-
to-phoneme transcription. In EUROSPEECH-2001,
pages 1911–1914, Aalborg, Denmark, September.

Grzegorz Kondrak. 2000. A new algorithm for the
alignment of phonetic sequences. In Proceedings of
the First Meeting of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
288–295, Seattle, Washington, USA, April.

Haizhou Li, A Kumaran, Vladimir Pervouchine, and Min
Zhang. 2009a. Report of NEWS 2009 machine
transliteration shared task. In Proceedings of the 2009
Named Entities Workshop: Shared Task on Transliter-
ation (NEWS 2009), pages 1–18, Suntec, Singapore,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Haizhou Li, A Kumaran, Min Zhang, and Vladimir Per-
vouchine. 2009b. Whitepaper of NEWS 2009 ma-
chine transliteration shared task. In Proceedings
of the 2009 Named Entities Workshop: Shared Task
on Transliteration (NEWS 2009), pages 19–26, Sun-
tec, Singapore, August. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Haizhou Li, A Kumaran, Min Zhang, and Vladimir Per-
vouchine. 2010. Report of NEWS 2010 transliteration
generation shared task. In Proceedings of the 2010
Named Entities Workshop (NEWS 2010), pages 1–11,
Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Korin Richmond, Robert Clark, and Sue Fitt. 2009. Ro-
bust LTS rules with the Combilex speech technology
lexicon. In Proceedings of Interspeech, pages 1295–
1298, Brighton, UK, September.

Eric Sven Ristad and Peter N. Yianilos. 1998. Learn-
ing string edit distance. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Recognition and Machine Intelligence, 20(5):522–
532, May.

Henk van den Heuvel, Jean-Pierre Martens, and Nanneke
Konings. 2007. G2P conversion of names. what can
we do (better)? In Proceedings of Interspeech, pages
1773–1776, Antwerp, Belgium, August.

Qian Yang, Jean-Pierre Martens, Nanneke Konings, and
Henk van den Heuvel. 2006. Development of a
phoneme-to-phoneme (p2p) converter to improve the
grapheme-to-phoneme (g2p) conversion of names. In

407



Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 2570–
2573, Genoa, Italy, May.

Min Zhang, Xiangyu Duan, Vladimir Pervouchine, and
Haizhou Li. 2010. Machine transliteration: Leverag-
ing on third languages. In Coling 2010: Posters, pages
1444–1452, Beijing, China, August. Coling 2010 Or-
ganizing Committee.

408


