










































Using Bilingual Parallel Corpora for Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1336–1345,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Bilingual Parallel Corpora
for Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment

Yashar Mehdad
FBK - irst and Uni. of Trento

Povo (Trento), Italy
mehdad@fbk.eu

Matteo Negri
FBK - irst

Povo (Trento), Italy
negri@fbk.eu

Marcello Federico
FBK - irst

Povo (Trento), Italy
federico@fbk.eu

Abstract

This paper explores the use of bilingual par-
allel corpora as a source of lexical knowl-
edge for cross-lingual textual entailment. We
claim that, in spite of the inherent difficul-
ties of the task, phrase tables extracted from
parallel data allow to capture both lexical re-
lations between single words, and contextual
information useful for inference. We experi-
ment with a phrasal matching method in or-
der to: i) build a system portable across lan-
guages, and ii) evaluate the contribution of
lexical knowledge in isolation, without inter-
action with other inference mechanisms. Re-
sults achieved on an English-Spanish corpus
obtained from the RTE3 dataset support our
claim, with an overall accuracy above average
scores reported by RTE participants on mono-
lingual data. Finally, we show that using par-
allel corpora to extract paraphrase tables re-
veals their potential also in the monolingual
setting, improving the results achieved with
other sources of lexical knowledge.

1 Introduction

Cross-lingual Textual Entailment (CLTE) has been
proposed by (Mehdad et al., 2010) as an extension
of Textual Entailment (Dagan and Glickman, 2004)
that consists in deciding, given two texts T and H in
different languages, if the meaning of H can be in-
ferred from the meaning of T. The task is inherently
difficult, as it adds issues related to the multilingual
dimension to the complexity of semantic inference
at the textual level. For instance, the reliance of cur-
rent monolingual TE systems on lexical resources

(e.g. WordNet, VerbOcean, FrameNet) and deep
processing components (e.g. syntactic and semantic
parsers, co-reference resolution tools, temporal ex-
pressions recognizers and normalizers) has to con-
front, at the cross-lingual level, with the limited
availability of lexical/semantic resources covering
multiple languages, the limited coverage of the ex-
isting ones, and the burden of integrating language-
specific components into the same cross-lingual ar-
chitecture.

As a first step to overcome these problems,
(Mehdad et al., 2010) proposes a “basic solution”,
that brings CLTE back to the monolingual scenario
by translating H into the language of T. Despite the
advantages in terms of modularity and portability of
the architecture, and the promising experimental re-
sults, this approach suffers from one main limitation
which motivates the investigation on alternative so-
lutions. Decoupling machine translation (MT) and
TE, in fact, ties CLTE performance to the availabil-
ity of MT components, and to the quality of the
translations. As a consequence, on one side trans-
lation errors propagate to the TE engine hampering
the entailment decision process. On the other side
such unpredictable errors reduce the possibility to
control the behaviour of the engine, and devise ad-
hoc solutions to specific entailment problems.

This paper investigates the idea, still unexplored,
of a tighter integration of MT and TE algorithms and
techniques. Our aim is to embed cross-lingual pro-
cessing techniques inside the TE recognition pro-
cess in order to avoid any dependency on external
MT components, and eventually gain full control of
the system’s behaviour. Along this direction, we

1336



start from the acquisition and use of lexical knowl-
edge, which represents the basic building block of
any TE system. Using the basic solution proposed
by (Mehdad et al., 2010) as a term of comparison,
we experiment with different sources of multilingual
lexical knowledge to address the following ques-
tions:
(1) What is the potential of the existing mul-

tilingual lexical resources to approach CLTE?
To answer this question we experiment with lex-
ical knowledge extracted from bilingual dictionar-
ies, and from a multilingual lexical database. Such
experiments show two main limitations of these re-
sources, namely: i) their limited coverage, and ii)
the difficulty to capture contextual information when
only associations between single words (or at most
named entities and multiword expressions) are used
to support inference.
(2) Does MT provide useful resources or tech-
niques to overcome the limitations of existing re-
sources? We envisage several directions in which
inputs from MT research may enable or improve
CLTE. As regards the resources, phrase and para-
phrase tables extracted from bilingual parallel cor-
pora can be exploited as an effective way to cap-
ture both lexical relations between single words, and
contextual information useful for inference. As re-
gards the algorithms, statistical models based on co-
occurrence observations, similar to those used in MT
to estimate translation probabilities, may contribute
to estimate entailment probabilities in CLTE. Focus-
ing on the resources direction, the main contribu-
tion of this paper is to show that the lexical knowl-
edge extracted from parallel corpora allows to sig-
nificantly improve the results achieved with other
multilingual resources.
(3) In the cross-lingual scenario, can we achieve
results comparable to those obtained in mono-
lingual TE? Our experiments show that, although
CLTE seems intrinsically more difficult, the results
obtained using phrase and paraphrase tables are bet-
ter than those achieved by average systems on mono-
lingual datasets. We argue that this is due to the
fact that parallel corpora are a rich source of cross-
lingual paraphrases with no equivalents in monolin-
gual TE.
(4) Can parallel corpora be useful also for mono-
lingual TE? To answer this question, we experiment

on monolingual RTE datasets using paraphrase ta-
bles extracted from bilingual parallel corpora. Our
results improve those achieved with the most widely
used resources in monolingual TE, namely Word-
Net, Verbocean, and Wikipedia.

The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows. Section 2 shortly overviews the role of lexical
knowledge in textual entailment, highlighting a gap
between TE and CLTE in terms of available knowl-
edge sources. Sections 3 and 4 address the first three
questions, giving motivations for the use of bilingual
parallel corpora in CLTE, and showing the results of
our experiments. Section 5 addresses the last ques-
tion, reporting on our experiments with paraphrase
tables extracted from phrase tables on the monolin-
gual RTE datasets. Section 6 concludes the paper,
and outlines the directions of our future research.

2 Lexical resources for TE and CLTE

All current approaches to monolingual TE, ei-
ther syntactically oriented (Rus et al., 2005), or
applying logical inference (Tatu and Moldovan,
2005), or adopting transformation-based techniques
(Kouleykov and Magnini, 2005; Bar-Haim et al.,
2008), incorporate different types of lexical knowl-
edge to support textual inference. Such information
ranges from i) lexical paraphrases (textual equiva-
lences between terms) to ii) lexical relations pre-
serving entailment between words, and iii) word-
level similarity/relatedness scores. WordNet, the
most widely used resource in TE, provides all the
three types of information. Synonymy relations
can be used to extract lexical paraphrases indicat-
ing that words from the text and the hypothesis en-
tail each other, thus being interchangeable. Hy-
pernymy/hyponymy chains can provide entailment-
preserving relations between concepts, indicating
that a word in the hypothesis can be replaced
by a word from the text. Paths between con-
cepts and glosses can be used to calculate simi-
larity/relatedness scores between single words, that
contribute to the computation of the overall similar-
ity between the text and the hypothesis.

Besides WordNet, the RTE literature documents
the use of a variety of lexical information sources
(Bentivogli et al., 2010; Dagan et al., 2009).
These include, just to mention the most popular

1337



ones, DIRT (Lin and Pantel, 2001), VerbOcean
(Chklovski and Pantel, 2004), FrameNet (Baker et
al., 1998), and Wikipedia (Mehdad et al., 2010;
Kouylekov et al., 2009). DIRT is a collection of sta-
tistically learned inference rules, that is often inte-
grated as a source of lexical paraphrases and entail-
ment rules. VerbOcean is a graph of fine-grained
semantic relations between verbs, which are fre-
quently used as a source of precise entailment rules
between predicates. FrameNet is a knowledge-base
of frames describing prototypical situations, and the
role of the participants they involve. It can be
used as an alternative source of entailment rules,
or to determine the semantic overlap between texts
and hypotheses. Wikipedia is often used to extract
probabilistic entailment rules based word similar-
ity/relatedness scores.

Despite the consensus on the usefulness of lexi-
cal knowledge for textual inference, determining the
actual impact of these resources is not straightfor-
ward, as they always represent one component in
complex architectures that may use them in differ-
ent ways. As emerges from the ablation tests re-
ported in (Bentivogli et al., 2010), even the most
common resources proved to have a positive impact
on some systems and a negative impact on others.
Some previous works (Bannard and Callison-Burch,
2005; Zhao et al., 2009; Kouylekov et al., 2009)
indicate, as main limitations of the mentioned re-
sources, their limited coverage, their low precision,
and the fact that they are mostly suitable to capture
relations mainly between single words.

Addressing CLTE we have to face additional and
more problematic issues related to: i) the stronger
need of lexical knowledge, and ii) the limited avail-
ability of multilingual lexical resources. As regards
the first issue, it’s worth noting that in the monolin-
gual scenario simple “bag of words” (or “bag of n-
grams”) approaches are per se sufficient to achieve
results above baseline. In contrast, their applica-
tion in the cross-lingual setting is not a viable so-
lution due to the impossibility to perform direct lex-
ical matches between texts and hypotheses in differ-
ent languages. This situation makes the availability
of multilingual lexical knowledge a necessary con-
dition to bridge the language gap. However, with
the only exceptions represented by WordNet and
Wikipedia, most of the aforementioned resources

are available only for English. Multilingual lexi-
cal databases aligned with the English WordNet (e.g.
MultiWordNet (Pianta et al., 2002)) have been cre-
ated for several languages, with different degrees of
coverage. As an example, the 57,424 synsets of the
Spanish section of MultiWordNet aligned to English
cover just around 50% of the WordNet’s synsets,
thus making the coverage issue even more problem-
atic than for TE. As regards Wikipedia, the cross-
lingual links between pages in different languages
offer a possibility to extract lexical knowledge use-
ful for CLTE. However, due to their relatively small
number (especially for some languages), bilingual
lexicons extracted from Wikipedia are still inade-
quate to provide acceptable coverage. In addition,
featuring a bias towards named entities, the infor-
mation acquired through cross-lingual links can at
most complement the lexical knowledge extracted
from more generic multilingual resources (e.g bilin-
gual dictionaries).

3 Using Parallel Corpora for CLTE

Bilingual parallel corpora represent a possible solu-
tion to overcome the inadequacy of the existing re-
sources, and to implement a portable approach for
CLTE. To this aim, we exploit parallel data to: i)
learn alignment criteria between phrasal elements
in different languages, ii) use them to automatically
extract lexical knowledge in the form of phrase ta-
bles, and iii) use the obtained phrase tables to create
monolingual paraphrase tables.

Given a cross-lingual T/H pair (with the text in
l1 and the hypothesis in l2), our approach leverages
the vast amount of lexical knowledge provided by
phrase and paraphrase tables to map H into T. We
perform such mapping with two different methods.
The first method uses a single phrase table to di-
rectly map phrases extracted from the hypothesis to
phrases in the text. In order to improve our system’s
generalization capabilities and increase the cover-
age, the second method combines the phrase table
with two monolingual paraphrase tables (one in l1,
and one in l2). This allows to:

1. use the paraphrase table in l2 to find para-
phrases of phrases extracted from H;

2. map them to entries in the phrase table, and ex-
tract their equivalents in l1;

1338



3. use the paraphrase table in l1 to find para-
phrases of the extracted fragments in l1;

4. map such paraphrases to phrases in T.

With the second method, phrasal matches between
the text and the hypothesis are indirectly performed
through paraphrases of the phrase table entries.

The final entailment decision for a T/H pair is as-
signed considering a model learned from the similar-
ity scores based on the identified phrasal matches.
In particular, “YES” and “NO” judgements are as-
signed considering the proportion of words in the
hypothesis that are found also in the text. This way
to approximate entailment reflects the intuition that,
as a directional relation between the text and the hy-
pothesis, the full content of H has to be found in T.

3.1 Extracting Phrase and Paraphrase Tables

Phrase tables (PHT) contain pairs of correspond-
ing phrases in two languages, together with associa-
tion probabilities. They are widely used in MT as a
way to figure out how to translate input in one lan-
guage into output in another language (Koehn et al.,
2003). There are several methods to build phrase ta-
bles. The one adopted in this work consists in learn-
ing phrase alignments from a word-aligned bilingual
corpus. In order to build English-Spanish phrase ta-
bles for our experiments, we used the freely avail-
able Europarl V.4, News Commentary and United
Nations Spanish-English parallel corpora released
for the WMT101. We run TreeTagger (Schmid,
1994) for tokenization, and used the Giza++ (Och
and Ney, 2003) to align the tokenized corpora at
the word level. Subsequently, we extracted the bi-
lingual phrase table from the aligned corpora using
the Moses toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). Since the re-
sulting phrase table was very large, we eliminated
all the entries with identical content in the two lan-
guages, and the ones containing phrases longer than
5 words in one of the two sides. In addition, in or-
der to experiment with different phrase tables pro-
viding different degrees of coverage and precision,
we extracted 7 phrase tables by pruning the initial
one on the direct phrase translation probabilities of
0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5. The resulting

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt10/

phrase tables range from 76 to 48 million entries,
with an average of 3.9 words per phrase.

Paraphrase tables (PPHT) contain pairs of corre-
sponding phrases in the same language, possibly as-
sociated with probabilities. They proved to be use-
ful in a number of NLP applications such as natural
language generation (Iordanskaja et al., 1991), mul-
tidocument summarization (McKeown et al., 2002),
automatic evaluation of MT (Denkowski and Lavie,
2010), and TE (Dinu and Wang, 2009).

One of the proposed methods to extract para-
phrases relies on a pivot-based approach using
phrase alignments in a bilingual parallel corpus
(Bannard and Callison-Burch, 2005). With this
method, all the different phrases in one language that
are aligned with the same phrase in the other lan-
guage are extracted as paraphrases. After the extrac-
tion, pruning techniques (Snover et al., 2009) can
be applied to increase the precision of the extracted
paraphrases.

In our work we used available2 paraphrase
databases for English and Spanish which have been
extracted using the method previously outlined.
Moreover, in order to experiment with different
paraphrase sets providing different degrees of cov-
erage and precision, we pruned the main paraphrase
table based on the probabilities, associated to its en-
tries, of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3. The number of phrase pairs
extracted varies from 6 million to about 80000, with
an average of 3.2 words per phrase.

3.2 Phrasal Matching Method

In order to maximize the usage of lexical knowledge,
our entailment decision criterion is based on similar-
ity scores calculated with a phrase-to-phrase match-
ing process.

A phrase in our approach is an n-gram composed
of up to 5 consecutive words, excluding punctua-
tion. Entailment decisions are estimated by com-
bining phrasal matching scores (Scoren) calculated
for each level of n-grams , which is the number
of 1-grams, 2-grams,..., 5-grams extracted from H
that match with n-grams in T. Phrasal matches are
performed either at the level of tokens, lemmas, or
stems, can be of two types:

2http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ alavie/METEOR

1339



1. Exact: in the case that two phrases are identical
at one of the three levels (token, lemma, stem);

2. Lexical: in the case that two different phrases
can be mapped through entries of the resources
used to bridge T and H (i.e. phrase tables, para-
phrases tables, dictionaries or any other source
of lexical knowledge).

For each phrase in H, we first search for exact
matches at the level of token with phrases in T. If
no match is found at a token level, the other levels
(lemma and stem) are attempted. Then, in case of
failure with exact matching, lexical matching is per-
formed at the same three levels. To reduce redun-
dant matches, the lexical matches between pairs of
phrases which have already been identified as exact
matches are not considered.

Once matching for each n-gram level has been
concluded, the number of matches (Mn) and the
number of phrases in the hypothesis (Nn) are used
to estimate the portion of phrases in H that are
matched at each level (n). The phrasal matching
score for each n-gram level is calculated as follows:

Scoren =
Mn
Nn

To combine the phrasal matching scores obtained
at each n-gram level, and optimize their relative
weights, we trained a Support Vector Machine clas-
sifier, SVMlight (Joachims, 1999), using each score
as a feature.

4 Experiments on CLTE

To address the first two questions outlined in Sec-
tion 1, we experimented with the phrase matching
method previously described, contrasting the effec-
tiveness of lexical information extracted from par-
allel corpora with the knowledge provided by other
resources used in the same way.

4.1 Dataset

The dataset used for our experiments is an English-
Spanish entailment corpus obtained from the orig-
inal RTE3 dataset by translating the English hy-
pothesis into Spanish. It consists of 1600 pairs
derived from the RTE3 development and test sets
(800+800). Translations have been generated by

the CrowdFlower3 channel to Amazon Mechanical
Turk4 (MTurk), adopting the methodology proposed
by (Negri and Mehdad, 2010). The method relies
on translation-validation cycles, defined as separate
jobs routed to MTurk’s workforce. Translation jobs
return one Spanish version for each hypothesis. Val-
idation jobs ask multiple workers to check the cor-
rectness of each translation using the original En-
glish sentence as reference. At each cycle, the trans-
lated hypothesis accepted by the majority of trust-
ful validators5 are stored in the CLTE corpus, while
wrong translations are sent back to workers in a
new translation job. Although the quality of the re-
sults is enhanced by the possibility to automatically
weed out untrusted workers using gold units, we per-
formed a manual quality check on a subset of the ac-
quired CLTE corpus. The validation, carried out by
a Spanish native speaker on 100 randomly selected
pairs after two translation-validation cycles, showed
the good quality of the collected material, with only
3 minor “errors” consisting in controversial but sub-
stantially acceptable translations reflecting regional
Spanish variations.

The T-H pairs in the collected English-Spanish
entailment corpus were annotated using TreeTagger
(Schmid, 1994) and the Snowball stemmer6 with to-
ken, lemma, and stem information.

4.2 Knowledge sources

For comparison with the extracted phrase and para-
phrase tables, we use a large bilingual dictionary
and MultiWordNet as alternative sources of lexical
knowledge.

Bilingual dictionaries (DIC) allow for precise
mappings between words in H and T. To create
a large bilingual English-Spanish dictionary we
processed and combined the following dictionaries
and bilingual resources:
- XDXF Dictionaries7: 22,486 entries.

3http://crowdflower.com/
4https://www.mturk.com/mturk/
5Workers’ trustworthiness can be automatically determined

by means of hidden gold units randomly inserted into jobs.
6http://snowball.tartarus.org/
7http://xdxf.revdanica.com/

1340



Figure 1: Accuracy on CLTE by pruning the phrase table
with different thresholds.

- Universal dictionary database8: 9,944 entries.
- Wiktionary database9: 5,866 entries.
- Omegawiki database10: 8,237 entries.
- Wikipedia interlanguage links11: 7,425 entries.
The resulting dictionary features 53,958 entries,
with an average length of 1.2 words.

MultiWordNet (MWN) allows to extract mappings
between English and Spanish words connected by
entailment-preserving semantic relations. The ex-
traction process is dataset-dependent, as it checks
for synonymy and hyponymy relations only between
terms found in the dataset. The resulting collection
of cross-lingual words associations contains 36,794
pairs of lemmas.

4.3 Results and Discussion
Our results are calculated over 800 test pairs of our
CLTE corpus, after training the SVM classifier over
800 development pairs. This section reports the
percentage of correct entailment assignments (accu-
racy), comparing the use of different sources of lex-
ical knowledge.

Initially, in order to find a reasonable trade-off be-
tween precision and coverage, we used the 7 phrase
tables extracted with different pruning thresholds

8http://www.dicts.info/
9http://en.wiktionary.org/

10http://www.omegawiki.org/
11http://www.wikipedia.org/

MWN DIC PHT PPHT Acc. δ
x 55.00 0.00

x 59.88 +4.88
x 62.62 +7.62
x x 62.88 +7.88

Table 1: Accuracy results on CLTE using different lexical
resources.

(see Section 3.1). Figure 1 shows that with the prun-
ing threshold set to 0.05, we obtain the highest re-
sult of 62.62% on the test set. The curve demon-
strates that, although with higher pruning thresholds
we retain more reliable phrase pairs, their smaller
number provides limited coverage leading to lower
results. In contrast, the large coverage obtained with
the pruning threshold set to 0.01 leads to a slight
performance decrease due to probably less precise
phrase pairs.

Once the threshold has been set, in order to
prove the effectiveness of information extracted
from bilingual corpora, we conducted a series of ex-
periments using the different resources mentioned in
Section 4.2.

As it can be observed in Table 1, the highest
results are achieved using the phrase table, both
alone and in combination with paraphrase tables
(62.62% and 62.88% respectively). These results
suggest that, with appropriate pruning thresholds,
the large number and the longer entries contained
in the phrase and paraphrase tables represent an ef-
fective way to: i) obtain high coverage, and ii) cap-
ture cross-lingual associations between multiple lex-
ical elements. This allows to overcome the bias to-
wards single words featured by dictionaries and lex-
ical databases.

As regards the other resources used for compari-
son, the results show that dictionaries substantially
outperform MWN. This can be explained by the
low coverage of MWN, whose entries also repre-
sent weaker semantic relations (preserving entail-
ment, but with a lower probability to be applied)
than the direct translations between terms contained
in the dictionary.

Overall, our results suggest that the lexical knowl-
edge extracted from parallel data can be successfully
used to approach the CLTE task.

1341



Dataset WN VO WIKI PPHT PPHT 0.1 PPHT 0.2 PPHT 0.3 AVG
RTE3 61.88 62.00 61.75 62.88 63.38 63.50 63.00 62.37
RTE5 62.17 61.67 60.00 61.33 62.50 62.67 62.33 61.41

RTE3-G 62.62 61.5 60.5 62.88 63.50 62.00 61.5 -

Table 2: Accuracy results on monolingual RTE using different lexical resources.

5 Using parallel corpora for TE

This section addresses the third and the fourth re-
search questions outlined in Section 1. Building
on the positive results achieved on the cross-lingual
scenario, we investigate the possibility to exploit
bilingual parallel corpora in the traditional monolin-
gual scenario. Using the same approach discussed
in Section 4, we compare the results achieved with
English paraphrase tables with those obtained with
other widely used monolingual knowledge resources
over two RTE datasets.

For the sake of completeness, we report in this
section also the results obtained adopting the “basic
solution” proposed by (Mehdad et al., 2010). Al-
though it was presented as an approach to CLTE,
the proposed method brings the problem back to the
monolingual case by translating H into the language
of T. The comparison with this method aims at ver-
ifying the real potential of parallel corpora against
the use of a competitive MT system (Google Trans-
late) in the same scenario.

5.1 Dataset

We experiment with the original RTE3 and RTE5
datasets, annotated with token, lemma, and stem in-
formation using the TreeTagger and the Snowball
stemmer.

In addition to confront our method with the solu-
tion proposed by (Mehdad et al., 2010) we translated
the Spanish hypotheses of our CLTE dataset into En-
glish using Google Translate. The resulting dataset
was annotated in the same way.

5.2 Knowledge sources

We compared the results achieved with paraphrase
tables (extracted with different pruning thresh-
olds12) with those obtained using the three most

12We pruned the paraphrase table (PPHT), with probabilities
set to 0.1 (PPHT 0.1), 0.2 (PPHT 0.2), and 0.3 (PPHT 0.3)

widely used English resources for Textual Entail-
ment (Bentivogli et al., 2010), namely:

WordNet (WN). WordNet 3.0 has been used
to extract a set of 5396 pairs of words connected by
the hyponymy and synonymy relations.

VerbOcean (VO). VerbOcean has been used
to extract 18232 pairs of verbs connected by the
“stronger-than” relation (e.g. “kill” stronger-than
“injure”).

Wikipedia (WIKI). We performed Latent Se-
mantic Analysis (LSA) over Wikipedia using the
jLSI tool (Giuliano, 2007) to measure the relat-
edness between words in the dataset. Then, we
filtered all the pairs with similarity lower than 0.7 as
proposed by (Kouylekov et al., 2009). In this way
we obtained 13760 word pairs.

5.3 Results and Discussion

Table 2 shows the accuracy results calculated over
the original RTE3 and RTE5 test sets, training our
classifier over the corresponding development sets.

The first two rows of the table show that pruned
paraphrase tables always outperform the other lexi-
cal resources used for comparison, with an accuracy
increase up to 3%. In particular, we observe that us-
ing 0.2 as a pruning threshold provides a good trade-
off between coverage and precision, leading to our
best results on both datasets (63.50% for RTE3, and
62.67% for RTE5). It’s worth noting that these re-
sults, compared with the average scores reported by
participants in the two editions of the RTE Challenge
(AVG column), represent an accuracy improvement
of more than 1%. Overall, these results confirm our
claim that increasing the coverage using context sen-
sitive phrase pairs obtained from large parallel cor-
pora, results in better performance not only in CLTE,

1342



but also in the monolingual scenario.
The comparison with the results achieved on

monolingual data obtained by automatically trans-
lating the Spanish hypotheses (RTE3-G row in Ta-
ble 2) leads to four main observations. First, we no-
tice that dealing with MT-derived inputs, the optimal
pruning threshold changes from 0.2 to 0.1, leading
to the highest accuracy of 63.50%. This suggests
that the noise introduced by incorrect translations
can be tackled by increasing the coverage of the
paraphrase table. Second, in line with the findings
of (Mehdad et al., 2010), the results obtained over
the MT-derived corpus are equal to those we achieve
over the original RTE3 dataset (i.e. 63.50%). Third,
the accuracy obtained over the CLTE corpus using
combined phrase and paraphrase tables (62.88%, as
reported in Table 1) is comparable to the best re-
sult gained over the automatically translated dataset
(63.50%). In all the other cases, the use of phrase
and paraphrase tables on CLTE data outperforms
the results achieved on the same data after transla-
tion. Finally, it’s worth remarking that applying our
phrase matching method on the translated dataset
without any additional source of knowledge would
result in an overall accuracy of 62.12%, which is
lower than the result obtained using only phrase ta-
bles on cross-lingual data (62.62%). This demon-
strates that phrase tables can successfully replace
MT systems in the CLTE task.

In light of this, we suggest that extracting lexi-
cal knowledge from parallel corpora is a preferable
solution to approach CLTE. One of the main rea-
sons is that placing a black-box MT system at the
front-end of the entailment process reduces the pos-
sibility to cope with wrong translations. Further-
more, the access to MT components is not easy (e.g.
Google Translate limits the number and the size of
queries, while open source MT tools cover few lan-
guage pairs). Moreover, the task of developing a
full-fledged MT system often requires the availabil-
ity of parallel corpora, and is much more complex
than extracting lexical knowledge from them.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we approached the cross-lingual Tex-
tual Entailment task focusing on the role of lexi-
cal knowledge extracted from bilingual parallel cor-

pora. One of the main difficulties in CLTE raises
from the lack of adequate knowledge resources to
bridge the lexical gap between texts and hypothe-
ses in different languages. Our approach builds on
the intuition that the vast amount of knowledge that
can be extracted from parallel data (in the form of
phrase and paraphrase tables) offers a possible so-
lution to the problem. To check the validity of our
assumptions we carried out several experiments on
an English-Spanish corpus derived from the RTE3
dataset, using phrasal matches as a criterion to ap-
proximate entailment. Our results show that phrase
and paraphrase tables allow to: i) outperform the re-
sults achieved with the few multilingual lexical re-
sources available, and ii) reach performance levels
above the average scores obtained by participants in
the monolingual RTE3 challenge. These improve-
ments can be explained by the fact that the lexi-
cal knowledge extracted from parallel data provides
good coverage both at the level of single words, and
at the level of phrases.

As a further contribution, we explored the appli-
cation of paraphrase tables extracted from parallel
data in the traditional monolingual scenario. Con-
trasting results with those obtained with the most
widely used resources in TE, we demonstrated the
effectiveness of paraphrase tables as a mean to over-
come the bias towards single words featured by the
existing resources.

Our future work will address both the extraction
of lexical information from bilingual parallel cor-
pora, and its use for TE and CLTE. On one side,
we plan to explore alternative ways to build phrase
and paraphrase tables. One possible direction is to
consider linguistically motivated approaches, such
as the extraction of syntactic phrase tables as pro-
posed by (Yamada and Knight, 2001). Another in-
teresting direction is to investigate the potential of
paraphrase patterns (i.e. patterns including part-
of-speech slots), extracted from bilingual parallel
corpora with the method proposed by (Zhao et al.,
2009). On the other side we will investigate more
sophisticated methods to exploit the acquired lexi-
cal knowledge. As a first step, the probability scores
assigned to phrasal entries will be considered to per-
form weighted phrase matching as an improved cri-
terion to approximate entailment.

1343



Acknowledgments

This work has been partially supported by the EC-
funded project CoSyne (FP7-ICT-4-24853).

References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.

1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. Proceedings
of COLING-ACL.

Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Para-
phrasing with Bilingual Parallel Corpora. Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005).

Roy Bar-haim , Jonathan Berant , Ido Dagan , Iddo
Greental , Shachar Mirkin , Eyal Shnarch , and Idan
Szpektor. 2008. Efficient semantic deduction and ap-
proximate matching over compact parse forests. Pro-
ceedings of the TAC 2008 Workshop on Textual Entail-
ment.

Luisa Bentivogli, Peter Clark, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang
Dang, and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2010. The Sixth
PASCAL Recognizing Textual Entailment Challenge.
Proceedings of the the Text Analysis Conference (TAC
2010).

Timothy Chklovski and Patrick Pantel. 2004. Verbocean:
Mining the web for fine-grained semantic verb rela-
tions. Proceedings of Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-04).

Ido Dagan and Oren Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic tex-
tual entailment: Generic applied modeling of language
variability. Proceedings of the PASCAL Workshop of
Learning Methods for Text Understanding and Min-
ing.

Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Bernardo Magnini, and Dan Roth.
2009. Recognizing textual entailment: Rational, eval-
uation and approaches. Journal of Natural Language
Engineering , Volume 15, Special Issue 04, pp i-xvii.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2010. Extending
the METEOR Machine Translation Evaluation Metric
to the Phrase Level. Proceedings of Human Language
Technologies (HLT-NAACL 2010).

Georgiana Dinu and Rui Wang. 2009. Inference Rules
and their Application to Recognizing Textual Entail-
ment. Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the Eu-
ropean Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009).

Claudio Giuliano. 2007. jLSI a tool for la-
tent semantic indexing. Software avail-
able at http://tcc.itc.it/research/textec/tools-
resources/jLSI.html.

Lidija Iordanskaja, Richard Kittredge, and Alain Polg re..
1991. Lexical selection and paraphrase in a meaning
text generation model. Natural Language Generation
in Articial Intelligence and Computational Linguistics.

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale support
vector machine learning practical.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu 2003.
Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. Proceedings of
HLT/NAACL.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. Proceed-
ings of the Conference of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL).

Milen Kouleykov and Bernardo Magnini. 2005. Tree
edit distance for textual entailment. Proceedings of
RALNP-2005, International Conference on Recent Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing.

Milen Kouylekov, Yashar Mehdad, and Matteo Negri.
2010. Mining Wikipedia for Large-Scale Repositories
of Context-Sensitive Entailment Rules. Proceedings
of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC 2010).

Yashar Mehdad, Alessandro Moschitti and Fabio Mas-
simo Zanzotto. 2010. Syntactic/semantic structures
for textual entailment recognition. Proceedings of the
11th Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL HLT 2010).

Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. DIRT - Discovery
of Inference Rules from Text.. Proceedings of ACM
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD-01).

Kathleen R. McKeown, Regina Barzilay, David Evans,
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, Judith L. Klavans, Ani
Nenkova, Carl Sable, Barry Schiffman, and Sergey
Sigelman. 2002. Tracking and summarizing news on
a daily basis with Columbias Newsblaster. Proceed-
ings of the Human Language Technology Conference..

Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2010. Towards Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment.
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (NAACL HLT 2010).

Dan Moldovan and Adrian Novischi. 2002. Lexical
chains for question answering. Proceedings of COL-
ING.

Matteo Negri and Yashar Mehdad. 2010. Creating a Bi-
lingual Entailment Corpus through Translations with
Mechanical Turk: $100 for a 10-day Rush. Proceed-
ings of the NAACL 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech
and Language Data With Amazons Mechanical Turk .

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):1951.

1344



Emanuele Pianta, Luisa Bentivogli, and Christian Gi-
rardi. 2002. MultiWordNet: Developing and Aligned
Multilingual Database. Proceedings of the First Inter-
national Conference on Global WordNet.

Vasile Rus, Art Graesser, and Kirtan Desai 2005.
Lexico-Syntactic Subsumption for Textual Entailment.
Proceedings of RANLP 2005.

Helmut Schmid 2005. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Language
Processing.

Marta Tatu andDan Moldovan. 2005. A semantic ap-
proach to recognizing textual entailment. Proceed-
ings of the Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (HLT/EMNLP 2005).

Matthew Snover, Nitin Madnani, Bonnie Dorr, and
Richard Schwartz. 2009. Fluency, Adequacy, or
HTER? Exploring Different Human Judgments with
a Tunable MT Metric. Proceedings of WMT09.

Rui Wang and Yi Zhang,. 2009. Recognizing Tex-
tual Relatedness with Predicate-Argument Structures.
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2009).

Kenji Yamada and Kevin Knight 2001. A Syntax-Based
Statistical Translation Model. Proceedings of the Con-
ference of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL).

Shiqi Zhao, Haifeng Wang, Ting Liu, and Sheng Li.
2009. Extracting Paraphrase Patterns from Bilingual
Parallel Corpora. Journal of Natural Language Engi-
neering , Volume 15, Special Issue 04, pp 503-526.

1345


