










































Predicting Relative Prominence in Noun-Noun Compounds


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 609–613,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Predicting Relative Prominence in Noun-Noun Compounds
Taniya Mishra

AT&T Labs-Research
180 Park Ave

Florham Park, NJ 07932
taniya@research.att.com

Srinivas Bangalore
AT&T Labs-Research

180 Park Ave
Florham Park, NJ 07932

srini@research.att.com

Abstract

There are several theories regarding what in-
fluences prominence assignment in English
noun-noun compounds. We have developed
corpus-driven models for automatically pre-
dicting prominence assignment in noun-noun
compounds using feature sets based on two
such theories: the informativeness theory and
the semantic composition theory. The eval-
uation of the prediction models indicate that
though both of these theories are relevant, they
account for different types of variability in
prominence assignment.

1 Introduction

Text-to-speech synthesis (TTS) systems stand to
gain in improved intelligibility and naturalness if
we have good control of the prosody. Typically,
prosodic labels are predicted through text analysis
and are used to control the acoustic parameters for
a TTS system. An important aspect of prosody pre-
diction is predicting which words should be prosod-
ically prominent, i.e., produced with greater en-
ergy, higher pitch, and/or longer duration than the
neighboring words, in order to indicate the for-
mer’s greater communicative salience. Appropriate
prominence assignment is crucial for listeners’ un-
derstanding of the intended message. However, the
immense prosodic variability found in spoken lan-
guage makes prominence prediction a challenging
problem. A particular sub-problem of prominence
prediction that still defies a complete solution is pre-
diction of relative prominence in noun-noun com-
pounds.

Noun-noun compounds such as White House,
cherry pie, parking lot, Madison Avenue, Wall
Street, nail polish, french fries, computer program-
mer, dog catcher, silk tie, and self reliance, oc-
cur quite frequently in the English language. In a
discourse neutral context, such constructions usu-
ally have leftmost prominence, i.e., speakers produce
the left-hand noun with greater prominence than the

right-hand noun. However, a significant portion —
about 25% (Liberman and Sproat, 1992) — of them
are assigned rightmost prominence (such as cherry
pie, Madison Avenue, silk tie, computer program-
mer, and self reliance from the list above). What
factors influence speakers’ decision to assign left or
right prominence is still an open question.

There are several different theories about rela-
tive prominence assignment in noun-noun (hence-
forth, NN) compounds, such as the structural the-
ory (Bloomfield, 1933; Marchand, 1969; Heinz,
2004), the analogical theory (Schmerling, 1971;
Olsen, 2000), the semantic theory (Fudge, 1984;
Liberman and Sproat, 1992) and the informativeness
theory (Bolinger, 1972; Ladd, 1984).1 However, in
most studies, the different theories are examined and
applied in isolation, thus making it difficult to com-
pare them directly. It would be informative and il-
luminating to apply these theories to the same task
and the same dataset.

For this paper, we focus on two particular the-
ories, the informativeness theory and the seman-
tic composition theory. The informativeness theory
posits that the relatively more informative and un-
expected noun is given greater prominence in the
NN compound than the less informative and more
predictable noun. The semantic composition theory
posits that relative prominence assignment in NN
compounds is decided according to the semantic re-
lationship between the two nouns.

We apply these two theories to the task of pre-
dicting relative prominence in NN compounds via
statistical corpus-driven methods, within the larger
context of building a system that can predict appro-
priate prominence patterns for text-to-speech syn-
thesis. Here we are only focusing on predicting rela-
tive prominence of NN compounds in a neutral con-
text, where there are no pragmatic reasons (such as
contrastiveness or given/new distinction) for shifting
prominence.

1In-depth reviews of the different theories can be found in
Plag (2006) and Bell and Plag (2010).

609



2 Informativeness Measures

We used the following five metrics to capture the
individual and relative informativeness of nouns in
each NN compound:

• Unigram Predictability (UP): Defined as the
predictability of a word given a text corpus, it
is measured as the log probability of the word
in the text corpus. Here, we use the maximum
likelihood formulation of this measure.

UP = log
Freq(wi)∑
i Freq(wi)

(1)

This is a very simple measure of word informa-
tiveness that has been shown to be effective in
a similar task (Pan and McKeown, 1999).

• Bigram Predictability (BP): Defined as the pre-
dictability of a word given a previous word, it
is measured as the log probability of noun N2
given noun N1.

BP = log (Prob(N2 | N1)) (2)

• Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI): Defined
as a measure of how collocated two words are,
it is measured as the log of the ratio of probabil-
ity of the joint event of the two words occurring
and the probability of them occurring indepen-
dent of each other.

PMI = log
Prob(N1, N2)

Prob(N1)Prob(N2)
(3)

• Dice Coefficient (DC): Dice is another colloca-
tion measure used in information retrieval.

DC =
2 × Prob(N1, N2)

Prob(N1) + Prob(N2)
(4)

• Pointwise Kullback-Leibler Divergence (PKL):
In this context, Pointwise Kullback-Leibler di-
vergence (a formulation of relative entropy)
measures the degree to which one over-
approximates the information content of N2 by
failing to take into account the immediately
preceding word N1. (PKL values are always
negative.) A high absolute value of PKL indi-
cates that there is not much information con-
tained in N2 if N1 is taken into account. We
define PKL as

Prob(N2 | N1) log Prob(N2 | N1)
Prob(N2)

(5)

Another way to consider PKL is as PMI nor-
malized by the predictability of N2 given N1.

All except the first the aforementioned five infor-
mativeness measures are relative measures. Of
these, PMI and Dice Coefficient are symmetric mea-
sures while Bigram Predictability and PKL are non-
symmetric (unidirectional) measures.

3 Semantic Relationship Modeling

We modeled the semantic relationship between the
two nouns in the NN compound as follows. For
each of the two nouns in each NN compound, we
maintain a semantic category vector of 26 elements.
The 26 elements are associated with 26 semantic
categories (such as food, event, act, location, arti-
fact, etc.) assigned to nouns in WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998). For each noun, each element of the semantic
category vector is assigned a value of 1, if the lem-
matized noun (i.e., the associated uninflected dic-
tionary entry) is assigned the associated semantic
category by WordNet, otherwise, the element is as-
signed a value of 0. (If a semantic category vector is
entirely populated by zeros, then that noun has not
been assigned any semantic category information by
WordNet.) We expected the cross-product of the se-
mantic category vectors of the two nouns in the NN
compound to roughly encode the possible semantic
relationships between the two nouns, which — fol-
lowing the semantic composition theory — corre-
lates with prominence assignment to some extent.

4 Semantic Informativeness Features

For each noun in each NN compound, we also
maintain three semantic informativeness features:
(1) Number of possible synsets associated with the
noun. A synset is a set of words that have the same
sense or meaning. (2) Left positional family size and
(3) Right positional family size. Positional family
size is the number of unique NN compounds that in-
clude the particular noun, either on the left or on the
right (Bell and Plag, 2010). These features are ex-
tracted from WordNet as well.

The intuition behind extracting synset counts and
positional family size was, once again, to measure
the relative informativeness of the nouns in NN com-
pounds. Smaller synset counts indicate more spe-
cific meaning of the noun, and thus perhaps more
information content. Larger right (or left) posi-
tional family size indicates that the noun is present

610



in the right (left) position of many possible NN com-
pounds, and thus less likely to receive higher promi-
nence in such compounds.

These features capture type-based informative-
ness, in contrast to the measures described in Sec-
tion 2, which capture token-based informativeness.

5 Experimental evaluation

For our evaluation, we used a hand-labeled corpus
of 7831 NN compounds randomly selected from the
1990 Associated Press newswire, and hand-tagged
for leftmost or rightmost prominence (Sproat, 1994).
This corpus contains 64 pairs of NN compounds that
differ in terms of capitalization but not in terms of
relative prominence assignment. It only contains
four pairs of NN compounds that differ in terms of
capitalization and in terms of relative prominence
assignment. Since there is not enough data in this
corpus to consider capitalization as a feature, we re-
moved the case information (by lowercasing the en-
tire corpora), and removed any duplicates. Of the
four pairs that differed in terms of capitalization,
we only retained the lower-cased NN compounds.
By normalizing Sproat’s hand-labeled corpus in this
way, we created a slightly smaller corpus 7767 ut-
terances that was used for the evaluation.

For each of the NN compounds in this corpus, we
computed the three aforementioned feature sets. To
compute the informativeness features, we used the
LDC English Gigaword corpus. The semantic cate-
gory vectors and the semantic informativeness fea-
tures were obtained from Wordnet. Using each of
the three feature sets individually as well as com-
bined together, we built automatic relative promi-
nence prediction models using Boostexter, a dis-
criminative classification model based on the boost-
ing family of algorithms, which was first proposed
in Freund and Schapire (1996).

Following an experimental methodology similar
to Sproat (1994), we used 88% (6835 samples) of
the corpus as training data and the remaining 12%
(932 samples) as test data. For each test case, the
output of the prediction models was either a 0 (indi-
cating that the leftmost noun receive higher promi-
nence) or a 1 (indicating that the rightmost noun re-
ceive higher prominence). We estimated the model
error of the different prediction models by comput-
ing the relative error reduction from the baseline er-
ror. The baseline error was obtained by assigning

the majority class to all test cases. We avoided over-
fitting by using 5-fold cross validation.

5.1 Results
The results of the evaluation of the different models
are presented in Table 1. In this table, INF denotes
informativeness features (Sec. 2), SRF denotes se-
mantic relationship modeling features (Sec. 3) and
SIF denotes semantic informativeness features (Sec.
4). We also present the results of building prediction
models by combining different features sets.

These results show that each of the prediction
models reduces the baseline error, thus indicating
that the different types of feature sets are each cor-
related with prominence assignment in NN com-
pounds to some extent. However, it appears that
some feature sets are more predictive. Of the indi-
vidual feature sets, SRF and INF features appear to
be more predictive than the SIF features. Combined
together, the three feature sets are most predictive,
reducing model error over the baseline error by al-
most 33% (compared to 16-22% for individual fea-
ture sets), though combining INF with SRF features
almost achieves the same reduction in baseline error.

Note that none of the three types of feature sets
that we have defined contain any direct lexical infor-
mation such as the nouns themselves or their lem-
mata. However, considering that the lexical con-
tent of the words is a rich source of information that
could have substantial predictive power, we included
the lemmata associated with the nouns in the NN
compounds as additional features to each feature set
and rebuilt the prediction models. An evaluation of
these lexically-enhanced models is shown in Table
2. Indeed, addition of the lemmatized form of the
NN compounds substantially increases the predic-
tive power of all the models. The baseline error is
reduced by almost 50% in each of the models —
the error reduction being the greatest (53%) for the
model built by combining all three feature sets.

6 Discussion and Conclusion

Several other studies have examined the main idea of
relative prominence assignment using one or more
of the theories that we have focused on in this paper
(though the particular tasks and terminology used
were different) and found similar results. For exam-
ple, Pan and Hirschberg (2000) have used some of
the same informativeness measures (denoted by INF
above) to predict pitch accent placement in word bi-

611



Feature Av. baseline Av. model % Error
Sets error (in %) error (in %) reduction
INF 29.18 22.85 21.69
SRF 28.04 21.84 22.00
SIF 29.22 24.36 16.66

INF-SRF 28.52 19.53 31.55
INF-SIF 28.04 21.25 24.33
SRF-SIF 29.74 21.30 28.31

All 28.98 19.61 32.36

Table 1: Results of prediction models

Feature Av. baseline Av. model % Error
Sets error (in %) error (in %) reduction
INF 28.6 14.67 48.74
SRF 28.34 14.29 49.55
SIF 29.48 14.85 49.49

INF-SRF 28.16 14.81 47.45
INF-SIF 28.38 14.16 50.03
SRF-SIF 29.24 14.51 50.30

All 28.12 13.19 52.95

Table 2: Results of lexically-enhanced prediction models

grams. Since pitch accents and perception of promi-
nence are strongly correlated, their conclusion that
informativeness measures are a good predictor of
pitch accent placement agrees with our conclusion
that informativeness measures are useful predictors
of relative prominence assignment. However, we
cannot compare their results to ours directly, since
their corpus and baseline error measurement2 were
different from ours.

Our results are more directly comparable to those
shown in Sproat (1994). For the same task as we
consider in this study, besides developing a rule-
based system, Sproat also developed a statistical
corpus-based model. His feature set was developed
to model the semantic relationship between the two
nouns in the NN compound, and included the lem-
mata related to the nouns. The model was trained
and tested on the same hand-labeled corpus that we
used for this study and the baseline error was mea-
sured in the same way. So, we can directly com-
pare the results of our lexically-enhanced SRF-based
models to Sproat’s corpus-driven statistical model.

2Pan and Hirschberg present error obtained by using a
unigram-based predictability model as baseline error. It is un-
clear what is the error obtained by assigning left prominence to
all words in their database, which was our baseline error.

In his work, Sproat reported a baseline error of 30%
and a model error of 16%. The reported relative im-
provement over the baseline error in Sproat’s study
was 46.6%, while our relative improvement using
the lexically enhanced SRF based model was 49.5%,
and the relative improvement using the combined
model is 52.95%.

Type-based semantic informativeness features of
the kind that we grouped as SIF were analyzed
in Bell and Plag (2010) as potential predictors of
prominence assignment in compound nouns. Like
us, they too found such features to be predictive
of prominence assignment and that combining them
with features that model the semantic relationship in
the NN compound makes them more predictive.

7 Conclusion

The goal of the presented work was predicting rel-
ative prominence in NN compounds via statistical
corpus-driven methods. We constructed automatic
prediction models using feature sets based on two
different theories about relative prominence assign-
ment in NN compounds: the informativeness theory
and the semantic composition theory. In doing so,
we were able to compare the two theories.

Our evaluation indicates that each of these theo-
ries is relevant, though perhaps to different degrees.
This is supported by the observation that the com-
bined model (in Table 1) is substantially more pre-
dictive than any of the individual models. This indi-
cates that the different feature sets capture different
correlations, and that perhaps each of the theories
(on which the feature sets are based) account for dif-
ferent types of variability in prominence assignment.

Our results also highlight the difference between
being able to use lexical information in prominence
prediction of NN compounds, or not. Using lexical
features, we can improve prediction over the default
case (i.e., assigning prominence to the left noun in
all cases) by over 50%. But if the given input is an
out-of-vocabulary NN compound, our non-lexically
enhanced best model can still improve prediction
over the default by about 33%.

Acknowledgment We would like to thank
Richard Sproat for freely providing the dataset on
which the developed models were trained and tested.
We would also like to thank him for his advice on
this topic.

612



References
M. Bell and I. Plag. 2010. Informativeness

is a determinant of compound stress in En-
glish. Submitted for publication. Obtained from
http://www2.uni-siegen.de/∼engspra/
publicat.html on February 12, 2010.

L. Bloomfield. 1933. Language, Holt, New York.
D. Bolinger. 1972. Accent is predictable (if you’re a

mind-reader). Language 48.
C. Fellbaum (editor). 1998. WordNet: An Electronic

Lexical Database, The MIT Press, Boston.
Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire, 1996. Experiments with

a new boosting alogrithm. Machine Learning: Pro-
ceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference,
pp. 148-156.

E. Fudge. 1984. English Word-Stress, Allen and Unwin,
London and Boston.

H. J. Giegerich. Compound or phrase? English noun-
plus-noun constructions and the stress criterion. In
English Language and Linguistics, 8:1–24.

R. D. Ladd, 1984. English compound stress. In Dafydd
Gibbon and Helmut Richter (eds.) Intonation, Accent
and Rhythm: Studies in 1188 Discourse Phonology,
W de Gruyter, Berlin.

M. Liberman and R. Sproat. 1992. The Stress and Struc-
ture of Modified Noun Phrases in English. In I. Sag
(ed.), Lexical Matters, pp. 131–181, CSLI Publica-
tions, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

H. Marchand. The categories and types of present-day
English word-formation, Beck, Munich.

S. Olsen. 2000. Compounding and stress in English: A
closer look at the boundary between morphology and
syntax. Linguistische Berichte, 181:55–70.

S. Pan and J. Hirschberg. 2000. Modeling local context
for pitch accent prediction. Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Conference of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL-00), pp. 233-240, Hong Kong.
ACL.

S. Pan and K. McKeown. 1999. Word informativeness
and automatic pitch accent modeling. Proceedings of
the Joint SIGDAT Conference on EMNLP and VLC,
pp. 148–157.

I. Plag. 2006. The variability of compound stress in En-
glish: structural, semantic and analogical factors. En-
glish Language and Linguistics, 10.1, pp. 143–172.

R. Sproat. 1994. English Noun-Phrase Accent Prediction
for Text-to-Speech. Computer Speech and Language,
8, pp. 79–94.

R.E. Schapire, A brief introduction to boosting. In Pro-
ceedings of IJCAI, 1999.

S. F. Schmerling. 1971. A stress mess. Studies in the
Linguistic Sciences, 1:52–65.

613


