










































Collective Classification of Congressional Floor-Debate Transcripts


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1506–1515,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Collective Classification of Congressional Floor-Debate Transcripts

Clinton Burfoot, Steven Bird and Timothy Baldwin
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering

University of Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
{cburfoot, sb, tim}@csse.unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

This paper explores approaches to sentiment
classification of U.S. Congressional floor-
debate transcripts. Collective classification
techniques are used to take advantage of the
informal citation structure present in the de-
bates. We use a range of methods based on
local and global formulations and introduce
novel approaches for incorporating the outputs
of machine learners into collective classifica-
tion algorithms. Our experimental evaluation
shows that the mean-field algorithm obtains
the best results for the task, significantly out-
performing the benchmark technique.

1 Introduction

Supervised document classification is a well-studied
task. Research has been performed across many
document types with a variety of classification tasks.
Examples are topic classification of newswire ar-
ticles (Yang and Liu, 1999), sentiment classifica-
tion of movie reviews (Pang et al., 2002), and satire
classification of news articles (Burfoot and Baldwin,
2009). This and other work has established the use-
fulness of document classifiers as stand-alone sys-
tems and as components of broader NLP systems.

This paper deals with methods relevant to super-
vised document classification in domains with net-
work structures, where collective classification can
yield better performance than approaches that con-
sider documents in isolation. Simply put, a network
structure is any set of relationships between docu-
ments that can be used to assist the document clas-
sification process. Web encyclopedias and scholarly

publications are two examples of document domains
where network structures have been used to assist
classification (Gantner and Schmidt-Thieme, 2009;
Cao and Gao, 2005).

The contribution of this research is in four parts:
(1) we introduce an approach that gives better than
state of the art performance for collective classifica-
tion on the ConVote corpus of congressional debate
transcripts (Thomas et al., 2006); (2) we provide a
comparative overview of collective document classi-
fication techniques to assist researchers in choosing
an algorithm for collective document classification
tasks; (3) we demonstrate effective novel approaches
for incorporating the outputs of SVM classifiers into
collective classifiers; and (4) we demonstrate effec-
tive novel feature models for iterative local classifi-
cation of debate transcript data.

In the next section (Section 2) we provide a for-
mal definition of collective classification and de-
scribe the ConVote corpus that is the basis for our
experimental evaluation. Subsequently, we describe
and critique the established benchmark approach for
congressional floor-debate transcript classification,
before describing approaches based on three alterna-
tive collective classification algorithms (Section 3).
We then present an experimental evaluation (Sec-
tion 4). Finally, we describe related work (Section 5)
and offer analysis and conclusions (Section 6).

2 Task Definition

2.1 Collective Classification

Given a network and an object o in the network,
there are three types of correlations that can be used

1506



to infer a label for o: (1) the correlations between
the label of o and its observed attributes; (2) the cor-
relations between the label of o and the observed at-
tributes and labels of nodes connected to o; and (3)
the correlations between the label of o and the un-
observed labels of objects connected to o (Sen et al.,
2008).

Standard approaches to classification generally
ignore any network information and only take into
account the correlations in (1). Each object is clas-
sified as an individual instance with features derived
from its observed attributes. Collective classification
takes advantage of the network by using all three
sources. Instances may have features derived from
their source objects or from other objects. Classifi-
cation proceeds in a joint fashion so that the label
given to each instance takes into account the labels
given to all of the other instances.

Formally, collective classification takes a graph,
made up of nodes V = {V1, . . . , Vn} and edges
E. The task is to label the nodes Vi ∈ V from
a label set L = {L1, . . . , Lq}, making use of the
graph in the form of a neighborhood function N =
{N1, . . . , Nn}, where Ni ⊆ V \ {Vi}.

2.2 The ConVote Corpus

ConVote, compiled by Thomas et al. (2006), is a
corpus of U.S. congressional debate transcripts. It
consists of 3,857 speeches organized into 53 debates
on specific pieces of legislation. Each speech is
tagged with the identity of the speaker and a “for”
or “against” label derived from congressional voting
records. In addition, places where one speaker cites
another have been annotated, as shown in Figure 1.

We apply collective classification to ConVote de-
bates by letting V refer to the individual speakers in a
debate and populatingN using the citation graph be-
tween speakers. We set L = {y, n}, corresponding
to “for” and “against” votes respectively. The text
of each instance is the concatenation of the speeches
by a speaker within a debate. This results in a corpus
of 1,699 instances with a roughly even class distri-
bution. Approximately 70% of these are connected,
i.e. they are the source or target of one or more cita-
tions. The remainder are isolated.

3 Collective Classification Techniques

In this section we describe techniques for perform-
ing collective classification on the ConVote cor-
pus. We differentiate between dual-classifier and
iterative-classifier approaches.

Dual-classifier approach: This approach uses
a collective classification algorithm that takes inputs
from two classifiers: (1) a content-only classifier that
determines the likelihood of a y or n label for an in-
stance given its text content; and (2) a citation clas-
sifier that determines, based on citation information,
whether a given pair of instances are “same class” or
“different class”.

Let Ψ denote a set of functions representing the
classification preferences produced by the content-
only and citation classifiers:

• For each Vi ∈ V , φi ∈ Ψ is a function φi: L →
R+ ∪ {0}.

• For each (Vi, Vj) ∈ E, ψij ∈ Ψ is a function
ψij : L × L → R+ ∪ {0}.

Later in this section we will describe three collec-
tive classification algorithms capable of performing
overall classification based on these inputs: (1) the
minimum-cut approach, which is the benchmark for
collective classification with ConVote, established
by Thomas et al.; (2) loopy belief propagation; and
(3) mean-field. We will show that these latter two
techniques, which are both approximate solutions
for Markov random fields, are superior to minimum-
cut for the task.

Figure 2 gives a visual overview of the dual-
classifier approach.

Iterative-classifier approach: This approach
incorporates content-only and citation features into
a single local classifier that works on the assump-
tion that correct neighbor labels are already known.
This approach represents a marked deviation from
the dual-classifier approach and offers unique ad-
vantages. It is fully described in Section 3.4.

Figure 3 gives a visual overview of the iterative-
classifier approach.

For a detailed introduction to collective classifica-
tion see Sen et al. (2008).

1507



Debate 006
Speaker 400378 [against]

Mr. Speaker, . . . all over Washington and in the country, people are talking today about the
majority’s last-minute decision to abandon . . .
. . .

Speaker 400115 [for]
. . .
Mr. Speaker, . . . I just want to say to the gentlewoman from New York that every single member
of this institution . . .

. . .

Figure 1: Sample speech fragments from the ConVote corpus. The phrase gentlewoman from New York by speaker
400115 is annotated as a reference to speaker 400378.

Debate content

Citation vectorsContent-only vectors

Content-only classifications Citation classifications

Content-only and
citation scores

Overall classifications

Extract features Extract features

SVM SVM

NormaliseNormalise

MF/LBP/Mincut

Figure 2: Dual-classifier approach.

Debate content

Content-only vectors

Content-only classifications

Local vectors

Local classifications

Overall classifications

Extract features

SVM

Combine content-only
and citation features

SVM

Update citation features

Terminate iteration

Figure 3: Iterative-classifier approach.

3.1 Dual-classifier Approach with
Minimum-cut

Thomas et al. use linear kernel SVMs as their base
classifiers. The content-only classifier is trained to
predict y or n based on the unigram presence fea-
tures found in speeches. The citation classifier is
trained to predict “same class” or “different class”
labels based on the unigram presence features found
in the context windows (30 tokens before, 20 tokens
after) surrounding citations for each pair of speakers

in the debate.
The decision plane distance computed by the

content-only SVM is normalized to a positive real
number and stripped of outliers:

φi(y) =


1 di > 2σi;(

1 + di2σi

)
/2 |di| ≤ 2σi;

0 di < −2σi

where σi is the standard deviation of the decision
plane distance, di, over all of the instances in the
debate and φi(n) = 1−φi(y). The citation classifier
output is processed similarly:1

ψij(y, y) =


0 dij < θ;
α · dij/4σij θ ≤ dij ≤ 4σij ;
α dij > 4σij

where σij is the standard deviation of the decision
plane distance, dij over all of the citations in the de-
bate and ψij(n, n) = ψij(y, y). The α and θ vari-
ables are free parameters.

A given class assignment v is assigned a cost that
is the sum of per-instance and per-pair class costs
derived from the content-only and citation classifiers
respectively:

c(v) =
∑
Vi∈V

φi(v̄i) +
∑

(Vi,Vj)∈E:vi 6=vj

ψij(vi, vi)

where vi is the label of node Vi and v̄i denotes the
complement class of vi.

1Thomas et al. classify each citation context window sep-
arately, so their ψ values are actually calculated in a slightly
more complicated way. We adopted the present approach for
conceptual simplicity and because it gave superior performance
in preliminary experiments.

1508



The cost function is modeled in a flow graph
where extra source and sink nodes represent the y
and n labels respectively. Each node in V is con-
nected to the source and sink with capacities φi(y)
and φi(n) respectively. Pairs classified in the “same
class” class are linked with capacities defined by ψ.

An exact optimum and corresponding overall
classification is efficiently computed by finding the
minimum-cut of the flow graph (Blum and Chawla,
2001). The free parameters are tuned on a set of
held-out data.

Thomas et al. demonstrate improvements over
content-only classification, without attempting to
show that the approach does better than any alter-
natives; the main appeal is the simplicity of the flow
graph model. There are a number of theoretical lim-
itations to the approach, which we now discuss.

As Thomas et al. point out, the model has no way
of representing the “different class” output from the
citation classifier and these citations must be dis-
carded. This, to us, is the most significant problem
with the model. Inspection of the corpus shows that
approximately 80% of citations indicate agreement,
meaning that for the present task the impact of dis-
carding this information may not be large. However,
the primary utility in collective approaches lies in
their ability to fill in gaps in information not picked
up by content-only classification. All available link
information should be applied to this end, so we
need models capable of accepting both positive and
negative information.

The normalization techniques used for converting
SVM outputs to graph weights are somewhat arbi-
trary. The use of standard deviations appears prob-
lematic as, intuitively, the strength of a classification
should be independent of its variance. As a case in
point, consider a set of instances in a debate all clas-
sified as similarly weak positives by the SVM. Use
of ψi as defined above would lead to these being er-
roneously assigned the maximum score because of
their low variance.

The minimum-cut approach places instances in
either the positive or negative class depending on
which side of the cut they fall on. This means
that no measure of classification confidence is avail-
able. This extra information is useful at the very
least to give a human user an idea of how much to
trust the classification. A measure of classification

confidence may also be necessary for incorporation
into a broader system, e.g., a meta-classifier (An-
dreevskaia and Bergler, 2008; Li and Zong, 2008).

Tuning the α and θ parameters is likely to become
a source of inaccuracy in cases where the tuning and
test debates have dissimilar link structures. For ex-
ample, if the tuning debates tend to have fewer, more
accurate links the α parameter will be higher. This
will not produce good results if the test debates have
more frequent, less accurate links.

3.2 Heuristics for Improving Minimum-cut
Bansal et al. (2008) offer preliminary work describ-
ing additions to the Thomas et al. minimum-cut ap-
proach to incorporate “different class” citation clas-
sifications. They use post hoc adjustments of graph
capacities based on simple heuristics. Two of the
three approaches they trial appear to offer perfor-
mance improvements:

The SetTo heuristic: This heuristic works
through E in order and tries to force Vi and Vj into
different classes for every “different class” (dij < 0)
citation classifier output where i < j. It does this by
altering the four relevant content-only preferences,
φi(y), φi(n), φj(y), and φj(n). Assume without
loss of generality that the largest of these values is
φi(y). If this preference is respected, it follows that
Vj should be put into class n. Bansal et al. instanti-
ate this chain of reasoning by setting:

• φ′i(y) = max(β, φi(y))

• φ′j(n) = max(β, φj(n))

where φ′ is the replacement content-only function,
β is a free parameter ∈ (.5, 1], φ′i(n) = 1 − φ′i(y),
and φ′j(y) = 1− φ′j(y).

The IncBy heuristic: This heuristic is a more
conservative version of the SetTo heuristic. Instead
of replacing the content-only preferences with fixed
constants, it increments and decrements the previous
values so they are somewhat preserved:

• φ′i(y) = min(1, φi(y) + β)

• φ′j(n) = min(1, φj(n) + β)

There are theoretical shortcomings with these ap-
proaches. The most obvious problem is the arbitrary
nature of the manipulations, which produce a flow

1509



graph that has an indistinct relationship to the out-
puts of the two classifiers.

Bensal et al. trial a range of β values, with vary-
ing impacts on performance. No attempt is made to
demonstrate a method for choosing a good β value.
It is not clear that the tuning approach used to set α
and θ would be successful here. In any case, having
a third parameter to tune would make the process
more time-consuming and increase the risks of in-
correct tuning, described above.

As Bansal et al. point out, proceeding through E
in order means that earlier changes may be undone
for speakers who have multiple “different class” ci-
tations.

Finally, we note that the confidence of the cita-
tion classifier is not embodied in the graph structure.
The most marginal “different class” citation, classi-
fied just on the negative side of the decision plane, is
treated identically to the most confident one furthest
from the decision plane.

3.3 Dual-classifier Approach with Markov
Random Field Approximations

A pairwise Markov random field (Taskar et al.,
2002) is given by the pair (G,Ψ), where G and Ψ
are as previously defined, Ψ being re-termed as a set
of clique potentials. Given an assignment v to the
nodes V , the pairwise Markov random field is asso-
ciated with the probability distribution:

P (v) =
1
Z
∏
Vi∈V

φi(vi)
∏

(Vi,Vj)∈E

ψij(vi, vj)

where:

Z =
∑
v′

∏
Vi∈V

φi(v′i)
∏

(Vi,Vj)∈E

ψij(v′i, v
′
j)

and v′i denotes the label of Vi for an alternative as-
signment in v′.

In general, exact inference over a pairwise
Markov random field is known to be NP-hard. There
are certain conditions under which exact inference
is tractable, but real-world data is not guaranteed to
satisfy these. A class of approximate inference al-
gorithms known as variational methods (Jordan et
al., 1999) solve this problem by substituting a sim-
pler “trial” distribution which is fitted to the Markov
random field distribution.

Loopy Belief Propagation: Applied to a pair-
wise Markov random field, loopy belief propagation
is a message passing algorithm that can be concisely
expressed as the following set of equations:

mi→j(vj) = α
∑
vi∈L
{ψij(vi, vj)φi(vi)∏

Vk∈Ni∩V\Vj

mk→i(vi),∀vj ∈ L}

bi(vi) = αφi(vi)
∏

Vj∈Ni∩V
mj→i(vi),∀vi ∈ L

where mi→j is a message sent by Vi to Vj and α is
a normalization constant that ensures that each mes-
sage and each set of marginal probabilities sum to 1.
The algorithm proceeds by making each node com-
municate with its neighbors until the messages sta-
bilize. The marginal probability is then derived by
calculating bi(vi).

Mean-Field: The basic mean-field algorithm can
be described with the equation:

bj(vj) = αφj(vj)
∏

Vi∈Nj∩V

∏
vi∈L

ψ
bi(vi)
ij (vi, vj), vj ∈ L

where α is a normalization constant that ensures∑
vj
bj(vj) = 1. The algorithm computes the fixed

point equation for every node and continues to do so
until the marginal probabilities bj(vj) stabilize.

Mean-field can be shown to be a variational
method in the same way as loopy belief propagation,
using a simpler trial distribution. For details see Sen
et al. (2008).

Probabilistic SVM Normalisation: Unlike
minimum-cut, the Markov random field approaches
have inherent support for the “different class” out-
put of the citation classifier. This allows us to ap-
ply a more principled SVM normalisation technique.
Platt (1999) describes a technique for converting the
output of an SVM classifier to a calibrated posterior
probability. Platt finds that the posterior can be fit
using a parametric form of a sigmoid:

P (y = 1|d) = 1
1 + exp(Ad+B)

This is equivalent to assuming that the output of
the SVM is proportional to the log odds of a positive
example. Experimental analysis shows error rate is

1510



improved over a plain linear SVM and probabilities
are of comparable quality to those produced using a
regularized likelihood kernel method.

By applying this technique to the base classifiers,
we can produce new, simpler Ψ functions, φi(y) =
Pi and ψij(y, y) = Pij where Pi is the probabilis-
tic normalized output of the content-only classifier
and Pij is the probabilistic normalized output of the
citation classifier.

This approach addresses the problems with the
Thomas et al. method where the use of standard
deviations can produce skewed normalizations (see
Section 3.1). By using probabilities we also open
up the possibility of replacing the SVM classifiers
with any other model than can be made to produce
a probability. Note also that there are no parameters
to tune.

3.4 Iterative Classifier Approach
The dual-classifier approaches described above rep-
resent global attempts to solve the collective classifi-
cation problem. We can choose to narrow our focus
to the local level, in which we aim to produce the
best classification for a single instance with the as-
sumption that all other parts of the problem (i.e. the
correct labeling of the other instances) are solved.

The Iterative Classification Algorithm (Bilgic et
al., 2007), defined in Algorithm 1, is a simple tech-
nique for performing collective classification using
such a local classifier. After bootstrapping with a
content-only classifier, it repeatedly generates new
estimates for vi based on its current knowledge of
Ni. The algorithm terminates when the predictions
stabilize or a fixed number of iterations is com-
pleted. Each iteration is completed using a newly
generated ordering O, over the instances V .

We propose three feature models for the local
classifier.

Citation presence and Citation count: Given
that the majority of citations represent the “same
class” relationship (see Section 3.1), we can an-
ticipate that content-only classification performance
will be improved if we add features to represent the
presence of neighbours of each class.

We define the function c(i, l) =
∑

vj∈Ni∩V δvj ,l
giving the number of neighbors for node Vi with la-
bel l, where δ is the Kronecker delta. We incorporate
these citation count values, one for the supporting

Algorithm 1 Iterative Classification Algorithm
for each node Vi ∈ V do {bootstrapping}

compute ~ai using only local attributes of node
vi ← f(~ai)

end for
repeat {iterative classification}

randomly generate ordering O over nodes in V
for each node Vi ∈ O do
{compute new estimate of vi}
compute ~ai using current assignments to Ni
vi ← f(~ai)

end for
until labels have stabilized or maximum iterations
reached

class and one for the opposing class, obtaining a new
feature vector (u1i , u

2
i , . . . , u

j
i , c(i, y), c(i, n)) where

u1i , u
2
i , . . . , u

j
i are the elements of ~ui, the binary un-

igram feature vector used by the content-only clas-
sifier to represent instance i.

Alternatively, we can represent neighbor labels
using binary citation presence values where any
non-zero count becomes a 1 in the feature vector.

Context window: We can adopt a more nu-
anced model for citation information if we incor-
porate the citation context window features into the
feature vector. This is, in effect, a synthesis of
the content-only and citation feature models. Con-
text window features come from the product space
L × C, where C is the set of unigrams used in ci-
tation context windows and ~ci denotes the context
window features for instance i. The new feature vec-
tor becomes: (u1i , u

2
i , . . . , u

j
i , c

1
i , c

2
i , . . . , c

k
i ). This

approach implements the intuition that speakers in-
dicate their voting intentions by the words they use
to refer to speakers whose vote is known. Because
neighbor relations are bi-directional the reverse is
also true: Speakers indicate other speakers’ voting
intentions by the words they use to refer to them.

As an example, consider the context window fea-
ture AGREE-FOR, indicating the presence of the
agree unigram in the citation window I agree with
the gentleman from Louisiana, where the label for
the gentleman from Louisiana instance is y. This
feature will be correctly correlated with the y label.
Similarly, if the unigram were disagree the feature
would be correlated with the n label.

1511



4 Experiments

In this section we compare the performance of our
dual-classifier and iterative-classifier approaches.
We also evaluate the performance of the three fea-
ture models for local classification.

All accuracies are given as the percentages of
instances correctly classified. Results are macro-
averaged using 10 × 10-fold cross validation, i.e.
10 runs of 10-fold cross validation using different
randomly assigned data splits.

Where quoted, statistical significance has been
calculated using a two-tailed paired t-test measured
over all 100 pairs with 10 degrees of freedom. See
Bouckaert (2003) for an experimental justification
for this approach.

Note that the results presented in this section
are not directly comparable with those reported by
Thomas et al. and Bansal et al. because their exper-
iments do not use cross-validation. See Section 4.3
for further discussion of experimental configuration.

4.1 Local Classification

We evaluate three models for local classification: ci-
tation presence features, citation count features and
context window features. In each case the SVM
classifier is given feature vectors with both content-
only and citation information, as described in Sec-
tion 3.4.

Table 1 shows that context window performs the
best with 89.66% accuracy, approximately 1.5%
ahead of citation count and 3.5% ahead of citation
presence. All three classifiers significantly improve
on the content-only classifier.

These relative scores seem reasonable. Knowing
the words used in citations of each class is better
than knowing the number of citations in each class,
and better still than only knowing which classes of
citations exist.

These results represent an upper-bound for the
performance of the iterative classifier, which re-
lies on iteration to produce the reliable information
about citations given here by oracle.

4.2 Collective Classification

Table 2 shows overall results for the three collective
classification algorithms. The iterative classifier was
run separately with citation count and context win-

Method Accuracy (%)
Majority 52.46
Content-only 75.29
Citation presence 85.01
Citation count 88.18
Context window 89.66

Table 1: Local classifier accuracy. All three local
classifiers are significant over the in-isolation classifier
(p < .001).

dow citation features, the two best performing local
classification methods, both with a threshold of 30
iterations.

Results are shown for connected instances, iso-
lated instances, and all instances. Collective clas-
sification techniques can only have an impact on
connected instances, so these figures are most im-
portant. The figures for all instances show the per-
formance of the classifiers in our real-world task,
where both connected and isolated instances need to
be classified and the end-user may not distinguish
between the two types.

Each of the four collective classifiers outperform
the minimum-cut benchmark over connected in-
stances, with the iterative classifier (context win-
dow) (79.05%) producing the smallest gain of less
than 1% and mean-field doing best with a nearly
6% gain (84.13%). All show a statistically signif-
icant improvement over the content-only classifier.
Mean-field shows a statistically significant improve-
ment over minimum-cut.

The dual-classifier approaches based on loopy
belief propagation and mean-field do better than
the iterative-classifier approaches by an average of
about 3%.

Iterative classification performs slightly better
with citation count features than with context win-
dow features, despite the fact that the context win-
dow model performs better in the local classifier
evaluation. We speculate that this may be due to ci-
tation count performing better when given incorrect
neighbor labels. This is an aspect of local classi-
fier performance we do not otherwise measure, so a
clear conclusion is not possible. Given the closeness
of the results it is also possible that natural statistical
variation is the cause of the difference.

1512



The performance of the minimum-cut method is
not reliably enhanced by either the SetTo or IncBy
heuristics. Only IncBy(.15) gives a very small im-
provement (0.14%) over plain minimum-cut. All
of the other combinations tried diminished perfor-
mance slightly.

4.3 A Note on Error Propagation and
Experimental Configuration

Early in our experimental work we noticed that per-
formance often varied greatly depending on the de-
bates that were allocated to training, tuning and test-
ing. This observation is supported by the per-fold
scores that are the basis for the macro-average per-
formance figures reported in Table 2, which tend
to have large standard deviations. The absolute
standard deviations over the 100 evaluations for the
minimum-cut and mean-field methods were 11.19%
and 8.94% respectively. These were significantly
larger than the standard deviation for the content-
only baseline, which was 7.34%. This leads us to
conclude that the performance of collective classifi-
cation methods is highly variable.

Bilgic and Getoor (2008) offer a possible expla-
nation for this. They note that the cost of incor-
rectly classifying a given instance can be magnified
in collective classification, because errors are prop-
agated throughout the network. The extent to which
this happens may depend on the random interaction
between base classification accuracy and network
structure. There is scope for further work to more
fully explain this phenomenon.

From these statistical and theoretical factors we
infer that more reliable conclusions can be drawn
from collective classification experiments that use
cross-validation instead of a single, fixed data split.

5 Related work

Somasundaran et al. (2009) use ICA to improve sen-
timent polarity classification of dialogue acts in a
corpus of multi-party meeting transcripts. Link fea-
tures are derived from annotations giving frame re-
lations and target relations. Respectively, these re-
late dialogue acts based on the sentiment expressed
and the object towards which the sentiment is ex-
pressed. Somasundaran et al. provides another ar-
gument for the usefulness of collective classification

(specifically ICA), in this case as applied at a dia-
logue act level and relying on a complex system of
annotations for link information.

Somasundaran and Wiebe (2009) propose an un-
supervised method for classifying the stance of each
contribution to an online debate concerning the mer-
its of competing products. Concessions to other
stances are modeled, but there are no overt citations
in the data that could be used to induce the network
structure required for collective classification.

Pang and Lee (2005) use metric labeling to per-
form multi-class collective classification of movie
reviews. Metric labeling is a multi-class equiva-
lent of the minimum-cut technique in which opti-
mization is done over a cost function incorporat-
ing content-only and citation scores. Links are con-
structed between test instances and a set of k near-
est neighbors drawn only from the training set. Re-
stricting the links in this way means the optimization
problem is simple. A similarity metric is used to find
nearest neighbors.

The Pang and Lee method is an instance of im-
plicit link construction, an approach which is be-
yond the scope of this paper but nevertheless an im-
portant area for future research. A similar technique
is used in a variation on the Thomas et al. experi-
ment where additional links between speeches are
inferred via a similarity metric (Burfoot, 2008). In
cases where both citation and similarity links are
present, the overall link score is taken as the sum of
the two scores. This seems counter-intuitive, given
that the two links are unlikely to be independent. In
the framework of this research, the approach would
be to train a link meta-classifier to take scores from
both link classifiers and output an overall link prob-
ability.

Within NLP, the use of LBP has not been re-
stricted to document classification. Examples of
other applications are dependency parsing (Smith
and Eisner, 2008) and alignment (Cromires and
Kurohashi, 2009). Conditional random fields
(CRFs) are an approach based on Markov random
fields that have been popular for segmenting and
labeling sequence data (Lafferty et al., 2001). We
rejected linear-chain CRFs as a candidate approach
for our evaluation on the grounds that the arbitrar-
ily connected graphs used in collective classification
can not be fully represented in graphical format, i.e.

1513



Connected Isolated All
Majority 52.46 46.29 50.51
Content only 75.31 78.90 76.28
Minimum-cut 78.31 78.90 78.40
Minimum-cut (SetTo(.6)) 78.22 78.90 78.32
Minimum-cut (SetTo(.8)) 78.01 78.90 78.14
Minimum-cut (SetTo(1)) 77.71 78.90 77.93
Minimum-cut (IncBy(.05)) 78.14 78.90 78.25
Minimum-cut (IncBy(.15)) 78.45 78.90 78.46
Minimum-cut (IncBy(.25)) 78.02 78.90 78.15
Iterative-classifier (citation count) 80.07? 78.90 79.69?
Iterative-classifier (context window) 79.05 78.90 78.93
Loopy Belief Propagation 83.37† 78.90 81.93†
Mean-Field 84.12† 78.90 82.45†

Table 2: Speaker classification accuracies (%) over connected, isolated and all instances. The marked results are
statistically significant over the content only benchmark (? p < .01, † p < .001). The mean-field results are statistically
significant over minimum-cut (p < .05).

linear-chain CRFs do not scale to the complexity of
graphs used in this research.

6 Conclusions and future work

By applying alternative models, we have demon-
strated the best recorded performance for collective
classification of ConVote using bag-of-words fea-
tures, beating the previous benchmark by nearly 6%.
Moreover, each of the three alternative approaches
trialed are theoretically superior to the minimum-cut
approach approach for three main reasons: (1) they
support multi-class classification; (2) they support
negative and positive citations; (3) they require no
parameter tuning.

The superior performance of the dual-classifier
approach with loopy belief propagation and mean-
field suggests that either algorithm could be consid-
ered as a first choice for collective document classi-
fication. Their advantage is increased by their abil-
ity to output classification confidences as probabili-
ties, while minimum-cut and the local formulations
only give absolute class assignments. We do not dis-
miss the iterative-classifier approach entirely. The
most compelling point in its favor is its ability to
unify content only and citation features in a single
classifier. Conceptually speaking, such an approach
should allow the two types of features to inter-relate
in more nuanced ways. A case in point comes from

our use of a fixed size context window to build a
citation classifier. Future approaches may be able
to do away with this arbitrary separation of features
by training a local classifier to consider all words in
terms of their impact on content-only classification
and their relations to neighbors.

Probabilistic SVM normalization offers a conve-
nient, principled way of incorporating the outputs of
an SVM classifier into a collective classifier. An op-
portunity for future work is to consider normaliza-
tion approaches for other classifiers. For example,
confidence-weighted linear classifiers (Dredze et al.,
2008) have been shown to give superior performance
to SVMs on a range of tasks and may therefore be a
better choice for collective document classification.

Of the three models trialled for local classifiers,
context window features did best when measured in
an oracle experiment, but citation count features did
better when used in a collective classifier. We con-
clude that context window features are a more nu-
anced and powerful approach that is also more likely
to suffer from data sparseness. Citation count fea-
tures would have been the less effective in a scenario
where the fact of the citation existing was less infor-
mative, for example, if a citation was 50% likely to
indicate agreement rather than 80% likely. There is
much scope for further research in this area.

1514



References
Alina Andreevskaia and Sabine Bergler. 2008. When

specialists and generalists work together: Overcom-
ing domain dependence in sentiment tagging. In ACL,
pages 290–298.

Mohit Bansal, Claire Cardie, and Lillian Lee. 2008. The
power of negative thinking: Exploiting label disagree-
ment in the min-cut classification framework. In COL-
ING, pages 15–18.

Mustafa Bilgic and Lise Getoor. 2008. Effective label
acquisition for collective classification. In KDD, pages
43–51.

Mustafa Bilgic, Galileo Namata, and Lise Getoor. 2007.
Combining collective classification and link predic-
tion. In ICDM Workshops, pages 381–386. IEEE
Computer Society.

Avrim Blum and Shuchi Chawla. 2001. Learning from
labeled and unlabeled data using graph mincuts. In
ICML, pages 19–26.

Remco R. Bouckaert. 2003. Choosing between two
learning algorithms based on calibrated tests. In
ICML, pages 51–58.

Clint Burfoot and Timothy Baldwin. 2009. Automatic
satire detection: Are you having a laugh? In ACL-
IJCNLP Short Papers, pages 161–164.

Clint Burfoot. 2008. Using multiple sources of agree-
ment information for sentiment classification of polit-
ical transcripts. In Australasian Language Technology
Association Workshop 2008, pages 11–18. ALTA.

Minh Duc Cao and Xiaoying Gao. 2005. Combining
contents and citations for scientific document classifi-
cation. In 18th Australian Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence, pages 143–152.

Fabien Cromires and Sadao Kurohashi. 2009. An
alignment algorithm using belief propagation and a
structure-based distortion model. In EACL, pages
166–174.

Mark Dredze, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira.
2008. Confidence-weighted linear classification. In
ICML, pages 264–271.

Zeno Gantner and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. 2009. Auto-
matic content-based categorization of Wikipedia ar-
ticles. In 2009 Workshop on The People’s Web
Meets NLP: Collaboratively Constructed Semantic
Resources, pages 32–37.

Michael Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi Jaakkola,
Lawrence Saul, and David Heckerman. 1999. An in-
troduction to variational methods for graphical mod-
els. Machine Learning, 37:183–233.

John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando C. N.
Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilis-
tic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data.
In ICML, pages 282–289.

Shoushan Li and Chengqing Zong. 2008. Multi-domain
sentiment classification. In ACL, pages 257–260.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2005. Seeing stars: Exploiting
class relationships for sentiment categorization with
respect to rating scales. In ACL, pages 115–124.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: Sentiment classification using ma-
chine learning techniques. In EMNLP, pages 79–86.

John C. Platt. 1999. Probabilistic outputs for support
vector machines and comparisons to regularized likeli-
hood methods. In A. Smola, P. Bartlett, B. Scholkopf,
and D. Schuurmans, editors, Advances in Large Mar-
gin Classifiers, pages 61–74. MIT Press.

Prithviraj Sen, Galileo Mark Namata, Mustafa Bilgic,
Lise Getoor, Brian Gallagher, and Tina Eliassi-Rad.
2008. Collective classification in network data. AI
Magazine, 29:93–106.

David A. Smith and Jason Eisner. 2008. Dependency
parsing by belief propagation. In EMNLP, pages 145–
156.

Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2009. Rec-
ognizing stances in online debates. In ACL-IJCNLP,
pages 226–234.

Swapna Somasundaran, Galileo Namata, Janyce Wiebe,
and Lise Getoor. 2009. Supervised and unsupervised
methods in employing discourse relations for improv-
ing opinion polarity classification. In EMNLP, pages
170–179.

Ben Taskar, Pieter Abbeel, and Daphne Koller. 2002.
Discriminative probabilistic models for relational data.
In UAI.

Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. 2006. Get out
the vote: Determining support or opposition from con-
gressional floor-debate transcripts. In EMNLP, pages
327–335.

Yiming Yang and Xin Liu. 1999. A re-examination of
text categorization methods. In Proceedings ACM SI-
GIR, pages 42–49.

1515


