










































A Probabilistic Modeling Framework for Lexical Entailment


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 558–563,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Probabilistic Modeling Framework for Lexical Entailment

Eyal Shnarch
Computer Science Department

Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

shey@cs.biu.ac.il

Jacob Goldberger
School of Engineering

Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

goldbej@eng.biu.ac.il

Ido Dagan
Computer Science Department

Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

dagan@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

Recognizing entailment at the lexical level is
an important and commonly-addressed com-
ponent in textual inference. Yet, this task has
been mostly approached by simplified heuris-
tic methods. This paper proposes an initial
probabilistic modeling framework for lexical
entailment, with suitable EM-based parame-
ter estimation. Our model considers promi-
nent entailment factors, including differences
in lexical-resources reliability and the impacts
of transitivity and multiple evidence. Evalu-
ations show that the proposed model outper-
forms most prior systems while pointing at re-
quired future improvements.

1 Introduction and Background

Textual Entailment was proposed as a generic
paradigm for applied semantic inference (Dagan et
al., 2006). This task requires deciding whether a tex-
tual statement (termed the hypothesis-H) can be in-
ferred (entailed) from another text (termed the text-
T ). Since it was first introduced, the six rounds
of the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) chal-
lenges1, currently organized under NIST, have be-
come a standard benchmark for entailment systems.

These systems tackle their complex task at vari-
ous levels of inference, including logical represen-
tation (Tatu and Moldovan, 2007; MacCartney and
Manning, 2007), semantic analysis (Burchardt et al.,
2007) and syntactic parsing (Bar-Haim et al., 2008;
Wang et al., 2009). Inference at these levels usually

1http://www.nist.gov/tac/2010/RTE/index.html

requires substantial processing and resources (e.g.
parsing) aiming at high performance.

Nevertheless, simple entailment methods, per-
forming at the lexical level, provide strong baselines
which most systems did not outperform (Mirkin
et al., 2009; Majumdar and Bhattacharyya, 2010).
Within complex systems, lexical entailment model-
ing is an important component. Finally, there are
cases in which a full system cannot be used (e.g.
lacking a parser for a targeted language) and one
must resort to the simpler lexical approach.

While lexical entailment methods are widely
used, most of them apply ad hoc heuristics which do
not rely on a principled underlying framework. Typ-
ically, such methods quantify the degree of lexical
coverage of the hypothesis terms by the text’s terms.
Coverage is determined either by a direct match of
identical terms in T and H or by utilizing lexi-
cal semantic resources, such as WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998), that capture lexical entailment relations (de-
noted here as entailment rules). Common heuristics
for quantifying the degree of coverage are setting a
threshold on the percentage coverage of H’s terms
(Majumdar and Bhattacharyya, 2010), counting ab-
solute number of uncovered terms (Clark and Har-
rison, 2010), or applying an Information Retrieval-
style vector space similarity score (MacKinlay and
Baldwin, 2009). Other works (Corley and Mihal-
cea, 2005; Zanzotto and Moschitti, 2006) have ap-
plied a heuristic formula to estimate the similarity
between text fragments based on a similarity func-
tion between their terms.

These heuristics do not capture several important
aspects of entailment, such as varying reliability of

558



entailment resources and the impact of rule chaining
and multiple evidence on entailment likelihood. An
additional observation from these and other systems
is that their performance improves only moderately
when utilizing lexical resources2.

We believe that the textual entailment field would
benefit from more principled models for various en-
tailment phenomena. Inspired by the earlier steps
in the evolution of Statistical Machine Translation
methods (such as the initial IBM models (Brown et
al., 1993)), we formulate a concrete generative prob-
abilistic modeling framework that captures the basic
aspects of lexical entailment. Parameter estimation
is addressed by an EM-based approach, which en-
ables estimating the hidden lexical-level entailment
parameters from entailment annotations which are
available only at the sentence-level.

While heuristic methods are limited in their abil-
ity to wisely integrate indications for entailment,
probabilistic methods have the advantage of be-
ing extendable and enabling the utilization of well-
founded probabilistic methods such as the EM algo-
rithm.

We compared the performance of several model
variations to previously published results on RTE
data sets, as well as to our own implementation
of typical lexical baselines. Results show that
both the probabilistic model and our percentage-
coverage baseline perform favorably relative to prior
art. These results support the viability of the proba-
bilistic framework while pointing at certain model-
ing aspects that need to be improved.

2 Probabilistic Model

Under the lexical entailment scope, our modeling
goal is obtaining a probabilistic score for the like-
lihood that all H’s terms are entailed by T. To that
end, we model prominent aspects of lexical entail-
ment, which were mostly neglected by previous lex-
ical methods: (1) distinguishing different reliabil-
ity levels of lexical resources; (2) allowing transi-
tive chains of rule applications and considering their
length when estimating their validity; and (3) con-
sidering multiple entailments when entailing a term.

2See ablation tests reports in http://aclweb.org/aclwiki/ in-
dex.php?title=RTE Knowledge Resources#Ablation Tests

chain

t1

t’

Resource2

tn

h1 hi hm

tjText:

Hypothesis:

. . .

Resource1

. . . . . .

MATCH

Resource1

. . .

Resource3

Figure 1: The generative process of entailing terms of a hy-
pothesis from a text. Edges represent entailment rules. There
are 3 evidences for the entailment of hi: a rule from Resource1,
another one from Resource3 both suggesting that tj entails it,
and a chain from t1 through an intermediate term t′.

2.1 Model Description

For T to entail H it is usually a necessary, but not
sufficient, that every term h ∈ H would be en-
tailed by at least one term t ∈ T (Glickman et al.,
2006). Figure 1 describes the process of entailing
hypothesis terms. The trivial case is when identical
terms, possibly at the stem or lemma level, appear
in T and H (a direct match as tn and hm in Fig-
ure 1). Alternatively, we can establish entailment
based on knowledge of entailing lexical-semantic
relations, such as synonyms, hypernyms and mor-
phological derivations, available in lexical resources
(e.g the rule inference→ reasoning from WordNet).
We denote by R(r) the resource which provided the
rule r.

Since entailment is a transitive relation, rules may
compose transitive chains that connect a term t ∈ T
to a term h ∈ H through intermediate terms. For
instance, from the rules infer→ inference and infer-
ence → reasoning we can deduce the rule infer →
reasoning (were inference is the intermediate term
as t′ in Figure 1).

Multiple chains may connect t to h (as for tj and
hi in Figure 1) or connect several terms in T to h
(as t1 and tj are indicating the entailment of hi in
Figure 1), thus providing multiple evidence for h’s
entailment. It is reasonable to expect that if a term t
indeed entails a term h, it is likely to find evidences
for this relation in several resources.

Taking a probabilistic perspective, we assume a
559



parameter θR for each resource R, denoting its re-
liability, i.e. the prior probability that applying a
rule from R corresponds to a valid entailment in-
stance. Direct matches are considered as a special
“resource”, called MATCH, for which θMATCH is ex-
pected to be close to 1.

We now present our probabilistic model. For a
text term t ∈ T to entail a hypothesis term h by a
chain c, denoted by t c−→ h, the application of every
r ∈ c must be valid. Note that a rule r in a chain c
connects two terms (its left-hand-side and its right-
hand-side, denoted lhs → rhs). The lhs of the first
rule in c is t ∈ T and the rhs of the last rule in it is
h ∈ H . We denote the event of a valid rule applica-
tion by lhs r−→ rhs. Since a-priori a rule r is valid
with probability θR(r), and assuming independence
of all r ∈ c, we obtain Eq. 1 to specify the prob-
ability of the event t c−→ h. Next, let C(h) denote
the set of chains which suggest the entailment of h.
The probability that T does not entail h at all (by
any chain), specified in Eq. 2, is the probability that
all these chains are not valid. Finally, the probabil-
ity that T entails all of H , assuming independence
of H’s terms, is the probability that every h ∈ H is
entailed, as given in Eq. 3. Notice that there could
be a term h which is not covered by any available
rule chain. Under this formulation, we assume that
each such h is covered by a single rule coming from
a special “resource” called UNCOVERED (expecting
θUNCOVERED to be relatively small).

p(t c−→ h) =
∏
r∈c

p(lhs r−→ rhs) =
∏
r∈c

θR(r)(1)

p(T 9 h) =
∏

c∈C(h)

[1− p(t c−→ h)] (2)

p(T → H) =
∏
h∈H

p(T → h) (3)

As can be seen, our model indeed distinguishes
varying resource reliability, decreases entailment
probability as rule chains grow and increases it when
entailment of a term is supported by multiple chains.

The above treatment of uncovered terms in H ,
as captured in Eq. 3, assumes that their entailment
probability is independent of the rest of the hypoth-
esis. However, when the number of covered hypoth-
esis terms increases the probability that the remain-
ing terms are actually entailed by T increases too

(even though we do not have supporting knowledge
for their entailment). Thus, an alternative model is
to group all uncovered terms together and estimate
the overall probability of their joint entailment as a
function of the lexical coverage of the hypothesis.
We denote Hc as the subset of H’s terms which are
covered by some rule chain and Huc as the remain-
ing uncovered part. Eq. 3a then provides a refined
entailment model for H , in which the second term
specifies the probability that Huc is entailed given
that Hc is validly entailed and the corresponding
lengths:

p(T→H) = [
∏

h∈Hc

p(T→h)]·p(T→Huc | |Hc|,|H|)

(3a)

2.2 Parameter Estimation

The difficulty in estimating the θR values is that
these are term-level parameters while the RTE-
training entailment annotation is given for the
sentence-level. Therefore, we use EM-based esti-
mation for the hidden parameters (Dempster et al.,
1977). In the E step we use the current θR values
to compute all whcr(T,H) values for each training
pair. whcr(T,H) stands for the posterior probability
that application of the rule r in the chain c for h ∈ H
is valid, given that either T entails H or not accord-
ing to the training annotation (see Eq. 4). Remember
that a rule r provides an entailment relation between
its left-hand-side (lhs) and its right-hand-side (rhs).
Therefore Eq. 4 uses the notation lhs r−→ rhs to des-
ignate the application of the rule r (similar to Eq. 1).

E :
whcr(T,H) =



p(lhs r−→ rhs|T → H) =
p(T→H|lhs

r−→rhs)p(lhs r−→rhs)
p(T→H)

if T → H

p(lhs r−→ rhs|T 9 H) =
p(T9H|lhs

r−→rhs)p(lhs r−→rhs)
p(T9H)

if T 9 H

(4)
After applying Bayes’ rule we get a fraction with

Eq. 3 in its denominator and θR(r) as the second term
of the numerator. The first numerator term is defined
as in Eq. 3 except that for the corresponding rule ap-
plication we substitute θR(r) by 1 (per the condition-
ing event). The probabilistic model defined by Eq.
1-3 is a loop-free directed acyclic graphical model

560



(aka a Bayesian network). Hence the E-step proba-
bilities can be efficiently calculated using the belief
propagation algorithm (Pearl, 1988).

The M step uses Eq. 5 to update the parameter set.
For each resourceR we average thewhcr(T,H) val-
ues for all its rule applications in the training, whose
total number is denoted nR.

M : θR =
1
nR

∑
T,H

∑
h∈H

∑
c∈C(h)

∑
r∈c|R(r)=R

whcr(T,H)

(5)
For Eq. 3a we need to estimate also p(T→Huc |
|Hc|,|H|). This is done directly via maximum likeli-
hood estimation over the training set, by calculating
the proportion of entailing examples within the set
of all examples of a given hypothesis length (|H|)
and a given number of covered terms (|Hc|). As
|Hc| we take the number of identical terms in T and
H (exact match) since in almost all cases terms in
H which have an exact match in T are indeed en-
tailed. We also tried initializing the EM algorithm
with these direct estimations but did not obtain per-
formance improvements.

3 Evaluations and Results

The 5th Recognizing Textual Entailment challenge
(RTE-5) introduced a new search task (Bentivogli
et al., 2009) which became the main task in RTE-
6 (Bentivogli et al., 2010). In this task participants
should find all sentences that entail a given hypothe-
sis in a given document cluster. This task’s data sets
reflect a natural distribution of entailments in a cor-
pus and demonstrate a more realistic scenario than
the previous RTE challenges.

In our system, sentences are tokenized and
stripped of stop words and terms are lemmatized and
tagged for part-of-speech. As lexical resources we
use WordNet (WN) (Fellbaum, 1998), taking as en-
tailment rules synonyms, derivations, hyponyms and
meronyms of the first senses of T and H terms, and
the CatVar (Categorial Variation) database (Habash
and Dorr, 2003). We allow rule chains of length up
to 4 in WordNet (WN4).

We compare our model to two types of baselines:
(1) RTE published results: the average of the best
runs of all systems, the best and second best per-
forming lexical systems and the best full system of
each challenge; (2) our implementation of lexical

coverage model, tuning the percentage-of-coverage
threshold for entailment on the training set. This
model uses the same configuration as our probabilis-
tic model. We also implemented an Information Re-
trieval style baseline3 (both with and without lex-
ical expansions), but given its poorer performance
we omit its results here.

Table 1 presents the results. We can see that
both our implemented models (probabilistic and
coverage) outperform all RTE lexical baselines on
both data sets, apart from (Majumdar and Bhat-
tacharyya, 2010) which incorporates additional lex-
ical resources, a named entity recognizer and a
co-reference system. On RTE-5, the probabilis-
tic model is comparable in performance to the best
full system, while the coverage model achieves con-
siderably better results. We notice that our imple-
mented models successfully utilize resources to in-
crease performance, as opposed to typical smaller
or less consistent improvements in prior works (see
Section 1).

Model
F1%

RTE-5 RTE-6

R
TE

avg. of all systems 30.5 33.8
2nd best lexical system 40.31 44.02

best lexical system 44.43 47.64

best full system 45.63 48.05

co
ve

ra
ge

no resource 39.5 44.8
+ WN 45.8 45.1
+ CatVar 47.2 45.5
+ WN + CatVar 48.5 44.7
+ WN4 46.3 43.1

pr
ob

ab
ili

st
ic no resource 41.8 42.1

+ WN 45.0 45.3
+ CatVar 42.0 45.9
+ WN + CatVar 42.8 45.5
+ WN4 45.8 42.6

Table 1: Evaluation results on RTE-5 and RTE-6. RTE systems
are: (1)(MacKinlay and Baldwin, 2009), (2)(Clark and Harri-
son, 2010), (3)(Mirkin et al., 2009)(2 submitted runs), (4)(Ma-
jumdar and Bhattacharyya, 2010) and (5)(Jia et al., 2010).

While the probabilistic and coverage models are
comparable on RTE-6 (with non-significant advan-
tage for the former), on RTE-5 the latter performs

3Utilizing Lucene search engine (http://lucene.apache.org)

561



better, suggesting that the probabilistic model needs
to be further improved. In particular, WN4 performs
better than the single-step WN only on RTE-5, sug-
gesting the need to improve the modeling of chain-
ing. The fluctuations over the data sets and impacts
of resources suggest the need for further investiga-
tion over additional data sets and resources. As for
the coverage model, under our configuration it poses
a bigger challenge for RTE systems than perviously
reported baselines. It is thus proposed as an easy to
implement baseline for future entailment research.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper presented, for the first time, a principled
and relatively rich probabilistic model for lexical en-
tailment, amenable for estimation of hidden lexical-
level parameters from standard sentence-level an-
notations. The positive results of the probabilistic
model compared to prior art and its ability to exploit
lexical resources indicate its future potential. Yet,
further investigation is needed. For example, analyz-
ing current model’s limitations, we observed that the
multiplicative nature of eqs. 1 and 3 (reflecting inde-
pendence assumptions) is too restrictive, resembling
a logical AND. Accordingly we plan to explore re-
laxing this strict conjunctive behavior through mod-
els such as noisy-AND (Pearl, 1988). We also in-
tend to explore the contribution of our model, and
particularly its estimated parameter values, within a
complex system that integrates multiple levels of in-
ference.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the NEGEV
Consortium of the Israeli Ministry of Industry,
Trade and Labor (www.negev-initiative.org), the
PASCAL-2 Network of Excellence of the European
Community FP7-ICT-2007-1-216886, the FIRB-
Israel research project N. RBIN045PXH and by the
Israel Science Foundation grant 1112/08.

References
Roy Bar-Haim, Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, Iddo Green-

tal, Shachar Mirkin, Eyal Shnarch, and Idan Szpektor.
2008. Efficient semantic deduction and approximate
matching over compact parse forests. In Proceedings
of Text Analysis Conference (TAC).

Luisa Bentivogli, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang Dang, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009. The fifth
PASCAL recognizing textual entailment challenge. In
Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference (TAC).

Luisa Bentivogli, Peter Clark, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang
Dang, and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2010. The sixth
PASCAL recognizing textual entailment challenge. In
Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference (TAC).

Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathemat-
ics of statistical machine translation: parameter esti-
mation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263–311,
June.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Nils Reiter, Stefan Thater, and
Anette Frank. 2007. A semantic approach to textual
entailment: System evaluation and task analysis. In
Proceedings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual
Entailment and Paraphrasing.

Peter Clark and Phil Harrison. 2010. BLUE-Lite: a
knowledge-based lexical entailment system for RTE6.
In Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference (TAC).

Courtney Corley and Rada Mihalcea. 2005. Measur-
ing the semantic similarity of texts. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic
Equivalence and Entailment.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol-
ume 3944, pages 177–190.

A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. 1977.
Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM
algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical society, se-
ries [B], 39(1):1–38.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and Com-
munication). The MIT Press.

Oren Glickman, Eyal Shnarch, and Ido Dagan. 2006.
Lexical reference: a semantic matching subtask. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 172–179. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Nizar Habash and Bonnie Dorr. 2003. A categorial vari-
ation database for english. In Proceedings of the North
American Association for Computational Linguistics.

Houping Jia, Xiaojiang Huang, Tengfei Ma, Xiaojun
Wan, and Jianguo Xiao. 2010. PKUTM participa-
tion at TAC 2010 RTE and summarization track. In
Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference (TAC).

Bill MacCartney and Christopher D. Manning. 2007.
Natural logic for textual inference. In Proceedings
of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment
and Paraphrasing.

562



Andrew MacKinlay and Timothy Baldwin. 2009. A
baseline approach to the RTE5 search pilot. In Pro-
ceedings of Text Analysis Conference (TAC).

Debarghya Majumdar and Pushpak Bhattacharyya.
2010. Lexical based text entailment system for main
task of RTE6. In Proceedings of Text Analysis Confer-
ence (TAC).

Shachar Mirkin, Roy Bar-Haim, Jonathan Berant, Ido
Dagan, Eyal Shnarch, Asher Stern, and Idan Szpektor.
2009. Addressing discourse and document structure in
the RTE search task. In Proceedings of Text Analysis
Conference (TAC).

Judea Pearl. 1988. Probabilistic reasoning in intelli-
gent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan
Kaufmann.

Marta Tatu and Dan Moldovan. 2007. COGEX at RTE
3. In Proceedings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on
Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing.

Rui Wang, Yi Zhang, and Guenter Neumann. 2009. A
joint syntactic-semantic representation for recognizing
textual relatedness. In Proceedings of Text Analysis
Conference (TAC).

Fabio Massimo Zanzotto and Alessandro Moschitti.
2006. Automatic learning of textual entailments with
cross-pair similarities. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

563


