










































Local and Global Algorithms for Disambiguation to Wikipedia


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1375–1384,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Local and Global Algorithms for Disambiguation to Wikipedia

Lev Ratinov 1 Dan Roth1 Doug Downey2 Mike Anderson3

1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{ratinov2|danr}@uiuc.edu

2Northwestern University
ddowney@eecs.northwestern.edu

3Rexonomy
mrander@gmail.com

Abstract

Disambiguating concepts and entities in a con-
text sensitive way is a fundamental problem
in natural language processing. The compre-
hensiveness of Wikipedia has made the on-
line encyclopedia an increasingly popular tar-
get for disambiguation. Disambiguation to
Wikipedia is similar to a traditional Word
Sense Disambiguation task, but distinct in that
the Wikipedia link structure provides addi-
tional information about which disambigua-
tions are compatible. In this work we analyze
approaches that utilize this information to ar-
rive at coherent sets of disambiguations for a
given document (which we call “global” ap-
proaches), and compare them to more tradi-
tional (local) approaches. We show that previ-
ous approaches for global disambiguation can
be improved, but even then the local disam-
biguation provides a baseline which is very
hard to beat.

1 Introduction

Wikification is the task of identifying and link-
ing expressions in text to their referent Wikipedia
pages. Recently, Wikification has been shown to
form a valuable component for numerous natural
language processing tasks including text classifica-
tion (Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 2007b; Chang et
al., 2008), measuring semantic similarity between
texts (Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 2007a), cross-
document co-reference resolution (Finin et al., 2009;
Mayfield et al., 2009), and other tasks (Kulkarni et
al., 2009).

Previous studies on Wikification differ with re-
spect to the corpora they address and the subset
of expressions they attempt to link. For exam-
ple, some studies focus on linking only named en-
tities, whereas others attempt to link all “interest-
ing” expressions, mimicking the link structure found
in Wikipedia. Regardless, all Wikification systems
are faced with a key Disambiguation to Wikipedia
(D2W) task. In the D2W task, we’re given a text
along with explicitly identified substrings (called
mentions) to disambiguate, and the goal is to out-
put the corresponding Wikipedia page, if any, for
each mention. For example, given the input sen-
tence “I am visiting friends in <Chicago>,” we
output http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicago – the
Wikipedia page for the city of Chicago, Illinois, and
not (for example) the page for the 2002 film of the
same name.

Local D2W approaches disambiguate each men-
tion in a document separately, utilizing clues such
as the textual similarity between the document and
each candidate disambiguation’s Wikipedia page.
Recent work on D2W has tended to focus on more
sophisticated global approaches to the problem, in
which all mentions in a document are disambiguated
simultaneously to arrive at a coherent set of dis-
ambiguations (Cucerzan, 2007; Milne and Witten,
2008b; Han and Zhao, 2009). For example, if a
mention of “Michael Jordan” refers to the computer
scientist rather than the basketball player, then we
would expect a mention of “Monte Carlo” in the
same document to refer to the statistical technique
rather than the location. Global approaches utilize
the Wikipedia link graph to estimate coherence.

1375



m1 = Taiwan m2 = China m3 = Jiangsu Province..............

t1 = Taiwan t5 =People's Republic of China t7 = Jiangsu

..............

Document text  with mentions

t2 = Chinese Taipei t3 =Republic of China t4 = China t6 = History of China

φ(m1, t1)

φ(m1, t2)

φ(m1, t3)

ψ(t1, t7) ψ(t3, t7) ψ(t5, t7)

Figure 1: Sample Disambiguation to Wikipedia problem with three mentions. The mention “Jiangsu” is unambiguous.
The correct mapping from mentions to titles is marked by heavy edges

In this paper, we analyze global and local ap-
proaches to the D2W task. Our contributions are
as follows: (1) We present a formulation of the
D2W task as an optimization problem with local and
global variants, and identify the strengths and the
weaknesses of each, (2) Using this formulation, we
present a new global D2W system, called GLOW. In
experiments on existing and novel D2W data sets,1

GLOW is shown to outperform the previous state-
of-the-art system of (Milne and Witten, 2008b), (3)
We present an error analysis and identify the key re-
maining challenge: determining when mentions re-
fer to concepts not captured in Wikipedia.

2 Problem Definition and Approach

We formalize our Disambiguation to Wikipedia
(D2W) task as follows. We are given a document
d with a set of mentions M = {m1, . . . ,mN},
and our goal is to produce a mapping from the set
of mentions to the set of Wikipedia titles W =
{t1, . . . , t|W |}. Often, mentions correspond to a
concept without a Wikipedia page; we treat this case
by adding a special null title to the set W .

The D2W task can be visualized as finding a
many-to-one matching on a bipartite graph, with
mentions forming one partition and Wikipedia ti-
tles the other (see Figure 1). We denote the output
matching as an N -tuple Γ = (t1, . . . , tN ) where ti
is the output disambiguation for mention mi.

1The data sets are available for download at
http://cogcomp.cs.illinois.edu/Data

2.1 Local and Global Disambiguation

A local D2W approach disambiguates each men-
tion mi separately. Specifically, let φ(mi, tj) be a
score function reflecting the likelihood that the can-
didate title tj ∈W is the correct disambiguation for
mi ∈ M . A local approach solves the following
optimization problem:

Γ∗
local

= arg max
Γ

N∑

i=1

φ(mi, ti) (1)

Local D2W approaches, exemplified by (Bunescu
and Pasca, 2006) and (Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007),
utilize φ functions that assign higher scores to titles
with content similar to that of the input document.

We expect, all else being equal, that the correct
disambiguations will form a “coherent” set of re-
lated concepts. Global approaches define a coher-
ence function ψ, and attempt to solve the following
disambiguation problem:

Γ∗ = arg max
Γ

[

N∑

i=1

φ(mi, ti) + ψ(Γ)] (2)

The global optimization problem in Eq. 2 is NP-
hard, and approximations are required (Cucerzan,
2007). The common approach is to utilize the
Wikipedia link graph to obtain an estimate pairwise
relatedness between titles ψ(ti, tj) and to efficiently
generate a disambiguation context Γ′, a rough ap-
proximation to the optimal Γ∗. We then solve the
easier problem:

Γ∗ ≈ arg max
Γ

N∑

i=1

[φ(mi, ti) +
∑

tj∈Γ′

ψ(ti, tj)] (3)

1376



Eq. 3 can be solved by finding each ti and then map-
ping mi independently as in a local approach, but
still enforces some degree of coherence among the
disambiguations.

3 Related Work

Wikipedia was first explored as an information
source for named entity disambiguation and in-
formation retrieval by Bunescu and Pasca (2006).
There, disambiguation is performed using an SVM
kernel that compares the lexical context around the
ambiguous named entity to the content of the can-
didate disambiguation’s Wikipedia page. However,
since each ambiguous mention required a separate
SVM model, the experiment was on a very limited
scale. Mihalcea and Csomai applied Word Sense
Disambiguation methods to the Disambiguation to
Wikipedia task (2007). They experimented with
two methods: (a) the lexical overlap between the
Wikipedia page of the candidate disambiguations
and the context of the ambiguous mention, and (b)
training a Naive Bayes classiffier for each ambigu-
ous mention, using the hyperlink information found
in Wikipedia as ground truth. Both (Bunescu and
Pasca, 2006) and (Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007) fall
into the local framework.

Subsequent work on Wikification has stressed that
assigned disambiguations for the same document
should be related, introducing the global approach
(Cucerzan, 2007; Milne and Witten, 2008b; Han and
Zhao, 2009; Ferragina and Scaiella, 2010). The two
critical components of a global approach are the se-
mantic relatedness function ψ between two titles,
and the disambiguation context Γ′. In (Milne and
Witten, 2008b), the semantic context is defined to
be a set of “unambiguous surface forms” in the text,
and the title relatedness ψ is computed as Normal-
ized Google Distance (NGD) (Cilibrasi and Vitanyi,
2007).2 On the other hand, in (Cucerzan, 2007) the
disambiguation context is taken to be all plausible
disambiguations of the named entities in the text,
and title relatedness is based on the overlap in cat-
egories and incoming links. Both approaches have
limitations. The first approach relies on the pres-

2(Milne and Witten, 2008b) also weight each mention in Γ′

by its estimated disambiguation utility, which can be modeled
by augmenting ψ on per-problem basis.

ence of unambiguous mentions in the input docu-
ment, and the second approach inevitably adds ir-
relevant titles to the disambiguation context. As we
demonstrate in our experiments, by utilizing a more
accurate disambiguation context, GLOW is able to
achieve better performance.

4 System Architecture

In this section, we present our global D2W system,
which solves the optimization problem in Eq. 3. We
refer to the system as GLOW, for Global Wikifica-
tion. We use GLOW as a test bed for evaluating local
and global approaches for D2W. GLOW combines
a powerful local model φ with an novel method
for choosing an accurate disambiguation context Γ′,
which as we show in our experiments allows it to
outperform the previous state of the art.

We represent the functions φ and ψ as weighted
sums of features. Specifically, we set:

φ(m, t) =
∑

i

wiφi(m, t) (4)

where each feature φi(m, t) captures some aspect
of the relatedness between the mention m and the
Wikipedia title t. Feature functions ψi(t, t′) are de-
fined analogously. We detail the specific feature
functions utilized in GLOW in following sections.
The coefficients wi are learned using a Support Vec-
tor Machine over bootstrapped training data from
Wikipedia, as described in Section 4.5.

At a high level, the GLOW system optimizes the
objective function in Eq. 3 in a two-stage process.
We first execute a ranker to obtain the best non-null
disambiguation for each mention in the document,
and then execute a linker that decides whether the
mention should be linked to Wikipedia, or whether
instead switching the top-ranked disambiguation to
null improves the objective function. As our exper-
iments illustrate, the linking task is the more chal-
lenging of the two by a significant margin.

Figure 2 provides detailed pseudocode for GLOW.
Given a document d and a set of mentions M , we
start by augmenting the set of mentions with all
phrases in the document that could be linked to
Wikipedia, but were not included in M . Introducing
these additional mentions provides context that may
be informative for the global coherence computation
(it has no effect on local approaches). In the second

1377



Algorithm: Disambiguate to Wikipedia
Input: document d, Mentions M = {m1, . . . ,mN}
Output: a disambiguation Γ = (t1, . . . , tN ).
1) Let M ′ = M∪ { Other potential mentions in d}
2) For each mention m′i ∈ M

′, construct a set of disam-
biguation candidates Ti = {ti1, . . . , t

i
ki
}, tij 6= null

3) Ranker: Find a solution Γ = (t′1, . . . , t
′
|M′|), where

t′i ∈ Ti is the best non-null disambiguation of m
′
i.

4) Linker: For each m′i, map t
′
i to null in Γ iff doing so

improves the objective function
5) Return Γ entries for the original mentions M .

Figure 2: High-level pseudocode for GLOW.

step, we construct for each mention mi a limited set
of candidate Wikipedia titles Ti thatmi may refer to.
Considering only a small subset of Wikipedia titles
as potential disambiguations is crucial for tractabil-
ity (we detail which titles are selected below). In the
third step, the ranker outputs the most appropriate
non-null disambiguation ti for each mention mi.

In the final step, the linker decides whether the
top-ranked disambiguation is correct. The disam-
biguation (mi, ti) may be incorrect for several rea-
sons: (1) mention mi does not have a corresponding
Wikipedia page, (2) mi does have a corresponding
Wikipedia page, but it was not included in Ti, or
(3) the ranker erroneously chose an incorrect disam-
biguation over the correct one.

In the below sections, we describe each step of the
GLOW algorithm, and the local and global features
utilized, in detail. Because we desire a system that
can process documents at scale, each step requires
trade-offs between accuracy and efficiency.

4.1 Disambiguation Candidates Generation

The first step in GLOW is to extract all mentions that
can refer to Wikipedia titles, and to construct a set
of disambiguation candidates for each mention. Fol-
lowing previous work, we use Wikipedia hyperlinks
to perform these steps. GLOW utilizes an anchor-
title index, computed by crawling Wikipedia, that
maps each distinct hyperlink anchor text to its tar-
get Wikipedia titles. For example, the anchor text
“Chicago” is used in Wikipedia to refer both to the
city in Illinois and to the movie. Anchor texts in the
index that appear in document d are used to supple-
ment the mention setM in Step 1 of the GLOW algo-
rithm in Figure 2. Because checking all substrings

Baseline Feature: P (t|m), P (t)
Local Features: φi(t,m)
cosine-sim(Text(t),Text(m)) : Naive/Reweighted
cosine-sim(Text(t),Context(m)): Naive/Reweighted
cosine-sim(Context(t),Text(m)): Naive/Reweighted
cosine-sim(Context(t),Context(m)): Naive/Reweighted
Global Features: ψi(ti, tj)
I[ti−tj ]∗PMI(InLinks(ti),InLinks(tj)) : avg/max
I[ti−tj ]∗NGD(InLinks(ti),InLinks(tj)) : avg/max
I[ti−tj ]∗PMI(OutLinks(ti),OutLinks(tj)) : avg/max
I[ti−tj ]∗NGD(OutLinks(ti),OutLinks(tj)) : avg/max
I[ti↔tj ] : avg/max
I[ti↔tj ]∗PMI(InLinks(ti),InLinks(tj)) : avg/max
I[ti↔tj ]∗NGD(InLinks(ti),InLinks(tj)) : avg/max
I[ti↔tj ]∗PMI(OutLinks(ti),OutLinks(tj)) : avg/max
I[ti↔tj ]∗NGD(OutLinks(ti),OutLinks(tj)) : avg/max

Table 1: Ranker features. I[ti−tj ] is an indicator variable
which is 1 iff ti links to tj or vise-versa. I[ti↔tj ] is 1 iff
the titles point to each other.

in the input text against the index is computation-
ally inefficient, we instead prune the search space
by applying a publicly available shallow parser and
named entity recognition system.3 We consider only
the expressions marked as named entities by the
NER tagger, the noun-phrase chunks extracted by
the shallow parser, and all sub-expressions of up to
5 tokens of the noun-phrase chunks.

To retrieve the disambiguation candidates Ti for
a given mention mi in Step 2 of the algorithm, we
query the anchor-title index. Ti is taken to be the
set of titles most frequently linked to with anchor
text mi in Wikipedia. For computational efficiency,
we utilize only the top 20 most frequent target pages
for the anchor text; the accuracy impact of this opti-
mization is analyzed in Section 6.

From the anchor-title index, we compute two lo-
cal features φi(m, t). The first, P (t|m), is the frac-
tion of times the title t is the target page for an an-
chor text m. This single feature is a very reliable
indicator of the correct disambiguation (Fader et al.,
2009), and we use it as a baseline in our experiments.
The second, P (t), gives the fraction of all Wikipedia
articles that link to t.

4.2 Local Features φ

In addition to the two baseline features mentioned in
the previous section, we compute a set of text-based

3Available at http://cogcomp.cs.illinois.edu/page/software.

1378



local features φ(t,m). These features capture the in-
tuition that a given Wikipedia title t is more likely to
be referred to by mention m appearing in document
d if the Wikipedia page for t has high textual simi-
larity to d, or if the context surrounding hyperlinks
to t are similar to m’s context in d.

For each Wikipedia title t, we construct a top-
200 token TF-IDF summary of the Wikipedia page
t, which we denote as Text(t) and a top-200 to-
ken TF-IDF summary of the context within which
t was hyperlinked to in Wikipedia, which we denote
as Context(t). We keep the IDF vector for all to-
kens in Wikipedia, and given an input mention m in
a document d, we extract the TF-IDF representation
of d, which we denote Text(d), and a TF-IDF rep-
resentation of a 100-token window around m, which
we denote Context(m). This allows us to define
four local features described in Table 1.

We additionally compute weighted versions of
the features described above. Error analysis has
shown that in many cases the summaries of the dif-
ferent disambiguation candidates for the same sur-
face form s were very similar. For example, con-
sider the disambiguation candidates of “China’ and
their TF-IDF summaries in Figure 1. The major-
ity of the terms selected in all summaries refer to
the general issues related to China, such as “legal-
ism, reform, military, control, etc.”, while a minority
of the terms actually allow disambiguation between
the candidates. The problem stems from the fact
that the TF-IDF summaries are constructed against
the entire Wikipedia, and not against the confusion
set of disambiguation candidates of m. Therefore,
we re-weigh the TF-IDF vectors using the TF-IDF
scheme on the disambiguation candidates as a ad-
hoc document collection, similarly to an approach
in (Joachims, 1997) for classifying documents. In
our scenario, the TF of the a token is the original
TF-IDF summary score (a real number), and the IDF
term is the sum of all the TF-IDF scores for the to-
ken within the set of disambiguation candidates for
m. This adds 4 more “reweighted local” features in
Table 1.

4.3 Global Features ψ

Global approaches require a disambiguation context
Γ′ and a relatedness measure ψ in Eq. 3. In this sec-
tion, we describe our method for generating a dis-

ambiguation context, and the set of global features
ψi(t, t

′) forming our relatedness measure.
In previous work, Cucerzan defined the disam-

biguation context as the union of disambiguation
candidates for all the named entity mentions in the
input document (2007). The disadvantage of this ap-
proach is that irrelevant titles are inevitably added to
the disambiguation context, creating noise. Milne
and Witten, on the other hand, use a set of un-
ambiguous mentions (2008b). This approach uti-
lizes only a fraction of the available mentions for
context, and relies on the presence of unambigu-
ous mentions with high disambiguation utility. In
GLOW, we utilize a simple and efficient alternative
approach: we first train a local disambiguation sys-
tem, and then use the predictions of that system as
the disambiguation context. The advantage of this
approach is that unlike (Milne and Witten, 2008b)
we use all the available mentions in the document,
and unlike (Cucerzan, 2007) we reduce the amount
of irrelevant titles in the disambiguation context by
taking only the top-ranked disambiguation per men-
tion.

Our global features are refinements of previously
proposed semantic relatedness measures between
Wikipedia titles. We are aware of two previous
methods for estimating the relatedness between two
Wikipedia concepts: (Strube and Ponzetto, 2006),
which uses category overlap, and (Milne and Wit-
ten, 2008a), which uses the incoming link structure.
Previous work experimented with two relatedness
measures: NGD, and Specificity-weighted Cosine
Similarity. Consistent with previous work, we found
NGD to be the better-performing of the two. Thus
we use only NGD along with a well-known Pon-
twise Mutual Information (PMI) relatedness mea-
sure. Given a Wikipedia title collection W , titles
t1 and t2 with a set of incoming links L1, and L2
respectively, PMI and NGD are defined as follows:

NGD(L1, L2) =
Log(Max(|L1|, |L2|))− Log(|L1 ∩ L2|)

Log(|W |)− Log(Min(|L1|, |L2|))

PMI(L1, L2) =
|L1 ∩ L2|/|W |

|L1|/|W ||L2|/|W |

The NGD and the PMI measures can also be com-
puted over the set of outgoing links, and we include
these as features as well. We also included a fea-
ture indicating whether the articles each link to one

1379



another. Lastly, rather than taking the sum of the re-
latedness scores as suggested by Eq. 3, we use two
features: the average and the maximum relatedness
to Γ′. We expect the average to be informative for
many documents. The intuition for also including
the maximum relatedness is that for longer docu-
ments that may cover many different subtopics, the
maximum may be more informative than the aver-
age.

We have experimented with other semantic fea-
tures, such as category overlap or cosine similar-
ity between the TF-IDF summaries of the titles, but
these did not improve performance in our experi-
ments. The complete set of global features used in
GLOW is given in Table 1.

4.4 Linker Features
Given the mention m and the top-ranked disam-
biguation t, the linker attempts to decide whether t is
indeed the correct disambiguation of m. The linker
includes the same features as the ranker, plus addi-
tional features we expect to be particularly relevant
to the task. We include the confidence of the ranker
in t with respect to second-best disambiguation t′,
intended to estimate whether the ranker may have
made a mistake. We also include several properties
of the mention m: the entropy of the distribution
P (t|m), the percent of Wikipedia titles in which m
appears hyperlinked versus the percent of times m
appears as plain text, whether m was detected by
NER as a named entity, and a Good-Turing estimate
of how likely m is to be out-of-Wikipedia concept
based on the counts in P (t|m).

4.5 Linker and Ranker Training

We train the coefficients for the ranker features us-
ing a linear Ranking Support Vector Machine, using
training data gathered from Wikipedia. Wikipedia
links are considered gold-standard links for the
training process. The methods for compiling the
Wikipedia training corpus are given in Section 5.

We train the linker as a separate linear Support
Vector Machine. Training data for the linker is ob-
tained by applying the ranker on the training set. The
mentions for which the top-ranked disambiguation
did not match the gold disambiguation are treated
as negative examples, while the mentions the ranker
got correct serve as positive examples.

Mentions/Distinct titles
data set Gold Identified Solvable

ACE 257/255 213/212 185/184
MSNBC 747/372 530/287 470/273

AQUAINT 727/727 601/601 588/588
Wikipedia 928/813 855/751 843/742

Table 2: Number of mentions and corresponding dis-
tinct titles by data set. Listed are (number of men-
tions)/(number of distinct titles) for each data set, for each
of three mention types. Gold mentions include all dis-
ambiguated mentions in the data set. Identified mentions
are gold mentions whose correct disambiguations exist in
GLOW’s author-title index. Solvable mentions are identi-
fied mentions whose correct disambiguations are among
the candidates selected by GLOW (see Table 3).

5 Data sets and Evaluation Methodology

We evaluate GLOW on four data sets, of which
two are from previous work. The first data set,
from (Milne and Witten, 2008b), is a subset of the
AQUAINT corpus of newswire text that is annotated
to mimic the hyperlink structure in Wikipedia. That
is, only the first mentions of “important” titles were
hyperlinked. Titles deemed uninteresting and re-
dundant mentions of the same title are not linked.
The second data set, from (Cucerzan, 2007), is taken
from MSNBC news and focuses on disambiguating
named entities after running NER and co-reference
resolution systems on newsire text. In this case,
all mentions of all the detected named entities are
linked.

We also constructed two additional data sets. The
first is a subset of the ACE co-reference data set,
which has the advantage that mentions and their
types are given, and the co-reference is resolved. We
asked annotators on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to
link the first nominal mention of each co-reference
chain to Wikipedia, if possible. Finding the accu-
racy of a majority vote of these annotations to be
approximately 85%, we manually corrected the an-
notations to obtain ground truth for our experiments.
The second data set we constructed, Wiki, is a sam-
ple of paragraphs from Wikipedia pages. Mentions
in this data set correspond to existing hyperlinks in
the Wikipedia text. Because Wikipedia editors ex-
plicitly link mentions to Wikipedia pages, their an-
chor text tends to match the title of the linked-to-
page—as a result, in the overwhelming majority of

1380



cases, the disambiguation decision is as trivial as
string matching. In an attempt to generate more
challenging data, we extracted 10,000 random para-
graphs for which choosing the top disambiguation
according to P (t|m) results in at least a 10% ranker
error rate. 40 paragraphs of this data was utilized for
testing, while the remainder was used for training.

The data sets are summarized in Table 2. The ta-
ble shows the number of annotated mentions which
were hyperlinked to non-null Wikipedia pages, and
the number of titles in the documents (without
counting repetitions). For example, the AQUAINT
data set contains 727 mentions,4 all of which refer
to distinct titles. The MSNBC data set contains 747
mentions mapped to non-null Wikipedia pages, but
some mentions within the same document refer to
the same titles. There are 372 titles in the data set,
when multiple instances of the same title within one
document are not counted.

To isolate the performance of the individual com-
ponents of GLOW, we use multiple distinct metrics
for evaluation. Ranker accuracy, which measures
the performance of the ranker alone, is computed
only over those mentions with a non-null gold dis-
ambiguation that appears in the candidate set. It is
equal to the fraction of these mentions for which the
ranker returns the correct disambiguation. Thus, a
perfect ranker should achieve a ranker accuracy of
1.0, irrespective of limitations of the candidate gen-
erator. Linker accuracy is defined as the fraction of
all mentions for which the linker outputs the correct
disambiguation (note that, when the title produced
by the ranker is incorrect, this penalizes linker accu-
racy). Lastly, we evaluate our whole system against
other baselines using a previously-employed “bag of
titles” (BOT) evaluation (Milne and Witten, 2008b).
In BOT, we compare the set of titles output for a doc-
ument with the gold set of titles for that document
(ignoring duplicates), and utilize standard precision,
recall, and F1 measures.

In BOT, the set of titles is collected from the men-
tions hyperlinked in the gold annotation. That is,
if the gold annotation is { (China, People’s Repub-
lic of China), (Taiwan, Taiwan), (Jiangsu, Jiangsu)}

4The data set contains votes on how important the mentions
are. We believe that the results in (Milne and Witten, 2008b)
were reported on mentions which the majority of annotators
considered important. In contrast, we used all the mentions.

Generated data sets
Candidates k ACE MSNBC AQUAINT Wiki
1 81.69 72.26 91.01 84.79
3 85.44 86.22 96.83 94.73
5 86.38 87.35 97.17 96.37
20 86.85 88.67 97.83 98.59

Table 3: Percent of “solvable” mentions as a function
of the number of generated disambiguation candidates.
Listed is the fraction of identified mentions m whose
target disambiguation t is among the top k candidates
ranked in descending order of P (t|m).

and the predicted anotation is: { (China, People’s
Republic of China), (China, History of China), (Tai-
wan, null), (Jiangsu, Jiangsu), (republic, Govern-
ment)} , then the BOT for the gold annotation is:
{People’s Republic of China, Taiwan, Jiangsu} , and
the BOT for the predicted annotation is: {People’s
Republic of China, History of China, Jiangsu} . The
title Government is not included in the BOT for pre-
dicted annotation, because its associate mention re-
public did not appear as a mention in the gold anno-
tation. Both the precision and the recall of the above
prediction is 0.66. We note that in the BOT evalua-
tion, following (Milne and Witten, 2008b) we con-
sider all the titles within a document, even if some
the titles were due to mentions we failed to identify.5

6 Experiments and Results

In this section, we evaluate and analyze GLOW’s
performance on the D2W task. We begin by eval-
uating the mention detection component (Step 1 of
the algorithm). The second column of Table 2 shows
how many of the “non-null” mentions and corre-
sponding titles we could successfully identify (e.g.
out of 747 mentions in the MSNBC data set, only
530 appeared in our anchor-title index). Missing en-
tities were primarily due to especially rare surface
forms, or sometimes due to idiosyncratic capitaliza-
tion in the corpus. Improving the number of iden-
tified mentions substantially is non-trivial; (Zhou et
al., 2010) managed to successfully identify only 59
more entities than we do in the MSNBC data set, us-
ing a much more powerful detection method based
on search engine query logs.

We generate disambiguation candidates for a

5We evaluate the mention identification stage in Section 6.

1381



Data sets
Features ACE MSNBC AQUAINT Wiki
P (t|m) 94.05 81.91 93.19 85.88

P (t|m)+Local
Naive 95.67 84.04 94.38 92.76
Reweighted 96.21 85.10 95.57 93.59
All above 95.67 84.68 95.40 93.59

P (t|m)+Global
NER 96.21 84.04 94.04 89.56
Unambiguous 94.59 84.46 95.40 89.67
Predictions 96.75 88.51 95.91 89.79

P (t|m)+Local+Global
All features 97.83 87.02 94.38 94.18

Table 4: Ranker Accuracy. Bold values indicate the
best performance in each feature group. The global ap-
proaches marginally outperform the local approaches on
ranker accuracy , while combing the approaches leads to
further marginal performance improvement.

mention m using an anchor-title index, choosing
the 20 titles with maximal P (t|m). Table 3 eval-
uates the accuracy of this generation policy. We
report the percent of mentions for which the cor-
rect disambiguation is generated in the top k can-
didates (called “solvable” mentions). We see that
the baseline prediction of choosing the disambigua-
tion t which maximizes P (t|m) is very strong (80%
of the correct mentions have maximal P (t|m) in all
data sets except MSNBC). The fraction of solvable
mentions increases until about five candidates per
mention are generated, after which the increase is
rather slow. Thus, we believe choosing a limit of 20
candidates per mention offers an attractive trade-off
of accuracy and efficiency. The last column of Ta-
ble 2 reports the number of solvable mentions and
the corresponding number of titles with a cutoff of
20 disambiguation candidates, which we use in our
experiments.

Next, we evaluate the accuracy of the ranker. Ta-
ble 4 compares the ranker performance with base-
line, local and global features. The reweighted lo-
cal features outperform the unweighted (“Naive”)
version, and the global approach outperforms the
local approach on all data sets except Wikipedia.
As the table shows, our approach of defining the
disambiguation context to be the predicted dis-
ambiguations of a simpler local model (“Predic-
tions”) performs better than using NER entities as
in (Cucerzan, 2007), or only the unambiguous enti-

Data set Local Global Local+Global
ACE 80.1 → 82.8 80.6 → 80.6 81.5 → 85.1
MSNBC 74.9 → 76.0 77.9 → 77.9 76.5 → 76.9
AQUAINT 93.5 → 91.5 93.8 → 92.1 92.3 → 91.3
Wiki 92.2 → 92.0 88.5 → 87.2 92.8 → 92.6

Table 5: Linker performance. The notation X → Y
means that when linking all mentions, the linking accu-
racy is X , while when applying the trained linker, the
performance is Y . The local approaches are better suited
for linking than the global approaches. The linking accu-
racy is very sensitive to domain changes.

System ACE MSNBC AQUAINT Wiki
Baseline: P (t|m) 69.52 72.83 82.67 81.77
GLOW Local 75.60 74.39 84.52 90.20
GLOW Global 74.73 74.58 84.37 86.62
GLOW 77.25 74.88 83.94 90.54
M&W 72.76 68.49 83.61 80.32

Table 6: End systems performance - BOT F1. The per-
formance of the full system (GLOW) is similar to that of
the local version. GLOW outperforms (Milne and Witten,
2008b) on all data sets.

ties as in (Milne and Witten, 2008b).6 Combining
the local and the global approaches typically results
in minor improvements.

While the global approaches are most effective for
ranking, the linking problem has different charac-
teristics as shown in Table 5. We can see that the
global features are not helpful in general for predict-
ing whether the top-ranked disambiguation is indeed
the correct one.

Further, although the trained linker improves ac-
curacy in some cases, the gains are marginal—and
the linker decreases performance on some data sets.
One explanation for the decrease is that the linker
is trained on Wikipedia, but is being tested on non-
Wikipedia text which has different characteristics.
However, in separate experiments we found that
training a linker on out-of-Wikipedia text only in-
creased test set performance by approximately 3
percentage points. Clearly, while ranking accuracy
is high overall, different strategies are needed to
achieve consistently high linking performance.

A few examples from the ACE data set help il-

6In NER we used only the top prediction, because using all
candidates as in (Cucerzan, 2007) proved prohibitively ineffi-
cient.

1382



lustrate the tradeoffs between local and global fea-
tures in GLOW. The global system mistakenly links
“<Dorothy Byrne>, a state coordinator for the
Florida Green Party, said . . . ” to the British jour-
nalist, because the journalist sense has high coher-
ence with other mentions in the newswire text. How-
ever, the local approach correctly maps the men-
tion to null because of a lack of local contextual
clues. On the other hand, in the sentence “In-
stead of Los Angeles International, for example,
consider flying into <Burbank> or John Wayne Air-
port in Orange County, Calif.”, the local ranker
links the mention Burbank to Burbank, California,
while the global system correctly maps the entity to
Bob Hope Airport, because the three airports men-
tioned in the sentence are highly related to one an-
other.

Lastly, in Table 6 we compare the end system
BOT F1 performance. The local approach proves
a very competitive baseline which is hard to beat.
Combining the global and the local approach leads
to marginal improvements. The full GLOW sys-
tem outperforms the existing state-of-the-art system
from (Milne and Witten, 2008b), denoted as M&W,
on all data sets. We also compared our system with
the recent TAGME Wikification system (Ferragina
and Scaiella, 2010). However, TAGME is designed
for a different setting than ours: extremely short
texts, like Twitter posts. The TAGME RESTful API
was unable to process some of our documents at
once. We attempted to input test documents one sen-
tence at a time, disambiguating each sentence inde-
pendently, which resulted in poor performance (0.07
points in F1 lower than the P (t|m) baseline). This
happened mainly because the same mentions were
linked to different titles in different sentences, lead-
ing to low precision.

An important question is why M&W underper-
forms the baseline on the MSNBC and Wikipedia
data sets. In an error analysis, M&W performed
poorly on the MSNBC data not due to poor disam-
biguations, but instead because the data set contains
only named entities, which were often delimited in-
correctly by M&W. Wikipedia was challenging for
a different reason: M&W performs less well on the
short (one paragraph) texts in that set, because they
contain relatively few of the unambiguous entities
the system relies on for disambiguation.

7 Conclusions

We have formalized the Disambiguation to
Wikipedia (D2W) task as an optimization problem
with local and global variants, and analyzed the
strengths and weaknesses of each. Our experiments
revealed that previous approaches for global disam-
biguation can be improved, but even then the local
disambiguation provides a baseline which is very
hard to beat.

As our error analysis illustrates, the primary re-
maining challenge is determining when a mention
does not have a corresponding Wikipedia page.
Wikipedia’s hyperlinks offer a wealth of disam-
biguated mentions that can be leveraged to train
a D2W system. However, when compared with
mentions from general text, Wikipedia mentions
are disproportionately likely to have corresponding
Wikipedia pages. Our initial experiments suggest
that accounting for this bias requires more than sim-
ply training a D2W system on a moderate num-
ber of examples from non-Wikipedia text. Apply-
ing distinct semi-supervised and active learning ap-
proaches to the task is a primary area of future work.

Acknowledgments

This research supported by the Army Research
Laboratory (ARL) under agreement W911NF-09-
2-0053 and by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) Machine Reading Pro-
gram under Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)
prime contract no. FA8750-09-C-0181. The third
author was supported by a Microsoft New Faculty
Fellowship. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or
recommendations are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the view of the ARL, DARPA,
AFRL, or the US government.

References

R. Bunescu and M. Pasca. 2006. Using encyclope-
dic knowledge for named entity disambiguation. In
Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (EACL-06), Trento, Italy, pages 9–16, April.

Ming-Wei Chang, Lev Ratinov, Dan Roth, and Vivek
Srikumar. 2008. Importance of semantic represen-
tation: dataless classification. In Proceedings of the

1383



23rd national conference on Artificial intelligence -
Volume 2, pages 830–835. AAAI Press.

Rudi L. Cilibrasi and Paul M. B. Vitanyi. 2007. The
google similarity distance. IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and
Data Eng., 19(3):370–383.

Silviu Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity dis-
ambiguation based on Wikipedia data. In Proceedings
of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages
708–716, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni.
2009. Scaling wikipedia-based named entity disam-
biguation to arbitrary web text. In Proceedings of
the WikiAI 09 - IJCAI Workshop: User Contributed
Knowledge and Artificial Intelligence: An Evolving
Synergy, Pasadena, CA, USA, July.

Paolo Ferragina and Ugo Scaiella. 2010. Tagme: on-the-
fly annotation of short text fragments (by wikipedia
entities). In Jimmy Huang, Nick Koudas, Gareth J. F.
Jones, Xindong Wu, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, and
Aijun An, editors, Proceedings of the 19th ACM con-
ference on Information and knowledge management,
pages 1625–1628. ACM.

Tim Finin, Zareen Syed, James Mayfield, Paul Mc-
Namee, and Christine Piatko. 2009. Using Wikitol-
ogy for Cross-Document Entity Coreference Resolu-
tion. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium
on Learning by Reading and Learning to Read. AAAI
Press, March.

Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007a.
Computing semantic relatedness using wikipedia-
based explicit semantic analysis. In Proceedings of the
20th international joint conference on Artifical intel-
ligence, pages 1606–1611, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007b.
Harnessing the expertise of 70,000 human editors:
Knowledge-based feature generation for text catego-
rization. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 8:2297–2345, Decem-
ber.

Xianpei Han and Jun Zhao. 2009. Named entity dis-
ambiguation by leveraging wikipedia semantic knowl-
edge. In Proceeding of the 18th ACM conference on
Information and knowledge management, CIKM ’09,
pages 215–224, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Thorsten Joachims. 1997. A probabilistic analysis of
the rocchio algorithm with tfidf for text categoriza-
tion. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’97, pages
143–151, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.

Sayali Kulkarni, Amit Singh, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and
Soumen Chakrabarti. 2009. Collective annotation
of wikipedia entities in web text. In Proceedings
of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD ’09,
pages 457–466, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

James Mayfield, David Alexander, Bonnie Dorr, Jason
Eisner, Tamer Elsayed, Tim Finin, Clay Fink, Mar-
jorie Freedman, Nikesh Garera, James Mayfield, Paul
McNamee, Saif Mohammad, Douglas Oard, Chris-
tine Piatko, Asad Sayeed, Zareen Syed, and Ralph
Weischede. 2009. Cross-Document Coreference Res-
olution: A Key Technology for Learning by Reading.
In Proceedings of the AAAI 2009 Spring Symposium
on Learning by Reading and Learning to Read. AAAI
Press, March.

Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai. 2007. Wikify!: link-
ing documents to encyclopedic knowledge. In Pro-
ceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference on Con-
ference on information and knowledge management,
CIKM ’07, pages 233–242, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008a. An effec-
tive, low-cost measure of semantic relatedness ob-
tained from wikipedia links. In In the Wikipedia and
AI Workshop of AAAI.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008b. Learning to link
with wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM con-
ference on Information and knowledge management,
CIKM ’08, pages 509–518, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Michael Strube and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2006.
Wikirelate! computing semantic relatedness using
wikipedia. In proceedings of the 21st national confer-
ence on Artificial intelligence - Volume 2, pages 1419–
1424. AAAI Press.

Yiping Zhou, Lan Nie, Omid Rouhani-Kalleh, Flavian
Vasile, and Scott Gaffney. 2010. Resolving surface
forms to wikipedia topics. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (Coling 2010), pages 1335–1343, Beijing, China,
August. Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.

1384


