










































Data-oriented Monologue-to-Dialogue Generation


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 242–247,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Data-oriented Monologue-to-Dialogue Generation

Paul Piwek
Centre for Research in Computing

The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK

p.piwek@open.ac.uk

Svetlana Stoyanchev
Centre for Research in Computing

The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK
s.stoyanchev@open.ac.uk

Abstract

This short paper introduces an implemented
and evaluated monolingual Text-to-Text gen-
eration system. The system takes mono-
logue and transforms it to two-participant di-
alogue. After briefly motivating the task
of monologue-to-dialogue generation, we de-
scribe the system and present an evaluation in
terms of fluency and accuracy.

1 Introduction

Several empirical studies show that delivering in-
formation in the form of a dialogue, as opposed to
monologue, can be particularly effective for educa-
tion (Craig et al., 2000; Lee et al., 1998) and per-
suasion (Suzuki and Yamada, 2004). Information-
delivering or expository dialogue was already em-
ployed by Plato to communicate his philosophy. It
is used primarily to convey information and possibly
also make an argument; this in contrast with dra-
matic dialogue which focuses on character develop-
ment and narrative.

Expository dialogue lends itself well for presenta-
tion through computer-animated agents (Prendinger
and Ishizuka, 2004). Most information is however
locked up as text in leaflets, books, newspapers,
etc. Automatic generation of dialogue from text in
monologue makes it possible to convert information
into dialogue as and when needed.

This paper describes the first data-oriented
monologue-to-dialogue generation system which re-
lies on the automatic mapping of the discourse
relations underlying monologue to appropriate se-

quences of dialogue acts. The approach is data-
oriented in that the mapping rules have been auto-
matically derived from an annotated parallel mono-
logue/dialogue corpus, rather than being hand-
crafted.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews
existing approaches to dialogue generation. Section
3 describes the current approach. We provide an
evaluation in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 describes
our conclusions and plans for further research.

2 Related Work

For the past decade, generation of information-
delivering dialogues has been approached primarily
as an AI planning task. André et al. (2000) describe
a system, based on a centralised dialogue planner,
that creates dialogues between a virtual car buyer
and seller from a database; this approach has been
extended by van Deemter et al. (2008). Others have
used (semi-) autonomous agents for dialogue gener-
ation (Cavazza and Charles, 2005; Mateas and Stern,
2005).

More recently, first steps have been taken towards
treating dialogue generation as an instance of Text-
to-Text generation (Rus et al., 2007). In particu-
lar, the T2D system (Piwek et al., 2007) employs
rules that map text annotated with discourse struc-
tures, along the lines of Rhetorical Structure Theory
(Mann and Thompson, 1988), to specific dialogue
sequences. Common to all the approaches discussed
so far has been the manual creation of generation
resources, whether it be mappings from knowledge
representations or discourse to dialogue structure.

242



With the creation of the publicly available1 CODA
parallel corpus of monologue and dialogue (Stoy-
anchev and Piwek, 2010a), it has, however, become
possible to adopt a data-oriented approach. This cor-
pus consists of approximately 700 turns of dialogue,
by acclaimed authors such as Mark Twain, that are
aligned with monologue that was written on the ba-
sis of the dialogue, with the specific aim to express
the same information as the dialogue.2 The mono-
logue side has been annotated with discourse rela-
tions, using an adaptation of the annotation guide-
lines of Carlson and Marcu (2001), whereas the di-
alogue side has been marked up with dialogue acts,
using tags inspired by the schemes of Bunt (2000),
Carletta et al. (1997) and Core and Allen (1997).
As we will describe in the next section, our ap-
proach uses the CODA corpus to extract mappings
from monologue to dialogue.

3 Monologue-to-Dialogue Generation
Approach

Our approach is based on five principal steps:

I Discourse parsing: analysis of the input mono-
logue in terms of the underlying discourse rela-
tions.

II Relation conversion: mapping of text annotated
with discourse relations to a sequence of dia-
logue acts, with segments of the input text as-
signed to corresponding dialogue acts.

III Verbalisation: verbal realisation of dialogue
acts based on the dialogue act type and text of
the corresponding monologue segment.

IV Combination Putting the verbalised dialogues
acts together to create a complete dialogue, and

V Presentation: Rendering of the dialogue (this
can range for simple textual dialogue scripts to
computer-animated spoken dialogue).

1computing.open.ac.uk/coda/data.html
2Consequently, the corpus was not constructed entirely of

pre-existing text; some of the text was authored as part of the
corpus construction. One could therefore argue, as one of the re-
viewers for this paper did, that the approach is not entirely data-
driven, if data-driven is interpreted as ‘generated from unadul-
terated, free text, without any human intervention needed’.

For step I we rely on human annotation or existing
discourse parsers such as DAS (Le and Abeysinghe,
2003) and HILDA (duVerle and Prendinger, 2009).
For the current study, the final step, V, consists sim-
ply of verbatim presentation of the dialogue text.
The focus of the current paper is with steps II and
III (with combination, step IV, beyond the scope of
the current paper). Step II is data-oriented in that
we have extracted mappings from discourse relation
occurrences in the corpus to corresponding dialogue
act sequences, following the approach described in
Piwek and Stoyanchev (2010). Stoyanchev and Pi-
wek (2010b) observed in the CODA corpus a great
variety of Dialogue Act (DA) sequences that could
be used in step II, however in the current version
of the system we selected a representative set of the
most frequent DA sequences for the five most com-
mon discourse relations in the corpus. Table 1 shows
the mapping from text with a discourse relations
to dialogue act sequences (i indicates implemented
mappings).

DA sequence A C C E M TR
D T R M T

YNQ; Expl i i d
YNQ; Yes; Expl i i i d
Expl; CmplQ; Expl i d
ComplQ; Expl i/t i/t i i c
Expl; YNQ;Yes i d
Expl; Contrad. i d
FactQ; FactA; Expl i c
Expl; Agr; Expl i d
Expl; Fact; Expl t c

Table 1: Mappings from discourse relations (A = Attribu-
tion, CD = Condition, CT = Contrast, ER = Explanation-
Reason, MM = Manner-Means) to dialogue act sequences
(explained below) together with the type of verbalisation
transformation TR being d(irect) or c(omplex).

For comparison, the table also shows the much
less varied mappings implemented by the T2D sys-
tem (indicated with t). Note that the actual mappings
of the T2D system are directly from discourse rela-
tion to dialogue text. The dialogue acts are not ex-
plicitly represented by the system, in contrast with
the current two stage approach which distinguishes
between relation conversion and verbalisation.

243



Verbalisation, step III, takes a dialogue act type
and the specification of its semantic content as given
by the input monologue text. Mapping this to the
appropriate dialogue act requires mappings that vary
in complexity.

For example, Expl(ain) can be generated by sim-
ply copying a monologue segment to dialogue utter-
ance. The dialogue acts Yes and Agreement can be
generated using canned text, such as “That is true”
and “I agree with you”.

In contrast, ComplQ (Complex Question), FactQ
(Factoid Question), FactA (Factiod Answer) and
YNQ (Yes/No Question) all require syntactic ma-
nipulation. To generate YNQ and FactQ, we use
the CMU Question Generation tool (Heilman and
Smith, 2010) which is based on a combination
of syntactic transformation rules implemented with
tregex (Levy and Andrew, 2006) and statistical
methods. To generate the Compl(ex) Q(uestion) in
the ComplQ;Expl Dialogue Act (DA) sequence, we
use a combination of the CMU tool and lexical trans-
formation rules.3 The GEN example in Table 2 il-
lustrates this: The input monologue has a Manner-
Means relations between the nucleus ‘In September,
Ashland settled the long-simmering dispute’ and the
satellite ‘by agreeing to pay Iran 325 million USD’.
The satellite is copied without alteration to the Ex-
plain dialogue act. The nucleus is processed by ap-
plying the following template-based rule:

Decl⇒ How Yes/No Question(Decl)

In words, the input consisting of a declarative sen-
tence is mapped to a sequence consisting of the word
‘How’ followed by a Yes/No-question (in this case
“Did Ashland settle the long-simmering dispute in
December?’) that is obtained with the CMU QG tool
from the declarative input sentence. A similar ap-
proach is applied for the other relations (Attribution,
Condition and Explanation-Reason) that can lead to
a ComplQ; Expl dialogue act sequence (see Table 1).

Generally, sequences requiring only copying or
canned text are labelled d(irect) in Table 1, whereas
those requiring syntactic transformation are labelled
c(omplex).

3In contrast, the ComplQ in the DA sequence
Expl;ComplQ;Expl is generated using canned text such as
‘Why?’ or ‘Why is that?’.

4 Evaluation

We evaluate the output generated with both complex
and direct rules for the relations of Table 1.

4.1 Materials, Judges and Procedure

The input monologues were text excerpts from the
Wall Street Journal as annotated in the RST Dis-
course Treebank4. They consisted of a single sen-
tence with one internal relation, or two sentences
(with no internal relations) connected by a single
relation. To factor out the quality of the discourse
annotations, we used the gold standard annotations
of the Discourse Treebank and checked these for
correctness, discarding a small number of incorrect
annotations.5 We included text fragments with a
variety of clause length, ordering of nucleus and
satellite, and syntactic structure of clauses. Table 2
shows examples of monologue/dialogue pairs: one
with a generated dialogue and the other from the cor-
pus.

Our study involved a panel of four judges, each
fluent speakers of English (three native) and ex-
perts in Natural Language Generation. We collected
judgements on 53 pairs of monologue and corre-
sponding dialogue. 19 pairs were judged by all four
judges to obtain inter-annotator agreement statistics,
the remainder was parcelled out. 38 pairs consisted
of WSJ monologue and generated dialogue, hence-
forth GEN, and 15 pairs of CODA corpus monologue
and human-authored dialogue, henceforth CORPUS
(instances of generated and corpus dialogue were
randomly interleaved) – see Table 2 for examples.

The two standard evaluation measures for lan-
guage generation, accuracy and fluency (Mellish and
Dale, 1998), were used: a) accuracy: whether a
dialogue (from GEN or CORPUS) preserves the in-
formation of the corresponding monologue (judge-
ment: ‘Yes’ or ‘No’) and b) monologue and dialogue
fluency: how well written a piece of monologue or
dialogue from GEN or CORPUS is. Fluency judge-
ments were on a scale from 1 ‘incomprehensible’ to
5 ‘Comprehensible, grammatically correct and nat-
urally sounding’.

4www.isi.edu/∼marcu/discourse/Corpora.html
5For instance, in our view ‘without wondering’ is incorrectly

connected with the attribution relation to ‘whether she is mov-
ing as gracefully as the scenery.’

244



GEN Monologue
In September, Ashland settled the
long-simmering dispute by agreeing to
pay Iran 325 million USD.

Dialogue (ComplQ; Expl)
A: How did Ashland settle the

long-simmering dispute in December?
B: By agreeing to pay Iran 325

million USD.

CORPUS Monologue
If you say “I believe the world is
round”, the “I” is the mind.

Dialogue (FactQ; FactA)
A: If you say “I believe the world is round”,

who is the “I” that is speaking?
B: The mind.

Table 2: Monologue-Dialogue Instances

4.2 Results
Accuracy Three of the four judges marked 90%
of monologue-dialogue pairs as presenting the same
information (with pairwise κ of .64, .45 and .31).
One judge interpreted the question differently and
marked only 39% of pairs as containing the same
information. We treated this as an outlier, and ex-
cluded the accuracy data of this judge. For the in-
stances marked by more than one judge, we took the
majority vote. We found that 12 out of 13 instances
(or 92%) of dialogue and monologue pairs from the
CORPUS benchmark sample were judged to contain
the same information. For the GEN monologue-
dialogue pairs, 28 out of 31 (90%) were judged to
contain the same information.

Fluency Although absolute agreement between
judges was low,6 pairwise agreement in terms of
Spearman rank correlation (ρ) is reasonable (aver-
age: .69, best: .91, worst: .56). For the subset of in-
stances with multiple annotations, we used the data
from the judge with the highest average pair-wise
agreement (ρ = .86)

The fluency ratings are summarised in Figure 1.
Judges ranked both monologues and dialogues for

6For the four judges, we had an average pairwise κ of .34
with the maximum and minimum values of .52 and .23, respec-
tively.

Figure 1: Mean Fluency Rating for Monologues and Dia-
logues (for 15 CORPUS and 38 GEN instances) with 95%
confidence intervals

the GEN sample higher than for the CORPUS sam-
ple (possibly as a result of slightly greater length of
the CORPUS fragments and some use of archaic lan-
guage). However, the drop in fluency, see Figure 2,
from monologue to dialogue is greater for GEN sam-
ple (average: .89 points on the rating scale) than the
CORPUS sample (average: .33) (T-test p<.05), sug-
gesting that there is scope for improving the genera-
tion algorithm.

Figure 2: Fluency drop from monologue to correspond-
ing dialogue (for 15 CORPUS and 38 GEN instances). On
the x-axis the fluency drop is marked, starting from no
fluency drop (0) to a fluency drop of 3 (i.e., the dialogue
is rated 3 points less than the monologue on the rating
scale).

245



Direct versus Complex rules We examined the
difference in fluency drop between direct and com-
plex rules. Figure 3 shows that the drop in fluency
for dialogues generated with complex rules is higher
than for the dialogues generated using direct rules
(T-test p<.05). This suggests that use of direct rules
is more likely to result in high quality dialogue. This
is encouraging, given that Stoyanchev and Piwek
(2010a) report higher frequencies in professionally
authored dialogues of dialogue acts (YNQ, Expl) that
can be dealt with using direct verbalisation (in con-
trast with low frequency of, e.g., FactQ).

Figure 3: Decrease in Fluency Score from Monologue
to Dialogue comparing Direct (24 samples) and Complex
(14 samples) dialogue generation rules

5 Conclusions and Further Work

With information presentation in dialogue form be-
ing particularly suited for education and persua-
sion, the presented system is a step towards mak-
ing information from text automatically available
as dialogue. The system relies on discourse-to-
dialogue structure rules that were automatically ex-
tracted from a parallel monologue/dialogue corpus.
An evaluation against a benchmark sample from the
human-written corpus shows that both accuracy and
fluency of generated dialogues are not worse than
that of human-written dialogues. However, drop in
fluency between input monologue and output dia-
logue is slightly worse for generated dialogues than
for the benchmark sample. We also established a dif-
ference in quality of output generated with complex
versus direct discourse-to-dialogue rules, which can

be exploited to improve overall output quality.
In future research, we aim to evaluate the accu-

racy and fluency of longer stretches of generated di-
alogue. Additionally, we are currently carrying out
a task-related evaluation of monologue versus dia-
logue to determine the utility of each.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the three anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments and sug-
gestions. We are also grateful to our col-
leagues in the Open University’s Natural Lan-
guage Generation group for stimulating discussions
and feedback. The research reported in this pa-
per was carried out as part of the CODA re-
search project (http://computing.open.ac.uk/coda/)
which was funded by the UK’s Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council under Grant
EP/G020981/1.

References

E. André, T. Rist, S. van Mulken, M. Klesen, and
S. Baldes. 2000. The automated design of believable
dialogues for animated presentation teams. In Jus-
tine Cassell, Joseph Sullivan, Scott Prevost, and Eliz-
abeth Churchill, editors, Embodied Conversational
Agents, pages 220–255. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts.

H. Bunt. 2000. Dialogue pragmatics and context spec-
ification. In H. Bunt and W. Black, editors, Abduc-
tion, Belief and Context in Dialogue: Studies in Com-
putational Pragmatics, volume 1 of Natural Language
Processing, pages 81–150. John Benjamins.

J. Carletta, A. Isard, S. Isard, J. Kowtko, G. Doherty-
Sneddon, and A. Anderson. 1997. The reliability of
a dialogue structure coding scheme. Computational
Linguistics, 23:13–31.

L. Carlson and D. Marcu. 2001. Discourse tagging
reference manual. Technical Report ISI-TR-545, ISI,
September.

M. Cavazza and F. Charles. 2005. Dialogue Gener-
ation in Character-based Interactive Storytelling. In
Proceedings of the AAAI First Annual Artificial Intel-
ligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment Confer-
ence, Marina Del Rey, California, USA.

M. Core and J. Allen. 1997. Coding Dialogs with
the DAMSL Annotation Scheme. In Working Notes:
AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Action in
Humans and Machine.

246



S. Craig, B. Gholson, M. Ventura, A. Graesser, and the
Tutoring Research Group. 2000. Overhearing dia-
logues and monologues in virtual tutoring sessions.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Ed-
ucation, 11:242–253.

D. duVerle and H. Prendinger. 2009. A novel discourse
parser based on support vector machines. In Proc 47th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 4th Int’l Joint Conf on Natural
Language Processing of the Asian Federation of Nat-
ural Language Processing (ACL-IJCNLP’09), pages
665–673, Singapore, August.

M. Heilman and N. A. Smith. 2010. Good question!
statistical ranking for question generation. In Proc. of
NAACL/HLT, Los Angeles.

Huong T. Le and Geehta Abeysinghe. 2003. A study to
improve the efficiency of a discourse parsing system.
In Proceedings 4th International Conference on Intel-
ligent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics
(CICLing-03), Springer LNCS 2588, pages 101–114.

J. Lee, F. Dinneen, and J. McKendree. 1998. Supporting
student discussions: it isn’t just talk. Education and
Information Technologies, 3:217–229.

R. Levy and G. Andrew. 2006. Tregex and tsurgeon:
tools for querying and manipulating tree data struc-
tures. In 5th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006)., Genoa, Italy.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

M. Mateas and A. Stern. 2005. Structuring content in the
faade interactive drama architecture. In Proc. of Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment
(AIIDE), Marina del Rey, Los Angeles, June.

C. Mellish and R. Dale. 1998. Evaluation in the context
of natural language generation. Computer Speech and
Language, 12:349–373.

P. Piwek and S. Stoyanchev. 2010. Generating Exposi-
tory Dialogue from Monologue: Motivation, Corpus
and Preliminary Rules. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 333–336, Los Angeles, Cali-
fornia, June.

P. Piwek, H. Hernault, H. Prendinger, and M. Ishizuka.
2007. T2D: Generating Dialogues between Virtual
Agents Automatically from Text. In Intelligent Vir-
tual Agents: Proceedings of IVA07, LNAI 4722, pages
161–174. Springer Verlag.

H. Prendinger and M. Ishizuka, editors. 2004. Life-Like
Characters: Tools, Affective Functions, and Applica-
tions. Cognitive Technologies Series. Springer, Berlin.

V. Rus, A. Graesser, A. Stent, M. Walker, and M. White.
2007. Text-to-Text Generation. In R. Dale and

M. White, editors, Shared Tasks and Comparative
Evaluation in Natural Language Generation: Work-
shop Report, Arlington, Virginia.

S. Stoyanchev and P. Piwek. 2010a. Constructing the
CODA corpus. In Procs of LREC 2010, Malta, May.

S. Stoyanchev and P. Piwek. 2010b. Harvesting re-usable
high-level rules for expository dialogue generation. In
6th International Natural Language Generation Con-
ference (INLG 2010), Dublin, Ireland, 7-8, July.

S. V. Suzuki and S. Yamada. 2004. Persuasion through
overheard communication by life-like agents. In Procs
of the 2004 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference
on Intelligent Agent Technology, Beijing, September.

K. van Deemter, B. Krenn, P. Piwek, M. Klesen,
M. Schroeder, and S. Baumann. 2008. Fully Gen-
erated Scripted Dialogue for Embodied Agents. Arti-
ficial Intelligence Journal, 172(10):1219–1244.

247


