










































Interactive Group Suggesting for Twitter


Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 519–523,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Interactive Group Suggesting for Twitter

Zhonghua Qu, Yang Liu
The University of Texas at Dallas

{qzh,yangl}@hlt.utdallas.edu

Abstract

The number of users on Twitter has drasti-
cally increased in the past years. However,
Twitter does not have an effective user group-
ing mechanism. Therefore tweets from other
users can quickly overrun and become in-
convenient to read. In this paper, we pro-
pose methods to help users group the peo-
ple they follow using their provided seeding
users. Two sources of information are used to
build sub-systems: textural information cap-
tured by the tweets sent by users, and social
connections among users. We also propose
a measure of fitness to determine which sub-
system best represents the seed users and use
it for target user ranking. Our experiments
show that our proposed framework works well
and that adaptively choosing the appropriate
sub-system for group suggestion results in in-
creased accuracy.

1 Introduction

Twitter is a well-known social network service that
allows users to post short 140 character status update
which is called “Tweet”. A twitter user can “follow”
other users to get their latest updates. Twitter cur-
rently has 19 million active users. These users fol-
lows 80 other users on average. Default Twitter ser-
vice displays “Tweets” in the order of their times-
tamps. It works well when the number of tweets
the user receives is not very large. However, the
flat timeline becomes tedious to read even for av-
erage users with less than 80 friends. As Twitter
service grows more popular in the past few years,

users’ “following” list starts to consist of Twitter ac-
counts for different purposes. Take an average user
“Bob” for example. Some people he follows are his
“Colleagues”, some are “Technology Related Peo-
ple”, and others could be “TV show comedians”.
When Bob wants to read the latest news from his
“Colleagues”, because of lacking effective ways to
group users, he has to scroll through all “Tweets”
from other users. There have been suggestions from
many Twitter users that a grouping feature could be
very useful. Yet, the only way to create groups is
to create “lists” of users in Twitter manually by se-
lecting each individual user. This process is tedious
and could be sometimes formidable when a user is
following many people.

In this paper, we propose an interactive group cre-
ating system for Twitter. A user creates a group by
first providing a small number of seeding users, then
the system ranks the friend list according to how
likely a user belongs to the group indicated by the
seeds. We know in the real world, users like to group
their “follows” in many ways. For example, some
may create groups containing all the “computer sci-
entists”, others might create groups containing their
real-life friends. A system using “social informa-
tion” to find friend groups may work well in the lat-
ter case, but might not effectively suggest correct
group members in the former case. On the other
hand, a system using “textual information” may be
effective in the first case, but is probably weak in
finding friends in the second case. Therefore in
this paper, we propose to use multiple information
sources for group member suggestions, and use a
cross-validation approach to find the best-fit sub-

519



system for the final suggestion. Our results show
that automatic group suggestion is feasible and that
selecting approximate sub-system yields additional
gain than using individual systems.

2 Related Work

There is no previous research on interactive sug-
gestion of friend groups on Twitter to our knowl-
edge; however, some prior work is related and can
help our task. (Roth et al., 2010) uses implicit so-
cial graphs to help suggest email addresses a person
is likely to send to based on the addresses already
entered. Also, using the social network informa-
tion, hidden community detection algorithms such
as (Palla et al., 2005) can help suggest friend groups.
Besides the social information, what a user tweets is
also a good indicator to group users. To character-
ize users’ tweeting style, (Ramage et al., 2010) used
semi-supervised topic modeling to map each user’s
tweets into four characteristic dimensions.

3 Interactive Group Creation

Creating groups manually is a tedious process.
However, creating groups in an entirely un-
supervised fashion could result in unwanted results.
In our system, a user first indicates a small number
of users that belong to a group, called “seeds”, then
the system suggests other users that might belong to
this group. The general structure of the system is
shown in Figure 1.

[
Social Sub-System

……

Textual Sub-System

Sub-System 

Selector

Seed Users

Target Users Ranks

Figure 1: Overview of the system architecture

As mentioned earlier, we use different informa-

tion sources to determine user/group similarity, in-
cluding textual information and social connections.
A module is designed for each information source to
rank users based on their similarity to the provided
seeds. In our approach, the system first tries to detect
what sub-system can best fit the seed group. Then,
the corresponding system is used to generate the fi-
nal ranked list of users according to the likelihood of
belonging to the group.

After the rank list is given, the user can adjust the
size of the group to best fit his/her needs. In addition,
a user can correct the system by specifically indicat-
ing someone as a “negative seed”, which should not
be on the top of the list. In this paper, we only con-
sider creating one group at a time with only “positive
seed” and do not consider the relationships between
different groups.

Since determining the best fitting sub-system or
the group type from the seeds needs the use of the
two sub-systems, we describe them first. Each sub-
system takes a group of seed users and unlabeled
target users as the input, and provides a ranked list
of the target users belonging to the group indicated
by the seeds.

3.1 Tweet Based Sub-system

In this sub-system, user groups are modeled using
the textual information contained in their tweets. We
collected all the tweets from a user and grouped
them together.

To represent the tweets information, we could use
a bag-of-word model for each user. However, since
Twitter messages are known to be short and noisy,
it is very likely that traditional natural language pro-
cessing methods will perform poorly. Topic mod-
eling approaches, such as Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003), model document as a
mixture of multinomial distribution of words, called
topics. They can reduce the dimension and group
words with similar semantics, and are often more
robust in face of data sparsity or noisy data. Be-
cause tweet messages are very short and hard to infer
topics directly from them, we merge all the tweets
from a user to form a larger document. Then LDA
is applied to the collection of documents from all
the users to derive the topics. Each user’s tweets
can then be represented using a bag-of-topics model,
where the ith component is the proportion of the ith

520



topic appearing in the user’s tweet.
Given a group of seed users, we want to find target

users that are similar to the seeds in terms of their
tweet content. To take multiple seed instances into
consideration, we use two schemes to calculate the
similarity between one target user and a seed group.

• centroid: we calculate the centroid of seeds,
then use the similarity between the centroid and
the target user as the final similarity value.

• average: we calculate the similarity between
the target and each individual seed user, then
take the average as the final similarity value.

In this paper, we explore using two different sim-
ilarity functions between two vectors (ui and vi),
cosine similarity and inverse Euclidean distance,
shown below respectively.

dcosine(u, v) =
1

| u || v |

n∑
i=1

ui × vi (1)

deuclidean(u, v) =
1√∑n

i=1(ui − vi)2
(2)

After calculating similarity for all the target users,
this tweet-based sub-system gives the ranking ac-
cordingly.

3.2 Friend Based Sub-system
As an initial study, we use a simple method to model
friend relationship in user groups. In the future, we
will replace it with other better performing meth-
ods. In this sub-system, we model people using
their social information. In Twitter, social informa-
tion consists of “following” relation and “mentions”.
Unlike other social networks like “Facebook” or
“Myspace”, a “following” relation in Twitter is di-
rected. In Twitter, a “mention” happens when some-
one refers to another Twitter user in their tweets.
Usually it happens in replies and retweets. Because
this sub-system models the real-life friend groups,
we only consider bi-directional following relation
between people. That is, we only consider an edge
between users when both of them follow each other.
There are many hidden community detection algo-
rithms that have been proposed for network graphs
(Newman, 2004; Palla et al., 2005). Our task is how-
ever different in that we know the seed of the target
group and the output needs to be a ranking. Here, we

use the count of bi-directional friends and mentions
between a target user and the seed group as the score
for ranking. The intuition is that the social graph be-
tween real life friends tends to be very dense, and
people who belong to the clique should have more
edges to the seeds than others.

3.3 Group Type Detection

The first component in our system is to determine
which sub-system to use to suggest user groups. We
propose to evaluate the fitness of each sub-system
base on the seeds provided using a cross-validation
approach. The assumption is that if a sub-system
(information source used to form the group) is a
good match, then it will rank the users in the seed
group higher than others not in the seed.

The procedure of calculating the fitness score of
each sub-system is shown in Algorithm 1. In the in-
put, S is the seed users (with more than one user),
U is the target users to be ranked, and subrank is
a ranking sub-system (two systems described above,
each taking seed users and target users as input, and
producing the ranking of the target users). This pro-
cedure loops through the seed users. Each time, it
takes one seed user Si out and puts it together with
other target users. Then it calls the sub-system to
rank the new list and finds out the resulting rank for
Si. The final fitness score is the sum of all the ranks
for the seed instances. The system with the highest
score is then selected and used to rank the original
target users.

Algorithm 1 Fitness of a sub-system for a seed
group
proc fitness(S, U, subrank) ≡

ranks := ∅
for i := 1 to size(S) do

U ′ := Si ∪ U
S′ := S \ Si
r := subrank(U ′, S′);
t := rankOf(Si, r);
ranks := ranks ∪ t; od

fitness := sum(ranks);
print(fitness);

end

4 Data

Our data set is collected from Twitter website using
its Web API. Because twitter does not provide direct
functions to group friends, we use lists created by

521



twitter users as the reference friend group in testing
and evaluation. We exclude users that have less than
20 or more than 150 friends; that do not have a qual-
ified list (more than 20 and less than 200 list mem-
bers); and that do not use English in their tweets.
After applying these filtering criteria, we found 87
lists from 12 users. For these qualified users, their
1, 383 friends information is retrieved, again using
Twitter API. For the friends that are retrieved, their
180, 296 tweets and 584, 339 friend-of-friend infor-
mation are also retrieved. Among all the retrieved
tweets, there are 65, 329 mentions in total.

5 Experiment

In our experiment, we evaluate the performance of
each sub-system and then use group type detection
algorithm to adaptively combine the systems. We
use the Twitter lists we collected as the reference
user groups for evaluation. For each user group, we
randomly take out 6 users from the list and use as
seed candidate. The target user consists of the rest of
the list members and other “friends” that the list cre-
ator has. From the ranked list for the target users, we
calculate the mean average precision (MAP) score
with the rank position of the list members. For each
group, we run the experiment 10 times using ran-
domly selected seeds. Then the average MAP on all
runs on all groups is reported. In order to evaluate
the effect of the seed size on the final performance,
we vary the number of seeds from 2 to 6 using the 6
taken-out list members.

In the tweet based sub-system, we optimize its hy-
per parameter automatically based on the data. After
trying different numbers of topics in LDA, we found
optimal performance with 50 topics (α = 0.5 and
β = 0.04).

System Seed Size2 3 5 6

Tweet Sub

CosCent 28.45 29.34 29.54 31.18
CosAvg 28.37 29.51 30.01 31.45
EucCent 27.32 28.12 28.97 29.75
EucAvg 27.54 28.74 29.12 29.97

Social Sub 26.45 27.78 28.12 30.21
Adaptive 30.17 32.43 33.01 34.74

BOW baseline 23.45 24.31 24.73 24.93
Random Baseline 17.32

Table 1: Ranking Result (Mean Average Precision) using
Different Systems.

Table 1 shows the performance of each sub-
system as well as the adaptive system. We include
the baseline results generated using random ranking.
As a stronger baseline (BOW baseline), we used co-
sine similarity between users’ tweets as the similar-
ity measure. In this baseline, we used a vocabulary
of 5000 words that have the highest TF-IDF values.
Each user’s tweet content is represented using a bag-
of-words vector using this vocabulary. The ranking
of this baseline is calculated using the average simi-
larity with the seeds.

In the tweet-based sub-system, “Cos” and “Euc”
mean cosine similarity and inverse Euclidean dis-
tance respectively as the similarity measure. “Cent”
and “Avg” mean using centroid vector and average
similarity respectively to measure the similarities
between a target user and the seed group. From the
results, we can see that in general using a larger seed
group improves performance since more informa-
tion can be obtained from the group. The “CosAvg”
scheme (which uses cosine similarity with average
similarity measure) achieves the best result. Using
cosine similarity measure gives better performance
than inverse Euclidean distance. This is not surpris-
ing since cosine similarity has been widely adopted
as an appropriate similarity measure in the vector
space model for text processing. The bag-of-word
baseline is much better than the random baseline;
however, using LDA topic modeling to collapse the
dimension of features achieves even better results.
This confirms that topic modeling is very useful in
representing noisy data, such as tweets.

In the adaptive system, we also used “CosAvg”
scheme in the tweet based sub-system. After the au-
tomatic sub-system selection, we observe increased
performance. This indicates that users form lists
based on different factors and thus always using
one single system is not the best solution. It also
demonstrates that our proposed fitness measure us-
ing cross-validation works well, and that the two in-
formation sources used to build sub-systems can ap-
propriately capture the group characteristics.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have proposed an interactive group
creation system for Twitter users to organize their
“followings”. The system takes friend seeds pro-
vided by users and generates a ranked list according

522



to the likelihood of a test user being in the group.
We introduced two sub-systems, based on tweet text
and social information respectively. We also pro-
posed a group type detection procedure that is able
to use the most appropriate system for group user
ranking. Our experiments show that by using differ-
ent systems adaptively, better performance can be
achieved compared to using any single system, sug-
gesting this framework works well. In the future, we
plan to add more sophisticated sub-systems in this
framework, and also explore combining ranking out-
puts from different sub-systems. Furthermore, we
will incorporate negative seeds into the process of
interactive suggestion.

References
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, Michael I. Jordan, and

John Lafferty. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 3:2003.

Mark Newman. 2004. Analysis of weighted networks.
Physical Review E, 70(5), November.

Gergely Palla, Imre Derenyi, Illes Farkas, and Tamas Vic-
sek. 2005. Uncovering the overlapping community
structure of complex networks in nature and society.
Nature, 435(7043):814–818, June.

Daniel Ramage, Susan Dumais, and Dan Liebling. 2010.
Characterizing microblogs with topic models. In
ICWSM.

Maayan Roth, Assaf Ben-David, David Deutscher, Guy
Flysher, Ilan Horn, Ari Leichtberg, Naty Leiser, Yossi
Matias, and Ron Merom. 2010. Suggesting friends
using the implicit social graph. In SIGKDD, KDD ’10,
pages 233–242. ACM.

523


