










































Exploiting Readymades in Linguistic Creativity: A System Demonstration of the Jigsaw Bard


Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 System Demonstrations, pages 14–19,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 21 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploiting Readymades in Linguistic Creativity:

A System Demonstration of the Jigsaw Bard

Tony Veale Yanfen Hao
School of Computer Science and Informatics, School of Computer Science and Informatics,

University College Dublin, University College Dublin,
Belfield, Dublin D4, Ireland. Belfield, Dublin D4, Ireland.

Tony.Veale@UCD.ie Yanfen.Hao@UCD.ie

Demonstration System can be viewed at: http://www.educatedinsolence.com/jigsaw

Abstract

Large lexical resources, such as corpora
and databases of Web ngrams, are a rich
source of pre-fabricated phrases that can be
reused in many different contexts. How-
ever, one must be careful in how these re-
sources are used, and noted writers such as
George Orwell have argued that the use of
canned phrases encourages sloppy thinking
and results in poor communication. None-
theless, while Orwell prized home-made
phrases over the readymade variety, there
is a vibrant movement in modern art which
shifts artistic creation from the production
of novel artifacts to the clever reuse of
readymades or objets trouvés. We describe
here a system that makes creative reuse of
the linguistic readymades in the Google
ngrams. Our system, the Jigsaw Bard, thus
owes more to Marcel Duchamp than to
George Orwell. We demonstrate how tex-
tual readymades can be identified and har-
vested on a large scale, and used to drive a
modest form of linguistic creativity.

1 Introduction
In a much-quoted essay from 1946 entitled Politics
and the English Language, the writer and thinker
George Orwell outlines his prescription for halting
a perceived decline in the English language. He
argues that language and thought form a tight

feedback cycle that can be either virtuous or vi-
cious. Lazy language can thus promote lazy think-
ing, and vice versa. Orwell pours scorn on two
particular forms of lazy language: the expedient
use of overly familiar metaphors merely because
they come quickly to mind, even though they have
lost their power to evoke vivid images,; and the use
of readymade turns of phrase as substitutes for in-
dividually crafted expressions. While a good writer
bends words to his meaning, Orwell worries that a
lazy writer bends his meaning to convenient words.

Orwell is especially scornful about readymade
phrases which, when over-used, “are tacked to-
gether like the sections of a prefabricated hen-
house.” A writer who operates by “mechanically
repeating the familiar phrases” and “gumming to-
gether long strips of words which have already
been set in order by someone else” has, he argues,
“gone some distance toward turning himself into a
machine.” Given his derogatory mechanistic view
of the use of readymade phrases, Orwell would not
be surprised to learn that computers are highly pro-
ficient in the large-scale use of familiar phrases,
whether acquired from large text corpora or from
the Google ngrams (see Brants and Franz, 2006).

Though argued with passion, there are serious
holes in Orwell’s logic. If one should “never  use a
metaphor, simile or other figure of speech which
you are used to seeing in print”, how then are fa-
miliar metaphors ever to become dead metaphors
and thereby enrich the language with new terms
and new senses? And if one cannot use familiar
readymade phrases, how can one make playful –
and creative – allusions to the writings of others, or

14



mischievously subvert the conventional wisdom of
platitudes and clichés? Orwell’s use of the term
readymade is entirely negative, yet the term is al-
together more respectable in the world of modern
art, thanks to its use by artists such as Marcel
Duchamp. For many artists, a readymade object is
not a substitute, but a starting point, for creativity.

Also called an objet trouvé or found object, a
readymade emerges from an artist’s encounter with
an object whose aesthetic merits are overlooked in
its banal, everyday contexts of use; when this ob-
ject is moved to an explicitly artistic context, such
as an art gallery, viewers are better able to appreci-
ate these merits. The artist’s insight is to recognize
the transformational power of this non-obvious
context switch. Perhaps the most famous (and no-
torious) readymade in the world of art is Marcel
Duchamp’s Fountain, a humble urinal that be-
comes an elegantly curved piece of sculpture when
viewed with the right mindset. Duchamp referred
to his objets trouvés as “assisted readymades” be-
cause they allow an artist to remake the act of
creation as one of pure insight and inspired recog-
nition rather than one of manual craftsmanship (see
Taylor, 2009). In computational terms, the
Duchampian notion of a readymade allows crea-
tivity to be modeled not as a construction problem
but as a decision problem. A computational
Duchamp need not explore an abstract conceptual
space of potential ideas, as in Boden (1994). How-
ever, a Duchampian agent must instead be exposed
to the multitude of potentially inspiring real-world
stimuli that a human artist encounters everyday.

Readymades represent a serendipitous form of
creativity that is poorly served by exploratory
models of creativity, such as that of Boden (1994),
and better served by the investment models such as
the buy-low-sell-high theory of Sternberg and Lu-
bart (1995). In this view, creators and artists find
unexpected or untapped value in unfashionable
objects or ideas that already exist, and quickly
move their gaze elsewhere once the public at large
come to recognize this value. Duchampian creators
invest in everyday objects, just as Duchamp found
artistic merit in urinals, bottles and combs. From a
linguistic perspective, these everyday objects are
commonplace words and phrases which, when
wrenched from their conventional contexts of use,
are free to take on enhanced meanings and provide
additional returns to the investor. The realm in

which a maker of linguistic readymades operates is
not the real world, and not an abstract conceptual
space, but the realm of texts: large corpora become
rich hunting grounds for investors in linguistic ob-
jets trouvés.

This proposal is demonstrated in computa-
tional form in the following sections. We show
how a rich vocabulary of cultural stereotypes can
be acquired from the Web, and how this vocabu-
lary facilitates the implementation of a decision
procedure for recognizing potential readymades in
large corpora – in this case, the Google database of
Web ngrams (Brants and Franz, 2006). This deci-
sion procedure provides a robust basis for a simile-
generation system called The Jigsaw Bard. The
cognitive / linguistic intuitions that underpin the
Bard’s concept of textual readymades are put to
the empirical test in section 5. While readymades
remain a contentious notion in the public’s appre-
ciation of artistic creativity – despite Duchamp’s
Fountain being considered one of the most influ-
ential artworks of the 20th century – we shall show
that the notion of a linguistic readymade has sig-
nificant practical merit in the realms of text gen-
eration and computational creativity.

2 Linguistic Readymades
Readymades are the result of artistic appropria-
tion, in which an object with cultural resonance –
an image, a phrase, a quote, a name, a thing – is re-
used in a new context with a new meaning. As a
fertile source of cultural reference points, language
is an equally fertile medium for appropriation.
Thus, in the constant swirl of language and culture,
movie quotes suggest song lyrics, which in turn
suggest movie titles, which suggest book titles, or
restaurant names, or the names of racehorses, and
so on, and on. The 1996 movie The Usual Suspects
takes its name from a memorable scene in 1942’s
Casablanca, as does the Woody Allen play and
movie Play it Again Sam. The 2010 art documen-
tary Exit Through the Gift Shop, by graffiti artist
Banksy, takes its name from a banal sign some-
times seen in museums and galleries: the sign,
suggestive as it is of creeping commercialism,
makes the perfect readymade for a film that la-
ments the mediocrity of commercialized art.

Appropriations can also be combined to pro-
duce novel mashups; consider, for instance, the use
of tweets from rapper Kanye West as alternate

15



captions for cartoon images from the New Yorker
magazine (see hashtag #KanyeNew-YorkerTweets).
Hashtags can themselves be linguistic readymades.
When free-speech advocates use the hashtag
#IAMSpartacus  to show solidarity with users
whose tweets have incurred the wrath of the law,
they are appropriating an emotional line from the
1960 film Spartacus. Linguistic readymades, then,
are well-formed text fragments that are often
highly quotable because they carry some figurative
content which can be reused in different contexts.

A quote like “round up the usual suspects” or
“I am Spartacus” requires a great deal of cultural
knowledge to appreciate. Since literal semantics
only provides a small part of their meaning, a
computer’s ability to recognize linguistic ready-
mades is only as good as the cultural knowledge at
its disposal. We thus explore here a more modest
form of readymade – phrases that can be used as
evocative image builders in similes – as in:

a wet haddock
snow in January
a robot fish
a bullet-ridden corpse

Each phrase can be found in the Google 1T data-
base of Web ngrams – snippets of Web text (of one
to five words) that occur on the web with a fre-
quency of 40 or higher (Brants and Franz, 2006).
Each is likely a literal description of a real object
or event – even “robot fish”, which describes an
autonomous marine vehicle whose movements
mimic real fish. But each exhibits figurative po-
tential as well, providing a memorable description
of physical or emotional coldness. Whether or not
each was ever used in a figurative sense before is
not the point: once this potential is recognized,
each phrase becomes a reusable linguistic ready-
made for the construction of a vivid figurative
comparison, as in “as cold as a robot fish”. We
now consider the building blocks from which these
comparisons can be ready-made..

3 A Vocabulary of Cultural Stereotypes

How does a computer acquire the knowledge that
fish, snow, January, bullets and corpses are cultural
signifiers of coldness? Much the same way that
humans acquire this knowledge: by attending to
the way these signifiers are used by others, espe-

cially when they are used in cultural clichés like
proverbial similes (e.g., “as cold as a fish”).

In fact, folk similes are an important vector in
the transmission of cultural knowledge: they point
to, and exploit, the shared cultural touchstones that
speakers and listeners alike can use to construct
and intuit meanings. Taylor (1954) catalogued
thousands of proverbial comparisons and similes
from California, identifying just as many building
blocks in the construction of new phrases and figu-
rative meanings. Only the most common similes
can be found in dictionaries, as shown by Norrick
(1986), while Moon (2008) demonstrates that
large-scale corpus analysis is needed to identify
folk similes with a breadth approaching that of
Taylor’s study. However, Veale and Hao (2007)
show that the World-Wide Web is the ultimate re-
source for harvesting similes.

Veale and Hao use the Google API to find many
instances of the pattern “as ADJ as a|an *” on the
web, where ADJ is an adjectival property and * is
the Google wildcard. WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) is
used to provide a set of over 2,000 different values
for ADJ, and the text snippets returned by Google
are parsed to extract the basic simile bindings.
Once the bindings are annotated to remove noise,
as well as frequent uses of irony, this Web harvest
produces over 12,000 cultural bindings between a
noun (such as fish, or robot) and its most stereo-
typical properties (such as cold, wet, stiff, logical,
heartless, etc.). Stereotypical properties are ac-
quired for approx. 4,000 common English nouns.
This is a set of building blocks on a larger scale
than even that of Taylor, allowing us to build on
Veale and Hao (2007) to identify readymades in
their hundreds of thousands in the Google ngrams.

However, to identify readymades as resonant
variations on cultural stereotypes, we need a cer-
tain fluidity in our treatment of adjectival proper-
ties. The phrase “wet haddock”  is a readymade for
coldness because “wet” accentuates the “cold” that
we associate with “haddock” (via the web simile
“as cold as a haddock”). In the words of Hofstad-
ter (1995), we need to build a SlipNet of properties
whose structure captures the propensity of proper-
ties to mutually and coherently reinforce each
other, so that phrases which subtly accentuate an
unstated property can be recognized. In the vein of
Veale and Hao (2007), we use the Google API to
harvest the elements of this SlipNet.

16



We hypothesize that the construction “as ADJ1
and ADJ2 as” shows ADJ1 and ADJ2 to be mutu-
ally reinforcing properties, since they can be seen
to work together as a single complex property in a
single comparison. Thus, using the full comple-
ment of adjectival properties used by Veale and
Hao (2007), we harvest all instances of the patterns
“as ADJ and * as” and “as * and ADJ as” from
Google, noting the combinations that are found and
their frequencies. These frequencies provide link
weights for the Hofstadter-style SlipNet that is
then constructed. In all, over 180,000 links are
harvested, connecting over 2,500 adjectival prop-
erties to one other. We put the intuitions behind
this SlipNet to the empirical test in section five.

4 Harvesting Readymades from Corpora
In the course of an average day, a creative writer is
exposed to a constant barrage of linguistic stimuli,
any small portion of which can strike a chord as a
potential readymade. In this casual inspiration
phase, the observant writer recognizes that a cer-
tain combination of words may produce, in another
context, a meaning that is more than the sum of its
parts. Later, when an apposite phrase is needed to
strike a particular note, this combination may be
retrieved from memory (or from a trusty note-
book), if it has been recorded and suitably indexed.

Ironically, Orwell (1946) suggests that lazy
writers “shirk” their responsibility to be “scrupu-
lous” in their use of language by “simply throwing
[their] mind open and letting the ready-made
phrases come crowding in”. For Orwell, words just
get in the way, and should be kept at arm’s length
until the writer has first allowed a clear meaning to
crystallize. This is dubious advice, as one expects a
creative writer to keep an open mind when consid-
ering all the possibilities that present themselves.
Yet Orwell’s proscription suggests how a computer
should go about the task of harvesting readymades
from corpora: by throwing its mind open to the
possibility that a given ngram may one day have a
second life as a creative readymade in another
context, the computer allows the phrases that
match some simple image-building criteria to come
crowding in, so they can be stored in a database.

Given a rich vocabulary of cultural stereo-
types and their properties, computers are capable
of indexing and recalling a considerably larger

body of resonant combinations than the average
human. The necessary barrage of linguistic stimuli
can be provided by the Google 1T database of Web
ngrams (Brants and Franz, 2006). Trawling these
ngrams, a modestly creative computer can recog-
nize well-formed combinations of cultural ele-
ments that might serve as a vivid vehicle of
description in a future comparison. For every
phrase P in the ngrams, where P combines stereo-
type nouns and/or adjectival modifiers, the com-
puter simply poses the following question: is there
an unstated property A such that the simile “as A
as P” is a meaningful and memorable comparison?
The property A can be simple, as in “as dark as a
chocolate espresso”, or complex, as in “as dark
and sophisticated as a chocolate martini”. In either
case, the phrase P is tucked away, and indexed un-
der the property A until such time as the computer
needs to produce a vivid evocation of A.

The following patterns are used to identify
potential readymades in the Web ngrams:

(1) NounS1 NounS2
where both nouns denote stereotypes that
share an unstated property AdjA. The prop-
erty AdjA serves to index this combination.
Example: “as cold as a robot fish”.

(2) NounS1 NounS2
where both nouns denote stereotypes with
salient properties AdjA1 and AdjA2 respec-
tively, such that AdjA1 and AdjA2 are mutu-
ally reinforcing. The combination is indexed
on AdjA1+AdjA2. Example: “as dark and
sophisticated as a chocolate martini”.

(3)  AdjA  NounS
where NounS denotes a cultural stereotype,
and the adjective AdjA denotes a property
that mutually reinforces an unstated but sali-
ent property AdjSA of the stereotype. Exam-
ple: “as cold as a wet haddock”. The
combination is indexed on AdjSA.

More complex structures for P are also possible, as
in the phrases “a lake of tears” (a melancholy way
to accentuate the property “wet”) and “a statue in a
library” (for “silent” and “quiet”). In this current
description, we focus on 2-gram phrases only.

17



Figure 1. Screenshot of The Jigsaw Bard, retrieving
linguistic readymades for the input property “cold”. See
http://www.educatedinsolence.com/jigsaw

Using these patterns, our application – the Jigsaw
Bard (see Figure 1) – pre-builds a vast collection
of figurative similes well in advance of the time it
is asked to use or suggest any of them. Each phrase
P is syntactically well-formed, and because P oc-
curs relatively frequently on the Web, it is likely to
be semantically well-formed as well. Just as
Duchamp side-stepped the need to physically
originate anything, but instead appropriated pre-
fabricated artifacts, the Bard likewise side-steps
the need for natural-language generation. Each
phrase it proposes has the ring of linguistic
authenticity; because this authenticity is rooted in
another, more literal context, the Bard also exhibits
its own Duchamp-like (if Duchamp-lite) creativity.
We now consider the scale of the Bard’s genera-
tivity, and the quality of its insights.

5 Empirical Evaluation
The vastness of the web, captured in the large-
scale sample that is the Google ngrams, means the
Jigsaw Bard finds considerable grist for its mill in
the phrases that match (1)…(3). Thus, the most
restrictive pattern, pattern (1), harvests approx.
20,000 phrases from the Google 2-grams, for al-
most a thousand simple properties (indexing an
average of 29 phrases under each property, such as
“swan song” for “beautiful”). Pattern (2) – which
allows a blend of stereotypes to be indexed under a
complex property – harvests approx. 170,000
phrases from the 2-grams, for approx. 70,000 com-
plex properties (indexing an average of 12 phrases

under each, such as “hospital bed” for “comfort-
able and safe”). Pattern (3) – which pairs a stereo-
type noun with an adjective that draws out a salient
property of the stereotype – is similarly productive:
it harvests approx. 150,000 readymade 2-grams for
over 2,000 simple properties (indexing an average
of 125 phrases per property, as in “youthful knight”
for “heroic” and “zealous convert” for “devout”).

The Jigsaw Bard is best understood as a crea-
tive thesaurus: for any given property (or blend of
properties) selected by the user, the Bard presents
a range of apt similes constructed from linguistic
readymades. The numbers above show that, recall-
wise, the Bard has sufficient coverage to work
robustly as a thesaurus. Quality-wise, users must
make their own determinations as to which similes
are most suited to their descriptive purposes, yet it
is important that suggestions provided by the Bard
are sensible and well-motivated. As such, we must
be empirically satisfied about two key intuitions:
first, that salient properties are indeed acquired
from the Web for our vocabulary of stereotypes
(this point relates to the aptness of the similes sug-
gested by the Bard); and second, that the adjectives
connected by the SlipNet really do mutually rein-
force each other (this point relates to the coherence
of complex properties, and to the ability of ready-
mades to accentuate unstated properties).

Both intuitions can be tested using Whissell’s
(1989) dictionary of affect, a psycholinguistic re-
source used for sentiment analysis that assigns a
pleasantness score of between 1.0 (least pleasant)
and 3.0 (most pleasant) to over 8,000 common-
place words. We should thus be able to predict the
pleasantness of a stereotype noun (like fish) using a
weighted average of the pleasantness of its salient
properties (like cold, slippery). We should also be
able to predict the pleasantness of an adjective us-
ing a weighted average of the pleasantness of its
adjacent adjectives in the SlipNet. (In each case,
weights are provided by relevant web frequencies.)

We can use a two-tailed Pearson test (p <
0.05) to compare the predictions made in each case
to the actual pleasantness scores provided by
Whissell’s dictionary, and thereby assess the qual-
ity of the knowledge used to make the predictions.
In the first case, predictions of the pleasantness of
stereotype nouns based on the pleasantness of their
salient properties (i.e., predicting the pleasantness
of Y from the Xs in “as X as Y”) have a positive

18



correlation of 0.5 with Whissell; conversely, ironic
properties yield a negative correlation of –0.2. In
the second, predictions of the pleasantness of ad-
jectives based on their relations in the SlipNet (i.e.,
predicting the pleasantness of X from the Ys in “as
X and Y as”) have a positive correlation of 0.7.
Though pleasantness is just one dimension of lexi-
cal affect, it is one that requires a broad knowledge
of a word, its usage and its denotations to accu-
rately estimate. In this respect, the Bard is well
served by a large stock of stereotypes and a coher-
ent network of informative properties.

6 Conclusions

Fishlov (1992) has argued that poetic similes rep-
resent a conscious deviation from the norms of
non-poetic comparison. His analysis shows that
poetic similes are longer and more elaborate, and
are more likely to be figurative and to flirt with
incongruity. Creative similes do not necessarily
use words that are longer, or rarer, or fancier, but
use many of the same cultural building blocks as
non-creative similes. Armed with a rich vocabulary
of building blocks, the Jigsaw Bard harvests a
great many readymade phrases from the Google
ngrams – from the evocative “chocolate martini” to
the seemingly incongruous “robot fish” – that can
be used to evoke an wide range of properties.

This generativity makes the Bard scalable and
robust. However, any creativity we may attribute
to it comes not from the phrases themselves – they
are readymades, after all – but from the recognition
of the subtle and often complex properties they
evoke. The Bard exploits a sweet-spot in our un-
derstanding of linguistic creativity, and so, as pre-
sented here, is merely a starting point for our
continued exploitation of linguistic readymades,
rather than an end in itself. By harvesting more
complex syntactic structures, and using more so-
phisticated techniques for analyzing the figurative
potential of these phrases, the Bard and its ilk may
gradually approach the levels of poeticity dis-
cussed by Fishlov. For now, it is sufficient that
even simple techniques serve as the basis of a ro-
bust and practical thesaurus application.

7 Hardware Requirements
The Jigsaw Bard is designed to be a lightweight
application that compiles its comprehensive data-

base of readymades in advance. It’s run-time de-
mands are low, it has no special hardware
requirements, and runs in a standard Web browser.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded in part by Science Founda-
tion Ireland (SFI), via the Centre for Next Genera-
tion Localization (CNGL).

References
Margaret Boden, 1994. Creativity: A Framework for

Research, Behavioural and Brain Sciences 17(3),
558-568.

Thorsten Brants. and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-gram
Version 1. Linguistic Data Consortium.

Christiane Fellbaum. (ed.) 2008. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge.

David Fishlov. 1992. Poetic and Non-Poetic Simile:
Structure, Semantics, Rhetoric. Poetics Today, 14(1).

Douglas R Hofstadter. 1995. Fluid Concepts and Crea-
tive Analogies: Computer Models of the Fundamen-
tal Mechanisms of Thought. Basic Books, NY.

Rosamund Moon. 2008.  Conventionalized as-similes in
English: A problem case. International Journal of
Corpus Linguistics 13(1), 3-37.

Neal Norrick,. 1986.  Stock Similes. Journal of Literary
Semantics XV(1), 39-52.

George Orwell. 1946. Politics And The English Lan-
guage. Horizon 13(76), 252-265.

Robert J Sternberg. and T. Ivan Lubart, 1995. Defying
the crowd: Cultivating creativity in a culture of con-
formity. Free Press, New York.

Archer Taylor. 1954. Proverbial Comparisons and
Similes from California. Folklore Studies 3. Ber-
keley: University of California Press.

Michael R. Taylor. (2009). Marcel Duchamp: Étant
donnés (Philadelphia Museum of Art). Yale Univer-
sity Press.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2007. Making Lexical
Ontologies Functional and Context-Sensitive. In
Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics.

Cynthia Whissell. 1989. The dictionary of affect in lan-
guage. In R. Plutchnik & H. Kellerman (eds.) Emo-
tion: Theory and research. New York: Harcourt
Brace, 113-131.

19


