










































Identifying High-Impact Sub-Structures for Convolution Kernels in Document-level Sentiment Classification


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 338–343,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying High-Impact Sub-Structures for Convolution Kernels in
Document-level Sentiment Classification

Zhaopeng Tu† Yifan He‡§ Jennifer Foster§ Josef van Genabith§ Qun Liu† Shouxun Lin†

†Key Lab. of Intelligent Info. Processing ‡Computer Science Department §School of Computing
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS New York University Dublin City University

†{tuzhaopeng,liuqun,sxlin}@ict.ac.cn,
‡yhe@cs.nyu.edu, §{jfoster,josef}@computing.dcu.ie

Abstract

Convolution kernels support the modeling of
complex syntactic information in machine-
learning tasks. However, such models are
highly sensitive to the type and size of syntac-
tic structure used. It is therefore an importan-
t challenge to automatically identify high im-
pact sub-structures relevant to a given task. In
this paper we present a systematic study inves-
tigating (combinations of) sequence and con-
volution kernels using different types of sub-
structures in document-level sentiment classi-
fication. We show that minimal sub-structures
extracted from constituency and dependency
trees guided by a polarity lexicon show 1.45
point absolute improvement in accuracy over a
bag-of-words classifier on a widely used sen-
timent corpus.

1 Introduction

An important subtask in sentiment analysis is sen-
timent classification. Sentiment classification in-
volves the identification of positive and negative
opinions from a text segment at various levels of
granularity including document-level, paragraph-
level, sentence-level and phrase-level. This paper
focuses on document-level sentiment classification.

There has been a substantial amount of work
on document-level sentiment classification. In ear-
ly pioneering work, Pang and Lee (2004) use a
flat feature vector (e.g., a bag-of-words) to rep-
resent the documents. A bag-of-words approach,
however, cannot capture important information ob-
tained from structural linguistic analysis of the doc-

uments. More recently, there have been several ap-
proaches which employ features based on deep lin-
guistic analysis with encouraging results including
Joshi and Penstein-Rose (2009) and Liu and Senef-
f (2009). However, as they select features manually,
these methods would require additional labor when
ported to other languages and domains.

In this paper, we study and evaluate diverse lin-
guistic structures encoded as convolution kernels for
the document-level sentiment classification prob-
lem, in order to utilize syntactic structures without
defining explicit linguistic rules. While the applica-
tion of kernel methods could seem intuitive for many
tasks, it is non-trivial to apply convolution kernels
to document-level sentiment classification: previous
work has already shown that categorically using the
entire syntactic structure of a single sentence would
produce too many features for a convolution ker-
nel (Zhang et al., 2006; Moschitti et al., 2008). We
expect the situation to be worse for our task as we
work with documents that tend to comprise dozens
of sentences.

It is therefore necessary to choose appropriate
substructures of a sentence as opposed to using the
whole structure in order to effectively use convolu-
tion kernels in our task. It has been observed that
not every part of a document is equally informa-
tive for identifying the polarity of the whole doc-
ument (Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Pang and
Lee, 2004; Koppel and Schler, 2005; Ferguson et
al., 2009): a film review often uses lengthy objective
paragraphs to simply describe the plot. Such objec-
tive portions do not contain the author’s opinion and
are irrelevant with respect to the sentiment classifi-

338



cation task. Indeed, separating objective sentences
from subjective sentences in a document produces
encouraging results (Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003;
Pang and Lee, 2004; Koppel and Schler, 2005; Fer-
guson et al., 2009). Our research is inspired by these
observations. Unlike in the previous work, however,
we focus on syntactic substructures (rather than en-
tire paragraphs or sentences) that contain subjective
words.

More specifically, we use the terms in the lexi-
con constructed from (Wilson et al., 2005) as the
indicators to identify the substructures for the con-
volution kernels, and extract different sub-structures
according to these indicators for various types of
parse trees (Section 3). An empirical evaluation on
a widely used sentiment corpus shows an improve-
ment of 1.45 point in accuracy over the baseline
resulting from a combination of bag-of-words and
high-impact parse features (Section 4).

2 Related Work

Our research builds on previous work in the field
of sentiment classification and convolution kernel-
s. For sentiment classification, the design of lexi-
cal and syntactic features is an important first step.
Several approaches propose feature-based learning
algorithms for this problem. Pang and Lee (2004)
and Dave et al. (2003) represent a document as a
bag-of-words; Matsumoto et al., (2005) extract fre-
quently occurring connected subtrees from depen-
dency parsing; Joshi and Penstein-Rose (2009) use
a transformation of dependency relation triples; Liu
and Seneff (2009) extract adverb-adjective-noun re-
lations from dependency parser output.

Previous research has convincingly demonstrat-
ed a kernel’s ability to generate large feature set-
s, which is useful to quickly model new and not
well understood linguistic phenomena in machine
learning, and has led to improvements in various
NLP tasks, including relation extraction (Bunescu
and Mooney, 2005a; Bunescu and Mooney, 2005b;
Zhang et al., 2006; Nguyen et al., 2009), question
answering (Moschitti and Quarteroni, 2008), seman-
tic role labeling (Moschitti et al., 2008).

Convolution kernels have been used before in sen-
timent analysis: Wiegand and Klakow (2010) use
convolution kernels for opinion holder extraction,

Johansson and Moschitti (2010) for opinion expres-
sion detection and Agarwal et al. (2011) for sen-
timent analysis of Twitter data. Wiegand and K-
lakow (2010) use e.g. noun phrases as possible can-
didate opinion holders, in our work we extract any
minimal syntactic context containing a subjective
word. Johansson and Moschitti (2010) and Agarwal
et al. (2011) process sentences and tweets respec-
tively. However, as these are considerably shorter
than documents, their feature space is less complex,
and pruning is not as pertinent.

3 Kernels for Sentiment Classification

3.1 Linguistic Representations

We explore both sequence and convolution kernels
to exploit information on surface and syntactic lev-
els. For sequence kernels, we make use of lexical
words with some syntactic information in the form
of part-of-speech (POS) tags. More specifically, we
define three types of sequences:

• SW, a sequence of lexical words, e.g.: A tragic
waste of talent and incredible visual effects.

• SP, a sequence of POS tags, e.g.: DT JJ NN IN
NN CC JJ JJ NNS.

• SWP, a sequence of words and POS tags,
e.g.: A/DT tragic/JJ waste/NN of/IN talent/NN
and/CC incredible/JJ visual/JJ effects/NNS.

In addition, we experiment with constituency tree
kernels (CON), and dependency tree kernels (D),
which capture hierarchical constituency structure
and labeled dependency relations between words,
respectively. For dependency kernels, we test with
word (DW), POS (DP), and combined word-and-
POS settings (DWP), and similarly for simple se-
quence kernels (SW, SP and SWP). We also use a
vector kernel (VK) in a bag-of-words baseline. Fig-
ure 1 shows the constituent and dependency struc-
ture for the above sentence.

3.2 Settings

As kernel-based algorithms inherently explore the
whole feature space to weight the features, it is im-
portant to choose appropriate substructures to re-
move unnecessary features as much as possible.

339



NP

PP

NP

DT JJ NN

A tragic waste

NP

IN

of

NP NP

NN

talent

CC

and

JJ JJ NNS

incredible visual effect

(a)

waste

det amod prep of

A tragic talent

conj and

effects

amod amod

incredible visual

(b)

waste

det amod prep of

DT JJ NN

conj and

NNS

amod amod

JJ JJ

(c)

waste

det amod prep of

DT

A

JJ

tragic

NN

talent

conj and

NNS

effects

amod amod

JJ

incredible

visual

visual

(d)

Figure 1: Illustration of the different tree structures employed for convolution kernels. (a) Constituent parse tree
(CON); (b) Dependency tree-based words integrated with grammatical relations (DW); (c) Dependency tree in (b)
with words substituted by POS tags (DP); (d) Dependency tree in (b) with POS tags inserted before words (DWP).

NP

DT JJ NN

A tragic waste

(a)

waste

amod

JJ

tragic

(b)

Figure 2: Illustration of the different settings on con-
stituency (CON) and dependency (DWP) parse trees with
tragic as the indicator word.

Unfortunately, in our task there exist several cues
indicating the polarity of the document, which are
distributed in different sentences. To solve this prob-
lem, we define the indicators in this task as subjec-
tive words in a polarity lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005).
For each polarity indicator, we define the “scope”
(the minimal syntactic structure containing at least
one subjective word) of each indicator for different
representations as follows:

For a constituent tree, a node and its children
correspond to a grammatical production. There-
fore, considering the terminal node tragic in the con-
stituent structure tree in Figure 1(a), we extract the
subtree rooted at the grandparent of the terminal, see
Figure 2(a). We also use the corresponding sequence

Scopes Trees Size
Document 32 24
Subjective Sentences 22 27
Constituent Substructures 30 10
Dependency Substructures 40 3

Table 1: The detail of the corpus. Here Trees denotes the
average number of trees, and Size denotes the averaged
number of words in each tree.

of words in the subtree for the sequential kernel.
For a dependency tree, we only consider the sub-

tree containing the lexical items that are directly
connected to the subjective word. For instance, giv-
en the node tragic in Figure 1(d), we will extract its
direct parent waste integrated with dependency rela-
tions and (possibly) POS, as in Figure 2(b).

We further add two background scopes, one be-
ing subjective sentences (the sentences that contain
subjective words), and the entire document.

4 Experiments

4.1 Setup

We carried out experiments on the movie review
dataset (Pang and Lee, 2004), which consists of

340



1000 positive reviews and 1000 negative reviews.
To obtain constituency trees, we parsed the docu-
ment using the Stanford Parser (Klein and Man-
ning, 2003). To obtain dependency trees, we passed
the Stanford constituency trees through the Stanford
constituency-to-dependency converter (de Marneffe
and Manning, 2008).

We exploited Subset Tree (SST) (Collins and
Duffy, 2001) and Partial Tree (PT) kernels (Mos-
chitti, 2006) for constituent and dependency parse
trees1, respectively. A sequential kernel is applied
for lexical sequences. Kernels were combined using
plain (unweighted) summation. Corpus statistics are
provided in Table 1.

We use a manually constructed polarity lexicon
(Wilson et al., 2005), in which each entry is annotat-
ed with its degree of subjectivity (strong, weak), as
well as its sentiment polarity (positive, negative and
neutral). We only take into account the subjective
terms with the degree of strong subjectivity.

We consider two baselines:

• VK: bag-of-words features using a vector ker-
nel (Pang and Lee, 2004; Ng et al., 2006)

• Rand: a number of randomly selected sub-
structures similar to the number of extracted
substructures defined in Section 3.2

All experiments were carried out using the SVM-
Light-TK toolkit2 with default parameter settings.
All results reported are based on 10-fold cross vali-
dation.

4.2 Results and Discussions

Table 2 lists the results of the different kernel type
combinations. The best performance is obtained by
combining VK and DW kernels, gaining a signifi-
cant improvement of 1.45 point in accuracy. As far
as PT kernels are concerned, we find dependency
trees with simple words (DW) outperform both de-
pendency trees with POS (DP) and those with both
words and POS (DWP). We conjecture that in this
case, as syntactic information is already captured by

1A SubSet Tree is a structure that satisfies the constraint that
grammatical rules cannot be broken, while a Partial Tree is a
more general form of substructures obtained by the application
of partial production rules of the grammar.

2available at http://disi.unitn.it/moschitti/

Kernels Doc Sent Rand Sub
VK 87.05
VK + SW 87.25 86.95 87.25 87.40
VK + SP 87.35 86.95 87.45 87.35
VK + SWP 87.30 87.45 87.30 88.15*
VK + CON 87.45 87.65 87.45 88.30**
VK + DW 87.35 87.50 87.30 88.50**
VK + DP 87.75* 87.20 87.35 87.75
VK + DWP 87.70* 87.30 87.65 87.80*

Table 2: Results of kernels. Here Doc denotes the whole
document of the text, Sent denotes the sentences that con-
tains subjective terms in the lexicon, Rand denotes ran-
domly selected substructures, and Sub denotes the sub-
structures defined in Section 3.2. We use “*” and “**” to
denote a result is better than baseline VK significantly at
p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 (sign test), respectively.

the dependency representation, POS tags can intro-
duce little new information, and will add unneces-
sary complexity. For example, given the substruc-
ture (waste (amod (JJ (tragic)))), the PT kernel will
use both (waste (amod (JJ))) and (waste (amod (JJ
(tragic)))). We can see that the former is adding no
value to the model, as the JJ tag could indicate ei-
ther positive words (e.g. good) or negative words
(e.g. tragic). In contrast, words are good indicators
for sentiment polarity.

The results in Table 2 confirm two of our hy-
potheses. Firstly, it clearly demonstrates the val-
ue of incorporating syntactic information into the
document-level sentiment classifier, as the tree k-
ernels (CON and D*) generally outperforms vector
and sequence kernels (VK and S*). More impor-
tantly, it also shows the necessity of extracting ap-
propriate substructures when using convolution ker-
nels in our task: when using the dependency kernel
(VK+DW), the result on lexicon guided substruc-
tures (Sub) outperforms the results on document,
sentence, or randomly selected substructures, with
statistical significance (p<0.05).

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We studied the impact of syntactic information on
document-level sentiment classification using con-
volution kernels, and reduced the complexity of the
kernels by extracting minimal high-impact substruc-
tures, guided by a polarity lexicon. Experiments

341



show that our method outperformed a bag-of-words
baseline with a statistically significant gain of 1.45
absolute point in accuracy.

Our research focuses on identifying and using
high-impact substructures for convolution kernels in
document-level sentiment classification. We expect
our method to be complementary with sophisticated
methods used in state-of-the-art sentiment classifica-
tion systems, which is to be explored in future work.

Acknowledgement

The authors were supported by 863 State Key
Project No. 2006AA010108, the EuroMatrixPlus F-
P7 EU project (grant No 231720) and Science Foun-
dation Ireland (Grant No. 07/CE/I1142). Part of the
research was done while Zhaopeng Tu was visiting,
and Yifan He was at the Centre for Next Generation
Localisation (www.cngl.ie), School of Computing,
Dublin City University. We thank the anonymous
reviewers for their insightful comments. We are al-
so grateful to Junhui Li for his helpful feedback.

References

Apoorv Agarwal, Boyi Xie, Ilia Vovsha, Owen Rambow,
and Rebecca Passonneau. 2011. Sentiment analysis
of twitter data. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Languages in Social Media, pages 30–38. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Razvan Bunescu and Raymond Mooney. 2005a. A
Shortest Path Dependency Kernel for Relation Extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of Human Language Technolo-
gy Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 724–731, Van-
couver, British Columbia, Canada, oct. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Razvan Bunescu and Raymond Mooney. 2005b. Sub-
sequence Kernels for Relation Extraction. In Y Weis-
s, B Sch o lkopf, and J Platt, editors, Proceedings of
the 19th Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 171–178, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.

Michael Collins and Nigel Duffy. 2001. Convolution
kernels for natural language. In Proceedings of Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 625–632.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. The stanford typed dependencies repre-
sentation. In Proceedings of the COLING Workshop
on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain Parser Eval-
uation, Manchester, August.

Paul Ferguson, Neil O’Hare, Michael Davy, Adam
Bermingham, Paraic Sheridan, Cathal Gurrin, and
Alan F. Smeaton. 2009. Exploring the use of
paragraph-level annotations for sentiment analysis of
financial blogs. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis.

Richard Johansson and Alessandro Moschitti. 2010.
Syntactic and semantic structure for opinion expres-
sion detection. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Con-
ference on Computational Natural Language Learn-
ing, pages 67–76, Uppsala, Sweden, July.

Mahesh Joshi and Carolyn Penstein-Rose. 2009. Gen-
eralizing Dependency Features for Opinion Mining.
In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference
Short Papers, pages 313–316, Suntec, Singapore, jul.
Suntec, Singapore.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate Unlexicalized Parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 423–430, Sapporo, Japan, jul. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Moshe Koppel and Jonathan Schler. 2005. Using neutral
examples for learning polarity. In Proceedings of In-
ternational Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI) 2005, pages 1616–1616.

Steve Lawrence Kushal Dave and David Pennock. 2003.
Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction and se-
mantic classification of product reviews. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th International Conference on World
Wide Web, pages 519–528, ACM. ACM.

Jingjing Liu and Stephanie Seneff. 2009. Review Sen-
timent Scoring via a Parse-and-Paraphrase Paradigm.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 161–
169, Singapore, aug. Singapore.

Shotaro Matsumoto, Hiroya Takamura, and Manabu
Okumura. 2005. Sentiment classification using word
sub-sequences and dependency sub-trees. Proceed-
ings of PAKDD’05, the 9th Pacific-Asia Conference on
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
3518/2005:21–32.

Alessandro Moschitti and Silvia Quarteroni. 2008. K-
ernels on Linguistic Structures for Answer Extraction.
In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers, pages
113–116, Columbus, Ohio, jun. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Alessandro Moschitti, Daniele Pighin, and Roberto
Basili. 2008. Tree kernels for semantic role labeling.
Computational Linguistics, 34(2):193–224.

Alessandro Moschitti. 2006. Efficient Convolution Ker-
nels for Dependency and Constituent Syntactic Trees.
In Proceedings of the 17th European Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 318–329, Berlin, Germany,

342



sep. Machine Learning: ECML 2006, 17th European
Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings.

Vincent Ng, Sajib Dasgupta, and S M Niaz Arifin. 2006.
Examining the Role of Linguistic Knowledge Sources
in the Automatic Identification and Classification of
Reviews. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006
Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 611–618,
Sydney, Australia, jul. Sydney, Australia.

Truc-Vien T Nguyen, Alessandro Moschitti, and
Giuseppe Riccardi. 2009. Convolution kernels on
constituent, dependency and sequential structures for
relation extraction. Proceedings of the 2009 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1378–1387.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A Sentimental Educa-
tion: Sentiment Analysis Using Subjectivity Summa-
rization Based on Minimum Cuts. In Proceedings of
the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 271–278, Barcelona, S-
pain, jun. Barcelona, Spain.

Michael Wiegand and Dietrich Klakow. 2010. Convolu-
tion Kernels for Opinion Holder Extraction. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 795–803, Los An-
geles, California, jun. Los Angeles, California.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-
Level Sentiment Analysis. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology Conference and Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 347–354, Vancouver, British Columbia, Cana-
da, oct. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Hong Yu and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Toward-
s answering opinion questions: Separating facts from
opinions and identifying the polarity of opinion sen-
tences. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 129–136, Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Min Zhang, Jie Zhang, Jian Su, and Guodong Zhou.
2006. A Composite Kernel to Extract Relations be-
tween Entities with Both Flat and Structured Features.
In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 825–832, Sydney, Australia, jul. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

343


