










































Movie-DiC: a Movie Dialogue Corpus for Research and Development


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 203–207,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Movie-DiC: a Movie Dialogue Corpus for Research and Development 

 
 

Rafael E. Banchs 
Human Language Technology 

Institute for Infocomm Research 
Singapore 138632 

rembanchs@i2r.a-star.edu.sg 
 
 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper describes Movie-DiC a Movie 
Dialogue Corpus recently collected for re-
search and development purposes. The col-
lected dataset comprises 132,229 dialogues 
containing a total of 764,146 turns that 
have been extracted from 753 movies. De-
tails on how the data collection has been 
created and how it is structured are pro-
vided along with its main statistics and cha-
racteristics. 

1 Introduction 
Data driven applications have proliferated in Com-
putational Linguistics during the last decade. Seve-
ral factors, such as the availability of more power-
ful computers, an almost unlimited storage ca-
pacity, the availability of large volumes of data in 
digital format, as well as the recent advances in 
machine learning theory, have significantly con-
tributed to such a proliferation.   

Among the many applications that have benefi-
ted from this data-driven boom, probably the most 
representative examples are: information retrieval 
(Qin et al., 2008), machine translation (Brown et 
al., 1993), question answering (Molla-Aliod and 
Vicedo, 2010) and dialogue systems (Rieser and 
Lemon, 2011). 

In the specific case of dialogue systems, data 
acquisition can impose some challenges depending 
on the specific domain and task the dialogue sys-
tem is targeted for. In some specific domains, in 
which human-human dialogue applications already 

exists, data collection is generally straight forward, 
while in some other cases, data design and collec-
tion can constitute a complex problem (Williams 
and Young, 2003; Zue, 2007; Misu et al., 2009).  

Depending on the objective being pursued, dia-
logue systems can be grouped into two major cate-
gories: task-oriented and chat-oriented systems. In 
the first case, the system is required to help the 
user to accomplish a specific goal or objective 
(Busemann et al., 1997; Stallard, 2000). In the se-
cond case, the system objective is mainly entertain-
ment oriented. Systems in this category are re-
quired to play, chitchat or just accompany the user 
(Weizenbaum, 1966; Wallis, 2010).  

In this work, we focus our attention on dialogue 
data which is suitable for training chat-oriented 
dialogue systems. Different from task-oriented dia-
logue collections (Mann, 2003), instead of being 
concentrated on a specific domain or area of 
knowledge, the training dataset for a chat-oriented 
dialogue system must cover a wide variety of do-
mains, as well as be able to provide a fair represen-
tation of world-knowledge semantics and prag-
matics (Bunt, 2000). To this end, we have col-
lected dialogues from movie scripts aiming at 
constructing a dialogue corpus which should pro-
vide a good sample of domains, styles and world 
knowledge, as well as constitute a valuable re-
source for research and development purposes. 

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 describes in detail the implemented col-
lection process and the structure of the generated 
database. Section 3 presents the main statistics, as 
well as the main characteristics of the resulting 
corpus. Finally, section 4 presents our conclusions 
and future work plans.  

203



2 Collecting Dialogues from Movies  
As already stated in the introduction, our presented 
dialogue corpus has been extracted from movie 
scripts. More specifically, scripts freely available 
from The Internet Movie Script Data Collection 
(http://www.imsdb.com/) have been used. In this 
section we describe the implemented data collec-
tion process and the data structure finally used for 
the generated corpus. 

As a first step of the collection construction, 
dialogues have to be identified and extracted from 
the crawled html files. Three basic types of infor-
mation elements are extracted from the scripts: 
speakers, utterances and context.  

The utterance and speaker information elements 
contain what is said at each dialogue turn and the 
corresponding character who says it, respectively. 
Context information elements, on the other hand, 
contain all additional information/texts appearing 
in the scripts, which are typically of narrative 
nature and explain what is happening in the scene.  

Figure 1 depicts a browser snapshot illustrating 
the typical layout of a movie script and the most 
common spatial distribution of the aforementioned 
information elements. 

It is important to mention that a lot of different 
variants to the format presented in Figure 1 can be 
actually encountered in The Internet Movie Script 
Data Collection. Because of this, our parsing al-
gorithms had to be revised and adjusted several 
times in order to achieve a reasonable level of 
robustness that allowed for processing the largest 
possible amount of movie scripts.  

Another important problem was the identifica-
tion of dialogue boundaries. Some heuristics were 
implemented by taking into account the size and 
number of context elements between speaker turns.  

A post-processing step was also implemented to 
either filter out or amend some of the most com-
mon parsing errors occurring during the extraction 
phase. Some of these errors include: corrupted for-
mats, turn continuations, notes inserted within the 
turn, misspelling of speaker names, etc. 

In addition to this, a semi-automatic process was 
still necessary to filter out movie scripts exhibiting 
extremely different layouts or invalid file formats. 
Approximately, 17% of the movie scripts crawled 
from The Internet Movie Script Data Collection 
had to be discarded. From a total of 911 crawled 
scripts, only 753 were successfully processed.   

 
 

Figure 1: Typical layout of a movie script 
 

The extracted information was finally organized 
in dialogical units, in which the information regar-
ding turn sequences inside each dialogue, as well 
as dialogue sequences within each movie script 
was preserved. Figure 2 illustrates an example of 
the XML representation for one of the dialogues 
extracted from Who Framed Roger Rabbit.  

 
<dialogue id="47" n_utterances="4"> 
   <speaker>VALIANT</speaker> 
      <context></context> 
      <utterance>You shot Roger.</utterance> 
   <speaker>JESSICA RABBIT</speaker> 
      <context>Jessica moves the box aside and 
tugs on the rabbit ears. The rabbit head pops 
off. Underneath is a Weasle. In his hand is the 
Colt .45 Buntline.</context> 
      <utterance>That's not Roger. It's one of 
Doom's men. He killed R.K. Maroon.</utterance> 
   <speaker>VALIANT</speaker> 
      <context></context> 
      <utterance>Lady, I guess I had you pegged 
wrong.</utterance> 
   <speaker>JESSICA RABBIT</speaker> 
      <context>As they run down the 
alley...</context> 
      <utterance>Don't worry, you're not the 
first. We better get out of here.</utterance> 
</dialogue> 

 
Figure 2: An example of a dialogue unit  

204



3 Movie Dialogue Corpus Statistics 
In this section we present the main statistics of the 
resulting dialogue corpus and study some of its 
more important properties. The final dialogue col-
lection was the result of successfully processing 
753 movie scripts. Table 1 summarizes the main 
statistics of the resulting dialogue collection.  

 
Total number of scripts collected 911 
Total number of scripts processed 753 
Total number of  dialogues 132,229 
Total number of  speaker turns 764,146 
Average amount of dialogues per movie 175.60 
Average amount of turns per movie 1,014.80 
Average amount of turns per dialogue 5.78 
 
Table 1: Main statistics of the collected movie 

dialogue dataset 
 
Movies were mainly crawled from the action, 

crime, drama and thriller genres. However, as each 
movie commonly belongs to more than one single 
genre, much more genres are actually represented 
in the dataset. Table 2 summarizes the distribution 
of movies by genre (notice that, as most of the 
movies belong to more than one genre, the total 
summation of percentages exceeds 100%). 

 
Genre Movies Percentage
Action 258 34.26 
Adventure 133 17.66 
Animation 22 2.92 
Comedy 149 19.79 
Crime 163 21.65 
Drama 456 60.56 
Family 31 4.12 
Fantasy 82 10.89 
Horror 104 13.81 
Musical 18 2.39 
Mystery 95 12.62 
Romance 123 16.33 
Sci-Fi 129 17.13 
Thriller 329 43.69 
War 25 3.32 
Western 11 1.46 
 

Table 2: Distribution of movies per genre 
 

The first characteristic of the corpus to be ana-
lyzed is the distribution of dialogues per movie. 
This distribution is shown in Figure 3. As seen 
from the figure, the distribution of dialogues per 
movie is clearly symmetric around its mean value 

of 175 dialogues per movie. For most of the mo-
vies in the collection, a number of dialogues ran-
ging from about 100 to 250 were extracted.    

 

 
 
Figure 3: Distribution of dialogues per movie  
 
The second property of the corpus to be studied 

is the distribution of turns per dialogue. This distri-
bution is shown in Figure 4. As seen from the 
figure, this distribution approximates a power law 
behavior, with a large number of very short dia-
logues (about 50K two-turn dialogues) and a small 
amount of long dialogues (only six dialogues with 
more than 200 turns). The median of the distribu-
tion is 5.63 turns per dialogue.   

 

  
Figure 4: Distribution of turns per dialogue  

 
The third property of the corpus to be described 

is the distribution of number of speakers per dia-

205



logue. This distribution is shown in Figure 5. As 
seen from the bar-plot depicted in the figure, the 
largest proportion of dialogues (around 60K) in-
volves two speakers. The second largest proportion 
of “dialogues” (about 35K) involves only a single 
speaker, which means that this subset of the data 
collection is actually composed by monologues or 
single speaker interventions. The third and fourth 
larger proportions are those involving three and 
four speakers, respectively.    

  

 
 

Figure 5: Distribution of number of speakers per 
dialogue 

 
Finally, in Figure 6, we present a cross-plot be-

tween the number of dialogues and the number of 
turns within each movie script. 
 

 
 

Figure 6: Cross-plot between the number of 
dialogues and turns within each movie script 

As seen from the cross-plot, an average movie 
has between 150 and 200 dialogues comprising 
between 1000 and 1200 turns in total. The cross-
plot also reveals some interesting extreme cases in 
the data collection.  

For instance, movies with few dialogues but ma-
ny turns are located towards the upper-left corner 
of the figure. In this zone we can find movies as: 
Happy Birthday Wanda June, Hannah and Her 
Sisters and All About Eve. In the lower-left corner 
of the figure we can find movies with few dia-
logues and few turns, as for instance: 1492 Con-
quest of Paradise and The Cooler.  

In the right side of the figure we find the lots-of-
dialogues region. There we can find movies with 
lots of very short dialogues (lower-right corner), 
such as Jimmy and Judy and Walking Tall; or mo-
vies with lots of dialogues and turns (upper-right 
corner), such as The Curious Case of Benjamin 
Button and Jennifer’s Body. 

4 Conclusions and Future Work  
In this paper, we have described Movie-DiC a 
Movie Dialogue Corpus that has been collected for 
research and development purposes. The data col-
lection comprises 132,229 dialogues containing a 
total of 764,146 turns/utterances that have been 
extracted from 753 movies. Details on how the 
data collection has been created and how the 
corpus is structured were provided along with the 
main statistics and characteristics of the corpus. 

Although strictly speaking, and by its particular 
nature, Movie-DiC does not constitute a corpus of 
real human-to-human dialogues, it does constitute 
an excellent dataset for studying the semantic and 
pragmatic aspects of human communication within 
a wide variety of contexts, scenarios, styles and 
socio-cultural settings.  

Specific technologies and applications that can 
exploit a resource like this include, but are not res-
tricted to: example-based chat bots (Banchs and Li, 
2012), question answering systems, discourse and 
pragmatics analysis, narrative vs. colloquial style 
classification, genre classification, etc.  

As future work, we intend to expand the current 
size of the collection from 0.7K to 2K movies, as 
well as to improve some of our parsing and post-
processing algorithms for reducing the amount of 
noise still present in the collection and enhance the 
quality of the current version of the dataset. 

206



Acknowledgments 
The author would like to thank the Institute for 
Infocomm Research for its support and permission 
to publish this work. 

References  
Banchs R E, Li H (2012) IRIS: a chat-oriented dialogue 

system based on the vector space model. In Procee-
dings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the ACL, demo 
session.  

Brown P, Della Pietra S, Della Pietra V, Mercer R 
(1993) The mathematics of statistical machine trans-
lation: parameter estimation. Computational Linguis-
tics 19(2):263-311. 

Bunt H (ed) (2000) Abduction, belief, and context in 
dialogue: studies in computational pragmatics. J. 
Benjamins. 

Busemann S, Declerck T, Diagne A, Dini L, Klein J, 
Schmeier S (1997) Natural language dialogue service 
for appointment scheduling agents. In Proceedings of 
the 5th Conference on Applied Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pp 25-32. 

Mann W (2003) The Dialogue Diversity Corpus. Acces-
sed online on 16 March 2012 from: http://www-
bcf.usc.edu/~billmann/diversity/DDivers-site.htm  

Misu T, Ohtake K, Hori C, Kashioka H, Nakamura S 
(2009) Annotating communicative function and se-
mantic content in dialogue act for construction of 
consulting dialogue systems. In Proceedings of the 
Int. Conf. of Spoken Language Processing 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Molla-Aliod D, Vicedo J (2010) Question answering. In 
Indurkhya and Damerau (eds) Handbook of Natural 
Language Processing, pp 485-510. Chapman & Hall. 

Qin T, Liu T, Zhang X, Wang D, Xiong W, Li H (2008) 
Learning to rank relational objects and its application 
to Web search. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional Conference on World Wide Web, pp 407-416. 

Rieser V, Lemon O (2011) Reinforcement learning for 
adaptive dialogue systems: a data-driven methodolo-
gy for dialogue management and natural language 
generation. Springer. 

Stallard D (2000) Talk’n’travel: a conversational system 
for air travel planning. In Proceedings of the 6th 
Conference on Applied Natural Language Proces-
sing, pp 68-75.  

Wallis P (2010) A robot in the kitchen. In Proceedings 
of the ACL 2010 Workshop on Companionable Dia-
logue Systems, pp 25-30. 

Weizenbaum J (1966) ELIZA – A computer program 
for the study of natural language communication be-
tween man and machine. Communications of the 
ACM 9(1):36-45. 

Williams J, Young S (2003) Using Wizard-of-Oz 
simulations to bootstrap Reinforcement-Learning-
based dialog management systems. In Proceedings of 
the 4th SIGDIAL Workshop on Discourse and Dia-
logue. 

Zue V (2007) On organic interfaces. In Proceedings of 
the International Conference of Spoken Language 
Processing. 

 

207


