










































Specifying Viewpoint and Information Need with Affective Metaphors: A System Demonstration of the Metaphor-Magnet Web App/Service


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7–12,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Specifying Viewpoint and Information Need with Affective Metaphors 

A System Demonstration of the Metaphor Magnet Web App/Service 

 

Tony Veale                 Guofu Li 
Web Science and Technology Division,   School of Computer Science & Informatics, 

KAIST, Daejeon, University College Dublin, 
South Korea. Belfield, Dublin D4, Ireland. 

Tony.Veale@gmail.com 
 

      Yanfen.Hao@UCD.ie 

 
Abstract 

Metaphors pervade our language because 
they are elastic enough to allow a speaker 
to express an affective viewpoint on a topic 
without committing to a specific meaning. 
This balance of expressiveness and inde-
terminism means that metaphors are just as 
useful for eliciting information as they are 
for conveying information. We explore 
here, via a demonstration of a system for 
metaphor interpretation and generation 
called Metaphor Magnet, the practical uses 
of metaphor as a basis for formulating af-
fective information queries. We also con-
sider the kinds of deep and shallow 
stereotypical knowledge that are needed for 
such a system, and demonstrate how they 
can be acquired from corpora and the web. 

1 Introduction 
Metaphor is perhaps the most flexible and adaptive 
tool in the human communication toolbox. It is 
suited to any domain of discourse, to any register, 
and to the description of any concept we desire. 
Speakers use metaphor to communicate not just 
meanings, but their feelings about those meanings. 
The open-ended nature of metaphor interpretation 
means that we can use metaphor to simultaneously 
express and elicit opinions about a given topic. 
Metaphors are flexible conceits that allow us to 
express a position while seeking elaboration or 
refutation of this position from others. A metaphor 
is neither true or false, but a conceptual model that 
allow speakers to negotiate a common viewpoint. 

Computational models for the interpretation and 
elaboration of metaphors should allow speakers to 
exploit the same flexibility of expression with ma-
chines as they enjoy with other humans. Such a 
goal clearly requires a great deal of knowledge, 
since metaphor is a knowledge-hungry mechanism 
par excellance (see Fass, 1997). However, much of 
the knowledge required for metaphor interpretation 
is already implicit in the large body of metaphors 
that are active in a community (see Martin, 1990; 
Mason, 2004). Existing metaphors are themselves 
a valuable source of knowledge for the production 
of new metaphors, so much so that a system can 
mine the relevant knowledge from corpora of fig-
urative text (e.g. see Veale, 2011; Shutova, 2010). 

One area of human-machine interaction that can 
clearly benefit from a competence in metaphor is 
that of information retrieval (IR). Speakers use 
metaphors with ease when eliciting information 
from each other, as e.g. when one suggests that a 
certain CEO is a tyrant or a god, or that a certain 
company is a dinosaur while another is a cult. 
Those that agree might respond by elaborating the 
metaphor and providing substantiating evidence, 
while those that disagree might refute the metaphor 
and switch to another of their own choosing. A 
well-chosen metaphor can provide the talking 
points for an informed conversation, allowing a 
speaker to elicit the desired knowledge as a combi-
nation of objective and subjective elements. 

In IR, such a capability should allow searchers 
to express their information needs subjectively, via 
affective metaphors like “X is a cult”. The goal, of 
course, is not just to retrieve documents that make 
explicit use of the same metaphor – a literal match-
ing of non-literal texts is of limited use –  but to 

7



retrieve texts whose own metaphors are consonant 
with those of the searcher, and which elaborate 
upon the same talking points. This requires a com-
puter to understand the user’s metaphor, to appre-
ciate how other metaphors might convey the same 
affective viewpoint, and to understand the different 
guises these metaphors might assume in a  text. 

IR extends the reach of its retrieval efforts by 
expanding the query it is given, in an attempt to 
make explicit what the user has left implicit. Meta-
phors, like under-specified queries, have rich 
meanings that are, for the most part, implicit: they 
imply and suggest much more than they specify. 
An expansionist approach to metaphor meaning, in 
which an affective metaphor is interpreted by gen-
erating the space of related metaphors and talking 
points that it implies, is thus very much suited to a 
more creative vision of IR, as e.g. suggested by 
Veale (2011). To expand a metaphorical query 
(like “company-X is a cult” or “company-Y is a 
dinosaur” or “Z was a tyrant”), a system must first 
expand the metaphor itself, into a set of plausible 
construals of the metaphor (e.g. a company that is 
viewed as a dinosaur will likely be powerful, but 
also bloated, lumbering and slow). 

The system described in this paper, Metaphor 
Magnet, demonstrates this expansionist approach 
to metaphorical inference. Users express queries in 
the form of affective metaphors or similes, perhaps 
using explicit + or – tags to denote a positive or 
negative spin on a given concept. For instance, 
“Google is as –powerful as Microsoft” does not 
look for documents that literally contain this simi-
le, but documents that express viewpoints that are 
implied by this simile, that is, documents that dis-
cuss the negative implications of Google’s power, 
where these implications are first understood in 
relation to Microsoft. The system does this by first 
considering the metaphors that are conventionally 
used to describe Microsoft, focusing only on those 
metaphors that evoke the property powerful, and 
which cast a negative light on Microsoft. The im-
plications of these metaphors (e.g., dinosaur, bully, 
monopoly, etc.) are then examined in the context of 
Google, using the metaphors that are typically used 
to describe Google as a guide to what is most apt. 
Thus, since Google is often described as a giant in 
web texts, the negative properties and behaviors of 
a stereotypical giant – like lumbering and sprawl-
ing – will be considered apt and highlighted. 

To perform this kind of analysis reliably, for a 

wide range of metaphors and an even wider range 
of topics,  requires a  robustly shallow approach. 
We exploit the fact that the Google n-grams 
(Brants and Franz, 2006) contains a great many 
copula metaphors of the form “X is a Y” to under-
stand how X is typically viewed on the web. We 
further exploit a large dictionary of affective stere-
otypes to provide an understanding of the +/- prop-
erties and behaviors of each source concept Y. 
Combining these resources allows the Metaphor 
Magnet system to understand the implications of a 
metaphorical query “X as Z” in terms of the quali-
ties that are typically considered salient for Z and 
which have been corpus-attested as apt for X. 

We describe the construction of our lexicon of 
affective stereotypes in section 2. Each stereotype 
is associated with a set of typical properties and 
behaviors (like sprawling for giant, or inspiring for 
guru), where the overall affect of each stereotype 
depends on which subset of qualities is activated in 
a given context (e.g., giant can be construed posi-
tively or negatively, as can baby, soldier, etc.). We 
describe how Metaphor Magnet exploits these ste-
reotypes in section 3, before providing a worked 
example in section 4 and screenshots in section 5. 

2 An Affective Lexicon of Stereotypes 
We construct the lexicon in two stages. In the first 
stage, a large collection of stereotypical descrip-
tions is harvested from the Web. As in Liu et al. 
(2003), our goal is to acquire a lightweight com-
mon-sense representation of many everyday con-
cepts. In the second stage, we link these common-
sense qualities in a support graph that captures 
how they mutually support each other in their co-
description of a stereotypical idea. From this graph 
we can estimate positive and negative valence 
scores for each property and behavior, and default 
averages for the stereotypes that exhibit them. 

Similes and stereotypes share a symbiotic rela-
tionship: the former exploit the latter as reference 
points for an evocative description, while the latter 
are perpetuated by their constant re-use in similes. 
Expanding on the approach in Veale (2011), we 
use two kinds of query for harvesting stereotypes 
from the web. The first, “as ADJ as a NOUN”, ac-
quires typical adjectival properties for noun con-
cepts; the second, “VERB+ing like a NOUN” and 
“VERB+ed like a NOUN”, acquires typical verb 
behaviors. Rather than use a wildcard * in both 

8



positions (ADJ and NOUN, or VERB and NOUN), 
which yields limited results with a search engine 
like Google, we generate fully instantiated similes 
from hypotheses generated via the Google n-
grams. Thus, from the 3-gram “a drooling zombie” 
we generate the query “drooling like a zombie”, 
and from the 3-gram “a mindless zombie” we gen-
erate “as mindless as a zombie”. 

Only those similes whose queries retrieve one 
or more web documents via Google are considered 
to contain promising associations. But this still 
gives us over 250,000 web-validated simile associ-
ations for our stereotypical model. We quickly fil-
ter these candidates manually, to ensure that the 
contents of the lexicon are of the highest quality. 
As a result, we obtain rich descriptions for many 
stereotypical ideas, such as Baby, which is de-
scribed via 163 typical properties and behaviors 
like crying, drooling and guileless. After this filter-
ing phase, the stereotype lexicon maps 9,479 stere-
otypes to a set of 7,898 properties and behaviors, 
to yield more than 75,000 pairings. 

We construct the second level of the lexicon by 
automatically linking these properties and behav-
iors to each other in a support graph. The intuition 
here is that properties which reinforce each other in 
a single description (e.g. “as lush and green as a 
jungle” or “as hot and humid as a sauna”) are more 
likely to have a similar affect than properties which 
do not support each other. We first gather all 
Google 3-grams in which a pair of stereotypical 
properties or behaviors X and Y are linked via co-
ordination, as in “hot and humid” or “kicking and 
screaming”. A bidirectional link between X and Y 
is added to the support graph if one or more stereo-
types in the lexicon contain both X and Y. If this is 
not so, we consider whether both descriptors ever 
reinforce each other in web similes, by posing the 
web query “as X and Y as”. If this query has  non-
zero hits, we also add a link between X and Y. 

Let N denote this support graph, and N(p) de-
note the set of neighboring terms to p, that is, the 
set of properties and behaviors that can mutually 
support p. Since every edge in N represents an af-
fective context, we can estimate the likelihood that 
a property p is ever used in a positive or negative 
context if we know the positive or negative affect 
of enough members of N(p). So if we label enough 
vertices of N as +  or -, we can interpolate a posi-
tive/negative valence score for all vertices p in N. 

To do this, we build a reference set -R of typi-

cally negative words, and a set +R of typically 
positive words. Given a few seed members of -R 
(such as sad, disgusting, evil, etc.) and a few seed 
members of +R (such as happy, wonderful, etc.), 
we find many other candidates to add to +R and -R 
by considering neighbors of these seeds in N. After 
three iterations in this fashion, we populate +R and 
-R with approx. 2000 words each. 

For a property p we can now define N+(p) and 
N-(p) as follows: 

   (1)        N+(p) = N(p) ∩ +R 

   (2)        N-(p) = N(p) ∩ -R 

We can now assign positive and negative valence 
scores to each vertex p  by interpolating from ref-
erence values to their neighbors in N: 

   (3)   pos(p)   =           |N+(p)|   

|N+(p) ∪ N-(p)| 

   (4)   neg(p)   =        1  -  pos(p) 

If a term S denotes a stereotypical idea and is de-
scribed via a set of typical properties and behaviors 
typical(S) in the lexicon, then: 

   (5)        pos(S)   =        Σp∈typical(S) pos(p) 
              |typical(S)| 

   (6)        neg(S)   = 1  -  pos(S) 

Thus, (5) and (6) calculate the mean affect of the 
properties and behaviors of S, as represented via 
typical(S). We can now use (3) and (4) to separate 
typical(S) into those elements that are more nega-
tive than positive (putting a negative spin on S) and 
into those that are more positive than negative 
(putting a positive spin on S): 

(7)  posTypical(S)  = {p | p ∈ typical(S) ∧ pos(p) > 0.5} 

(8)  negTypical(S)  = {p | p ∈ typical(S) ∧ neg(p) > 0.5} 

2.1 Evaluation of Stereotypical Affect 
In the process of populating +R and -R, we identi-
fy a reference set of 478 positive stereotypes (such 
as saint and hero) and 677 negative stereotypes 
(such as tyrant and monster). When we use these 
reference points to test the effectiveness of (5) and 
(6) – and thus, indirectly, of (3) and (4) and of the 

9



stereotype lexicon itself – we find that 96.7% of 
the positive stereotypes in +R are correctly as-
signed a positivity score greater than 0.5 (pos(S) > 
neg(S)) by (5), while 96.2% of the negative stereo-
types in -R are correctly assigned a negativity 
score greater than 0.5  (neg(S) > pos(S)) by (6). 

3 Expansion/Interpretation of Metaphors  
The Google n-grams are a rich source of affective 
metaphors of the form Target is Source, such as 
“politicians are crooks”, “Apple is a cult”, “racism 
is a disease” and “Steve Jobs is a god”. Let src(T) 
denote the set of stereotypes that are commonly 
used to describe T, where commonality is defined 
as the presence of the corresponding copula meta-
phor in the Google n-grams. To find metaphors for 
proper-named entities like “Bill Gates”, we also 
analyze n-grams of the form stereotype First 
[Middle] Last, such as “tyrant Adolf Hitler”. Thus:  

src(racism)  =    {problem, disease, joke, sin, poi-
son, crime, ideology, weapon} 

src(Hitler) = {monster, criminal, tyrant, idiot, 
madman, vegetarian, racist, …} 

We do not try to discriminate literal from non-
literal assertions, nor do we even try to define liter-
ality. We simply assume each putative metaphor 
offers a potentially useful perspective on a topic T. 
 Let srcTypical(T) denote the aggregation of all 
properties ascribable to T via metaphors in src(T): 

   (9) srcTypical (T)   =   M∈src(T)
typical(M)

 

We can also use the posTypical and negTypical 
variants in (7) and (8) to focus only on metaphors 
that project positive or negative qualities onto T.
  (9) is especially useful when the source S in the 
metaphor  T is S  is not a known stereotype in the 
lexicon, as happens when one describes Apple as 
Scientology. When the set typical(S) is empty, src-
Typical(S) may not be, so srcTypical(S) can act as 
a proxy representation for S in these cases.  
 The properties and behaviors that are salient to 
the interpretation of   T is S   are given by: 

   (10)  salient (T,S)  =  |srcTypical(T) ∪  typical(T)|  
         ∩ 
            |srcTypical(S) ∪  typical(S)| 

In the context of T is S, the metaphorical stereotype  

M ∈ src(S)∪src(T)∪{S} is an apt vehicle for T if: 

   (11)   apt(M, T,S)  = |salient(T,S) ∩  typical(M)| > 0 

and the degree to which M is apt for T is given by: 

  (12)  aptness(M,T,S)  =     |salient(T, S) ∩  typical(M)| 
                 |typical(M)| 

We can construct an interpretation for  T is S  by 
considering not just {S}, but the stereotypes in 
src(T) that are apt for T in the context of T is S, as 
well as the stereotypes that are commonly used to 
describe S – that is, src(S) – that are also apt for T: 
 
   (13)  interpretation(T, S)  
      = {M|M ∈ src(T)∪src(S)∪{S} ∧ apt(M, T, S)} 

In effect then, the interpretation of  T is S  is itself a 
set of apt metaphors for T that expand upon S. The 
elements {Mi} of interpretation(T, S) can now be 
sorted by  aptness(Mi T, S)  to produce a ranked list 
of interpretations (M1, M2 … Mn). For any inter-
pretation M, the salient features of M are thus: 

   (14)  salient(M, T,S) = typical(M) ∩  salient (T,S)   

If  T is S  is a creative IR query – to find docu-
ments that view T as S – then interpretation(T, S) 
is an expansion of  T is S  that includes the com-
mon metaphors that are consistent with T viewed 
as S. For any viewpoint Mi, salient(Mi, T, S) is an 
expansion of Mi that includes all of the qualities 
that T is likely to exhibit when it behaves like Mi. 

4 Metaphor Magnet: A Worked Example 
Consider the query “Google is Microsoft”, which 
expresses a need for documents in which Google 
exhibits qualities typically associated with Mi-
crosoft. Now, both Google and Microsoft are com-
plex concepts, so there are many ways in which 
they can be considered similar or dissimilar, either 
in a good or a bad light. However, the most salient 
aspects of Microsoft will be those that underpin 
our common metaphors for Microsoft, i.e., stereo-
types in src(Microsoft). These metaphors will pro-
vide the talking points for the interpretation. 
 The Google n-grams yield up the following 
metaphors, 57 for Microsoft and 50 for Google: 

src(Microsoft) = {king, master, threat, bully, giant, 
leader, monopoly, dinosaur …} 

∪ 

10



 src(Google)   = {king, engine, threat, brand, giant, 
leader, celebrity, religion …} 

So the following qualities are aggregated for each: 

srcTypical(Microsoft) = {trusted, menacing, ruling,  
threatening, overbearing,  
admired, commanding, …} 

srcTypical(Google)  = {trusted, lurking reigning, 
ruling, crowned, shining, 
determined, admired …} 

Now, the salient qualities highlighted by the meta-
phor, namely salient(Google, Microsoft),  are: 

{celebrated, menacing, trusted, challenging, estab-
lished,  threatening, admired, respected, …} 

Thus, interpretation(Google, Microsoft) contains: 

{king, criminal, master, leader, bully,  threatening, 
giant, threat, monopoly, pioneer, dinosaur, …} 

Suppose we focus on the metaphorical expansion 
“Google is king”, since king is the most highly 
ranked element of the interpretation. Now,  sali-
ent(king, Google, Microsoft)  contains: 

{celebrated, revered, admired, respected, ruling, 
arrogant, commanding, overbearing, reigning, …} 

These properties and behaviors are already implicit 
in our perception of Google, insofar as they are 
salient aspects of the stereotypes to which Google 
is frequently compared. The metaphor “Google is 
Microsoft” – and its expansion “Google is king” – 
simply crystalizes these qualities, from perhaps 
different comparisons, into a single act of ideation. 

Consider the metaphor “Google is -Microsoft”. 
Since -Microsoft is used to impart a negative spin 
(+ would impart a positive spin), negTypical is 
here used in place of typical in (9) and (10). Thus: 

  srcTypical(-Microsoft)  =   
 {menacing, threatening, twisted, raging, feared, 

sinister, lurking, domineering, overbearing, …} 

  salient(Google, -Microsoft) =  
  {menacing, bullying, roaring, dreaded…} 

Now interpretation(Google, -Microsoft) becomes: 
    {criminal, giant, threat, bully, victim, devil, …} 
In contrast, interpretation(Google, +Microsoft) is:  

    {king, master, leader, pioneer, partner, …}  

More focus is achieved with the simile query 
“Google is as –powerful as Microsoft”. In explicit 
similes, we need to focus on just a subset of  the 
salient properties, using e.g. this variant of (10): 

 {p |  p ∈ salient(Google, Microsoft) ∩ N(powerful) 
            ∧ neg(p) > pos(p)} 

In this -powerful case, the interpretation becomes: 
   {bully, giant, devil, monopoly, dinosaur, …}  

5 The  Metaphor Magnet Web App 
Metaphor Magnet is designed to be a lightweight 
web application that provides both HTML output 
(for humans) and XML (for client applications).  
The system allows users to enter queries such as 
Google is –Microsoft, life is a +game, Steve Jobs is 
Tony Stark, or even Rasputin is Karl Rove (queries 
are case-sensitive). Each query is expanded into a 
set of apt metaphors via mappings in the Google n-
grams, and each metaphor is expanded into a set of 
contextually apt qualities. In turn, each quality is 
then expanded into an IR query that is used to re-
trieve relevant hits from Google. In effect, the sys-
tem allows users to interface with a search engine 
like Google using metaphor and other affective 
language forms. The demonstration system can be 
accessed using a standard browser at this URL: 

     http://boundinanutshell.com/metaphor-magnet 

Metaphor Magnet can exploit the properties and 
behaviors of its stock of almost 10,000 stereotypes, 
and can infer salient qualities for many proper-
named entities like Karl Rove and Steve Jobs using 
a combination of copula statements from the 
Google n-grams (e.g., “Steve Jobs is a visionary”) 
and category assignments from Wikipedia. 

The interpretation of the simile/query “Google is 
as -powerful as Microsoft” thus highlights a selec-
tion of affective viewpoints on the source concept, 
Microsoft, and picks out an apt selection of view-
points on the target Google. Metaphor Magnet dis-
plays both selections as phrase clouds in which 
each hyperlinked phrase – a combination of an apt 
stereotype and a salient quality – is clickable, to 
yield linguistic evidence for the selection and cor-
responding web-search results (via a Google gadg-
et). The phrase cloud representing Microsoft in this 
simile is shown in the screenshot of Figure 1, while 
the phrase cloud for Google is shown in Figure 2. 

11



 
Figure 1. A screenshot of a phrase cloud for the 
perspective cast upon the source “Microsoft” by 
the simile “Google is as –powerful as Microsoft”.  

 

Figure 2. A screenshot of a phrase cloud for the 
perspective cast upon the target term “Google” by 
the simile “Google is as –powerful as Microsoft”. 

 
Metaphor Magnet demonstrates the potential utili-
ty of affective metaphors in human-computer lin-
guistic interaction, and acts as a web service from 
which other NL applications can derive a measure 
of metaphorical competence. When accessed as a 
service, Metaphor Magnet returns either HTML or 
XML data, via simple get requests. For illustrative 
purposes, each HTML page also provides the URL 
for the corresponding XML-structured data set. 

Acknowledgements 
This research was partly supported by the WCU 
(World Class University) program under the Na-
tional Research Foundation of Korea (Ministry of 
Education, Science and Technology of Korea, Pro-
ject No: R31-30007), and partly funded by Science 
Foundation Ireland via the Centre for Next Genera-
tion Localization (CNGL). 

References  
Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-gram 

Version 1. Linguistic Data Consortium. 

Dan Fass. 1997. Processing Metonymy and Metaphor. 
Contemporary Studies in Cognitive Science & Tech-
nology. New York: Ablex. 

Hugo Liu, Henry Lieberman and Ted Selker. 2003. A 
Model of Textual Affect Sensing Using Real-World 
Knowledge. Proc. of the 8th international conference 
on Intelligent user interfaces, 125-132. 

James H. Martin. 1990. A Computational Model of 
Metaphor Interpretation. NY: Academic Press. 

Zachary J. Mason. 2004. CorMet: A Computational, 
Corpus-Based Conventional Metaphor Extraction 
System, Computational Linguistics, 30(1):23-44. 

Ekaterina Shutova. 2010. Metaphor Identification Using 
Verb and Noun Clustering. In Proc. of the 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
1001-1010 

Tony Veale. 2011. Creative Language Retrieval. Crea-
tive Language Retrieval: A Robust Hybrid of Infor-
mation Retrieval and Linguistic Creativity. In Proc. 
of ACL’2011, the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 

12


