










































PDTB-style Discourse Annotation of Chinese Text


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 69–77,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

PDTB-style Discourse Annotation of Chinese Text

Yuping Zhou
Computer Science Department

Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02452

yzhou@brandeis.edu

Nianwen Xue
Computer Science Department

Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02452

xuen@brandeis.edu

Abstract

We describe a discourse annotation scheme
for Chinese and report on the preliminary re-
sults. Our scheme, inspired by the Penn Dis-
course TreeBank (PDTB), adopts the lexically
grounded approach; at the same time, it makes
adaptations based on the linguistic and statisti-
cal characteristics of Chinese text. Annotation
results show that these adaptations work well
in practice. Our scheme, taken together with
other PDTB-style schemes (e.g. for English,
Turkish, Hindi, and Czech), affords a broader
perspective on how the generalized lexically
grounded approach can flesh itself out in the
context of cross-linguistic annotation of dis-
course relations.

1 Introduction

In the realm of discourse annotation, the Penn Dis-
course TreeBank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008) sep-
arates itself by adopting a lexically grounded ap-
proach: Discourse relations are lexically anchored
by discourse connectives (e.g., because, but, there-
fore), which are viewed as predicates that take ab-
stract objects such as propositions, events and states
as their arguments. In the absence of explicit dis-
course connectives, the PDTB asks the annotator to
fill in a discourse connective that best describes the
discourse relation between these two sentences, in-
stead of selecting from an inventory of predefined
discourse relations. By keeping the discourse an-
notation lexically grounded even in the case of im-
plicit discourse relations, the PDTB appeals to the
annotator’s judgment at an intuitive level. This is in

contrast with an approach in which the set of dis-
course relations are pre-determined by linguistic ex-
perts and the role of the annotator is just to select
from those choices (Mann and Thompson, 1988;
Carlson et al., 2003). This lexically grounded ap-
proach led to consistent and reliable discourse anno-
tation, a feat that is generally hard to achieve for dis-
course annotation. The PDTB team reported inter-
annotator agreement in the lower 90% for explicit
discourse relations (Miltsakaki et al., 2004).

In this paper we describe a discourse annota-
tion scheme for Chinese that adopts this lexically
grounded approach while making adaptations when
warranted by the linguistic and statistical properties
of Chinese text. This scheme is shown to be practi-
cal and effective in the annotation experiment.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In
Section 2, we review the key aspects of the PDTB
annotation scheme under discussion in this paper. In
Section 3, we first show that some key features of
Chinese make adaptations necessary in Section 3.1,
and then in Section 3.2, we present our systematic
adaptations that follow from the differences outlined
in Section 3.1. In Section 4, we present the prelim-
inary annotation results we have so far. And finally
in Section 5, we conclude the paper.

2 The PDTB annotation scheme

As mentioned in the introduction, discourse relation
is viewed as a predication with two arguments in the
framework of the PDTB. To characterize the pred-
ication, the PDTB annotates its argument structure
and sense. Two types of discourse relation are dis-
tinguished in the annotation: explicit and implicit.

69



Although their annotation is carried out separately, it
conforms to the same paradigm of a discourse con-
nective with two arguments. In what follows, we
highlight the key points that will be under discussion
in the following sections. To get a more compre-
hensive and detailed picture of the PDTB scheme,
see the PDTB 2.0 annotation manual (Prasad et al.,
2007).

2.1 Annotation of explicit discourse relations
Explicit discourse relations are those anchored by
explicit discourse connectives in text. Explicit con-
nectives are drawn from three grammatical classes:

• Subordinating conjunctions: e.g., because,
when, since, although;

• Coordinating conjunctions: e.g., and, or, nor;
• Discourse adverbials: e.g., however, other-

wise, then, as a result, for example.

Not all uses of these lexical items are considered to
function as a discourse connective. For example,
coordinating conjunctions appearing in VP coordi-
nations, such as “and” in (1), are not annotated as
discourse connectives.

(1) More common chrysotile fibers are curly and
are more easily rejected by the body, Dr. Moss-
man explained.

The text spans of the two arguments of a discourse
connective are marked up. The two arguments, Arg1
and Arg2, are defined based on the physical location
of the connective: Arg2 is the argument expressed
by the clause syntactically bound to the connective,
and Arg1 is the other argument. There are no restric-
tions on how many clauses can be included in the
text span for an argument other than the Minimality
Principle: Only as many clauses and/or sentences
should be included in an argument selection as are
minimally required and sufficient for the interpreta-
tion of the relation.

2.2 Annotation of implicit discourse relations
In the case of implicit discourse relations, annotators
are asked to insert a discourse connective that best
conveys the implicit relation; when no such connec-
tive expression is appropriate, the implicit relation
is further distinguished as the following three sub-
types:

• AltLex: when insertion of a connective leads
to redundancy due to the presence of an alter-
natively lexicalized expression, as in (2).

• EntRel: when the only relation between the
two arguments is that they describe different as-
pects of the same entity, as in (3).

• NoRel: when neither a lexicalized discourse re-
lation nor entity-based coherence is present. It
is to be noted that at least some of the “NoRel”
cases are due to the adjacency constraint (see
below for more detail).

(2) And she further stunned her listeners by re-
vealing her secret garden design method: [Arg1
Commissioning a friend to spend five or six
thousand dollars . . . on books that I ultimately
cut up.] [Arg2 AltLex After that, the layout had
been easy.

(3) [Arg1 Hale Milgrim, 41 years old, senior vice
president, marketing at Elecktra Entertainment
Inc., was named president of Capitol Records
Inc., a unit of this entertainment concern].
[Arg2 EntRel Mr. Milgrim succeeds David
Berman, who resigned last month].

There are restrictions on what kinds of implicit
relations are subjected to annotation, presented be-
low. These restrictions do not have counterparts in
explicit relation annotation.

• Implicit relations between adjacent clauses in
the same sentence not separated by a semi-
colon are not annotated, even though the rela-
tion may very well be definable. A case in point
is presented in (4) below, involving an intra-
sentential comma-separated relation between a
main clause and a free adjunct.

• Implicit relations between adjacent sentences
across a paragraph boundary are not annotated.

• The adjacency constraint: At least some part
of the spans selected for Arg1 and Arg2 must
belong to the pair of adjacent sentences initially
identified for annotation.

(4) [MC The market for export financing was liber-
alized in the mid-1980s], [FA forcing the bank
to face competition].

70



2.3 Annotation of senses
Discourse connectives, whether originally present in
the data in the case of explicit relations, or filled in
by annotators in the case of implicit relations, along
with text spans marked as “AltLex”, are annotated
with respect to their senses. There are three levels in
the sense hierarchy:

• Class: There are four major semantic classes:
TEMPORAL, CONTINGENCY, COMPARISON,
and EXPANSION;

• Type: A second level of types is further de-
fined for each semantic class. For example,
under the class CONTINGENCY, there are two
types: “Cause” (relating two situations in a di-
rect cause-effect relation) and “Condition” (re-
lating a hypothetical situation with its (possi-
ble) consequences);1

• Subtype: A third level of subtypes is defined
for some, but not all, types. For instance, under
the type “CONTINGENCY:Cause”, there are two
subtypes: “reason” (for cases like because and
since) and “result” (for cases like so and as a
result).

It is worth noting that a type of implicit relation,
namely those labeled as “EntRel”, is not part of the
sense hierarchy since it has no explicit counterpart.

3 Adapted scheme for Chinese

3.1 Key characteristics of Chinese text
Despite similarities in discourse features between
Chinese and English (Xue, 2005), there are differ-
ences that have a significant impact on how dis-
course relations could be best annotated. These dif-
ferences can be illustrated with (5):

(5) 据悉
according to reports

，
,

[AO1东莞
Dongguan

海关
Customs

共
in total

接受
accept

企业
company

合同
contract

备案
record

八千四百多
8400 plus

份 ]
CLASS

，[AO2
,

比
compare

试点
pilot

前
before

略
slight

有
EXIST

上升 ]
increase

，
,

[AO3企业
company

1There is another dimension to this level, i.e. literal or prag-
matic use. If this dimension is taken into account, there could be
said to be four types: “Cause”, “Pragmatic Cause”, “Condition”,
and “Pragmatic Condition”. For details, see Prasad et al. (2007).

反应
respond/response

良好 ]
well/good

，
,

[AO4普遍
generally

表示
acknowledge

接受 ]
accept/acceptance

。
.

“According to reports, [AO1 Dongguan District
Customs accepted more than 8400 records of com-
pany contracts], [AO2 a slight increase from before
the pilot]. [AO3 Companies responded well], [AO4
generally acknowledging acceptance].”

This sentence reports on how a pilot program
worked in Dongguan City. Because all that is said
is about the pilot program, it is perfectly natural to
include it all in a single sentence in Chinese. Intu-
itively though, there are two different aspects of how
the pilot program worked: the number of records
and the response from the affected companies. To
report the same facts in English, it is more natural
to break them down into two sentences or two semi-
colon-separated clauses, but in Chinese, not only are
they merely separated by comma, but also there is no
connective relating them.

This difference in writing style necessitates re-
thinking of the annotation scheme. If we apply the
PDTB scheme to the English translation, regardless
of whether the two pieces of facts are expressed in
two sentences or two semi-colon-separated clauses,
at least one discourse relation will be annotated, re-
lating these two text units. In contrast, if we apply
the same scheme to the Chinese sentence, no dis-
course relation will be picked out because this is
just one comma-separated sentence with no explicit
discourse connectives in it. In other words, the dis-
course relation within the Chinese sentence, which
would be captured in its English counterpart follow-
ing the PDTB procedure, would be lost when anno-
tating Chinese. Such loss is not a sporadic occur-
rence but rather a very prevalent one since it is asso-
ciated with the customary writing style of Chinese.
To ensure a reasonable level of coverage, we need to
consider comma-delimited intra-sentential implicit
relations when annotating Chinese text.

There are some complications associated with this
move. One of them is that it introduces into dis-
course annotation considerable ambiguity associ-
ated with the comma. For example, the first in-
stance of comma in (5), immediately following “据
悉” (“according to reports”), clearly does not indi-
cate a discourse relation, so it needs to be spelt out in

71



the guidelines how to exclude such cases of comma
as discourse relation indicators. We think, however,
that disambiguating the commas in Chinese text is
valuable in its own right and is a necessary step in
annotating discourse relations.

Another complication is that some comma-
separated chunks are ambiguous as to whether they
should be considered potential arguments in a dis-
course relation. The chunks marked AO2 and AO4
in (5) are examples of such cases. They, judging
from their English translation, may seem clear cases
of free adjuncts in PDTB terms (Prasad et al., 2007),
but there is no justification for treating them as such
in Chinese. The lack of justification comes from at
least three features of Chinese:

• Certain words, for instance, “反应” (“re-
spond/response”), “良好” (“well/good”) and
“接受” (“accept/acceptance”), are ambiguous
with respect to their POS, and when they com-
bine, the resulting sentence may have more
than one syntactic analysis. For example, AO3
may be literally translated as “Companies re-
sponded well” or “Companies’ response was
good”.

• There are no inflectional clues to differenti-
ate free adjuncts and main clauses. For ex-
ample, one can be reasonably certain that “表
示” (“acknowledge”) functions as a verb in (5),
however, there is no indication whether it is
in the form corresponding to “acknowledging”
or “acknowledged” in English. Or putting it
differently, whether one wants to express in
Chinese the meaning corresponding to the -ing
form or the tensed form in English, the same
form “表示” could apply.

• Both subject and object can be dropped in Chi-
nese, and they often are when they are infer-
able from the context. For example, in the two-
sentence sequence below, the subject of (7) is
dropped since it is clearly the same as the sub-
ject of the previous sentence in (6) .

(6) [S1
recent

近
five
五
years

年
since

来
,
，
Shanghai

上海
through

通过
actively

积极
from

从
other

外
province

省
city
市
procure

收购
export

出口
supply

货源
,

、
organize

举办
China

中国
East

华东
Export

出口
Commodity

商品
Fair

交易会
etc.

等
event,

活动，
strengthen

增强
port

口岸
to

对
whole country

全国
DE

的
connection

辐射
capability

能力
.

。]

“[S1 In the past five years, Shanghai strength-
ened the connection of its port to other areas
of the country through actively procuring ex-
port supplies from other provinces and cities,
and through organizing events such as the East
China Export Commodities Fair.]”

(7) [S2同时
At the same time

，
,
发展
develop

跨国
transnational

经营
operation

，
,
大力
vigorously

开拓
open up

多元化
diversified

市场。]
market

“[S2 At the same time, (it) developed transna-
tional operations (and) vigorously opened up
diversified markets.]”

Since the subject can be omitted from the en-
tire sentence, absence or presence of subject in
a clause is not an indication whether the clause
is a main clause or a free adjunct, or whether it
is part of a VP coordination without a connec-
tive. So if we take into account both the lack of
differentiating inflectional clues and the possi-
bility of omitting the subject, AO4 in (5) may
be literally translated as “generally acknowl-
edging acceptance”, or “(and) generally ac-
knowledged acceptance”, or “(companies) gen-
erally acknowledged acceptance”, or “(compa-
nies) generally acknowledged (they) accepted
(it)”.

Since in Chinese, there is no reliable indicator dis-
tinguishing between main clauses and free adjuncts,
or distinguishing between coordination on the clause
level without the subject and coordination on the VP
level, we will not rely on these distinctions in anno-
tation, as the PDTB team does in their annotation.

These basic decisions directly based on linguistic
characteristics of Chinese lead to more systematic
adaptations to the annotation scheme, to which we
will turn in the next subsection.

3.2 Systematic adaptations
The main consequence of the basic decisions de-
scribed in Section 3.1 is that we have a whole lot

72



more tokens of implicit relation than explicit rela-
tion to deal with. According to a rough count on
20 randomly selected files from Chinese Treebank
(Xue et al., 2005), 82% are tokens of implicit rela-
tion, compared to 54.5% in the PDTB 2.0. Given
the overwhelming number of implicit relations, we
re-examine where it could make an impact in the an-
notation scheme. There are three such areas.

3.2.1 Procedural division between explicit and
implicit discourse relation

In the PDTB, explicit and implicit relations are
annotated separately. This is probably partly be-
cause explicit connectives are quite abundant in En-
glish, and partly because the project evolved in
stages, expanding from the more canonical case of
explicit relation to implicit relation for greater cov-
erage. When annotating Chinese text, maintaining
this procedural division makes much less sense: the
landscape of discourse relation (or at least the key
elements of it) has already been mapped out by the
PDTB work and to set up a separate task to cover
18% of the data does not seem like a worthwhile
bother without additional benefits for doing so.

So the question now is how to annotate explicit
and implicit relations in one fell swoop? In Chi-
nese text, the use of a discourse connective is al-
most always accompanied by a punctuation or two
(usually period and/or comma), preceding or flank-
ing it. So a sensible solution is to rely on punctu-
ations as the denominator between explicit and im-
plicit relations;and in the case of explicit relation,
the connective will be marked up as an attribute of
the discourse relation. This unified approach simpli-
fies the annotation procedure while preserving the
explicit/implicit distinction in the process.

One might question, at this point, whether such
an approach can still call itself “lexically grounded”.
Certainly not if one interprets the term literally ; but
in a broader sense, our approach can be seen as an
instantiation of a generalized version of it, much the
same way that the PDTB is an, albeit different, in-
stantiation of it for English. The thrust of the lexi-
cally grounded approach is that discourse annotation
should be a data-driven, bottom-up process, rather
than a top-down one, trying to fit data into a pre-
scriptive system. Once the insight that a discourse
connective functions like a predicate with two ar-

guments is generalized to cover all discourse rela-
tions, there is no fundamental difference between
explicit and implicit discourse relations: both work
like a predicate whether or not there is a lexicaliza-
tion of it. As to what role this distinction plays in
the annotation procedure, it is an engineering issue,
depending on a slew of factors, among which are
cross-linguistic variations. In the case of Chinese,
we think it is more economical to treat explicit and
implicit relations alike in the annotation process.

To treat explicit and implicit relations alike actu-
ally goes beyond annotating them in one pass; it also
involves how they are annotated, which we discuss
next.

3.2.2 Annotation of implicit discourse relations
In the PDTB, treatment of implicit discourse rela-

tions is modeled after that of explicit relations, and at
the same time, some restrictions are put on implicit,
but not explicit, relations. This is quite understand-
able: implicit discourse relations tend to be vague
and elusive, so making use of explicit relations as a
prototype helps pin them down, and restrictions are
put in place to strike a balance between high relia-
bility and good coverage. When implicit relations
constitute a vast majority of the data as is the case
with Chinese, both aspects need to be re-examined
to strike a new balance.

In the PDTB, annotators are asked to insert a
discourse connective that best conveys the implicit
discourse relation between two adjacent discourse
units; when no such connective expression is ap-
propriate, the implicit discourse relation is further
distinguished as “AltLex”, “EntRel”, and “NoRel”.
The inserted connectives and those marked as “Al-
tLex”, along with explicit discourse connectives, are
further annotated with respect to their senses.

When a connective needs to be inserted in a ma-
jority of cases, the difficulty of the task really stands
out. In many cases, it seems, there is a good rea-
son for not having a connective present and because
of it, the wording rejects insertion of a connective
even if it expresses the underlying discourse relation
exactly (or sometimes, maybe the wording itself is
the reason for not having a connective). So to try
to insert a connective expression may very well be
too hard a task for annotators, with little to show for
their effort in the end.

73



Furthermore, the inter-annotator agreement for
providing an explicit connective in place of an im-
plicit one is computed based on the type of explicit
connectives (e.g. cause-effect relations, temporal re-
lations, contrastive relations, etc.), rather than based
on their identity (Miltsakaki et al., 2004). This sug-
gests that a reasonable degree of agreement for such
a task may only be reached with a coarse classifica-
tion scheme.

Given the above two considerations, our solution
is to annotate implicit discourse relations with their
senses directly, bypassing the step of inserting a con-
nective expression. It has been pointed out that to
train annotators to reason about pre-defined abstract
relations with high reliability might be too hard a
task (Prasad et al., 2007). This difficulty can be
overcome by associating each semantic type with
one or two prototypical explicit connectives and ask-
ing annotators to consider each to see if it expresses
the implicit discourse relation. This way, annotators
have a concrete aid to reason about abstract relations
without having to choose one connective from a set
expressing roughly the same relation or having to
worry about whether insertion of the connective is
somehow awkward.

It should be noted that annotating implicit rela-
tions directly with their senses means that sense an-
notation is no longer restricted to those that can be
lexically expressed, but also includes those that can-
not, notably those labeled “EntRel/NoRel” in the
PDTB.2 In other words, we annotate senses of dis-
course relations, not just connectives and their lex-
ical alternatives (in the case of AltLex). This ex-
pansion is consistent with the generalized view of
the lexically grounded approach discussed in Sec-
tion 3.2.1.

With respect to restrictions on implicit relation,
we will adopt them as they prove to be necessary
in the annotation process, with one exception. The
exception is the restriction that implicit relations be-
tween adjacent clauses in the same sentence not sep-
arated by a semi-colon are not annotated. This re-
striction seems to apply mainly to a main clause and
any free adjunct attached to it in English; in Chinese,
however, the distinction between a main clause and a

2Thus “EntRel” and “NoRel” are treated as relation senses,
rather than relation types, in our scheme.

free adjunct is not as clear-cut for reasons explained
in Section 3.1. So this restriction is not applicable
for Chinese annotation.

3.2.3 Definition of Arg1 and Arg2
The third area that an overwhelming number of

implicit relation in the data affects is how Arg1 and
Arg2 are defined. As mentioned in the introduc-
tion, discourse relations are viewed as a predication
with two arguments. These two arguments are de-
fined based on the physical location of the connec-
tive in the PDTB: Arg2 is the argument expressed by
the clause syntactically bound to the connective and
Arg1 is the other argument. In the case of implicit
relations, the label is assigned according to the text
order.

In an annotation task where implicit relations con-
stitute an overwhelming majority, the distinction of
Arg1 and Arg2 is meaningless in most cases. In addi-
tion, the phenomenon of parallel connectives is pre-
dominant in Chinese. Parallel connectives are pairs
of connectives that take the same arguments, exam-
ples of which in English are “if..then”, “either..or”,
and “on the one hand..on the other hand”. In Chi-
nese, most connectives are part of a pair; though
some can be dropped from their pair, it is considered
“proper” or formal to use both. (8) below presents
two such examples, for which parallel connectives
are not possible in English.

(8) a. 伦敦
London

股市
stock market

因
because

适逢
coincide

银行节
Bank Holiday

，
,
故
therefore

没有
NEG

开市。
open market

“London Stock Market did not open because it
was Bank Holiday.”

b. 虽然
Although

他们
they

不
NEG

离
leave

土
land
、
,
不
NEG

离
leave

乡
home village

，
,
但
but
严格
strict

来
PART

讲
speak

已
already

不再
no longer

是
be
传统
tradition

意义
sense

上
PREP

的
DE
农民。
peasant

“Although they do not leave land or their home
village, strictly speaking, they are no longer
peasants in the traditional sense.”

In the PDTB, parallel connectives are annotated dis-
continuously; but given the prevalence of such phe-
nomenon in Chinese, such practice would generate

74



a considerably high percentage of essentially repeti-
tive annotation among explicit relations.

So the situation with Chinese is that distinguish-
ing Arg1 and Arg2 the PDTB way is meaningless
in most cases, and in the remaining cases, it of-
ten results in duplication. Rather than abandoning
the distinction altogether, we think it makes more
sense to define Arg1 and Arg2 semantically. It will
not create too much additional work beyond distinc-
tion of different senses of discourse relation in the
PDTB. For example, in the semantic type CONTIN-
GENCY:Cause, we can define “reason” as Arg1 and
“result” as Arg2. In this scheme, no matter which
one of因 (“because”) and故 (“therefore”) appears
without the other, or if they appear as a pair in a
sentence, or if the relation is implicit, the Arg1 and
Arg2 labels will be consistently assigned to the same
clauses.

This approach is consistent with the move from
annotating senses of connectives to annotating
senses of discourse relations, pointed out in Section
3.2.2. For example, in the PDTB’s sense hierarchy,
“reason” and “result” are subtypes under type CON-
TINGENCY:Cause: “reason” applies to connectives
like “because” and “since” while “result” applies
to connectives like “so” and “as a result”. When
we move to annotating senses of discourse relations,
since both types of connectives express the same un-
derlying discourse relation, there will not be further
division under CONTINGENCY:Cause, and the “rea-
son”/“result” distinction is an intrinsic property of
the semantic type. We think this level of generality
makes sense semantically.

4 Annotation experiment

To test our adapted annotation scheme, we have con-
ducted annotation experiments on a modest, yet sig-
nificant, amount of data and computed agreement
statistics.

4.1 Set-up

The agreement statistics come from annotation con-
ducted by two annotators in training so far. The data
set consists of 98 files taken from the Chinese Tree-
bank (Xue et al., 2005). The source of these files is
Xinhua newswire. The annotation is carried out on

the PDTB annotation tool3.

4.2 Inter-annotator agreement
To evaluate our proposed scheme, we measure
agreement on each adaption proposed in Section
3, as well as agreement on argument span deter-
mination. Whenever applicable, we also present
(roughly) comparable statistics of the PDTB (Milt-
sakaki et al., 2004). The results are summarized in
Table 1.

Chinese PDTB
tkn no. F(p/r) (%) (%)

rel-ident 3951*
95.4

N/A
(96.0/94.7)

rel-type 3951 95.1 N/A
imp-sns-type 2967 87.4 72
arg-order 3059 99.8 N/A
argument span
exp-span-xm 1580 84.2 90.2
exp-span-pm 1580 99.6 94.5
imp-span-xm 5934 76.9 85.1

overall-bnd- 14039*
87.7

N/A
(87.5/87.9)

Table 1: Inter-annotator agreement in various aspects
of Chinese discourse annotation: rel-ident, discourse
relation identification; rel-type, relation type classifica-
tion; imp-sns-type, classification of sense type of im-
plicit relations; arg-order, order determination of Arg1
and Arg2. For agreement on argument spans, the
naming convention is <type-of-relation>-<element-as-
independent-token>-<matching-method>. exp: explicit
relations; imp: implicit relations; span: argument span;
xm: exact match; pm: partial match; bnd: boundary. *:
number of tokens agreed on by both annotators.

The first adaption we proposed is to annotate ex-
plicit and implicit discourse relations in one pass.
This introduces two steps, at which agreement can
each be measured: First, the annotator needs to
make the judgment, at each instance of the punctu-
ations, whether there is a discourse relation (a step
we call “relation identification”); second, once a dis-
course relation is identified, the annotator needs to
classify the type as one of “Explicit”, “Implicit”, or
“AltLex” (a step we call “relation type classifica-
tion”). The agreement at these two steps is 95.4%

3http://www.seas.upenn.edu/∼pdtb/tools.shtml#annotator

75



and 95.1% respectively.
The second adaption is to bypass the step of in-

serting a connective when annotating an implicit dis-
course relation and classify the sense directly. The
third adaptation is to define Arg1 and Arg2 semanti-
cally for each sense. To help annotators think about
relation sense abstractly and determine the order of
the arguments, we put a helper item alongside each
sense label, like “Causation: 因为arg1所以arg2”
(“Causation: because arg1 therefore arg2”). This
approach works well, as evidenced by 87.4%4 and
99.8% agreement for the two processes respectively.

To evaluate agreement on determining argument
span, we adopt four measures. In the first three,
explicit and implicit relations are calculated sepa-
rately (although they are actually annotated in the
same process) to make our results comparable to
the published PDTB results. Each argument span is
treated as an independent token and either exact or
partial match (i.e. if two spans share one boundary)
counts as 1. The fourth measure is less stringent than
exact match and more stringent than partial match:
It groups explicit and implicit relation together and
treats each boundary as an independent token. Typ-
ically, an argument span has two boundaries, but it
can have four (or more) boundaries when an argu-
ment span is interrupted by a connective and/or an
AltLex item.

Evidently, determining argument span is the most
challenging aspect of discourse annotation. How-
ever, it should be pointed out that agreement was on
an overall upward trend, which became especially
prominent after we instituted a restriction on im-
plicit relations across a paragraph boundary towards
the end of the training period. It restricts full anno-

4Two more points should be made about this number. First,
it may be partially attributed to our differently structured sense
hierarchy. It is a flat structure containing the following 12 val-
ues: ALTERNATIVE, CAUSATION, CONDITIONAL, CONJUNC-
TION, CONTRAST, EXPANSION, PROGRESSION, PURPOSE,
RESTATEMENT, TEMPORAL, EntRel, and NoRel. Aside from in-
cluding EntRel and NoRel (the reason and significance of which
have been discussed in Section 3.2.2), the revision was by and
large not motivated by Chinese-specific features, so we do not
address it in detail in this paper. Second, in making the compar-
ison with the PDTB result, the 12-value structure is collapsed
into 5 values: TEMPORAL, CONTINGENCY, COMPARISON, EX-
PANSION, and EntRel/NoRel, which must be different from the
5 values in Miltsakaki et al. (2004), judging from the descrip-
tions.

tation to only three specific situations so that most
loose and/or hard-to-delimit relations across para-
graph boundaries are excluded. This restriction ap-
pears to be quite effective, as shown in Table 2.

num Overall Arg Span
of boundary span-em

rel.’s F(p/r) (%) (%)
last 5 wks 1103 90.0 (90.0/89.9) 80.8
last 3 wks 677 91.0 (91.0/91.0) 82.5
last 2 wks 499 91.8 (91.8/91.8) 84.2

Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement on argument span
during the last 5 weeks of training.

5 Conclusions

We have presented a discourse annotation scheme
for Chinese that adopts the lexically ground ap-
proach of the PDTB while making systematic adap-
tations motivated by characteristics of Chinese text.
These adaptations not only work well in practice, as
evidenced by the results from our annotation exper-
iment, but also embody a more generalized view of
the lexically ground approach to discourse annota-
tion: Discourse relations are predication involving
two arguments; the predicate can be either covert
(i.e. Implicit) or overt, lexicalized as discourse con-
nectives (i.e. Explicit) or their more polymorphous
counterparts (i.e. AltLex). Consistent with this
generalized view is a more semantically motivated
sense annotation scheme: Senses of discourse rela-
tions (as opposed to just connectives) are annotated;
and the two arguments of the discourse relation are
semantically defined, allowing the sense structure
to be more general and less connective-dependent.
These framework-level generalizations can be ap-
plied to discourse annotation of other languages.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the IIS Division of the Na-
tional Science Foundation via Grant No. 0910532
entitled “Richer Representations for Machine Trans-
lation”and by the CNS Division via Grant No.
0855184 entitled “Building a community resource
for temporal inference in Chinese”. All views ex-
pressed in this paper are those of the authors and do

76



not necessarily represent the view of the National
Science Foundation.

References
Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen Okurowski.

2003. Building a Discourse-Tagged Corpus in the
Framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory. In Current
Directions in Discourse and Dialogue. Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers.

William Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1988. Rhetori-
cal structure theory. Toward a functional theory of text
organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotating discourse con-
nectives and their arguments. In Proceedings of the
HLT/NAACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Anno-
tation, pages 9–16, Boston, MA, May.

Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan
Lee, Aravind Joshi, Livio Robaldo, and Bonnie Web-
ber, 2007. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0 Annota-
tion Manual. The PDTB Research Group, December.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008).

Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu dong Chiou, and Martha
Palmer. 2005. The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase
Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 11(2):207–238.

Nianwen Xue. 2005. Annotating the Discourse Con-
nectives in the Chinese Treebank. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation,
Ann Arbor, Michigan.

77


