










































Applications of GPC Rules and Character Structures in Games for Learning Chinese Characters


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1–6,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Applications of GPC Rules and Character Structures in Games for 
Learning Chinese Characters 

§Wei-Jie Huang ↑Chia-Ru Chou ↕Yu-Lin Tzeng ‡Chia-Ying Lee †Chao-Lin Liu 
†§National Chengchi University, Taiwan ‡↑↕Academia Sinica, Taiwan 

†chaolin@nccu.edu.tw, ‡chiaying@gate.sinica.edu.tw 

Abstract 
We demonstrate applications of psycholin-
guistic and sublexical information for learn-
ing Chinese characters. The knowledge 
about the grapheme-phoneme conversion 
(GPC) rules of languages has been shown to 
be highly correlated to the ability of reading 
alphabetic languages and Chinese. We build 
and will demo a game platform for 
strengthening the association of phonologi-
cal components in Chinese characters with 
the pronunciations of the characters. Results 
of a preliminary evaluation of our games 
indicated significant improvement in learn-
ers’ response times in Chinese naming 
tasks. In addition, we construct a Web-
based open system for teachers to prepare 
their own games to best meet their teaching 
goals. Techniques for decomposing Chinese 
characters and for comparing the similarity 
between Chinese characters were employed 
to recommend lists of Chinese characters 
for authoring the games. Evaluation of the 
authoring environment with 20 subjects 
showed that our system made the authoring 
of games more effective and efficient. 

1 Introduction 
Learning to read and write Chinese characters is a 
challenging task for learners of Chinese. To read 
everyday news articles, one needs to learn thou-
sands of Chinese characters. The official agents in 
Taiwan and China, respectively, chose 5401 and 
3755 characters as important basic characters in 
national standards. Consequently, the general pub-
lic has gained the impression that it is not easy to 
read Chinese articles, because each of these thou-
sands of characters is written in different ways. 

Teachers adopt various strategies to help learn-
ers to memorize Chinese characters. An instructor 
at the University of Michigan made up stories 
based on decomposed characters to help students 
remember their formations  (Tao, 2007). Some take 
linguistics-based approaches. Pictogram is a major 
formation of Chinese characters, and radicals carry 

partial semantic information about Chinese charac-
ters. Hence, one may use radicals as hints to link 
the meanings and writings of Chinese characters. 
For instance, “河”(he2, river) [Note: Chinese char-
acters will be followed by their pronunciations, 
denoted in Hanyu pinyin, and, when necessary, an 
English translation.], “海”(hai3, sea), and 
“洋”(yang2, ocean) are related to huge water sys-
tems, so they share the semantic radical, 氵, which 
is a pictogram for “water” in Chinese. Applying 
the concepts of pictograms, researchers designed 
games, e.g.,  (Lan et al., 2009) and animations, e.g., 
(Lu, 2011) for learning Chinese characters. 

The aforementioned approaches and designs 
mainly employ visual stimuli in activities. We re-
port exploration of using the combination of audio 
and visual stimuli. In addition to pictograms, more 
than 80% of Chinese characters are phono-
semantic characters (PSCs, henceforth)  (Ho and 
Bryant, 1997). A PSC consists of a phonological 
component (PC, henceforth) and a semantic com-
ponent. Typically, the semantic components are the 
radicals of PSCs. For instance, “讀”(du2), 
“瀆”(du2), “犢” (du2), “牘”(du2) contain different 
radicals, but they share the same phonological 
components, “賣”(mai4), on their right sides. Due 
to the shared PC, these four characters are pro-
nounced in exactly the same way. If a learner can 
learn and apply this rule, one may guess and read 
“黷”(du2) correctly easily. 

In the above example, “賣” is a normal Chinese 
character, but not all Chinese PCs are standalone 
characters. The characters “檢”(jian3), “撿” 
(jian3), and “儉”(jian3) share their PCs on their 
right sides, but that PC is not a standalone Chinese 
character. In addition, when a PC is a standalone 
character, it might not indicate its own or similar 
pronunciation when it serves as a PC in the hosting 
character, e.g., “賣” and “讀” are pronounced as 
/mai4/ and /du2/, respectively. In contrast, the pro-
nunciations of “匋”, “淘”, “陶”, and “啕” are 
/tao2/. 

Pronunciations of specific substrings in words of 
alphabetic languages are governed by grapheme-
phoneme conversion (GPC) rules, though not all 
languages have very strict GPC rules. The GPC 
rules in English are not as strict as those in Finish 

1



 (Ziegler and Goswami, 2005), for instance. The 
substring “ean” are pronounced consistently in 
“bean”, “clean”, and “dean,” but the substring “ch” 
does not have a consistent pronunciation in 
“school”, “chase”, and “machine.” PCs in Chinese 
do not follow strict GPC rules either, but they re-
main to be good agents for learning to read. 

Despite the differences among phoneme systems 
and among the degrees of strictness of the GPC 
rules in different languages, ample psycholinguis-
tic evidences have shown that phonological aware-
ness is a crucial factor in predicting students’ read-
ing ability, e.g.,  (Siok and Fletcher, 2001). Moreo-
ver, the ability to detect and apply phonological 
consistency in GPCs, including the roles of PCs in 
PSCs in Chinese, plays an instrumental role in 
learners’ competence in reading Chinese. Phono-
logical consistency is an important concept for 
learners of various alphabetic languages  (Jared et 
al., 1990; Ziegler and Goswami, 2005) and of Chi-
nese, e.g., (Lee et al., 2005), and is important for 
both young readers  (Ho and Bryant, 1997; Lee, 
2009) and adult readers  (Lin and Collins, 2012). 

This demonstration is unique on two aspects: (1) 
students play games that are designed to strengthen 
the association between Chinese PCs and the pro-
nunciations of hosting characters and (2) teachers 
compile the games with tools that are supported by 
sublexical information in Chinese. The games aim 
at implicitly informing players of the Chinese GPC 
rules, mimicking the process of how infants would 
apply statistical learning  (Saffran et al., 1996). We 
evaluated the effectiveness of the game platform 
with 116 students between grade 1 and grade 6 in 
Taiwan, and found that the students made progress 
in the Chinese naming tasks. 

As we will show, it is not trivial to author games 
for learning a GPC rule to meet individualized 
teaching goals. For this reason, techniques reported 
in a previous ACL conference for decomposing 
and comparing Chinese characters were employed 
to assist the preparation of games (Liu et al., 2011). 
Results of our evaluation showed that the author-
ing tool facilitates the authoring process, improv-
ing both efficiency and effectiveness. 

We describe the learning games in Section 2, 
and report the evaluation results of the games in 
Section 3. The authoring tool is presented in Sec-
tion 4, and its evaluation is discussed in Section 5. 
We provide some concluding remarks in Section 6. 

2 The Learning Games 
A game platform should include several functional 

components such 
as the manage-
ment of players’ 
accounts and the 
maintenance of 
players’ learning 
profiles. Yet, due 
to the page limits, 
we focus on the 
parts that are 
most relevant to the demonstration. 

Figure 1 shows a screenshot when a player is 
playing the game. This is a game of “whac-a-
mole” style. The target PC appears in the upper 
middle of the window (“里”(li3) in this example), 
and a character and an accompanying monster (one 
at a time) will pop up randomly from any of the six 
holes on the ground. The player will hear the pro-
nunciation of the character (i.e., “裡”(li3)), such 
that the player receives both audio and visual stim-
uli during a game. Players’ task is to hit the mon-
sters for the characters that contain the shown PC. 
The box at the upper left corner shows the current 
credit (i.e., 3120) of the player. The player’s credit 
will be increased or decreased if s/he hits a correct 
or an incorrect character, respectively. If the player 
does not hit, the credit will remain the same. Play-
ers are ranked, in the Hall of Fame, according to 
their total credits to provide an incentive for them 
to play the game after school. 

In Figure 1, the player has to hit the monster be-
fore the monster disappears to get the credit. If the 
player does not act in time, the credit will not 
change. 

On ordinary computers, the player manipulates 
the mouse to hit the monster. On multi-touch tablet 
computers, the play can just touch the monsters 
with fingers. Both systems will be demoed. 

2.1 Challenging Levels 
At the time of logging into the game, players can 
choose two parameters: (1) class level: lower class 
(i.e., grades 1 and 2), middle class (i.e., grades 3 
and 4), or upper class (i.e., grades 5 and 6) and (2) 
speed level: the duration between the monsters’ 
popping up and going down. The characters for 
lower, middle, and upper classes vary in terms of 
frequency and complexity of the characters. A stu-
dent can choose the upper class only if s/he is in 
the upper class or if s/he has gathered sufficient 
credits. There are three different speeds for the 
monsters to appear and hide: 2, 3, and 5 seconds. 
Choosing different combinations of these two pa-

Figure 1. The learning game 

2



rameters affect how the credits are added or de-
ducted when the players hit the monsters correctly 
or incorrectly, respectively. Table 1 shows the in-
crements of credits for different settings. The num-
bers on the leftmost column are speed levels. 

2.2  Feedback Information 
After finishing a 
game, the player 
receives feed-
back about the 
correct and in-
correct actions 
that were taken 
during the game. 
Figure 2 shows 
such an example. 
The feedback informs the players what characters 
were correctly hit (“埋”(mai2), “理”(li3), 
“裡”(li3), and “鯉”(li3)), incorrectly hit 
(“婷”(ting2) and “袖”(show4)), and should have 
been hit (“狸”(li2)). When the player moves mouse 
over these characters, a sample Chinese word that 
shows how the character is used in daily lives will 
show up in a vertical box near the middle (i.e., 
“裡面”(li3 mian4)). 

The main purpose of providing the feedback in-
formation is to allow players a chance to reflect on 
what s/he had done during the game, thereby 
strengthening the learning effects. 

On the upper right hand side of Figure 2 are four 
tabs for more functions. Clicking on the top tab 
(繼續玩) will take the player to the next game. In 
the next game, the focus will switch to a different 
PC. The selection of the next PC is random in the 
current system, but we plan to make the switching 
from a game to another adaptive to the students’ 
performance in future systems. Clicking on the 
second tab (看排行) will see the player list in the 
Hall of Fame, clicking on the third tab 
(返回主選單) will return to the main menu, and 
clicking on the fourth (加分題) will lead to games 
for extra credits. We have extended our games to 
lead students to learning Chinese words from char-
acters, and details will be illustrated during the 
demo. 

2.3 Behind the Scene 

The data structure of a game is simple. When com-
piling a game, a teacher selects the PC for the 
game, and prepares six characters that contain the 
PC (to be referred as an In-list henceforth) and 
four characters as distracter characters that do not 
contain the PC (to be referred as an Out-list hence-
forth). The simplest internal form of a game looks 
like {target PC= “里”, In-list= “裡理鯉浬哩鋰”, 
Out-list= “塊鰓嘿鉀” }. We can convert this struc-
ture into a game easily. Through this simple struc-
ture, teachers choose the PCs to teach with charac-
ter combinations of different challenging levels. 

During the process of playing, our system ran-
domly selects one character from the list of 10 
characters. In a game, 10 characters will be pre-
sented to the player. 

3 Preliminary Evaluation and Analysis 
The game platform was evaluated with 116 stu-
dents, and was found to shorten students’ response 
times in Chinese naming tasks. 

3.1 Procedure and Participants 
The evaluation was conducted at an elementary 
school in Taipei, Taiwan, during the winter break 
between late January and the end of February 
2011. The lunar new year of 2011 happened to be 
within this period. 

Students were divided into an experimental 
group and a control group. We taught students of 
the experimental group and showed them how to 
play the games in class hours before the break be-
gan. The experimental group had one month of 
time to play the games, but there were no rules 
asking the participants how much time they must 
spend on the games. Instead, they were told that 
they would be rewarded if they were ranked high 
in the Hall of Fame. Table 2 shows the numbers of 
participants and their actual class levels. 

As we explained in Section 2.1, a player could 
choose the class level before the game begins. 
Hence, for example, it is possible for a lower class 
player to play the games designed for middle or 
even upper class levels to increase their credits 
faster. However, if the player is not competent, the 
credits may be deducted faster as well. In the eval-
uation, 20 PCs were used in the games for each 
class level in Table 1. 

Pretests and posttests were administered with the 
standardized (1) Chinese Character Recognition 

Figure 2. Feedback information

 Lower Middle Upper 
Experimental 11 23 24 

Control 11 23 24 
Table 2. Number of participants 

 Lower Middle Upper 
5 10 20 30 
3 15 25 35 
2 20 30 40 

Table 1.Credits for challenging levels

3



Test (CCRT) and (2) Rapid Automatized Naming 
Task (RAN). In CCRT, participants needed to 
write the pronunciations in Jhuyin, which is a pho-
netic system used in Taiwan, for 200 Chinese 
characters. The number of correctly written 
Jhuyins for the characters was recorded. In RAN, 
participants read 20 Chinese characters as fast as 
they could, and their speeds and accuracies were 
recorded. 

3.2 Results and Analysis 
Table 3 shows the statistics for the control group. 
After the one month evaluation period, the perfor-
mance of the control group did not change signifi-
cantly, except participants in the upper class. This 
subgroup improved their speeds in RAN. (Statisti-
cally significant numbers are highlighted.) 

Table 4 shows the statistics for the experimental 
group. After the evaluation period, the speeds in 
RAN of all class levels improved significantly. 

The correct rates in RAN of the control group 
did not improve or fall, though not statistically sig-
nificant. In contrast, the correct rates in RAN of 
the experimental group improved, but the im-
provement was not statistically significant either. 

The statistics for the CCRT tests were not statis-
tically significant. The only exception is that the 
middle class in the experimental group achieved 
better CCRT results. We were disappointed in the 
falling of the performance in CCRT of the lower 
class, though the change was not significant. The 

lower class students were very young, so we con-
jectured that it was harder for them to remember 
the writing of Jhuyin symbols after the winter 
break. Hence, after the evaluation, we strengthened 
the feedback by adding Jhuyin information. In Fig-
ure 2, the Jhuyin information is now added beside 
the sample Chinese words, i.e., “裡面” (li3 mian4). 

4 An Open Authoring Tool for the Games 
Our game platform has attracted the attention of 
teachers of several elementary schools. To meet 
the teaching goals of teacher in different areas, we 
have to allow the teachers to compile their own 
games for their needs. 

The data structure for a game, as we explained 
in Section  2.3, is not complex. A teacher needs to 
determine the PC to be taught first, then s/he must 
choose an In-list and an Out-list. In the current im-
plementation, we choose to have six characters in 
the In-list and four characters in the Out-list. We 
allow repeated characters when the qualified char-
acters are not enough. 

This authoring process is far less trivial as it 
might seem to be. In a previous evaluation, even 
native speakers of Chinese found it challenging to 
list many qualified characters out of the sky. Be-
cause PCs are not radicals, ordinary dictionaries 
would not help very much. For instance, “埋” 
(mai2), “狸”(li2), “裡”(li3), and “鯉”(li3) belong 
to different radicals and have different pronuncia-
tions, so there is no simple way to find them at just 
one place. 

Identifying characters for the In-list of a PC is 
not easy, and finding the characters for the Out-list 
is even more challenging. In Figure 1, “里” (li3) is 
the PC to teach in the game. Without considering 
the characters in In-list for the game, we might 
believe that “甲” (jia3) and “呈” (cheng2) look 
equally similar to “里”, so both are good distract-
ers. If, assuming that “理”(li3) is in the In-list, 
“玾” (jia3) will be a better distracter than “埕” 
(cheng2) for the Out-list, because “玾” and “理” 
are more similar in appearance. By contrast, if we 
have “裡” in the In-list, we may prefer to having 
“程” (cheng2) than having “玾” in the Out-list. 

Namely, given a PC to teach and a selected In-
list, the “quality” of the Out-list is dependent on 
the characters in In-list. Out-lists of high quality 
influence the challenging levels of the games, and 
will become a crucial ingredient when we make the 
games adaptive to players’ competence. 

4.1 PC Selection 

Control Group 
 Class Pretests Posttests p-value 

CCRT 
(charac-

ters) 

Lower 59 61 .292 
Middle 80 83 .186 
Upper 117 120 .268 

RAN 
Correct 

Rate 

Lower 83% 79% .341 
Middle 59% 64% .107 
Upper 89% 89% 1.00 

RAN 
Speed 

(second) 

Lower 23.1 20.6 .149 
Middle 24.3 20.2 .131 
Upper 15.7 14.1 .026 

Table 3. Results for control group
Experimental Group 

 Class Pretests Posttests p-value 
CCRT 

(charac-
ters) 

Lower 64 61 .226 
Middle 91 104 .001 
Upper 122 124 .52 

RAN 
Correct 

Rate 

Lower 73% 76% .574
Middle 70% 75% .171 
Upper 89% 91% .279 

RAN 
Speed 

(second) 

Lower 21.5 16.9 .012 
Middle 24.6 19.0 .001 
Upper 16.9 14.7 <0.001 

Table 4. Results for experimental group 

4



In a realistic teaching situation, a teacher will be 
teaching new characters and would like to provide 
students games that are related to the structures of 
the new characters. Hence, it is most convenient 
for the teachers that our tool decomposes a given 
character and recommends the PC in the character. 
For instance, given “理”, we show the teacher that 
we could compile a game for “里”. This is achiev-
able using the techniques that we illustrate in the 
next subsection. 

4.2 Character Recommendation 
Given a selected PC, a teacher has to prepare the 
In-list and Out-list for the game. Extending the 
techniques we reported in  (Liu et al., 2011), we 
decompose every Chinese character into a se-
quence of detailed Cangjie codes, which allows us 
to infer the PC contained in a character and to infer 
the similarity between two Chinese characters. 

For instance, the internal codes for “里”, “理”, 
“裡”, and “玾” are, respectively, “WG”, 
“MGWG”, “LWG”, and “MGWL”. The English 
letters denote the basic elements of Chinese char-
acters. For instance, “WG” stands for “田土”, 
which are the upper and the lower parts of “里”, 
“WL” stands for “田中”, which could be used to 
rebuild “甲” in a sense. By comparing the internal 
codes of Chinese characters, it is possible to find 
that (1) “理” and “裡” include “里” and that (2) 
“理” and “玾” are visually similar based on the 
overlapping codes. 

For the example problem that we showed in 
Figures 1 and 2, we may apply an extended proce-
dure of  (Liu et al., 2011) to find an In-list for “里”: 
“鋰裡浬狸埋理娌哩俚”. This list includes more 
characters than most native speakers can produce 
for “里” within a short period. Similar to what we 
reported previously, it is not easy to find a perfect 
list of characters. More specifically, it was relative-
ly easy to achieve high recall rates, but the preci-
sion rates varied among different PCs. However, 
with a good scoring function to rank the characters, 
it is not hard to achieve quality recommendations 
by placing the characters that actually contain the 
target PCs on top of the recommendation. 

Given that “里” is the target PC and the above 
In-list, we can recommend characters that look like 
the correct characters, e.g., “鈿鉀鍾” for “鋰”, 
“裸袖嘿” for “裡”, “湮湩渭＂ for “浬”, 
“狎猥狠狙” for “狸” , and “黑墨＂ for  “里”. 

We employed similar techniques to recommend 
characters for In-lists and Out-lists. The database 
that contains information about the decomposed 

Chinese charac-
ters was the 
same, but we 
utilized different 
object functions 
in selecting and 
ranking the 
characters.  We 
considered all 
elements in a 
character to rec-
ommend charac-
ters for In-lists, but focused on the inclusion of 
target PCs in the decomposed characters to rec-
ommend characters for Out-lists. Again our rec-
ommendations for the Out-lists were not perfect, 
and different ranking functions affect the perceived 
usefulness of the authoring tools.  

Figure 3 shows the step to choose characters in 
the Out-list for characters in the In-list. In this ex-
ample, six characters for the In-list for the PC “ ” 
had been chosen, and were listed near the top: 
“搖遙謠瑤鷂搖”.  Teachers can find characters 
that are similar to these six correct characters in 
separate pull-down lists. The screenshot shows the 
operation to choose a character that is similar to 
“遙” (yao2) from the pull-down list. The selected 
character would be added into the Out-list. 

4.3 Game Management 
We allow teachers to apply for accounts and pre-
pare the games based on their own teaching goals. 
However, we cannot describe this management 
subsystem for page limits. 

5 Evaluation of the Authoring Tool 
We evaluated how well our tools can help teachers 
with 20 native speakers. 

5.1 Participants and Procedure 
We recruited 20 native speakers of Chinese: nine 
of them are undergraduates, and the rest are gradu-
ate students. Eight are studying some engineering 
fields, and the rest are in liberal arts or business. 

The subjects were equally split into two groups. 
The control group used only paper and pens to au-
thor the games, and the experimental group would 
use our authoring tools. We informed and showed 
the experimental group how to use our tool, and 
members of the experimental group must follow an 
illustration to create a sample game before the 
evaluation began. 

Every subject must author 5 games, each for a 

Figure 3. Selecting a character for 
an Out-list 

5



different PC. A game needed 6 characters in the In-
list and 4 characters in the Out-list. Every evalua-
tor had up to 15 minutes to finish all tasks. 

The games authored by the evaluators were 
judged by psycholinguists who have experience in 
teaching. The highest possible scores for the In-list 
and the Out-list were both 30 for a game. 

5.2 Gains in Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Table 5 shows the results of the evaluation. The 
experimental group outperformed the control 
group in both the quality of the games and in the 
time spent on the authoring task. The differences 
are clearly statistically significant. 

Table 6 shows the scores for the In-list and Out-
list achieved by the control and the experimental 
groups. Using the authoring tools helped the evalu-
ators to achieved significantly higher scores for the 
Out-list. Indeed, it is not easy to find characters 
that (1) are similar to the characters in the In-list 
and (2) cannot contain the target PC. 

Due to the page limits, we could not present the 
complete authoring system, but hope to have the 
chance to show it during the demonstration. 

6 Concluding Remarks 
We reported a game for strengthening the associa-
tion of the phonetic components and the pronun-
ciations of Chinese characters. Experimental re-
sults indicated that playing the games helped stu-
dents shorten the response times in naming tasks. 
To make our platform more useable, we built an 
authoring tool so that teachers could prepare games 
that meet specific teaching goals. Evaluation of the 
tool with college and graduate students showed 
that our system offered an efficient and effective 
environment for this authoring task. 

Currently, players of our games still have to 
choose challenge levels. In the near future, we 
wish to make the game adaptive to players’ compe-
tence by adopting more advanced techniques, in-
cluding the introduction of “consistency values” 

 (Jared et al., 1990). Evidence shows that foreign 
students did not take advantage of the GPC rules in 
Chinese to learn Chinese characters  (Shen, 2005). 
Hence, it should be interesting to evaluate our sys-
tem with foreign students to see whether our ap-
proach remains effective. 

Acknowledgement 
We thank the partial support of NSC-100-2221-E-004-014 
and NSC-98-2517-S-004-001-MY3 projects of the Nation-
al Science Council, Taiwan. We appreciate reviewers’ 
invaluable comments, which we will respond in an ex-
tended version of this paper. 

References  
C. S.-H. Ho and P. Bryant. 1997. Phonological skills are im-

portant in learning to read Chinese, Developmental Psy-
chology, 33(6), 946–951. 

D. Jared, K. McRae, and M. S. Seidenberg. 1990. The basis of 
consistency effects in word naming, J. of Memory & Lan-
guage, 29(6), 687–715. 

Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, C.-Y. Wu, R.-L. Wang, and K.-E. 
Chang. 2009. A cognitive interactive approach to Chinese 
characters learning: System design and development, Proc. 
of the Int’l Conf. on Edutainment, 559–564. 

C.-Y. Lee. 2009. The cognitive and neural basis for learning to 
reading Chinese, J. of Basic Education, 18(2), 63–85. 

C.-Y. Lee, J.-L. Tsai, E. C.-I Su, O. J.-L. Tzeng, and D.-L. 
Hung. 2005. Consistency, regularity, and frequency effects 
in naming Chinese characters, Language and Linguistics, 
6(1), 75–107. 

C.-H. Lin and P. Collins. 2012. The effects of L1 and ortho-
graphic regularity and consistency in naming Chinese char-
acters. Reading and Writing. 

C.-L. Liu, M.-H. Lai, K.-W. Tien, Y.-H. Chuang, S.-H. Wu, 
and C.-Y. Lee. 2011. Visually and phonologically similar 
characters in incorrect Chinese words: Analyses, identifica-
tion, and applications, ACM Trans. on Asian Language In-
formation Processing, 10(2), 10:1–39. 

M.-T. P. Lu. 2011. The Effect of Instructional Embodiment 
Designs on Chinese Language Learning: The Use of Em-
bodied Animation for Beginning Learners of Chinese 
Characters, Ph.D. Diss., Columbia University, USA. 

J. R. Saffran, R. N. Aslin, and E. L. Newport. 1996. Statistical 
learning by 8-month-old infants, Science, 274(5294), 
1926–1928. 

H. H. Shen. 2005. An investigation of Chinese-character 
learning strategies among non-native speakers of Chinese, 
System, 33, 49–68. 

W.T. Siok and P. Fletcher. 2001. The role of phonological 
awareness and visual-orthographic skills in Chinese read-
ing acquisition, Developmental Psychology, 37(6), 886–
899. 

H. Tao. 2007. Stories for 130 Chinese characters, textbook 
used at the University of Michigan, USA. 

J. C. Ziegler and U. Goswami. 2005. Reading acquisition, 
developmental dyslexia, and skilled reading across lan-
guages: A psycholinguistic grain size theory, Psychological 
Bulletin, 131(1), 3–29. 

 Avg. scores 
(In-list and Out-list) 

Avg. time 

Control 16.8 15 min 
Experimental 52.8 7.1 min 

p-value < 0.0001 < 0.0001 
Table 5. Improved effectiveness and efficiency 

 Avg. scores 
In-list Out-list 

Control 15.9 1 
Experimental 29.9 22.9 

Table 6. Detailed scores for the average scores

6


