










































Crosslingual Induction of Semantic Roles


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 647–656,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Crosslingual Induction of Semantic Roles

Ivan Titov Alexandre Klementiev
Saarland University

Saarbrücken, Germany
{titov|aklement}@mmci.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

We argue that multilingual parallel data pro-
vides a valuable source of indirect supervision
for induction of shallow semantic representa-
tions. Specifically, we consider unsupervised
induction of semantic roles from sentences an-
notated with automatically-predicted syntactic
dependency representations and use a state-
of-the-art generative Bayesian non-parametric
model. At inference time, instead of only
seeking the model which explains the mono-
lingual data available for each language, we
regularize the objective by introducing a soft
constraint penalizing for disagreement in ar-
gument labeling on aligned sentences. We
propose a simple approximate learning algo-
rithm for our set-up which results in efficient
inference. When applied to German-English
parallel data, our method obtains a substantial
improvement over a model trained without us-
ing the agreement signal, when both are tested
on non-parallel sentences.

1 Introduction

Learning in the context of multiple languages simul-
taneously has been shown to be beneficial to a num-
ber of NLP tasks from morphological analysis to
syntactic parsing (Kuhn, 2004; Snyder and Barzilay,
2010; McDonald et al., 2011). The goal of this work
is to show that parallel data is useful in unsupervised
induction of shallow semantic representations.

Semantic role labeling (SRL) (Gildea and Juraf-
sky, 2002) involves predicting predicate argument
structure, i.e. both the identification of arguments

and their assignment to underlying semantic roles.
For example, in the following sentences:

(a) [A0Peter] blamed [A1Mary] [A2for planning a theft].
(b) [A0Peter] blamed [A2planning a theft] [A1on Mary].
(c) [A1Mary] was blamed [A2for planning a theft] [A0by

Peter]

the arguments ‘Peter’, ‘Mary’, and ‘planning a theft’
of the predicate ‘blame’ take the agent (A0), patient
(A1) and reason (A2) roles, respectively. In this
work, we focus on predicting argument roles.

SRL representations have many potential appli-
cations in NLP and have recently been shown
to benefit question answering (Shen and Lapata,
2007; Kaisser and Webber, 2007), textual entailment
(Sammons et al., 2009), machine translation (Wu
and Fung, 2009; Liu and Gildea, 2010; Wu et al.,
2011; Gao and Vogel, 2011), and dialogue systems
(Basili et al., 2009; van der Plas et al., 2011), among
others. Though syntactic representations are often
predictive of semantic roles (Levin, 1993), the inter-
face between syntactic and semantic representations
is far from trivial. Lack of simple deterministic rules
for mapping syntax to shallow semantics motivates
the use of statistical methods.

Most of the current statistical approaches to SRL
are supervised, requiring large quantities of human
annotated data to estimate model parameters. How-
ever, such resources are expensive to create and only
available for a small number of languages and do-
mains. Moreover, when moved to a new domain,
performance of these models tends to degrade sub-
stantially (Pradhan et al., 2008). Sparsity of anno-
tated data motivates the need to look to alternative

647



resources. In this work, we make use of unsuper-
vised data along with parallel texts and learn to in-
duce semantic structures in two languages simulta-
neously. As does most of the recent work on unsu-
pervised SRL, we assume that our data is annotated
with automatically-predicted syntactic dependency
parses and aim to induce a model of linking between
syntax and semantics in an unsupervised way.

We expect that both linguistic relatedness and
variability can serve to improve semantic parses in
individual languages: while the former can pro-
vide additional evidence, the latter can serve to re-
duce uncertainty in ambiguous cases. For example,
in our sentences (a) and (b) representing so-called
blame alternation (Levin, 1993), the same informa-
tion is conveyed in two different ways and a success-
ful model of semantic role labeling needs to learn
the corresponding linkings from the data. Induc-
ing them solely based on monolingual data, though
possible, may be tricky as selectional preferences
of the roles are not particularly restrictive; similar
restrictions for patient and agent roles may further
complicate the process. However, both sentences
(a) and (b) are likely to be translated in German
as ‘[A0Peter] beschuldigte [A1Mary] [A2einen Dieb-
stahl zu planen]’. Maximizing agreement between
the roles predicted for both languages would pro-
vide a strong signal for inducing the proper linkings
in our examples.

In this work, we begin with a state-of-the-art
monolingual unsupervised Bayesian model (Titov
and Klementiev, 2012) and focus on improving its
performance in the crosslingual setting. It induces
a linking between syntax and semantics, encoded as
a clustering of syntactic signatures of predicate ar-
guments. The clustering implicitly defines the set of
permissible alternations. For predicates present in
both sides of a bitext, we guide models in both lan-
guages to prefer clusterings which maximize agree-
ment between predicate argument structures pre-
dicted for each aligned predicate pair. We experi-
mentally show the effectiveness of the crosslingual
learning on the English-German language pair.

Our model admits efficient inference: the estima-
tion time on CoNLL 2009 data (Hajič et al., 2009)
and Europarl v.6 bitext (Koehn, 2005) does not ex-
ceed 5 hours on a single processor and the infer-
ence algorithm is highly parallelizable, reducing in-

ference time down to less than half an hour on mul-
tiple processors. This suggests that the models scale
to much larger corpora, which is an important prop-
erty for a successful unsupervised learning method,
as unlabeled data is abundant.

In summary, our contributions are as follows.

• This work is the first to consider the crosslin-
gual setting for unsupervised SRL.

• We propose a form of agreement penalty and
show its efficacy on English-German language
pair when used in conjunction with a state-of-
the-art non-parametric Bayesian model.

• We demonstrate that efficient approximate in-
ference is feasible in the multilingual setting.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 begins with a definition of the crosslingual
semantic role induction task we address in this pa-
per. In Section 3, we describe the base monolingual
model, and in Section 4 we propose an extension for
the crosslingual setting. In Section 5, we describe
our inference procedure. Section 6 provides both
evaluation and analysis. Finally, additional related
work is presented in Section 7.

2 Problem Definition

As we mentioned in the introduction, in this work
we focus on the labeling stage of semantic role la-
beling. Identification, though an important prob-
lem, can be tackled with heuristics (Lang and Lap-
ata, 2011a; Grenager and Manning, 2006; de Marn-
effe et al., 2006) or potentially by using a supervised
classifier trained on a small amount of data.

Instead of assuming the availability of role an-
notated data, we rely only on automatically gener-
ated syntactic dependency graphs in both languages.
While we cannot expect that syntactic structure can
trivially map to a semantic representation1, we can
make use of syntactic cues. In the labeling stage,
semantic roles are represented by clusters of ar-
guments, and labeling a particular argument corre-
sponds to deciding on its role cluster. However, in-
stead of dealing with argument occurrences directly,

1Although it provides a strong baseline which is difficult to
beat (Grenager and Manning, 2006; Lang and Lapata, 2010;
Lang and Lapata, 2011a).

648



we represent them as predicate-specific syntactic
signatures, and refer to them as argument keys. This
representation aids our models in inducing high pu-
rity clusters (of argument keys) while reducing their
granularity. We follow (Lang and Lapata, 2011a)
and use the following syntactic features for English
to form the argument key representation:

• Active or passive verb voice (ACT/PASS).
• Arg. position relative to predicate (LEFT/RIGHT).
• Syntactic relation to its governor.
• Preposition used for argument realization.

In the example sentences in Section 1, the argu-
ment keys for candidate arguments Peter for sen-
tences (a) and (c) would be ACT:LEFT:SBJ and
PASS:RIGHT:LGS->by,2 respectively. While aim-
ing to increase the purity of argument key clusters,
this particular representation will not always pro-
duce a good match: e.g. planning a theft in sen-
tence (b) will have the same key as Mary in sen-
tence (a). Increasing the expressiveness of the ar-
gument key representation by using features of the
syntactic frame would enable us to distinguish that
pair of arguments. However, we keep this particular
representation, in part to compare with the previous
work. In German, we do not include the relative po-
sition features, because they are not very informative
due to variability in word order.

In sum, we treat the unsupervised semantic role
labeling task as clustering of argument keys. Thus,
argument occurrences in the corpus whose keys are
clustered together are assigned the same semantic
role. The objective of this work is to improve ar-
gument key clusterings by inducing them simulta-
neously in two languages.

3 Monolingual Model

In this section we describe one of the Bayesian mod-
els for semantic role induction proposed in (Titov
and Klementiev, 2012). Before describing our
method, we briefly introduce the central compo-
nents of the model: the Chinese Restaurant Pro-
cesses (CRPs) and Dirichlet Processes (DPs) (Fer-
guson, 1973; Pitman, 2002). For more details we
refer the reader to (Teh, 2007).

2LGS denotes a logical subject in a passive construction
(Surdeanu et al., 2008).

3.1 Chinese Restaurant Processes

CRPs define probability distributions over partitions
of a set of objects. An intuitive metaphor for de-
scribing CRPs is assignment of tables to restaurant
customers. Assume a restaurant with a sequence of
tables, and customers who walk into the restaurant
one at a time and choose a table to join. The first
customer to enter is assigned the first table. Sup-
pose that when a client number i enters the restau-
rant, i − 1 customers are sitting at each of the k ∈
(1, . . . ,K) tables occupied so far. The new cus-
tomer is then either seated at one of the K tables
with probability Nki−1+α , where Nk is the number of
customers already sitting at table k, or assigned to a
new table with the probability αi−1+α , α > 0.

If we continue and assume that for each table ev-
ery customer at a table orders the same meal, with
the meal for the table chosen from an arbitrary base
distributionH , then all ordered meals will constitute
a sample from the Dirichlet Process DP (α,H).

An important property of the non-parametric pro-
cesses is that a model designer does not need to spec-
ify the number of tables (i.e. clusters) a-priori as it
is induced automatically on the basis of the data and
also depending on the choice of the concentration
parameter α. This property is crucial for our task,
as the intended number of roles cannot possibly be
specified for every predicate.

3.2 The Generative Story

In Section 2 we defined our task as clustering of ar-
gument keys, where each cluster corresponds to a
semantic role. If an argument key k is assigned to a
role r (k ∈ r), all of its occurrences are labeled r.

The Bayesian model encodes two common as-
sumptions about semantic roles. First, it enforces the
selectional restriction assumption: namely it stip-
ulates that the distribution over potential argument
fillers is sparse for every role, implying that ‘peaky’
distributions of arguments for each role r are pre-
ferred to flat distributions. Second, each role nor-
mally appears at most once per predicate occur-
rence. The inference algorithm will search for a
clustering which meets the above requirements to
the maximal extent.

The model associates two distributions with each
predicate: one governs the selection of argument

649



fillers for each semantic role, and the other mod-
els (and penalizes) duplicate occurrence of roles.
Each predicate occurrence is generated indepen-
dently given these distributions. Let us describe the
model by first defining how the set of model param-
eters and an argument key clustering are drawn, and
then explaining the generation of individual predi-
cate and argument instances. The generative story is
formally presented in Figure 1.

For each predicate p, we start by generating a par-
tition of argument keys Bp with each subset r ∈
Bp representing a single semantic role. The parti-
tions are drawn from CRP(α) independently for each
predicate. The crucial part of the model is the set of
selectional preference parameters θp,r, the distribu-
tions of arguments x for each role r of predicate p.
We represent arguments by lemmas of their syntac-
tic heads.3

The preference for sparseness of the distributions
θp,r is encoded by drawing them from the DP prior
DP (β,H(A)) with a small concentration parameter
β, the base probability distribution H(A) is just the
normalized frequencies of arguments in the corpus.
The geometric distribution ψp,r is used to model the
number of times a role r appears with a given predi-
cate occurrence. The decision whether to generate at
least one role r is drawn from the uniform Bernoulli
distribution. If 0 is drawn then the semantic role is
not realized for the given occurrence, otherwise the
number of additional roles r is drawn from the ge-
ometric distribution Geom(ψp,r). The Beta priors
over ψ can indicate the preference towards generat-
ing at most one argument for each role.

Now, when parameters and argument key clus-
terings are chosen, we can summarize the remain-
der of the generative story as follows. We begin by
independently drawing occurrences for each predi-
cate. For each predicate role we independently de-
cide on the number of role occurrences. Then each
of the arguments is generated (see GenArgument)
by choosing an argument key kp,r uniformly from
the set of argument keys assigned to the cluster r,
and finally choosing its filler xp,r, where the filler is
the lemma of the syntactic head of the argument.

3For prepositional phrases, the head noun of the object noun
phrase is taken as it encodes crucial lexical information. How-
ever, the preposition is not ignored but rather encoded in the
corresponding argument key, as explained in Section 2.

Clustering of argument keys:

for each predicate p = 1, 2, . . . :
Bp ∼ CRP (α) [partition of arg keys]

Parameters:

for each predicate p = 1, 2, . . . :
for each role r ∈ Bp:
θp,r ∼ DP (β,H(A)) [distrib of arg fillers]
ψp,r ∼ Beta(η0, η1) [geom distr for dup roles]

Data generation:

for each predicate p = 1, 2, . . . :
for each occurrence s of p:

for every role r ∈ Bp:
if [n ∼ Unif(0, 1)] = 1: [role appears at least once]

GenArgument(p, r) [draw one arg]
while [n ∼ ψp,r] = 1: [continue generation]

GenArgument(p, r) [draw more args]

GenArgument(p, r):
kp,r ∼ Unif(1, . . . , |r|) [draw arg key]
xp,r ∼ θp,r [draw arg filler]

Figure 1: The generative story for predicate-argument
structure.

4 Multilingual Extension

As we argued in Section 1, our goal is to penalize
for disagreement in semantic structures predicted for
each language on parallel data. In doing so, as in
much of previous work on unsupervised induction of
linguistic structures, we rely on automatically pro-
duced word alignments. In Section 6, we describe
how we use word alignment to decide if two argu-
ments are aligned; for now, we assume that (noisy)
argument alignments are given.

Intuitively, when two arguments are aligned in
parallel data, we expect them to be labeled with the
same semantic role in both languages. This corre-
spondence is simpler than the one expected in mul-
tilingual induction of syntax and morphology where
systematic but unknown relation between structures
in two language is normally assumed (e.g., (Snyder
et al., 2008)). A straightforward implementation of
this idea would require us to maintain one-to-one
mapping between semantic roles across languages.
Instead of assuming this correspondence, we penal-
ize for the lack of isomorphism between the sets of
roles in aligned predicates with the penalty depen-
dent on the degree of violation. This softer approach

650



is more appropriate in our setting, as individual ar-
gument keys do not always deterministically map to
gold standard roles4 and strict penalization would
result in the propagation of the corresponding over-
coarse clusters to the other language. Empirically,
we observed this phenomenon on the held-out set
with the increase of the penalty weight.

Encoding preference for the isomorphism directly
in the generative story is problematic: sparse Dirich-
let priors can be used in a fairly trivial way to encode
sparsity of the mapping in one direction or another
but not in both. Instead, we formalize this preference
with a penalty term similar to the expectation criteria
in KL-divergence form introduced in McCallum et
al. (2007). Specifically, we augment the joint proba-
bility with a penalty term computed on parallel data:∑
p(1), p(2)

(
− γ(1)

∑
r(1)∈B

p(1)

fr(1) arg max
r(2)∈B

p(2)

log P̂ (r(2)|r(1))

−γ(2)
∑

r(2)∈B
p(2)

fr(2) arg max
r(1)∈B

p(1)

log P̂ (r(1)|r(2))
)
,

where P̂ (r(l)|r(l′)) is the proportion of times the role
r(l

′) of predicate p(l
′) in language l′ is aligned to the

role r(l) of predicate p(l) in language l, and fr(l) is
the total number of times the role is aligned, γ(l) is a
non-negative constant. The rationale for introducing
the individual weighting fr(l) is two-fold. First, the
proportions P̂ (r(l)|r(l′)) are more ‘reliable’ when
computed from larger counts. Second, more fre-
quent roles should have higher penalty as they com-
pete with the joint probability term, the likelihood
part of which scales linearly with role counts.

Space restrictions prevent us from discussing the
close relation between this penalty formulation and
the existing work on injecting prior and side infor-
mation in learning objectives in the form of con-
straints (McCallum et al., 2007; Ganchev et al.,
2010; Chang et al., 2007).

In order to support efficient and parallelizable in-
ference, we simplify the above penalty by consider-
ing only disjoint pairs of predicates, instead of sum-
ming over all pairs p(1) and p(2). When choosing

4The average purity for argument keys with automatic argu-
ment identification and using predicted syntactic trees, before
any clustering, is approximately 90.2% on English and 87.8%
on German.

the pairs, we aim to cover the maximal number of
alignment counts so as to preserve as much informa-
tion from parallel corpora as possible. This objective
corresponds to the classic maximum weighted bipar-
tite matching problem with the weight for each edge
p(1) and p(2) equal to the number of times the two
predicates were aligned in parallel data. We use the
standard polynomial algorithm (the Hungarian algo-
rithm, (Kuhn, 1955)) to find an optimal solution.

5 Inference

An inference algorithm for an unsupervised model
should be efficient enough to handle vast amounts
of unlabeled data, as it can easily be obtained and is
likely to improve results. We use a simple approx-
imate inference algorithm based on greedy search.
We start by discussing search for the maximum a-
posteriori clustering of argument keys in the mono-
lingual set-up and then discuss how it can be ex-
tended to accommodate the role alignment penalty.

5.1 Monolingual Setting

In the model, a linking between syntax and seman-
tics is induced independently for each predicate.
Nevertheless, searching for a MAP clustering can
be expensive: even a move involving a single ar-
gument key implies some computations for all its
occurrences in the corpus. Instead of more com-
plex MAP search algorithms (see, e.g., (Daume III,
2007)), we use a greedy procedure where we start
with each argument key assigned to an individual
cluster, and then iteratively try to merge clusters.
Each move involves (1) choosing an argument key
and (2) deciding on a cluster to reassign it to. This is
done by considering all clusters (including creating
a new one) and choosing the most probable one.

Instead of choosing argument keys randomly at
the first stage, we order them by corpus frequency.
This ordering is beneficial as getting clustering right
for frequent argument keys is more important and
the corresponding decisions should be made earlier.5

We used a single iteration in our experiments, as we
have not noticed any benefit from using multiple it-
erations.

5This has been explored before for shallow semantic rep-
resentations (Lang and Lapata, 2011a; Titov and Klementiev,
2011).

651



5.2 Incorporating the Alignment Penalty

Inference in the monolingual setting is done inde-
pendently for each predicate, as the model factor-
izes over the predicates. The role alignment penalty
introduces interdependencies between the objectives
for each bilingual predicate pair chosen by the as-
signment algorithm as discussed in Section 4. For
each pair of predicates, we search for clusterings
to maximize the sum of the log-probability and the
negated penalty term.

At first glance it may seem that the alignment
penalty can be easily integrated into the greedy MAP
search algorithm: instead of considering individual
argument keys, one could use pairs of argument keys
and decide on their assignment to clusters jointly.
However, given that there is no isomorphic mapping
between argument keys across languages, this solu-
tion is unlikely to be satisfactory.6 Instead, we use
an approximate inference procedure similar in spirit
to annotation projection techniques.

For each predicate, we first induce semantic roles
independently for the first language, as described
in Section 5.1, and then use the same algorithm for
the second language but take the penalty term into
account. Then we repeat the process in the reverse
direction. Among these two solutions, we choose
the one which yields the higher objective value. In
this way, we begin with producing a clustering for
the side which is easier to cluster and provides more
clues for the other side.7

6 Empirical Evaluation

We begin by describing the data and evaluation met-
rics we use before discussing results.

6.1 Data

We run our main experiments on the English-
German section of Europarl v6 parallel corpus

6We also considered a variation of this idea where a pair of
argument keys is chosen randomly proportional to their align-
ment frequency and multiple iterations are repeated. Despite
being significantly slower than our method, it did not provide
any improvement in accuracy.

7In preliminary experiments, we studied an even simpler in-
ference method where the projection direction was fixed for all
predicates. Though this approach did outperform the monolin-
gual model, the results were substantially worse than achieved
with our method.

(Koehn, 2005) and the CoNLL 2009 distributions
of the Penn Treebank WSJ corpus (Marcus et al.,
1993) for English and the SALSA corpus (Burchardt
et al., 2006) for German. As standard for unsuper-
vised SRL, we use the entire CoNLL training sets
for evaluation, and use held-out sets for model se-
lection and parameter tuning.

Syntactic annotation. Although the CoNLL 2009
dataset already has predicted dependency structures,
we could not reproduce them so that we could use
the same parser to annotate Europarl. We chose to
reannotate it, since using different parsing models
for both datasets would be undesirable. We used
MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2007) for English and the
syntactic component of the LTH system (Johansson
and Nugues, 2008) for German.

Predicate and argument identification. We select all
non-auxiliary verbs as predicates. For English, we
identify their arguments using a heuristic proposed
in (Lang and Lapata, 2011a). It is comprised of a
list of 8 rules, which use nonlexicalized properties
of syntactic paths between a predicate and a candi-
date argument to iteratively discard non-arguments
from the list of all words in a sentence. For Ger-
man, we use the LTH argument identification classi-
fier. Accuracy of argument identification on CoNLL
2009 using predicted syntactic analyses was 80.7%
and 86.5% for English and German, respectively.

Argument alignment. We use GIZA++ (Och and
Ney, 2003) to produce word alignments in Europarl:
we ran it in both directions and kept the intersec-
tion of the induced word alignments. For every ar-
gument identified in the previous stage, we chose a
set of words consisting of the argument’s syntactic
head and, for prepositional phrases, the head noun
of the object noun phrase. We mark arguments in
two languages as aligned if there is any word align-
ment between the corresponding sets and if they are
arguments of aligned predicates.

6.2 Evaluation Metrics

We use the standard purity (PU) and collocation
(CO) metrics as well as their harmonic mean (F1) to
measure the quality of the resulting clusters. Purity
measures the degree to which each cluster contains
arguments sharing the same gold role:

652



PU =
1
N

∑
i

max
j
|Gj ∩ Ci|

where Ci is the set of arguments in the i-th induced
cluster, Gj is the set of arguments in the jth gold
cluster, and N is the total number of arguments.
Collocation evaluates the degree to which arguments
with the same gold roles are assigned to a single
cluster:

CO =
1
N

∑
j

max
i
|Gj ∩ Ci|

We compute the aggregate PU, CO, and F1 scores
over all predicates in the same way as (Lang and La-
pata, 2011a) by weighting the scores of each pred-
icate by the number of its argument occurrences.
Since our goal is to evaluate the clustering algo-
rithms, we do not include incorrectly identified ar-
guments when computing these metrics.

6.3 Parameters and Set-up

Our models are robust to parameter settings; the pa-
rameters were tuned (to an order of magnitude) to
optimize the F1 score on the held-out development
set and were as follows. Parameters governing du-
plicate role generation, η(·)0 and η

(·)
1 , and penalty

weights γ(·) were set to be the same for both lan-
guages, and are 100, 1.e-3 and 10, respectively. The
concentration parameters were set as follows: for
English, they were set to α(1) = 1.e-3, β(1) = 1.e-3,
and, for German, they were α(2) = 0.1, β(2) = 1.

Domains of Europarl (parliamentary proceedings)
and German/English CoNLL data (newswire) are
substantially different. Since the influence of do-
main shift is not the focus of work, we try to min-
imize its effect by computing the likelihood part of
the objective on CoNLL data alone. This also makes
our setting more comparable to prior work.8

6.4 Results

Base monolingual model. We begin by evaluat-
ing our base monolingual model MonoBayes alone
against the current best approaches to unsupervised
semantic role induction. Since we do not have ac-
cess to the systems, we compare on the marginally
different English CoNLL 2008 (Surdeanu et al.,

8Preliminary experiments on the entire dataset show a slight
degradation in performance.

PU CO F1
LLogistic 79.5 76.5 78.0
GraphPart 88.6 70.7 78.6
SplitMerge 88.7 73.0 80.1
MonoBayes 88.1 77.1 82.2
SyntF 81.6 77.5 79.5

Table 1: Argument clustering performance with gold
argument identification and gold syntactic parses on
CoNLL 2008 shared-task dataset. Bold-face is used to
highlight the best F1 scores.

2008) shared task dataset used in their experiments.
We report the results using gold argument identifi-
cation and gold syntactic parses in order to focus
the evaluation on the argument labeling stage and to
minimize the noise due to automatic syntactic anno-
tations. The methods are Latent Logistic classifica-
tion (Lang and Lapata, 2010), Split-Merge cluster-
ing (Lang and Lapata, 2011a), and Graph Partition-
ing (Lang and Lapata, 2011b) (labeled LLogistic,
SplitMerge, and GraphPart, respectively) achieving
the current best unsupervised SRL results in this set-
ting. Additionally, we compute the syntactic func-
tion baseline (SyntF), which simply clusters predi-
cate arguments according to the dependency relation
to their head. Following (Lang and Lapata, 2010),
we allocate a cluster for each of 20 most frequent
relations in the CoNLL dataset and one cluster for
all other relations. Our model substantially outper-
forms other models (see Table 1).

Multilingual extensions. Next, we improve our
model performance using agreement as an addi-
tional supervision signal during training (see Sec-
tion 4). We compare the performance of indi-
vidual English and German models induced sepa-
rately (MonoBayes) with the jointly induced mod-
els (MultiBayes) as well as the syntactic baseline,
see Table 2.9 While we see little improvement
in F1 for English, the German system improves
by 1.8%. For German, the crosslingual learning
also results in 1.5% improvement over the syntac-
tic baseline, which is considered difficult to outper-
form (Grenager and Manning, 2006; Lang and Lap-
ata, 2010). Note that recent unsupervised SRL meth-

9Note that the scores are computed on correctly identified ar-
guments only, and tend to be higher in these experiments prob-
ably because the complex arguments get discarded by the argu-
ment identifier.

653



English German
PU CO F1 PU CO F1

MonoBayes 87.5 80.1 83.6 86.8 75.7 80.9
MultiBayes 86.8 80.7 83.7 85.0 80.6 82.7
SyntF 81.5 79.4 80.4 83.1 79.3 81.2

Table 2: Results on CoNLL 2009 with automatic argu-
ment identification and automatic syntactic parses.

ods do not always improve on it, see Table 1.
The relatively low expressivity and limited purity

of our argument keys (see discussion in Section 4)
are likely to limit potential improvements when us-
ing them in crosslingual learning. The natural next
step would be to consider crosslingual learning with
a more expressive model of the syntactic frame and
syntax-semantics linking.

7 Related Work

Unsupervised learning in crosslingual setting has
been an active area of research in recent years. How-
ever, most of this research has focused on induc-
tion of syntactic structures (Kuhn, 2004; Snyder
et al., 2009) or morphologic analysis (Snyder and
Barzilay, 2008) and we are not aware of any pre-
vious work on induction of semantic representa-
tions in the crosslingual setting. Learning of se-
mantic representations in the context of monolin-
gual weakly-parallel data was studied in Titov and
Kozhevnikov (2010) but their setting was semi-
supervised and they experimented only on a re-
stricted domain.

Most of the SRL research has focused on the
supervised setting, however, lack of annotated re-
sources for most languages and insufficient cover-
age provided by the existing resources motivates
the need for using unlabeled data or other forms
of weak supervision. This includes methods based
on graph alignment between labeled and unlabeled
data (Fürstenau and Lapata, 2009), using unlabeled
data to improve lexical generalization (Deschacht
and Moens, 2009), and projection of annotation
across languages (Pado and Lapata, 2009; van der
Plas et al., 2011). Semi-supervised and weakly-
supervised techniques have also been explored for
other types of semantic representations but these
studies again have mostly focused on restricted do-
mains (Kate and Mooney, 2007; Liang et al., 2009;
Goldwasser et al., 2011; Liang et al., 2011).

Early unsupervised approaches to the SRL task
include (Swier and Stevenson, 2004), where the
VerbNet verb lexicon was used to guide unsuper-
vised learning, and a generative model of Grenager
and Manning (2006) which exploits linguistic priors
on syntactic-semantic interface.

More recently, the role induction problem has
been studied in Lang and Lapata (2010) where it
has been reformulated as a problem of detecting al-
ternations and mapping non-standard linkings to the
canonical ones. Later, Lang and Lapata (2011a) pro-
posed an algorithmic approach to clustering argu-
ment signatures which achieves higher accuracy and
outperforms the syntactic baseline. In Lang and La-
pata (2011b), the role induction problem is formu-
lated as a graph partitioning problem: each vertex in
the graph corresponds to a predicate occurrence and
edges represent lexical and syntactic similarities be-
tween the occurrences. Unsupervised induction of
semantics has also been studied in Poon and Domin-
gos (2009) and Titov and Klementiev (2011) but the
induced representations are not entirely compatible
with the PropBank-style annotations and they have
been evaluated only on a question answering task
for the biomedical domain. Also, a related task of
unsupervised argument identification has been con-
sidered in Abend et al. (2009).

8 Conclusions

This work adds unsupervised semantic role labeling
to the list of NLP tasks benefiting from the crosslin-
gual induction setting. We show that an agreement
signal extracted from parallel data provides indi-
rect supervision capable of substantially improving
a state-of-the-art model for semantic role induction.

Although in this work we focused primarily on
improving performance for each individual lan-
guage, cross-lingual semantic representation could
be extracted by a simple post-processing step. In
future work, we would like to model cross-lingual
semantics explicitly.

Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the MMCI Cluster of Excel-
lence and a Google research award. The authors thank
Mikhail Kozhevnikov, Alexis Palmer, Manfred Pinkal,
Caroline Sporleder and the anonymous reviewers for their
suggestions.

654



References

Omri Abend, Roi Reichart, and Ari Rappoport. 2009.
Unsupervised argument identification for semantic
role labeling. In ACL-IJCNLP.

Roberto Basili, Diego De Cao, Danilo Croce, Bonaven-
tura Coppola, and Alessandro Moschitti. 2009. Cross-
language frame semantics transfer in bilingual cor-
pora. In CICLING.

A. Burchardt, K. Erk, A. Frank, A. Kowalski, S. Pado,
and M. Pinkal. 2006. The SALSA corpus: a german
corpus resource for lexical semantics. In LREC.

Ming-Wei Chang, Lev Ratinov, and Dan Roth.
2007. Guiding semi-supervision with constraint-
driven learning. In ACL.

Hal Daume III. 2007. Fast search for dirichlet process
mixture models. In AISTATS.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
LREC 2006.

Koen Deschacht and Marie-Francine Moens. 2009.
Semi-supervised semantic role labeling using the La-
tent Words Language Model. In EMNLP.

Thomas S. Ferguson. 1973. A Bayesian analysis of
some nonparametric problems. The Annals of Statis-
tics, 1(2):209–230.

Hagen Fürstenau and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Graph align-
ment for semi-supervised semantic role labeling. In
EMNLP.

Kuzman Ganchev, Joao Graca, Jennifer Gillenwater, and
Ben Taskar. 2010. Posterior regularization for struc-
tured latent variable models. Journal of Machine
Learning Research (JMLR), 11:2001–2049.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2011. Corpus expansion for
statistical machine translation with semantic role label
substitution rules. In ACL:HLT.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic la-
belling of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
28(3):245–288.

Dan Goldwasser, Roi Reichart, James Clarke, and Dan
Roth. 2011. Confidence driven unsupervised semantic
parsing. In ACL.

Trond Grenager and Christoph Manning. 2006. Un-
supervised discovery of a statistical verb lexicon. In
EMNLP.

Jan Hajič, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard Johans-
son, Daisuke Kawahara, Maria Antònia Martı́, Lluı́s
Màrquez, Adam Meyers, Joakim Nivre, Sebastian
Padó, Jan Štěpánek, Pavel Straňák, Mihai Surdeanu,
Nianwen Xue, and Yi Zhang. 2009. The conll-2009
shared task: Syntactic and semantic dependencies in
multiple languages. In CoNLL 2009: Shared Task.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2008.
Dependency-based semantic role labeling of Prop-
Bank. In EMNLP.

Michael Kaisser and Bonnie Webber. 2007. Question
answering based on semantic roles. In ACL Workshop
on Deep Linguistic Processing.

Rohit J. Kate and Raymond J. Mooney. 2007. Learning
language semantics from ambigous supervision. In
AAAI.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
MT Summit.

Harold W. Kuhn. 1955. The hungarian method for the
assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics Quar-
terly, 2:83–97.

Jonas Kuhn. 2004. Experiments in parallel-text based
grammar induction. In ACL.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Unsupervised in-
duction of semantic roles. In ACL.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. 2011a. Unsupervised se-
mantic role induction via split-merge clustering. In
ACL.

Joel Lang and Mirella Lapata. 2011b. Unsupervised
semantic role induction with graph partitioning. In
EMNLP.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago Press.

Percy Liang, Michael I. Jordan, and Dan Klein. 2009.
Learning semantic correspondences with less supervi-
sion. In ACL-IJCNLP.

Percy Liang, Michael Jordan, and Dan Klein. 2011.
Learning dependency-based compositional semantics.
In ACL: HLT.

Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. 2010. Semantic role fea-
tures for machine translation. In Coling.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Andrew McCallum, Gideon Mann, and Gregory Druck.
2007. Generalized expectation criteria. Techni-
cal Report TR 2007-60, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA.

Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, and Keith Hall. 2011.
Multi-source transfer of delexicalized dependency
parsers. In EMNLP.

J. Nivre, J. Hall, S. Kübler, R. McDonald, J. Nils-
son, S. Riedel, and D. Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL
2007 shared task on dependency parsing. In EMNLP-
CoNLL.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29:19–51.

655



Sebastian Pado and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Cross-lingual
annotation projection for semantic roles. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 36:307–340.

Jim Pitman. 2002. Poisson-Dirichlet and GEM invari-
ant distributions for split-and-merge transformations
of an interval partition. Combinatorics, Probability
and Computing, 11:501–514.

Hoifung Poon and Pedro Domingos. 2009. Unsuper-
vised semantic parsing. In EMNLP.

Sameer Pradhan, Wayne Ward, and James H. Martin.
2008. Towards robust semantic role labeling. Com-
putational Linguistics, 34:289–310.

M. Sammons, V. Vydiswaran, T. Vieira, N. Johri,
M. Chang, D. Goldwasser, V. Srikumar, G. Kundu,
Y. Tu, K. Small, J. Rule, Q. Do, and D. Roth. 2009.
Relation alignment for textual entailment recognition.
In Text Analysis Conference (TAC).

Dan Shen and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Using semantic
roles to improve question answering. In EMNLP.

Benjamin Snyder and Regina Barzilay. 2008. Unsuper-
vised multilingual learning for morphological segmen-
tation. In ACL.

Benjamin Snyder and Regina Barzilay. 2010. Climbing
the tower of Babel: Unsupervised multilingual learn-
ing. In ICML.

Benjamin Snyder, Tahira Naseem, Jacob Eisenstein, and
Regina Barzilay. 2008. Unsupervised multilingual
learning for POS tagging. In EMNLP.

Benjamin Snyder, Tahira Naseem, and Regina Barzilay.
2009. Unsupervised multilingual grammar induction.
In ACL.

Mihai Surdeanu, Adam Meyers Richard Johansson, Lluı́s
Màrquez, and Joakim Nivre. 2008. The CoNLL-2008
shared task on joint parsing of syntactic and semantic
dependencies. In CoNLL 2008: Shared Task.

Richard Swier and Suzanne Stevenson. 2004. Unsuper-
vised semantic role labelling. In EMNLP.

Yee Whye Teh. 2007. Dirichlet process. Encyclopedia
of Machine Learning.

Ivan Titov and Alexandre Klementiev. 2011. A Bayesian
model for unsupervised semantic parsing. In ACL.

Ivan Titov and Alexandre Klementiev. 2012. A Bayesian
approach to unsupervised semantic role induction. In
EACL.

Ivan Titov and Mikhail Kozhevnikov. 2010. Bootstrap-
ping semantic analyzers from non-contradictory texts.
In ACL.

Lonneke van der Plas, Paola Merlo, and James Hender-
son. 2011. Scaling up automatic cross-lingual seman-
tic role annotation. In ACL.

Dekai Wu and Pascale Fung. 2009. Semantic roles for
SMT: A hybrid two-pass model. In NAACL.

Dekai Wu, Marianna Apidianaki, Marine Carpuat, and
Lucia Specia, editors. 2011. Proc. of Fifth Work-
shop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical
Translation. ACL.

656


