










































Joint Inference of Named Entity Recognition and Normalization for Tweets


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 526–535,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Joint Inference of Named Entity Recognition and Normalization for Tweets
Xiaohua Liu ‡ †, Ming Zhou †, Furu Wei †, Zhongyang Fu §, Xiangyang Zhou ♯

‡School of Computer Science and Technology
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150001, China
§Department of Computer Science and Engineering

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
♯School of Computer Science and Technology

Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, China
†Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, 100190, China

†{xiaoliu, fuwei, mingzhou}@microsoft.com
§ zhongyang.fu@gmail.com ♯ v-xzho@microsoft.com

Abstract

Tweets represent a critical source of fresh in-
formation, in which named entities occur fre-
quently with rich variations. We study the
problem of named entity normalization (NEN)
for tweets. Two main challenges are the er-
rors propagated from named entity recogni-
tion (NER) and the dearth of information in
a single tweet. We propose a novel graphi-
cal model to simultaneously conduct NER and
NEN on multiple tweets to address these chal-
lenges. Particularly, our model introduces a
binary random variable for each pair of words
with the same lemma across similar tweets,
whose value indicates whether the two related
words are mentions of the same entity. We
evaluate our method on a manually annotated
data set, and show that our method outper-
forms the baseline that handles these two tasks
separately, boosting the F1 from 80.2% to
83.6% for NER, and the Accuracy from 79.4%
to 82.6% for NEN, respectively.

1 Introduction

Tweets, short messages of less than 140 characters
shared through the Twitter service 1, have become
an important source of fresh information. As a re-
sult, the task of named entity recognition (NER)
for tweets, which aims to identify mentions of rigid
designators from tweets belonging to named-entity
types such as persons, organizations and locations
(2007), has attracted increasing research interest.
For example, Ritter et al. (2011) develop a sys-
tem that exploits a CRF model to segment named

1http://www.twitter.com

entities and then uses a distantly supervised ap-
proach based on LabeledLDA to classify named en-
tities. Liu et al. (2011) combine a classifier based
on the k-nearest neighbors algorithm with a CRF-
based model to leverage cross tweets information,
and adopt the semi-supervised learning to leverage
unlabeled tweets.

However, named entity normalization (NEN) for
tweets, which transforms named entities mentioned
in tweets to their unambiguous canonical forms, has
not been well studied. Owing to the informal nature
of tweets, there are rich variations of named enti-
ties in them. According to our investigation on the
data set provided by Liu et al. (2011), every named
entity in tweets has an average of 3.3 variations 2.
As an illustrative example, we show “Anneke Gron-
loh”, which may occur as “Mw.,Gronloh”, “Anneke
Kronloh” or “Mevrouw G”. We thus propose NEN
for tweets, which plays an important role in entity
retrieval, trend detection, and event and entity track-
ing. For example, Khalid et al. (2008) show that
even a simple normalization method leads to im-
provements of early precision, for both document
and passage retrieval, and better normalization re-
sults in better retrieval performance.

Traditionally, NEN is regarded as a septated task,
which takes the output of NER as its input (Li et al.,
2002; Cohen, 2005; Jijkoun et al., 2008; Dai et al.,
2011). One limitation of this cascaded approach is
that errors propagate from NER to NEN and there is
no feedback from NEN to NER. As demonstrated by
Khalid et al. (2008), most NEN errors are caused

2This data set consists of 12,245 randomly sampled tweets
within five days.

526



by recognition errors. Another challenge of NEN
is the dearth of information in a single tweet, due
to the short and noise-prone nature of tweets. Re-
portedly, the accuracy of a baseline NEN system
based on Wikipedia drops considerably from 94%
on edited news to 77% on news comments, a kind of
user generated content (UGC) with similar style to
tweets (Jijkoun et al., 2008).

We propose jointly conducting NER and NEN
on multiple tweets using a graphical model, to
address these challenges. Intuitively, improving
the performance of NER boosts the performance
of NEN. For example, consider the following two
tweets: “· · ·Alex’s jokes. Justin’s smartness. Max’s
randomnes· · · ” and “· · ·Alex Russo was like the
best character on Disney Channel· · · ”. Identify-
ing “Alex” and “Alex Russo” as PERSON will en-
courage NEN systems to normalize “Alex” into
“Alex Russo”. On the other hand, NEN can guide
NER. For instance, consider the following two
tweets: “· · · she knew Burger King when he was a
Prince!· · · ” and “· · · I’m craving all sorts of food:
mcdonalds, burger king, pizza, chinese· · · ”. Sup-
pose the NEN system believes that “burger king”
cannot be mapped to “Burger King” since these two
tweets are not similar in content. This will help NER
to assign them different types of labels. Our method
optimizes these two tasks simultaneously by en-
abling them to interact with each other. This largely
differentiates our method from existing work.

Furthermore, considering multiple tweets simul-
taneously allows us to exploit the redundancy in
tweets, as suggested by Liu et al. (2011). For exam-
ple, consider the following two tweets: “· · ·Bobby
Shaw you don’t invite the wind· · · ” and “· · · I own
yah ! Loool bobby shaw· · · ”. Recognizing “Bobby
Shaw” in the first tweet as a PERSON is easy owing
to its capitalization and the following word “you”,
which in turn helps to identify “bobby shaw” in the
second tweet as a PERSON.

We adopt a factor graph as our graphical model,
which is constructed in the following manner. We
first introduce a random variable for each word in
every tweet, which represents the BILOU (Begin-
ning, the Inside and the Last tokens of multi-token
entities as well as Unit-length entities) label of the
corresponding word. Then we add a factor to con-
nect two neighboring variables, forming a conven-

tional linear chain CRFs. Hereafter, we use tm to
denote the mth tweet ,tim and y

i
m to denote the i

th

word of of tm and its BILOU label, respectively, and
f im to denote the factor related to y

i−1
m and y

i
m. Next,

for each word pair with the same lemma, denoted by
tim and t

j
n, we introduce a binary random variable,

denoted by zijmn, whose value indicates whether tim
and tjn belong to two mentions of the same entity. Fi-
nally, for any zijmn we add a factor, denoted by f

ij
mn,

to connect yim, y
j
n and z

ij
mn. Factors in the same

group ({f ijmn} or {f im}) share the same set of fea-
ture templates. Figure 1 illustrates an example of
our factor graph for two tweets.

Figure 1: A factor graph that jointly conducts NER and
NEN on multiple tweets. Blue and green circles rep-
resent NE type (y-serials) and normalization variables
(z-serials), respectively; filled circles indicate observed
random variables; blue rectangles represent the factors
connecting neighboring y-serial variables while red rect-
angles stand for the factors connecting distant y-serial
and z-serial variables.

It is worth noting that our factor graph is differ-
ent from the skip-chain CRFs (Galley, 2006) in the
sense that any skip-chain factor of our model con-
sists not only of two NE type variables (yim and y

j
n),

which is the case for skip-chain CRFs, but also a nor-
malization variable (zijmn). It is these normalization
variables that enable us to conduct NER and NEN
jointly.

We manually add normalization information to
the data set shared by Liu et al. (2011), to eval-
uate our method. Experimental results show that
our method achieves 83.6% F1 for NER and 82.6%
Accuracy for NEN, outperforming the baseline with
80.2%F1 for NER and 79.4% Accuracy for NEN.

We summarize our contributions as follows.

1. We introduce the task of NEN for tweets, and
propose jointly conducting NER and NEN for

527



multiple tweets using a factor graph, which
leverages redundancy in tweets to make up for
the dearth of information in a single tweet and
allows these two tasks to inform each other.

2. We evaluate our method on a human annotated
data set, and show that our method compares
favorably with the baseline, achieving better
performance in both tasks.

Our paper is organized as follows. In the next sec-
tion, we introduce related work. In Section 3 and 4,
we formally define the task and present our method.
In Section 5, we evaluate our method. And finally
we conclude our work in Section 6.

2 Related Work

Related work can be divided into two categories:
NER and NEN.

2.1 NER

NER has been well studied and its solutions can be
divided into three categories: 1) Rule-based (Krupka
and Hausman, 1998); 2) machine learning based
(Finkel and Manning, 2009; Singh et al., 2010); and
3) hybrid methods (Jansche and Abney, 2002). Ow-
ing to the availability of annotated corpora, such as
ACE05, Enron (Minkov et al., 2005) and CoNLL03
(Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder, 2003), data
driven methods are now dominant.

Current studies of NER mainly focus on formal
text such as news articles (Mccallum and Li, 2003;
Etzioni et al., 2005). A representative work is that
of Ratinov and Roth (2009), in which they system-
atically study the challenges of NER, compare sev-
eral solutions, and show some interesting findings.
For example, they show that the BILOU encoding
scheme significantly outperforms the BIO schema
(Beginning, the Inside and Outside of a chunk).

A handful of work on other genres of texts exists.
For example, Yoshida and Tsujii build a biomedi-
cal NER system (2007) using lexical features, or-
thographic features, semantic features and syntactic
features, such as part-of-speech (POS) and shallow
parsing; Downey et al. (2007) employ capitaliza-
tion cues and n-gram statistics to locate names of a
variety of classes in web text; Wang (2009) intro-
duces NER to clinical notes. A linear CRF model

is trained on a manually annotated data set, which
achieves an F1 of 81.48% on the test data set; Chiti-
cariu et al. (2010) design and implement a high-
level language NERL which simplifies the process
of building, understanding, and customizing com-
plex rule-based named-entity annotators for differ-
ent domains.

Recently, NER for Tweets attracts growing inter-
est. Finin et al. (2010) use Amazons Mechani-
cal Turk service 3 and CrowdFlower 4 to annotate
named entities in tweets and train a CRF model to
evaluate the effectiveness of human labeling. Rit-
ter et al. (2011) re-build the NLP pipeline for
tweets beginning with POS tagging, through chunk-
ing, to NER, which first exploits a CRF model to
segment named entities and then uses a distantly su-
pervised approach based on LabeledLDA to clas-
sify named entities. Unlike this work, our work de-
tects the boundary and type of a named entity si-
multaneously using sequential labeling techniques.
Liu et al. (2011) combine a classifier based on
the k-nearest neighbors algorithm with a CRF-based
model to leverage cross tweets information, and
adopt the semi-supervised learning to leverage un-
labeled tweets. Our method leverages redundance
in similar tweets, using a factor graph rather than a
two-stage labeling strategy. One advantage of our
method is that local and global information can in-
teract with each other.

2.2 NEN

There is a large body of studies into normalizing
various types of entities for formally written texts.
For instance, Cohen (2005) normalizes gene/protein
names using dictionaries automatically extracted
from gene databases; Magdy et al. (2007) address
cross-document Arabic name normalization using a
machine learning approach, a dictionary of person
names and frequency information for names in a
collection; Cucerzan (2007) demostrates a large-
scale system for the recognition and semantic dis-
ambiguation of named entities based on informa-
tion extracted from a large encyclopedic collection
and Web search results; Dai et al. (2011) employ
a Markov logic network to model interweaved con-

3https://www.mturk.com/mturk/
4http://crowdflower.com/

528



straints in a setting of gene mention normalization.
Jijkoun et al. (2008) study NEN for UGC. They

report that the accuracy of a baseline NEN system
based on Wikipedia drops considerably from 94%
on edited news to 77% on UGC. They identify three
main error sources, i.e., entity recognition errors,
multiple ways of referring to the same entity and am-
biguous references, and exploit hand-crafted rules to
improve the baseline NEN system.

We introduce the task of NEN for tweets, a new
genre of texts with rich entity variations. In contrast
to existing NEN systems, which take the output of
NER systems as their input, our method conducts
NER and NEN at the same time, allowing them to
reinforce each other, as demonstrated by the experi-
mental results.

3 Task Definition

A tweet is a short text message with no more than
140 characters. Here is an example of a tweet: “my-
craftingworld: #Win Microsoft Office 2010 Home
and Student #Contest from @office http://bit.ly/ · · ·
”, where “mycraftingworld” is the name of the user
who published this tweet. Words beginning with
“#” like “”#Win” are hash tags; words starting
with “@” like “@office” represent user names; and
“http://bit.ly/” is a shortened link.

Given a set of tweets, e.g., tweets within some pe-
riod or related to some query, our task is: 1) To rec-
ognize each mention of entities of predefined types
for each tweet; and 2) to restore each entity mention
into its unambiguous canonical form. Following Liu
et al. (2011), we focus on four types of entities, i.e.,
PERSON, ORGANIZATION, PRODUCT, and LO-
CATION, and constrain our scope to English tweets.
Note that the NEN sub-task can be transformed as
follows. Given each pair of entity mentions, decide
whether they denote the same entity. Once this is
achieved, we can link all the mentions of the same
entity, and choose a representative mention, e.g., the
longest mention, as their canonical form.

As an illustrative example, consider the following
three tweets: “· · ·Gaga’s Christmas dinner with her
family. Awwwwn· · · ”, “· · ·Lady Gaaaaga with her
family on Christmas· · · ” and “· · ·Buying a maga-
zine just because Lady Gaga’s on the cover· · · ”. It
is expected that “Gaga”, “Lady Gaaaaga” and “Lady

Gaga” are all labeled as PERSON, and can be re-
stored as “Lady Gaga”.

4 Our Method

In contrast to existing work, our method jointly
conducts NER and NEN for multiple tweets. We
first give an overview of our method, then detail its
model and features.

4.1 Overview

Given a set of tweets as input, our method recog-
nizes predefined types of named entities and for each
entity outputs its unambiguous canonical form.

To resolve NER, we assign a label to each
word in a tweet, indicating both the boundary
and entity type. Following Ratinov and Roth
(2009), we use the BILOU schema. For ex-
ample, consider the tweet “· · ·without you is
like an iphone without apps; Lady gaga with-
out her telephone· · · ”, the labeled sequence us-
ing the BILOU schema is: “· · ·withoutO youO
isO likeO anO iphoneU−PRODUCT withoutO appsO;
LadyB−PERSON gagaL−PERSON withoutO herO
telephoneO· · · ” , where “iphoneU−PRODUCT ” indi-
cates that “iphone” is a product name of unit length;
“LadyB−PERSON ” means “Lady” is the beginning
of a person name while “gagaL−PERSON ” suggests
that “gaga” is the last token of a person name.

To resolve NEN, we assign a binary value label
zijmn to each pair of words tim and t

j
n which share the

same lemma. zijmn = 1 or -1, indicating whether tim
and tjn belong to two mentions of the same entity 5.
For example, consider the three tweets presented in
Section 3. “Gaga11”

6 and “Gaga13” will be assigned
a “1” label, since they are part of two mentions of the
same entity “Lady Gaga”; similarly, “Lady12” and
“Lady13” are connected with a “1” label. Note that
there are no NEN labels for pairs like “her11” and
“her12” or “with

1
1 and “with

1
2”, since words like “her”

and “with” are stop words.
With NE type and normalization labels obtained,

we judge two mentions, denoted by ti1···ikm and

5Stop words have no normalization labels. The stop words
are mainly from http://www.textfixer.com/resources/common-
english-words.txt.

6We use wim to denote word w’s ith appearance in the mth

tweet. For example, “Gaga11” denotes the first occurance of
“Gaga” in the first tweet.

529



tj1···jln , respectively, refer to the same entity if and
only if: 1) The two mentions share the same entity
type; 2) ti1···ikm is a sub-string of t

j1···jl
n or vise versa;

and 3) zijmn = 1, i = i1, · · · , ik and j = j1, · · · , jl,
if zijmn exists. Still take the three tweets presented
in Section 3 for example. Suppose “Gaga11” and
“Lady Gaga13” are labeled as PERSON, and there
is only one related NE normalization label, which
is associated with “‘Gaga11” and “Gaga

1
3” and has 1

as its value. We then consider that these two men-
tions can be normalized into the same entity; in a
similar way, we can align “Lady12 Gaaaaga” with
“Lady13 Gaga”. Combining these pieces informa-
tion together, we can infer that “‘Gaga11”, “Lady

1
2

Gaaaaga” and “Lady13 Gaga” are three mentions of
the same entity. Finally, we can select ‘Lady13 Gaga”
as the representative, and output ‘Lady Gaga” as
their canonical form. We choose the mention with
the maximum number of words as the representa-
tive. In case of a tie, we prefer the mention with an
Wikipedia entry 7.

The central problem with our method is infer-
ring all the NE type (y-serial) and normalization
(z-serial) variables. To achieve this, we construct
a factor graph according to the input tweets, which
can evaluate the probability of every possible assign-
ment of y-serials and z-serials, by checking the
characteristics of the assignment. Each character-
istic is called a feature. In this way, we can select
the assignment with the highest probability. Next
we will introduce our model in detail, including its
training and inference procedure and features.

4.2 Model
We adopt a factor graph as our model. One advan-
tage of our model is that it allows y-serials and
z-serials variables to interact with each other to
jointly optimize NER and NEN.

Given a set of tweets T = {tm}Nm=1, we can build
a factor graph G = (Y,Z, F,E), where: Y and Z
denote y-serials and z-serials variables, respec-
tively; F represents factor vertices, consisting of
{f im} and {f

ij
mn}, f im = f im(yi−1m , yim) and f

ij
mn =

f ijmn(yim, y
j
n, z

ij
mn); E stands for edges, which de-

pends on F , and consists of edges between yi−1m and
yim, and those between y

i
m,y

j
n and f

ij
mn.

7If it still ends up as a draw, we will randomly choose one
from the best.

G = (Y, Z, F, E) defines a probability distribu-
tion according to Formula 1.

ln P (Y, Z|G, T ) ∝
∑
m,i

ln f im(y
i−1
m , y

i
m)+∑

m,n,i,j

δijmn · ln f ijmn(yim, yjn, zijmn)
(1)

where δijmn = 1 if and only if tim and t
j
n have the

same lemma and are not stop words, otherwise zero.
A factor factorizes according to a set of features, so
that:

ln f im(y
i−1
m , y

i
m) =

∑
k

λ
(1)
k ϕ

(1)
k (y

i−1
m , y

i
m)

ln f ijmn(y
i
m, y

j
n, z

ij
mn) =

∑
k

λ
(2)
k ϕ

(2)
k (y

i
m, y

j
n, z

ij
mn)

(2)
{ϕ(1)k }

K1
k=1 and {ϕ

(2)
k }

K2
k=1 are two feature sets. Θ =

{λ(1)k }
K1
k=1

∪
{λ(2)k }

K2
k=1 is called the feature weight

set or parameter set of G. Each feature has a real
value as its weight.
Training Θ is learnt from annotated tweets T , by
maximizing the data likelihood, i.e.,

Θ∗ = arg max
Θ

lnP (Y,Z|Θ, T ) (3)

To solve this optimization problem, we first calcu-
late its gradient:

∂ ln P (Y, Z|T ; Θ)
∂λ1k

=
∑
m,i

ϕ
(1)
k (y

i−1
m , y

i
m)

−
∑
m,i

∑
yi−1m ,yim

p(yi−1m , y
i
m|T ; Θ)ϕ

(1)
k (y

i−1
m , y

i
m)

(4)

∂ ln P (Y, Z|T ; Θ)
∂λ2k

=
∑

m,n,i,j

δijmn · ϕ
(2)
k (y

i
m, y

j
n, z

ij
mn)

−
∑

m,n,i,j

δijmn
∑

yim,y
j
n,z

ij
mn

p(yim, y
j
n, z

ij
mn|T ; Θ)

·ϕ(2)k (y
i
m, y

j
n, z

ij
mn)
(5)

Here, the two marginal probabilities
p(yi−1m , y

i
m|T ; Θ) and p(yim, y

j
n, z

ij
mn|T ; Θ) are

computed using loopy belief propagation (Murphy
et al., 1999). Once we have computed the gradient,
Θ∗ can be worked out by standard techniques such
as steepest descent, conjugate gradient and the

530



limited-memory BFGS algorithm (L-BFGS). We
choose L-BFGS because it is particularly well suited
for optimization problems with a large number of
variables.
Inference Supposing the parameters Θ have been
set to Θ∗, the inference problem is: Given a set
of testing tweets T , output the most probable
assignment of Y and Z, i.e.,

(Y, Z)∗ = arg max
(Y,Z)

lnP (Y,Z|Θ∗, T ) (6)

We adopt the max-product algorithm to solve this
inference problem. The max-product algorithm is
nearly identical to the loopy belief propagation al-
gorithm, with the sums replaced by maxima in the
definitions. Note that in both the training and test-
ing stage, the factor graph is constructed in the same
way as described in Section 1.
Efficiency We take several actions to improve our
model’s efficiency. Firstly, we manually compile a
comprehensive named entity dictionary from vari-
ous sources including Wikipedia, Freebase 8, news
articles and the gazetteers shared by Ratinov and
Roth (2009). In total this dictionary contains 350
million entries 9. By looking up this dictionary 10,
we generate the possible BILOU labels, denoted by
Y im hereafter, for each word t

i
m. For instance, con-

sider “· · ·Good Morning new11 york11· · · ”. Suppose
“New York City” and “New York Times” are in
our dictionary, then “new11 york

1
1” is the matched

string with two corresponding entities. As a re-
sult, “B-LOCATION” and “B-ORGANIZATION”
will be added to Ynew11 , and “I-LOCATION” and
“I-ORGANIZATION” will be added to Yyork11 . If
Y im ̸= ∅, we enforce the constraint for training and
testing that yim ∈ Y im , to reduce the search space.

Secondly, in the testing phase, we introduce three
rules related to zijmn: 1) z

ij
mm = 1, which says two

words sharing the same lemma in the same tweet
denote the same entity; 2) set zijmn to 1, if the sim-
ilarity between tm and tn is above a threshold (0.8
in our work), or tm and tn share one hash tag; and
3)zmnij = −1, if the similarity between tm and
tn is below a threshold (0.3 in work). To compute

8http://freebase.com/view/military
9One phrase refereing to L entities has L entries.

10We use case-insensitive leftmost longest match.

the similarity, each tweet is represented as a bag-of-
words vector with the stop words removed, and the
cosine similarity is adopted, as defined in Formula
7. These rules pre-label a significant part of z-serial
variables (accounting for 22.5%), with an accuracy
of 93.5%.

sim(tm, tn) =
t⃗m · t⃗n
|⃗tm||⃗tn|

(7)

Note that in our experiments, these measures reduce
the training and testing time by 36.2% and 62.8%,
respectively, while no obvious performance drop is
observed.

4.3 Features
A feature in {ϕ(1)k }

K1
k=1 involves a pair of neighbor-

ing NE-type labels, i.e., yi−1m and y
i
m, while a fea-

ture in {ϕ(2)k }
K2
k=1 concerns a pair of distant NE-type

labels and its associated normalization label, i.e.,
yim,y

j
n and z

ij
mn. Details are given below.

4.3.1 Feature Set One: {ϕ(1)k }
K1
k=1

We adopts features similar to Wang (2009), and
Ratinov and Roth (2009), i.e., orthographic features,
lexical features and gazetteer-related features. These
features are defined on the observation. Combining
them with yi−1m and y

i
m constitutes {ϕ

(1)
k }

K1
k=1.

Orthographic features: Whether tim is capitalized
or upper case; whether it is alphanumeric or contains
any slashes; wether it is a stop word; word prefixes
and suffixes.
Lexical features: Lemma of tim, ti−1m and ti+1m ,
respectively; whether tim is an out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) word 11; POS of tim, t

i−1
m and t

i+1
m , respec-

tively; whether tim is a hash tag, a link, or a user
account.
Gazetteer-related features: Whether Y im is empty;
the dominating label/entity type in Y im. Which one
is dominant is decided by majority voting of the en-
tities in our dictionary. In case of a tie, we randomly
choose one from the best.

4.3.2 Feature Set Two: {ϕ(2)k }
K2
k=1

Similarly, we define orthographic, lexical features
and gazetteer-related features on the observation, yim

11We first conduct a simple dictionary-lookup based normal-
ization with the incorrect/correct word pair list provided by Han
et al. (2011) to correct common ill-formed words. Then we call
an online dictionary service to judge whether a word is OOV.

531



and yjn; and then we combine these features with
zijmn, forming {ϕ(2)k }

K2
k=1.

Orthographic features: Whether tim / t
j
n is capital-

ized or upper case; whether tim / t
j
n is alphanumeric

or contains any slashes; prefixes and suffixes of tim.
Lexical features: Lemma of tim; whether tim is
OOV; whether tim / t

i+1
m / t

i−1
m and t

j
n / t

j+1
n / t

j−1
n

have the same POS; whether yim and y
j
n have the

same label/entity type.
Gazetteer-related features: Whether Y im

∩
Y jn /

Y i+1m
∩

Y j+1n / Y i−1m
∩

Y j−1n is empty; whether the
dominating label/entity type in Y im is the same as
that in Y jn .

5 Experiments

We manually annotate a data set to evaluate our
method. We show that our method outperforms the
baseline, a cascaded system that conducts NER and
NEN individually.

5.1 Data Preparation

We use the data set provided by Liu et al. (2011),
which consists of 12,245 tweets with four types of
entities annotated: PERSON, LOCATION, ORGA-
NIZATION and PRODUCT. We enrich this data set
by adding entity normalization information. Two
annotators 12 are involved. For any entity mention,
two annotators independently annotate its canonical
form. The inter-rater agreement measured by kappa
is 0.72. Any inconsistent case is discussed by the
two annotators till a consensus is reached. 2, 245
tweets are used for development, and the remainder
are used for 5-fold cross validation.

5.2 Evaluation Metrics

We adopt the widely-used Precision, Recall and F1
to measure the performance of NER for a partic-
ular type of entity, and the average Precision, Re-
call and F1 to measure the overall performance of
NER (Liu et al., 2011; Ritter et al., 2011). As for
NEN, we adopt the widely-used Accuracy, i.e., to
what percentage the outputted canonical forms are
correct (Jijkoun et al., 2008; Cucerzan, 2007; Li et
al., 2002).

12Two native English speakers.

5.3 Baseline

We develop a cascaded system as the baseline,
which conducts NER and NEN sequentially. Its
NER module, denoted by SBR, is based on the state-
of-the-art method introduced by Liu et al. (2011);
and its NEN model , denoted by SBN , follows
the NEN system for user-generated news comments
proposed by Jijkoun et al. (2008), which uses
handcrafted rules to improve a typical NEN system
that normalizes surface forms to Wikipedia page ti-
tles. We use the POS tagger developed by Ritter et
al. (2011) to extract POS related features, and the
OpenNLP toolkit to get lemma related features.

5.4 Results

Tables 1- 2 show the overall performance of the
baseline and ours (denoted by SRN ). It can be
seen that, our method yields a significantly higher
F1 (with p < 0.01) than SBR, and a moderate im-
provement of accuracy as compared with SBN (with
p < 0.05). As a case study, we show that our system
successfully identified “jaxon11” as a PERSON in the
tweet “· · · come to see jaxon11 someday· · · ”, which
is mistakenly labeled as a LOCATION by SBR.
This is largely owing to the fact that our system
aligns “jaxon11” with “Jaxson

1
2” in the tweet “· · · I

love Jaxson12,Hes like my little brother· · · ”, in which
“Jaxson12” is identified as a PERSON. As a result,
this encourages our system to consider “jaxon11” as
a PERSON. We also find cases where our system
works but SBN fails. For example, “Goldman11”
in the tweet “· · ·Goldman sees massive upside risk
in oil prices· · · ” is normalized into “Albert Gold-
man” by SBR, because it is mistakenly identified as
a PERSON by SBS ; in contrast, our system recog-
nizes “Goldman12 Sachs” as an ORGANIZATION,
and successfully links ‘Goldman12” to “Goldman

1
1”,

resulting that “Goldman11” is identified as an ORGA-
NIZATION and normalized into “Goldman Sachs”.

Table 3 reports the NER performance of our
method for each entity type, from which we see that
our system consistently yields better F1 on all entity
types than SBR. We also see that our system boosts
the F1 for ORGANIZATION most significantly, re-
flecting the fact that a large number of organizations
that are incorrectly labeled as PERSON by SBR, are
now correctly recognized by our method.

532



System Pre Rec F1
SRN 84.7 82.5 83.6
SBR 81.6 78.8 80.2

Table 1: Overall performance (%) of NER.

System Accuracy
SRN 82.6
SBN 79.4

Table 2: Overall Accuracy (%) of NEN .

System PER PRO LOC ORG
SRN 84.2 80.5 82.1 85.2
SBR 83.9 78.7 81.3 79.8

Table 3: F1 (%) of NER on different entity types.

Features NER (F1) NEN (Accuracy)
Fo 59.2 61.3

Fo + Fl 65.8 68.7
Fo + Fg 80.1 77.2

Fo + Fl + Fg 83.6 82.6

Table 4: Overall F1 (%) of NER and Accuracy (%) of
NEN with different feature sets.

Table 4 shows the overall performance of our
method with various feature set combinations,
where Fo, Fl and Fg denote the orthographic fea-
tures, the lexical features, and the gazetteer-related
features, respectively. From Table 4 we see that
gazetteer-related features significantly boost the F1
for NER and Accuracy for NEN, suggesting the im-
portance of external knowledge for this task.

5.5 Discussion

One main error source for NER and NEN, which
accounts for more than half of all the errors, is
slang expressions and informal abbreviations. For
instance, our method recognizes “California11” in
the tweet “· · ·And Now, He Lives All The Way In
California11· · · ” as a LOCATION, however, it mis-
takenly identifies “Cali12” in the tweet “· · · i love
Cali so much· · · ” as a PERSON. One reason is our
system does not generate any z-serial variable for
“California11” and “Cali

1
2” since they have differ-

ent lemmas. A more complicated case is “BS11” in
the tweet “· · · I, bobby shaw, am gonna put BS11 on

everything· · · ”, in which “BS11” is the abbreviation
of “bobby shaw”. Our method fails to recognize
“BS11” as an entity. There are two possible ways to
fix these errors: 1) Extending the scope of z-serial
variables to each word pairs with a common prefix;
and 2) developing advanced normalization compo-
nents to restore such slang expressions and informal
abbreviations into their canonical forms.

Our method does not directly exploit Wikipedia
for NEN. This explains the cases where our system
correctly links multiple entity mentions but fails to
generate canonical forms. Take the following two
tweets for example: “· · · nitip link win711 sp1· · · ”
and “· · ·Hit the 3TB wall on SRT installing fresh
Win712· · · ”. Our system recognizes “win711” and
“Win712” as two mentions of the same product, but
cannot output their canonical forms “Windows 7”.
One possible solution is to exploit Wikipedia to
compile a dictionary consisting of entities and their
variations.

6 Conclusions and Future work

We study the task of NEN for tweets, a new genre
of texts that are short and prone to noise. Two chal-
lenges of this task are the dearth of information in
a single tweet and errors propagated from the NER
component. We propose jointly conducting NER
and NEN for multiple tweets using a factor graph, to
address these challenges. One unique characteristic
of our model is that a NE normalization variable is
introduced to indicate whether a word pair belongs
to the mentions of the same entity. We evaluate our
method on a manually annotated data set. Experi-
mental results show our method yields better F1 for
NER and Accuracy for NEN than the state-of-the-art
baseline that conducts two tasks sequentially.

In the future, we plan to explore two directions to
improve our method. First, we are going to develop
advanced tweet normalization technologies to re-
solve slang expressions and informal abbreviations.
Second, we are interested in incorporating knowl-
edge mined from Wikipedia into our factor graph.

Acknowledgments

We thank Yunbo Cao, Dongdong Zhang, and Mu Li
for helpful discussions, and the anonymous review-
ers for their valuable comments.

533



References
Laura Chiticariu, Rajasekar Krishnamurthy, Yunyao

Li, Frederick Reiss, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2010. Domain adaptation of rule-based annotators
for named-entity recognition tasks. In EMNLP, pages
1002–1012.

Aaron Cohen. 2005. Unsupervised gene/protein named
entity normalization using automatically extracted dic-
tionaries. In Proceedings of the ACL-ISMB Work-
shop on Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and
Databases: Mining Biological Semantics, pages 17–
24, Detroit, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Silviu Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity disam-
biguation based on wikipedia data. In In Proc. 2007
Joint Conference on EMNLP and CNLL, pages 708–
716.

Hong-Jie Dai, Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, and Wen-Lian
Hsu. 2011. Entity disambiguation using a markov-
logic network. In Proceedings of 5th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
pages 846–855, Chiang Mai, Thailand, November.
Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing.

Doug Downey, Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni.
2007. Locating Complex Named Entities in Web Text.
In IJCAI.

Oren Etzioni, Michael Cafarella, Doug Downey, Ana-
Maria Popescu, Tal Shaked, Stephen Soderland,
Daniel S. Weld, and Alexander Yates. 2005. Unsu-
pervised named-entity extraction from the web: an ex-
perimental study. Artif. Intell., 165(1):91–134.

Tim Finin, Will Murnane, Anand Karandikar, Nicholas
Keller, Justin Martineau, and Mark Dredze. 2010.
Annotating named entities in twitter data with crowd-
sourcing. In CSLDAMT, pages 80–88.

Jenny Rose Finkel and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
Nested named entity recognition. In EMNLP, pages
141–150.

Michel Galley. 2006. A skip-chain conditional random
field for ranking meeting utterances by importance.
In Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
364–372.

Bo Han and Timothy Baldwin. 2011. Lexical normalisa-
tion of short text messages: Makn sens a #twitter. In
ACL HLT.

Martin Jansche and Steven P. Abney. 2002. Informa-
tion extraction from voicemail transcripts. In EMNLP,
pages 320–327.

Valentin Jijkoun, Mahboob Alam Khalid, Maarten Marx,
and Maarten de Rijke. 2008. Named entity normal-
ization in user generated content. In Proceedings of
the second workshop on Analytics for noisy unstruc-
tured text data, AND ’08, pages 23–30, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Mahboob Khalid, Valentin Jijkoun, and Maarten de Ri-
jke. 2008. The impact of named entity normaliza-
tion on information retrieval for question answering.
In Craig Macdonald, Iadh Ounis, Vassilis Plachouras,
Ian Ruthven, and Ryen White, editors, Advances in In-
formation Retrieval, volume 4956 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 705–710. Springer Berlin /
Heidelberg.

George R. Krupka and Kevin Hausman. 1998. Isoquest:
Description of the netowlTM extractor system as used
in muc-7. In MUC-7.

Huifeng Li, Rohini K. Srihari, Cheng Niu, and Wei Li.
2002. Location normalization for information extrac-
tion. In COLING.

Xiaohua Liu, Shaodian Zhang, Furu Wei, and Ming
Zhou. 2011. Recognizing named entities in tweets.
In ACL.

Walid Magdy, Kareem Darwish, Ossama Emam, and
Hany Hassan. 2007. Arabic cross-document person
name normalization. In In CASL Workshop 07, pages
25–32.

Andrew Mccallum and Wei Li. 2003. Early results
for named entity recognition with conditional random
fields, feature induction and web-enhanced lexicons.
In HLT-NAACL, pages 188–191.

Einat Minkov, Richard C. Wang, and William W. Cohen.
2005. Extracting personal names from email: apply-
ing named entity recognition to informal text. In HLT,
pages 443–450.

Kevin P. Murphy, Yair Weiss, and Michael I. Jordan.
1999. Loopy belief propagation for approximate in-
ference: An empirical study. In In Proceedings of Un-
certainty in AI, pages 467–475.

David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A survey of
named entity recognition and classification. Linguisti-
cae Investigationes, 30:3–26.

Lev Ratinov and Dan Roth. 2009. Design challenges
and misconceptions in named entity recognition. In
CoNLL, pages 147–155.

Alan Ritter, Sam Clark, Mausam, and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Named entity recognition in tweets: An ex-
perimental study. In Proceedings of the 2011 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1524–1534, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sameer Singh, Dustin Hillard, and Chris Leggetter. 2010.
Minimally-supervised extraction of entities from text
advertisements. In HLT-NAACL, pages 73–81.

Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder. 2003. In-
troduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task: language-
independent named entity recognition. In HLT-
NAACL, pages 142–147.

534



Yefeng Wang. 2009. Annotating and recognising named
entities in clinical notes. In ACL-IJCNLP, pages 18–
26.

Kazuhiro Yoshida and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2007. Reranking
for biomedical named-entity recognition. In BioNLP,
pages 209–216.

535


