



















































Sequential Summarization: A New Application for Timely Updated Twitter Trending Topics


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 567–571,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sequential Summarization: A New Application for Timely Updated 

Twitter Trending Topics 

Dehong Gao, Wenjie Li, Renxian Zhang 

Department of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong 
{csdgao, cswjli, csrzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk 

 

Abstract 

The growth of the Web 2.0 technologies has 

led to an explosion of social networking 

media sites. Among them, Twitter is the most 

popular service by far due to its ease for real-

time sharing of information. It collects 

millions of tweets per day and monitors what 

people are talking about in the trending topics 

updated timely. Then the question is how 

users can understand a topic in a short time 

when they are frustrated with the 

overwhelming and unorganized tweets. In 

this paper, this problem is approached by 

sequential summarization which aims to 

produce a sequential summary, i.e., a series 

of chronologically ordered short sub-

summaries that collectively provide a full 

story about topic development. Both the 

number and the content of sub-summaries are 

automatically identified by the proposed 

stream-based and semantic-based approaches. 

These approaches are evaluated in terms of 

sequence coverage, sequence novelty and 

sequence correlation and the effectiveness of 

their combination is demonstrated.  

1 Introduction and Background 

Twitter, as a popular micro-blogging service, 

collects millions of real-time short text messages 

(known as tweets) every second. It acts as not 

only a public platform for posting trifles about 

users’ daily lives, but also a public reporter for 

real-time news. Twitter has shown its powerful 

ability in information delivery in many events, 

like the wildfires in San Diego and the 

earthquake in Japan. Nevertheless, the side effect 

is individual users usually sink deep under 

millions of flooding-in tweets. To alleviate this 

problem, the applications like whatthetrend 1 

have evolved from Twitter to provide services 

that encourage users to edit explanatory tweets 

about a trending topic, which can be regarded as 

topic summaries. It is to some extent a good way 

to help users understand trending topics. 

                                                           
1 whatthetrend.com 

There is also pioneering research in automatic 

Twitter trending topic summarization. (O'Connor 

et al., 2010) explained Twitter trending topics by 

providing a list of significant terms. Users could 

utilize these terms to drill down to the tweets 

which are related to the trending topics. (Sharifi 

et al., 2010) attempted to provide a one-line 

summary for each trending topic using phrase 

reinforcement ranking. The relevance model 

employed by (Harabagiu and Hickl, 2011) 

generated summaries in larger size, i.e., 250-

word summaries, by synthesizing multiple high 

rank tweets. (Duan et al., 2012) incorporate the 

user influence and content quality information in 

timeline tweet summarization and employ 

reinforcement graph to generate summaries for 

trending topics. 

Twitter summarization is an emerging 

research area. Current approaches still followed 

the traditional summarization route and mainly 

focused on mining tweets of both significance 

and representativeness. Though, the summaries 

generated in such a way can sketch the most 

important aspects of the topic, they are incapable 

of providing full descriptions of the changes of 

the focus of a topic, and the temporal information 

or freshness of the tweets, especially for those 

newsworthy trending topics, like earthquake and 

sports meeting. As the main information 

producer in Twitter, the massive crowd keeps 

close pace with the development of trending 

topics and provide the timely updated 

information. The information dynamics and 

timeliness is an important consideration for 

Twitter summarization. That is why we propose 

sequential summarization in this work, which 

aims to produce sequential summaries to capture 

the temporal changes of mass focus. 

Our work resembles update summarization 

promoted by TAC 2  which required creating 

summaries with new information assuming the 

reader has already read some previous 

documents under the same topic. Given two 

chronologically ordered documents sets about a 

topic, the systems were asked to generate two 

                                                           
2 www.nist.gov/tac 

567



summaries, and the second one should inform the 

user of new information only. In order to achieve 

this goal, existing approaches mainly emphasized 

the novelty of the subsequent summary (Li and 

Croft, 2006; Varma et al., 2009; Steinberger and 

Jezek, 2009). Different from update 

summarization, we focus more on the temporal 

change of trending topics. In particular, we need 

to automatically detect the “update points” 

among a myriad of related tweets.  

It is the goal of this paper to set up a new 

practical summarization application tailored for 

timely updated Twitter messages. With the aim 

of providing a full description of the focus 

changes and the records of the timeline of a 

trending topic, the systems are expected to 

discover the chronologically ordered sets of 

information by themselves and they are free to 

generate any number of update summaries 

according to the actual situations instead of a 

fixed number of summaries as specified in 

DUC/TAC. Our main contributions include 

novel approaches to sequential summarization 

and corresponding evaluation criteria for this 

new application. All of them will be detailed in 

the following sections. 

2 Sequential Summarization 

Sequential summarization proposed here aims to 

generate a series of chronologically ordered sub-

summaries for a given Twitter trending topic. 

Each sub-summary is supposed to represent one 

main subtopic or one main aspect of the topic, 

while a sequential summary, made up by the sub-

summaries, should retain the order the 

information is delivered to the public. In such a 

way, the sequential summary is able to provide a 

general picture of the entire topic development. 

2.1 Subtopic Segmentation 

One of the keys to sequential summarization is 

subtopic segmentation. How many subtopics 

have attracted the public attention, what are they, 

and how are they developed? It is important to 

provide the valuable and organized materials for 

more fine-grained summarization approaches. 

We proposed the following two approaches to 

automatically detect and chronologically order 

the subtopics. 

2.1.1 Stream-based Subtopic Detection and 
Ordering 

Typically when a subtopic is popular enough, it 

will create a certain level of surge in the tweet 

stream. In other words, every surge in the tweet 

stream can be regarded as an indicator of the 

appearance of a subtopic that is worthy of being 

summarized. Our early investigation provides 

evidence to support this assumption. By 

examining the correlations between tweet content 

changes and volume changes in randomly 

selected topics, we have observed that the 

changes in tweet volume can really provide the 

clues of topic development or changes of crowd 

focus.  

The stream-based subtopic detection approach 

employs the offline peak area detection (Opad) 

algorithm (Shamma et al., 2010) to locate such 

surges by tracing tweet volume changes. It 

regards the collection of tweets at each such 

surge time range as a new subtopic.  

Offline Peak Area Detection (Opad) Algorithm 

1: Input: TS (tweets stream, each twi with timestamp ti); 

peak interval window ∆𝑡 (in hour), and time 
stepℎ (ℎ ≪  ∆𝑡); 

2: Output: Peak Areas PA. 

3: Initial: two time slots: 𝑇′ = 𝑇 = 𝑡0 + ∆𝑡;  
Tweet numbers: 𝑁′ = 𝑁 = 𝑪𝒐𝒖𝒏𝒕(𝑇) 

4: while (𝑡𝑠 = 𝑇 + ℎ) < 𝑡𝑛−1 
5:      update 𝑇′ = 𝑡𝑠 + ∆𝑡 and 𝑁

′ = 𝑪𝒐𝒖𝒏𝒕(𝑇′) 
6:      if (𝑁′ < 𝑁 And up-hilling)  
7: output one peak area 𝑝𝑎𝑇  
8: state of down-hilling 

9:      else  

10: update 𝑇 = 𝑇′ and 𝑁 =  𝑁′ 
11: state of up-hilling 

12: 

13: function 𝑪𝒐𝒖𝒏𝒕(𝑇) 
14: Count tweets in time interval T 

The subtopics detected by the Opad algorithm 

are naturally ordered in the timeline. 

2.1.2 Semantic-based Subtopic Detection and 
Ordering 

Basically the stream-based approach monitors 

the changes of the level of user attention. It is 

easy to implement and intuitively works, but it 

fails to handle the cases where the posts about 

the same subtopic are received at different time 

ranges due to the difference of geographical and 

time zones. This may make some subtopics 

scattered into several time slots (peak areas) or 

one peak area mixed with more than one 

subtopic. 

In order to sequentially segment the subtopics 

from the semantic aspect, the semantic-based 

subtopic detection approach breaks the time 

order of tweet stream, and regards each tweet as 

an individual short document. It takes advantage 

of Dynamic Topic Modeling (David and Michael, 

2006) to explore the tweet content.  

568



DTM in nature is a clustering approach which 

can dynamically generate the subtopic 

underlying the topic. Any clustering approach 

requires a pre-specified cluster number. To avoid 

tuning the cluster number experimentally, the 

subtopic number required by the semantic-based 

approach is either calculated according to 

heuristics or determined by the number of the 

peak areas detected from the stream-based 

approach in this work. 

Unlike the stream-based approach, the 

subtopics formed by DTM are the sets of 

distributions of subtopic and word probabilities. 

They are time independent. Thus, the temporal 

order among these subtopics is not obvious and 

needs to be discovered. We use the probabilistic 

relationships between tweets and topics learned 

from DTM to assign each tweet to a subtopic that 

it most likely belongs to. Then the subtopics are 

ordered temporally according to the mean values 

of their tweets’ timestamps. 

2.2 Sequential Summary Generation 

Once the subtopics are detected and ordered, the 

tweets belonging to each subtopic are ranked and 

the most significant one is extracted to generate 

the sub-summary regarding that subtopic. Two 

different ranking strategies are adopted to 

conform to two different subtopic detection 

mechanisms. 

For a tweet in a peak area, the linear 

combination of two measures is considered to 

evaluate its significance to be a sub-summary: (1) 

subtopic representativeness measured by the 

cosine similarity between the tweet and the 

centroid of all the tweets in the same peak area; 

(2) crowding endorsement measured by the times 

that the tweet is re-tweeted normalized by the 

total number of re-tweeting. With the DTM 

model, the significance of the tweets is evaluated 

directly by word distribution per subtopic.  

MMR (Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998) is used 

to reduce redundancy in sub-summary generation.  

3 Experiments and Evaluations 

The experiments are conducted on the 24 Twitter 

trending topics collected using Twitter APIs 3 . 

The statistics are shown in Table 1. 

Due to the shortage of gold-standard 

sequential summaries, we invite two annotators 

to read the chronologically ordered tweets, and 

write a series of sub-summaries for each topic 

                                                           
3https://dev.twitter.com/ 

independently. Each sub-summary is up to 140 

characters in length to comply with the limit of 

tweet, but the annotators are free to choose the 

number of sub-summaries. It ends up with 6.3 

and 4.8 sub-summaries on average in a 

sequential summary written by the two 

annotators respectively. These two sets of 

sequential summaries are regarded as reference 

summaries to evaluate system-generated 

summaries from the following three aspects. 

 

Category #TT 
Trending Topic 

Examples 

Tweets 

Number 

News 6 
Minsk, Libya 

Release 
25145 

Sports 6 
#bbcf1, 

Lakers/Heat 
17204 

Technology 5 Google Fiber 13281 

Science 2 AH1N1, Richter 10935 

Entertainment 2 Midnight Club, 6573 

Meme 2 
#ilovemyfans, 

Night Angels 
14595 

Lifestyle 1 Goose Island 6230 

Total 24 ------------ 93963 

Table 1. Data Set 

 Sequence Coverage 

Sequence coverage measures the N-gram match 

between system-generated summaries and 

human-written summaries (stopword removed 

first). Considering temporal information is an 

important factor in sequential summaries, we 

propose the position-aware coverage measure by 

accommodating the position information in 

matching. Let S={s1, s2, …, sk} denote a 

sequential summary and si the ith sub-summary, 

N-gram coverage is defined as: 
𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒

=
1

|𝑆𝑠𝑔|
∑

∑ ∑ 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑁-𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚)𝑁-𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚∈𝑠𝑖,𝑠𝑗𝑠𝑗∈𝑆ℎ𝑤
𝜔𝑖𝑗 ∙ ∑ ∑ 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑁-𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚)𝑁-𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚∈𝑠𝑗𝑠𝑗∈𝑆ℎ𝑤𝑠𝑖∈𝑆𝑠𝑔

 

where,  𝜔𝑖𝑗 = |𝑗 − 𝑖| + 1, i and j denote the serial 

numbers of the sub-summaries in the system-

generated summary 𝑆𝑠𝑔  and the human-written 

summary 𝑆ℎ𝑤 , respectively. 𝜔  serves as a 
coefficient to discount long-distance matched 

sub-summaries. We evaluate unigram, bigram, 

and skipped bigram matches. Like in ROUGE 

(Lin, 2004), the skip distance is up to four words. 

 Sequence Novelty 

Sequence novelty evaluates the average novelty 

of two successive sub-summaries. Information 

content (IC) has been used to measure the 

novelty of update summaries by (Aggarwal et al., 

2009). In this paper, the novelty of a system-

569



generated sequential summary is defined as the 

average of IC increments of two adjacent sub-

summaries,  

𝑁𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑡𝑦 =
1

|𝑆| − 1
∑(𝐼𝐶𝑠𝑖 − 𝐼𝐶𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑖−1)

𝑖>1

 

where |𝑆| is the number of sub-summaries in the 

sequential summary. 𝐼𝐶𝑠𝑖 = ∑ 𝐼𝐶𝑤𝑤∈𝑠𝑖 . 𝐼𝐶𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑖−1 =

∑ 𝐼𝐶𝑤𝑤∈𝑠𝑖∩𝑠𝑖−1  is the overlapped information in the 

two adjacent sub-summaries. 𝐼𝐶𝑤 = 𝐼𝑇𝐹𝑤  ×

𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝑤, 𝑊𝑇𝑤) where w is a word, 𝐼𝑇𝐹𝑤 is the 

inverse tweet frequency of w, and 𝑊𝑇𝑤 is all the 

tweets in the trending topic. The relevance 

function is introduced to ensure that the 

information brought by new sub-summaries is 

not only novel but also related to the topic.  

 Sequence Correlation 

Sequence correlation evaluates the sequential 

matching degree between system-generated and 

human-written summaries. In statistics, 

Kendall’s tau coefficient is often used to measure 

the association between two sequences (Lapata, 

2006). The basic idea is to count the concordant 

and discordant pairs which contain the same 

elements in two sequences. Borrowing this idea, 

for each sub-summary in a human-generated 

summary, we find its most matched sub-

summary (judged by the cosine similarity 

measure) in the corresponding system-generated 

summary and then define the correlation 

according to the concordance between the two 

matched sub-summary sequences. 
𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

=
2(|#𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟𝑠| − |#𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟𝑠|)

𝑛(𝑛 − 1)
 

where n is the number of human-written sub-

summaries.  

Tables 2 and 3 below present the evaluation 

results. For the stream-based approach, we set 

∆t=3 hours experimentally. For the semantic-

based approach, we compare three different 

approaches to defining the sub-topic number K: 

(1) Semantic-based 1: Following the approach 

proposed in (Li et al., 2007), we first derive the 

matrix of tweet cosine similarity. Given the 1-

norm of eigenvalues  𝜆𝑖
𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 (𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝑛) of the 

similarity matrix and the ratios 𝛾𝑖 =  𝜆𝑖
𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚/𝜆2 , 

the subtopic number 𝐾 = 𝑖 + 1  if 𝛾𝑖 − 𝛾𝑖+1 > 𝛿 

(𝛿 = 0.4 ). (2) Semantic-based 2: Using the rule 

of thumb in (Wan and Yang, 2008), 𝐾 = √𝑛 , 

where n is the tweet number. (3) Combined: K is 

defined as the number of the peak areas detected 

from the Opad algorithm, meanwhile we use the 

tweets within peak areas as the tweets of DTM. 

This is our new idea. 

The experiments confirm the superiority of the 

semantic-based approach over the stream-based 

approach in summary content coverage and 

novelty evaluations, showing that the former is 

better at subtopic content modeling. The sub-

summaries generated by the stream-based 

approach have comparative sequence (i.e., order) 

correlation with the human summaries. 

Combining the advantages the two approaches 

leads to the best overall results.  

 

Coverage Unigram  Bigram  
Skipped 

Bigram 

Stream-

based(∆t=3) 
0.3022 0.1567 0.1523 

Semantic-

based1(δ=0.5) 
0.3507 0.1684 0.1866 

Semantic-based 2 0.3112 0.1348 0.1267 

Combined(∆t=3) 0.3532 0.1699 0.1791 

Table 2. N-Gram Coverage Evaluation 

Approaches Novelty Correlation 

Stream-based (∆t=3) 0.3798 0.3330 

Semantic-based 1 (δ=0.4) 0.7163 0.3746 

Semantic-based 2 0.7017 0.3295 

Combined (∆t=3) 0.7793 0.3986 

Table 3. Novelty and Correlation Evaluation 

4 Concluding Remarks 

We start a new application for Twitter trending 

topics, i.e., sequential summarization, to reveal 

the developing scenario of the trending topics 

while retaining the order of information 

presentation. We develop several solutions to 

automatically detect, segment and order 

subtopics temporally, and extract the most 

significant tweets into the sub-summaries to 

compose sequential summaries. Empirically, the 

combination of the stream-based approach and 

the semantic-based approach leads to sequential 

summaries with high coverage, low redundancy, 

and good order. 

Acknowledgments 

The work described in this paper is supported by 

a Hong Kong RGC project (PolyU No. 5202/12E) 

and a National Nature Science Foundation of 

China (NSFC No. 61272291). 

References  

Aggarwal Gaurav, Sumbaly Roshan and Sinha Shakti. 

2009. Update Summarization. Stanford: CS224N 

Final Projects. 

570



Blei M. David and Jordan I. Michael. 2006. Dynamic 

topic models. In Proceedings of the 23rd 

international conference on Machine learning, 113-

120.  Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

Carbonell Jaime and Goldstein Jade. 1998. The use of 

MMR, diversity based reranking for reordering 

documents and producing summaries. In 

Proceedings of the 21st Annual International 

Conference on Research and Development in 

Information Retrieval, 335-336. Melbourne, 

Australia. 

Duan Yajuan, Chen Zhimin, Wei Furu, Zhou Ming 

and Heung-Yeung Shum. 2012. Twitter Topic 

Summarization by Ranking Tweets using Social                

Influence and Content Quality. In Proceedings of 

the 24th International Conference on Computational 

Linguistics, 763-780. Mumbai, India. 

Harabagiu Sanda and Hickl Andrew. 2011. Relevance 

Modeling for Microblog Summarization. In 

Proceedings of 5th International AAAI Conference 

on Weblogs and Social Media. Barcelona, Spain. 

Lapata Mirella. 2006. Automatic evaluation of 

information ordering: Kendall’s tau. Computational 

Linguistics, 32(4):1-14.  

Li Wenyuan, Ng Wee-Keong, Liu Ying and Ong 

Kok-Leong. 2007. Enhancing the Effectiveness of 

Clustering with Spectra Analysis. IEEE 

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 

19(7):887-902. 

Li Xiaoyan and Croft W. Bruce. 2006. Improving 

novelty detection for general topics using sentence 

level information patterns. In Proceedings of the 

15th ACM International Conference on Information 

and Knowledge Management, 238-247. New York, 

USA. 

Lin Chin-Yew. 2004. ROUGE: a Package for 

Automatic Evaluation of Summaries. In 

Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Text 

Summarization Branches Out, 74-81. Barcelona, 

Spain. 

Liu Fei, Liu Yang and Weng Fuliang. 2011. Why is 

“SXSW ” trending? Exploring Multiple Text 

Sources for Twitter Topic Summarization. In 

Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Language in 

Social Media, 66-75. Portland, Oregon. 

O'Connor Brendan, Krieger Michel and Ahn David. 

2010. TweetMotif: Exploratory Search and Topic 

Summarization for Twitter. In Proceedings of the 

4th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs 

and Social Media, 384-385. Atlanta, Georgia. 

Shamma A. David, Kennedy Lyndon and Churchill F. 

Elizabeth. 2010. Tweetgeist: Can the Twitter 

Timeline Reveal the Structure of Broadcast Events? 

In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on 

Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 589-593. 

Savannah, Georgia, USA. 

Sharifi Beaux, Hutton Mark-Anthony and Kalita Jugal. 

2010. Summarizing Microblogs Automatically. In 

Human Language Technologies: the 2010 Annual 

Conference of the North American Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics, 685-

688. Los Angeles, California. 

Steinberger Josef and Jezek Karel. 2009. Update 

summarization based on novel topic distribution. In 

Proceedings of the 9th ACM Symposium on 

Document Engineering, 205-213. Munich, 

Germany. 

Varma Vasudeva, Bharat Vijay, Kovelamudi Sudheer, 

Praveen Bysani, Kumar K. N, Kranthi Reddy, 

Karuna Kumar and Nitin Maganti. 2009. IIIT 

Hyderabad at TAC 2009. In Proceedings of the 

2009 Text Analysis Conference. GaithsBurg, 

Maryland. 

Wan Xiaojun and Yang Jianjun. 2008. Multi-

document summarization using cluster-based link 

analysis. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual 

International Conference on Research and 

Development in Information Retrieval, 299-306. 

Singapore, Singapore. 

 

571


