



















































Patient Experience in Online Support Forums: Modeling Interpersonal Interactions and Medication Use


Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop, pages 16–22,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

 Patient Experience in Online Support Forums:  
Modeling Interpersonal Interactions and Medication Use 

Annie T. Chen 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
School of Information and Library Science 

atchen@email.unc.edu 
 

  

Abstract 

Though there has been substantial research 
concerning the extraction of information from 
clinical notes, to date there has been less work 
concerning the extraction of useful infor-
mation from patient-generated content. Using 
a dataset comprised of online support group 
discussion content, this paper investigates two 
dimensions that may be important in the ex-
traction of patient-generated experiences from 
text; significant individuals/groups and medi-
cation use.  With regard to the former, the pa-
per describes an approach involving the pair-
ing of important figures (e.g. family, hus-
bands, doctors, etc.) and affect, and suggests 
possible applications of such techniques to re-
search concerning online social support, as 
well as integration into search interfaces for 
patients.  Additionally, the paper demonstrates 
the extraction of side effects and sentiment at 
different phases in patient medication use, e.g. 
adoption, current use, discontinuation and 
switching, and demonstrates the utility of such 
an application for drug safety monitoring in 
online discussion forums. 

1 Introduction 
Online support groups are a rich source of infor-
mation concerning patient experiences, but they 
are far different from clinical content.  Instead of 
“The patient presents with…” and “denies vomit-
ing,” patients may speak of their “doc” and 
“rheumy.”  There may be utterances like “LOL” 
(laugh out loud) and “Hugs.”  Patients may raise 
issues that they may be reticent to speak with 
health care practitioners about, day-to-day condi-
tion management issues, or personal strategies 
that they have for taking medicine. 
   In recent years, it has been observed that pa-
tients may be a valuable source of expertise to 
other patients, and that they provide information 
that is different from the expertise of clinicians 
(Civan & Pratt, 2007; Hartzler & Pratt, 2011).  
This may include: action strategies, recommend-

ed knowledge, suggested approaches, and infor-
mation resources for dealing with problems.  
This content can be extremely valuable to clini-
cians and patients alike; however, to date most 
interfaces for patient-generated content offer few 
features tailored to the unique nature of the con-
tent in these support forums.  

Thus, the objective of the current paper was to 
explore techniques for extracting and visualizing 
dimensions of patient experience.  For this pre-
liminary work, two specific dimensions were 
selected: interpersonal interactions and medica-
tion use.   

Interpersonal interactions are an important di-
mension to consider because others have such a 
profound impact on patient experience.  For ex-
ample, social support from family, friends and 
even practitioners can be invaluable to patients; 
and understanding, (or the lack of it), from prac-
titioners and other people in one’s life can be 
enormously difficult for people, especially those 
dealing with a stigmatized condition such as fi-
bromyalgia (Barker, 2008).  Thus, automatic 
identification of patient experiences with others, 
e.g. family, husband, wife, son, daughter, doctor, 
etc., and ways of highlighting similar types of 
experiences across patients, might serve various 
uses.  Scientists could use this to study social 
support, physician-patient communication and 
other types of interpersonal interactions.  Inte-
grated into a search interface, patients could 
search for others with similar experiences, and 
see if there are strategies that they could use to 
address their own problem. 

Medication use is another important dimen-
sion of patient experience.  There has also been 
an increased interest in the use of online discus-
sion content to predict adverse events and moni-
tor off-label prescription practices (e.g. Wang et 
al., 2011; Leaman et al., 2010; Chee et al., 2011).  
This work differs from previous literature in that 
the method identifies and visually contextualizes 
patient medication experiences, particularly in 
terms of stages of use and affect.   

16



2 Background 
This work draws primarily upon two streams of 
literature: automated analyses of health-related 
discussion content, and extraction of medication-
related information from text.  With regard to the 
former, a large number of studies have employed 
the software, Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count 
(LIWC), to compare emotional expression in 
communities or associations between emotional 
expression and health outcomes (e.g. Siriaraya et 
al., 2011; Han et al., 2008).   
 Other studies of online support groups have 
focused on social support.  Wang, Kraut and 
Levine (2012) used machine learning with fea-
tures generated using LIWC and Latent Dirichlet 
Allocation to investigate whether different types 
and amounts of social support are associated 
with length of membership.  Namkoong et al. 
(2010) examined the effects of exchanging 
treatment information within computer-mediated 
breast cancer support groups on emotional well-
being.  Treatment information exchange was as-
sessed using InfoTrend, a software program that 
employs a rule-based system for computer-aided 
coding of key ideas. 
 The task of extraction of medication-related 
information has often been explored in past liter-
ature.  For example, the 2009 i2b2 medication 
challenge focused on the extraction of medica-
tion-related information from discharge summar-
ies including: medication name, dosage, mode, 
frequency, duration and reason (Spasic et al., 
2010).  This study differs from previous work in 
that, the focus is not on the time of day or the 
frequency of medication use, but rather, the stage 
in the adoption/discontinuation of a medication 
an individual is at. 

3 Method 
Discussion content was downloaded through a 
series of focused crawls of a health-related social 
networking site (SNS), DailyStrength 
(http://www.dailystrength.org).  The 
content from the corpus encompasses a span of 
time of approximately 3.5 years, from the site’s 
inception in 2006, to early 2010.  
 Text pre-processing was done to strip code 
and extract post metadata.  The text was parsed 
and tagged using the Stanford Parts-of-Speech 
Tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003).  An affective 
lexicon, WordNet-Affect was used to identify 
words with emotional content in the text (Strap-
parava & Valitutti, 2004).  There are many spe-
cialized resources that could be used to extract 

medical terminology.  However, forum partici-
pants wrote in ways that often departed from 
medical terminology; thus, it was decided that 
manually constructed lexicons of medication 
names, side effects and people would be more 
effective. 

4 Results 
The results are reported in three parts: descrip-
tive statistics for the corpus, interaction with oth-
ers and medication information. 

4.1 Corpus 
The corpus is comprised of discussion posts for 
three conditions.  Since the first part of this study 
examines interpersonal interactions, three condi-
tions were selected in which key support interac-
tions and level of affect were expected to differ.   

 
Unit/Con
dition 

Breast 
cancer 

Type 1 
diabetes 

Fibrom-
yalgia 

Threads 614 514 763 
Posts 2,847 3,259 6,095 
Tokens 366,121 389,392 541,233 
Types  18,181 18,755 25,942 
 

Table 1: Corpus Statistics 

4.2 Modeling Interpersonal Interactions 
This work first addresses the challenge of model-
ing interpersonal interactions.  There are two 
methods of visualization that are explored: the 
coupling of people and affect, and that of people 
and actions. 

The first step in the pairing of people and af-
fect, was to identify and estimate rates of occur-
rence of important figures appearing in the text 
such as: family, husband, wife, mother, friend, 
and doctor.  In order to extract these relations, 
the researcher manually compiled a list of terms 
indicating such relations through review of social 
support literature pertaining to the focal condi-
tions and manual analysis of the text.  Alterna-
tive names such as “hubby” for husband, “doc” 
and “dr” for doctor, and “rheumy” for rheuma-
tologist, were included. Many of the instances of 
the word “family” appeared were references to 
family doctors or family history; these references 
were excluded from the estimates (Table 2). 

These results show that certain types of indi-
viduals tend to appear in forum conversations for 
certain conditions over others: mothers, family 
and friends in breast cancer; sons, daughters, and 
“people” in Type 1 diabetes; and doctors in fi-

17



bromyalgia.  As can be seen, many posts do not 
include references to other people, but rather, 
focus on other areas such as patients’ own expe-
riences.  

 
Term Breast 

cancer 
Diabetes Fibromyal-

gia 
Family 5.09 3.95 1.75 
Husband 4.03 3.4 3.02 
Wife 0.57 0.92 0.41 
Mother 8.62 3.86 1.54 
Son 1 3.86 0.61 
Daughter 2.23 4.8 1 
Friend 3.13 2.23 1.85 
Doctor 13.28 13.49 16.42 
People 8.42 13.37 8.96 

 
Table 2: Percent of Posts Mentioning Important Roles 

 
 Next, the degree of affect expressed in prox-

imity with these roles was investigated.  Various 
sentiment lexicons are available, e.g. Senti-
WordNet, WordNet-Affect and the LIWC lexi-
con. Many lexicons classify words as positive or 
negative or by a limited set of emotions; howev-
er, with complex issues like health and interper-
sonal interactions, there may be multiple dimen-
sions.  WordNet-Affect was selected for its di-
verse set of emotion categories.  Following a re-
view of emotion research and preliminary con-
tent analysis of the corpus, seven emotions were 
selected on the basis of frequency and relevance 
to the conditions (Table 3). 

 
Emotion Example 
Anger I'm happy but also mad cuz I've 

been suffering and no doctor both-
ered to tell me about this. 

Fear I have the prescription right here 
and afraid to try it. 

Frustration It is extremely discouraging to 
hear that repeatedly... 

Sadness It's sad that I am so excited about 
getting some sleep. 

Anxiety You may be worrying over noth-
ing. 

Happiness I'm so happy Lyrica is working for 
you. 

Hope I really hope this works for you. 
 

Table 3: Examples of Emotional Expression 
 

The percentage of posts expressing various af-
fect types was calculated (Table 4).  Across all 
conditions, fear and hope were most common.  

The highest proportion of fear, happiness and 
hope were seen in the breast cancer forum.  
Though anger and frustration were not as com-
mon as other emotions, higher levels of these 
emotions in diabetes are perhaps worthy of note.  

 
Emotion Breast 

cancer 
Diabetes Fibromyal-

gia 
Hope 15.55 12.2 13.36 
Anger 1.5 2.82 1.38 

Frustration 0.78 3.49 1.75 
Fear 16.05 11.11 6.32 

Happiness 10.31 6.41 5.98 
Sadness 10.26 9.91 8.21 
Anxiety 9.85 8.29 4.81 

 
Table 4: Percentage of Posts Expressing Emotions 
 
Radar graphs illustrating the extent of emo-

tional expression for the various roles were gen-
erated to facilitate comparison (Fig. 1).  The light 
blue line, representing “doctor,” is the innermost 
ring in all cases, demonstrating that emotional 
expression occurs least often in posts that men-
tion doctors.  Posts mentioning family (dark blue 
lines) were generally associated with higher de-
grees of emotional expression.  Moreover, it is 
interesting that the patterns of emotional expres-
sion are quite different across conditions.  

This paper also explores the visualization of 
discussion content by combining important fig-
ures and their actions.  For this preliminary work, 
this action was undertaken with the fibromyalgia 
forum.  The approach taken here was to extract 
high frequency verbs co-occurring in the same 
sentence with the target role.  High frequency 
verbs that co-occurred with “doctor” included: 
“said,” “told,” “gave,” “prescribed,” “started,” 
and “diagnosed.”  The verb “asked” also oc-
curred frequently because forum participants of-
ten discussed or suggested questions to ask of 
doctors.  Arranging person-verb pairings together 
in an interface could be a convenient way to ac-
quire a sense of what patients are being told, and 
what medications doctors are prescribing.  One 
might even add additional search constraints.  
For example, with regard to patient experiences 
with doctors prescribing Lyrica, the system 
might retrieve: “Recently my doctor put me on 
Lyrica which did help but had me…,” “My doc-
tor gave me a ‘taper down’ schedule,” “My doc-
tor prescribed Lyrica which I refused to take.”  
Patients could use such a system to acquire a 
sense of the range of experiences that others have 
had with the drug. 

18



 

 
 
Figure 1: Percent of Posts Containing Affect for Breast Cancer (left), Diabetes (center), and Fibromyalgia (right) 
 
 

4.3 Modeling Medication Use 
Extant literature has found that though some 
categories of discussion content, e.g. self-
introductions, research results and study in-
vites, are common across conditions, other 
types of discussion content differ, e.g., breast 
cancer discussion more commonly focuses on 
treatments, and fibromyalgia discussions tend 
to focus more on medications (Chen, 2012). 
Thus, in this study, the researcher selected fi-
bromyalgia as a case study for modeling dis-
cussion or comments about medication use. 

The researcher created a lexicon of drug 
names for use in this study, drawn from a re-
view of fibromyalgia literature and information 
resources, as well as manual review of corpus 
content.  The most common medications are 
listed in Table 3. 

 
Medication Name # Posts % Posts 
Lyrica 670 11.36 
Cymbalta 329 5.58 
Savella 215 3.65 
Neurontin 175 2.97 
Tramadol 137 2.32 
Ultram 79 1.34 
 

Table 5: Common Medications 
 
In order to model temporal differences in 

patient experience with medications, this study 
implemented a rule-based system for extrac-
tion at five phases in the adoption and use of a 
medication: adoption, current use, transition, 
switching, and discontinuation (Table 4).  
Adoption referred to when an individual began 
taking a medication.  Current use referred to 
the period in which a person is taking a medi-

cation, and has no plans (that he or she reveals 
at least) to discontinue it.  If an individual said 
that they first had a certain kind of experience 
with a medication, but that later on it changed, 
this was referred to as “transition.”  Discontin-
uation referred to when an individual stopped 
using one medication, and switching to when 
an individual changed from using one medica-
tion to another.  Information such as whether 
side effects were temporary, withdrawal symp-
toms and interactions/contraindications was 
also extracted.  These rules were implemented 
at the sentence level to prevent misattributions 
of side effects when multiple medications are 
mentioned in the same post.   

 
Phase Rule 
Start “start”, “began” 
Current Use “I take”, “is working”, 

“currently”, “been on” 
etc. 

Transition (A & B) A: “initially”, “at first”, 
“in the beginning”  

B: “after”, “but”, “then” 
Switching Fulfills both start and 

stop criterion or con-
tains “switch”. 

Discontinuation “stop”, “off” or “quit” 
 
Table 6: Medication Phase Extraction Rules 

 
Using an interface designed for this study, 

the researcher investigated the reporting of 
side effects during each phase.  Though the 
most common side effects for a drug were 
generally reported in multiple phases, certain 
side effects were reported in a given phase but 
not another.  The last column, “no stage,” de-
picts posts that did not contain explicit refer-
ences to a specific phase of medication use. 

19



 
 

Figure 2: Mentions of Side Effects for Lyrica, Dis-
tinguished by Phase 

 
Figure 2 shows that, for Lyrica, the predom-

inant symptom that was reported by patients 
was weight gain, which appeared in almost all 
phases. Those who took Savella reported 
symptoms such as nausea, high blood pressure 
and dizziness, but there were also a number of 
reports that these disappear over time (Fig. 3). 
 

  
 

Figure 3: Mentions of Side Effects for Savella, Dis-
tinguished by Phase 

 
Another important aspect of patients’ expe-

rience with certain medications is their attitude 
towards it. In the previous section, the focus 
was on emotions because they are important 
for understanding interpersonal interaction.  In 
the case of medications, rather than tracking 
the appearance of emotion, it may be useful to 
consider positive/negative polarity, whether 
the medication works or not, and side effects. 

Thus, in addition to side effects, sentences 
with positive and negative sentiment were ex-
tracted using WordNet-Affect.  Words from 
the “happiness” and “hope” categories of 
Word-Net Affect were used for positive senti-
ment, and the “fear,” “anger” and “sadness” 
categories of WordNet-Affect were used for 

negative sentiment.  A lexicon constructed by 
examining the corpus supplemented the words 
from WordNet-Affect. 

A rule-based system was implemented to 
identify instances in which participants men-
tioned whether a medication worked or not.  
This was implemented using keywords such as 
“effective,” “work” or “help,” and recognizing 
negation.  Table 7 lists the number of senti-
ment and perceptions of efficacy mentions.  
These do not add up to the number of medica-
tion mentions, as many times when medica-
tions appear, sentiment is neutral or ambigu-
ous, and perception of efficacy is not the topic 
of the post.  For example, the text might say, 
“The doctor started me on Savella yesterday.” 

These results illustrate the utility of extract-
ing multiple facets of patient medication expe-
rience, e.g. positive/negative valence, efficacy 
and side effects, in order to better understand 
these experiences.  Of particular note in these 
findings are that the estimates of one dimen-
sion may appear to conflict with another.  For 
example, overall sentiment towards many 
medications is negative, but they are reported 
as working more often than not.  The side ef-
fects tell yet another story; in many cases, the 
side effects are different in different phases.  
Reading the content, one comes to understand 
that, in an overwhelming number of cases, it is 
not that patients have found medications that 
solve all their problems, but that they are se-
lecting ones that work and weighing the costs 
of the side effects.  Thus, an interface that ena-
bles users to view all these nuances could be 
an invaluable asset. 

 
Medication  
(# mentions) 

Polarity Works 
Pos Neg Yes No 

Lyrica (934) 42 96 72 21 
Cymbalta (413) 11 49 43 20 
Savella (338) 21 23 23 2 
Neurontin (235) 6 15 13 3 
Tramadol (178) 6 3 16 4 

 
Table 7: Sentiment and Efficacy of Medications 
 
The last facet of medication use that was 

modeled was suggestions and/or recommenda-
tions from forum participants.  One rule for 
doing this was by extracting sentences that 
began with verbs such as: “try,” “take,” “ask,” 
“tell,” and “go.”  Another was to extract sen-
tences with “suggest” or “recommend.”  Doing 
so would retrieve advice such as: “Ask ur doc-

20



tor about Elavil and Lyrica combination,” “She 
suggested staying on the Lyrica…. while… 
doing the Vitamin D treatment,” and “Word of 
advice: stop taking SSRI 's at least one week 
prior to start of Savella.”  

Forum posts are valuable because they are 
rich troves of patient experience; however, 
their richness means that it is also possible to 
get lost in the story.  An interface that organiz-
es the advice, but also allows one to link to the 
full text, can help users to orient themselves. 

5 Discussion and Implications 
This study employed NLP techniques in order 
to model two dimensions of patient experience 
in online support forums: interpersonal interac-
tions and medication use.  With regard to in-
teractions with others, the prominence of dif-
ferent individuals and associated affect dif-
fered depending on condition.  With regard to 
medication use, patients’ experiences of medi-
cation use differed along phase of adoption. 
 These results may have important implica-
tions for the design of support forums.  For 
example, in posts about family that contained 
fear and anxiety, certain topics tended to occur 
often: family history, families being supportive 
or non-supportive, and concerns of worrying 
the family.  Forum participants presented vari-
ous perspectives and suggestions concerning 
these issues.  Thus, one recommendation is 
that systems could be designed to organize 
these various perspectives and suggestions in a 
form that is easier for the viewer to understand. 

The results of this study also yielded various 
insights concerning fibromyalgia.  In particu-
lar, the prominence of doctors, and relatively 
infrequent mention of family and friends was 
worthy of note. Previous research has found 
that fibromyalgia patients report a lack of un-
derstanding from medical practitioners and 
others around them (e.g. Madden & Sim, 2006; 
Sim & Madden, 2008).  These reports of inter-
actions with medical practitioners could help 
researchers to understand where gaps in 
knowledge and communication exist in both 
parties, and attempt to rectify them.  The con-
tent from online support forums may also be 
helpful for researchers seeking to understand 
patients’ patterns of interpersonal interaction. 

The framework presented here for modeling 
medication use could be useful in many set-
tings.  Visualizing side effects at various points 
in the adoption, use and perhaps discontinua-

tion of a medication could avert potential mis-
understandings.  For example, sentiment anal-
ysis on a medication X might be favorable 
overall; however, decomposing the posts by 
phase might show that users initially react fa-
vorably, but develop problems with it over 
time.  Of course, the converse, that individuals 
experience certain side effects initially, but that 
these disappear over time, could also be true.  
Such information could be useful to a wide 
audience, including patients, clinicians, re-
searchers and the pharmaceutical industry. 

5.1 Limitations and Future Directions 
There are many directions in which the current 
work could be improved.  First, in the case of 
interpersonal interactions, affect was modeled 
as dichotomous variable indicating presence or 
absence.  However, the level of emotional ex-
pression in a post could vary substantially.  
Thus, it may be useful to employ a lexicon that 
provides word rankings, such as SentiWordNet 
(Esuli & Sebastiani, 2006). 

In the case of medication use, extraction of 
relevant sentences was based on presence of 
the medication name; thus, the system would 
not have identified sentences in which pro-
nouns were used.  A system that performed co-
reference resolution might identify significant-
ly more references to medications.   

Because previous research has indicated that 
medications are a common topic in fibromyal-
gia-related discussion, medication use was a 
natural target for modeling discussion content.  
However, it would also be useful to extend the 
modeling to include treatment experiences.  
Treatments such as massage and aqua therapy 
are often used in fibromyalgia, and treatments 
are the foci for many other conditions, such as 
breast cancer.  Rather than considering phases 
of medication use, one might consider psycho-
logical state and expectations prior to, during 
and after treatment.  Lastly, the interface that 
was developed for exploring medication use 
was specific to fibromyalgia; moving forward, 
it would be useful to expand the interface to 
other conditions.  

 
Acknowledgments 
 
The author would like to thank Dr. Stephanie 
W. Haas at the University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, and the anonymous reviewers for 
their helpful suggestions in the preparation of 
this manuscript. 

21



References  
Kristin K. Barker. 2008. Electronic support groups, 

patient-consumers, and medicalization: The case 
of contested illness. Journal of Health and So-
cial Behavior, 49(1):20-36. 

Brant W. Chee, Richard Berlin, and Bruce Schatz. 
2011. Predicting adverse drug events from per-
sonal health messages. In AMIA Annu Symp 
Proc. 2011: 217–226. 

Annie T. Chen. 2012. Exploring online support 
spaces: Using cluster analysis to examine breast 
cancer, diabetes and fibromyalgia support 
groups. Patient Education and Counseling, 
87(2): 250-257. 

Andrea Civan and Wanda Pratt. 2007. Threading 
together patient expertise. In AMIA Annu Symp 
Proc. 2007: 140–144. 

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. SEN-
TI-WORDNET: A publicly available lexical re-
source for opinion mining. In Proceedings of 
LREC-06, 5th Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation: 417–422. 

Jeong Yeob Han, Bret R. Shaw, Robert P. Hawkins, 
Suzanne Pingree, Fiona McTavish, and David H. 
Gustafson. 2008. Expressing positive emotions 
within online support groups by women with 
breast cancer. Journal of Health Psychology, 
13(8):1002-1007. 

Andrea Hartzler and Wanda Pratt. 2011. Managing 
the personal side of health: How patient exper-
tise differs from the expertise of clinicians. J 
Med Internet Res, 13(3):e62. 

Robert Leaman, Laura Wojtulewicz, Ryan Sullivan, 
Annie Skariah, Jian Yang, and Graciela Gonza-
lez. 2010. Towards internet-age pharmacovigi-
lance: extracting adverse drug reactions from us-
er posts to health-related social networks. In 
Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedi-
cal Natural Language Processing: 117–125. 

Kang Namkoong, Dhavan V. Shah, Jeong Yeob 
Han, Sojung C. Kim, Woohyun Yoo, David Fan, 
. . . David H. Gustafson. 2010. Expression and 
reception of treatment information in breast can-
cer support groups: How health self-efficacy 
moderates effects on emotional well-being. Pa-
tient Education and Counseling, 81(Supp1):S41-
S47. 

Sue Madden and Julius Sim. 2006. Creating mean-
ing in fibromyalgia syndrome. Social Science & 
Medicine, 63: 2962–73. 

Panote Siriaraya, Caleb Tang, Chee Siang Ang, 
Ulrike Pfeil, and Panayiotis Zaphiris. 2011. A 
comparison of empathic communication pattern 
for teenagers and older people in online support 

communities. Behaviour & Information Tech-
nology, 30(5): 617-628. 

Irena Spasic, Farzaneh Sarafraz, John A Keane, and 
Goran Nenadic. 2010. Medication information 
extraction with linguistic pattern matching and 
semantic rules. J Am Med Inform Assoc;17:532-
535. 

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004. 
WordNet-Affect: an Affective Extension of 
WordNet. In Proceedings of the 4th Internation-
al Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC 2004):1083-1086. 

Julius Sim and Sue Madden. 2008. Illness experi-
ence in fibromyalgia syndrome: A metasynthesis 
of qualitative studies. Social Science & Medi-
cine, 67: 57–67. 

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-Rich 
Part-of-Speech Tagging with a Cyclic Depend-
ency Network. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 
2003: 252-259. 

Wei Wang, Krystl Haerian, Hojjat Salmasian, Rave 
Harpaz, Herbert Chase, and Carol Friedman. 
2011. A Drug-Adverse Event Extraction Algo-
rithm to Support Pharmacovigilance Knowledge 
Mining from PubMed Citations. In AMIA Annu 
Symp Proc. 2011: 1464–1470. 

Yi-Chia Wang, Robert Kraut, John M. Levine. 
2012. To stay or leave? The relationship of emo-
tional and informational support to commitment 
in online health support groups. Presented at 
CSCW 2012. Seattle, WA. 

22


