



















































A Novel Classifier Based on Quantum Computation


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 484–488,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Novel Text Classifier Based on Quantum Computation 
 

 
Ding Liu,  Xiaofang Yang,  Minghu Jiang 

Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of Humanities, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing , China 

Dingliu_thu@126.com  xfyang.thu@gmail.com   
jiang.mh@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn 

 
 

Abstract 

In this article, we propose a novel classifier 
based on quantum computation theory. Differ-
ent from existing methods, we consider the 
classification as an evolutionary process of a 
physical system and build the classifier by us-
ing the basic quantum mechanics equation. 
The performance of the experiments on two 
datasets indicates feasibility and potentiality of 
the quantum classifier.  

1 Introduction 
Taking modern natural science into account, the 
quantum mechanics theory (QM) is one of the 
most famous and profound theory which brings a 
world-shaking revolution for physics. Since QM 
was born, it has been considered as a significant 
part of theoretic physics and has shown its power 
in explaining experimental results. Furthermore, 
some scientists believe that QM is the final prin-
ciple of physics even the whole natural science. 
Thus, more and more researchers have expanded 
the study of QM in other fields of science, and it 
has affected almost every aspect of natural sci-
ence and technology deeply, such as quantum 
computation.   

The principle of quantum computation has al-
so affected a lot of scientific researches in com-
puter science, specifically in computational mod-
eling, cryptography theory as well as information 
theory. Some researchers have employed the 
principle and technology of quantum computa-
tion to improve the studies on Machine Learning 
(ML) (Aїmeur et al., 2006; Aїmeur et al., 2007; 
Chen et al., 2008; Gambs, 2008; Horn and 
Gottlieb, 2001; Nasios and Bors, 2007), a field 
which studies theories and constructions of sys-
tems that can learn from data, among which clas-
sification is a typical task. Thus, we attempted to  

 
build a computational model based on quantum 
computation theory to handle classification tasks 
in order to prove the feasibility of applying the 
QM model to machine learning. 

In this article, we present a method that con-
siders the classifier as a physical system amena-
ble to QM and treat the entire process of classifi-
cation as the evolutionary process of a closed 
quantum system. According to QM, the evolu-
tion of quantum system can be described by a 
unitary operator. Therefore, the primary problem 
of building a quantum classifier (QC) is to find 
the correct or optimal unitary operator. We ap-
plied classical optimization algorithms to deal 
with the problem, and the experimental results 
have confirmed our theory. 

The outline of this paper is as follows. First, 
the basic principle and structure of QC is intro-
duced in section 2. Then, two different experi-
ments are described in section 3. Finally, section 
4 concludes with a discussion. 

2  Basic principle of quantum classifier  
As we mentioned in the introduction, the major 
principle of quantum classifier (QC) is to consid-
er the classifier as a physical system and the 
whole process of classification as the evolution-
ary process of a closed quantum system. Thus, 
the evolution of the quantum system can be de-
scribed by a unitary operator (unitary matrix), 
and the remaining job is to find the correct or 
optimal unitary operator. 

2.1 Architecture of quantum classifier 
The architecture and the whole procedure of data 
processing of QC are illustrated in Figure 1. As 
is shown, the key aspect of QC is the optimiza-
tion part where we employ the optimization algo-
rithm to find an optimal unitary operator .  

484



  
Figure 1. Architecture of quantum classifier 

 
The detailed information about each phase of the 
process will be explained thoroughly in the fol-
lowing sections.  

2.2 Encode input state and target state 
In quantum mechanics theory, the state of a 
physical system can be described as a superposi-
tion of the so called eigenstates which are or-
thogonal. Any state, including the eigenstate, can 
be represented by a complex number vector. We 
use Dirac’s braket notation to formalize the data 
as equation 1: 

| ⟩ = | ⟩																					(1) 

 
where | ⟩ denotes a state and ∈ ℂ is a com-
plex number with = ⟨ | ⟩ being the projec-
tion of | ⟩ on the eigenstate | ⟩. According to 
quantum theory,  denotes the probability am-
plitude. Furthermore, the probability of | ⟩ col-
lapsing on | ⟩ is P( ) = | |∑ | |  . 

Based on the hypothesis that QC can be con-
sidered as a quantum system, the input data 
should be transformed to an available format in 
quantum theory — the complex number vector. 
According to Euler’s formula, a complex number 
z can be denoted as =  with r≥ , ∈ ℝ. 
Equation 1, thus, can be written as: 
 
																													| ⟩ = | ⟩ 												(2) 

 
where  and  denote the module and the 
phase of the complex coefficient respectively.  
 

 
For different applications, we employ different 
approaches to determine the value of  and . 
Specifically, in our experiment, we assigned the 
term frequency, a feature frequently used in text 
classification to  , and treated the phase  as 
a constant, since we found the phase makes little 
contribution to the classification.  

For each data sample , we calculate 
the corresponding input complex number vector 
by equation 3, which is illustrated in detail in 
Figure 2. 

 

																| ⟩ = ∙ | 																					(3)	 

 
 

Figure 2. Process of calculating the input state 
 
Each eigenstate |  denotes the correspond-

ing , resulting in m eigenstates for  all 
the samples.  

As is mentioned above, the evolutionary pro-
cess of a closed physical system can be described 
by a unitary operator, depicted by a matrix as in 
equation 4: 

 
																																| ⟩ = | ⟩																											(4) 

 
where | ⟩ and | ⟩ denote the final state and the 
initial state respectively. The approach to deter-
mine the unitary operator will be discussed in 

485



section 2.3. We encode the target state in the 
similar way. Like the Vector Space Model(VSM), 
we use a label matrix to represent each class as in 
Figure 3. 

 
 

Figure 3.  Label matrix 
 

For each input sample , we generate 
the corresponding target complex number vector 
according to equation 5: 

																						| ⟩ = ∙ | 															(5) 

 
where each eigenstate |  represents the corre-
sponding , resulting in w eigenstates for 
all the labels. Totally, we need +  eigen-
states, including features and labels. 

 

2.3 Finding the Hamiltonian matrix and the 
Unitary operator 

As is mentioned in the first section, finding a 
unitary operator to describe the evolutionary pro-
cess is the vital step in building a QC. As a basic 
quantum mechanics theory, a unitary operator 
can be represented by a unitary matrix with the 
property = , and a unitary operator can 
also be written as equation 6: 

																																	 = ℏ 																												(6) 
 
where H is the Hamiltonian matrix and ℏ is the 
reduced Planck constant. Moreover, the Hamil-
tonian H is a Hermitian matrix with the property 

= ( )∗ = . The remaining job, therefore, 
is to find an optimal Hamiltonian matrix. 

Since H is a Hermitian matrix, we only need 
to determine ( + )  free real parameters, 
provided that the dimension of H is (m+w). Thus, 
the problem of determining H can be regarded as 
a classical optimization problem, which can be 
resolved by various optimization algorithms 
(Chen and Kudlek, 2001). An error function is 
defined as equation 7: 

 

														 ( ) =
∑( , )∈

											(7) 

where T is a set of training pairs with ,
, 	  denoting the target, input, and output 

state respectively, and  is determined by  as 
equation 8: 
 

                    | ⟩ = ℏ | ⟩                      (8)          
 

In the optimization phase, we employed sever-
al optimization algorithm, including BFGS, Ge-
neric Algorithm, and a multi-objective optimiza-
tion algorithm SQP (sequential quadratic pro-
gramming) to optimize the error function. In our 
experiment, the SQP method performed best out-
performed the others.  
 

3 Experiment 
We tested the performance of QC on two differ-
ent datasets. In section 3.1, the Reuters-21578 
dataset was used to train a binary QC. We com-
pared the performance of QC with several classi-
cal classification methods, including Support 
Vector Machine (SVM) and K-nearest neighbor 
(KNN). In section 3.2, we evaluated the perfor-
mance on multi-class classification using an oral 
conversation datasets and analyzed the results. 

3.1 Reuters-21578 
The Reuters dataset we tested contains 3,964 
texts belonging to “earnings” category and 8,938 
texts belonging to “others” categories. In this 
classification task, we selected the features by 
calculating the  score of each term from the 
“earnings” category (Manning and Schütze, 
2002).  

For the convenience of counting, we adopted 
3,900 “earnings” documents and 8,900 “others” 
documents and divided them into two groups: the 
training pool and the testing sets. Since we fo-
cused on the performance of QC trained by 
small-scale training sets in our experiment, we 
each selected 1,000 samples from the “earnings” 
and the “others” category as our training pool 
and took the rest of the samples (2,900 “earnings” 
and 7,900 “others” documents) as our testing sets.  
We randomly selected training samples from the 
training pool ten times to train QC, SVM, and 
KNN classifier respectively and then verified the 
three trained classifiers on the testing sets, the 
results of which are illustrated in Figure 4. We 
noted that the QC performed better than both 
KNN and SVM on small-scale training sets, 
when the number of training samples is less than 
50. 

486



 
Figure 4.  Classification accuracy for Reuters-

21578 datasets 
 

Generally speaking, the QC trained by a large 
training set may not always has an ideal perfor-
mance. Whereas some single training sample 
pair led to a favorable result when we used only 
one sample from each category to train the QC. 
Actually, some single samples could lead to an 
accuracy of more than 90%, while some others 
may produce an accuracy lower than 30%. 
Therefore, the most significant factor for QC is 
the quality of the training samples rather than the 
quantity. 

3.2 Oral conversation datasets 
Besides the binary QC, we also built a multi-
class version and tested its performance on an 
oral conversation dataset which was collected by 
the Laboratory of Computational Linguistics of 
Tsinghua university. The dataset consisted of 
1,000 texts and were categorized into 5 classes, 
each containing 200 texts. We still took the term 
frequency as the feature, the dimension of which 
exceeded 1,000. We, therefore, utilized the pri-
mary component analysis (PCA) to reduce the 
high dimension of the features in order to de-
crease the computational complexity. In this ex-
periment, we chose the top 10 primary compo-
nents of the outcome of PCA, which contained 
nearly 60% information of the original data. 
Again, we focused on the performance of QC 
trained by small-scale training sets. We selected 
100 samples from each class to construct the 
training pool and took the rest of the data as the 
testing sets. Same to the experiment in section 
3.1, we randomly selected the training samples 
from the training pool ten times to train QC, 
SVM, and KNN classifier respectively and veri 
fied the models on the testing sets, the results of 
which are shown in Figure 5. 
 

 
Figure 5.  Classification accuracy for oral 

conversation datasets 
 

4 Discussion 
We present here our model of text classification 
and compare it with SVM and KNN on two da-
tasets. We find that it is feasible to build a super-
vised learning model based on quantum mechan-
ics theory. Previous studies focus on combining 
quantum method with existing classification 
models such as neural network (Chen et al., 2008) 
and kernel function (Nasios and Bors, 2007) aim-
ing to improve existing models to work faster 
and more efficiently. Our work, however, focus-
es on developing a novel method which explores 
the relationship between machine learning model 
with physical world, in order to investigate these 
models by physical rule which describe our uni-
verse. Moreover, the QC performs well in text 
classification compared with SVM and KNN and 
outperforms them on small-scale training sets. 
Additionally, the time complexity of QC depends 
on the optimization algorithm and the amounts of 
features we adopt. Generally speaking, simulat-
ing quantum computing on classical computer 
always requires more computation resources, and 
we believe that quantum computer will tackle the 
difficulty in the forthcoming future. Actually, 
Google and NASA have launched a quantum 
computing AI lab this year, and we regard the 
project as an exciting beginning. 

Future studies include: We hope to find a 
more suitable optimization algorithm for QC and  
a more reasonable physical explanation towards 
the “quantum nature” of the QC. We hope our 
attempt will shed some light upon the application 
of quantum theory into the field of machine 
learning. 
 
 
 

487



Acknowledgments 
 
This work was supported by the National Natural 
Science Foundation in China (61171114), State 
Key Lab of Pattern Recognition open foundation, 
CAS. Tsinghua University Self-determination 
Research Project (20111081023 & 20111081010) 
and Human & liberal arts development founda-
tion (2010WKHQ009) 
 

References  
Esma Aїmeur, Gilles Brassard, and Sébastien Gambs. 

2006. Machine Learning in a Quantum World. Ca-
nadian AI 2006 

Esma Aїmeur, Gilles Brassard and Sébastien Gambs. 
2007.   Quantum Clustering Algorithms. Proceed-
ings of the 24 th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning 

Joseph C.H. Chen and Manfred Kudlek. 2001. Duality 
of Syntex and Semantics – From the View Point of 
Brain as a Quantum Computer. Proceedings of Re-
cent Advances in NLP 

Joseph C.H. Chen. 2001. Quantum Computation and 
Natural Language Processing. University of Ham-
burg, Germany. Ph.D. thesis 

Joseph C.H. Chen. 2001. A Quantum Mechanical 
Approach to Cognition and Representation. Con-
sciousness and its Place in Nature,Toward a Sci-
ence of Consciousness. 

Cheng-Hung Chen, Cheng-Jian Lin and Chin-Teng 
Lin. 2008. An efficient quantum neuro-fuzzy clas-
sifier based on fuzzy entropy and compensatory 
operation. Soft Comput, 12:567–583. 

Fumiyo Fukumoto and Yoshimi Suzuki. 2002. Ma-
nipulating Large Corpora for Text Classification. 
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing 

Sébastien Gambs. 2008. Quantum classification, 
arXiv:0809.0444 

Lov K. Grover. 1997. Quantum Mechanics Helps in 
Searching for a Needle in a Haystack. Physical Re 
view Letters, 79,325–328 

David Horn and Assaf Gottlieb. 2001. The Method of 
Quantum Clustering. Proceedings of Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems . 

Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schütze. 2002. 
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Pro-
cessing. MIT Press. Cambridge, Massachu-
setts,USA. 

Nikolaos Nasios and Adrian G. Bors. 2007. Kernel-
based classification using quantum mechanics. Pat-
tern Recognition, 40:875–889 

Hartmut Neven and Vasil S. Denchev. 2009. Training 
a Large Scale Classifier with the Quantum Adia-
batic Algorithm. arXiv:0912.0779v1 

Michael A. Nielsen and Isasc L. Chuang. 2000. Quan-
tum Computation and Quantum Information, Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Masahide Sasaki and and Alberto Carlini. 2002. 
Quantum learning and universal quantum matching 
machine. Physical Review, A 66, 022303 

Dan Ventura. 2002. Pattern classification using a 
quantum system. Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence on Information Sciences.  

 

488


