



















































Identifying Opinion Subgroups in Arabic Online Discussions


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 829–835,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying Opinion Subgroups in Arabic Online Discussions

Amjad Abu-Jbara
Department of EECS

University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA

amjbara@umich.edu

Mona Diab
Department of Computer Science

George Washington University
Washington DC, USA
mtdiab@gwu.edu

Ben King
Department of EECS

University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA

benking@umich.edu

Dragomir Radev
Department of EECS

University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
radev@umich.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we use Arabic natural lan-
guage processing techniques to analyze
Arabic debates. The goal is to identify
how the participants in a discussion split
into subgroups with contrasting opinions.
The members of each subgroup share the
same opinion with respect to the discus-
sion topic and an opposing opinion to
the members of other subgroups. We
use opinion mining techniques to identify
opinion expressions and determine their
polarities and their targets. We opinion
predictions to represent the discussion in
one of two formal representations: signed
attitude network or a space of attitude vec-
tors. We identify opinion subgroups by
partitioning the signed network represen-
tation or by clustering the vector space
representation. We evaluate the system us-
ing a data set of labeled discussions and
show that it achieves good results.

1 Introduction

Arabic is one of the fastest growing languages
on the internet. The number of internet users in
the Arab region grew by 2500% over the past 10
years. As of January 2012, the number of Arabic-
speaking internet users was 86 millions. The re-
cent political and civic movements in the Arab
World resulted in a revolutionary growth in the
number of Arabic users on social networking sites.
For example, Arabic is the fastest growing lan-

guage in Twitter history 1.
This growth in the presence of Arab users on

social networks and all the interactions and dis-
cussions that happen among them led to a huge
amount of opinion-rich Arabic text being avail-
able. Analyzing this text could reveal the different
viewpoints of Arab users with respect to the topics
that they discuss online.

When a controversial topic is discussed, it is
normal for the discussants to adopt different view-
points towards it. This usually causes rifts in dis-
cussion groups and leads to the split of the dis-
cussants into subgroups with contrasting opinions.
Our goal in this paper is to use natural language
processing techniques to detect opinion subgroups
in Arabic discussions. Our approach starts by
identifying opinionated (subjective) text and deter-
mining its polarity (positive, negative, or neutral).
Next, we determine the target of each opinion ex-
pression. The target of opinion can be a named
entity mentioned in the discussion or an aspect of
the discussed topic. We use the identified opinion-
target relations to represent the discussion in one
of two formal representations. In the first repre-
sentation, each discussant is represented by a vec-
tor that encodes all his or her opinion information
towards the discussion topic. In the second repre-
sentation, each discussant is represented by a node
in a signed graph. A positive edge connects two
discussants if they have similar opinion towards
the topic, otherwise the sign of the edge is nega-

1http://semiocast.com/publications/
2011_11_24_Arabic_highest_growth_on_
Twitter

829



tive. To identify opinion subgroups, we cluster the
vector space (the first representation) or partition
the signed network (the second representation).

We evaluate this system using a data set of Ara-
bic discussions collected from an Arabic debating
site. We experiment with several variations of the
system. The results show that the clustering the
vector space representation achieves better results
than partitioning the signed network representa-
tion.

2 Previous Work

Our work is related to a large body of research on
opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Pang &
Lee (2008) and Liu & Zhang (2012) wrote two re-
cent comprehensive surveys about sentiment anal-
ysis and opinion mining techniques and applica-
tions.

Previous work has proposed methods for iden-
tifying subjective text that expresses opinion
and distinguishing it from objective text that
presents factual information (Wiebe, 2000; Hatzi-
vassiloglou and Wiebe, 2000a; Banea et al., 2008;
Riloff and Wiebe, 2003).

Subjective text may express positive, negative,
or neutral opinion. Previous work addressed the
problem of identifying the polarity of subjective
text (Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe, 2000b; Hassan
et al., 2010; Riloff et al., 2006). Many of the pro-
posed methods for text polarity identification de-
pend on the availability of polarity lexicons (i.e.
lists of positive and negative words). Several ap-
proaches have been devised for building such lex-
icons (Turney and Littman, 2003; Kanayama and
Nasukawa, 2006; Takamura et al., 2005; Hassan
and Radev, 2010). Other research efforts focused
on identifying the holders and the targets of opin-
ion (Zhai et al., 2010; Popescu and Etzioni, 2007;
Bethard et al., 2004).

Opinion mining and sentiment analysis tech-
niques have been used in various applications.
One example of such applications is identifying
perspectives (Grefenstette et al., 2004; Lin et al.,
2006) which is most similar to the topic of this
paper. For example, in (Lin et al., 2006), the au-
thors experiment with several supervised and sta-
tistical models to capture how perspectives are ex-
pressed at the document and the sentence levels.

Laver et al. (2003) proposed a method for extract-
ing perspectives from political texts. They used
their method to estimate the policy positions of po-
litical parties in Britain and Ireland, on both eco-
nomic and social policy dimensions.

Somasundaran and Wiebe (2009) present an un-
supervised opinion analysis method for debate-
side classification. They mine the web to learn
associations that are indicative of opinion stances
in debates and combine this knowledge with dis-
course information. Anand et al. (2011) present a
supervised method for stance classification. They
use a number of linguistic and structural fea-
tures such as unigrams, bigrams, cue words, re-
peated punctuation, and opinion dependencies to
build a stance classification model. In previous
work, we proposed a method that uses participant-
to-participant and participant-to-topic attitudes to
identify subgroups in ideological discussions us-
ing attitude vector space clustering (Abu-Jbara and
Radev, 2012). In this paper, we extend this method
by adding latent similarity features to the attitude
vectors and applying it to Arabic discussions. In
another previous work, our group proposed a su-
pervised method for extracting signed social net-
works from text (Hassan et al., 2012a). The
signed networks constructed using this method
were based only on participant-to-participant at-
titudes that are expressed explicitly in discussions.
We used this method to extract signed networks
from discussions and used a partitioning algo-
rithm to detect opinion subgroups (Hassan et al.,
2012b). In this paper, we extend this method by
using participant-to-topic attitudes to construct the
signed network.

Unfortunately, not much work has been done
on Arabic sentiment analysis and opinion min-
ing. Abbasi et al. (2008) applies sentiment anal-
ysis techniques to identify and classify document-
level opinions in text crawled from English and
Arabic web forums. Hassan et al. (2011) pro-
posed a method for identifying the polarity of non-
English words using multilingual semantic graphs.
They applied their method to Arabic and Hindi.
Abdul-Mageed and Diab (2011) annotated a cor-
pus of Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) news text
for subjectivity at the sentence level. In a later
work (2012a), they expanded their corpus by la-

830



beling data from more genres using Amazon Me-
chanical Turk. Abdul-Mageed et al. (2012a) de-
veloped SAMAR, a system for subjectivity and
Sentiment Analysis for Arabic social media gen-
res. We use this system as a component in our
approach.

3 Approach

In this section, we present our approach to de-
tecting opinion subgroups in Arabic discussions.
We propose a pipeline that consists of five com-
ponents. The input to the pipeline is a discussion
thread in Arabic language crawled from a discus-
sion forum. The output is the list of participants
in the discussion and the subgroup membership of
each discussant. We describe the components of
the pipeline in the following subsections.

3.1 Preprocessing

The input to this component is a discussion thread
in HTML format. We parse the HTML file to iden-
tify the posts, the discussants, and the thread struc-
ture. We transform the Arabic content of the posts
and the discussant names that are written in Arabic
to the Buckwalter encoding (Buckwalter, 2004).
We use AMIRAN (Diab, 2009), a system for pro-
cessing Arabic text, to tokenize the text and iden-
tify noun phrases.

3.2 Identifying Opinionated Text

To identify opinion-bearing text, we start from the
word level. We identify the polarized words that
appear in text by looking each word up in a lexicon
of Arabic polarized words. In our experiments, we
use Sifat (Abdul-Mageed and Diab, 2012b), a lex-
icon of 3982 Arabic adjectives labeled as positive,
negative, or neutral.

The polarity of a word may be dependant on
its context (Wilson et al., 2005). For example,
a positive word that appears in a negated context
should be treated as expressing negative opinion
rather than positive. To identify the polarity of
a word given the sentence it appears in, we use
SAMAR (Abdul-Mageed et al., 2012b), a system
for Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis for Ara-
bic social media genres. SAMAR labels a sen-
tence that contains an opinion expression as pos-
itive, negative, or neutral taking into account the
context of the opinion expression. The reported

accuracy of SAMAR on different data sets ranges
between 84% and 95% for subjectivity classifica-
tion and 65% and 81% for polarity classification.

3.3 Identifying Opinion Targets

In this step, we determine the targets that the opin-
ion is expressed towards. We treat as an opin-
ion target any noun phrase (NP) that appears in
a sentence that SAMAR labeled as polarized (pos-
itive or negative) in the previous step. To avoid
the noise that may result from including all noun
phrases, we limit what we consider as an opinion
target, to the ones that appear in at least two posts
written by two different participants. Since, the
sentence may contain multiple possible targets for
every opinion expression, we associate each opin-
ion expression with the target that is closest to it in
the sentence. For each discussant, we keep track
of the targets mentioned in his/her posts and the
number of times each target was mentioned in a
positive/negative context.

3.4 Latent Textual Similarity

If two participants share the same opinion, they
tend to focus on similar aspects of the discus-
sion topic and emphasize similar points that sup-
port their opinion. To capture this, we follow
previous work (Guo and Diab, 2012; Dasigi et
al., 2012) and apply Latent Dirichelet Allocation
(LDA) topic models to the text written by the dif-
ferent participants. We use an LDA model with
100 topics. So, we represent all the text written
in the discussion by each participant as a vector
of 100 dimensions. The vector of each participant
contains the topic distribution of the participant, as
produced by the LDA model.

3.5 Subgroup Detection

At this point, we have for every discussant the tar-
gets towards which he/she expressed explicit opin-
ion and a 100-dimensions vector representing the
LDA distribution of the text written by him/her.
We use this information to represent the discussion
in two representations. In the first representation,
each discussant is represented by a vector. For ev-
ery target identified in steps 3 of the pipeline, we
add three entries in the vector. The first entry holds
the total number of times the target was mentioned
by the discussant. The second entry holds the

831



بعد صدور قرار من النائب العام بضبط وإحضار باسم يوسف بتهمة 

 ازدراء األديان وإهانة الرئيس هل تتوقع حبسه وما رأيك في القرار؟

المتهم بريء حتي تثبت إدانته والنائب العام غير شرعي وجماعة االخوان 

ضد كل معارضي مرسي وليس باسم يوسف ببالغات تدفع محاميها للتقدم 

الشعب كله يعارضه وباسم لم يفتري عليه بل . مرسيفقط من يعارض 
 يعرض له لقطات شاهدها الجميع تدل علي ان مرسي ال يصلح رجل دولة

باسم جعل منا نحن . رئيسهاباسم يوسف يهين مصر قبل ان يهين 

المصريون أضحوكة في العالم بسخريته من كل رموز المجتمع 

المصري وباسفافه وابتذاله وفي صراعه االخير مع مرتضي 
 منصور خير دليل علي تدني اخالقهما معا

(a) 

(c) (b) 

Figure 1: An example debate taken from our dataset. (a) is the discussion topic. (b) and (c) are two posts
expressing contrasting viewpoints with respect to the topic.

number of times the target was mentioned in a pos-
itive context. The third entry holds the number of
target mentions in a negative context. We also add
to this vector the 100 topic entries from the LDA
vector of that discussant. So, if the number of tar-
gets identified in step 3 of the pipeline is t then
the number of entries in the discussant vector is
3 ∗ t+ 100.

To identify opinion subgroups, we cluster
the vector space. We experiment with several
clustering algorithms including K-means (Mac-
Queen, 1967), Farthest First (FF) (Hochbaum and
Shmoys, 1985; Dasgupta, 2002), and Expectation
Maximization (EM) (Dempster et al., 1977).

The second representation is a signed network
representation. In this representation, each dis-
cussant is represented by a node in a graph. Two
discussants are connected by an edge if they both
mention at least one common target in their posts.
If a discussant mentions a target multiple times in
different contexts with different polarities, the ma-
jority polarity is assumed as the opinion of this
discussant with respect to this target. A positive
sign is assigned to the edge connecting two discus-
sants if the number of targets that they have simi-
lar opinion towards is greater than the targets that
they have opposing opinion towards, otherwise a
negative sign is assigned to the edge.

To identify subgroups, we use a signed net-
work partitioning algorithm to partition the net-
work. Each resulting partition constitutes a sub-
group. Following (Hassan et al., 2012b), we use
the Dorian-Mrvar (1996) algorithm to partition the
signed network. The optimization criterion aims

to have dense positive links within groups and
dense negative links between groups.

The optimization function is as follows:

F (C) = α× |NEG|+ (1− α)× |POS| (1)

where C is the clustering under evaluation,
|NEG| is the number of negative links between
nodes in the same subgroup, |POS| is the number
of positive links between nodes in different sub-
groups, and α is a parameter that specifies impor-
tance of the two terms. We set α to 0.5 in all our
experiments.

Clusters are selected such that P (C) is mini-
mum. The best clustering that minimizes P (C) is
found by moving nodes around clusters in a greedy
way starting with a random clustering. To han-
dle the possibility of finding a local minima, the
whole process is repeated k times with random
restarts and the clustering with the minimum value
of P (C) is returned. We set k to 3 in all our ex-
periments.

4 Data

We use data from an Arabic discussion forum
called Naqeshny.2. Naqeshny is a platform for
two-sided debates. The debate starts when a per-
son asks a question (e.g. which political party do
you support?) and gives two possible answers or
positions. The registered members of the web-
site who are interested in the topic participate in
the debate by selecting a position and then post-
ing text to support that position and dispute the

2www.Naqeshny.com

832



opposing position. This means that the data set is
self-labeled for subgroup membership. Since the
tools used in our system are trained on Modern
Standard Arabic (MSA) text, we selected debates
that are mostly MSA. The data set consists of 36
debates comprising a total of 711 posts written by
326 users. The average number of posts per dis-
cussion is 19.75 and the average number of partic-
ipants per discussion is 13.08. Figure 1 shows an
example from the data.

5 Experiments and Results

We use three metrics to evaluate the resulting sub-
groups: Purity (Manning et al., 2008), Entropy,
and F-measure. We ran several variations of the
system on the data set described in the previous
section. In one variation, we use the signed net-
work partitioning approach to detect subgroups.
In the other variations, we use the vector space
clustering approach. We experiment with differ-
ent clustering algorithms. We also run two experi-
ments to evaluate the contribution of both opinion-
target counts and latent similarity features on the
clustering accuracy. In one run, we use target-
opinion counts only. In the other run, we use latent
similarity features only. EM was used as the clus-
tering algorithm in these two runs. Table 1 shows
the results. All the results have been tested for sta-
tistical significance using a 2-tailed paired t-test.
The differences between the results of the different
methods shown in the table are statistically signif-
icant at the 0.05 level. The results show that the
clustering approach achieves better results than the
signed network partitioning approach. This can be
explained by the fact that the vector representa-
tion is a richer representation and encodes all the
discussants’ opinion information explicitly. The
results also show that Expectation Maximization
achieves significantly better results than the other
clustering algorithms that we experimented with.
The results also show that both latent text similar-
ity and opinion-target features are important and
contribute to the performance.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a system for iden-
tifying opinion subgroups in Arabic online dis-
cussions. The system uses opinion and text sim-

System Purity F-Measure Entropy
Signed Network 0.71 0.67 0.68

Clustering - K-means 0.72 0.70 0.67

Clustering - EM 0.77 0.76 0.50
Clustering - FF 0.72 0.69 0.70

Opinion-Target Only 0.67 0.65 0.72

Text Similarity Only 0.64 0.65 0.74

Table 1: Comparison of the different variations of
the proposed approach

ilarity features to encode discussants’ opinions.
Two approaches were explored for detecting sub-
groups. The first approach clusters a space of dis-
cussant opinion vectors. The second approach par-
titions a signed network representation of the dis-
cussion. Our experiments showed that the former
approach achieves better results. Our experiments
also showed that both opinion and similarity fea-
tures are important.

Acknowledgements

This research was funded in part by the Office of
the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity. All state-
ments of fact, opinion or conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be
construed as representing the of?cial views or poli-
cies of IARPA, the ODNI or the U.S. Government.

The authors would like to thank Basma Siam for
her help with collecting the data.

References
Ahmed Abbasi, Hsinchun Chen, and Arab Salem.

2008. Sentiment analysis in multiple languages:
Feature selection for opinion classification in web
forums. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 26(3):12:1–12:34,
June.

Muhammad Abdul-Mageed and Mona Diab. 2011.
Subjectivity and sentiment annotation of modern
standard arabic newswire. In Proceedings of the
5th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 110–
118, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Muhammad Abdul-Mageed and Mona Diab. 2012a.
Awatif: A multi-genre corpus for modern standard
arabic subjectivity and sentiment analysis. In Nico-
letta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri,
Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Ugur Dogan, Bente
Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios

833



Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey, may. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Muhammad Abdul-Mageed and Mona Diab. 2012b.
Toward building a large-scale arabic sentiment lexi-
con. In Proceedings of the 6th International Global
Word-Net Conference, Matsue, Japan.

Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, Sandra Kübler, and Mona
Diab. 2012a. Samar: a system for subjectivity
and sentiment analysis of arabic social media. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop in Computational
Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis,
WASSA ’12, pages 19–28, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, Sandra Kuebler, and
Mona Diab. 2012b. Samar: A system for subjec-
tivity and sentiment analysis of arabic social me-
dia. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop in Com-
putational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment
Analysis, pages 19–28, Jeju, Korea, July. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Amjad Abu-Jbara and Dragomir Radev. 2012. Sub-
group detection in ideological discussions. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Jeju, Korea, July. The Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Pranav Anand, Marilyn Walker, Rob Abbott, Jean E.
Fox Tree, Robeson Bowmani, and Michael Minor.
2011. Cats rule and dogs drool!: Classifying stance
in online debate. In Proceedings of the 2nd Work-
shop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity
and Sentiment Analysis (WASSA 2.011), pages 1–9,
Portland, Oregon, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2008. A bootstrapping method for building subjec-
tivity lexicons for languages with scarce resources.
In LREC’08.

Steven Bethard, Hong Yu, Ashley Thornton, Vasileios
Hatzivassiloglou, and Dan Jurafsky. 2004. Auto-
matic extraction of opinion propositions and their
holders. In 2004 AAAI Spring Symposium on Ex-
ploring Attitude and Affect in Text, page 2224.

Tim Buckwalter. 2004. Issues in arabic orthography
and morphology analysis. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Arabic
Script-based Languages, Semitic ’04, pages 31–34,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Sanjoy Dasgupta. 2002. Performance guarantees for
hierarchical clustering. In 15th Annual Conference
on Computational Learning Theory, pages 351–363.
Springer.

Pradeep Dasigi, Weiwei Guo, and Mona Diab. 2012.
Genre independent subgroup detection in online dis-
cussion threads: A study of implicit attitude us-
ing textual latent semantics. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 65–69, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. 1977.
Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the
em algorithm. JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL STATIS-
TICAL SOCIETY, SERIES B, 39(1):1–38.

Mona Diab. 2009. Second generation tools (amira
2.0): Fast and robust tokenization, pos tagging, and
base phrase chunking. In Khalid Choukri and Bente
Maegaard, editors, Proceedings of the Second Inter-
national Conference on Arabic Language Resources
and Tools, Cairo, Egypt, April. The MEDAR Con-
sortium.

Patrick Doreian and Andrej Mrvar. 1996. A partition-
ing approach to structural balance. Social Networks,
18(2):149–168.

Gregory Grefenstette, Yan Qu, James G Shanahan, and
David A Evans. 2004. Coupling niche browsers
and affect analysis for an opinion mining applica-
tion. In Proceedings of RIAO, volume 4, pages 186–
194. Citeseer.

Weiwei Guo and Mona Diab. 2012. Modeling sen-
tences in the latent space. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
864–872, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ahmed Hassan and Dragomir Radev. 2010. Identify-
ing text polarity using random walks. In ACL’10.

Ahmed Hassan, Vahed Qazvinian, and Dragomir
Radev. 2010. What’s with the attitude?: identi-
fying sentences with attitude in online discussions.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1245–1255.

Ahmed Hassan, Amjad Abu-Jbara, Rahul Jha, and
Dragomir Radev. 2011. Identifying the semantic
orientation of foreign words. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies: short papers - Volume 2, HLT ’11, pages 592–
597, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Ahmed Hassan, Amjad Abu-Jbara, and Dragomir
Radev. 2012a. Extracting signed social networks
from text. In Workshop Proceedings of TextGraphs-
7: Graph-based Methods for Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 6–14, Jeju, Republic of Korea, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

834



Ahmed Hassan, Amjad Abu-Jbara, and Dragomir
Radev. 2012b. Signed attitude networks: Predict-
ing positive and negative links using linguistic anal-
ysis. In Submitted to the Conference on Emprical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Jeju, Ko-
rea, July. The Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce Wiebe. 2000a.
Effects of adjective orientation and gradability on
sentence subjectivity. In COLING, pages 299–305.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce M Wiebe.
2000b. Effects of adjective orientation and grad-
ability on sentence subjectivity. In Proceedings of
the 18th conference on Computational linguistics-
Volume 1, pages 299–305. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Hochbaum and Shmoys. 1985. A best possible heuris-
tic for the k-center problem. Mathematics of Oper-
ations Research, 10(2):180–184.

Hiroshi Kanayama and Tetsuya Nasukawa. 2006.
Fully automatic lexicon expansion for domain-
oriented sentiment analysis. In EMNLP’06, pages
355–363.

Michael Laver, Kenneth Benoit, and John Garry. 2003.
Extracting policy positions from political texts using
words as data. American Political Science Review,
97(02):311–331.

Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Which side are you
on?: identifying perspectives at the document and
sentence levels. In Proceedings of the Tenth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 109–116. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Bing Liu and Lei Zhang. 2012. A survey of opin-
ion mining and sentiment analysis. In Charu C. Ag-
garwal and ChengXiang Zhai, editors, Mining Text
Data, pages 415–463. Springer US.

J. B. MacQueen. 1967. Some methods for classifi-
cation and analysis of multivariate observations. In
L. M. Le Cam and J. Neyman, editors, Proc. of the
fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics
and Probability, volume 1, pages 281–297. Univer-
sity of California Press.

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and
Hinrich Schtze. 2008. Introduction to Information
Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, New York,
NY, USA.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Foundations and trends in infor-
mation retrieval, 2(1-2):1–135.

Ana-Maria Popescu and Orena Etzioni. 2007. Extract-
ing product features and opinions from reviews. In
Natural language processing and text mining, pages
9–28. Springer.

Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning
extraction patterns for subjective expressions. In
EMNLP’03, pages 105–112.

Ellen Riloff, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Janyce Wiebe.
2006. Feature subsumption for opinion analysis.
In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
440–448. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2009. Rec-
ognizing stances in online debates. In Proceed-
ings of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual
Meeting of the ACL and the 4th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing of the
AFNLP, pages 226–234, Suntec, Singapore, August.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura.
2005. Extracting semantic orientations of words us-
ing spin model. In ACL’05, pages 133–140.

Peter Turney and Michael Littman. 2003. Measuring
praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orienta-
tion from association. ACM Transactions on Infor-
mation Systems, 21:315–346.

Janyce Wiebe. 2000. Learning subjective adjectives
from corpora. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Twelfth Conference on Innovative Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, pages 735–740.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In HLT/EMNLP’05, Van-
couver, Canada.

Zhongwu Zhai, Bing Liu, Hua Xu, and Peifa Jia. 2010.
Grouping product features using semi-supervised
learning with soft-constraints. In Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 1272–1280. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

835


