



















































Evaluating a City Exploration Dialogue System with Integrated Question-Answering and Pedestrian Navigation


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1660–1668,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluating a City Exploration Dialogue System Combining
Question-Answering and Pedestrian Navigation

Srinivasan Janarthanam1, Oliver Lemon1, Phil Bartie2, Tiphaine Dalmas2,
Anna Dickinson2, Xingkun Liu1, William Mackaness2, and Bonnie Webber2

1 The Interaction Lab, Heriot-Watt University
2 Edinburgh University
sc445@hw.ac.uk

Abstract

We present a city navigation and tourist
information mobile dialogue app with in-
tegrated question-answering (QA) and ge-
ographic information system (GIS) mod-
ules that helps pedestrian users to nav-
igate in and learn about urban environ-
ments. In contrast to existing mobile apps
which treat these problems independently,
our Android app addresses the prob-
lem of navigation and touristic question-
answering in an integrated fashion using
a shared dialogue context. We evaluated
our system in comparison with Samsung
S-Voice (which interfaces to Google nav-
igation and Google search) with 17 users
and found that users judged our system to
be significantly more interesting to inter-
act with and learn from. They also rated
our system above Google search (with the
Samsung S-Voice interface) for tourist in-
formation tasks.

1 Introduction

We present a mobile dialogue system (an Android
app) called Spacebook that addresses the problem
of pedestrian navigation and tourist information in
urban environments. There has been little prior
work that addresses these two problems - naviga-
tion and tourist information provision - in an inte-
grated way. By navigation, we refer to the prob-
lem of finding appropriate destinations to go to
and the task of wayfinding to reach them and by
tourist information provision we refer to the prob-
lem of meeting the informational needs of a user
about entities such as museums, statues and fa-
mous personalities. A dialogue system such as this
could serve as a personal tour guide to pedestrian
tourists as they walk around unknown cities. With
the proliferation of smartphones, there has been a

number of mobile apps developed to address these
problems. However these apps have the following
problems: first, they demand the user’s visual at-
tention because they predominantly present infor-
mation on a mobile screen. This can be dangerous
in urban environments, as well as being distract-
ing. Second, these apps address the problems of
navigation and tourist information independently
and therefore do not have a shared interaction con-
text. This means that users cannot switch between
information and navigation tasks in a natural and
fluid manner.

User1: Take me to the National Museum.

System2: The National Museum is about 300m away..

System3: At the KFC, turn left on to South Bridge

System4 : Near you is the statue of David Hume.
User2: Who is David Hume.

System5: David Hume was a Scottish philosopher....

User3: Tell me more about David Hume.

System6: He was one of the most important figures in..

System7: You should be able to see the museum ...
User4: Tell me more about the museum.
System8: The National Museum of Scotland is a....

Table 1: An example interaction with the evalu-
ated system

In contrast to many existing mobile apps,
Spacebook has a speech-only interface and ad-
dresses both problems in an integrated way. We
conjecture that with a speech-only interface, users
can immerse themselves in exploring the city,
and that because of the shared context they can
switch between navigation and tourist information
tasks more easily. Using the navigational context,
Spacebook pushes point-of-interest information
which can then initiate tourist information tasks
using the QA module. Table 1 presents an example
interaction with our system showing the integrated
use of navigation and question-answering capabil-

1660



ities. Utterances System4-8 show the system’s ca-
pability to push information about nearby points-
of-interest (PoI) during a navigation task and an-
swer followup questions using the QA system (in
utterances User2 and User3). The final 3 utter-
ances show a natural switch between navigation to
an entity and QA about that entity.

We investigate whether our system using a com-
bination of geographical information system (GIS)
and natural language processing (NLP) technolo-
gies would be a better companion to pedestrian
city explorers than the current state-of-the-art mo-
bile apps. We hypothesize that, (1) users will find
our speech-only interface to navigation efficient as
it allows them to navigate without having to re-
peatedly look at a map and (2), that users will
find a dialogue interface which integrates touris-
tic question-answering and navigation within a
shared context to be useful for finding information
about entities in the urban environment. We first
present some related work in section 2. We de-
scribe the architecture of the system in section 3.
We then present our experimental design, results
and analysis in sections 5, 6 and 7.

2 Related work

Mobile apps such as Siri, Google Maps Naviga-
tion, Sygic, etc. address the problem of naviga-
tion while apps like Triposo, Guidepal, Wikihood,
etc. address the problem of tourist information by
presenting the user with descriptive information
about various points of interest (PoI) in the city.
While some exploratory apps present snippets of
information about a precompiled list of PoIs, other
apps dynamically generate a list of PoIs arranged
based on their proximity to the users. Users can
also obtain specific information about PoIs using
Search apps. Also, since these navigation and ex-
ploratory/search apps do not address both prob-
lems in an integrated way, users need to switch
between them and therefore lose interaction con-
text.

While most apps address these two problems
independently, some like Google Now, Google
Field Trip, etc, mix navigation with exploration.
But such apps present information primarily vi-
sually on the screen for the user to read. Some
of these are available for download at the Google
Play Android app store1. Several dialogue and
natural language systems have addressed the issue

1https://play.google.com/store

of pedestrian navigation (Malaka and Zipf, 2000;
Raubal and Winter, 2002; Dale et al., 2003; Bar-
tie and Mackaness, 2006; Shroder et al., 2011;
Dethlefs and Cuayáhuitl, 2011). There has also
been recent interest in shared tasks for generat-
ing navigation instructions in indoor and urban en-
vironments (Byron et al., 2007; Janarthanam and
Lemon, 2011). Some dialogue systems deal with
presenting information concerning points of inter-
est (Ko et al., 2005; Kashioka et al., 2011) and in-
teractive question answering (Webb and Webber,
2009).

In contrast, Spacebook has the objective of
keeping the user’s cognitive load low and prevent-
ing users from being distracted (perhaps danger-
ously so) from walking in the city (Kray et al.,
2003). Also, it allows users to interleave the two
sub-tasks seamlessly and can keep entities dis-
cussed in both tasks in shared context (as shown
in Table 1).

3 Architecture

The architecture of the Spacebook system is
shown in figure 1. Our architecture brings to-
gether Spoken Dialogue Systems (SDS), Geo-
graphic Information Systems (GIS) and Question-
Answering (QA) technologies (Janarthanam et al.,
2012). Its essentially a spoken dialogue system
(SDS) consisting of an automatic speech recog-
niser (ASR), a semantic parser, an Interaction
Manager, an utterance generator and a text-to-
speech synthesizer (TTS). The GIS modules in
this architecture are the City Model, the Visibility
Engine, and the Pedestrian tracker. Users commu-
nicate with the system using a smartphone-based
client app (an Android app) that sends users’ po-
sition, pace rate, and spoken utterances to the sys-
tem, and delivers synthesised system utterances to
the user.

Figure 1: System Architecture

1661



3.1 Dialogue interface

The dialogue interface consists of a speech recog-
nition module, an utterance parser, an interaction
manager, an utterance generator and a speech syn-
thesizer. The Nuance 9 speech recogniser with
a domain specific language model was used for
speech recognition. The recognised speech is cur-
rently parsed using a rule-based parser into dia-
logue acts and semantic content.

The Interaction Manager (IM) is the central
component of this architecture, which provides
the user with navigational instructions, pushes PoI
information and manages QA questions. It re-
ceives the user’s input in the form of a dialogue
act (DA), the user’s location (latitude and longi-
tude) and pace rate. Based on these inputs and the
dialogue context, it responds with system output
dialogue act, based on a dialogue policy. The IM
initiates the conversation with a calibration phase
where the user’s initial location and orientation are
obtained. The user can then initiate tasks that in-
terest him/her. These tasks include searching for
an entity (e.g. a museum or a restaurant), request-
ing navigation instructions to a destination, ask-
ing questions about the entities in the City Model,
and so on. When the user is mobile, the IM iden-
tifies points of interest2 on the route proximal to
the user. We call this “PoI push”. The user is en-
couraged to ask for more information if he/she is
interested. The system also answers adhoc ques-
tions from the user (e.g. “Who is David Hume?”,
“What is the Old College?”, etc) (see section 3.4).

Navigation instructions are given in-situ by ob-
serving user’s position continuously, in relation
to the next node (street junction) on the current
planned route, and they are given priority if in con-
flict with a PoI push at the same time. Navigation
instructions use landmarks near route nodes when-
ever possible (e.g. “When you reach Clydesdale
Bank , keep walking forward”). The IM also in-
forms when users pass by recognisable landmarks,
just to reassure them that they are on track (e.g.
“You will pass by Tesco on the right”). In addition
to navigation instructions, the IM also answers
users’ questions concerning the route, his/her lo-
cation, and location of and distance to the various
entities. Finally, the IM uses the city model’s Vis-
ibility Engine (VE) to determine whether the des-
tination is visible to the user (see section 3.3).

2Using high scoring ones when there are many, based on
tourist popularity ratings in the City Model.

The shared spatial and dialogue context em-
ploys a feature-based representation which is up-
dated every 1 second (for location), and after every
dialogue turn. Spatial context such as the user’s
coordinates, street names, PoIs and landmarks
proximal to the user, etc are used by PoI push-
ing and navigation. The dialogue context main-
tains the history of landmarks and PoIs pushed,
latest entities mentioned, etc to resolve anaphoric
references in navigation and QA requests, and to
deliver coherent dialogue responses. The IM re-
solves anaphoric references by keeping a record
of entities mentioned in the dialogue context. It
also engages in clarification sub-dialogues when
the speech recognition confidence scores are low.
The IM stores the name and type information for
each entity (such as landmark, building, etc) men-
tioned in navigation instructions and PoI pushes.
Subsequent references to these entities using ex-
pressions such as “the museum”, “the cafe” etc
are resolved by searching for the latest entity of
the given type. Pronouns are resolved to the last
mentioned entity.

The IM also switches between navigation, PoI
push, and QA tasks in an intelligent manner by
using the shared context to prioritise its utterances
from these different tasks. The utterance genera-
tor is a Natural Language Generation module that
translates the system DA into surface text which is
converted into speech using the Cereproc Text-to-
Speech Synthesizer using a Scottish female voice.
The only changes made were minor adjustments
to the pronunciation of certain place names.

3.2 Pedestrian tracker
Urban environments can be challenging with lim-
ited sky views, and hence limited line of sight
to satellites, in deep urban corridors. There is
therefore significant uncertainty about the user’s
true location reported by GNSS sensors on smart-
phones (Zandbergen and Barbeau, 2011). This
module improves on the reported user position
by combining smartphone sensor data (e.g. ac-
celerometer) with map matching techniques, to
determine the most likely location of the pedes-
trian (Bartie and Mackaness, 2012).

3.3 City Model
The City Model is a spatial database containing
information about thousands of entities in the city
of Edinburgh (Bartie and Mackaness, 2013). This
data has been collected from a variety of exist-

1662



ing resources such as Ordnance Survey, Open-
StreetMap, Google Places, and the Gazetteer for
Scotland. It includes the location, use class, name,
street address, and where relevant other properties
such as build date and tourist ratings. The model
also includes a pedestrian network (streets, pave-
ments, tracks, steps, open spaces) which is used
by an embedded route planner to calculate min-
imal cost routes, such as the shortest path. The
city model also consists of a Visibility Engine
that identifies the entities that are in the user’s
vista space (Montello, 1993). To do this it ac-
cesses a digital surface model, sourced from Li-
DAR, which is a 2.5D representation of the city
including buildings, vegetation, and land surface
elevation. The Visibility Engine uses this dataset
to offer a number of services, such as determining
the line of sight from the observer to nominated
points (e.g. which junctions are visible), and de-
termining which entities within the city model are
visible. Using these services, the IM determines if
the destination is visible or not.

3.4 Question-Answering server

The QA server currently answers a range of def-
inition and biographical questions such as, “Tell
me more about the Scottish Parliament”, “Who
was David Hume?”, “What is haggis?”, and re-
quests to resume (eg. “Tell me more”). QA
is also capable of recognizing out of scope re-
quests, that is, either navigation-related questions
that can be answered by computations from the
City Model and dealt with elsewhere in the sys-
tem (“How far away is the Scottish Parliament?”,
“How do I get there?”), or exploration queries
that cannot be handled yet (“When is the can-
non gun fired from the castle?”). Question clas-
sification is entirely machine learning-based using
the SMO algorithm (Keerthi et al., 1999) trained
over 2013 annotated utterances. Once the question
has been typed, QA proceeds to focus detection
also using machine learning techniques (Mikhail-
sian et al., 2009). Detected foci include possi-
bly anaphoric expressions (“Who was he?”, “Tell
me more about the castle”). These expressions
are resolved against the dialogue history and ge-
ographical context. QA then proceeds to a tex-
tual search on texts from the Gazetteer of Scotland
(Gittings, 2012) and Wikipedia, and definitions
from WordNet glosses. The task is similar to TAC
KBP 2013 Entity Linking Track and named en-

tity disambiguation (Cucerzan, 2007). Candidate
answers are reranked using a trained confidence
score with the top candidate used as the final an-
swer. These are usually long, descriptive answers
and are provided as a flow of sentence chunks that
the user can interrupt (see table 2). The Interaction
Manager queries the QA model and pushes infor-
mation when a salient PoI is in the vicinity of the
user.

“Edinburgh’s most famous and historic thoroughfare,
which has formed the heart of the Old Town since
mediaeval times. The Royal Mile includes Castlehill,
the Lawnmarket, the Canongate and the Abbey Strand,
but, is officially known simply as the High Street.”

Table 2: QA output: query on “Royal Mile”

3.5 Mobile client

The mobile client app, installed on an Android
smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S3), connects the
user to the dialogue system using a 3G data con-
nection. The client senses the user’s location us-
ing positioning technology using GNSS satellites
(GPS and GLONASS) which is sent to the dia-
logue system at the rate of one update every two
seconds. It also sends pace rate of the user from
the accelerometer sensor. In parallel, the client
also places a phone call using which the user com-
municates with the dialogue system.

4 Baseline system

The baseline system chosen for evaluation was
Samsung S-Voice, a state-of-the-art commercial
smartphone speech interface. S-Voice is a Sam-
sung Android mobile phone app that allows a user
to use the functionalities of device using a speech
interface. For example, the user can say “Call
John” and it will dial John from the user’s con-
tacts. It launches the Google Navigation app when
users request directions and it activates Google
Search for open ended touristic information ques-
tions. The Navigation app is capable of providing
instructions in-situ using speech. We used the S-
Voice system for comparison because it provided
an integrated state-of-the-art interface to use both
a navigation app and also an information-seeking
app using the same speech interface. Users were
encouraged to use these apps using speech but
were allowed to use the GUI interface when us-
ing speech wasn’t working (e.g. misrecognition of
local names). Users obtained the same kind of in-

1663



formation (i.e. navigation directions, descriptions
about entities such as people, places, etc) from the
baseline system as they would from our system.
However, our system interacted with the user us-
ing the speech modality only.

5 Experimental design

Spacebook and the baseline were evaluated in the
summer of 2012. We evaluated both systems with
17 subjects in the streets of Edinburgh. There
were 11 young subjects (between 20 and 26 years,
mean=22 ± 2) and 6 older subjects (between 50
and 71 years, mean=61 ± 11). They were mostly
native English speakers (88%). 59% of the users
were regular smartphone users and their mean
overall time spent in the city was 76 months. The
test subjects had no previous experience with the
proposed system. They were recruited via email
adverts and mail shots. Subjects were given a task
sheet with 8 tasks in two legs (4 tasks per leg).
These tasks included both navigation and tourist
information tasks (see table 3). Subjects used our
system for one of the legs and the baseline system
for the other and the order was balanced. Each leg
took up to 30 mins to finish and the total duration
including questionnaires was about 1.5 hours. Fig-
ure 2 shows the route taken by the subjects. The
route is about 1.3 miles long. Subjects were fol-
lowed by the evaluator who made notes on their
behaviour (e.g. subject looks confused, subject
looks at or manipulates the phone, subject looks
around, etc).

Subjects filled in a demographic questionnaire
prior to the experiment. After each leg, they filled
in a system questionnaire (see appendix) rating
their experience. After the end of the experi-
ment, they filled out a comparative questionnaire
and were debriefed. They were optionally asked
to elaborate on their questionnaire ratings. Users
were paid £20 after the experiment was over.

6 Results

Subjects were asked to identify tasks that they
thought were successfully completed. The per-
ceived task success rates of the two systems were
compared for each task using the Chi square test.
The results show that there is no statistically sig-
nificant difference between the two systems in
terms of perceived task success although the base-
line system had a better task completion rate in
tasks 1-3, 5 and 6. Our system performed better in

Figure 2: Task route

tourist information tasks (4, 7) (see table 4).

Task Our system Baseline p
T1 (N) 77.7 100 0.5058
T2 (TI) 88.8 100 0.9516
T3 (N) 100 100 NA
T4 (TI) 100 87.5 0.9516
T5 (N+TI) 62.5 100 0.1654
T6 (N+TI) 87.5 100 0.9516
T7 (TI) 100 55.5 0.2926
T8 (N) 75.0 88.8 0.9105

Table 4: % Perceived Task success - task wise
comparison (N - navigation task, TI - Tourist In-
formation task)

The system questionnaires that were filled out
by users after each leg were analysed. These
consisted of questions concerning each system to
be rated on a six point Likert scale (1-Strongly
Disagree, 2-Disagree, 3-Somewhat Disagree, 4-
Somewhat Agree, 5-Agree, 6-Strongly Agree).
The responses were paired and tested using a
Wilcoxon Sign Rank test. Median and Mode for
each system and significance in differences are
shown in table 5. Results show that although
our system is not performing significantly better
than the baseline system (SQ1-SQ10 except SQ7),
users seem to find it more understanding (SQ7)
and more interesting to interact with (SQ11) than
the baseline. We grouped the subjects by age
group and tested their responses. We found that
the young subjects (age group 20-26), also felt that

1664



Leg 1
(Task 1) Ask the system to guide you to the Red Fort restaurant.
(Task 2) You’ve heard that Mary Queen of Scots lived in Edinburgh. Find out about her.
(Task 3) Walk to the university gym.
(Task 4) Near the gym there is an ancient wall with a sign saying “Flodden Wall”. Find out what that is.
Leg 2
(Task 5) Try to find John Knox House and learn about the man.
(Task 6) Ask the system to guide you to the Old College. What can you learn about this building?
(Task 7) Try to find out more about famous Edinburgh people and places, for example, David Hume,
John Napier, and Ian Rankin. Try to find information about people and places that you are personally
interested in or that are related to what you see around you.
(Task 8) Ask the system to guide you back to the Informatics Forum.

Table 3: Tasks for the user

they learned something new about the city using it
(SQ12) (p < 0.05) while the elderly (age group
50-71) didn’t. We also found statistically signifi-
cant differences in smartphone users rating for our
system on their learning compared to the baseline
(SQ12).

Subjects were also asked to choose between the
two systems given a number of requirements such
as ease of use, use for navigation, tourist infor-
mation, etc. There was an option to rank the sys-
tems equally (i.e. a tie). They were presented with
the same requirements as the system questionnaire
with one additional question - “Overall which sys-
tem do you prefer?” (CQ0). Users’ choice of sys-
tem based on a variety of requirements is shown
in table 6. Users’ choice counts were tested us-
ing Chi-square test. Significant differences were
found in users’ choice of system for navigation
and tourist information requirements. Users pre-
ferred the baseline system for navigation (CQ2)
and our system for touristic information (CQ3) on
the city. Although there was a clear choice of sys-
tems based on the two tasks, there was no signifi-
cant preference of one system over the other over-
all (CQ0). They chose our system as the most in-
teresting system to interact with (CQ11) and that
it was more informative than the baseline (CQ12).
Figure 3 shows the relative frequency between
user choices on comparative questions.

7 Analysis

Users found it somewhat difficult to navigate using
Spacebook (see comments in table 7). Although
the perceived task success shows that our system
was able to get the users to their destination and
there was no significant difference between the
two systems based on their questionnaire response
on navigation, they pointed out a number of issues
and suggested a number of modifications. Many

Figure 3: Responses to comparative questions

users noted that a visual map and the directional
arrow in the baseline system was helpful for nav-
igation. In addition, they noted that our system’s
navigation instructions were sometimes not satis-
factory. They observed that there weren’t enough
instructions coming from the system at street junc-
tions. They needed more confirmatory utterances
(that they are walking in the right direction) (5
users) and quicker recovery and notification when
walking the wrong way (5 users). They observed
that the use of street names was confusing some-
times. Some users also wanted a route summary
before the navigation instructions are given.

The problem with Spacebook’s navigation pol-
icy was that it did not, for example, direct the
user via easily visible landmarks (e.g. “Head to-
wards the Castle”), and relies too much on street
names. Also, due to the latency in receiving GPS
information, the IM sometimes did not present in-
structions soon enough during evaluation. Some-
times it received erroneous GPS information and
therefore got the user’s orientation wrong. These
problems will be addressed in the future version.
Some users did find navigation instructions use-
ful because of the use of proximal landmarks such

1665



Question B Mode B Median S Mode S Median p
SQ1 - Ease of use 4 4 5 4 0.8207
SQ2 - Navigation 4 4 5 4 0.9039
SQ3 - Tourist Information 2 3 4 4 0.07323
SQ4 - Easy to understand 5 5 5 5 0.7201
SQ5 - Useful messages 5 4 5 4 1
SQ6 - Response time 5 5 2 2 0.2283
SQ7 - Understanding 3 3 5 4 0.02546
SQ8 - Repetitive 2 3 2 3 0.3205
SQ9 - Aware of user environment 5 5 4 4 0.9745
SQ10 - Cues for guidance 5 5 5 5 0.1371
SQ11 - Interesting to interact with 5 4 5 5 0.01799
SQ12 - Learned something new 5 4 5 5 0.08942

Table 5: System questionnaire responses (B=Baseline, S=our system)

Task Baseline Our system Tie p-
Preferred Preferred value

CQ0 23.52 35.29 41.17 0.66
CQ1 35.29 29.41 35.29 0.9429
CQ2 64.70 0 35.29 0.004
CQ3 17.64 64.70 17.64 0.0232
CQ4 35.29 29.41 23.52 0.8187
CQ5 23.52 52.94 23.52 0.2298
CQ6 23.52 29.41 35.29 0.8187
CQ7 17.64 47.05 35.29 0.327
CQ8 29.41 23.52 47.05 0.4655
CQ9 29.41 52.94 17.64 0.1926
CQ10 47.05 29.41 23.52 0.4655
CQ11 5.88 76.47 17.64 0.0006
CQ12 0 70.58 29.41 0.005

Table 6: User’s choice on comparative questions
(CQ are the same questions as SQ but requesting
a ranking of the 2 systems)

as KFC, Tesco, etc. (popular chain stores). Some
users also suggested that our system should have
a map and that routes taken should be plotted on
them for reference. Based on the ratings and ob-
servations made by the users, we conclude that our
first hypothesis that Spacebook would be more ef-
ficient for navigation than the baseline because of
its speech-only interface was inconclusive. We be-
lieve so because users’ poor ratings for Spacebook
may be due to the current choice of dialogue pol-
icy for navigation. It may be possible to reassure
the user with a better dialogue policy with just the
speech interface. However, this needs further in-
vestigation.

Users found the information-search task inter-
esting and informative when they used Spacebook
(see sample user comments in table 8). They
also found push information on nearby PoIs un-
expected and interesting as they would not have
found them otherwise. Many users believed that
this could be an interesting feature that could help
tourists. They also found that asking questions and

finding answers was much easier with Spacebook
compared to the baseline system, where some-
times users needed to type search keywords in.
Another user observation was that they did not
have to stop to listen to information presented
by our system (as it was in speech) and could
carry on walking. However, with the baseline sys-
tem, they had to stop to read information off the
screen. Although users in general liked the QA
feature, many complained that Spacebook spoke
too quickly when it was presenting answers. Some
users felt that the system might lose context of the
navigation task if presented with a PoI question.
In contrast, some others noted Spacebook’s ability
to interleave the two tasks and found it to be an
advantage.

Users’ enthusiasm for our system was observed
when (apart from the points of interest that were
in the experimental task list) they also asked spon-
taneous questions about James Watt, the Talbot
Rice gallery, the Scottish Parliament and Edin-
burgh Castle. Some of the PoIs that the system
pushed information about were the Royal College
of Surgeons, the Flodden Wall, the Museum of
Childhood, and the Scottish Storytelling Centre.
Our system answered a mean of 2.5 out of 6.55
questions asked by users in leg 1 and 4.88 out of
8.5 questions in leg 2. Please note that an utter-
ance is sent to QA if it is not parsed by the parser
and therefore some utterances may not be legit-
mate questions themselves. Users were pushed a
mean of 2.88 and 6.37 PoIs during legs 1 and 2.
There were a total of 17 “tell me more” requests
requesting the system to present more information
(mean=1.35 ± 1.57).

Evaluators who followed the subjects noted that
the subjects felt difficulty using the baseline sys-
tem as they sometimes struggled to see the screen

1666



1. “It’s useful when it says ’Keep walking’ but it should say it more often.”
2. “[Your system] not having a map, it was sometimes difficult to check how aware it was of my environment.”
3. “[Google] seemed to be easier to follow as you have a map as well to help.”
4. “It told me I had the bank and Kentucky Fried Chicken so I crossed the road because I knew it’d be somewhere over
beside them. I thought ’OK, great. I’m going the right way.’ but then it didn’t say anything else. I like those kind of
directions because when it said to go down Nicolson Street I was looking around trying to find a street sign.”
5. “The system keeps saying ’when we come to a junction, I will tell you where to go’, but I passed junctions and it
didn’t say anything. It should say ’when you need to change direction, I will tell you.’”
6. “I had to stop most of the times for the system to be aware of my position. If walking very slowly, its awareness of
both landmarks and streets is excellent.”

Table 7: Sample user comments on the navigation task

1. “Google doesn’t *offer* any information. I would have to know what to ask for...”
2. “Since many information is given without being asked for (by your system), one can discover new places and
landmarks even if he lives in the city. Great feature!!”
3. “I didn’t feel confident to ask [your system] a question and still feel it would remember my directions”
4. “Google could only do one thing at a time, you couldn’t find directions for a place whilst learning more.”
5. “If she talked a little bit slower [I would use the system for touristic purposes]. She just throws masses of information
really, really quickly.”

Table 8: Sample user comments on the tourist information task

in bright sunlight. They sometimes had difficulty
identifying which way to go based on the route
plotted on the map. In comparison, subjects did
not have to look at the screen when they used
our system. Based on the ratings and observa-
tions made by the users about our system’s tourist
information features such as answering questions
and pushing PoI information, we have support for
our second hypothesis: that users find a dialogue
interface which integrates question-answering and
navigation within a shared context to be useful for
finding information about entities in the urban en-
vironment.

8 Future plans

We plan to extend Spacebook’s capabilities to ad-
dress other challenges in pedestrian navigation and
tourist information. Many studies have shown
that visible landmarks provide better cues for nav-
igation than street names (Ashweeni and Steed,
2006; Hiley et al., 2008). We will use visible
landmarks identified using the visibility engine to
make navigation instructions more effective, and
we plan to include entities in dialogue and visual
context as candidates for PoI push, and to imple-
ment an adaptive strategy that will estimate user
interests and push information that is of interest
to them. We are also taking advantage of user’s
local knowledge of the city to present navigation
instructions only for the part of the route that the
user does not have any knowledge of. These fea-
tures, we believe, will make users’ experience of

the interface more pleasant, useful and informa-
tive.

9 Conclusion

We presented a mobile dialogue app called Space-
book to support pedestrian users in navigation
and tourist information gathering in urban envi-
ronments. The system is a speech-only interface
and addresses navigation and tourist information
in an integrated way, using a shared dialogue con-
text. For example, using the navigational context,
Spacebook can push point-of-interest information
which can then initiate touristic exploration tasks
using the QA module.

We evaluated the system against a state-of-the-
art baseline (Samsung S-Voice with Google Navi-
gation and Search) with a group of 17 users in the
streets of Edinburgh. We found that users found
Spacebook interesting to interact with, and that
it was their system of choice for touristic infor-
mation exploration tasks. These results were sta-
tistically significant. Based on observations and
user ratings, we conclude that our speech-only
system was less preferred for navigation and more
preferred for tourist information tasks due to fea-
tures such as PoI pushing and the integrated QA
module, when compared to the baseline system.
Younger users, who used Spacebook, even felt that
they learned new facts about the city.

Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results was funded by the Eu-
ropean Commission’s Framework 7 programme under grant

1667



agreement no. 270019 (SPACEBOOK project).

References
K. B. Ashweeni and A. Steed. 2006. A natural

wayfinding exploiting photos in pedestrian naviga-
tion systems. In Proceedings of the 8th conference
on Human-computer interaction with mobile devices
and services.

P. Bartie and W. Mackaness. 2006. Development
of a speech-based augmented reality system to sup-
port exploration of cityscape. Transactions in GIS,
10:63–86.

P. Bartie and W. Mackaness. 2012. D3.4 Pedestrian
Position Tracker. Technical report, The SPACE-
BOOK Project (FP7/2011-2014 grant agreement no.
270019).

P. Bartie and W. Mackaness. 2013. D3.1.2 The Space-
Book City Model. Technical report, The SPACE-
BOOK Project (FP7/2011-2014 grant agreement no.
270019).

D. Byron, A. Koller, J. Oberlander, L. Stoia, and
K. Striegnitz. 2007. Generating Instructions in Vir-
tual Environments (GIVE): A challenge and evalua-
tion testbed for NLG. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Shared Tasks and Comparative Evaluation
in Natural Language Generation.

S. Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity disam-
biguation based on Wikipedia data. In Proceedings
of EMNLP-CoNLL.

R. Dale, S. Geldof, and J. Prost. 2003. CORAL : Using
Natural Language Generation for Navigational As-
sistance. In Proceedings of ACSC2003, Australia.

Nina Dethlefs and Heriberto Cuayáhuitl. 2011. Hierar-
chical Reinforcement Learning and Hidden Markov
Models for Task-Oriented Natural Language Gener-
ation. In Proc. of ACL.

B. Gittings. 2012. The Gazetteer for Scotland -
http://www.scottish-places.info.

H. Hiley, R. Vedantham, G. Cuellar, A. Liuy,
N. Gelfand, R. Grzeszczuk, and G. Borriello. 2008.
Landmark-based pedestrian navigation from collec-
tions of geotagged photos. In Proceedings of the
7th Int. Conf. on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia
(MUM).

S. Janarthanam and O. Lemon. 2011. The GRUVE
Challenge: Generating Routes under Uncertainty in
Virtual Environments. In Proceedings of ENLG.

S. Janarthanam, O. Lemon, X. Liu, P. Bartie, W. Mack-
aness, T. Dalmas, and J. Goetze. 2012. Integrat-
ing location, visibility, and Question-Answering in
a spoken dialogue system for Pedestrian City Explo-
ration. In Proc. of SIGDIAL 2012, S. Korea.

H. Kashioka, T. Misu, E. Mizukami, Y. Shiga,
K. Kayama, C. Hori, and H. Kawai. 2011. Multi-
modal Dialog System for Kyoto Sightseeing Guide.
In Asia-Pacific Signal and Information Processing
Association Annual Summit and Conference.

S.S. Keerthi, S. K. Shevade, C. Bhattacharyya, and
K. R. K. Murthy. 1999. Improvements to Platt’s
SMO Algorithm for SVM Classifier Design. Neural
Computation, 3:637–649.

J. Ko, F. Murase, T. Mitamura, E. Nyberg, M. Tateishi,
I. Akahori, and N. Hataoka. 2005. CAMMIA: A
Context-Aware Spoken Dialog System for Mobile
Environments. In IEEE ASRU Workshop.

C. Kray, K. Laakso, C. Elting, and V. Coors. 2003.
Presenting Route Instructions on Mobile Devices.
In Proceedings of IUI 03, Florida.

R. Malaka and A. Zipf. 2000. Deep Map - challenging
IT research in the framework of a tourist information
system. In Information and Communication Tech-
nologies in Tourism 2000, pages 15–27. Springer.

A. Mikhailsian, T. Dalmas, and R. Pinchuk. 2009.
Learning foci for question answering over topic
maps. In Proceedings of ACL 2009.

D. Montello. 1993. Scale and multiple psychologies
of space. In A. U. Frank and I. Campari, editors,
Spatial information theory: A theoretical basis for
GIS.

M. Raubal and S. Winter. 2002. Enriching wayfinding
instructions with local landmarks. In Second Inter-
national Conference GIScience. Springer, USA.

C.J. Shroder, W. Mackaness, and B. Gittings. 2011.
Giving the Right Route Directions: The Require-
ments for Pedestrian Navigation Systems. Transac-
tions in GIS, pages 419–438.

N. Webb and B. Webber. 2009. Special Issue on Inter-
active Question Answering: Introduction. Natural
Language Engineering, 15(1):1–8.

P. A. Zandbergen and S. J. Barbeau. 2011. Posi-
tional Accuracy of Assisted GPS Data from High-
Sensitivity GPS-enabled Mobile Phones. Journal of
Navigation, 64(3):381–399.

1668


