



















































IndoNet: A Multilingual Lexical Knowledge Network for Indian Languages


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 268–272,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

IndoNet: A Multilingual Lexical Knowledge Network for Indian
Languages

Brijesh Bhatt Lahari Poddar Pushpak Bhattacharyya
Center for Indian Language Technology
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay

Mumbai, India
{ brijesh, lahari, pb } @cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

We present IndoNet, a multilingual lexi-
cal knowledge base for Indian languages.
It is a linked structure of wordnets of
18 different Indian languages, Universal
Word dictionary and the Suggested Up-
per Merged Ontology (SUMO). We dis-
cuss various benefits of the network and
challenges involved in the development.
The system is encoded in Lexical Markup
Framework (LMF) and we propose mod-
ifications in LMF to accommodate Uni-
versal Word Dictionary and SUMO. This
standardized version of lexical knowledge
base of Indian Languages can now easily
be linked to similar global resources.

1 Introduction

Lexical resources play an important role in nat-
ural language processing tasks. Past couple of
decades have shown an immense growth in the de-
velopment of lexical resources such as wordnet,
Wikipedia, ontologies etc. These resources vary
significantly in structure and representation for-
malism.

In order to develop applications that can make
use of different resources, it is essential to link
these heterogeneous resources and develop a com-
mon representation framework. However, the dif-
ferences in encoding of knowledge and multilin-
guality are the major road blocks in development
of such a framework. Particularly, in a multilin-
gual country like India, information is available in
many different languages. In order to exchange in-
formation across cultures and languages, it is es-
sential to create an architecture to share various
lexical resources across languages.

In this paper we present IndoNet, a lexical re-
source created by merging wordnets of 18 dif-

ferent Indian languages1, Universal Word Dictio-
nary (Uchida et al., 1999) and an upper ontology,
SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2001).

Universal Word (UW), defined by a headword
and a set of restrictions which give an unambigu-
ous representation of the concept, forms the vo-
cabulary of Universal Networking Language. Sug-
gested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) is the
largest freely available ontology which is linked
to the entire English WordNet (Niles and Pease,
2003). Though UNL is a graph based repre-
sentation and SUMO is a formal ontology, both
provide language independent conceptualization.
This makes them suitable candidates for interlin-
gua.

IndoNet is encoded in Lexical Markup Frame-
work (LMF), an ISO standard (ISO-24613) for
encoding lexical resources (Francopoulo et al.,
2009).

The contribution of this work is twofold,

1. We propose an architecture to link lexical re-
sources of Indian languages.

2. We propose modifications in Lexical Markup
Framework to create a linked structure of
multilingual lexical resources and ontology.

2 Related Work

Over the years wordnet has emerged as the most
widely used lexical resource. Though most of the
wordnets are built by following the standards laid
by English Wordnet (Fellbaum, 1998), their con-
ceptualizations differ because of the differences in
lexicalization of concepts across languages. ‘Not

1Wordnets for Indian languages are developed in In-
doWordNet project. Wordnets are available in following
Indian languages: Assamese, Bodo, Bengali, English, Gu-
jarati, Hindi, Kashmiri, Konkani, Kannada, Malayalam, Ma-
nipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Punjabi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu and
Urdu. These languages covers 3 different language families,
Indo Aryan, Sino-Tebetian and Dravidian.http://www.
cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet

268



only that, there exist lexical gaps where a word
in one language has no correspondence in another
language, but there are differences in the ways lan-
guages structure their words and concepts’. (Pease
and Fellbaum, 2010).

The challenge of constructing a unified multi-
lingual resource was first addressed in EuroWord-
Net (Vossen, 1998). EuroWordNet linked word-
nets of 8 different European languages through
a common interlingual index (ILI). ILI consists
of English synsets and serves as a pivot to link
other wordnets. While ILI allows each language
wordnet to preserve its semantic structure, it has
two basic drawbacks as described in Fellbaum and
Vossen (2012),

1. An ILI tied to one specific language clearly
reflects only the inventory of the language it
is based on, and gaps show up when lexicons
of different languages are mapped to it.

2. The semantic space covered by a word in one
language often overlaps only partially with a
similar word in another language, resulting in
less than perfect mappings.

Subsequently in KYOTO project2, ontologies are
preferred over ILI for linking of concepts of dif-
ferent languages. Ontologies provide language in-
dpendent conceptualization, hence the linking re-
mains unbiased to a particular language. Top level
ontology SUMO is used to link common base
concepts across languages. Because of the small
size of the top level ontology, only a few wordnet
synsets can be linked directly to the ontological
concept and most of the synsets get linked through
subsumption relation. This leads to a significant
amount of information loss.

KYOTO project used Lexical Markup Frame-
work (LMF) (Francopoulo et al., 2009) as a rep-
resentation language. ‘LMF provides a com-
mon model for the creation and use of lexical re-
sources, to manage the exchange of data among
these resources, and to enable the merging of a
large number of individual electronic resources to
form extensive global electronic resources’ (Fran-
copoulo et al., 2009). Soria et al. (2009) proposed
WordNet-LMF to represent wordnets in LMF for-
mat. Henrich and Hinrichs (2010) have further
modified Wordnet-LMF to accommodate lexical

2http://kyoto-project.eu/xmlgroup.iit.
cnr.it/kyoto/index.html

relations. LMF also provides extensions for multi-
lingual lexicons and for linking external resources,
such as ontology. However, LMF does not explic-
itly define standards to share a common ontology
among multilingual lexicons.

Our work falls in line with EuroWordNet and
Kyoto except for the following key differences,

• Instead of using ILI, we use a ‘common con-
cept hierarchy’ as a backbone to link lexicons
of different languages.

• In addition to an upper ontology, a concept in
common concept hierarchy is also linked to
Universal Word Dictionary. Universal Word
dictionary provides additional semantic in-
formation regarding argument types of verbs,
that can be used to provide clues for selec-
tional preference of a verb.

• We refine LMF to link external resources
(e.g. ontologies) with multilingual lexicon
and to represent Universal Word Dictionary.

3 IndoNet

IndoNet uses a common concept hierarchy to
link various heterogeneous lexical resources. As
shown in figure 1, concepts of different wordnets,
Universal Word Dictionary and Upper Ontology
are merged to form the common concept hierar-
chy. Figure 1 shows how concepts of English
WordNet (EWN), Hindi Wordnet (HWN), upper
ontology (SUMO) and Universal Word Dictionary
(UWD) are linked through common concept hier-
archy (CCH).

This section provides details of Common Con-
cept Hierarcy and LMF encoding for different re-
sources.

Figure 1: An Example of Indonet Structure

269



Figure 2: LMF representation for Universal Word Dictionary

3.1 Common Concept Hierarchy (CCH)

The common concept hierarchy is an abstract pivot
index to link lexical resources of all languages. An
element of a common concept hierarchy is defined
as < sinid1, sinid2, ..., uwid, sumoid > where,
sinidi is synset id of ith wordnet, uw id is univer-
sal word id, and sumo id is SUMO term id of the
concept. Unlike ILI, the hypernymy-hyponymy
relations from different wordnets are merged to
construct the concept hierarchy. Each synset of
wordnet is directly linked to a concept in ‘com-
mon concept hierarchy’.

3.2 LMF for Wordnet

We have adapted the Wordnet-LMF, as specified
in Soria et al. (2009). However IndoWordnet
encodes more lexical relations compared to Eu-
roWordnet. We enhanced the Wordnet-LMF to ac-
commodate the following relations: antonym, gra-
dation, hypernymy, meronym, troponymy, entail-
ment and cross part of speech links for ability and
capability.

3.3 LMF for Universal Word Dictionary

A Universal Word is composed of a headword and
a list of restrictions, that provide unique meaning
of the UW. In our architecture we allow each sense
of a headword to have more than one set of restric-
tions (defined by different UW dictionaries) and
be linked to lemmas of multiple languages with a
confidence score. This allows us to merge multiple

UW dictionaries and represent it in LMF format.
We introduce four new LMF classes; Restrictions,
Restriction, Lemmas and Lemma and add new at-
tributes; headword and mapping score to existing
LMF classes.

Figure 2 shows an example of LMF represen-
tation of UW Dictionary. At present, the dic-
tionary is created by merging two dictionaries,
UW++ (Boguslavsky et al., 2007) and CFILT
Hin-UW3. Lemmas from different languages are
mapped to universal words and stored under the
Lemmas class.

3.4 LMF to link ontology with Common
Concept Hierarchy

Figure 3 shows an example LMF representation
of CCH. The interlingual pivot is represented
through SenseAxis. Concepts in different re-
sources are linked to the SenseAxis in such a way
that concepts linked to same SenseAxis convey the
same Sense.

Using LMF class MonolingualExternalRefs,
ontology can be integrated with a monolingual
lexicon. In order to share an ontology among mul-
tilingual resources, we modify the original core
package of LMF.

As shown in figure 3, a SUMO term is shared
across multiple lexicons via the SenseAxis. SUMO
is linked with concept hierarchy using the follow-

3http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/˜hdict/
webinterface_user/

270



Figure 3: LMF representation for Common Concept Hierarchy

ing relations: antonym, hypernym, instance and
equivalent. In order to support these relations,
Reltype attribute is added to the interlingual Sense
class.

4 Observation

Table 1 shows part of speech wise status of linked
concepts4. The concept hierarchy contains 53848
concepts which are shared among wordnets of In-
dian languages, SUMO and Universal Word Dic-
tionary. Out of the total 53848 concepts, 21984 are
linked to SUMO, 34114 are linked to HWN and
44119 are linked to UW. Among these, 12,254 are
common between UW and SUMO and 21984 are
common between wordnet and SUMO.

POS HWN UW SUMO CCH
adjective 5532 2865 3140 5193
adverb 380 2697 249 2813
noun 25721 32831 16889 39620
verb 2481 5726 1706 6222
total 34114 44119 21984 53848

Table 1: Details of the concepts linked

This creates a multilingual semantic lexicon
that captures semantic relations between concepts
of different languages. Figure 1 demonstrates
this with an example of ‘kinship relation’. As

4Table 1 shows data for Hindi Wordnet. Statistics for
other wordnets can be found at http://www.cfilt.
iitb.ac.in/wordnet/webhwn/iwn_stats.php

shown in Figure 1, ‘uncle’ is an English lan-
guage concept defined as ‘the brother of your fa-
ther or mother’. Hindi has no concept equivalent
to ‘uncle’ but there are two more specific concepts
‘kaka’, ‘brother of father.’ and ‘mama’, ‘brother
of mother.’

The lexical gap is captured when these con-
cepts are linked to CCH. Through CCH, these con-
cepts are linked to SUMO term ‘FamilyRelation’
which shows relation between these concepts.
Universal Word Dictionary captures exact rela-
tion between these concepts by applying restric-
tions [chacha] uncle(icl>brother (mod>father))
and [mama] uncle(icl>brother (mod>mother)).
This makes it possible to link concepts across lan-
guages.

5 Conclusion

We have presented a multilingual lexical resource
for Indian languages. The proposed architecture
handles the ‘lexical gap’ and ‘structural diver-
gence’ among languages, by building a common
concept hierarchy. In order to encode this resource
in LMF, we developed standards to represent UW
in LMF.

IndoNet is emerging as the largest multilingual
resource covering 18 languages of 3 different lan-
guage families and it is possible to link or merge
other standardized lexical resources with it.

Since Universal Word dictionary is an integral
part of the system, it can be used for UNL based

271



Machine Translation tasks. Ontological structure
of the system can be used for multilingual infor-
mation retrieval and extraction.

In future, we aim to address ontological issues
of the common concept hierarchy and integrate
domain ontologies with the system. We are also
aiming to develop standards to evaluate such mul-
tilingual resources and to validate axiomatic foun-
dation of the same. We plan to make this resource
freely available to researchers.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the support of the Department of
Information Technology (DIT), Ministry of Com-
munication and Information Technology, Gov-
ernment of India and also of Ministry of Hu-
man Resource Development. We are also grate-
ful to Study Group for Machine Translation and
Automated Processing of Languages and Speech
(GETALP) of the Laboratory of Informatics of
Grenoble (LIG) for assissting us in building the
Universal Word dictionary.

References
I. Boguslavsky, J. Bekios, J. Cardenosa, and C. Gal-

lardo. 2007. Using Wordnet for Building an In-
terlingual Dictionary. In Fifth International Con-
ference Information Research and Applications,
(TECH 2007).

Christiane Fellbaum and Piek Vossen. 2012. Chal-
lenges for a multilingual wordnet. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, 46(2):313–326, june.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. Bradford Books.

Gil Francopoulo, Nuria Bel, Monte George, Nicoletta
Calzolari, Monica Monachini, Mandy Pet, and Clau-
dia Soria. 2009. Multilingual resources for NLP
in the lexical markup framework (LMF). Language
Resources and Evaluation.

Verena Henrich and Erhard Hinrichs. 2010. Standard-
izing wordnets in the ISO standard LMF: Wordnet-
LMF for GermaNet. In Proceedings of the 23rd In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, COLING ’10, pages 456–464, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA.

Ian Niles and Adam Pease. 2001. Towards a standard
upper ontology. In Proceedings of the international
conference on Formal Ontology in Information Sys-
tems - Volume 2001, FOIS ’01, pages 2–9, New York
NY USA. ACM.

Ian Niles and Adam Pease. 2003. Linking Lexicons
and Ontologies: Mapping WordNet to the Suggested

Upper Merged Ontology. In Proceedings Of The
2003 International Conference On Information And
Knowledge Engineering (Ike 03), Las Vegas, pages
412–416.

Adam Pease and Christiane Fellbaum. 2010. Formal
ontology as interlingua: The SUMO and WordNet
linking project and global wordnet. In Ontology and
Lexicon, A Natural Language Processing perspec-
tive, pages 25–35. Cambridge University Press.

Claudia Soria, Monica Monachini, and Piek Vossen.
2009. Wordnet-LMF: fleshing out a standardized
format for wordnet interoperability. In Proceedings
of the 2009 international workshop on Intercultural
collaboration, IWIC ’09, pages 139–146, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

H. Uchida, M. Zhu, and T. Della Senta. 1999. The
UNL- a Gift for the Millenium. United Nations Uni-
versity Press, Tokyo.

Piek Vossen, editor. 1998. EuroWordNet: a mul-
tilingual database with lexical semantic networks.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA.

272


