



















































An Empirical Examination of Challenges in Chinese Parsing


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 98–103,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Empirical Examination of Challenges in Chinese Parsing

Jonathan K. Kummerfeld† Daniel Tse‡ James R. Curran‡ Dan Klein†
†Computer Science Division ‡School of Information Technology

University of California, Berkeley University of Sydney
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia

{jkk,klein}@cs.berkeley.edu {dtse6695,james}@it.usyd.edu.au

Abstract
Aspects of Chinese syntax result in a dis-
tinctive mix of parsing challenges. How-
ever, the contribution of individual sources
of error to overall difficulty is not well un-
derstood. We conduct  a  comprehensive
automatic analysis of error types made by
Chinese parsers, covering a broad range of
error types for large sets of sentences, en-
abling the first empirical ranking of Chi-
nese error types by their performance im-
pact. We also investigate which error types
are resolved by using gold part-of-speech
tags, showing that improving Chinese tag-
ging  only  addresses  certain  error  types,
leaving substantial outstanding challenges.

1 Introduction
A decade of Chinese parsing research, enabled

by the Penn Chinese Treebank (PCTB; Xue et al.,
2005), has seen Chinese parsing performance im-
prove from 76.7 F1 (Bikel and Chiang, 2000) to
84.1 F1 (Qian and Liu, 2012). While recent ad-
vances have focused on understanding and reduc-
ing the errors that occur in segmentation and part-
of-speech tagging (Qian and Liu, 2012; Jiang et al.,
2009; Forst and Fang, 2009), a range of substantial
issues remain that are purely syntactic.

Early work by Levy and Manning (2003) pre-
sented modifications to a parser motivated by a
manual investigation of parsing errors. They noted
substantial differences between Chinese and En-
glish parsing, attributing some of the differences to
treebank annotation decisions and others to mean-
ingful differences in syntax. Based on this analysis
they considered how to modify their parser to cap-
ture the information necessary to model the syn-
tax within the PCTB. However, their manual ana-
lysis was limited in scope, covering only part of
the parser output, and was unable to characterize
the relative impact of the issues they uncovered.

This paper presents a more comprehensive ana-
lysis of errors in Chinese parsing, building on the
technique presented in Kummerfeld et al. (2012),
which characterized the error behavior of English
parsers by quantifying how often they make er-
rors such as PP attachment and coordination scope.
To accommodate error classes that are absent in
English, we  augment  the  system  to  recognize
Chinese-specific parse errors.1 We use the modi-
fied system to show the relative impact of different
error types across a range of Chinese parsers.

To understand the impact of tagging errors on
different  error  types, we  performed  a  part-of-
speech ablation experiment, in  which particular
confusions are introduced in isolation. By analyz-
ing the distribution of errors in the system output
with and without gold part-of-speech tags, we are
able to isolate and quantify the error types that can
be resolved by improvements in tagging accuracy.

Our analysis shows that improvements in tag-
ging accuracy can only address a subset of the chal-
lenges of Chinese syntax. Further improvement in
Chinese parsing performance will require research
addressing other challenges, in particular, deter-
mining coordination scope.

2 Background
The closest previous work is the detailed manual

analysis performed by Levy and Manning (2003).
While their focus was on issues faced by their fac-
tored PCFG parser (Klein and Manning, 2003b),
the error types they identified are general issues
presented by Chinese syntax in the PCTB. They
presented several Chinese error types that are rare
or absent in English, including noun/verb ambigu-
ity, NP-internal structure and coordination ambi-
guity due to pro-drop, suggesting that closing the
English-Chinese parsing gap demands techniques

1The system described  in  this  paper  is  available  from
http://code.google.com/p/berkeley-parser-analyser/

98



beyond those currently used for English. How-
ever, as noted in their final section, their manual
analysis of parse errors in 100 sentences only cov-
ered a portion of a single parser’s output, limiting
the conclusions they could reach regarding the dis-
tribution of errors in Chinese parsing.

2.1 Automatic Error Analysis
Our  analysis  builds  on  Kummerfeld  et al.

(2012), which presented a system that automati-
cally classifies English parse errors using a two
stage process. First, the system finds the shortest
path from the system output to the gold annota-
tions, where each step in the path is a tree transfor-
mation, fixing at least one bracket error. Second,
each transformation step is classified into one of
several error types.

When directly applied to Chinese parser output,
the system placed over 27% of the errors in the
catch-all ‘Other’ type. Many of these errors clearly
fall into one of a small set of error types, motivat-
ing an adaptation to Chinese syntax.

3 Adapting error analysis to Chinese
To adapt the Kummerfeld et al. (2012) system to

Chinese, we developed a new version of the second
stage of the system, which assigns an error cate-
gory to each tree transformation step.

To characterize the errors the original system
placed in the ‘Other’ category, we looked through
one  hundred  sentences, identifying  error  types
generated by Chinese syntax that the existing sys-
tem did not account for. With these observations
we were able to implement new rules to catch the
previously missed cases, leading to the set shown
in Table 1. To ensure the accuracy of our classifica-
tions, we alternated between refining the classifica-
tion code and looking at affected classifications to
identify issues. We also periodically changed the
sentences from the development set we manually
checked, to avoid over-fitting.

Where necessary, we also expanded the infor-
mation available during classification. For exam-
ple, we use the structure of the final gold standard
tree when classifying errors that are a byproduct of
sense disambiguation errors.

4 Chinese parsing errors
Table 1 presents the errors made by the Berkeley

parser. Below we describe the error types that are

Error Type Brackets % of total
NP-internal* 6019 22.70%
Coordination 2781 10.49%
Verb taking wrong args* 2310 8.71%
Unary 2262 8.53%
Modifier Attachment 1900 7.17%
One Word Span 1560 5.88%
Different label 1418 5.35%
Unary A-over-A 1208 4.56%
Wrong sense/bad attach* 1018 3.84%
Noun boundary error* 685 2.58%
VP Attachment 626 2.36%
Clause Attachment 542 2.04%
PP Attachment 514 1.94%
Split Verb Compound* 232 0.88%
Scope error* 143 0.54%
NP Attachment 109 0.41%
Other 3186 12.02%

Table 1: Errors made when parsing Chinese. Values are the
number of bracket errors attributed to that error type. The
values shown are for the Berkeley parser, evaluated on the
development set. * indicates error types that were added or
substantially changed as part of this work.

either new in this analysis, have had their definition
altered, or have an interesting distribution.2

In all of our results we follow Kummerfeld et al.
(2012), presenting the number of bracket errors
(missing or extra)  attributed to each error type.
Bracket counts are more informative than a direct
count of each error type, because the impact on
EVALB F-score varies between errors, e.g. a sin-
gle attachment error can cause 20 bracket errors,
while a unary error causes only one.

NP-internal. (Figure 1a). Unlike  the  Penn
Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993), the PCTB anno-
tates some NP-internal structure. We assign this
error type when a transformation involves words
whose parts of speech in the gold tree are one of:
CC, CD, DEG, ETC, JJ, NN, NR, NT and OD.

We investigated the errors that fall into the NP-
internal category and found that 49% of the errors
involved the creation or deletion of a single pre-
termianl phrasal bracket. These errors arise when
a parser proposes a tree in which POS tags (for in-
stance, JJ or NN) occur as siblings of phrasal tags
(such as NP), a configuration used by the PCTB
bracketing guidelines to indicate complementation
as opposed to adjunction (Xue et al., 2005).

2For an explanation of the English error types, see Kum-
merfeld et al. (2012).

99



Verb taking wrong args. (Figure 1b). This
error type arises when a verb (e.g.扭转 reverse)
is  hypothesized  to  take  an  incorrect  argument
(布什 Bush instead of 地位 position). Note that
this also covers some of the errors that Kummer-
feld  et al. (2012) classified  as  NP Attachment,
changing the distribution for that type.

Unary. For mis-application of unary rules we
separate out instances in which the two brackets in
the production have the the same label (A-over-A).
This cases is created when traces are eliminated, a
standard step in evaluation. More than a third of
unary errors made by the Berkeley parser are of the
A-over-A type. This can be attributed to two fac-
tors: (i) the PCTB annotates non-local dependen-
cies using traces, and (ii) Chinese syntax generates
more traces than English syntax (Guo et al., 2007).
However, for parsers that do not return traces they
are a benign error.

Modifier attachment. (Figure 1c). Incorrect
modifier scope caused by modifier phrase attach-
ment level. This is less frequent in Chinese than
in English: while English VP modifiers occur in
pre- and post-verbal positions, Chinese only al-
lows pre-verbal modification.

Wrong sense/bad attach. (Figure 1d). This ap-
plies when the head word of a phrase receives the
wrong POS, leading to an attachment error. This
error type is common in Chinese because of POS
fluidity, e.g. the well-known Chinese verb/noun
ambiguity often causes mis-attachments that are
classified as this error type.

In  Figure 1d, the  word 投资 invest has
both  noun  and  verb  senses. While  the  gold
standard  interpretation  is  the  relative  clause
firms that Macau invests in, the parser returned an
NP interpretation Macau investment firms.

Noun boundary error. In this error type, a span
is moved to a position where the POS tags of its
new siblings all belong to the list of NP-internal
structure tags which we identified above, reflecting
the inclusion of additional material into an NP.

Split  verb  compound. The  PCTB annota-
tions recognize several Chinese verb compound-
ing strategies, such as  the serial  verb construc-
tion (规划建设 plan [and] build) and the resulta-
tive construction (煮熟 cook [until] done), which
join a bare verb to another lexical item. We in-
troduce an error type specific to Chinese, in which
such verb compounds are split, with the two halves
of the compound placed in different phrases.

....NP.

....

..NN... ..教练coach

.

....

..NN... ..女足soccer

.
.. ..NN... ..国家nat'l

.
..NP.
....

..NP.

....

..NP.....NN

. ....NP.....NN

. ....NP.....NN

(a) NP-internal structure errors

....VP.

....

..NP.

....

..NP... ..地位position

.
.. ..DNP.

....

..DEG... ..的
.

.. ..NP... ..布什Bush

.
.. ..VV... ..扭转reverse

.

..CP.

....

..IP.

....

..VP.

....

..VV

. ....NP

. ....DEC

. ....NP
(b) Verb taking wrong arguments

....VP.

....

..VP... ..夺得金牌win gold

.

.. ..QP.
....

..QP... ..第三次3rd time

.
.. ..ADVP... ..连续in a row

.
..VP.
....

..ADVP

.
....QP.

....

..QP

. ....VP

(c) Modifier attachment ambiguity

....CP.
....

..NP... ..企业firm

.

.. ..IP.
....

..VP... ..投资invest

.
.. ..NP... ..澳门Macau

.
..NP.

....

..NP

.
....NP.

....

..NP

. ....NP
(d) Sense confusion

Figure 1: Prominent error types in Chinese parsing. The left
tree is the gold structure; the right is the parser hypothesis.

Scope error. These are cases in which a new
span must be added to more closely bind a modifier
phrase (ADVP, ADJP, and PP).

PP attachment. This error type is rare in Chi-
nese, as adjunct PPs are pre-verbal. It does oc-
cur near coordinated VPs, where ambiguity arises
about  which of  the conjuncts  the PP has scope
over. Whether this particular case is PP attachment
or coordination is debatable; we follow Kummer-
feld et al. (2012) and label it PP attachment.

4.1 Chinese-English comparison
It is difficult to directly compare error analysis

results for Chinese and English parsing because
of substantial changes in the classification method,
and differences in treebank annotations.

As described in the previous section, the set of
error categories considered for Chinese is very dif-
ferent to the set of categories for English. Even
for some of the categories that were not substan-
tially changed, errors may be classified differently
because of cross-over between categories between

100



NP Verb Mod. 1-Word Diff Wrong Noun VP Clause PP
System F1 Int. Coord Args Unary Attach Span Label Sense Edge Attach Attach Attach Other
Best 1.54 1.25 1.01 0.76 0.72 0.21 0.30 0.05 0.21 0.26 0.22 0.18 1.87
Berk-G 86.8
Berk-2 81.8
Berk-1 81.1
ZPAR 78.1
Bikel 76.1
Stan-F 76.0
Stan-P 70.0
Worst 3.94 1.75 1.73 1.48 1.68 1.06 1.02 0.88 0.55 0.50 0.44 0.44 4.11

Table 2: Error breakdown for the development set of PCTB 6. The area filled in for each bar indicates the average number of
bracket errors per sentence attributed to that error type, where an empty bar is no errors and a full bar has the value indicated in
the bottom row. The parsers are: the Berkeley parser with gold POS tags as input (Berk-G), the Berkeley product parser with
two grammars (Berk-2), the Berkeley parser (Berk-1), the parser of Zhang and Clark (2009) (ZPAR), the Bikel parser (Bikel),
the Stanford Factored parser (Stan-F), and the Stanford Unlexicalized PCFG parser (Stan-P).

two categories (e.g. between Verb taking wrong
args and NP Attachment).

Differences in treebank annotations also present
a challenge for cross-language error comparison.
The  most  common  error  type  in  Chinese, NP-
internal structure, is rare in the results of Kummer-
feld et al. (2012), but the datasets are not compara-
ble because the PTB has very limited NP-internal
structure annotated. Further characterization of the
impact of annotation differences on errors is be-
yond the scope of this paper.

Three conclusions that can be made are that (i)
coordination is a major issue in both languages,
(ii) PP attachment is a much greater problem in
English, and  (iii)  a  higher  frequency  of  trace-
generating syntax in Chinese compared to English
poses substantial challenges.

5 Cross-parser analysis
The previous section described the error types

and their distribution for a single Chinese parser.
Here we confirm that these are general trends, by
showing that the same pattern is observed for sev-
eral  different  parsers  on  the  PCTB 6 dev  set.3
We include results  for  a  transition-based parser
(ZPAR; Zhang  and  Clark, 2009), a  split-merge
PCFG parser (Petrov et al., 2006; Petrov and Klein,
2007; Petrov, 2010), a lexicalized parser (Bikel
and Chiang, 2000), and a factored PCFG and de-
pendency parser (Levy and Manning, 2003; Klein
and Manning, 2003a,b). 4

Comparing the two Stanford parsers in Table 2,
the factored model provides clear improvements

3We use the standard data split suggested by the PCTB 6
file manifest. As a result, our results differ from those previ-
ously reported on other splits. All analysis is on the dev set,
to avoid revealing specific information about the test set.

4These parsers represent a variety of parsing methods,
though exclude some recently developed parsers that are not
publicly available (Qian and Liu, 2012; Xiong et al., 2005).

on  sense  disambiguation, but  performs  slightly
worse on coordination.

The Berkeley product parser we include uses
only two grammars because we found, in contrast
to the English results (Petrov, 2010), that further
grammars provided limited benefits. Comparing
the performance with the standard Berkeley parser
it seems that the diversity in the grammars only as-
sists certain error types, with most of the improve-
ment  occurring in  four  of  the categories, while
there is no improvement, or a slight decrease, in
five categories.

6 Tagging Error Impact
The challenge of accurate POS tagging in Chi-

nese has been a major part of several recent papers
(Qian and Liu, 2012; Jiang et al., 2009; Forst and
Fang, 2009). The Berk-G row of Table 2 shows
the performance of the Berkeley parser when given
gold POS tags.5 While the F1 improvement is un-
surprising, for the first time we can clearly show
that the gains are only in a subset of the error types.
In particular, tagging improvement will not help
for two of the most significant challenges: coordi-
nation scope errors, and verb argument selection.

To see which tagging confusions contribute to
which error reductions, we adapt the POS ablation
approach of Tse and Curran (2012). We consider
the POS tag pairs shown in Table 3. To isolate the
effects of each confusion we start from the gold
tags and introduce the output of the Stanford tag-
ger whenever it returns one of the two tags being
considered.6 We then feed these “semi-gold” tags

5We used the Berkeley parser as it was the best of the
parsers we considered. Note that the Berkeley parser occa-
sionally prunes all of the parses that use the gold POS tags,
and so returns the best available alternative. This leads to a
POS accuracy of 99.35%, which is still well above the parser’s
standard POS accuracy of 93.66%.

6We introduce errors to gold tags, rather than removing er-

101



Confused tags Errors ∆ F1
VV NN 1055 -2.72
DEC DEG 526 -1.72
JJ NN 297 -0.57
NR NN 320 -0.05

Table 3: The most frequently confused POS tag pairs. Each
∆ F1 is relative to Berk-G.

to the Berkeley parser, and run the fine-grained er-
ror analysis on its output.

VV/NN. This confusion has been consistently
shown to be a major contributor to parsing errors
(Levy and Manning, 2003; Tse and Curran, 2012;
Qian and Liu, 2012), and we find a drop of over 2.7
F1 when the output of the tagger is introduced. We
found that while most error types have contribu-
tions from a range of POS confusions, verb/noun
confusion was responsible for virtually all of the
noun boundary errors corrected by using gold tags.

DEG/DEC. This confusion between the rela-
tivizer and subordinator senses of the particle 的
de is the primary source of improvements on mod-
ifier attachment when using gold tags.

NR/NN and JJ/NN. Despite  their  frequency,
these confusions have little effect on parsing per-
formance. Even within the NP-internal error type
their impact is limited, and almost all of the errors
do not change the logical form.

7 Conclusion
We have  quantified  the  relative  impacts  of  a

comprehensive set of error types in Chinese pars-
ing. Our analysis has also shown that while im-
provements in Chinese POS tagging can make a
substantial difference for some error types, it will
not address two high-frequency error types: in-
correct verb argument attachment and coordina-
tion scope. The frequency of these two error types
is also unimproved by the use of products of la-
tent variable grammars. These observations sug-
gest that resolving the core challenges of Chinese
parsing will require new developments that suit the
distinctive properties of Chinese syntax.

Acknowledgments
We extend our thanks to Yue Zhang for helping

us train new ZPAR models. We would also like
to thank the anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful suggestions. This research was supported by
a General Sir John Monash Fellowship to the first
rors from automatic tags, isolating the effect of a single con-
fusion by eliminating interaction between tagging decisions.

author, the Capital Markets CRC under ARC Dis-
covery grant DP1097291, and the NSF under grant
0643742.

References
Daniel M. Bikel and David Chiang. 2000. Two

Statistical Parsing Models Applied to the Chi-
nese Treebank. In Proceedings of the Second
Chinese Language Processing Workshop, pages
1–6. Hong Kong, China.

Martin Forst and Ji Fang. 2009. TBL-improved
non-deterministic  segmentation  and  POS tag-
ging for a Chinese parser. In Proceedings of the
12th Conference of the European Chapter of the
ACL, pages 264–272. Athens, Greece.

Yuqing Guo, Haifeng Wang, and Josef van Gen-
abith. 2007. Recovering Non-Local Dependen-
cies for Chinese. In Proceedings of the 2007
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL),
pages 257–266. Prague, Czech Republic.

Wenbin Jiang, Liang Huang, and Qun Liu. 2009.
Automatic Adaptation of Annotation Standards:
Chinese Word Segmentation and POS Tagging
– A Case Study. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the
ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP,
volume 1, pages 522–530. Suntec, Singapore.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003a.
Accurate Unlexicalized Parsing. In Proceedings
of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 423–430.
Sapporo, Japan.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003b.
Fast Exact Inference with a Factored Model for
Natural Language Parsing. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 15, pages
3–10. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, David Hall, James R.
Curran, and Dan Klein. 2012. Parser Show-
down at the Wall Street Corral: An Empirical
Investigation of Error Types in Parser Output.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 1048–1059. Jeju Island, South
Korea.

102



Roger Levy and Christopher Manning. 2003. Is
it harder to parse Chinese, or the Chinese Tree-
bank? In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 439–446. Sapporo, Japan.

Mitchell P.  Marcus, Beatrice  Santorini, and
Mary Ann  Marcinkiewicz.  1993. Building
a  Large  Annotated  Corpus  of  English: The
Penn  Treebank. Computational  Linguistics,
19(2):313–330.

Slav Petrov. 2010. Products of Random Latent
Variable Grammars. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational  Linguistics, pages  19–27.  Los
Angeles, California.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and
Dan Klein.  2006. Learning  Accurate, Com-
pact, and Interpretable Tree Annotation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and the 44th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 433–440. Sydney, Australia.

Slav Petrov and Dan Klein. 2007. Improved In-
ference for Unlexicalized Parsing. In Human
Language Technologies 2007: The Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics; Proceed-
ings of the Main Conference, pages 404–411.
Rochester, New York, USA.

Xian Qian and Yang Liu.  2012. Joint Chinese
word segmentation, POS tagging and parsing.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 501–511. Jeju Island, Korea.

Daniel  Tse  and  James R.  Curran.  2012. The
Challenges of Parsing Chinese with Combina-
tory Categorial Grammar. In Proceedings of the
2012 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
295–304. Montréal, Canada.

Deyi Xiong, Shuanglong Li, Qun Liu, Shouxun
Lin, and Yueliang Qian. 2005. Parsing the Penn
Chinese Treebank with semantic knowledge. In
Proceedings of  the Second international  joint
conference  on  Natural  Language  Processing,
pages 70–81. Jeju Island, Korea.

Nianwen  Xue, Fei  Xia, Fu-Dong  Chiou, and
Martha  Palmer.  2005. The  Penn  Chinese
TreeBank: Phrase  structure  annotation  of  a
large corpus. Natural Language Engineering,
11(2):207–238.

Yue Zhang and Stephen Clark. 2009. Transition-
Based Parsing of the Chinese Treebank using a
Global Discriminative Model. In Proceedings
of the 11th International Conference on Parsing
Technologies (IWPT’09), pages 162–171. Paris,
France.

103


