



















































Psycholinguistically Motivated Computational Models on the Organization and Processing of Morphologically Complex Words


Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop, pages 123–129,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Psycholinguistically Motivated Computational Models on the Organization 

and Processing of Morphologically Complex Words 

 

 

Tirthankar Dasgupta 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 

 tirtha@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in 

 

  

 

Abstract 

In this work we present psycholinguisti-

cally motivated computational models for 

the organization and processing of Ban-

gla morphologically complex words in 

the mental lexicon. Our goal is to identify 

whether morphologically complex words 

are stored as a whole or are they orga-

nized along the morphological line. For 

this, we have conducted a series of psy-

cholinguistic experiments to build up hy-

pothesis on the possible organizational 

structure of the mental lexicon. Next, we 

develop computational models based on 

the collected dataset. We observed that 

derivationally suffixed Bangla words are 

in general decomposed during processing 

and compositionality between the stem 

and the suffix plays an important role in 

the decomposition process. We observed 

the same phenomena for Bangla verb se-

quences where experiments showed non-

compositional verb sequences are in gen-

eral stored as a whole in the ML and low 

traces of compositional verbs are found 

in the mental lexicon.  

1 Introduction 

Mental lexicon is the representation of the words 
in the human mind and their associations that 

help fast retrieval and comprehension (Aitchison, 

1987). Words are known to be associated with 

each other in terms of, orthography, phonology, 

morphology and semantics. However, the precise 

nature of these relations is unknown. 

An important issue that has been a subject of 

study for a long time is to identify the fundamen-

tal units in terms of which the mental lexicon is 

organized. That is, whether lexical representa-

tions in the mental lexicon are word based or are 

they organized along morphological lines. For 

example, whether a word such as “unimaginable” 
is stored in the mental lexicon as a whole word 

or do we break it up “un-” , “imagine” and “-
able”, understand the meaning of each of these 
constituent and then recombine the units to com-

prehend the whole word. 

Such questions are typically answered by de-

signing appropriate priming experiments (Mars-

len-Wilson et al., 1994) or other lexical decision 

tasks. The reaction time of the subjects for re-

cognizing various lexical items under appropriate 

conditions reveals important facts about their 

organization in the brain. (See Sec. 2 for models 

of morphological organization and access and 

related experiments). 

A clear understanding of the structure and the 

processing mechanism of the mental lexicon will 

further our knowledge of how the human brain 

processes language. Further, these linguistically 

important and interesting questions are also high-

ly significant for computational linguistics (CL) 

and natural language processing (NLP) applica-

tions. Their computational significance arises 

from the issue of their storage in lexical re-

sources like WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) and rais-

es the questions like, how to store morphologi-

cally complex words, in a lexical resource like 

WordNet keeping in mind the storage and access 

efficiency. 

There is a rich literature on organization and 

lexical access of morphologically complex words 

where experiments have been conducted mainly 

for derivational suffixed words of English, He-

brew, Italian, French, Dutch, and few other lan-

guages (Marslen-Wilson et al., 2008; Frost et al., 

1997; Grainger, et al., 1991; Drews and Zwitser-

lood, 1995). However, we do not know of any 

such investigations for Indian languages, which 

123



are morphologically richer than many of their 

Indo-European cousins. Moreover, Indian lan-

guages show some distinct phenomena like, 

compound and composite verbs for which no 

such investigations have been conducted yet. On 

the other hand, experiments indicate that mental 

representation and processing of morphologically 

complex words are not quite language indepen-

dent (Taft, 2004). Therefore, the findings from 

experiments in one language cannot be genera-

lized to all languages making it important to 

conduct similar experimentations in other lan-

guages.  

This work aims to design cognitively moti-

vated computational models that can explain the 

organization and processing of Bangla morpho-

logically complex words in the mental lexicon. 

Presently we will concentrate on the following 

two aspects: 

 Organization and processing of Bangla Poly-
morphemic words: our objective here is to de-

termine whether the mental lexicon decompos-

es morphologically complex words into its 

constituent morphemes or does it represent the 

unanalyzed surface form of a word. 

 Organization and processing of Bangla com-
pound verbs (CV): compound verbs are the 

subject of much debate in linguistic theory. No 

consensus has been reached yet with respect to 

the issue that whether to consider them as uni-

tary lexical units or are they syntactically as-

sembled combinations of two independent lex-

ical units. As linguistic arguments have so far 

not led to a consensus, we here use cognitive 

experiments to probe the brain signatures of 

verb-verb combinations and propose cognitive 

as well as computational models regarding the 

possible organization and processing of Bangla 

CVs in the mental lexicon (ML). 

With respect to this, we apply the different 

priming and other lexical decision experiments, 

described in literature (Marslen-Wilson et al., 

1994; Bentin, S. and Feldman, 1990) specifically 

for derivationally suffixed polymorphemic words 

and compound verbs of Bangla. Our cross-modal 

and masked priming experiment on Bangla deri-

vationally suffixed words shows that morpholog-

ical relatedness between lexical items triggers a 

significant priming effect, even when the forms 

are phonologically/orthographically unrelated. 

These observations are similar to those reported 

for English and indicate that derivationally suf-

fixed words in Bangla are in general accessed 

through decomposition of the word into its con-

stituent morphemes. Further, based on the expe-

rimental data we have developed a series of 

computational models that can be used to predict 

the decomposition of Bangla polymorphemic 

words. Our evaluation result shows that decom-

position of a polymorphemic word depends on 

several factors like, frequency, productivity of 

the suffix and the compositionality between the 

stem and the suffix.  

The organization of the paper is as follows: 

Sec. 2 presents related works; Sec. 3 describes 

experiment design and procedure; Sec. 4 presents 

the processing of CVs; and finally, Sec. 5 con-

cludes the paper by presenting the future direc-

tion of the work. 

2 Related Works 

2.1 Representation of polymorphemic words 

Over the last few decades many studies have at-

tempted to understand the representation and 

processing of morphologically complex words in 

the brain for various languages. Most of the stu-

dies are designed to support one of the two mu-

tually exclusive paradigms: the full-listing and 
the morphemic model. The full-listing model 
claims that polymorphic words are represented as 

a whole in the human mental lexicon (Bradley, 

1980; Butterworth, 1983). On the other hand, 

morphemic model argues that morphologically 
complex words are decomposed and represented 

in terms of the smaller morphemic units. The 

affixes are stripped away from the root form, 

which in turn are used to access the mental lex-

icon (Taft and Forster, 1975; Taft, 1981; MacK-

ay, 1978). Intermediate to these two paradigms is 

the partial decomposition model that argues that 
different types of morphological forms are 

processed separately. For instance, the derived 

morphological forms are believed to be 

represented as a whole, whereas the representa-

tion of the inflected forms follows the morphem-

ic model (Caramazza et al., 1988).  

Traditionally, priming experiments have been 
used to study the effects of morphology in lan-

guage processing. Priming is a process that re-
sults in increase in speed or accuracy of response 

to a stimulus, called the target, based on the oc-
currence of a prior exposure of another stimulus, 

called the prime (Tulving et al., 1982). Here, 
subjects are exposed to a prime word for a short 

duration, and are subsequently shown a target 

word. The prime and target words may be mor-

phologically, phonologically or semantically re-

124



lated. An analysis of the effect of the reaction 

time of subjects reveals the actual organization 

and representation of the lexicon at the relevant 

level. See Pulvermüller (2002) for a detailed ac-

count of such phenomena.  

It has been argued that frequency of a word in-

fluences the speed of lexical processing and thus, 

can serve as a diagnostic tool to observe the na-

ture and organization of lexical representations.  

(Taft, 1975) with his experiment on English in-

flected words, argued that lexical decision res-

ponses of polymorphemic words depends upon 

the base word frequency. Similar observation for 

surface word frequency was also observed by 

(Bertram et al., 2000;Bradley, 1980;Burani et al., 

1987;Burani et al., 1984;Schreuder et al., 1997; 

Taft 1975;Taft, 2004) where it has been claimed 

that words having low surface frequency tends to 

decompose. Later, Baayen(2000) proposed the 

dual processing race model that proposes that a 

specific morphologically complex form is ac-

cessed via its parts if the frequency of that word 

is above a certain threshold of frequency, then 

the direct route will win, and the word will be 

accessed as a whole. If it is below that same thre-

shold of frequency, the parsing route will win, 

and the word will be accessed via its parts. 

2.2 Representation of Compound Verbs 

A compound verb (CV) consists of a sequence of 

two verbs (V1 and V2) acting as a single verb 

and expresses a single expression of meaning. 

For example, in the sentence 

 রুটিগুল ো খেল  খেল ো (/ruTigulo kheYe phela/) 
―bread-plural-the eat and drop-pres. Imp‖  

―Eat the breads‖ 

the verb sequence “খেল  খেল ো (eat drop)” is an 
example of CV. Compound verbs are a special 

phenomena that are abundantly found in Indo-

European languages like Indian languages.  

A plethora of works has been done to provide 

linguistic explanations on the formation of such 

word, yet none so far has led to any consensus. 

Hook (1981) considers the second verb V2 as an 

aspectual complex comparable to the auxiliaries. 

Butt (1993) argues CV formations in Hindi and 

Urdu are either morphological or syntactical and 

their formation take place at the argument struc-

ture. Bashir (1993) tried to construct a semantic 

analysis based on “prepared” and “unprepared 

mind”. Similar findings have been proposed by 

Pandharipande (1993) that points out V1 and V2 

are paired on the basis of their semantic compa-

tibility, which is subject to syntactic constraints. 

Paul (2004) tried to represent Bangla CVs in 

terms of HPSG formalism. She proposes that the 

selection of a V2 by a V1 is determined at the 

semantic level because the two verbs will unify if 

and only if they are semantically compatible. 

Since none of the linguistic formalism could sa-

tisfactorily explain the unique phenomena of CV 

formation, we here for the first time drew our 

attention towards psycholinguistic and neuro-

linguistic studies to model the processing of 

verb-verb combinations in the ML and compare 

these responses with that of the existing models. 

3 The Proposed Approaches 

3.1 The psycholinguistic experiments 

We apply two different priming experiments 

namely, the cross modal priming and masked 

priming experiment discussed in (Forster and 

Davis, 1984; Rastle et al., 2000;Marslen-Wilson 

et al., 1994; Marslen-Wilson et al., 2008) for 

Bangla morphologically complex words. Here, 

the prime is morphologically derived form of the 

target presented auditorily (for cross modal prim-

ing) or visually (for masked priming). The sub-

jects were asked to make a lexical decision 

whether the given target is a valid word in that 

language. The same target word is again probed 

but with a different audio or visual probe called 

the control word. The control shows no relation-

ship with the target. For example, baYaska 

(aged) and baYasa (age) is a prime-target pair, 

for which the corresponding control-target pair 

could be naYana (eye) and baYasa (age). 

 Similar to (Marslen-Wilson et al., 2008) the 

masked priming has been conducted for three 

different SOA (Stimulus Onset Asynchrony), 

48ms, 72ms and 120ms. The SOA is measured as 

the amount of time between the start the first 

stimulus till the start of the next stimulus. 

Table 1: Dataset for the experiment, + implies 

related, and - implies unrelated. 

There were 500 prime-target and control-

target pairs classified into five classes. Depend-

ing on the class, the prime is related to the target 

Class Example 

M+S+O+ nibAsa(residence)-nibAsi(resident) 

M+S+O- mitra(friend) - maitri (friendship) 

M’+S-O+ Ama(Mango)- AmadAni (import) 

M-S+O- jantu(Animal)- bAgha (Tiger) 

M-S-O+ ghaDi(watch)-ghaDiYAla (croco-

dile) 

125



either in terms of morphology, semantics, ortho-

graphy and/or Phonology (See Table 1).  

The experiments were conducted on 24 highly 

educated native Bangla speakers. Nineteen of 

them have a graduate degree and five hold a post 

graduate degree. The age of the subjects varies 

between 22 to 35 years. 

Results: The RTs with extreme values and in-

correct decisions were excluded from the data. 

The data has been analyzed using two ways 

ANOVA with three factors: priming (prime and 

control), conditions (five classes) and prime du-

rations (three different SOA). We observe strong 

priming effects (p<0.05) when the target word is 

morphologically derived and has a recognizable 

suffix, semantically and orthographically related 

with respect to the prime; no priming effects are 

observed when the prime and target words are 

orthographically related but share no morpholog-

ical or semantic relationship; although not statis-

tically significant (p>0.07), but weak priming is 

observed for prime target pairs that are only se-

mantically related. We see no significant differ-

ence between the prime and control RTs for oth-

er classes.  

We also looked at the RTs for each of the 500 

target words. We observe that maximum priming 

occurs for words in [M+S+O+](69%), some 

priming is evident in [M+S+O-](51%) and 

[M'+S-O+](48%), but for most of the words in 

[M-S+O-](86%) and [M-S-O+](92%) no priming 

effect was observed. 

3.2 Frequency Distribution Models of Morpho-
logical Processing 

From the above results we saw that not all poly-

morphemic words tend to decompose during 

processing, thus we need to further investigate 

the processing phenomena of Bangla derived 

words. One notable means is to identify whether 

the stem or suffix frequency is involved in the 

processing stage of that word. For this, we apply 

different frequency based models to the Bangla 

polymorphemic words and try to evaluate their 

performance by comparing their predicted results 

with the result obtained through the priming ex-

periment.  

Model-1: Base and Surface word frequency ef-

fect- It states that the probability of decomposi-

tion of a Bangla polymorphemic word depends 

upon the frequency of its base word. Thus, if the 

stem frequency of a polymorphemic word 

crosses a given threshold value, then the word 

will decomposed into its constituent morpheme. 

Similar claim has been made for surface word 

frequency model where decomposition depends 

upon the frequency of the surface word itself. 

We have evaluated both the models with the 500 

words used in the priming experiments discussed 

above. We have achieved an accuracy of 62% 

and 49% respectively for base and surface word 

frequency models. 

Model-2: Combining the base and surface word 

frequency- In a pursuit towards an extended 

model, we combine model 1 and 2 together. We 

took the log frequencies of both the base and the 

derived words and plotted the best-fit regression 

curve over the given dataset. 
The evaluation of this model over the same set 

of 500 target words returns an accuracy of 68% 

which is better than the base and surface word 

frequency models. However, the proposed model 

still fails to predict processing of around 32% of 

words. This led us to further enhance the model. 

For this, we analyze the role of suffixes in mor-

phological processing. 

Model-3: Degree of Affixation and Suffix Prod-

uctivity: we examine whether the regression 

analysis between base and derived frequency of 

Bangla words varies between suffixes and how 

these variations affect morphological decomposi-

tion. With respect to this, we try to compute the 

degree of affixation between the suffix and the 

base word. For this, we perform regression anal-

ysis on sixteen different Bangla suffixes with 

varying degree of type and token frequencies. 

For each suffix, we choose 100 different derived 

words. We observe that those suffixes having 

high value of intercept are forming derived 

words whose base frequencies are substantially 

high as compared to their derived forms. Moreo-

ver we also observe that high intercept value for 

a given suffix indicates higher inclination to-

wards decomposition. 

Next, we try to analyze the role of suffix 

type/token ratio and compare them with the 

base/derived frequency ratio model. This has 

been done by regression analysis between the 

suffix type-token ratios with the base-surface 

frequency ratio.  

We further tried to observe the role of suffix 

productivity in morphological processing. For 

this, we computed the three components of prod-

uctivity P, P* and V as discussed in (Hay and 

Plag, 2004). P is the “conditioned degree of 

productivity” and is the probability that we are 

encountering a word with an affix and it is 

representing a new type. P* is the “hapaxed-

conditioned degree of productivity”. It expresses 

the probability that when an entirely new word is 

126



encountered it will contain the suffix. V is the 

“type frequency”. Finally, we computed the 

productivity of a suffix through its P, P* and V 

values. We found that decomposition of Bangla 

polymorphemic word is directly proportional to 

the productivity of the suffix. Therefore, words 

that are composed of productive suffixes (P val-

ue ranges between 0.6 and 0.9) like “-oYAlA”, 

“-giri”, “-tba” and “-panA” are highly decom-

posable than low productive suffixes like “-Ani”, 

“-lA”, “-k”, and “-tama”. The evaluation of the 

proposed model returns an accuracy of 76% 

which comes to be 8% better than the preceding 

models. 

Combining Model-2 and Model-3: One impor-

tant observation that can be made from the above 

results is that, model-3 performs best in deter-

mining the true negative values. It also possesses 

a high recall value of (85%) but having a low 

precision of (50%). In other words, the model 

can predict those words for which decomposition 

will not take place. On the other hand, results of 

Model-2 posses a high precision of 70%. Thus, 

we argue that combining the above two models 

can better predict the decomposition of Bangla 

polymorphemic words. Hence, we combine the 

two models together and finally achieved an 

overall accuracy of 80% with a precision of 87% 

and a recall of 78%. This surpasses the perfor-

mance of the other models discussed earlier. 

However, around 22% of the test words were 

wrongly classified which the model fails to justi-

fy. Thus, a more rigorous set of experiments and 

data analysis are required to predict access me-

chanisms of such Bangla polymorphemic words. 

3.3 Stem-Suffix Compositionality 

Compositionality refers to the fact that meaning 

of a complex expression is inferred from the 

meaning of its constituents. Therefore, the cost 

of retrieving a word from the secondary memory 

is directly proportional to the cost of retrieving 

the individual parts (i.e the stem and the suffix). 

Thus, following the work of (Milin et al., 2009) 

we define the compositionality of a morphologi-

cally complex word (We) as: 

C(We)=α1H(We)+α2H(e)+α3H(W|e)+ α4H(e|W) 

Where, H(x) is entropy of an expression x, 

H(W|e) is the conditional entropy between the 

stem W and suffix e  and α is the proportionality 
factor whose value is computed through regres-

sion analysis. 

Next, we tried to compute the compositionali-

ty of the stem and suffixes in terms of relative 

entropy D(W||e) and Point wise mutual informa-

tion (PMI). The relative entropy is the measure 

of the distance between the probability distribu-

tion of the stem W and the suffix e. The PMI 

measures the amount of information that one 

random variable (the stem) contains about the 

other (the suffix).  

We have compared the above three techniques 

with the actual reaction time data collected 

through the priming and lexical decision experi-

ment. We observed that all the three information 

theoretic models perform much better than the 

frequency based models discussed in the earlier 

section, for predicting the decomposability of 

Bangla polymorphemic words. However, we 

think it is still premature to claim anything con-

crete at this stage of our work. We believe much 

more rigorous experiments are needed to be per-

formed in order to validate our proposed models. 

Further, the present paper does not consider fac-

tors related to age of acquisition, and word fami-

liarity effects that plays important role in the 

processing of morphologically complex words. 

Moreover, it is also very interesting to see how 

stacking of multiple suffixes in a word are 

processed by the human brain. 

4 Organization and Processing of Com-
pound Verbs in the Mental Lexicon 

Compound verbs, as discussed above, are special 

type of verb sequences consisting of two or more 

verbs acting as a single verb and express a single 

expression of meaning. The verb V1 is known as 

pole and V2 is called as vector. For example, 

“ওঠে পড়া ” (getting up) is a compound verb 
where individual words do not entirely reflects 

the meaning of the whole expression. However, 

not all V1+V2 combinations are CVs. For exam-

ple, expressions like, “নিঠে য়াও ”(take and then 

go) and “ নিঠে আঠ ়া” (return back) are the ex-

amples of verb sequences where meaning of the 

whole expression can be derived from the mean-

ing of the individual component and thus, these 

verb sequences are not considered as CV. The 

key question linguists are trying to identify for a 

long time and debating a lot is whether to con-

sider CVs as a single lexical units or consider 

them as two separate units. Since linguistic rules 

fails to explain the process, we for the first time 

tried to perform cognitive experiments to under-

stand the organization and processing of such 

verb sequences in the human mind. A clear un-

derstanding about these phenomena may help us 

to classify or extract actual CVs from other verb 

127



sequences. In order to do so, presently we have 

applied three different techniques to collect user 

data. In the first technique, we annotated 4500 

V1+V2 sequences, along with their example sen-

tences, using a group of three linguists (the ex-

pert subjects). We asked the experts to classify 

the verb sequences into three classes namely, 

CV, not a CV and not sure. Each linguist has 
received 2000 verb pairs along with their respec-

tive example sentences. Out of this, 1500 verb 

sequences are unique to each of them and rest 

500 are overlapping. We measure the inter anno-

tator agreement using the Fleiss Kappa (Fleiss et 
al., 1981) measure (κ) where the agreement lies 

around 0.79. Next, out of the 500 common verb 

sequences that were annotated by all the three 

linguists, we randomly choose 300 V1+V2 pairs 

and presented them to 36 native Bangla speakers. 

We ask each subjects to give a compositionality 

score of each verb sequences under 1-10 point 

scale, 10 being highly compositional and 1 for 

noncompositional. We found an agreement of 
κ=0.69 among the subjects. We also observe a 

continuum of compositionality score among the 

verb sequences. This reflects that it is difficult to 

classify Bangla verb sequences discretely into 

the classes of CV and not a CV. We then, com-
pare the compositionality score with that of the 

expert user’s annotation. We found a significant 

correlation between the expert annotation and the 

compositionality score. We observe verb se-

quences that are annotated as CVs (like, খেঠে 

খিল  ,ওঠে পড ,কঠে খি ) have got low compositio-

nality score (average score ranges between 1-4) 

on the other hand high compositional values are 

in general tagged as not a cv (নিঠে য়া (come and 

get), নিঠে আে (return back), তুঠল খেঠেনি (kept), 
গনিঠে পিল (roll on floor)). This reflects that verb 

sequences which are not CV shows high degree 

of compositionality. In other words non CV 

verbs can directly interpret from their constituent 

verbs. This leads us to the possibility that com-

positional verb sequences requires individual 

verbs to be recognized separately and thus the 

time to recognize such expressions must be 

greater than the non-compositional verbs which 

maps to a single expression of meaning. In order 

to validate such claim we perform a lexical deci-

sion experiment using 32 native Bangla speakers 

with 92 different verb sequences. We followed 

the same experimental procedure as discussed in 

(Taft, 2004) for English polymorphemic words. 

However, rather than derived words, the subjects 

were shown a verb sequence and asked whether 

they recognize them as a valid combination. The 

reaction time (RT) of each subject is recorded. 

Our preliminarily observation from the RT anal-

ysis shows that as per our claim, RT of verb se-

quences having high compositionality value is 

significantly higher than the RTs for low or non-

compositional verbs. This proves our hypothesis 

that Bangla compound verbs that show less com-

positionality are stored as a hole in the mental 

lexicon and thus follows the full-listing model 

whereas compositional verb phrases are indivi-

dually parsed. However, we do believe that our 

experiment is composed of a very small set of 

data and it is premature to conclude anything 

concrete based only on the current experimental 

results.  

5 Future Directions 

In the next phase of our work we will focus on 

the following aspects of Bangla morphologically 

complex words: 

The Word Familiarity Effect: Here, our aim is to 

study the role of familiarity of a word during its 

processing. We define the familiarity of a word 

in terms of corpus frequency, Age of acquisition, 

the level of language exposure of a person, and 

RT of the word etc. 

Role of suffix types in morphological decompo-

sition: For native Bangla speakers which mor-

phological suffixes are internalized and which 

are just learnt in school, but never internalized. 

We can compare the representation of Native, 

Sanskrit derived and foreign suffixes in Bangla 

words. 

Computational models of organization and 

processing of Bangla compound verbs: presently 

we have performed some small set of experi-

ments to study processing of compound verbs in 

the mental lexicon. In the next phase of our work 

we will extend the existing experiments and also 

apply some more techniques like, crowd sourc-

ing and language games to collect more relevant 

RT and compositionality data. Finally, based on 

the collected data we will develop computational 

models that can explain the possible organiza-

tional structure and processing mechanism of 

morphologically complex Bangla words in the 

mental lexicon. 

Reference 

Aitchison, J. (1987). ―Words in the mind: An intro-

duction to the mental lexicon‖. Wiley-Blackwell, 

128



Baayen R. H. (2000). ―On frequency, transparency 

and productivity‖. G. Booij and J. van Marle (eds), 

Yearbook of Morphology, pages 181-208, 

Baayen R.H. (2003). ―Probabilistic approaches to 

morphology‖. Probabilistic linguistics, pages 229-

287. 

Baayen R.H., T. Dijkstra, and R. Schreuder. (1997). 

―Singulars and plurals in dutch: Evidence for a pa-

rallel dual-route model‖. Journal of Memory and 

Language, 37(1):94-117. 

Bashir, E. (1993), ―Causal Chains and Compound 

Verbs.‖ In M. K. Verma ed. (1993). 

Bentin, S. & Feldman, L.B. (1990). The contribution 

of morphological and semantic relatedness to repe-

tition priming at short and long lags: Evidence 

from Hebrew. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 

Psychology, 42, pp. 693–711. 

Bradley, D. (1980). Lexical representation of deriva-

tional relation, Juncture, Saratoga, CA: Anma Li-

bri, pp. 37-55. 

Butt, M. (1993), ―Conscious choice and some light 

verbs in Urdu.‖ In M. K. Verma ed. (1993). 

Butterworth, B. (1983). Lexical Representation, Lan-

guage Production, Vol. 2, pp. 257-294, San Diego, 

CA: Academic Press. 

Caramazza, A., Laudanna, A. and Romani, C. (1988). 

Lexical access and inflectional morphology. Cog-

nition, 28, pp. 297-332. 

Drews, E., and Zwitserlood, P. (1995).Morphological 

and orthographic similarity in visual word recogni-

tion. Journal of Experimental Psycholo-

gy:HumanPerception andPerformance, 21, 1098–

1116. 

Fellbaum, C. (ed.). (1998). WordNet: An Electronic 

Lexical Database, MIT Press. 

Forster, K.I., and Davis, C. (1984). Repetition prim-

ing and frequency attenuation in lexical access. 

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 

Memory, and Cognition, 10, 680–698. 

Frost, R., Forster, K.I., & Deutsch, A. (1997). What 

can we learn from the morphology of Hebrew? A 

masked-priming investigation of morphological re-

presentation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 

Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 829–856. 

Grainger, J., Cole, P., & Segui, J. (1991). Masked 

morphological priming in visual word recognition. 

Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 370–384. 

Hook, P. E. (1981). ―Hindi Structures: Intermediate 

Level.‖ Michigan Papers on South and Southeast 

Asia, The University of Michigan Center for South 

and Southeast Studies, Ann Arbor, Michigan. 

Joseph L Fleiss, Bruce Levin, and Myunghee Cho 

Paik. 1981. The measurement of interrater agree-

ment. Statistical methods for rates and propor-
tions,2:212–236. 

MacKay,D.G.(1978), Derivational rules and the inter-

nal lexicon. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal 

Behavior, 17, pp.61-71. 

Marslen-Wilson, W.D., & Tyler, L.K. (1997). Disso-

ciating types of mental computation. Nature, 387, 

pp. 592–594. 

Marslen-Wilson, W.D., & Tyler, L.K. (1998). Rules, 

representations, and the English past tense. Trends 

in Cognitive Sciences, 2, pp. 428–435. 

Marslen-Wilson, W.D., Tyler, L.K., Waksler, R., & 

Older, L. (1994). Morphology and meaning in the 

English mental lexicon. Psychological Review, 

101, pp. 3–33. 

Marslen-Wilson,W.D. and Zhou,X.( 1999). Abstract-

ness, allomorphy, and lexical architecture. Lan-

guage and Cognitive Processes, 14, 321–352. 

Milin, P., Kuperman, V., Kosti´, A. and Harald R., H. 

(2009). Paradigms bit by bit: an information-

theoretic approach to the processing of paradig-

matic structure in inflection and derivation, Anal-

ogy in grammar: Form and acquisition, pp: 214—

252. 

Pandharipande, R. (1993). ―Serial verb construction in 

Marathi.‖ In M. K. Verma ed. (1993). 

Paul, S. (2004). An HPSG Account of Bangla Com-

pound Verbs with LKB Implementation, Ph.D. Dis-

sertation. CALT, University of Hyderabad. 

Pulvermüller, F. (2002). The Neuroscience of Lan-

guage. Cambridge University Press. 

Stolz, J.A., and Feldman, L.B. (1995). The role of 

orthographic and semantic transparency of the base 

morpheme in morphological processing. In L.B. 

Feldman (Ed.) Morphological aspects of language 

processing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As-

sociates Inc. 

 Taft, M., and Forster, K.I.(1975). Lexical storage and 

retrieval of prefix words. Journal of Verbal Learn-

ing and Verbal Behavior, Vol.14, pp. 638-647. 

Taft, M.(1988). A morphological decomposition 

model of lexical access. Linguistics, 26, pp. 657-

667. 

Taft, M. (2004). Morphological decomposition and 

the reverse base frequency effect. Quarterly Jour-

nal of Experimental Psychology, 57A, pp. 745-765 

Tulving, E., Schacter D. L., and Heather A.(1982). 

Priming Effects in Word Fragment Completion are 

independent of Recognition Memory. Journal of 

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and 

Cognition, vol.8 (4). 

129


