



















































A Java Framework for Multilingual Definition and Hypernym Extraction


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 103–108,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Java Framework for Multilingual Definition and Hypernym Extraction

Stefano Faralli and Roberto Navigli
Dipartimento di Informatica
Sapienza Università di Roma

{faralli,navigli}@di.uniroma1.it

Abstract

In this paper we present a demonstra-
tion of a multilingual generalization of
Word-Class Lattices (WCLs), a super-
vised lattice-based model used to identify
textual definitions and extract hypernyms
from them. Lattices are learned from a
dataset of automatically-annotated defini-
tions from Wikipedia. We release a Java
API for the programmatic use of multilin-
gual WCLs in three languages (English,
French and Italian), as well as a Web ap-
plication for definition and hypernym ex-
traction from user-provided sentences.

1 Introduction
Electronic dictionaries and domain glossaries are
definition repositories which prove very useful not
only for lookup purposes, but also for automatic
tasks such as Question Answering (Cui et al.,
2007; Saggion, 2004), taxonomy learning (Navigli
et al., 2011; Velardi et al., 2013), domain Word
Sense Disambiguation (Duan and Yates, 2010;
Faralli and Navigli, 2012), automatic acquisition
of semantic predicates (Flati and Navigli, 2013),
relation extraction (Yap and Baldwin, 2009) and,
more in general, knowledge acquisition (Hovy et
al., 2013). Unfortunately, constructing and updat-
ing such resources requires the effort of a team of
experts. Moreover, they are of no help when deal-
ing with new words or usages, or, even worse, new
domains. Nonetheless, raw text often contains
several definitional sentences, that is, it provides
within itself formal explanations for terms of inter-
est. Whilst it is not feasible to search texts manu-
ally for definitions in several languages, the task of
extracting definitional information can be autom-
atized by means of Machine Learning (ML) and
Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques.

Many approaches (Snow et al., 2004; Kozareva
and Hovy, 2010, inter alia) build upon lexico-
syntactic patterns, inspired by the seminal work
of Hearst (1992). However, these methods suf-
fer from two signifiicant drawbacks: on the one
hand, low recall (as definitional sentences occur in
highly variable syntactic structures), and, on the

other hand, noise (because the most frequent def-
initional pattern – X is a Y – is inherently very
noisy). A recent approach to definition and hyper-
nym extraction, called Word-Class Lattices (Nav-
igli and Velardi, 2010, WCLs), overcomes these
issues by addressing the variability of definitional
sentences and providing a flexible way of automat-
ically extracting hypernyms from them. To do so,
lattice-based classifiers are learned from a training
set of textual definitions. Training sentences are
automatically clustered by similarity and, for each
such cluster, a lattice classifier is learned which
models the variants of the definition template de-
tected. A lattice is a directed acyclic graph, a
subclass of non-deterministic finite state automata.
The purpose of the lattice structure is to preserve
(in a compact form) the salient differences among
distinct sequences.

In this paper we present a demonstration of
Word-Class Lattices by providing a Java API and
a Web application for online usage. Since multi-
linguality is a key need in today’s information so-
ciety, and because WCLs have been tested over-
whelmingly only with the English language, we
provide experiments for three different languages,
namely English, French and Italian. To do so, in
contrast to Navigli and Velardi (2010), who cre-
ated a manually annotated training set of defini-
tions, we provide a heuristic method for the au-
tomatic acquisition of reliable training sets from
Wikipedia, and use them to determine the robust-
ness and generalization power of WCLs. We show
high performance in definition and hypernym ex-
traction for our three languages.

2 Word-Class Lattices

In this section we briefly summarize Word-Class
Lattices, originally introduced by Navigli and Ve-
lardi (2010).

2.1 Definitional Sentence Generalization
WCL relies on a formal notion of textual defi-
nition. Specifically, given a definition, e.g.: “In
computer science, a closure is a first-class func-
tion with free variables that are bound in the lex-
ical environment”, we assume that it contains the

103



[In geography, a country]DF [is]V F [a political division]GF .
[In finance, a bond]DF [is]V F [a negotiable certificate]GF [that that acknowledges. . . ]REST .
[In poetry, a foot]DF [is]V F [a measure]GF [, consisting. . . ]REST .

Table 1: Example definitions (defined terms are marked in bold face, their hypernyms in italics).

In

geography

finance
poetry

NN1 , a 〈TARGET〉

foot

bond

country

a

political

negotiable

JJ NN2

division

certificate

measure

Figure 1: The DF and GF Word-Class Lattices for the sentences in Table 1.

following fields (Storrer and Wellinghoff, 2006):
definiendum (DF), definitor (VF), definiens (GF)
and rest (REST), where DF is the part of the
definition including the word being defined (e.g.,
“In computer science, a closure”), VF is the verb
phrase used to introduce the definition (e.g., “is”),
GF usually includes the hypernym (e.g., “a first-
class function”, hypernym marked in italics) and
RF includes additional clauses (e.g., “with free
variables that are bound in the lexical environ-
ment”).

Consider a set of training sentences T , each
of which is automatically part-of-speech tagged
and manually bracketed with the DF, VF, GF and
REST fields (examples are shown in Table 1). We
first identify the set of most frequent words F
(e.g., the, a, is, of, refer, etc.). Then we add
the symbol 〈TARGET〉 to F and replace in T the
terms being defined with 〈TARGET〉. We then use
the set of frequent words F to generalize words to
“word classes”.
We define a word class as either a word itself
or its part of speech. Given a sentence s =
w1, w2, . . . , w|s|, where wi is the i-th word of s,
we generalize its words wi to word classes ωi as
follows:

ωi =

{
wi if wi ∈ F
POS(wi) otherwise

that is, a word wi is left unchanged if it occurs fre-
quently in the training corpus (i.e., wi ∈ F ) or is
transformed to its part of speech tag (POS(wi))
otherwise. As a result, we obtain a generalized
sentence s′ = ω1, ω2, . . . , ω|s|. For instance,
given the first sentence in Table 1, we obtain the
corresponding generalized sentence: “In NN, a
〈TARGET〉 is a JJ NN”, where NN and JJ indicate
the noun and adjective classes, respectively.

2.2 Learning
The WCL learning algorithm consists of 3 steps:

• Star patterns: each sentence in the training
set is preprocessed and generalized to a star

pattern by replacing with * all the words wi 6∈
F , i.e., non-frequent words. For instance, “In
geography, a country is a political division”
is transformed to “In *, a 〈TARGET〉 is a *”;

• Sentence clustering: the training sentences
are then clustered based on the star patterns
they belong to;

• Word-Class Lattice construction: for each
sentence cluster, a WCL is created separately
for each DF, VF and GF field by means of a
greedy alignment algorithm. In Figure 1 we
show the resulting lattices for the DF and GF
fields built for the cluster of sentences of Ta-
ble 1. Note that during the construction of the
lattice the nodes associated with the hyper-
nym words in the learning sentences (i.e., di-
vision, certificate and measure) are marked as
hypernyms in order to determine the hyper-
nym of a test sentence at classification time
(see (Navigli and Velardi, 2010) for details).

2.3 Classification
Once the learning process is over, a set of WCLs
is produced for the DF, VF and GF fields. Given
a test sentence s, we consider all possible combi-
nations of definiendum, definitor and definiens lat-
tices and select the combination of the three WCLs
that best fits the sentence, if such a combination
exists. In fact, choosing the most appropriate
combination of lattices impacts the performance
of hypernym extraction. The best combination
of WCLs is selected by maximizing the follow-
ing confidence score: score(s, lDF , lV F , lGF ) =
coverage · log(support+1) where s is the candi-
date sentence, lDF , lV F and lGF are three lattices
one for each definition field, coverage is the frac-
tion of words of the input sentence covered by the
three lattices, and support is the sum of the num-
ber of sentences in the star patterns corresponding
to the GF lattice. Finally, when a sentence is clas-
sified as a definition, its hypernym is extracted by

104



# Wikipedia pages # definitions extracted
English (EN) 3,904,360 1,552,493
French (FR) 1,617,359 447,772
Italian (IT) 1,008,044 291,259

Table 2: The number of Wikipedia pages and the
resulting automatically annotated definitions.

selecting the words in the input sentence that are
marked as hypernyms in the WCL selected for GF.

3 Multilingual Word-Class Lattices
In order to enable multilinguality, thereby extract-
ing definitions and hypernyms in many languages,
we provide here a heuristic method for the creation
of multilingual training datasets from Wikipedia,
that we apply to three languages: English, French
and Italian. As a result, we are able to fully au-
tomatize the definition and hypernym extraction
by utilizing collaboratively-curated encyclopedia
content.

3.1 Automatic Learning of Multilingual
WCLs

The method consists of four steps:

1. candidate definition extraction: we iterate
through the collection of Wikipedia pages for
the language of interest. For each article we
extract the first paragraph, which usually, but
not always, contains a definitional sentence
for the concept expressed by the page title.
We discard all those pages for which the title
corresponds to a special page (i.e., title in the
form “List of [. . . ]”, “Index of [. . . ]”, “[. . . ]
(disambiguation)” etc.).

2. part-of-speech tagging and phrase chunk-
ing: for each candidate definition we per-
form part-of-speech tagging and chunking,
thus automatically identifying noun, verb,
and prepositional phrases (we use TreeTag-
ger (Schmid, 1997)).

3. automatic annotation: we replace all the oc-
currences in the candidate definition of the
target term (i.e., the title of the page) with
the marker 〈TARGET〉, we then tag as hyper-
nym the words associated with the first hy-
perlink occurring to the right of 〈TARGET〉.
Then we tag as VF (i.e., definitor field,
see Section 2.1) the verb phrase found be-
tween 〈TARGET〉 and the hypernym, if such
a phrase exists. Next we tag as GF (i.e.,
definiens field) the phrase which contains the
hypernym and as DF (i.e., definiendum field)
the phrase which starts at the beginning of
the sentence and ends right before the start
of the VP tag. Finally we mark as REST the

remaining phrases after the phrase already
tagged as GF. For example, given the sen-
tence “Albert Einstein was a German-born
theoretical physicist.”, we produce the fol-
lowing sentence annotation: “[Albert Ein-
stein]DF [was]V F [a German-born theoreti-
cal physicist]GF .” (target term marked in
bold and hypernym in italics).

4. filtering: we finally discard all the candidate
definitions for which not all fields could be
found during the previous step (i.e., either the
〈TARGET〉, hypernym or any DF, VF, GF,
REST tag is missing).

We applied the above four steps to the En-
glish, French and Italian dumps of Wikipedia1.
The numbers are shown in Table 2: starting with
3,904,360 Wikipedia pages for English, 1,617,359
for French and 1,008,044 for Italian (first column),
we obtained 1,552,493, 447,772, and 291,259 au-
tomatically tagged sentences, respectively, for the
three languages (second column in the Table).
Since we next had to use these sentences for train-
ing our WCLs, we took out a random sample
of 1000 sentences for each language which we
used for testing purposes. We manually annotated
each of these sentences as definitional or non-
definitional2 and, in the case of the former, also
with the correct hypernym.

3.2 Evaluation
We tested the newly acquired training dataset
against two test datasets. The first dataset was
our random sampling of 1000 Wikipedia test sen-
tences which we had set aside for each language
(no intersection with the training set, see previous
section). The second dataset was the same one
used in Navigli and Velardi (2010), made up of
sentences from the ukWaC Web corpus (Ferraresi
et al., 2008) and used to estimate the definition and
hypernym extraction performance on an open text
corpus.

3.3 Results
Table 3 shows the results obtained on definition
(column 2-4) and hypernym extraction (column 5-
7) in terms of precision (P), recall (R) and accu-
racy (A) on our first dataset. Note that accuracy
also takes into account candidate definitions in
the test set which were tagged as non-definitional
(see Section 3.1). In the Table we compare the
performance of our English WCL trained from
Wikipedia sentences using our automatic proce-
dure against the original performance of WCL

1We used the 21-09-2012 (EN), 17-09-2012 (FR), 21-09-
2012 (IT) dumps.

2Note that the first sentence of a Wikipedia page might
seldom be non-definitional, such as “Basmo fortress is lo-
cated in the north-western part . . . ”.

105



Definition Extraction Hypernym Extraction
P R A P R A

EN 98.5 78.3 81.0 98.5 77.4 80.0
FR 98.7 83.3 84.0 98.6 78.0 79.0
IT 98.8 87.3 87.0 98.7 83.2 83.0
EN (2010) 100.0 59.0 66.0 100.0 58.3 65.0

Table 3: Precision (P), recall (R) and accuracy
(A) of definition and hypernym extraction when
testing on our dataset of 1000 randomly sam-
pled Wikipedia first-paragraph sentences. EN
(2010) refers to the WCL learned from the origi-
nal manually-curated training set from Navigli and
Velardi (2010), while EN, FR and IT refer to WCL
trained, respectively, with one of the three training
sets automatically acquired from Wikipedia.

P R
EN 98.9 57.6
EN (2010) 94.8 56.5

Table 4: Estimated WCL definition extraction
precision (P) and recall (R), testing a sample of
ukWaC sentences.

trained on 1,908 manually-selected training sen-
tences3. It can be seen that the automatically ac-
quired training set considerably improves the per-
formance, as it covers higher variability. We note
that the recall in both definition and hypernym ex-
traction is higher for French and Italian. We at-
tribute this behavior to the higher complexity and,
again, variability of English Wikipedia pages, and
specifically first-sentence definitions. We remark
that the presented results were obtained without
any human effort, except for the independent col-
laborative editing and hyperlinking of Wikipedia
pages, and that the overall performances can be
improved by manually checking the automatically
annotated training datasets.

We also replicated the experiment carried out
by Navigli and Velardi (2010), testing WCLs with
a subset (over 300,000 sentences) of the ukWaC
Web corpus. As can be seen in Table 4, the
estimated precision and recall for WCL defini-
tion extraction with the 2010 training set were
94.8% and 56.5%, respectively, while with our au-
tomatically acquired English training set we ob-
tained a higher precision of 98.9% and a recall of
57.6%. This second experiment shows that learn-
ing WCLs from hundreds of thousands of defini-
tion candidates does not overfit to Wikipedia-style
definitional sentences.

After looking at the automatically acquired
training datasets, we noted some erroneous an-
notations mainly due to the following factors: i)
some Wikipedia pages do not start with defini-

3Available from http://lcl.uniroma1.it/wcl

1 // select the language of interest
2 Language targetLanguage = Language.EN;
3 // open the training set
4 Dataset ts = new AnnotatedDataset(
5 trainingDatasetFile,
6 targetLanguage);
7 // obtain an instance of the WCL classifier
8 WCLClassifier c = new WCLClassifier(targetLanguage);
9 c.train(ts);

10 // create a sentence to be tested
11 Sentence sentence = Sentence.createFromString(
12 "WCL",
13 "WCL is a kind of classifier.",
14 targetLanguage);
15 // test the sentence
16 SentenceAnnotation sa = c.test(sentence);
17 // print the hypernym
18 if (sa.isDefinition())
19 System.out.println(sa.getHyper());

Figure 2: An example of WCL API usage.

tional sentences; ii) they may contain more than
one verbal phrase between the defined term and
the hypernym; iii) the first link after the verbal
phrase does not cover, or partially covers, the
correct hypernym. The elimination of the above
wrongly acquired definitional patterns can be im-
plemented with some language-dependent heuris-
tics or can be done by human annotators. In any
case, given the presence of a high number of cor-
rect annotated sentences, these wrong definitional
patterns have a very low impact on the definition
and hypernym extraction precision as shown in the
above experiments (see Table 3 and Table 4).

4 Multilingual WCL API
Together with the training and test sets of the
above experiments, we also release here our im-
plementation of Word-Class Lattices, available as
a Java API. As a result the WCL classifier can eas-
ily be used programmatically in any Java project.
In Figure 2 we show an example of the API usage.
After the selection of the target language (line 2),
we load the training dataset for the target language
(line 4). Then an instance of WCLClassifier is
created (line 8) and the training phase is launched
on the input training corpora (line 9). Now the
classifier is ready to be tested on any given sen-
tence in the target language (lines 11-16). If the
classifier output is positive (line 18) we can print
the extracted hypernym (line 19). The output of
the presented code is the string “classifier” which
corresponds to the hypernym extracted by WCL
for the input sentence “WCL is a kind of classi-
fier”.

4.1 Web user interface
We also release a Web interface to enable online
usage of our WCLs for the English, French and
Italian languages. In Figure 3 we show a screen-
shot of our Web interface. The user can type the

106



Figure 3: A screenshot of the WCL Web interface.

term of interest, the candidate definition, select
the language of interest and, after submission, in
the case of positive response from WCL, obtain
the corresponding hypernym and a graphical rep-
resentation of the lattices matching the given sen-
tence, as shown in the bottom part of the Figure.

The graphical representation shows the concate-
nation of the learned lattices which match the DF,
VF, GF parts of the given sentence (see Section
2). We also allow the user not to provide the term
of interest: in this case all the nouns in the sen-
tence are considered as candidate defined terms.
The Web user interface is part of a client-server ap-
plication, created with the JavaServer Pages tech-
nology. The server side produces an HTML page
(like the one shown in Figure 3), using the WCL
API (see Section 4) to process and test the submit-
ted definition candidate.

5 Related Work

A great deal of work is concerned with the lan-
guage independent extraction of definitions. Much
recent work uses symbolic methods that depend
on lexico-syntactic patterns or features, which are
manually created or semi-automatically learned as
recently done in (Zhang and Jiang, 2009; Wester-
hout, 2009). A fully automated method is, instead,
proposed by Borg et al. (2009), where higher
performance (around 60-70% F1-measure) is ob-
tained only for specific domains and patterns. Ve-
lardi et al. (2008), in order to improve precision
while keeping pattern generality, prune candidates
using more refined stylistic patterns and lexical fil-
ters. Cui et al. (2007) propose the use of prob-
abilistic lexico-semantic patterns, for definitional
question answering in the TREC contest4. How-
ever, the TREC evaluation datasets cannot be con-
sidered true definitions, but rather text fragments
providing some relevant fact about a target term.

4Text REtrieval Conferences: http://trec.nist.
gov

Hypernym extraction methods vary from simple
lexical patterns (Hearst, 1992; Oakes, 2005) to sta-
tistical and machine learning techniques (Agirre
et al., 2000; Caraballo, 1999; Dolan et al., 1993;
Sanfilippo and Poznanski, 1992; Ritter et al.,
2009). Extraction heuristics can be adopted in
many languages (De Benedictis et al., 2013),
where given a definitional sentence the hypernym
is identified as the first occuring noun after the
defined term. One of the highest-coverage meth-
ods is proposed by Snow et al. (2004). They first
search sentences that contain two terms which are
known to be in a taxonomic relation (term pairs are
taken from WordNet (Miller et al., 1990)); then
they parse the sentences, and automatically ex-
tract patterns from the parse trees. Finally, they
train a hypernym classifier based on these features.
Lexico-syntactic patterns are generated for each
sentence relating a term to its hypernym, and a de-
pendency parser is used to represent them.

6 Conclusion

In this demonstration we provide three main con-
tributions: 1) a general method for obtaining large
training sets of annotated definitional sentences
for many languages from Wikipedia, thanks to
which we can release three new training sets for
English, French and Italian; 2) an API to program-
matically use WCLs in Java projects; 3) a Web ap-
plication which enables online use of multilingual
WCLs: http://lcl.uniroma1.it/wcl/.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge
the support of the ERC Starting
Grant MultiJEDI No. 259234.

107



References
Eneko Agirre, Olatz Ansa, Eduard H. Hovy, and David

Martı́nez. 2000. Enriching very large ontologies using the
WWW. In ECAI Workshop on Ontology Learning, Berlin,
Germany.

Claudia Borg, Mike Rosner, and Gordon Pace. 2009. Evo-
lutionary algorithms for definition extraction. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st Workshop on Definition Extraction, pages
26–32, Borovets, Bulgaria.

Sharon A. Caraballo. 1999. Automatic construction of a
hypernym-labeled noun hierarchy from text. In Proceed-
ings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Proceedings of the Confer-
ence, pages 120–126, Maryland, USA.

Hang Cui, Min-Yen Kan, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2007. Soft pat-
tern matching models for definitional question answering.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 25(2):1–30.

Flavio De Benedictis, Stefano Faralli, and Roberto Navigli.
2013. GlossBoot: Bootstrapping Multilingual Domain
Glossaries from the Web. In Proceedings of 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Sofia, Bulgaria.

William Dolan, Lucy Vanderwende, and Stephen D. Richard-
son. 1993. Automatically deriving structured knowledge
bases from on-line dictionaries. In Proceedings of the
First Conference of the Pacific Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 5–14, Vancouver, Canada.

Weisi Duan and Alexander Yates. 2010. Extracting glosses
to disambiguate word senses. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technologies: The 11th Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 627–635, Los Angeles, CA,
USA.

Stefano Faralli and Roberto Navigli. 2012. A new
minimally-supervised framework for Domain Word Sense
Disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 1411–1422, Jeju, Korea.

Adriano Ferraresi, Eros Zanchetta, Marco Baroni, and Silvia
Bernardini. 2008. Introducing and evaluating ukWaC, a
very large web-derived corpus of English. In Proceedings
of the 4th Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC-4), pages 47–
54, Marrakech, Morocco.

Tiziano Flati and Roberto Navigli. 2013. SPred: Large-scale
Harvesting of Semantic Predicates. In Proceedings of 51st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hyponyms
from large text corpora. In Proceedings of the 15th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
539–545, Nantes, France.

Eduard Hovy, Roberto Navigli, and Simone Paolo Ponzetto.
2013. Collaboratively built semi-structured content and
artificial intelligence: The story so far. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 194:2–27.

Zornitsa Kozareva and Eduard Hovy. 2010. Learning argu-
ments and supertypes of semantic relations using recur-
sive patterns. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
Uppsala, Sweden, pages 1482–1491, Uppsala, Sweden.

George A. Miller, R.T. Beckwith, Christiane D. Fellbaum,
D. Gross, and K. Miller. 1990. WordNet: an online

lexical database. International Journal of Lexicography,
3(4):235–244.

Roberto Navigli and Paola Velardi. 2010. Learning Word-
Class Lattices for definition and hypernym extraction. In
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 1318–1327, Up-
psala, Sweden.

Roberto Navigli, Paola Velardi, and Stefano Faralli. 2011.
A graph-based algorithm for inducing lexical taxonomies
from scratch. In Proceedings of the 22th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1872–
1877, Barcelona, Spain.

Michael P. Oakes. 2005. Using Hearst’s rules for the auto-
matic acquisition of hyponyms for mining a pharmaceu-
tical corpus. In RANLP Text Mining Workshop’05, pages
63–67, Borovets, Bulgaria.

Alan Ritter, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni. 2009.
What is this, anyway: Automatic hypernym discovery.
In Proceedings of the 2009 AAAI Spring Symposium on
Learning by Reading and Learning to Read, pages 88–93,
Palo Alto, California.

Horacio Saggion. 2004. Identifying definitions in text col-
lections for question answering. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, pages 1927–1930, Lisbon, Portugal.

Antonio Sanfilippo and Victor Poznanski. 1992. The ac-
quisition of lexical knowledge from combined machine-
readable dictionary sources. In Proceedings of the third
Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing,
pages 80–87, Trento, Italy.

Helmut Schmid. 1997. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging
using decision trees. In Daniel Jones and Harold Somers,
editors, New Methods in Language Processing, Studies in
Computational Linguistics, pages 154–164. UCL Press,
London, GB.

Rion Snow, Daniel Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2004.
Learning syntactic patterns for automatic hypernym dis-
covery. In Lawrence K. Saul, Yair Weiss, and Léon Bot-
tou, editors, Proc. of NIPS 2004, pages 1297–1304, Cam-
bridge, Mass. MIT Press.

Angelika Storrer and Sandra Wellinghoff. 2006. Automated
detection and annotation of term definitions in German
text corpora. In LREC 2006, pages 275–295, Genoa, Italy.

Paola Velardi, Roberto Navigli, and Pierluigi D’Amadio.
2008. Mining the Web to create specialized glossaries.
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 23(5):18–25.

Paola Velardi, Stefano Faralli, and Roberto Navigli. 2013.
OntoLearn Reloaded: A graph-based algorithm for taxon-
omy induction. Computational Linguistics, 39(3).

Eline Westerhout. 2009. Definition extraction using linguis-
tic and structural features. In Proceedings of the RANLP
2009 Workshop on Definition Extraction, page 61–67,
Borovets, Bulgaria.

Willy Yap and Timothy Baldwin. 2009. Experiments on
pattern-based relation learning. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM 2009), pages 1657–1660, Hong Kong,
China, 2009.

Chunxia Zhang and Peng Jiang. 2009. Automatic extraction
of definitions. In Proceedings of 2nd IEEE International
Conference on Computer Science and Information Tech-
nology, pages 364–368, Beijing, China.

108


