



















































Exploring Word Order Universals: a Probabilistic Graphical Model Approach


Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop, pages 150–157,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploring Word Order Universals: a Probabilistic Graphical Model 
Approach 

Xia Lu 
Department of Linguistics 

University at Buffalo 
Buffalo, NY USA 

xialu@buffalo.edu 

Abstract 

In this paper we propose a probabilistic graph-
ical model as an innovative framework for 
studying typological universals. We view lan-
guage as a system and linguistic features as its 
components whose relationships are encoded 
in a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). Taking 
discovery of the word order universals as a 
knowledge discovery task we learn the graph-
ical representation of a word order sub-system 
which reveals a finer structure such as direct 
and indirect dependencies among word order 
features. Then probabilistic inference enables 
us to see the strength of such relationships: 
given the observed value of one feature (or 
combination of features), the probabilities of 
values of other features can be calculated.  Our 
model is not restricted to using only two val-
ues of a feature. Using imputation technique 
and EM algorithm it can handle missing val-
ues well. Model averaging technique solves 
the problem of limited data. In addition the in-
cremental and divide-and-conquer method ad-
dresses the areal and genetic effects simulta-
neously instead of separately as in Daumé III 
and Campbell (2007). 

1 Introduction 
Ever since Greenberg (1963) proposed 45 uni-
versals of language based on a sample of 30 lan-
guages, typologists have been pursuing this topic 
actively for the past half century. Since some of 
them do not agree with the term (or concept) of 
“universal” they use other terminology such as 
“correlation”, “co-occurrence”, “dependency”, 
“interaction” and “implication” to refer to the 
relationships between/among linguistic feature 
pairs most of which concern morpheme and 
word order. Indeed the definition of “universals” 
has never been clear until recently, when most 
typologists agreed that such universals should be 
statistical universals which are “statistical 
tendencies” discovered from data samples by 

using statistical methods as used in any other 
science. Only those tendencies that can be ex-
trapolated to make general conclusions about the 
population can be claimed to be “universals” 
since they reflect the global preferences of value 
distribution of linguistic features across genea-
logical hierarchy and geographical areas.  
   Previous statistical methods in the research of 
word order universals have yielded interesting 
results but they have to make strong assumptions 
and do a considerable amount of data prepro-
cessing to make the data fit the statistical model 
(Greenberg, 1963; Hawkins, 1982; Dryer, 1989; 
Nichols, 1986; Justeson & Stephens, 1990). Re-
cent studies using probabilistic models are much 
more flexible and can handle noise and uncer-
tainty better (Daumé III & Campbell, 2007; Dunn 
et al., 2011). However these models still rely on 
strong theoretic assumptions and heavy data 
treatment, such as using only two values of word 
order pairs while discarding other values, pur-
posefully selecting a subset of the languages to 
study, or selecting partial data with complete 
values. In this paper we introduce a novel ap-
proach of using a probabilistic graphical model 
to study word order universals. Using this model 
we can have a graphic representation of the 
structure of language as a complex system com-
posed of linguistic features. Then the relationship 
among these features can be quantified as proba-
bilities. Such a model does not rely on strong 
assumptions and has little constraint on data. 

The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 
we discuss the rationale of using a probabilistic 
graphic model to study word order universals 
and introduce our two models; Section 3 is about 
learning structures and parameters for the two 
models. Section 4 discusses the quantitative 
analysis while Section 5 gives qualitative analy-
sis of the results. Section 6 is about inference 
such as MAP query and in Section 6 we discuss 
the advantage of using PGM to study word order 
universals.  

150



2 A new approach: probabilistic graph-
ical modeling 

2.1 Rationale for using PGM in word order 
study 

The probabilistic graphical model is the marriage 
of probabilistic theory and graph theory. It com-
bines a graphical representation with a complex 
distribution over a high-dimensional space. 
There are two major types of graphical represen-
tations of distributions. One is a Directed Acyclic 
Graph (DAG) which is also known as a Bayesian 
network with all edges having a source and a 
target. The other is an Undirected Acyclic Graph, 
which is also called a Markov network with all 
edges undirected. A mixture of these two types is 
also possible (Koller & Friedman, 2009).  
  There are two advantages of using this model to 
study word order universals. First the graphical 
structure can reveal much finer structure of lan-
guage as a complex system. Most studies on 
word order correlations examine the pairwise 
relationship, for example, how the order of verb 
and object correlates with the order of noun and 
adjective. However linguists have also noticed 
other possible interactions among the word order 
features, like chains of overlapping implications: 
Prep  ((NAdj  NGen) & (NGen  NRel)) 
proposed by Hawkins (1983); multi-conditional 
implications (Daumé III, 2007); correlations 
among six word order pairs and three-way inter-
actions  (Justeson & Stephens, 1990); spurious 
word order correlations  (Croft et al., 2011); 
chains of associations, e.g. if C predicts B and B 
predicts A, then C predicts A redundantly (Bick-
el, 2010b). These claims about the possible inter-
actions among word order features imply com-
plex relationships among the features. The study 
of word order correlations started with pairwise 
comparison, probably because that was what ty-
pologists could do given the limited resources of 
statistical methods. However when we study the 
properties of a language, by knowing just several 
word orders such as order of verb and object, 
noun and adpositions, etc., we are unable to say 
anything about the language as a whole. Here we 
want to introduce a new perspective of seeing 
language as a complex system. We assume there 
is a meta-language that has the universal proper-
ties of all languages in the world. We want a 
model that can represent this meta-language and 
make inferences about linguistic properties of 
new languages. This system is composed of mul-
tiple sub-systems such as phonology, morpholo-
gy, syntax, etc. which correspond to the subfields 

in linguistics. In this paper we focus on the sub-
system of word order only.  

The other advantage of PGM is that it enables 
us to quantify the relationships among word or-
der features. Justeson & Stephens (1990) men-
tioned the notion of “correlation strength” when 
they found out that N/A order appears less 
strongly related to basic V/S/O order and/or 
adposition type than is N/G order. This is the 
best a log-linear model can do, to indicate 
whether a correlation is “strong”, “less strong”, 
“weak” or “less weak”. Dunn et al. (2011) used 
Bayes factor value to quantify the relationships 
between the word order pairs but they mistook 
the strength of evidence for an effect as the 
strength of the effect itself (Levy & Daumé III, 
2011). A PGM model for a word order subsys-
tem encodes a joint probabilistic distribution of 
all word order feature pairs. Using probability we 
can describe the degree of confidence about the 
uncertain nature of word order correlations. For 
example, if we set the specific value as evidence, 
then we can get the values of other features using 
an inference method. Such values can be seen as 
quantified strength of relationship between val-
ues of features.  

2.2 Our model 
In our word order universal modeling we will use 
DAG structure since we think the direction of 
influence matters when talking about the rela-
tionship among features. In Greenberg (1966a) 
most of the universals are unidirectional, such as 
“If a language has object-verb order, then it also 
has subject-verb order” while few are bidirec-
tional universals. The term “directionality” does 
not capture the full nature of the different status-
es word order features have in the complex lan-
guage system. We notice in all the word order 
studies the order of SOV or OV was given spe-
cial attention. In Dryer’s study VO order is the 
dominant one which determines the set of word 
order pairs correlated with it (or not). We assume 
word order features have different statuses in the 
language system and such differences should be 
manifested by directionality of relationships be-
tween feature pairs. Therefore we choose DAG 
structure as our current model framework. 
    Another issue is the sampling problem. Some 
typologists (Dryer 1989, Croft 2003) have ar-
gued that the language samples in the WALS 
database (Haspelmath et al., 2005) are not inde-
pendent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) be-
cause languages can share the same feature val-
ues due to either genetic or areal effect. While 

151



others (Maslova, 2010) argue that languages 
within a family have developed into distinct ones 
through the long history. We notice that even we 
can control the areal and genetic factors there are 
still many other factors that can influence the 
typological data distribution, such as 1) language 
speakers: cognitive, physiological, social, and 
communicative factors; 2) data collection: diffi-
culty in identifying features; political biases 
(some languages are well documented); 3) ran-
dom noise such as historical accidents. Here we 
do not make any assumption about the i.i.d prop-
erty of the language samples and propose two 
models: one is FLAT, which assumes samples 
are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.); 
the other is UNIV, which takes care of the possi-
ble dependencies among the samples. By com-
paring the predictive power of these two models 
we hope to find one that is closer to the real dis-
tribution.  

3 Learning  
To build our models we need to learn both struc-
ture and parameters for the two models. We used 
Murphy (2001)’s Bayesian Network Toolbox 
(BNT) and Leray & Francois (2004)’s BNT 
Structure Learning Package (BNT_SLP) for this 
purpose.  

3.1 Data 
As we mentioned earlier we will restrict our at-
tention to the domain of word order only in this 
paper. In the WALS database there are 56 fea-
tures belonging to the “Word Order” category. 
Because some of the features are redundant, we  
chose 15 sets of word order features which are: 
S_O_V1 (order of subject, object and verb) [72], 
S_V (order of subject and verb) [3], O_V (order 
of object and verb) [3], O_Obl_V (order of Ob-
ject, Oblique, and Verb) [6], ADP_NP (order of 
adposition and noun phrase) [5], G_N (order of 
genitive and noun) [3], A_N (order of adjective 
and noun) [4], Dem_N (order of demonstrative 
and noun) [4], Num_N (order of numeral and 
noun) [4], R_N (order of relative clause and 
noun) [7], Deg_A (order of degree word and ad-
jective) [3], PoQPar (position of polar question 
particles) [6], IntPhr (position of interrogative 
phrases in content questions) [3], AdSub_Cl (or-
der of adverbial subordinator and clause) [5], 

1 The detailed descriptions of these word order features and 
values can be found at http://wals.info/. 
2 The number in the square brackets indicates the number of 
values for that feature.  

Neg_V (order of negative morpheme and verb) 
[4]. We did some minimal treatment of data. For 
Neg_V which has 17 values we collapsed its val-
ues 7-17 to 6 (“Mixed”). For Dem_N and Neg_V, 
we treat word and suffix as the same and col-
lapsed values 1 and 3 to 1, and values 2 and 4 to 
2. After deleting those languages with no value 
for all 15 word order features we have 1646 data 
entries. This database is very sparse: in overall 
the percentage of missing values is 31%. For 
seven features more than 50% of the languages 
have values missing.  

3.2 Learning the FLAT model  
There are two big problems in learning DAG 
structure for the FLAT model. One is caused by 
large number of missing values. Because EM 
method for structures from incomplete data takes 
very long time to converge due to the large pa-
rameter space of our model, we decided to use 
imputation method to handle the missing data 
problem (Singh, 1997). The other difficulty is 
caused by limited data. To solve this problem we 
used model averaging by using bootstrap repli-
cates (Friedman et al., 1999). We use GES 
(greedy search in the space of equivalent classes) 
algorithm in BNT_SLP to learn structure from a 
bootstrap dataset because it uses CPDAGs to 
represent Markov equivalent classes which 
makes graph fusion easier. The algorithm is as 
follows: 
1) Use nearest-neighbor method to impute missing 

values in the original dataset D and create a com-
plete dataset . 

2) Create T=200 bootstrap resamples by resampling 
the same number of instances as the original da-
taset with replacement from . Then for each 
resample  learn the highest scoring structure . 

3) Fuse the 200 graphs into a single graph  using 
the “Intergroup Undirected Networks Integration” 
method (Liu et al., 2007). Then use  
cpdag_to_dag.m in BNT_SLP to change   into a 
directed graph . 

4) Compute the BIC scores of  using the 200 
resamples and choose the highest one. If the con-
vergence criterion (change of BIC is less than 10  compared with the previous iteration) is met, 
stop. Otherwise go to Step 5. 

5) Learn 200 sets of parameters   for  using the 
200 resamples and take a weighted-average as the 
final parameters . Also use EM algorithm and 
dataset D to learn parameters    for . Choose 
the parameters  between   and    that gives 
the highest BIC score. Use MAP estimation to fill 
in the missing values in D and generate a complete 
dataset . Go to Step 2. 

                                                 

152



  The structure for the FLAT model is shown in 
Figure 1. 

Figure 1. DAG structure of the FLAT model 

3.3 Learning the UNIV model 
As discussed in Section 2.2, the possible depend-
encies among language samples pose difficulty 
for statistical methods using the WALS data. 
Daumé III & Campbell (2007)’s hierarchical 
models provided a good solution to this problem; 
however their two models LINGHIER and DIS-
THIER dealt with genetic and areal influences 
separately and the two separate results still do 
not tell us what the “true universals” are. 
   Instead of trying to control the areal and genet-
ic and other factors, we propose a different per-
spective here. As we have mentioned, the kind of 
universals we care about are the stable properties 
of language, which means they can be found 
across all subsets of languages. Therefore to 
solve the problem of dependence among the lan-
guages we take an incremental and divide-and-
conquer approach. Using clustering algorithm we 
identified five clusters in the WALS data. In 
each cluster we picked 1/n of the data and com-
bine them to make a subset. In this way we can 
have n subsets of data which have decreased de-
gree of dependencies among the samples. We 
learn a structure for each subset and fuse the n 
graphs into one single graph. The algorithm is as 
follows:  
1) Use nearest-neighbor method to impute missing

values and create M complete datasets  (1
).

2) For each  divide the samples into n subsets.
Then for each subset  learn the highest scoring
structure .

3) Fuse the n graphs into a single graph  using the
“Intragroup Undirected Networks Integration”
method (Liu et al., 2007).

4) Fuse the M graphs to make a single directed graph
 as in Step 3 in the previous section.

5) Compute the BIC score of  using datasets 
(1 ) and choose the highest score. If the
convergence criterion (same as in the previous sec-
tion) is met, stop. Otherwise go to Step 6.

6) Learn parameters   for  using datasets 
(1 ) and take a weighted-average as the
final parameters . Also use EM algorithm and
original dataset to learn parameters    for .
Choose the parameters  among   and    that
gives the highest BIC score. Use MAP estimation
to fill in the missing values in D and generate an-
other M complete dataset.  Go to Step 2.

  The final structure for the UNIV model is 
shown in Figure 2.  

Figure 2. DAG structure of the UNIV model 

  The semantics of a DAG structure cannot be 
simply interpreted as causality (Koller & Fried-
man, 2009). From this graph we can see word 
order features are on different tiers in the hierar-
chy. The root S_O_V seems to “dominate” all 
the other features; noun modifiers and noun are 
in the middle tier while O_Obl_V, AdSub_Cl, 
Deg_A, Num_N, R, Neg_V and PoQPar are the 
leaf nodes which might indicate their smallest 
contribution to the word order properties of a 
language. O_V seems to be an important node 
since most paths start from it indicating its influ-
ence can flow to many other nodes. 
   We can also see there are two types of connec-
tions among the nodes: 1) direct connection: any 
two nodes connected with an arc directly have 
influence on each other. This construction induc-
es a correlation between the two features regard-
less of the evidence. This type of dependency 
was the one most explored in the previous litera-
tures. 2) three cases of indirect connections: a. 
indirect causal effect: e.g. O_V does not influ-
ence G_N directly, but via ADP_NP; b. indirect 
evidential effect: knowing G_N will change our 
belief about O_V indirectly; c. common cause: 
e.g. ADP_NP and O_Obl_V can influence each 
other without O_V being observed. Our model 
reveals a much finer structure of the word order 

153



sub-system by distinguishing different types of 
dependencies that might have been categorized 
simply as “correlation” in the traditional statisti-
cal methods.  

4 Quantitative Analysis of Results 
The word order universal results are difficult to 
evaluate because we do not know the correct an-
swers. Nonetheless we did a quantitative evalua-
tion following Daumé III and Campbell (2007)’s 
method. The results are shown in Figure 3.  

 
Figure 3. Results of Quantitative Evaluation 

 
   As we can see the predictive power of the 
UNIV model is much better than that of the 
FLAT model. The accuracy of our both models 
is lower than those of Daumé III and Campbell’s. 
But this does not mean our models are worse 
considering the complexity in model learning. 
Instead our UNIV model shows steady accurate 
prediction for the top ten universals and has more 
stable performance compared with other models. 
  Using the UNIV model we can do many types 
of computation. Besides pairwise feature values, 
we can calculate the probability of any combina-
tion of word order feature values. If we want to 
know how value “GN” of feature “G_N” is de-
pendent on value “POST” of feature “ADP_NP” 
we set POST to be evidence (probability=100%) 
and get the probability of having “GN”. Such a 
probability can be taken as a measurement of 
dependence strength between these two values. 
We need more evidence for setting a threshold 
value to define a word order universal but for 
now we just use 0.5. We calculated the probabili-
ties of all pairwise feature values in the UNIV 
model which can found at 
http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~xialu/univ.html. 

5 Qualitative Analysis of Results  
We also did qualitative evaluation through com-
parison with the well-known findings in word 
order correlation studies. We compared our re-

sults with three major works: those of Green-
berg’s, Dryer’s, and Daumé III and Campbell’s. 

5.1 Evaluation: compare with Greenberg’s 
and Dryer’s work 

Comparison with Greenberg’s work is shown in 
Table 1 (in Appendix A). If the probability is 
above 0.5 we say it is a universal and mark it red. 
We think values like 0.4-0.5 can also give us 
some suggestive estimates therefore we mark 
these green. For Universal 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 18 and 
19, our results conform to Greenberg’s. But for 
others there are discrepancies of different de-
grees. For example, for U12 our results show that 
“VSO” can predict “Initial” but not very strongly 
compared with “SOV” predicting “Not_Initial”.   

Table 2 (in Appendix A) shows our compari-
son with Dryer (1992)’s work. We noticed there 
is an asymmetry in terms of V_O’s influence on 
other word order pairs, which was not discussed 
in previous work. In the correlated pairs, only 
ADP_NP and G_N show bidirectional correla-
tion with O_V while PoQPar becomes a non-
correlated pair. In the non-correlated pairs, 
Dem_N becomes a correlated pair and other 
pairs also show correlation of weak strength. 
Most of our results therefore do not confirm 
Dryer’s findings.  

5.2 Evaluation: compare with Daumé III 
and Campbell’s work 

We compared the probabilities of single value 
pairs of the top ten word order universals with 
Daumé III and Campbell’s results, which are 
shown in the following figures. 

 
Figure 4. Compare with Daumé III and Campbell’s 

HIER model 

 

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

pr
ob

ab
ili

tie
s

the first ten universals 

p(true) prob PGM

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

pr
ob

ab
ili

tie
s

the first ten universals 

p(true) prob PGM

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Pr
ed

ic
tio

n 
Ac

cu
ra

cy

Number of Universals (        )

FLAT UNIV

154



Figure 5. Compare with Daumé III and Campbell’s 
DIST model 

   P(true) is the probability of having the particu-
lar implication; prob is the probability calculated 
in a different way which is not specified in Dau-
mé III and Campbell’s work. PGM is our model. 
It can be seen that our model provides moderate 
numbers which fall between the two probabilities 
in Daumé III and Campbell’s results. In Figure 4 
the two universals that have the biggest gaps are: 
9) Prepositions ->VO and 10) Adjective-Noun-
>Demonstrative-Noun. In Figure 5 the three uni-
versals that have the biggest gaps are: 3) Noun-
Genitive->Initial subordinator word, 6) Noun-
Genitive->Prepositions and 8) OV->SV. It is 
hard to tell which model does a better job just by 
doing comparison like this.    Daumé III and 
Campbell’s model computes the probabilities of 
3442 feature pairs separately. Their model with 
two values as nodes does not consider the more 
complex dependencies among more than two 
features. Our model provides a better solution by 
trying to maximize the joint probabilities of all 
word order feature pairs.  

6 Inference 
Besides discovering word order universals, our 
model can reveal more properties of word order 
sub-system through various inference queries. At 
present we use SamIam3 for inference because it 
has an easy-to-use interface for probabilistic in-
ference queries. Figure 6 (in Appendix B) gives 
an example: when we know the language is sub-
ject preceding verb and negative morpheme pre-
ceding verb, then we know the probability for 
this language to have postpositions is 0.5349, as 
well as the probabilities for the values of all oth-
er features.  
    The other type of query is MAP which aims to 
find the most likely assignments to all of the un-
observed variables. For example, when we only 
know that language is VO, we can use MAP que-
ry to find the combination of values which has 
the highest probability (0.0032 as shown in Table 
3 in Appendix C).  
  One more useful function is to calculate the 
likelihood of a language in terms of word order 
properties. If all values of 13 features of a lan-
guage are known, then the probability (likelihood) 
of having such a language can be calculated. We 
calculated the likelihood of eight languages and 
got the results as shown in Figure 7 (in Appendix 

3 SamIam is a tool for modeling and reasoning with Bayesi-
an networks ( http://reasoning.cs.ucla.edu/samiam/). 

C). As we can see, English has the highest likeli-
hood to be a language while Hakka Chinese has 
the lowest. German and French have similar like-
lihood; Portuguese and Spanish are similar but 
are less than German and French. In other words 
English is a typical language regarding word or-
der properties while Hakka Chinese is an atypi-
cal one. 

7 Discussion 
Probabilistic graphic modeling provides solu-
tions to the problems we noticed in the previous 
studies of word order universals. By modeling 
language as a complex system we shift our atten-
tion to the language itself instead of just features. 
Using PGM we can infer properties about a lan-
guage given the known values and we can also 
infer the likelihood of a language given all the 
values. In the future if we include other domains, 
such as phonology, morphology and syntax, we 
will be able to discover more properties about 
language as a whole complex system.  
    Regarding the relationships among the fea-
tures since PGM can give a finer structure we are 
able to see how the features are related directly 
or indirectly. By using probability theory we 
overcome the shortcomings of traditional statisti-
cal methods based on NHST. Probabilities cap-
ture our uncertainty about word order correla-
tions. Instead of saying “A is correlated with B”, 
we can say “A is correlated with B to a certain 
extent”. PGM enables us to quantify our 
knowledge about the word order properties of 
languages.  
    Regarding the data treatment, we did very lit-
tle preprocessing of data, therefore reducing the 
possibility of bringing in additional bias from 
other processes such as family construction in 
Dunn et al.'s experiment. In addition we did not 
remove most of the values so that we can make 
inferences based on values such as “no determi-
nant order” and “both orders”. In this way we 
retain the information in our data to the largest 
extent. 
   We think PGM has the potential to become a 
new methodology for studying word order uni-
versals. It also opens up many new possibilities 
for studying linguistic typology as well: 
 It can include other domains to build a more 

complex network and to discover more typologi-
cal properties of languages.  
 It can be used in field work for linguists to      

make predictions about properties of unknown 
languages.  

                                                 

155



References  
Bickel, B. 2010a. Absolute and statistical universals. 

In Hogan, P. C. (ed.) The Cambridge Encyclopedia 
of the Language Sciences, 77-79. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.  

Bickel, B. 2010b. Capturing particulars and univer-
sals in clause linkage: a multivariate analysis. In 
Bril, I. (ed.) Clause-hierarchy and clause-linking: 
the syntax and pragmatics interface, pp. 51 - 101. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins.  

Croft, William. 2003. Typology and universals. 2nd 
edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. 2009. Probabilistic 
Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques 
(Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning se-
ries). MIT Press, Aug 31, 2009 

Daumé, H., & Campbell, L. (2007). A Bayesian mod-
el for discovering typological implications. 
In Annual Meeting –Association For Computation-
al Linguistics (Vol. 45, No. 1, p. 65). 

D.M. Chickering, D. Heckerman, and C. Meek. 1997. 
A Bayesian approach to learning Bayesian net-
works with local structure. Proceeding UAI'97 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth conference on Un-
certainty in artificial intelligence.  

Dryer, M. S. 1989. Large linguistic areas and lan-
guage sampling. Studies in Language 13,  257 – 
292. 

Dryer, Matthew S. & Martin Haspelmath (eds.). 2011. 
The world atlas of language structures online. 
München: Max Planck Digital Library. 

Dryer, Matthew S. 2011. The evidence for word order 
correlations. Linguistic Typology 15. 335–380. 

Dunn, Michael, Simon J. Greenhill, Stephen C. Lev-
inson & Russell D. Gray. 2011. Evolved structure 
of language shows lineage- -
order universals. Nature 473. 79–82. 

E. T. Jaynes. 2003. Probability Theory: The Logic of 
Science. Cambridge University Press, Apr 10, 2003.  

Friedman, N. (1998, July). The Bayesian structural 
EM algorithm. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth 
conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelli-
gence (pp. 129-138). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers 
Inc. 

Friedman, N., Nachman, I., & Peér, D. (1999, July). 
Learning bayesian network structure from massive 
datasets: the “sparse candidate” algorithm. 
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth conference on Un-
certainty in artificial intelligence (pp. 206-215). 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. 

Greenberg, J. H. 1963. Some universals of grammar 
with particular reference to the order of meaning-
ful elements. In Universals of Language, J. H. 
Greenberg, Ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 73-
113.  

Greenberg, Joseph H. 1966. Synchronic and diachron-
ic universals in phonology. Language 42. 508–517. 

Greenberg, J. H. (1969). Some methods of dynamic 
comparison in linguistics. Substance and structure 
of language, 147-203. 

Hawkins, John A. 1983. Word Order Universals. Ac-
ademic Press, 1983.  

Justeson, J. S., & Stephens, L. D. (1990). Explana-
tions for word order universals: a log-linear analy-
sis. In Proceedings of the XIV International Con-
gress of Linguists (Vol. 3, pp. 2372-76). 

Leray, P., & Francois, O. (2004). BNT structure 
learning package: Documentation and experiments. 

Levy, R., & Daumé III, H. (2011). Computational 
methods are invaluable for typology, but the mod-
els must match the questions: Commentary on 
Dunn et al.(2011).Linguistic Typology.(To appear). 

Liu, F., Tian, F., & Zhu, Q. (2007). Bayesian network 
structure ensemble learning. In Advanced Data 
Mining and Applications (pp. 454-465). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. 

Maslova, Elena & Tatiana Nikitina. 2010. Language 
universals and stochastic regularity of language 
change: Evidence from cross-linguistic distribu-
tions of case marking patterns. Manuscript. 

Murphy, K. (2001). The bayes net toolbox for 
matlab. Computing science and statistics, 33(2), 
1024-1034. 

Perkins, Revere D. 1989. Statistical techniques for 
determining language sample size. Studies in Lan-
guage 13. 293–315. 

Singh, M. (1997, July). Learning Bayesian networks 
from incomplete data. In Proceedings of the Na-
tional conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 
534-539). JOHN WILEY & SONS LTD. 

William Croft, Tanmoy Bhattacharya, Dave Klein-
schmidt, D. Eric Smith and T. Florian Jaeger. 2011.  
Greenbergian universals, diachrony and statistical 
analyses [commentary on Dunn et al., Evolved 
structure of language shows lineage-specific trends 
in word order universals]. Linguistic Typology 
15.433-53. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

156



Appendices 

A. Comparison with others’ work 

Universals Dependencies UNIV 
U2: ADP_NP<=>N_G POST->GN 

PRE->NG 
GN->POST 
NG->PRE 

83.59 
70.29 
78.45 
81.91 

U3: VSO->PRE VSO->PRE 74.41 
U4: SOV->POST SOV->POST 85.28 
U5: SOV&NG->NA SOV&NG->NA 68.95 
U9: PoQPar<=>ADP_NP Initial->PRE  

Final->POST  
PRE->Initial 
POST->Final 

41.87 
49.67 
15.80 
31.73 

U10: PoQPar<=> VSO all values of 
PoQPar:  
VSO below 10% 

below 
10% 

U11: IntPhr->VS Initial->VS 24.12 
U12: VSO->IntPhr VSO->Initial 

SOV->Initial 
SOV->Not_Initial 

50.54 
28.52 
60.41 

U17: VSO->A_N VSO->A_N 24.86 
U18&19: 
A_N<=>Num_N<=>Dem_
N 

AN->NumN 
AN->DemN 
NA->NNum 
NA->NDem 

68.86 
73.74 
61.74 
61.00 

U24: RN->POST (or AN) RN->POST 
RN->AN 

65.73 
29.23 

Table 1. Comparison with Greenberg’s work 
 

OV UNIV VO UNIV 
correlated pairs 

ADP_NP(POST) 90.48 ADP_NP(PRE) 82.72 
G_N(GN) 79.38 G_N(NG) 61.49 
R_N(RN) 19.66 R_N(NR) 75.17 
PoQPar(Final) 31.89 PoQPar(Initial) 15.79 
AdSub_Cl (Final) 20.90 AdSub_Cl (Initial) 49.22 
IntPhr(Not_Initial) 58.74 IntPhr(Initial) 34.36 

non-correlated pairs 
A_N(AN) 29.48 A_N(NA) 65.00 
Dem_N(Dem_N) 52.27 Dem_N(N_Dem) 54.25 
Num_N(NumN) 41.6 Num_N(NNum) 49.25 
Deg_A(Deg_A) 43.48 Deg_A(A_Deg) 38.44 
Neg_V(NegV) 48.06 Neg_V(VNeg) 25.13 

Table 2.  Comparison with Dryer’s work 
 

B. Probabilistic query example in SamIam 

 
Figure 6. One query example 

C. Inference examples 
P(MAP,e)=0.0015052949102098631 
P(MAP|e)=0.003213814742532023 

Variable Value 
A_N NA 
ADP_NP PRE 
AdSub_Cl Initial 
Deg_A Deg_A 
Dem_N N_Dem 
G_N NG 
IntPhr Not_Initial 
Neg_V NegV 
Num_N NNum 
O_Obl_V VOX 
PoQPar Final 
R_N NR 
S_O_V SVO 
S_V SV 

Table 3. MAP query example 
 

 
Figure 7. Likelihood of eight languages in terms of 

word order properties 
 

0.00E+00

5.00E-07

1.00E-06

1.50E-06

2.00E-06

2.50E-06

157


