



















































Linguistic Models for Analyzing and Detecting Biased Language


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1650–1659,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Linguistic Models for Analyzing and Detecting Biased Language

Marta Recasens
Stanford University
recasens@google.com

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
Stanford University

Max Planck Institute SWS
cristiand@cs.stanford.edu

Dan Jurafsky
Stanford University

jurafsky@stanford.edu

Abstract

Unbiased language is a requirement for
reference sources like encyclopedias and
scientific texts. Bias is, nonetheless, ubiq-
uitous, making it crucial to understand its
nature and linguistic realization and hence
detect bias automatically. To this end we
analyze real instances of human edits de-
signed to remove bias from Wikipedia ar-
ticles. The analysis uncovers two classes
of bias: framing bias, such as praising or
perspective-specific words, which we link
to the literature on subjectivity; and episte-
mological bias, related to whether propo-
sitions that are presupposed or entailed in
the text are uncontroversially accepted as
true. We identify common linguistic cues
for these classes, including factive verbs,
implicatives, hedges, and subjective inten-
sifiers. These insights help us develop fea-
tures for a model to solve a new prediction
task of practical importance: given a bi-
ased sentence, identify the bias-inducing
word. Our linguistically-informed model
performs almost as well as humans tested
on the same task.

1 Introduction

Writers and editors of reference works such as
encyclopedias, textbooks, and scientific articles
strive to keep their language unbiased. For ex-
ample, Wikipedia advocates a policy called neu-
tral point of view (NPOV), according to which
articles should represent “fairly, proportionately,
and as far as possible without bias, all signifi-
cant views that have been published by reliable
sources” (Wikipedia, 2013b). Wikipedia’s style
guide asks editors to use nonjudgmental language,
to indicate the relative prominence of opposing
points of view, to avoid presenting uncontroversial

facts as mere opinion, and, conversely, to avoid
stating opinions or contested assertions as facts.

Understanding the linguistic realization of bias
is important for linguistic theory; automatically
detecting these biases is equally significant for
computational linguistics. We propose to ad-
dress both by using a powerful resource: edits in
Wikipedia that are specifically designed to remove
bias. Since Wikipedia maintains a complete revi-
sion history, the edits associated with NPOV tags
allow us to compare the text in its biased (before)
and unbiased (after) form, helping us better under-
stand the linguistic realization of bias. Our work
thus shares the intuition of prior NLP work apply-
ing Wikipedia’s revision history (Nelken and Ya-
mangil, 2008; Yatskar et al., 2010; Max and Wis-
niewski, 2010; Zanzotto and Pennacchiotti, 2010).

The analysis of Wikipedia’s edits provides valu-
able linguistic insights into the nature of biased
language. We find two major classes of bias-driven
edits. The first, framing bias, is realized by sub-
jective words or phrases linked with a particular
point of view. In (1), the term McMansion, unlike
homes, appeals to a negative attitude toward large
and pretentious houses. The second class, episte-
mological bias, is related to linguistic features that
subtly (often via presupposition) focus on the be-
lievability of a proposition. In (2), the assertive
stated removes the bias introduced by claimed,
which casts doubt on Kuypers’ statement.

(1) a. Usually, smaller cottage-style houses have been de-
molished to make way for these McMansions.

b. Usually, smaller cottage-style houses have been de-
molished to make way for these homes.

(2) a. Kuypers claimed that the mainstream press in Amer-
ica tends to favor liberal viewpoints.

b. Kuypers stated that the mainstream press in America
tends to favor liberal viewpoints.

Bias is linked to the lexical and grammatical cues
identified by the literature on subjectivity (Wiebe
et al., 2004; Lin et al., 2011), sentiment (Liu et
al., 2005; Turney, 2002), and especially stance

1650



or “arguing subjectivity” (Lin et al., 2006; So-
masundaran and Wiebe, 2010; Yano et al., 2010;
Park et al., 2011; Conrad et al., 2012). For ex-
ample, like stance, framing bias is realized when
the writer of a text takes a particular position on
a controversial topic and uses its metaphors and
vocabulary. But unlike the product reviews or de-
bate articles that overtly use subjective language,
editors in Wikipedia are actively trying to avoid
bias, and hence biases may appear more subtly,
in the form of covert framing language, or pre-
suppositions and entailments that may not play as
important a role in other genres. Our linguistic
analysis identifies common classes of these subtle
bias cues, including factive verbs, implicatives and
other entailments, hedges, and subjective intensi-
fiers.

Using these cues could help automatically de-
tect and correct instances of bias, by first finding
biased phrases, then identifying the word that in-
troduces the bias, and finally rewording to elim-
inate the bias. In this paper we propose a so-
lution for the second of these tasks, identifying
the bias-inducing word in a biased phrase. Since,
as we show below, this task is quite challenging
for humans, our system has the potential to be
very useful in improving the neutrality of refer-
ence works like Wikipedia. Tested on a subset of
non-neutral sentences from Wikipedia, our model
achieves 34% accuracy—and up to 59% if the
top three guesses are considered—on this difficult
task, outperforming four baselines and nearing hu-
mans tested on the same data.

2 Analyzing a Dataset of Biased
Language

We begin with an empirical analysis based on
Wikipedia’s bias-driven edits. This section de-
scribes the data, and summarizes our linguistic
analysis.1

2.1 The NPOV Corpus from Wikipedia

Given Wikipedia’s strict enforcement of an NPOV
policy, we decided to build the NPOV corpus,
containing Wikipedia edits that are specifically de-
signed to remove bias. Editors are encouraged to
identify and rewrite biased passages to achieve a
more neutral tone, and they can use several NPOV

1The data and bias lexicon we developed are available at
http://www.mpi-sws.org/˜cristian/Biased_
language.html

Data Articles Revisions Words Edits Sents

Train 5997 2238K 11G 13807 1843
Dev 653 210K 0.9G 1261 163
Test 814 260K 1G 1751 230

Total 7464 2708K 13G 16819 2235

Table 1: Statistics of the NPOV corpus, extracted
from Wikipedia. (Edits refers to bias-driven ed-
its, i.e., with an NPOV comment. Sents refers to
sentences with a one-word bias-driven edit.)

tags to mark biased content.2 Articles tagged this
way fall into Wikipedia’s category of NPOV dis-
putes.

We constructed the NPOV corpus by retrieving
all articles that were or had been in the NPOV-
dispute category3 together with their full revision
history. We used Stanford’s CoreNLP tools4 to to-
kenize and split the text into sentences. Table 1
shows the statistics of this corpus, which we split
into training (train), development (dev), and test.
Following Wikipedia’s terminology, we call each
version of a Wikipedia article a revision, and so an
article can be viewed as a set of (chronologically
ordered) revisions.

2.2 Extracting Edits Meant to Remove Bias
Given all the revisions of a page, we extracted the
changes between pairs of revisions with the word-
mode diff function from the Diff Match and Patch
library.5 We refer to these changes between revi-
sions as edits, e.g., McMansion > large home. An
edit consists of two strings: the old string that is
being replaced (i.e., the before form), and the new
modified string (i.e., the after form).

Our assumption was that among the edits hap-
pening in NPOV disputes, we would have a high
density of edits intended to remove bias, which we
call bias-driven edits, like (1) and (2) from Sec-
tion 1. But many other edits occur even in NPOV
disputes, including edits to fix spelling or gram-
matical errors, simplify the language, make the
meaning more precise, or even vandalism (Max

2{{POV}}, {{POV-check}}, {{POV-section}}, etc.
Adding these tags displays a template such as “The neutrality
of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found
on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the
dispute is resolved.”

3http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Category:All_NPOV_disputes

4http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
corenlp.shtml

5http://code.google.com/p/google-diff-
match-patch

1651



and Wisniewski, 2010). Therefore, in order to ex-
tract a high-precision set of bias-driven edits, we
took advantage of the comments that editors can
associate with a revision—typically short and brief
sentences describing the reason behind the revi-
sion. We considered as bias-driven edits those that
appeared in a revision whose comment mentioned
(N)POV, e.g., Attempts at presenting some claims
in more NPOV way; or merging in a passage
from the researchers article after basic NPOV-
ing. We only kept edits whose before and af-
ter forms contained five or fewer words, and dis-
carded those that only added a hyperlink or that
involved a minimal change (character-based Lev-
enshtein distance < 4). The final number of bias-
driven edits for each of the data sets is shown in
the “Edits” column of Table 1.

2.3 Linguistic Analysis
Style guides talk about biased language in a pre-
scriptive manner, listing a few words that should
be avoided because they are flattering, vague, or
endorse a particular point of view (Wikipedia,
2013a). Our focus is on analyzing actual bi-
ased text and bias-driven edits extracted from
Wikipedia.

As we suggested above, this analysis uncovered
two major classes of bias: epistemological bias
and framing bias. Table 2 shows the distribution
(from a sample of 100 edits) of the different types
and subtypes of bias presented in this section.

(A) Epistemological bias involves propositions
that are either commonly agreed to be true or com-
monly agreed to be false and that are subtly pre-
supposed, entailed, asserted or hedged in the text.

1. Factive verbs (Kiparsky and Kiparsky, 1970)
presuppose the truth of their complement
clause. In (3-a) and (4-a), realize and re-
veal presuppose the truth of “the oppression
of black people...” and “the Meditation tech-
nique produces...”, whereas (3-b) and (4-b)
present the two propositions as somebody’s
stand or an experimental result.

(3) a. He realized that the oppression of black peo-
ple was more of a result of economic exploita-
tion than anything innately racist.

b. His stand was that the oppression of black
people was more of a result of economic ex-
ploitation than anything innately racist.

(4) a. The first research revealed that the Meditation
technique produces a unique state fact.

b. The first research indicated that the Medita-
tion technique produces a unique state fact.

Bias Subtype %

A. Epistemological bias 43

- Factive verbs 3
- Entailments 25
- Assertives 11
- Hedges 4

B. Framing bias 57

- Intensifiers 19
- One-sided terms 38

Table 2: Proportion of the different bias types.

2. Entailments are directional relations that
hold whenever the truth of one word or
phrase follows from another, e.g., murder en-
tails kill because there cannot be murdering
without killing (5). However, murder en-
tails killing in an unlawful, premeditated way.
This class includes implicative verbs (Kart-
tunen, 1971), which imply the truth or un-
truth of their complement, depending on the
polarity of the main predicate. In (6-a), co-
erced into accepting entails accepting in an
unwilling way.

(5) a. After he murdered three policemen, the
colony proclaimed Kelly a wanted outlaw.

b. After he killed three policemen, the colony
proclaimed Kelly a wanted outlaw.

(6) a. A computer engineer who was coerced into
accepting a plea bargain.

b. A computer engineer who accepted a plea bar-
gain.

3. Assertive verbs (Hooper, 1975) are those
whose complement clauses assert a proposi-
tion. The truth of the proposition is not pre-
supposed, but its level of certainty depends
on the asserting verb. Whereas verbs of say-
ing like say and state are usually neutral,
point out and claim cast doubt on the cer-
tainty of the proposition.

(7) a. The “no Boeing” theory is a controversial is-
sue, even among conspiracists, many of whom
have pointed out that it is disproved by ...

b. The “no Boeing” theory is a controversial is-
sue, even among conspiracists, many of whom
have said that it is disproved by...

(8) a. Cooper says that slavery was worse in South
America and the US than Canada, but clearly
states that it was a horrible and cruel practice.

b. Cooper says that slavery was worse in South
America and the US than Canada, but points
out that it was a horrible and cruel practice.

1652



4. Hedges are used to reduce one’s commit-
ment to the truth of a proposition, thus
avoiding any bold predictions (9-b) or state-
ments (10-a).6

(9) a. Eliminating the profit motive will decrease the
rate of medical innovation.

b. Eliminating the profit motive may have a
lower rate of medical innovation.

(10) a. The lower cost of living in more rural areas
means a possibly higher standard of living.

b. The lower cost of living in more rural areas
means a higher standard of living.

Epistemological bias is bidirectional, that is,
bias can occur because doubt is cast on a propo-
sition commonly assumed to be true, or because
a presupposition or implication is made about a
proposition commonly assumed to be false. For
example, in (7) and (8) above, point out is replaced
in the former case, but inserted in the second case.
If the truth of the proposition is uncontroversially
accepted by the community (i.e., reliable sources,
etc.), then the use of a factive is unbiased. In con-
trast, if only a specific viewpoint agrees with its
truth, then using a factive is biased.

(B) Framing bias is usually more explicit than
epistemological bias because it occurs when sub-
jective or one-sided words are used, revealing the
author’s stance in a particular debate (Entman,
2007).

1. Subjective intensifiers are adjectives or ad-
verbs that add (subjective) force to the mean-
ing of a phrase or proposition.

(11) a. Schnabel himself did the fantastic reproduc-
tions of Basquiat’s work.

b. Schnabel himself did the accurate reproduc-
tions of Basquiat’s work.

(12) a. Shwekey’s albums are arranged by many tal-
ented arrangers.

b. Shwekey’s albums are arranged by many dif-
ferent arrangers.

2. One-sided terms reflect only one of the sides
of a contentious issue. They often belong
to controversial subjects (e.g., religion, ter-
rorism, etc.) where the same event can be
seen from two or more opposing perspec-
tives, like the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (Lin
et al., 2006).

6See Choi et al. (2012) for an exploration of the interface
between hedging and framing.

(13) a. Israeli forces liberated the eastern half of
Jerusalem.

b. Israeli forces captured the eastern half of
Jerusalem.

(14) a. Concerned Women for America’s major ar-
eas of political activity have consisted of op-
position to gay causes, pro-life law...

b. Concerned Women for America’s major ar-
eas of political activity have consisted of op-
position to gay causes, anti-abortion law...

(15) a. Colombian terrorist groups.
b. Colombian paramilitary groups.

Framing bias has been studied within the liter-
ature on stance recognition and arguing subjectiv-
ity. Because this literature has focused on iden-
tifying which side an article takes on a two-sided
debate such as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (Lin
et al., 2006), most studies cast the problem as a
two-way classification of documents or sentences
into for/positive vs. against/negative (Anand et
al., 2011; Conrad et al., 2012; Somasundaran and
Wiebe, 2010), or into one of two opposing views
(Yano et al., 2010; Park et al., 2011). The fea-
tures used by these models include subjectivity
and sentiment lexicons, counts of unigrams and
bigrams, distributional similarity, discourse rela-
tionships, and so on.

The datasets used by these studies come from
genres that overtly take a specific stance (e.g.,
debates, editorials, blog posts). In contrast,
Wikipedia editors are asked not to advocate a par-
ticular point of view, but to provide a balanced ac-
count of the different available perspectives. For
this reason, overtly biased opinion statements such
as “I believe that...” are not common in Wikipedia.
The features used by the subjectivity literature
help us detect framing bias, but we also need fea-
tures that capture epistemological bias expressed
through presuppositions and entailments.

3 Automatically Identifying Biased
Language

We now show how the bias cues identified in Sec-
tion 2.3 can help solve a new task. Given a biased
sentence (e.g., a sentence that a Wikipedia editor
has tagged as violating the NPOV policy), our goal
in this new task is to identify the word that intro-
duces bias. This is part of a potential three-step
process for detecting and correcting biased lan-
guage: (1) finding biased phrases, (2) identifying
the word that introduces the bias, (3) rewording to
eliminate the bias. As we will see below, it can be

1653



hard even for humans to track down the sources of
bias, because biases in reference works are often
subtle and implicit. An automatic bias detector
that can highlight the bias-inducing word(s) and
draw the editors’ attention to words that need to
be modified could thus be important for improving
reference works like Wikipedia or even in news re-
porting.

We selected the subset of sentences that had a
single NPOV edit involving one (original) word.
(Although the before form consists of only one
word, the after form can be either one or more
words or the null string (i.e., deletion edits); we do
not use the after string in this identification task).
The number of sentences in the train, dev and test
sets is shown in the last column of Table 1.

We trained a logistic regression model on a
feature vector for every word that appears in the
NPOV sentences from the training set, with the
bias-inducing words as the positive class, and all
the other words as the negative class. The features
are described in the next section.

At test time, the model is given a set of sen-
tences and, for each of them, it ranks the words ac-
cording to their probability to be biased, and out-
puts the highest ranked word (TOP1 model), the
two highest ranked words (TOP2 model), or the
three highest ranked words (TOP3 model).

3.1 Features

The types of features used in the logistic regres-
sion model are listed in Table 3, together with
their value space. The total number of features is
36,787. The ones targeting framing bias draw on
previous work on sentiment and subjectivity de-
tection (Wiebe et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2005). Fea-
tures to capture epistemological bias are based on
the bias cues identified in Section 2.3.

A major split separates the features that de-
scribe the word under analysis (e.g., lemma, POS,
whether it is a hedge, etc.) from those that de-
scribe its surrounding context (e.g., the POS of the
word to the left, whether there is a hedge in the
context, etc.). We define context as a 5-gram win-
dow, i.e., two words to the left of the word un-
der analysis, and two to the right. Taking con-
text into account is important given that biases can
be context-dependent, especially epistemological
bias since it depends on the truth of a proposition.
To define some of the features like POS and gram-
matical relation, we used the Stanford’s CoreNLP

tagger and dependency parser (de Marneffe et al.,
2006).

Features 9–10 use the list of hedges from Hy-
land (2005), features 11–14 use the factives and
assertives from Hooper (1975), features 15–16
use the implicatives from Karttunen (1971), fea-
tures 19–20 use the entailments from Berant et
al. (2012), features 21–25 employ the subjectiv-
ity lexicon from Riloff and Wiebe (2003), and fea-
tures 26–29 use the sentiment lexicon—positive
and negative words—from Liu et al. (2005). If the
word (or a word in the context) is in the lexicon,
then the feature is true, otherwise it is false.

We also included a “bias lexicon” (feature 31)
that we built based on our NPOV corpus from
Wikipedia. We used the training set to extract the
lemmas of words that were the before form of at
least two NPOV edits, and that occurred in at least
two different articles. Of the 654 words included
in this lexicon, 433 were unique to this lexicon
(i.e., recorded in neither Riloff and Wiebe’s (2003)
subjectivity lexicon nor Liu et al.’s (2005) senti-
ment lexicon) and represented many one-sided or
controversial terms, e.g., abortion, same-sex, exe-
cute.

Finally, we also included a “collaborative fea-
ture” that, based on the previous revisions of the
edit’s article, computes the ratio between the num-
ber of times that the word was NPOV-edited and
its frequency of occurrence. This feature was de-
signed to capture framing bias specific to an article
or topic.

3.2 Baselines

Previous work on subjectivity and stance recog-
nition has been evaluated on the task of classify-
ing documents as opinionated vs. factual, for vs.
against, positive vs. negative. Given that the task
of identifying the bias-inducing word of a sentence
is novel, there were no previous results to compare
directly against. We ran the following five base-
lines.

1. Random guessing. Naively returns a random
word from every sentence.

2. Role baseline. Selects the word with the
syntactic role that has the highest probabil-
ity to be biased, as computed on the train-
ing set. This is the parse tree root (proba-
bility p = .126 to be biased), followed by
verbal arguments (p = .085), and the subject
(p = .084).

1654



ID Feature Value Description

1* Word <string> Word w under analysis.
2 Lemma <string> Lemma of w.
3* POS {NNP, JJ, ...} POS of w.
4* POS – 1 {NNP, JJ, ...} POS of one word before w.
5 POS – 2 {NNP, JJ, ...} POS of two words before w.
6* POS + 1 {NNP, JJ, ...} POS of one word after w.
7 POS + 2 {NNP, JJ, ...} POS of two words after w.
8 Position in sentence {start, mid, end} Position of w in the sentence (split into three parts).
9 Hedge {true, false} w is in Hyland’s (2005) list of hedges (e.g., apparently).
10* Hedge in context {true, false} One/two words) around w is a hedge (Hyland, 2005).
11* Factive verb {true, false} w is in Hooper’s (1975) list of factives (e.g., realize).
12* Factive verb in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is a factive (Hooper, 1975).
13* Assertive verb {true, false} w is in Hooper’s (1975) list of assertives (e.g., claim).
14* Assertive verb in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is an assertive (Hooper, 1975).
15 Implicative verb {true, false} w is in Karttunen’s (1971) list of implicatives (e.g., manage).
16* Implicative verb in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is an implicative (Karttunen, 1971).
17* Report verb {true, false} w is a report verb (e.g., add).
18 Report verb in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is a report verb.
19* Entailment {true, false} w is in Berant et al.’s (2012) list of entailments (e.g., kill).
20* Entailment in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is an entailment (Berant et al., 2012).
21* Strong subjective {true, false} w is in Riloff and Wiebe’s (2003) list of strong subjectives (e.g.,

absolute).
22 Strong subjective in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is a strong subjective (Riloff and

Wiebe, 2003).
23* Weak subjective {true, false} w is in Riloff and Wiebe’s (2003) list of weak subjectives (e.g.,

noisy).
24* Weak subjective in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is a weak subjective (Riloff and

Wiebe, 2003).
25 Polarity {+, –, both, ...} The polarity of w according to Riloff and Wiebe (2003), e.g.,

praising is positive.
26* Positive word {true, false} w is in Liu et al.’s (2005) list of positive words (e.g., excel).
27* Positive word in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is positive (Liu et al., 2005).
28* Negative word {true, false} w is in Liu et al.’s (2005) list of negative words (e.g., terrible).
29* Negative word in context {true, false} One/two word(s) around w is negative (Liu et al., 2005).
30* Grammatical relation {root, subj, ...} Whether w is the subject, object, root, etc. of its sentence.
31 Bias lexicon {true, false} w has been observed in NPOV edits (e.g., nationalist).
32* Collaborative feature <numeric> Number of times that w was NPOV-edited in the article’s prior

history / frequency of w.

Table 3: Features used by the bias detector. The star (*) shows the most contributing features.

3. Sentiment baseline. Logistic regression
model that only uses the features based on
Liu et al.’s (2005) lexicons of positive and
negative words (i.e., features 26–29).

4. Subjectivity baseline. Logistic regression
model that only uses the features based on
Riloff and Wiebe’s (2003) lexicon of subjec-
tive words (i.e., features 21–25).

5. Wikipedia baseline. Selects as biased the
words that appear in Wikipedia’s list of words
to avoid (Wikipedia, 2013a).

These baselines assessed the difficulty of the
task, as well as the extent to which traditional
sentiment-analysis and subjectivity features would
suffice to detect biased language.

3.3 Results and Discussion

To measure performance, we used accuracy de-
fined as:

#sentences with the correctly predicted biased word

#sentences

The results are shown in Table 4. As explained
earlier, we evaluated all the models by outputting
as biased either the highest ranked word or the
two or three highest ranked words. These corre-
spond to the TOP1, TOP2 and TOP3 columns, re-
spectively. The TOP3 score increases to 59%. A
tool that highlights up to three words to be revised
would simplify the editors’ job and decrease sig-
nificantly the time required to revise.

Our model outperforms all five baselines by a
large margin, showing the importance of consid-
ering a wide range of features. Wikipedia’s list
of words to avoid falls very short on recall. Fea-

1655



System TOP1 TOP2 TOP3

Baseline 1: Random 2.18 7.83 9.13
Baseline 2: Role 15.65 20.43 25.65
Baseline 3: Sentiment 14.78 22.61 27.83
Baseline 4: Subjectivity 16.52 25.22 33.91
Baseline 5: Wikipedia 10.00 10.00 10.00
Our system 34.35 46.52 58.70
Humans (AMT) 37.39 50.00 59.13

Table 4: Accuracy (%) of the bias detector on the
test set.

tures that contribute the most to the model’s per-
formance (in a feature ablation study on the dev
set) are highlighted with a star (*) in Table 3. In
addition to showing the importance of linguistic
cues for different classes of bias, the ablation study
highlights the role of contextual features. The bias
lexicon does not seem to help much, suggesting
that it is overfit to the training data.

An error analysis shows that our system makes
acceptable errors in that words wrongly predicted
as bias-inducing may well introduce bias in a dif-
ferent context. In (16), the system picked eschew,
whereas orthodox would have been the correct
choice according to the gold edit. Note that both
the sentiment and the subjectivity lexicons list es-
chew as a negative word. The bias type that poses
the greatest challenge to the system are terms that
are one-sided or loaded in a particular topic, such
as orthodox in this example.

(16) a. Some Christians eschew orthodox theology; such
as the Unitarians, Socinian, [...]

b. Some Christians eschew mainstream trinitarian
theology; such as the Unitarians, Socinian, [...]

The last row in Table 4 lists the performance
of humans on the same task, presented in the next
section.

4 Human Perception of Biased Language

Is it difficult for humans to find the word in a
sentence that induces bias, given the subtle, of-
ten implicit biases in Wikipedia. We used Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk7 (AMT) to elicit annotations
from humans for the same 230 sentences from the
test set that we used to evaluate the bias detector
in Section 3.3. The goal of this annotation was
twofold: to compare the performance of our bias
detector against a human baseline, and to assess
the difficulty of this task for humans. While AMT
labelers are not trained Wikipedia editors, under-

7http://www.mturk.com

standing how difficult these cases are for untrained
labelers is an important baseline.

4.1 Task
Our HIT (Human Intelligence Task) was called
“Find the biased word!”. We kept the task descrip-
tion succinct. Turkers were shown Wikipedia’s
definition of a “biased statement” and two exam-
ple sentences that illustrated the two types of bias,
framing and epistemological. In each HIT, annota-
tors saw 10 sentences, one after another, and each
one followed by a text box entitled “Word intro-
ducing bias.” For each sentence, they were asked
to type in the text box the word that caused the
statement to be biased. They were only allowed to
enter a single word.

Before the 10 sentences, turkers were asked to
list the languages they spoke as well as their pri-
mary language in primary school. This was En-
glish in all the cases. In addition, we included a
probe question in the form of a paraphrasing task:
annotators were given a sentence and two para-
phrases (a correct and a bad one) to choose from.
The goal of this probe question was to discard
annotators who were not paying attention or did
not have a sufficient command of English. This
simple test was shown to be effective in verifying
and eliciting linguistic attentiveness (Munro et al.,
2010). This was especially important in our case
as we were interested in using the human annota-
tions as an oracle. At the end of the task, partici-
pants were given the option to provide additional
feedback.

We split the 230 sentences into 23 sets of 10
sentences, and asked for 10 annotations of each
set. Each approved HIT was rewarded with $0.30.

4.2 Results and Discussion
On average, it took turkers about four minutes to
complete each HIT. The feedback that we got from
some of them confirmed our hypothesis that find-
ing the bias source is difficult: “Some of the ‘bi-
ases’ seemed very slight if existent at all,” “This
was a lot harder than I thought it would be... Inter-
esting though!”.

We postprocessed the answers ignoring case,
punctuation signs, and spelling errors. To ensure
an answer quality as high as possible, we only
kept those turkers who answered attentively by ap-
plying two filters: we only accepted answers that
matched a valid word from the sentence, and we
discarded answers from participants who did not

1656



2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Number of times the top word was selected

N
um

be
r o

f s
en

te
nc

es

0
10

20
30

40
50

Figure 1: Distribution of the number of turkers
who selected the top word (i.e., the word selected
by the majority of turkers).

pass the paraphrasing task—there were six such
cases. These filters provided us with confidence in
the turkers’ answers as a fair standard of compari-
son.

Overall, humans correctly identified the biased
word 30% of the time. For each sentence, we
ranked the words according to the number of turk-
ers (out of 10) who selected them and, like we
did for the automated system, we assessed per-
formance when considering only the top word
(TOP1), the top 2 words (TOP2), and the top 3
words (TOP3). The last row of Table 4 reports the
results. Only 37.39% of the majority answers co-
incided with the gold label, slightly higher than
our system’s accuracy. The fact that the human
answers are very close to the results of our system
reflects the difficulty of the task. Biases in refer-
ence works can be very subtle and go unnoticed
by humans; automated systems could thus be ex-
tremely helpful.

As a measure of inter-rater reliability, we com-
puted pairwise agreement. The turkers agreed
40.73% of the time, compared to the 5.1% chance
agreement that would be achieved if raters had
randomly selected a word for each sentence. Fig-
ure 1 plots the number of times the top word of
each sentence was selected. The bulk of the sen-
tences only obtained between four and six answers
for the same word.

There is a good amount of overlap (∼34%) be-
tween the correct answers predicted by our system
and those from humans. Much like the automated
system, humans also have the hardest time identi-
fying words that are one-sided or controversial to

a specific topic. They also picked eschew for (16)
instead of orthodox. Compared to the system, they
do better in detecting bias-inducing intensifiers,
and about the same with epistemological bias.

5 Related Work

The work in this paper builds upon prior work on
subjectivity detection (Wiebe et al., 2004; Lin et
al., 2011; Conrad et al., 2012) and stance recogni-
tion (Yano et al., 2010; Somasundaran and Wiebe,
2010; Park et al., 2011), but applied to the genre
of reference works such as Wikipedia. Unlike the
blogs, online debates and opinion pieces which
have been the major focus of previous work, bias
in reference works is undesirable. As a result,
the expression of bias is more implicit, making it
harder to detect by both computers and humans.
Of the two classes of bias that we uncover, fram-
ing bias is indeed strongly linked to subjectiv-
ity, but epistemological bias is not. In this re-
spect, our research is comparable to Greene and
Resnik’s (2009) work on identifying implicit sen-
timent or perspective in journalistic texts, based on
semantico-syntactic choices.

Given that the data that we use is not supposed
to be opinionated, our task consists in detecting
(implicit) bias instead of classifying into side A
or B documents about a controversial topic like
ObamaCare (Conrad et al., 2012) or the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict (Lin et al., 2006; Greene and
Resnik, 2009). Our model detects whether all
the relevant perspectives are fairly represented by
identifying statements that are one-sided. To this
end, the features based on subjectivity and senti-
ment lexicons turn out to be helpful, and incor-
porating more features for stance detection is an
important direction for future work.

Other aspects of Wikipedia structure have been
used for other NLP applications. The Wikipedia
revision history has been used for spelling correc-
tion, text summarization (Nelken and Yamangil,
2008), lexical simplification (Yatskar et al., 2010),
paraphrasing (Max and Wisniewski, 2010), and
textual entailment (Zanzotto and Pennacchiotti,
2010). Ganter and Strube (2009) have used
Wikipedia’s weasel-word tags to train a hedge de-
tector. Callahan and Herring (2011) have exam-
ined cultural bias based on Wikipedia’s NPOV
policy.

1657



6 Conclusions

Our study of bias in Wikipedia has implications
for linguistic theory and computational linguis-
tics. We show that bias in reference works falls
broadly into two classes, framing and epistemo-
logical. The cues to framing bias are more ex-
plicit and are linked to the literature on subjec-
tivity; cues to epistemological bias are subtle and
implicit, linked to presuppositions and entailments
in the text. Epistemological bias has not received
much attention since it does not play a major role
in overtly opinionated texts, the focus of much re-
search on stance recognition. However, our logis-
tic regression model reveals that epistemological
and other features can usefully augment the tradi-
tional sentiment and subjectivity features for ad-
dressing the difficult task of identifying the bias-
inducing word in a biased sentence.

Identifying the bias-inducing word is a chal-
lenging task even for humans. Our linguistically-
informed model performs nearly as well as hu-
mans tested on the same task. Given the sub-
tlety of some of these biases, an automated sys-
tem that highlights one or more potentially biased
words would provide a helpful tool for editors of
reference works and news reports, not only mak-
ing them aware of unnoticed biases but also sav-
ing them hours of time. Future work could in-
vestigate the incorporation of syntactic features or
further features from the stance detection litera-
ture. Features from the literature on veridicality
(de Marneffe et al., 2012) could be informative of
the writer’s commitment to the truth of the events
described, and document-level features could help
assess the extent to which the article provides a
balanced account of all the facts and points of
view.

Finally, the NPOV data and the bias lexicon that
we release as part of this research could prove use-
ful in other bias related tasks.

Acknowledgments

We greatly appreciate the support of Jean Wu and
Christopher Potts in running our task on Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk, and all the Amazon Turkers
who participated. We benefited from comments
by Valentin Spitkovsky on a previous draft and
from the helpful suggestions of the anonymous re-
viewers. The first author was supported by a Beat-
riu de Pinós postdoctoral scholarship (2010 BP-A
00149) from Generalitat de Catalunya. The sec-

ond author was supported by NSF IIS-1016909.
The last author was supported by the Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at
Stanford.

References
Pranav Anand, Marilyn Walker, Rob Abbott, Jean

E. Fox Tree, Robeson Bowmani, and Michael Mi-
nor. 2011. Cats rule and dogs drool!: Classifying
stance in online debate. In Proceedings of ACL-
HLT 2011 Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 1–9.

Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, Meni Adler, and Jacob
Goldberger. 2012. Efficient tree-based approxima-
tion for entailment graph learning. In Proceedings
of ACL 2012, pages 117–125.

Ewa Callahan and Susan C. Herring. 2011. Cul-
tural bias in Wikipedia articles about famous per-
sons. Journal of the American Society for Informa-
tion Science and Technology, 62(10):1899–1915.

Eunsol Choi, Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jennifer Spindel.
2012. Hedge detection as a lens on framing in the
GMO debates: a position paper. In Proceedings
of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-Propositional
Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics,
pages 70–79.

Alexander Conrad, Janyce Wiebe, and Rebecca Hwa.
2012. Recognizing arguing subjectivity and argu-
ment tags. In Proceedings of ACL-2012 Workshop
on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 80–88.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of LREC 2006.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Christopher Potts. 2012. Did it hap-
pen? The pragmatic complexity of veridicality as-
sessment. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):301–
333.

Robert M. Entman. 2007. Framing bias: Media in the
distribution of power. Journal of Communication,
57(1):163–173.

Viola Ganter and Michael Strube. 2009. Finding
hedges by chasing weasels: Hedge detection using
Wikipedia tags and shallow linguistic features. In
Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 173–176.

Stephan Greene and Philip Resnik. 2009. More than
words: Syntactic packaging and implicit sentiment.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2009, pages 503–
511.

1658



Joan B. Hooper. 1975. On assertive predicates. In
J. Kimball, editor, Syntax and Semantics, volume 4,
pages 91–124. Academic Press, New York.

Ken Hyland. 2005. Metadiscourse: Exploring Interac-
tion in Writing. Continuum, London and New York.

Lauri Karttunen. 1971. Implicative verbs. Language,
47(2):340–358.

Paul Kiparsky and Carol Kiparsky. 1970. Fact. In
M. Bierwisch and K. E. Heidolph, editors, Progress
in Linguistics, pages 143–173. Mouton, The Hague.

Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Which side are you
on? Identifying perspectives at the document and
sentence levels. In Proceedings of CoNLL 2006,
pages 109–116.

Chenghua Lin, Yulan He, and Richard Everson.
2011. Sentence subjectivity detection with
weakly-supervised learning. In Proceedings of
AFNLP 2011, pages 1153–1161.

Bing Liu, Minqing Hu, and Junsheng Cheng. 2005.
Opinion Observer: analyzing and comparing opin-
ions on the Web. In Proceedings of WWW 2005,
pages 342–351.

Aurélien Max and Guillaume Wisniewski. 2010. Min-
ing naturally-occurring corrections and paraphrases
from Wikipedia’s revision history. In Proceedings
of LREC 2010, pages 3143–3148.

Robert Munro, Steven Bethard, Victor Kuperman,
Vicky Tzuyin Lai, Robin Melnick, Christopher
Potts, Tyler Schnoebelen, and Harry Tily. 2010.
Crowdsourcing and language studies: the new gen-
eration of linguistic data. In Proceedings of the
NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech
and Language Data With Amazons Mechanical
Turk, pages 122–130.

Rani Nelken and Elif Yamangil. 2008. Mining
Wikipedias article revision history for training Com-
putational Linguistics algorithms. In Proceedings of
the 1st AAAI Workshop on Wikipedia and Artificial
Intelligence.

Souneil Park, KyungSoon Lee, and Junehwa Song.
2011. Contrasting opposing views of news articles
on contentious issues. In Proceedings of ACL 2011,
pages 340–349.

Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning extrac-
tion patterns for subjective expressions. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP 2003, pages 105–112.

Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2010. Rec-
ognizing stances in ideological on-line debates. In
Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Analysis and Genera-
tion of Emotion in Text, pages 116–124.

Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?
Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised clas-
sification of reviews. In Proceedings of ACL 2002,
pages 417–424.

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce,
Matthew Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learn-
ing subjective language. Computational Linguistics,
30(3):277–308.

Wikipedia. 2013a. Wikipedia: Manual of style / Words
to watch. http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Wikipedia:Words_to_avoid. [Re-
trieved February 5, 2013].

Wikipedia. 2013b. Wikipedia: Neutral point of view.
http:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view.
[Retrieved February 5, 2013].

Tae Yano, Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2010.
Shedding (a thousand points of) light on biased lan-
guage. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010
Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data
With Amazons Mechanical Turk, pages 152–158.

Mark Yatskar, Bo Pang, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2010. For the sake of sim-
plicity: Unsupervised extraction of lexical simplifi-
cations from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of NAACL-
HLT 2010, pages 365–368.

Fabio M. Zanzotto and Marco Pennacchiotti. 2010.
Expanding textual entailment corpora from
Wikipedia using co-training. In Proceedings of
the 2nd Coling Workshop on The People’s Web
Meets NLP: Collaboratively Constructed Semantic
Resources, pages 28–36.

1659


