



















































A Unified Morpho-Syntactic Scheme of Stanford Dependencies


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 578–584,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Unified Morpho-Syntactic Scheme of Stanford Dependencies

Reut Tsarfaty
Uppsala University, Sweden

tsarfaty@stp.lingfil.uu.se

Abstract
Stanford Dependencies (SD) provide a
functional characterization of the gram-
matical relations in syntactic parse-trees.
The SD representation is useful for parser
evaluation, for downstream applications,
and, ultimately, for natural language un-
derstanding, however, the design of SD fo-
cuses on structurally-marked relations and
under-represents morphosyntactic realiza-
tion patterns observed in Morphologically
Rich Languages (MRLs). We present a
novel extension of SD, called Unified-SD
(U-SD), which unifies the annotation of
structurally- and morphologically-marked
relations via an inheritance hierarchy. We
create a new resource composed of U-SD-
annotated constituency and dependency
treebanks for the MRL Modern Hebrew,
and present two systems that can automat-
ically predict U-SD annotations, for gold
segmented input as well as raw texts, with
high baseline accuracy.

1 Introduction

Stanford Dependencies (SD) provide a functional
characterization of the grammatical relations in
syntactic trees, capturing the predicate-argument
structure of natural language sentences (de Marn-
effe et al., 2006). The SD representation proved
useful in a range of downstream tasks, includ-
ing Textual Entailments (Dagan et al., 2006) and
BioNLP (Fundel and Zimmer., 2007), and in re-
cent years SD structures have also become a de-
facto standard for parser evaluation in English (de
Marneffe and Manning, 2008a; Cer et al., 2010;
Nivre et al., 2010). Efforts now commence to-
wards extending SD for cross-lingual annotation

and evaluation (McDonald et al., 2013; Che et al.,
2012; Haverinen et al., 2011). By and large, these
efforts aim to remain as close as possible to the
original SD scheme. However, the original SD de-
sign emphasizes word-tokens and configurational
structures, and consequently, these schemes over-
look properties and realization patterns observed
in a range of languages known as Morphologically
Rich Languages (MRLs) (Tsarfaty et al., 2010).

MRLs use word-level affixes to express gram-
matical relations that are typically indicated by
structural positions in English. By virtue of
word-level morphological marking, word-order in
MRLs may be flexible. MRLs have been a fo-
cal point for the parsing community due to the
challenges that these phenomena pose for systems
originally developed for English.1 Here we argue
that the SD hierarchy and design principles simi-
larly emphasize English-like structures and under-
represent morphosyntactic argument-marking al-
ternatives. We define an extension of SD, called
Unified-SD (U-SD), which unifies the annotation
of structurally and morphologically marked rela-
tions via an inheritance hierarchy. We extend SD
with a functional branch, and provide a principled
treatment of morpho-syntactic argument marking.

Based on the U-SD scheme we create a new
parallel resource for the MRL Modern Hebrew,
whereby aligned constituency and dependency
trees reflect equivalent U-SD annotations (cf.
Rambow (2010)) for the same set of sentences. We
present two systems that can automatically learn
U-SD annotations, from the dependency and the
constituency versions respectively, delivering high
baseline accuracy on the prediction task.

1See also the SPMRL line of workshops https://
sites.google.com/site/spsemmrl2012/ and the
MT-MRL workshop http://cl.haifa.ac.il/MT/.

578



2 The Challenge: SD for MRLs

Stanford Dependencies (SD) (de Marneffe et al.,
2006; de Marneffe and Manning, 2008b) deliver a
functional representation of natural language sen-
tences, inspired by theoretical linguistic work such
as studies on Relational Grammars (Postal and
Perlmutter, 1977), Lexical Functional Grammars
(LFG) (Bresnan, 2000) and the PARC dependency
scheme (King et al., 2003). At the same time, the
scheme is designed with end-users in mind, allow-
ing them to utilize parser output in a form which
is intuitively interpretable and easily processed.

SD basic trees represent sentences as binary
relations between word tokens. These relations
are labeled using traditional grammatical concepts
(subject, object, modifier) that are arranged into an
inheritance hierarchy (de Marneffe and Manning,
2008a, Sec. 3). There are different versions of SD
annotations: the basic SD scheme, which anno-
tates surface dependency relations as a tree span-
ning all word tokens in the sentence, and the col-
lapsed SD version, in which function words (such
as prepositions) are collapsed and used for speci-
fying a direct relation between content words.

The SD scheme defines a core set of labels
and principles which are assumed to be useful
for different languages. However, a close exam-
ination of the SD label-set and inheritance hier-
archy reveals that some of its design principles
are geared towards English-like (that is, configu-
rational) phenomena, and conflict with basic prop-
erties of MRLs. Let us list three such design prin-
ciples and outline the challenges that they pose.

2.1. SD relate input-tokens. In MRLs, substan-
tial information is expressed as word affixes. One
or more morphemes may be appended to a content
word, and several morphemes may be contained in
a single space-delimited token. For example, the
Hebrew token wkfraiti2 in (1) includes the mor-
phemes w (and), kf (when) and raiti (saw); the lat-
ter segment is a content word, and the former two
are functional morphemes.

(1) wkfraiti
and-when-saw.1st.Singular

at
acc

hsrj
the-movie

hifn
the-old

w/and-1.1 kf/when-1.2 raiti/saw-1.3
at/acc-2 h/the-3.1 srj/movie-3.2 h/the-4.1
ifn/old-4.2

2We use the transliteration of Sima’an et al. (2001).

(a) S

NP-sbj

”John”

VP

V-prd

”loves”

NP-obj

”Mary”

(b) S

NP-sbj

”dan”
Dan

V-prd

”ohev”
loves

NP-obj

”et-dana”
ACC-Dana

Figure 1: English (a) and Hebrew (b) PS trees dec-
orated with function labels as dash features.

Naı̈vely taking input tokens as words fails to cap-
ture meaningful relations between morphological
segments internal to space-delimited tokens.

2.2. SD label structurally-marked relations.
Configurational languages like English use func-
tion words such as prepositions and auxiliaries
to indicate relations between content words and
to mark properties of complete structures. In
MRLs, such relations and properties may be indi-
cated by word-level morphological marking such
as case (Blake, 1994) and agreement (Corbett,
2006). In (1), for instance, the case marker at indi-
cates an accusative object relation between “see”
and “movie”, to be distinguished from, e.g, a da-
tive object. Moreover, the agreement in (1) on
the definite morpheme signals that “old” modifies
“movie”. While the original SD scheme label-set
covers function words (e.g. auxpass, expl, prep),
it misses labels for bound morphemes that mark
grammatical relations across languages (such as
accusative, dative or genitive). Explicit labeling of
such relational morphemes will allow us to benefit
from the information that they provide.

2.3. SD relations may be inferred using struc-
tural cues. SD relations are extracted from dif-
ferent types of trees for the purpose of, e.g., cross-
framework evaluation (Cer et al., 2010). Inso-
far, recovering SD relations from phrase-structure
(PS) trees have used a range of structural cues
such as positions and phrase-labels (see, for in-
stance, the software of de Marneffe and Manning
(2008a)). In MRLs, positions and phrase types
may not suffice for recovering SD relations: an
NP under S in Hebrew, for instance, may be a
subject or an object, as shown in Figure 1, and
morphological information then determines the
function of these constituents. Automatically in-
ferring predicate-argument structures across tree-
banks thus must rely on both structural and mor-
phological marking, calling for a single annotation
scheme that inter-relate the marking alternatives.

579



gf

root hd
prd
exist

nhd
ghd

dep

arg

sbj obj comp

mod conj

func

marker

prep case
acc gen

det
def

aux
passaux cop

sub

rel complmn cc

punct

Figure 3: The Unified SD (U-SD) Ontology. The architectural changes from the original SD scheme: (i)
added a hd branch, for implicit head labels; (ii) added a func branch where all functional elements (prep,
aux, cc, rel) as well as morphological markers are moved under; (iii) there is a clear separation between
open-class categories (which fall under hd, dep), closed class elements (under func) and non-words (root
and punct). Boldface elements are new to U-SD. Italic branches spell out further as in the original SD.

(a) ROOT

S-root

V-prd

”raiti”

NP-obj

ACC-acc

”at”

NP-hd

NP-hd

H-def

”h”

NN-hd

”srj”

ADJP-mod

H-def

”h”

ADJ-hd

”ifn”

(b) ROOT

root

”raiti”/V

obj

”at”/ACC

hd

”srj”/NN

def

h/H

mod

”ifn”/ADJ

def

h/H

(c) ROOT

root

”raiti”/V

ACC-obj

”srj”/NN.DEF

mod

”ifn”/ADJ.DEF

Figure 2: Sample U-SD Trees for sentence (1).
(a) a phrase-structure tree decorated with U-SD la-
bels, (b) a basic U-SD tree, and (c) a collapsed U-
SD tree, where functional nodes are consumed.

3 The Proposal: Unified-SD (U-SD)

To address these challenges, we propose an exten-
sion of SD called Unified-SD (U-SD) which an-
notates relations between morphological segments
and reflects different types of argument-marking
patterns. The SD ontology is re-organized and ex-
tended to allow us to annotate morphologically-
and structurally-marked relations alike.

Preliminaries. We assume that M(w1...wn) =
s1....sm is a morphological analysis function that
identifies all morphological segments of a sen-
tence S = w1...wn. The U-SD scheme provides
the syntactic representation of S by means of a set
of triplets (l, si, sj) consisting of a label l, a head
si and a dependent sj (i 6= j). The segments are
assumed to be numbered x.y where x is the posi-
tion of the input token, and y is the position of the
segment inside the token. The segmentation num-
bering is demonstrated in Example (1).

The U-SD Hierarchy. Figure 3 shows our pro-
posed U-SD hierarchy. Everything in the ontol-
ogy is of type gf (grammatical function). We
define five ontological sub-types: root, hd, dep,
func, punct. The root marks a special root de-
pendency. The dep branch is used for depen-
dent types, and it retains much of the structure in
the original SD scheme (separating sbj types, obj
types, mod types, etc.). The new func branch con-
tains argument-marking elements, that is, function
words and morphemes that play a role in indicat-
ing properties or grammatical relations in the syn-
tactic representation. These functional elements
may be of types marker (prepositions and case),
aux (auxiliary verbs and copular elements) and sub
(subordination/conjunction markers). All inher-
ited func elements may be consumed (henceforth,
collapsed) in order to infer grammatical proper-
ties and relations between content words. Head
types are implicit in dependency triplets, however,
when decorating PS trees with dependency labels
as dash features or edge features (as in TigerXML
formats (Brants et al., 2002) or via unification-
based formalisms) both heads and dependents are
labeled with their grammatical types (see Fig-
ure 2(a)). The hd branch extends the scheme with
an inventory of argument-taking elements, to be
used when employing SD inside constituency tree-
banks. The punct branch is reserved for punctu-
ation, prosody and other non-verbal speech acts.
The complete ontology is given in the appendix.

Annotation Guidelines. Anderson (1992) de-
lineates three kinds of properties that are realized
by morphology: structural, inherent, and agree-
ment properties. Structural properties (e.g., case)
are marked on a content word to indicate its rela-

580



Gold:
Segments Functions

DEP 1.00 0.8475
RR 1.00 0.8984

Predicted:
Segments Functions

DEP 1.00 0.8349
RR 1.00 0.8559

Raw:
Segments Functions

DEP 0.9506 0.7817
RR 0.9603 0.8130

Table 1: Inferring U-SD trees using different frameworks. All numbers report labeled TedEval accuracy.

tion to other parts of the sentence. Inherent prop-
erties (gender, number, etc.) indicate inherent se-
mantic properties of nominals. Agreement prop-
erties indicate the semantic properties of nominals
on top of other elements (verbs, adjectives, etc.),
in order to indicate their relation to the nominals.

We define annotation guidelines that reflect
these different properties. Structural morphemes
(case) connect words in the arc-structure, linking
a head to its semantic dependent, like the case
marker “at”-ACC in Figure 2(b). Inherent / agree-
ment properties are annotated as dependents of the
content word they add properties to, for instance,
the prefixes def in Figure 2(b) hang under the mod-
ified noun and adjective.

Collapsed U-SD structures interpret func ele-
ments in order to refine the representation of re-
lations between content words. Case markers can
be used for refining the relation between the con-
tent words they connect by labeling their direct re-
lation, much like prep in the original SD scheme
(see, e.g., the ACC-obj in Figure 2c). Inher-
ent/agreement features are in fact features of their
respective head word (as the X.DEF nodes in Fig-
ure 2c).3 Auxiliaries may further be used to add
tense/aspect to the main predicate, and subordina-
tors may propagate information inside the struc-
ture (much like conjunction is propagated in SD).

Universal Aspects of U-SD. The revised U-
SD ontology provides a typological inventory
of labels that describe different types of argu-
ments (dep), argument-taking elements (hd), and
argument-marking elements (func) in the grammar
of different languages. Abstract (universal) con-
cepts reside high in the hierarchy, and more spe-
cific distinctions, e.g., morphological markers of
particular types, are daughters within more spe-
cific branches. Using U-SD for evaluating mono-
lingual parsers is best done with the complete label
set relevant for that language. For cross-language
evaluation, we can limit the depth of the hierar-
chy, and convert the more specific notions to their
most-specific ancestor in the evaluation set.

3Technically, this is done by deleting a line adding a prop-
erty to the morphology column in the CoNLL format.

4 Automatic Annotation of U-SD Trees

Can U-SD structures be automatically predicted?
For MRLs, this requires disambiguating both mor-
phological and syntactic information. Here we
employ the U-SD scheme for annotating mor-
phosyntactic structures in Modern Hebrew, and
use these resources to train two systems that pre-
dict U-SD annotations for raw texts.4

Data. We use the Modern Hebrew treebank
(Sima’an et al., 2001), a corpus of 6220 sentences
morphologically segmented and syntactically an-
alyzed as PS trees. We infer the function label
of each node in the PS trees based on the mor-
phological features, syntactic environment, and
dash-feature (if exist), using deterministic gram-
mar rules (Glinert, 1989). Specifically, we com-
pare each edge with a set of templates, and, once
finding a template that fits the morphological and
syntactic profile of an edge, we assign functions
to all daughters. This delivers PS trees where each
node is annotated with a U-SD label (Figure 2a).
At a second stage we project the inferred labels
onto the arcs of the unlabeled dependency trees of
Goldberg (2011), using the tree unification opera-
tion of Tsarfaty et al. (2012a). The result is a de-
pendency tree aligned with the constituency tree
where dependency arcs are labeled with the same
function as the respective span in the PS tree.5

Systems. We present two systems that predict
U-SD labels along with morphological and syn-
tactic information, using [DEP], a dependency
parser (Nivre et al., 2007), and [RR], a Relational-
Realizational (RR) constituency parser (Tsarfaty
and Sima’an, 2008). DEP is trained directly on the
dependency version of the U-SD resource. Since
it cannot predict its own segmentation, automatic
segments and tags are predicted using the system
of Adler and Elhadad (2006). The constituency-

4Despite significant advances in parsing Hebrew, as of yet
there has been no functional evaluation of Hebrew parsers.
E.g., Goldberg and Elhadad (2010) evaluate on unlabeled de-
pendencies, Tsarfaty (2010) evaluate on constituents. This is
largely due to the lack of standard resources and guidelines
for annotating functional structures in such a language.

5The resources can be downloaded at http://www.
tsarfaty.com/heb-sd/.

581



based model is trained on U-SD-labeled RR trees
using Petrov et al. (2006). We use the lattice-based
extension of Goldberg and Elhadad (2011) to per-
form joint segmentation and parsing. We evalu-
ate three input scenarios: [Gold] gold segmen-
tation and gold tags, [Predicted] gold segments,
and [Raw] raw words. We evaluate parsing results
with respect to basic U-SD trees, for 42 labels. We
use TedEval for joint segmentation-tree evaluation
(Tsarfaty et al., 2012b) and follow the cross-parser
evaluation protocol of Tsarfaty et al. (2012a).

Results. Since this work focuses on creating a
new resource, we report results on the standard
devset (Table 1). The gold input scenarios ob-
tain higher accuracy on function labels in all cases,
since gold morphological analysis delivers disam-
biguated functions almost for free. Constituency-
based RR structures obtain better accuracy on U-
SD annotations than the respective dependency
parser. All in all, the U-SD seed we created allows
us to infer rich interpretable annotations automati-
cally for raw text, using either a dependency parser
or a constituency parser, in good accuracy.

5 Conclusion
The contribution of this paper is three-fold. We of-
fer a principled treatment of annotating MRLs via
a Unified-SD scheme, which we design to be ap-
plicable to many languages. We deliver new U-SD
annotated resources for the MRL Modern Hebrew,
in different formal types. We finally present two
systems that automatically predict U-SD annota-
tions for raw texts. These structures are intended
to serve semantic applications. We further intend
to use this scheme and computational frameworks
to serve a wide cross-parser investigation on infer-
ring functional structures across languages.

Appendix: The U-SD Ontology
The list in (2) presents the complete U-SD ontol-
ogy. The hierarchy employs and extends the SD
label set of de Marneffe et al. (2006). For read-
ability, we omit here various compound types un-
der mod, including nn, mwe, predet and preconj.

Acknowledgements

We thank Joakim Nivre, Yoav Goldberg, Djamé
Seddah and anonymous reviewers for comments
and discussion. This research was partially funded
by the Swedish Research Council. The author is
now a researcher at the Weizmann Institute.

(2) gf root - root
hd - head (governor, argument-taking)

prd - verbal predicate
exist - head of an existential phrase

nhd - head of a nominal phrase
ghd - genitive head of a nominal phrase

dep - dependent (governed, or an argument)
arg - argument

agent - agent
comp - complement

acomp - adjectival complement
ccomp - comp clause with internal sbj
xcomp - comp clause with external sbj
pcomp - comp clause of a preposition

obj - object
dobj - direct object
gobj - genitive object
iobj - indirect object
pobj - object of a preposition

subj - subject
expl - expletive subject
nsubj - nominal subject
— nsubjpass - passive nominal sbj
csubj - clausal subject
— csubjpass - passive clausal sbj

mod - modifier
appos - apposition/parenthetical
abbrev - abbreviation
amod - adjectival modifier
advmod - adverbial modifier
— neg - negative modifier
prepmod - prepositional modifier
— possmod - possession modifier
— tmod - temporal modifier
rcmod - relative clause modifier
infmod - infinitival modifier
nummod - numerical modifier

parataxis - ”side-by-side”, interjection
conj - conjuct

func - functional (argument marking)
marker - nominal-marking elements

prep - preposition
case - case marker
— acc - accusative case
— dat - dative case
— gen - genitive case
— nom - nominative case
det - determiner
— def - definite marker
— dem - demonstrative

sub - phrase-marking elements
complm - introducing comp phrase
rel - introducing relative phrase
cc - introducing conjunction
mark - introducing an advb phrase

aux - auxiliary verb or a feature-bundle
auxpass - passive auxiliary
cop - copular element
modal - modal verb
qaux - question auxiliary

punct - punctuation

582



References
Meni Adler and Michael Elhadad. 2006. An

unsupervised morpheme-based HMM for Hebrew
morphological disambiguation. In Proceedings of
COLING-ACL.

Stephen R. Anderson. 1992. A-Morphous Morphol-
ogy. Cambridge University Press.

Barry J. Blake. 1994. Case. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolf-
gang Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The TIGER
treebank. In Proceedings of TLT.

Joan Bresnan. 2000. Lexical-Functional Syntax.
Blackwell.

Daniel Cer, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Daniel Ju-
rafsky, and Christopher D. Manning. 2010. Parsing
to stanford dependencies: Trade-offs between speed
and accuracy. In Proceedings of LREC.

Wanxiang Che, Valentin I. Spitkovsky, and Ting Liu.
2012. A comparison of chinese parsers for stanford
dependencies. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 11–16.

Greville G. Corbett. 2006. Agreement. Cam-
bridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In MLCW 2005, LNAI Volume.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008a. Stanford dependencies manual. Tech-
nical Report.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008b. The stanford typed dependencies
representation. In Proceedings of the workshop on
Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain Parser Evalu-
ation.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of LREC, pages 449–454.

Robert Kuffner Fundel, Katrin and Ralf Zimmer. 2007.
RelEx relation extraction using dependency parse
trees. Bioinformatics, (23).

Lewis Glinert. 1989. The Grammar of Modern He-
brew. Cambridge University Press.

Yoav Goldberg and Michael Elhadad. 2010. Easy-first
dependency parsing of Modern Hebrew. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL/HLT workshop on Statistical Parsing
of Morphologically Rich Languages.

Yoav Goldberg and Michael Elhadad. 2011. Joint He-
brew segmentation and parsing using a PCFGLA lat-
tice parser. In Proceedings of ACL.

Yoav Goldberg. 2011. Automatic syntactic processing
of Modern Hebrew. Ph.D. thesis, Ben Gurion Uni-
versity of the Negev.

Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Samuel Kohonen, Timo
Viljanen, Jenna Nyblom, and Tapio Salakoski.
2011. A dependency-based analysis of treebank an-
notation errors. In Proceedings of DepLing.

Tracy H. King, Richard Crouch, Stefan Riezler, Mary
Dalrymple, and Ronald Kaplan. 2003. The PARC
700 dependency bank. In The 4th International
Workshop on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora.

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuzman
Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao Zhang, Os-
car Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria Bertomeu
Castelló, and Jungmee Lee. 2013. Universal depen-
dency annotation for multilingual parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL.

Joakim Nivre, Jens Nilsson, Johan Hall, Atanas
Chanev, Gülsen Eryigit, Sandra Kübler, Svetoslav
Marinov, and Erwin Marsi. 2007. Maltparser:
A language-independent system for data-driven de-
pendency parsing. Natural Language Engineering,
13(1):1–41.

Joakim Nivre, Laura Rimell, Ryan McDonald, and Car-
los Gómez-Rodrı́guez. 2010. Evaluation of depen-
dency parsers on unbounded dependencies. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING, pages 813–821.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and inter-
pretable tree annotation. In Proceedings of ACL.

Paul M. Postal and David M. Perlmutter. 1977. Toward
a universal characterization of passivization. In BLS
3.

Owen Rambow. 2010. The Simple Truth about De-
pendency and Phrase Structure Representations: An
Opinion Piece. In Proceedings of HLT-ACL.

Khalil Sima’an, Alon Itai, Yoad Winter, Alon Altman,
and Noa Nativ. 2001. Building a Tree-Bank for
Modern Hebrew Text. In Traitement Automatique
des Langues.

Reut Tsarfaty and Khalil Sima’an. 2008. Relational-
realizational parsing. In Proceedings of CoLing.

Reut Tsarfaty, Djame Seddah, Yoav Goldberg, Sandra
Kuebler, Marie Candito, Jennifer Foster, Yannick
Versley, Ines Rehbein, and Lamia Tounsi. 2010.
Statistical parsing for morphologically rich language
(SPMRL): What, how and whither. In Proceedings
of the first workshop on Statistical Parsing of Mor-
phologically Rich Languages (SPMRL) at NA-ACL.

Reut Tsarfaty, Joakim Nivre, and Evelina Andersson.
2012a. Cross-framework evaluation for statistical
parsing. In Proceeding of EACL.

583



Reut Tsarfaty, Joakim Nivre, and Evelina Andersson.
2012b. Joint evaluation for segmentation and pars-
ing. In Proceedings of ACL.

Reut Tsarfaty. 2010. Relational-Realizational Pars-
ing. Ph.D. thesis, University of Amsterdam.

584


