



















































PATHS: A System for Accessing Cultural Heritage Collections


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 151–156,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

PATHS: A System for Accessing Cultural Heritage Collections
Eneko Agirre∗, Nikolaos Aletras†, Paul Clough†, Samuel Fernando†,

Paula Goodale†, Mark Hall†, Aitor Soroa∗ and Mark Stevenson†

(∗) IXA NLP Group, University of the Basque Country
Manuel Lardizabal, 1, 20.018 Donostia, Basque Country

(†) Department of Computer Science, Sheffield University
211 Portobello, Sheffield S1 4DP, United Kingdom

Abstract

This paper describes a system for navigat-
ing large collections of information about
cultural heritage which is applied to Eu-
ropeana, the European Library. Euro-
peana contains over 20 million artefacts
with meta-data in a wide range of Euro-
pean languages. The system currently pro-
vides access to Europeana content with
meta-data in English and Spanish. The pa-
per describes how Natural Language Pro-
cessing is used to enrich and organise this
meta-data to assist navigation through Eu-
ropeana and shows how this information is
used within the system.

1 Introduction

Significant amounts of information about cultural
heritage has been digitised in recent years and is
now easily available through online portals. How-
ever, this vast amount of material can also be over-
whelming for many users since they are provided
with little or no guidance on how to find and inter-
pret this information. Potentially useful and rel-
evant content is hidden from the users who are
typically offered simple keyword-based searching
functionality as the entry point into a cultural her-
itage collection. The situation is very different
within traditional mechanisms for viewing cultural
heritage (e.g. museums) where artefacts are or-
ganised thematically and users guided through the
collection.

This paper describes a system that allows users
to explore large cultural heritage collections. Nav-
igation is based around the metaphor of pathways
(or trails) through the collection, an approach that
has been widely explored as an alternative to stan-
dard keyword-based search (Furuta et al., 1997;
Reich et al., 1999; Shipman et al., 2000; White and
Huang, 2010). Pathways are sets of artefacts or-

ganised around a theme which form access points
to the collection.

Pathways are a useful way to access informa-
tion about cultural heritage. Users accessing these
collections are often unfamiliar with their content,
making keyword-based search unsuitable since
they are unable to formulate appropriate queries
(Wilson et al., 2010). Non-keyword-based search
interfaces have been shown to be suitable for ex-
ploratory search (Marchionini, 2006). Pathways
support this exploration by echoing the organised
galleries and guided tours found in museums.

2 Related Work

Heitzman et al. (1997) describe the ILEX system
which acts as a guide through the jewellery col-
lection of the National Museum of Scotland. The
user explores the collection through a set of web
pages which provide descriptions of each artefact
that are personalised for each user. The system
makes use of information about the artefacts the
user has viewed to build up a model of their in-
terests and uses this to customise the descriptions
of each artefact and provide recommendations for
further artefacts in which they may be interested.

Grieser et al. (2007) also explore providing rec-
ommendations based on the artefacts a user has
viewed so far. They make use of a range of tech-
niques including language modelling, geospatial
modelling and analysis of previous visitors’ be-
haviour to provide recommendations to visitors to
the Melbourne Museum.

Grieser et al. (2011) explore methods for de-
termining the similarity between museum arte-
facts, commenting that this is useful for navigation
through these collections and important for per-
sonalisation (Bowen and Filippini-Fantoni, 2004;
O’Donnell et al., 2001), recommendation (Bohn-
ert et al., 2009; Trant, 2009) and automatic tour
generation (Finkelstein et al., 2002; Roes et al.,
2009). They also use exhibits from Melbourne

151



Museum and apply a range of approaches to deter-
mine the similarity between them, including com-
paring descriptions and measuring physical dis-
tance between them in the museum.

These approaches, like many of the systems
that have been developed for online access to cul-
tural heritage (e.g. (Hage et al., 2010)), are based
around virtual access to a concrete physical space
(i.e. a museum). They often provide tours which
are constrained by the physical layout of the mu-
seum, such as virtual museum visits. However,
these approaches are less suitable for unstructured
collections such as databases of cultural heritage
artefacts collected from multiple institutions or
artefacts not connected with existing physical pre-
sentation (e.g. in a museum). The PATHS sys-
tem is designed for these types of collections and
makes use of natural language analysis to sup-
port navigation. In particular, similarity between
artefacts is computed automatically (see Section
4.1), background information automatically added
to artefact descriptions (see Section 4.2) and a hi-
erarchy of artefacts generated (see Section 4.3).

3 Cultural Heritage Data

The PATHS system has been applied to data from
Europeana1. This is a web-portal to collections
of cultural heritage artefacts provided by a wide
range of European institutions. Europeana cur-
rently provides access to over 20 million artefacts
including paintings, films, books, archival records
and museum objects. The artefacts are provided
by around 1,500 institutions which range from
major institutions, including the Rijksmuseum in
Amsterdam, the British Library and the Louvre,
to smaller organisations such as local museums.
It therefore contains an aggregation of digital con-
tent from several sources and is not connected with
any one physical museum.

The PATHS system makes use of three collec-
tions from Europeana. The first of these con-
tains artefacts from content providers in the United
Kingdom which has meta-data in English. The
artefacts in the remaining two collections come
from institutions in Spain and have meta-data in
Spanish.

CultureGrid Culture Grid2 is a digital content
provider service from the Collection Trust3.

1http://www.europeana.eu
2http://www.culturegrid.org.uk
3http://www.collectionstrust.org.uk

It contains information about over one mil-
lion artefacts from 40 different UK content
providers such as national and regional mu-
seums and libraries.

Cervantes Biblioteca Virtual Miguel De Cer-
vantes4 contains digitalised Spanish text in
various formats. In total, the online library
contains about 75,000 works from a range of
periods in Spanish history.

Hispana The Biblioteca Nacional de España5
contains information about a diverse set of
content including text and drawings. The ma-
terial is collected from different providers in
Spain including museums and libraries.

Europeana stores metadata for each artefact in
an XML-based format which includes information
such as its title, the digital format, the collection,
the year of creation and also a short description of
each artefact. However, this meta-data is created
by the content providers and varies significantly
across artefacts. Many of the artefacts have only
limited information associated with them, for ex-
ample a single word title. In addition, the content
providers that contribute to Europeana use differ-
ent hierarchical structures to organise their collec-
tions (e.g. Library of Congress Subject Headings6

and the Art and Architecture Thesaurus7), or do
not organise their content into any structure. Con-
sequently the various hierarchies that are used in
Europeana only cover some of the artefacts and
are not compatible with each other.

3.1 Filtering Data

Analysis of the artefacts in these three collections
revealed that many have short and uninformative
titles or lack a description. This forms a challenge
to language processing techniques since the arte-
fact’s meta-data does not contain enough informa-
tion to model it accurately.

The collections were filtered by removing any
artefacts that have no description and have either
fewer than four words in their title or have a title
that is repeated more than 100 times in the col-
lection. Table 1 shows the number of artefacts
in each of the Europeana collections before and

4http://www.cervantesvirtual.com
5http://www.bne.es
6http://authorities.loc.gov/
7http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/

vocabularies/aat/

152



after this filter has been applied. Applying the
heuristic leads to the removal of around 31% of the
artefacts, although the number varies significantly
across the collections with 61% of the artefacts in
CultureGrid being removed and only 1% of those
in Hispana.

Collection Lang. Total Filtered
CultureGrid Eng. 1,207,781 466,958

Hispana Sp. 1,235,133 1,219,731
Cervantes Sp. 19,278 14,983

2,462,192 1,701,672

Table 1: Number of artefacts in Europeana collec-
tions before and after filtering

4 Data Processing

A range of pre-preprocessing steps were carried
out on these collections to provide additional in-
formation to support navigation in the PATHS sys-
tem.

4.1 Artefact Similarity
We begin by computing the similarity between
the various artefacts in the Europeana collections.
This information is useful for navigation and rec-
ommendation but is not available in the Europeana
collections since they are drawn from a diverse
range of sources.

Similarity is computed using an approach de-
scribed by Aletras et al. (2012). in which the top-
ics generated from each artefact’s metadata using
a topic model are compared. Latent Dirichlet Al-
location (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) is a widely used
type of topic model in which documents can be
viewed as probability distributions over topics, θ.
The similarity between a pair of documents can be
estimated by comparing their topic distributions.
This is achieved by viewing each distribution as
a vector of probabilities and then computing the
cosine of the angle between them:

sim(a, b) =
~θa.~θb

|~θa| × | ~θb|
(1)

where ~θa is the vector created from the probability
distribution generated by LDA for document a.

This approach is evaluated using a set of 295
pairs of artefacts for which human judgements
of similarity were obtained using crowdsourcing
(Aletras et al., 2012). Pearson correlation between
the similarity scores and human judgements was
0.53.

The similarity between all the artefacts in the
collection is computed in a pairwise fashion. The
25 artefacts with the highest score are retained for
each artefact.

4.2 Background Links
The metadata associated with Europeana artefacts
is often very limited. Consequently links to rele-
vant articles in Wikipedia were added to each the
meta-data of each artefact using Wikipedia Miner
(Milne and Witten, 2008) to provide background
information. In addition to the link, Wikipedia
Miner returns a confidence value between 0 and
1 for each link based on the context of the item.

The accuracy of the links added by Wikipedia
Miner were evaluated using the meta-data associ-
ated with 21 randomly selected artefacts. Three
annotators analysed the links added and found that
a confidence value of 0.5 represented a good bal-
ance between accuracy and coverage. See Fer-
nando and Stevenson (2012) for further details.

4.3 Hierarchies
The range of hierarchies used by the various col-
lections that comprise the Europeana collection
make navigation difficult (see Section 3). Con-
sequently, the Wikipedia links added to the arte-
fact meta-data were used to automatically gener-
ate hierarchies that the cover the entire collection.
These hierarchies are used by the PATHS system
to assist browsing and exploration.

Two approaches are used to generate hierarchies
of Europeana artefacts (WikiFreq and WikiTax).
These are combined to generate the WikiMerge hi-
erarchy which is used in the PATHS system.

WikiFreq uses link frequencies across the en-
tire collection to organise the artefacts. The first
stage in the hierarchy generation process is to
compute the frequency with which each linked
Wikipedia article appears in the collection. The
links in each artefact are these analysed to con-
struct a hierarchy consisting of Wikipedia articles.
The links in the meta-data associated with each
artefact are ordered based on their frequency in the
entire collection and that set of links then inserted
into the hierarchy. For example, if the set of or-
dered links for an artefact is a1, a2, a3 · · · an then
the artefact is then inserted into the hierarchy un-
der the branch a1 → a2 → a3 · · · → an, with
a1 at the top level in the tree and the artefact ap-
pearing under the node an. If this branch does not
already exist in the tree then it is created.

153



The hierarchy is pruned to removing nodes with
fewer than 20 artefacts in them. In addition, if a
node has more than 20 child nodes, only the 20
most frequent are used.

WikiTax uses the Wikipedia Taxonomy
(Ponzetto and Strube, 2011), a taxonomy derived
from Wikipedia categories. Europeana artefacts
are inserted into this taxonomy using the links
added by Wikipedia Miner with each artefact
being added to the taxonomy for all categories
listed in the links. This leads to a taxonomy in
which artefacts can occur in multiple locations.

Each approach was used to generate hierarchies
from the Europeana collections. The resulting hi-
erarchies were evaluated via online surveys, see
Fernando et al. (2012) for further details. It was
found that WikiFreq performed well at placing
items into the correct location in the taxonomy and
grouping together similar items under the same
node. However, the overall structure of WikiTax
was judged to be more coherent and comprehensi-
ble.

WikiMerge combines combines WikiFreq and
WikiTax. WikiFreq is used to link each artefact
to Wikipedia articles a1 . . . an, but only the link
to the most specific article, an, is retained. The
an articles are linked to their parent WikiTax top-
ics based on the Wikipedia categories the articles
belong to. The resulting hierarchy is pruned re-
moving all WikiTax topics that do not have a Wik-
iFreq child or have only one child topic. Finally
top-level topics in the combined hierarchy are then
linked to their respective Wikipedia root node.

The resulting WikiMerge hierarchy has Wik-
iFreq topics as its leaves and WikiTax topics as
its interior and root nodes. Experiments showed
that this approach was successful in combining
the strengths of the two methods (Fernando et al.,
2012).

5 The PATHS System

The PATHS system provides access to the Euro-
peana collections described in Section 3 by mak-
ing use of the additional information generated us-
ing the approaches described in Section 4. The in-
terface of the PATHS system has three main areas:

Paths enables users to navigate via pathways (see
Section 5.1).

Search supports discovery of both collection arte-
facts and pathways through keyword search
(see Section 5.2).

Explore enables users to explore the collections
using a variety of types of overview (see Sec-
tion 5.3).

5.1 Paths Area
This area provides users with access to Europeana
through pathways or trails. These are manually
generated sets of artefacts organised into a tree
structure which are designed to showcase the con-
tent available to the user in an organised way.
These can be created by users and can be pub-
lished for others to follow. An example path-
way on the topic “railways” is shown in Figure
1. A short description of the pathway’s content is
shown towards the top of the figure and a graphical
overview of its contents at the bottom.

Figure 1: Example pathway on the topic “rail-
ways”

Figure 2 shows as example artefact as displayed
in the system. The example artefact is a portrait
of Catherine the Great. The left side of the figure
shows information extracted directly from the Eu-
ropeana meta-data for this artefact. The title and
textual description are shown towards the top left
together with a thumbnail image of the artefact.
Other information from the meta-data is shown be-
neath the “About this item” heading. The right
side of the figure shows additional information

Figure 2: Example artefact displayed in system in-
terface. Related artefacts and background links are
displayed on right hand side

154



Figure 3: Example visualisations of hierarchy: thesaurus view (top left), tag cloud (top right), map views
(bottom)

about the artefact generated using the approaches
described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Related arte-
facts are shown to the user one at a time, click-
ing on the thumbnail image leads to the equivalent
page for the related artefact. Below this are links
to the Wikipedia articles that are identified in the
text of the article’s title and description.

5.2 Search Area
This area allows users to search for artefacts and
pathways using standard keyword search imple-
mented using Lucene (McCandless et al., 2010).

5.3 Explore Area
The system provides a variety of ways to view
the hierarchies generated using the approach de-
scribed in Section 4.3. Figure 3 shows how these
are displayed for a section of the hierarchy with
the label “Society”. The simplest view (shown in
the top left of Figure 3) is a thesaurus type view
in which levels of the hierarchy are represented by
indentation. The system also allows levels of the
hierarchy to be viewed as a tag cloud (top right of
Figure 3). The final representation of the hierar-
chy is as a map, shown in the bottom of Figure 3.

In this visualisation categories in the hierarchy are
represented as “islands” on the map. Zooming in
on the map provides more detail about that area of
the hierarchy.

6 Summary and Future Developments

This paper describes a system for navigating Eu-
ropeana, an aggregation of collections of cultural
heritage artefacts. NLP analysis is used to organ-
ise the collection and provide additional informa-
tion. The results of this analysis are provided to
the user through an online interface which pro-
vides access to English and Spanish content in Eu-
ropeana.

Planned future development of this system in-
cludes providing recommendations and more per-
sonalised access. Similarity information (Sec-
tion 4.1) can be used to provide information from
which the recommendations can be made. Person-
alised access will make use of information about
individual users (e.g. from their browsing be-
haviour or information they provide about their
preferences) to generate individual views of Eu-
ropeana.

155



Online Demo

The PATHS system is available at
http://explorer.paths-project.eu/

Acknowledgments

The research leading to these results was
carried out as part of the PATHS project
(http://paths-project.eu) funded by
the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agree-
ment no. 270082

References
N. Aletras, M. Stevenson, and P. Clough. 2012. Com-

puting similarity between items in a digital library
of cultural heritage. Journal of Computing and Cul-
tural Heritage, 5(4):no. 16.

D. Blei, A. Ng, and M. Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet
allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
3:993–1022.

F. Bohnert, D. Schmidt, and I. Zuckerman. 2009. Spa-
tial Process for Recommender Systems. In Proc. of
IJCAI 2009, pages 2022–2027, Pasadena, CA.

J. Bowen and S. Filippini-Fantoni. 2004. Personaliza-
tion and the Web from a Museum Perspective. In
Proc. of Museums and the Web 2004, pages 63–78.

Samuel Fernando and Mark Stevenson. 2012. Adapt-
ing Wikification to Cultural Heritage. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th Workshop on Language Technology
for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Human-
ities, pages 101–106, Avignon, France.

Samuel Fernando, Mark Hall, Eneko Agirre, Aitor
Soroa, Paul Clough, and Mark Stevenson. 2012.
Comparing taxonomies for organising collections of
documents. In Proc. of COLING 2012, pages 879–
894, Mumbai, India.

L. Finkelstein, E. Gabrilovich, Y. Matias, E. Rivlin,
Z. Solan, G. Wolfman, and E. Ruppin. 2002. Plac-
ing Search in Context: The Concept Revisited. ACM
Trans. on Information Systems, 20(1):116–131.

R. Furuta, F.. Shipman, C. Marshall, D. Brenner, and
H. Hsieh. 1997. Hypertext paths and the World-
Wide Web: experiences with Walden’s Paths. In
Proc. of the Eighth ACM conference on Hypertext,
pages 167–176, New York, NY.

K. Grieser, T. Baldwin, and S. Bird. 2007. Dynamic
Path Prediction and Recommendation in a Museum
Environment. In Proc. of the Workshop on Lan-
guage Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaT-
eCH 2007), pages 49–56, Prague, Czech Republic.

K. Grieser, T. Baldwin, F. Bohnert, and L. Sonenberg.
2011. Using Ontological and Document Similarity
to Estimate Museum Exhibit Relatedness. Journal
of Computing and Cultural Heritage, 3(3):1–20.

W.R. van Hage, N. Stash, Y. Wang, and L.M. Aroyo.
2010. Finding your way through the Rijksmuseum
with an adaptive mobile museum guide. In Proc. of
ESWC 2010, pages 46–59.

J. Heitzman, C. Mellish, and J. Oberlander. 1997. Dy-
namic Generation of Museum Web Pages: The In-
telligent Labelling Explorer. Archives and Museum
Informatics, 11(2):117–125.

G. Marchionini. 2006. Exploratory Search: from Find-
ing to Understanding. Comm. ACM, 49(1):41–46.

M. McCandless, E. Hatcher, and O. Gospodnetic.
2010. Lucene in Action. Manning Publications.

D. Milne and I. Witten. 2008. Learning to Link with
Wikipedia. In Proc. of CIKM 2008, Napa Valley,
California.

M. O’Donnell, C. Mellish, J. Oberlander, and A. Knott.
2001. ILEX: An architecture for a dynamic hy-
pertext generation system. Natural Language En-
gineering, 7:225–250.

S.P. Ponzetto and M. Strube. 2011. Taxonomy in-
duction based on a collaboratively built knowledge
repository. Artificial Intelligence, 175(9-10):1737–
1756.

S. Reich, L. Carr, D. De Roure, and W. Hall. 1999.
Where have you been from here? Trails in hypertext
systems. ACM Computing Surveys, 31.

I. Roes, N. Stash, Y. Wang, and L. Aroyo. 2009. A
personalized walk through the museum: the CHIP
interactive tour guide. In Proc. of the 27th Interna-
tional Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 3317–3322, Boston, MA.

F. Shipman, R. Furuta, D. Brenner, C. Chung, and
H. Hsieh. 2000. Guided paths through web-based
collections: Design, experiences, and adaptations.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, 51(3):260–272.

J. Trant. 2009. Tagging, folksonomies and art mu-
seums: Early experiments and ongoing research.
Journal of Digital Information, 10(1).

R. White and J. Huang. 2010. Assessing the scenic
route: measuring the value of search trails in web
logs. In Proc. of SIGIR 2010, pages 587–594.

M. Wilson, Kulesm B., M. Schraefel, and B. Schnei-
derman. 2010. From keyword search to explo-
ration: Designing future search interfaces for the
web. Foundations and Trends in Web Science,
2(1):1–97.

156


