



















































Improving machine translation by training against an automatic semantic frame based evaluation metric


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 375–381,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Improving machine translation by training against
an automatic semantic frame based evaluation metric

Chi-kiu Lo and Karteek Addanki and Markus Saers and Dekai Wu
HKUST

Human Language Technology Center
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

{jackielo|vskaddanki|masaers|dekai}@cs.ust.hk

Abstract

We present the first ever results show-
ing that tuning a machine translation sys-
tem against a semantic frame based ob-
jective function, MEANT, produces more
robustly adequate translations than tun-
ing against BLEU or TER as measured
across commonly used metrics and human
subjective evaluation. Moreover, for in-
formal web forum data, human evalua-
tors preferredMEANT-tuned systems over
BLEU- or TER-tuned systems by a sig-
nificantly wider margin than that for for-
mal newswire—even though automatic se-
mantic parsing might be expected to fare
worse on informal language. We argue
that by preserving themeaning of the trans-
lations as captured by semantic frames
right in the training process, an MT sys-
tem is constrained to make more accu-
rate choices of both lexical and reorder-
ing rules. As a result, MT systems tuned
against semantic frame based MT evalu-
ation metrics produce output that is more
adequate. Tuning a machine translation
system against a semantic frame based ob-
jective function is independent of the trans-
lation model paradigm, so, any transla-
tion model can benefit from the semantic
knowledge incorporated to improve trans-
lation adequacy through our approach.

1 Introduction

We present the first ever results of tuning a statis-
tical machine translation (SMT) system against a
semantic frame based objective function in order
to produce a more adequate output. We compare
the performance of our system with that of two
baseline SMT systems tuned against BLEU and
TER, the commonly used n-gram and edit distance

based metrics. Our system performs better than
the baseline across seven commonly used evalu-
ation metrics and subjective human evaluation on
adequacy. Surprisingly, tuning against a seman-
tic MT evaluation metric also significantly out-
performs the baseline on the domain of informal
web forum data wherein automatic semantic pars-
ing might be expected to fare worse. These results
strongly indicate that using a semantic frame based
objective function for tuning would drive develop-
ment of MT towards direction of higher utility.
Glaring errors caused by semantic role confu-

sion that plague the state-of-the-art MT systems
are a consequence of using fast and cheap lexi-
cal n-gram based objective functions like BLEU
to drive their development. Despite enforcing flu-
ency it has been established that these metrics do
not enforce translation utility adequately and often
fail to preservemeaning closely (Callison-Burch et
al., 2006; Koehn and Monz, 2006).
We argue that instead of BLEU, a metric that fo-

cuses on getting the meaning right should be used
as an objective function for tuning SMT so as to
drive continuing progress towards higher utility.
MEANT (Lo et al., 2012), is an automatic seman-
tic MT evaluation metric that measures similarity
between the MT output and the reference transla-
tion via semantic frames. It correlates better with
human adequacy judgment than other automatic
MT evaluation metrics. Since a high MEANT
score is contingent on correct lexical choices as
well as syntactic and semantic structures, we be-
lieve that tuning against MEANT would improve
both translation adequacy and fluency.
Incorporating semantic structures into SMT by

tuning against a semantic frame based evaluation
metric is independent of the MT paradigm. There-
fore, systems from different MT paradigms (such
as hierarchical, phrase based, transduction gram-
mar based) can benefit from the semantic informa-
tion incorporated through our approach.

375



2 Related Work

Relatively little work has been done towards bi-
asing the translation decisions of an SMT system
to produce adequate translations that correctly pre-
servewho did what to whom, when, where and why
(Pradhan et al., 2004). This is because the devel-
opment of SMT systemswas predominantly driven
by tuning against n-gram based evaluation met-
rics such as BLEU or edit distance based metrics
such as TER which do not sufficiently bias SMT
system’s decisions to produce adequate transla-
tions. Although there has been a recent surge of
work aimed towards incorporating semantics into
the SMT pipeline, none attempt to tune against a
semantic objective function. Below, we describe
some of the attempts to incorporate semantic in-
formation into the SMT and present a brief survey
on evaluation metrics that focus on rewarding se-
mantically valid translations.

Utilizing semantics in SMT In the past few
years, there has been a surge of work aimed at in-
corporating semantics into various stages of the
SMT. Wu and Fung (2009) propose a two-pass
model that reorders the MT output to match the
SRL of the input, which is too late to affect the
translation decisions made by the MT system dur-
ing decoding. In contrast, training against a se-
mantic objective function attempts to improve the
decoding search strategy by incorporating a bias
towards meaningful translations into the model in-
stead of postprocessing its results.
Komachi et al. (2006) and Wu et al. (2011) pre-

process the input sentence to match the verb frame
alternations in the output side. Liu and Gildea
(2010) and Aziz et al. (2011) use input side SRL
to train a tree-to-string SMT system. Xiong et al.
(2012) trained a discriminative model to predict
the position of the semantic roles in the output.
All these approaches are orthogonal to the present
question of whether to train toward a semantic ob-
jective function. Any of the above models could
potentially benefit from tuning with semantic met-
rics.

MT evaluation metrics As mentioned previ-
ously, tuning against n-gram based metrics such
as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), NIST (Dod-
dington, 2002), METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie,
2005) does not sufficiently drive SMT into mak-
ing decisions to produce adequate translations
that correctly preserve ”who did what to whom,

when, where and why”. In fact, a number of
large scale meta-evaluations (Callison-Burch et
al., 2006; Koehn and Monz, 2006) report cases
where BLEU strongly disagrees with human judg-
ments of translation accuracy. Tuning against edit
distance based metrics such as CDER (Leusch et
al., 2006), WER (Nießen et al., 2000), and TER
(Snover et al., 2006) also fails to sufficiently bias
SMT systems towards producing translations that
preserve semantic information.
We argue that an SMT system tuned against an

adequacy-oriented metric that correlates well with
human adequacy judgement produces more ade-
quate translations. For this purpose, we choose
MEANT, an automatic semantic MT evaluation
metric that focuses on getting the meaning right by
comparing the semantic structures of the MT out-
put and the reference. We briefly describe some
of the alternative semantic metrics below to justify
our choice.
ULC (Giménez and Màrquez, 2007, 2008) is

an aggregated metric that incorporates several se-
mantic similarity features and shows improved
correlation with human judgement on translation
quality (Callison-Burch et al., 2007; Giménez
and Màrquez, 2007; Callison-Burch et al., 2008;
Giménez and Màrquez, 2008) but no work has
been done towards tuning an MT system against
ULC perhaps due to its expensive running time.
Lambert et al. (2006) did tune on QUEEN, a sim-
plified version of ULC that discards the seman-
tic features and is based on pure lexical features.
Although tuning on QUEEN produced slightly
more preferable translations than solely tuning on
BLEU, themetric does not make use of any seman-
tic features and thus fails to exploit any potential
gains from tuning to semantic objectives.
Although TINE (Rios et al., 2011) is an recall-

oriented automatic evaluation metric which aims
to preserve the basic event structure, no work has
been done towards tuning an SMT system against
it. TINE performs comparably to BLEU andworse
than METEOR on correlation with human ade-
quacy judgment.
In contrast to TINE, MEANT (Lo et al., 2012),

which is the weighted f-score over the matched se-
mantic role labels of the automatically aligned se-
mantic frames and role fillers, outperforms BLEU,
NIST, METEOR, WER, CDER and TER. This
makes it more suitable for tuning SMT systems to
produce much adequate translations.

376



newswire BLEU NIST METEOR no_syn METEOR WER CDER TER MEANT
BLEU-tuned 29.85 8.84 52.10 55.42 67.88 55.67 58.40 0.1667
TER-tuned 25.37 6.56 48.26 51.24 66.18 52.58 56.96 0.1578
MEANT-tuned 25.91 7.81 50.15 53.60 67.76 54.56 58.61 0.1676

Table 1: Translation quality of MT system tuned against MEANT, BLEU and TER on newswire data

forum BLEU NIST METEOR no_syn METEOR WER CDER TER MEANT
BLEU-tuned 9.58 4.10 31.77 34.63 80.09 64.54 76.12 0.1711
TER-tuned 6.94 2.21 28.55 30.85 76.15 57.96 74.73 0.1539
MEANT-tuned 7.92 3.11 30.40 33.08 77.32 61.01 74.64 0.1727

Table 2: Translation quality of MT system tuned against MEANT, BLEU and TER on forum data

3 Tuning SMT against MEANT

We now show that using MEANT as an objec-
tive function to drive minimum error rate training
(MERT) of state-of-the-art MT systems improves
MT utility not only on formal newswire text, but
even on informal forum text, where automatic se-
mantic parsing is difficult.
Toward improving translation utility of state-of-

the-art MT systems, we chose to use a strong and
competitive system in the DARPA BOLT program
as our baseline. The baseline system is a Moses
hierarchical model trained on a collection of LDC
newswire and a small portion of Chinese-English
parallel web forum data, together with a 5-gram
language model. For the newswire experiment, we
used a collection of NIST 02-06 test sets as our de-
velopment set and NIST 08 test set for evaluation.
The development and test sets contain 6,331 and
1,357 sentences respectively with four references.
For the forum data experiment, the development
and test sets were a held-out subset of the BOLT
phase 1 training data. The development and test
sets contain 2,000 sentences and 1,697 sentences
with one reference.
We use ZMERT (Zaidan, 2009) to tune the base-

line because it is a widely used, highly competi-
tive, robust, and reliable implementation of MERT
that is also fully configurable and extensible with
regard to incorporating new evaluation metrics. In
this experiment, we use aMEANT implementation
along the lines described in Lo et al. (2012).
In each experiment, we tune two contrastive

conventional 100-best MERT tuned baseline sys-
tems on both newswire and forum data genres; one
tuned against BLEU, an n-gram based evaluation
metric and the other using TER, an edit distance
based metric. As semantic role labeling is expen-
sive we only tuned using 10-best list for MEANT-
tuned system. Tuning against BLEU and TER took

around 1.5 hours and 5 hours per iteration respec-
tively whereas tuning against MEANT took about
1.6 hours per iteration.

4 Results

Of course, tuning against any metric would maxi-
mize the performance of the SMT system on that
particular metric, but would be overfitting. For
example, something would be seriously wrong
if tuning against BLEU did not yield the best
BLEU scores. A far more worthwhile goal would
be to bias the SMT system to produce adequate
translations while achieving the best scores across
all the metrics. With this as our objective, we
present the results of comparing MEANT-tuned
systems against the baselines as evaluated on com-
monly used automatic metrics and human ade-
quacy judgement.

Cross-evaluation using automatic metrics Ta-
bles 1 and 2 show that MEANT-tuned systems
achieve the best scores across all other metrics in
both newswire and forum data genres, when avoid-
ing comparison of the overfit metrics too similar to
the one the system was tuned on (the cells shaded
in grey in the table: NIST and METEOR are n-
gram based metrics, similar to BLEU while WER
and CDER are edit distance based metrics, similar
to TER). In the newswire domain, however, our
system achieves marginally lower TER score than
BLEU-tuned system.
Figure 1 shows an example where the MEANT-

tuned system produced a more adequate transla-
tion that accurately preserves the semantic struc-
ture of the input sentence than the two baseline
systems. The MEANT scores for the MT output
from the BLEU-, TER- and MEANT-tuned sys-
tems are 0.0635, 0.1131 and 0.2426 respectively.
Both the MEANT score and the human evaluators
rank the MT output from the MEANT-tuned sys-

377



Figure 1: Examples of machine translation output and the corresponding semantic parses from the [B]
BLEU-, [T] TER-and [M]MEANT-tuned systems together with [IN] the input sentence and [REF] the
reference translation. Note that the MT output of the BLEU-tuned system has no semantic parse output
by the automatic shallow semantic parser.

tem as the most adequate translation. In this exam-
ple, the MEANT-tuned system has translated the
two predicates “攻占” and “施行” in the input sen-
tence into the correct form of the predicates “at-
tack” and “adopted” in theMT output, whereas the
BLEU-tuned system has translated both of them
incorrectly (translates the predicates into nouns)
and the TER-tuned system has correctly translated
only the first predicate (into “seized”) and dropped
the second predicate. Moreover, for the frame “攻
占” in the input sentence, the MEANT-tuned sys-
tem has correctly translated the ARG0 “哈玛斯好战
份子” into “Hamas militants” and the ARG1 “加
萨走廊” into “Gaza”. However, the TER-tuned
system has dropped the predicate “施行” so that
the corresponding arguments “The Palestinian Au-
thority” and “into a state of emergency” have all
been incorrectly associated with the predicate “攻
占 /seized”. This example shows that the transla-
tion adequacy of SMT has been improved by tun-
ing against MEANT because the MEANT-tuned
system is more accurately preserving the semantic
structure of the input sentence.

Our results show that MEANT-tuned system
maintains a balance between lexical choices and
word order because it performs well on n-gram
based metrics that reward lexical matching and
edit distance metrics that penalize incorrect word

order. This is not surprising as a high MEANT
score relies on a high degree of semantic structure
matching, which is contingent upon correct lexi-
cal choices as well as syntactic and semantic struc-
tures.

Human subjective evaluation In line with our
original objective of biasing SMT systems towards
producing adequate translations, we conduct a hu-
man evaluation to judge the translation utility of
the outputs produced by MEANT-, BLEU- and
TER-tuned systems. Following the manual eval-
uation protocol of Lambert et al. (2006), we ran-
domly draw 150 sentences from the test set in each
domain to form the manual evaluation set. Table
3 shows the MEANT scores of the two manual
evaluation sets. In both evaluation sets, like in the
test sets, the output from the MEANT-tuned sys-
tem score slightly higher inMEANT than that from
the BLEU-tuned system and significantly higher
than that from the TER-tuned system. The output
of each tuned MT system along the input sentence
and the reference were presented to human evalu-
ators. Each evaluation set is ranked by two evalu-
ators for measuring inter-evaluator agreement.
Table 4 indicates that output of the MEANT-

tuned system is ranked adequate more frequently
compared to BLEU- and TER-tuned baselines for
both newswire and web forum genres. The inter-

378



newswire forum
BLEU-tuned 0.1564 0.1663
TER-tuned 0.1203 0.1453
MEANT-tuned 0.1633 0.1737

Table 3: MEANT scores of each system in the 150-
sentence manual evaluation set.

newswire forum
Eval 1 Eval 2 Eval 1 Eval 2

BLEU-tuned (B) 37 42 47 42
TER-tuned (T) 22 24 28 23
MEANT-tuned (M) 55 56 59 68
B=T 14 12 0 0
M=B 5 4 8 9
M=T 4 4 4 4
M=B=T 13 9 4 4

Table 4: No. of sentences ranked the most ade-
quate by human evaluators for each system.

H1 newswire forum
MEANT-tuned > BLEU-tuned 80% 95%
MEANT-tuned > TER-tuned 99% 99%

Table 5: Significance level of accepting the alter-
native hypothesis.

evaluator agreement is 84% and 70% for newswire
and forum data genres respectively.
We performed the right-tailed two proportion

significance test on human evaluation of the SMT
system outputs for both the genres. Table 5 shows
that the MEANT-tuned system generates more ad-
equate translations than the TER-tuned system at
the 99% significance level for both newswire and
web forum genres. The MEANT-tuned system is
ranked more adequate than the BLEU-tuned sys-
tem at the 95% significance level on the web fo-
rum genre and for the newswire genre the hypoth-
esis is accepted at a significance level of 80%.
The high inter-evaluator agreement and the signif-
icance tests confirm that MEANT-tuned system is
better at producing adequate translations compared
to BLEU- or TER-tuned systems.

Informal vs. formal text The results of table
4 and 5 also show that—surprisingly—the human
evaluators preferred MEANT-tuned system out-
put over BLEU-tuned and TER-tuned system out-
put by a far wider margin on the informal forum
text compared to the formal newswire text. The
MEANT-tuned system is better than both base-
lines at the 80% significance level for the formal
text genre. For the informal text genre, it per-
forms the two baselines at the 95% significance
level. Although one might expect an semantic

frame dependent metric such as MEANT to per-
form poorly on the domain of informal text, sur-
prisingly, it nonetheless significantly outperforms
the baselines at the task of generating adequate out-
put. This indicates that the design of the MEANT
evaluation metric is robust enough to tune an SMT
system towards adequate output on informal text
domains despite the shortcomings of automatic
shallow semantic parsing.

5 Conclusion

We presented the first ever results to demon-
strate that tuning an SMT system against MEANT
produces much adequate translation than tuning
against BLEU or TER, as measured across all
other commonly used metrics and human subjec-
tive evaluation. We also observed that tuning
against MEANT succeeds in producing adequate
output significantly more frequently even on the
informal text such as web forum data. By pre-
serving the meaning of the translations as captured
by semantic frames right in the training process,
an MT system is constrained to make more accu-
rate choices of both lexical and reordering rules.
The performance of our system as measured across
all commonly used metrics indicate that tuning
against a semantic MT evaluation metric does pro-
duce output which is adequate and fluent.
We believe that tuning onMEANTwould prove

equally useful for MT systems based on any
paradigm, especially where the model does not
incorporate semantic information to improve the
adequacy of the translations produced and using
MEANT as an objective function to tune SMT
would drive sustainable development of MT to-
wards the direction of higher utility.

Acknowledgment

This material is based upon work supported in
part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) under BOLT contract no.
HR0011-12-C-0016, and GALE contract nos.
HR0011-06-C-0022 and HR0011-06-C-0023; by
the European Union under the FP7 grant agree-
ment no. 287658; and by the Hong Kong
Research Grants Council (RGC) research grants
GRF620811, GRF621008, and GRF612806. Any
opinions, findings and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
DARPA, the EU, or RGC.

379



References

Wilker Aziz, Miguel Rios, and Lucia Specia. Shal-
low semantic trees for SMT. In Proceedings
of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation (WMT2011), 2011.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. METEOR:
An automatic metric forMT evaluation with im-
proved correlation with human judgments. In
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic
and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine
Translation and/or Summarization, pages 65–
72, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 2005.

Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in Ma-
chine Translation Research. In Proceedings of
the 13th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (EACL-06), pages 249–256, 2006.

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder.
(Meta-) evaluation of Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 136–158, 2007.

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder.
Further Meta-evaluation of Machine Transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, pages 70–106,
2008.

George Doddington. Automatic evaluation of
machine translation quality using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Human Lan-
guage Technology Research, pages 138–145,
San Diego, California, 2002.

Jesús Giménez and Lluís Màrquez. Linguistic
features for automatic evaluation of heteroge-
nous MT systems. In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 256–264, Prague, Czech Republic,
June 2007.

Jesús Giménez and LluísMàrquez. A smorgasbord
of features for automaticMT evaluation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 195–198, Colum-
bus, Ohio, June 2008.

Philipp Koehn and Christof Monz. Manual and
Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation
between European Languages. In Proceedings

of the Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation (WMT-06), pages 102–121, 2006.

Mamoru Komachi, Yuji Matsumoto, and Masaaki
Nagata. Phrase reordering for statistical ma-
chine translation based on predicate-argument
structure. In Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Workshop on Spoken Language Transla-
tion (IWSLT 2006), 2006.

Patrik Lambert, Jesús Giménez, Marta R Costa-
jussá, Enrique Amigó, Rafael E Banchs, Lluıs
Márquez, and JAR Fonollosa. Machine Transla-
tion system development based on human like-
ness. In Spoken Language Technology Work-
shop, 2006. IEEE, pages 246–249. IEEE, 2006.

Gregor Leusch, Nicola Ueffing, and Hermann
Ney. CDer: Efficient MT Evaluation Using
Block Movements. In Proceedings of the 13th
Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (EACL-
06), 2006.

Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. Semantic role fea-
tures for machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 23rd international conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING-10), 2010.

Chi-kiu Lo, Anand Karthik Tumuluru, and Dekai
Wu. Fully Automatic Semantic MT Evaluation.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation (WMT2012), 2012.

Sonja Nießen, Franz Josef Och, Gregor Leusch,
and Hermann Ney. A Evaluation Tool for Ma-
chine Translation: Fast Evaluation for MT Re-
search. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC-2000), 2000.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–
318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, July 2002.

Sameer Pradhan, Wayne Ward, Kadri Hacioglu,
James H.Martin, and Dan Jurafsky. Shallow Se-
mantic Parsing Using Support Vector Machines.
In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Hu-
man Language Technology and the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (HLT-NAACL-04), 2004.

Miguel Rios, Wilker Aziz, and Lucia Specia. Tine:
A metric to assess mt adequacy. In Proceed-

380



ings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 116–122. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2011.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz,
Linnea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. A study
of translation edit rate with targeted human an-
notation. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference
of the Association for Machine Translation in
the Americas (AMTA-06), pages 223–231, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, August 2006.

Dekai Wu and Pascale Fung. Semantic Roles for
SMT: A Hybrid Two-Pass Model. In Proceed-
ings of the 2009 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics - Human Language Technolo-
gies (NAACL-HLT-09), pages 13–16, 2009.

Xianchao Wu, Katsuhito Sudoh, Kevin Duh, Ha-
jime Tsukada, and Masaaki Nagata. Extract-
ing preordering rules from predicate-argument
structures. In Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (IJCNLP-11), 2011.

Deyi Xiong, Min Zhang, and Haizhou Li. Mod-
eling the Translation of Predicate-Argument
Structure for SMT. In Proceedings of the Joint
conference of the 50th AnnualMeeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
12), 2012.

Omar F. Zaidan. Z-MERT: A Fully Config-
urable Open Source Tool for Minimum Error
Rate Training of Machine Translation Systems.
The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics, 91:79–88, 2009.

381


