



















































GuiTAR-based Pronominal Anaphora Resolution in Bengali


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 126–130,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 

GuiTAR-based Pronominal Anaphora Resolution in Bengali  

Apurbalal Senapati 
Indian Statistical Institute 

203, B.T.Road, Kolkata-700108, India 
apurbalal.senapati@gmail.com 

Utpal Garain 
Indian Statistical Institute 

203, B.T.Road, Kolkata-700108, India 
utpal.garain@gmail.com 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper attempts to use an off-the-shelf 
anaphora resolution (AR) system for Bengali. 
The language specific preprocessing modules 
of GuiTAR (v3.0.3) are identified and suitably 
designed for Bengali. Anaphora resolution 
module is also modified or replaced in order to 
realize different configurations of GuiTAR. 
Performance of each configuration is evaluat-
ed and experiment shows that the off-the-shelf 
AR system can be effectively used for Indic 
languages.  

1 Introduction 
Little computational linguistics research has been 
done for anaphora resolution (AR) in Indic lan-
guages. Notable research efforts in this area are 
conducted by Shobha et al. (2000), Prasad et al. 
(2000), Jain et al. (2004), Agrawal et al. (2007), 
Uppalapu et al. (2009). These works address AR 
problem in language like Hindi, some South In-
dian languages including Tamil. Dhar et al. 
(2008) reported a research on Bengali. Progress 
of the research through these works was difficult 
to quantify as most of the authors used their self-
generated datasets and in some cases algorithms 
lack in required details to make them reproduci-
ble.  

First rigorous effort was taken in ICON 2011 
(ICON 2011) where a shared task was conducted 
on AR in  three Indic languages (Hindi, Bengali, 
and Tamil). Training and test datasets were pro-
vided, both the machine learning (WEKA and 
SVM based classification) and rule-based ap-
proaches are used and the participating systems 
(4 teams for Bengali, and 2 teams each for Hindi 
and Tamil) were evaluated using five different 
metrics (MUC, B3, CEAFM, CEAFE, and 
BLANC). However, no team attempted to reuse 
any of the off-the-shelf AR systems. This paper 
aims to explore this issue to investigate how far 
useful such a system is for AR in Indic lan-
guages. Bengali has been taken as the reference 

language and GuiTAR (Poesio, 2004) has been 
considered as the reference off-the-shelf system.    

GuiTAR is primarily designed for English 
language and therefore, its direct application for 
Bengali is not possible for grammatical varia-
tions and resource limitations. Therefore, the 
central contribution of this paper is to develop 
required resources for Bengali and thereby 
providing them to GuiTAR for anaphora resolu-
tion. Our contribution also includes extension of 
the ICON2011 AR dataset for Bengali so that 
evaluation could be done on a bigger sized da-
taset. Finally, GuiTAR anaphora resolution 
module is replaced by a previously developed 
approach (which is primarily rule-based, 
Senapati, 2011; Senapati, 2012a) and perfor-
mances of different configurations are compared.     

2 Language specific issues in GuiTAR 
GuiTAR has two major modules namely, prepro-
cessing and anaphora resolution (Kabadjov, 
2007). In both of these modules modifications 
are required to fit it to Bengali. Let's first identify 
the components in both of these two modules 
where replacement/modifications are needed.  
Pre-processing:  The purpose of this module is 
to make GuiTAR independent from input format 
specifications and variations. It takes as input in 
XML or text format. In case of text input, XML 
file generated by the LT-XML tool. The XML 
file contains the information like word bounda-
ries (tokens), grammatical classes (part-of-
speech), and chunking information. From the 
XML format MAS-XML (Minimum Anaphoric 
Syntax - XML) is produced to include minimal 
information namely, noun phrase boundaries, 
utterance boundaries, categories of pronoun, 
number information, gender information, etc.  
All these aspects are to be addressed for Bengali 
so that for a given input discourse in Bengali, 
MAS-XML file can be generated correctly. Next 
section explains how this issue.     
Anaphora resolution: The GuiTAR system re-
solves four types of anaphoras. The pronouns 
(personal and possessive) are resolved by using 

126



 
 

an implementation of MARS (Mitkov, 2002), 
whereas different algorithms are used for resolv-
ing definite descriptions, and proper nouns. In 
Mitkov’s algorithm whenever a pronoun is to be 
resolved, it finds a list of potential antecedents 
within a given ‘window’ and checks three types 
of syntactic agreements (i.e., person, number and 
gender) between an antecedent and the pronoun. 
In case of more than one potential antecedent 
exists in the list it would be recursively filtered 
applying sequentially five different antecedent 
indicators (aggregate score, immediate reference, 
collocational pattern, indicating verbs and refer-
ential distance) until there is only one element in 
the list, i.e., the selected antecedent. We intro-
duce suitable modifications in this module so 
that the same implementation of MARS can 
work for Bengali. This is explained in Sec. 4.    

3 Bengali NLP Resources 
Pronouns in Bengali has been studied before 
(linguistically by Majumdar, 2000; Sengupta, 
2000 and for computational linguistics: Senapati, 
2012a). Table-1 categorizes all pronouns (522 in 
number) available in Bengali as observed in a 
corpus (Bengali corpus, undated) of 35 million 
words.  
          

Category Permissible Pronouns 
Honorific Singular 

তাঁর,তাঁেক, িতিন, তাঁরই, িতিনই,.. 
Honorific Plural    

তাঁরা, তাঁরাই, যাঁরা, উনারা,.. 
1st Person Singular    

আিম, আমােক, মার,.. 
1st Person Plural    

আমরা, আমােদরেক, মােদর,.. 
2nd Person Singular   

তার, তামার, আপনার,.. 
2nd Person Plural 

তারা, তামরা, আপনারা,.. 
3rd Person Singular    

এ, এর, ও, স, তারও, তার,..  
3rd Person Plural 

এরা, ওরা, তারা, তােদর,..  
Reflexive Pronoun 

িনেজ, িনেজই, িনেজেক, িনেজর,.. 
 

Table 1: Language resource 

3.1 Number Acquisition for Nouns  
In Bengali, a set of nominal suffixes 
(Bhattacharya, 1993) (inflections and classifier) 
are used to recognize the number (singu-
lar/plural) of noun. To identify the number of a 
noun, we check whether any of the nominal suf-
fixes (indicating plurality) are attached with the 
noun. If found, the number of the noun is tagged 

as plural. From the corpus, we identified 17 such 
suffixes (e.g. দর /der, রা /ra, িদেগর /diger, িদগেক 
/digke, গুিল /guli, etc.) which are used for number 
acquisition for nouns.   

3.2 Honorificity of Nouns 
The honorific agreement exists in Bengali. 
Honorificity of a noun is indicated by a word or 
expression with connotations conveying esteem 
or respect when used in addressing or referring to 
a person. In Bengali three degree of honorificity 
are observed for the second person and two for 
the third person (Majumdar, 2000; Sengupta, 
2000). The second and third person pronouns 
have distinct forms for different degrees of 
honorificity. Honorificity information is applica-
ble for proper nouns (person) and nouns indicat-
ing relations like father, mother, teacher, etc.  

The honorificity information is identified by 
maintaining a list of terms which can be consid-
ered as honorific addressing terms (e.g. 
ভ েলাক/bhadrolok, বাবু/babu, ডঃ/Dr., 
মহাশয়/mohashoy, ডা./Dr.,  etc.). About 20 such 
terms are there in the list and we get these terms 
from analysis of the Bengali corpus. When these 
terms are used to add honorificity of a noun they 
appear either before or after the noun. Another 
additional way for identifying the honorificity 
information is to look at the inflection of the 
main verb which is inflected with ন/n (i.e. 
বেলন/bolen, কেরন/koren etc.).  

Honorificity is extracted during the pre-
processing phase and added with the attribute 
hon = <value>. The value is set ‘sup’ (superior 
i.e. highest degree of honor), ‘neu’ (neutral i.e. 
medium degree of honor) or ‘inf’ (inferior i.e. 
lowest degree of honor) based on their degree of 
honorificity.  For pronouns, this information is 
available from the pronoun list (honorific singu-
lar and honorific plural) as shown in Table-1.   

4 GuiTAR for Bengali 
The following sections explain the modifications 
needed to configure GuiTAR for Bengali. 

4.1 GuiTAR Preprocessing for Bengali 
For getting part-of-speech information, the Stan-
ford POS tagger has been retrained for Bengali 
language. The tagger is trained with about tagged 
10,000 sentences and is found to produce about 
92% accuracy while tested on 2,000 sentences. A 
rule based Bengali chunker (De, 2011) is used to 
get chunking information. NEIs and their classes 
(person, location, and organization) are tagged 

127



 
 

manually (we did not get any Bengali NEI tool). 
After adding all these information, the input text 
is formatted into GuiTAR specified input XML 
file and is converted into MAS-XML. This file 
contains other syntactic information: person, 
types of pronouns, number and honorificity. In-
formation on person and types of pronouns 
comes from Table-1. Number and honorificity 
are identified as explained before. Gender infor-
mation has little role in Bengali anaphora resolu-
tion and hence is not considered. Types of pro-
nouns are taken from Table-1.   

4.2 GuiTAR-based Pronoun Resolution for 
Bengali 

GuiTAR resolves pronouns using MARS ap-
proach (Mitkov, 2002) that makes use of several 
agreements (based on person, number and gen-
der). Certain changes are required here as gender 
agreement has no role. This agreement has been 
replaced by the honorific agreement. Moreover, 
the way pronouns are divided in MARS imple-
mentation is not always relevant for Bengali pro-
nouns. For example, we do not differentiate be-
tween personal and possessive pronouns but they 
are separately treated in MARS. In our case, we 
have only considered the personal and reflexive 
pronouns while applying MARS based imple-
mentation for anaphora resolution. 

In case of more than one antecedent found, 
GuiTAR resolves it by using five antecedent in-
dicators namely, aggregate score, immediate ref-
erence, collocational pattern, indicating verbs 
and referential distance. For Bengali, the indicat-
ing verb indicator has no role in filtering the an-
tecedents and hence removed.  

5 Data and data format 
To evaluate the configured GuiTAR system the 
dataset provided by ICON 2011(ICON 2011) has 
been used. They provided annotated data (POS 
tagged, chunked and name entity tagged) for 
three Indian languages including Bengali. The 
annotated data is represented by a column format. 
Figure 1 shows a sample of the annotated data 
and the details description of the data is given in 
Table - 2.  
 

 
Figure 2. ICON 2011 data format.  

We have changed this format into GuiTAR spec-
ified XML format and finally checked/corrected 
manually. GuiTAR Preprocessor converts this 
XML into MAS-XML which looks like some-
thing as shown in Figure 3.   
 

 
Figure 3. Sample GuiTAR MAS-XML file for 

Bengali text.  
 

Column  Type  Description 
1 Document Id Contains the file-

name  
2 Part number File are divided 

into part numbered  
3 Word num-

ber 
Word index in the 
sentence 

4 Word  Word itself 
4 POS POS of the word 
5 Chunking Chunking infor-

mation using IOB 
format 

6 NE tags Name Entity In-
formation is given 

7 Description Description 
8 Co-reference Co-reference  

information 

Table 2: Description of ICON 2011 data format 
 

The ICON 2011 data contains nine texts from 
different domains (Tourism, Story, News article, 
Sports). We have extended this dataset by adding 
four more texts in the same format. Among these 
four pieces, three are short stories and one is tak-
en from newspaper articles. Table 3 shows the 
distribution of pronouns in the whole test data set 
for Bengali. 

 
Data ICON2011 Extended  
#text 9 4 
#words 22,531 4,923 
#pronouns 1,325 322 
#anaphoric 1,019 253 

Table 3: Coverage of ICON 2011 dataset 

128



 
 

6 Evaluation  
The modified GuiTAR system has been evaluat-
ed by the dataset as described above. The dataset 
contains 1647 pronouns out of them 706 are per-
sonal pronouns (including reflexive pronouns). 
As the MARS in GuiTAR resolves only personal 
pronouns, we have used only these personal pro-
nouns for evaluation. Three different systems are 
configured as described below:  
System-1 (Baseline): A baseline system is con-
figured by considering the most recent noun 
phrase as the referent of a pronoun (the first noun 
phrase in the backward direction is the anteced-
ent of a pronoun).  
System-2 (GuiTAR with MARS): In this config-
uration, GuiTAR is used with the modifications 
(as described in Sec. 4.1) in its preprocessing 
module and the modified MARS (as described in 
Sec. 4.2) is used for pronominal anaphora resolu-
tion (PAR). 
System-3 (GuiTAR with new a PAR module): 
Under this configuration, GuiTAR is used with 
the modifications (as described in Sec. 4.1) in its 
pre-processing module but MARS is replaced by 
a previously developed system (Senapati, 2011; 
Senapati, 2012a) for pronominal anaphora reso-
lution in Bengali. This is basically a rule-based 
system. For every noun phrase (i.e. a possible 
antecedent) the method first maintains a list of 
possible pronouns which the antecedent could 
attach with (note that any noun phrase cannot be 
referred by any pronoun). On encountering a 
pronoun, the method searches for the antecedents 
for which the pronoun is in the respective pro-
noun-lists. If there is more than one such ante-
cedent, a set of rules is applied to resolve. The 
approach for applying the rules is similar to the 
one proposed by Baldwin (1997).    

The evaluation has used five metrics namely, 
MUC, B3, CEAFM, CEAFE and BLANC.  The 
experimental results are reported in Table 4. Re-
sults show that GuiTAR with MARS gives better 
result than the situation where the most recent 
antecedent is picked (i.e. the baseline system). 
This improvement is statistically significant 
(p<0.03 in a two-sided t-test). When MARS is 
replaced by system-3, further improvement is 
achieved which is also statistically significant 
(p<0.01). 

6.1 Error analysis 
Analysis of errors shows that errors in number 
acquisition and identification of the honorificity 
are two major errors during preprocessing phase. 

These errors propagate and result in further er-
rors during resolution. Resolution process itself 
introduces some new errors. For example, some 
Bengali personal pronouns are ambiguous 
(sometimes they are anaphoric whereas in other 
cases they may appear as non-anaphoric too). 
তার/tar, স/se are two examples of such pronouns 
in Bengali (Senapati, 2012b) and the present res-
olution system is not able to resolve such cases.       

 System System-1 
(Baseline)  

GuiTAR 
Metric System-2 

(MARS) 
Sys-
tem-3 

 
MUC 

P 0.453 0.516 0.538 
R 0.550 0.536 0.579 
F1 0.497 0.526 0.558 

 
B3 

P 0.766 0.828 0.921 
R 0.771 0.824 0.911 
F1 0.769 0.826 0.916 

 
CEAFM 

P 0.785 0.800 0.885 
R 0.632 0.622 0.784 
F1 0.700 0.700 0.832 

 
CEAFE 

P 0.797 0.825 0.921 
R 0.552 0.571 0.731 
F1 0.652 0.675 0.815 

 
BLANC 

P 0.688 0.700 0.732 
R 0.735 0.736 0.741 
F1 0.711 0.718 0.736 

Avg. F1 0.666 0.689 0.771 

Table 4: Experimental results 

7 Conclusion 
The present experiment shows that GuiTAR 
which is one of the off-the-shelf anaphora resolu-
tion systems can be effectively configured for 
Bengali. Basic NLP information required by 
GuiTAR pre-processing module has been sup-
plied mostly through automatic tools. A suitable 
tool is needed for NEI in Bengali. This can be 
explored in future. It is also revealed that MARS 
based implementation in GuiTAR is not very 
suitable for Bengali because the antecedent indi-
cators used by MARS are probably not very ef-
fective for Bengali. Suitably designed rule based 
system could produce better result as shown in 
the experiment. Addition of other resolution al-
gorithms is definitely a future extension of this 
study. Resolution of non-personal pronouns 
(which were not considered here) would be ad-
dressed next. In future, the similar experiment 
can be easily extended to other Indic languages 
(especially for Hindi and Tamil for which anno-
tated data is available).  

129



 
 

References  
Agarwal, S., Srivastava, M., Agarwal, P., Sanyal, R. 

2007. Anaphora Resolution in Hindi Documents, in 
Proc. Natural Language Processing and Knowledge 
Engineering (IEEE NLP-KE), Beijing, China. 

Baldwin, B. 1997. CogNIAC: high precision corefer-
ence with limited knowledge and linguistic re-
sources, In ACL/EACL workshop on Operational 
factors in practical, robust anaphora resolution, 
pages 38- 45, Madrid, Spain. 

Bengali Corpus. TDIL Corpus in Unicode, 
http://www.isical.ac.in/~lru/downloadCorpus.html. 

Bhattacharya, T. and Dasgupta, P. 1993. Classifiers, 
word order and definiteness in Bengali, In Pro-
ceedings of the Seminar on Word Order. Osmania 
University, Hyderabad, India. 

Dhar, A. and Garain, U. 2008. A method for pronomi-
nal anaphora resolution in Bengali, In Proc. of 6th 
Int. Conf. on Natural Language Processing 
(ICON), Student paper competition section, Pune, 
India. 

De, S., Dhar, A., Biswas, S. and Garain, U. 2011. On 
Development and Evaluation of a Chunker for 
Bangla, In Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. on Emerging Ap-
plications of Information Technology (EAIT), pp. 
321-324, Kolkata, India.  

ICON. 2011. NLP Tools Contest: Anaphora Resolu-
tion in Indian Languages, In 9th Int. Conf. on 
Natural Language Processing (ICON), Chennai, 
India. 

Jain, P., M R. Mital, S. Kumar, A. Mukerjee, and A. 
M. Raina. 2004. Anaphora Resolution in Multi-
Person Dialogues, in Proc. 5th SIGdial Workshop 
on Discourse and Dialogue, Cambridge, Massachu-
setts, USA. 

Kabadjov, M.A. 2007. A Comprehensive Evaluation 
of Anaphora Resolution and Discourse-new Classi-
fication, PhD thesis, Department of Computer Sci-
ence, University of Essex.  

Majumdar, A. 2000. Studies in the Anaphoric Rela-
tions in Bengali, Publisher: Subarnarekha, India. 

Mitkov, R. 2002. Anaphora Resolution. Longman. 

Poesio, M. and Kabadjov, M.A. 2004. A General-
Purpose, off-the-shelf Anaphora Resolution Mod-
ule: Implementation and Preliminary Evaluation, 
in LREC 2004. 

Prasad, R. and Strube, M. 2000. Discourse salience 
and pronoun resolution in Hindi, in Penn Working 
Papers in Linguistics, pp. 189-208. 

Sengupta, G. 2000. Lexical anaphors and pronouns in 
Bnagla, Lexical Anaphors and Pronouns in Se-
lected South Asian Langauges: A Principled Ty-
pology (Eds. B.C. Lust, K. Wali, J.W. Gair, and 

K.V. Subbarao), pp. 277-280, Publisher: Mouton 
de Gruyter, Berlin, New York. 

Senapati, A. and Garain, U. 2011. Anaphora Resolu-
tion System for Bengali by Pronoun Emitting Ap-
proach, in Proc. NLP Tool Contest, 9th Int. Conf. 
on Natural Language Processing (ICON), Chennai, 
India. 

Senapati, A. and Garain, U. 2012a. Anaphora Resolu-
tion in Bengali using global discourse knowledge, 
In Int. Conf. of Asian Language Processing 
(IALP), Hanoi, Vietnam. 

Senapati, A. and Garain, U. 2012b. Identification of 
Anaphoric tAr (তার) and se (স) in Bengali, In Proc. 
34th All India Conference of Linguists (AICL), 
Shillong, India. 

Sobha, L. and Patnaik, B.N.Patnaik. 2000. Vasisth: 
An Anaphora Resolution System For Indian Lan-
guages, In Proc. Artificial and Computational In-
telligence for Decision, Control and Automation in 
Engineering and Industrial Applications 
(ACIDCA), Monastir, Tunisia. 

Uppalapu, B. and Sharma, D.M. (2009). Pronoun 
Resolution For Hindi, in DAARC 2009. 

130


