



















































Measuring semantic content in distributional vectors


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 440–445,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Measuring semantic content in distributional vectors

Aurélie Herbelot
EB Kognitionswissenschaft

Universität Potsdam
Golm, Germany

aurelie.herbelot@cantab.net

Mohan Ganesalingam
Trinity College

University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

mohan0@gmail.com

Abstract
Some words are more contentful than oth-
ers: for instance, make is intuitively more
general than produce and fifteen is more
‘precise’ than a group. In this paper,
we propose to measure the ‘semantic con-
tent’ of lexical items, as modelled by
distributional representations. We inves-
tigate the hypothesis that semantic con-
tent can be computed using the Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence, an information-
theoretic measure of the relative entropy
of two distributions. In a task focus-
ing on retrieving the correct ordering of
hyponym-hypernym pairs, the KL diver-
gence achieves close to 80% precision but
does not outperform a simpler (linguis-
tically unmotivated) frequency measure.
We suggest that this result illustrates the
rather ‘intensional’ aspect of distributions.

1 Introduction

Distributional semantics is a representation of lex-
ical meaning that relies on a statistical analysis
of the way words are used in corpora (Curran,
2003; Turney and Pantel, 2010; Erk, 2012). In
this framework, the semantics of a lexical item is
accounted for by modelling its co-occurrence with
other words (or any larger lexical context). The
representation of a target word is thus a vector in a
space where each dimension corresponds to a pos-
sible context. The weights of the vector compo-
nents can take various forms, ranging from sim-
ple co-occurrence frequencies to functions such as
Pointwise Mutual Information (for an overview,
see (Evert, 2004)).

This paper investigates the issue of comput-
ing the semantic content of distributional vectors.

That is, we look at the ways we can distribution-
ally express that make is a more general verb than
produce, which is itself more general than, for
instance, weave. Although the task is related to
the identification of hyponymy relations, it aims
to reflect a more encompassing phenomenon: we
wish to be able to compare the semantic content of
words within parts-of-speech where the standard
notion of hyponymy does not apply (e.g. preposi-
tions: see with vs. next to or of vs. concerning)
and across parts-of-speech (e.g. fifteen vs. group).

The hypothesis we will put forward is that se-
mantic content is related to notions of relative en-
tropy found in information theory. More specif-
ically, we hypothesise that the more specific a
word is, the more the distribution of the words
co-occurring with it will differ from the baseline
distribution of those words in the language as a
whole. (A more intuitive way to phrase this is that
the more specific a word is, the more information
it gives us about which other words are likely to
occur near it.) The specific measure of difference
that we will use is the Kullback-Leibler divergence
of the distribution of words co-ocurring with the
target word against the distribution of those words
in the language as a whole. We evaluate our hy-
pothesis against a subset of the WordNet hierar-
chy (given by (Baroni et al, 2012)), relying on the
intuition that in a hyponym-hypernym pair, the hy-
ponym should have higher semantic content than
its hypernym.

The paper is structured as follows. We first
define our notion of semantic content and moti-
vate the need for measuring semantic content in
distributional setups. We then describe the im-
plementation of the distributional system we use
in this paper, emphasising our choice of weight-
ing measure. We show that, using the compo-

440



nents of the described weighting measure, which
are both probability distributions, we can calculate
the relative entropy of a distribution by inserting
those probability distributions in the equation for
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. We finally
evaluate the KL measure against a basic notion of
frequency and conclude with some error analysis.

2 Semantic content

As a first approximation, we will define seman-
tic content as informativeness with respect to de-
notation. Following Searle (1969), we will take
a ‘successful reference’ to be a speech act where
the choice of words used by the speaker appropri-
ately identifies a referent for the hearer. Glossing
over questions of pragmatics, we will assume that
a more informative word is more likely to lead to
a successful reference than a less informative one.
That is, if Kim owns a cat and a dog, the identify-
ing expression my cat is a better referent than my
pet and so cat can be said to have more semantic
content than pet.

While our definition relies on reference, it also
posits a correspondence between actual utterances
and denotation. Given two possible identifying ex-
pressions e1 and e2, e1 may be preferred in a par-
ticular context, and so, context will be an indicator
of the amount of semantic content in an expres-
sion. In Section 5, we will produce an explicit
hypothesis for how the amount of semantic con-
tent in a lexical item affects the contexts in which
it appears.

A case where semantic content has a direct cor-
respondence with a lexical relation is hyponymy.
Here, the correspondence relies entirely on a basic
notion of extension. For instance, it is clear that
hammer is more contentful than tool because the
extension of hammer is smaller than that of tool,
and therefore more discriminating in a given iden-
tifying expression (See Give me the hammer ver-
sus Give me the tool). But we can also talk about
semantic content in cases where the notion of ex-
tension does not necessarily apply. For example,
it is not usual to talk of the extension of a prepo-
sition. However, in context, the use of a preposi-
tion against another one might be more discrim-
inating in terms of reference. Compare a) Sandy
is with Kim and b) Sandy is next to Kim. Given a
set of possible situations involving, say, Kim and
Sandy at a party, we could show that b) is more
discriminating than a), because it excludes the sit-

uations where Sandy came to the party with Kim
but is currently talking to Kay at the other end of
the room. The fact that next to expresses physi-
cal proximity, as opposed to just being in the same
situation, confers it more semantic content accord-
ing to our definition. Further still, there may be a
need for comparing the informativeness of words
across parts of speech (compare A group of/Fifteen
people was/were waiting in front of the town hall).

Although we will not discuss this in detail, there
is a notion of semantic content above the word
level which should naturally derive from compo-
sition rules. For instance, we would expect the
composition of a given intersective adjective and
a given noun to result into a phrase with a seman-
tic content greater than that of its components (or
at least equal to it).

3 Motivation

The last few years have seen a growing interest in
distributional semantics as a representation of lex-
ical meaning. Owing to their mathematical inter-
pretation, distributions allow linguists to simulate
human similarity judgements (Lund, Burgess and
Atchley, 1995), and also reproduce some of the
features given by test subjects when asked to write
down the characteristics of a given concept (Ba-
roni and Lenci, 2008). In a distributional semantic
space, for instance, the word ‘cat’ may be close to
‘dog’ or to ‘tiger’, and its vector might have high
values along the dimensions ‘meow’, ‘mouse’ and
‘pet’. Distributional semantics has had great suc-
cesses in recent years, and for many computational
linguists, it is an essential tool for modelling phe-
nomena affected by lexical meaning.

If distributional semantics is to be seen as
a general-purpose representation, however, we
should evaluate it across all properties which we
deem relevant to a model of the lexicon. We con-
sider semantic content to be one such property. It
underlies the notion of hyponymy and naturally
models our intuitions about the ‘precision’ (as op-
posed to ‘vagueness’) of words.

Further, semantic content may be crucial in
solving some fundamental problems of distribu-
tional semantics. As pointed out by McNally
(2013), there is no easy way to define the notion
of a function word and this has consequences for
theories where function words are not assigned
a distributional representation. McNally suggests
that the most appropriate way to separate function

441



from content words might, in the end, involve tak-
ing into account how much ‘descriptive’ content
they have.

4 An implementation of a distributional
system

The distributional system we implemented for this
paper is close to the system of Mitchell and La-
pata (2010) (subsequently M&L). As background
data, we use the British National Corpus (BNC) in
lemmatised format. Each lemma is followed by a
part of speech according to the CLAWS tagset for-
mat (Leech, Garside, and Bryant, 1994). For our
experiments, we only keep the first letter of each
part-of-speech tag, thus obtaining broad categories
such as N or V. Furthermore, we only retain words
in the following categories: nouns, verbs, adjec-
tives and adverbs (punctuation is ignored). Each
article in the corpus is converted into a 11-word
window format, that is, we are assuming that con-
text in our system is defined by the five words pre-
ceding and the five words following the target.

To calculate co-occurrences, we use the follow-
ing equations:

freqci =
∑

t

freqci,t (1)

freqt =
∑

ci

freqci,t (2)

freqtotal =
∑

ci,t

freqci,t (3)

The quantities in these equations represent the
following:

freqci,t frequency of the context word ci
with the target word t

freqtotal total count of word tokens
freqt frequency of the target word t
freqci frequency of the context word ci

As in M&L, we use the 2000 most frequent
words in our corpus as the semantic space dimen-
sions. M&L calculate the weight of each context
term in the distribution as follows:

vi(t) =
p(ci|t)
p(ci)

=
freqci,t × freqtotal
freqt × freqci

(4)

We will not directly use the measure vi(t) as it
is not a probability distribution and so is not suit-
able for entropic analysis; instead our analysis will

be phrased in terms of the probability distributions
p(ci|t) and p(ci) (the numerator and denominator
in vi(t)).

5 Semantic content as entropy: two
measures

Resnik (1995) uses the notion of information con-
tent to improve on the standard edge counting
methods proposed to measure similarity in tax-
onomies such as WordNet. He proposes that the
information content of a term t is given by the self-
information measure − log p(t). The idea behind
this measure is that, as the frequency of the term
increases, its informativeness decreases. Although
a good first approximation, the measure cannot be
said to truly reflect our concept of semantic con-
tent. For instance, in the British National Corpus,
time and see are more frequent than thing or may
and man is more frequent than part. However, it
seems intuitively right to say that time, see and
man are more ‘precise’ concepts than thing, may
and part respectively. Or said otherwise, there is
no indication that more general concepts occur in
speech more than less general ones. We will there-
fore consider self-information as a baseline.

As we expect more specific words to be more
informative about which words co-occur with
them, it is natural to try to measure the specificity
of a word by using notions from information the-
ory to analyse the probability distribution p(ci|t)
associated with the word. The standard notion
of entropy is not appropriate for this purpose, be-
cause it does not take account of the fact that the
words serving as semantic space dimensions may
have different frequencies in language as a whole,
i.e. of the fact that p(ci) does not have a uniform
distribution. Instead we need to measure the de-
gree to which p(ci|t) differs from the context word
distribution p(ci). An appropriate measure for this
is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence or rela-
tive entropy:

DKL(P‖Q) =
∑

i

ln(
P (i)

Q(i)
)P (i) (5)

By taking P (i) to be p(ci|t) and Q(i) to be p(ci)
(as given by Equation 4), we calculate the rela-
tive entropy of p(ci|t) and p(ci). The measure is
clearly informative: it reflects the way that t mod-
ifies the expectation of seeing ci in the corpus.
We hypothesise that when compared to the distri-
bution p(ci), more informative words will have a

442



more ‘distorted’ distribution p(ci|t) and that the
KL divergence will reflect this.1

6 Evaluation

In Section 2, we defined semantic content as a no-
tion encompassing various referential properties,
including a basic concept of extension in cases
where it is applicable. However, we do not know
of a dataset providing human judgements over the
general informativeness of lexical items. So in or-
der to evaluate our proposed measure, we inves-
tigate its ability to retrieve the right ordering of
hyponym pairs, which can be considered a subset
of the issue at hand.

Our assumption is that if X is a hypernym of
Y , then the information content in X will be lower
than in Y (because it has a more ‘general’ mean-
ing). So, given a pair of words {w1, w2} in a
known hyponymy relation, we should be able to
tell which of w1 or w2 is the hypernym by com-
puting the respective KL divergences.

We use the hypernym data provided by (Baroni
et al, 2012) as testbed for our experiment.2 This
set of hyponym-hypernym pairs contains 1385 in-
stances retrieved from the WordNet hierarchy. Be-
fore running our system on the data, we make
slight modifications to it. First, as our distributions
are created over the British National Corpus, some
spellings must be converted to British English: for
instance, color is replaced by colour. Second, five
of the nouns included in the test set are not in the
BNC. Those nouns are brethren, intranet, iPod,
webcam and IX. We remove the pairs containing
those words from the data. Third, numbers such as
eleven or sixty are present in the Baroni et al set as
nouns, but not in the BNC. Pairs containing seven
such numbers are therefore also removed from the
data. Finally, we encounter tagging issues with
three words, which we match to their BNC equiv-
alents: acoustics and annals are matched to acous-
tic and annal, and trouser to trousers. These mod-
ifications result in a test set of 1279 remaining
pairs.

We then calculate both the self-information
measure and the KL divergence of all terms in-

1Note that KL divergence is not symmetric:
DKL(p(ci|t)‖p(ci))) is not necessarily equal to
DKL(p(ci)‖p(ci|t)). The latter is inferior as a few
very small values of p(ci|t) can have an inappropriately large
effect on it.

2The data is available at http://clic.cimec.
unitn.it/Files/PublicData/eacl2012-data.
zip.

cluded in our test set. In order to evaluate the sys-
tem, we record whether the calculated entropies
match the order of each hypernym-hyponym pair.
That is, we count a pair as correctly represented
by our system if w1 is a hypernym of w2 and
KL(w1) < KL(w2) (or, in the case of the
baseline, SI(w1) < SI(w2) where SI is self-
information).

Self-information obtains 80.8% precision on the
task, with the KL divergence lagging a little be-
hind with 79.4% precision (the difference is not
significant). In other terms, both measures per-
form comparably. We analyse potential reasons
for this disappointing result in the next section.

7 Error analysis

It is worth reminding ourselves of the assumption
we made with regard to semantic content. Our
hypothesis was that with a ‘more general’ target
word t, the p(ci|t) distribution would be fairly
similar to p(ci).

Manually checking some of the pairs which
were wrongly classified by the KL divergence re-
veals that our hypothesis might not hold. For ex-
ample, the pair beer – beverage is classified in-
correctly. When looking at the beverage distri-
bution, it is clear that it does not conform to our
expectations: it shows high vi(t) weights along
the food, wine, coffee and tea dimensions, for in-
stance, i.e. there is a large difference between
p(cfood) and p(cfood|t), etc. Although beverage
is an umbrella word for many various types of
drinks, speakers of English use it in very partic-
ular contexts. So, distributionally, it is not a ‘gen-
eral word’. Similar observations can be made for,
e.g. liquid (strongly associated with gas, presum-
ably via coordination), anniversary (linked to the
verb mark or the noun silver), or again projectile
(co-occurring with weapon, motion and speed).

The general point is that, as pointed out else-
where in the literature (Erk, 2013), distributions
are a good representation of (some aspects of) in-
tension, but they are less apt to model extension.3

So a term with a large extension like beverage
may have a more restricted (distributional) inten-
sion than a word with a smaller extension, such as

3We qualify ‘intension’ here, because in the sense of a
mapping from possible worlds to extensions, intension can-
not be said to be provided by distributions: the distribution of
beverage, it seems, does not allow us to successfully pick out
all beverages in the real world.

443



beer.4

Contributing to this issue, fixed phrases, named
entities and generally strong collocations skew our
distributions. So for instance, in the jewelry distri-
bution, the most highly weighted context is mental
(with vi(t) = 395.3) because of the music album
Mental Jewelry. While named entities could eas-
ily be eliminated from the system’s results by pre-
processing the corpus with a named entity recog-
niser, the issue is not so simple when it comes to
fixed phrases of a more compositional nature (e.g.
army ant): excluding them might be detrimental
for the representation (it is, after all, part of the
meaning of ant that it can be used metaphorically
to refer to people) and identifying such phrases is
a non-trivial problem in itself.

Some of the errors we observe may also be
related to word senses. For instance, the word
medium, to be found in the pair magazine –
medium, can be synonymous with middle, clair-
voyant or again mode of communication. In the
sense of clairvoyant, it is clearly more specific
than in the sense intended in the test pair. As dis-
tributions do not distinguish between senses, this
will have an effect on our results.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we attempted to define a mea-
sure of distributional semantic content in or-
der to model the fact that some words have a
more general meaning than others. We com-
pared the Kullback-Leibler divergence to a sim-
ple self-information measure. Our experiments,
which involved retrieving the correct ordering of
hyponym-hypernym pairs, had disappointing re-
sults: the KL divergence was unable to outperform
self-information, and both measures misclassified
around 20% of our testset.

Our error analysis showed that several factors
contributed to the misclassifications. First, distri-
butions are unable to model extensional properties
which, in many cases, account for the feeling that a
word is more general than another. Second, strong
collocation effects can influence the measurement
of information negatively: it is an open question
which phrases should be considered ‘words-with-
spaces’ when building distributions. Finally, dis-

4Although it is more difficult to talk of the extension of
e.g. adverbials (very) or some adjectives (skillful), the general
point is that text is biased towards a certain usage of words,
while the general meaning a competent speaker ascribes to
lexical items does not necessarily follow this bias.

tributional representations do not distinguish be-
tween word senses, which in many cases is a de-
sirable feature, but interferes with the task we sug-
gested in this work.

To conclude, we would like to stress that we do
not think another information-theoretic measure
would perform hugely better than the KL diver-
gence. The point is that the nature of distributional
vectors makes them sensitive to word usage and
that, despite the general assumption behind dis-
tributional semantics, word usage might not suf-
fice to model all aspects of lexical semantics. We
leave as an open problem the issue of whether a
modified form of our ‘basic’ distributional vectors
would encode the right information.

Acknowledgements

This work was funded by a postdoctoral fellow-
ship from the Alexander von Humboldt Founda-
tion to the first author, and a Title A Fellowship
from Trinity College, Cambridge, to the second
author.

References
Baroni, Marco, and Lenci, Alessandro. 2008. Con-

cepts and properties in word spaces. In Alessan-
dro Lenci (ed.), From context to meaning: Distribu-
tional models of the lexicon in linguistics and cog-
nitive science (Special issue of the Italian Journal of
Linguistics 20(1)), pages 55–88.

Baroni, Marco, Raffaella Bernardi, Ngoc-Quynh Do
and Chung-chieh Shan. 2012. Entailment above the
word level in distributional semantics. In Proceed-
ings of the 13th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL2012), pages 23–32.

Baroni, Marco, Raffaella Bernardi, and Roberto Zam-
parelli. 2012. Frege in Space: a Program for Com-
positional Distributional Semantics. Under review.

Curran, James. 2003. From Distributional to Semantic
Similarity. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh,
Scotland, UK.

Erk, Katrin. 2012. Vector space models of word mean-
ing and phrase meaning: a survey. Language and
Linguistics Compass, 6:10:635–653.

Erk, Katrin. 2013. Towards a semantics for distribu-
tional representations. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Computational Seman-
tics (IWCS2013).

Evert, Stefan. 2004. The statistics of word cooccur-
rences: word pairs and collocations. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Stuttgart.

444



Leech, Geoffrey, Roger Garside, and Michael Bryant.
1994. Claws4: The tagging of the british national
corpus. In Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
94), pages 622–628, Kyoto, Japan.

Lund, Kevin, Curt Burgess, and Ruth Ann Atchley.
1995. Semantic and associative priming in high-
dimensional semantic space. In Proceedings of the
17th annual conference of the Cognitive Science So-
ciety, Vol. 17, pages 660–665.

McNally, Louise. 2013. Formal and distributional se-
mantics: From romance to relationship. In Proceed-
ings of the ‘Towards a Formal Distributional Seman-
tics’ workshop, 10th International Conference on
Computational Semantics (IWCS2013), Potsdam,
Germany. Invited talk.

Mitchell, Jeff and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Composition
in Distributional Models of Semantics. Cognitive
Science, 34(8):1388–1429, November.

Resnik, Philipp. 1995. Using information content
to evaluate semantic similarity in a taxonomy. In
Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-95), pages
448–453.

Searle, John R. 1969. Speech acts: An essay in the phi-
losophy of language. Cambridge University Press.

Turney, Peter D. and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From
frequency to meaning: Vector space models of se-
mantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
37:141–188.

445


