



















































FrameNet on the Way to Babel: Creating a Bilingual FrameNet Using Wiktionary as Interlingual Connection


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1363–1373,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

FrameNet on the Way to Babel: Creating a Bilingual FrameNet Using
Wiktionary as Interlingual Connection

Silvana Hartmann† and Iryna Gurevych†‡
† Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lap (UKP-TUDA)

Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt
‡ Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lap (UKP-DIPF)

German Institute for Educational Research and Educational Information
www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
We present a new bilingual FrameNet lex-
icon for English and German. It is cre-
ated through a simple, but powerful ap-
proach to construct a FrameNet in any
language using Wiktionary as an inter-
lingual representation. Our approach is
based on a sense alignment of FrameNet
and Wiktionary, and subsequent transla-
tion disambiguation into the target lan-
guage. We perform a detailed evaluation
of the created resource and a discussion of
Wiktionary as an interlingual connection
for the cross-language transfer of lexical-
semantic resources. The created resource
is publicly available at http://www.
ukp.tu-darmstadt.de/fnwkde/.

1 Introduction

FrameNet is a valuable resource for natural lan-
guage processing (NLP): semantic role labeling
(SRL) systems based on FrameNet provide se-
mantic analysis for NLP applications, such as
question answering (Narayanan and Harabagiu,
2004; Shi and Mihalcea, 2005) and information
extraction (Mohit and Narayanan, 2003). How-
ever, their wide deployment has been prohibited
by the poor coverage and limited availability of a
similar resource in many languages.

Expert-built lexical-semantic resources are ex-
pensive to create. Previous cross-lingual trans-
fer of FrameNet used corpus-based approaches, or
resource alignment with multilingual expert-built
resources, such as EuroWordNet. The latter in-
directly also suffers from the high cost and con-
strained coverage of expert-built resources.

Recently, collaboratively created resources have
been investigated for the multilingual extension of
resources in NLP, beginning with Wikipedia (Nav-
igli and Ponzetto, 2010). They rely on the so-
called “Wisdom of the Crowds”, contributions by

a large number of volunteers, which results in a
continuously updated high-quality resource avail-
able in hundreds of languages. Due to the ency-
clopedic nature of Wikipedia, previous work fo-
cused on encyclopedic information for Wikipedia
entries, i.e., almost exclusively on nouns.

This is not enough for resources like FrameNet.
Such resources need lexical-semantic information
on various POS. For FrameNet, information on
the predicates associated with a semantic frame –
mostly verbs, nouns, and adjectives – is crucial,
for instance gloss or syntactic subcategorization.

A solution for the problem of multilingual ex-
tension of lexical semantic resources is to use
Wiktionary, a collaboratively created dictionary,
as connection between languages. It provides
high-quality lexical information on all POS, for in-
stance glosses, sense relations, syntactic subcate-
gorization, etc. Like Wikipedia, it is continuously
extended and contains translations to hundreds of
languages, including low-resource ones. To our
knowledge, Wiktionary has not been evaluated as
an interlingual index for the cross-lingual exten-
sion of lexical-semantic resources.

In this paper, we present a novel method for
the creation of bilingual FrameNet lexicons based
on an alignment to Wiktionary. We demonstrate
our method on the language pair English-German
and present the resulting resources, a lemma-based
multilingual and a sense-disambiguated German-
English FrameNet lexicon.

The understanding of lexical-semantic re-
sources and their combinations, e.g., how align-
ment algorithms can be adapted to individual re-
source pairs and different POS, is essential for
their effective use in NLP and a prerequisite for
later in-task evaluation and application. To en-
hance this understanding for the presented re-
source pair, we perform a detailed analysis of
the created resource and compare it to existing
FrameNet resources for German.

1363



The contributions of our work are the following:
(1) We create a novel sense alignment between
FrameNet and the English Wiktionary. It results
in a multilingual FrameNet FNWKxx, which links
FrameNet senses to lemmas in 280 languages. (2)
We create a sense-disambiguated English-German
FrameNet lexicon FNWKde based on FNWKxx
and translation disambiguation on the German
Wiktionary.1 (3) We analyze the two resources
and outline further steps for creating a multilin-
gual FrameNet.

This is a major step towards the vision of this
paper: a simple, but powerful approach to partially
construct a FrameNet in any language using Wik-
tionary as an interlingual representation.

2 Resource Overview

FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) is an expert-built
lexical-semantic resource incorporating the theory
of frame-semantics (Fillmore, 1976). It groups
word senses in frames that represent particular sit-
uations. Thus, the verb complete and the noun
completion belong to the Activity finish frame. The
participants of these situations, typically realized
as syntactic arguments, are the semantic roles of
the frame, for instance the Agent performing an ac-
tivity, or the Activity itself. FrameNet release 1.5
contains 1,015 frames, and 11,942 word senses.
Corpus texts annotated with frames and their roles
have been used to train automatic SRL systems.

Wiktionary is a collaboratively created dictio-
nary available in over 500 language editions. It is
continuously extended and revised by a commu-
nity of volunteer editors. The English language
edition contains over 500,000 word senses.2

Wiktionary is organized like a traditional dic-
tionary in lexical entries and word senses. For the
word senses, definitions and example sentences, as
well as other lexical information, such as register
(e.g., colloquial), phonetic transcription, inflec-
tion may be available, including language-specific
types of information. Senses also provide trans-
lations to other languages. These are connected
to lexical entries in the respective language edi-
tions via hyperlinks. This allows us to use Wik-
tionary as an interlingual connection between mul-
tiple languages.

1The xx in FNWKxx stands for all the languages in the
resource. After translation disambiguation in a specific lan-
guage, xx is replaced by the corresponding language code.

2as of May 2013, see http://en.wiktionary.
org/wiki/Wiktionary:Statistics.

Figure 1: Method overview.

The quality of Wiktionary has been confirmed
by Meyer and Gurevych (2012b) who also give an
overview on the usage of Wiktionary in NLP ap-
plications such as speech synthesis.

3 Method Overview

Our method consists of two steps visualized in
Fig. 1. In the first step, we create a novel sense
alignment between FrameNet and the English
Wiktionary following Niemann and Gurevych
(2011). Thus, the FrameNet sense of to complete
with frame Activity finish is assigned to the sense
of to complete in Wiktionary meaning to finish.

This step establishes Wiktionary as an interlin-
gual index between FrameNet senses and lemmas
in many languages, and builds the foundation for
the bilingual FrameNet extension.

It results in a basic multilingual FrameNet lexi-
con FNWKxx with translations to lemmas in 283
languages. An example: by aligning the FrameNet
sense of the verb complete with gloss to finish
with the corresponding English Wiktionary sense,
we collect 39 translations to 22 languages, e.g., the
German fertigmachen and the Spanish terminar.

The second step is the disambiguation of the
translated lemmas with respect to the target lan-
guage Wiktionary in order to retrieve the lin-
guistic information of the corresponding word
sense in the target language Wiktionary (Meyer
and Gurevych, 2012a). We evaluate this step
for English and German and create the bilingual
FrameNet lexicon FNWKde. For the example
sense of complete, we extract lexical information
for the word sense of its German translation fer-
tigmachen, for instance a German gloss, an ex-
ample sentence, register information (colloquial),
and synonyms, e.g., beenden. As a side-benefit of
our method, we also extend the English FrameNet
by the linguistic information in Wiktionary.

1364



4 Related Work

4.1 Creating FrameNets in New Languages
There are two main lines of research in bootstrap-
ping a FrameNet for languages other than English.

The first, corpus-based approach is to automat-
ically extract word senses in the target language
based on parallel corpora and frame annotations
in the source language. In this vein, Padó and
Lapata (2005) propose a cross-lingual FrameNet
extension to German and French; Johansson and
Nugues (2005) and Johansson and Nugues (2006)
do this for Spanish and Swedish, and Basili et al.
(2009) for Italian.

Padó and Lapata (2005) observe that their ap-
proach suffers from polysemy errors, because lem-
mas in the source language need to be disam-
biguated with respect to all the frames they evoke.
To alleviate this problem, they use a disambigua-
tion approach based on the most frequent frame;
Basili et al. (2009) use distributional methods for
frame disambiguation. Our approach is based on
sense alignments and therefore explicitly aims to
avoid such errors.

The second line of work is resource-based:
FrameNet is aligned to multilingual resources in
order to extract senses in the target language. Us-
ing monolingual resources, this approach has also
been employed to extend FrameNet coverage for
English (Shi and Mihalcea, 2005; Johansson and
Nugues, 2007; Ferrandez et al., 2010).

De Cao et al. (2008) map FrameNet frames
to WordNet synsets based on the embedding of
FrameNet lemmas in WordNet. They use Multi-
WordNet, an English-Italian wordnet, to induce an
Italian FrameNet lexicon with 15,000 entries.

To create MapNet, Tonelli and Pianta (2009)
align FrameNet senses with WordNet synsets by
exploiting the textual similarity of their glosses.
The similarity measure is based on stem overlap of
the candidates’ glosses expanded by WordNet do-
mains, the WordNet synset, and the set of senses
for a FrameNet frame. In Tonelli and Pighin
(2009), they use these features to train an SVM-
classifier to identify valid alignments and report
an F1-score of 0.66 on a manually annotated gold
standard. They report 4,265 new English senses
and 6,429 new Italian senses, which were derived
via MultiWordNet.

ExtendedWordFramenet (Laparra and Rigau,
2009; Laparra and Rigau, 2010) is also based
on the alignment of FrameNet senses to Word-

Net synsets. The goal is the multilingual cover-
age extension of FrameNet, which is achieved by
linking WordNet to wordnets in other languages
(Spanish, Italian, Basque, and Catalan) in the Mul-
tilingual Central Repository. For each language,
they add more then 10,000 senses to FrameNet.
They rely on a knowledge-based word sense dis-
ambiguation algorithm to establish the alignment
and report F1=0.75 on a gold standard based on
Tonelli and Pighin (2009).

Tonelli and Giuliano (2009) align FrameNet
senses to Wikipedia entries with the goal to ex-
tract word senses and example sentences in Ital-
ian. Based on Wikipedia, this alignment is re-
stricted to nouns. Subsequent work on Wikipedia
and FrameNet follows a different path and tries to
enhance the modeling of selectional preferences
for FrameNet predicates (Tonelli et al., 2012).

Finally, there have been suggestions to com-
bine the corpus-based and the resource-based ap-
proaches: Borin et al. (2012) do this for Finnish
and Swedish. They prove the feasibility of
their approach by creating a preliminary Finnish
FrameNet with 2,694 senses.

Mouton et al. (2010) directly exploit the trans-
lations in the English and French Wiktionary edi-
tions to extend the French FrameNet. They match
the FrameNet senses to Wiktionary lexical en-
tries, thus encountering the problem of polysemy
in the target language. To solve this, they de-
fine a set of filters that control how target lemmas
are distributed over frames, increasing precision at
the expense of recall (P=0.74, R=0.3, F1=0.42).
While their approach is in theory applicable to
other languages, our approach goes beyond this
by laying the ground for simultaneous FrameNet
extension in multiple languages via FNWKxx.

4.2 Wiktionary Sense Alignments

Collaboratively created resources have become
popular for sense alignments for NLP, start-
ing with the alignment between WordNet and
Wikipedia (Ruiz-Casado et al., 2005; Ponzetto
and Navigli, 2009). Wiktionary has been subject
to few alignment efforts: de Melo and Weikum
(2009) integrate information from Wiktionary into
Universal WordNet. Meyer and Gurevych (2011)
map WordNet synsets to Wiktionary senses and
show their complementary domain coverage.

1365



5 FrameNet – Wiktionary Alignment

5.1 Alignment Technique

We follow the state-of-the-art sense alignment
technique introduced by Niemann and Gurevych
(2011). They align senses in WordNet to
Wikipedia entries in a supervised setting using se-
mantic similarity measures.

One reason to use their method was that it al-
lows zero alignments or one-to-many alignments.
This is crucial for obtaining a high-quality align-
ment of heterogeneous resources, such as the pre-
sented one, because their sense granularity and
coverage can diverge a lot.

The alignment algorithm consists of two steps.
In the candidate extraction step, we iterate over all
FrameNet senses and match them with all senses
from Wiktionary which have the same lemma and
thus are likely to describe the same sense.

This step yields a set of candidate sense pairs
Call. In the classification step, a similarity score
between the textual information associated with
the senses in a candidate pair (e.g., their gloss) is
computed and a threshold-based classifier decides
for each pair on valid alignments.

Niemann and Gurevych (2011) combine two
different types of similarity (i) cosine similarity
on bag-of-words vectors (COS) and (ii) a person-
alized PageRank-based similarity measure (PPR).
The PPR measure (Agirre and Soroa, 2009) maps
the glosses of the two senses to a semantic vec-
tor space spanned up by WordNet synsets and then
compares them using the chi-square measure.

The semantic vectors ppr are computed us-
ing the personalized PageRank algorithm on the
WordNet graph. They determine the important
nodes in the graph as the nodes that a random
walker following the edges visits most frequently:

ppr = cMppr+ (1− c)vppr, (1)

where M is a transition probability matrix be-
tween the n WordNet synsets, c is a damping fac-
tor, and vppr is a vector of size n representing
the probability of jumping to the node i associated
with each vi. For personalized PageRank, vppr is
initialized in a particular way: the initial weight is
distributed equally over the m vector components
(i.e., synsets) associated with a word in the sense
gloss, other components receive a 0 value.

For each similarity measure, Niemann and
Gurevych (2011) determine a threshold (tppr and

tcos) independently on a manually annotated gold
standard. The final alignment decision is the con-
junction of two decision functions:

a(ss, st) =

PPR(ss, st) > tppr& COS(ss, st) > tcos.
(2)

We differ from Niemann and Gurevych (2011) in
that we use a joint training setup which determines
tppr and tcos to optimize classification performance
directly (as proposed in Gurevych et al. (2012)):

(tppr, tcos) = argmax(tppr,tcos)F1(a), (3)

where F1 is the maximized evaluation score and a
is the decision function in equation (2).

5.2 Candidate Extraction
To compile the candidate set, we paired senses
from both resources with identical lemma-POS
combinations. FrameNet senses are defined by a
lemma, a gloss, and a frame. Wiktionary senses
are defined by a lemma and a gloss. For the
FrameNet sense Activity finish of the verb com-
plete, we find two candidate senses in Wiktionary
(to finish and to make whole). There are on av-
erage 3.7 candidates per FrameNet sense. The full
candidate setCall contains over 44,000 sense pairs
and covers 97% of the 11,942 FrameNet senses.

5.3 Gold Standard Creation
For the gold standard, we sampled 2,900 candidate
pairs from Call. The properties of the gold stan-
dard mirror the properties of Call: the sampling
preserved the distribution of POS in Call (around
40% verbs and nouns, and 12% adjectives) and
the average numbers of candidates per FrameNet
sense. This ensures that highly polysemous words
as well as words with few senses are selected.

Two human raters annotated the sense pairs
based on their glosses. The annotation task con-
sisted in a two-class annotation: Do the presented
senses have same meaning - (YES/NO). The raters
received detailed guidelines and were trained on
around 100 sense pairs drawn from the sample.

We computed Cohen’s κ to measure the inter-
rater agreement between the two raters. It is
κ=0.72 on the full set, which is considered accept-
able according to Artstein and Poesio (2008). An
additional expert annotator disambiguated ties.

For comparison: Meyer and Gurevych (2011)
report κ=0.74 for their WordNet – Wiktionary
gold standard, and Niemann and Gurevych (2011)

1366



adj noun verb all

κ .8 .77 .65 .72

Table 1: Inter-rater agreement.

κ=0.87 for their WordNet – Wikipedia gold stan-
dard. These gold standards only consist of nouns,
which appear to be an easier annotation task than
verb senses. This is supported by our analysis of
the agreement by POS (see Table 1): the agree-
ment on nouns and adjectives lies between the two
agreement scores previously reported on nouns.
Thus our annotation is of similar quality. Only
the agreement on verbs is slightly below the ac-
ceptability threshold of 0.67 (Artstein and Poesio,
2008). The verb senses are very fine-grained and
thus present a difficult alignment task. Therefore,
we had an expert annotator correct the verbal part
of the gold standard set. After removing the train-
ing set for the raters, the final gold standard con-
tains 2,789 sense pairs. 28% of these are aligned.

5.4 Alignment Experiments
We determined the best setting for the alignment
of FrameNet and Wiktionary in a ten-fold cross-
validation on the gold standard.

Besides the parameters for the computation of
the PPR vectors (we used the publicly available
UKB tool by Agirre and Soroa (2009)), the main
parameter in the experiments is the textual in-
formation that is used to represent the senses.
For FrameNet senses, we used the lemma-pos,
sense gloss, example sentences, frame name and
frame definition as textual features; for Wiktionary
senses, we considered lemma-pos, sense gloss, ex-
ample sentences, hyponyms and synonyms.

We computed the similarity scores on tok-
enized, lemmatized and stop-word-filtered texts.

First, we evaluated models for COS and PPR
independently based on various combinations of
the textual features listed above. We then used
the parameter setting of the best-performing sin-
gle models to train the model that jointly optimizes
the thresholds for PPR and COS (see eqn. (5)). In
Table 2, we report on the results of the best single
models and the best joint model.

For the evaluation, we compute precision P, re-
call R and F1 on the positive class (aligned=true),
e.g., precision P is the number of pairs correctly
aligned divided by all aligned pairs.

We achieved the highest precision and F1-score

Evaluation verb noun adj all

P Random-1 BL 0.503 0.559 0.661 0.557
WKT-1 BL 0.620 0.664 0.725 0.66
BEST COS 0.639 0.778 0.706 0.703
BEST PPR 0.66 0.754 0.729 0.713
BEST JOINT 0.677 0.766 0.742 0.728

R Random-1 BL 0.471 0.546 0.683 0.540
WKT-1 BL 0.581 0.65 0.75 0.64
BEST COS 0.658 0.758 0.754 0.715
BEST PPR 0.666 0.724 0.754 0.699
BEST JOINT 0.683 0.783 0.83 0.75

F1 Random-1 BL 0.487 0.552 0.672 0.549
WKT-1 BL 0.60 0.657 0.737 0.65
BEST COS 0.648 0.768 0.729 0.709
BEST PPR 0.663 0.739 0.741 0.706
BEST JOINT 0.68 0.775 0.784 0.739
UBound 0.735 0.834 0.864 0.797

Table 2: Alignment performance by POS.

for COS using all available features, but excluding
FrameNet example sentences because they intro-
duce too much noise. Adding the frame name and
frame definition to the often short glosses provides
a richer sense representation for the COS measure.

The best-performing PPR configuration uses
sense gloss and lemma-pos. For the joint model,
we employed the best single PPR configuration,
and a COS configuration that uses sense gloss ex-
tended by Wiktionary hypernyms, synonyms and
FrameNet frame name and frame definition, to
achieve the highest score, an F1-score of 0.739.

5.5 Gold Standard Evaluation
We compared the performance of our alignment
on the gold standard to a baseline which randomly
selects one target sense from the candidate set of
each source sense (Random-1). We also consider
the more competitive Wiktionary first sense base-
line (WKT-1). It is guided by the heuristic that
more frequent senses are listed first in Wiktionary
(Meyer and Gurevych, 2010). It is a stronger base-
line with an F1-score of 0.65 (see Table 2).

To derive the upper bound for the alignment per-
formance (UBound), we computed the F1 score
from the average pairwise F1-score of the annota-
tors according to Hripcsak and Rothschild (2005).

As the evaluation set mirrors the POS distri-
bution in FrameNet and is sufficiently large, un-
like earlier alignments, we can analyze the per-
formance by POS. The BEST JOINT model per-
forms well on nouns, slightly better on adjectives,
and worse on verbs, see Table 2. For the baselines
and the UBound the same applies, with the dif-
ference that adjectives receive even better results

1367



in comparison. This fits in with the perceived de-
gree of difficulty according to the observed poly-
semy for the POS: for verbs we have many candi-
date sets with two or more candidates, i.e., we ob-
serve higher polysemy, while for nouns and even
stronger for adjectives, many small candidate sets
occur, which stand for an easier alignment de-
cision. This is in line with the reported higher
complexity of lexical resources with respect to
verbs and greater difficulty in alignments and word
sense disambiguation (Laparra and Rigau, 2010).

The performance of BEST JOINT on all POS
is F1=0.73, which is significantly higher than the
WKT-1 baseline (p<0.05 according to McNe-
mar’s test). The performance on nouns (F1=0.775)
is on par with the results reported by Niemann and
Gurevych (2011) for nouns (F1=0.78).

5.6 Error Analysis

The confusion matrix from the evaluation of BEST
JOINT on the gold standard shows 214 false pos-
itives and 191 false negatives. The false nega-
tives suffer from low overlap between the glosses,
which are often quite short (contend - assert),
sometimes circular (sinful - relating to sin). Align-
ing senses with such glosses is difficult for a sys-
tem based on semantic similarity. In about 50% of
the analyzed pairs, highly similar words are used
in the gloss, that we should be able to detect with
second-order representations, for instance by ex-
panding short definitions with the definitions of
the contained words, or via derivational similarity.

A number of false positives occur because the
gold standard was developed in a very fine-grained
manner: distinctions such as causative vs. inchoa-
tive (enlarge: become large vs. enlarge: make
large) were explicitly stressed in the definitions
and thus annotated as different senses by the anno-
tators. This was motivated by the fact that this dis-
tinction is relevant for many frames in FrameNet.
The first meaning of enlarge belongs to the frame
Expansion, the second to Cause expansion. Our
similarity based approach cannot capture such dif-
ferences well.

6 Intermediate Resource FNWKxx

6.1 Statistics

We applied the best system setup to the full can-
didate set of over 44,000 candidates to create the
intermediate resource FNWKxx. The alignment
consists of 12,094 sense pairs. It covers 82% of

fine-grained P coarse-grained P

All POS 0.67 0.78

By POS verb noun adj verb noun adj0.53 0.73 0.80 0.73 0.82 0.85

Table 3: Post-hoc evaluation (precision P).

the senses in FrameNet and 86% of the frames. It
connects more than 9,800 unique FrameNet senses
with more than 10,000 unique Wiktionary senses,
which shows that both non-alignments and multi-
ple alignments occur for some source senses.

6.2 Post-hoc Evaluation

Our cross-validation approach entails the danger
of over-fitting. In order to verify the quality of
the alignment, we performed a detailed post-hoc
analysis on a sample of 270 aligned sense pairs
randomly drawn from the set of aligned senses.

Because sense granularity was an issue in the
error analysis, we considered two alignment deci-
sions: (a) fine-grained alignment: the two glosses
describe the same sense; (b) coarse-grained align-
ment. The causative/inchoative distinction is,
among others, ignored.

The evaluation results are listed in Table 3. The
precision for the fine-grained (a) is lower than the
allover precision on the gold standard. The evalua-
tion by POS shows that the result for nouns and ad-
jectives is equal or superior to the evaluation result
on the gold standard, while it is worse for verbs.
This shows that over-fitting, if at all, is only a risk
for the verb senses.

The allover precision for (b) exceeds the pre-
cision on the gold standard. Particularly verbs
receive much better results. This shows that
a coarse-grained alignment may suffice for the
FrameNet extension.

This evaluation confirms the quality of the
sense alignment, in particular with respect to the
FrameNet extension. But it also elicits the ques-
tion whether a coarse-grained alignment would
suffice. We will discuss this question below.

6.3 Resource Analysis

For each of the aligned senses in the 12,094
aligned sense pairs, we extracted glosses from
Wiktionary. Because FrameNet glosses are often
very brief, the additional glosses will benefit algo-
rithms such as frame detection for SRL. We also
added 4,352 new example sentences from Wik-

1368



tionary to FrameNet.
We can extract 2,151 new lemma-POS for

FrameNet frames from the synonyms of the
aligned senses in Wiktionary. We also ex-
tract other related lemma-POS, for instance 487
antonyms, 126 hyponyms, and 19 hypernyms.

This step establishes Wiktionary as an interlin-
gual connection between FrameNet and a large
number of languages, including low-resource
ones: via Wiktionary, we connect FrameNet
senses to translations in 283 languages, e.g., we
translate the sense of the verb complete associ-
ated with the frame Activity Finish to the German
colloquial fertigmachen, the Spanish terminar, the
Turkish tamamlamak, and 19 other languages.

For 36 languages, we can extract more than
1,000 translations each, among them low-resource
languages such as Telugu, Swahili, or Kurdish.
The languages with most translations are: Finnish
(9,333), Russian (7,790), and German (6,871).
The number of Finnish translations is more than
three times larger than the preliminary Finnish
FrameNet by Borin et al. (2012). Likewise, we
get three times the number of German lemma-POS
than provided by the SALSA corpus.

7 Translation Disambiguation

7.1 Disambiguation Method

FNWKxx initially does not provide lexical-
semantic information for the German translations:
the translations link to a lemma in the German
Wiktionary, not a target sense. In order to inte-
grate the information attached to a German Wik-
tionary sense, e.g., the gloss, into our resource, the
lemmas need to be disambiguated.

We use the sense-disambiguated Wiktionary re-
sulting from a recently published approach for
the disambiguation of relations and translations in
Wiktionary (Meyer and Gurevych, 2012a) to cre-
ate our new bilingual (German-English) FrameNet
lexicon FNWKde.

Their approach combines information on the
source sense and all potential target senses in order
to determine the best target sense in a rule-based
disambiguation strategy. The information is en-
coded as binary features, which are ordered in a
back-off hierarchy: if the first feature applies, the
target sense is selected, otherwise the second fea-
ture is considered, and so forth.

The most important features are: definition
overlap between source and automatically trans-

SALSA2 P&L05 FNWKde

Type Corpus Corpus Lexicon
Creation Manual Automatic Automatic

Frames(+p) 266(907) 468 755
Senses 1,813 9,851 5,897
Examples 24,184 1,672,551 6,933
Glosses - - 5,897

Table 4: Frame-semantic resources for German.

lated target definition; occurrence of the source
lemma in the target definition; shared linguistic
information (e.g., same register); inverse transla-
tion relations (i.e., the source lemma occurs on the
translation list of the target sense); relation over-
lap; Lesk measure between original and translated
glosses in source and target language; and finally,
backing off to the first target sense.

For the gold standard evaluation of the approach
we refer to Meyer and Gurevych (2012a): their
system obtained an F1-score of 0.67 for the task of
disambiguating translations from English to Ger-
man, and an F1-score of 0.79 for the disambigua-
tion of English sense relations. We use the latter to
identify target senses of synonyms in FNWKxx.

8 Resource FNWKde

8.1 Statistics
Table 4 gives an overview of FNWKde. It con-
tains 5,897 pairs of German Wiktionary senses
and FrameNet senses, i.e., 86% of the translations
could be disambiguated. Each sense has a gloss,
and there are 6,933 example sentences.

Based on the relation disambiguation and in-
ference of new relations by Meyer and Gurevych
(2012a), we can also disambiguate synonyms in
the English Wiktionary. This leads to a further ex-
tension of the English FrameNet summarized in
Table 5. The number of Wiktionary senses aligned
to FrameNet senses is increased by 50%.

We also provide results for other sense relations,
e.g., antonyms. We will discuss whether and how
they can be integrated as FrameNet senses in our
resource below.

8.2 Post-hoc Evaluation
Because the errors of two subsequently applied au-
tomatic methods can multiply, we provide a post-
hoc evaluation of the results.

To evaluate the quality of the German FrameNet
lexicon, we collected the FrameNet senses for a
list of 15 frames that were sampled by Padó and

1369



# English senses # English senses
Relation per FrameNet sense per frame

SYNONYM 17,713 13,288
HYPONYM 4,818 3,347
HYPERNYM 6,369 3,961
ANTONYM 9,626 6,737

Table 5: Statistics after relation disambiguation.

Lapata (2005) according to three frequency bands
on a large corpus. There are 115 senses associated
with these frames in our resource. In a manual
evaluation of these 115 senses, we find that 67%
were assigned correctly to their frames. This is
higher than expected, considering the errors from
the applied methods add up.

Further analysis revealed that both resource cre-
ation steps contribute equally to the 39 errors. For
17 of the evaluated sense pairs, redundancy con-
firms their quality: they were obtained indepen-
dently by two or three alignment-and-translation
paths and do not contain alignment errors.

8.3 Comparison
We compare FNWKde to two German frame-
semantic resources, the manually annotated
SALSA corpus (Burchardt et al., 2006) and a
resource from Padó and Lapata (2005), hence-
forth P&L05. Note that both resources are frame-
annotated corpora, while FNWKde is a FrameNet-
like lexicon and contains information complemen-
tary to the corpora. The different properties of the
resources are contrasted in Table 4.

The automatically developed resources, includ-
ing FNWKde, provide a larger number of senses
than SALSA. The annotated corpora contain a
large number of examples, but they do not pro-
vide any glosses, which are useful for frame detec-
tion in SRL, nor do they contain any other lexical-
semantic information.

FNWKde covers a larger number of FrameNet
frames than the other two resources. 266 of the
907 frames in SALSA are connected to original
FrameNet frames, the others are newly-developed
proto-frames p (shown in parentheses in Table 4).

Table 6 describes the proportion of the over-
lapping frames and senses3 to the respective re-
sources. The numbers on frame overlap show
that our resource covers the frames in the other

3Note that the senses in SALSA and P&L05 are defined
by frame, lemma, and POS. In Table 6, FNWKde senses
with identical frame, lemma, and POS, but different gloss are
therefore conflated to one sense.

Resource r % of r % of FNWKde

Frame SALSA 2 89% 31%
P&L05 90% 55%

Sense SALSA 2 15% 5%
P&L05 10% 19%

Table 6: Overlap of FNWKde with resource r.

resources well (89% and 90% coverage respec-
tively), and that it adds frames not covered in the
other resources: P&L05 only covers 55% of the
frames in FNWKde. The sense overlap shows
that the resources have senses in common, which
confirms the quality of the automatically devel-
oped resources, but they also complement each
other. FNWKde, for instance, adds 3,041 senses
to P&L05.

9 Discussion: a Multilingual FrameNet

FNWKxx builds an excellent starting point to cre-
ate FrameNet lexicons in various languages: the
translation counts, for instance 6,871 for German,
compare favorably to FrameNet 1.5, which con-
tains 9,700 English lemma-POS.

To create those FrameNet lexicons, the transla-
tion disambiguation approach used for FNWKde
(step 2 in Fig. 1) needs to be adapted to other lan-
guages. The approach is in theory applicable to
any language, but there are some obstacles: first,
it relies on the availability of the target sense in
the target language Wiktionary. For many of the
top 30 languages in FNWKxx, the Wiktionary edi-
tions seem sufficiently large to provide targets for
translation disambiguation,4 and they are contin-
uously extended. Second, our approach requires
access to the target language Wiktionary, but the
data format across Wiktionary language editions
is not standardized. Third, the approach requires
machine translation into the target language. For
languages, where such a tool is not available, we
could default to the first-sense-heuristic, or en-
courage the Wiktionary community to link the
translations to their target Wiktionary senses in-
spired by Sajous et al. (2010).

Another issue that applies to all automatic
(and also manual) approaches of cross-lingual
FrameNet extension is the restricted cross-
language applicability of frames. Boas (2005)
reports that, while many frames are largely

4see overview table at http://www.ukp.
tu-darmstadt.de/fnwkde/.

1370



language-independent, other frames receive
culture-specific or language-specific interpreta-
tions, for example calendars or holidays. Also,
fine-grained sense and frame distinctions may be
more relevant in one language than in another
language. Such granularity differences also led
to the addition of proto-frames in SALSA 2 (Re-
hbein et al., 2012). Therefore, manual correction
or extension of a multilingual FrameNet based on
FNWKde may be desired for specific applications.
In this case, the automatically created FrameNets
in other languages are good starting points that
can be quickly and efficiently compiled.

The quality of the multilingual FNWKxx de-
pends on i) the translations in the interlingual con-
nection Wiktionary, which are manually created,
controlled by the community, and therefore reli-
able, and ii) on the FrameNet–Wiktionary align-
ment. Therefore, we evaluated our sense align-
ment method in detail. The alignment reaches
state-of-the-art results, and the analysis shows that
the method is particularly fit for a coarse-grained
alignment. We however find lower performance
for verbs in a fine-grained setting. We argue
that an improved alignment algorithm, for instance
taking subcategorization information into account,
can identify the fine-grained distinctions.

The post-hoc analysis raised the question of
FrameNet frame granularity. Do separate frames
exist for causative/inchoative alternations (as Be-
ing dry and Cause to be dry for to dry), or do they
belong to the same frame (Make noise for to creak
and to creak something)? For the coarse-grained
frames, fine-grained decisions can be merged in a
second classification step. Alternatively, we could
map Wiktionary senses directly to frames, and in-
clude features that cover the granularity distinc-
tions, e.g., whether the existing senses of a frame
show the semantic alternation.

We could use the same approach to assign
senses to a frame which are derived via sense
relations other than synonymy, i.e., for linking
antonyms or hyponyms to a frame. Some frames
do cover antonymous predicates, others do not.

Based on Wiktionary, our approach suffers less
from the disadvantages of previous resource-based
work, i.e., the constraints of expert-built resources
and the lack of lexical information in Wikipedia.
Unlike corpus-based approaches for cross-lingual
FrameNet extension, our approach does not pro-
vide frame-semantic annotations for the example

sentences. Our advantage is that we create a
FrameNet lexicon with lexical-semantic informa-
tion in the target language. Example annotations
can be additionally obtained via cross-lingual an-
notation projection (Padó and Lapata, 2009), and
the lexical information in FNWKde can be used to
guide this process.

10 Conclusion

The resource-coverage bottleneck for frame-
semantic resources is particularly severe for less
well-resourced languages. We present a simple,
but effective approach to solve this problem using
the English Wiktionary as an interlingual repre-
sentation and subsequent translation disambigua-
tion in the target language. We validate our ap-
proach on the language pair English-German and
discuss the options and requirements for creating
FrameNets in further languages.

As part of this work, we created the first sense
alignment between FrameNet and the English
Wiktionary. The resulting resource FNWKxx con-
nects FrameNet senses to over 280 languages. The
bilingual English-German FrameNet lexicon FN-
WKde competes with manually created resources,
as shown by a comparison to the SALSA corpus.

We make both resources publicly available in
the standardized format UBY-LMF (Eckle-Kohler
et al., 2012), which supports automatic processing
of the resources via the UBY Java API, see
http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de/
fnwkde/.

We also extended FrameNet by several thou-
sand new English senses from Wiktionary which
are provided as part of FNWKde. In our future
work, we will evaluate the benefits of the extracted
information to SRL.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Volk-
swagen Foundation as part of the Lichtenberg-
Professorship Program under grant No. I/82806
and by the German Research Foundation under
grant No. GU 798/3-1 and grant No. GU 798/9-1.

We thank Christian Meyer and Judith-Eckle
Kohler for insightful discussions and comments,
and Christian Wirth for contributions in the early
stage of this project. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful remarks.

1371



References
Eneko Agirre and Aitor Soroa. 2009. Personalizing

PageRank for Word Sense Disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 33–41, Athens, Greece.

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-Coder
Agreement for Computational Linguistics. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Pro-
ceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics and 17th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING-ACL’98), pages 86–90, Montreal,
Canada.

Roberto Basili, Diego Cao, Danilo Croce, Bonaventura
Coppola, and Alessandro Moschitti. 2009. Cross-
language frame semantics transfer in bilingual cor-
pora. In Alexander Gelbukh, editor, Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, volume
5449 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
332–345. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Hans C. Boas. 2005. Semantic Frames as Interlingual
Representations for Multilingual Lexical Databases.
International Journal of Lexicography, 18(4):445–
478.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Richard Johansson, Kris-
tiina Muhonen, Tanja Purtonen, and Kaarlo Voion-
maa. 2012. Transferring frames: Utilization of
linked lexical resources. In Proceedings of the
NAACL-HLT Workshop on the Induction of Linguis-
tic Structure, pages 8–15, Montréal, Canada.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, Anette Frank, An-
drea Kowalski, Sebastian Pado, and Manfred Pinkal.
2006. The SALSA corpus: a German corpus re-
source for lexical semantics. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, pages 969–974, Genoa,
Italy.

Diego De Cao, Danilo Croce, Marco Pennacchiotti,
and Roberto Basili. 2008. Combining word sense
and usage for modeling frame semantics. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2008 Conference on Semantics in
Text Processing, STEP ’08, pages 85–101, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA.

Gerard de Melo and Gerhard Weikum. 2009. Towards
a universal wordnet by learning from combined evi-
dence. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM
2009), pages 513–522, New York, NY, USA.

Judith Eckle-Kohler, Iryna Gurevych, Silvana Hart-
mann, Michael Matuschek, and Christian M. Meyer.
2012. UBY-LMF - A Uniform Model for Standard-
izing Heterogeneous Lexical-Semantic Resources in
ISO-LMF. In Proceedings of the 8th International

Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’12), pages 275–282, Istanbul, Turkey.

Oscar Ferrandez, Michael Ellsworth, Rafael Munoz,
and Collin F. Baker. 2010. Aligning FrameNet
and WordNet based on Semantic Neighborhoods.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), pages 310–314, Valletta, Malta.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame Semantics and the
Nature of Language. In Annuals of the New York
Academy of Sciences: Conference on the Origin and
Development of Language and Speech, volume 280,
pages 20–32. New York Academy of Sciences, New
York, NY, USA.

Iryna Gurevych, Judith Eckle-Kohler, Silvana Hart-
mann, Michael Matuschek, Christian M. Meyer, and
Christian Wirth. 2012. Uby - A Large-Scale Uni-
fied Lexical-Semantic Resource Based on LMF. In
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL 2012), pages 580–590, Avignon,
France.

George Hripcsak and Adam S. Rothschild. 2005.
Agreement, the F-Measure, and Reliability in Infor-
mation Retrieval. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 12(3):296–298.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2005. Us-
ing Parallel Corpora for Automatic Transfer of
FrameNet Annotation. In Proceedings of the 1st
ROMANCE FrameNet Workshop, Cluj-Napoca, Ro-
mania.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2006. A
framenet-based semantic role labeler for swedish. In
Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Con-
ference Poster Sessions, pages 436–443, Sydney,
Australia, July.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Using
WordNet to extend FrameNet coverage. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Building Frame-semantic
Resources for Scandinavian and Baltic Languages,
at NODALIDA, pages 27–30, Tartu, Estonia.

Egoitz Laparra and German Rigau. 2009. Integrating
WordNet and FrameNet using a Knowledge-based
Word Sense Disambiguation Algorithm. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference RANLP-
2009, pages 208–213, Borovets, Bulgaria.

Egoitz Laparra and German Rigau. 2010. eXtended
WordFrameNet. In Proceedings of the Seventh In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’10), pages 1214–1419, Valletta,
Malta.

Christian M. Meyer and Iryna Gurevych. 2010.
How Web Communities Analyze Human Language:
Word Senses in Wiktionary. In Proceedings of
the Second Web Science Conference, Raleigh, NC,
USA.

1372



Christian M. Meyer and Iryna Gurevych. 2011. What
Psycholinguists Know About Chemistry: Align-
ing Wiktionary and WordNet for Increased Domain
Coverage. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
pages 883–892, Chiang Mai, Thailand.

Christian M. Meyer and Iryna Gurevych. 2012a. To
Exhibit is not to Loiter: A Multilingual, Sense-
Disambiguated Wiktionary for Measuring Verb Sim-
ilarity. In Proceedings of COLING 2012, pages
1763–1780, Mumbai, India.

Christian M. Meyer and Iryna Gurevych. 2012b. Wik-
tionary: A new rival for expert-built lexicons? Ex-
ploring the possibilities of collaborative lexicogra-
phy. In Sylviane Granger and Magali Paquot, edi-
tors, Electronic Lexicography, pages 259–291. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford.

Behrang Mohit and Srini Narayanan. 2003. Semantic
Extraction with Wide-Coverage Lexical Resources.
In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003: Companion
Volume, pages 64–66, Edmonton, Canada.

Claire Mouton, Gaël de Chalendar, and Benoı̂t Richert.
2010. FrameNet Translation Using Bilingual Dic-
tionaries with Evaluation on the English-French
Pair. In Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), pages 20–27, Valletta, Malta.

Srini Narayanan and Sanda Harabagiu. 2004. Ques-
tion Answering Based on Semantic Structures. In
Proceedings of the 20th international conference
on Computational Linguistics - COLING ’04, pages
693–701, Geneva, Switzerland.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2010.
Babelnet: Building a very large multilingual seman-
tic network. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 216–225, Uppsala, Sweden.

Elisabeth (geb. Wolf) Niemann and Iryna Gurevych.
2011. The People’s Web meets Linguistic Knowl-
edge: Automatic Sense Alignment of Wikipedia and
WordNet. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Computational Semantics (IWCS), pages
205–214, Singapore.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Cross-
lingual bootstrapping of semantic lexicons: the case
of FrameNet. In Proceedings of the 20th national
conference on Artificial intelligence - Volume 3,
AAAI’05, pages 1087–1092, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Cross-
lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 36:307–
340.

Simone Paolo Ponzetto and Roberto Navigli. 2009.
Large-Scale Taxonomy Mapping for Restructuring
and Integrating Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the
21st International Joint Conference on AI, pages
2083–2088, Pasadena, CA, USA.

Ines Rehbein, Joseph Ruppenhofer, Caroline
Sporleder, and Manfred Pinkal. 2012. Adding
nominal spice to SALSA - frame-semantic annota-
tion of German nouns and verbs. In Proceedings
of the 11th Conference on Natural Language
Processing (KONVENS’12), pages 89–97, Vienna,
Austria.

Maria Ruiz-Casado, Enrique Alfonseca, and Pablo
Castells. 2005. Automatic Assignment of
Wikipedia Encyclopedic Entries to WordNet
Synsets. In Advances in Web Intelligence, volume
3528 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
380–386. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg.

Franck Sajous, Emmanuel Navarro, Bruno Gaume,
Laurent Prévot, and Yannick Chudy. 2010. Semi-
automatic endogenous enrichment of collaboratively
constructed lexical resources: piggybacking onto
wiktionary. In Proceedings of the 7th interna-
tional conference on Advances in natural language
processing, IceTAL’10, pages 332–344. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.

Lei Shi and Rada Mihalcea. 2005. Putting pieces to-
gether: Combining FrameNet, VerbNet and Word-
Net for robust semantic parsing. In Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages
100–111. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg.

Sara Tonelli and Claudio Giuliano. 2009. Wikipedia as
frame information repository. In Proceedings of the
2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 276–285, Singapore.

Sara Tonelli and Emanuele Pianta. 2009. A novel ap-
proach to mapping FrameNet lexical units to Word-
Net synsets. In IWCS-8 ’09: Proceedings of the
Eighth International Conference on Computational
Semantics, pages 342–345, Tilburg, The Nether-
lands.

Sara Tonelli and Daniele Pighin. 2009. New Features
for FrameNet - WordNet Mapping. In Proceedings
of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning (CoNLL-2009), pages 219–
227, Boulder, CO, USA.

Sara Tonelli, Volha Bryl, Claudio Giuliano, and Lu-
ciano Serafini. 2012. Investigating the seman-
tics of frame elements. In Knowledge Engineer-
ing and Knowledge Management, volume 7603 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 130–143.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

1373


