



















































Sign Language Lexical Recognition With Propositional Dynamic Logic


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 328–333,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sign Language Lexical Recognition With Propositional Dynamic
Logic

Arturo Curiel
Université Paul Sabatier

118 route de Narbonne, IRIT,
31062, Toulouse, France

curiel@irit.fr

Christophe Collet
Université Paul Sabatier

118 route de Narbonne, IRIT,
31062, Toulouse, France

collet@irit.fr

Abstract

This paper explores the use of Proposi-
tional Dynamic Logic (PDL) as a suit-
able formal framework for describing
Sign Language (SL), the language of
deaf people, in the context of natu-
ral language processing. SLs are vi-
sual, complete, standalone languages
which are just as expressive as oral lan-
guages. Signs in SL usually correspond
to sequences of highly specific body
postures interleaved with movements,
which make reference to real world ob-
jects, characters or situations. Here we
propose a formal representation of SL
signs, that will help us with the analysis
of automatically-collected hand track-
ing data from French Sign Language
(FSL) video corpora. We further show
how such a representation could help us
with the design of computer aided SL
verification tools, which in turn would
bring us closer to the development of an
automatic recognition system for these
languages.

1 Introduction

Sign languages (SL), the vernaculars of deaf
people, are complete, rich, standalone commu-
nication systems which have evolved in paral-
lel with oral languages (Valli and Lucas, 2000).
However, in contrast to the last ones, research
in automatic SL processing has not yet man-
aged to build a complete, formal definition ori-
ented to their automatic recognition (Cuxac
and Dalle, 2007). In SL, both hands and non-
manual features (NMF), e.g. facial muscles,
can convey information with their placements,
configurations and movements. These particu-
lar conditions can difficult the construction of

a formal description with common natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) methods, since the ex-
isting modeling techniques are mostly designed
to work with one-channel sound productions
inherent to oral languages, rather than with
the multi-channel partially-synchronized infor-
mation induced by SLs.

Our research strives to address the formal-
ization problem by introducing a logical lan-
guage that lets us represent SL from the lowest
level, so as to render the recognition task more
approachable. For this, we use an instance of
a formal logic, specifically Propositional Dy-
namic Logic (PDL), as a possible description
language for SL signs.

For the rest of this section, we will present a
brief introduction to current research efforts in
the area. Section 2 presents a general descrip-
tion of our formalism, while section 3 shows
how our work can be used when confronted
with real world data. Finally, section 4 present
our final observations and future work.

Images for the examples where taken from
(DictaSign, 2012) corpus.

1.1 Current Sign Language Research

Extensive efforts have been made to achieve
efficient automatic capture and representation
of the subtle nuances commonly present in
sign language discourse (Ong and Ranganath,
2005). Research ranges from the development
of hand and body trackers (Dreuw et al., 2009;
Gianni and Dalle, 2009), to the design of high
level SL representation models (Lejeune, 2004;
Lenseigne and Dalle, 2006). Linguistic re-
search in the area has focused on the character-
ization of corporal expressions into meaning-
ful transcriptions (Dreuw et al., 2010; Stokoe,
2005) or common patterns across SL (Aronoff
et al., 2005; Meir et al., 2006; Wittmann,
1991), so as to gain understanding of the un-

328



derlying mechanisms of SL communication.

Works like (Losson and Vannobel, 1998) deal
with the creation of a lexical description ori-
ented to computer-based sign animation. Re-
port (Filhol, 2009) describes a lexical specifi-
cation to address the same problem. Both pro-
pose a thoroughly geometrical parametric en-
coding of signs, thus leaving behind meaning-
ful information necessary for recognition and
introducing data beyond the scope of recog-
nition. This complicates the reutilization of
their formal descriptions. Besides, they don’t
take in account the presence of partial informa-
tion. Treating partiality is important for us,
since it is often the case with automatic tools
that incomplete or unrecognizable information
arises. Finally, little to no work has been di-
rected towards the unification of raw collected
data from SL corpora with higher level descrip-
tions (Dalle, 2006).

2 Propositional Dynamic Logic for
SL

Propositional Dynamic Logic (PDL) is a multi-
modal logic, first defined by (Fischer and Lad-
ner, 1979). It provides a language for describ-
ing programs, their correctness and termina-
tion, by allowing them to be modal operators.
We work with our own variant of this logic,
the Propositional Dynamic Logic for Sign Lan-
guage (PDLSL), which is just an instantiation
of PDL where we take signers’ movements as
programs.

Our sign formalization is based on the ap-
proach of (Liddell and Johnson, 1989) and (Fil-
hol, 2008). They describe signs as sequences of
immutable key postures and movement transi-
tions.

In general, each key posture will be charac-
terized by the concurrent parametric state of
each body articulator over a time-interval. For
us, a body articulator is any relevant body part
involved in signing. The parameters taken in
account can vary from articulator to articula-
tor, but most of the time they comprise their
configurations, orientations and their place-
ment within one or more places of articulation.
Transitions will correspond to the movements
executed between fixed postures.

2.1 Syntax

We need to define some primitive sets that will
limit the domain of our logical language.

Definition 2.1 (Sign Language primi-
tives). Let BSL = {D,W,R,L} be the set of
relevant body articulators for SL, where D, W,
R and L represent the dominant, weak, right
and left hands, respectively. Both D and W
can be aliases for the right or left hands, but
they change depending on whether the signer
is right-handed or left-handed, or even depend-
ing on the context.
Let Ψ be the two-dimensional projection of

a human body skeleton, seen by the front. We
define the set of places of articulation for SL as
ΛSL = {HEAD, CHEST, NEUTRAL, . . .}, such that
for each λ ∈ ΛSL, λ is a sub-plane of Ψ, as
shown graphically in figure 1.
Let CSL be the set of possible morphological

configurations for a hand.
Let ∆ = {↑,↗,→,↘, ↓,↙,←,↖} be the set

of relative directions from the signer’s point of
view, where each arrow represents one of eight
possible two-dimensional direction vectors that
share the same origin. For vector δ ∈ ∆, we
define vector

←−
δ as the same as δ but with the

inverted abscissa axis, such that
←−
δ ∈ ∆. Let

vector δ̂ indicate movement with respect to the
dominant or weak hand in the following man-
ner:

δ̂ =

{
δ if D ≡ R or W ≡ L←−
δ if D ≡ L or W ≡ R

Finally, let −→v1 and −→v2 be any two vectors with
the same origin. We denote the rotation angle
between the two as θ(−→v1 ,−→v2).

Now we define the set of atomic propositions
that we will use to characterize fixed states,
and a set of atomic actions to describe move-
ments.

Definition 2.2 (Atomic Propositions for
SL Body Articulators ΦSL). The set of
atomic propositions for SL articulators (ΦSL)
is defined as:

ΦSL = {β1δβ2 ,Ξ
β1
λ , T

β1
β2
,Fβ1c ,∠δβ1}

where β1, β2 ∈ BSL, δ ∈ ∆, λ ∈ ΛSL and
c ∈ CSL.

329



Figure 1: Possible places of articulation in BSL.

Intuitively, β1δβ2 indicates that articulator β1
is placed in relative direction δ with respect
to articulator β2. Let the current place of
articulation of β2 be the origin point of β2’s
Cartesian system (Cβ2). Let vector

−→
β1 de-

scribe the current place of articulation of β1
in Cβ2. Proposition β1δβ2 holds when ∀

−→v ∈ ∆,
θ(
−→
β1, δ) ≤ θ(

−→
β1,
−→v ).

Ξβ1λ asserts that articulator β1 is located in
λ.
T β1β2 is active whenever articulator β1 physi-

cally touches articulator β2.
Fβ1c indicates that c is the morphological

configuration of articulator β1.
Finally, ∠δβ1 means that an articulator β1 is

oriented towards direction δ ∈ ∆. For hands,
∠δβ1 will hold whenever the vector perpendicu-
lar to the plane of the palm has the smallest
rotation angle with respect to δ.

Definition 2.3 (Atomic Actions for SL
Body Articulators ΠSL). The atomic ac-
tions for SL articulators ( ΠSL) are given by
the following set:

ΠSL = {δβ1 ,!β1}

where δ ∈ ∆ and β1 ∈ BSL.
Let β1’s position before movement be the ori-

gin of β1’s Cartesian system (Cβ1) and
−→
β1 be

the position vector of β1 in Cβ1 after moving.
Action δβ1 indicates that β1 moves in relative
direction δ in Cβ1 if ∀−→v ∈ ∆, θ(

−→
β1, δ) ≤

θ(
−→
β1,
−→v ).

Action !β1 occurs when articulator β1
moves rapidly and continuously (thrills) with-

out changing it’s current place of articulation.

Definition 2.4 (Action Language for SL
Body Articulators ASL). The action lan-
guage for body articulators (ASL) is given by
the following rule:

α ::= π | α ∩ α | α ∪ α | α;α | α∗

where π ∈ ΠSL.
Intuitively, α ∩ α indicates the concurrent

execution of two actions, while α ∪ α means
that at least one of two actions will be non-
deterministically executed. Action α;α de-
scribes the sequential execution of two actions.
Finally, action α∗ indicates the reflexive tran-
sitive closure of α.

Definition 2.5 (Language PDLSL ). The
formulae ϕ of PDLSL are given by the following
rule:

ϕ ::= > | p | ¬ϕ | ϕ ∧ ϕ | [α]ϕ

where p ∈ ΦSL, α ∈ ASL.

2.2 Semantics

PDLSL formulas are interpreted over labeled
transition systems (LTS), in the spirit of the
possible worlds model introduced by (Hin-
tikka, 1962). Models correspond to connected
graphs representing key postures and transi-
tions: states are determined by the values of
their propositions, while edges represent sets
of executed movements. Here we present only
a small extract of the logic semantics.

Definition 2.6 (Sign Language Utterance
Model USL). A sign language utterance model
(USL), is a tuple USL = (S,R, J·KΠSL , J·KΦSL)
where:

• S is a non-empty set of states

• R is a transition relation R ⊆ S×S where,
∀s ∈ S, ∃s′ ∈ S such that (s, s′) ∈ R.

• J·KΠSL : ΠSL → R, denotes the function
mapping actions to the set of binary rela-
tions.

• J·KΦSL : S → 2ΦSL , maps each state to a
set of atomic propositions.

330



We also need to define a structure over se-
quences of states to model internal dependen-
cies between them, nevertheless we decided to
omit the rest of our semantics, alongside satis-
faction conditions, for the sake of readability.

3 Use Case: Semi-Automatic Sign
Recognition

We now present an example of how we can use
our formalism in a semi-automatic sign recog-
nition system. Figure 2 shows a simple module
diagram exemplifying information flow in the
system’s architecture. We proceed to briefly
describe each of our modules and how they
work together.

Corpus

Tracking
and Seg-
mentation
Module

Key
postures &
transitions

PDLSL
Model

Extraction
Module

PDLSL
Verification
Module

PDLSL
Graph

Sign
Formulæ

User
Input

Sign
Proposals

Figure 2: Information flow in a semi-automatic
SL lexical recognition system.

3.1 Tracking and Segmentation
Module

The process starts by capturing relevant infor-
mation from video corpora. We use an exist-
ing head and hand tracker expressly developed
for SL research (Gonzalez and Collet, 2011).
This tool analyses individual video instances,
and returns the frame-by-frame positions of
the tracked articulators. By using this infor-
mation, the module can immediately calculate
speeds and directions on the fly for each hand.

The module further employs the method
proposed by the authors in (Gonzalez and
Collet, 2012) to achieve sub-lexical segmenta-
tion from the previously calculated data. Like
them, we use the relative velocity between
hands to identify when hands either move at
the same time, independently or don’t move at
all. With these, we can produce a set of possi-
ble key postures and transitions that will serve
as input to the modeling module.

3.2 Model Extraction Module

This module calculates a propositional state
for each static posture, where atomic PDLSL

formulas codify the information tracked in the
previous part. Detected movements are inter-
preted as PDLSL actions between states.

...

R↗L
ΞLTORSE

ΞRR_SIDEOFBODY
¬FRL_CONFIG

¬FLFIST_CONFIG
¬T RL

...

...
R←L

ΞLL_SIDEOFBODY
ΞRR_SIDEOFBODY
FRKEY_CONFIG
FLKEY_CONFIG

¬T RL
...

↗L

!D ∩ !G

...
R←L

ΞLCENTEROFBODY
ΞRR_SIDEOFHEAD
FRBEAK_CONFIG
FLINDEX_CONFIG

¬T RL
...

↙L ...
R←L

ΞLL_SIDEOFBODY
ΞRR_SIDEOFBODY

FROPENPALM_CONFIG
FLOPENPALM_CONFIG

¬T RL
...

↗L

Figure 3: Example of modeling over four auto-
matically identified frames as possible key pos-
tures.

Figure 3 shows an example of the process.
Here, each key posture is codified into propo-
sitions acknowledging the hand positions with
respect to each other (R←L ), their place of artic-
ulation (e.g. “left hand floats over the torse”
with ΞLTORSE), their configuration (e.g. “right
hand is open” with FROPENPALM_CONFIG) and their
movements (e.g. “left hand moves to the up-
left direction” with ↗L).

This module also checks that the generated
graph is correct: it will discard simple track-
ing errors to ensure that the resulting LTS will
remain consistent.

3.3 Verification Module

First of all, the verification module has to be
loaded with a database of sign descriptions en-
coded as PDLSL formulas. These will charac-
terize the specific sequence of key postures that
morphologically describe a sign. For exam-
ple, let’s take the case for sign “route” in FSL,
shown in figure 4, with the following PDLSL
formulation,

Example 3.1 (ROUTEFSL formula).

(ΞRFACE ∧ ΞLFACE ∧ L→R ∧ FRCLAMP ∧ FLCLAMP ∧ T RL )→
[←R ∩ →L](L→R ∧ FRCLAMP ∧ FLCLAMP ∧ ¬T RL )

(1)

331



Figure 4: ROUTEFSL production.

Formula (1) describes ROUTEFSL as a sign
with two key postures, connected by a two-
hand simultaneous movement (represented
with operator ∩). It also indicates the posi-
tion of each hand, their orientation, whether
they touch and their respective configurations
(in this example, both hold the same CLAMP
configuration).

The module can then verify whether a sign
formula in the lexical database holds in any
sub-sequence of states of the graph generated
in the previous step. Algorithm 1 sums up the
process.

Algorithm 1 PDLSL Verification Algorithm
Require: SL modelMSL
Require: connected graph GSL
Require: lexical database DBSL
1: Proposals_For[state_qty]
2: for state s ∈ GSL do
3: for sign ϕ ∈ DBSL where s ∈ ϕ do
4: if MSL, s |= ϕ then
5: Proposals_For[s].append(ϕ)
6: end if
7: end for
8: end for
9: return Proposals_For

For each state, the algorithm returns a set
of possible signs. Expert users (or higher level
algorithms) can further refine the process by
introducing additional information previously
missed by the tracker.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

We have shown how a logical language can
be used to model SL signs for semi-automatic
recognition, albeit with some restrictions. The
traits we have chosen to represent were im-
posed by the limits of the tracking tools we
had to our disposition, most notably working

with 2D coordinates. With these in mind, we
tried to design something flexible that could
be easily adapted by computer scientists and
linguists alike. Our primitive sets, were inten-
tionally defined in a very general fashion due
to the same reason: all of the perceived di-
rections, articulators and places of articulation
can easily change their domains, depending on
the SL we are modeling or the technological
constraints we have to deal with. Proposi-
tions can also be changed, or even induced, by
existing written sign representation languages
such as Zebedee (Filhol, 2008) or HamNoSys
(Hanke, 2004), mainly for the sake of extend-
ability.

From the application side, we still need to
create an extensive sign database codified in
PDLSL and try recognition on other corpora,
with different tracking information. For ver-
ification and model extraction, further opti-
mizations are expected, including the handling
of data inconsistencies and repairing broken
queries when verifying the graph.

Regarding our theoretical issues, future
work will be centered in improving our lan-
guage to better comply with SL research. This
includes adding new features, like incorpo-
rating probability representation to improve
recognition. We also expect to finish the defini-
tion of our formal semantics, as well as proving
correction and complexity of our algorithms.

References
Mark Aronoff, Irit Meir, andWendy Sandler. 2005.

The paradox of sign language morphology. Lan-
guage, 81(2):301.

Christian Cuxac and Patrice Dalle. 2007. Problé-
matique des chercheurs en traitement automa-
tique des langues des signes, volume 48 of
Traitement Automatique des Langues. Lavoisier,
http://www.editions-hermes.fr/, October.

Patrice Dalle. 2006. High level models for sign lan-
guage analysis by a vision system. In Workshop
on the Representation and Processing of Sign
Language: Lexicographic Matters and Didactic
Scenarios (LREC), Italy, ELDA, page 17–20.

DictaSign. 2012. http://www.dictasign.eu.

Philippe Dreuw, Daniel Stein, and Hermann Ney.
2009. Enhancing a sign language transla-
tion system with vision-based features. In
Miguel Sales Dias, Sylvie Gibet, Marcelo M.

332



Wanderley, and Rafael Bastos, editors, Gesture-
Based Human-Computer Interaction and Simu-
lation, number 5085 in Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 108–113. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, January.

Philippe Dreuw, Hermann Ney, Gregorio Martinez,
Onno Crasborn, Justus Piater, Jose Miguel
Moya, and Mark Wheatley. 2010. The Sign-
Speak project - bridging the gap between sign-
ers and speakers. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, and et. al., ed-
itors, Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, May. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Michael Filhol. 2008. Modèle descriptif des signes
pour un traitement automatique des langues des
signes. Ph.D. thesis, Université Paris-sud (Paris
11).

Michael Filhol. 2009. Zebedee: a lexical descrip-
tion model for sign language synthesis. Internal,
LIMSI.

Michael J. Fischer and Richard E. Ladner. 1979.
Propositional dynamic logic of regular pro-
grams. Journal of Computer and System Sci-
ences, 18(2):194–211, April.

Frédéric Gianni and Patrice Dalle. 2009. Ro-
bust tracking for processing of videos of com-
munication’s gestures. Gesture-Based Human-
Computer Interaction and Simulation, page
93–101.

Matilde Gonzalez and Christophe Collet. 2011.
Robust body parts tracking using particle fil-
ter and dynamic template. In 2011 18th IEEE
International Conference on Image Processing
(ICIP), pages 529 –532, September.

Matilde Gonzalez and Christophe Collet. 2012.
Sign segmentation using dynamics and hand
configuration for semi-automatic annotation of
sign language corpora. In Eleni Efthimiou,
Georgios Kouroupetroglou, and Stavroula-Evita
Fotinea, editors, Gesture and Sign Language
in Human-Computer Interaction and Embodied
Communication, number 7206 in Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 204–215. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, January.

Thomas Hanke. 2004. HamNoSys—Representing
sign language data in language resources and
language processing contexts. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on the Representation and Pro-
cessing of Sign Languages “From SignWriting to
Image Processing. Information, Lisbon, Portu-
gal, 30 May.

Jaakko Hintikka. 1962. Knowledge and Belief.
Ithaca, N.Y.,Cornell University Press.

Fanch Lejeune. 2004. Analyse sémantico-cognitive
d’énoncés en Langue des Signes Fran\ccaise
pour une génération automatique de séquences
gestuelles. Ph.D. thesis, PhD thesis, Orsay Uni-
versity, France.

Boris Lenseigne and Patrice Dalle. 2006. Us-
ing signing space as a representation for sign
language processing. In Sylvie Gibet, Nicolas
Courty, and Jean-François Kamp, editors, Ges-
ture in Human-Computer Interaction and Sim-
ulation, number 3881 in Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 25–36. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, January.

S. K. Liddell and R. E. Johnson. 1989. American
sign language: The phonological base. Gallaudet
University Press, Washington. DC.

Olivier Losson and Jean-Marc Vannobel. 1998.
Sign language formal description and synthe-
sis. INT.JOURNAL OF VIRTUAL REALITY,
3:27—34.

Irit Meir, Carol Padden, Mark Aronoff, and Wendy
Sandler. 2006. Re-thinking sign language verb
classes: the body as subject. In Sign Languages:
Spinning and Unraveling the Past, Present and
Future. 9th Theoretical Issues in Sign Language
Research Conference, Florianopolis, Brazil, vol-
ume 382.

Sylvie C. W. Ong and Surendra Ranganath. 2005.
Automatic sign language analysis: a survey and
the future beyond lexical meaning. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
ligence, 27(6):873 – 891, June.

William C. Stokoe. 2005. Sign language structure:
An outline of the visual communication systems
of the american deaf. Journal of Deaf Studies
and Deaf Education, 10(1):3–37, January.

Clayton Valli and Ceil Lucas. 2000. Linguistics of
American Sign Language Text, 3rd Edition: An
Introduction. Gallaudet University Press.

Henri Wittmann. 1991. Classification linguis-
tique des langues signées non vocalement. Revue
québécoise de linguistique théorique et appliquée,
10(1):88.

333


