



















































Computational considerations of comparisons and similes


Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop, pages 89–95,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Computational considerations of comparisons and similes

Vlad Niculae
University of Wolverhampton

vlad@vene.ro

Victoria Yaneva
University of Wolverhampton
v.yaneva@wlv.ac.uk

Abstract

This paper presents work in progress to-
wards automatic recognition and classifi-
cation of comparisons and similes.

Among possible applications, we discuss
the place of this task in text simplifica-
tion for readers with Autism Spectrum
Disorders (ASD), who are known to have
deficits in comprehending figurative lan-
guage.

We propose an approach to comparison
recognition through the use of syntactic
patterns. Keeping in mind the require-
ments of autistic readers, we discuss the
properties relevant for distinguishing se-
mantic criteria like figurativeness and ab-
stractness.

1 Introduction

Comparisons are phrases that express the likeness
of two entities. They rely on specific patterns that
make them recognisable. The most obvious pat-
tern, be like , is illustrated by the following
example, but many subtler ways of building com-
parisons exist:

“He was like his father, except he had
a crooked nose and his ears were a little
lopsided.” (In “Black cat” by Alex Krill)

Similes are a subset of comparisons. The simile
is a figure of speech that builds on a comparison in
order to exploit certain attributes of an entity in a
striking manner. According to the Oxford English
Dictionary, what sets a simile apart from a com-
parison is that it compares “one thing with another
thing of a different kind”1.

1“simile, n. a figure of speech involving the comparison
of one thing with another thing of a different kind, used to
make a description more emphatic or vivid (e.g. as brave as a
lion)” OED Online. June 2004. Oxford University Press. 06
February 2013 http://dictionary.oed.com/.

A popular example by Charles Dickens is:

“Mrs. Cratchit entered: flushed, but
smiling proudly: with the pudding, like
a speckled cannon-ball, so hard and
firm, (...)” (In “A Christmas Carol” by
Charles Dickens)

The comparison between a Christmas pudding
and a cannon-ball is so unexpected, as delicious
deserts are not conventionally associated with
cannon-balls (or any kind of metal objects), that
the author needs to clarify the resemblance by
adding “so hard and firm” right after the sim-
ile. Intuitively, the OED definition is confirmed
by these two examples: a Christmas pudding
and a cannon-ball are things of different kinds,
whereas he and his father are things of the same
kind (namely, human males). As we shall see,
the borderline which divides some similes and
fixed expressions is the degree of conventional-
ity. Many other phrases used by Dickens in “A
Christmas Carol” also link two notions of differ-
ent kinds: Old Marley was “as dead as a doornail”
and Scrooge was “as hard as flint” and “as soli-
tary as an oyster”. In these cases, however, the
link between the two entities is a pattern repeated
so many times that it has consequently lost its in-
novativeness and turned into a dead metaphor (“as
dead as a doornail”) or a conventional simile (sec-
tions 4.1, 5.4.2).

The scholarly discussion of the simile has been
controversial, especially with respect to its rela-
tive, the metaphor. The two were regarded as very
close by Aristotle’s Rhetoric: “The simile, also, is
a metaphor, the difference is but slight” (Aristote-
les and Cooper, 1932). However, modern research
has largely focused on metaphor, while the sim-
ile suffered a defiguration, described and argued
against by Bethlehem (1996): in order to support
the idea that the metaphor embodies the essence of
figurativeness, the simile was gradually stripped of

89



its status as figure of speech.
Metaphor is defined as “a word or phrase ap-

plied to an object or action to which it is not liter-
ally applicable”2.

In other words, a metaphor links features of ob-
jects or events from two different, often incompat-
ible domains, thus being a “realization of a cross-
domain conceptual mapping” (Deignan, 2005).
We are interested in the parallel between similes
and metaphors insofar as it points to an overlap.
There are types of similes that can be transformed
into equivalent metaphors, and certain metaphors
can be rewritten as similes, but neither set is in-
cluded in the other. This view is supported by
corpus evidence (Hanks, 2012) and contradicts re-
ductionist defiguration point of view, in a way that
Israel et al. (2004) suggest: some metaphors ex-
press things that cannot be expressed by similes,
and vice versa.

In computational linguistics, similes have been
neglected in favour of metaphor even more than
in linguistics3 , despite the fact that comparisons
have a structure that makes them rather amenable
to automated processing. In sections 2 we discuss
one motivation for studying comparisons and sim-
iles: their simplification to language better suited
for people with ASD. Section 3 reviews related
work on figurative language in NLP. In section 4
we present the structure of comparisons and some
associated patterns, emphasising the difficulties
posed by the flexibility of language. Section 5
describes computational approaches to the tasks,
along with results from preliminary experiments
supporting our ideas. The study is wrapped up and
future work is presented in section 6.

2 Autism and simile comprehension

2.1 Autism and figurative language

Highly abstract or figurative metaphors and sim-
iles may be problematic for certain groups of
language users amongst which are people with
different types of acquired language disorders
(aphasias) or developmental ones like ASD. As
a result of impairment in communication, social
interaction and behaviour, ASD are characterised

2“metaphor, n.” OED Online. June 2004. Oxford Univer-
sity Press. 06 February 2013 http://dictionary.oed.com/

3A Google Scholar search for papers containing the word
linguistic have the word metaphor in the title approximately
5000 times, but simile only around 645 times. In the ACL
anthology, metaphor occurs around 1070 times while simile
occurs 52 times.

by atypical information processing in diverse areas
of cognition (Skoyles, 2011). People with autism,
especially if they are children, experience disturb-
ing confusion when confronted with figurative lan-
guage. Happé (1995) describes:

A request to “Stick your coat down over
there” is met by a serious request for
glue. Ask if she will “give you a hand”,
and she will answer that she needs to
keep both hands and cannot cut one off
to give to you. Tell him that his sister
is “crying her eyes out” and he will look
anxiously on the floor for her eye-balls...

The decreased ability of autistic people to un-
derstand metaphors and figurative language as a
whole (Rundblad and Annaz, 2010; MacKay and
Shaw, 2004; Happé, 1995), could be seen as an ob-
stacle in communication, given that we all “think
in metaphors” and a language system is “figura-
tive in its nature” (Lakoff and Johson, 1980). The
growing demand to overcome this barrier has led
to the investigation of possible ways in which NLP
can detect and simplify non-literal expressions in
a text.

2.2 Comprehending similes

People with ASD4 show almost no impairment
in comprehending those similes which have lit-
eral meaning (Happé, 1995). This relative ease in
processing is probably due to the fact that similes
contain explicit markers (e.g. like and as), which
evoke comparison between two things in a certain
aspect.

With regard to understanding figurative similes,
Hobson (2012) describes in the case of fifteen-
year-old L.: “He could neither grasp nor formulate
similarities, differences or absurdities, nor could
he understand metaphor”.

Theoretically, one of the most obvious markers
of similes, the word like, could be a source of a
lot of misinterpretations. For example, like could
be a verb, a noun, or a preposition, depending on
the context. Given that autistic people have prob-
lems understanding context (Skoyles, 2011), how
would an autistic reader perceive the role of like
in a more elaborate and ambiguous comparison?
Another possible linguistic reason for the impaired
understanding of similes might be that like is used

4With level of cognitive ability corresponding to at least
first level of Theory of Mind (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985)

90



ambiguously in many expressions which are nei-
ther similes nor comparisons, such as I feel like an
ice cream or I feel like something is wrong.

Even if the expression does not include such
an ambiguous use of like, there are other cases
in which a person with autism might be misled.
For example, if the simile is highly figurative or
abstract, it may be completely incomprehensible
for people with ASD (e.g. the conventional Love is
like a flame). A step forward towards the simpli-
fication of such expressions is their identification
and filtering of the ones that are not problematic.
Through manipulations, the difficult aspects such
as abstractness, figurativeness, and ambiguity can
be attenuated.

3 Relevant literature

Comprehensive theoretical investigations into the
expressive power of similes can be found in
(Bethlehem, 1996) and (Israel et al., 2004).
Weiner (1984) applies ontologies to discriminate
simple literal and figurative comparisons (loosely
using the term metaphor to refer to what we call
the intersection of similes and metaphors).

Most of the recent computational linguistics re-
search involving similes comes from Veale. In
(Veale and Hao, 2008), the pattern as as is ex-
ploited to mine salient and stereotypical properties
of entities using the Google search engine. A sim-
ilar process has been applied to both English and
Chinese by Li et al. (2012). The Metaphor Mag-
net system presented in (Veale and Li, 2012) sup-
ports queries against a rich ontology of metaphor-
ical meanings and affects using the same simple
simile patterns. The Jigsaw Bard (Veale and Hao,
2011) is a thesaurus driven by figurative conven-
tional similes extracted from the Google Ngram
corpus.

The role played by figurative language in the
field of text simplification has not been extensively
studied outside of a few recent publications (Tem-
nikova, 2012; Štajner et al., 2012).

4 Anatomy of a comparison

4.1 Conventionality: norms and exploitations
The theory of norms and exploitations (Hanks,
2013) describes language norms as “a pattern of
ordinary usage in everyday language with which
a particular meaning or implicature is associated”
and argues that norms can be exploited in differ-
ent ways in order to “say new things or to say old

things in new and interesting ways”. This distinc-
tion can be applied to similes: as slow as a snail
is a conventional simile that evokes strong asso-
ciation between slowness and snails. On the con-
trary, in she looked like a cross between a Christ-
mas tree and an American footballer (example
adapted from the British National Corpus, hence-
forth BNC) a person (the topic) is not convention-
ally associated with a Christmas tree (the vehicle),
let alone if it is crossed with a football player. In
this example the vehicle is not merely unexpected,
it also does not exist as a common pattern, and can,
by itself, create amazement.

Though figures of speech are good ways to ex-
ploit norms, figurative language can become con-
ventional, and an exploitation can be literal (e.g.
word creation, ellipsis).

The border between conventionality and cre-
ativeness is fuzzy and heuristics such as the ones
proposed in (Deignan, 2005) can only approxi-
mate it. Possible alternative methods are discussed
in section 5.4.2.

4.2 Syntactic structure
The breadth of comparisons and similes hasn’t
been extensively studied, so there is no surprise
in the small amount of coverage in computational
linguistics research on the subject. In order to de-
velop a solid foundation for working with complex
comparisons, we will follow and argue for the ter-
minology from (Hanks, 2012), where the structure
of a simile is analysed. The same structure applies
to comparisons, since as we have said, all simi-
les are comparisons and they are indistinguishable
syntactically. The constituents of a comparison
are:

• T : the topic, sometimes called tenor: it is
usually a noun phrase and acts as logical sub-
ject.

• E: the eventuality (event or state): usually a
verb, it sets the frame for the observation of
the common property.

• P : the shared property or ground: it ex-
presses what the two entities have in com-
mon.

• C: the comparator: commonly a preposition
(like or part of an adjectival phrase (better
than), it is the trigger word or phrase that
marks the presence of a comparison.

91



VG

E = VB

HE
AD

T

SB
J

PP

IN

C ∈ { like, as }

H
EA

D

V

O
BJ

COM
P/ADV

(a) Basic comparison pattern. Matches he
eats like a pig and it is seen as a release.

VG

E = VB

HE
AD

T

SB
J

ADJP

IN

C = as

AD
V

JJ

P

H
E

A
D

SBAR

IN

C = as

SU
BO

RD

V = S

SEN
T

DGCOMP

PRD

(b) Explicit comparison with double as.
Matches expressions like it’s as easy as pie.

Figure 1: GLARF-style representation of two basic comparison patterns.

• V : the vehicle: it is the object of the compar-
ison and is also usually a noun phrase.

An example (adapted from the BNC) of a simile
involving all of the above would be:

[He T ] [looked E] [like C] [a broiled
frog V ], [hunched P ] over his desk, grin-
ning and satisfied.

The order of the elements is flexible.
Fishelov (1993) attributes this reordering to
poetic simile, along with other deviations from
the norm that he defines as non-poetic simile.
We note, in agreement with Bethlehem (1996),
that the distinction is rendered less useful when
the focus is on the vague notion of poeticality.
Fishelov even suggested that poetic similes can be
found outside of poetic text, and vice versa. We
will therefore focus on exploitations that change
the meaning.

More often than not, the property is left for the
reader to deduce:

[His mouth T ] [tasted E] [like C] [the
bottom of a parrot’s cage V ]

But even when all elements appear, the compar-
ison may be ambiguous, as lexical choice in P and
in E lead to various degrees of specificity. For
example replacing the word tasted, which forms
the E in the example above, with the more gen-
eral predicator is, results in a simile that might

have the same meaning, but is more difficult to
decode. On the other hand, the whole V phrase
the bottom of a parrot’s cage, which is an eu-
phemistic metonymy, could be substituted with
its concrete, literal meaning thus transforming the
creative simile into what might be a conventional
pattern. Nested figures of speech can also occur at
this level, for example the insertion of a metaphor-
ical and synesthetic P : it tasted [dirty P ], like a
parrot’s cage.

We consider the eventuality E as the syntac-
tic core of the comparison structure. Despite the
apparently superior importance of the comparator,
which acts as a trigger word, the event acts as a
predicator, attracting to it the entire structure in
the form of a set of arguments. This observation
is missing from the work of Fishelov (1993) and
Bethlehem (1996), who lump the event together
with either P or T . In terms of meaning, the two
constituents are of course tightly connected, but
to computationally identify the components, their
separation is important.

Roncero (2006) pointed out that for certain
common similes (e.g. love is like a rose) found
on the Internet, it is likely that an explanation of
the shared property follows, whereas for all topic-
vehicle pairs studied, the corresponding metaphor
is less often explained. However, these simpler
similes form a special case, as most similes can-
not be made into metaphors (Hanks, 2012).

92



4.3 Comparisons without like

Hanks (2012) observes that there are plenty of
other ways to make a simile in addition to using
like or as. Most definitions of similes indeed claim
that there are more possible comparators, but ex-
amples are elusive.

Israel et al. (2004) point out that any construc-
tion that can make a comparison can be used to
make a simile. This is a crucial point given the
amount of flexibility available for such construc-
tions. An example they give is:

[The retirement of Yves Saint Laurent
T ] [is E] [the fashion equivalent C] of
[the breakup of the Beatles V ]. (heard
on the National Public Radio)

We can see that it is possible for the comparator
to be informative and not just an empty marker, in
this case marking the domain (fashion) to which
the topic refers to.

5 Approaches proposed

5.1 Overview

Simplifying creative language involves under-
standing. The task of understanding similes may
be hard to achieve. We will not just write about
the components we have already developed (the
pattern matching), but also present a broader plan.
At a coarse scale, the process breaks down into a
syntactic recognition step and a semantic step that
could be called entailment. The goal is to find out
what is being said about the topic. Often similes
claim that a property is present or absent, but this
is not always the case.

5.2 Dataset

At the moment there is no available dataset for
comparison and simile recognition and classifica-
tion. We have begun our investigation and de-
veloped the patterns on a toy dataset consisting
of the examples from (Hanks, 2005), which are
comparisons, similes and other ambiguous uses
of the preposition like extracted from the BNC.
We also evaluated the system on around 500 sen-
tences containing like and as from the BNC and
the VUAMC5. The latter features some marking
of trigger words, but we chose to score manually
in order to assess the relevance of the annotation.

5VU Amsterdam Metaphor Corpus (Steen et al., 2010),
available at www.metaphorlab.vu.nl

5.3 Recognizing comparisons and similes

5.3.1 Comparison pattern matching
We have seen that similes are a subset of compar-
isons and follow comparison structures. A good
consequence is that they follow syntactic patterns
that can be recognised. We have used GLARF
(Meyers et al., 2001), an argument representation
framework built on the output of the BLLIP parser.
It enhances the constituency-based parse tree with
additional roles and arguments by applying rules
and resources like Propbank. The like and as com-
parators form the GLARF-style patterns shown in
figure 1. The matching process iterates over all
nodes with arguments, principally verbs and nom-
inalisations. If the subtree rooted under it matches
certain filters, then we assign to the root the role
of E and the arguments can fill the other slots.

We evaluated the process on the small devel-
opment set as well as on the larger set of lexi-
cal matches described above. The results are pre-
sented in table 1. The mistakes on the develop-
ment set, as well as many on the other corpus, are
caused by slightly different patterns (e.g. he didn’t
look much like a doctor). This can be addressed
by adjustment or through automatic discovery of
patterns. Expressions like in hold your hands like
this are mistaken as comparisons. Ad hoc set
constructions are mostly correctly unmatched (e.g.
big earners like doctors and airline pilots but in-
correctly matches semantically ambiguous uses of
feel like.

On the lexical matches of as, the behaviour is
different as the word seems much less likely to be
a trigger. Most errors are therefore returning spu-
rious matches, as opposed to like, where most er-
rors are omissions This suggests that each trigger
word behaves differently, and therefore robustness
across patterns is important.

Overall, our method handles typical compar-
isons in short sentences rather well. Complex or
long sentences sometimes cause T and V to be in-
completely identified, or sometimes the parse to
fail. This suggests that deep syntactic parsing is a
limitation of the approach.

5.3.2 Discovering new patterns
Using a seed-based semi-supervised iterative pro-
cess, we plan to identify most of the frequent
structures used to build conventional comparisons.
We expect that, in addition to idiomatic expres-
sions, some T -V pairs often compared to each

93



full part none
comparison 24 5 4

not comparison 1 1 5

(a) Counts of 40 examples with like from the
development set in (Hanks, 2005). Partial match

P = 94%, R = 88%.

full part none
0.17 0.07 0.33
0.05 0.05 0.33

(b) Proportions of 410
examples with like from BNC
and VUAMC. Partial match
P = 70.5%, R = 41.7%

full part none
0.11 0.05 0.09
0.26 0.11 0.39

(c) Proportions of 376
examples with as from BNC
and VUAMC. Partial match
P = 29.6%, R = 64.8%

Table 1: Confusion matrices and precision/recall scores for comparison identification. Full matching is
when the heads of T,E, V and C are correctly identified, while partial is if only some of them are.

other with the like pattern will occur in other syn-
tactical patterns or lexical collocations.

5.4 Semantic aspects

5.4.1 Classifying comparisons
The phrases that match patterns like the ones de-
scribed are not necessarily comparisons. Due to
ambiguities, sentences such as I feel like an ice
cream are indistinguishable from comparisons in
our model.

Another aspect we would like to distinguish is
whether an instance of a pattern is a simile or not.
We plan to tackle this using machine learning. Se-
mantic features from an ontology like the one used
in PDEV6, or a more comprehensive work such as
WordNet7, can carry the information whether T
and V belong to similar semantic categories. We
expect other information, such as distributional
and distributed word vector representations, to be
of use.

5.4.2 Conventional similes
It may also be of interest to decide whether an in-
stance is conventional or creative. This can be im-
plemented by measuring corpus frequencies. In-
stead of looking for perfect matches, patterns can
be applied to simply count how many times some-
thing is compared to a V , regardless of the specific
syntax used8.

5.4.3 Simplification
The goal of text simplification is to generate syn-
tactically well-formed language9 that is easier to

6http://deb.fi.muni.cz/pdev/
7http://wordnet.princeton.edu/
8Care must be taken to avoid contradictions from ex-

ploitations: The aircraft is like a rock or is built like a rock
seems like a conventional simile, but The aircraft would gen-
tly skip like a rock and then settle down on the surface of the
ocean (Example from the BNC) is unconventional.

9Especially for ASD readers, who are very sensitive to
language mistakes to the point that it completely distracts
them from the meaning.

understand than the original phrase.
A comparison can be formalized as predicate

E(T ;P ). We can think of his mouth tasted like
the bottom of a parrot’s cage as a way to express
taste(his mouth; very bad). There is more than
one way to build such an encoding.

The task reduces to the generation a simple
phrase of the form T ′E′P ′, by simplifying the
elements of the representation above. Useful re-
sources are corpus occurrence counts of related
phrases, word similarity and relatedness, and con-
ventional associations.

6 Conclusions and future work

The problem of automatic identification of similes
has its place in the paradigm of text simplification
for people with language impairments. In particu-
lar, people with ASD have difficulties understand-
ing figurative language.

We applied the idea of comparison patterns to
match subtrees of an enhanced parse tree to eas-
ily match comparison structures and their con-
stituents. This lead us to investigate corpus-driven
mining of new comparison patterns, to go beyond
like and as.

We are working on semi-automatically develop-
ing a dataset of comparisons and ambiguous non-
comparisons, labelled with the interesting proper-
ties and with a focus on pattern variety and am-
biguous cases. This will be useful for evaluat-
ing our system at a proper scale. We plan to per-
form extrinsic evaluation with respect to tasks like
text simplification, textual entailment and machine
translation.

Acknowledgements

The research described in this paper was partially
funded by the European Commission through the
FIRST project (FP7-287607) and partially by the
BCROCE project.

94



References
Aristoteles and Lane Cooper. 1932. The rhetoric of

Aristotle. Appleton.

Simon Baron-Cohen, Alan M Leslie, and Uta Frith.
1985. Does the autistic child have a “theory of
mind”? Cognition, 21(1):37–46.

Louise Shabat Bethlehem. 1996. Simile and figurative
language. Poetics Today, v17(n2):p203(38). table.

Alice Deignan. 2005. Metaphor and Corpus Linguis-
tics. Converging Evidence in Language and Com-
munication Research Series. John Benjamins.

David Fishelov. 1993. Poetic and non-poetic simile:
Structure, semantics, rhetoric. Poetics Today, pages
1–23.

Patrick Hanks. 2005. Similes and Sets: The English
Preposition ’like’. In R. Blatná and V. Petkevic, ed-
itors, Languages and Linguistics: Festschrift for Fr.
Cermak.

Patrick Hanks. 2012. The Roles and Structure of Com-
parisons, Similes, and Metaphors in Natural Lan-
guage (An Analogical System). In Presented at the
Stockholm Metaphor Festival, September 6-8.

Patrick Hanks. 2013. Lexical Analysis: Norms and
Exploitations. Mit Press.

Francesca G. E. Happé. 1995. Understanding minds
and metaphors: Insights from the study of figurative
language in autism. Metaphor and Symbolic Activ-
ity, 10(4):275–295.

R. Peter Hobson. 2012. Autism, literal language and
concrete thinking: Some developmental considera-
tions. Metaphor and Symbol, 27(1):4–21.

Michael Israel, Jennifer Riddle Harding, and Vera To-
bin. 2004. On simile. Language, Culture, and
Mind. CSLI Publications.

George Lakoff and Mark Johson. 1980. Metaphors We
Live By. Cátedra.

Bin Li, Jiajun Chen, and Yingjie Zhang. 2012. Web
based collection and comparison of cognitive prop-
erties in english and chinese. In Proceedings of
the Joint Workshop on Automatic Knowledge Base
Construction and Web-scale Knowledge Extraction,
AKBC-WEKEX ’12, pages 31–34, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Gilbert MacKay and Adrienne Shaw. 2004. A com-
parative study of figurative language in children with
autistic spectrum disorders. Child Language Teach-
ing and Therapy, 20(1):13–32.

Adam Meyers, Ralph Grishman, Michiko Kosaka, and
Shubin Zhao. 2001. Covering treebanks with glarf.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2001 Workshop on Shar-
ing Tools and Resources - Volume 15, STAR ’01,

pages 51–58, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Carlos Roncero, John M. Kennedy, and Ron Smyth.
2006. Similes on the internet have explanations.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13:74–77.

Gabriella Rundblad and Dagmara Annaz. 2010. The
atypical development of metaphor and metonymy
comprehension in children with autism. Autism,
14(1):29–46.

John R Skoyles. 2011. Autism, context/noncontext
information processing, and atypical development.
Autism research and treatment, 2011.

G.J. Steen, A.G. Dorst, and J.B. Herrmann. 2010.
A Method for Linguistic Metaphor Identification:
From Mip to Mipvu. Converging evidence in lan-
guage and communication research. Benjamins.

Irina Temnikova. 2012. Text Complexity and Text Sim-
plification in the Crisis Management domain. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhamp-
ton, UK, May.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2008. A context-sensitive
framework for lexical ontologies. Knowledge Eng.
Review, 23(1):101–115.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2011. Exploiting ready-
mades in linguistic creativity: A system demonstra-
tion of the jigsaw bard. In ACL (System Demonstra-
tions), pages 14–19. The Association for Computer
Linguistics.

Tony Veale and Guofu Li. 2012. Specifying viewpoint
and information need with affective metaphors: A
system demonstration of the metaphor-magnet web
app/service. In ACL (System Demonstrations),
pages 7–12. The Association for Computer Linguis-
tics.

Sanja Štajner, Richard Evans, Constantin Orasan, and
Ruslan Mitkov. 2012. What can readability mea-
sures really tell us about text complexity? In
Luz Rello and Horacio Saggion, editors, Proceed-
ings of the LREC’12 Workshop: Natural Lan-
guage Processing for Improving Textual Accessibil-
ity (NLP4ITA), page 14, Istanbul, Turkey, may. Eu-
ropean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

E. Judith Weiner. 1984. A knowledge representation
approach to understanding metaphors. Comput. Lin-
guist., 10(1):1–14, January.

95


