



















































WebAnno: A Flexible, Web-based and Visually Supported System for Distributed Annotations


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1–6,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

WebAnno: A Flexible, Web-based and Visually Supported
System for Distributed Annotations

Seid Muhie Yimam1,3 Iryna Gurevych2,3 Richard Eckart de Castilho2 Chris Biemann1
(1) FG Language Technology, Dept. of Computer Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt

(2) Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP-TUDA)
Dept. of Computer Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt

(3) Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP-DIPF)
German Institute for Educational Research and Educational Information

http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
We present WebAnno, a general pur-
pose web-based annotation tool for a wide
range of linguistic annotations. Web-
Anno offers annotation project manage-
ment, freely configurable tagsets and the
management of users in different roles.
WebAnno uses modern web technology
for visualizing and editing annotations in
a web browser. It supports arbitrarily
large documents, pluggable import/export
filters, the curation of annotations across
various users, and an interface to farming
out annotations to a crowdsourcing plat-
form. Currently WebAnno allows part-of-
speech, named entity, dependency parsing
and co-reference chain annotations. The
architecture design allows adding addi-
tional modes of visualization and editing,
when new kinds of annotations are to be
supported.

1 Introduction

The creation of training data precedes any sta-
tistical approach to natural language processing
(NLP). Linguistic annotation is a process whereby
linguistic information is added to a document,
such as part-of-speech, lemmata, named entities,
or dependency relations. In the past, platforms
for linguistic annotations were mostly developed
ad-hoc for the given annotation task at hand, used
proprietary formats for data exchange, or required
local installation effort. We present WebAnno, a
browser-based tool that is immediately usable by
any annotator with internet access. It supports an-
notation on a variety of linguistic levels (called an-
notation layers in the remainder), is interoperable
with a variety of data formats, supports annotation
project management such as user management, of-
fers an adjudication interface, and provides qual-
ity management using inter-annotator agreement.

Furthermore, an interface to crowdsourcing plat-
forms enables scaling out simple annotation tasks
to a large numbers of micro-workers. The added
value of WebAnno, as compared to previous an-
notation tools, is on the one hand its web-based
interface targeted at skilled as well as unskilled
annotators, which unlocks a potentially very large
workforce. On the other hand, it is the support for
quality control, annotator management, and adju-
dication/curation, which lowers the entrance bar-
rier for new annotation projects. We created Web-
Anno to fulfill the following requirements:

• Web-based: Distributed work, no installation
effort, increased availability.

• Interface to crowdsourcing: unlocking a very
large distributed workforce.

• Quality and user management: Integrated
different user roles support (administra-
tor, annotator, and curator), inter-annotator
agreement measurement, data curation, and
progress monitoring.

• Flexibility: Support of multiple annotation
layers, pluggable import and export formats,
and extensibility to other front ends.

• Pre-annotated and un-annotated documents:
supporting new annotations, as well as man-
ual corrections of existing, possibly auto-
matic annotations.

• Permissive open source: Usability of our tool
in future projects without restrictions, under
the Apache 2.0 license.

In the following section, we revisit related work
on annotation tools, which only partially fulfill the
aforementioned requirements. In Section 3, the ar-
chitecture as well as usage aspects of our tool are
lined out. The scope and functionality summary

1



of WebAnno is presented in Section 4. Section 5
elaborates on several use cases of WebAnno, and
Section 6 concludes and gives an outlook to fur-
ther directions.

2 Related Work

GATE Teamware (Bontcheva et al., 2010) is prob-
ably the tool that closely matches our requirements
regarding quality management, annotator manage-
ment, and support of a large set of annotation lay-
ers and formats. It is mostly web-based, but the
annotation is carried out with locally downloaded
software. An interface to crowdsourcing platforms
is missing. The GATE Teamware system is heav-
ily targeted towards template-based information
extraction. It sets a focus on the integration of au-
tomatic annotation components rather than on the
interface for manual annotation. Besides, the over-
all application is rather complex for average users,
requires considerable training and does not offer
an alternative simplified interface as it would be
required for crowdsourcing.

General-purpose annotation tools like MMAX2
(Müller and Strube, 2006) or WordFreak (Morton
and LaCivita, 2003) are not web-based and do not
provide annotation project management. They are
also not sufficiently flexible regarding different an-
notation layers. The same holds for specialized
tools for single annotation layers, which we can-
not list here for the sake of brevity.

With the brat rapid annotation tool (Stenetorp
et al., 2012), for the first time a web-based open-
source annotation tool was introduced, which sup-
ports collaborative annotation for multiple anno-
tation layers simultaneously on a single copy of
the document, and is based on a client-server ar-
chitecture. However, the current version of brat
has limitations such as: (i) slowness for docu-
ments of more than 100 sentences, (ii) limits re-
garding file formats, (iii) web-based configuration
of tagsets/tags is not possible and (iv) configuring
the display of multiple layers is not yet supported.
While we use brat’s excellent visualization front
end in WebAnno, we decided to replace the server
layer to support the user and quality management,
and monitoring tools as well as to add the interface
to crowdsourcing.

3 System Architecture of WebAnno

The overall architecture of WebAnno is depicted
in Figure 1. The modularity of the architecture,

Figure 1: System architecture, organized in user,
front end, back end and persistent data storage.

which is mirrored in its open-source implementa-
tion1, makes it possible to easily extend the tool or
add alternative user interfaces for annotation lay-
ers that brat is less suited for, e.g. for constituent
structure. In Section 3.1, we illustrate how differ-
ent user roles are provided with different graphical
user interfaces, and show the expressiveness of the
annotation model. Section 3.2 elaborates on the
functionality of the back end, and describes how
data is imported and exported, as well as our im-
plementation of the persistent data storage.

3.1 Front End

All functionality of WebAnno is accessible via
a web browser. For annotation and visualiza-
tion of annotated documents, we adapted the brat
rapid annotation tool. Changes had to be made to
make brat interoperate with the Apache Wicket,
on which WebAnno is built, and to better integrate
into the WebAnno experience.

3.1.1 Project Definition

The definition and the monitoring of an annota-
tion project is conducted by a project manager (cf.
Figure 1) in a project definition form. It supports
creating a project, loading un-annotated or pre-
annotated documents in different formats2, adding
annotator and curator users, defining tagsets, and
configuring the annotation layers. Only a project
manager can administer a project. Figure 2 illus-
trates the project definition page with the tagset
editor highlighted.

1Available for download at (this paper is based on v0.3.0):
webanno.googlecode.com/

2Formats: plain text, CoNLL (Nivre et al., 2007), TCF
(Heid et al., 2010), UIMA XMI (Ferrucci and Lally, 2004)

2



Figure 2: The tagset editor on the project definition page

3.1.2 Annotation
Annotation is carried out with an adapted ver-
sion of the brat editor, which communicates with
the server via Ajax (Wang et al., 2008) using the
JSON (Lin et al., 2012) format. Annotators only
see projects they are assigned to. The annotation
page presents the annotator different options to set
up the annotation environment, for customization:

• Paging: For heavily annotated documents or
very large documents, the original brat vi-
sualization is very slow, both for displaying
and annotating the document. We use a pag-
ing mechanism that limits the number of sen-
tences displayed at a time to make the perfor-
mance independent of the document size.

• Annotation layers: Annotators usually work
on one or two annotations layers, such as
part-of-speech and dependency or named en-
tity annotation. Overloading the annota-
tion page by displaying all annotation layers
makes the annotation and visualization pro-
cess slower. WebAnno provides an option to
configure visible/editable annotation layers.

• Immediate persistence: Every annotation is
sent to the back end immediately and per-
sisted there. An explicit interaction by the
user to save changes is not required.

3.1.3 Workflow
WebAnno implements a simple workflow to track
the state of a project. Every annotator works on a

separate version of the document, which is set to
the state in progress the first time a document is
opened by the annotator. The annotator can then
mark it as complete at the end of annotation at
which point it is locked for further annotation and
can be used for curation. Such a document cannot
be changed anymore by an annotator, but can be
used by a curator. A curator can mark a document
as adjudicated.

3.1.4 Curation
The curation interface allows the curator to open a
document and compare annotations made by the
annotators that already marked the document as
complete. The curator reconciles the annotation
with disagreements. The curator can either decide
on one of the presented alternatives, or freely re-
annotate. Figure 3 illustrates how the curation in-
terface detects sentences with annotation disagree-
ment (left side of Figure 3) which can be used to
navigate to the sentences for curation.

3.1.5 Monitoring
WebAnno provides a monitoring component, to
track the progress of a project. The project man-
ager can check the progress and compute agree-
ment with Kappa and Tau (Carletta, 1996) mea-
sures. The progress is visualized using a matrix of
annotators and documents displaying which docu-
ments the annotators have marked as complete and
which documents the curator adjudicated. Fig-
ure 4 shows the project progress, progress of in-
dividual annotator and completion statistics.

3



Figure 3: Curation user interface (left: sentences
with disagreement; right: merging editor)

3.1.6 Crowdsourcing

Crowdsourcing is a way to quickly scale annota-
tion projects. Distributing a task that otherwise
will be performed by a controlled user group has
become much easier. Hence, if quality can be en-
sured, it is an alternative to high quality annotation
using a large number of arbitrary redundant anno-
tations (Wang et al., 2013). For WebAnno, we
have designed an approach where a source doc-
ument is split into small parts that get presented
to micro-workers in the CrowdFlower platform3.
The crowdsourcing component is a separate mod-
ule that handles the communication via Crowd-
Flower’s API, the definition of test items and job
parameters, and the aggregation of results. The
crowdsourced annotation appears as a virtual an-
notator in the tool.

Since it is not trivial to express complex anno-
tation tasks in comparably simple templates suit-
able for crowdsourcing (Biemann, 2013), we pro-
ceed by working out crowdsourcing templates and
strategies per annotation layer. We currently only
support named entity annotation with predefined
templates. However, the open and modular archi-
tecture allows to add more crowdsourced annota-
tion layers.

3.2 Back End

WebAnno is a Java-based web application that
may run on any modern servlet container. In mem-
ory and on the file system, annotations are stored

3www.crowdflower.com

Figure 4: Project monitoring

as UIMA CAS objects (Ferrucci and Lally, 2004).
All other data is persisted in an SQL database.

3.2.1 Data Conversion

WebAnno supports different data models that re-
flect the different communication of data between
the front end, back end, and the persistent data
storage. The brat data model serves exchanging
data between the front end and the back end.

The documents are stored in their original for-
mats. For annotations, we use the type system
from the DKPro Core collection of UIMA compo-
nents (Eckart de Castilho and Gurevych, 2009)4.
This is converted to the brat model for visualiza-
tion. Importing documents and exporting anno-
tations is implemented using UIMA reader and
writer components from DKPro Core as plug-ins.
Thus, support for new formats can easily be added.
To provide quick reaction times in the user inter-
face, WebAnno internally stores annotations in a
binary format, using the SerializedCasReader and
SerializedCasWriter components.

3.2.2 Persistent Data Storage

Project definitions including project name and de-
scriptions, tagsets and tags, and user details are
kept in a database, whereas the documents and an-
notations are stored in the file system. WebAnno
supports limited versioning of annotations, to pro-
tect against the unforeseen loss of data. Figure 5
shows the database entity relation diagram.

4code.google.com/p/dkpro-core-asl/

4



Figure 5: WebAnno database scheme

4 Scope and Functionality Summary

WebAnno supports the production of linguistically
annotated corpora for different natural language
processing applications. WebAnno implements
ease of usage and simplicity for untrained users,
and provides:

• Annotation via a fast, and easy-to-use web-
based user interface.

• Project and user management.

• Progress and quality monitoring.

• Interactive curation by adjudicating disagree-
ing annotations from multiple users.

• Crowdsourcing of annotation tasks.

• Configurable annotation types and tag sets.

5 Use Cases

WebAnno currently allows to configure different
span and arc annotations. It comes pre-configured
with the following annotation layers from the
DKPro Core type system:

Span annotations

• Part-of-Speech (POS) tags: an annotation
task on tokens. Currently, POS can be added
to a token, if not already present, and can be
modified. POS annotation is a prerequisite of
dependency annotation (Figure 6).

Figure 6: Parts-of-speech & dependency relations

Figure 7: Co-reference & named entites

• Named entities: a multiple span annotation
task. Spans can cover multiple adjacent to-
kens, nest and overlap (Figure 7), but cannot
cross sentence boundaries.

Arc Annotations

• Dependency relations: This is an arc annota-
tion which connects two POS tag annotations
with a directed relation (Figure 6).

• Co-reference chains: The co-reference chain
is realized as a set of typed mention spans
linked by typed co-reference relation arcs.
The co-reference relation annotation can
cross multiple sentences and is represented in
co-reference chains (Figure 7).

The brat front end supports tokens and sub-
tokens as a span annotation. However, tokens are
currently the minimal annotation units in Web-
Anno, due to a requirement of supporting the TCF
file format (Heid et al., 2010). Part-of-speech an-
notation is limited to singles token, while named
entity and co-reference chain annotations may
span multiple tokens. Dependency relations are
implemented in such a way that the arc is drawn
from the governor to the dependent (or the other
way around, configurable), while co-reference
chains are unidirectional and a chain is formed by
referents that are transitively connected by arcs.

Based on common practice in manual annota-
tion, every user works on their own copy of the
same document so that no concurrent editing oc-
curs. We also found that displaying all annotation
layers at the same time is inconvenient for anno-
tators. This is why WebAnno supports showing

5



and hiding of individual annotation layers. The
WebAnno curation component displays all anno-
tation documents from all users for a given source
document, enabling the curator to visualize all of
the annotations with differences at a time. Unlike
most of the annotation tools which rely on config-
uration files, WebAnno enables to freely configure
all parameters directly in the browser.

6 Conclusion and Outlook

WebAnno is a new web-based linguistic annota-
tion tool. The brat annotation and GUI front end
have been enhanced to support rapidly process-
ing large annotation documents, configuring the
annotation tag and tagsets in the browser, speci-
fying visible annotation layers, separating anno-
tation documents per user, just to name the most
important distinctions. Besides, WebAnno sup-
ports project definition, import/export of tag and
tagsets. Flexible support for importing and ex-
porting different data formats is handled through
UIMA components from the DKPro Core project.
The monitoring component of WebAnno helps the
administrator to control the progress of annotators.
The crowdsourcing component of WebAnno pro-
vides a unique functionality to distribute the an-
notation to a large workforce and automatically
integrate the results back into the tool via the
crowdsourcing server. The WebAnno annotation
tool supports curation of different annotation doc-
uments, displaying annotation documents created
by users in a given project with annotation dis-
agreements. In future work, WebAnno will be en-
hanced to support several other front ends to han-
dle even more annotation layers, and to provide
more crowdsourcing templates. Another planned
extension is a more seamless integration of lan-
guage processing tools for pre-annotation.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Benjamin Milde and Andreas
Straninger, who assisted in implementing WebAnno, as well
as Marc Reznicek, Nils Reiter and the whole CLARIN-D F-
AG 7 for testing and providing valuable feedback. The work
presented in this paper was funded by a German BMBF grant
to the CLARIN-D project, the Hessian LOEWE research ex-
cellence program as part of the research center “Digital Hu-
manities” and by the Volkswagen Foundation as part of the
Lichtenberg-Professorship Program under grant No. I/82806.

References
Chris Biemann. 2013. Creating a system for lexical substi-

tutions from scratch using crowdsourcing. Lang. Resour.
Eval., 47(1):97–122, March.

Kalina Bontcheva, Hamish Cunningham, Ian Roberts, and
Valentin Tablan. 2010. Web-based collaborative corpus
annotation: Requirements and a framework implementa-
tion. In New Challenges for NLP Frameworks workshop
at LREC-2010, Malta.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classification
tasks: the kappa statistic. In Computational Linguistics,
Volume 22 Issue 2, pages 249–254.

Richard Eckart de Castilho and Iryna Gurevych. 2009.
DKPro-UGD: A Flexible Data-Cleansing Approach to
Processing User-Generated Discourse. In Online-
proceedings of the First French-speaking meeting around
the framework Apache UIMA, LINA CNRS UMR 6241 -
University of Nantes, France.

David Ferrucci and Adam Lally. 2004. UIMA: An Architec-
tural Approach to Unstructured Information Processing in
the Corporate Research Environment. In Journal of Natu-
ral Language Engineering 2004, pages 327–348.

Ulrich Heid, Helmut Schmid, Kerstin Eckart, and Erhard
Hinrichs. 2010. A Corpus Representation Format for
Linguistic Web Services: the D-SPIN Text Corpus Format
and its Relationship with ISO Standards. In Proceedings
of LREC 2010, Malta.

Boci Lin, Yan Chen, Xu Chen, and Yingying Yu. 2012.
Comparison between JSON and XML in Applications
Based on AJAX. In Computer Science & Service System
(CSSS), 2012, Nanjing, China.

Thomas Morton and Jeremy LaCivita. 2003. WordFreak:
an open tool for linguistic annotation. In Proceedings of
NAACL-2003, NAACL-Demonstrations ’03, pages 17–18,
Edmonton, Canada.

Christoph Müller and Michael Strube. 2006. Multi-level an-
notation of linguistic data with MMAX2. In S. Braun,
K. Kohn, and J. Mukherjee, editors, Corpus Technology
and Language Pedagogy: New Resources, New Tools,
New Methods, pages 197–214. Peter Lang, Frankfurt a.M.,
Germany.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan McDonald,
Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz Yuret. 2007.
The CoNLL 2007 Shared Task on Dependency Parsing.
In Proceedings of the CoNLL Shared Task Session of
EMNLP-CoNLL 2007, pages 915–932, Prague, Czech Re-
public.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić, Tomoko
Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2012. brat:
a Web-based Tool for NLP-Assisted Text Annotation. In
Proceedings of the Demonstrations at EACL-2012, Avi-
gnon, France.

Qingling Wang, Qin Liu, Na Li, and Yan Liu. 2008. An
Automatic Approach to Reengineering Common Website
with AJAX. In 4th International Conference on Next Gen-
eration Web Services Practices, pages 185–190, Seoul,
South Korea.

Aobo Wang, Cong Duy Vu Hoang, and Min-Yen Kan. 2013.
Perspectives on Crowdsourcing Annotations for Natural
Language Processing. In Language Resources And Eval-
uation, pages 9–31. Springer Netherlands.

6


