



















































Mining Equivalent Relations from Linked Data


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 289–293,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mining Equivalent Relations from Linked Data 

 

 

Ziqi Zhang
1
 Anna Lisa Gentile

1
 Isabelle Augenstein

1
 

Eva Blomqvist
2
 Fabio Ciravegna

1
 

1
 Department of Computer Science, 

University of Sheffield, UK 

2
 Department of Computer and Information 

Science, Linköping University, Sweden 

{z.zhang, a.l.gentile, i.augenstein, 

f.ciravegna}@dcs.shef.ac.uk, eva.blomqvist@liu.se
 

 

Abstract 

Linking heterogeneous resources is a major re-

search challenge in the Semantic Web. This 

paper studies the task of mining equivalent re-

lations from Linked Data, which was insuffi-

ciently addressed before. We introduce an un-

supervised method to measure equivalency of 

relation pairs and cluster equivalent relations. 

Early experiments have shown encouraging 

results with an average of 0.75~0.87 precision 

in predicting relation pair equivalency and 

0.78~0.98 precision in relation clustering. 

1 Introduction 

Linked Data defines best practices for exposing, 

sharing, and connecting data on the Semantic 

Web using uniform means such as URIs and 

RDF. It constitutes the conjunction between the 

Web and the Semantic Web, balancing the rich-

ness of semantics offered by Semantic Web with 

the easiness of data publishing. For the last few 

years Linked Open Data has grown to a gigantic 

knowledge base, which, as of 2013, comprised 

31 billion triples in 295 datasets
1
.  

A major research question concerning Linked 

Data is linking heterogeneous resources, the fact 

that publishers may describe analogous infor-

mation using different vocabulary, or may assign 

different identifiers to the same referents. Among 

such work, many study mappings between ontol-

ogy concepts and data instances (e.g., Isaac et al, 

2007; Mi et al., 2009; Le et al., 2010; Duan et al., 

2012). An insufficiently addressed problem is 

linking heterogeneous relations, which is also 

widely found in data and can cause problems in 

information retrieval (Fu et al., 2012). Existing 

work in linking relations typically employ string 

similarity metrics or semantic similarity mea-

                                                 
1
 http://lod-cloud.net/state/ 

sures that require a-priori domain knowledge and 

are limited in different ways (Zhong et al., 2002; 

Volz et al., 2009; Han et al., 2011; Zhao and 

Ichise, 2011; Zhao and Ichise, 2012).  

This paper introduces a novel method to dis-

cover equivalent groups of relations for Linked 

Data concepts. It consists of two components: 1) 

a measure of equivalency between pairs of rela-

tions of a concept and 2) a clustering process to 

group equivalent relations. The method is unsu-

pervised; completely data-driven requiring no a-

priori domain knowledge; and also language in-

dependent. Two types of experiments have been 

carried out using two major Linked Data sets: 1) 

evaluating the precision of predicting equivalen-

cy of relation pairs and 2) evaluating the preci-

sion of clustering equivalent relations. Prelimi-

nary results have shown encouraging results as 

the method achieves between 0.75~0.85 preci-

sion in the first set of experiments while 

0.78~0.98 in the latter. 

2 Related Work  

Research on linking heterogeneous ontological 

resources mostly addresses mapping classes (or 

concepts) and instances (Isaac et al, 2007; Mi et 

al., 2009; Le et al., 2010; Duan et al., 2012; 

Schopman et al., 2012), typically based on the 

notions of similarity. This is often evaluated by 

string similarity (e.g. string edit distance), se-

mantic similarity (Budanitsky and Hirst, 2006), 

and distributional similarity based on the overlap 

in data usage (Duan et al., 2012; Schopman et 

al., 2012). There have been insufficient studies 

on mapping relations (or properties) across on-

tologies. Typical methods make use of a combi-

nation of string similarity and semantic similarity 

metrics (Zhong et al., 2002; Volz et al., 2009; 

Han et al., 2011; Zhao and Ichise, 2012). While 

string similarity fails to identify equivalent rela-

tions if their lexicalizations are distinct, semantic 

similarity often depends on taxonomic structures 

289



in existing ontologies (Budanitsky and Hirst, 

2006). Unfortunately many Linked Data instanc-

es use relations that are invented arbitrarily or 

originate in rudimentary ontologies (Parundekar 

et al., 2012). Distributional similarity has also 

been used to discover equivalent or similar rela-

tions. Mauge et al. (2012) extract product proper-

ties from an e-commerce website and align 

equivalent properties using a supervised maxi-

mum entropy classification method. We study 

linking relations on Linked Data and propose an 

unsupervised method. Fu et al. (2012) identify 

similar relations using the overlap of the subjects 

of two relations and the overlap of their objects. 

On the contrary, we aim at identifying strictly 

equivalent relations rather than similarity in gen-

eral. Additionally, the techniques introduced our 

work is also related to work on aligning multilin-

gual Wikipedia resources (Adar et al., 2009; 

Bouma et al., 2009) and semantic relatedness 

(Budanitsky and Hirst, 2006). 

3 Method 

Let t denote a 3-tuple (triple) consisting of a sub-

ject (ts), predicate (tp) and object (to). Linked Da-

ta resources are typed and its type is called class. 

We write type (ts) = c meaning that ts is of class c. 

p denotes a relation and rp is a set of triples 

whose tp=p, i.e., rp={t | tp = p}. 

Given a specific class c, and its pairs of rela-

tions (p, p’) such that rp={t|tp=p, type(ts)=c} and 

rp’={t|tp=p’, type (ts)=c}, we measure the equiv-

alency of p and p’ and then cluster equivalent 

relations. The equivalency is calculated locally 

(within same class c) rather than globally (across 

all classes) because two relations can have iden-

tical meaning in specific class context but not 

necessarily so in general. For example, for the 

class Book, the relations dbpp:title and foaf:name 

are used with the same meaning, however for 

Actor, dbpp:title is used interchangeably with 

awards dbpp:awards (e.g., Oscar best actor). 

In practice, given a class c, our method starts 

with retrieving all t from a Linked Data set 

where type(ts)=c, using the universal query lan-

guage SPARQL with any SPARQL data end-

point. This data is then used to measure equiva-

lency for each pair of relations (Section 3.1). The 

equivalence scores are then used to group rela-

tions in equivalent clusters (Section 3.2). 

3.1 Measure of equivalence 

The equivalence for each distinct pair of rela-

tions depends on three components. 

Triple overlap evaluates the degree of over-

lap
2
 in terms of the usage of relations in triples. 

Let SO(p) be the collection of subject-object 

pairs from rp and SOint the intersection 

)r(SO)r(SO)'p,p(SO 'ppint             [1] 

then the triple overlap TO(p, p’) is calculated as 

}
|r|

|)r,r(SO|
,

|r|

|)r,r(SO|
{MAX

'p

'ppint

p

'ppint
        [2] 

Intuitively, if two relations p and p’ have a 

large overlap of subject-object pairs in their data 

instances, they are likely to have identical mean-

ing. The MAX function allows addressing infre-

quently used, but still equivalent relations (i.e., 

where the overlap covers most triples of an in-

frequently used relation but only a very small 

proportion of a much more frequently used).  

Subject agreement While triple overlap looks 

at the data in general, subject agreement looks at 

the overlap of subjects of two relations, and the 

degree to which these subjects have overlapping 

objects. Let S(p) return the set of subjects of rela-

tion p, and O(p|s) returns the set of objects of 

relation p whose subjects are s, i.e.: 

}st,pt|t{)s|r(O)s|p(O spop          [3] 

we define: 

)r(S)r(S)'p,p(S 'ppint           [4] 

|)'p,p(S|

otherwise,

|)s|'p(O)s|p(O|if,

int

)'p,p(Ss int







0

01

         [5] 

|)'p(S)p(S|/|)'p,p(S| int          [6] 

then the agreement AG(p, p’) is  

)'p,p(AG            [7] 

Equation [5] counts the number of overlapping 

subjects whose objects have at least one overlap. 

The higher the value of α, the more the two rela-

tions “agree” in terms of their shared subjects. 

For each shared subject of p and p’ we count 1 if 

they have at least 1 overlapping object and 0 oth-

erwise. This is because both p and p’ can be 

1:many relations and a low overlap value could 

mean that one is densely populated while the 

other is not, which does not necessarily mean 

they do not “agree”. Equation [6] evaluates the 

degree to which two relations share the same set 

of subjects. The agreement AG(p, p’) balances 

the two factors by taking the product. As a result, 

                                                 
2
 In this paper overlap is based on “exact” match. 

290



relations that have high level of agreement will 

have more subjects in common, and higher pro-

portion of shared subjects with shared objects. 

Cardinality ratio is a ratio between cardinali-

ty of the two relations. Cardinality of a relation 

CD(p) is calculated based on data: 

|)r(S|

|r|
)p(CD

p

p
          [8] 

and the cardinality ratio is calculated as 

)}'p(CD),p(CD{MAX

)}'p(CD),p(CD{MIN
)'p,p(CDR         [9] 

The final equivalency measure integrates all 

the three components to return a value in [0, 2]: 

)'p,p(CDR

)'p,p(AG)'p,p(TO
)'p,p(E


               [10] 

The measure will favor two relations that have 

similar cardinality.  

3.2 Clustering 

We apply the measure to every pair of relations 

of a concept, and keep those with a non-zero 

equivalence score. The goal of clustering is to 

create groups of equivalent relations based on the 

pair-wise equivalence scores. We use a simple 

rule-based agglomerative clustering algorithm 

for this purpose. First, we rank all relation pairs 

by their equivalence score, then we keep a pair if 

(i) its score and (ii) the number of triples covered 

by each relation are above a certain threshold, 

TminEqvl and TminTP respectively. Each pair forms 

an initial cluster. To merge clusters, given an 

existing cluster c and a new pair (p, p’) where 

either pc or p’c, the pair is added to c if E(p, 
p’) is close (as a fractional number above the 

threshold TminEqvlRel) to the average scores of all 

connected pairs in c. This preserves the strong 

connectivity in a cluster. This is repeated until no 

merge action is taken. Adjusting these thresholds 

allows balancing between precision and recall. 

4 Experiment Design 

To our knowledge, there is no publically availa-

ble gold standard for relation equivalency using 

Linked Data. We randomly selected 21 concepts 

(Figure 1) from the DBpedia ontology (v3.8): 

Actor, Aircraft, Airline, Airport, Automobile, 

Band, BasketballPlayer, Book, Bridge, Comedian, 

Film, Hospital, Magazine, Museum, Restaurant, 

Scientist, TelevisionShow, TennisPlayer, Theatre, 

University, Writer 

Figure 1. Concepts selected for evaluation. 

We apply our method to each concept to dis-

cover clusters of equivalent relations, using as 

SPARQL endpoint both DBpedia
3
 and Sindice

4
 

and report results separately. This is to study 

how the method performs in different conditions: 

on one hand on a smaller and cleaner dataset 

(DBpedia); on the other hand on a larger and 

multi-lingual dataset (Sindice) to also test cross-

lingual capability of our method. We chose rela-

tively low thresholds, i.e. TminEqvl=0.1, TminTP= 

0.01% and TminEqvlRel=0.6, in order to ensure high 

recall without sacrificing much precision.  

Four human annotators manually annotated 

the output for each concept. For this preliminary 

evaluation, we have limited the amount of anno-

tations to a maximum of 100 top scoring pairs of 

relations per concept, resulting in 16~100 pairs 

per concept (avg. 40) for DBpedia experiment 

and 29~100 pairs for Sindice (avg. 91). The an-

notators were asked to rate each edge in each 

cluster with -1 (wrong), 1 (correct) or 0 (cannot 

decide). Pairs with 0 are ignored in the evalua-

tion (about 12% for DBpedia; and 17% for Sin-

dice mainly due to unreadable encoded URLs for 

certain languages). To evaluate cross-lingual 

pairs, we asked annotators to use translation 

tools. Inter-Annotator-Agreement (observed 

IAA) is shown in Table 1. Also using this data, 

we derived a gold standard for clustering based 

on edge connectivity and we evaluate (i) the pre-

cision of top n% (p@n%) ranked equivalent rela-

tion pairs and (ii) the precision of clustering for 

each concept.  

 Mean High Low 

DBpedia 0.79 0.89 0.72 

Sindice 0.75 0.82 0.63 

Table 1. IAA on annotating pair equivalency 

So far the output of 13 concepts has been an-

notated. This dataset
5
 contains ≈1800 relation 

pairs and is larger than the one by Fu et al. 

(2012). Annotation process shows that over 75% 

of relation pairs in the Sindice experiment con-

tain non-English relations and mostly are cross-

lingual. We used this data to report performance, 

although the method has been applied to all the 

21 concepts, and the complete results can be vis-

ualized at our demo website link. Some examples 

are shown in Figure 2.  

                                                 
3
 http://dbpedia.org/sparql 

4
 http://sparql.sindice.com/ 

5
 http://staffwww.dcs.shef.ac.uk/people/Z.Zhang/ re-

sources/paper/acl2013short/web/ 

291



 

Figure 2. Examples of visualized clusters 

5 Result and Discussion 

Figure 3 shows p@n% for pair equivalency
6
 and 

Figure 4 shows clustering precision.  

 
Figure 3. p@n%. The box plots show the ranges of 

precision at each n%; the lines show the average. 

 
Figure 4. Clustering precision  

As it is shown in Figure 2, Linked Data rela-

tions are often heterogeneous. Therefore, finding 

equivalent relations to improve coverage is im-

portant. Results in Figure 3 show that in most 

cases the method identifies equivalent relations 

with high precision. It is effective for both sin-

gle- and cross-language relation pairs. The worst 

performing case for DBpedia is Aircraft (for all 

n%), mostly due to duplicating numeric valued 

objects of different relations (e.g., weight, length, 

capacity). The decreasing precision with respect 

to n% suggests the measure effectively ranks 

correct pairs to the top. This is a useful feature 

from IR point of view. Figure 4 shows that the 

method effectively clusters equivalent relations 

with very high precision: 0.8~0.98 in most cases. 

                                                 
6
 Per-concept results are available on our website. 

Overall we believe the results of this early proof-

of-concept are encouraging. As a concrete exam-

ple to compare against Fu et al. (2012), for Bas-

ketballPlayer, our method creates separate clus-

ters for relations meaning “draft team” and “for-

mer team” because although they are “similar” 

they are not “equivalent”. 

We noticed that annotating equivalent rela-

tions is a non-trivial task. Sometimes relations 

and their corresponding schemata (if any) are 

poorly documented and it is impossible to under-

stand the meaning of relations (e.g., due to acro-

nyms) and even very difficult to reason based on 

data. Analyses of the evaluation output show that 

errors are typically found between highly similar 

relations, or whose object values are numeric 

types. In both cases, there is a very high proba-

bility of having a high overlap of subject-object 

pairs between relations. For example, for Air-

craft, the relations dbpp:heightIn and dbpp: 

weight are predicted to be equivalent because 

many instances have the same numeric value for 

the properties. Another example are the Airport 

properties dbpp:runwaySurface, dbpp:r1Surface, 

dbpp:r2Surface etc., which according to the data 

seem to describe the construction material (e.g., 

concrete, asphalt) of airport runways. The rela-

tions are semantically highly similar and the ob-

ject values have a high overlap. A potential solu-

tion to such issues is incorporating ontological 

knowledge if available. For example, if an ontol-

ogy defines the two distinct properties of Airport 

without explicitly defining an “equivalence” re-

lation between them, they are unlikely to be 

equivalent even if the data suggests the opposite.  

6 Conclusion 

This paper introduced a data-driven, unsuper-

vised and domain and language independent 

method to learn equivalent relations for Linked 

Data concepts. Preliminary experiments show 

encouraging results as it effectively discovers 

equivalent relations in both single- and multi-

lingual settings. In future, we will revise the 

equivalence measure and also experiment with 

clustering algorithms such as (Beeferman et al., 

2000). We will also study the contribution of 

individual components of the measure in such 

task. Large scale comparative evaluations (incl. 

recall) are planned and this work will be extend-

ed to address other tasks such as ontology map-

ping and ontology pattern mining (Nuzzolese et 

al., 2011).  

 

292



Acknowledgement 

Part of this research has been sponsored by the 

EPSRC funded project LODIE: Linked Open 

Data for Information Extraction, EP/J019488/1. 

Additionally, we also thank the reviewers for 

their valuable comments given for this work. 

 

References  

Eytan Adar, Michael Skinner, Daniel Weld. 

2009. Information Arbitrage across Multi-

lingual Wikipedia. Proceedings of the Second 

ACM International Conference on Web 

Search and Data Mining, pp. 94 – 103. 

Gosse Bouma, Sergio Duarte, Zahurul Islam. 

2009. Cross-lingual Alignment and Comple-

tion of Wikipedia Templates. Proceedings of 

the Third International Workshop on Cross 

Lingual Information Access: Addressing the 

Information Need of Multilingual Societies, 

pp. 61 – 69   

Doug Beeferman, Adam Berger. 2000. Agglom-

erative clustering of a search engine query log. 

Proceedings of the sixth ACM SIGKDD inter-

national conference on Knowledge discovery 

and data mining, pp. 407-416. 

Alexander Budanitsky and Graeme Hirst. 2006. 

Evaluating WordNet-based Measures of Se-

mantic Distance. Computational Linguistics, 

32(1), pp.13-47. 

Songyun Duan, Achille Fokoue, Oktie Has-

sanzadeh, Anastasios Kementsietsidis, Kavitha 

Srinivas, and Michael J. Ward. 2012. In-

stance-Based Matching of Large Ontologies 

Using Locality-Sensitive Hashing. ISWC 

2012, pp. 46 – 64 

Linyun Fu, Haofen Wang, Wei Jin, Yong Yu. 

2012. Towards better understanding and uti-

lizing relations in DBpedia. Web Intelligence 

and Agent Systems , Volume 10 (3) 

Andrea Nuzzolese, Aldo Gangemi, Valentina 

Presutti, Paolo Ciancarini. 2011. Encyclopedic 

Knowledge Patterns from Wikipedia Links. 

Proceedings of the 10th International Semantic 

Web Conference, pp. 520-536 

Lushan Han, Tim Finin and Anupam Joshi. 2011. 

GoRelations: An Intuitive Query System for 

DBpedia. Proceedings of the Joint Internation-

al Semantic Technology Conference 

Antoine Isaac, Lourens van der Meij, Stefan 

Schlobach, Shenghui Wang. 2007. An empiri-

cal study of instance-based ontology match-

ing. Proceedings of the 6th International Se-

mantic Web Conference and the 2nd Asian 

conference on Asian Semantic Web Confer-

ence, pp. 253-266 

Ngoc-Thanh Le, Ryutaro Ichise, Hoai-Bac Le. 

2010. Detecting hidden relations in geograph-

ic data. Proceedings of the 4th International 

Conference on Advances in Semantic Pro-

cessing, pp. 61 – 68 

Karin Mauge, Khash Rohanimanesh, Jean-David 

Ruvini. 2012. Structuring E-Commerce Inven-

tory. Proceedings of ACL2012, pp. 805-814 

Jinhua Mi, Huajun Chen, Bin Lu, Tong Yu, 

Gang Pan. 2009. Deriving similarity graphs 

from open linked data on semantic web. Pro-

ceedings of the 10th IEEE International Con-

ference on Information Reuse and Integration, 

pp. 157–162. 

Rahul Parundekar, Craig Knoblock,  José Luis. 

Ambite. 2012. Discovering Concept Cover-

ings in Ontologies of Linked Data Sources. 

Proceedings of ISWC2012, pp. 427–443. 

Balthasar Schopman, Shenghui Wang, Antoine 

Isaac, Stefan Schlobach. 2012. Instance-Based 

Ontology Matching by Instance Enrichment. 

Journal on Data Semantics, 1(4), pp 219-236 

Julius Volz, Christian Bizer, Martin Gaedke, 

Georgi Kobilarov. 2009. Silk – A Link Discov-

ery Framework for the Web of Data. Proceed-

ings of the 2nd Workshop on Linked Data on 

the Web 

Lihua Zhao, Ryutaro Ichise. 2011. Mid-ontology 

learning from linked data. Proceedings of the 

Joint International Semantic Technology Con-

ference, pp. 112 – 127. 

Lihua Zhao, Ryutaro Ichise. 2012. Graph-based 

ontology analysis in the linked open data. Pro-

ceedings of the 8th International Conference 

on Semantic Systems, pp. 56 – 63 

Jiwei Zhong, Haiping Zhu, Jianming Li and 

Yong Yu. 2002. Conceptual Graph Matching 

for Semantic Search. The 2002 International 

Conference on Computational Science. 

293


