



















































A Stacking-based Approach to Twitter User Geolocation Prediction


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7–12,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Stacking-based Approach to Twitter User Geolocation Prediction

Bo Han,♠♥ Paul Cook,♥ and Timothy Baldwin♠♥
♠ NICTA Victoria Research Laboratory

♥ Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
hanb@student.unimelb.edu.au, paulcook@unimelb.edu.au,

tb@ldwin.net

Abstract

We implement a city-level geolocation
prediction system for Twitter users. The
system infers a user’s location based on
both tweet text and user-declared metadata
using a stacking approach. We demon-
strate that the stacking method substan-
tially outperforms benchmark methods,
achieving 49% accuracy on a benchmark
dataset. We further evaluate our method
on a recent crawl of Twitter data to in-
vestigate the impact of temporal factors
on model generalisation. Our results sug-
gest that user-declared location metadata
is more sensitive to temporal change than
the text of Twitter messages. We also de-
scribe two ways of accessing/demoing our
system.

1 Introduction

In this paper, we present and evaluate a geoloca-
tion prediction method for Twitter users.1 Given
a user’s tweet data as input, the task of user level
geolocation prediction is to infer a primary loca-
tion (i.e., “home location”: Mahmud et al. (2012))
for the user from a discrete set of pre-defined loca-
tions (Cheng et al., 2010). For instance, President
Obama’s location might be predicted to be Wash-
ington D.C., USA, based on his public tweets and
profile metadata.

Geolocation information is essential to location-
based applications, like targeted advertising and
local event detection (Sakaki et al., 2010;
MacEachren et al., 2011). However, the means
to obtain such information are limited. Although
Twitter allows users to specify a plain text de-
scription of their location in their profile, these de-
scriptions tend to be ad hoc and unreliable (Cheng

1We only use public Twitter data for experiments and ex-
emplification in this study.

et al., 2010). Recently, user geolocation predic-
tion based on a user’s tweets has become popular
(Wing and Baldridge, 2011; Roller et al., 2012),
based on the assumption that tweets implicitly
contain locating information, and with appropri-
ate statistical modeling, the true location can be
inferred. For instance, if a user frequently men-
tions NYC, JFK and yankees, it is likely that they
are from New York City, USA.

In this paper, we discuss an implementation of
a global city-level geolocation prediction system
for English Twitter users. The system utilises both
tweet text and public profile metadata for model-
ing and inference. Specifically, we train multino-
mial Bayes classifiers based on location indica-
tive words (LIWs) in tweets (Han et al., 2012),
and user-declared location and time zone meta-
data. These base classifiers are further stacked
(Wolpert, 1992) using logistic regression as the
meta-classifier. The proposed stacking model is
compared with benchmarks on a public geolo-
cation dataset. Experimental results demonstrate
that our stacking model outperforms benchmark
methods by a large margin, achieving 49% accu-
racy on the test data. We further evaluate the stack-
ing model on a more recent crawl of public tweets.
This experiment tests the effectiveness of a geolo-
cation model trained on “old” data when applied to
“new” data. The results reveal that user-declared
locations are more variable over time than tweet
text and time zone data.

2 Background and Related Work

Identifying the geolocation of objects has been
widely studied in the research literature over target
objects including webpages (Zong et al., 2005),
search queries (Backstrom et al., 2008), Flickr im-
ages (Crandall et al., 2009) and Wikipedia ed-
itors (Lieberman and Lin, 2009). Recently, a
considerable amount of work has been devoted
to extending geolocation prediction for Twitter

7



users (Cheng et al., 2010; Eisenstein et al., 2010).
The geolocations are usually represented by un-
ambiguous city names or a partitioning of the
earth’s surface (e.g., grid cells specified by lati-
tude/longitude). User geolocation is generally re-
lated to a “home” location where a user regularly
resides, and user mobility is ignored. Twitter al-
lows users to declare their home locations in plain
text in their profile, however, this data has been
found to be unstructured and ad hoc in preliminary
research (Cheng et al., 2010; Hecht et al., 2011).

While popular for desktop machine geoloca-
tion, methods that map IP addresses to physical
locations (Buyukokkten et al., 1999) cannot be
applied to Twitter-based user geolocation, as IPs
are only known to the service provider and are
non-trivial to retrieve in a mobile Internet environ-
ment. Although social network information has
been proven effective in inferring user locations
(Backstrom et al., 2010; Sadilek et al., 2012; Rout
et al., 2013), we focus exclusively on message
and metadata information in this paper, as they are
more readily accessible.

Text data tends to contain salient geospatial ex-
pressions that are particular to specific regions.
Attempts to leverage this data directly have been
based on analysis of gazetted expressions (Leid-
ner and Lieberman, 2011) or the identification of
geographical entities (Quercini et al., 2010; Qin et
al., 2003). However these methods are limited in
their ability to capture informal geospatial expres-
sions (e.g. Brissie for Brisbane) and more non-
geospatial terms which are associated with partic-
ular locations (e.g. ferry for Seattle or Sydney).

Beyond identifying geographical references us-
ing off-the-shelf tools, more sophisticated meth-
ods have been introduced in the social media
realm. Cheng et al. (2010) built a simple gen-
erative model based on tweet words, and fur-
ther added words which are local to particular re-
gions and applied smoothing to under-represented
locations. Kinsella et al. (2011) applied differ-
ent similarity measures to the task, and investi-
gated the relative difficulty of geolocation predic-
tion at city, state, and country levels. Wing and
Baldridge (2011) introduced a grid-based repre-
sentation for geolocation modeling and inference
based on fixed latitude and longitude values, and
aggregated all tweets in a single cell. Their ap-
proach was then based on lexical similarity us-
ing KL-divergence. One drawback to the uniform-

sized cell representation is that it introduces class
imbalance: urban areas tend to contain far more
tweets than rural areas. Based on this observa-
tion, Roller et al. (2012) introduced an adaptive
grid representation in which cells contain approx-
imately the same number of users, based on a KD-
tree partition. Given that most tweets are from
urban areas, Han et al. (2012) consider a city-
based class division, and explore different feature
selection methods to extract “location indicative
words”, which they show to improve prediction
accuracy. Additionally, time zone information has
been incorporated in a coarse-to-fine hierarchical
model by first determining the time zone, and then
disambiguating locations within it (Mahmud et al.,
2012). Topic models have also been applied to the
task, in capturing regional linguistic differences
(Eisenstein et al., 2010; Yin et al., 2011; Hong et
al., 2012).

When designing a practical geolocation sys-
tem, simple models such as naive Bayes and near-
est prototype methods (e.g., based on KL diver-
gence) have clear advantages in terms of train-
ing and classification throughput, given the size of
the class set (often numbering in the thousands of
classes) and sheer volume of training data (poten-
tially in the terabytes of data). This is particularly
important for online systems and downstream ap-
plications that require timely predictions. As such,
we build off the text-based naive Bayes-based ge-
olocation system of Han et al. (2012), which our
experiments have shown to have a good balance of
tractability and accuracy. By selecting a reduced
set of “location indicative words”, prediction can
be further accelerated.

3 Methodology

In this study, we adopt the same city-based rep-
resentation and multinomial naive Bayes learner
as Han et al. (2012). The city-based representa-
tion consists of 3,709 cities throughout the world,
and is obtained by aggregating smaller cities with
the largest nearby city. Han et al. (2012) found
that using feature selection to identify “location
indicative words” led to improvements in geoloca-
tion performance. We use the same feature selec-
tion technique that they did. Specifically, feature
selection is based on information gain ratio (IGR)
(Quinlan, 1993) over the city-based label set for
each word.

In the original research of Han et al. (2012),

8



only the text of Twitter messages was used,
and training was based exclusively on geotagged
tweets, despite these accounting for only around
1% of the total public data on Twitter. In this
research, we include additional non-geotagged
tweets (e.g., posted from a non-GPS enabled de-
vice) for those users who have geotagged tweets
(allowing us to determine a home location for the
user).

In addition to including non-geotagged data in
modeling and inference, we further take advan-
tage of the text-based metadata embedded in a
user’s public profile (and included in the JSON ob-
ject for each tweet). This metadata is potentially
complementary to the tweet message and of bene-
fit for geolocation prediction, especially the user-
declared location and time zone, which we con-
sider here. Note that these are in free text rather
than a structured data format, and that while there
are certainly instances of formal place name de-
scriptions (e.g., Edinburgh, UK), they are often
informal (e.g., mel for Melbourne). As such, we
adopt a statistical approach to model each selected
metadata field, by capturing the text in the form
of character 4-grams, and training a multinomial
naive Bayes classifier for each field.

To combine together the tweet text and meta-
data fields, we use stacking (Wolpert, 1992). The
training of stacking consists of two steps. First,
a multinomial naive Bayes base classifier (L0) is
learned for each data type using 10-fold cross
validation. This is carried out for the tweet
text (TEXT), user-declared location (MB-LOC) and
user-declared time zone (MB-TZ). Next, a meta-
classifier (L1 classifier) is trained over the base
classifiers, using a logistic regression learner (Fan
et al., 2008).

4 Evaluation and Discussion

In this section, we compare our proposed stack-
ing approach with existing benchmarks on a public
dataset, and investigate the impact of time using a
recently collected dataset.

4.1 Evaluation Measures
In line with other work on user geolocation pre-
diction, we use three evaluation measures:

• Acc : The percentage of correct city-level
predictions.

• Acc@161 : The percentage of predicted lo-
cations which are within a 161km (100 mile)

Methods Acc Acc@161 Median
KL .117 .277 793
MB .126 .262 913
KL-NG .260 .487 181
MB-NG .280 .492 170
MB-LOC .405 .525 92
MB-TZ .064 .171 1330
STACKING .490 .665 9

Table 1: Results over WORLD

radius of the home location (Cheng et al.,
2010), to capture near-misses (e.g., Edin-
burgh UK being predicted as Glasgow, UK).

• Median : The median distance from the pre-
dicted city to the home location (Eisenstein et
al., 2010).

4.2 Comparison with Benchmarks

We base our evaluation on the publicly-available
WORLD dataset of Han et al. (2012). The dataset
contains 1.4M users whose tweets are primarily
identified as English based on the output of the
langid.py language identification tool (Lui and
Baldwin, 2012), and who have posted at least 10
geotagged tweets. The city-level home location
for a geotagged user is determined as follows.
First, each of a user’s geotagged tweets is mapped
to its nearest city (based on the same set of 3,709
cities used for the city-based location representa-
tion). Then, the most frequent city for a user is
selected as the home location.

To benchmark our method, we reimplement
two recently-published state-of-the-art methods:
(1) the KL-divergence nearest prototype method
of Roller et al. (2012) based on KD-tree parti-
tioned grid cells, which we denote as KL; and
(2) the multinomial naive Bayes city-level geolo-
cation model of Han et al. (2012), which we de-
note as MB. Because of the different class repre-
sentations, Acc numbers are not comparable be-
tween the benchmarks. To remedy this, we find
the closest city to the centroid of each grid cell in
the KD-tree representation, and map the classifi-
cation onto this city. We present results including
non-geotagged data for users with geotagged mes-
sages for the two methods, as KL-NG and MB-
NG, respectively. We also present results based
on the user-declared location (MB-LOC) and time
zone (MB-TZ), and finally the stacking method
(STACKING) which combines MB-NG, MB-LOC
and MB-TZ. The results are shown in Table 1.

9



The approximate doubling of Acc for KL-
NG and MB-NG over KL and MB, respectively,
demonstrates the high utility of non-geotagged
data in tweet text-based geolocation prediction.
Of the two original models, we can see that MB
is comparable to KL, in line with the findings of
Han et al. (2012). The MB-LOC results are by far
the highest of all the base classifiers. Contrary to
the suggestion of Cheng et al. (2010) that user-
declared locations are too unreliable to use for user
geolocation, we find evidence indicating that they
are indeed a valuable source of information for this
task. The best overall results are achieved for the
stacking approach (STACKING), assigning almost
half of the test users to the correct city-level lo-
cation, and improving more than four-fold on the
previous-best accuracy (i.e., MB). These results
also suggest that there is strong complementarity
between user metadata and tweet text.

4.3 Evaluation on Time-Heterogeneous Data

In addition to the original held-out test data
(WORLDtest) from WORLD, we also developed a
new geotagged evaluation dataset using the Twit-
ter Streaming API.2 This new LIVEtest dataset is
intended to evaluate the impact of time on predic-
tive accuracy. The training and test data in WORLD
are time-homogeneous as they are randomly sam-
pled from data collected in a relatively narrow time
window. In contrast, LIVEtest is much newer, col-
lected more than 1 year later than WORLD. Given
that Twitter users and topics change over time, an
essential question is whether the statistical model
learned from the “old” training data is still effec-
tive over the “new” test data?

The LIVEtest data was collected over 48 hours
from 2013/03/03 to 2013/03/05. By selecting
users with at least 10 geotagged tweets and a de-
clared language of English, 55k users were ob-
tained. For each user, their recent status updates
were aggregated, and non-English users were fil-
tered out based on the language predictions of
langid.py. For some users with geotagged
tweets from many cities, the most frequent city
might not be an appropriate representation of their
home location for evaluation. To improve the eval-
uation data quality, we therefore exclude users
who have less than 50% of their geotagged tweets
originating from a single city. After filtering, 32k

2https://dev.twitter.com/docs/api/1.1/
get/statuses/sample

LIVEtest Acc Acc@161 Median
MB-NG .268 (−.012) .510 (−.018) 151 ( −19)
MB-LOC .326 (−.079) .465 (−.060) 306 (+214)
MB-TZ .065 (+.001) .160 (−.011) 1529 (+199)
STACKING .406 (−.084) .614 (−.051) 40 ( +31)

Table 2: Results over LIVEtest, and the absolute
fluctuation over the results for WORLDtest

users were obtained, forming the final LIVEtest
dataset. In the final LIVEtest, the smallest class
has only one test user, and the largest class has
569 users. The mean users per city is 27.76.

The results over LIVEtest, and the difference
in absolute score over WORLDtest, are shown in
Table 2. The stacked model accuracy numbers
drop 5–8% on LIVEtest, and the median error
distance increases moderately by 31km. Over-
all, the numbers suggest inference on WORLDtest,
which is time-homogenous with the training data
(taken from WORLD), is an easier classification
than LIVEtest, which is time-heterogeneous with
the training data. Training on “old” data and test-
ing on “new” data is certainly possible, however.
Looking over the results of the base classifiers, we
can see that the biggest hit is for MB-LOC clas-
sifier. In contrast, the accuracy for MB-NG and
MB-TZ is relatively stable (other than the sharp in-
crease in the median error distance for MB-TZ).

5 Architecture and Access

In this section, we describe the architecture of the
proposed geolocation system, as well as two ways
of accessing the live system.3 The core structure
of the system consists of two parts: (1) the inter-
face; (2) the back-end geolocation service.

We offer two interfaces to access the system: a
Twitter bot and a web interface. The Twitter bot
account is: @MELBLTFSD. A daemon process de-
tects any user mentions of the bot in tweets via
keyword matching through the Twitter search API.
The screen name of the tweet author is extracted
and sent to the back-end geolocation service, and
the predicted user geolocation is sent to the Twitter
user in a direct message, as shown in Figure 1.

Web access is via http://hum.csse.unimelb.
edu.au:9000/geo.html. Users can input a Twit-
ter user screen name through the web interface,
whereby a call is made to the back-end geoloca-
tion service to geolocate that user. The geoloca-

3The source code is available from https://github.
com/tq010or/acl2013

10



Figure 2: Web interface for user geolocation. The numbered green markers represent geotagged tweets.
These coordinates are utilised to validate our predictions, and are not used in the geolocation process.
The red marker is the predicted city-based user geolocation.

Figure 1: Twitter bot interface. When the Twit-
ter bot is mentioned in a tweet, that user is sent a
direct message with the predicted geolocation.

tion results are rendered on a map (along with any
geotagged tweets for the user) as in Figure 2.4

The back-end geolocation service crawls recent
tweets for a given user in real time,5 and word
and n-gram features are extracted from both the
text and the user metadata. These features are sent
to the L0 classifiers (TEXT, MB-LOC and MB-TZ),
and the L0 results are further fed into the L1 clas-
sifier for the final prediction.

6 Summary and Future Work

In this paper, we presented a city-level geoloca-
tion prediction system for Twitter users. Over a
public dataset, our stacking method — exploiting
both tweet text and user metadata — substantially

4Currently, only Google Chrome is supported. https:
//www.google.com/intl/en/chrome/

5Up to 200 tweets are crawled, the upper bound of mes-
sages returned per single request based on Twitter API v1.1.

outperformed benchmark methods. We further
evaluated model generalisation on a newer, time-
heterogeneous dataset. The overall results de-
creased by 5–8% in accuracy, compared with num-
bers on time-homogeneous data, primarily due to
the poor generalisation of the MB-LOC classifier.

In future work, we plan to further investigate
the cause of the MB-LOC classifier accuracy de-
crease on the new dataset. In addition, we’d like
to study differences in prediction accuracy across
cities. For cities with reliable predictions, the sys-
tem can be adapted as a preprocessing module for
downstream applications, e.g., local event detec-
tion based on users with reliable predictions.

Acknowledgements

NICTA is funded by the Australian government as
represented by Department of Broadband, Com-
munication and Digital Economy, and the Aus-
tralian Research Council through the ICT centre
of Excellence programme.

References
Lars Backstrom, Jon Kleinberg, Ravi Kumar, and Jas-

mine Novak. 2008. Spatial variation in search en-
gine queries. In Proc. of WWW, pages 357–366,
Beijing, China.

Lars Backstrom, Eric Sun, and Cameron Marlow.
2010. Find me if you can: improving geographi-
cal prediction with social and spatial proximity. In
Proc. of WWW, pages 61–70, Raleigh, USA.

11



Orkut Buyukokkten, Junghoo Cho, Hector Garcia-
Molina, Luis Gravano, and Narayana Shivakumar.
1999. Exploiting geographical location informa-
tion of web pages. In ACM SIGMOD Workshop on
The Web and Databases, pages 91–96, Philadelphia,
USA.

Zhiyuan Cheng, James Caverlee, and Kyumin Lee.
2010. You are where you tweet: a content-based
approach to geo-locating twitter users. In Proc. of
CIKM, pages 759–768, Toronto, Canada.

David J. Crandall, Lars Backstrom, Daniel Hutten-
locher, and Jon Kleinberg. 2009. Mapping the
world’s photos. In Proc. of WWW, pages 761–770,
Madrid, Spain.

Jacob Eisenstein, Brendan O’Connor, Noah A. Smith,
and Eric P. Xing. 2010. A latent variable model for
geographic lexical variation. In Proc. of EMNLP,
pages 1277–1287, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-
Rui Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR:
A library for large linear classification. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 9:1871–1874.

Bo Han, Paul Cook, and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. Ge-
olocation prediction in social media data by find-
ing location indicative words. In Proc. of COLING,
pages 1045–1062, Mumbai, India.

Brent Hecht, Lichan Hong, Bongwon Suh, and Ed H.
Chi. 2011. Tweets from justin bieber’s heart:
the dynamics of the location field in user profiles.
In Proc. of SIGCHI, pages 237–246, Vancouver,
Canada.

Liangjie Hong, Amr Ahmed, Siva Gurumurthy,
Alexander J. Smola, and Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis.
2012. Discovering geographical topics in the twit-
ter stream. In Proc. of WWW, pages 769–778, Lyon,
France.

Sheila Kinsella, Vanessa Murdock, and Neil O’Hare.
2011. ”I’m eating a sandwich in glasgow”: mod-
eling locations with tweets. In Proc. of the 3rd In-
ternational Workshop on Search and Mining User-
generated Contents, pages 61–68, Glasgow, UK.

Jochen L. Leidner and Michael D. Lieberman. 2011.
Detecting geographical references in the form of
place names and associated spatial natural language.
SIGSPATIAL Special, 3(2):5–11.

Michael D. Lieberman and Jimmy Lin. 2009. You
are where you edit: Locating wikipedia contributors
through edit histories. In ICWSM.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. langid.py: An
off-the-shelf language identification tool. In Proc.
of the ACL, pages 25–30, Jeju Island, Korea.

Alan M. MacEachren, Anuj Jaiswal, Anthony C.
Robinson, Scott Pezanowski, Alexander Savelyev,
Prasenjit Mitra, Xiao Zhang, and Justine Blanford.
2011. Senseplace2: Geotwitter analytics support for
situational awareness. In IEEE Conference on Vi-
sual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 181–
190, Rhode Island, USA.

Jalal Mahmud, Jeffrey Nichols, and Clemens Drews.
2012. Where is this tweet from? inferring home lo-
cations of twitter users. In Proc. of ICWSM, Dublin,
Ireland.

Teng Qin, Rong Xiao, Lei Fang, Xing Xie, and Lei
Zhang. 2003. An efficient location extraction algo-
rithm by leveraging web contextual information. In
Proc. of SIGSPATIAL, pages 55–62, San Jose, USA.

Gianluca Quercini, Hanan Samet, Jagan Sankara-
narayanan, and Michael D. Lieberman. 2010. De-
termining the spatial reader scopes of news sources
using local lexicons. In Proc. of the 18th Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Geographic In-
formation Systems, pages 43–52, San Jose, USA.

John Ross Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Ma-
chine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo,
USA.

Stephen Roller, Michael Speriosu, Sarat Rallapalli,
Benjamin Wing, and Jason Baldridge. 2012. Super-
vised text-based geolocation using language mod-
els on an adaptive grid. In Proc. of EMNLP, pages
1500–1510, Jeju Island, Korea.

Dominic Rout, Kalina Bontcheva, Daniel Preoţiuc-
Pietro, and Trevor Cohn. 2013. Where’s @wally?:
a classification approach to geolocating users based
on their social ties. In Proc. of the 24th ACM Con-
ference on Hypertext and Social Media, pages 11–
20, Paris, France.

Adam Sadilek, Henry Kautz, and Jeffrey P. Bigham.
2012. Finding your friends and following them to
where you are. In Proc. of WSDM, pages 723–732,
Seattle, USA.

Takeshi Sakaki, Makoto Okazaki, and Yutaka Matsuo.
2010. Earthquake shakes twitter users: real-time
event detection by social sensors. In Proc. of WWW,
pages 851–860, Raleigh, USA.

Benjamin P. Wing and Jason Baldridge. 2011. Sim-
ple supervised document geolocation with geodesic
grids. In Proc. of ACL, pages 955–964, Portland,
USA.

David H. Wolpert. 1992. Stacked generalization. Neu-
ral Networks, 5(2):241–259.

Zhijun Yin, Liangliang Cao, Jiawei Han, Chengxiang
Zhai, and Thomas Huang. 2011. Geographical
topic discovery and comparison. In Proc. of WWW,
pages 247–256, Hyderabad, India.

Wenbo Zong, Dan Wu, Aixin Sun, Ee-Peng Lim,
and Dion Hoe-Lian Goh. 2005. On assigning
place names to geography related web pages. In
ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries,
pages 354–362.

12


