



















































Exploring Sentiment in Social Media: Bootstrapping Subjectivity Clues from Multilingual Twitter Streams


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 505–510,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploring Sentiment in Social Media: Bootstrapping Subjectivity Clues
from Multilingual Twitter Streams

Svitlana Volkova
CLSP

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD

svitlana@jhu.edu

Theresa Wilson
HLTCOE

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD
taw@jhu.edu

David Yarowsky
CLSP

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD

yarowsky@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract

We study subjective language in social
media and create Twitter-specific lexi-
cons via bootstrapping sentiment-bearing
terms from multilingual Twitter streams.
Starting with a domain-independent, high-
precision sentiment lexicon and a large
pool of unlabeled data, we bootstrap
Twitter-specific sentiment lexicons, us-
ing a small amount of labeled data to
guide the process. Our experiments on
English, Spanish and Russian show that
the resulting lexicons are effective for
sentiment classification for many under-
explored languages in social media.

1 Introduction

The language that people use to express opinions
and sentiment is extremely diverse. This is true for
well-formed data, such as news and reviews, and
it is particularly true for data from social media.
Communication in social media is informal, ab-
breviations and misspellings abound, and the per-
son communicating is often trying to be funny,
creative, and entertaining. Topics change rapidly,
and people invent new words and phrases.

The dynamic nature of social media together
with the extreme diversity of subjective language
has implications for any system with the goal
of analyzing sentiment in this domain. General,
domain-independent sentiment lexicons have low
coverage. Even models trained specifically on so-
cial media data may degrade somewhat over time
as topics change and new sentiment-bearing terms
crop up. For example, the word “occupy” would
not have been indicative of sentiment before 2011.

Most of the previous work on sentiment lexicon
construction relies on existing natural language

processing tools, e.g., syntactic parsers (Wiebe,
2000), information extraction (IE) tools (Riloff
and Wiebe, 2003) or rich lexical resources such
as WordNet (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006). How-
ever, such tools and lexical resources are not avail-
able for many languages spoken in social media.
While English is still the top language in Twitter,
it is no longer the majority. Thus, the applicabil-
ity of these approaches is limited. Any method for
analyzing sentiment in microblogs or other social
media streams must be easily adapted to (1) many
low-resource languages, (2) the dynamic nature of
social media, and (3) working in a streaming mode
with limited or no supervision.

Although bootstrapping has been used for learn-
ing sentiment lexicons in other domains (Turney
and Littman, 2002; Banea et al., 2008), it has not
yet been applied to learning sentiment lexicons for
microblogs. In this paper, we present an approach
for bootstrapping subjectivity clues from Twitter
data, and evaluate our approach on English, Span-
ish and Russian Twitter streams. Our approach:

• handles the informality, creativity and the dy-
namic nature of social media;

• does not rely on language-dependent tools;
• scales to the hundreds of new under-explored

languages and dialects in social media;
• classifies sentiment in a streaming mode.
To bootstrap subjectivity clues from Twitter

streams we rely on three main assumptions:
i. sentiment-bearing terms of similar orienta-

tion tend to co-occur at the tweet level (Tur-
ney and Littman, 2002);

ii. sentiment-bearing terms of opposite orienta-
tion do not co-occur at the tweet level (Ga-
mon and Aue, 2005);

iii. the co-occurrence of domain-specific and
domain-independent subjective terms serves
as a signal of subjectivity.

505



2 Related Work

Mihalcea et.al (2012) classifies methods for boot-
strapping subjectivity lexicons into two types:
corpus-based and dictionary-based.

Dictionary-based methods rely on existing lex-
ical resources to bootstrap sentiment lexicons.
Many researchers have explored using relations in
WordNet (Miller, 1995), e.g., Esuli and Sabastiani
(2006), Andreevskaia and Bergler (2006) for En-
glish, Rao and Ravichandran (2009) for Hindi and
French, and Perez-Rosas et al. (2012) for Spanish.
Mohammad et al. (2009) use a thesaurus to aid
in the construction of a sentiment lexicon for En-
glish. Other works (Clematide and Klenner, 2010;
Abdul-Mageed et al., 2011) automatically expands
and evaluates German and Arabic lexicons. How-
ever, the lexical resources that dictionary-based
methods need, do not yet exist for the majority of
languages in social media. There is also a mis-
match between the formality of many language re-
sources, such as WordNet, and the extremely in-
formal language of social media.

Corpus-based methods extract subjectivity and
sentiment lexicons from large amounts of unla-
beled data using different similarity metrics to
measure the relatedness between words. Hatzivas-
siloglou and McKeown (1997) were the first to ex-
plore automatically learning the polarity of words
from corpora. Early work by Wiebe (2000) iden-
tifies clusters of subjectivity clues based on their
distributional similarity, using a small amount of
data to bootstrap the process. Turney (2002) and
Velikovich et al. (2010) bootstrap sentiment lexi-
cons for English from the web by using Pointwise
Mutual Information (PMI) and graph propaga-
tion approach, respectively. Kaji and Kitsuregawa
(2007) propose a method for building sentiment
lexicon for Japanese from HTML pages. Banea
et al. (2008) experiment with Lexical Semantic
Analysis (LSA) (Dumais et al., 1988) to bootstrap
a subjectivity lexicon for Romanian. Kanayama
and Nasukawa (2006) bootstrap subjectivity lexi-
cons for Japanese by generating subjectivity can-
didates based on word co-occurrence patterns.

In contrast to other corpus-based bootstrapping
methods, we evaluate our approach on multiple
languages, specifically English, Spanish, and Rus-
sian. Also, as our approach relies only on the
availability of a bilingual dictionary for translating
an English subjectivity lexicon and crowdsourcing
for help in selecting seeds, it is more scalable and

better able to handle the informality and the dy-
namic nature of social media. It also can be effec-
tively used to bootstrap sentiment lexicons for any
language for which a bilingual dictionary is avail-
able or can be automatically induced from parallel
corpora.

3 Data

For the experiments in this paper, we use three
sets of data for each language: 1M unlabeled
tweets (BOOT) for bootstrapping Twitter-specific
lexicons, 2K labeled tweets for development data
(DEV), and 2K labeled tweets for evaluation
(TEST). DEV is used for parameter tuning while
bootstrapping, and TEST is used to evaluating the
quality of the bootstrapped lexicons.

We take English tweets from the corpus con-
structed by Burger et al. (2011) which con-
tains 2.9M tweets (excluding retweets) from 184K
users.1 English tweets are identified automati-
cally using a compression-based language identifi-
cation (LID) tool (Bergsma et al., 2012). Accord-
ing to LID, there are 1.8M (63.6%) English tweets,
which we randomly sample to create BOOT, DEV
and TEST sets for English. Unfortunately, Burger’s
corpus does not include Russian and Spanish data
on the same scale as English. Therefore, for
other languages we construct a new Twitter corpus
by downloading tweets from followers of region-
specific news and media feeds.

Sentiment labels for tweets in DEV and TEST
sets for all languages are obtained using Amazon
Mechanical Turk. For each tweet we collect an-
notations from five workers and use majority vote
to determine the final label for the tweet. Snow
et al. (2008) show that for a similar task, labeling
emotion and valence, on average four non-expert
labelers are needed to achieve an expert level of
annotation. Table 1 gives the distribution of tweets
over sentiment labels for the development and test
sets for English (E-DEV, E-TEST), Spanish (S-
DEV, S-TEST), and Russian (R-DEV, R-TEST).
Below are examples of tweets in Russian with En-
glish translations labeled with sentiment:

• Positive: В планах вкусный завтрак
и куча фильмов (Planning for delicious
breakfast and lots of movies);

• Negative: Хочу сдохнуть, и я это сделаю
(I want to die and I will do that);

1They provided the tweet IDs, and we used the Twitter
Corpus Tools to download the tweets.

506



Data Positive Neg Both Neutral
E-DEV 617 357 202 824
E-TEST 596 347 195 862
S-DEV 358 354 86 1,202
S-TEST 317 387 93 1203
R-DEV 452 463 156 929
R-TEST 488 380 149 983

Table 1: Sentiment label distribution in develop-
ment DEV and test TEST datasets across languages.

• Both: Хочется написать грубее про
фильм но не буду. Хотя актеры хоро-
ши (I want to write about the movie rougher
but I will not. Although the actors are good);

• Neutral: Почему умные мысли приходят
только ночью? (Why clever thoughts come
only at night?).

4 Lexicon Bootstrapping

To create a Twitter-specific sentiment lexicon for
a given language, we start with a general-purpose,
high-precision sentiment lexicon2 and bootstrap
from the unlabeled data (BOOT) using the labeled
development data (DEV) to guide the process.

4.1 High-Precision Subjectivity Lexicons
For English we seed the bootstrapping pro-
cess with the strongly subjective terms from the
MPQA lexicon3 (Wilson et al., 2005). These
terms have been previously shown to be high-
precision for recognizing subjective sentences
(Riloff and Wiebe, 2003).

For the other languages, the subjective seed
terms are obtained by translating English seed
terms using a bilingual dictionary, and then col-
lecting judgments about term subjectivity from
Mechanical Turk. Terms that truly are strongly
subjective in translation are used for seed terms
in the new language, with term polarity projected
from the English. Finally, we expand the lexicons
with plurals and inflectional forms for adverbs, ad-
jectives and verbs.

4.2 Bootstrapping Approach
To bootstrap, first the new lexicon LB(0) is seeded
with the strongly subjective terms from the orig-
inal lexicon LI . On each iteration i ≥ 1, tweets
in the unlabeled data are labeled using the lexicon

2Other works on generating domain-specific sentiment
lexicons e.g., from blog data (Jijkoun et al., 2010) also start
with a general, domain-specific lexicon.

3http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/

from the previous iteration, LB(i−1). If a tweet
contains one or more terms from LB(i−1) it is con-
sidered subjective, otherwise objective. The polar-
ity of subjective tweets is determined in a similar
way: if the tweet contains ≥ 1 positive terms, tak-
ing into account the negation, it is considered neg-
ative; if it contains ≥ 1 negative terms, taking into
account the negation, it is considered positive.4 If
it contains both positive and negative terms, it is
considered to be both. Then, for every term not in
LB(i−1) that has a frequency ≥ θfreq, the proba-
bility of that term being subjective is calculated as
shown in Algorithm 1 line 10. The top θk terms
with a subjective probability ≥ θpr are then added
to LB(i). The polarity of new terms is determined
based on the probability of the term appearing in
positive or negative tweets as shown in line 18.5

The bootstrapping process terminates when there
are no more new terms meeting the criteria to add.

Algorithm 1 BOOTSTRAP (σ, θpr, θfreq, θtopK )

1: iter = 0, σ = 0.5, LB(~θ)← LI(σ)
2: while (stop 6= true) do
3: LiterB (~θ)← ∅,∆LiterB (~θ)← ∅
4: for each new term w ∈ {V \ LB(~θ)} do
5: for each tweet t ∈ T do
6: if w ∈ t then
7: UPDATE c(w,LB(~θ)), c(w,LposB (~θ)), c(w)
8: end if
9: end for

10: psubj(w)← c(w,LB(~θ))
c(w)

11: ppos(w)← c(w,L
pos
B

(~θ))

c(w,LB(~θ))

12: LiterB (~θ)← w, psubj(w), ppol(w)
13: end for
14: SORT LiterB (~θ) by p

subj(w)
15: while (K ≤ θtopK) do
16: for each new term w ∈ LiterB (~θ) do
17: if [psubj(w) ≥ θpr and cw ≥ θfreq then
18: if [ppos(w) ≥ 0.5] then
19: wpol ← positive
20: else
21: wpol ← negative
22: end if
23: ∆LiterB (~θ)← ∆LiterB (~θ) + wpol
24: end if
25: end for
26: K = K + 1
27: end while
28: if [∆LiterB (~θ) == 0] then
29: stop← true
30: end if
31: LB(~θ)← LB(~θ) + ∆LiterB (~θ)
32: iter = iter + 1
33: end while

4If there is a negation in the two words before a sentiment
term, we flip its polarity.

5Polarity association probabilities should sum up to 1
ppos(w|LB(~θ)) + pneg(w|LB(~θ)) = 1.

507



English Spanish Russian
LEI L

E
B L

S
I L

S
B L

R
I L

R
B

Pos 2.3 16.8 2.9 7.7 1.4 5.3
Neg 2.8 4.7 5.2 14.6 2.3 5.5
Total 5.1 21.5 8.1 22.3 3.7 10.8

Table 2: The original and the bootstrapped (high-
lighted) lexicon term count (LI ⊂ LB) with polar-
ity across languages (thousands).

The set of parameters ~θ is optimized using a grid
search on the development data using F-measure
for subjectivity classification. As a result, for En-
glish ~θ = [0.7, 5, 50] meaning that on each itera-
tion the top 50 new terms with a frequency ≥ 5
and probability ≥ 0.7 are added to the lexicon.
For Spanish, the set of optimal parameters ~θ =
[0.65, 3, 50] and for Russian - ~θ = [0.65, 3, 50]. In
Table 2 we report size and term polarity from the
original LI and the bootstrapped LB lexicons.

5 Lexicon Evaluations

We evaluate our bootstrapped sentiment lexicons
English LEB , Spanish L

S
B and Russian L

R
B by com-

paring them with existing dictionary-expanded
lexicons that have been previously shown to be ef-
fective for subjectivity and polarity classification
(Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006; Perez-Rosas et al.,
2012; Chetviorkin and Loukachevitch, 2012). For
that we perform subjectivity and polarity classifi-
cation using rule-based classifiers6 on the test data
E-TEST, S-TEST and R-TEST.

We consider how the various lexicons perform
for rule-based classifiers for both subjectivity and
polarity. The subjectivity classifier predicts that
a tweet is subjective if it contains a) at least one,
or b) at least two subjective terms from the lexi-
con. For the polarity classifier, we predict a tweet
to be positive (negative) if it contains at least one
positive (negative) term taking into account nega-
tion. If the tweet contains both positive and nega-
tive terms, we take the majority label.

For English we compare our bootstrapped lex-
icon LEB against the original lexicon L

E
I and

strongly subjective terms from SentiWordNet 3.0
(Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006). To make a fair
comparison, we automatically expand SentiWord-
Net with noun plural forms and verb inflectional
forms. In Figure 1 we report precision, recall

6Similar approach to a rule-based classification using
terms from he MPQA lexicon (Riloff and Wiebe, 2003).

and F-measure results. They show that our boot-
strapped lexicon significantly outperforms Senti-
WordNet for subjectivity classification. For polar-
ity classification we get comparable F-measure but
much higher recall for LEB compared to SWN .

(a) Subj ≥ 1 (b) Subj ≥ 2 (c) Polarity

Lexicon Fsubj≥1 Fsubj≥2 Fpolarity
SWN 0.57 0.27 0.78
LEI 0.71 0.48 0.82
LEB 0.75 0.72 0.78

Figure 1: Precision (x-axis), recall (y-axis) and
F-measure (in the table) for English: LEI = ini-
tial lexicon, LEB = bootstrapped lexicon, SWN =
strongly subjective terms from SentiWordNet.

For Spanish we compare our bootstrapped lex-
icon LSB against the original L

S
I lexicon, and the

full and medium strength terms from the Span-
ish sentiment lexicon constructed by Perez-Rosas
et el. (2012). We report precision, recall and F-
measure in Figure 2. We observe that our boot-
strapped lexicon yields significantly better perfor-
mance for subjectivity classification compared to
both full and medium strength terms. However,
our bootstrapped lexicon yields lower recall and
similar precision for polarity classification.

(a) Subj ≥ 1 (b) Subj ≥ 2 (c) Polarity

Lexicon Fsubj≥1 Fsubj≥2 Fpolarity
SM 0.44 0.17 0.64
SF 0.47 0.13 0.66
LSI 0.59 0.45 0.58
LSB 0.59 0.59 0.55

Figure 2: Precision (x-axis), recall (y-axis) and F-
measure (in the table) for Spanish: LSI = initial
lexicon, LSB = bootstrapped lexicon, SF = full
strength terms; SM = medium strength terms.

508



For Russian we compare our bootstrapped lex-
icon LRB against the original L

R
I lexicon, and the

Russian sentiment lexicon constructed by Chetv-
iorkin and Loukachevitchet (2012). The external
lexicon in Russian P was built for the domain
of product reviews and does not include polarity
judgments for subjective terms. As before, we
expand the external lexicon with the inflectional
forms for adverbs, adjectives and verbs. We report
results for Russian in Figure 3. We find that for
subjectivity our bootstrapped lexicon shows better
performance compared to the external lexicon (5k
terms). However, the expanded external lexicon
(17k terms) yields higher recall with a significant
drop in precision. Note that for Russian, we report
polarity classification results for LRB and L

R
I lexi-

cons only because P does not have polarity labels.

(a) Subj ≥ 1 (b) Subj ≥ 2 (c) Polarity

Lexicon Fsubj≥1 Fsubj≥2 Fpolarity
P 0.55 0.29 –
PX 0.62 0.47 –
LRI 0.46 0.13 0.73
LRB 0.61 0.35 0.73

Figure 3: Precision (x-axis), recall (y-axis) and F-
measure for Russian: LRI = initial lexicon, L

R
B =

bootstrapped lexicon, P = external sentiment lex-
icon, PX = expanded external lexicon.

We next perform error analysis for subjectiv-
ity and polarity classification for all languages and
identify common errors to address them in future.

For subjectivity classification we observe that
applying part-of-speech tagging during the boot-
strapping could improve results for all languages.
We could further improve the quality of the lex-
icon and reduce false negative errors (subjec-
tive tweets classified as neutral) by focusing on
sentiment-bearing terms such as adjective, adverbs
and verbs. However, POS taggers for Twitter are
only available for a limited number of languages
such as English (Gimpel et al., 2011). Other false
negative errors are often caused by misspellings.7

7For morphologically-rich languages, our approach cov-
ers different linguistic forms of terms but not their mis-
spellings. However, it can be fixed by an edit-distance check.

We also find subjective tweets with philosophi-
cal thoughts and opinions misclassified, especially
in Russian, e.g., Иногда мы бываем не готовы
к исполнению заветной мечты но все рав-
но так не хочется ее спугнуть (Sometimes we
are not ready to fulfill our dreams yet but, at the
same time, we do not want to scare them). Such
tweets are difficult to classify using lexicon-based
approaches and require deeper linguistic analysis.

False positive errors for subjectivity classifica-
tion happen because some terms are weakly sub-
jective and can be used in both subjective and
neutral tweets e.g., the Russian term хвастаться
(brag) is often used as subjective, but in a tweet
никогда не стоит хвастаться будущим (never
brag about your future) it is used as neutral. Simi-
larly, the Spanish term buenas (good) is often used
subjectively but it is used as neutral in the follow-
ing tweet “@Diveke me falto el buenas! jaja que
onda que ha pasado” (I miss the good times we
had, haha that wave has passed!).

For polarity classification, most errors happen
because our approach relies on either positive or
negative polarity scores for a term but not both.8

However, in the real world terms may sometimes
have both usages. Thus, some tweets are misclas-
sified (e.g., “It is too warm outside”). We can
fix this by summing over weighted probabilities
rather than over term counts. Additional errors
happen because tweets are very short and convey
multiple messages (e.g., “What do you mean by
unconventional? Sounds exciting!”) Thus, our ap-
proach can be further improved by adding word
sense disambiguation and anaphora resolution.

6 Conclusions

We propose a scalable and language independent
bootstrapping approach for learning subjectivity
clues from Twitter streams. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of the bootstrapping procedure by
comparing the resulting subjectivity lexicons with
state-of the-art sentiment lexicons. We perform
error analysis to address the most common error
types in the future. The results confirm that the
approach can be effectively exploited and further
improved for subjectivity classification for many
under-explored languages in social media.

8During the bootstrapping we calculate probability for a
term to be positive and negative, e.g., p(warm|+) = 0.74
and p(warm|−) = 0.26. But during polarity classification
we rely on the highest probability score and consider it to be
“the polarity” for the term e.g., positive for warm.

509



References
Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, Mona T. Diab, and Mo-

hammed Korayem. 2011. Subjectivity and senti-
ment analysis of modern standard arabic. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL/HLT.

Alina Andreevskaia and Sabine Bergler. 2006. Min-
ing wordnet for fuzzy sentiment: Sentiment tag ex-
traction from WordNet glosses. In Proceedings of
EACL.

Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2008. A bootstrapping method for building subjec-
tivity lexicons for languages with scarce resources.
In Proceedings of LREC.

Shane Bergsma, Paul McNamee, Mossaab Bagdouri,
Clayton Fink, and Theresa Wilson. 2012. Language
identification for creating language-specific Twitter
collections. In Proceedings of 2nd Workshop on
Language in Social Media.

John D. Burger, John C. Henderson, George Kim, and
Guido Zarrella. 2011. Discriminating gender on
Twittier. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Ilia Chetviorkin and Natalia V. Loukachevitch. 2012.
Extraction of Russian sentiment lexicon for product
meta-domain. In Proceedings of COLING.

Simon Clematide and Manfred Klenner. 2010. Eval-
uation and extension of a polarity lexicon for Ger-
man. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment
Analysis.

Susan T. Dumais, George W. Furnas, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, Scott Deerwester, and Richard Harshman.
1988. Using latent semantic analysis to improve
access to textual information. In Proceedings of
SIGCHI.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Senti-
WordNet: A publicly available lexical resource for
opinion mining. In Proceedings of LREC.

Michael Gamon and Anthony Aue. 2005. Automatic
identification of sentiment vocabulary: exploiting
low association with known sentiment terms. In
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Feature Engi-
neering for Machine Learning in Natural Language
Processing.

Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, Brendan O’Connor,
Dipanjan Das, Daniel Mills, Jacob Eisenstein,
Michael Heilman, Dani Yogatama, Jeffrey Flanigan,
and Noah A. Smith. 2011. Part-of-speech tagging
for Twittier: annotation, features, and experiments.
In Proceedings of ACL.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathy McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In Proceedings of ACL.

Valentin Jijkoun, Maarten de Rijke, and Wouter
Weerkamp. 2010. Generating focused topic-
specific sentiment lexicons. In Proceedings of ACL.

Nobuhiro Kaji and Masaru Kitsuregawa. 2007. Build-
ing lexicon for sentiment analysis from massive
collection of html documents. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Hiroshi Kanayama and Tetsuya Nasukawa. 2006.
Fully automatic lexicon expansion for domain-
oriented sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Rada Mihalcea, Carmen Banea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2012. Multilingual subjectivity and sentiment anal-
ysis. In Proceedings of ACL.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database
for English. Communications of the ACM, 38(11).

Saif Mohammad, Cody Dunne, and Bonnie Dorr.
2009. Generating high-coverage semantic orienta-
tion lexicons from overtly marked words and a the-
saurus. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Veronica Perez-Rosas, Carmen Banea, and Rada Mi-
halcea. 2012. Learning sentiment lexicons in Span-
ish. In Proceedings of LREC.

Delip Rao and Deepak Ravichandran. 2009. Semi-
supervised polarity lexicon induction. In Proceed-
ings of EACL.

Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning extrac-
tion patterns for subjective expressions. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast – but is it
good?: Evaluating non-expert annotations for natu-
ral language tasks. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Peter D. Turney and Michael L. Littman. 2002. Un-
supervised learning of semantic orientation from a
hundred-billion-word corpus. Computing Research
Repository.

Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?:
Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classi-
fication of reviews. In Proceedings of ACL.

Leonid Velikovich, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, Kerry
Hannan, and Ryan McDonald. 2010. The viabil-
ity of web-derived polarity lexicons. In Proceedings
of NAACL.

Janyce Wiebe. 2000. Learning subjective adjectives
from corpora. In Proceedings of AAAI.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

510


