



















































Identifying English and Hungarian Light Verb Constructions: A Contrastive Approach


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 255–261,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying English and Hungarian Light Verb Constructions:
A Contrastive Approach

Veronika Vincze1,2, István Nagy T.2 and Richárd Farkas2
1Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Research Group on Artificial Intelligence

vinczev@inf.u-szeged.hu
2Department of Informatics, University of Szeged
{nistvan,rfarkas}@inf.u-szeged.hu

Abstract
Here, we introduce a machine learning-
based approach that allows us to identify
light verb constructions (LVCs) in Hun-
garian and English free texts. We also
present the results of our experiments on
the SzegedParalellFX English–Hungarian
parallel corpus where LVCs were manu-
ally annotated in both languages. With
our approach, we were able to contrast
the performance of our method and define
language-specific features for these typo-
logically different languages. Our pre-
sented method proved to be sufficiently ro-
bust as it achieved approximately the same
scores on the two typologically different
languages.

1 Introduction

In natural language processing (NLP), a signifi-
cant part of research is carried out on the English
language. However, the investigation of languages
that are typologically different from English is
also essential since it can lead to innovations that
might be usefully integrated into systems devel-
oped for English. Comparative approaches may
also highlight some important differences among
languages and the usefulness of techniques that are
applied.

In this paper, we focus on the task of identify-
ing light verb constructions (LVCs) in English and
Hungarian free texts. Thus, the same task will be
carried out for English and a morphologically rich
language. We compare whether the same set of
features can be used for both languages, we in-
vestigate the benefits of integrating language spe-
cific features into the systems and we explore how
the systems could be further improved. For this
purpose, we make use of the English–Hungarian
parallel corpus SzegedParalellFX (Vincze, 2012),
where LVCs have been manually annotated.

2 Light Verb Constructions

Light verb constructions (e.g. to give advice) are
a subtype of multiword expressions (Sag et al.,
2002). They consist of a nominal and a verbal
component where the verb functions as the syn-
tactic head, but the semantic head is the noun. The
verbal component (also called a light verb) usu-
ally loses its original sense to some extent. Al-
though it is the noun that conveys most of the
meaning of the construction, the verb itself can-
not be viewed as semantically bleached (Apres-
jan, 2004; Alonso Ramos, 2004; Sanromán Vi-
las, 2009) since it also adds important aspects to
the meaning of the construction (for instance, the
beginning of an action, such as set on fire, see
Mel’čuk (2004)). The meaning of LVCs can be
only partially computed on the basis of the mean-
ings of their parts and the way they are related to
each other, hence it is important to treat them in a
special way in many NLP applications.

LVCs are usually distinguished from productive
or literal verb + noun constructions on the one
hand and idiomatic verb + noun expressions on
the other (Fazly and Stevenson, 2007). Variativ-
ity and omitting the verb play the most significant
role in distinguishing LVCs from productive con-
structions and idioms (Vincze, 2011). Variativity
reflects the fact that LVCs can be often substituted
by a verb derived from the same root as the nomi-
nal component within the construction: productive
constructions and idioms can be rarely substituted
by a single verb (like make a decision – decide).
Omitting the verb exploits the fact that it is the
nominal component that mostly bears the seman-
tic content of the LVC, hence the event denoted
by the construction can be determined even with-
out the verb in most cases. Furthermore, the very
same noun + verb combination may function as an
LVC in certain contexts while it is just a productive
construction in other ones, compare He gave her a

255



ring made of gold (non-LVC) and He gave her a
ring because he wanted to hear her voice (LVC),
hence it is important to identify them in context.

In theoretical linguistics, Kearns (2002) distin-
guishes between two subtypes of light verb con-
structions. True light verb constructions such as
to give a wipe or to have a laugh and vague ac-
tion verbs such as to make an agreement or to
do the ironing differ in some syntactic and se-
mantic features and can be separated by various
tests, e.g. passivization, WH-movement, pronom-
inalization etc. This distinction also manifests in
natural language processing as several authors pay
attention to the identification of just true light verb
constructions, e.g. Tu and Roth (2011). However,
here we do not make such a distinction and aim to
identify all types of light verb constructions both
in English and in Hungarian, in accordance with
the annotation principles of SZPFX.

The canonical form of a Hungarian light verb
construction is a bare noun + third person singular
verb. However, they may occur in non-canonical
versions as well: the verb may precede the noun,
or the noun and the verb may be not adjacent due
to the free word order. Moreover, as Hungarian
is a morphologically rich language, the verb may
occur in different surface forms inflected for tense,
mood, person and number. These features will be
paid attention to when implementing our system
for detecting Hungarian LVCs.

3 Related Work

Recently, LVCs have received special interest in
the NLP research community. They have been au-
tomatically identified in several languages such as
English (Cook et al., 2007; Bannard, 2007; Vincze
et al., 2011a; Tu and Roth, 2011), Dutch (Van de
Cruys and Moirón, 2007), Basque (Gurrutxaga
and Alegria, 2011) and German (Evert and Ker-
mes, 2003).

Parallel corpora are of high importance in the
automatic identification of multiword expressions:
it is usually one-to-many correspondence that is
exploited when designing methods for detecting
multiword expressions. Caseli et al. (2010) de-
veloped an alignment-based method for extracting
multiword expressions from Portuguese–English
parallel corpora. Samardžić and Merlo (2010) an-
alyzed English and German light verb construc-
tions in parallel corpora: they pay special attention
to their manual and automatic alignment. Zarrieß

and Kuhn (2009) argued that multiword expres-
sions can be reliably detected in parallel corpora
by using dependency-parsed, word-aligned sen-
tences. Sinha (2009) detected Hindi complex
predicates (i.e. a combination of a light verb and
a noun, a verb or an adjective) in a Hindi–English
parallel corpus by identifying a mismatch of the
Hindi light verb meaning in the aligned English
sentence. Many-to-one correspondences were also
exploited by Attia et al. (2010) when identifying
Arabic multiword expressions relying on asym-
metries between paralell entry titles of Wikipedia.
Tsvetkov and Wintner (2010) identified Hebrew
multiword expressions by searching for misalign-
ments in an English–Hebrew parallel corpus.

To the best of our knowledge, parallel corpora
have not been used for testing the efficiency of an
MWE-detecting method for two languages at the
same time. Here, we investigate the performance
of our base LVC-detector on English and Hungar-
ian and pay special attention to the added value of
language-specific features.

4 Experiments

In our investigations we made use of the Szeged-
ParalellFX English-Hungarian parallel corpus,
which consists of 14,000 sentences and contains
about 1370 LVCs for each language. In addition,
we are aware of two other corpora – the Szeged
Treebank (Vincze and Csirik, 2010) and Wiki50
(Vincze et al., 2011b) –, which were manually an-
notated for LVCs on the basis of similar principles
as SZPFX, so we exploited these corpora when
defining our features.

To automatically identify LVCs in running
texts, a machine learning based approach was ap-
plied. This method first parsed each sentence and
extracted potential LVCs. Afterwards, a binary
classification method was utilized, which can au-
tomatically classify potential LVCs as an LVC or
not. This binary classifier was based on a rich fea-
ture set described below.

The candidate extraction method investi-
gated the dependency relation among the verbs
and nouns. Verb-object, verb-subject, verb-
prepositional object, verb-other argument (in the
case of Hungarian) and noun-modifier pairs were
collected from the texts. The dependency labels
were provided by the Bohnet parser (Bohnet,
2010) for English and by magyarlanc 2.0
(Zsibrita et al., 2013) for Hungarian.

256



The features used by the binary classifier can be
categorised as follows:

Morphological features: As the nominal com-
ponent of LVCs is typically derived from a verbal
stem (make a decision) or coincides with a verb
(have a walk), the VerbalStem binary feature fo-
cuses on the stem of the noun; if it had a verbal
nature, the candidates were marked as true. The
POS-pattern feature investigates the POS-tag se-
quence of the potential LVC. If it matched one pat-
tern typical of LVCs (e.g. verb + noun) the
candidate was marked as true; otherwise as false.
The English auxiliary verbs, do and have often
occur as light verbs, hence we defined a feature for
the two verbs to denote whether or not they were
auxiliary verbs in a given sentence.The POS code
of the next word of LVC candidate was also ap-
plied as a feature. As Hungarian is a morpholog-
ically rich language, we were able to define vari-
ous morphology-based features like the case of the
noun or its number etc. Nouns which were histor-
ically derived from verbs but were not treated as
derivation by the Hungarian morphological parser
were also added as a feature.

Semantic features: This feature also exploited
the fact that the nominal component is usually de-
rived from verbs. Consequently, the activity
or event semantic senses were looked for among
the upper level hyperonyms of the head of the
noun phrase in English WordNet 3.11 and in the
Hungarian WordNet (Miháltz et al., 2008).

Orthographic features: The suffix feature is
also based on the fact that many nominal compo-
nents in LVCs are derived from verbs. This feature
checks whether the lemma of the noun ended in
a given character bi- or trigram. The number of
words of the candidate LVC was also noted and
applied as a feature.

Statistical features: Potential English LVCs
and their occurrences were collected from 10,000
English Wikipedia pages by the candidate extrac-
tion method. The number of occurrences was used
as a feature when the candidate was one of the syn-
tactic phrases collected.

Lexical features: We exploit the fact that the
most common verbs are typically light verbs.
Therefore, fifteen typical light verbs were selected
from the list of the most frequent verbs taken from
the Wiki50 (Vincze et al., 2011b) in the case of En-
glish and from the Szeged Treebank (Vincze and

1http://wordnet.princeton.edu

Csirik, 2010) in the case of Hungarian. Then, we
investigated whether the lemmatised verbal com-
ponent of the candidate was one of these fifteen
verbs. The lemma of the noun was also applied
as a lexical feature. The nouns found in LVCs
were collected from the above-mentioned corpora.
Afterwards, we constructed lists of lemmatised
LVCs got from the other corpora.

Syntactic features: As the candidate extraction
methods basically depended on the dependency
relation between the noun and the verb, they could
also be utilised in identifying LVCs. Though the
dobj, prep, rcmod, partmod or nsubjpass
dependency labels were used in candidate extrac-
tion in the case of English, these syntactic relations
were defined as features, while the att, obj,
obl, subj dependency relations were used in the
case of Hungarian. When the noun had a deter-
miner in the candidate LVC, it was also encoded
as another syntactic feature.

Our feature set includes language-independent
and language-specific features as well. Language-
independent features seek to acquire general fea-
tures of LVCs while language-specific features can
be applied due to the different grammatical char-
acteristics of the two languages or due to the avail-
ability of different resources. Table 1 shows which
features were applied for which language.

We experimented with several learning algo-
rithms and decision trees have been proven per-
forming best. This is probably due to the fact that
our feature set consists of compact – i.e. high-
level – features. We trained the J48 classifier of the
WEKA package (Hall et al., 2009). This machine
learning approach implements the decision trees
algorithm C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993). The J48 classi-
fier was trained with the above-mentioned features
and we evaluated it in a 10-fold cross validation.

The potential LVCs which are extracted by the
candidate extraction method but not marked as
positive in the gold standard were classed as neg-
ative. As just the positive LVCs were annotated
on the SZPFX corpus, the Fβ=1 score interpreted
on the positive class was employed as an evalu-
ation metric. The candidate extraction methods
could not detect all LVCs in the corpus data, so
some positive elements in the corpora were not
covered. Hence, we regarded the omitted LVCs
as false negatives in our evaluation.

257



Features Base English Hungarian
Orthographical • – –
VerbalStem • – –
POS pattern • – –
LVC list • – –
Light verb list • – –
Semantic features • – –
Syntactic features • – –
Auxiliary verb – • –
Determiner – • –
Noun list – • –
POS After – • –
LVC freq. stat. – • –
Agglutinative morph. – – •
Historical derivation – – •

Table 1: The basic feature set and language-
specific features.

English Hungarian
ML 63.29/56.91/59.93 66.1/50.04/56.96
DM 73.71/29.22/41.67 63.24/34.46/44.59

Table 2: Results obtained in terms of precision, re-
call and F-score. ML: machine learning approach
DM: dictionary matching method.

5 Results

As a baseline, a context free dictionary matching
method was applied. For this, the gold-standard
LVC lemmas were gathered from Wiki50 and the
Szeged Treebank. Texts were lemmatized and if
an item on the list was found in the text, it was
treated as an LVC.

Table 2 lists the results got on the two differ-
ent parts of SZPFX using the machine learning-
based approach and the baseline dictionary match-
ing. The dictionary matching approach yielded the
highest precision on the English part of SZPFX,
namely 73.71%. However, the machine learning-
based approach proved to be the most successful
as it achieved an F-score that was 18.26 higher
than that with dictionary matching. Hence, this
method turned out to be more effective regard-
ing recall. At the same time, the machine learn-
ing and dictionary matching methods got roughly
the same precision score on the Hungarian part of
SZPFX, but again the machine learning-based ap-
proach achieved the best F-score. While in the
case of English the dictionary matching method
got a higher precision score, the machine learning
approach proved to be more effective.

An ablation analysis was carried out to exam-
ine the effectiveness of each individual feature of
the machine learning-based candidate classifica-

Feature English Hungarian
All 59.93 56.96
Lexical -19.11 -14.05
Morphological -1.68 -1.75
Orthographic -0.43 -3.31
Syntactic -1.84 -1.28
Semantic -2.17 -0.34
Statistical -2.23 –
Language-specific -1.83 -1.05

Table 3: The usefulness of individual features in
terms of F-score using the SZPFX corpus.

tion. For each feature type, a J48 classifier was
trained with all of the features except that one. We
also investigated how language-specific features
improved the performance compared to the base
feature set. We then compared the performance to
that got with all the features. Table 3 shows the
contribution of each individual feature type on the
SZPFX corpus. For each of the two languages,
each type of feature contributed to the overall per-
formance. Lexical features were very effective in
both languages.

6 Discussion

According to the results, our base system is ro-
bust enough to achieve approximately the same
results on two typologically different languages.
Language-specific features further contribute to
the performance as shown by the ablation anal-
ysis. It should be also mentioned that some of
the base features (e.g. POS-patterns, which we
thought would be useful for English due to the
fixed word order) were originally inspired by one
of the languages and later expanded to the other
one (i.e. they were included in the base feature set)
since it was also effective in the case of the other
language. Thus, a multilingual approach may be
also beneficial in the case of monolingual applica-
tions as well.

The most obvious difference between the per-
formances on the two languages is the recall scores
(the difference being 6.87 percentage points be-
tween the two languages). This may be related to
the fact that the distribution of light verbs is quite
different in the two languages. While the top 15
verbs covers more than 80% of the English LVCs,
in Hungarian, this number is only 63% (and in or-
der to reach the same coverage, 38 verbs should be
included). Another difference is that there are 102

258



different verbs in English, which follow the Zipf
distribution, on the other hand, there are 157 Hun-
garian verbs with a more balanced distributional
pattern. Thus, fewer verbs cover a greater part of
LVCs in English than in Hungarian and this also
explains why lexical features contribute more to
the overall performance in English. This fact also
indicates that if verb lists are further extended, still
better recall scores may be achieved for both lan-
guages.

As for the effectiveness of morphological and
syntactic features, morphological features perform
better on a language with a rich morphologi-
cal representation (Hungarian). However, syntax
plays a more important role in LVC detection in
English: the added value of syntax is higher for
the English corpora than for the Hungarian one,
where syntactic features are also encoded in suf-
fixes, i.e. morphological information.

We carried out an error analysis in order to see
how our system could be further improved and
the errors reduced. We concluded that there were
some general and language-specific errors as well.
Among the general errors, we found that LVCs
with a rare light verb were difficult to recognize
(e.g. to utter a lie). In other cases, an originally
deverbal noun was used in a lexicalised sense to-
gether with a typical light verb ((e.g. buildings
are given (something)) and these candidates were
falsely classed as LVCs. Also, some errors in
POS-tagging or dependency parsing also led to
some erroneous predictions.

As for language-specific errors, English verb-
particle combinations (VPCs) followed by a noun
were often labeled as LVCs such as make up
his mind or give in his notice. In Hungar-
ian, verb + proper noun constructions (Hamletet
játsszák (Hamlet-ACC play-3PL.DEF) “they are
playing Hamlet”) were sometimes regarded as
LVCs since the morphological analysis does not
make a distinction between proper and common
nouns. These language-specific errors may be
eliminated by integrating a VPC detector and a
named entity recognition system into the English
and Hungarian systems, respectively.

Although there has been a considerable amount
of literature on English LVC identification (see
Section 3), our results are not directly comparable
to them. This may be explained by the fact that dif-
ferent authors aimed to identify a different scope
of linguistic phenomena and thus interpreted the

concept of “light verb construction” slightly dif-
ferently. For instance, Tu and Roth (2011) and Tan
et al. (2006) focused only on true light verb con-
structions while only object–verb pairs are consid-
ered in other studies (Stevenson et al., 2004; Tan et
al., 2006; Fazly and Stevenson, 2007; Cook et al.,
2007; Bannard, 2007; Tu and Roth, 2011). Several
other studies report results only on light verb con-
structions formed with certain light verbs (Steven-
son et al., 2004; Tan et al., 2006; Tu and Roth,
2011). In contrast, we aimed to identify all kinds
of LVCs, i.e. we did not apply any restrictions on
the nature of LVCs to be detected. In other words,
our task was somewhat more difficult than those
found in earlier literature. Although our results are
somewhat lower on English LVC detection than
those attained by previous studies, we think that
despite the difficulty of the task, our method could
offer promising results for identifying all types of
LVCs both in English and in Hungarian.

7 Conclusions

In this paper, we introduced our machine learning-
based approach for identifying LVCs in Hungar-
ian and English free texts. The method proved
to be sufficiently robust as it achieved approxi-
mately the same scores on two typologically dif-
ferent languages. The language-specific features
further contributed to the performance in both lan-
guages. In addition, some language-independent
features were inspired by one of the languages, so
a multilingual approach proved to be fruitful in the
case of monolingual LVC detection as well.

In the future, we would like to improve our sys-
tem by conducting a detailed analysis of the effect
of each feature on the results. Later, we also plan
to adapt the tool to other types of multiword ex-
pressions and conduct further experiments on lan-
guages other than English and Hungarian, the re-
sults of which may further lead to a more robust,
general LVC system. Moreover, we can improve
the method applied in each language by imple-
menting other language-specific features as well.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the European
Union and the European Social Fund through the
project FuturICT.hu (grant no.: TÁMOP-4.2.2.C-
11/1/KONV-2012-0013).

259



References
Margarita Alonso Ramos. 2004. Las construcciones

con verbo de apoyo. Visor Libros, Madrid.

Jurij D. Apresjan. 2004. O semantičeskoj nepustote
i motivirovannosti glagol’nyx leksičeskix funkcij.
Voprosy jazykoznanija, (4):3–18.

Mohammed Attia, Antonio Toral, Lamia Tounsi, Pavel
Pecina, and Josef van Genabith. 2010. Automatic
Extraction of Arabic Multiword Expressions. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: from Theory to Applications, pages
19–27, Beijing, China, August. Coling 2010 Orga-
nizing Committee.

Colin Bannard. 2007. A measure of syntactic flexibil-
ity for automatically identifying multiword expres-
sions in corpora. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on a Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions,
MWE ’07, pages 1–8, Morristown, NJ, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast depen-
dency parsing is not a contradiction. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 89–97.

Helena de Medeiros Caseli, Carlos Ramisch, Maria das
Graças Volpe Nunes, and Aline Villavicencio. 2010.
Alignment-based extraction of multiword expres-
sions. Language Resources and Evaluation, 44(1-
2):59–77.

Paul Cook, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson.
2007. Pulling their weight: exploiting syntactic
forms for the automatic identification of idiomatic
expressions in context. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on a Broader Perspective on Multiword Ex-
pressions, MWE ’07, pages 41–48, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Stefan Evert and Hannah Kermes. 2003. Experiments
on candidate data for collocation extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of EACL 2003, pages 83–86.

Afsaneh Fazly and Suzanne Stevenson. 2007. Distin-
guishing Subtypes of Multiword Expressions Using
Linguistically-Motivated Statistical Measures. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Perspec-
tive on Multiword Expressions, pages 9–16, Prague,
Czech Republic, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Antton Gurrutxaga and Iñaki Alegria. 2011. Auto-
matic Extraction of NV Expressions in Basque: Ba-
sic Issues on Cooccurrence Techniques. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions:
from Parsing and Generation to the Real World,
pages 2–7, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explorations, 11(1):10–18.

Kate Kearns. 2002. Light verbs in English.
Manuscript.

Igor Mel’čuk. 2004. Verbes supports sans peine.
Lingvisticae Investigationes, 27(2):203–217.

Márton Miháltz, Csaba Hatvani, Judit Kuti, György
Szarvas, János Csirik, Gábor Prószéky, and Tamás
Váradi. 2008. Methods and Results of the Hun-
garian WordNet Project. In Attila Tanács, Dóra
Csendes, Veronika Vincze, Christiane Fellbaum, and
Piek Vossen, editors, Proceedings of the Fourth
Global WordNet Conference (GWC 2008), pages
311–320, Szeged. University of Szeged.

Ross Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Ma-
teo, CA.

Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd International Conference on In-
telligent Text Processing and Computational Lin-
guistics (CICLing-2002, pages 1–15, Mexico City,
Mexico.

Tanja Samardžić and Paola Merlo. 2010. Cross-lingual
variation of light verb constructions: Using parallel
corpora and automatic alignment for linguistic re-
search. In Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on
NLP and Linguistics: Finding the Common Ground,
pages 52–60, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Begoña Sanromán Vilas. 2009. Towards a seman-
tically oriented selection of the values of Oper1.
The case of golpe ’blow’ in Spanish. In David
Beck, Kim Gerdes, Jasmina Milićević, and Alain
Polguère, editors, Proceedings of the Fourth In-
ternational Conference on Meaning-Text Theory –
MTT’09, pages 327–337, Montreal, Canada. Univer-
sité de Montréal.

R. Mahesh K. Sinha. 2009. Mining Complex Predi-
cates In Hindi Using A Parallel Hindi-English Cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Identification, Interpretation, Disam-
biguation and Applications, pages 40–46, Singa-
pore, August. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Suzanne Stevenson, Afsaneh Fazly, and Ryan North.
2004. Statistical Measures of the Semi-Productivity
of Light Verb Constructions. In Takaaki Tanaka,
Aline Villavicencio, Francis Bond, and Anna Ko-
rhonen, editors, Second ACL Workshop on Multi-
word Expressions: Integrating Processing, pages 1–
8, Barcelona, Spain, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Yee Fan Tan, Min-Yen Kan, and Hang Cui. 2006.
Extending corpus-based identification of light verb
constructions using a supervised learning frame-
work. In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop on

260



Multi-Word Expressions in a Multilingual Contexts,
pages 49–56, Trento, Italy, April. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Yulia Tsvetkov and Shuly Wintner. 2010. Extrac-
tion of multi-word expressions from small parallel
corpora. In Coling 2010: Posters, pages 1256–
1264, Beijing, China, August. Coling 2010 Organiz-
ing Committee.

Yuancheng Tu and Dan Roth. 2011. Learning English
Light Verb Constructions: Contextual or Statistical.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Ex-
pressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real
World, pages 31–39, Portland, Oregon, USA, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Tim Van de Cruys and Begoña Villada Moirón. 2007.
Semantics-based multiword expression extraction.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on a Broader
Perspective on Multiword Expressions, MWE ’07,
pages 25–32, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Veronika Vincze and János Csirik. 2010. Hungar-
ian corpus of light verb constructions. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 1110–
1118, Beijing, China, August. Coling 2010 Organiz-
ing Committee.

Veronika Vincze, István Nagy T., and Gábor Berend.
2011a. Detecting Noun Compounds and Light Verb
Constructions: a Contrastive Study. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from
Parsing and Generation to the Real World, pages
116–121, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. ACL.

Veronika Vincze, István Nagy T., and Gábor Berend.
2011b. Multiword expressions and named entities in
the Wiki50 corpus. In Proceedings of RANLP 2011,
Hissar, Bulgaria.

Veronika Vincze. 2011. Semi-Compositional Noun
+ Verb Constructions: Theoretical Questions and
Computational Linguistic Analyses. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.

Veronika Vincze. 2012. Light Verb Constructions
in the SzegedParalellFX English–Hungarian Paral-
lel Corpus. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri,
Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uǧur Doǧan, Bente
Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Sina Zarrieß and Jonas Kuhn. 2009. Exploiting Trans-
lational Correspondences for Pattern-Independent
MWE Identification. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Multiword Expressions: Identification,
Interpretation, Disambiguation and Applications,
pages 23–30, Singapore, August. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

János Zsibrita, Veronika Vincze, and Richárd Farkas.
2013. magyarlanc 2.0: szintaktikai elemzés és fel-
gyorsı́tott szófaji egyértelműsı́tés [magyarlanc 2.0:
Syntactic parsing and accelerated POS-tagging].
In Attila Tanács and Veronika Vincze, editors,
MSzNy 2013 – IX. Magyar Számı́tógépes Nyelvészeti
Konferencia, pages 368–374, Szeged. Szegedi Tu-
dományegyetem.

261


