



















































Feature-Based Selection of Dependency Paths in Ad Hoc Information Retrieval


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 507–516,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Feature-Based Selection of Dependency Paths
in Ad Hoc Information Retrieval

K. Tamsin Maxwell
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK
t.maxwell@ed.ac.uk

Jon Oberlander
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

j.oberlander@ed.ac.uk

W. Bruce Croft
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
croft@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

Techniques that compare short text seg-
ments using dependency paths (or simply,
paths) appear in a wide range of automated
language processing applications including
question answering (QA). However, few
models in ad hoc information retrieval (IR)
use paths for document ranking due to
the prohibitive cost of parsing a retrieval
collection. In this paper, we introduce a
flexible notion of paths that describe chains
of words on a dependency path. These
chains, or catenae, are readily applied in
standard IR models. Informative catenae
are selected using supervised machine
learning with linguistically informed fea-
tures and compared to both non-linguistic
terms and catenae selected heuristically
with filters derived from work on paths.
Automatically selected catenae of 1-2
words deliver significant performance
gains on three TREC collections.

1 Introduction
In the past decade, an increasing number of

techniques have used complex and effective
syntactic and semantic features to determine the
similarity, entailment or alignment between short
texts. These approaches are motivated by the idea
that sentence meaning can be flexibly captured by
the syntactic and semantic relations between words,
and encoded in dependency parse tree fragments.
Dependency paths (or simply, paths) are compared
using techniques such as tree edit distance (Pun-
yakanok et al., 2004; Heilman and Smith, 2010),
relation probability (Gao et al., 2004) and parse tree
alignment (Wang et al., 2007; Park et al., 2011).

Much work on sentence similarity using
dependency paths focuses on question answering
(QA) where textual inference requires attention
to linguistic detail. Dependency-based techniques
can also be highly effective for ad hoc information

retrieval (IR) (Park et al., 2011). However, few
path-based methods have been explored for ad
hoc IR, largely because parsing large document
collections is computationally prohibitive.

In this paper, we explore a flexible application
of dependency paths that overcomes this difficulty.
We reduce paths to chains of words called catenae
(Osborne and Groß, 2012) that capture salient
semantic content in an underspecified manner.
Catenae can be used as lexical units in a reformu-
lated query to explicitly indicate important word
relationships while retaining efficient and flexible
proximity matching. Crucially, this does not
require parsing documents. Moreover, catenae are
compatible with a variety of existing IR models.

We hypothesize that catenae identify most units
of salient knowledge in text. This is because
they are a condition for ellipsis, in which salient
knowledge can be successfully omitted from text
(Osborne and Groß, 2012). To our knowledge, this
paper is the first time that catenae are proposed
as a means for term selection in IR, and where
ellipsis is considered as a means for identification
of semantic units.

We also extend previous work with development
of a linguistically informed, supervised machine
learning technique for selection of informative
catenae. Previous heuristic filters for dependency
paths (Lin and Pantel, 2001; Shen et al., 2005;
Cui et al., 2005) can exclude informative relations.
Alternatively, treating all paths as equally infor-
mative (Punyakanok et al., 2004; Park et al., 2011;
Moschitti, 2008) can generate noisy word relations
and is computationally intensive.

The challenge of path selection is that no
explicit information in text indicates which paths
are relevant. Consider the catenae captured by
heuristic filters for the TREC1 query, ‘What
role does blood-alcohol level play in automobile
accident fatalities’ (#358, Table 1). It may appear
obvious that the component words of ‘role play’

1Text REtrieval Conference, see http://trec.nist.gov/

507



blood alcohol

level play

auto accident

accident fatal

role play

play fatal

blood alcohol play

play accident fatal

auto accident fatal

level play fatal

role play fatal

role level play

blood alcohol

level play

auto accident

accident fatal

role blood

alcohol level

play auto

blood alcohol

level play

auto accident

accident fatal

role play

play fatal

Catenae Sequential dependenceGovernor3dependent

Query: What role does blood-alcohol level play in automobile* accident fatalities*?    (*abbreviated to `auto', `fatal')

auto accident

accident fatal

play fatal

play accident fatal

auto accident fatal

Predicate3argument

auto accident

accident fatal

auto accident fatal

level play fatal

role play fatal

Nominal end slots

Table 1: Catenae derived from dependency paths, as selected by heuristic methods. Selections are
compared to sequential bigrams that use no linguistic knowledge.

and ‘level play’ do not have an important semantic
relationship relative to the query, yet these catenae
are described by parent-child relations that are
commonly used to filter paths in text processing
applications. Alternative filters that avoid such
trivial word combinations also omit descriptions of
key entities such as ‘blood alcohol’, and identify
longer catenae that may be overly restrictive.
These shortcomings suggest that an optimized
selection process may improve performance of
techniques that use dependency paths in ad hoc IR.

We identify three previously proposed selection
methods, and compare them on the task of catenae
selection for ad hoc IR. Selections are tested
using three TREC collections: Robust04, WT10G,
and GOV2. This provides a diverse platform for
experiments. We also develop a linguistically
informed machine learning technique for catenae
selection that captures both key aspects of heuristic
filters, and novel characteristics of catenae and
paths. The basic idea is that selection, or weighting,
of catenae can be improved by features that are
specific to paths, rather than generic for all terms.

Results show that our selection method is more
effective in identifying key catenae compared
to previously proposed filters. Integration of the
identified catenae in queries also improves IR ef-
fectiveness compared to a highly effective baseline
that uses sequential bigrams with no linguistic
knowledge. This model represents the obvious
alternative to catenae for term selection in IR.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows.
§2 reviews related work, §3 describes catenae
and their linguistic motivation and §4 describes
our selection method. §5 evaluates classification
experiments using the supervised filter. §6 presents
the results of experiments in ad hoc IR. Finally, §7
concludes the paper.

2 Related work
Techniques that compare short text segments

using dependency paths are applied to a wide range
of automated language processing tasks, including
paraphrasing, summarization, entailment detection,
QA, machine translation and the evaluation of
word, phrase and sentence similarity. A generic
approach uses a matching function to compare a
dependency path between any two stemmed terms
x and y in a sentence A with any dependency path
between x and y in sentence B. The match score
for A and B is computed over all dependency
paths in A.

In QA this approach improves question repre-
sentation, answer selection and answer ranking
compared to methods that use bag-of-words
and ngram features (Surdeanu et al., 2011). For
example, Lin and Pantel (2001) present a method
to derive paraphrasing rules for QA using analysis
of paths that connect two nouns; Echihabi and
Marcu (2003) align all paths in questions with
trees for heuristically pruned answers; Cui et
al. (2005) score answers using a variation of the
IBM translation model 1; Wang et al. (2007)
use quasi-synchronous translation to map all
parent-child paths in a question to any path in an
answer; and Moschitti (2008) explores syntactic
and semantic kernels for QA classification.

In ad hoc IR, most models of term dependence
use word co-occurrence and proximity (Song and
Croft, 1999; Metzler and Croft, 2005; Srikanth and
Srihari, 2002; van Rijsbergen, 1993). Syntactic
language models for IR are a significant departure
from this trend (Gao et al., 2004; Lee et al., 2006;
Cai et al., 2007; Maisonnasse et al., 2007) that
use dependency paths to address long-distance
dependencies and normalize spurious differences
in surface text. Paths are constrained in both

508



prd
loc

pmod
loc

pmod

Is    polio under control  in   China ?

X1
X2

X3
X4

X5
X6

polio
polio control
control
control China
China
polio control China

polio       under        control

control       in       China

polio       under        control       in        China 

loc pmod

loc pmod

loc pmod loc pmod

Catenae 'stoplisted. Dependency paths

Figure 1: Catenae are an economical and intuitive
representation of dependency paths.

queries and documents to parent-child relations.
In contrast, (Park et al., 2011) present a quasi-
synchronous translation model for IR that does not
limit paths. This is based on the observation that
semantically related words have a variety of direct
and indirect relations. All of these models require
parsing of an entire document collection.

Techniques using dependency paths in both QA
and ad hoc IR show promising results, but there
is no clear understanding of which path constraints
result in the greatest IR effectiveness. We directly
compare selections of catenae as a simplified
representation of paths.

In addition, a vast number of methods have
been presented for term weighting and selection
in ad hoc IR. Our supervised selection extends the
successful method presented by Bendersky and
Croft (2008) for selection and weighting of query
noun phrases (NPs). It also extends work for deter-
mining the variability of governor-dependent pairs
(Song et al., 2008). In contrast to this work, we
apply linguistic features that are specific to catenae
and dependency paths, and select among units
containing more than two content-bearing words.

3 Catenae as semantic units

Catenae (Latin for ‘chain’, singular catena) are
dependency-based syntactic units. This section
outlines their unique semantic properties.

A catena is defined on a dependency graph that
has lexical nodes (or words) linked by binary asym-
metrical relations called dependencies. Depen-
dencies hold between a governor and a dependent
and may be syntactic or semantic in nature (Nivre,
2005). A dependency graph is usually acyclic such
that each node has only one governor, and one root
node of the tree does not depend on any other node.

A catena is a word, or sequence of words that are
continuous with respect to a walk on a dependency

Is polio under control in China, and is polio under control in India?

Antecedent

First conjunct:
Antecedent clause

Second conjunct:
Elliptical/target clause

Elided text Remnant

Figure 2: Ellipsis in a coordinated construct.

graph. For example, Fig. 1 shows a dependency
parse that generates 21 catenae in total: (using
i for Xi) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, 23, 34, 45, 56, 123,
234, 345, 456, 1234, 2345, 3456, 12345, 23456,
123456. We process catenae to remove stop words
on the INQUERY stoplist (Allan et al., 2000) and
lexical units containing 18 TREC description stop
words such as ‘describe’. This results in a reduced
set of catenae as shown in Fig. 1.

A dependency path is ordered and includes both
word tokens and the relations between them. In
contrast, a catena is a set of word types that may
be ordered or partially ordered. A catena is an
economical, intuitive lexical unit that corresponds
to a dependency path and is argued to play an
important role in syntax (Osborne et al., 2012).

In this paper, we explore catenae instead of paths
for ad hoc IR due to their suitability for efficient IR
models and flexible representation of language se-
mantics. Specifically, we note that catenae identify
words that can be omitted in elliptical constructions
(Osborne et al., 2012). They thus represent salient
semantic information in text. To clarify this insight,
we briefly review catenae in ellipsis.

3.1 Semantic units in ellipsis

Fig. 2 shows terminology for the phenomenon
of ellipsis. The omitted words are called elided
text, and words that could be omitted, but are not,
we call elliptical candidates.

Ellipsis relies on the logical structure of a
coordinated construction in which two or more
elements, such as sentences, are joined by a
conjunctive word or phrase such as ‘and’ or
‘more than’. A coordinated structure is required
because the omitted words are ‘filled in’ by
assuming a parallel relation p between the first
and second conjunct. In ellipsis, p is omitted and
its arguments are retained in text. In order for
ellipsis to be successful and grammatically correct,
p must be salient shared knowledge at the time of
communication (Prince, 1986; Steedman, 1990). If
p is salient then the omitted text can be inferred. If
p is not salient then the omission of words merely
results in ungrammatical, or incoherent, sentences.

This framework is practically illustrated in Fig.

509



   Is polio under control in China, and 3is polio under control. in India ?
   Is polio under control in China, and is cancer under observation 3in China7 ?
* Is polio under control in China, and 3is7 cancer 2under. observation 3in China7 ?
* Is polio under control in China, and 3is polio. under 2control in7 India ?

Ellipsis candidates marked in italics: they are catenae

a7                                         in India    ?
b7   is cancer under observation        ?
c7 *    cancer            observation        ?
d7 *                under                 India   ?

Is polio under control in China, and...

Ellided sentences

Figure 3: For ellipsis to be successful, elided words must be catenae. Ellipsis candidates are catenae2.

Is    polio under control  in   China ?

X1 X2

X3
X4

X5 X6

Figure 4: A parse in which ‘polio China’ is a
catena.

3 for the query, ‘Is polio under control in China?’.
Sentences marked by * are incoherent, and it is
evident that the omitted words do not form a salient
semantic unit. They also do not form catenae. In
contrast, the omitted words in successful ellipsis
do form catenae, and they represent informative
word combinations with respect to the query. This
observation leads us to an ellipsis hypothesis:

Ellipsis hypothesis: For queries formulated
into coordinated structures, the subset of
catenae that are elliptical candidates identify
the salient semantic units in the query.

3.2 Limitations of paths and catenae

The prediction of salient semantic units by cate-
nae is quite robust. However, there are two prob-
lems that can limit the effectiveness of any tech-
nique that uses catenae or dependency paths in IR.

1) Syntactic ambiguity: We make the simpli-
fying assumption that the most probable parse of
a query is accurate and sufficient for the extraction
of relevant catenae. However, this is not always
true. For example, the sentence ‘Is polio under
control in China, and under observation ?’
constitutes successful ellipsis. The elided words
‘polio in china’ are relevant to a base query, ‘Is
polio under control in China?’. Unfortunately,
in Fig. 1 the elided text does not qualify as a
catena. A parse with alternative prepositional
phrase attachment is shown in Fig. 4. Here, the
successfully elided text does qualify as a catena.
This highlights the fact that a single dependency
parse may only partially represent the ambiguous
semantics of a query. More accurate parsing does
not address this problem.

2) Rising: Automatic extraction of catenae is
limited by the phenomenon of rising. Let the

used  a  toxic chemical  as   a  weapon

X4
X3X2

X1

X5

X6
X7

Standard structure

A  toxic chemical used  as   a  weapon

X3
X2X1 X4g

X5

X6
X7

Rising structure

Figure 5: A parse with and without rising. The
dashed dependency edge marks where a head is
not also the governor and the g-script marks the
governor of the risen catena.

governor of a catena be the word that licenses
it (in Fig. 5 ‘used’ licenses ‘a toxic chemical’
e.g. ‘used what?’). Let the head of a catena be
its parent in a dependency tree. Rising occurs
when the head is not the same as the governor.
This is frequently seen with wh-fronting questions
that start who, what etc., as well as with many
other syntactic discontinuities (Osborne and Groß,
2012). More specifically, rising occurs when a
catena is separated from its governor by words
that its governor does not dominate, or the catena
dominates the governor, as in Fig. 5. Note that
in the risen structure, the words for the catena
‘chemical as a weapon’ are discontinuous on the
surface, interrupted by the word ‘used’.

4 Selection method for catenae
Catenae describe relatively few of the possible

word combinations in a sentence, but still include
many combinations that do not result in successful
ellipsis and are not informative for IR.

This section describes our supervised method
for selection of informative catenae. Candidate
catenae are identified using two constraints that
enable more efficient extraction: stopwords are
removed, and stopped catenae must contain fewer
than four words (single words are permitted). We
use a pseudo-projective joint dependency parse
and semantic role labelling system (Johansson and

510



Nugues, 2008) to generate the dependency parse.
This enables us to explore semantic classification
features and is highly accurate. However, any
dependency parser may be applied instead. For
comparison, catenae extracted from 500 queries
using the Stanford dependency parser (de Marneffe
et al., 2006) overlap with 77% of catenae extracted
from the same queries using the applied parser.

4.1 Feature Classes

Four feature classes are presented in Table 2:

Ellipsis candidates: The ellipsis hypothesis
suggests that informative catenae are elliptical
candidates. However, queries are not in the
coordinated structures required for ellipsis. To
enable extraction of characteristic features we (a)
construct a coordinated query by adding the query
to itself; and (b) elide catenae from the second
conjunct. For example, for the query, Is polio
under control in China? we have:

(a) Is polio under control in China, and is
polio under control in China?
(b) Is polio under control in China, and is
polio in China?

We refer to the words in (b) as the query remainder
and use this to identify features detailed in Table 2.

Dependency path features: Part-of-speech
tags and semantic roles have been used to filter
dependency paths. We identify several features that
use these characteristics from prior work (Table 2).

In addition, variability in the separation distance
in documents observed for words that have
governor-dependent relations in queries has been
proposed for identification of promising paths
(Song et al., 2008). We also observe that due to the
phenomenon of rising, words that form catenae can
be discontinuous in text, and the ability of catenae
to match similar word combinations is limited by
variability of how they appear in documents. Thus,
we propose features for separation distance, but use
efficient collection statistics rather than summing
statistics for every document in a collection.

Co-occurrence features: A governor w1 tends
to subcategorize for its dependents wn. This
means that w1 often determines the choice of wn.
We conclude that co-occurrence is an important
feature of dependency relations (Mel’c̆uk, 2003).
In addition, term frequencies and inverse document
frequencies calculated using word co-occurrence
measures are commonly used in IR. We use
features previously proposed for filtering terms in
IR (Bendersky and Croft, 2008) with two methods

to normalize co-occurrence counts for catenae of
different lengths: a factor |c||c|, where |c| is the
number of words in catena c (Hagen et al., 2011),
and the average score for a feature type over all
pairwise word combinations in c.

IR performance predictors: Catenae take the
same form as typical IR search terms. For this
reason, we also use predictors of IR effectiveness
previously applied to IR terms.

In general, path and co-occurrence features are
similar to those applied by Surdeanu et al. (2011)
but we do not parse documents. Path features
are also similar to Song et al. (2008), but more
efficient and suited to units of variable length.
Ellipsis features have not been used before.

5 Experimental setup

5.1 Classification

Catenae selection is framed as a supervised
classification problem trained on binary human
judgments of informativeness: how well catenae
represent a query and discriminate between
relevant and non-relevant documents in a col-
lection. Kappa for two annotators on catenae
in 100 sample queries was 0.63, and test-retest
reliability for individual judges was similar (0.62)3.
Although this is low, human annotations produced
consistently better classification accuracy than
other labelling methods explored.

We use the Weka (Hall et al., 2009) Ad-
aBoost.M1 meta-classifier (Freund and Schapire,
1996) with unpruned C4.5 decision trees as base
learners to classify catenae as informative or
not. Adaboost.M1 boosts decisions over T weak
learners for T features using weighted majority
voting. At each round, predictions of a new learner
are focused on incorrectly classified examples
from the previous round. Adaboost.M1 was
selected in preference to other algorithms because
it performed better in preliminary experiments,
leverages many weak features to advantage, and
usually does not overfit (Schapire et al., 1997).

Predictions are made using 10-fold cross-
validation. There are roughly three times the
number of uninformative catenae compared to
informative catenae. In addition, the number of
training examples is small (1295 to 5163 per collec-
tion). To improve classifier accuracy, the training
data for each collection is supplemented and
balanced by generating examples from queries for

3Catenae, judgments and annotation details available at
ciir.cs.umass.edu/˜tmaxwell

511



isSeq

Minimum perplexity of ngrams with length 2, 3, and 
4 in a window of up to a 3 words around the site of 
catenae omission. This is the area where 
ungrammaticality may be introduced. For the 
remainder R=`ABCDE&ABE' we compute ppl1 for 
I&ABE, &AB, ABE, &A, AB, BEJ.

R_ppl1

R_strict

Compliance with strict handKcoded rules for 
grammaticality of a remainder. Rules include 
unlikely orderings of punctuation and partKofK
speech MPOSQ tags Me.g. ,, Q, poor placement of 
determiners and punctuation, and orphaned words, 
such as adjectives without the nouns they modify.

R_relax

A relaxed version of handKcoded rules for R_strict. 
Some rules were observed to be overly aggressive in 
detection of ungrammatical remainders.

Ellipsis candidate features (E)

Co-occurrence features (C)

IR performance prediction features (I)

c_ppl1

Dependency path features (D) (continued)

Dependency paths traverse nodes including 
stopwords and may be filtered based on POS tags. 
We use perplexity for the sequence of POS tags in 
catenae before removing stopwords. This is 
computed using a POS language model built on 
ukWaC parsed wikipedia data MBaroni et al., 2009Q.

phClass

Phrasal class for a catena, with options NP, VP and 
Other. A catena has a NP or VP class if it is, or is 
entirely contained by, an NP or VP MSong et al., 
2008Q.

NP_split

Unsuccessful ellipsis often results if elided words 
only partly describe a base NP. Boolean feature for 
presence of a partial NP in the remainder. NPs Mand 
PPsQ are identified using the MontyLingua toolkit.

PP_split
As for NP_split, defined for prepositional phrases 
(PP). 

F_split As for NP_split, defined for finite clauses.

semRole

Boolean feature indicating whether a catena 
describes all, or part of, a predicateKargument 
structure MPASQ. Previous work approximated PAS 
by using paths between head nouns and verbs, and 
all paths excluding those within base chunks.

c_len
Length of a stopped catenae. Longer terms tend to 
reduce IR recall.

Boolean indicating if catena words are sequential in 
stoplisted surface text. 

cf_ow

Frequency of a catena in the retrieval collection, 
words appearing ordered in a window the length of 
the catena. 

cf_uw As for cf_ow, but words may appear unordered.

cf_uw8
As for cf_uw, but the window has a length of 8 
words.

idf_ow

Inverse document frequency MidfQ where document 
frequency MdfQ of a catena is calculated using cf_ow 
windows. Let N  be the number of documents in 
the retrieval collection, then:

                      
idf(Ci) = log2

N

df(Ci)

and idf(Ci) = N  if df(Ci) = 0.

idf_uw As for idf_ow, but words may appear unordered.

idf_uw8
As for idf_uw, but the window has a length of 8 
words.

gf

Google ngrams frequency MBrants and Franz, 2006Q 
from a web crawl of approximately one trillion 
English word tokens. Counts from a large collection 
are expected to be more reliable than those from 
smaller test collections.

WIG

Normalized Weighted Information Gain MWIGQ is 
the change in information over top ranked 
documents between a random ranked list and an 
actual ranked list retrieved with a catena c MZhou 
and Croft, 2007Q. 

    
wig(c) =

1
k

∑
d∈Dk(c) log p(c|d)− log p(c|C)

−log p(c|C)
where Dk are the top k=50 documents retrieved 

with catena c from collection C, and p(c|·) are 
maximum likelihood estimates. A second feature 
uses the average WIG score for all pairwise word 
combinations in c.

qf_in

Frequency of appearance in queries from the Live 
Search 2006 search query log Mapproximately 15 
million queriesQ. Query log frequencies are a 
measure of the likelihood that a catena will appear 
in any query. 

wf_in
As for qf_in, but using frequency counts in 
Wikipedia titles instead of queries.

sepMode

Most frequent separation distance of words in 
catena c in the retrieval collection, with possible 
values S = 81, 2, 3, long=. 1 means that all words are 
adjacent, 2 means separation by 0-1 words, and long 

means containment in a window of size 4 ∗ |c|.

H_c

Entropy for separation distance s of words in catena 
c in the retrieval collection.fs is the frequency of c 
in window size s, and fS is the frequency of c in a 

window of size 4 ∗ |c| . All f are normalized for 
catena length using |c||c| MHagen et al., 2011Q.

              
Hc =

∑

s∈S

fs + 0.5

fS + 0.5
log2

fs + 0.5

fS + 0.5

sepRatio

Where fs and fS are defined as for H_c:

                        
sepRatioc =

fs>2 + 0.5

fS + 0.5

wRatio

For words w in catena c; fS is defined as for H_c.

                   
wRatioc =

0.5 + 1|c|
∑

w∈c fw

fS + 0.5

nomEnd

Boolean indicating whether the words at each end 
of the catena are nouns Mor the catena is a single 
nounQ.

Dependency path features (D)

Table 2: Classifier features.

512



Feature Classes

Pr

 

ROB04

WT10G

GOV2

 

D-CIE-CIE-DE-D-CI

R

86.2 72.8

79.3 67.1

77.0 68.0

Pr R

83.5 67.5

76.9 59.7

70.9 61.8

Pr R

86.2 71.7

77.2 65.6

72.8 63.9

Pr R

86.2 72.0

79.6 66.1

75.5 67.2

 

Table 3: Average classifier precision (Pr) and recall
(R) over 10 folds. Pr is % positive predictions
that are correct. R is % positive labeled instances
predicted as positive. A combination of all classes
marginally performs best.

other collections used in this paper, plus TREC8-
QA. For example, training data for Robust04
includes data from WT10G, GOV2 and TREC8-
QA. Any examples that replicate catenae in the test
collection are excluded. For Robust04, WT10G
and GOV2 respectively, 30%, 82% and 69% of the
training data is derived from other collections.

5.2 Classification results

Average classification precision and recall is
shown in Table 3. Co-occurrence and IR effective-
ness prediction features (CI) was the most influen-
tial class, and accounted for 70% of all features in
the model. Performance is marginally better using
all features (E-D-CI) with a moderate improvement
over human agreement on the annotation task. The
E-D-CI filter is used in subsequent experiments.

Catenae were predicted for all queries. Predic-
tions were more accurate for Robust04 than the
other two collections. One potential explanation
is that Robust04 queries are longer on average
(up to 32 content words per query, compared to
up to 16 words) so they generate a more diverse
set of catenae that are more easily distinguished
with respect to informativeness. The proportion
of training data specific to the retrieval collection
may also be a factor. Longer queries produce a
greater number of catenae, so less training data
from other collections is required.

6 Evaluation framework

6.1 Baseline IR models

Baselines are a unigram query likelihood (QL)
model (bag of words) and a highly effective
sequential dependence (SD) variant of the Markov
random field (MRF) model (Metzler and Croft,
2005). SD uses a linear combination of three
cliques of terms, where each clique is prioritized
by a weight λc. The first clique contains individual
words (query likelihood QL), λ1 = 0.85. The
second clique contains query bigrams that match

document bigrams in 2-word ordered windows
(‘#1’), λ2 = 0.1. The third clique uses the same
bigrams as clique 2 with an 8-word unordered
window (‘#uw8’), λ3 = 0.05. For example, the
query new york city in Indri4 query language is:

#weight(
λ1 #combine(new york city)
λ2 #combine(#1(new york) #1(york city))
λ3 #combine(#uw8(new york) #uw8(york city)))

SD is a competitive baseline in IR (Bendersky
and Croft, 2008; Park et al., 2011; Xue et al.,
2010). Our reformulated model uses the same
query format as SD, but the second and third
cliques contain filtered catenae instead of query
bigrams. In addition, because catenae may be
multi-word units, we adjust the unordered window
size to 4 ∗ |c|. So, if two catenae ‘york’ and ‘new
york city’ are selected, the last clique has the form:

λ3 #combine( york #uw12(new york city))

This query representation enables word relations
to be explicitly indicated while maintaining
efficient and flexible matching of catenae in
documents. Moreover, it does not use dependency
relations between words during retrieval, so there
is no need to parse a collection.

6.2 Baseline catenae selection

We explore four filters for catenae. Three are
based on previous work and describe heuristic
features of promising catenae. The fourth is our
novel supervised classifier.

NomEnd: Catenae starting and ending with
nouns, or containing only one word that is a noun.
Paths between nouns are used by Lin and Pantel
(2001).

SemRol: Catenae in which all component
words are either predicates or argument heads.
This is based on work that uses paths between head
nouns and verbs (Shen et al., 2005), semantic roles
(Moschitti, 2008), and all dependency paths except
those that occur between words in the same base
chunk (e.g. noun / verb phrase) (Cui et al., 2005).

GovDep: Cantenae containing words with a
governor-dependent relation. Many IR models
use this form of path filtering e.g. (Gao et al.,
2004; Wang et al., 2007). Relations are ‘collapsed’
by removing stopwords to reduce the distance
between content nodes in a dependency graph.

4http://www.lemurproject.org/

513



ROBUST04 WT10G GOV2
MAP R-Pr MAP R-Pr MAP R-Pr

QL 25.25 28.69 19.55 22.77 25.77 31.26
SD 26.57† 30.02† 20.63 24.31† 28.00† 33.30†
NomEnd 25.91† 29.35‡ 20.81† 24.27† 27.41† 32.94†
GovDep 26.26† 29.63† 21.06 24.23† 27.87† 33.51†
SemRol 25.70† 29.06 19.78 22.93 26.76 32.49†
SFeat 27.04† 30.11† 20.84† 24.31† 28.43† 33.84†
SF-12 27.03† 30.20† 21.62† 24.81† 28.57† 34.01†

Table 4: IR results using filtered catenae consistently improve over non-linguistic methods.
Significance(p < .05) shown compared to QL (†) and SD (‡).

ROBUST04 WT10G GOV2
MAP R-Pr MAP R-Pr MAP R-Pr

SF-12 27.03 30.20 21.62 24.81 28.57 34.01
SF-123 26.83 30.34 21.34 24.64 28.77 34.24
SF-NE 26.51 29.86 21.42 24.55 27.96 33.26
SF-GD 26.22 29.48 20.33 23.72 28.30 33.83
Gold 27.92 31.15 22.56 25.69 29.65 35.08

Table 5: Results with supervised selection of catenae with specified length (SF-12, SF-123) are more
effective than combinations of SFeat with heuristic NomEnd (SF-NE) or GovDep (SF-GD).

6.3 Experiments

Experiments compare queries reformulated
using catenae selected by baseline filters and our
supervised selection method (SFeat) to SD and
a bag-of-words model (QL). We also compare IR
effectiveness of all catenae filtered using SFeat
with approaches that combine SFeat with baseline
filters. All models are implemented using the Indri
retrieval engine version 4.12.

6.4 Results

Results in Table 4 show significant improvement
in mean average precision (MAP) of queries using
catenae compared to QL. Consistent improvements
over SD are also demonstrated for supervised
selection applied to all catenae (SFeat) and catenae
with only 1-2 words (SF-12) across all collections
(Table 5). Overall, changes are small and fairly
robust, with one half to two thirds of all queries
showing less than 10% change in MAP.

Unlike sFeat, other filters tend to decrease per-
formance compared to SD. Governor-dependent
relations for WT10G are an exception and we spec-
ulate that this is due to a negative influence of 3-
word catenae for this collection. Manual inspection
suggests that WT10G queries are short and have
relatively simple syntactic structure (e.g. few PP
attachment ambiguities). This means that 3-word
catenae (in all models except GovDep) tend to in-
clude uninformative words, such as ‘reasons’ in
‘fasting religious reasons’. In contrast, 3-word cate-

nae in other collections tend to identify query sub-
concepts or phrases, such as ‘science plants water’.

Classification results for catenae separated by
length, such that the classifier for catenae with a
specific length are trained on examples of catenae
with the same length, confirm this intuition. The
rejection rate for 3-word catenae is twice as high
for WT10G as for other collections. It is also
more difficult to distinguish informative 3-word
catenae compared to catenae with 1-2 words. To
assess the impact of classification accuracy on IR
effectiveness, Table 5 shows results with oracle
knowledge of annotator judgments.

The SF-12 model combines catenae predicted for
lengths 1 and 2. Its strong performance across all
collections suggests that most of the benefit derived
from catenae in IR is found in governor-dependent
and single word units, where single words are
important (GovDep uses only 2-word catenae).
Another major observation (Table 5) is that mixing
baseline heuristic filters with a supervised ap-
proach is not as successful as supervised selection
alone. In particular, performance decreases for
filtered governor-dependent pairs. This suggests
that some important word relations in GovDep and
NomEnd are captured by triangulation.

Finally, we review selected catenae for queries
that perform significantly better or worse than SD
(> 75% change in MAP). The best IR effectiveness
occurs when selected catenae clearly focus on the
most important aspect of a query. Poor perfor-

514



mance is caused by a lack of focus in a catenae set,
even though selected catenae are reasonable, or an
emphasis on words that are not central to the query.
The latter can occur when words that are not es-
sential to query semantics appear in many catenae
due to their position in the dependency graph.

7 Conclusion
We presented a flexible implementation of

dependency paths for long queries in ad hoc IR that
does not require dependency parsing a collection.
Our supervised selection technique for catenae
addresses the need to balance a representation of
language expressiveness with effective, efficient
statistical methods. This is a core challenge in
computational linguistics.

It is not possible to directly compare perfor-
mance of our approach with ad hoc techniques in
IR that parse a retrieval collection. However, we
note that a recent result using query translation
based on dependency paths (Park et al., 2011)
reports 14% improvement over query likelihood
(QL). Our approach achieves 7% improvement
over QL on the same collection. We conclude that
catenae do not replace path-based techniques, but
may offer some insight into their application, and
have particular value when it is not practical to
parse target documents to determine text similarity.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Center

for Intelligent Information Retrieval. Any opinions,
findings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsor.

References
James Allan, Margaret E. Connell, W. Bruce Croft,

Fang-Fang Feng, David Fisher, and Xiaoyan Li.
2000. INQUERY and TREC-9. In Proceedings of
TREC-9, pages 551–562.

Michael Bendersky and W. Bruce Croft. 2008.
Discovering key concepts in verbose queries. In
Proceedings of the 31st annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, SIGIR ’08, pages 491–498,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Keke Cai, Jiajun Bu, Chun Chen, and Guang Qiu.
2007. A novel dependency language model for in-
formation retrieval. Journal of Zhejiang University
SCIENCE A, 8(6):871–882.

Hang Cui, Renxu Sun, Keya Li, Min-Yen Kan,
and Tat-Seng Chua. 2005. Question answering
passage retrieval using dependency relations. In

Proceedings of the 28th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, SIGIR ’05, pages 400–407,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of LREC-2006.

Abdessamad Echihabi and Daniel Marcu. 2003. A
noisy-channel approach to question answering.
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics - Volume
1, ACL ’03, pages 16–23, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yoav Freund and Robert E. Schapire. 1996. Experi-
ments with a new boosting algorithm. In ICML’96,
pages 148–156.

Jianfeng Gao, Jian-Yun Nie, Guangyuan Wu, and
Guihong Cao. 2004. Dependence language model
for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 27th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval,
SIGIR ’04, pages 170–177, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Matthias Hagen, Martin Potthast, Benno Stein, and
Christof Bräutigam. 2011. Query segmentation
revisited. In Proceedings of the 20th international
conference on World wide web, WWW ’11, pages
97–106, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an up-
date. SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 11:10–18,
November.

Michael Heilman and Noah A. Smith. 2010. Tree
edit models for recognizing textual entailments,
paraphrases, and answers to questions. In Hu-
man Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, HLT
’10, pages 1011–1019, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2008.
Dependency-based syntactic–semantic analysis
with PropBank and NomBank. In Proceedings of
CoNNL 2008, pages 183–187.

Changki Lee, Gary Geunbae Lee, and Myung-Gil
Jang. 2006. Dependency structure language model
for information retrieval. In In ETRI journal,
volume 28, pages 337–346.

Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. DIRT - discov-
ery of inference rules from text. In Proceedings
of ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining (KDD-01), pages 323–328, San
Francisco, CA.

515



Loı̈c Maisonnasse, Eric Gaussier, and Jean-Pierre
Chevallet. 2007. Revisiting the dependence
language model for information retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 30th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, SIGIR ’07, pages 695–696,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Igor A. Mel’c̆uk. 2003. Levels of dependency in
linguistic description: Concepts and problems. In
V. Agel, L. Eichinger, H.-W. Eroms, P. Hellwig,
H. J. Herringer, and H. Lobin, editors, Dependency
and Valency. An International Handbook of Contem-
porary Research, volume 1, pages 188–229. Walter
De Gruyter, Berlin–New York.

Donald Metzler and W. Bruce Croft. 2005. A Markov
random field model for term dependencies. In
Proceedings of the 28th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, SIGIR ’05, pages 472–479,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Alessandro Moschitti. 2008. Kernel methods, syntax
and semantics for relational text categorization.
In Proceeding of the 17th ACM conference on
Information and knowledge management, CIKM
’08, pages 253–262, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Joakim Nivre. 2005. Dependency grammar and depen-
dency parsing. Technical report, Växjö University:
School of Mathematics and Systems Engineering.

Timothy Osborne and Thomas Groß. 2012. Con-
structions are catenae: Construction grammar
meets dependency grammar. Cognitive Linguistics,
23(1):165–216.

Timothy Osborne, Michael Putnam, and Groß. 2012.
Catenae: Introducing a novel unit of syntactic
analysis. Syntax, 15(4):354–396, December.

Jae Hyun Park, W. Bruce Croft, and David A. Smith.
2011. A quasi-synchronous dependence model for
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 20th
ACM international conference on Information and
knowledge management, CIKM ’11, pages 17–26,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Ellen F. Prince. 1986. On the syntactic marking of
presupposed open propositions. In Proceedings of
the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic
Society, pages 208–222.

V. Punyakanok, D. Roth, and W. Yih. 2004. Mapping
dependencies trees: An application to question
answering. In Proceedings of AI and MATH
Symposium 2004 (Special session: Intelligent Text
Processing).

Robert E. Schapire, Yoav Freund, Peter Bartlett, and
Wee Sun Lee. 1997. Boosting the margin: A new
explanation for the effectiveness of voting methods.
In Proceedings of ICML, pages 322–330.

Dan Shen, Geert-Jan M. Kruijff, and Dietrich Klakow.
2005. Exploring syntactic relation patterns for
question answering. In Proceedings of the Second
international joint conference on Natural Language
Processing, IJCNLP’05, pages 507–518, Berlin,
Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Fei Song and W. Bruce Croft. 1999. A general
language model for information retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th ACM international conference
on Information and knowledge management, CIKM
’99, pages 316–321, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Young-In Song, Kyoung-Soo Han, Sang-Bum Kim,
So-Young Park, and Hae-Chang Rim. 2008. A
novel retrieval approach reflecting variability of syn-
tactic phrase representation. Journal of Intelligent
Information Systems, 31(3):265–286, December.

Munirathnam Srikanth and Rohini Srihari. 2002.
Biterm language models for document retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 25th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, SIGIR ’02, pages 425–426,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Mark J. Steedman. 1990. Gapping as Constituent Co-
ordination. Linguistics and Philosophy, 13(2):207–
263, April.

Mihai Surdeanu, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Hugo
Zaragoza. 2011. Learning to rank answers
to non-factoid questions from web collections.
Computational Linguistics, 37(2):351–383, June.

C. J. van Rijsbergen. 1993. A theoretical basis for the
use of co-occurrence data in information retrieval.
Journal of Documentation, 33(2):106–119.

Mengqiu Wang, Noah A. Smith, and Teruko Mitamura.
2007. What is the Jeopardy model? a quasi-
synchronous grammar for QA. In Proceedings of
the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL),
pages 22–32, Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xiaobing Xue, Samuel Huston, and W. Bruce Croft.
2010. Improving verbose queries using subset
distribution. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM inter-
national conference on Information and knowledge
management, CIKM ’10, pages 1059–1068, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

516


