



















































A Visual Analytics System for Cluster Exploration


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 109–114,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Visual Analytics System for Cluster Exploration

Andreas Lamprecht1, Annette Hautli2, Christian Rohrdantz1, Tina Bögel2
1Department of Computer Science, 2Department of Linguistics

University of Konstanz, Germany
{firstname.lastname}@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract

This paper offers a new way of represent-
ing the results of automatic clustering al-
gorithms by employing a Visual Analytics
system which maps members of a cluster
and their distance to each other onto a two-
dimensional space. A case study on Urdu
complex predicates shows that the system
allows for an appropriate investigation of
linguistically motivated data.

1 Motivation

In recent years, Visual Analytics systems have in-
creasingly been used for the investigation of lin-
guistic phenomena in a number of different areas,
starting from literary analysis (Keim and Oelke,
2007) to the cross-linguistic comparison of lan-
guage features (Mayer et al., 2010a; Mayer et al.,
2010b; Rohrdantz et al., 2012a) and lexical se-
mantic change (Rohrdantz et al., 2011; Heylen et
al., 2012; Rohrdantz et al., 2012b). Visualization
has also found its way into the field of computa-
tional linguistics by providing insights into meth-
ods such as machine translation (Collins et al.,
2007; Albrecht et al., 2009) or discourse parsing
(Zhao et al., 2012).

One issue in computational linguistics is the
interpretability of results coming from machine
learning algorithms and the lack of insight they
offer on the underlying data. This drawback of-
ten prevents theoretical linguists, who work with
computational models and need to see patterns on
large data sets, from drawing detailed conclusions.
The present paper shows that a Visual Analytics
system facilitates “analytical reasoning [...] by an
interactive visual interface” (Thomas and Cook,
2006) and helps resolving this issue by offering
a customizable, in-depth view on the statistically
generated result and simultaneously an at-a-glance
overview of the overall data set.

In particular, we focus on the visual representa-
tion of automatically generated clusters, in itself
not a novel idea as it has been applied in other
fields like the financial sector, biology or geogra-
phy (Schreck et al., 2009). But as far as the litera-
ture is concerned, interactive systems are still less
common, particularly in computational linguistics,
and they have not been designed for the specific
needs of theoretical linguists. This paper offers
a method of visually encoding clusters and their
internal coherence with an interactive user inter-
face, which allows users to adjust underlying pa-
rameters and their views on the data depending on
the particular research question. By this, we partly
open up the “black box” of machine learning.

The linguistic phenomenon under investigation,
for which the system has originally been designed,
is the varied behavior of nouns in N+V CP com-
plex predicates in Urdu (e.g., memory+do = ‘to
remember’) (Mohanan, 1994; Ahmed and Butt,
2011), where, depending on the lexical seman-
tics of the noun, a set of different light verbs is
chosen to form a complex predicate. The aim is
an automatic detection of the different groups of
nouns, based on their light verb distribution. Butt
et al. (2012) present a static visualization for the
phenomenon, whereas the present paper proposes
an interactive system which alleviates some of the
previous issues with respect to noise detection, fil-
tering, data interaction and cluster coherence. For
this, we proceed as follows: section 2 explains the
proposed Visual Analytics system, followed by the
linguistic case study in section 3. Section 4 con-
cludes the paper.

2 The system

The system requires a plain text file as input,
where each line corresponds to one data object.In
our case, each line corresponds to one Urdu noun
(data object) and contains its unique ID (the name
of the noun) and its bigram frequencies with the

109



four light verbs under investigation, namely kar
‘do’, ho ‘be’, hu ‘become’ and rakH ‘put’; an ex-
emplary input file is shown in Figure 1.

From a data analysis perspective, we have four-
dimensional data objects, where each dimension
corresponds to a bigram frequency previously ex-
tracted from a corpus. Note that more than
four dimensions can be loaded and analyzed, but
for the sake of simplicity we focus on the four-
dimensional Urdu example for the remainder of
this paper. Moreover, it is possible to load files
containing absolute bigram frequencies and rela-
tive frequencies. When loading absolute frequen-
cies, the program will automatically calculate the
relative frequencies as they are the input for the
clustering. The absolute frequencies, however, are
still available and can be used for further process-
ing (e.g. filtering).

Figure 1: preview of appropriate file structures

2.1 Initial opening and processing of a file

It is necessary to define a metric distance function
between data objects for both clustering and vi-
sualization. Thus, each data object is represented
through a high dimensional (in our example four-
dimensional) numerical vector and we use the Eu-
clidean distance to calculate the distances between
pairs of data objects. The smaller the distance be-
tween two data objects, the more similar they are.

For visualization, the high dimensional data
is projected onto the two-dimensional space of
a computer screen using a principal component
analysis (PCA) algorithm1. In the 2D projection,
the distances between data objects in the high-
dimensional space, i.e. the dissimilarities of the
bigram distributions, are preserved as accurately
as possible. However, when projecting a high-
dimensional data space onto a lower dimension,
some distinctions necessarily level out: two data
objects may be far apart in the high-dimensional
space, but end up closely together in the 2D pro-
jection. It is important to bear in mind that the 2D
visualization is often quite insightful, but interpre-

1http://workshop.mkobos.com/2011/java-pca-
transformation-library/

tations have to be verified by interactively investi-
gating the data.

The initial clusters are calculated (in the high-
dimensional data space) using a default k-Means
algorithm2 with k being a user-defined parameter.
There is also the option of selecting another clus-
tering algorithm, called the Greedy Variance Min-
imization3 (GVM), and an extension to include fur-
ther algorithms is under development.

2.2 Configuration & Interaction

2.2.1 The main window
The main window in Figure 2 consists of three
areas, namely the configuration area (a), the vi-
sualization area (b) and the description area (c).
The visualization area is mainly built with the pic-
colo2d library4 and initially shows data objects
as colored circles with a variable diameter, where
color indicates cluster membership (four clusters
in this example). Hovering over a dot displays in-
formation on the particular noun, the cluster mem-
bership and the light verb distribution in the de-
scription area to the right. By using the mouse
wheel, the user can zoom in and out of the visual-
ization.

A very important feature for the task at hand is
the possibility to select multiple data objects for
further processing or for filtering, with a list of se-
lected data objects shown in the description area.
By right-clicking on these data objects, the user
can assign a unique class (and class color) to them.
Different clustering methods can be employed us-
ing the options item in the menu bar.

Another feature of the system is that the user
can fade in the cluster centroids (illustrated by a
larger dot in the respective cluster color in Fig-
ure 2), where the overall feature distribution of the
cluster can be examined in a tooltip hovering over
the corresponding centroid.

2.2.2 Visually representing data objects
To gain further insight into the data distribution
based on the 2D projection, the user can choose
between several ways to visualize the individual
data objects, all of which are shown in Figure 3.
The standard visualization type is shown on the
left and consists of a circle which encodes cluster
membership via color.

2http://java-ml.sourceforge.net/api/0.1.7/ (From the JML
library)

3http://www.tomgibara.com/clustering/fast-spatial/
4http://www.piccolo2d.org/

110



Figure 2: Overview of the main window of the system, including the configuration area (a), the visual-
ization area (b) and the description area (c). Large circles are cluster centroids.

Figure 3: Different visualizations of data points

Alternatively, normal glyphs and star glyphs
can be displayed. The middle part of Figure 3

shows the data displayed
with normal glyphs. In
this view, the relative
frequency of each light
verb is mapped onto the
length of a line. The

lines start in north position and are positioned
clockwise around the center according to their
occurrence in the input file. This view has the
advantage that overall feature dominance in a
cluster can be seen at-a-glance.

The visualization type
on the right in Figure 3
is called the star glyph,
an extension to normal
glyphs. Here, the line
endings are connected,

forming a “star”. As in the representation with
the glyphs, this makes similar data objects easily
recognizable and comparable with each other.

2.2.3 Filtering options

Our systems offers options for filtering data ac-
cording to different criteria.

Filter by means of bigram occurrence By ac-
tivating the bigram occurrence filtering, it is pos-
sible to only show those nouns, which occur in bi-
grams with a certain selected subset of all features
(light verbs) only. This is especially useful when
examining possible commonalities.

Filter selected words Another opportunity of
showing only items of interest is to select and dis-
play them separately. The PCA is recalculated for
these data objects and the visualization is stretched
to the whole area.

111



Filter selected cluster Additionally, the user
can visualize a specific cluster of interest. Again,
the PCA is recalculated and the visualization
stretched to the whole area. The cluster can then
be manually fine-tuned and cleaned, for instance
by removing wrongly assigned items.

2.2.4 Options to handle overplotting
Due to the nature of the data, much overplotting
occurs. For example, there are many words, which
only occur with one light verb. The PCA assigns
the same position to these words and, as a conse-
quence, only the top bigram can be viewed in the
visualization. In order to improve visual access to
overplotted data objects, several methods that al-
low for a more differentiated view of the data have
been included and are described in the following
paragraphs.

Change transparency of data objects By mod-
ifying the transparency with the given slider, areas
with a dense data population can be readily identi-
fied, as shown in the following example:

Repositioning of data objects To reduce the
overplotting in densely populated areas, data ob-
jects can be repositioned randomly having a fixed
deviation from their initial position. The degree of
deviation can be interactively determined by the
user employing the corresponding slider:

The user has the option to reposition either all
data objects or only those that are selected in ad-
vance.

Frequency filtering If the initial data contains
absolute bigram frequencies, the user can filter
the visualized words by frequency. For example,
many nouns occur only once and therefore have
an observed probability of 100% for co-occurring
with one of the light verbs. In most cases it is use-
ful to filter such data out.

Scaling data objects If the user zooms beyond
the maximum zoom factor, the data objects are
scaled down. This is especially useful, if data ob-
jects are only partly covered by many other ob-

jects. In this case, they become fully visible, as
shown in the following example:

2.3 Alternative views on the data

In order to enable a holistic analysis it is often
valuable to provide the user with different views
on the data. Consequently, we have integrated the
option to explore the data with further standard vi-
sualization methods.

2.3.1 Correlation matrix
The correlation matrix in Figure 4 shows the corre-
lations between features, which are visualized by
circles using the following encoding: The size of
a circle represents the correlation strength and the
color indicates whether the corresponding features
are negatively (white) or positively (black) corre-
lated.

Figure 4: example of a correlation matrix

2.3.2 Parallel coordinates
The parallel coordinates diagram shows the distri-
bution of the bigram frequencies over the differ-
ent dimensions (Figure 5). Every noun is repre-
sented with a line, and shows, when hovered over,
a tooltip with the most important information. To
filter the visualized words, the user has the option
of displaying previously selected data objects, or
s/he can restrict the value range for a feature and
show only the items which lie within this range.

2.3.3 Scatter plot matrix
To further examine the relation between pairs of
features, a scatter plot matrix can be used (Figure
6). The individual scatter plots give further insight
into the correlation details of pairs of features.

112



Figure 5: Parallel coordinates diagram

Figure 6: Example showing a scatter plot matrix.

3 Case study

In principle, the Visual Analytics system presented
above can be used for any kind of cluster visu-
alization, but the built-in options and add-ons are
particularly designed for the type of work that lin-
guists tend to be interested in: on the one hand, the
user wants to get a quick overview of the overall
patterns in the phenomenon, but on the same time,
the system needs to allow for an in-depth data in-
spection. Both is given in the system: The overall
cluster result shown in Figure 2 depicts the coher-
ence of clusters and therefore the overall pattern
of the data set. The different glyph visualizations
in Figure 3 illustrate the properties of each clus-
ter. Single data points can be inspected in the de-
scription area. The randomization of overplotted
data points helps to see concentrated cluster pat-

terns where light verbs behave very similarly in
different noun+verb complex predicates.

The biggest advantage of the system lies in the
ability for interaction: Figure 7 shows an example
of the visualization used in Butt et al. (2012), the
input being the same text file as shown in Figure
1. In this system, the relative frequencies of each
noun with each light verb is correlated with color
saturation — the more saturated the color to the
right of the noun, the higher the relative frequency
of the light verb occurring with it. The number of
the cluster (here, 3) and the respective nouns (e.g.
kAm ‘work’) is shown to the left. The user does
not get information on the coherence of the clus-
ter, nor does the visualization show prototypical
cluster patterns.

Figure 7: Cluster visualization in Butt et al. (2012)

Moreover, the system in Figure 7 only has a
limited set of interaction choices, with the conse-
quence that the user is not able to adjust the un-
derlying data set, e.g. by filtering out noise. How-
ever, Butt et al. (2012) report that the Urdu data
is indeed very noisy and requires a manual clean-
ing of the data set before the actual clustering. In
the system presented here, the user simply marks
conspicuous regions in the visualization panel and
removes the respective data points from the origi-
nal data set. Other filtering mechanisms, e.g. the
removal of low frequency items which occur due
to data sparsity issues, can be removed from the
overall data set by adjusting the parameters.

A linguistically-relevant improvement lies in
the display of cluster centroids, in other words the
typical noun + light verb distribution of a cluster.
This is particularly helpful when the linguist wants
to pick out prototypical examples for the cluster
in order to stipulate generalizations over the other
cluster members.

113



4 Conclusion

In this paper, we present a novel visual analyt-
ics system that helps to automatically analyze bi-
grams extracted from corpora. The main purpose
is to enable a more informed and steered clus-
ter analysis than currently possible with standard
methods. This includes rich options for interac-
tion, e.g. display configuration or data manipu-
lation. Initially, the approach was motivated by
a concrete research problem, but has much wider
applicability as any kind of high-dimensional nu-
merical data objects can be loaded and analyzed.
However, the system still requires some basic un-
derstanding about the algorithms applied for clus-
tering and projection in order to prevent the user to
draw wrong conclusions based on artifacts. Bear-
ing this potential pitfall in mind when performing
the analysis, the system enables a much more in-
sightful and informed analysis than standard non-
interactive methods.

In the future, we aim to conduct user experi-
ments in order to learn more about how the func-
tionality and usability could be further enhanced.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially funded by the Ger-
man Research Foundation (DFG) under grant
BU 1806/7-1 “Visual Analysis of Language
Change and Use Patterns” and the German Fed-
eral Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
under grant 01461246 “VisArgue” under research
grant.

References
Tafseer Ahmed and Miriam Butt. 2011. Discover-

ing Semantic Classes for Urdu N-V Complex Pred-
icates. In Proceedings of the international Con-
ference on Computational Semantics (IWCS 2011),
pages 305–309.

Joshua Albrecht, Rebecca Hwa, and G. Elisabeta
Marai. 2009. The Chinese Room: Visualization
and Interaction to Understand and Correct Ambigu-
ous Machine Translation. Comput. Graph. Forum,
28(3):1047–1054.

Miriam Butt, Tina Bögel, Annette Hautli, Sebastian
Sulger, and Tafseer Ahmed. 2012. Identifying Urdu
Complex Predication via Bigram Extraction. In In
Proceedings of COLING 2012, Technical Papers,
pages 409 – 424, Mumbai, India.

Christopher Collins, M. Sheelagh T. Carpendale, and
Gerald Penn. 2007. Visualization of Uncertainty
in Lattices to Support Decision-Making. In EuroVis
2007, pages 51–58. Eurographics Association.

Kris Heylen, Dirk Speelman, and Dirk Geeraerts.
2012. Looking at word meaning. An interactive
visualization of Semantic Vector Spaces for Dutch
synsets. In Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Joint
Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 16–24.

Daniel A. Keim and Daniela Oelke. 2007. Litera-
ture Fingerprinting: A New Method for Visual Liter-
ary Analysis. In IEEE VAST 2007, pages 115–122.
IEEE.

Thomas Mayer, Christian Rohrdantz, Miriam Butt,
Frans Plank, and Daniel A. Keim. 2010a. Visualiz-
ing Vowel Harmony. Linguistic Issues in Language
Technology, 4(Issue 2):1–33, December.

Thomas Mayer, Christian Rohrdantz, Frans Plank, Pe-
ter Bak, Miriam Butt, and Daniel A. Keim. 2010b.
Consonant Co-Occurrence in Stems across Lan-
guages: Automatic Analysis and Visualization of
a Phonotactic Constraint. In Proceedings of the
2010 Workshop on NLP and Linguistics: Finding the
Common Ground, pages 70–78, Uppsala, Sweden,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Tara Mohanan. 1994. Argument Structure in Hindi.
Stanford: CSLI Publications.

Christian Rohrdantz, Annette Hautli, Thomas Mayer,
Miriam Butt, Frans Plank, and Daniel A. Keim.
2011. Towards Tracking Semantic Change by Vi-
sual Analytics. In ACL 2011 (Short Papers), pages
305–310, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Christian Rohrdantz, Michael Hund, Thomas Mayer,
Bernhard Wälchli, and Daniel A. Keim. 2012a. The
World’s Languages Explorer: Visual Analysis of
Language Features in Genealogical and Areal Con-
texts. Computer Graphics Forum, 31(3):935–944.

Christian Rohrdantz, Andreas Niekler, Annette Hautli,
Miriam Butt, and Daniel A. Keim. 2012b. Lexi-
cal Semantics and Distribution of Suffixes - A Vi-
sual Analysis. In Proceedings of the EACL 2012
Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 7–15,
April.

Tobias Schreck, Jürgen Bernard, Tatiana von Landes-
berger, and Jörn Kohlhammer. 2009. Visual cluster
analysis of trajectory data with interactive kohonen
maps. Information Visualization, 8(1):14–29.

James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook. 2006. A Visual
Analytics Agenda. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 26(1):10–13.

Jian Zhao, Fanny Chevalier, Christopher Collins, and
Ravin Balakrishnan. 2012. Facilitating Discourse
Analysis with Interactive Visualization. IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 18(12):2639–2648.

114


