



















































Simple, readable sub-sentences


Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop, pages 142–149,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Simple, readable sub-sentences

Sigrid Klerke
Centre for Language Technology

University of Copenhagen
sigridklerke@gmail.com

Anders Søgaard
Centre for Language Technology

University of Copenhagen
soegaard@hum.ku.dk

Abstract

We present experiments using a new unsu-
pervised approach to automatic text sim-
plification, which builds on sampling and
ranking via a loss function informed by
readability research. The main idea is
that a loss function can distinguish good
simplification candidates among randomly
sampled sub-sentences of the input sen-
tence. Our approach is rated as equally
grammatical and beginner reader appro-
priate as a supervised SMT-based baseline
system by native speakers, but our setup
performs more radical changes that better
resembles the variation observed in human
generated simplifications.

1 Introduction

As a field of research in NLP, text simplification
(TS) has gained increasing attention recently, pri-
marily for English text, but also for Brazilian Por-
tuguese (Specia, 2010; Aluísio et al., 2008), Dutch
(Daelemans et al., 2004), Spanish (Drndarevic
and Saggion, 2012), Danish (Klerke and Søgaard,
2012), French (Seretan, 2012) and Swedish (Ry-
bing and Smith, 2009; Decker, 2003). Our experi-
ments use Danish text which is similar to English
in that it has a deep orthography making it hard
to map between letters and sounds. Danish has a
relatively free word order and sparse morfology.

TS can help readers with below average reading
skills access information and may supply relevant
training material, which is crucial for developing
reading skills. However, manual TS is as expen-
sive as translation, which is a key limiting factor
on the availability of easy-to-read material. One of
the persistent chalenges of TS is that different in-
terventions are called for depending on the target
reader population. Automatic TS is an effective
way to counter these limitations.

2 Approach

Definitions of TS typically reflect varying target
reader populations and the methods studied. For
our purposes we define TS to include any oper-
ation on the linguistic structure and content of a
text, intended to produce new text, which

1. has semantic content similar to (a part of) the
original text

2. requires less cognitive effort to decode and
understand by a target reader, compared to
the original text.

Operations on linguistic content may include
deletion, reordering and insertion of content,
paraphrasing concepts, resolving references, etc.,
while typography and layout are excluded as non-
linguistic properties.

We cast the problem of generating a more read-
able sentence from an input as a problem of choos-
ing a reasonable sub-sentence from the words
present in the original. The corpus-example below
illustrates how a simplified sentence can be em-
bedded as scattered parts of a non-simplified sen-
tence. The words in bold are the common parts
which make up almost the entire human generated
simplification and constitutes a suitable simplifi-
cation on its own.
Original : Der er målt hvad der bliver betegnet som abnormt store

mængder af radioaktivt materiale i havvand nær det jordskælvsramte

atomkraftværk i Japan .

What has been termed an abnormally large amount of radioactivity

has been measured in sea water near the nuclear power plant that

was hit by earthquakes in Japan

Simplified : Der er målt en stor mængde radioaktivt materiale i havet

nær atom-kraftværket Fukushima i Japan .

A large amount of radioactivity has been measured in the sea near

the nuclear power plant Fukushima in Japan

To generate candidate sub-sentences we use a
random deletion procedure in combination with

142



general dependency-based heuristics for conserv-
ing main sentence constituents, and then introduce
a loss-function for choosing between candidates.
Since we avoid relying on a specialized parallel
corpus or a simplification grammar, which can be
expensive to create, the method is especially rel-
evant for under-resourced languages and organi-
zations. Although we limit rewriting to deletions,
the space of possible candidates grows exponen-
tially with the length of the input sentence, pro-
hibiting exhaustive candidate generation, which is
why we chose to sample the deletions randomly.
However, to increase the chance of sampling good
candidates, we restrict the search space under
the assumption that some general patterns apply,
namely, that the main verb and subject should al-
ways be kept, negations should be kept and that if
something is kept that originally had objects, those
objects should also be kept. Another way in which
we restrict the candidate space is by splitting long
sentences. Some clauses are simple to identify
and extract, like relative clauses, and doing so can
dramatically reduce sentence length. Both sim-
ple deletions and extraction of clauses can be ob-
served in professionally simplified text. (Medero,
2011; Klerke, 2012)

The next section positions this research in the
context of related work. Section 4 presents the ex-
perimental setup including generation and evalu-
ation. In Section 5, the results are presented and
discussed and, finally, concluding remarks and fu-
ture perspectives are presented in the last section.

3 Related work

Approaches for automatic TS traditionally focus
on lexical substitution (De Belder and Moens,
2012; Specia et al., 2012; Yatskar et al., 2010), on
identifying re-write rules at sentence level either
manually (Chandrasekar et al., 1996; Carroll et al.,
1999; Canning et al., 2000; Siddharthan, 2010;
Siddharthan, 2011; Seretan, 2012) or automati-
cally from parallel corpora (Woodsend and Lap-
ata, 2011; Coster and Kauchak, 2011; Zhu et al.,
2010) and possibly learning cues for when to ap-
ply such changes (Petersen and Ostendorf, 2007;
Medero, 2011; Bott et al., 2012).

Chandrasekar et al. (1996) propose a structural
approach, which uses syntactic cues to recover rel-
ative clauses and appositives. Sentence level syn-
tactic re-writing has since seen a variety of man-
ually constructed general sentence splitting rules,

designed to operate both on dependencies and
phrase structure trees, and typically including lex-
ical cues (Siddharthan, 2011; Heilman and Smith,
2010; Canning et al., 2000). Similar rules have
been created from direct inspection of simplifica-
tion corpora (Decker, 2003; Seretan, 2012) and
discovered automatically from large scale aligned
corpora (Woodsend and Lapata, 2011; Zhu et al.,
2010).

In our experiment we apply few basic sentence
splitting rules as a pre-processing technique be-
fore using an over-generating random deletion ap-
proach.

Carroll et al. (1999) perform lexical substitution
from frequency counts and eliminate anaphora by
resolving and replacing the referring expressions
with the entity referred to. Their system further
include compound sentence splitting and rewrit-
ing of passive sentences to active ones (Canning
et al., 2000). Research into lexical simplification
remains an active topic. De Belder and Moens
(2012; Specia et al. (2012) are both recent pub-
lications of new resources for evaluating lexical
simplification in English consisting of lists of syn-
onyms ranked by human judges. Another type
of resource is graded word-lists as described in
Brooke et al. (2012). Annotator agreement and
comparisons so far shows that it is easy to over-
fit to reflect individual annotator and domain dif-
ferences that are not of relevance to generalized
systems.

In a minimally supervised setup, our TS ap-
proach can be modified to include lexical simpli-
fications as part of the random generation process.
This would require a broad coverage list of words
and simpler synonyms, which could for instance
be extracted from a parallel corpus like the DSim
corpus.

For the majority of research in automatic TS
the question of what constitutes cognitive load is
not discussed. An exception is Siddharthan and
Katsos (2012), who seek to isolate the psycho-
linguistically motivated notions of sentence com-
prehension from sentence acceptability by actually
measuring the effect of TS on cognition on a small
scale.

Readability research is a line of research that is
more directly concerned with the nature of cogni-
tive load in reading building on insights from psy-
cholinguistics. One goal is to develop techniques
and metrics for assessing the readability of unseen

143



text. Such metrics are used as a tool for teachers
and publishers, but existing standard metrics (like
Flesch-Kincaid (Flesch, 1948) and LIX (Bjorns-
son, 1983)) were designed and optimized for easy
manual application to human written text, requir-
ing thehuman reader to assess that the text is
congruent and coherent. More recent methods
promise to be applicable to unassessed text. Lan-
guage modeling in particular has shown to be a
robust and informative component of systems for
assessing text readability (Schwarm and Osten-
dorf, 2005; Vajjala and Meurers, 2012) as it is bet-
ter suited to evaluate grammaticality than standard
metrics. We use language modeling alongside tra-
ditional metrics for selecting good simplification
candidates.

4 Experiments

4.1 Baseline Systems

We used the original input text and the human sim-
plified text from the sentence aligned DSim corpus
which consist of 48k original and manually sim-
plified sentences of Danish news wire text (Klerke
and Søgaard, 2012) as reference in the evaluations.
In addition we trained a statistical machine trans-
lation (SMT) simplification system, in effect trans-
lating from normal news wire text to simplified
news. To train an SMT system, a large resource
of aligned parallel text and a language model of
the target language are needed. We combined the
25 million words Danish Korpus 20001 with the
entire 1.75 million words unaligned DSim cor-
pus (Klerke and Søgaard, 2012) to build the lan-
guage model2. Including both corpora gives bet-
ter coverage and assigns lower average ppl and a
simlar difference in average ppl between the two
sides of a held out part of the DSim corpus com-
pared to using only the simplified part of DSim
for the language model. Following Coster and
Kauchak (2011), we used the phrase-based SMT
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007), with GIZA++ word-
alignment (Och and Ney, 2000) and phrase tables
learned from the sentence aligned portion of the
DSim corpus.

1http://korpus.dsl.dk/korpus2000/
engelsk_hovedside

2The LM was a 5-gram Knesser-Ney smoothed lowercase
model, built using IRSTLM (Federico et al., 2008)

4.2 Experimental setup
Three system variants were set up to generate
simplified output from the original news wire of
the development and test partitions of the DSim
corpus. The texts were dependency-parsed us-
ing Bohnet’s parser (Bohnet, 2010) trained on the
Danish Treebank3 (Kromann, 2003) with default
settings4.

1. Split only performed simple sentence split-
ting.

2. Sample over-generated candidates by sam-
pling the heuristically restricted space of ran-
dom lexical deletions and ranking candidates
with a loss function.

3. Combined is a combination of the two, ap-
plying the sampling procedure of Sample to
the split sentences from Split.

Sentence Splitting We implemented sentence
splitting to extract relative clauses, as marked by
the dependency relation rel, coordinated clauses,
coord, and conjuncts, conj, when at least a verb
and a noun is left in each part of the split. Only
splits resulting in sentences of more than three
words were considered. Where applicable, re-
ferred entities were included in the extracted sen-
tence by using the dependency analysis to extract
the subtree of the former head of the new sen-
tence5. In case of more than one possibility, the
split resulting in the most balanced division of the
sentence was chosen and the rules were re-applied
if a new sentence was still longer than ten tokens.

Structural Heuristics To preserve nodes from
later deletion we applied heuristics using simple
structural cues from the dependency structures.
We favored nodes headed by a subject relation,
subj, and object relations, *obj, and negating
modifiers (the Danish word ikke) under the as-
sumption that these were most likely to be impor-
tant for preserving semantics and generating well-
formed candidates under the sampling procedure
described below. The heuristics were applied both
to trees, acting by preserving entire subtrees and
applied to words, only preserving single tokens.

3http://ilk.uvt.nl/conll/post_task_
data.html

4Performance of the parser on the treebank test set La-
beled attatchment score (LAS) = 85.65 and Unlabeled at-
tatchment score (UAS) = 90.29

5For a formal description see (Klerke, 2012)

144



This serves as a way of avoiding relying heavily
on possibly faulty dependency analyses and also
avoid the risk of insisting on keeping long, com-
plex or superfluous modifiers.

Sampling Candidates for scoring were over-
generated by randomly selecting parts of a (pos-
sibly split) input sentence. Either the selected
nodes with their full sub-tree or the single tokens
from the flat list of tokens were eliminated, unless
they were previously selected for preservation by
a heuristic. Some additional interaction between
heuristics and sampling happened when the dele-
tions were performed on trees: deletion of subtrees
allow non-continuous deletions when the parses
are non-projective, and nodes that were otherwise
selected for keeping may nevertheless be removed
if they are part of a subtree of a node selected for
deletion. After pruning, all nodes that used to have
outgoing obj-relations had the first child node of
these relations restored.

4.3 Scoring
We rank candidates according to a loss function
incorporating both readability score (the lower,
the more readable) and language model perplexity
(the lower, the less perplexing) as described below.
The loss function assigns values to the candidates
such that the best simplification candidate receives
the lowest score.

The loss function is a weighted combination of
three scores: perplexity (PPL), LIX and word-
class distribution (WCD). The PPL scores were
obtained from a 5-gram language model of Dan-
ish6 We used the standard readability metric for
Danish, LIX (Bjornsson, 1983)7. Finally, the
WCD measured the variation in universal pos-
tag-distribution 8 compared to the observed tag-
variation in the entire simplified corpus. For PPL
and LIX we calculated the difference between the
score of the input sentence and the candidate.

Development data was used for tuning the
weights of the loss function. Because the
candidate-generation is free to produce extremely
short candidates, we have to deal with candidates

6The LM was Knesser-Ney smoothed, using the same cor-
pora as the baseline system, without punctuation and built us-
ing SRILM (Stolcke, 2002).

7LIX is similar to the English Flesch-Kincaid grade level
in favoring short sentences with short words. The formula
is LIX = average sentence length + % long words , with
long words being of more than 6 characters. (Anderson,
1983) calculated a conversion from LIX to grade levels.

8suggested by(Petrov et al., 2011)

receiving extremely low scores. Those scores
never arise in the professionally simplified text,
so we eliminate extreme candidates by introduc-
ing filters on all scores. The lower limit was tuned
experimentally and fixed approximately two times
below the average difference observed between
the two parts of the aligned DSim corpus, thus lim-
iting the reduction in PPL and LIX to 60% of the
input’s PPL and LIX. The upper limit was fixed
at the input-level plus 20% to allow more varied
candidates through the filters. The WCD-filter ac-
cepted all candidates with a tag-variance that fell
below the 75-percentile observed variance in the
simplified training part of the DSim corpus. The
resulting loss was calculated as the sum of three
weighted scores.

Below is the loss function we minimized over
the filtered candidates t ∈ Ts for each input sen-
tence, s. The notation var() denotes the range al-
lowed through a hard filter. Using development
data we set the values of the term weights to
α = 1, β = 6 and γ = 2.

t∗ = argmin
t∈Ts

loss(s, t)

loss(s, t) = α
∆LIX(s, t)

var(LIX(s))
+ β

∆PPL(s, t)

var(PPL(s))

+ γ
∆WCD(.75, t)

WCD(.75)

If no candidates passed through the filters, the
input sentence was kept.

4.4 Evaluation
Evaluation was performed by a group of proficient
Danish speaking volunteers who received written
instructions and responded anonymously via an
online form. 240 sentences were evaluated: six
versions of each of 40 test set sentences. 48
sentences were evaluated by four judges, and
the remaining by one judge each. The judges
were asked to rate each sentence in terms of
grammaticality and in terms of perceived beginner
reader appropriateness, both on a 5-point scale,
with one signifying very good and five signifying
very bad. The evaluators had to rate six versions
of each sentence: original news wire, a human
simplified version, the baseline system, a split
sentence version (Split), a sampled only version
(Sample), and a version combining the Split and
Sample techniques (Combined). The presentation
was randomized. Below are example outputs

145



for the baseline and the other three automatic
systems:
BL: Der er hvad der bliver betegnet som abnormt store mængder

radioaktivt materiale i havvand nær frygter atomkraftværk .

Split : Der er målt hvad. Hvad bliver betegnet som abnormt

store mængder af radioaktivt materiale i havvand nær det

jordskælvsramte atomkraftværk i Japan .

Sample: Der er målt hvad der bliver betegnet som store mængder

af radioaktivt materiale i havvand japan .

Comb.: Der er målt hvad. Hvad bliver betegnet som store mængder

af radioaktivt materiale det atomkraftværk i japan .

5 Results

The ranking of the systems in terms of begin-
ner reader appropriateness and grammaticality, are
shown in Figure 1. From the test set of the DSim
corpus, 15 news wire texts were arbitrarily se-
lected for evaluation. For these texts we calcu-
lated median LIX and PPL. The results are shown
in Table 1. The sentences for human evaluation
were drawn arbitrarily from this collection. As
expected, the filtering of candidates and the loss
function force the systems Sample and Combined
to choose simplifications with LIX and PPL scores
close to the ones observed in the human simpli-
fied version. Split sentences only reduce LIX as
a result of shorter sentences, however PPL is the
highest, indicating a loss of grammaticality. Most
often this was caused by tagger and parser errors.
The baseline reduces PPL slightly, while LIX is
unchanged. This reflects the importance of the
language model in the SMT system.

In the analyses below, the rating were collapsed
to three levels. For texts ranked by more than
one judge, we calculated agreement as Krippen-
dorff’s α. The results are shown in Table 2. In
addition to sentence-wise agreement, the system-
wise evaluation agreement was calculated as all
judges were evaluating the same 6 systems 8 times
each. We calculated α of the most frequent score
(mode) assigned by each judge to each system.
As shown in Table 2 this system score agreement
was only about half of the single sentence agree-
ment, which reflect a notable instability in output
quality of all computer generated systems. The
same tendency is visible in both histograms in Fig-
ure 1a and 1b. While grammaticality is mostly
agreed upon when the scores are collapsed into
three bins (α = 0.650), proficient speakers do not
agree to the same extent on what constitutes be-

ginner reader appropriate text (α = 0.338). The
average, mean and most frequent assigned ranks
are recorded in Table 3. Significant differences at
p < 0.05 are reported in Table 4.

1 very good

2 3 4 5 very poor

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Beginning reader appropriateness
votes for each system

Original
Simplified
Baseline
Split
Sample
Combined

(a) Sentence – Beginner

1 very good

2 3 4 5 very poor

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Grammaticality
votes for each system

Original
Simplified
Baseline
Split
Sample
Combined

(b) Sentence – Grammar.

Figure 1: Distribution of all rankings on systems
before collapsing rankings.

Orig. Simpl. Base Split Sample Comb.
PPL 222 174 214 234 164 177
LIX 45 (10) 39 (8) 45 (10) 41(9) 36 (8) 32 (7)

Table 1: LIX and PPL scores for reference texts
and system generated output. Medians are re-
ported, because distributions are very skewed,
which makes the mean a bad estimator of central
tendency. LIX grade levels in parenthesis.

Reflecting the fair agreement on grammatical-
ity, all comparisons come out significant except
the human generated versions that are judged as
equally grammatical and the Combined and Base-
line systems that are indistinguishable in gram-
maticality. Beginner reader appropriateness is sig-
nificantly better in the human simplified version

146



Systems Sentences
Beginner reader 0.168 0.338
Grammaticality 0.354 0.650

Table 2: Krippendorff’s α agreement for full-text
and sentence evaluation. Agreement on system
ranks was calculated from the most frequent score
per judge per system.

compared to all other versions, and the original
version is significantly better than the Sample and
Split systems. The remaining observed differences
are not significant due to the great variation in
quality as expressed in Figure 1a.

We found that our Combined system produced
sentences that were as grammatical as the base-
line and also frequently judged to be appropriate
for beginner readers. The main source of error
affecting both Combined and Split is faulty sen-
tence splitting as a result of errors in tagging and
parsing. One way to avoid this in future develop-
ment is to propagate several split variants to the
final sampling and scoring. In addition, the sys-
tems Combined and Sample are prone to omitting
important information that is perceived as missing
when compared directly to the original, although
those two systems are the ones that score the clos-
est to the human generated simplifications. As can
be expected in a system operating exclusively at
sentence level, coherence across sentence bound-
aries remains a weak point.

Another important point is that while the base-
line system performs well in the evaluation, this
is likely due to its conservativeness: choosing
simplifications resembling the original input very
closely. This is evident both in our automatic mea-
sures (see Table 1) and from manual inspection.
Our systems Sample and Combine, on the other
hand, have been tuned to perform much more radi-
cal changes and in this respect more closely model
the changes we see in the human simplification.
Combined is thus evaluated to be at level with
the baseline in grammaticality and beginner reader
appropriateness, despite the fact that the baseline
system is supervised.

Conclusion and perspectives

We have shown promising results for simplifica-
tion of Danish sentences. We have also shown
that using restricted over-generation and scoring
can be a feasible way for simplifying text with-
out relying directly on large scale parallel corpora,

Sent. – Beginner Sent. – Grammar
x̄ x̃ mode x̄ x̃ mode

Human Simp. 1.44 1 1 1.29 1 1
Orig. 2.14 1 1 1.32 1 1
Base 2.58 3 1 1.88 2 1
Split 3.31 3 5 2.44 3 3
Sample 3.22 3 5 2.39 3 3
Comb. 2.72 1 1 1.93 2 1

Table 3: Human evaluation. Mean (x̄), median (x̃)
and most frequent (mode) of assigned ranks by be-
ginner reader appropriateness and grammaticality
as assessed by proficient Danish speakers.

Comb. Sample Split Base Orig.
Human Simp. b, g b, g b, g b, g b
Orig. g b, g b, g g
Base g g
Split g
Sample g

Table 4: Significant differences between systems
in experiment b: Beginner reader appropriate-
ness and g: Grammaticality. Bonferroni-corrected
Mann-Whitney’s U for 15 comparisons, two-tailed
test. A letter indicate significant difference at cor-
rected p < 0.05 level.

which for many languages do not exist. To inte-
grate language modeling and readability metrics in
scoring is a first step towards applying results from
readability research to the simplification frame-
work. Our error analysis showed that many errors
come from pre-processing and thus more robust
NLP-tools for Danish are needed. Future perspec-
tives include combining supervised and unsuper-
vised methods to exploit the radical unsupervised
deletion approach and the knowledge obtainable
from observable structural changes and potential
lexical simplifications. We plan to focus on refin-
ing the reliability of sentence splitting in the pres-
ence of parser errors as well as on developing a
loss function that incorporates more of the insights
from readability research, and to apply machine
learning techniques to the weighting of features.
Specifically we would like to investigate the use-
fulness of discourse features and transition proba-
bilities (Pitler and Nenkova, 2008) for performing
and evaluating full-text simplifications.

Acknowledgements

Thanks to Mirella Lapata and Kristian Woodsend
for their feedback and comments early in the pro-
cess of this work and to the Emnlp@Cph group
and reviewers for their helpful comments.

147



References
S.M. Aluísio, Lucia Specia, T.A.S. Pardo, E.G.

Maziero, H.M. Caseli, and R.P.M. Fortes. 2008. A
corpus analysis of simple account texts and the pro-
posal of simplification strategies: first steps towards
text simplification systems. In Proceedings of the
26th annual ACM international conference on De-
sign of communication, pages 15–22. ACM.

Jonathan Anderson. 1983. LIX and RIX: Variations on
a little-known readability index. Journal of Reading,
26(6):490–496.

C. H. Bjornsson. 1983. Readability of Newspapers
in 11 Languages. Reading Research Quarterly,
18(4):480–497.

B Bohnet. 2010. Very high accuracy and fast depen-
dency parsing is not a contradiction. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 89–97. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

S. Bott, H. Saggion, and D. Figueroa. 2012. A hy-
brid system for spanish text simplification. In Third
Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for
Assistive Technologies (SLPAT), Montreal, Canada.

Julian Brooke, Vivian Tsang, David Jacob, Fraser
Shein, and Graeme Hirst. 2012. Building Read-
ability Lexicons with Unannotated Corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Predicting and
Improving Text Readability for target reader popula-
tions, pages 33–39, Montr{é}al, Canada, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Y. Canning, J. Tait, J. Archibald, and R. Crawley.
2000. Cohesive generation of syntactically simpli-
fied newspaper text. Springer.

John Carroll, G. Minnen, D. Pearce, Yvonne Canning,
S. Devlin, and J. Tait. 1999. Simplifying text
for language-impaired readers. In Proceedings of
EACL, volume 99, pages 269–270. Citeseer.

R. Chandrasekar, Christine Doran, and B Srinivas.
1996. Motivations and methods for text simplifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the 16th conference on Com-
putational linguistics-Volume 2, pages 1041–1044.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

William Coster and David Kauchak. 2011. Simple En-
glish Wikipedia: a new text simplification task. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies: short papers-Volume 2, vol-
ume 2, pages 665–669. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

W. Daelemans, A. Höthker, and E.T.K. Sang. 2004.
Automatic sentence simplification for subtitling in
dutch and english. In Proceedings of the 4th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 1045–1048.

A. Davison and R.N. Kantor. 1982. On the failure of
readability formulas to define readable texts: A case
study from adaptations. Reading Research Quar-
terly, pages 187–209.

J. De Belder and M.F. Moens. 2012. A dataset for the
evaluation of lexical simplification. Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages
426–437.

Anna Decker. 2003. Towards automatic grammati-
cal simplification of Swedish text. Master’s thesis,
Stockholm University.

Biljana Drndarevic and Horacio Saggion. 2012. To-
wards Automatic Lexical Simplification in Spanish:
An Empirical Study. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Read-
ability for target reader populations, pages 8–16,
Montr{é}al, Canada, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

M Federico, N Bertoldi, and M Cettolo. 2008.
IRSTLM: an open source toolkit for handling large
scale language models. In Ninth Annual Conference
of the International Speech Communication Associ-
ation.

Rudolph Flesch. 1948. A new readability yardstick.
Journal of applied psychology, 32(3):221.

Michael Heilman and Noah A Smith. 2010. Extract-
ing simplified statements for factual question gen-
eration. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on
Question Generation.

Sigrid Klerke and Anders Søgaard. 2012. DSim , a
Danish Parallel Corpus for Text Simplification. In
Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2012), pages 4015–4018.

Sigrid Klerke. 2012. Automatic text simplification in
danish. sampling a restricted space of rewrites to op-
timize readability using lexical substitutions and de-
pendency analyses. Master’s thesis, University of
Copenhagen.

P Koehn, H Hoang, A Birch, C Callison-Burch, M Fed-
erico, N Bertoldi, B Cowan, W Shen, C Moran,
R Zens, and Others. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
pages 177–180. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

M T Kromann. 2003. The Danish Dependency Tree-
bank and the DTAG treebank tool. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories (TLT), page 217.

Julie Medero. 2011. Identifying Targets for Syntactic
Simplification. In Proceedings of Speech and Lan-
guage Technology in Education.

148



F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2000. A comparison of alignment
models for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 18th conference on Computational
linguistics-Volume 2, pages 1086–1090. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

S.E. E Petersen and Mari Ostendorf. 2007. Text sim-
plification for language learners: a corpus analy-
sis. In the Proceedings of the Speech and Language
Technology for Education Workshop, pages 69–72.
Citeseer.

S. Petrov, D. Das, and R. McDonald. 2011. A
universal part-of-speech tagset. Arxiv preprint
ArXiv:1104.2086.

Emily Pitler and Ani Nenkova. 2008. Revisiting
readability: A unified framework for predicting text
quality. Proceedings of the Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Jonas Rybing and Christian Smith. 2009. CogFLUX
Grunden till ett automatiskt textförenklingssystem
för svenska. Master’s thesis, Linköpings Univer-
sitet.

Sarah E Schwarm and Mari Ostendorf. 2005. Reading
Level Assessment Using Support Vector Machines
and Statistical Language Models. In Proceedings
of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 523–
530.

V. Seretan. 2012. Acquisition of syntactic simplifica-
tion rules for french. In Proceedings of Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012).

Advaith Siddharthan and Napoleon Katsos. 2012.
Offline Sentence Processing Measures for testing
Readability with Users. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Read-
ability for target reader populations, pages 17–24,
Montr{é}al, Canada, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2010. Complex lexico-syntactic
reformulation of sentences using typed dependency
representations. Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Natural Language Generation Conference.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2011. Text Simplification us-
ing Typed Dependencies: A Comparison of the Ro-
bustness of Different Generation Strategies. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 2–11.

L. Specia, S.K. Jauhar, and R. Mihalcea. 2012.
Semeval-2012 task 1: English lexical simplification.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012), pages 347–
355.

L. Specia. 2010. Translating from complex to simpli-
fied sentences. In Proceedings of the 9th interna-
tional conference on Computational Processing of
the Portuguese Language, pages 30–39.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing.

S. Vajjala and D. Meurers. 2012. On improving the
accuracy of readability classification using insights
from second language acquisition. In Proceedings
of the 7th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications (BEA7), pages
163–173.

Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata. 2011. Learn-
ing to Simplify Sentences with Quasi-Synchronous
Grammar and Integer Programming. In Proceed-
ings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (2011), pages 409–
420.

Mark Yatskar, Bo Pang, C. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil,
and Lillian Lee. 2010. For the sake of simplic-
ity: Unsupervised extraction of lexical simplifica-
tions from Wikipedia. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 365–368. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Zhemin Zhu, Delphine Bernhard, and I. Gurevych.
2010. A monolingual tree-based translation model
for sentence simplification. In Proceedings of The
23rd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 1353–1361. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

149


