



















































Tag2Blog: Narrative Generation from Satellite Tag Data


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 169–174,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tag2Blog: Narrative Generation from Satellite Tag Data
Kapila Ponnamperuma Advaith Siddharthan Cheng Zeng Chris Mellish

Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen

{k.ponnamperuma, advaith, c.zeng, c.mellish}@abdn.ac.uk

René van der Wal
Aberdeen Centre for Environmental Sustainability (ACES)

University of Aberdeen
r.vanderwal@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract
The aim of the Tag2Blog system is to
bring satellite tagged wild animals “to
life” through narratives that place their
movements in an ecological context. Our
motivation is to use such automatically
generated texts to enhance public engage-
ment with a specific species reintroduction
programme, although the protocols devel-
oped here can be applied to any animal or
other movement study that involves signal
data from tags. We are working with one
of the largest nature conservation chari-
ties in Europe in this regard, focusing on
a single species, the red kite. We de-
scribe a system that interprets a sequence
of locational fixes obtained from a satellite
tagged individual, and constructs a story
around its use of the landscape.

1 Introduction

We present a system, Tag2Blog, that uses Natu-
ral Language Generation (NLG) in bringing up-to-
date information about wild animals in their nat-
ural environment to nature enthusiasts. We fo-
cus on the reintroduction of the red kite to the
UK. The red kite, a member of the raptor fam-
ily, has been persecuted to near extinction in the
UK. Since 1989, efforts have been underway to
reintroduce the species across the UK with mixed
success. Where less successful, illegal activities of
humans are partly responsible (Smart et al., 2010).

We are working with the RSPB1, one of the
largest nature conservation charities in Europe,
around a reintroduction site where the species
struggles to get re-established. We propose to use
NLG for public engagement around a small num-
ber of satellite tagged individuals. The nature con-
servation goal is to create a positive perception of

1http://www.rspb.org.uk

the species through informative blogs based on the
movements of individual birds. The NLG goal is
the generation of these blogs; specifically, to put
individual locations of a bird into an ecological
context. This paper describes the design and im-
plementation of the system. We are also carrying
out concurrent ecological research on red kites that
will further inform the NLG component.

2 Related work

There is increasing realisation of the potential of
digital approaches, including the use of websites
and social media, to increase public engagement
with nature conservation issues. For instance, in
the UK, the Open Air Laboratories (OPAL) net-
work2 is a large initiative led by Imperial Col-
lege, which aims to create and inspire a new gen-
eration of nature-lovers by getting people to ex-
plore their local environment (Silvertown, 2009).
Such initiatives are typically labour and time in-
tensive, and require continual effort to maintain in-
terest through the creation of new content. To date,
initiatives such as OPAL have largely focused on
biological recording as a public engagement tool,
thereby using - for example - standard social net-
working sites to prompt the collection of species
distributional data (Stafford et al., 2010), or web
interfaces that use NLG to provide feedback to cit-
izen scientists (Blake et al., 2012).

We propose something altogether different: the
use of sensor data as a starting point for public en-
gagement through the delivery of self-updating au-
tomatically generated blogs. This application pro-
vides fresh challenges for the field of NLG, where
typically systems are designed to offer decision
support in the workplace (Goldberg et al., 1994;
Portet et al., 2009). Decision support requires ac-
curacy and clarity first and foremost. We, on the
other hand, aim to generate texts that are suffi-

2http://www.opalexplorenature.org

169



Figure 1: Screenshot of the Tag2Blog system.

ciently fluent and engaging for the general public
to be attracted and informed by.

This does not mean that there is no precedent
to our work. There are a handful of NLG sys-
tems that offer “info-tainment”, such as Dial Your
Disc (Van Deemter and Odijk, 1997) and Ilex
(O’Donnell et al., 2001). Systems that gener-
ate sports commentary are particularly relevant, as
they contextualise objects spatially and temporally
and track the movement of objects as part of the
game analysis (André et al., 2000). Rhodes et al.
(2010) further explore dramatic narrative genera-
tion, to bring emotional content into the texts.

We subscribe to the same goals, adding to these
the requirement that texts should be easy to read.
For instance, ecological concepts (such as site fi-
delity) could be communicated by explicitly defin-
ing them. However, we would prefer these to be
inferred from more engaging narratives, such as
that in Fig. 1, which is a screenshot showing sam-
ple text generated by our system.

3 System architecture
The aim of the Tag2Blog system is to bring satel-
lite tagged individuals of a species (e.g., the red
kite) “to life” by constructing narratives describ-
ing their movements. In this regard, we need to
interpret a sequence of locational fixes obtained
from a tagged bird, and construct a story around
its use of the landscape. To facilitate ecologi-
cal interpretations, it is important to first supple-
ment the locational data with other spatially rel-
evant data; for example, landscape features and

Figure 2: Architecture of the Tag2Blog system

weather. The Tag2Blog system therefore consists
of two modules: Data Acquisition and Contextual-
isation (DAC), described in §3.1 and Natural Lan-
guage Generation (NLG), described in §3.2.
3.1 Data acquisition and contextualisation
This module is composed of a spatial database
and a set of services for updating and access-
ing data. We start with the information obtained
from the satellite tags on the birds, which provide
time-stamped locational information. This is aug-
mented with data of associated habitat types, ter-
rain features, place names and weather conditions.
Our database thus stores rich information about
the locations visited, acquired from a variety of
sources summarised below:

Habitats: Land cover maps3 are used to as-
sociate different habitat types (e.g., coniferous
woodland, moorland, improved grassland, etc.) to

3http://www.ceh.ac.uk

170



locational fixes.
Terrain features: Ordnance Survey Vector Map
data4 are used to identify features (e.g., lochs,
rivers, roads, etc.) in the vicinity of the fixes.
Names: Ordnance Survey Gazetteer data is used
to obtain place and feature names.
Weather: The closest weather station to the fix
is queried for historical weather data from the time
of the fix, using an external web service.

The following services were implemented to
update and enrich red kite location fixes:

Data update service: The satellite tags on the
red kites have been programmed to transmit up to
5 GPS fixes per day, usually every two hours be-
tween 8am and 6pm5. The satellite data provider
sends a daily email, using which we update the
spatial database with red kite locations automat-
ically. We also provide the conservation charity
with a user interface, to allow them to censor eco-
logically sensitive locations (such as nesting sites),
as and when required.
Data analysis service: Location data of each
individual bird is periodically clustered (i.e.,
weekly) to identify their temporary home ranges.
These clusters are spatially represented as ellipses
and are stored in the database so that new fixes can
be compared against known locational patterns.
Weather web service client: Weather data rele-
vant to the time and location of each red kite loca-
tional fix is obtained on demand from a met office
web service by providing the date, time, and the
closest weather station.
Data access service: Each satellite fix is asso-
ciated with a Java object (GeoLocation), which
encapsulates the enriched data (habitats, place
names, features, weather, etc.) for that loca-
tion. Apart from individual locations, overall
fight parameters such as distance from geographic
features, displacement from or presence within
known home ranges, are also computed and en-
capsulated into a Java object. These objects are
generated on demand and passed onto the NLG
module, described next.

3.2 Natural language generation module
The Tag2Blog system follows the NLG architec-
ture proposed by Reiter and Dale (2000) and is

4http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk
5The satellite tags are solar powered, and only have power

to provide a single fix per day in the winter months.

composed of three components: a document plan-
ner (§3.2.2), a microplanner (§3.2.3) and a surface
realiser (§3.2.4). The document planner utilises a
domain model (§3.2.1) to populate and order mes-
sage definitions, which are in turn passed on to the
microplanner for creating sentence specifications.
The surface realiser then generates text from these
sentence.specifications.

3.2.1 Domain model and data analysis
The enriched data, as described above, be used
as such to generate narratives of journeys. How-
ever in order to make these narratives insightful,
an ecological interpretation is needed, and kite
behaviours must also be included in the domain
model. Siddharthan et al. (2012) has identified
key behaviours that can be fruitfully communi-
cated through such narratives. We broadly cate-
gorise these behaviours into:

• Site fidelity and exploratory behaviour
• Feeding and roosting behaviour
• Social behaviour (associations with other red kites)

A domain model was developed to infer likely
kite behaviours from the enriched data. To build
the domain model, we used explicit and implicit
knowledge elicitation methods, such as data anal-
ysis and interviews, annotations of NLG produced
blogs by ecologists, and analysis of hand-written
blogs by ecologists from source data.

Site fidelity and exploratory behaviour: His-
torical location data is used to identify clusters
(temporary home ranges) for each bird using the
ADEHABITATHR6 package (Calenge, 2006). In
order to describe the overall movement pattern
during the period, spatial data analysis is carried
out and parameters, such as total distance trav-
elled, displacement from clusters, percentage of
fixes within each cluster, are calculated. These
parameters are then used to identify the overall
movement pattern. Fig. 3 shows three such pat-
terns: Stationary, Short circular trip and Long dis-
tance movement.

Feeding and roosting behaviours: After con-
ducting structured interviews with ecologists and
analysing blogs written by ecologists, a set of
rules were created to identify different feeding
and roosting behaviours. Likely foraging patterns
were defined on the basis of habitat type, season,

6http://cran.rstudio.com/web/packages/adehabitatHR

171



(a) (b) (c)

Figure 3: Movement patterns demonstrated in different weeks by different birds: (a) Stationary, staying
within the temporary home range, (b) Short circular trip, moving out and returning to the temporary
home range, and (c) Long distance movement, ending in a different location. The orange areas represent
clusters of locations of the red kite from historical data that model temporary home ranges for the bird.

time of the day and weather conditions. The fol-
lowing extract from a blog written by an ecolo-
gist shows how experts can infer a behaviour from
data. Note that it is acceptable in our application
for such behaviours to be speculative, as long as
they have a basis in kite ecology, and are plausible
given the data.

“Early that evening she was seen in farmland

near Torness. Here, the rain must have brought

up earthworms to the surface snacks well worth

catching!”

From this text, we inferred the following rule:

Rule: Feeding on Earthworms
IF it previously rained AND habitat is farm land,

THEN it is likely that the red kite is feeding on

earthworms.

We have expressed a range of such behaviours as
JBoss7 rules.

Social behaviours: Red kites being social birds,
there are many social interactions that could be in-
ferred from the type of data we brought together.
Associations between red kites are typically in-
ferred by analysing relative locations of differ-
ent red kites. However, there is one specific be-
haviour, communal roosting, where a large group
of red kites sleeps together in woodland during
the winter months, for which we make use of our

7http://www.jboss.org/drools

knowledge of known communal roost locations;
i.e., local knowledge provided by ecologists.

3.2.2 Document planner
The document planner carries out content determi-
nation and document structuring.

Content determination: There are several
types of message definitions, implemented as
Java classes, that correspond to different narrative
descriptions (flying, feeding, etc.). The message
generator infers possible behaviours (feeding,
roosting, exploring, etc.) using the domain model
and then selects one or more based on content
determination rules. For example, the message
generator might infer possible behaviours such
as feeding and exploring from the analyses
described above in §3.2.1. However, the content
determination rules would prioritise exploring
behaviours over feeding (due to their rarity) and
hence generate a EXPLORINGMESSAGE, which
contains the information required to generate a
description of the exploration journey. Similarly,
corresponding messages would be generated for
other flying, feeding, and social behaviours.

Document structuring: Our weekly blogs con-
tain an introductory paragraph, which captures the
overall movement pattern for the week, followed
by a more detailed paragraph, which describes in-
teresting behaviours during that week. Each para-

172



graph is internally represented as a schema, which
also orders the messages into a document plan.

3.2.3 Microplanner
The document plan generated at the previous stage
is passed on to the microplanner for creating text
specifications. This includes phrase specifications
and their aggregation into sentences. Clauses are
combined using discourse cues to express different
discourse relations, such as concession, compari-
son and explanation.

3.2.4 Surface realiser
The role of the surface realiser is to convert the
text specification received from the microplanner
into text that the user can read and understand.
This includes linguistic realisation (converting the
sentence specifications into sentences) and struc-
tural realisation (structuring the sentences inside
the document). Both the linguistic and structural
realisations are performed by using functionali-
ties provided by the SIMPLENLG realiser library
(Gatt and Reiter, 2009).

4 Utility of blogs in this domain

Until recently, our partner charity was publishing
hand-written blogs based on the journeys of these
satellite tagged red kites. They have had to close
down the site due to resource constraints: Such
blogs are difficult, monotonous and time consum-
ing to produce by hand. Tag2Blog will allow the
charity to restart this form of public engagement.

We have earlier studied the use of ecological
blogs based on satellite tag data (Siddharthan et
al., 2012). Using hand-written blogs in a toy do-
main, we found that readers were willing to an-
thromorphise the bird, and generally formed a pos-
itive perception of it. Additionally, users were able
to recall ecological insights communicated in the
blog, demonstrating that such blogs are informa-
tive as well.

In this paper, we restrict ourselves to reporting
a very preliminary evaluation of the quality of the
computer generated blogs. We compared three
blogs produced from the same data (the move-
ments of one individual red kite during one week):

a) A computer generated blog of a journey, produced
without using any domain knowledge as described in
§3.2.1, and merely describing spatial movements of the
red kite over time.

b) A computer generated blog of a journey with ecological
insights, as described in §3.2.1. This is the production
version used in Fig. 1.

c) Version (a), which has been post-edited by an ecologist
to introduce ecological insights into the narrative. The
ecologist was give access to a table containing habitat,
terrain and weather information for each satellite fix.

Tab. 1 shows samples from the three versions.
All three versions were shown to five human
judges, without indication of provenance. They
were asked to rate each blog on a scale of 1 (low)
to 5 (high) for how readable, informative, engag-
ing and ecologically sound they considered the
texts. They were also asked to rate the relevance of
each blog to different age groups (primary school
children, secondary school children and adults).

We used as judges, a social scientist specialised
in human–nature interactions, a public engage-
ment officer at our University who interacts with
local schools on a regular basis, a secondary
school English teacher, and two school students,
aged 14 and 16. Our goal was to obtain a diversity
of opinion to inform system design.

Tab. 2 shows the ratings of our five evalua-
tors for different aspects of each blog. The av-
erages show that in most aspects, version (b) is
rated higher than version (a) and, rather expect-
edly, the human edited/annotated version (c) is
rated the highest. But, note that the two school
students rated the automatically generated blogs
highly, and that both felt that version (b) was the
best suited for secondary schools. The public en-
gagement officer rated (b) as less readable, and
less relevant to schools. She specifically high-
lighted the use of terminology without introduc-
tion (e.g., “roost” and “foraging”) as an issue.

Our focus will now be on improving the lan-
guage, to address some of the readability and en-
gagingness concerns.

5 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented an NLG system that can gen-
erate ecologically informative and engaging narra-
tives of animal (red kite) movements. Our initial
evaluations have shown encouraging results and
further evaluations are now planned. The system
can be accessed through http://redkite.abdn.ac.uk/blog/.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported by an award made
by the RCUK Digital Economy programme
to the dot.rural Digital Economy Hub (ref.
EP/G066051/1). We also thank our partner organ-
isation, the RSPB (with special thanks to Stuart
Benn), who manage the reintroduction project.

173



Text First four sentences from each blog
(a) This week, Millie did not travel far, but was actively exploring a small area. During this week, Millie has been

observed on various habitats. However, except Thursday she chose to spend the night at the same woodland near
Torness. No doubt Millie was not alone this week as kites Moray and Beauly were also observed often in the
vicinity.

(b) This week, Millie did not travel far, but was actively exploring a small area mainly within her home range. During
this week, Millie’s foraging patterns have been varied. However, except Thursday she chose to roost in the same
woodland near Torness. No doubt Millie had a quite social week as kites Moray and Beauly were also observed
often in the vicinity.

(c) This week Millie did not travel far but was actively exploring a small area north-east of Loch Ness. Friday morning
Millie left the woodland where she spend the night to fly to Loch Ruthven amid heavy rain. The poor visibility
may have driven her to fly low when searching for food along the water sides. Early that evening she was seen in
farmland near Torness.

Table 1: Excerpts of texts in each experimental condition

Sociologist Pub. Eng. Teacher 16yo 14yo Average
Blog a b c a b c a b c a b c a b c a b c
Readability 3 3 5 4 3 5 3 2 4 3 4 4 3 4 4 3.2 3.2 4.4
Informativeness 3 4 5 5 5 5 2 1 2 3 4 5 3 3 4 3.2 3.4 4.4
Engagingness 2 4 5 3 3 4 2 1 3 3 4 5 2 4 4 2.4 3.2 4.2
Ecological soundness 4 3 3 4 4 4 5 5 5 3 4 4 3 4 3 3.8 4.0 3.8
Relevance to:

Primary Schools 3 4 5 3 2 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 2 3 3.4 3.2 3.8
Secondary Schools 3 4 5 4 3 4 2 2 2 4 5 3 3 4 3 3.2 3.6 3.4
Adults 3 4 5 4 4 4 3 1 3 3 4 5 3 4 4 3.2 3.4 4.2

Table 2: Evaluation of Blogs by Experts

References
E. André, K. Binsted, K. Tanaka-Ishii, S. Luke, G.

Herzog, and T. Rist. 2000. Three robocup simu-
lation league commentator systems. AI Magazine,
21(1):57.

S. Blake, A. Siddharthan, H. Nguyen, N. Sharma, A.
Robinson, E. O Mahony, B. Darvill, C. Mellish, and
R. van der Wal. 2012. Natural language genera-
tion for nature conservation: Automating feedback
to help volunteers identify bumblebee species. In
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2012), pages
311–324.

C. Calenge. 2006. The package adehabitat for the r
software: tool for the analysis of space and habitat
use by animals. Ecological Modelling, 197:1035.

A. Gatt and E. Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A realisation
engine for practical applications. In Proceedings of
the 112th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation (ENLG), pages 90–93.

E. Goldberg, N. Driedger, and R.I. Kittredge.
1994. Using natural-language processing to produce
weather forecasts. IEEE Expert, 9(2):45–53.

M. O’Donnell, C. Mellish, J. Oberlander, and A. Knott.
2001. Ilex: an architecture for a dynamic hypertext
generation system. Natural Language Engineering,
7(3):225–250.

F. Portet, E. Reiter, A. Gatt, J. Hunter, S. Sripada,
Y. Freer, and C. Sykes. 2009. Automatic gener-
ation of textual summaries from neonatal intensive
care data. Artificial Intelligence, 173(7-8):789–816.

E. Reiter and R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural Lan-
guage Generation Systems. Cambridge University
Press.

M. Rhodes, S. Coupland, and T. Cruickshank. 2010.
Enhancing real-time sports commentary generation
with dramatic narrative devices. In Proceedings of
the Third Joint Conference on Interactive Digital
Storytelling, ICIDS 2010, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 111–116. Springer.

A. Siddharthan, M. Green, K. van Deemter, C. Mel-
lish, and R. van der Wal. 2012. Blogging birds:
Generating narratives about reintroduced species to
promote public engagement. In Proceedings of the
Seventh International Natural Language Generation
Conference (INLG), pages 120–124.

J. Silvertown. 2009. A new dawn for citizen science.
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 24(9):467–471.

J. Smart, A. Amar, I.M.W. Sim, B. Etheridge, D.
Cameron, G. Christie, and J.D. Wilson. 2010.
Illegal killing slows population recovery of a re-
introduced raptor of high conservation concern–the
red kite milvus milvus. Biological Conservation,
143(5):1278–1286.

R. Stafford, A.G. Hart, L. Collins, C.L. Kirkhope, R.L.
Williams, S.G. Rees, J.R. Lloyd, and A.E. Goode-
nough. 2010. Eu-Social Science: The Role of Inter-
net Social Networks in the Collection of Bee Biodi-
versity Data. PloS one, 5(12):e14381.

K. van Deemter and J. Odijk. 1997. Context model-
ing and the generation of spoken discourse. Speech
Communication, 21(1-2):101–121.

174


