



















































Typesetting for Improved Readability using Lexical and Syntactic Information


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 719–724,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Typesetting for Improved Readability using
Lexical and Syntactic Information

Ahmed Salama

ahmedsaa@qatar.cmu.edu

Kemal Oflazer
Carnegie Mellon University – Qatar

Doha, Qatar
ko@cs.cmu.edu

Susan Hagan

hagan@cmu.edu

Abstract

We present results from our study of which
uses syntactically and semantically moti-
vated information to group segments of
sentences into unbreakable units for the
purpose of typesetting those sentences in
a region of a fixed width, using an other-
wise standard dynamic programming line
breaking algorithm, to minimize ragged-
ness. In addition to a rule-based base-
line segmenter, we use a very modest size
text, manually annotated with positions of
breaks, to train a maximum entropy clas-
sifier, relying on an extensive set of lexi-
cal and syntactic features, which can then
predict whether or not to break after a cer-
tain word position in a sentence. We also
use a simple genetic algorithm to search
for a subset of the features optimizing F1,
to arrive at a set of features that deliv-
ers 89.2% Precision, 90.2% Recall (89.7%
F1) on a test set, improving the rule-based
baseline by about 11 points and the classi-
fier trained on all features by about 1 point
in F1.

1 Introduction and Motivation

Current best practice in typography focuses on
several interrelated factors (Humar et al., 2008;
Tinkel, 1996). These factors include typeface se-
lection, the color of the type and its contrast with
the background, the size of the type, the length of
the lines of type in the body of the text, the media
in which the type will live, the distance between
each line of type, and the appearance of the jus-
tified or ragged right side edge of the paragraphs,
which should maintain either the appearance of a
straight line on both sides of the block of type (jus-
tified) or create a gentle wave on the ragged right
side edge.

This paper addresses one aspect of current “best
practice,” concerning the alignment of text in a
paragraph. While current practice values that gen-
tle “wave,” which puts the focus on the elegant
look of the overall paragraph, it does so at the
expense of meaning-making features. Meaning-
making features enable typesetting to maintain the
integrity of phrases within sentences, giving those
interests equal consideration with the overall look
of the paragraph. Figure 1 (a) shows a text frag-
ment typeset without any regard to natural breaks
while (b) shows an example of a typesetting that
we would like to get, where many natural breaks
are respected.

While current practice works well enough for
native speakers, fluency problems for non-native
speakers lead to uncertainty when the beginning
and end of English phrases are interrupted by the
need to move to the next line of the text before
completing the phrase. This pause is a poten-
tial problem for readers because they try to inter-
pret content words, relate them to their referents
and anticipate the role of the next word, as they
encounter them in the text (Just and Carpenter,
1980). While incorrect anticipation might not be
problematic for native speakers, who can quickly
re-adjust, non-native speakers may find inaccu-
rate anticipation more troublesome. This prob-
lem could be more significant because English
as a second language (ESL) readers are engaged
not only in understanding a foreign language, but
also in processing the “anticipated text” as they
read a partial phrase, and move to the next line
in the text, only to discover that they anticipated
meaning incorrectly. Even native speakers with
less skill may experience difficulty comprehend-
ing text and work with young readers suggests that
”[c]omprehension difficulties may be localized at
points of high processing demands whether from
syntax or other sources” (Perfetti et al., 2005). As
ESL readers process a partial phrase, and move to

719



the next line in the text, instances of incorrectly
anticipated meaning would logically increase pro-
cessing demands to a greater degree. Additionally,
as readers make meaning, we assume that they
don’t parse their thoughts using the same phrasal
divisions “needed to diagram a sentence.” Our per-
spective not only relies on the immediacy assump-
tion, but also develops as an outgrowth of other
ways that we make meaning outside of the form or
function rules of grammar. Specifically, Halliday
and Hasan (1976) found that rules of grammar do
not explain how cohesive principals engage read-
ers in meaning making across sentences. In order
to make meaning across sentences, readers must
be able to refer anaphorically backward to the pre-
vious sentence, and cataphorically forward to the
next sentence. Along similar lines, readers of a
single sentence assume that transitive verbs will
include a direct object, and will therefore specu-
late about what that object might be, and some-
times get it wrong.

Thus proper typesetting of a segment of text
must explore ways to help readers avoid incor-
rect anticipation, while also considering those mo-
ments in the text where readers tend to pause in
order to integrate the meaning of a phrase. Those
decisions depend on the context. A phrasal break
between a one-word subject and its verb tends to
be more unattractive, because the reader does not
have to make sense of relationships between the
noun/subject and related adjectives before moving
on to the verb. In this case, the reader will be more
likely to anticipate the verb to come. However,
a break between a subject preceded by multiple
adjectives and its verb is likely to be more use-
ful to a reader (if not ideal), because the relation-
ships between the noun and its related adjectives
are more likely to have thematic importance lead-
ing to longer gaze time on the relevant words in
the subject phrase (Just and Carpenter, 1980).

We are not aware of any prior work for bring-
ing computational linguistic techniques to bear on
this problem. A relatively recent study (Levasseur
et al., 2006) that accounted only for breaks at
commas and ends of sentences, found that even
those breaks improved reading fluency. While the
participants in that study were younger (7 to 9+
years old), the study is relevant because the chal-
lenges those young participants face, are faced
again when readers of any age encounter new and
complicated texts that present words they do not

know, and ideas they have never considered.
On the other hand, there is ample work on the

basic algorithm to place a sequence of words in a
typesetting area with a certain width, commonly
known as the optimal line breaking problem (e.g.,
Plass (1981), Knuth and Plass (1981)). This prob-
lem is quite well-understood and basic variants are
usually studied as an elementary example applica-
tion of dynamic programming.

In this paper we explore the problem of learn-
ing where to break sentences in order to avoid the
problems discussed above. Once such unbreak-
able segments are identified, a simple application
of the dynamic programming algorithm for opti-
mal line breaking, using unbreakable segments as
“words”, easily typesets the text to a given width
area.

2 Text Breaks

The rationale for content breaks is linked to our in-
terest in preventing inaccurate anticipation, which
is based on the immediacy assumption. The imme-
diacy assumption (Just and Carpenter, 1980) con-
siders, among other things, the reader’s interest in
trying to relate content words to their referents as
soon as possible. Prior context also encourages
the reader to anticipate a particular role or case
for the next word, such as agent or the manner
in which something is done.Therefore, in defin-
ing our breaks, we consider not only the need to
maintain the syntactic integrity of phrases, such
as the prepositional phrase, but also the semantic
integrity across syntactical divisions. For exam-
ple, semantic integrity is important when transitive
verbs anticipate direct objects. Strictly speaking,
we define a bad break as one that will cause (i)
unintended anaphoric collocation, (ii) unintended
cataphoric collocation, or (iii) incorrect anticipa-
tion.

Using these broad constraints, we derived a set
of about 30 rules that define acceptable and non-
acceptable breaks, with exceptions based on con-
text and other special cases. Some of the rules are
very simple and are only related to the word posi-
tion in the sentence:

• Break at the end of a sentence.

• Keep the first and last words of a sentence
with the rest of it.

The rest of the rule set are more complex and de-
pend on the structure of the sentence in question,

720



sanctions and UN charges of gross rights abuses. Military tensions on the
Korean peninsula have risen to their highest level for years, with the
communist state under the youthful Kim threatening nuclear war in response
to UN sanctions imposed after its third atomic test last month. It has also

(a) Text with standard typesetting

from US sanctions and UN charges of gross rights abuses. Military tensions
on the Korean peninsula have risen to their highest level for years,
with the communist state under the youthful Kim threatening nuclear war
in response to UN sanctions imposed after its third atomic test last month.

(b) Text with syntax-directed typesetting

Figure 1: Short fragment of text with standard typesetting (a) and with syntax and semantics motivated
typesetting (b), both in a 75 character width.

e.g.:

• Keep a single word subject with the verb.

• Keep an appositive phrase with the noun it
renames.

• Do not break inside a prepositional phrase.

• Keep marooned prepositions with the word
they modify.

• Keep the verb, the object and the preposition
together in a phrasal verb phrase.

• Keep a gerund clause with its adverbial com-
plement.

There are exceptions to these rules in certain cases
such as overly long phrases.

3 Experimental Setup

Our data set consists of a modest set of 150 sen-
tences (3918 tokens) selected from four different
documents and manually annotated by a human
expert relying on the 30 or so rules. The annota-
tion consists of marking after each token whether
one is allowed to break at that position or not.1

We developed three systems for predicting
breaks: a rule-based baseline system, a maximum-
entropy classifier that learns to classify breaks us-
ing about 100 lexical, syntactic and collocational
features, and a maximum entropy classifier that
uses a subset of these features selected by a sim-
ple genetic algorithm in a hill-climbing fashion.
We evaluated our classifiers intrinsically using the
usual measures:

1We expect to make our annotated data available upon the
publication of the paper.

• Precision: Percentage of the breaks posited
that were actually correct breaks in the gold-
standard hand-annotated data. It is possible
to get 100% precision by putting a single
break at the end.

• Recall: Percentage of the actual breaks cor-
rectly posited. It is possible to get 100% re-
call by positing a break after each token.

• F1: The geometric mean of precision and re-
call divided by their average.

It should be noted that when a text is typeset into
an area of width of a certain number of characters,
an erroneous break need not necessarily lead to an
actual break in the final output, that is an error may
not be too bad. On the other hand, a missed break
while not hurting the readability of the text may
actually lead to a long segment that may eventu-
ally worsen raggedness in the final typesetting.

Baseline Classifier We implemented a subset of
the rules (those that rely only on lexical and part-
of-speech information), as a baseline rule-based
break classifier. The baseline classifier avoids
breaks:

• after the first word in a sentence, quote or
parentheses,

• before the last word in a sentence, quote or
parentheses, and

• between a punctuation mark following a
word or between two consecutive punctua-
tion marks.

It posits breaks (i) before a word following a
punctuation, and (ii) before prepositions, auxil-
iary verbs, coordinating conjunctions, subordinate
conjunctions, relative pronouns, relative adverbs,
conjunctive adverbs, and correlative conjunctions.

721



Maximum Entropy Classifier We used the
CRF++ Tool2 but with the option to run it only
as a maximum entropy classifier (Berger et al.,
1996), to train a classifier. We used a large set
of about 100 features grouped into the following
categories:

• Lexical features: These features include the
token and the POS tag for the previous, cur-
rent and the next word. We also encode
whether the word is part of a compound noun
or a verb, or is an adjective that subcatego-
rizes a specific preposition in WordNet, (e.g.,
familiar with).

• Constituency structure features: These are
unlexicalized features that take into account
in the parse tree, for a word and its previous
and next words, the labels of the parent, the
grandparent and their siblings, and number of
siblings they have. We also consider the label
of the closest common ancestor for a word
and its next word.

• Dependency structure features: These are un-
lexicalized features that essentially capture
the number of dependency relation links that
cross-over a given word boundary. The moti-
vation for these comes from the desire to limit
the amount of information that would need to
be carried over that boundary, assuming this
would be captured by the number of depen-
dency links over the break point.

• Baseline feature: This feature reflects
whether the rule-based baseline break classi-
fier posits a break at this point or not.

We use the following tools to process the sen-
tences to extract some of these features:

• Stanford constituency and dependency
parsers, (De Marneffe et al., 2006; Klein and
Manning, 2002; Klein and Manning, 2003),

• lemmatization tool in NLTK (Bird, 2006),

• WordNet for compound nouns and verbs
(Fellbaum, 1998).

2Available at http://crfpp.googlecode.com/
svn/trunk/doc/index.html.

Baseline ME-All ME-GA
Precision 77.9 87.3 89.2
Recall 80.4 90.2 90.2
F1 79.1 88.8 89.7

Table 1: Results from Baseline and Maximum En-
tropy break classifiers

Maximum Entropy Classifier with GA Feature
Selection We used a genetic algorithm on a de-
velopment data set, to select a subset of the fea-
tures above. Basically, we start with a randomly
selected set of features and through mutation and
crossover try to obtain feature combinations that
perform better over the development set in terms
of F1 score. After a few hundred generations of
this kind of hill-climbing, we get a subset of fea-
tures that perform the best.

4 Results

Our current evaluation is only intrinsic in that we
measure our performance in getting the break and
no-break points correctly in a test set. The results
are shown in Table 1. The column ME-All shows
the results for a maximum entropy classifier us-
ing all the features and the column ME-GA shows
the results for a maximum entropy classifier using
about 50 of the about 100 features available, as se-
lected by the genetic algorithm.

Our best system delivers 89.2% precision and
90.2% recall (with 89.7% F1), improving the rule-
based baseline by about 11 points and the classifier
trained on all features by about 1 point in F1.

After processing our test set with the ME-GA
classifier, we can feed the segments into a stan-
dard word-wrapping dynamic programming algo-
rithm (along with a maximum width) and obtain a
typeset version with minimum raggedness on the
right margin. This algorithm is fast enough to use
even dynamically when resizing a window if the
text is displayed in a browser on a screen. Fig-
ure 1 (b) displays an example of a small fragment
of text typeset using the output of our best break
classifier. One can immediately note that this type-
setting has more raggedness overall, but avoids the
bad breaks in (a). We are currently in the process
of designing a series of experiments for extrinsic
evaluation to determine if such typeset text helps
comprehension for secondary language learners.

722



4.1 Error Analysis
An analysis of the errors our best classifier makes
(which may or may not be translated into an actual
error in the final typesetting) shows that the major-
ity of the errors basically can be categorized into
the following groups:

• Incorrect breaks posited for multiword collo-
cations (e.g., act* of war,3 rule* of law, far
ahead* of, raining cats* and dogs, etc.)

• Missed breaks after a verb (e.g., calls | an act
of war, proceeded to | implement, etc.)

• Missed breaks before or after prepositions or
adverbials (e.g., the day after | the world re-
alized, every kind | of interference)

We expect to overcome such cases by increasing
our training data size significantly by using our
classifier to break new texts and then have a hu-
man annotator to manually correct the breaks.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

We have used syntactically motivated information
to help in typesetting text to facilitate better under-
standing of English text especially by secondary
language learners, by avoiding breaks which may
cause unnecessary anticipation errors. We have
cast this as a classification problem to indicate
whether to break after a certain word or not, by
taking into account a variety of features. Our best
system maximum entropy framework uses about
50 such features, which were selected using a ge-
netic algorithm and performs significantly better
than a rule-based break classifier and better than a
maximum entropy classifier that uses all available
features.

We are currently working on extending this
work in two main directions: We are designing
a set of experiments to extrinsically test whether
typesetting by our system improves reading ease
and comprehension. We are also looking into a
break labeling scheme that is not binary but based
on a notion of “badness” – perhaps quantized into
3-4 grades, that would allow flexibility between
preventing bad breaks and minimizing raggedness.
For instance, breaking a noun-phrase right after an
initial the may be considered very bad. On the
other hand, although it is desirable to keep an ob-
ject NP together with the preceding transitive verb,

3* indicates a spurious incorrect break, | indicates a
missed break.

breaking before the object NP, could be OK, if not
doing so causes an inordinate amount of ragged-
ness. Then the final typesetting stage can optimize
a combination of raggedness and the total “bad-
ness” of all the breaks it posits.

Acknowledgements

This publication was made possible by grant
NPRP-09-873-1-129 from the Qatar National Re-
search Fund (a member of the Qatar Foundation).
Susan Hagan acknowledges the generous support
of the Qatar Foundation through Carnegie Mellon
University’s Seed Research program. The state-
ments made herein are solely the responsibility
of this author(s), and not necessarily those of the
Qatar Foundation.

References
Adam Berger, Stephen Della Pietra, and Vincent Della

Pietra. 1996. A maximum entropy approach to nat-
ural language processing. Computational Linguis-
tics, 22(1):39–71.

Steven Bird. 2006. NLTK: The natural language
toolkit. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL, pages
69–72. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of LREC, volume 6, pages 449–454.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An electronic
lexical database. The MIT Press.

M. A. K. Halliday and R. Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in
English. Longman, London.

I. Humar, M. Gradisar, and T. Turk. 2008. The impact
of color combinations on the legibility of a web page
text presented on crt displays. International Journal
of Industrial Ergonomics, 38(11-12):885–899.

Marcel A. Just and Patricia A. Carpenter. 1980. A the-
ory of reading: From eye fixations to comprehen-
sion. Psychological Review, 87:329–354.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2002. Fast
exact inference with a factored model for natural
language parsing. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 15(2003):3–10.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 423–430. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

723



Donald E Knuth and Michael F. Plass. 1981. Break-
ing paragraphs into lines. Software: Practice and
Experience, 11(11):1119–1184.

Valerie Marciarille Levasseur, Paul Macaruso,
Laura Conway Palumbo, and Donald Shankweiler.
2006. Syntactically cued text facilitates oral
reading fluency in developing readers. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 27(3):423–445.

C. A. Perfetti, N. Landi, and J. Oakhill. 2005. The ac-
quisition of reading comprehension skill. In M. J.
Snowling and C. Hulme, editors, The science of
reading: A handbook, pages 227–247. Blackwell,
Oxford.

Michael Frederick Plass. 1981. Optimal Pagina-
tion Techniques for Automatic Typesetting Systems.
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.

K. Tinkel. 1996. Taking it in: What makes type easier
to read. Adobe Magazine, pages 40–50.

724


