



















































Extending an interoperable platform to facilitate the creation of multilingual and multimodal NLP applications


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 43–48,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extending an interoperable platform to facilitate the creation
of multilingual and multimodal NLP applications

Georgios Kontonatsios∗, Paul Thompson∗, Riza Theresa Batista-Navarro∗,
Claudiu Mihăilă∗, Ioannis Korkontzelos and Sophia Ananiadou

The National Centre for Text Mining,
School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester

131 Princess Street, Manchester M1 7DN, UK
{kontonag,batistar,thompsop,mihailac,

korkonti,ananiads}@cs.man.ac.uk

Abstract

U-Compare is a UIMA-based workflow
construction platform for building natu-
ral language processing (NLP) applica-
tions from heterogeneous language re-
sources (LRs), without the need for pro-
gramming skills. U-Compare has been
adopted within the context of the META-
NET Network of Excellence, and over
40 LRs that process 15 European lan-
guages have been added to the U-Compare
component library. In line with META-
NET’s aims of increasing communication
between citizens of different European
countries, U-Compare has been extended
to facilitate the development of a wider
range of applications, including both mul-
tilingual and multimodal workflows. The
enhancements exploit the UIMA Subject
of Analysis (Sofa) mechanism, that allows
different facets of the input data to be rep-
resented. We demonstrate how our cus-
tomised extensions to U-Compare allow
the construction and testing of NLP appli-
cations that transform the input data in dif-
ferent ways, e.g., machine translation, au-
tomatic summarisation and text-to-speech.

1 Introduction

Currently, there are many repositories that con-
tain a range of NLP components, e.g., OpenNLP1,
Stanford CoreNLP2, JULIE NLP Toolsuite3 and
NaCTeM software tools4. The ability to chain
components from these repositories into pipelines
is a prerequisite to facilitate the development of

∗The authors have contributed equally to the development
of this work and production of the manuscript.

1http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/projects.html
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.shtml
3http://www.julielab.de/Resources/Software/NLP Tools.html
4http://nactem.ac.uk/software.php

complex NLP applications. Combining together
heterogeneous components is not, however, al-
ways straightforward. The various components
used in a pipeline may be implemented using dif-
ferent programming languages, may have incom-
patible input/output formats, e.g., stand-off or in-
line annotations, or may require or produce incom-
patible data types, e.g., a particular named entity
recogniser (NER) may require specific types of
syntactic constituents as input, making it impor-
tant to choose the right type of syntactic parser to
run prior to the NER. Thus, the tools required to
build a new application may not be interoperable
with each other, and considerable extra work may
be required to make the tools talk to each other.

The Unstructured Information Management Ar-
chitecture (UIMA) (Ferrucci and Lally, 2004) was
created as a means to alleviate such problems. It
is a framework that facilitates the straightforward
combination of LRs, i.e., tools and corpora, into
workflow applications. UIMA is an OASIS stan-
dard that enables interoperability of LRs by defin-
ing a standard workflow metadata format and stan-
dard input/output representations.

U-Compare (Kano et al., 2011) is a graphical
NLP workflow construction platform built on top
of UIMA. It facilitates the rapid construction, test-
ing and evaluation of NLP workflows using drag-
and-drop actions within its graphical user inter-
face (GUI). U-Compare enhances interoperabil-
ity among UIMA-compliant LRs, by defining a
common and sharable Type System, i.e., a hier-
archy of annotation types, which models a wide
range of NLP data types, e.g., sentence, token,
part-of-speech tag, named entity and discourse
annotations. The aim is for all components in
U-Compare’s library to be compliant with this
type system. In the context of META-NET, U-
Compare’s library has been extended with 46 new
LRs supporting 15 European languages, all of
which are compliant with the same type system.

43



This makes U-Compare the world’s largest repos-
itory of type system-compatible LRs, allowing
users to seamlessly combine together resources to
create a range of NLP applications.

Previously, U-Compare was able to support the
development of a wide range of monolingual lex-
ical, syntactic and semantic processing tasks ap-
plications that enriched textual input documents
by adding annotations of various types. However,
not all NLP applications operate in this way; some
workflows transform the input data to create new
“views” of the input data. The META-NET project
aims to ensure equal access to information by all
European citizens. This aim implies the devel-
opment of both multilingual applications, which
transform input data from one language into an-
other, or multimodal applications, in which text
may be transformed into speech, or vice versa.

U-Compare has been extended in several ways
to support the construction of these more complex
workflow types. Specifically, information about
both the original and transformed data, together
with annotations associated with each view, can
now be visualised in a straightforward manner.
The changes support two new categories of work-
flow. Firstly, workflows that produce two or more
textual views of an input text are useful not only
for multilingual applications, such as those that
carry out machine translation, but also applica-
tions that transform the input text in other ways,
such as those that produce a summary of an in-
put text. Secondly, workflows that output audio as
well as textual views, e.g., text-to-speech applica-
tions, are also supported.

2 Related work

Over the past few years, an increasing num-
bers of researchers have begun to create and dis-
tribute their own workflow construction architec-
tures (Ferrucci and Lally, 2004; Cunningham et
al., 2002; Grishman et al., 1997; Schäfer, 2006)
or platforms (Kano et al., 2011; Rak et al., 2012;
Ogrodniczuk and Karagiozov, 2011; Savova et al.,
2010) that allow the rapid development of NLP ap-
plications.

GATE (Cunningham et al., 2002) is a workflow
construction framework that has been used to de-
velop several types of NLP applications, including
summarisation systems. It facilitates the develop-
ment of a wide range of NLP applications by pro-
viding a collection of components that can process

various languages, together with Java libraries that
handle character encoding for approximately 100
languages. However, GATE does not formally de-
fine any standards to model multilingual or mul-
timodal applications, but rather aims to boost the
development process of NLP applications.

TIPSTER (Grishman et al., 1997) is a generic
framework for the development of NLP applica-
tions. TIPSTER provides multilingual function-
alities by associating text segments of a paral-
lel document with one or more languages. This
allows language-dependent NLP components to
process only the appropriate mono-lingual sub-
documents. However, TIPSTER does not provide
explicit guidelines regarding the annotation types
and attributes that are produced by components.
This lack of a common and sharable system of
annotation types discourages interoperability be-
tween LRs. However, TIPSTER does not provide
a mechanism that facilitates the development of
multilingual or multimodal NLP applications.

Heart of Gold (Schäfer, 2006) is an XML-
based workflow construction architecture that en-
ables interoperability of tools developed in dif-
ferent programming languages to be combined
into pipelines. Heart of Gold contains a rich li-
brary of shallow and deep parsing components
supporting several languages, e.g., English, Ger-
man, Japanese and Greek. Nonetheless, Heart of
Gold does not specifically support the construction
of multilingual or multimodal workflows.

In contrast to the other frameworks introduced
above, UIMA (Ferrucci and Lally, 2004) provides
an abstract-level mechanism that can be used to
support the development of workflows that carry
out transformations of the input data. This mech-
anism is called the Subject of Analysis or Sofa.
Multiple Sofas can be linked with an input file,
each of which stores different data and associ-
ated annotations. This mechanism can thus be ex-
ploited to represent alternative “views” of the in-
put data, such as a source text and its translation.
The data stored in different Sofas is not restricted
to textual information; it can also correspond to
other modalities, such as audio data. This makes
the Sofa mechanism equally suitable for storing
the output of text-to-speech workflows. Our ex-
tensions to U-Compare are thus implemented by
reading and displaying the contents of different
types of Sofas.

The Sofa mechanism has previously been

44



under-exploited by UIMA developers, despite its
power in allowing more complex NLP workflows
to be constructed. Indeed, no other existing
UIMA-based platform (Kano et al., 2011; Rak et
al., 2012; Savova et al., 2010; Hahn et al., 2008)
has demonstrated the use of Sofas to construct
multilingual or multimodal applications. Thus, to
our knowledge, our enhancements to U-Compare
constitute the first attempt to make the construc-
tion of workflows that carry out transformations of
input data more readily available to UIMA users,
without the need for programming skills.

3 METANET4U Components in
U-Compare

The two dozen national and many regional lan-
guages of Europe present linguistic barriers that
can severely limit the free flow of goods, infor-
mation and services. The META-NET Network
of Excellence was created to respond to this is-
sue. Consisting of 60 research centres from 34
countries, META-NET has aimed to stimulate a
concerted, substantial and continent-wide effort to
push forward language technology research and
engineering, in order to ensure equal access to
information and knowledge for all European cit-
izens.

META-NET’s aims are dependent on the ready
availability of LRs that can carry out NLP and
text mining (TM) on a range of European lan-
guages. Such resources constitute the building
blocks for constructing language technology ap-
plications that can help European citizens to gain
easy access to the information they require. One
of the major outcomes of META-NET has been
the development of META-SHARE, an open, dis-
tributed facility for sharing and exchange of LRs
in a large number of European languages.

Within the context of META-NET, interoper-
ability of LRs is clearly of utmost importance, to
expedite the process of developing new NLP ap-
plications. In order to provide a concrete demon-
stration of the utility and power of promoting in-
teroperability within META-SHARE, one of the
sub-projects of META-NET, i.e., METANET4U,
has carried out a pilot study on interoperability,
making use of the UIMA framework and the U-
Compare platform. It is in this context that a set
of 46 new LRs, available in META-SHARE, were
wrapped as UIMA components and made avail-
able in U-Compare. Of these components, 37 op-

erate on one or more specific languages other than
English and 4 are language-independent. Table 1
shows the full set of categories of UIMA com-
ponents created during the METANET4U project,
together with the languages supported.

Several of these new components output mul-
tiple Sofas, i.e., two machine translation compo-
nents, two automatic summarisation components
and a text-to-speech component. It is hoped that
our U-Compare extensions will help to stimulate
the development of a greater number of related
UIMA components, and thus promote a new level
of complexity for future UIMA workflows.

Component Function Supported Languages
Language Identifier 54 modern languages
Paragraph breaker pt, mt

Sentence splitter
en, pt ,mt, es, ca, ast,
cy, gl, it

Tokeniser
en, pt, mt, es, ca, ast,
cy, gl, it, fr

Morph. Analyser
en, pt, es, ca, ast,
cy, gl, it, ro, eu, fr

POS Tagger
en, es, ca, cy, gl, it,
pt, ro, eu, fr, mt

Syntactic chunker
en, es, ca, gl,
ast, ro, fr

NP chunker ro
Segmenter ro, en
FDG Parser ro
Dependency Parser en, es, ca, gl, ast
Discourse Parser ro

NER
Language
independent

Summariser ro, en

Machine translation
es↔{gl,pt,ca}
en↔es, eu→es

Table 1: METANET4U UIMA components

4 Enhancements to U-Compare

In UIMA, an artefact, i.e., raw text, audio, im-
age, video, and its annotations, e.g., part-of-
speech tags, are represented in a standard format,
namely the Common Analysis Structure (CAS).
A CAS can contain any number of smaller sub-
CASes, i.e., Sofas, that carry different artefacts
with their linked annotations. Figure 1 illustrates
the different types of Sofas that are created by the
three types of workflows that we will demonstrate.
Firstly, for a machine translation workflow, at least

45



Multi-lingual
Multi-modal
Workflows

Documents
aZ αΩ

CAS

♫
CAS

CAS

SOFA SOFA

SOFA SOFA

SOFA SOFA

Figure 1: UIMA based multilingual and multi-
modal workflow architecture

two CAS views, i.e., Sofas, are created, the first
corresponding to the text in the source language,
and the other Sofas corresponding to the transla-
tion(s) of the source text into target language(s).
The second type of workflow, i.e., automatic sum-
marisation, is related to the former workflow, in
that the two Sofas produced by the workflow are
both textual, one containing the input text and one
containing a summary of the original text. The
third type of workflow is different, in that a Sofa
containing audio data is used to represent the out-
put of a multimodal workflow.

Two specific extensions have been made to U-
Compare to handle both textual and audio So-
fas. When the output of a workflow consists of
multiple textual views (Sofas), the default anno-
tation viewer is automatically split to allow mul-
tiple views of the text to be displayed and side-
by-side. This can be useful, e.g., to allow careful
comparison of a source text and target translation
in a machine translation workflow. To handle au-
dio Sofas, we have developed a new, customised
viewer that can visualise and play audio data. The
visualisation consists of a graphical display of the
waveform, power information and spectrogram, as
well as segmentation of the audio data into re-
gions (such as individual tokens) and transcrip-
tions, if such information is present in the audio
Sofa. The viewer makes use the open-source li-
brary Java Speech Toolkit (JSTK)5.

5 Workflow applications

In order to provide a practical demonstration of
the enhanced capabilities of U-Compare, we show

5http://code.google.com/p/jstk

three different workflows that transform the input
data in different ways, namely translation, auto-
matic summarisation and speech synthesis. In this
section, we provide brief details of these work-
flows.

5.1 Machine translation
The University of Manchester has created UIMA
wrapper components corresponding to different
modules of Apertium (Corbı́-Bellot et al., 2005), a
free rule-based machine translation engine. These
components consist of a morphological analyser,
POS tagger and translator. The three components
must be run in sequence to carry out translation,
although the first two components can be used
in other workflows to carry out monolingual
analyses. The UIMA components currently
handle a subset of the 27 languages dealt with
by the complete Apertium system, corresponding
to the languages of the METANET4U partners,
i.e., English↔Spanish, Galician↔Spanish,
Portuguese↔Spanish, Catalan↔Spanish and
Basque→Spanish. However, additional language
pairs can be added straightforwardly. Our sample
workflow includes as its initial component the
Language Identifier from the Romanian Academy
Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence
(RACAI), to automatically detect the language of
the text in the input Sofa. The subsequent compo-
nents in the workflow are the Apertium modules.
The workflow demonstrates how heterogeneous
components from different research groups can
be combined into workflows to create new NLP
applications. A sample output from running the
workflow is shown in Figure 2. The input text
was detected as English by the RACAI Language
Identifier. The English text was subsequently
analysed by the morphological analyser and POS
Tagger, and translated to Spanish by the translator.
Figure 2 illustrates the side-by-side display of the
contents of the two Sofas.

5.2 Automatic summarisation
Automatic summarisation for Romanian text can
be carried out by creating a workflow consisting
of two components developed by the Universitatea
“Alexandru Ioan Cuza” din Iaşi (UAIC). Firstly,
a segmenter (UAICSeg) splits the input text into
fragments, which are in turn used as input to the
summariser component (UAICSum). The length
of the output summary (percentage of the whole
document) is parameterised. As can be seen in

46



Figure 2: Translation of English text to Spanish

Figure 3: Summarisation of Romanian text

Figure 3, the output of this workflow is displayed
using the same parallel Sofa viewer. In this case,
the full text is displayed in the left-hand pane and
the summary is shown in the right-hand pane.

5.3 Speech synthesis
The Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC)
developed a speech synthesiser component that
is based around their Ogmios text-to-speech sys-
tem (Bonafonte et al., 2006). The UIMA com-
ponent version of this tool generates separate text
and audio Sofas; the former stores the textual to-
kens and textual representations of their pronun-
ciations, whilst the latter stores the start and end
time offsets of each of the tokens in the audio file,
together with their transcriptions. Fig. 4 shows
how the textual Sofa information is displayed in
U-Compare’s default annotation viewer, whilst the
audio Sofa information is shown in the new au-
dio visualiser mentioned above. The three differ-
ent types of visual information are displayed be-

low each other, and the segments (tokens) of the
audio file, together with their transcriptions, are
displayed at the bottom of the window. A “Play”
button allows either the complete file or a selected
segment to be played.

6 Conclusions

The requirements of META-NET have motivated
several new enhancements to the U-Compare plat-
form, which, to our knowledge, make it the first
UIMA-based workflow construction platform that
is fully geared towards the development of NLP
applications that support a wide range of European
languages. The 46 new UIMA-wrapped LRs that
have been made available through U-Compare,
supporting 15 different European languages and
all compliant with the same type system, mean
that the improved U-Compare is essentially a hub
of multilingual resources, which can be freely and
flexibly combined to create new workflows. In

47



Figure 4: Speech Synthesis

addition, our enhancements to U-Compare mean
that various types of multilingual and multimodal
workflows can now be created with the minimum
effort. These enhancements are intended to make
U-Compare more attractive to users, and to help
stimulate the development of a new generation of
more complex UIMA-based NLP applications. As
future work, we intend to extend the library of
components that output multiple Sofas, and further
extend the functionalities of U-Compare to handle
other data modalities, e.g., video.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially funded by the Euro-
pean Community’s Seventh Framework Program
(FP7/2007-2013) [grant number 318736 (OSS-
METER)]; MetaNet4U project (ICT PSP Pro-
gramme) [grant number 270893]; and Engineer-
ing and Physical Sciences Research Council [grant
numbers EP/P505631/1, EP/J50032X/1].

References
A. Bonafonte, P. Agüero, J. Adell, J. Pérez, and

A. Moreno. 2006. Ogmios: The upc text-to-speech
synthesis system for spoken translation. In TC-
STAR Workshop on Speech-to-Speech Translation,
pages 199–204.

A. Corbı́-Bellot, M. Forcada, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. Pérez-
Ortiz, G. Ramı́rez-Sánchez, F. Sánchez-Martı́nez,
I. Alegria, A. Mayor, and K. Sarasola. 2005.
An open-source shallow-transfer machine transla-
tion engine for the romance languages of Spain. In
Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the EAMT,
pages 79–86.

H. Cunningham, D. Maynard, K. Bontcheva, and
V. Tablan. 2002. GATE: an architecture for devel-
opment of robust HLT applications.

D. Ferrucci and A. Lally. 2004. Building an ex-
ample application with the unstructured information
management architecture. IBM Systems Journal,
43(3):455–475.

R. Grishman, B. Caid, J. Callan, J. Conley, H. Corbin,
J. Cowie, K. DiBella, P. Jacobs, M. Mettler, B. Og-
den, et al. 1997. TIPSTER text phase ii architecture
design version 2.1 p 19 june 1996.

U. Hahn, E. Buyko, R. Landefeld, M. Mühlhausen,
M. Poprat, K. Tomanek, and J. Wermter. 2008. An
overview of JCoRe, the JULIE lab UIMA compo-
nent repository. In LREC’08 Workshop ‘Towards
Enhanced Interoperability for Large HLT Systems:
UIMA for NLP‘, pages 1–7, Marrakech, Morocco,
May.

Y. Kano, M. Miwa, K. Cohen, L. Hunter, S. Ananiadou,
and J. Tsujii. 2011. U-compare: A modular nlp
workflow construction and evaluation system. IBM
Journal of Research and Development, 55(3):11.

M. Ogrodniczuk and D. Karagiozov. 2011. Atlas - the
multilingual language processing platform. Proce-
samiento de Lenguaje Natural, 47(0):241–248.

R. Rak, A. Rowley, W. Black, and S. Ananiadou.
2012. Argo: an integrative, interactive, text mining-
based workbench supporting curation. Database:
The Journal of Biological Databases and Curation,
2012.

G. Savova, J. Masanz, P. Ogren, J. Zheng, S. Sohn,
K. Kipper-Schuler, and C. Chute. 2010. Mayo clin-
ical text analysis and knowledge extraction system
(ctakes): architecture, component evaluation and ap-
plications. Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association, 17(5):507–513.

U. Schäfer. 2006. Middleware for creating and com-
bining multi-dimensional nlp markup. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th Workshop on NLP and XML: Multi-
Dimensional Markup in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 81–84. ACL.

48


