



















































Hierarchical Phrase Table Combination for Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 802–810,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Hierarchical Phrase Table Combination for Machine Translation

Conghui Zhu1 Taro Watanabe2 Eiichiro Sumita2 Tiejun Zhao1
1School of Computer Science and Technology

Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China
2National Institute of Information and Communication Technology

3-5 Hikari-dai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan
{chzhu,tjzhao}@mtlab.hit.edu.cn
{taro.watanabe,Sumita}@nict.go.jp

Abstract

Typical statistical machine translation sys-
tems are batch trained with a given train-
ing data and their performances are large-
ly influenced by the amount of data. With
the growth of the available data across
different domains, it is computationally
demanding to perform batch training ev-
ery time when new data comes. In face
of the problem, we propose an efficient
phrase table combination method. In par-
ticular, we train a Bayesian phrasal inver-
sion transduction grammars for each do-
main separately. The learned phrase ta-
bles are hierarchically combined as if they
are drawn from a hierarchical Pitman-Yor
process. The performance measured by
BLEU is at least as comparable to the tra-
ditional batch training method. Further-
more, each phrase table is trained sepa-
rately in each domain, and while compu-
tational overhead is significantly reduced
by training them in parallel.

1 Introduction

Statistical machine translation (SMT) system-
s usually achieve ’crowd-sourced’ improvements
with batch training. Phrase pair extraction, the
key step to discover translation knowledge, heav-
ily relies on the scale of training data. Typi-
cally, the more parallel corpora used, the more
phrase pairs and more accurate parameters will
be learned, which can obviously be beneficial to
improving translation performances. Today, more
parallel sentences are drawn from divergent do-
mains, and the size keeps growing. Consequent-
ly, how to effectively use those data and improve
translation performance becomes a challenging is-
sue.

This joint work was done while the first author visited
NICT.

Batch retraining is not acceptable for this case,
since it demands serious computational overhead
when training on a large data set, and it requires
us to re-train every time new training data is avail-
able. Even if we can handle the large computation
cost, improvement is not guaranteed every time we
perform batch tuning on the newly updated train-
ing data obtained from divergent domains. Tradi-
tional domain adaption methods for SMT are also
not adequate in this scenario. Most of them have
been proposed in order to make translation sys-
tems perform better for resource-scarce domain-
s when most training data comes from resource-
rich domains, and ignore performance on a more
generic domain without domain bias (Wang et al.,
2012). As an alternative, incremental learning
may resolve the gap by incrementally adding da-
ta sentence-by-sentence into the training data. S-
ince SMT systems trend to employ very large scale
training data for translation knowledge extraction,
updating several sentence pairs each time will be
annihilated in the existing corpus.

This paper proposes a new phrase table combi-
nation method. First, phrase pairs are extracted
from each domain without interfering with oth-
er domains. In particular, we employ the non-
parametric Bayesian phrasal inversion transduc-
tion grammar (ITG) of Neubig et al. (2011) to per-
form phrase table extraction. Second, extracted
phrase tables are combined as if they are drawn
from a hierarchical Pitman-Yor process, in which
the phrase tables represented as tables in the Chi-
nese restaurant process (CRP) are hierarchically
chained by treating each of the previously learned
phrase tables as prior to the current one. Thus, we
can easily update the chain of phrase tables by ap-
pending the newly extracted phrase table and by
treating the chain of the previous ones as its prior.

Experiment results indicate that our method can
achieve better translation performance when there
exists a large divergence in domains, and can

802



achieve at least comparable results to batch train-
ing methods, with a significantly less computa-
tional overhead.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2, we introduce related work. In sec-
tion 3, we briefly describe the translation mod-
el with phrasal ITGs and Pitman-Yor process. In
section 4, we explain our hierarchical combination
approach and give experiment results in section 5.
We conclude the paper in the last section.

2 Related Work

Bilingual phrases are cornerstones for phrase-
based SMT systems (Och and Ney, 2004; Koehn
et al., 2003; Chiang, 2005) and existing translation
systems often get ‘crowd-sourced’ improvements
(Levenberg et al., 2010). A number of approaches
have been proposed to make use of the full poten-
tial of the available parallel sentences from vari-
ous domains, such as domain adaptation and in-
cremental learning for SMT.

The translation model and language model
are primary components in SMT. Previous work
proved successful in the use of large-scale data for
language models from diverse domains (Brants et
al., 2007; Schwenk and Koehn, 2008). Alterna-
tively, the language model is incrementally up-
dated by using a succinct data structure with a
interpolation technique (Levenberg and Osborne,
2009; Levenberg et al., 2011).

In the case of the previous work on translation
modeling, mixed methods have been investigat-
ed for domain adaptation in SMT by adding do-
main information as additional labels to the orig-
inal phrase table (Foster and Kuhn, 2007). Un-
der this framework, the training data is first di-
vided into several parts, and phase pairs are ex-
tracted with some sub-domain features. Then al-
l the phrase pairs and features are tuned together
with different weights during decoding. As a way
to choose the right domain for the domain adap-
tion, a classifier-based method and a feature-based
method have been proposed. Classification-based
methods must at least add an explicit label to indi-
cate which domain the current phrase pair comes
from. This is traditionally done with an automat-
ic domain classifier, and each input sentence is
classified into its corresponding domain (Xu et al.,
2007). As an alternative to the classification-based
approach, Wang et al. (2012) employed a feature-
based approach, in which phrase pairs are enriched

by a feature set to potentially reflect the domain in-
formation. The similarity calculated by a informa-
tion retrieval system between the training subset
and the test set is used as a feature for each paral-
lel sentence (Lu et al., 2007). Monolingual topic
information is taken as a new feature for a domain
adaptive translation model and tuned on the devel-
opment set (Su et al., 2012). Regardless of under-
lying methods, either classifier-based or feature-
based method, the performance of current domain
adaptive phrase extraction methods is more sensi-
tive to the development set selection. Usually the
domain similar to a given development data is usu-
ally assigned higher weights.

Incremental learning in which new parallel sen-
tences are incrementally updated to the training
data is employed for SMT. Compared to tradi-
tional frequent batch oriented methods, an online
EM algorithm and active learning are applied to
phrase pair extraction and achieves almost compa-
rable translation performance with less computa-
tional overhead (Levenberg et al., 2010; González-
Rubio et al., 2011). However, their methods usu-
ally require numbers of hyperparameters, such as
mini-batch size, step size, or human judgment to
determine the quality of phrases, and still rely on a
heuristic phrase extraction method in each phrase
table update.

3 Phrase Pair Extraction with
Unsupervised Phrasal ITGs

Recently, phrase alignment with ITGs (Cherry
and Lin, 2007; Zhang et al., 2008; Blunsom et
al., 2008) and parameter estimation with Gibb-
s sampling (DeNero and Klein, 2008; Blunsom
and Cohn, 2010) are popular. Here, we em-
ploy a method proposed by Neubig et al. (2011),
which uses parametric Bayesian inference with the
phrasal ITGs (Wu, 1997). It can achieve com-
parable translation accuracy with a much small-
er phrase table than the traditional GIZA++ and
heuristic phrase extraction methods. It has al-
so been proved successful in adjusting the phrase
length granularity by applying character-based
SMT with more sophisticated inference (Neubig
et al., 2012).

ITG is a synchronous grammar formalism
which analyzes bilingual text by introducing in-
verted rules, and each ITG derivation corresponds
to the alignment of a sentence pair (Wu, 1997).
Translation probabilities of ITG phrasal align-

803



ments can be estimated in polynomial time by s-
lightly limiting word reordering (DeNero and K-
lein, 2008).

More formally, P
(
〈e, f〉; θx, θt

)
are the proba-

bility of phrase pairs 〈e, f〉, which is parameter-
ized by a phrase pair distribution θt and a symbol
distribution θx. θx is a Dirichlet prior, and θt is es-
timated with the Pitman-Yor process (Pitman and
Yor, 1997; Teh, 2006), which is expressed as

θt ∼ PY
(
d, s, Pdac

)
(1)

where d is the discount parameter, s is the strength
parameter, and , and Pdac is a prior probability
which acts as a fallback probability when a phrase
pair is not in the model.

Under this model, the probability for a phrase
pair found in a bilingual corpus 〈E,F 〉 can be rep-
resented by the following equation using the Chi-
nese restaurant process (Teh, 2006):

P
(
〈ei, fi〉; 〈E,F 〉

)
=

1

C + s
(ci − d× ti)+

1

C + s
(s+ d× T )× Pdac(〈ei, fi〉) (2)

where

1. ci and ti are the customer and table count of
the ith phrase pair 〈ei, fi〉 found in a bilingual
corpus 〈E,F 〉;

2. C and T are the total customer and table count
in corpus 〈E,F 〉;

3. d and s are the discount and strengthen hyper-
parameters.

The prior probability Pdac is recursively defined
by breaking a longer phrase pair into two through
the recursive ITG’s generative story as follows
(Neubig et al., 2011):

1. Generate symbol x from Px(x; θx) with three
possible values: Base, REG, or INV .

2. Depending on the value of x take the following
actions.

a. If x = Base, generate a new phrase pair
directly from Pbase.

b. If x = REG, generate 〈e1, f1〉 and
〈e2, f2〉 from P

(
〈e, f〉; θx, θt

)
, and con-

catenate them into a single phrase pair
〈e1e2, f1f2〉.

Figure 1: A word alignment (a), and its hierarchi-
cal derivation (b).

c. If x = INV , follow a similar process as b,
but concatenate f1 and f2 in reverse order
〈e1e2, f2f1〉.

Note that the Pdac is recursively defined through
the binary branched P , which in turns employs
Pdac as a prior probability. Pbase is a base measure
defined as a combination of the IBM Models in t-
wo directions and the unigram language models in
both sides. Inference is carried out by a heuristic
beam search based block sampling with an effi-
cient look ahead for a faster convergence (Neubig
et al., 2012).

Compared to GIZA++ with heuristic phrase ex-
traction, the Bayesian phrasal ITG can achieve
competitive accuracy under a smaller phrase ta-
ble size. Further, the fallback model can incor-
porate phrases of all granularity by following the
ITG’s recursive definition. Figure 1 (b) illustrates
an example of the phrasal ITG derivation for word
alignment in Figure 1 (a) in which a bilingual sen-
tence pair is recursively divided into two through
the recursively defined generative story.

4 Hierarchical Phrase Table
Combination

We propose a new phrase table combination
method, in which individually learned phrase ta-
ble are hierarchically chained through a hierarchi-
cal Pitman-Yor process.

Firstly, we assume that the whole train-
ing data 〈E,F 〉 can be split into J domains,
{〈E1, F 1〉, . . . , 〈EJ , F J〉}. Then phrase pairs are

804



Figure 2: A hierarchical phrase table combination (a), and a basic unit of a Chinese restaurant process
with K tables and N customers.

extracted from each domain j (1 ≤ j ≤ J) sepa-
rately with the method introduced in Section 3. In
traditional domain adaptation approaches, phrase
pairs are extracted together with their probabili-
ties and/or frequencies so that the extracted phrase
pairs are merged uniformly or after scaling.

In this work, we extract the table counts for each
phrase pair under the Chinese restaurant process
given in Section 3. In Figure 2 (b), a CRP is illus-
trated which has K tables and N customers with
each chair representing a customer. Meanwhile
there are two parameters, discount and strength for
each domain similar to the ones in Equation (1).

Our proposed hierarchical phrase table combi-
nation can be formally expressed as following:

θ1 ∼ PY (d1, s1, P 2)
· · · · · ·
θj ∼ PY (dj , sj , P j+1)
· · · · · ·
θJ ∼ PY

(
dJ , sJ , P Jbase

)
(3)

Here the (j + 1)th layer hierarchical Pitman-Yor
process is employed as a base measure for the
jth layer hierarchical Pitman-Yor process. The
hierarchical chain is terminated by the base mea-
sure from the J th domain P Jbase. The hierarchi-
cal structure is illustrated in Figure 2 (a) in which
the solid lines implies a fall back using the ta-
ble counts from the subsequent domains, and the
dotted lines means the final fallback to the base
measure P Jbase. When we query a probability of
a phrase pair 〈e, f〉, we first query the probabil-
ity of the first layer P 1(〈e, f〉). If 〈e, f〉 is not
in the model, we will fallback to the next level of

P 2(〈e, f〉). This process continues until we reach
the Jth base measure of P J(〈e, f〉). Each fallback
can be viewed as a translation knowledge integra-
tion process between subsequent domains.

For example in Figure 2 (a), the ith phrase pair
〈ei, fi〉 appears only in the domain 1 and domain
2, so its translation probability can be calculated
by substituting Equation (3) with Equation (2):

P
(
〈ei, fi〉; 〈E,F 〉

)
=

1

C1 + s1
(c1i − d1 × t1i )

+
s1 + d1 × T 1

(C1 + s1)× (C2 + s2)(c
2
i − d2 × t2i )

+
J∏

j=1

(sj + dj × T j
Cj + sj

)
× P Jbase(〈ei, fi〉) (4)

where the superscript indicates the domain for the
corresponding counts, i.e. cji for the customer
count in the jth domain. The first term in Equa-
tion (4) is the phrase probability from the first do-
main, and the second one comes from the second
domain, but weighted by the fallback weight of the
1st domain. Since 〈ei, fi〉 does not appear in the
rest of the layers, the last term is taken from al-
l the fallback weight from the second layer to the
J th layer with the final P Jbase. All the parameter-
s θj and hyperparameters dj and sj , are obtained
by learning on the jth domain. Returning the hy-
perparameters again when cascading another do-
main may improve the performance of the combi-
nation weight, but we will leave it for future work.
The hierarchical process can be viewed as an in-
stance of adapted integration of translation knowl-
edge from each sub-domain.

805



Algorithm 1 Translation Probabilities Estima-
tion
Input: cji , t

j
i , P

j
base, C

j , T j , dj and sj

Output: The translation probabilities for each
pair

1: for all phrase pair 〈ei, fi〉 do
2: Initialize the P (〈ei, fi〉) = 0 and wi = 1
3: for all domain 〈Ej , Fj〉 such that 1 6 j 6

J − 1 do
4: if 〈ei, fi〉 ∈ 〈Ej , Fj〉 then
5: P (〈ei, fi〉) += wi × (Cji − dj ×

tji )/(C
j + sj)

6: end if
7: wi = wi × (sj + dj × T j)/(Cj + sj)
8: end for
9: P (〈ei, fi〉) += wi× (CJi −dJ × tJi + (sJ +

dJ × T J)× P Jbase(〈ei, fi〉))/(CJ + sJ)
10: end for

Our approach has several advantages. First,
each phrase pair extraction can concentrate on a s-
mall portion of domain-specific data without inter-
fering with other domains. Since no tuning stage
is involved in the hierarchical combination, we can
easily include a new phrase table from a new do-
main by simply chaining them together. Second,
phrase pair phrase extraction in each domain is
completely independent, so it is easy to parallelize
in a situation where the training data is too large
to fit into a small amount of memory. Finally, new
domains can be integrated incrementally. When
we encounter a new domain, and if a phrase pair is
completely new in terms of the model, the phrase
pair is simply appended to the current model, and
computed without the fallback probabilities, since
otherwise, the phrase pair would be boosted by the
fallback probabilities. Pitman-Yor process is also
employed in n-gram language models which are
hierarchically represented through the hierarchi-
cal Pitman-Yor process with switch priors to in-
tegrate different domains in all the levels (Wood
and Teh, 2009). Our work incrementally combines
the models from different domains by directly em-
ploying the hierarchical process through the base
measures.

5 Experiment

We evaluate the proposed approach on the
Chinese-to-English translation task with three data
sets with different scales.

Data set Corpus #sent. pairs
IWSLT HIT 52, 603

BTEC 19, 975
Domain 1 47, 993
Domain 2 30, 272

FBIS Domain 3 49, 509
Domain 4 38, 228
Domain 5 55, 913

News 221, 915
News 95, 593

LDC Magazine 98, 335
Magazine 254, 488
Finance 86, 112

Table 1: The sentence pairs used in each data set.

5.1 Experiment Setup

The first data set comes from the IWSLT2012
OLYMPICS task consisting of two training sets:
the HIT corpus, which is closely related to the Bei-
jing 2008 Olympic Games, and the BTEC corpus,
which is a multilingual speech corpus containing
tourism-related sentences. The second data set,
the FBIS corpus, is a collection of news articles
and does not have domain information itself, so a
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) tool, PLDA1,
is used to divide the whole corpus into 5 different
sub-domains according to the concatenation of the
source side and target side as a single sentence (Li-
u et al., 2011). The third data set is composed of 5
corpora2 from LDC with various domains, includ-
ing news, magazine, and finance. The details are
shown in Table 1.

In order to evaluate our approach, four phrase
pair extraction methods are performed:

1. GIZA-linear: Phase pairs are extracted in each
domain by GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) and
the ”grow-diag-final-and” method with a max-
imum length 7. The phrase tables from vari-
ous domains are linearly combined by averag-
ing the feature values.

2. Pialign-linear: Similar to GIZA-linear, but we
employed the phrasal ITG method described in
Section 3 using the pialign toolkit 3 (Neubig et

1http://code.google.com/p/plda/
2In particular, they come from LDC catalog number:

LDC2002E18, LDC2002E58, LDC2003E14, LDC2005E47,
LDC2006E26, in this order.

3http://www.phontron.com/pialign/

806



Methods
IWSLT FBIS LDC

BLEU Size BLEU Size BLEU Size
GIZA-linear 19.222 1,200,877 29.342 15,369,028 30.67 77,927,347
Pialign-linear 19.534 876,059 29.858 7,235,342 31.12 28,877,149
GIZA-batch 19.616 1,185,255 31.38 13,737,258 32.06 63,606,056
Pialign-batch 19.506 841,931 31.104 6,459,200

Pialign-adaptive 19.624 841,931 30.926 6,459,200
Hier-combin 20.32 876,059 31.29 7,235,342 32.03 28,877,149

Table 2: BLEU scores and phrase table size by alignment method and probabilities estimation method.
Pialign was run with five samples. Because of computational overhead, the baseline Pialign-batch and
Pialign-adaptive were not run on the largest data set.

al., 2011). Extracted phrase pairs are linearly
combined by averaging the feature values.

3. GIZA-batch: Instead of splitting into each do-
main, the data set is merged as a single corpus
and then a heuristic GZA-based phrase extrac-
tion is performed, similar as GIZA-linear.

4. Pialign-batch: Similar to the GIZA-batch, a s-
ingle model is estimated from a single, merged
corpus. Since pialign cannot handle large data,
we did not experiment on the largest LDC data
set.

5. Pialign-adaptive: Alignment and phrase pairs
extraction are same to Pialign-batch, while
translation probabilities are estimated by the
adaptive method with monolingual topic in-
formation (Su et al., 2012). The method es-
tablished the relationship between the out-of-
domain bilingual corpus and in-domain mono-
lingual corpora via topic distribution to esti-
mate the translation probability.

ø(ẽ|f̃) =
∑

tf

ø(ẽ, tf |f̃)

=
∑

tf

ø(ẽ|tf , f̃) · P (tf |f̃)
(5)

where ø(ẽ|tf , f̃) is the probability of translating f̃
into ẽ given the source-side topic f̃ , P (tf |f̃) is
the phrase-topic distribution of f.

The method we proposed is named Hier-
combin. It extracts phrase pairs in the same way as
the Pialign-linear. In the phrase table combination
process, the translation probability of each phrase
pair is estimated by the Hier-combin and the other
features are also linearly combined by averaging

the feature values. Pialign is used with default pa-
rameters. The parameter ’samps’ is set to 5, which
indicates 5 samples are generated for a sentence
pair.

The IWSLT data consists of roughly 2, 000 sen-
tences and 3, 000 sentences each from the HIT and
BTEC for development purposes, and the test da-
ta consists of 1, 000 sentences. For the FBIS and
LDC task, we used NIST MT 2002 and 2004 for
development and testing purposes, consisting of
878 and 1, 788 sentences respectively. We em-
ploy Moses, an open-source toolkit for our exper-
iment (Koehn et al., 2007). SRILM Toolkit (Stol-
cke, 2002) is employed to train 4-gram language
models on the Xinhua portion of Gigaword cor-
pus, while for the IWLST2012 data set, only its
training set is used. We use batch-MIRA (Cher-
ry and Foster, 2012) to tune the weight for each
feature and translation quality is evaluated by the
case-insensitive BLEU-4 metric (Papineni et al.,
2002). The BLEU scores reported in this paper
are the average of 5 independent runs of indepen-
dent batch-MIRA weight training, as suggested by
(Clark et al., 2011).

5.2 Result and Analysis

5.2.1 Performances of various extraction
methods

We carry out a series of experiments to evaluate
translation performance. The results are listed in
Table 2. Our method significantly outperforms the
baseline Pialign-linear. Except for the translation
probabilities, the phrase pairs of two methods are
exactly same, so the number of phrase pairs are
equal in the two methods. Further more, the per-
formance of the baseline Pialign-adaptive is also
higher than the baseline Pialign-linear’s and lower
than ours. This proves that the adaptive method

807



Methods Task Time(minute)
Batch Retraining 536.9

Hierarchical Parallel Extraction 122.55
Combination Integrating 1.5

Total 124.05

Table 3: Minutes used for alignment and phase
pair extraction in the FBIS data set.

with monolingual topic information is useful in
the tasks, but our approach with the hierarchical
Pitman-Yor process can estimate more accurate
translation probabilities based on all the data from
various domains.

Compared with the GIZA-batch, our approach
achieves competitive performance with a much s-
maller phrase table. The number of phase pairs
generated by our method is only 73.9%, 52.7%,
and 45.4% of the GIZA-batch’s respectively. In
the IWLST2012 data set, there is a huge difference
gap between the HIT corpus and the BTEC corpus,
and our method gains 0.814 BLEU improvement.
While the FBIS data set is artificially divided and
no clear human assigned differences among sub-
domains, our method loses 0.09 BLEU.

In the framework we proposed, phrase pairs are
extracted from each domain completely indepen-
dent of each other, so those tasks can be executed
on different machines, at different times, and of
course in parallel when we assume that the do-
mains are not incrementally added in the train-
ing data. The runtime of our approach and the
batch-based ITGs sampling method in the FBIS
data set is listed in Table 3 measured on a 2.7 GHz
E5-2680 CPU and 128 Gigabyte memory. When
comparing the hier-combin with the pialign-batch,
the BLEU scores are a little higher while the time
spent for training is much lower, almost one quar-
ter of the pialign-batch.

Even the performance of the pialign-linear is
better than the Baseline GIZA-linear’s, which
means that phrase pair extraction with hierarchi-
cal phrasal ITGs and sampling is more suitable
for domain adaptation tasks than the combination
GIZA++ and a heuristic method.

Generally, the hierarchical combination method
exploits the nature of a hierarchical Pitman-Yor
process and gains the advantage of its smoothing
effect, and our approach can incrementally gener-
ate a succinct phrase table based on all the data
from various domains with more accurate prob-

abilities. Traditional SMT phrase pair extraction
is batch-based, while our method has no obvious
shortcomings in translation accuracy, not to men-
tion efficiency.

5.2.2 Effect of Integration Order
Here, we evaluate whether our hierarchical com-
bination is sensitive to the order of the domains
when forming a hierarchical structure. Through
Equation (3), in our experiments, we chained the
domains in the order listed in Table 1, which is
in almost chronological order. Table 4 shows the
BLEU scores for the three data sets, in which the
order of combining phrase tables from each do-
main is alternated in the ascending and descending
of the similarity to the test data. The similarity be-
tween the data from each domain and the test data
is calculated using the perplexity measure with 5-
gram language model. The model learned from
the domain more similar to the test data is placed
in the front so that it can largely influence the
parameter computation with less backoff effects.
There is a big difference between the two opposite
order in IWSLT 2012 data set, in which more than
one point of decline in BLEU score when taking
the BTEC corpus as the first layer. Note that the
perplexity of BTEC was 344.589 while that of HIT
was 107.788. The result may indicate that our hi-
erarchical phrase combination method is sensitive
to the integration order when the training data is
small and there exists large gap in the similarity.
However, if most domains are similar (FBIS data
set) or if there are enough parallel sentence pairs
(NIST data set) in each domain, then the transla-
tion performances are almost similar even with the
opposite integrating orders.

IWSLT FBIS LDC
Descending 20.154 30.491 31.268
Ascending 19.066 30.388 31.254
Difference 1.088 0.103 0.014

Table 4: BLEU scores for the hierarchical model
with different integrating orders. Here Pialign was
run without multi-samples.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we present a novel hierarchical
phrase table combination method for SMT, which
can exploit more of the potential from all of da-
ta coming from various fields and generate a suc-

808



cinct phrase table with more accurate translation
probabilities. The method assumes that a com-
bined model is derived from a hierarchical Pitman-
Yor process with each prior learned separately in
each domain, and achieves BLEU scores competi-
tive with traditional batch-based ones. Meanwhile,
the framework has natural characteristics for par-
allel and incremental phrase pair extraction. The
experiment results on three different data sets in-
dicate the effectiveness of our approach.

In future work, we will also introduce incre-
mental learning for phase pair extraction inside a
domain, which means using the current translation
probabilities already obtained as the base measure
of sampling parameters for the upcoming domain.
Furthermore, we will investigate any tradeoffs be-
tween the accuracy of the probability estimation
and the coverage of phrase pairs.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank our colleagues in both
HIT and NICT for insightful discussions, and
three anonymous reviewers for many invaluable
comments and suggestions to improve our paper.
This work is supported by National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (61100093, 61173073,
61073130, 61272384), and the Key Project of the
National High Technology Research and Develop-
ment Program of China (2011AA01A207).

References
Phil Blunsom and Trevor Cohn. 2010. Inducing syn-

chronous grammars with slice sampling. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 238–241,
Los Angeles, California, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Phil Blunsom, Trevor Cohn, and Miles Osborne. 2008.
A discriminative latent variable model for statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL,
pages 200–208, Columbus, Ohio, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Thorsten Brants, Ashok C. Popat, Peng Xu, Franz J.
Och, and Jeffrey Dean. 2007. Large language
models in machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computation-
al Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL),
pages 858–867, Prague, Czech Republic, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Colin Cherry and George Foster. 2012. Batch tuning
strategies for statistical machine translation. In Pro-

ceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
427–436, Montréal, Canada, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Colin Cherry and Dekang Lin. 2007. Inversion
transduction grammar for joint phrasal translation
modeling. In Proceedings of SSST, NAACL-HLT
2007/AMTA Workshop on Syntax and Structure in
Statistical Translation, pages 17–24.

David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based
model for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’05, pages 263–
270, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Jonathan H. Clark, Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and
Noah A. Smith. 2011. Better hypothesis testing for
statistical machine translation: controlling for opti-
mizer instability. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies: short pa-
pers - Volume 2, HLT ’11, pages 176–181, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

John DeNero and Dan Klein. 2008. The complexi-
ty of phrase alignment problems. In Proceedings of
ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers, pages 25–28, Colum-
bus, Ohio, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

George Foster and Roland Kuhn. 2007. Mixture-
model adaptation for smt. In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 128–135.

Jesús González-Rubio, Daniel Ortiz-Martinez, and
Francisco Casacuberta. 2011. Fast incremental ac-
tive learning for statistical machine translation. A-
VANCES EN INTELIGENCIA ARTIFICIAL.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proc.
of HLT-NAACL, pages 45–54.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertol-
di, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
ACL ’07, pages 177–180, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Abby Levenberg and Miles Osborne. 2009. Stream-
based randomised language models for smt. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing: Volume 2-
Volume 2, pages 756–764. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

809



Abby Levenberg, Chris Callison-Burch, and Miles Os-
borne. 2010. Stream-based translation models
for statistical machine translation. In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, HLT ’10, pages 394–
402, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Abby Levenberg, Miles Osborne, and David Matthews.
2011. Multiple-stream language models for statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
177–186, Edinburgh, Scotland, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Zhiyuan Liu, Yuzhou Zhang, Edward Y Chang, and
Maosong Sun. 2011. Plda+: Parallel latent dirichlet
allocation with data placement and pipeline process-
ing. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology (TIST), 2(3):1–18.

Yajuan Lu, Jin Huang, and Qun Liu. 2007. Improving
statistical machine translation performance by train-
ing data selection and optimization. In Proceedings
of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computation-
al Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL),
pages 343–350, Prague, Czech Republic, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Graham Neubig, Taro Watanabe, Eiichiro Sumita,
Shinsuke Mori, and Tatsuya Kawahara. 2011. An
unsupervised model for joint phrase alignment and
extraction. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistic-
s: Human Language Technologies, pages 632–641,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Graham Neubig, Taro Watanabe, Shinsuke Mori, and
Tatsuya Kawahara. 2012. Machine translation with-
out words through substring alignment. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 165–174, Jeju Island, Korea, July. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systemat-
ic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The align-
ment template approach to statistical machine trans-
lation. Comput. Linguist., 30(4):417–449, Decem-
ber.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic e-
valuation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Jim Pitman and Marc Yor. 1997. The two-parameter
poisson-dirichlet distribution derived from a stable
subordinator. The Annals of Probability, 25(2):855–
900.

Holger Schwenk and Philipp Koehn. 2008. Large
and diverse language models for statistical machine
translation. In International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing, pages 661–668.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. Srilm - an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proc. of ICSLP.

Jinsong Su, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, Yidong Chen, X-
iaodong Shi, Huailin Dong, and Qun Liu. 2012.
Translation model adaptation for statistical machine
translation with monolingual topic information. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 459–468.

Yee Whye Teh. 2006. A hierarchical bayesian lan-
guage model based on pitman-yor processes. In
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
on Computational Linguistics and the 44th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 985–992. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Wei Wang, Klaus Macherey, Wolfgang Macherey,
Franz Och, and Peng Xu. 2012. Improved do-
main adaptation for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Conference of the Association
for Machine translation, Americas.

F. Wood and Y. W. Teh. 2009. A hierarchical non-
parametric Bayesian approach to statistical language
model domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics, volume 12.

Dekai Wu. 1997. Stochastic inversion transduction
grammars and bilingual parsing of parallel corpora.
Computational linguistics, 23(3):377–403.

Jia Xu, Yonggang Deng, Yuqing Gao, and Hermann
Ney. 2007. Domain dependent statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the MT Summit XI.

Hao Zhang, Chris Quirk, Robert C. Moore, and
Daniel Gildea. 2008. Bayesian learning of non-
compositional phrases with synchronous parsing.
In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 97–105,
Columbus, Ohio, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

810


