



















































Concreteness and Subjectivity as Dimensions of Lexical Meaning


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 725–731,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Concreteness and Subjectivity as Dimensions of Lexical Meaning

Felix Hill
Computer Laboratory
Cambridge University
felix.hill@cl.cam.ac.uk

Anna Korhonen
Computer Laboratory
Cambridge University

anna.korhonen@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract

We quantify the lexical subjectivity of ad-
jectives using a corpus-based method, and
show for the first time that it correlates
with noun concreteness in large corpora.
These cognitive dimensions together influ-
ence how word meanings combine, and
we exploit this fact to achieve performance
improvements on the semantic classifica-
tion of adjective-noun pairs.

1 Introduction

Concreteness, the degree to which language has
a perceptible physical referent, and subjectivity,
the extent to which linguistic meaning depends on
the perspective of the speaker, are well established
cognitive and linguistic notions. Recent results
suggest that they could also be useful knowledge
for natural language processing systems that aim
to extract and represent the meaning of language.

Insight into concreteness can help systems to
classify adjective-noun pairs according to their se-
mantics. In the non-literal expressions kill the pro-
cess or black comedy, a verb or adjective that oc-
curs with a concrete argument in literal phrases
takes an abstract argument. Turney et al. (2011)
present a supervised model that exploits this effect
to correctly classify 79% of adjective-noun pairs
as having literal or non-literal meaning.

Subjectivity analysis has already proved highly
applicable to a range of NLP applications, includ-
ing sentiment analysis, information extraction and
text categorization (Pang and Lee, 2004; Riloff
and Wiebe, 2003). For such applications, subjec-
tivity is analyzed at the phrasal or document level.
However, recent work has highlighted the applica-
tion of subjectivity analysis to lexical semantics,
for instance to the tasks of disambiguating words
according to their usage or sense (Wiebe and Mi-
halcea, 2006; Banea et al., 2014).

The importance of concreteness to NLP systems
is likely to grow with the emergence of multi-
modal semantic models (Bruni et al., 2012; Roller
and Schulte im Walde, 2013). Such models, which
learn representations from both linguistic and per-
ceptual input, outperform text-only models on a
range of evaluations. However, while multi-modal
models acquire richer representations of concrete
concepts, their ability to represent abstract con-
cepts can be weaker than text-only models (Hill et
al., 2013). A principled treatment of concreteness
is thus likely to be important if the multi-modal
approach is to prove effective on a wider range of
concepts. In a similar vein, interest in subjectiv-
ity analysis is set to grow with interest in extract-
ing sentiment and opinion from the web and social
media (Benson et al., 2011). Moreover, given that
humans seem to exploit both concreteness (Paivio,
1990) and subjectivity (Canestrelli et al., 2013)
clues when processing language, it is likely that
the same clues should benefit computational mod-
els aiming to replicate human-level performance
in this area.

In this paper, we show how concreteness and
subjectivity can be applied together to produce
performance improvements on two classification
problems: distinguishing literal and non-literal
adjective-noun pairs (Turney et al., 2011), and
classifying the modification type exhibited by
such pairs (Boleda et al., 2012). We describe an
unsupervised corpus-based method to quantify ad-
jective subjectivity, and show that it effectively
predicts the labels of a hand-coded subjectivity
lexicon. Further, we show for the first time that
adjective subjectivity correlates with noun con-
creteness in large corpora. In addition, we anal-
yse the effect of noun concreteness and adjective
subjectivity on meaning combination, illustrating
how the interaction of these dimensions enables
the accurate classification of adjective-noun pairs
according to their semantics. We conclude by dis-

725



cussing other potential applications of concrete-
ness and subjectivity to NLP.

2 Dimensions of meaning

Concreteness A large and growing body of em-
pirical evidence indicates clear differences be-
tween concrete concepts, such as donut or hot-
dog and abstract concepts, such as guilt or obesity.
Concrete words are more easily learned, remem-
bered and processed than abstract words (Paivio,
1991), while differences in brain activity (Binder
et al., 2005) and cognitive representation (Hill et
al., 2013) have also been observed. In linguistic
conctructions, concreteness appears to influence
compound and phrasal semantics (Traugott, 1985;
Bowdle and Gentner, 2005; Turney et al., 2011).
Together with the practical applications outlined in
Section 1, these facts indicate the potential value
of concreteness for models aiming to replicate hu-
man performance in language processing tasks.

While automatic methods have been proposed
for the quantification of lexical concreteness, they
each rely on dictionaries or similar hand-coded
resources (Kwong, 2008; Turney et al., 2011).
We instead extract scores from a recently released
dataset of lexical concepts rated on a 1-5 scale for
concreteness by 20 annotators in a crowdsourcing
experiment (Brysbaert et al., 2013).1

Subjectivity Subjectivity is the degree to which
language is interpretable independently of the
speaker’s perspective (Langacker, 2002). For ex-
ample, the utterance he sits across the table is
more subjective than he sits opposite Sam as its
truth depends on the speaker’s position. Language
may also be subjective because it conveys evalua-
tions or opinions (Mihalcea et al., 2007).

Computational applications of subjectivity, in-
cluding sentiment analysis and information ex-
traction, have focused largely on phrase or doc-
ument meaning.2 In contrast, here we present six
corpus-based features designed to quantify the lex-
ical subjectivity of adjectives. The features Com-
parability and Modifiability are identified as pre-
dictors of subjectivity by Wiebe (2000). The re-
mainder are motivated by corpus studies and/or
observations from the theoretical literature.3

1Available at http://crr.ugent.be/archives/1330.
2See e.g. (Wiebe and Riloff, 2011).
3Several of the features here were applied by Hill (2012),

to the task of ordering multiple-modifier strings.

Adverbiability: Quirk et al. (1985) theorizes that
subjective adjectives tend to develop derived ad-
verbial forms, whereas more objective adjectives
do not. We thus define adverbiability as the fre-
quency of derived adverbial forms relative to the
frequency of their base form, e.g.∑

hotly∑
hot+

∑
hotly

Comparability: Wiebe (2000) oberve that grad-
able are more likely to be subjective. Following
Wiebe, we note that the existence of comparative
forms for an adjective are indicative of gradabil-
ity. We thus define comparability as the frequency
of comparative or superlative forms relative to the
frequency of the base form, e.g.∑

hotter +
∑
hottest∑

hot+
∑
hotter +

∑
hottest

LeftTendency: Adamson (2000) proposes that
more subjective adjectives typically occur furthest
from the noun in multiple-modifier strings such as
(hot crossed buns). We consequently extract the
LeftTendency of our adjectives, defined as the fre-
quency of occurrence as the leftmost of two ad-
jectives as a proportion of the overall frequency of
occurrence in multiple-modifier strings.

Modifiability: Another characteristic of gradable
adjectives noted by Wiebe (2000) is that they ad-
mit degree modifiers (very/quite delicious). We
therefore extract the relative frequency of occur-
rence with one of a hand-coded list of English de-
gree modifiers.

Predicativity: Bolinger (1967) proposed that sub-
jective adjectives occur in predicative construc-
tions (the cake is sweet), rather than attribu-
tive constructions (the German capital) more fre-
quently than objective adjectives. We therefore ex-
tract the relative frequency of occurrence in such
constructions.

Non-nominality: Many adjectives also function
as nouns (sweet cake vs. (boiled sweet). Un-
like nouns, many adjectives are inherently subjec-
tive, and the number of adjectives in texts corre-
lates with human judgements of their subjectivity
(Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe, 2000). We there-
fore extract the frequency with which concepts are
tagged as adjectives relative to as nouns, on the

726



assumption that ‘pure’ adjectives are on average
more subjective than nominal-style adjectives.

Concreteness meets Subjectivity Demonstra-
ble commonalities in how different people per-
ceive the physical world suggest that concrete lan-
guage may be more objective than abstract lan-
guage (Langacker, 1997). Intuitively, adjectives
ascribing physical properties (wooden shed) are
more objective than those conveying abstract traits
(suspicious man). Indeed, in certain cases the
original, apparently objective, senses of polyse-
mous adjectives are not modifiable (very wooden
shed?), while their more abstract sense extensions
are (very wooden personality).

Motivated by these observations, in the follow-
ing sections we test two hypotheses. (1) Subjec-
tive / objective adjectives are more likely to mod-
ify abstract / concrete nouns respectively. (2) Sub-
jectivity and concreteness can predict aspects of
how adjective and noun concepts combine.

3 Analysis

In addressing (1), we extracted the 2,000 highest-
frequency nouns from the Brysbaert et al. (2013)
concreteness dataset. We denote by CONC(n)
the mean concreteness rating for noun n. For the
24,908 adjectives that occur in some adjective-
noun pair with one of these nouns in the British
National Corpus (BNC) (Leech et al., 1994), we
extracted subjectivity features from the Google
Books Corpus (Goldberg and Orwant, 2013).
Since each of the six features takes values on [0, 1],
we define the overall subjectivity of an adjective a
with feature vector sa = [sa1 . . . s

a
6] as

SUBJ(a) =
6∑

i=1

sai .

To verify the quality of our subjectivity features,
we measured their performance as predictors in a
logistic regression classifying the 3,250 adjectives
labelled as subjective or not in the Wilson et al.
(2005) lexicon.4 The combination of all features
produced an overall classifiction accuracy of 79%.
The performance of individual features as predic-
tors in isolation is shown in Figure 1 (top).

We first tested the relationship between con-
creteness and subjectivity with a correlation anal-
ysis over noun concepts. For each noun n we de-

4Available at http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/

79.1

74.2

72.8

70.1

69.4

71.2

73.7

Combined

Adverbiability

Modifiability

Predicativity

Comparability

LeftTendency

NonNominality

0 20 40 60 80
Feature Prediction Performance (% correct)

−0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

2 4 6
CONC (noun concreteness)

S
U

B
J 

(a
dj

ec
tiv

e 
su

bj
ec

tiv
ity

)
Figure 1: Top: Performance of features in
predicting subjectivity labels from the Wilson
et al. (2005) lexicon. Bottom: Concreteness-
subjectivity correlation in adj-noun pairs.

a SUBJ(a) n CONC(n)
flashy 1.98 umbrella 5
honest 1.63 flask 5
good 1.59 automobile 5
Siberian 6.9× 10−4 virtue 1.49
interglacial 6.3× 10−4 pride 1.46
Soviet 1.9× 10−4 hope 1.18

Table 1: The most and least subjective adjectives
and most and least concrete nouns in our data.

fined its subjectivity profile as the mean of the sub-
jectivity vectors of its modifying adjectives

SUBJpfl(n) =
1
|An|

∑
a∈An

sa

where the bag An contains an adjective a for each
occurrence of the pair (a, n) in the BNC. As hy-
pothesized, CONC(n) was a significant predictor
of the magnitude of the subjectivity profile (Pear-
son r = −0.421, p < 0.01). This effect is illus-
trated in Figure 1 (bottom).

To explore the relationship between concrete-
ness, subjectivity and meaning, we plotted the
20,000 highest frequency (a, n) pairs in the BNC
in the CONC-SUBJ semantic space (Figure 2,
top). In addition, to examine the effect of con-
creteness alone on adjective-noun semantics, we

727



(a, n) ∆ (a, n) ∆
white hope 4.61 mature attitude 4.05
fresh hope 4.34 injured pride 4.03
male pride 4.28 black mood 3.99
wild hope 4.06 white spirit 3.93

Table 2: The eight pairs with highest ∆ =
ExpCONC(a)− CONC(n) in our data.

defined a new adjective feature

ExpCONC(a) =
1
|Na|

∑
n∈Na

CONC(n)

where the bag Na contains noun n for each occur-
rence of the pair (a, n) in the BNC. Figure 2 (bot-
tom) illustrates the the CONC-ExpCONC space.

In both spaces, the extremities reflect particular
meaning combination types. Pairs in the bottom-
left region of the CONC-SUBJ space (objective
adjectives with abstract nouns, such as green pol-
itics) seem to exhibit a non-literal, or at least non
prototypical modification type. In contrast, for
pairs in the objective+concrete corner, the adjec-
tives appear to perform a classifying or categoriz-
ing function (baptist minister).

In the CONC-ExpCONC space, on the diag-
onal, where noun-concreteness is ‘as expected’,
pairings appear to combine literally. Away from
the diagonal, meaning composition is less pre-
dictable. In the top-left, where ExpCONC is
greater than CONC, the combinations are almost
all non-literal, as shown in Table 2.

In this section we have outlined a set of corpus
features that, taken together, enable effective ap-
proximation of adjective subjectivity. The results
of our analyses also demonstrate a clear interac-
tion between subjectivity and concreteness scores
for nouns attributed by human raters. Specifi-
cally, objective adjectives are more likely to mod-
ify concrete nouns and subjective adjectives are
more likely to modify abstract nouns. Qualita-
tive investigations further suggest the interaction
between these dimensions to be useful in the se-
mantic characterization of adjective-noun pairs, a
proposition we test formally in the next section.

4 Evaluation

We evaluate the potential of our adjective subjec-
tivity features, together with noun concreteness,
to predict adjective-noun semantics, based on two
existing classification tasks.

middle:way

mass:democracy

green:politics

hardy:soul
lyric:fantasy

soviet:attitude

public:moneypop:music

relative:peace
low:intelligence

expensive:carserious:condition

honest:man

baptist:minister
hindu:temple

delicious:food

sincere:person
dutiful:son

−1

0

1

2 4 6
CONC (noun concreteness)

S
U

B
J 

(a
dj

ec
tiv

e 
su

bj
ec

tiv
ity

)
easy:meat

naked:truth
tired:mind

chief:objective

hot:issue fresh:air
blue:sky

public:information
local:prison

future:home

expeditionary:force

regular:contact
funny:shape

unsettling:effect

diplomatic:bag

powdered:milk

salty:water

2

3

4

5

6

7

2 4 6
CONC (noun concreteness)

E
xp

C
O

N
C

 (
ad

je
ct

iv
e 

ex
pe

ct
ed

 c
on

cr
et

en
es

s)

Figure 2: Adjective-noun pairs in two semantic
spaces. Selected pairs are labelled for illustration,
italics indicate non-literal meaning combinations.

4.1 Non-literal Composition Task

To evaluate their model of lexical concreteness,
Turney et al. (2011) developed a list of 100 com-
mon adjective-noun pairs classified as either deno-
tative (used literally) or connotative (non-literal)
by five annotators. Using an identical supervised
learning procedure to Turney et al. (logistic re-
gression with 10-fold cross-validation), we test
whether our lexical representations based on sub-
jectivity and concreteness convey sufficient infor-
mation to perform the same classification.

4.2 Modification-type Classification

Boleda et al. (2012) introduce a set of 370
adjective-noun pairs grouped into modification
types by human judges. Because a red car is
both a car and red, the pair is classed as intersec-
tive, whereas dark humour, which is not literally
dark, is classed as subsective. To create a distinct
but analogous binary categorization problem to the
composition task, we filtered out pairs not unani-
mously allocated to either class. We again aim to
classify the remaining 211 intersective and 93 sub-
sective pairs with a logistic regression.

728



Feature type Composition Modification
Baseline 55.0 69.4
Concreteness 83.0 72.7
Subjectivity 64.0 70.4
Combined 85.0 75.0
Turney et al. 79.0 -

Table 3: Prediction accuracy (%) of models with
different features on the two tasks. The baseline
method allocates all test pairs to the majority class.

4.3 Results
Models were trained with concreteness features
(CONC and ExpCONC), subjectivity features
(SUBJ and SUBJpfl) and the combination of both
types (Combined). The performance of each
model is presented in Table 3, along with a base-
line score reflecting the strategy of allocating all
pairs to the largest class.

On the non-literal composition task, the con-
creteness (83.0) and combined (85.0) models out-
perform that of Turney et al. (79.0). The concrete-
ness model performance represents further confir-
mation of the link between concreteness and com-
position. The improvement of this model over
Turney et al. (2011) is perhaps to be expected,
since our model exploits the wide scope of the
new Brysbaert et al. (2013) crowdsourced data
whereas Turney et al. infer concreteness scores
from a smaller training set. Notably, our combined
model improves on the concreteness-only model,
confirming that the interaction of concreteness and
subjectivity provides additional information perti-
nent to meaning composition.

The modification-type task has no performance
benchmark since Boleda et al. (2012) do not use
their data for classification. Although all models
improve on the majority-class baseline, the com-
bined model was again most effective. Additive
improvement over the baseline in each case was
lower than for the composition task, which may
reflect the greater subtlety inherent in the sub-
sective/intersective classification. Indeed, inter-
annotator agreement for this goldstandard (Co-
hen’s κ = 0.87) was lower than for the composi-
tion task (0.95), implying a less cognitively salient
distinction.

5 Conclusion

We have shown that objective adjectives are most
likely to modify concrete nouns, and that non-

literal combinations can emerge when this princi-
ple is violated (Section 3). Indeed, the occurrence
of an adjective with a more abstract noun than
those it typically modifies is a strikingly consistent
indicator of metaphoricity (Table 2). In addition,
we showed that both concreteness and subjectivity
improve the automatic classification of adjective-
noun pairs according to compositionality or mod-
ification type (Section 4). Importantly, a classifier
with both subjectivity and concreteness features
outperforms concreteness-only classifiers, includ-
ing those proposed in previous work.

The results underline the relevance of both sub-
jectivity and concreteness to lexical and phrasal
semantics, and their application to language pro-
cessing tasks. We hypothesize that concreteness
and subjectivity are fundamental to human lan-
guage processing because language is precisely
the conveyance of information about the world
from one party to another. In decoding this sig-
nal, it is clearly informative to understand to what
extent the information refers directly to the world,
and also to what extent it reports a fact versus an
opinion. We believe these dimensions will ulti-
mately prove essential for computational systems
aiming to replicate human performance in inter-
preting language. As the results suggest, they may
be particularly important for capturing the intrica-
cies of semantic composition and thus extending
representations beyond the lexeme.

Of course, two dimensions alone are not suf-
ficient to reflect all of the subtleties of adjective
and noun semantics. For instance, our model clas-
sifies white spirit, a transparent cleaning product,
as non-literal, since the lexical concreteness score
does not allow for strong noun polysemy. Further,
it makes no allowance for wider sentential context,
which can be an important clue to modification
type in such cases.

We aim to address these limitations in future
work by integrating subjectivity and concreteness
with conventially acquired semantic representa-
tions, and, ultimately, models that integrate input
corresponding to the perceptual modalities.

6 Acknowledgements

The authors are supported by St John’s College,
Cambridge and The Royal Society.

729



References
Sylvia Adamson. 2000. A lovely little example. In

Olga Fischer, Annette Rosenbach, and Deiter Stein,
editors, Pathways of change: Grammaticalization in
English. John Benjamins.

Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2014. Sense-level subjectivity in a multilingual set-
ting. Computer Speech & Language, 28(1):7–19.

Edward Benson, Aria Haghighi, and Regina Barzilay.
2011. Event discovery in social media feeds. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies-Volume 1, pages 389–398. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Jeffrey R Binder, Chris F Westbury, Kristen A McK-
iernan, Edward T Possing, and David A Medler.
2005. Distinct brain systems for processing concrete
and abstract concepts. Journal of Cognitive Neuro-
science, 17(6):905–917.

Gemma Boleda, Eva Maria Vecchi, Miquel Cornudella,
and Louise McNally. 2012. First-order vs. higher-
order modification in distributional semantics. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
1223–1233. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Dwight Bolinger. 1967. Adjectives in english: attribu-
tion and predication. Lingua, 18:1–34.

Brian F Bowdle and Dedre Gentner. 2005. The career
of metaphor. Psychological review, 112(1):193.

Elia Bruni, Gemma Boleda, Marco Baroni, and Nam-
Khanh Tran. 2012. Distributional semantics in tech-
nicolor. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Long Papers-Volume 1, pages 136–145. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Marc Brysbaert, Amy Beth Warriner, and Victor Ku-
perman. 2013. Concreteness ratings for 40 thou-
sand generally known English word lemmas. Be-
havior research methods, pages 1–8.

Anneloes R Canestrelli, Willem M Mak, and Ted JM
Sanders. 2013. Causal connectives in discourse
processing: How differences in subjectivity are re-
flected in eye movements. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 28(9):1394–1413.

Yoav Goldberg and Jon Orwant. 2013. A dataset of
syntactic-ngrams over time from a very large cor-
pus of english books. In Second Joint Conference
on Lexical and Computational Semantics, Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 241–247.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce M Wiebe. 2000.
Effects of adjective orientation and gradability on

sentence subjectivity. In Proceedings of the 18th
conference on Computational linguistics-Volume 1,
pages 299–305. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Felix Hill, Douwe Kiela, and Anna Korhonen. 2013.
Concreteness and corpora: A theoretical and prac-
tical analysis. ACL 2013 Workshop on Cognitive
Modelling and Computational Linguistics, CMCL
2013, page 75.

Felix Hill. 2012. Beauty before age? Applying sub-
jectivity to automatic english adjective ordering. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies:
Student Research Workshop, pages 11–16. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Oi Yee Kwong. 2008. A preliminary study on the im-
pact of lexical concreteness on word sense disam-
biguation. In PACLIC, pages 235–244.

Ronald W Langacker. 1997. Consciousness, construal
and subjectivity. Language structure, discourse and
the access to consciousness. Advances in Conscious-
ness Research. John Benjamins, pages 49–57.

Ronald W Langacker. 2002. Deixis and subjectiv-
ity. In Frank Brisard, editor, Grounding: The epis-
temic footing of deixis and reference, pages 1–28.
De Gruyter.

Geoffrey Leech, Roger Garside, and Michael Bryant.
1994. Claws4: the tagging of the british national
corpus. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 622–628. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Rada Mihalcea, Carmen Banea, and Janyce Wiebe.
2007. Learning multilingual subjective language
via cross-lingual projections. In Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol-
ume 45, page 976.

Allan Paivio. 1990. Mental Representations: A Dual
Coding Approach. Oxford University Press.

Allan Paivio. 1991. Dual coding theory: Retrospect
and current status. Canadian Journal of Psychol-
ogy/Revue canadienne de psychologie, 45(3):255.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental educa-
tion: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summa-
rization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of
the 42nd annual meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, page 271. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Randolph Quirk, David Crystal, and Pearson Educa-
tion. 1985. A Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language, volume 397. Cambridge Univ
Press.

Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning extrac-
tion patterns for subjective expressions. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 conference on Empirical methods in

730



natural language processing, pages 105–112. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Stephen Roller and Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2013.
A multimodal LDA model integrating textual, cog-
nitive and visual modalities. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1146–1157, Seattle,
Washington, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Elizabeth C Traugott. 1985. On regularity in semantic
change. Journal of literary semantics, 14(3):155–
173.

Peter D Turney, Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, and Yohai
Cohen. 2011. Literal and metaphorical sense iden-
tification through concrete and abstract context. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on the Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
680–690.

Janyce Wiebe and Rada Mihalcea. 2006. Word sense
and subjectivity. In Proceedings of the 21st Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
and the 44th annual meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 1065–1072. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Janyce Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. 2011. Finding mutual
benefit between subjectivity analysis and informa-
tion extraction. Affective Computing, IEEE Trans-
actions on, 2(4):175–191.

Janyce Wiebe. 2000. Learning subjective adjectives
from corpora. In AAAI/IAAI, pages 735–740.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the con-
ference on human language technology and empiri-
cal methods in natural language processing, pages
347–354. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

731


