



















































Shallow Analysis Based Assessment of Syntactic Complexity for Automated Speech Scoring


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1305–1315,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Shallow Analysis Based Assessment of Syntactic Complexity for
Automated Speech Scoring

Suma Bhat
Beckman Institute,

University of Illinois,
Urbana, IL

spbhat2@illinois.edu

Huichao Xue
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA

hux10@cs.pitt.edu

Su-Youn Yoon
Educational Testing Service

Princeton, NJ
syoon@ets.org

Abstract

Designing measures that capture various
aspects of language ability is a central
task in the design of systems for auto-
matic scoring of spontaneous speech. In
this study, we address a key aspect of lan-
guage proficiency assessment – syntactic
complexity. We propose a novel measure
of syntactic complexity for spontaneous
speech that shows optimum empirical per-
formance on real world data in multiple
ways. First, it is both robust and reliable,
producing automatic scores that agree well
with human rating compared to the state-
of-the-art. Second, the measure makes
sense theoretically, both from algorithmic
and native language acquisition points of
view.

1 Introduction

Assessment of a speaker’s proficiency in a second
language is the main task in the domain of au-
tomatic evaluation of spontaneous speech (Zech-
ner et al., 2009). Prior studies in language ac-
quisition and second language research have con-
clusively shown that proficiency in a second lan-
guage is characterized by several factors, some of
which are, fluency in language production, pro-
nunciation accuracy, choice of vocabulary, gram-
matical sophistication and accuracy. The design of
automated scoring systems for non-native speaker
speaking proficiency is guided by these studies in
the choice of pertinent objective measures of these
key aspects of language proficiency.

The focus of this study is the design and per-
formance analysis of a measure of the syntactic
complexity of non-native English responses for
use in automatic scoring systems. The state-of-
the art automated scoring system for spontaneous
speech (Zechner et al., 2009; Higgins et al., 2011)

currently uses measures of fluency and pronuncia-
tion (acoustic aspects) to produce scores that are in
reasonable agreement with human-rated scores of
proficiency. Despite its good performance, there
is a need to extend its coverage to higher order as-
pects of language ability. Fluency and pronunci-
ation may, by themselves, already be good indi-
cators of proficiency in non-native speakers, but
from a construct validity perspective1, it is neces-
sary that an automatic assessment model measure
higher-order aspects of language proficiency. Syn-
tactic complexity is one such aspect of proficiency.
By “syntactic complexity”, we mean a learner’s
ability to use a wide range of sophisticated gram-
matical structures.

This study is different from studies that fo-
cus on capturing grammatical errors in non-native
speakers (Foster and Skehan, 1996; Iwashita et al.,
2008). Instead of focusing on grammatical errors
that are found to be highly representative of lan-
guage proficiency, our interest is in capturing the
range of forms that surface in language production
and the degree of sophistication of such forms,
collectively referred to as syntactic complexity in
(Ortega, 2003).

The choice and design of objective measures of
language proficiency is governed by two crucial
constraints:

1. Validity: a measure should show high dis-
criminative ability between various levels of
language proficiency, and the scores pro-
duced by the use of this measure should show
high agreement with human-assigned scores.

2. Robustness: a measures should be derived
automatically and should be robust to errors
in the measure generation process.

A critical impediment to the robustness con-
straint in the state-of-the-art is the multi-stage au-

1Construct validity is the degree to which a test measures
what it claims, or purports, to be measuring and an important
criterion in the development and use of assessments or tests.

1305



tomated process, where errors in the speech recog-
nition stage (the very first stage) affect subsequent
stages. Guided by studies in second language de-
velopment, we design a measure of syntactic com-
plexity that captures patterns indicative of profi-
cient and non-proficient grammatical structures by
a shallow-analysis of spoken language, as opposed
to a deep syntactic analysis, and analyze the per-
formance of the automatic scoring model with its
inclusion. We compare and contrast the proposed
measure with that found to be optimum in Yoon
and Bhat (2012).

Our primary contributions in this study are:
• We show that the measure of syntactic com-

plexity derived from a shallow-analysis of
spoken utterances satisfies the design con-
straint of high discriminative ability between
proficiency levels. In addition, including our
proposed measure of syntactic complexity in
an automatic scoring model results in a statis-
tically significant performance gain over the
state-of-the-art.
• The proposed measure, derived through a

completely automated process, satisfies the
robustness criterion reasonably well.
• In the domain of native language acquisition,

the presence or absence of a grammatical
structure indicates grammatical development.
We observe that the proposed approach ele-
gantly and effectively captures this presence-
based criterion of grammatical development,
since the feature indicative of presence or ab-
sence of a grammatical structure is optimal
from an algorithmic point of view.

2 Related Work

Speaking in a non-native language requires diverse
abilities, including fluency, pronunciation, into-
nation, grammar, vocabulary, and discourse. In-
formed by studies in second language acquisition
and language testing that regard these factors as
key determiners of spoken language proficiency,
some researchers have focused on the objective
measurement of these aspects of spoken language
in the context of automatic assessment of language
ability. Notable are studies that have focused on
assessment of fluency (Cucchiarini et al., 2000;
Cucchiarini et al., 2002), pronunciation (Witt and
Young, 1997; Witt, 1999; Franco et al., 1997;
Neumeyer et al., 2000), and intonation (Zechner
et al., 2009). The relative success of these studies

has yielded objective measures of acoustic aspects
of speaking ability, resulting in a shift in focus
to more complex aspects of assessment of gram-
mar (Bernstein et al., 2010; Chen and Yoon, 2011;
Chen and Zechner, 2011), topic development (Xie
et al., 2012), and coherence (Wang et al., 2013).

In an effort to assess grammar and usage in a
second language learning environment, numerous
studies have focused on identifying relevant quan-
titative measures. These measures have been used
to estimate proficiency levels in English as a sec-
ond language (ESL) writing with reasonable suc-
cess. Wolf-Quintero et al. (1998), Ortega (2003),
and Lu (2010) found that measures such as mean
length of T-unit2 and dependent clauses per clause
(henceforth termed as length-based measures) are
well correlated with holistic proficiency scores
suggesting that these quantitative measures can be
used as objective indices of grammatical develop-
ment.

In the context of spoken ESL, these measures
have been studied as well but the results have been
inconclusive. The measures could only broadly
discriminate between students’ proficiency levels,
rated on a scale with moderate to weak correla-
tions, and strong data dependencies on the par-
ticipant groups were observed (Halleck, 1995;
Iwashita et al., 2008; Iwashita, 2010).

With the recent interest in the area of auto-
matic assessment of speech, there is a concur-
rent need to assess the grammatical development
of ESL students automatically. Studies that ex-
plored the applicability of length-based measures
in an automated scoring system (Chen and Zech-
ner, 2011; Chen and Yoon, 2011) observed another
important drawback of these measures in that set-
ting. Length-based measures do not meet the con-
straints of the design, that, in order for measures
to be effectively incorporated in the automated
speech scoring system, they must be generated in
a fully automated manner, via a multi-stage au-
tomated process that includes speech recognition,
part of speech (POS) tagging, and parsing.

A major bottleneck in the multi-stage process
of an automated speech scoring system for second
language is the stage of automated speech recog-
nition (ASR). Automatic recognition of non-native
speakers’ spontaneous speech is a challenging task
as evidenced by the error rate of the state-of-the-

2T-units are defined as “the shortest grammatically allow-
able sentences into which writing can be split.” (Hunt, 1965)

1306



art speech recognizer. For instance, Chen and
Zechner (2011) reported a 50.5% word error rate
(WER) and Yoon and Bhat (2012) reported a 30%
WER in the recognition of ESL students’ spoken
responses. These high error rates at the recogni-
tion stage negatively affect the subsequent stages
of the speech scoring system in general, and in
particular, during a deep syntactic analysis, which
operates on a long sequence of words as its con-
text. As a result, measures of grammatical com-
plexity that are closely tied to a correct syntac-
tic analysis are rendered unreliable. Not surpris-
ingly, Chen and Zechner (2011) studied measures
of grammatical complexity via syntactic parsing
and found that a Pearson’s correlation coefficient
of 0.49 between syntactic complexity measures
(derived from manual transcriptions) and profi-
ciency scores, was drastically reduced to near non-
existence when the measures were applied to ASR
word hypotheses. This suggests that measures
that rely on deep syntactic analysis are unreliable
in current ASR-based scoring systems for sponta-
neous speech.

In order to avoid the problems encountered
with deep analysis-based measures, Yoon and
Bhat (2012) explored a shallow analysis-based ap-
proach, based on the assumption that the level of
grammar sophistication at each proficiency level
is reflected in the distribution of part-of-speech
(POS) tag bigrams. The idea of capturing dif-
ferences in POS tag distributions for classification
has been explored in several previous studies. In
the area of text-genre classification, POS tag dis-
tributions have been found to capture genre differ-
ences in text (Feldman et al., 2009; Marin et al.,
2009); in a language testing context, it has been
used in grammatical error detection and essay
scoring (Chodorow and Leacock, 2000; Tetreault
and Chodorow, 2008). We will see next what as-
pects of syntactic complexity are captured by such
a shallow-analysis.

3 Shallow-analysis approach to
measuring syntactic complexity

The measures of syntactic complexity in this ap-
proach are POS bigrams and are not obtained by a
deep analysis (syntactic parsing) of the structure of
the sentence. Hence we will refer to this approach
as ‘shallow analysis’. In a shallow-analysis ap-
proach to measuring syntactic complexity, we rely
on the distribution of POS bigrams at every profi-

ciency level to be representative of the range and
sophistication of grammatical constructions at that
level. At the outset, POS-bigrams may seem too
simplistic to represent any aspect of true syntactic
complexity. We illustrate to the contrary, that they
are indeed able to capture certain grammatical er-
rors and sophisticated constructions by means of
the following instances. Consider the two sentence
fragments below taken from actual responses (the
bigrams of interest and their associated POS tags
are bold-faced).

1. They can/MD to/TO survive . . .
2. They created the culture/NN that/WDT

now/RB is common in the US.
We notice that Example 1 is not only less gram-

matically sophisticated than Example 2 but also
has a grammatical error. The error stems from the
fact that it has a modal verb followed by the word
“to”. On the other hand, Example 2 contains a
relative clause composed of a noun introduced by
“that”. Notice how these grammatical expressions
(one erroneous and the other sophisticated) can be
detected by the POS bigrams “MD-TO” and “NN-
WDT”, respectively.

The idea that the level of syntactic complex-
ity (in terms of its range and sophistication) can
be assessed based on the distribution of POS-tags
is informed by prior studies in second language
acquisition. It has been shown that the usage of
certain grammatical constructions (such as that of
the embedded relative clause in the second sen-
tence above) are indicators of specific milestones
in grammar development (Covington et al., 2006).
In addition, studies such as Foster and Skehan
(1996) have successfully explored the utility of
frequency of grammatical errors as objective mea-
sures of grammatical development.

Based on this idea, Yoon and Bhat (2012) de-
veloped a set of features of syntactic complex-
ity based on POS sequences extracted from a
large corpus of ESL learners’ spoken responses,
grouped by human-assigned scores of proficiency
level. Unlike previous studies, it did not rely
on the occurrence of normative grammatical con-
structions. The main assumption was that each
score level is characterized by different types of
prominent grammatical structures. These repre-
sentative constructions are gathered from a collec-
tion of ESL learners’ spoken responses rated for
overall proficiency. The syntactic complexity of
a test spoken response was estimated based on its

1307



similarity to the proficiency groups in the refer-
ence corpus with respect to the score-specific con-
structions. A score was assigned to the response
based on how similar it was to the high score
group. In Section 4.1, we go over the approach
in further detail.

Our current work is inspired by the shallow
analysis-based approach of Yoon and Bhat (2012)
and operates under the same assumptions of cap-
turing the range and sophistication of grammati-
cal constructions at each score level. However,
the approaches differ in the way in which a spo-
ken response is assigned to a score group. We
first analyze the limitations of the model studied in
(Yoon and Bhat, 2012) and then describe how our
model can address those limitations. The result is
a new measure based on POS bigrams to assess
ESL learners’ mastery of syntactic complexity.

4 Models for Measuring Grammatical
Competence

We mentioned that the measure proposed in this
study is derived from assumptions similar to those
studied in (Yoon and Bhat, 2012). Accordingly,
we will summarize the previously studied model,
outline its limitations, show how our proposed
measure addresses those limitations and compare
the two measures for the task of automatic scoring
of speech.

4.1 Vector-Space Model based approach

Yoon and Bhat (2012) explored an approach in-
spired by information retrieval. They treat the con-
catenated collection of responses from a particular
score-class as a ‘super’ document. Then, regard-
ing POS bigrams as terms, they construct POS-
based vector space models for each score-class
(there are four score classes denoting levels of pro-
ficiency as will be explained in Section 5.2), thus
yielding four score-specific vector-space models
(VSMs). The terms of the VSM are weighted by
the term frequency-inverse document frequency
(tf -idf ) weighting scheme (Salton et al., 1975).
The intuition behind the approach is that responses
in the same proficiency level often share similar
grammar and usage patterns. The similarity be-
tween a test response and a score-specific vector is
then calculated by a cosine similarity metric. Al-
though a total of 4 cosine similarity scores (one
per score group) were generated, only cos4from
among the four similarity scores, and cosmax,

were selected as features.
• cos4: the cosine similarity score between the

test response and the vector of POS bigrams
for the highest score class (level 4); and,
• cosmax: the score level of the VSM with

which the given response shows maximum
similarity.

Of these, cos4was selected based on its empir-
ical performance (it showed the strongest corre-
lation with human-assigned scores of proficiency
among the distance-based measures). In addition,
an intuitive justification for the choice is that the
score-4 vector is a grammatical “norm” represent-
ing the average grammar usage distribution of the
most proficient ESL students. The measure of syn-
tactic complexity of a response, cos4, is its simi-
larity to the highest score class.

The study found that the measures showed rea-
sonable discriminative ability across proficiency
levels. Despite its encouraging empirical perfor-
mance, the VSM method of capturing grammati-
cal sophistication has the following limitations.

First, the VSM-based method is likely to over-
estimate the contribution of the POS bigrams
when highly correlated bigrams occur as terms in
the VSM. Consider the presence of a grammar pat-
tern represented by more than one POS bigram.
For example, both “NN-WDT” and “WDT-RB” in
Sentence 2 reflect the learner’s usage of a relative
clause. However, we note that the two bigrams are
correlated and including them both results in an
over-estimation of their contribution. The VSM
set-up has no mechanism to handle correlated fea-
tures.

Second, the tf -idf weighting scheme for rela-
tively rare POS bigrams does not adequately cap-
ture their underlying distribution with respect to
score groups. Grammatical expressions that occur
frequently in one score level but rarely in other
levels can be assumed to be characteristic of a
specific score level. Therefore, the more uneven
the distribution of a grammatical expression across
score classes, the more important that grammatical
expression should be as an indicator of a particular
score class. However, the simple idf scheme can-
not capture this uneven distribution. A pattern that
occurs rarely but uniformly across different score
groups can get the same weight as a pattern which
is unevenly distributed to one score group. Mar-
tineau and Finin (2009) observed this weakness of
the tf -idf weighting in the domain of sentiment

1308



analysis. When using tf -idf weighting to extract
words that were strongly associated with positive
sentiment in a movie review corpus (they consid-
ered each review as a document and a word as a
term), it was found that a substantial proportion
of words with the highest tf -idf were rare words
(e.g., proper nouns) which were not directly asso-
ciated with the sentiment.

We propose to address these important limita-
tions of the VSM approach by the use of a method
that accounts for each of the deficiencies. This is
done by resorting to a maximum entropy model
based approach, to which we turn next.

4.2 Maximum Entropy-Based model

In order to address the limitations discussed in 4.1,
we propose a classification-based approach. Tak-
ing an approach different from previous studies,
we formulate the task of assigning a score of syn-
tactic complexity to a spoken response as a classi-
fication problem: given a spoken response, assign
the response to a proficiency class. A classifier is
trained in an inductive fashion, using a large cor-
pus of learner responses that is divided into pro-
ficiency scores as the training data and then used
to test data that is similar to the training data. A
distinguishing feature of the current study is that
the measure is based on a comparison of charac-
teristics of the test response to models trained on
large amounts of data from each score point, as op-
posed to measures that are simply characteristics
of the responses themselves (which is how mea-
sures have been considered in prior studies).

The inductive classifier we use here is the
maximum-entropy model (MaxEnt) which has
been used to solve several statistical natural lan-
guage processing problems with much success
(Berger et al., 1996; Borthwick et al., 1998; Borth-
wick, 1999; Pang et al., 2002; Klein et al., 2003;
Rosenfeld, 2005). The productive feature en-
gineering aspects of incorporating features into
the discriminative MaxEnt classifier motivate the
model choice for the problem at hand. In partic-
ular, the ability of the MaxEnt model’s estimation
routine to handle overlapping (correlated) features
makes it directly applicable to address the first lim-
itation of the VSM model. The second limitation,
related to the ineffective weighting of terms via
the the tf -idf scheme, seems to be addressed by
the fact that the MaxEnt model assigns a weight
to each feature (in our case, POS bigrams) on a

per-class basis (in our case, score group), by tak-
ing every instance into consideration. Therefore,
a MaxEnt model has an advantage over the model
described in 4.1 in that it uses four different weight
schemes (one per score level) and each scheme is
optimized for each score level. This is beneficial
in situations where the features are not evenly im-
portant across all score levels.

5 Experimental Setup

Our experiments seek answers to the following
questions.

1. To what extent does a MaxEnt-score of syn-
tactic complexity discriminate between levels
of proficiency?

2. What is the effect of including the proposed
measure of syntactic complexity in the state-
of-the-art automatic scoring model?

3. How robust is the measure to errors in the var-
ious stages of automatic generation?

5.1 Tasks

In order to answer the motivating questions of the
study, we set-up two tasks. In the first task, we
compare the extent to which the VSM-based mea-
sure and the MaxEnt-based measure (outlined in
4.1 and 4.2 above) discriminate between levels of
syntactic complexity. Additionally, we compare
the performance of an automatic scoring model of
overall proficiency that includes the measures of
syntactic complexity from each of the two mod-
els being compared and analyze the gains with re-
spect to the state-of-the-art. In the second task, we
study the measures’ robustness to errors incurred
by ASR.

5.2 Data

In this study, we used a collection of responses
from an international English language assess-
ment. The assessment consisted of questions to
which speakers were prompted to provide sponta-
neous spoken responses lasting approximately 45-
60 seconds per question. Test takers read and/or
listened to stimulus materials and then responded
to questions based on the stimuli. All questions so-
licited spontaneous, unconstrained natural speech.

A small portion of the available data with inad-
equate audio quality and lack of student response
was excluded from the study. The remaining re-
sponses were partitioned into two datasets: the
ASR set and the scoring model training/test (SM)

1309



set. The ASR set, with 47,227 responses, was
used for ASR training and POS similarity model
training. The SM set, with 2,950 responses, was
used for feature evaluation and automated scoring
model evaluation. There was no overlap in speak-
ers between the ASR set and the SM set.

Each response was rated for overall proficiency
by trained human scorers using a 4-point scoring
scale, where 1 indicates low speaking proficiency
and 4 indicated high speaking proficiency. The
distribution of proficiency scores, along with other
details of the data sets, are presented in Table 1.

As seen in Table 1, there is a strong bias towards
the middle scores (score 2 and 3) with approxi-
mately 84-85% of the responses belonging to these
two score levels. Although the skewed distribution
limits the number of score-specific instances for
the highest and lowest scores available for model
training, we used the data without modifying the
distribution since it is representative of responses
in a large-scale language assessment scenario.

Human raters’ extent of agreement in the sub-
jective task of rating responses for language pro-
ficiency constrains the extent to which we can ex-
pect a machine’s score to agree with that of hu-
mans. An estimate of the extent to which human
raters agree on the subjective task of proficiency
assessment, is obtained by two raters scoring ap-
proximately 5% of data (2,388 responses from
ASR set and 140 responses from SM set). Pear-
son correlation r between the scores assigned by
the two raters was 0.62 in ASR set and 0.58 in SM
set. This level of agreement will guide the evalua-
tion of the human-machine agreement on scores.

5.3 Stages of Automatic Grammatical
Competence Assessment

Here we outline the multiple stages involved in the
automatic syntactic complexity assessment. The
first stage, ASR, yields an automatic transcription,
which is followed by the POS tagging stage. Sub-
sequently, the feature extraction stage (a VSM or
a MaxEnt model as the case may be) generates the
syntactic complexity feature which is then incor-
porated in a multiple linear regression model to
generate a score.

The steps for automatic assessment of overall
proficiency follow an analogous process (either in-
cluding the POS tagger or not), depending on the
objective measure being evaluated. The various
objective measures are then combined in the mul-

tiple regression scoring model to generate an over-
all score of proficiency.

5.3.1 Automatic Speech Recognizer
An HMM recognizer was trained using ASR set
(approximately 733 hours of non-native speech
collected from 7,872 speakers). A gender inde-
pendent triphone acoustic model and combination
of bigram, trigram, and four-gram language mod-
els were used. A word error rate (WER) of 31%
on the SM dataset was observed.

5.3.2 POS tagger
POS tags were generated using the POS tagger
implemented in the Open-NLP toolkit3. It was
trained on the Switchboard (SWBD) corpus. This
POS tagger was trained on about 528K word/tag
pairs. A combination of 36 tags from the Penn
Treebank tag set and 6 tags generated for spoken
languages were used in the tagger.

The tagger achieved a tagging accuracy of
96.3% on a Switchboard evaluation set composed
of 379K words, suggesting high accuracy of the
tagger. However, due to substantial amount of
speech recognition errors in our data, the POS
error rate (resulting from the combined errors of
ASR and automated POS tagger) is expected to be
higher.

5.3.3 VSM-based Model
We used the ASR data set to train a POS-bigram
VSM for the highest score class and generated
cos4 and cosmax reported in Yoon and Bhat
(2012), for the SM data set as outlined in Sec-
tion 4.1.

5.3.4 Maximum Entropy Model Classifier
The input to the classifier is a set of POS bi-
grams (1366 bigrams in all) obtained from the
POS-tagged output of the data. We considered
binary-valued features (whether a POS bigram oc-
curred or not), occurrence frequency, and relative
frequency as input for the purpose of experimen-
tation. We used the maximum entropy classifier
implementation in the MaxEnt toolkit4. The clas-
sifier was trained using the LBFGS algorithm for
parameter estimation and used equal-scale gaus-
sian priors for smoothing. The results that fol-
low are based on MaxEnt classifier’s parameter
settings initialized to zero. Since a preliminary

3http://opennlp.apache.org
4http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/

lzhang10/maxent_toolkit.html.

1310



Data set No. of No. of Score Score distribution
responses speakers Mean SD 1 2 3 4

ASR 47,227 7,872 2.67 0.73 1,953 16,834 23,106 5,334
4% 36% 49% 11%

SM 2,950 500 2.61 0.74 166 1,103 1,385 296
6% 37% 47% 10%

Table 1: Data size and score distribution

analysis of the effect of varying the feature (bi-
nary or frequency) revealed that the binary-valued
feature was optimal (in terms of yielding the best
agreement between human and machine scores),
we only report our results for this case. The ASR
data set was used to train the MaxEnt classifier and
the features generated from the SM data set were
used for evaluation.

One straightforward way of using the maximum
entropy classifier’s prediction for our case is to
directly use its predicted score-level – 1, 2, 3 or
4. However, this forces the classifier to make a
coarse-grained choice and may over-penalize the
classifier’s scoring errors. To illustrate this, con-
sider a scenario where the classifier assigns two
responses A and B to score level 2 (based on the
maximum a posteriori condition). Suppose that,
for response A, the score class with the second
highest probability corresponds to score level 1
and that, for response B, it corresponds to score
level 3. It is apparent that the classifier has an
overall tendency to assign a higher score to B, but
looking at its top preference alone (2 for both re-
sponses), masks this tendency.

We thus capture the classifier’s finer-grained
scoring tendency by calculating the expected value
of the classifier output. For a given response, the
MaxEnt classifier calculates the conditional prob-
ability of a score-class given the response, in turn
yielding conditional probabilities of each score
group given the observation – pi for score group
i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. In our case, we consider the pre-
dicted score of syntactic complexity to be the ex-
pected value of the class label given the observa-
tion as, mescore = 1×p1+2×p2+3×p3+4×p4.
This permits us to better represent the score as-
signed by the MaxEnt classifier as a relative pref-
erence over score assignments.

5.3.5 Automatic Scoring System
We consider a multiple regression automatic scor-
ing model as studied in Zechner et al. (2009; Chen
and Zechner (2011; Higgins et al. (2011). In its

state-of-the-art set-up, the following model uses
the features – HMM acoustic model score (global
normalized), speaking rate, word types per sec-
ond, average chunk length in words and language
model score (global normalized). We use these
features by themselves (Base), and also in con-
junction with the VSM-based feature (cva4) and
the MaxEnt-based feature (mescore).

5.4 Evaluation Metric

We evaluate the measures using the metrics cho-
sen in previous studies (Zechner et al., 2009; Chen
and Zechner, 2011; Yoon and Bhat, 2012). A
measure’s utility has been evaluated according to
its ability to discriminate between levels of pro-
ficiency assigned by human raters. This is done
by considering the Pearson correlation coefficient
between the feature and the human scores. In an
ideal situation, we would have compared machine
score with scores of grammatical skill assigned by
human raters. In our case, however, with only
access to the overall proficiency scores, we use
scores of language proficiency as those of gram-
matical skill.

A criterion for evaluating the performance of
the scoring model is the extent to which the au-
tomatic scores of overall proficiency agree with
the human scores. As in prior studies, here too
the level of agreement is evaluated by means of
the weighted kappa measure as well as unrounded
and rounded Pearson’s correlations between ma-
chine and human scores (since the output of the re-
gression model can either be rounded or regarded
as is). The feature that maximizes this degree of
agreement will be preferred.

6 Experimental Results

First, we compare the discriminative ability of
measures of syntactic complexity (VSM-model
based measure with that of the MaxEnt-based
measure) across proficiency levels. Table 2 sum-
marizes our experimental results for this task. We

1311



Features Manual Transcriptions ASR
mescore 0.57 0.52

cos4 0.48 0.43
cosmax - 0.31

Table 2: Pearson correlation coefficients between measures and holistic proficiency scores. All values
are significant at level 0.01. Only the measures cos4 and mescore were compared for robustness using
manual and ASR transcriptions.

notice that of the measures compared, mescore
shows the highest correlation with scores of syn-
tactic complexity. The correlation was approxi-
mately 0.1 higher in absolute value than that of
cos4, which was the best performing feature in the
VSM-based model and the difference is statisti-
cally significant.

Seeking to study the robustness of the mea-
sures derived using a shallow analysis, we next
compare the two measures studied here, with re-
spect to the impact of speech recognition errors on
their correlation with scores of syntactic complex-
ity. Towards this end, we compare mescore and
cos4when POS bigrams are extracted from man-
ual transcriptions (ideal ASR) and ASR transcrip-
tions.

In Table 2, noticing that the correlations de-
crease going along a row, we can say that the er-
rors in the ASR system caused both mescore and
cos4to under-perform. However, the performance
drop (around 0.05) resulting from a shallow anal-
ysis is relatively small compared to the drop ob-
served while employing a deep syntactic analysis.
Chen and Zechner (2011) found that while using
measures of syntactic complexity obtained from
transcriptions, errors in ASR transcripts caused
over 0.40 drop in correlation from that found with
manual transcriptions5. This comparison suggests
that the current POS-based shallow analysis ap-
proach is more robust to ASR errors compared to
a syntactic analysis-based approach.

The effect of the measure of syntactic complex-
ity is best studied by including it in an automatic
scoring model of overall proficiency. We com-
pare the performance gains over the state-of-the-
art with the inclusion of additional features (VSM-
based and MaxEnt-based, in turn). Table 3 shows
the system performance with different grammar
sophistication measures. The results reported are
averaged over a 5-fold cross validation of the mul-
tiple regression model, where 80% of the SM data

5Due to differences in the dataset and ASR system, a di-
rect comparison between the current study and the cited prior
study was not possible.

set is used to train the model and the evaluation is
done using 20% of the data in every fold.

As seen in Table 3, using the proposed measure,
mescore, leads to an improved agreement be-
tween human and machine scores of proficiency.
Comparing the unrounded correlation results in
Table 3 we notice that the model Base+mescore
shows the highest correlation of predicted scores
with human scores. In addition, we test the sig-
nificance of the difference between two depen-
dent correlations using Steiger’s Z-test (via the
paired.r function in the R statistical package
(Revelle, 2012)). We note that the performance
gain of Base+mescore over Base as well as over
Base + cos4 is statistically significant at level =
0.01. The performance gain of Base+cos4 over
Base, however, is not statistically significant at
level = 0.01. Thus, the inclusion of the MaxEnt-
based measure of syntactic complexity results in
improved agreement between machine and hu-
man scores compared to the state-of-the-art model
(here, Base).

7 Discussions

We now discuss some of the observations and re-
sults of our study with respect to the following
items.

Improved performance: We sought to verify
empirically that the MaxEnt model really outper-
forms the VSM in the case of correlated POS
bigrams. To see this, we separate the test set
into three subsets A, B,C. Set A contains re-
sponses where MaxEnt outperforms VSM; set B
contains responses where VSM outperforms Max-
Ent; set C contains responses where their predic-
tions are comparable. For each group of responses
s ∈ {A, B,C}, we calculate the percentage of re-
sponses Ps where two highly correlated POS bi-
grams occur6. We found that the percentages fol-
low the order: PA = 12.93% > PC = 7.29% >

6We consider two POS bigrams to be highly correlated,
when the their pointwise-mutual information is higher than
4.

1312



Evaluation method Base Base+cos4 Base+mescore
Weighted kappa 0.503 0.524 0.546

Correlation (unrounded) 0.548 0.562 0.592
Correlation (rounded) 0.482 0.492 0.519

Table 3: Comparison of scoring model performances using features of syntactic complexity studied in
this paper along with those available in the state-of-the-art. Here, Base is the scoring model without the
measures of syntactic complexity. All correlations are significant at level 0.01.

PB = 4.41%. This suggests that when correlated
POS bigrams occur, MaxEnt is more likely to pro-
vide better score predictions than VSM does.

Feature design: In the case of MaxEnt,
the observation that binary-valued features (pres-
ence/absence of POS bigrams) yield better perfor-
mance than features indicative of the occurrence
frequency of the bigram has interesting implica-
tions. This was also observed in Pang et al. (2002)
where it was interpreted to mean that overall senti-
ment is indicated by the presence/absence of key-
words, as opposed to topic of a text, which is in-
dicated by the repeated use of the same or simi-
lar terms. An analogous explanation is applicable
here.

At first glance, the use of the presence/absence
of grammatical structures may raise concerns
about a potential loss of information (e.g. the dis-
tinction between an expression that is used once
and another that is used multiple times is lost).
However, when considered in the context of lan-
guage acquisition studies, this approach seems to
be justified. Studies in native language acquisi-
tion, have considered multiple grammatical devel-
opmental indices that represent the grammatical
levels reached at various stages of language acqui-
sition. For instance, Covington et al. (2006) pro-
posed the revised D-level scale which was origi-
nally studied by Rosenberg and Abbeduto (1987).
The D-Level Scale categorizes grammatical de-
velopment into 8 levels according to the pres-
ence of a set of diverse grammatical expressions
varying in difficulty (for example, level 0 con-
sists of simple sentences, while level 5 consists
of sentences joined by a subordinating conjunc-
tion). Similarly, Scarborough (1990) proposed
the Index of Productive Syntax (IPSyn), accord-
ing to which, the presence of particular grammati-
cal structures, from a list of 60 structures (ranging
from simple ones such as including only subjects
and verbs, to more complex constructions such as
conjoined sentences) is evidence of language ac-
quisition milestones.

Despite the functional differences between the
indices, there is a fundamental operational simi-
larity - that they both use the presence or absence
of grammatical structures, rather than their oc-
currence count, as evidence of acquisition of cer-
tain grammatical levels. The assumption that a
presence-based view of grammatical level acquisi-
tion is also applicable to second language assess-
ment helps validate our observation that binary-
valued features yield a better performance when
compared with frequency-valued features.

Generalizability: The training and test sets
used in this study had similar underlying distribu-
tions – they both sought unconstrained responses
to a set of items with some minor differences in
item type. Looking ahead, an important question
is the extent to which our measure is sensitive to a
mismatch between training and test data.

8 Conclusions

Seeking alternatives to measuring syntactic com-
plexity of spoken responses via syntactic parsers,
we study a shallow-analysis based approach for
use in automatic scoring.

Empirically, we show that the proposed mea-
sure, based on a maximum entropy classification,
satisfied the constraints of the design of an objec-
tive measure to a high degree. In addition, the pro-
posed measure was found to be relatively robust to
ASR errors. The measure outperformed a related
measure of syntactic complexity (also based on
shallow-analysis of spoken response) previously
found to be well-suited for automatic scoring. In-
cluding the measure of syntactic complexity in
an automatic scoring model resulted in statisti-
cally significant performance gains over the state-
of-the-art. We also make an interesting observa-
tion that the impressionistic evaluation of syntactic
complexity is better approximated by the presence
or absence of grammar and usage patterns (and
not by their frequency of occurrence), an idea sup-
ported by studies in native language acquisition.

1313



References

Adam L Berger, Vincent J Della Pietra, and Stephen
A Della Pietra. 1996. A maximum entropy ap-
proach to natural language processing. Computa-
tional linguistics, 22(1):39–71.

Jared Bernstein, Jian Cheng, and Masanori Suzuki.
2010. Fluency and structural complexity as predic-
tors of L2 oral proficiency. In Proceedings of Inter-
Speech, pages 1241–1244.

Andrew Borthwick, John Sterling, Eugene Agichtein,
and Ralph Grishman. 1998. Exploiting diverse
knowledge sources via maximum entropy in named
entity recognition. In Proc. of the Sixth Workshop
on Very Large Corpora.

Andrew Borthwick. 1999. A maximum entropy ap-
proach to named entity recognition. Ph.D. thesis,
New York University.

Lei Chen and Su-Youn Yoon. 2011. Detecting
structural events for assessing non-native speech.
In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications,
IUNLPBEA ’11, pages 38–45, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Miao Chen and Klaus Zechner. 2011. Computing
and evaluating syntactic complexity features for au-
tomated scoring of spontaneous non-native speech.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 722–
731.

Martin Chodorow and Claudia Leacock. 2000. An un-
supervised method for detecting grammatical errors.
In Proceedings of NAACL, pages 140–147.

Michael A Covington, Congzhou He, Cati Brown, Lo-
rina Naci, and John Brown. 2006. How complex
is that sentence? a proposed revision of the rosen-
berg and abbeduto d-level scale. ReVision. Wash-
ington, DC http://www. ai. uga. edu/caspr/2006-01-
Covington. pdf.(Accessed May 10, 2010.).

Catia Cucchiarini, Helmer Strik, and Lou Boves. 2000.
Quantitative assessment of second language learn-
ers’ fluency by means of automatic speech recogni-
tion technology. The Journal of the Acoustical Soci-
ety of America, 107(2):989–999.

Catia Cucchiarini, Helmer Strik, and Lou Boves. 2002.
Quantitative assessment of second language learn-
ers’ fluency: comparisons between read and sponta-
neous speech. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 111(6):2862–2873.

Sergey Feldman, M.A. Marin, Mari Ostendorf, and
Maya R. Gupta. 2009. Part-of-speech histograms
for genre classification of text. In Proceedings of
ICASSP, pages 4781 –4784.

Pauline Foster and Peter Skehan. 1996. The influence
of planning and task type on second language per-
formance. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
18:299–324.

Horacio Franco, Leonardo Neumeyer, Yoon Kim, and
Orith Ronen. 1997. Automatic pronunciation scor-
ing for language instruction. In Proceedings of
ICASSP, pages 1471–1474.

Gene B Halleck. 1995. Assessing oral proficiency: a
comparison of holistic and objective measures. The
Modern Language Journal, 79(2):223–234.

Derrick Higgins, Xiaoming Xi, Klaus Zechner, and
David Williamson. 2011. A three-stage approach
to the automated scoring of spontaneous spoken re-
sponses. Computer Speech & Language, 25(2):282–
306.

Kellogg W Hunt. 1965. Grammatical structures writ-
ten at three grade levels. ncte research report no. 3.

Noriko Iwashita, Annie Brown, Tim McNamara, and
Sally O’Hagan. 2008. Assessed levels of second
language speaking proficiency: How distinct? Ap-
plied Linguistics, 29(1):24–49.

Noriko Iwashita. 2010. Features of oral proficiency in
task performance by efl and jfl learners. In Selected
proceedings of the Second Language Research Fo-
rum, pages 32–47.

Dan Klein, Joseph Smarr, Huy Nguyen, and Christo-
pher D Manning. 2003. Named entity recognition
with character-level models. In Proceedings of the
seventh conference on Natural language learning at
HLT-NAACL 2003-Volume 4, pages 180–183. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Xiaofei Lu. 2010. Automatic analysis of syntac-
tic complexity in second language writing. Inter-
national Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 15(4):474–
496.

M.A Marin, Sergey Feldman, Mari Ostendorf, and
Maya R. Gupta. 2009. Filtering web text to match
target genres. In Proceedings of ICASSP, pages
3705–3708.

Justin Martineau and Tim Finin. 2009. Delta tfidf: An
improved feature space for sentiment analysis. In
ICWSM.

Leonardo Neumeyer, Horacio Franco, Vassilios Di-
galakis, and Mitchel Weintraub. 2000. Automatic
scoring of pronunciation quality. Speech Communi-
cation, pages 88–93.

Lourdes Ortega. 2003. Syntactic complexity measures
and their relationship to L2 proficiency: A research
synthesis of college–level L2 writing. Applied Lin-
guistics, 24(4):492–518.

1314



Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
ACL-02 conference on Empirical methods in natural
language processing-Volume 10, pages 79–86. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

William Revelle, 2012. psych: Procedures for Psycho-
logical, Psychometric, and Personality Research.
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois. R
package version 1.2.1.

Sheldon Rosenberg and Leonard Abbeduto. 1987. In-
dicators of linguistic competence in the peer group
conversational behavior of mildly retarded adults.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 8:19–32.

Ronald Rosenfeld. 2005. Adaptive statistical language
modeling: a maximum entropy approach. Ph.D. the-
sis, IBM.

Gerard Salton, Anita Wong, and Chung-Shu Yang.
1975. A vector space model for automatic indexing.
Communications of the ACM, 18(11):613–620.

Hollis S Scarborough. 1990. Index of productive syn-
tax. Applied Psycholinguistics, 11(1):1–22.

Joel R. Tetreault and Martin Chodorow. 2008. The
ups and downs of preposition error detection in ESL
writing. In Proceedings of COLING, pages 865–
872.

Xinhao Wang, Keelan Evanini, and Klaus Zechner.
2013. Coherence modeling for the automated as-
sessment of spontaneous spoken responses. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 814–819.

Silke Witt and Steve Young. 1997. Performance
measures for phone-level pronunciation teaching in
CALL. In Proceedings of STiLL, pages 99–102.

Silke Witt. 1999. Use of the speech recognition in
computer-assisted language learning. Unpublished
dissertation, Cambridge University Engineering de-
partment, Cambridge, U.K.

Kate Wolf-Quintero, Shunji Inagaki, and Hae-Young
Kim. 1998. Second language development in writ-
ing: Measures of fluency, accuracy, and complexity.
Technical Report 17, Second Language Teaching
and curriculum Center, The University of Hawai’i,
Honolulu, HI.

Shasha Xie, Keelan Evanini, and Klaus Zechner. 2012.
Exploring content features for automated speech
scoring. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT, pages
103–111.

Su-Youn Yoon and Suma Bhat. 2012. Assessment of
esl learners’ syntactic competence based on similar-
ity measures. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 600–608. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Klaus Zechner, Derrick Higgins, Xiaoming Xi, and
David M Williamson. 2009. Automatic scoring of
non-native spontaneous speech in tests of spoken en-
glish. Speech Communication, 51(10):883–895.

1315


