



















































Context-aware Learning for Sentence-level Sentiment Analysis with Posterior Regularization


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 325–335,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Context-aware Learning for Sentence-level Sentiment Analysis
with Posterior Regularization

Bishan Yang
Department of Computer Science

Cornell University
bishan@cs.cornell.edu

Claire Cardie
Department of Computer Science

Cornell University
cardie@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

This paper proposes a novel context-aware
method for analyzing sentiment at the
level of individual sentences. Most ex-
isting machine learning approaches suf-
fer from limitations in the modeling of
complex linguistic structures across sen-
tences and often fail to capture non-
local contextual cues that are important
for sentiment interpretation. In contrast,
our approach allows structured modeling
of sentiment while taking into account
both local and global contextual infor-
mation. Specifically, we encode intu-
itive lexical and discourse knowledge as
expressive constraints and integrate them
into the learning of conditional random
field models via posterior regularization.
The context-aware constraints provide ad-
ditional power to the CRF model and can
guide semi-supervised learning when la-
beled data is limited. Experiments on
standard product review datasets show that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-
art methods in both the supervised and
semi-supervised settings.

1 Introduction

The ability to extract sentiment from text is cru-
cial for many opinion-mining applications such as
opinion summarization, opinion question answer-
ing and opinion retrieval. Accordingly, extract-
ing sentiment at the fine-grained level (e.g. at the
sentence- or phrase-level) has received increasing
attention recently due to its challenging nature and
its importance in supporting these opinion analysis
tasks (Pang and Lee, 2008).

In this paper, we focus on the task of sentence-
level sentiment classification in online reviews.
Typical approaches to the task employ supervised

machine learning algorithms with rich features
and take into account the interactions between
words to handle compositional effects such as po-
larity reversal (e.g. (Nakagawa et al., 2010;
Socher et al., 2013)). Still, their methods can en-
counter difficulty when the sentence on its own
does not contain strong enough sentiment signals
(due to the lack of statistical evidence or the re-
quirement for background knowledge). Consider
the following review for example,

1. Hearing the music in real stereo is a true reve-

lation. 2. You can feel that the music is no longer

constrained by the mono recording. 3. In fact, it

is more like the players are performing on a stage

in front of you ...

Existing feature-based classifiers may be effective
in identifying the positive sentiment of the first
sentence due to the use of the word revelation,
but they could be less effective in the last two sen-
tences due to the lack of explicit sentiment signals.
However, if we examine these sentences within the
discourse context, we can see that: the second sen-
tence expresses sentiment towards the same aspect
– the music – as the first sentence; the third sen-
tence expands the second sentence with the dis-
course connective In fact. These discourse-level
relations help indicate that sentence 2 and 3 are
likely to have positive sentiment as well.

The importance of discourse for sentiment anal-
ysis has become increasingly recognized. Most
existing work considers discourse relations be-
tween adjacent sentences or clauses and incor-
porates them as constraints (Kanayama and Na-
sukawa, 2006; Zhou et al., 2011) or features in
classifiers Trivedi and Eisenstein (2013; Lazari-
dou et al. (2013). Very little work has explored
long-distance discourse relations for sentiment
analysis. Somasundaran et al. (2008) defines
coreference relations on opinion targets and ap-
plies them to constrain the polarity of sentences.

325



However, the discourse relations were obtained
from fine-grained annotations and implemented as
hard constraints on polarity.

Obtaining sentiment labels at the fine-grained
level is costly. Semi-supervised techniques have
been proposed for sentence-level sentiment classi-
fication (Täckström and McDonald, 2011a; Qu et
al., 2012). However, they rely on a large amount
of document-level sentiment labels that may not
be naturally available in many domains.

In this paper, we propose a sentence-level senti-
ment classification method that can (1) incorporate
rich discourse information at both local and global
levels; (2) encode discourse knowledge as soft
constraints during learning; (3) make use of un-
labeled data to enhance learning. Specifically, we
use the Conditional Random Field (CRF) model
as the learner for sentence-level sentiment classi-
fication, and incorporate rich discourse and lexi-
cal knowledge as soft constraints into the learn-
ing of CRF parameters via Posterior Regulariza-
tion (PR) (Ganchev et al., 2010). As a framework
for structured learning with constraints, PR has
been successfully applied to many structural NLP
tasks (Ganchev et al., 2009; Ganchev et al., 2010;
Ganchev and Das, 2013). Our work is the first to
explore PR for sentiment analysis. Unlike most
previous work, we explore a rich set of structural
constraints that cannot be naturally encoded in the
feature-label form, and show that such constraints
can improve the performance of the CRF model.

We evaluate our approach on the sentence-
level sentiment classification task using two stan-
dard product review datasets. Experimental re-
sults show that our model outperforms state-of-
the-art methods in both the supervised and semi-
supervised settings. We also show that dis-
course knowledge is highly useful for improving
sentence-level sentiment classification.

2 Related Work

There has been a large amount of work on sen-
timent analysis at various levels of granular-
ity (Pang and Lee, 2008). In this paper, we focus
on the study of sentence-level sentiment classifi-
cation. Existing machine learning approaches for
the task can be classified based on the use of two
ideas. The first idea is to exploit sentiment sig-
nals at the sentence level by learning the relevance
of sentiment and words while taking into account
the context in which they occur: Nakagawa et

al. (2010) uses tree-CRF to model word interac-
tions based on dependency tree structures; Choi
and Cardie (2008) applies compositional inference
rules to handle polarity reversal; Socher et al.
(2011) and Socher et al. (2013) compute composi-
tional vector representations for words and phrases
and use them as features in a classifier.

The second idea is to exploit sentiment signals
at the inter-sentential level. Polanyi and Zaenen
(2006) argue that discourse structure is important
in polarity classification. Various attempts have
been made to incorporate discourse relations into
sentiment analysis: Pang and Lee (2004) explored
the consistency of subjectivity between neighbor-
ing sentences; Mao and Lebanon (2007),McDon-
ald et al. (2007), and Täckström and McDonald
(2011a) developed structured learning models to
capture sentiment dependencies between adjacent
sentences; Kanayama and Nasukawa (2006) and
Zhou et al. (2011) use discourse relations to con-
strain two text segments to have either the same
polarity or opposite polarities; Trivedi and Eisen-
stein (2013) and Lazaridou et al. (2013) encode
the discourse connectors as model features in su-
pervised classifiers. Very little work has explored
long-distance discourse relations. Somasundaran
et al. (2008) define opinion target relations and ap-
ply them to constrain the polarity of text segments
annotated with target relations. Recently, Zhang
et al. (2013) explored the use of explanatory dis-
course relations as soft constraints in a Markov
Logic Network framework for extracting subjec-
tive text segments.

Leveraging both ideas, our approach exploits
sentiment signals from both intra-sentential and
inter-sentential context. It has the advantages of
utilizing rich discourse knowledge at different lev-
els of context and encoding it as soft constraints
during learning.

Our approach is also semi-supervised. Com-
pared to the existing work on semi-supervised
learning for sentence-level sentiment classification
(Täckström and McDonald, 2011a; Täckström and
McDonald, 2011b; Qu et al., 2012), our work
does not rely on a large amount of coarse-grained
(document-level) labeled data, instead, distant
supervision mainly comes from linguistically-
motivated constraints.

Our work also relates to the study of posterior
regularization (PR) (Ganchev et al., 2010). PR has
been successfully applied to many structured NLP

326



tasks such as dependency parsing, information ex-
traction and cross-lingual learning tasks (Ganchev
et al., 2009; Bellare et al., 2009; Ganchev et al.,
2010; Ganchev and Das, 2013). Most previous
work using PR mainly experiments with feature-
label constraints. In contrast, we explore a rich
set of linguistically-motivated constraints which
cannot be naturally formulated in the feature-label
form. We also show that constraints derived from
the discourse context can be highly useful for dis-
ambiguating sentence-level sentiment.

3 Approach

In this section, we present the details of our pro-
posed approach. We formulate the sentence-level
sentiment classification task as a sequence label-
ing problem. The inputs to the model are sentence-
segmented documents annotated with sentence-
level sentiment labels (positive, negative or neu-
tral) along with a set of unlabeled documents.
During prediction, the model outputs sentiment la-
bels for a sequence of sentences in the test docu-
ment. We utilize conditional random fields and use
Posterior Regularization (PR) to learn their param-
eters with a rich set of context-aware constraints.

In what follows, we first briefly describe the
framework of Posterior Regularization. Then we
introduce the context-aware constraints derived
based on intuitive discourse and lexical knowl-
edge. Finally we describe how to perform learning
and inference with these constraints.

3.1 Posterior Regularization

PR is a framework for structured learning with
constraints (Ganchev et al., 2010). In this work,
we apply PR in the context of CRFs for sentence-
level sentiment classification.

Denote x as a sequence of sentences within a
document and y as a vector of sentiment labels
associated with x. The CRF model the following
conditional probabilities:

pθ(y|x) = exp(θ · f(x,y))
Zθ(x)

where f(x,y) are the model features, θ are the
model parameters, and Zθ(x) =

∑
y exp(θ ·

f(x,y)) is a normalization constant. The objec-
tive function for a standard CRF is to maximize
the log-likelihood over a collection of labeled doc-

uments plus a regularization term:

max
θ
L(θ) = max

θ

∑
(x,y)

log pθ(y|x)− ||θ||
2
2

2δ2

PR makes the assumption that the labeled data
we have is not enough for learning good model
parameters, but we have a set of constraints on the
posterior distribution of the labels. We can define
the set of desirable posterior distrbutions as

Q = {q(Y) : Eq[φ(X,Y)] = b} (1)
where φ is a constraint function, b is a vector of
desired values of the expectations of the constraint
functions under the distribution q 1. Note that the
distribution q is defined over a collection of un-
labeled documents where the constraint functions
apply, and we assume independence between doc-
uments.

The PR objective can be written as the origi-
nal model objective penalized with a regulariza-
tion term, which minimizes the KL-divergence be-
tween the desired model posteriors and the learned
model posteriors with an L2 penalty 2 for the con-
straint violations.

max
θ
L(θ)−min

q∈Q
{KL(q(Y)||pθ(Y|X))

+ β||Eq[φ(X,Y)]− b||22}
(2)

The objective can be optimized by an EM-like
scheme that iteratively solves the minimization
problem and the maximization problem. Solving
the minimization problem is equivalent to solving
its dual since the objective is convex. The dual
problem is

arg max
λ

λ · b− logZλ(X)− 14β ||λ||
2
2 (3)

We optimize the objective function 2 using
stochastic projected gradient, and compute the
learning rate using AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2010).

3.2 Context-aware Posterior Constraints
We develop a rich set of context-aware poste-
rior constraints for sentence-level sentiment anal-
ysis by exploiting lexical and discourse knowl-
edge. Specifically, we construct the lexical con-
straints by extracting sentiment-bearing patterns

1In general, inequality constraints can also be used. We
focus on the equality constraints since we found them to ex-
press the sentiment-relevant constraints well.

2Other convex functions can be used for the penalty. We
use L2 norm because it works well in practice. β is a regular-
ization constant

327



within sentences and construct the discourse-level
constraints by extracting discourse relations that
indicate sentiment coherence or sentiment changes
both within and across sentences. Each constraint
can be formulated as equality between the expec-
tation of a constraint function value and a desired
value set by prior knowledge. The equality is not
strictly enforced (due to the regularization in the
PR objective 2). Therefore all the constraints are
applied as soft constraints. Table 1 provides in-
tuitive description and examples for all the con-
straints used in our model.

Lexical Patterns The existence of a polarity-
carrying word alone may not correctly indicate the
polarity of the sentence, as the polarity can be re-
versed by other polarity-reversing words. We ex-
tract lexical patterns that consist of polar words
and negators 3, and apply the heuristics based on
compositional semantics (Choi and Cardie, 2008)
to assign a sentiment value to each pattern.

We encode the extracted lexical patterns along
with their sentiment values as feature-label con-
straints. The constraint function can be written as

φw(x, y) =
∑
i

fw(xi, yi)

where fw(xi, yi) is a feature function which has
value 1 when sentence xi contains the lexical pat-
tern w and its sentiment label yi equals to the ex-
pected sentiment value and has value 0 otherwise.
The constraint expectation value is set to be the
prior probability of associating w with its senti-
ment value. Note that sentences with neutral senti-
ment can also contain such lexical patterns. There-
fore we allow the lexical patterns to be assigned a
neutral sentiment with a prior probability r0 (we
compute this value as the empirical probability of
neutral sentiment in the training documents). Us-
ing the polarity indicated by lexical patterns to
constrain the sentiment of sentences is quite ag-
gressive. Therefore we only consider lexical pat-
terns that are strongly discriminative (many opin-
ion words in the lexicon only indicate sentiment
with weak strength). The selected lexical patterns
include a handful of seed patterns (such as “pros”
and “cons”) and the lexical patterns that have high
precision (larger then 0.9) of predicting sentiment
in the training data.

3The polar words are identified using the MPQA lexicon
and the negators are identified using a handful of seed words
extended by the General Inquirer dictionary and WordNet as
described in (Choi and Cardie, 2008).

Discourse Connectives. Lexical patterns can
be limited in capturing contextual information
since they only look at interactions between words
within an expression. To capture context at the
clause or sentence level, we consider discourse
connectives, which are cue phrases or words that
indicate discourse relations between adjacent sen-
tences or clauses. To identify discourse connec-
tives, we apply a discourse tagger trained on the
Penn Discourse Treebank (Prasad et al., 2008) 4

to our data. Discourse connectives are tagged with
four senses: Expansion, Contingency, Compari-
son, Temporal.

Discourse connectives can operate at both intra-
sentential and inter-sentential level. For example,
the word “although” is often used to connect two
polar clauses within a sentence, while the word
“however” is often used to at the beginning of
the sentence to connect two polar sentences. It
is important to distinguish these two types of dis-
course connectives. We consider a discourse con-
nective to be intra-sentential if it has the Com-
parison sense and connects two polar clauses with
opposite polarities (determined by the lexical pat-
terns). We construct a feature-label constraint for
each intra-sentential discourse connective and set
its expected sentiment value to be neutral.

Unlike the intra-sentential discourse connec-
tives, the inter-sentential discourse connectives
can indicate sentiment transitions between sen-
tences. Intuitively, discourse connectives with
the senses of Expansion (e.g. also, for example,
furthermore) and Contingency (e.g. as a result,
hence, because) are likely to indicate sentiment
coherence; discourse connectives with the sense
of Comparison (e.g. but, however, nevertheless)
are likely to indicate sentiment changes. This in-
tuition is reasonable but it assumes the two sen-
tences connected by the discourse connective are
both polar sentences. In general, discourse con-
nectives can also be used to connect non-polar
(neutral) sentences. Thus it is hard to directly
constrain the posterior expectation for each type
of sentiment transitions using inter-sentential dis-
course connectives.

Instead, we impose constraints on the model
posteriors by reducing constraint violations. We

4http://www.cis.upenn.edu/˜epitler/
discourse.html

328



Types Description and Examples Inter-sentential

Lexical patterns
The sentence containing a polar lexical pattern w tends to have the polarity
indicated by w. Example lexical patterns are annoying, hate, amazing, not dis-
appointed, no concerns, favorite, recommend.

Discourse Connectives
(clause)

The sentence containing a discourse connective cwhich connects its two clauses
that have opposite polarities indicated by the lexical patterns tends to have neu-
tral sentiment. Example connectives are while, although, though, but.

Discourse Connectives
(sentence)

Two adjacent sentences which are connected by a discourse connective c tends
to have the same polarity if c indicates a Expansion or Contingency relation,
e.g. also, for example, in fact, because ; opposite polarities if c indicates a
Comparison relation, e.g. otherwise, nevertheless, however.

X

Coreference The sentences which contain coreferential entities appeared as targets of opinionexpressions tend to have the same polarity. X
Listing patterns A series of sentences connected via a listing tend to have the same polarity. X
Global labels The sentence-level polarity tends to be consistent with the document-level po-larity. X

Table 1: Summarization of Posterior Constraints for Sentence-level Sentiment Classification

define the following constraint function:

φc,s(x, y) =
∑
i

fc,s(xi, yi, yi−1)

where c denotes a discourse connective, s indi-
cates its sense, and fc,s is a penalty function that
takes value 1.0 when yi and yi−1 form a contradic-
tory sentiment transition, that is, yi 6=polar yi−1 if
s ∈ {Expansion,Contingency}, or yi =polar yi−1
if s = Comparison. The desired value for the con-
straint expectation is set to 0 so that the model is
encouraged to have less constraint violations.

Opinion Coreference Sentences in a discourse
can be linked by many types of coherence rela-
tions (Jurafsky et al., 2000). Coreference is one
of the commonly used relations in written text.
In this work, we explore coreference in the con-
text of sentence-level sentiment analysis. We con-
sider a set of polar sentences to be linked by the
opinion coreference relation if they contain core-
ferring opinion-related entities. For example, the
following sentences express opinions towards “the
speaker phone”, “The speaker phone” and “it” re-
spectively. As these opinion targets are corefer-
ential (referring to the same entity “the speaker
phone”), they are linked by the opinion corefer-
ence relation 5.

My favorite features are the speaker
phone and the radio. The speaker
phone is very functional. I use it in
the car, very audible even with freeway
noise.

5In general, the opinion-related entities include both the
opinion targets and the opinion holders. In this work, we
only consider the targets since we experiment with single-
author product reviews. The opinion holders can be included
in a similar way as the opinion targets.

Our coreference relations indicated by opinion
targets overlap with the same target relation intro-
duced in (Somasundaran et al., 2009). The dif-
ferences are: (1) we encode the coreference re-
lations as soft constraints during learning instead
of applying them as hard constraints during infer-
ence time; (2) our constraints can apply to both
polar and non-polar sentences; (3) our identifica-
tion of coreference relations is automatic without
any fine-grained annotations for opinion targets.

To extract coreferential opinion targets, we ap-
ply Stanford’s coreference system (Lee et al.,
2013) to extract coreferential mentions in the doc-
ument, and then apply a set of syntactic rules to
identify opinion targets from the extracted men-
tions. The syntactic rules correspond to the
shortest dependency paths between an opinion
word and an extracted mention. We consider
the 10 most frequent dependency paths in the
training data. Example dependency paths include
nsubj(opinion, mention), nobj(opinion, mention),
and amod(mention, opinion).

For sentences connected by the opinion coref-
erence relation, we expect their sentiment to be
consistent. To encode this intuition, we define the
following constraint function:

φcoref (x, y) =
∑

i,ant(i)=j,j≥0
fcoref (xi, xj , yi, yj)

where ant(i) denotes the index of the sentence
which contains an antecedent target of the target
mentioned in sentence i (the antecedent relations
over pairs of opinion targets can be constructed
using the coreference resolver), and fcoref is a
penalty function which takes value 1.0 when the
expected sentiment coherency is violated, that is,
yi 6=polar yj . Similar to the inter-sentential dis-

329



course connectives, modeling opinion coreference
via constraint violations allows the model to han-
dle neutral sentiment. The expected value of the
constraint functions is set to 0.

Listing Patterns Another type of coherence re-
lations we observe in online reviews is listing,
where a reviewer expresses his/her opinions by
listing a series of statements followed by a se-
quence of numbers. For example, “1. It’s smaller
than the ipod mini .... 2. It has a removable battery
....”. We expect sentences connected by a listing
to have consistent sentiment. We implement this
constraint in the same form as the coreference con-
straint (the antecedent assignments are constructed
from the numberings).

Global Sentiment Previous studies have
demonstrated the value of document-level sen-
timent in guiding the semi-supervised learning
of sentence-level sentiment (Täckström and
McDonald, 2011b; Qu et al., 2012). In this work,
we also take into account this information and
encode it as posterior constraints. Note that these
constraints are not necessary for our model and
can be applied when the document-level sentiment
labels are naturally available.

Based on an analysis of the Amazon review
data, we observe that sentence-level sentiment
usually doesn’t conflict with the document-level
sentiment in terms of polarity. For example, the
proportion of negative sentences in the positive
documents is very small compared to the propor-
tion of positive sentences. To encode this intuition,
we define the following constraint function:

φg(x, y) =
n∑
i

δ(yi 6=polar g)/n

where g ∈ {positive, negative} denotes the sen-
timent value of a polar document, n is the total
number of sentences in x, and δ is an indicator
function. We hope the expectation of the con-
straint function takes a small value. In our experi-
ments, we set the expected value to be the empiri-
cal estimate of the probability of “conflicting” sen-
timent in polar documents using the training data.

3.3 Training and Inference

During training, we need to compute the constraint
expectations and the feature expectations under
the auxiliary distribution q at each gradient step.

We can derive q by solving the dual problem in 3:

q(y|x) = exp(θ · f(x,y) + λ · φ(x,y))
Zλ,θ(X)

(4)

where Zλ,θ(X) is a normalization constant. Most
of our constraints can be factorized in the same
way as factorizing the model features in the first-
order CRF model, and we can compute the expec-
tations under q very efficiently using the forward-
backward algorithm. However, some of our dis-
course constraints (opinion coreference and list-
ing) can break the tractable structure of the model.
For constraints with higher-order structures, we
use Gibbs Sampling (Geman and Geman, 1984) to
approximate the expectations. Given a sequence
x, we sample a label yi at each position i by com-
puting the unnormalized conditional probabilities
p(yi = l|y−i) ∝ exp(θ · f(x,yi = l,y−i) + λ ·
φ(x,yi = l,y−i)) and renormalizing them. Since
the possible label assignments only differ at posi-
tion i, we can make the computation efficient by
maintaining the structure of the coreference clus-
ters and precomputing the constraint function for
different types of violations.

During inference, we find the best label assign-
ment by computing arg maxy q(y|x). For doc-
uments where the higher-order constraints apply,
we use the same Gibbs sampler as described above
to infer the most likely label assignment, other-
wise, we use the Viterbi algorithm.

4 Experiments

We experimented with two product review
datasets for sentence-level sentiment classifica-
tion: the Customer Review (CR) data (Hu and Liu,
2004)6 which contains 638 reviews of 14 prod-
ucts such as cameras and cell phones, and the
Multi-domain Amazon (MD) data from the test set
of Täckström and McDonald (2011a) which con-
tains 294 reivews from 5 different domains. As in
Qu et al. (2012), we chose the books, electronics
and music domains for evaluation. Each domain
also comes with 33,000 extra reviews with only
document-level sentiment labels.

We evaluated our method in two settings: su-
pervised and semi-supervised. In the supervised
setting, we treated the test data as unlabeled data
and performed transductive learning. In the semi-
supervised setting, our unlabeled data consists of

6Available at http://www.cs.uic.edu/˜liub/
FBS/sentiment-analysis.html.

330



both the available unlabeled data and the test data.
For each domain in the MD dataset, we made
use of no more than 100 unlabeled documents in
which our posterior constraints apply. We adopted
the evaluation schemes used in previous work: 10-
fold cross validation for the CR dataset and 3-fold
cross validation for the MD dataset. We also report
both two-way classification (positive vs. negative)
and three-way classification results (positive, neg-
ative or neutral). We use accuracy as the per-
formance measure. In our tables, boldface num-
bers are statistically significant by paired t-test for
p < 0.05 against the best baseline developed in
this paper 7.

We trained our model using a CRF incorpo-
rated with the proposed posterior constraints. For
the CRF features, we include the tokens, the part-
of-speech tags, the prior polarities of lexical pat-
terns indicated by the opinion lexicon and the
negator lexicon, the number of positive and neg-
ative tokens and the output of the vote-flip algo-
rithm (Choi and Cardie, 2009). In addition, we in-
clude the discourse connectives as local or transi-
tion features and the document-level sentiment la-
bels as features (only available in the MD dataset).

We set the CRF regularization parameter σ = 1
and set the posterior regularization parameter β
and γ (a trade-off parameter we introduce to bal-
ance the supervised objective and the posterior
regularizer in 2) by using grid search 8. For
approximation inference with higher-order con-
straints, we perform 2000 Gibbs sampling itera-
tions where the first 1000 iterations are burn-in it-
erations. To make the results more stable, we con-
struct three Markov chains that run in parallel, and
select the sample with the largest objective value.

All posterior constraints were developed using
the training data on each training fold. For the MD
dataset, we also used the dvd domain as additional
labeled data for developing the constraints.

Baselines. We compared our method to a num-
ber of baselines: (1) CRF: CRF with the same set
of model features as in our method. (2) CRF-
INF: CRF augmented with inference constraints.
We can incorporate the proposed constraints (con-
straints derived from lexical patterns and discourse
connectives) as hard constraints into CRF during

7Significance test was not conducted over the previous
methods as we do not have their results for each fold.

8We conducted 10-fold cross-validation on each training
fold with the parameter space: β : [0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0]
and γ : [0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 5.0, 10.0].

Methods CR MD
CRF 81.1 67.0

CRF-inflex 80.9 66.4
CRF-infdisc 81.1 67.2

PRlex 81.8 69.7
PR 82.7 70.6

Previous work
TreeCRF (Nakagawa et al., 2010) 81.4 -

Dropout LR (Wang and Manning, 2013) 82.1 -

Table 2: Accuracy results (%) for supervised sen-
timent classification (two-way)

Books Electronics Music Avg
VoteFlip 44.6 45.0 47.8 45.8

DocOracle 53.6 50.5 63.0 55.7
CRF 57.4 57.5 61.8 58.9

CRF-inflex 56.7 56.4 60.4 57.8
CRF-infdisc 57.2 57.6 62.1 59.0

PRlex 60.3 59.9 63.2 61.1
PR 61.6 61.0 64.4 62.3

Previous work
HCRF 55.9 61.0 58.7 58.5
MEM 59.7 59.6 63.8 61.0

Table 3: Accuracy results (%) for semi-supervised
sentiment classification (three-way) on the MD
dataset

inference by manually setting λ in equation 4 to a
large value,9. When λ is large enough, it is equiva-
lent to adding hard constraints to the viterbi infer-
ence. To better understand the different effects of
lexical and discourse constraints, we report results
for applying only the lexical constraints (CRF-
INFlex) as well as results for applying only the
discourse constraints (CRF-INFdisc). (3) PRlex:
a variant of our PR model which only applies the
lexical constraints. For the three-way classifica-
tion task on the MD dataset, we also implemented
the following baselines: (4) VOTEFLIP: a rule-
based algorithm that leverages the positive, nega-
tive and neutral cues along with the effect of nega-
tion to determine the sentence sentiment (Choi
and Cardie, 2009). (5) DOCORACLE: assigns
each sentence the label of its corresponding doc-
ument.

4.1 Results

We first report results on a binary (positive or neg-
ative) sentence-level sentiment classification task.
For this task, we used the supervised setting and
performed transductive learning for our model.
Table 2 shows the accuracy results. We can see

9We set λ to 1000 for the lexical constraints and -1000 to
the discourse connective constraints in the experiments

331



Books Electronics Music
pos/neg/neu pos/neg/neu pos/neg/neu

VoteFlip 43/42/47 45/46/44 50/46/46
DocOracle 54/60/49 57/54/42 72/65/52

CRF 47/51/64 60/61/52 67/60/58
CRF-inflex 46/52/63 59/61/50 65/59/57
CRF-infdisc 47/51/64 60/61/52 67/61/59

PRlex 50/56/66 64/63/53 67/64/59
PR 52/56/68 64/66/53 69/65/60

Table 4: F1 scores for each sentiment cate-
gory (positive, negative and neutral) for semi-
supervised sentiment classification on the MD
dataset

that PR significantly outperforms all other base-
lines in both the CR dataset and the MD dataset
(average accuracy across domains is reported).
The poor performance of CRF-INFlex indicates
that directly applying lexical constraints as hard
constraints during inference could only hurt the
performance. CRF-INFdisc slightly outperforms
CRF but the improvement is not significant. In
contrast, both PRlex and PR significantly outper-
form CRF, which implies that incorporating lex-
ical and discourse constraints as posterior con-
straints is much more effective. The superior per-
formance of PR over PRlex further suggests that
the proper use of discourse information can signif-
icantly improve accuracy for sentence-level senti-
ment classification.

We also analyzed the model’s performance on a
three-way sentiment classification task. By intro-
ducing the “neutral” category, the sentiment clas-
sification problem becomes harder. Table 4 shows
the results in terms of accuracy for each domain
in the MD dataset. We can see that both PR and
PRlex significantly outperform all other baselines
in all domains. The rule-based baseline VOTE-
FLIP gave the weakest performance because it has
no prediction power on sentences with no opinion
words. DOCORACLE performs much better than
VOTEFLIP and performs especially well on the
Music domain. This indicates that the document-
level sentiment is a very strong indicator of the
sentence-level sentiment label. For the CRF base-
line and its invariants, we observe a similar per-
formance trend as in the two-way classification
task: there is nearly no performance improve-
ment from applying the lexical and discourse-
connective-based constraints during CRF infer-
ence. In contrast, both PRlex and PR provide
substantial improvements over CRF. This con-

firms that encoding lexical and discourse knowl-
edge as posterior constraints allows the feature-
based model to gain additional learning power
for sentence-level sentiment prediction. In par-
ticular, incorporating discourse constraints leads
to consistent improvements to our model. This
demonstrates that our modeling of discourse in-
formation is effective and that taking into account
the discourse context is important for improving
sentence-level sentiment analysis. We also com-
pare our results to the previously published results
on the same dataset. HCRF (Täckström and Mc-
Donald, 2011a) and MEM (Qu et al., 2012) are
two state-of-the-art semi-supervised methods for
sentence-level sentiment classification. We can
see that our best model PR gives the best results
in most categories.

Table 4 shows the results in terms of F1 scores
for each sentiment category (positive, negative and
neutral). We can see that the PR models are able to
provide improvements over all the sentiment cate-
gories compared to all the baselines in general. We
observe that the DOCORACLE baseline provides
very strong F1 scores on the positive and nega-
tive categories especially in the Books and Mu-
sic domains, but very poor F1 on the neutral cate-
gory. This is because it over-predicts the polar sen-
tences in the polar documents, and predicts no po-
lar sentences in the neutral documents. In contrast,
our PR models provide more balanced F1 scores
among all the sentiment categories. Compared to
the CRF baseline and its variants, we found that
the PR models can greatly improve the precision
of predicting positive and negative sentences, re-
sulting in a significant improvement on the pos-
itive/negative F1 scores. However, the improve-
ment on the neutral category is modest. A plausi-
ble explanation is that most of our constraints fo-
cus on discriminating polar sentences. They can
help reduce the errors of misclassifying polar sen-
tences, but the model needs more constraints in
order to distinguish neutral sentences from polar
sentences. We plan to address this issue in future
work.

4.2 Discussion

We analyze the errors to better understand the mer-
its and limitations of the PR model. We found
that the PR model is able to correct many CRF
errors caused by the lack of labeled data. The first
row in Table 5 shows an example of such errors.

332



Example Sentences CRF PR
Example 1: 〈neg〉 If I could, I would like to return it or exchange
for something better.〈/neg〉 〈neu〉 × X
Example 2: 〈neg〉 Things I wasn’t a fan of – the ending was to
cutesy for my taste.〈/neg〉 〈neg〉 Also, all of the side characters
(particularly the mom, vee, and the teacher) were incredibly flat
and stereotypical to me.〈/neg〉

〈neu〉 〈pos〉 × X

Example 3: 〈neg〉 I also have excessive noise when I talk and
have phone in my pocket while walking.〈/neg〉 〈neu〉 But other
models are no better.〈/neu〉

〈neg〉 〈pos〉 × 〈neg〉 〈pos〉 ×

Table 5: Example sentences where PR succeeds and fails to correct the mistakes of CRF

The lexical features return and exchange may
be good indicators of negative sentiment for the
sentence. However, with limited labeled data, the
CRF learner can only associate very weak senti-
ment signals to these features. In contrast, the PR
model is able to associate stronger sentiment sig-
nals to these features by leveraging unlabeled data
for indirect supervision. A simple lexicon-based
constraint during inference time may also correct
this case. However, hard-constraint baselines can
hardly improve the performance in general be-
cause the contributions of different constraints are
not learned and their combination may not lead to
better predictions. This is also demonstrated by
the limited performance of CRF-INF in our exper-
iments.

We also found that the discourse constraints
play an important role in improving the sentiment
prediction. The lexical constraints alone are of-
ten not sufficient since their coverage is limited by
the sentiment lexicon and they can only constrain
sentiment locally. On the contrary, discourse con-
straints are not dependent on sentiment lexicons,
and more importantly, they can provide sentiment
preferences on multiple sentences at the same
time. When combining discourse constraints with
features from different sentences, the PR model
becomes more powerful in disambiguating senti-
ment. The second example in Table 5 shows that
the PR model learned with discourse constraints
correctly predicts the sentiment of two sentences
where no lexical constraints apply.

However, discourse constraints are not always
helpful. One reason is that they do not constrain
the neutral sentiment. As a result they could not
help disambiguate neutral sentiment from polar
sentiment, such as the third example in Table 5.
This is also a problem for most of our lexical con-
straints. In general, it is hard to learn reliable indi-
cators for the neutral sentiment. In the MD dataset,
a neutral label may be given because the sentence

contains mixed sentiment or no sentiment or it is
off-topic. We plan to explore more refined con-
straints that can deal with the neutral sentiment in
future work. Another limitation of the discourse
constraints is that they could be affected by the er-
rors of the discourse parser and the coreference re-
solver. A potential way to address this issue is to
learn discourse constraints jointly with sentiment.
We plan to study this in future research.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a context-aware ap-
proach for learning sentence-level sentiment. Our
approach incorporates intuitive lexical and dis-
course knowledge as expressive constraints while
training a conditional random field model via pos-
terior regularization. We explore a rich set of
context-aware constraints at both intra- and inter-
sentential levels, and demonstrate their effective-
ness in the analysis of sentence-level sentiment.
While we focus on the sentence-level task, our ap-
proach can be easily extended to handle sentiment
analysis at finer levels of granularity. Our exper-
iments show that our model achieves better accu-
racy than existing supervised and semi-supervised
models for the sentence-level sentiment classifica-
tion task.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by DARPA-BAA-
12-47 DEFT grant #12475008 and NSF grant
BCS-0904822. We thank Igor Labutov for help-
ful discussion and suggestions; Oscar Täckström
and Lizhen Qu for providing their Amazon review
datasets; and the anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments and suggestions.

References
Kedar Bellare, Gregory Druck, and Andrew McCal-

lum. 2009. Alternating projections for learning

333



with expectation constraints. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence, pages 43–50. AUAI Press.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2008. Learning with
compositional semantics as structural inference for
subsentential sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 793–801. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2009. Adapting a po-
larity lexicon using integer linear programming for
domain-specific sentiment classification. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing: Volume 2-
Volume 2, pages 590–598. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2010.
Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning
and stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12:2121–2159.

Kuzman Ganchev and Dipanjan Das. 2013. Cross-
lingual discriminative learning of sequence models
with posterior regularization.

Kuzman Ganchev, Jennifer Gillenwater, and Ben
Taskar. 2009. Dependency grammar induction via
bitext projection constraints. In Proceedings of the
ACL-IJCNLP, pages 369–377.

Kuzman Ganchev, Joao Graça, Jennifer Gillenwater,
and Ben Taskar. 2010. Posterior regularization for
structured latent variable models. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 99:2001–2049.

Stuart Geman and Donald Geman. 1984. Stochas-
tic relaxation, gibbs distributions, and the bayesian
restoration of images. Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, (6):721–741.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the tenth
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowl-
edge discovery and data mining, pages 168–177.
ACM.

Dan Jurafsky, James H Martin, Andrew Kehler, Keith
Vander Linden, and Nigel Ward. 2000. Speech
and language processing: An introduction to natu-
ral language processing, computational linguistics,
and speech recognition, volume 2. MIT Press.

Hiroshi Kanayama and Tetsuya Nasukawa. 2006.
Fully automatic lexicon expansion for domain-
oriented sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the
2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 355–363. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Ivan Titov, and Caroline
Sporleder. 2013. A bayesian model for joint
unsupervised induction of sentiment, aspect and

discourse representations. In To Appear in Proceed-
ings of the 51th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Heeyoung Lee, Angel Chang, Yves Peirsman,
Nathanael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, and Dan Ju-
rafsky. 2013. Deterministic coreference resolution
based on entity-centric, precision-ranked rules.

Yi Mao and Guy Lebanon. 2007. Isotonic conditional
random fields and local sentiment flow. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 19:961.

Ryan McDonald, Kerry Hannan, Tyler Neylon, Mike
Wells, and Jeff Reynar. 2007. Structured mod-
els for fine-to-coarse sentiment analysis. In An-
nual Meeting-Association For Computational Lin-
guistics, volume 45, page 432.

Tetsuji Nakagawa, Kentaro Inui, and Sadao Kurohashi.
2010. Dependency tree-based sentiment classifica-
tion using crfs with hidden variables. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 786–794.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental educa-
tion: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summa-
rization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of
the 42nd annual meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, page 271. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Now Pub.

Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. 2006. Contextual
valence shifters. In Computing attitude and affect in
text: Theory and applications, pages 1–10. Springer.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind K Joshi, and Bon-
nie L Webber. 2008. The penn discourse treebank
2.0. In LREC. Citeseer.

Lizhen Qu, Rainer Gemulla, and Gerhard Weikum.
2012. A weakly supervised model for sentence-level
semantic orientation analysis with multiple experts.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 149–159. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Richard Socher, Jeffrey Pennington, Eric H Huang,
Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher D Manning. 2011.
Semi-supervised recursive autoencoders for predict-
ing sentiment distributions. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 151–161. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

334



Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep mod-
els for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Swapna Somasundaran, Janyce Wiebe, and Josef Rup-
penhofer. 2008. Discourse level opinion interpre-
tation. In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics-Volume 1,
pages 801–808. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Swapna Somasundaran, Galileo Namata, Janyce
Wiebe, and Lise Getoor. 2009. Supervised and
unsupervised methods in employing discourse rela-
tions for improving opinion polarity classification.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume
1-Volume 1, pages 170–179. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Oscar Täckström and Ryan McDonald. 2011a. Dis-
covering fine-grained sentiment with latent variable
structured prediction models. In Advances in Infor-
mation Retrieval, pages 368–374. Springer.

Oscar Täckström and Ryan McDonald. 2011b. Semi-
supervised latent variable models for sentence-level
sentiment analysis.

Rakshit Trivedi and Jacob Eisenstein. 2013. Discourse
connectors for latent subjectivity in sentiment analy-
sis. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 808–813.

Sida Wang and Christopher Manning. 2013. Fast
dropout training. In Proceedings of the 30th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-
13), pages 118–126.

Qi Zhang, Jin Qian, Huan Chen, Jihua Kang, and Xu-
anjing Huang. 2013. Discourse level explanatory
relation extraction from product reviews using first-
order logic.

Lanjun Zhou, Binyang Li, Wei Gao, Zhongyu Wei,
and Kam-Fai Wong. 2011. Unsupervised discovery
of discourse relations for eliminating intra-sentence
polarity ambiguities. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 162–171. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

335


