



















































A Study of Concept-based Weighting Regularization for Medical Records Search


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 603–612,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Study of Concept-based Weighting Regularization
for Medical Records Search

Yue Wang, Xitong Liu, Hui Fang
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,

University of Delaware, USA
{wangyue,xtliu,hfang}@udel.edu

Abstract

An important search task in the biomedical
domain is to find medical records of pa-
tients who are qualified for a clinical trial.
One commonly used approach is to apply
NLP tools to map terms from queries and
documents to concepts and then compute
the relevance scores based on the concept-
based representation. However, the map-
ping results are not perfect, and none of
previous work studied how to deal with
them in the retrieval process. In this pa-
per, we focus on addressing the limitations
caused by the imperfect mapping results
and study how to further improve the re-
trieval performance of the concept-based
ranking methods. In particular, we ap-
ply axiomatic approaches and propose two
weighting regularization methods that ad-
just the weighting based on the relations
among the concepts. Experimental results
show that the proposed methods are effec-
tive to improve the retrieval performance,
and their performances are comparable to
other top-performing systems in the TREC
Medical Records Track.

1 Introduction

With the increasing use of electronic health
records, it becomes urgent to leverage this rich
information resource about patients’ health condi-
tions to transform research in health and medicine.
As an example, when developing a cohort for
a clinical trial, researchers need to identify pa-
tients matching a set of clinical criteria based on
their medical records during their hospital visits
(Safran et al., 2007; Friedman et al., 2010). This
selection process is clearly a domain-specific re-
trieval problem, which searches for relevant medi-
cal records that contain useful information about

their corresponding patients’ qualification to the
criteria specified in a query, e.g., “female patient
with breast cancer with mastectomies during ad-
mission”.

Intuitively, to better solve this domain-specific
retrieval problem, we need to understand the re-
quirements specified in a query and identify the
documents satisfying these requirements based on
their semantic meanings. In the past decades,
significant efforts have been put on constructing
biomedical knowledge bases (Aronson and Lang,
2010; Lipscomb, 2000; Corporation, 1999) and
developing natural language processing (NLP)
tools, such as MetaMap, to utilize the informa-
tion from the knowledge bases (Aronson, 2001;
McInnes et al., 2009). These efforts make it pos-
sible to map free text to concepts and use these
concepts to represent queries and documents.

Indeed, concept-based representation is one
of the commonly used approaches that leverage
knowledge bases to improve the retrieval perfor-
mance (Limsopatham et al., 2013d; Limsopatham
et al., 2013b). The basic idea is to represent
both queries and documents as “bags of concepts”,
where the concepts are identified based on the in-
formation from the knowledge bases. This method
has been shown to be more effective than tra-
ditional term-based representation in the medical
record retrieval because of its ability to handle the
ambiguity in the medical terminology. However,
this method also suffers the limitation that its ef-
fectiveness depends on the accuracy of the concept
mapping results. As a result, directly applying
existing weighting strategies might lead to non-
optimal retrieval performance.

In this paper, to address the limitation caused by
the inaccurate concept mapping results, we pro-
pose to regularize the weighting strategies in the
concept-based representation methods. Specifi-
cally, by applying the axiomatic approaches (Fang
and Zhai, 2005), we analyze the retrieval func-

603



tions with concept-based representation and find
that they may violate some reasonable retrieval
constraints. We then propose two concept-based
weighting regularization methods so that the reg-
ularized retrieval functions would satisfy the re-
trieval constraints and achieve better retrieval per-
formance. Experimental results over two TREC
collections show that both proposed concept-
based weighting regularization methods can im-
prove the retrieval performance, and their perfor-
mance is comparable with the best systems of
the TREC Medical Records tracks (Voorhees and
Tong, 2011; Voorhees and Hersh, 2012).

Many NLP techniques have been developed to
understand the semantic meaning of textual in-
formation, and are often applied to improve the
search accuracy. However, due to the inherent am-
biguity of natural languages, the results of NLP
tools are not perfect. One of our contributions is
to present a general methodology that can be used
to adjust existing IR techniques based on the inac-
curate NLP results.

2 Related Work

The Medical Records track of the Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC) provides a common platform
to study the medical records retrieval problem
and evaluate the proposed methods (Voorhees and
Tong, 2011; Voorhees and Hersh, 2012).

Concept-based representation has been studied
for the medical record retrieval problem (Lim-
sopatham et al., 2013d; Limsopatham et al.,
2013b; Limsopatham et al., 2013a; Qi and La-
querre, 2012; Koopman et al., 2011; Koopman et
al., 2012). For example, Qi and Laquerre used
MetaMap to generate the concept-based repre-
sentation and then apply a vector space retrieval
model for ranking, and their results are one of
the top ranked runs in the TREC 2012 Medi-
cal Records track (Qi and Laquerre, 2012). To
further improve the performance, Limsopatham
et al. proposed a task-specific representation,
i.e., using only four types of concepts (symp-
tom, diagnostic test, diagnosis and treatment) in
the concept-based representation and a query ex-
pansion method based on the relationships among
the medical concepts (Limsopatham et al., 2013d;
Limsopatham et al., 2013a). Moreover, they also
proposed a learning approach to combine both
term-based and concept-based representation to
further improve the performance (Limsopatham et

Figure 1: Example of MetaMap result for a query.

al., 2013b).
Our work is also related to domain-specific

IR (Yan et al., 2011; Lin and Demner-Fushman,
2006; Zhou et al., 2007). For example, Yan et
al. proposed a granularity-based document rank-
ing model that utilizes ontologies to identify doc-
ument concepts. However, none of the previous
work has studied how to regularize the weight of
concepts based on their relations.

It is well known that the effectiveness of a re-
trieval function is closely related to the weight-
ing strategies (Fang and Zhai, 2005; Singhal et
al., 1996). Various term weighting strategies have
been proposed and studied for the term-based
representation (Amati and Van Rijsbergen, 2002;
Singhal et al., 1996; Robertson et al., 1996).
However, existing studies on concept-based rep-
resentation still used weighting strategies devel-
oped for term-based representation such as vector
space models (Qi and Laquerre, 2012) and diver-
gence from randomness (DFR) (Limsopatham et
al., 2013a) and did not take the inaccurate con-
cept mapping results into consideration. Com-
pared with previous work, we focus on address-
ing the limitation caused by the inaccurate con-
cept mapping. Note that our efforts are orthogonal
to existing work, and it is expected to bring addi-
tional improvement to the retrieval performance.

3 Concept-based Representation for
Medical Records Retrieval

3.1 Problem Formulation

We follow the problem setup used in the TREC
medical record track (Voorhees and Tong, 2011;
Voorhees and Hersh, 2012). The task is to retrieve
relevant patient visits with respect to a query.
Since each visit can be associated with multiple
medical records, the relevance of a visit is related
to the relevance of individual associated medical
records. Existing studies computed the relevance

604



scores at either visit-level, where all the medical
records of a visit are merged into a visit document
(Demner-Fushman et al., 2012; Limsopatham et
al., 2013c), or record-level, where we can first
compute the relevance score of individual records
and then aggregate their scores as the relevance
score of a visit (Limsopatham et al., 2013c; Zhu
and Carterette, 2012; Limsopatham et al., 2013d).
In this paper, we focus on the visit-level relevance
because of its simplicity. In particular, given a pa-
tient’s visit, all the medical records generated from
this visit are merged as a document. Note that our
proposed concept-weighting strategies can also be
easily applied to record-level relevance modeling.

Since the goal is to retrieve medical records of
patients that satisfying requirements specified in a
query, the relevance of medical records should be
modeled based on how well they match all the re-
quirements (i.e., aspects) specified in the queries.

3.2 Background: UMLS and MetaMap

Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) is a
metathesaurus containing information from more
than 100 controlled medical terminologies such as
the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clin-
ical Terms (SNOMED-CT) and Medical Subject
Headings (MeSH). Specifically, it contains the in-
formation about over 2.8 million biomedical con-
cepts. Each concept is labeled with a Concept
Unique Identifier (CUI) and has a preferred name
and a semantic type.

Moreover, NLP tools for utilizing the informa-
tion from UMLS have been developed. In partic-
ular, MetaMap (Aronson, 2001) can take a text
string as the input, segment it into phrases, and
then map each phrase to multiple UMLS CUIs
with confidence scores. The confidence score is
an indicator of the quality of the phrase-to-concept
mapping by MetaMap. It is computed by four met-
rics: centrality, variation, coverage and cohesive-
ness (Aronson, 2001). These four measures try to
evaluate the mapping from different angles, such
as the involvement of the central part, the distance
of the concept to the original phrase, and how well
the concept matches the phrase. The maximum
confidence in MetaMap is 1000.

Figure 1 shows the MetaMap results for an ex-
ample query “children with dental caries”. Two
query aspects, i.e., “children” and “dental caries”,
are identified. Each of them is mapped to multiple
concepts, and each concept is associated with the

confidence score as well as more detailed informa-
tion about this concept.

3.3 Concept-based Representation

Traditional retrieval models are based on “bag of
terms” representation. One limitation of this rep-
resentation is that relevance scores are computed
based on the matching of terms rather than the
meanings. As a result, the system may fail to re-
trieve the relevant documents that do not contain
any query terms.

To overcome this limitation, concept-based rep-
resentation has been proposed to bridge the vo-
cabulary gap between documents and queries
(Qi and Laquerre, 2012; Limsopatham et al.,
2013b; Koopman et al., 2012). In particular,
MetaMap is used to map terms from queries
and documents (e.g., medical records) to the
semantic concepts from biomedical knowledge
bases such as UMLS. Within the concept-based
representation, the query can then be repre-
sented as a bag of all the generated CUIs
in the MetaMap results. For example, the
query from Figure 1 can be represented as
{C0008059, C0680063, C0011334, C0333519,
C0226984}. Documents can be represented in a
similar way.

After converting both queries and documents
to concept-based representations using MetaMap,
previous work applied existing retrieval functions
such as vector space models (Singhal et al., 1996)
to rank the documents. Note that when referring
to existing retrieval functions in the paper, they
include traditional keyword matching based func-
tions such as pivoted normalization (Singhal et
al., 1996), Okapi (Robertson et al., 1996), Dirich-
let prior (Zhai and Lafferty, 2001) and basic ax-
iomatic functions (Fang and Zhai, 2005).

4 Weighting Strategies for
Concept-based Representation

4.1 Motivation

Although existing retrieval functions can be di-
rectly applied to concept-based representation,
they may lead to non-optimal performance. This
is mainly caused by the fact that MetaMap may
generate more than one mapped concepts for an
aspect, i.e., a semantic unit in the text.

Ideally, an aspect will be mapped to only one
concept, and different concepts would represent
different semantic meanings. Under such a situ-

605



                                                                                                                                             

Figure 2: Exploratory data analysis (From left to right are choosing minimum, average and maximum
IDF concepts as the representing concepts, respectively. The removed concepts are highlighted in the
figures.).

ation, traditional retrieval functions would likely
work well and generate satisfying retrieval per-
formance since the relations among concepts are
independent which is consistent with the assump-
tions made in traditional IR (Manning et al., 2008).

However, the mapping results generated by
MetaMap are not perfect. Although MetaMap is
able to rank all the candidate concepts with the
confidence score and pick the most likely one,
the accuracy is not very high. In particular, our
preliminary results show that turning on the dis-
ambiguation functionality provided by MetaMap
(i.e., returning only the most likely concept for
each query) could lead to worse retrieval per-
formance than using all the candidate mappings.
Thus, we use the one-to-many mapping results
generated by MetaMap, in which each aspect can
be mapped to multiple concepts.

Unfortunately, such one-to-many concept map-
pings could hinder the retrieval performance in the
following two ways.

• The multiple concepts generated from the
same aspect are related, which is inconsis-
tent with the independence assumption made
in the existing retrieval functions (Manning
et al., 2008). For example, as shown in Fig-
ure 1, “dental caries” is mapped to three con-
cepts. It is clear that the concepts are related,
but existing retrieval functions are unable to
capture their relations and would compute the
weight of each concept independently.

• The one-to-many mapping results generated
by MetaMap could arbitrarily inflate the
weights of some query aspects. For exam-
ple, as shown in Figure 1, query aspect “chil-
dren” is mapped to 2 concepts while “den-
tal caries” is mapped to 3 concepts. In the
existing retrieval functions, term occurrences

are important relevance signals. However,
when converting the text to concepts repre-
sentation using MetaMap, the occurrences of
the concepts are determined by not only the
original term occurrences, a good indicator
of relevance, but also the number of mapped
concepts, which is determined by MetaMap
and has nothing to do with the relevance sta-
tus. As a result, the occurrences of concepts
might not be a very accurate indicator of im-
portance of the corresponding query aspect.

To address the limitations caused by the inac-
curate mapping results, we propose to apply ax-
iomatic approaches (Fang and Zhai, 2005) to reg-
ularize the weighting strategies for concept-based
representation methods. In particular, we first
formalize retrieval constraints that any reasonable
concept-based representation methods should sat-
isfy and then discuss how to regularize the existing
weighting strategies to satisfy the constraints and
improve the retrieval performance.

We first explain the notations used in this sec-
tion. Q and D denote a query and a document
with the concept-based representation. S(Q,D)
is the relevance score of D with respect to Q. ei
denotes a concept, and A(e) denotes the query
aspect associated with e, i.e., a set of concepts
that are mapped to the same phrases as e by us-
ing MetaMap. i(e) is the normalized confidence
score of the mapping for concept e generated by
MetaMap. c(e,D) denotes the occurrences of
concept e in document D, df(e) denotes the num-
ber of documents containing e. |D| is the docu-
ment length of D. Impc(e) is the importance of
the concept such as the concept IDF value, and
ImpA(A) is the importance of the aspect.

606



4.2 Unified concept weighting regularization
We now discuss how to address the first challenge,
i.e,. how to regularize the weighting strategy so
that we can take into consideration the fact that
concepts associated with the same query aspect are
not independent. We call a concept is a variant of
another one if both of them are associated with the
same aspect.

Intuitively, given a query with two aspects, a
document covering both aspects should be ranked
higher than those covering only one aspect. We
can formalize the intuition in the concept-based
representation as the following constraint.

Unified Constraint: Let query be Q =
{e1, e2, e3}, and we know that e2 is a variant of
e3. Assume we have two documents D1 and D2
with the same document length, i.e., |D1| = |D2|.
If we know that c(e1, D1) = c(e3, D2) > 0,
c(e1, D2) = c(e3, D1) = 0 and c(e2, D1) =
c(e2, D2) > 0, then S(Q,D1) > S(Q,D2).

It is clear that existing retrieval functions would
violate this constraint since they ignore the rela-
tions among concepts.

One simple strategy to fix this problem is to
merge all the concept variants as a single concept
and select one representative concept to replace all
occurrences of other variants in both queries and
documents. By merging the concepts together, we
are aiming to purify the concepts and make the
similar concepts centralized so that the assumption
that all the concepts are independent would hold.

Formally, the adjusted occurrences of a concept
e in a document D is shown as follows:

cmod(e,D)=

{∑
e′∈EC(e) c(e

′, D) e=Rep(EC(e))
0 e 6=Rep(EC(e)) (1)

where c(e,D) is the original occurrence of con-
cept e in document D, EC(e) denotes a set of
all the variants of e including itself (i.e., all the
concepts with the same preferred name as e), and
Rep(EC(e)) denotes the representative concept
from EC(e).

It is trivial to prove that, with such changes, ex-
isting retrieval functions would satisfy the above
constraint since the constraint implies TFC2 con-
straint defined in the previous study (Fang et al.,
2004).

Now the remaining question is how to select the
representative concept from all the variants. There
are three options: select the concept with the maxi-
mum IDF, average IDF, or minimum IDF. We con-

duct exploratory data analysis on these three op-
tions. In particular, for each option, we generate
a plot indicating the correlation between the IDF
value of a concept and the relevance probability of
the concept (i.e., the probability that a document
containing the concept is relevant). Note that both
original and replaced IDF values are shown in the
plot for each option. Figure 2 shows the results. It
is clear that the right plot (i.e., selecting the con-
cept with the maximum IDF as the representative
concept) is the best choice since the changes make
the points less scattered. In fact, this can also be
confirmed by experimental results as reported in
Table 5. Thus, we use the concept with the max-
imum IDF value as the representative concept of
all the variants.

4.3 Balanced concept weighting
regularization

We now discuss how to address the second chal-
lenge, i.e., how to regularize the weighting strat-
egy to deal with the arbitrarily inflated statistics
caused by the one-to-many mappings.

The arbitrary inflation could impact the impor-
tance of the query aspects. For example, as shown
in Figure 1, one aspect is mapped to two con-
cepts while the other is mapped to three. More-
over, it could also impact the accuracy of the con-
cept IDF values. Consider “colonoscopies” and
“adult”, it is clear that the first term is more im-
portant than the second one, which is consistent
with their term IDF values, i.e., 7.52 and 2.92, re-
spectively. However, with the concept-based rep-
resentation, the IDF value of the concept “colono-
scopies”(C0009378) is 2.72, which is even smaller
than that of concept “adult” (C1706450), i.e., 2.92.

To fix the negative impact on query aspects, we
could leverage the findings in the previous study
(Zheng and Fang, 2010) and regularize the weight-
ing strategy based on the length of query aspects
to favor documents covering more query aspects.
Since each concept mapping is associated with a
confidence score, we can incorporate them into the
regularization function as follows:

f(e,Q) = (1− α) + α ·
( ∑

e′∈Q i(e′)∑
e′′∈A(e) i(e′′)

)
, (2)

where i(e) is the normalized confidence score of
concept e generated by MetaMap, and α is a pa-
rameter between 0 and 1 to control the effect of the
regularization. When α is set to 0, there is no reg-
ularization. This regularization function aims to

607



penalize the weight of concept e based on its vari-
ants as well as the concepts from other aspects. In
particular, a concept would receive more penalty
(i.e., its weight will be decreased more) when it
has more variants and the mappings of these vari-
ants are more accurate.

To fix the negative impact on the concept IDF
values, we propose to regularize the weighting
based on the importance of the query aspect. This
regularization can be formalized as the following
constraint.

Balanced Constraint: Let Q be a query
with two concepts and the concepts are associ-
ated with different aspects, i.e., Q = {e1, e2},
and A(e1) 6= A(e2). Assume D1 and D2
are two documents with the same length, i.e.,
|D1| = |D2|, and they cover different concepts
with the same occurrences, i.e., c(e1, D1) =
c(e2, D2) > 0 and c(e2, D1) = c(e1, D2) =
0. If we know Impc(e1) = Impc(e2) and
ImpA(A(e1)) < ImpA(A(e2)), then we have
S(Q,D1) < S(Q,D2).

This constraint requires that the relevance score
of a document should be affected by not only the
importance of the concepts but also the importance
of the associated query aspect. In a way, the con-
straint aims to counteract the arbitrary statistics in-
flation caused by MetaMap results and balance the
weight among concepts based on the importance
of the associated query aspects. And it is not dif-
ficult to show that existing retrieval functions vio-
late this constraint.

Now the question is how to revise the retrieval
functions to make them satisfy this constraint. We
propose to incorporate the importance of query as-
pect into the previous regularization function in
Equation (2) as follows:

f(e,Q) = (1−α)+α ·
( ∑

e′∈Q i(e
′)∑

e′′∈A(e) i(e
′′)

)
·ImpA(A(e)).

(3)

Note that ImpA(A(e)) is the importance of a
query aspect and can be estimated based on the
terms from the query aspect. In this paper, we
use the maximum term IDF value from the aspect
to estimate the importance, which performs better
than using minimum and average IDF values as
shown in the experiments (i.e., Table 6). We plan
to study other options in the future work.

4.4 Discussions
Both proposed regularization methods can be
combined with any existing retrieval functions. In
this paper, we focus on one of the state of the
art weighting strategies, i.e., F2-EXP function de-
rived from axiomatic retrieval model (Fang and
Zhai, 2005), and explain how to incorporate the
regularization methods into the function.

The original F2-EXP retrieval function is shown
as follows:

S(Q, D) =
∑

e∈Q∩D

c(e, Q) · ( N
df(e)

)
0.35 · c(e, D)

c(e, D) + b +
b×|D|
avdl

(4)

where b is a parameter control the weight of the
document length normalization.

With the unified concept weighting regulariza-
tion, the revised function based on F2-EXP func-
tion, i.e., Unified, is shown as follows:

S(Q, D)=

∑
e∈Q∩D

cmod(e, Q)·(
N

df(t)
)
0.35 · cmod(e, D)

cmod(e, D)+b+
b×|D|
avdl

(5)

where cmod(e,D) and cmod(e,Q) denote the
modified occurrences as shown in Equation (1). It
can be shown that this function satisfies the unified
constraint but violates the balanced constraint.

Following the similar strategy used in the previ-
ous study (Zheng and Fang, 2010), we can further
incorporate the regularization function proposed
in Equation (3) to the above function to make it
satisfy the balanced constraint as follows:

S(Q, D) =

∑
e∈Q∩D

cmod(e, Q)·(
N

df(t)
)
0.35 ·f(e, Q) (6)

· cmod(e, D)
cmod(e, D)+b+

b×|D|
avdl

where f(e,Q) is the newly proposed regular-
ization function as shown in Equation (3). This
method is denoted as Balanced, and can be shown
that it satisfies both constraints.

Table 1: Statistics of collections.
# of unique tokens AvgDL AvgQL11 AvgQL12

Term 263,356 2,659 10.23 8.82
Concept 58,192 2,673 8.79 7.81

5 Experiments

5.1 Experiment Setup
We conduct experiments using two data sets from
the TREC Medical Records track 2011 and 2012.

608



Table 2: Description of Methods
Name Representation Ranking strategies

Term-BL Term F2-EXP (i.e., Equation (4))
Concept-BL Concept (i.e., Section 3.3) F2-EXP (i.e., Equation (4))

TSConcept-BL Task specific concept ((Limsopatham et al., 2013d)) F2-EXP (i.e., Equation (4))
Unified Concept (i.e., Section 4.2) F2-EXP + Unified (i.e., Equation (5))

Balanced Concept (i.e., Section 4.3) F2-EXP + Balanced (i.e., Equation (6))

Table 3: Performance under optimized parameter settings
Med11 Med12

MAP bpref infNDCG infAP

Term-BL 0.3474 0.4727 0.4695 0.2106
Concept-BL 0.3967 0.5476 0.5243 0.2497

TSConcept-BL 0.3964 0.5329 0.5283 0.2694
Unified 0.4235T 0.5443T 0.5416T 0.2586T

Balanced 0.4561T ,C ,TS 0.5697T ,C ,TS 0.5767T ,C ,TS 0.2859T ,C ,TS

The data sets are denoted as Med11 and Med12.
Both data sets used the same document collection
with 100,866 medical records, each of which is as-
sociated with a unique patient visit to the hospi-
tal or emergency department. Since the task is to
retrieve relevant visits, we merged all the records
from a visit to form a single document for the visit,
which leads to 17,198 documents in the collection.
There are 34 queries in Med11 and 47 in Med12.
These queries were developed by domain experts
based on the “inclusion criteria” of a clinical study
(Voorhees and Tong, 2011; Voorhees and Hersh,
2012).

After applying MetaMap to both documents and
queries, we can construct a concept-based collec-
tion. Since documents are often much longer, we
can first segment them into sentences, get the map-
ping results for each sentence, and then merge
them together to generate the concept-based rep-
resentation for the documents.

Table 1 compares the statistics of the term-
based and the concept-based collections, including
the number of unique tokens in the collection (i.e.,
the number of terms for term-based representa-
tion and the number of concepts for concept-based
representation), the average number of tokens in
the documents (AvgDL) and the average number
of tokens in the queries for these two collections
(AvgQL11 and AvgQL12). It is interesting to see
that the number of unique tokens is much smaller
when using the concept-based indexing. This is
expected since terms are semantically related and
a group of related terms would be mapped to one
semantic concept. Moreover, we observe that the

document length and query length are similar for
both collections. This is caused by the fact that
concepts are related and the MetaMap would map
an aspect to multiple related concepts.

Table 2 summarizes the methods that we com-
pare in the experiments. Following the evalua-
tion methodology used in the medical record track,
we use MAP@1000 as the primary measure for
Med11 and also report bpref. For Med12, we take
infNDCG@100 as the primary measure and also
report infAP@100. Different measures were cho-
sen for these two sets mainly because different
pooling strategies were used to create the judg-
ment pools (Voorhees and Hersh, 2012).

5.2 Performance Comparison

Table 3 shows the performance under optimized
parameter settings for all the methods over both
data sets. The performance is optimized in terms
of MAP in Med11, and infNDCG in Med12, re-
spectively. α and b are tuned from 0 to 1 with the
step 0.1. Note that T , C and TS indicate improve-
ment over Term-BL, Concept-BL and TSConcept-
BL is statistically significant at 0.05 level based on
Wilcoxon signed-rank test, respectively.

Results show that Balanced method can signifi-
cantly improve the retrieval performance over both
collections. Unified method outperforms the base-
line methods in terms of the primary measure on
both collections, although it fails to improve the
infAP on Med12 for one baseline method. It is not
surprising to see that Balanced method is more ef-
fective than Unified since the former satisfies both
of the proposed retrieval constraints while the lat-

609



Table 4: Testing Performance
Trained on Med12 Med11
Tested on Med11 Med12
Measures MAP bpref infNDCG infAP

Term-BL 0.3451 0.4682 0.4640 0.2040
Concept-BL 0.3895 0.5394 0.5194 0.2441

TSConcept-BL 0.3901 0.5286 0.5208 0.2662
Unified 0.4176T,C 0.5391T 0.5346T 0.2514T

Balanced 0.4497T ,C ,TS 0.5627T ,C ,TS 0.5736T ,C ,TS 0.2811T ,C ,TS

ter satisfies only one. Finally, we noticed that
the performance difference between TSConcept-
BL and Concept-BL is not as significant as the
ones reported in the previous study (Limsopatham
et al., 2013d), which is probably caused by the
difference of problem set up (i.e., record-level vs.
visit-level as discussed in Section 3.1).

We also conduct experiments to train parame-
ters on one collection and compare the testing per-
formance on the other collection. The results are
summarized in Table 4. Clearly, Balanced is still
the most effective regularization method. The test-
ing performance is very close to the optimal per-
formance, which indicates that the proposed meth-
ods are robust with respect to the parameter set-
ting.

Moreover, we would like to point out that the
testing performance of Balanced is comparable
to the top ranked runs from the TREC Medical
records track. For example, the performance of
the best automatic system in Med11 (e.g., Cen-
gageM11R3) is 0.552 in terms of bpref, while
the performance of the best automatic system
in Med12 (e.g., udelSUM) is 0.578 in terms of
infNDCG. Note that the top system of Med12 used
multiple external resources such as Wikipedia and
Web, while we did not use such resources. More-
over, our performance might be further improved
if we apply the result filtering methods used by
many TREC participants (Leveling et al., 2012).

Table 5: Selecting representative concepts
MAP bpref

Unified (i.e., Unified-max) 0.4235 0.5443
Unified-min 0.3894 0.5202
Unified-avg 0.4164 0.5303

5.3 More Analysis

In the Unified method, we chose the concept with
the maximum IDF as the representative concept

Table 6: Estimating query aspect importance
MAP bpref

Balanced (i.e., Balanced-max) 0.4561 0.5697
Balanced-min 0.4216 0.5484
Balanced-avg 0.4397 0.5581

Table 7: Regularization components in Balanced
MAP bpref

Balanced 0.4561 0.5697
Confidence only 0.4294 0.5507
Importance only 0.4373 0.5598

among all the variants. We now conduct experi-
ments on Med11 to compare its performance with
those of using average IDF and minimum IDF
ones as the representative concept. The results are
shown in Table 5. It is clear that using maximum
IDF is the best choice, which is consistent with
our observation from the data exploratory analysis
shown in Figure 2.

In the Balanced method, we used the maximum
IDF value to estimate the query importance. We
also conduct experiments to compare its perfor-
mance with those using the minimum and aver-
age IDF values. Table 6 summarizes the results,
and shows that using the maximum IDF value per-
forms better than the other choices.

As shown in Equation (3), the Balanced method
regularizes the weights through two components:
(1) normalized confidence score of each aspect,

i.e.,
∑

e′∈Q i(e
′)∑

e′′∈A(e) i(e
′′) ; and (2) the importance of the

query aspect, i.e., ImpA(A(e)). To examine the
effectiveness of each component, we conduct ex-
periments using the modified Balanced method
with only one of the components. The results are
shown in Table 7. It is clear that both components
are essential to improve the retrieval performance.

Finally, we report the performance improve-
ment of the proposed methods over the Concept-
BL for each query in Figure 3. Clearly, both of the

610



-0.2

-0.1

 0

 0.1

 0.2

 0.3

 0.4

 0.5

 0.6

 0.7

 0.8

101 106 111 116 121 126 131 136 141 146 151 156 161 165 171 176 181 185

P
e

rf
o

rm
a

n
c
e

 D
if
fe

re
n

c
e

Query ID

Improvement(Unified)
Improvement(Balanced)

Figure 3: Improvement of proposed methods (Compared with the Concept-BL method).

proposed methods can improve the effectiveness
of most queries, and the Balanced method is more
robust than the Unified method.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Medical record retrieval is an important domain-
specific IR problem. Concept-based representa-
tion is an effective approach to dealing with am-
biguity terminology in medical domain. How-
ever, the results of the NLP tools used to gen-
erate the concept-based representation are often
not perfect. In this paper, we present a general
methodology that can use axiomatic approaches
as guidance to regularize the concept weighting
strategies to address the limitations caused by the
inaccurate concept mapping and improve the re-
trieval performance. In particular, we proposed
two weighting regularization methods based on
the relations among concepts. Experimental re-
sults show that the proposed methods can signif-
icantly outperform existing retrieval functions.

There are many interesting directions for our fu-
ture work. First, we plan to study how to automat-
ically predict whether to use concept-based index-
ing based on the quality of MetaMap results, and
explore whether the proposed methods are appli-
cable for other entity linking methods. Second,
we will study how to leverage other information
from knowledge bases to further improve the per-
formance. Third, more experiments could be con-
ducted to examine the effectiveness of the pro-
posed methods when using other ranking strate-
gies. Finally, it would be interesting to study how
to follow the proposed methodology to study other
domain-specific IR problems.

References
Gianni Amati and Cornelis Joost Van Rijsbergen.

2002. Probabilistic models of information retrieval
based on measuring the divergence from random-
ness. ACM TOIS.

Alan R. Aronson and François-Michel Lang. 2010. An
overview of metamap: historical perspective and re-
cent advances. JAMIA, 17(3):229–236.

Alan R. Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomed-
ical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap
program. In Proceedings of AMIA Symposium.

Practice Management Information Corporation. 1999.
ICD-9-CM: International Classification of Dis-
eases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification, 5th Edi-
tion. Practice Management Information Corpora-
tion.

Dina Demner-Fushman, Swapna Abhyankar, Anto-
nio Jimeno-Yepes, Russell Loane, Francois Lang,
James G. Mork, Nicholas Ide, and Alan R. Aron-
son. 2012. NLM at TREC 2012 Medical Records
Track. In Proceedings of TREC 2012.

Hui Fang and ChengXiang Zhai. 2005. An exploration
of axiomatic approaches to information retrieval. In
Proceedings of SIGIR’05.

Hui Fang, Tao Tao, and ChengXiang Zhai. 2004. A
formal study of information retrieval heuristics. In
Proceedings of SIGIR’04.

Charles P. Friedman, Adam K. Wong, and David Blu-
menthal. 2010. Achieving a nationwide learning
health system. Science Translational Medicine.

Beval Koopman, Michael Lawley, and Peter Bruza.
2011. AEHRC & QUT at TREC 2011 Medical
Track : a concept-based information retrieval ap-
proach. In Proceedings of TREC’11.

Bevan Koopman, Guido Zuccon, Anthony Nguyen,
Deanne Vickers, Luke Butt, and Peter D. Bruza.

611



2012. Exploiting SNOMED CT Concepts & Re-
lationships for Clinical Information Retrieval: Aus-
tralian e-Health Research Centre and Queensland
University of Technology at the TREC 2012 Med-
ical Track. In Proceedings of TREC’12.

Johannes Leveling, Lorraine Goeuriot, Liadh Kelly,
and Gareth J. F. Jones. 2012. DCU@TRECMed
2012: Using adhoc Baselines for Domain-Specific
Retrieval. In Proceedings of TREC 2012.

Nut Limsopatham, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ou-
nis. 2013a. Inferring conceptual relationships to
improve medical records search. In Proceedings of
OAIR’13.

Nut Limsopatham, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ou-
nis. 2013b. Learning to combine representations
for medical records search. In Proceedings of SI-
GIR’13.

Nut Limsopatham, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis.
2013c. Learning to selectively rank patients’ medi-
cal history. In Proceedings of CIKM’13.

Nut Limsopatham, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis.
2013d. A task-specific query and document repre-
sentation for medical records search. In Proceedings
of ECIR’13.

Jimmy Lin and Dina Demner-Fushman. 2006. The
role of knowledge in conceptual retrieval: a study
in the domain of clinical medicine. In Proceedings
of the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR confer-
ence on Research and development in information
retrieval, SIGIR ’06, pages 99–106, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Carolyn E Lipscomb. 2000. Medical Subject Headings
(MeSH). The Medical Library Association.

Christopher D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Schutze.
2008. Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Bridget T. McInnes, Ted Pedersen, and Serguei V. S.
Pakhomov. 2009. UMLS-Interface and UMLS-
Similarity : Open Source Software for Measuring
Paths and Semantic Similarity. In Proceedings of
AMIA Symposium.

Yanjun Qi and Pierre-Francois Laquerre. 2012. Re-
trieving Medical Records: NEC Labs America at
TREC 2012 Medical Record Track. In Proceedings
of TREC 2012.

S.E. Robertson, S. Walker, S. Jones, M.M. Hancock-
Beaulieu, and M. Gatford. 1996. Okapi at TREC-3.
pages 109–126.

Charles Safran, Meryl Bloomrosen, W. Edward
Hammond, Steven Labkoff, Suzanne Markel-Fox,
Paul C. Tang, and Don E. Detmer. 2007. White pa-
per: Toward a national framework for the secondary
use of health data: An american medical informatics
association white paper. JAMIA, 14(1):1–9.

Amit Singhal, Chris Buckley, and Mandar Mitra. 1996.
Pivoted document length normalization. In Pro-
ceedings of SIGIR’96.

Ellen M. Voorhees and William Hersh. 2012.
Overview of the TREC 2012 Medical Records
Track. In Proceedings of TREC 2012.

Ellen M. Voorhees and Richard M. Tong. 2011.
Overview of the TREC 2011 Medical Records
Track. In Proceedings of TREC 2011.

Xin Yan, Raymond Y.K. Lau, Dawei Song, Xue Li,
and Jian Ma. 2011. Toward a semantic granular-
ity model for domain-specific information retrieval.
ACM TOIS.

Chengxiang Zhai and John Lafferty. 2001. A study
of smoothing methods for language models applied
to Ad Hoc information retrieval. In Proceedings of
SIGIR’01.

Wei Zheng and Hui Fang. 2010. Query aspect
based term weighting regularization in information
retrieval. In Proceedings of ECIR’10.

Wei Zhou, Clement Yu, Neil Smalheiser, Vetle Torvik,
and Jie Hong. 2007. Knowledge-intensive concep-
tual retrieval and passage extraction of biomedical
literature. In Proceedings of SIGIR’07.

Dongqing Zhu and Ben Carterette. 2012. Combining
multi-level evidence for medical record retrieval. In
Proceedings of SHB’12.

612


