



















































Negation Focus Identification with Contextual Discourse Information


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 522–530,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Negation Focus Identification with Contextual Discourse Information 

 
 

Bowei Zou        Qiaoming Zhu       Guodong Zhou* 
Natural Language Processing Lab, School of Computer Science and Technology 

Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China 
zoubowei@gmail.com, {qmzhu, gdzhou}@suda.edu.cn 

 
  

 

Abstract 

Negative expressions are common in natural 
language text and play a critical role in in-
formation extraction. However, the perfor-
mances of current systems are far from satis-
faction, largely due to its focus on intra-
sentence information and its failure to con-
sider inter-sentence information. In this paper, 
we propose a graph model to enrich intra-
sentence features with inter-sentence features 
from both lexical and topic perspectives. 
Evaluation on the *SEM 2012 shared task 
corpus indicates the usefulness of contextual 
discourse information in negation focus iden-
tification and justifies the effectiveness of our 
graph model in capturing such global infor-
mation. * 

1 Introduction 
Negation is a grammatical category which com-
prises various kinds of devices to reverse the 
truth value of a proposition (Morante and 
Sporleder, 2012). For example, sentence (1) 
could be interpreted as it is not the case that he 
stopped. 

(1) He didn't stop. 

Negation expressions are common in natural 
language text. According to the statistics on bio-
medical literature genre (Vincze et al., 2008), 
19.44% of sentences contain negative expres-
sions. The percentage rises to 22.5% on Conan 
Doyle stories (Morante and Daelemans, 2012). It 
is interesting that a negative sentence may have 
both negative and positive meanings. For exam-
ple, sentence (2) could be interpreted as He 
stopped, but not until he got to Jackson Hole 
with positive part he stopped and negative part 
until he got to Jackson Hole. Moreover, a nega-

                                                 
* Corresponding author 

tive expression normally interacts with some 
special part in the sentence, referred as negation 
focus in linguistics. Formally, negation focus is 
defined as the special part in the sentence, which 
is most prominently or explicitly negated by a 
negative expression. Hereafter, we denote nega-
tive expression in boldface and negation focus 
underlined. 

(2) He didn't stop until he got to Jackson Hole. 

While people tend to employ stress or intona-
tion in speech to emphasize negation focus and 
thus it is easy to identify negation focus in 
speech corpora, such stress or intonation infor-
mation often misses in the dominating text cor-
pora. This poses serious challenges on negation 
focus identification. Current studies (e.g., Blanco 
and Moldovan, 2011; Rosenberg and Bergler, 
2012) sort to various kinds of intra-sentence in-
formation, such as lexical features, syntactic fea-
tures, semantic role features and so on, ignoring 
less-obvious inter-sentence information. This 
largely defers the performance of negation focus 
identification and its wide applications, since 
such contextual discourse information plays a 
critical role on negation focus identification. 
Take following sentence as an example. 

(3) Helen didn’t allow her youngest son to 
play the violin. 

In sentence (3), there are several scenarios on 
identification of negation focus, with regard to 
negation expression n’t, given different contexts: 
Scenario A: Given sentence But her husband did 
as next sentence, the negation focus should be 
Helen, yielding interpretation the person who 
didn’t allow the youngest son to play the violin is 
Helen but not her husband. 
Scenario B: Given sentence She thought that he 
didn’t have the artistic talent like her eldest son 
as next sentence, the negation focus should be 
the youngest son, yielding interpretation Helen 

522



thought that her eldest son had the talent to play 
the violin, but the youngest son didn’t. 
Scenario C: Given sentence Because of her 
neighbors’ protests as previous sentence, the ne-
gation focus should be play the violin, yielding 
interpretation Helen didn’t allow her youngest 
son to play the violin, but it didn’t show whether 
he was allowed to do other things. 

In this paper, to well accommodate such con-
textual discourse information in negation focus 
identification, we propose a graph model to en-
rich normal intra-sentence features with various 
kinds of inter-sentence features from both lexical 
and topic perspectives. Besides, the standard 
PageRank algorithm is employed to optimize the 
graph model. Evaluation on the *SEM 2012 
shared task corpus (Morante and Blanco, 2012) 
justifies our approach over several strong base-
lines. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 overviews the related work. Section 3 
presents several strong baselines on negation fo-
cus identification with only intra-sentence fea-
tures. Section 4 introduces our topic-driven 
word-based graph model with contextual dis-
course information. Section 5 reports the exper-
imental results and analysis. Finally, we con-
clude our work in Section 6. 

2 Related Work 
Earlier studies of negation were almost in lin-
guistics (e.g. Horn, 1989; van der Wouden, 
1997), and there were only a few in natural lan-
guage processing with focus on negation recog-
nition in the biomedical domain. For example, 
Chapman et al. (2001) developed a rule-based 
negation recognition system, NegEx, to deter-
mine whether a finding mentioned within narra-
tive medical reports is present or absent. Since 
the release of the BioScope corpus (Vincze et al., 
2008), a freely available resource consisting of 
medical and biological texts, machine learning 
approaches begin to dominate the research on 
negation recognition (e.g. Morante et al., 2008; 
Li et al., 2010). 

Generally, negation recognition includes three 
subtasks: cue detection, which detects and identi-
fies possible negative expressions in a sentence, 
scope resolution, which determines the grammat-
ical scope in a sentence affected by a negative 
expression, and focus identification, which iden-
tifies the constituent in a sentence most promi-
nently or explicitly negated by a negative expres-

sion. This paper concentrates on the third subtask, 
negation focus identification. 

Due to the increasing demand on deep under-
standing of natural language text, negation 
recognition has been drawing more and more 
attention in recent years, with a series of shared 
tasks and workshops, however, with focus on cue 
detection and scope resolution, such as the Bi-
oNLP 2009 shared task for negative event detec-
tion (Kim et al., 2009) and the ACL 2010 Work-
shop for scope resolution of negation and specu-
lation (Morante and Sporleder, 2010), followed 
by a special issue of Computational Linguistics 
(Morante and Sporleder, 2012) for modality and 
negation. 

The research on negation focus identification 
was pioneered by Blanco and Moldovan (2011), 
who investigated the negation phenomenon in 
semantic relations and proposed a supervised 
learning approach to identify the focus of a nega-
tion expression. However, although Morante and 
Blanco (2012) proposed negation focus identifi-
cation as one of the *SEM’2012 shared tasks, 
only one team (Rosenberg and Bergler, 2012) 1 
participated in this task. They identified negation 
focus using three kinds of heuristics and 
achieved 58.40 in F1-measure. This indicates 
great expectation in negation focus identification. 

The key problem in current research on nega-
tion focus identification is its focus on intra-
sentence information and large ignorance of in-
ter-sentence information, which plays a critical 
role in the success of negation focus identifica-
tion. For example, Ding (2011) made a qualita-
tive analysis on implied negations in conversa-
tion and attempted to determine whether a sen-
tence was negated by context information, from 
the linguistic perspective. Moreover, a negation 
focus is always associated with authors’ intention 
in article. This indicates the great challenges in 
negation focus identification. 

3 Baselines 
Negation focus identification in *SEM’2012 
shared tasks is restricted to verbal negations an-
notated with MNEG in PropBank, with only the 
constituent belonging to a semantic role selected 
as negation focus. Normally, a verbal negation 
expression (not or n’t) is grammatically associat-
ed with its corresponding verb (e.g., He didn’t 
stop). For details on annotation guidelines and 

                                                 
1 In *SEM’2013, the shared task is changed with focus on 
"Semantic Textual Similarity". 

523



examples for verbal negations, please refer to 
Blanco and Moldovan (2011). 

For comparison, we choose the state-of-the-art 
system described in Blanco and Moldovan 
(2011), which employed various kinds of syntac-
tic features and semantic role features, as one of 
our baselines. Since this system adopted C4.5 for 
training, we name it as BaselineC4.5. In order to 
provide a stronger baseline, besides those fea-
tures adopted in BaselineC4.5, we added more re-
fined intra-sentence features and adopted ranking 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) model for train-
ing. We name it as BaselineSVM. 

Following is a list of features adopted in the 
two baselines, for both BaselineC4.5 and Base-
lineSVM, 
 Basic features: first token and its part-of-

speech (POS) tag of the focus candidate; the 
number of tokens in the focus candidate; 
relative position of the focus candidate 
among all the roles present in the sentence; 
negated verb and its POS tag of the negative 
expression;  

 Syntactic features: the sequence of words 
from the beginning of the governing VP to 
the negated verb; the sequence of POS tags 
from the beginning of the governing VP to 
the negated verb; whether the governing VP 
contains a CC; whether the governing VP 
contains a RB. 

 Semantic features: the syntactic label of se-
mantic role A1; whether A1 contains POS 
tag DT, JJ, PRP, CD, RB, VB, and WP, as 
defined in Blanco and Moldovan (2011); 
whether A1 contains token any, anybody, an-
ymore, anyone, anything, anytime, anywhere, 
certain, enough, full, many, much, other, 
some, specifics, too, and until, as defined in 
Blanco and Moldovan (2011); the syntactic 
label of the first semantic role in the sentence; 
the semantic label of the last semantic role in 
the sentence; the thematic role for 
A0/A1/A2/A3/A4 of the negated predicate. 

and for BaselineSVM only, 
 Basic features: the named entity and its type 

in the focus candidate; relative position of the 
focus candidate to the negative expression 
(before or after). 

 Syntactic features: the dependency path and 
its depth from the focus candidate to the neg-
ative expression; the constituent path and its 
depth from the focus candidate to the nega-
tive expression; 

4 Exploring Contextual Discourse In-
formation for Negation Focus Identi-
fication 

While some of negation focuses could be identi-
fied by only intra-sentence information, others 
must be identified by contextual discourse in-
formation. Section 1 illustrates the necessity of 
such contextual discourse information in nega-
tion focus identification by giving three scenarios 
of different discourse contexts for negation ex-
pression n’t in sentence (3). 

For better illustration of the importance of 
contextual discourse information, Table 1 shows 
the statistics of intra- and inter-sentence infor-
mation necessary for manual negation focus 
identification with 100 instances randomly ex-
tracted from the held-out dataset of *SEM'2012 
shared task corpus. It shows that only 17 instanc-
es can be identified by intra-sentence information. 
It is surprising that inter-sentence information is 
indispensable in 77 instances, among which 42 
instances need only inter-sentence information 
and 35 instances need both intra- and inter-
sentence information. This indicates the great 
importance of contextual discourse information 
on negation focus identification. It is also inter-
esting to note 6 instances are hard to determine 
even given both intra- and inter-sentence infor-
mation. 

Info Number
#Intra-Sentence Only 17 
#Inter-Sentence Only 42 

#Both 35 
#Hard to Identify 6 

(Note: "Hard to Identify" means that it is hard for a 
human being to identify the negation focus even 
given both intra- and inter-sentence information.) 

Table 1. Statistics of intra- and inter-sentence 
information on negation focus identification. 

Statistically, we find that negation focus is al-
ways related with what authors repeatedly states 
in discourse context. This explains why contex-
tual discourse information could help identify 
negation focus. While inter-sentence information 
provides the global characteristics from the dis-
course context perspective and intra-sentence 
information provides the local features from lex-
ical, syntactic and semantic perspectives, both 
have their own contributions on negation focus 
identification. 

In this paper, we first propose a graph model 
to gauge the importance of contextual discourse 

524



information. Then, we incorporate both intra- 
and inter-sentence features into a machine learn-
ing-based framework for negation focus identifi-
cation. 

4.1 Graph Model 

Graph models have been proven successful in 
many NLP applications, especially in represent-
ing the link relationships between words or sen-
tences (Wan and Yang, 2008; Li et al., 2009). 
Generally, such models could construct a graph 
to compute the relevance between document 
theme and words. 

In this paper, we propose a graph model to 
represent the contextual discourse information 
from both lexical and topic perspectives. In par-
ticular, a word-based graph model is proposed to 
represent the explicit relatedness among words in 
a discourse from the lexical perspective, while a 
topic-driven word-based model is proposed to 
enrich the implicit relatedness between words, by 
adding one more layer to the word-based graph 
model in representing the global topic distribu-
tion of the whole dataset. Besides, the PageRank 
algorithm (Page et al., 1998) is adopted to opti-
mize the graph model. 

Word-based Graph Model: 

A word-based graph model can be defined as 
Gword (W, E), where W={wi} is the set of words in 
one document and E={eij|wi, wj ∈W} is the set of 
directed edges between these words, as shown in 
Figure 1. 

 
Figure 1. Word-based graph model. 

In the word-based graph model, word node wi 
is weighted to represent the correlation of the 
word with authors’ intention. Since such correla-
tion is more from the semantic perspective than 
the grammatical perspective, only content words 
are considered in our graph model, ignoring 
functional words (e.g., the, to,…). Especially, the 
content words limited to those with part-of-

speech tags of JJ, NN, PRP, and VB. For sim-
plicity, the weight of word node wi is initialized 
to 1. 

In addition, directed edge eij is weighted to 
represent the relatedness between word wi and 
word wj in a document with transition probability 
P(j|i) from i to j, which is normalized as follows: 

| ,∑ ,                    (1) 
where k represents the nodes in discourse, and 
Sim(wi,wj) denotes the similarity between wi and 
wj. In this paper, two kinds of information are 
used to calculate the similarity between words. 
One is word co-occurrence (if word wi and word 
wj occur in the same sentence or in the adjacent 
sentences, Sim(wi,wj) increases 1), and the other 
is WordNet (Miller, 1995) based similarity. 
Please note that Sim(wi,wi) = 0 to avoid self-
transition, and Sim(wi,wj) and Sim(wj,wi) may not 
be equal. 

Finally, the weights of word nodes are calcu-
lated using the PageRank algorithm as follows: 

1 
∑ |

																																		 1                                        (2) 
where d is the damping factor as in the PageRank 
algorithm. 

Topic-driven Word-based Graph Model 

While the above word-based graph model can 
well capture the relatedness between content 
words, it can only partially model the focus of a 
negation expression since negation focus is more 
directly related with topic than content. In order 
to reduce the gap, we propose a topic-driven 
word-based model by adding one more layer to 
refine the word-based graph model over the 
global topic distribution, as shown in Figure 2.  

 
Figure 2. Topic-driven word-based graph model. 

525



Here, the topics are extracted from all the doc-
uments in the *SEM 2012 shared task using the 
LDA Gibbs Sampling algorithm (Griffiths, 2002). 
In the topic-driven word-based graph model, the 
first layer denotes the relatedness among content 
words as captured in the above word-based graph 
model, and the second layer denotes the topic 
distribution, with the dashed lines between these 
two layers indicating the word-topic model re-
turn by LDA. 

Formally, the topic-driven word-based two-
layer graph is defined as Gtopic (W, T, Ew, Et), 
where W={wi} is the set of words in one docu-
ment and T={ti} is the set of topics in all docu-
ments; Ew={ewij|wi, wj ∈W} is the set of directed 
edges between words and Et ={etij|wi∈W, tj ∈T} 
is the set of undirected edges between words and 
topics; transition probability Pw(j|i) of ewij is de-
fined as the same as P(j|i) of the word-based 
graph model. Besides, transition probability Pt 
(i,m) of etij in the word-topic model is defined as: 

, ,∑ ,                 (3) 
where Rel(wi, tm) is the weight of word wi in top-
ic tm calculated by the LDA Gibbs Sampling al-
gorithm.  On the basis, the transition probability 
Pw (j|i) of ewij is updated by calculating as fol-
lowing: 

′ | θ ∙ | 1 θ ∙ , ,∑ , ,   
(4) 

where k represents all topics linked to both word 
wi and word wj, and θ∈[0,1] is the coefficient 
controlling the relative contributions from the 
lexical information in current document and the 
topic information in all documents. 

Finally, the weights of word nodes are calcu-
lated using the PageRank algorithm as follows: 

1 
∑ ′ |

																																		 1                                        (5) 
where d is the damping factor as in the PageRank 
algorithm. 

4.2 Negation Focus Identification via 
Graph Model 

Given the graph models and the PageRank opti-
mization algorithm discussed above, four kinds 
of contextual discourse information are extracted 
as inter-sentence features (Table 2). 

In particular, the total weight and the max 
weight of words in the focus candidate are calcu-
lated as follows: 

∑         (6) 
max     (7) 

where i represents the content words in the focus 
candidate. These two kinds of weights focus on 
different aspects about the focus candidate with 
the former on the contribution of content words, 
which is more beneficial for a long focus candi-
date, and the latter biased towards the focus can-
didate which contains some critical word in a 
discourse. 

No Feature 

1 Total weight of words in the focus candi-date using the co-occurrence similarity. 

2 Max weight of words in the focus candi-date using the co-occurrence similarity. 

3 Total weight of words in the focus candi-date using the WordNet similarity. 

4 Max weight of words in the focus candi-date using the WordNet similarity. 
Table 2. Inter-sentence features extracted from 

graph model. 

For evaluating the contribution of contextual 
discourse information on negation focus identifi-
cation directly, we incorporate the four inter-
sentence features from the topic-driven word-
based graph model into a negation focus identifi-
er. 

5 Experimentation 
In this section, we describe experimental settings 
and systematically evaluate our negation focus 
identification approach with focus on exploring 
the effectiveness of contextual discourse infor-
mation. 

5.1 Experimental Settings 

Dataset 

In all our experiments, we employ the 
*SEM'2012 shared task corpus (Morante and 
Blanco, 2012)2 . As a freely downloadable re-
source, the *SEM shared task corpus is annotated 
on top of PropBank, which uses the WSJ section 
of the Penn TreeBank. In particular, negation 
focus annotation on this corpus is restricted to 
verbal negations (with corresponding mark 

                                                 
2 http://www.clips.ua.ac.be/sem2012-st-neg/ 

526



MNEG in PropBank). On 50% of the corpus an-
notated by two annotators, the inter-annotator 
agreement was 0.72 (Blanco and Moldovan, 
2011). Along with negation focus annotation, 
this corpus also contains other annotations, such 
as POS tag, named entity, chunk, constituent tree, 
dependency tree, and semantic role. 

In total, this corpus provides 3,544 instances 
of negation focus annotations. For fair compari-
son, we adopt the same partition as *SEM’2012 
shared task in all our experiments, i.e., with 
2,302 for training, 530 for development, and 712 
for testing. Although for each instance, the cor-
pus only provides the current sentence, the pre-
vious and next sentences as its context, we sort to 
the Penn TreeBank3 to obtain the corresponding 
document as its discourse context. 

Evaluation Metrics 

Same as the *SEM'2012 shared task, the evalua-
tion is made using precision, recall, and F1-score. 
Especially, a true positive (TP) requires an exact 
match for the negation focus, a false positive (FP) 
occurs when a system predicts a non-existing 
negation focus, and a false negative (FN) occurs 
when the gold annotations specify a negation 
focus but the system makes no prediction. For 
each instance, the predicted focus is considered 
correct if it is a complete match with a gold an-
notation. 

Beside, to show whether an improvement is 
significant, we conducted significance testing 
using z-test, as described in Blanco and Moldo-
van (2011). 

Toolkits 

In our experiments, we report not only the de-
fault performance with gold additional annotated 
features provided by the *SEM'2012 shared task 
corpus and the Penn TreeBank, but also the per-
formance with various kinds of features extracted 
automatically, using following toolkits: 
 Syntactic Parser: We employ the Stanford 

Parser4 (Klein and Manning, 2003; De Marn-
effe et al., 2006) for tokenization, constituent 
and dependency parsing. 

 Named Entity Recognizer: We employ the 
Stanford NER5 (Finkel et al., 2005) to obtain 
named entities. 

                                                 
3 http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~treebank/ 
4 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml 
5 http://nlp.stanford.edu/ner/ 

 Semantic Role Labeler: We employ the se-
mantic role labeler, as described in Punyaka-
nok et al (2008). 

 Topic Modeler: For estimating transition 
probability Pt(i,m), we employ 
GibbsLDA++6, an LDA model using Gibbs 
Sampling technique for parameter estimation 
and inference. 

 Classifier: We employ SVMLight 7 with default 
parameters as our classifier. 

5.2 Experimental Results 

With Only Intra-sentence Information 

Table 3 shows the performance of the two base-
lines, the decision tree-based classifier as in 
Blanco and Moldovan (2011) and our ranking 
SVM-based classifier. It shows that our ranking 
SVM-based baseline slightly improves the F1-
measure by 2.52% over the decision tree-based 
baseline, largely due to the incorporation of more 
refined features.  

System P(%) R(%) F1 
BaselineC4.5 66.73 49.93 57.12
BaselineSVM 60.22 59.07 59.64

Table 3. Performance of baselines with only 
intra-sentence information. 

Error analysis of the ranking SVM-based 
baseline on development data shows that 72% of 
them are caused by the ignorance of inter-
sentence information. For example, among the 
42 instances listed in the category of “#Inter-
Sentence Only” in Table 1, only 7 instances can 
be identified correctly by the ranking SVM-
based classifier. With about 4 focus candidates in 
one sentence on average, this percentage is even 
lower than random. 

With Only Inter-sentence Information 

For exploring the usefulness of pure contextual 
discourse information in negation focus identifi-
cation, we only employ inter-sentence features 
into ranking SVM-based classifier. First of all, 
we estimate two parameters for our topic-driven 
word-based graph model: topic number T for 
topic model and coefficient θ between Pw(j|i) and 
Pt (i,m) in Formula 4. 

Given the LDA Gibbs Sampling model with 
parameters α = 50/T and β = 0.1, we vary T from 
20 to 100 with an interval of 10 to find the opti-

                                                 
6 http://gibbslda.sourceforge.net/ 
7 http://svmlight.joachims.org 

527



mal T. Figure 3 shows the experiment results of 
varying T (with θ = 0.5) on development data. It 
shows that the best performance is achieved 
when T = 50 with 51.11 in F1). Therefore, we set 
T as 50 in our following experiments. 

 
Figure 3. Performance with varying T. 

For parameter θ, a trade-off between the tran-
sition probability Pw(j|i) (word to word) and the 
transition probability Pt (i,m) (word and topic) to 
update P’w(j|i), we vary it from 0 to 1 with an 
interval of 0.1. Figure 4 shows the experiment 
results of varying θ (with T=50) on development 
data. It shows that the best performance is 
achieved when θ = 0.6, which are adopted here-
after in all our experiments. This indicates that 
direct lexical information in current document 
contributes more than indirect topic information 
in all documents on negation focus identification. 
It also shows that direct lexical information in 
current document and indirect topic information 
in all documents are much complementary on 
negation focus identification. 

 
Figure 4. Performance with varying θ. 

System P(%) R(%) F1 
using word-based graph 
model  45.62 42.02 43.75

using topic-driven word-
based graph model 54.59 50.76 52.61

Table 4. Performance with only inter-sentence 
information. 

Table 4 shows the performance of negation 
focus identification with only inter-sentence fea-
tures. It also shows that the system with inter-
sentence features from the topic-driven word-
based graph model significantly improves the 
F1-measure by 8.86 over the system with inter-
sentence features from the word-based graph 
model, largely due to the usefulness of topic in-
formation. 

In comparison with Table 3, it shows that the 
system with only intra-sentence features achieves 
better performance than the one with only inter-
sentence features (59.64 vs. 52.61 in F1-
measure). 

With both Intra- and Inter-sentence In-
formation 

Table 5 shows that enriching intra-sentence fea-
tures with inter-sentence features significantly 
(p<0.01) improve the performance by 9.85 in F1-
measure than the better baseline. This indicates 
the usefulness of such contextual discourse in-
formation and the effectiveness of our topic-
driven word-based graph model in negation fo-
cus identification.  

System P(%) R(%) F1 
BaselineC4.5 with intra 
feat. only 66.73 49.93 57.12

BaselineSVM with intra 
feat. only 60.22 59.07 59.64

Ours with Both feat. 
using word-based GM 64.93 62.47 63.68

Ours  with  Both   feat. 
using    topic-driven 
word-based GM

71.67 67.43 69.49

(Note: “feat.” denotes features; “GM” denotes graph model.) 

Table 5. Performance comparison of systems on 
negation focus identification. 

System P(%) R(%) F1 
BaselineC4.5 with intra 
feat. only (auto) 60.94 44.62 51.52

BaselineSVM with intra 
feat. Only (auto) 53.81 51.67 52.72

Ours with Both feat. 
using word-based GM 
(auto) 

58.77 57.19 57.97

Ours  with  Both   feat. 
using    topic-driven 
word-based GM (auto) 

66.74 64.53 65.62

Table 6. Performance comparison of systems on 
negation focus identification with automatically 

extracted features. 

528



Besides, Table 6 shows the performance of 
our best system with all features automatically 
extracted using the toolkits as described in Sec-
tion 5.1. Compared with our best system employ-
ing gold additional annotated features (the last 
line in Table 5), the homologous system with 
automatically extracted features (the last line in 
Table 6) only decrease of less than 4 in F1-
measure. This demonstrates the achievability of 
our approach. 

In comparison with the best-reported perfor-
mance on the *SEM’2012 shared task (Rosen-
berg and Bergler, 2012), our system performs 
better by about 11 in F-measure.  

5.3 Discussion 

While this paper verifies the usefulness of con-
textual discourse information on negation focus 
identification, the performance with only inter-
sentence features is still weaker than that with 
only intra-sentence features. There are two main 
reasons. On the one hand, the former employs an 
unsupervised approach without prior knowledge 
for training. On the other hand, the usefulness of 
inter-sentence features depends on the assump-
tion that a negation focus relates to the meaning 
of which is most relevant to authors’ intention in 
a discourse. If there lacks relevant information in 
a discourse context, negation focus will become 
difficult to be identified only by inter-sentence 
features.  

Error analysis also shows that some of the ne-
gation focuses are very difficult to be identified, 
even for a human being. Consider the sentence (3) 
in Section 1, if given sentence because of her 
neighbors' protests, but her husband doesn’t 
think so as its following context, both Helen and 
to play the violin can become the negation focus. 
Moreover, the inter-annotator agreement in the 
first round of negation focus annotation can only 
reach 0.72 (Blanco and Moldovan, 2011). This 
indicates inherent difficulty in negation focus 
identification. 

6 Conclusion 
In this paper, we propose a graph model to enrich 
intra-sentence features with inter-sentence fea-
tures from both lexical and topic perspectives. In 
this graph model, the relatedness between words 
is calculated by word co-occurrence, WordNet-
based similarity, and topic-driven similarity. 
Evaluation on the *SEM 2012 shared task corpus 
indicates the usefulness of contextual discourse 
information on negation focus identification and 

our graph model in capturing such global infor-
mation. 

In future work, we will focus on exploring 
more contextual discourse information via the 
graph model and better ways of integrating intra- 
and inter-sentence information on negation focus 
identification. 

Acknowledgments 
This research is supported by the National Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China, No.61272260, 
No.61331011, No.61273320, the Natural Science 
Foundation of Jiangsu Province, No. BK2011282, 
the Major Project of College Natural Science 
Foundation of Jiangsu Province, 
No.11KIJ520003, and the Graduates Project of 
Science and Innovation, No. CXZZ12_0818. The 
authors would like to thank the anonymous re-
viewers for their insightful comments and sug-
gestions. Our sincere thanks are also extended to 
Dr. Zhongqing Wang for his valuable discus-
sions during this study. 

Reference 
Eduardo Blanco and Dan Moldovan. 2011. Semantic 

Representation of Negation Using Focus Detection. 
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 
581-589, Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. 

Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury, 
Gregory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001. 
A simple algorithm for identifying negated find-
ings and diseases in discharge summaries. Journal 
of Biomedical Informatics, 34:301-310. 

Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Bill MacCartney and 
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating Typed 
Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure Parses. 
In Proceedings of  LREC’2006. 

Yun Ding. 2011. Implied Negation in Discourse. 
Journal of Theory and Practice in Language Stud-
ies, 1(1): 44-51, Jan 2011. 

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher 
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local infor-
mation into information extraction systems by 
gibbs sampling. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual 
Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 363-370, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. 

Tom Griffiths. 2002. Gibbs sampling in the generative 
model of Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Tech. rep., 
Stanford University. 

Laurence R Horn. 1989. A Natural History of Nega-
tion. Chicago University Press, Chicago, IL. 

529



Fangtao Li, Yang Tang, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan 
Zhu. 2009. Answering Opinion Questions with 
Random Walks on Graphs. In Proceedings of the 
47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th 
IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 737-745, Suntec, 
Singapore, 2-7 Aug 2009. 

Junhui Li, Guodong Zhou, Hongling Wang, and Qi-
aoming Zhu. 2010. Learning the Scope of Negation 
via Shallow Semantic Parsing. In Proceedings of 
the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics. Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 671-679. 

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, 
Yoshinobu Kano, and Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2009. Over-
view of BioNLP'09 Shared Task on Event Extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the BioNLP'2009 Workshop 
Companion Volume for Shared Task. Stroudsburg, 
PA, USA: Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 1-9. 

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate Unlexicalized Parsing. In Proceedings of the 
41st Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 423-430. 

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database 
for english. Commun. ACM, 38(11):39-41. 

Roser Morante, Anthony Liekens and Walter Daele-
mans. 2008. Learning the Scope of Negation in Bi-
omedical Texts. In Proceedings of the 2008 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 715-724, Honolulu, Oc-
tober 2008. 

Roser Morante and Caroline Sporleder, editors. 2010. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and 
Speculation in Natural Language Processing. Uni-
versity of Antwerp, Uppsala, Sweden. 

Roser Morante and Eduardo Blanco. 2012. *SEM 
2012 Shared Task: Resolving the Scope and Focus 
of Negation. In Proceedings of the First Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics 
(*SEM), pages 265-274, Montreal, Canada, June 7-
8, 2012. 

Roser Morante and Caroline Sporleder. 2012. Modali-
ty and Negation: An Introduction to the Special Is-
sue. Computational Linguistics, 2012, 38(2): 223-
260. 

Roser Morante and Walter Daelemans. 2012. Conan 
Doyle-neg: Annotation of negation cues and their 
scope in Conan Doyle stories. In Proceedings of 
LREC 2012, Istambul. 

Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and 
Terry Winograd. 1998. The pagerank citation rank-
ing: Bringing order to the web. Technical report, 
Stanford University. 

Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth, and Wen-tau Yih. 2008. 
The importance of syntactic parsing and inference 

in semantic role labeling. Computational Linguis-
tics, 34(2):257-287, June. 

Sabine Rosenberg and Sabine Bergler. 2012. UCon-
cordia: CLaC Negation Focus Detection at *Sem 
2012. In Proceedings of the First Joint Conference 
on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), 
pages 294-300, Montreal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. 

Ton van der Wouden. 1997. Negative Contexts: Col-
location, Polarity, and Multiple Negation. 
Routledge, London. 

Veronika Vincze, György Szarvas, Richárd Farkas, 
György Móra, and János Csirik. 2008. The Bio-
Scope corpus: biomedical texts annotated for un-
certainty,negation and their scopes. BMC Bioin-
formatics, 9(Suppl 11):S9. 

Xiaojun Wan and Jianwu Yang. 2008. Multi-
document summarization using cluster-based link 
analysis. In Proceedings of the 31st annual inter-
national ACM SIGIR conference on Research and 
development in information retrieval, pages 299-
306. 

 

530


