



















































Automatic Labelling of Topic Models Learned from Twitter by Summarisation


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 618–624,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Labelling of Topic Models Learned from Twitter by
Summarisation

Amparo Elizabeth Cano Basave† Yulan He‡ Ruifeng Xu§
† Knowledge Media Institute, Open University, UK

‡ School of Engineering and Applied Science, Aston University, UK
§ Key Laboratory of Network Oriented Intelligent Computation

Shenzhen Graduate School, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
amparo.cano@open.ac.uk, y.he@cantab.net, xuruifeng@hitsz.edu.cn

Abstract

Latent topics derived by topic models such
as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) are
the result of hidden thematic structures
which provide further insights into the
data. The automatic labelling of such
topics derived from social media poses
however new challenges since topics may
characterise novel events happening in the
real world. Existing automatic topic la-
belling approaches which depend on exter-
nal knowledge sources become less appli-
cable here since relevant articles/concepts
of the extracted topics may not exist in ex-
ternal sources. In this paper we propose
to address the problem of automatic la-
belling of latent topics learned from Twit-
ter as a summarisation problem. We in-
troduce a framework which apply sum-
marisation algorithms to generate topic la-
bels. These algorithms are independent
of external sources and only rely on the
identification of dominant terms in doc-
uments related to the latent topic. We
compare the efficiency of existing state
of the art summarisation algorithms. Our
results suggest that summarisation algo-
rithms generate better topic labels which
capture event-related context compared to
the top-n terms returned by LDA.

1 Introduction
Topic model based algorithms applied to social
media data have become a mainstream technique
in performing various tasks including sentiment
analysis (He, 2012) and event detection (Zhao et
al., 2012; Diao et al., 2012). However, one of
the main challenges is the task of understanding
the semantics of a topic. This task has been ap-
proached by investigating methodologies for iden-
tifying meaningful topics through semantic coher-

ence (Aletras and Stevenson, 2013; Mimno et al.,
2011; Newman et al., 2010) and for characterising
the semantic content of a topic through automatic
labelling techniques (Hulpus et al., 2013; Lau et
al., 2011; Mei et al., 2007). In this paper we focus
on the latter.

Our research task of automatic labelling a topic
consists on selecting a set of words that best de-
scribes the semantics of the terms involved in this
topic. The most generic approach to automatic la-
belling has been to use as primitive labels the top-
n words in a topic distribution learned by a topic
model such as LDA (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004;
Blei et al., 2003). Such top words are usually
ranked using the marginal probabilities P (wi|tj)
associated with each word wi for a given topic tj .
This task can be illustrated by considering the fol-
lowing topic derived from social media related to
Education:

school protest student fee choic motherlod
tuition teacher anger polic

where the top 10 words ranked by P (wi|tj) for
this topic are listed. Therefore the task is to find
the top-n terms which are more representative of
the given topic. In this example, the topic certainly
relates to a student protest as revealed by the top
3 terms which can be used as a good label for this
topic.

However previous work has shown that top
terms are not enough for interpreting the coherent
meaning of a topic (Mei et al., 2007). More re-
cent approaches have explored the use of external
sources (e.g. Wikipedia, WordNet) for supporting
the automatic labelling of topics by deriving can-
didate labels by means of lexical (Lau et al., 2011;
Magatti et al., 2009; Mei et al., 2007) or graph-
based (Hulpus et al., 2013) algorithms applied on
these sources.

Mei et al. (2007) proposed an unsupervised
probabilistic methodology to automatically assign
a label to a topic model. Their proposed approach

618



was defined as an optimisation problem involving
the minimisation of the KL divergence between a
given topic and the candidate labels while max-
imising the mutual information between these two
word distributions. Lau et al. (2010) proposed to
label topics by selecting top-n terms to label the
overall topic based on different ranking mecha-
nisms including pointwise mutual information and
conditional probabilities.

Methods relying on external sources for auto-
matic labelling of topics include the work by Ma-
gatti et al. (2009) which derived candidate topic
labels for topics induced by LDA using the hi-
erarchy obtained from the Google Directory ser-
vice and expanded through the use of the OpenOf-
fice English Thesaurus. Lau et al. (2011) gen-
erated label candidates for a topic based on top-
ranking topic terms and titles of Wikipedia arti-
cles. They then built a Support Vector Regres-
sion (SVR) model for ranking the label candidates.
More recently, Hulpus et al. (2013) proposed to
make use of a structured data source (DBpedia)
and employed graph centrality measures to gener-
ate semantic concept labels which can characterise
the content of a topic.

Most previous topic labelling approaches focus
on topics derived from well formatted and static
documents. However in contrast to this type of
content, the labelling of topics derived from tweets
presents different challenges. In nature microp-
ost content is sparse and present ill-formed words.
Moreover, the use of Twitter as the “what’s-
happening-right now” tool, introduces new event-
dependent relations between words which might
not have a counter part in existing knowledge
sources (e.g. Wikipedia). Our original interest in
labelling topics stems from work in topic model
based event extraction from social media, in par-
ticular from tweets (Shen et al., 2013; Diao et
al., 2012). As opposed to previous approaches,
the research presented in this paper addresses the
labelling of topics exposing event-related content
that might not have a counter part on existing ex-
ternal sources. Based on the observation that a
short summary of a collection of documents can
serve as a label characterising the collection, we
propose to generate topic label candidates based
on the summarisation of a topic’s relevant docu-
ments. Our contributions are two-fold:

- We propose a novel approach for topics la-
belling that relies on term relevance of documents

relating to a topic; and
- We show that summarisation algorithms,

which are independent of extenal sources, can be
used with success to label topics, presenting a
higher perfomance than the top-n terms baseline.

2 Methodology
We propose to approach the topic labelling prob-
lem as a multi-document summarisation task. The
following describes our proposed framework to
characterise documents relevant to a topic.

2.1 Preliminaries

Given a set of documents the problem to be solved
by topic modelling is the posterior inference of the
variables, which determine the hidden thematic
structures that best explain an observed set of doc-
uments. Focusing on the Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion (LDA) model (Blei et al., 2003; Griffiths and
Steyvers, 2004), let D be a corpus of documents
denoted as D = {d1,d2, ..,dD}; where each doc-
ument consists of a sequence ofNd words denoted
by d = (w1, w2, .., wNd); and each word in a
document is an item from a vocabulary index of
V different terms denoted by {1, 2, .., V }. Given
D documents containing K topics expressed over
V unique words, LDA generative process is de-
scribed as follows:
- For each topic k ∈ {1, ...K} draw φk ∼
Dirichlet(β),
- For each document d ∈ {1..D}:
? draw θd ∼ Dirichlet(α);
? For each word n ∈ {1..Nd} in document d:
◦ draw a topic zd,n ∼ Multinomial(θd);
◦ draw a word wd,n ∼ Multinomial(ϕzd,n).

where φk is the word distribution for topic k,
and θd is the distribution of topics in document
d. Topics are interpreted using the top N terms
ranked based on the marginal probability p(wi|tj).
2.2 Automatic Labelling of Topic Models

Given K topics over the document collection D,
the topic labelling task consists on discovering a
sequence of words for each topic k ∈ K. We pro-
pose to generate topic label candidates by sum-
marising topic relevant documents. Such docu-
ments can be derived using both the observed data
from the corpus D and the inferred topic model
variables. In particular, the prominent topic of a
document d can be found by

kd = arg max
k∈K

p(k|d) (1)

619



Therefore given a topic k, a set of C documents
related to this topic can be obtained via equation
1.

Given the set of documents C relevant to topic k,
we proposed to generate a label of a desired length
x from the summarisation of C.
2.3 Topic Labelling by Summarisation

We compare different summarisation algorithms
based on their ability to provide a good label to a
given topic. In particular we investigate the use of
lexical features by comparing three different well-
known multi-document summarisation algorithms
against the top-n topic terms baseline. These al-
gorithms include:

Sum Basic (SB) This is a frequency based sum-
marisation algorithm (Nenkova and Vanderwende,
2005), which computes initial word probabilities
for words in a text. It then weights each sen-
tence in the text (in our case a micropost) by
computing the average probability of the words in
the sentence. In each iteration it picks the high-
est weighted document and from it the highest
weighted word. It uses an update function which
penalises words which have already been picked.

Hybrid TFIDF (TFIDF) It is similar to SB,
however rather than computing the initial word
probabilities based on word frequencies it weights
terms based on TFIDF. In this case the document
frequency is computed as the number of times a
word appears in a micropost from the collection
C. Following the same procedure as SB it returns
the top x weighted terms.

Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) This is a
relevance based ranking algorithm (Carbonell and
Goldstein, 1998), which avoids redundancy in the
documents used for generating a summary. It mea-
sures the degree of dissimilarity between the docu-
ments considered and previously selected ones al-
ready in the ranked list.

Text Rank (TR) This is a graph-based sum-
mariser method (Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004) where
each word is a vertex. The relevance of a vertex
(term) to the graph is computed based on global
information recursively drawn from the whole
graph. It uses the PageRank algorithm (Brin and
Page, 1998) to recursively change the weight of
the vertices. The final score of a word is there-
fore not only dependent on the terms immediately
connected to it but also on how these terms con-

nect to others. To assign the weight of an edge
between two terms, TextRank computes word co-
occurrence in windows of N words (in our case
N = 10). Once a final score is calculated for each
vertex of the graph, TextRank sorts the terms in
a reverse order and provided the top T vertices in
the ranking. Each of these algorithms produces a
label of a desired length x for a given topic k.

3 Experimental Setup

3.1 Dataset

Our Twitter Corpus (TW) was collected between
November 2010 and January 2011. TW comprises
over 1 million tweets. We used the OpenCalais’
document categorisation service1 to generate cate-
gorical sets. In particular, we considered four dif-
ferent categories which contain many real-world
events, namely: War and Conflict (War), Disaster
and Accident (DisAc), Education (Edu) and Law
and Crime (LawCri). The final TW dataset after
removing retweets and short microposts (less than
5 words after removing stopwords) contains 7000
tweets in each category.

We preprocessed TW by first removing: punc-
tuation, numbers, non-alphabet characters, stop
words, user mentions, and URL links. We then
performed Porter stemming (Porter, 1980) in order
to reduce the vocabulary size. Finally to address
the issue of data sparseness in the TW dataset, we
removed words with a frequency lower than 5.

3.2 Generating the Gold Standard

Evaluation of automatic topic labelling often re-
lied on human assessment which requires heavy
manual effort (Lau et al., 2011; Hulpus et al.,
2013). However performing human evaluations of
Social Media test sets comprising thousands of in-
puts become a difficult task. This is due to both
the corpus size, the diversity of event-related top-
ics and the limited availability of domain experts.
To alleviate this issue here, we followed the distri-
bution similarity approach, which has been widely
applied in the automatic generation of gold stan-
dards (GSs) for summary evaluations (Donaway et
al., 2000; Lin et al., 2006; Louis and Nenkova,
2009; Louis and Nenkova, 2013). This approach
compares two corpora, one for which no GS labels
exist, against a reference corpus for which a GS
exists. In our case these corpora correspond to the
TW and a Newswire dataset (NW). Since previous

1OpenCalais service, http://www.opencalais.com

620



research has shown that headlines are good indi-
cators of the main focus of a text, both in struc-
ture and content, and that they can act as a human
produced abstract (Nenkova, 2005), we used head-
lines as the GS labels of NW.

The News Corpus (NW) was collected during
the same period of time as the TW corpus. NW
consists of a collection of news articles crawled
from traditional news media (BBC, CNN, and
New York Times) comprising over 77,000 articles
which include supplemental metadata (e.g. head-
line, author, publishing date). We also used the
OpenCalais’ document categorisation service to
automatically label news articles and considered
the same four topical categories, (War, DisAc,
Edu and LawCri). The same preprocessing steps
were performed on NW.

Therefore, following a similarity alignment ap-
proach we performed the steps oulined in Algo-
rithm 1 for generating the GS topic labels of a topic
in TW.

Algorithm 1 GS for Topic Labels
Input: LDA topics for TW, and the LDA topics for NW for

category c.
Output: Gold standard topic label for each of the LDA top-

ics for TW.
1: for each topic i ∈ {1, 2, ..., 100} from TW do
2: for each topic j ∈ {1, 2..., 100} from NW do
3: Compute the Cosine similarity between word dis-

tributions of topic ti and topic tj .
4: end for
5: Select topic j which has the highest similarity to i and

whose similarity measure is greater than a threshold
(in this case 0.7)

6: end for
7: for each of the extracted topic pairs (ti − tj) do
8: Collect relevant news articles CjNW of topic tj from

the NW set.
9: Extract the headlines of news articles from CjNW and

select the top x most frequent words as the gold stan-
dard label for topic ti in the TW set

10: end for

These steps can be outlined as follows:1) We
ran LDA on TW and NW separately for each cate-
gory with the number of topics set to 100; 2) We
then aligned the Twitter topics and Newswire top-
ics by the similarity measurement of word distri-
butions of these topics (Ercan and Cicekli, 2008;
Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009; Wang et al.,
2009; Delort and Alfonseca, 2012); 3) Finally to
generate the GS label for each aligned topic pair
(ti − tj), we extracted the headlines of the news
articles relevant to tj and selected the top x most
frequent words (after stop word removal and stem-
ming). The generated label was used as the gold

standard label for the corresponding Twitter topic
ti in the topic pair.

4 Experimental Results
We compared the results of the summarisation
techniques with the top terms (TT) of a topic as
our baseline. These TT set corresponds to the
top x terms ranked based on the probability of
the word given the topic (p(w|k)) from the topic
model. We evaluated these summarisation ap-
proaches with the ROUGE-1 method (Lin, 2004),
a widely used summarisation evaluation metric
that correlates well with human evaluation (Liu
and Liu, 2008). This method measures the over-
lap of words between the generated summary and
a reference, in our case the GS generated from the
NW dataset.

The evaluation was performed at x =
{1, .., 10}. Figure 1 presents the ROUGE-1 per-
formance of the summarisation approaches as the
lengthx of the generated topic label increases. We
can see in all four categories that the SB and
TFIDF approaches provide a better summarisa-
tion coverage as the length of the topic label in-
creases. In particular, in both the Education
and Law & Crime categories, both SB and
TFIDF outperforms TT and TR by a large margin.
The obtained ROUGE-1 performance is within the
same range of performance previously reported on
Social Media summarisation (Inouye and Kalita,
2011; Nichols et al., 2012; Ren et al., 2013).

Table 1 presents average results for ROUGE-
1 in the four categories. Particularly the SB
and TFIDF summarisation techniques consis-
tently outperform the TT baseline across all four
categories. SB gives the best results in three cate-
gories except War.

ROUGE-1

TT SB TFIDF MMR TR
War 0.162 0.184 0.192 0.154 0.141
DisAc 0.134 0.194 0.160 0.132 0.124
Edu 0.106 0.240 0.187 0.104 0.023
LawCri 0.035 0.159 0.149 0.034 0.115

Table 1: Average ROUGE-1 for topic labels at x =
{1..10}, generated from the TW dataset.

The generated labels with summarisation at x =
5 are presented in Table 2, where GS represents the
label generated from the Newswire headlines.

Different summarisation techniques reveal
words which do not appear in the top terms but

621



0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0

x

R
o

u
g

e

War_Conflict

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0

x

R
o

u
g

e

Disaster_Accident

0.1

0.2

2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0

x

R
o

u
g

e

Education

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0

x

R
o

u
g

e

Law_Crime
T
w

it
te

r 
T
o

p
ic

s
variable

TT

SB

TFIDF

TR

MMR

Figure 1: Performance in ROUGE for Twitter-derived topic labels, where x is the number of terms in the
generated label

which are relevant to the information clustered
by the topic. In this way, the labels generated for
topics belonging to different categories generally
extend the information provided by the top terms.
For example in Table 2, the DisAc headline is
characteristic of the New Zealand’s Pike River’s
coal mine blast accident, which is an event
occurred in November 2010.

Although the top 5 terms set from the LDA topic
extracted from TW (listed under TT) does capture
relevant information related to the event, it does
not provide information regarding the blast. In this
sense the topic label generated by SB more accu-
rately describes this event.

We can also notice that the GS labels generated
from Newswire media presented in Table 2 appear
on their own, to be good labels for the TW topics.
However as we described in the introduction we
want to avoid relaying on external sources for the
derivation of topic labels.

This experiment shows that frequency based
summarisation techniques outperform graph-
based and relevance based summarisation
techniques for generating topic labels that im-
prove upon the top-terms baseline, without relying
on external sources. This is an attractive property
for automatically generating topic labels for
tweets where their event-related content might not
have a counter part on existing external sources.

5 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we proposed a novel alternative to
topic labelling which do not rely on external data
sources. To the best of out knowledge no existing
work has been formally studied for automatic la-
belling through summarisation. This experiment
shows that existing summarisation techniques can
be exploited to provide a better label of a topic,
extending in this way a topic’s information by pro-

War DisAc

GS protest brief polic
afghanistan attack world
leader bomb obama
pakistan

mine zealand rescu miner
coal fire blast kill man dis-
ast

TT polic offic milit recent
mosqu

mine coal pike river
zealand

SB terror war polic arrest offic mine coal explos river pike
TFIDF polic war arrest offic terror mine coal pike safeti

zealand
MMR recent milit arrest attack

target
trap zealand coal mine ex-
plos

TR war world peac terror hope mine zealand plan fire fda

Edu LawCri

GS school protest student fee
choic motherlod tuition
teacher anger polic

man charg murder arrest
polic brief woman attack
inquiri found

TT student univers protest oc-
cupi plan

man law child deal jail

SB student univers school
protest educ

man arrest law kill judg

TFIDF student univers protest
plan colleg

man arrest law judg kill

MMR nation colleg protest stu-
dent occupi

found kid wife student jail

TR student tuition fee group
hit

man law child deal jail

Table 2: Labelling examples for topics generated
from the TW Dataset. GS represents the gold-
standard generated from the relevant Newswire
dataset. All terms are Porter stemmed as described
in subsection 3.1

viding a richer context than top-terms. These re-
sults show that there is room to further improve
upon existing summarisation techniques to cater
for generating candidate labels.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the EPRSC grant
EP/J020427/1, the EU-FP7 project SENSE4US
(grant no. 611242), and the Shenzhen Interna-
tional Cooperation Research Funding (grant num-
ber GJHZ20120613110641217).

622



References
Nikolaos Aletras and Mark Stevenson. 2013. Evaluat-

ing topic coherence using distributional semantics.
In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
on Computational Semantics (IWCS 2013) – Long
Papers, pages 13–22, Potsdam, Germany, March.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

David Meir Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. In J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 3, pages 993–1022.

Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. 1998. The anatomy
of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine*
1. In Computer networks and ISDN systems, vol-
ume 30, pages 107–117.

Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The use of
mmr, diversity-based reranking for reordering docu-
ments and producing summaries. In Proceedings of
the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, SIGIR ’98, pages 335–336, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Jean-Yves Delort and Enrique Alfonseca. 2012. Dual-
sum: A topic-model based approach for update sum-
marization. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, EACL ’12, pages 214–223,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Qiming Diao, Jing Jiang, Feida Zhu, and Ee-Peng Lim.
2012. Finding bursty topics from microblogs. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 536–544, Jeju Island, Korea,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Robert L. Donaway, Kevin W. Drummey, and Laura A.
Mather. 2000. A comparison of rankings produced
by summarization evaluation measures. In Proceed-
ings of the 2000 NAACL-ANLP Workshop on Au-
tomatic Summarization, NAACL-ANLP-AutoSum
’00, pages 69–78, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Gonenc Ercan and Ilyas Cicekli. 2008. Lexical co-
hesion based topic modeling for summarization. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing, CICLing’08, pages 582–592, Berlin, Hei-
delberg. Springer-Verlag.

Thomas L. Griffiths and Mark Steyvers. 2004. Finding
scientific topics. PNAS, 101(suppl. 1):5228–5235.

Aria Haghighi and Lucy Vanderwende. 2009. Ex-
ploring content models for multi-document summa-
rization. In Proceedings of Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, NAACL ’09, pages 362–370,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Yulan He. 2012. Incorporating sentiment prior
knowledge for weakly supervised sentiment analy-
sis. ACM Transactions on Asian Language Infor-
mation Processing, 11(2):4:1–4:19, June.

Ioana Hulpus, Conor Hayes, Marcel Karnstedt, and
Derek Greene. 2013. Unsupervised graph-based
topic labelling using dbpedia. In Proceedings of the
sixth ACM international conference on Web search
and data mining, WSDM ’13, pages 465–474, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

David Inouye and Jugal K. Kalita. 2011. Comparing
twitter summarization algorithms for multiple post
summaries. In SocialCom/PASSAT, pages 298–306.
IEEE.

Jey Han Lau, David Newman, Karimi Sarvnaz, and
Timothy Baldwin. 2010. Best Topic Word Selec-
tion for Topic Labelling. CoLing.

Jey Han Lau, Karl Grieser, David Newman, and Tim-
othy Baldwin. 2011. Automatic labelling of topic
models. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies - Volume 1,
HLT ’11, pages 1536–1545, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin, Guihong Cao, Jianfeng Gao, and
Jian-Yun Nie. 2006. An information-theoretic
approach to automatic evaluation of summaries.
In Proceedings of the Main Conference on Hu-
man Language Technology Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics, HLT-NAACL ’06, pages 463–
470, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Stan Szpakowicz
Marie-Francine Moens, editor, Text Summarization
Branches Out: Proceedings of the ACL-04 Work-
shop, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Feifan Liu and Yang Liu. 2008. Correlation between
rouge and human evaluation of extractive meeting
summaries. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics on Human Language Technologies: Short
Papers, HLT-Short ’08, pages 201–204, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Annie Louis and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Automatically
evaluating content selection in summarization with-
out human models. In Proceedings of the 2009
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing: Volume 1 - Volume 1, EMNLP
’09, pages 306–314, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Annie Louis and Ani Nenkova. 2013. Automatically
assessing machine summary content without a gold

623



standard. Computational Linguistics, 39(2):267–
300.

Davide Magatti, Silvia Calegari, Davide Ciucci, and
Fabio Stella. 2009. Automatic labeling of top-
ics. In Proceedings of the 2009 Ninth International
Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Appli-
cations, ISDA ’09, pages 1227–1232, Washington,
DC, USA. IEEE Computer Society.

Qiaozhu Mei, Xuehua Shen, and ChengXiang Zhai.
2007. Automatic labeling of multinomial topic
models. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, KDD ’07, pages 490–499, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Rada Mihalcea and Paul Tarau. 2004. TextRank:
Bringing Order into Texts. In Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP ’04, pages 404–411, Barcelona, Spain. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

David Mimno, Hanna M. Wallach, Edmund Talley,
Miriam Leenders, and Andrew McCallum. 2011.
Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’11,
pages 262–272, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Ani Nenkova and Lucy Vanderwende. 2005. The im-
pact of frequency on summarization. Microsoft Re-
search, Redmond, Washington, Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-
2005-101.

Ani Nenkova. 2005. Automatic text summarization of
newswire: Lessons learned from the document un-
derstanding conference. In Proceedings of the 20th
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Vol-
ume 3, AAAI’05, pages 1436–1441. AAAI Press.

David Newman, Jey Han Lau, Karl Grieser, and Tim-
othy Baldwin. 2010. Automatic evaluation of
topic coherence. In Human Language Technologies:
The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, HLT ’10, pages 100–108, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jeffrey Nichols, Jalal Mahmud, and Clemens Drews.
2012. Summarizing sporting events using twitter. In
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM International Confer-
ence on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI ’12, pages
189–198, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Martin Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping.
Program, 14(3):130–137.

Zhaochun Ren, Shangsong Liang, Edgar Meij, and
Maarten de Rijke. 2013. Personalized time-aware
tweets summarization. In Proceedings of the 36th
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR
’13, pages 513–522, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Chao Shen, Fei Liu, Fuliang Weng, and Tao Li. 2013.
A participant-based approach for event summariza-
tion using twitter streams. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies - Volume 1, HLT ’13, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Dingding Wang, Shenghuo Zhu, Tao Li, and Yihong
Gong. 2009. Multi-document summarization us-
ing sentence-based topic models. In Proceedings
of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers,
ACLShort ’09, pages 297–300, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xin Zhao, Baihan Shu, Jing Jiang, Yang Song, Hongfei
Yan, and Xiaoming Li. 2012. Identifying event-
related bursts via social media activities. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
1466–1477, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

624


