



















































Automatic Detection of Multilingual Dictionaries on the Web


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 93–98,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Detection of Multilingual Dictionaries on the Web

Gintarė Grigonytė♠ Timothy Baldwin♥

♠ Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University
♥ Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne

gintare@ling.su.se tb@ldwin.net

Abstract

This paper presents an approach to query
construction to detect multilingual dictio-
naries for predetermined language combi-
nations on the web, based on the identifi-
cation of terms which are likely to occur
in bilingual dictionaries but not in general
web documents. We use eight target lan-
guages for our case study, and train our
method on pre-identified multilingual dic-
tionaries and the Wikipedia dump for each
of our languages.

1 Motivation

Translation dictionaries and other multilingual
lexical resources are valuable in a myriad of
contexts, from language preservation (Thieberger
and Berez, 2012) to language learning (Laufer
and Hadar, 1997), cross-language information
retrieval (Nie, 2010) and machine translation
(Munteanu and Marcu, 2005; Soderland et al.,
2009). While there are syndicated efforts
to produce multilingual dictionaries for differ-
ent pairings of the world’s languages such as
freedict.org, more commonly, multilingual
dictionaries are developed in isolation for a spe-
cific set of languages, with ad hoc formatting,
great variability in lexical coverage, and no cen-
tral indexing of the content or existence of that
dictionary (Baldwin et al., 2010). Projects such
as panlex.org aspire to aggregate these dic-
tionaries into a single lexical database, but are
hampered by the need to identify individual multi-
lingual dictionaries, especially for language pairs
where there is a sparsity of data from existing dic-
tionaries (Baldwin et al., 2010; Kamholz and Pool,
to appear). This paper is an attempt to automate
the detection of multilingual dictionaries on the
web, through query construction for an arbitrary
language pair. Note that for the method to work,

we require that the dictionary occurs in “list form”,
that is it takes the form of a single document (or
at least, a significant number of dictionary entries
on a single page), and is not split across multiple
small-scale sub-documents.

2 Related Work

This research seeks to identify documents of a
particular type on the web, namely multilingual
dictionaries. Related work broadly falls into
four categories: (1) mining of parallel corpora;
(2) automatic construction of bilingual dictionar-
ies/thesauri; (3) automatic detection of multilin-
gual documents; and (4) classification of docu-
ment genre.

Parallel corpus construction is the task of au-
tomatically detecting document sets that contain
the same content in different languages, com-
monly based on a combination of site-structural
and content-based features (Chen and Nie, 2000;
Resnik and Smith, 2003). Such methods could
potentially identify parallel word lists from which
to construct a bilingual dictionary, although more
realistically, bilingual dictionaries exist as single
documents and are not well suited to this style of
analysis.

Methods have also been proposed to automat-
ically construct bilingual dictionaries or thesauri,
e.g. based on crosslingual glossing in predictable
patterns such as a technical term being immedi-
ately proceeded by that term in a lingua franca
source language such as English (Nagata et al.,
2001; Yu and Tsujii, 2009). Alternatively, com-
parable or parallel corpora can be used to extract
bilingual dictionaries based on crosslingual distri-
butional similarity (Melamed, 1996; Fung, 1998).
While the precision of these methods is generally
relatively high, the recall is often very low, as there
is a strong bias towards novel technical terms be-
ing glossed but more conventional terms not.

Also relevant to this work is research on lan-

93



guage identification, and specifically the detection
of multilingual documents (Prager, 1999; Yam-
aguchi and Tanaka-Ishii, 2012; Lui et al., 2014).
Here, multi-label document classification meth-
ods have been adapted to identify what mix of
languages is present in a given document, which
could be used as a pre-filter to locate documents
containing a given mixture of languages, although
there is, of course, no guarantee that a multilingual
document is a dictionary.

Finally, document genre classification is rele-
vant in that it is theoretically possible to develop
a document categorisation method which classi-
fies documents as multilingual dictionaries or not,
with the obvious downside that it would need to be
applied exhaustively to all documents on the web.
The general assumption in genre classification is
that the type of a document should be judged not
by its content but rather by its form. A variety
of document genre methods have been proposed,
generally based on a mixture of structural and
content-based features (Matsuda and Fukushima,
1999; Finn et al., 2002; zu Eissen and Stein, 2005).

While all of these lines of research are relevant
to this work, as far as we are aware, there has not
been work which has proposed a direct method
for identifying pre-existing multilingual dictionar-
ies in document collections.

3 Methodology

Our method is based on a query formulation ap-
proach, and querying against a pre-existing index
of a document collection (e.g. the web) via an in-
formation retrieval system.

The first intuition underlying our approach is
that certain words are a priori more “language-
discriminating” than others, and should be pre-
ferred in query construction (e.g. sushi occurs as
a [transliterated] word in a wide variety of lan-
guages, whereas anti-discriminatory is found pre-
dominantly in English documents). As such, we
prefer search terms wi with a higher value for
maxl P (l|wi), where l is the language of interest.

The second intuition is that the lexical cover-
age of dictionaries varies considerably, especially
with multilingual lexicons, which are often com-
piled by a single developer or small community
of developers, with little systematicity in what is
including or not included in the dictionary. As
such, if we are to follow a query construction ap-
proach to lexicon discovery, we need to be able

to predict the likelihood of a given word wi be-
ing included in an arbitrarily-selected dictionary
Dl incorporating language l (i.e. P (wi|Dl)). Fac-
tors which impact on this include the lexical prior
of the word in the language (e.g. P (paper|en) >
P (papyrus|en)), whether they are lemmas or not
(noting that multilingual dictionaries tend not to
contain inflected word forms), and their word class
(e.g. multilingual dictionaries tend to contain more
nouns and verbs than function words).

The third intuition is that certain word combi-
nations are more selective of multilingual dictio-
naries than others, i.e. if certain words are found
together (e.g. cruiser, gospel and noodle), the con-
taining document is highly likely to be a dictionary
of some description rather than a “conventional”
document.

Below, we describe our methodology for query
construction based on these elements in greater de-
tail. The only assumption on the method is that
we have access to a selection of dictionaries D
(mono- or multilingual) and a corpus of conven-
tional (non-dictionary) documents C, and knowl-
edge of the language(s) contained in each dictio-
nary and document.

Given a set of dictionaries Dl for a language l
and the complement set Dl = D\Dl, we first con-
struct the lexicon Ll for that language as follows:

Ll =
{
wi|wi ∈ Dl ∩ wi /∈ Dl

}
(1)

This creates a language-discriminating lexicon for
each language, satisfying the first criterion.

Lexical resources differ in size, scope and cov-
erage. For instance, a well-developed, mature
multilingual dictionary may contain over 100,000
multilingual lexical records, while a specialised 5-
way multilingual domain dictionary may contain
as few as 100 multilingual lexical records. In line
with our second criterion, we want to select words
which have a higher likelihood of occurrence in
a multilingual dictionary involving that language.
To this end, we calculate the weight sdict(wi,l) for
each word wi,l ∈ Ll:

sdict(wi,l) =
∑
d∈Dl

{ |Ll|−|d|
|Ll| if wi,l ∈ d
− |d||Ll| otherwise

(2)

where |d| is the size of dictionary d in terms of the
number of lexemes it contains.

The final step is to weight words by their typ-
icality in a given language, as calculated by their

94



likelihood of occurrence in a random document in
that language. This is estimated by the proportion
of Wikipedia documents in that language which
contain the word in question:

Score(wi,l) =
df(wi,l)

Nl
sdict(wi,l) (3)

where df(wi,l) is the count of Wikipedia docu-
ments of language l which contain wi, and Nl is
the total number of Wikipedia documents in lan-
guage l.

In all experiments in this paper, we assume that
we have access to at least one multilingual dictio-
nary containing each of our target languages, but
in absence of such a dictionary, sdict(wi,l) could
be set to 1 for all words wi,l in the language.

The result of this term weighing is a ranked list
of words for each language. The next step is to
identify combinations of words that are likely to
be found in multilingual dictionaries and not stan-
dard documents for a given language, in accor-
dance with our third criterion.

3.1 Apriori-based query generation
We perform query construction for each language
based on frequent item set mining, using the Apri-
ori algorithm (Agrawal et al., 1993). For a given
combination of languages (e.g. English and Swa-
heli), queries are then formed simply by combin-
ing monolingual queries for the component lan-
guages.

The basic approach is to use a modified support
formulation within the Apriori algorithm to prefer
word combinations that do not cooccur in regular
documents. Based on the assumption that query-
ing a (pre-indexed) document collection is rela-
tively simple, we generate a range of queries of de-
creasing length and increasing likelihood of term
co-occurrence in standard documents, and query
until a non-empty set of results is returned.

The modified support formulation is as follows:

cscore(w1, ..., wn) ={
0 if ∃d, wi, wj : cod(wi, wj)∏

i Score(wi) otherwise

where cod(wi, wj) is a Boolean function which
evaluates to true iff wi and wj co-occur in doc-
ument d. That is, we reject any combinations of
words which are found to co-occur in Wikipedia
documents for that language. Note that the actual
calculation of this co-occurrence can be performed

Figure 1: Examples of learned queries for different
languages

efficiently, as: (a) for a given iteration of Apri-
ori, it only needs to be performed between the new
word that we are adding to the query (“item set” in
the terminology of Apriori) and each of the other
words in a non-zero support itemset from the pre-
vious iteration of the algorithm (which are guaran-
teed to not co-occur with each other); and (b) the
determination of whether two terms collocate can
be performed efficiently using an inverted index of
Wikipedia for that language.

In our experiments, we apply the Apriori al-
gorithm exhaustively for a given language with a
support threshold of 0.5, and return the resultant
item sets in ranked order of combined score for
the component words.

A random selection of queries learned for each
of the 8 languages targeted in this research is pre-
sented in Figure 1.

4 Experimental methodology

We evaluate our proposed methodology in two
ways:

1. against a synthetic dataset, whereby we in-
jected bilingual dictionaries into a collection
of web documents, and evaluated the ability
of the method to return multilingual dictio-
naries for individual languages; in this, we
naively assume that all web documents in the
background collection are not multilingual
dictionaries, and as such, the results are po-
tentially an underestimate of the true retrieval
effectiveness.

2. against the open web via the Google search
API for a given combination of languages,
and hand evaluation of the returned docu-
ments

95



Lang Wikipedia articles (M) Dictionaries Queries learned Avg. query length
en 3.1 26 2546 3.2
zh 0.3 0 5034 3.6
es 0.5 2 356 2.9
ja 0.6 0 1532 3.3
de 1.0 13 634 2.7
fr 0.9 5 4126 3.0
it 0.6 4 1955 3.0
ar 0.1 2 9004 3.2

Table 1: Details of the training data and queries learned for each language

Note that the first evaluation with the synthetic
dataset is based on monolingual dictionary re-
trieval effectiveness because we have very few
(and often no) multilingual dictionaries for a given
pairing of our target languages. For a given lan-
guage, we are thus evaluating the ability of our
method to retrieve multilingual dictionaries con-
taining that language (and other indeterminate lan-
guages).

For both the synthetic dataset and open web ex-
periments, we evaluate our method based on mean
average precision (MAP), that is the mean of the
average precision scores for each query which re-
turns a non-empty result set.

To train our method, we use 52 bilingual Free-
dict (Freedict, 2011) dictionaries and Wikipedia1

documents for each of our target languages. As
there are no bilingual dictionaries in Freedict for
Chinese and Japanese, the training of Score values
is based on the Wikipedia documents only. Mor-
phological segmentation for these two languages
was carried out using MeCab (MeCab, 2011) and
the Stanford Word Segmenter (Tseng et al., 2005),
respectively. See Table 1 for details of the num-
ber of Wikipedia articles and dictionaries for each
language.

Below, we detail the construction of the syn-
thetic dataset.

4.1 Synthetic dataset

The synthetic dataset was constructed using a sub-
set of ClueWeb09 (ClueWeb09, 2009) as the back-
ground web document collection. The original
ClueWeb09 dataset consists of around 1 billion
web pages in ten languages that were collected in
January and February 2009. The relative propor-
tions of documents in the different languages in
the original dataset are as detailed in Table 2.

We randomly downsampled ClueWeb09 to 10

1Based on 2009 dumps.

Language Proportion
en (English) 48.41%
zh (Chinese) 17.05%
es (Spanish) 7.62%
ja (Japanese) 6.47%
de (German) 4.89%
fr (French) 4.79%
ko (Korean) 3.61%
it (Italian) 2.8%
pt (Portuguese) 2.62%
ar (Arabic) 1.74%

Table 2: Language proportions in ClueWeb09.

million documents for the 8 languages targeted
in this research (the original 10 ClueWeb09 lan-
guages minus Korean and Portuguese). We then
sourced a random set of 246 multilingual dic-
tionaries that were used in the construction of
panlex.org, and injected them into the docu-
ment collection. Each of these dictionaries con-
tains at least one of our 8 target languages, with
the second language potentially being outside the
8. A total of 49 languages are contained in the
dictionaries.

We indexed the synthetic dataset using Indri (In-
dri, 2009).

5 Results

First, we present results over the synthetic dataset
in Table 3. As our baseline, we simply query for
the language name and the term dictionary in the
local language (e.g. English dictionary, for En-
glish) in the given language.

For languages that had bilingual dictionaries for
training, the best results were obtained for Span-
ish, German, Italian and Arabic. Encouragingly,
the results for languages with only Wikipedia doc-
uments (and no dictionaries) were largely com-
parable to those for languages with dictionaries,
with Japanese achieving a MAP score compara-
ble to the best results for languages with dictio-
nary training data. The comparably low result for

96



Lang Dicts MAP Baseline
en 92 0.77 0.00
zh 7 0.75 0.00
es 34 0.98 0.04
ja 5 0.94 0.00
de 75 0.97 0.08
fr 34 0.84 0.03
it 8 0.95 0.01
ar 3 0.92 0.00

AVERAGE: 32.2 0.88 0.04

Table 3: Dictionary retrieval results over the syn-
thetic dataset (“Dicts” = the number of dictionaries
in the document collection for that language.

English is potentially affected by its prevalence
both in the bilingual dictionaries in training (re-
stricting the effective vocabulary size due to our
Ll filtering), and in the document collection. Re-
call also that our MAP scores are an underestimate
of the true results, and some of the ClueWeb09
documents returned for our queries are potentially
relevant documents (i.e. multilingual dictionaries
including the language of interest). For all lan-
guages, the baseline results were below 0.1, and
substantially lower than the results for our method.

Looking next to the open web, we present in Ta-
ble 4 results based on querying the Google search
API with the 1000 longest queries for English
paired with each of the other 7 target languages.
Most queries returned no results; indeed, for the
en-ar language pair, only 49/1000 queries returned
documents. The results in Table 4 are based on
manual evaluation of all documents returned for
the first 50 queries, and determination of whether
they were multilingual dictionaries containing the
indicated languages.

The baseline results are substantially higher
than those for the synthetic dataset, almost cer-
tainly a direct result of the greater sophistication
and optimisation of the Google search engine (in-
cluding query log analysis, and link and anchor
text analysis). Despite this, the results for our
method are lower than those over the synthetic
dataset, we suspect largely as a result of the style
of queries we issue being so far removed from
standard Google query patterns. Having said this,
MAP scores of 0.32–0.92 suggest that the method
is highly usable (i.e. at any given cutoff in the doc-
ument ranking, an average of at least one in three
documents is a genuine multilingual dictionary),
and any non-dictionary documents returned by the
method could easily be pruned by a lexicographer.

Lang Dicts MAP Baseline
zh 16 0.55 0.19
es 17 0.92 0.13
ja 13 0.32 0.04
de 34 0.77 0.09
fr 36 0.77 0.08
it 23 0.69 0.11
ar 8 0.39 0.17

AVERAGE: 21.0 0.63 0.12

Table 4: Dictionary retrieval results over the open
web for dictionaries containing English and each
of the indicated languages (“Dicts” = the number
of unique multilingual dictionaries retrieved for
that language).

Among the 7 language pairs, en-es, en-de, en-fr
and en-it achieved the highest MAP scores. In
terms of unique lexical resources found with 50
queries, the most successful language pairs were
en-fr, en-de and en-it.

6 Conclusions

We have described initial results for a method de-
signed to automatically detect multilingual dictio-
naries on the web, and attained highly credible re-
sults over both a synthetic dataset and an exper-
iment over the open web using a web search en-
gine.

In future work, we hope to explore the ability
of the method to detect domain-specific dictionar-
ies (e.g. training over domain-specific dictionar-
ies from other language pairs), and low-density
languages where there are few dictionaries and
Wikipedia articles to train the method on.

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments, and the Panlex devel-
opers for assistance with the dictionaries and ex-
perimental design. This research was supported
by funding from the Group of Eight and the Aus-
tralian Research Council.

References
Rakesh Agrawal, Tomasz Imieliński, and Arun Swami.

1993. Mining association rules between sets of
items in large databases. ACM SIGMOD Record,
22(2):207–216.

Timothy Baldwin, Jonathan Pool, and Susan M.
Colowick. 2010. PanLex and LEXTRACT: Trans-
lating all words of all languages of the world. In

97



Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2010), Demo
Volume, pages 37–40, Beijing, China.

Jiang Chen and Jian-Yun Nie. 2000. Parallel web text
mining for cross-language IR. In Proceedings of
Recherche d’Informations Assistee par Ordinateur
2000 (RIAO’2000), pages 62–77, College de France,
France.

ClueWeb09. 2009. The ClueWeb09 dataset. http:
//lemurproject.org/clueweb09/.

Aidan Finn, Nicholas Kushmerick, and Barry Smyth.
2002. Genre classification and domain transfer for
information filtering. In Proceedings of the 24th Eu-
ropean Conference on Information Retrieval (ECIR
2002), pages 353–362, Glasgow, UK.

Freedict. 2011. Freedict dictionaries. http://www.
freedict.com.

Pascale Fung. 1998. A statistical view on bilin-
gual lexicon extraction: From parallel corpora to
non-parallel corpora. In Proceedings of Associa-
tion for Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA
1998): Machine Translation and the Information
Soup, pages 1–17, Langhorne, USA.

Indri. 2009. Indri search engine. http://www.
lemurproject.org/indri/.

David Kamholz and Jonathan Pool. to appear. PanLex:
Building a resource for panlingual lexical transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 9th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2014), Reykjavik, Iceland.

Batia Laufer and Linor Hadar. 1997. Assessing the
effectiveness of monolingual, bilingual, and “bilin-
gualised” dictionaries in the comprehension and pro-
duction of new words. The Modern Language Jour-
nal, 81(2):189–196.

Marco Lui, Jey Han Lau, and Timothy Baldwin. 2014.
Automatic detection and language identification of
multilingual documents. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 2(Feb):27–40.

Katsushi Matsuda and Toshikazu Fukushima. 1999.
Task-oriented world wide web retrieval by document
type classification. In Proceedings of the 1999 ACM
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM 1999), pages 109–113, Kansas City,
USA.

MeCab. 2011. http://mecab.googlecode.
com.

I. Dan Melamed. 1996. Automatic construction of
clean broad-coverage translation lexicons. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Conference of the Association
for Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA
1996), Montreal, Canada.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguis-
tics, 31(4):477–504.

Masaaki Nagata, Teruka Saito, and Kenji Suzuki.
2001. Using the web as a bilingual dictionary. In
Proceedings of the ACL 2001 Workshop on Data-
driven Methods in Machine Translation, pages 1–8,
Toulouse, France.

Jian-Yun Nie. 2010. Cross-language information
retrieval. Morgan and Claypool Publishers, San
Rafael, USA.

John M. Prager. 1999. Linguini: language identifi-
cation for multilingual documents. In Proceedings
the 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference
on Systems Sciences (HICSS-32), Maui, USA.

Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith. 2003. The web
as a parallel corpus. Computational Linguistics,
29(3):349–380.

Stephen Soderland, Christopher Lim, Mausam,
Bo Qin, Oren Etzioni, and Jonathan Pool. 2009.
Lemmatic machine translation. In Proceedings
of the Twelfth Machine Translation Summit (MT
Summit XII), Ottawa, Canada.

Nicholas Thieberger and Andrea L. Berez. 2012. Lin-
guistic data management. In Nicholas Thieberger,
editor, The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Field-
work. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Huihsin Tseng, Pichuan Chang, Galen Andrew, Daniel
Jurafsky, and Christopher Manning. 2005. A condi-
tional random field word segmenter for sighan bake-
off 2005. In Proceedings of the Fourth SIGHAN
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, volume
171.

Hiroshi Yamaguchi and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. 2012.
Text segmentation by language using minimum de-
scription length. In Proceedings the 50th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 969–978,
Jeju Island, Korea.

Kun Yu and Junichi Tsujii. 2009. Bilingual dictio-
nary extraction from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of
the Twelfth Machine Translation Summit (MT Sum-
mit XII), pages 379–386, Ottawa, Canada.

Sven Meyer zu Eissen and Benno Stein. 2005. Genre
classification of web pages. In Proceedings of the
27th Annual German Conference in AI (KI 2005),
pages 256–269, Ulm, Germany.

98


