



















































Vector spaces for historical linguistics: Using distributional semantics to study syntactic productivity in diachrony


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 309–314,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Vector spaces for historical linguistics: Using distributional semantics to
study syntactic productivity in diachrony

Florent Perek
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA

fperek@princeton.edu

Abstract

This paper describes an application of dis-
tributional semantics to the study of syn-
tactic productivity in diachrony, i.e., the
property of grammatical constructions to
attract new lexical items over time. By
providing an empirical measure of seman-
tic similarity between words derived from
lexical co-occurrences, distributional se-
mantics not only reliably captures how the
verbs in the distribution of a construc-
tion are related, but also enables the use
of visualization techniques and statistical
modeling to analyze the semantic develop-
ment of a construction over time and iden-
tify the semantic determinants of syntactic
productivity in naturally occurring data.

1 Introduction

Language change does not exclusively consist of
drastic shifts in ‘core’ aspects of grammar, such as
changes in word order. Variation in usage, which
can occur in no more than a few decades, is much
more common, and to many linguists constitutes
linguistic change in the making. Among these as-
pects of language use that are subject to diachronic
change, this paper is concerned with the productiv-
ity of syntactic constructions, i.e., the range of lex-
ical items with which a construction can be used.
A given construction might occur with very differ-
ent distributions at different points in time, even
when the function it conveys remains the same.
This is what Israel (1996) finds for the pattern
“Verb one’s way Path”, commonly called the way-
construction (Goldberg, 1995), exemplified by (1)
and (2) below.

(1) They hacked their way through the jungle.
(2) She typed her way to a promotion.

As reported by Israel, examples like (1), in
which the main verb describes the physical means

whereby motion towards a goal is enabled, are at-
tested as early as the 16th century, but it was not
until the 19th century that examples like (2) started
to appear, in which the action depicted by the verb
provides a more indirect (and abstract) way of at-
taining the agent’s goal.

The productivity of a construction may appear
partly arbitrary, but a growing body of evidence
suggests that it is tied to the previous experience
of speakers with that construction (Barðdal, 2008;
Bybee and Eddington, 2006; Suttle and Goldberg,
2011). More specifically, previous research points
to a strong semantic component, in that the pos-
sibility of a novel use depends on how it seman-
tically relates to prior usage. Along these lines,
Suttle and Goldberg (2011, 1254) posit a criterion
of coverage, defined as “the degree to which at-
tested instances ‘cover’ the category determined
jointly by attested instances together with the tar-
get coinage”. Coverage relates to how the seman-
tic domain of a construction is populated in the
vicinity of a given target coinage, and in particular
to the density of the semantic space.

The importance of semantics for syntactic pro-
ductivity implies that the meaning of lexical items
must be appropriately taken into account when
studying the distribution of constructions, which
calls for an empirical operationalization of seman-
tics. Most existing studies rely either on the se-
mantic intuitions of the analyst, or on semantic
norming studies (Bybee and Eddington, 2006). In
this paper, I present a third alternative that takes
advantage of advances in computational linguis-
tics and draws on a distributionally-based measure
of semantic similarity. On the basis of a case study
of the construction “V the hell out of NP”, I show
how distributional semantics can profitably be ap-
plied to the study of syntactic productivity.

309



2 The hell-construction

The case study presented in this paper considers
the syntactic pattern “V the hell out of NP”, as ex-
emplified by the following sentences from the Cor-
pus of Contemporary American English (COCA;
Davies, 2008):

(3) Snakes just scare the hell out of me.
(4) It surprised the hell out of me when I heard

what he’s been accused of.
(5) You might kick the hell out of me like you

did that doctor.

The construction generally conveys an in-
tensifying function (very broadly defined).
Thus, scare/surprise the hell out of means
“scare/surprise very much”, and kick the hell out
of means “kick very hard”. The particular aspect
that is intensified may be highly specific to the
verb and depend to some extent on the context.
Scare and beat are the most typical verbs in that
construction (and arguably the two that first come
to mind), but a wide and diverse range of other
verbs can also be found, such that avoid in (6),
drive (a car) in (7) and even an intransitive verb
(listen) in (8):

(6) I [...] avoided the hell out of his presence.
(7) But you drove the hell out of it!
(8) I’ve been listening the hell out of your tape.

To examine how the construction evolved over
time, I used diachronic data from the Corpus
of Historical American English (COHA; Davies
2010), which contains about 20 million words
of written American English for each decade be-
tween 1810 and 2009 roughly balanced for genre
(fiction, magazines, newspapers, non-fiction). In-
stances of the hell-construction were filtered out
manually from the results of the query “[v*] the
hell out of”, mostly ruling out locative construc-
tions like get the hell out of here. The diachronic
evolution of the verb slot in terms of token and
type frequency is plotted in Figure 1. Since the
corpus size varies slightly in each decade, the to-
ken frequencies are normalized per million words.

The construction is first attested in the corpus
in the 1930s. Since then, it has been steadily in-
creasing in token frequency (to the exception of
a sudden decrease in the 1990s). Also, more and
more different verbs are attested in the construc-
tion, as shown by the increase in type frequency.

●

● ●

● ●

●

●

●

1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

0
1

2
3

4

To
ke

ns
 p

er
 m

ill
io

n 
w

or
ds

●

●

● ● ●

●

●

●

0
10

20
30

40
50

Ty
pe

s

Token frequency (per million words)
Type frequency

Figure 1: Diachronic development of the hell-
construction in terms of normalized token fre-
quency and type frequency

This reflects a general expansion of the productiv-
ity of the construction, but it does not show what
this productivity consists of. For instance, it does
not say what kinds of verbs joined the distribu-
tion and to what extent the distribution becomes
semantically more diverse over time. To answer
these questions, I will analyze the distribution of
the construction from a semantic point of view
by using a measure of semantic similarity derived
from distributional information.

3 Distributional measure of semantic
similarity

Drawing on the observation that words occurring
in similar contexts tend to have related mean-
ings (Miller and Charles, 1991), distributional ap-
proaches to semantics seek to capture the mean-
ing of words through their distribution in large text
corpora (Lenci, 2008; Turney and Pantel, 2010;
Erk, 2012). One benefit of the distributional se-
mantics approach is that it allows semantic sim-
ilarity between words to be quantified by mea-
suring the similarity in their distribution. This is
achieved by means of a vector-space model that
assigns an array of numerical values (i.e., a vector)
derived from distributional information to each
word. A wide range of distributional informa-
tion can be employed in vector-based models; the
present study uses the ‘bag of words’ approach,
which is based on the frequency of co-occurrence
of words within a given context window. Accord-
ing to Sahlgren (2008), this kind of model cap-
tures to what extent words can be substituted for
each other, which is a good measure of semantic
similarity between verbs. As it turns out, even this

310



relatively coarse model captures semantic distinc-
tions in the distribution of the hell-construction
that make intuitive sense.

All instances of the relevant verbs were ex-
tracted from the COCA1 with their context of oc-
currence. In order to make sure that enough dis-
tributional information is available to reliably as-
sess semantic similarity, verbs with less than 2,000
occurrences were excluded, which left 92 usable
items (out of 105). The words in the sentence con-
texts extracted from the COCA were lemmatized
and annotated for part-of-speech using TreeTag-
ger (Schmid, 1994). The part-of-speech annotated
lemma of each collocate within a 5-word window
was extracted from the COCA data to build the co-
occurrence matrix recording the frequency of co-
occurrence of each verb with its collocates. Only
the nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs listed
among the 5,000 most frequent words in the cor-
pus were considered (to the exclusion of be, have,
and do), thus ignoring function words (articles,
prepositions, conjunctions, etc.) and all words that
did not make the top 5,000.

The co-occurrence matrix was transformed by
applying a Point-wise Mutual Information weight-
ing scheme, using the DISSECT toolkit (Dinu et
al., 2013), to turn the raw frequencies into weights
that reflect how distinctive a collocate is for a
given target word with respect to the other tar-
get words under consideration. The resulting ma-
trix, which contains the distributional information
(in 4,683 columns) for 92 verbs occurring in the
hell-construction, constitutes the semantic space
under consideration in this case study. Pairwise
distances between the target verbs were calculated
using the cosine distance. The rest of the analysis
was conducted on the basis of this distance matrix
in the R environment (R Development Core Team,
2013).

1The COCA contains 464 million words of American En-
glish consisting of the same amount of spoken, fiction, mag-
azine, newspaper, and academic prose data for each year
between 1990 and 2012. Admittedly, a more ecologically
valid choice would have been to use data from a particular
time frame to build a vector-space model for the same time
frame, but even the twenty-odd million words per decade of
the COHA did not prove sufficient to achieve that purpose.
This is, however, not as problematic as it might sound, since
the meaning of the verbs under consideration are not likely
to have changed considerably within the time frame of this
study. Besides, using the same data presents the advantage
that the distribution is modeled with the same semantic space
in all time periods, which makes it easier to visualize changes.

4 Application of the vector-space model

4.1 Semantic plots
One of the advantages conferred by the quantifi-
cation of semantic similarity is that lexical items
can be precisely considered in relation to each
other, and by aggregating the similarity informa-
tion for all items in the distribution, we can pro-
duce a visual representation of the structure of
the semantic domain of the construction in order
to observe how verbs in that domain are related
to each other, and to immediately identify the re-
gions of the semantic space that are densely pop-
ulated (with tight clusters of verbs), and those that
are more sparsely populated (fewer and/or more
scattered verbs). Multidimensional scaling (MDS)
provides a way both to aggregate similarity infor-
mation and to represent it visually. This technique
aims to place objects in a space with two (or more)
dimensions such that the between-object distances
are preserved as much as possible.

The pairwise distances between verbs were sub-
mitted to multidimensional scaling into two di-
mensions.2 To visualize the semantic development
of the hell-construction over time, the diachronic
data was divided into four successive twenty-year
periods: 1930-1949, 1950-1969, 1970-1989, and
1990-2009. The semantic plots corresponding to
the distribution of the construction in each period
are presented in Figure 2. For convenience and
ease of visualization, the verbs are color-coded
according to four broad semantic groupings that
were identified inductively by means of hierarchi-
cal clustering (using Ward’s criterion).3

By comparing the plots in Figure 2, we can
follow the semantic development of the hell-
construction. The construction is strikingly cen-
tered around two kinds of verbs: mental verbs (in
red: surprise, please, scare, etc.) and verbs of
hitting (most verbs in green: smash, kick, whack,
etc.), a group that is orbited by other kinds of
forceful actions (such as pinch, push, and tear).
These two types of verbs account for most of
the distribution at the onset, and they continue to

2Non-metric MDS was employed (Kruskal, 1964), using
the function isoMDS from the R package MASS.

3Another benefit of combining clustering and MDS stems
from the fact that the latter often distorts the data when fitting
the objects into two dimensions, in that some objects might
have to be slightly misplaced if not all distance relations can
be simultaneously complied with. Since cluster analysis op-
erates with all 4,683 dimensions of the distributional space, it
is more reliable than MDS, although it lacks the visual appeal
of the latter.

311



1930s − 1940s

x

●●

beat

bore

bother

chase

eat

kick
knock

lick

love

please
scare

shoot

smash

surprise
tear

want

whip

work

worry

1950s − 1960s

x

●

●

●
●

●

●

argue

bang

beatbomb

bore

depress

embarrass

flatter

fool

frighten

frustrate

hate

impress
irritate

kick

kill

knock

love

need pan

puzzle

relaxscare

sell

shock

squeeze
stun

sue

surprise

understand whack

worry

1970s − 1980s

x

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

● ●

●

act

admire

adore
amuse

analyze

annoy

avoid

beatbomb

bother

bribe drive

embarrass
entertain

exploit fly

frighten hang

hit

impress

kick
knock

like

play

puzzle

rack

resent

rub
scare

scratch
scrub

sell

shock

shoot

startle
surprise

tear
thrash

whackwhip

1990s − 2000s

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

adore

analyze

annoy

bang

beat

blast
blow

bomb

bore

bother bug
care

complicate

confuse

cut
depress

disappoint

eat

embarrass

enjoy

excuse
explain

fascinate
flatter

frighten

frustrate

impress

intimidate

irritate

kick

kill

knock

love

pinch

pound

push

respect

scare

sell

shock

shoot

sing

slam

slap
slicespoil

squeeze

sue

surprise

torment

trash

twist

wear

whack

work

worry

Figure 2: Semantic plots of the hell-construction
in four time periods.

weigh heavily throughout the history of the con-
struction. These two classes also correspond to
the regions of the semantic domain that attract the
most new members, and they constantly do so in
all periods. Outside of these two clusters, the se-
mantic space is much more sparsely populated. In
the first period (1930-1949), only a few peripheral
members are found. They are joined by other dis-
tantly related items in later periods, although by no
more than a handful in each. In other words, the
construction is markedly less productive in these
outer domains, which never form proper clusters
of verbs.

In sum, the semantic plots show that densely
populated regions of the semantic space appear to
be the most likely to attract new members. Out-
side of the two identified domains of predilection,
other classes never become important, assumedly
because they do not receive a “critical mass” of
items, and therefore attract new members more
slowly.

4.2 Statistical analysis
With the quantification of semantic similarity pro-
vided by the distributional semantic model, it is
also possible to properly test the hypothesis that
productivity is tied to the structure of the seman-
tic space. On the reasonable assumption that the
semantic contribution of the construction did not
change, and therefore that all verbs ever attested
in it are equally plausible from a semantic point
of view, the fact that some verbs joined the dis-
tribution later than others is in want of an expla-
nation. In view of the observations collected on
the semantic plots and in line with previous re-
search (especially Suttle and Goldberg’s notion of
coverage), I suggest that the occurrence of a new
item in the construction in a given period is related
to the density of the semantic space around that
item in the previous period. If the semantic space
around the novel item is dense, i.e., if there is a
high number of similar items, the coinage will be
very likely. The sparser the semantic space around
a given item, the less likely this item can be used.

The measure of density used in this study con-
siders the set of the N nearest neighbors of a given
item in the semantic space, and is defined by the
following formula:

DensityV,N = 1−
∑N

n=1 d(V, Vn)
N

where d(V, Vn) is the distance between a verb V

312



and its nth nearest neighbor. In plain language,
density equals one minus the mean distance to the
N nearest neighbors. The latter value decreases
with space density (i.e., if there are many close
neighbors), and is therefore technically a measure
of sparsity; since cosine distances are between 0
and 1, subtracting the mean distance from one re-
turns a measure of density within the same bound-
aries.

This measure of density was used as a factor in
logistic regression to predict the first occurrence
of a verb in the construction, coded as the binary
variable OCCURRENCE, set to 1 for the first pe-
riod in which the verb is attested in the construc-
tion, and to 0 for all preceding periods (later pe-
riods were discarded). For each VERB-PERIOD-
OCCURRENCE triplet, the density of the semantic
space around the verb in the immediately preced-
ing period was calculated. Six different versions
of the density measure, with the number of neigh-
bors under consideration (N) varying between 3
and 8, were used to fit six mixed effects regres-
sion models with OCCURRENCE as the dependent
variable, DENSITY as a fixed effect, and random
by-verb intercepts and slopes (Bates et al., 2011).
The results of these models are summarized in Ta-
ble 1.

N Effect of DENSITY p-value
3 0.7211 0.195
4 0.8836 0.135
5 1.0487 0.091 (.)
6 1.2367 0.056 (.)
7 1.4219 0.034 (*)
8 1.6625 0.017 (*)

Table 1: Summary of logistic regression results
for different values of N. Model formula: OC-
CURRENCE ∼ DENSITY + (1 + DENSITY|VERB).
Marginally significant effects are marked with a
period (.), significant effects with a star (*).

For all values of N, we find a positive effect of
DENSITY, i.e., there is a positive relation between
the measure of density and the probability of first
occurrence of a verb in the construction. However,
the effect is only significant for N ≥ 7; hence, the
hypothesis that space density increases the odds of
a coinage occurs in the construction is supported
for measures of density based on these values of
N.

More generally, the p-value decreases as N in-

creases, which means that the positive relation be-
tween DENSITY and OCCURRENCE is less sys-
tematic when DENSITY is measured with fewer
neighbors. This is arguably because a higher N
helps to better discriminate between dense clusters
where all items are close together from looser ones
that consist of a few ‘core’ items surrounded by
more distant neighbors. This result illustrates the
role of type frequency in syntactic productivity: a
measure of density that is supported by a higher
number of types makes better prediction than a
measure supported by fewer types. This means
that productivity not only hinges on how the exist-
ing semantic space relates to the novel item, it also
occurs more reliably when this relation is attested
by more items. These finding support the view
that semantic density and type frequency, while
they both positively influence syntactic productiv-
ity, do so in different ways: density defines the
necessary conditions for a new coinage to occur,
while type frequency increases the confidence that
this coinage is indeed possible.

5 Conclusion

This paper reports the first attempt at using a dis-
tributional measure of semantic similarity derived
from a vector-space model for the study of syn-
tactic productivity in diachrony. On the basis of
a case study of the construction “V the hell out
of NP” from 1930 to 2009, the advantages of this
approach were demonstrated. Not only does dis-
tributional semantics provide an empirically-based
measure of semantic similarity that appropriately
captures semantic distinctions, it also enables the
use of methods for which quantification is neces-
sary, such as data visualization and statistical anal-
ysis. Using multidimensional scaling and logis-
tic regression, it was shown that the occurrence
of new items throughout the history of the con-
struction can be predicted by the density of the se-
mantic space in the neighborhood of these items
in prior usage. In conclusion, this work opens new
perspectives for the study of syntactic productivity
in line with the growing synergy between compu-
tational linguistics and other fields.

References

Johana Barðdal. 2008. Productivity: Evidence from
Case and Argument Structure in Icelandic. John
Benjamins, Amsterdam.

313



Douglas Bates, Martin Maechler, Ben Bolker and
Steven Walker. 2011. lme4: Linear mixed-
effects models using S4 classes. R package. URL:
http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lme4

Joan Bybee. 2010. Language, Usage and Cognition.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Joan Bybee and David Eddington. 2006. A usage-
based approach to Spanish verbs of ‘becoming’.
Language, 82(2):323–355.

Mark Davies. 2008. The Corpus of Contemporary
American English: 450 million words, 1990-present.
Available online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/

Mark Davies. 2010. The Corpus of Historical Ameri-
can English: 400 million words, 1810-2009. Avail-
able online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coha/

Georgiana Dinu, The Nghia Pham and Marco Baroni.
2013. DISSECT: DIStributional SEmantics Compo-
sition Toolkit. In Proceedings of the System Demon-
strations of ACL 2013 (51st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics).

Katrin Erk. 2012. Vector Space Models of Word
Meaning and Phrase Meaning: A Survey. Language
and Linguistics Compass, 6(10):635–653.

Adele Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A construction
grammar approach to argument structure. Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Michael Israel. 1996. The way constructions grow. In
Adele E. Goldberg (ed.), Conceptual structure, dis-
course and language, pages 217–230. CSLI Publi-
cations, Stanford, CA.

Joseph Kruskal. 1964. Multidimensional scaling by
optimizing goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothe-
sis. Psychometrika, 29(1):1–27.

Alessandro Lenci. 2008. Distributional semantics in
linguistic and cognitive research. Rivista di Linguis-
tica, 20(1):1–31.

George Miller and Walter Charles. 1991. Contex-
tual correlates of semantic similarity. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 6(1):1–28.

R Development Core Team. 2013. R: A language
and environment for statistical computing. R Foun-
dation for Statistical Computing, Vienna; URL:
http://www.R-project.org/

Magnus Sahlgren. 2008. The distributional hypothe-
sis. Rivista di Linguistica, 20(1):33–53.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech
Tagging Using Decision Trees. In Proceedings of
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, Manchester, UK.

Laura Suttle and Adele Goldberg. 2011. The partial
productivity of constructions as induction. Linguis-
tics, 49(6):1237–1269.

Peter Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From Fre-
quency to Meaning: Vector Space Models of Se-
mantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
37:141–188.

314


