



















































Content Importance Models for Scoring Writing From Sources


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 247–252,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Content Importance Models for Scoring Writing From Sources

Beata Beigman Klebanov Nitin Madnani Jill Burstein Swapna Somasundaran
Educational Testing Service

660 Rosedale Road
Princeton, NJ 08541

{bbeigmanklebanov,nmadnani,jburstein,ssomasundaran}@ets.org

Abstract

Selection of information from external
sources is an important skill assessed in
educational measurement. We address an
integrative summarization task used in an
assessment of English proficiency for non-
native speakers applying to higher educa-
tion institutions in the USA. We evaluate a
variety of content importance models that
help predict which parts of the source ma-
terial should be selected by the test-taker
in order to succeed on this task.

1 Introduction

Selection and integration of information from ex-
ternal sources is an important academic and life
skill, mentioned as a critical competency in the
Common Core State Standards for English Lan-
guage Arts/Literacy: College-ready students will
be able to “gather relevant information from mul-
tiple print and digital sources, assess the credibi-
lity and accuracy of each source, and integrate the
information while avoiding plagiarism.”1

Accordingly, large-scale assessments of writing
incorporate tasks that test this skill. One such test
requires test-takers to read a passage, then to lis-
ten to a lecture discussing the same topic from
a different point of view, and to summarize the
points made in the lecture, explaining how they
cast doubt on points made in the reading. The qua-
lity of the information selected from the lecture is
emphasized in excerpts from the scoring rubric for
this test (below); essays are scored on a 1-5 scale:

Score 5 successfully selects the important infor-
mation from the lecture and coherently and
accurately presents this information in rela-
tion to the relevant information presented in
the reading.

1http://www.corestandards.org/
ELA-Literacy/CCRA/W.

Score 4 is generally good in selecting the impor-
tant information from the lecture ..., but it
may have a minor omission.

Score 3 contains some important information
from the lecture ..., but it may omit one major
key point.

Score 2 contains some relevant information from
the lecture ... The response significantly
omits or misrepresents important points.

Score 1 provides little or no meaningful or rele-
vant coherent content from the lecture.

The ultimate goal of our project is to improve
automated scoring of such essays by taking into
account the extent to which a response integrates
important information from the lecture. This pa-
per reports on the first step aimed at automatically
assigning importance scores to parts of the lecture.
The next step – developing an essay scoring sys-
tem using content importance models along with
other features of writing quality, will be addressed
in future work. A simple essay scoring mechanism
will be used for evaluation purposes in this paper,
as described in the next section.

2 Design of Experiment

In evaluations of summarization algorithms, it is
common practice to derive the gold standard con-
tent importance scores from human summaries, as
done, for example, in the pyramid method, where
the importance of a content element corresponds
to the number of reference human summaries that
make use of it (Nenkova and Passonneau, 2004).
Selection of the appropriate content plays a cru-
cial role in attaining a high score for the essays
we consider here, as suggested by the quotes from
the scoring rubric in §1, as well as by a corpus
study by Plakans and Gebril (2013). We therefore
observe that high-scoring essays can be thought

247



of as high-quality human summaries of the lec-
ture, albeit containing, in addition, references to
the reading material and language that contrasts
the different viewpoints, making them a somewhat
noisy gold standard. On the other hand, since low-
scoring essays contain deficient summaries of the
lecture, our setup allows for a richer evaluation
than typical in studies using gold standard human
data only, in that a good model should not only
agree with the gold standard human summaries
but should also disagree with sub-standard human
summaries. We therefore use correlation with es-
say score to evaluate content importance models.

The evaluation will proceed as follows. Every
essay E is responding to a test prompt that con-
tains a lecture L and a reading R. We identify the
essay’s overlap with the lecture:

O(E,L) = {x|x ∈ L, x ∈ E} (1)

where the exact definition of x, that is, what is
taken to be a single unit of information, will be
one of the parameters to be studied. The essay is
then assigned the following score by the content
importance model M :

SM (E) =
Σx∈O(E,L)wM (x)× C(x, E)

nE
(2)

where wM (x) is the importance weight as-
signed by model M to item x in the lecture,
C(x, E) is the count of tokens in E that realize
the information unit x, and nE is the number of
tokens in the essay. In this paper, the distinction
between x and C is that between type and token
count of instances of that type.2 This simple sco-
ring mechanism quantifies the rate of usage of im-
portant information per token in the essay. Finally,
we calculate the correlation of scores assigned to
essays by model M with scores assigned to the
same essays by human graders.

This design ensures that once x is fixed, all the
content importance models are evaluated within
the same scoring scheme, so any differences in the
correlations can be attributed to the differences in
the weights assigned by the importance models.

2In the future, we intend to explore more complex rea-
lization functions, allowing paraphrase, skip n-grams (as in
ROUGE (Lin, 2004)), and other approximate matches, such
as misspellings and inflectional variants.

3 Content Importance Models

Our setting can be thought of as a special kind
of summarization task. Test-takers are required
to summarize the lecture while referencing the
reading, making this a hybrid of single- and multi-
document summarization, where one source is
treated as primary and the other as secondary.

We therefore consider models of content impor-
tance that had been found useful in the summariza-
tion literature, as well as additional models that
utilize a special feature of our scenario: We have
hundreds of essays of varying quality responding
to any given prompt, as opposed to a typical news
summarization scenario where a small number of
high quality human summaries are available for a
given article. A sample of these essays can be used
when developing a content importance model.

We define the following importance models.
For all definitions, x is a unit of information
in the lecture; C(x, t) is the number of tokens in
text t that realize x; nL and nR are the number of
tokens in the lecture and the reading, respectively.3

Naı̈ve: w(x) = 1. This is a simple overlap model.

Prob: w(x) = C(x,L)nL , an MLE estimate of
the probability that x appears in the lecture.
Those x that appear more are more important.

Position: w(x) = FP (x)nL , where FP (x) is the
offset of the first occurrence of x in the lec-
ture. The offset corresponds to the token’s
serial number in the text, 1 through nL.

LectVsRead: w(x) = C(x,L)nL −
C(x,R)

nR
, that is, the

difference in the probabilities of occurrence
of x in the lecture and in the reading passage
that accompanies the lecture. This model at-
tempts to capture the contrastive aspect of
importance – the content that is unique to
the lecture is more important than the content
that is shared by the lecture and the reading.

The following two models capitalize on evi-
dence of use of information in better and worse es-
says. For estimating these models, we sample, for
each prompt, a development set of 750 essays re-
sponding to the prompt (that is, addressing a given
pair of lecture and reading stimuli). Out of these,
we take, for each prompt, all essays at score points

3Prob, Position, and LectVsRead models normalize by
nR and nL to enable comparison of essays responding to dif-
ferent lecture + reading stimuli (prompts).

248



4 and 5 (EGood) and all essays at score points 1
and 2 (EBad). These data do not overlap with the
experimental data described in section 4. In both
definitions below, e is an essay.

Good: w(x) = |{e∈EGood|x∈e}||EGood| . An x is more im-
portant if more good essays use it. Hong and
Nenkova (2014) showed that a variant of this
measure used on pairs of articles and their ab-
stracts from the New York Times effectively
identified words that typically go into sum-
maries, across topics. In contrast, our mea-
surements are prompt-specific.

GoodVsBad: w(x) = |{e∈EGood|x∈e}||EGood| −
|{e∈EBad|x∈e}|

|EBad| . An x is more important if
good essays use it more than bad essays.
To our knowledge, this measure has not
been used in the summarization literature,
probably because a large sample of human
summaries of varying quality is typically not
available.

4 Data

We use 116 prompts drawn from an assessment of
English proficiency for non-native speakers. Each
prompt contains a lecture and a reading passage.
For each prompt, we sample about 750 essays.
Each essay has an operational score provided by
a human grader. Table 1 shows the distribution of
essay scores; mean score is 3. Text transcripts of
the lectures were used.

Score 1 2 3 4 5
Proportion 0.13 0.18 0.35 0.25 0.09

Table 1: Distribution of essay scores.

5 Results

Independently from the content importance
models, we address the effect of the granularity of
the unit of information. Intuitively, since all the
materials for a given prompt deal with the same
topic, we expect large unigram overlaps between
lecture and reading, and between good and bad
essays, whereas n-grams with larger n can be
more distinctive. On the other hand, larger n lead
to misses, where an information unit would fail
to be identified in an essay due to a paraphrase,
thus impairing the ability of the scoring function
to use the content importance model effectively.

We therefore evaluate each content importance
model for different granularities of the content
unit x: n-grams for n = 1, 2, 3, 4. Table 2 shows
the correlations with essay scores.

Content Pearson’s r
Importance
Model n=1 n=2 n=3 n=4
Naı̈ve 0.24 0.27* 0.24 0.20
Prob 0.04 0.14 0.17 0.14
Position 0.22 0.30* 0.26* 0.20
LectVsRead 0.09 0.25* 0.31* 0.26*
Good 0.07 0.15 0.10 0.07
GoodVsBad 0.54* 0.42* 0.32* 0.21

Table 2: Correlations with essay scores attained by
content models, for various definitions of informa-
tion unit (n-grams with n = 1, 2, 3, 4). Five top
scores are boldfaced. The baseline performance
is shown in underlined italics. Correlations that
are significantly better (p < 0.05) than the naı̈ve
n = 1 model are marked with an asterisk. We
use McNemar (1955, p. 148) test for significance
of difference between same-sample correlations.
N = 85, 252 for all correlations.

6 Discussion

The Naı̈ve model with n = 1 can be considered a
baseline, corresponding to unweighted word over-
lap between the lecture and the essay. This model
attains a significant positive correlation with essay
score (r = 0.24), suggesting that, in general, bet-
ter writers use more material from the lecture.

Our next observation is that the Prob and Good
models do not improve over the baseline, that is,
their weighting schemes generally assign higher
weights to the wrong units. We believe the rea-
son for this is that the most highly used n-grams,
in the lecture and in the essays, correspond to ge-
neral topical and functional elements. The impor-
tance of these elements is discounted in the more
effective Position, LectVsRead, and GoodVsBad
models, highlighting subtler aspects of the lecture.

Next, let us consider the granularity of the units
of information. We observe that 4-grams are in-
ferior to trigrams for all models, suggesting that
data sparsity is becoming a problem for matching
4-word sequences. For models that assign weight
based on one or two sources (lecture, or lecture
and reading) – Naı̈ve, Position, LectVsRead – un-
igram models are generally ineffective, while bi-

249



gram and trigram models significantly outperform
the baseline. We interpret this as suggesting that
it is certain particular, detailed aspects of the top-
ical concepts that constitute the important nuggets
in the lecture; these are usually realized by multi-
word sequences.

The GoodVsBad models show a different pat-
tern, obtaining the best performance with a uni-
gram version. These models are sensitive to data
sparsity not only when matching essays to the
lecture (this problem is common to all models)
but also during model building. Recall that the
weights in a GoodVsBad model are estimated
based on differential use in samples of good and
bad essays. The estimation of use-in-a-corpus is
more accurate for smaller n, because longer n-
grams are more susceptible to paraphrasing, which
leads to under-estimation of use. Assuming that
paraphrasing behavior of good and bad writers is
not the same – in fact, there is corpus evidence
that better writers paraphrase more (Burstein et
al., 2012) – the resulting inaccuracies might im-
pact the estimation of differential use in a sys-
tematic manner, making the n > 1 models less
effective than the unigrams. Given that (a) the
GoodVsBad bigram model is the second best over-
all in spite of the shortcomings of the estimation
process, and (b) that the bigram models worked
better than unigram models for all the other con-
tent importance models, the GoodVsBad bigram
model could probably be improved significantly
by using a more flexible information realization
mechanism.

To illustrate the information assigned high im-
portance by different models, consider a lec-
ture discussing advantages of fish farming. The
top-scoring Good bigrams are topical expressions
(fish farming), functional bigrams around fish and
farming,4 aspects of content dealt with at length
in the lecture (wild fish, commercial fishing), bi-
grams referencing some of the claims – fish con-
taining less fat and being used for fish meal. In
addition, this model picks out some sequences of
function words and punctuation (of the, are not,
“, and”, “, the”) that suggest that better essays
tend to give more detail (hence have more com-
plex noun phrases and coordinated constructions)
and to draw contrast.

For the bigram GoodVsBad model, the topi-
cal bigram fish farming is not in the top 20 bi-

4such as that fish, of fish, farming is, “, fish”

grams. Although some bigrams are shared with
the Good model, the GoodVsBad model selects
additional details about the claims, such as the
contrast between inedible fish and edible fish that
is eaten by humans, as well as reference to chemi-
cals used in farming and to the claim that wild fish
are already endangered by other practices.

The most important bigrams according to the
LectVsRead model include functional bigrams
around fish and farming, functional sequences
(that the, is a), as well as commercial fishing and
edible fish. Also selected are functional bigrams
around consumption and species, hinting, indi-
rectly, at the edibility differences between species.
Finally, this model selects almost all bigrams in
the reading passage makes, the reading makes
claims that and the reading says. While distin-
guishing the lecture from the reading, these do not
capture topic-relevant content of the lecture.

The GoodVsBad unigram model selects poul-
try, endangered, edible, chemicals among its top 6
unigrams,5 effectively touching upon the connec-
tion with other farm-raised foods (poultry, chemi-
cals), with wild fish (endangered) and with human
benefit (edible) that are made in the lecture.

7 Related work

Modern essay scoring systems are complex and
cover various aspects of the writing construct,
such as grammar, organization, vocabulary (Sher-
mis and Burstein, 2013). The quality of content
is often addressed by features that quantify the
similarity between the vocabulary used in an es-
say and reference essays from given score points
(Attali and Burstein, 2006; Foltz et al., 2013; At-
tali, 2011). For example, Attali (2011) proposed a
measure of differential use of words in higher and
lower scoring essays defined similarly to Good-
VsBad, without, however, considering the source
text at all. Such features can be thought of as con-
tent quality features, as they implicitly assume that
writers of better essays use better content. How-
ever, there are various kinds of better content, only
one of them being selection of important informa-
tion from the source; other elements of content
originate with the writer, such as examples, dis-
course markers, evaluations, introduction and con-
clusion, etc. Our approach allows focusing on a
particular aspect of content quality, namely, selec-
tion of appropriate materials from the source.

5the other two being fishing and used.

250



Our results are related to the findings of Gure-
vich and Deane (2007) who studied the difference
between the reading and the lecture in their im-
pact on essay scores for this test. Using data from
a single prompt, they showed that the difference
between the essay’s average cosine similarity to
the reading and its average cosine similarity to the
lecture is predictive of the score for non-native
speakers of English, thus using a model similar
to LectVsRead, although they took all lecture,
reading, and essay words into account, in contrast
to our model that looks only at n-grams that ap-
pear in the lecture. Our study shows that the ef-
fectiveness of lecture-reading contrast models for
essay scoring generalizes to a large set of prompts.
Similarly, Evanini et al. (2013) found that over-
lap with material that is unique to the lecture (not
shared with the reading) was predictive of scores
in a spoken source-based question answering task.

In the vast literature on summarization, our
work is closest to Hong and Nenkova (2014) who
studied models of word importance for multi-
document summarization of news. The Prob, Po-
sition, and Good models are inspired by their
findings of the effectiveness of similar models in
their setting. We found that, in our setting, Prob
and Good models performed worse than assigning
a uniform weight to all words. We note, however,
that models from Hong and Nenkova (2014) are
not strictly comparable, since their word proba-
bility models were calculated after stopword ex-
clusion, and their model that inspired our Good
model was defined somewhat differently and val-
idated using content words only. The defini-
tion of our Position model and its use in the es-
say scoring function S (equation 2) correspond to
Hong and Nenkova (2014) average first location
model for scoring summaries. Differently from
their findings, this model is not effective for sin-
gle words in our setting. Position models over n-
grams with n > 1 are effective, but their predic-
tion is in the opposite direction of that found for
the news data – the more important materials tend
to appear later in the lecture, as indicated by the
positive r between average first position and essay
score. These findings underscore the importance
of paying attention to the genre of the source ma-
terial when developing summarization systems.

Our summarization task incorporates elements
of contrastive opinion summarization (Paul et al.,
2010; Kim and Zhai, 2009), since the lecture and

the reading sometimes interpret the same facts in
a positive or negative light (for example, the fact
that chemicals are used in fish farms is negative
if compared to wild fish, but not so if compared
to other farm-raised foods like poultry). Relation-
ships between aspect and sentiment (Brody and
Elhadad, 2010; Lazaridou et al., 2013) are also
relevant, since aspects of the same fact are em-
phasized with different evaluations (the quantity
vs the variety of species that go into fish meal for
farmed fish). We hypothesize that units participat-
ing in sentiment and aspect contrasts are of higher
importance; this is a direction for future work.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we addressed the task of automati-
cally assigning importance scores to parts of a lec-
ture that is to be summarized as part of an English
language proficiency test. We investigated the op-
timal units of information to which importance
should be assigned, as well as a variety of impor-
tance scoring models, drawing on the news sum-
marization and essay scoring literature.

We found that bigrams and trigrams were ge-
nerally more effective than unigrams and 4-grams
across importance models, with some exceptions.

We also found that the most effective impor-
tance models are those that equate importance
of an n-gram with its preferential use in higher-
scoring essays than in lower-scoring ones, above
and beyond merely looking at the n-grams used in
good essays. This demonstrates the utility of using
not only gold, high-quality human summaries, but
also sub-standard ones when developing content
importance models.

Additional importance criteria that are intrinsic
to the lecture, as well as those that capture contrast
with a different source discussing the same topic,
were also found to be reasonably effective. Since
different importance models often select different
items as most important, we intend to investigate
complementarity of the different models.

Finally, our results highlight that the effective-
ness of an importance model depends on the genre
of the source text. Thus, while a first sentence
baseline is very competitive in news summariza-
tion, we found that important information tends
not to be located in the opening sentences in our
data (these tend to provide general, introductory
information), but appears later on, when more de-
tailed, specific claims are put forward.

251



References
Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. 2006. Automated Essay

Scoring With e-rater R©V.2. Journal of Technology,
Learning, and Assessment, 4(3).

Yigal Attali. 2011. A Differential Word Use Measure
for Content Analysis in Automated Essay Scoring.
ETS Research Report, RR-11-36.

Samuel Brody and Noemie Elhadad. 2010. An unsu-
pervised aspect-sentiment model for online reviews.
In Human Language Technologies: The 2010 An-
nual Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, HLT
’10, pages 804–812, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Jill Burstein, Michael Flor, Joel Tetreault, Nitin Mad-
nani, and Steven Holtzman. 2012. Examining Lin-
guistic Characteristics of Paraphrase in Test-Taker
Summaries. ETS Research Report, RR-12-18.

Keelan Evanini, Shasha Xie, and Klaus Zechner. 2013.
Prompt-based content scoring for automated spoken
language assessment. In Proceedings of the Eighth
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building
Educational Applications, pages 157–162, Atlanta,
Georgia, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Peter Foltz, Lynn Streeter, Karen Lochbaum, and
Thomas Landauer. 2013. Implementation and Ap-
plication of the Intelligent Essay Assessor. In Mark
Shermis and Jill Burstein, editors, Handbook of au-
tomated essay evaluation: Current applications and
new directions, pages 68–88. New York: Routh-
ledge.

Olga Gurevich and Paul Deane. 2007. Document
similarity measures to distinguish native vs. non-
native essay writers. In Human Language Technolo-
gies 2007: The Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics; Companion Volume, Short Papers, pages
49–52, Rochester, New York, April. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Kai Hong and Ani Nenkova. 2014. Improving
the estimation of word importance for news multi-
document summarization. In The Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Gottenberg, Sweden, April. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Hyun Duk Kim and ChengXiang Zhai. 2009. Gener-
ating comparative summaries of contradictory opin-
ions in text. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Confer-
ence on Information and Knowledge Management,
CIKM ’09, pages 385–394, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Ivan Titov, and Caroline
Sporleder. 2013. A bayesian model for joint
unsupervised induction of sentiment, aspect and
discourse representations. In Proceedings of the

51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1630–1639, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings of
ACL workshop: Text summarization branches out,
pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Quinn McNemar. 1955. Psychological Statistics. New
York: J. Wiley and Sons, 2nd edition.

Ani Nenkova and Rebecca Passonneau. 2004. Evalu-
ating content selection in summarization: The pyra-
mid method. In Human Language Technologies
2004: The Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 145–152, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, May
2 - May 7. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Michael J. Paul, ChengXiang Zhai, and Roxana Girju.
2010. Summarizing contrastive viewpoints in opin-
ionated text. In Proceedings of the 2010 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP ’10, pages 66–76, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Lia Plakans and Atta Gebril. 2013. Using multiple
texts in an integrated writing assessment: Source
text use as a predictor of score. Journal of Second
Language Writing, 22:217–230.

Mark Shermis and Jill Burstein, editors. 2013. Hand-
book of Automated Essay Evaluation: Current Ap-
plications and Future Directions. New York: Rout-
ledge.

252


