



















































Citation Resolution: A method for evaluating context-based citation recommendation systems


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 358–363,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Citation Resolution: A method for evaluating context-based citation
recommendation systems

Daniel Duma
University of Edinburgh

D.C.Duma@sms.ed.ac.uk

Ewan Klein
University of Edinburgh

ewan@staffmail.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Wouldn’t it be helpful if your text edi-
tor automatically suggested papers that are
relevant to your research? Wouldn’t it
be even better if those suggestions were
contextually relevant? In this paper we
name a system that would accomplish this
a context-based citation recommendation
(CBCR) system. We specifically present
Citation Resolution, a method for the eval-
uation of CBCR systems which exclusively
uses readily-available scientific articles.
Exploiting the human judgements that are
already implicit in available resources, we
avoid purpose-specific annotation. We ap-
ply this evaluation to three sets of methods
for representing a document, based on a)
the contents of the document, b) the sur-
rounding contexts of citations to the doc-
ument found in other documents, and c) a
mixture of the two.

1 Introduction

Imagine that you were working on a draft paper
which contained a sentence like the following:1

A variety of coherence theories have
been developed over the years ... and
their principles have found application
in many symbolic text generation sys-
tems (e.g. [CITATION HERE])

Wouldn’t it be helpful if your editor automat-
ically suggested some references that you could
cite here? This is what a citation recommenda-
tion system ought to do. If the system is able to
take into account the context in which the citation
occurs — for example, that papers relevant to our
example above are not only about text generation

1Adapted from the introduction to Barzilay and Lapata
(2008)

systems, but specifically mention applying coher-
ence theories — then this would be much more
informative. So we define a context-based citation
recommendation (CBCR) system as one that assists
the author of a draft document by suggesting other
documents with content that is relevant to a partic-
ular context in the draft.

Our longer term research goal is to provide sug-
gestions that satisfy the requirements of specific
expository or rhetorical tasks, e.g. provide support
for a particular argument, acknowledge previous
work that uses the same methodology, or exem-
plify work that would benefit from the outcomes
of the author’s work. However, our current pa-
per has more modest aims: we present initial re-
sults using existing IR-based approaches and we
introduce an evaluation method and metric. CBCR
systems are not yet widely available, but a num-
ber of experiments have been carried out that may
pave the way for their popularisation, e.g. He et al.
(2010), Schäfer and Kasterka (2010) and He et al.
(2012). It is within this early wave of experiments
that our work is framed.

A main problem we face is that evaluating the
performance of these systems ultimately requires
human judgement. This can be captured as a set of
relevance judgements for candidate citations over
a corpus of documents, which is an arduous ef-
fort that requires considerable manual input and
very careful preparation. In designing a context-
based citation recommendation system, we would
ideally like to minimise these costs.

Fortunately there is already an abundance of
data that meets our requirements: every scientific
paper contains human “judgements” in the form
of citations to other papers which are contextually
appropriate: that is, relevant to specific passages
of the document and aligned with its argumenta-
tive structure. Citation Resolution is a method for
evaluating CBCR systems that is exclusively based
on this source of human judgements.

358



Let’s define some terminology. In the follow-
ing passage, the strings ‘Scott and de Souza, 1990’
and ‘Kibble and Power, 2004’ are both citation to-
kens:

A variety of coherence theories have
been developed over the years ... and
their principles have found application
in many symbolic text generation sys-
tems (e.g. Scott and de Souza, 1990;
Kibble and Power, 2004)

Note that a citation token can use any standard for-
mat. Furthermore

• a citation context is the context in which a ci-
tation token occurs, with no limit as to repre-
sentation of this context, length or processing
involved;

• a collection-internal reference is a reference
in the bibliography of the source document
that matches a document in a given corpus;

• a resolvable citation is an in-text citation to-
ken which resolves to a collection-internal
reference.

2 Related work

While the existing work in this specific area is
far from extensive, previous experiments in evalu-
ating context-based citation recommendation sys-
tems have used one of three approaches. First,
evaluation can be carried out through user studies,
which is costly because it cannot be reused (e.g.
Chandrasekaran et al. (2008)).

Second, a set of relevance judgements can be
created for repeated testing. Ritchie (2009) details
the building of a large set of relevance judgements
in order to evaluate an experimental document re-
trieval system. The judgements were mainly pro-
vided by the authors of papers submitted to a lo-
cally organised conference, for over 140 queries,
each of them being the main research question
of one paper. This is a standard approach in IR,
known as building a test collection (Sanderson,
2010), which the author herself notes was an ar-
duous and time-consuming task.

Third, as we outlined above, existing citations
between papers can be exploited as a source of
human judgements. The most relevant previous
work on this is He et al. (2010), who built an ex-
perimental CBCR system using the whole index of
CiteSeerX as a test collection (over 450,000 docu-
ments). They avoided direct human evaluation and
instead used three relevance metrics:

• Recall, the presence of the original reference
in the list of suggestions generated by the sys-
tem;

• Co-cited probability, a ratio between, on the
one hand, the number of papers citing both
the original reference and a recommended
one, and on the other hand, the number of pa-
pers citing either of them; and

• Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain, a
measure based on the rank of the original ref-
erence in the list of suggested references, its
score decreasing logarithmically.

However, these metrics fail to adequately recog-
nise that the particular reference used by an author
e.g. in support of an argument or as exemplifica-
tion of an approach, may not be the most appro-
priate that could be found in the whole collection.
This does not just amount to a difference of opin-
ion between different authors; it is possible that
within a large enough collection there exists a pa-
per which the original author herself would con-
sider to be more appropriate by any criteria (per-
suasive power, discoverability or the publication,
etc.) than the one actually cited in the paper. Also,
given that recommending the original citation used
by the author in first position is our key criterion, a
metric with smooth discounting like NDCG is too
lenient for our purposes.

We have then chosen top-1 accuracy as our met-
ric, where every time the original citation is first on
the list of suggestions, it receives a score of 1, and
0 otherwise, and these scores are averaged over
all resolved citations in the document collection.
This metric is intuitive in measuring the efficiency
of the system at this task, as it is immediately in-
terpretable as a percentage of success.

While previous experiments in CBCR, like the
ones we have just presented, have treated the task
as an Information Retrieval problem, our ultimate
purpose is different and travels beyond IR into
Question Answering. We want to ultimately be
able to assess the reason a document was cited in
the context of the argumentation structure of the
document, following previous work on the auto-
matic classification of citation function by Teufel
et al. (2006), Liakata et al. (2012) and Schäfer and
Kasterka (2010). We expect this will allow us to
identify claims made in a draft paper and match
them with related claims made in other papers for
support or contrast, and so offer answers in the
form of relevant passages extracted from the sug-

359



gested documents.
It is frequently observed that the reasons for cit-

ing a paper go beyond its contribution to the field
and its relevance to the research being reported
(Hyland, 2009). There is a large body of research
on the motivations behind citing documents (Mac-
Roberts and MacRoberts, 1996), and it is likely
that this will come to play a part in our research in
the future.

In this paper, however, we present our initial
results which compare three different sets of IR-
based approaches to generating the document rep-
resentation for a CBCR system. One is based on
the contents of the document itself, one is based
on the existing contexts of citations of this paper
in other documents, and the third is a mixture of
the two.

3 The task: Citation Resolution

In this section we present the evaluation method in
more abstract terms; for the implementation used
in this paper, please see Sections 4 and 5. The
core criterion of this task is to use only the human
judgements that we have clearest evidence for. Let
d be a document and R the collection of all doc-
uments that are referenced in d. We believe it is
reasonable to assume that the author of document
d knows enough about the contents of each doc-
ument Ri to choose the most appropriate citation
from the collection R for every citation context in
the document.

This captures a very strong relevance judge-
ment about the relation between a particular cita-
tion context in the document and a particular cited
reference document. We use these judgements for
evaluation: our task is to match every citation con-
text in the document (i.e. the surrounding context
of a citation token) with the right reference from
the list of references cited by that paper.

This task differs somewhat from standard Infor-
mation Retrieval, in that we are not trying to re-
trieve a document from a larger collection outside
the source document, but trying to resolve the cor-
rect reference for a given citation context from an
existing list of documents, that is, from the bibli-
ography that has been manually curated by the au-
thors. Our document collection used for retrieval
is further composed of only the references of that
document that we can access.

The algorithm for the task is presented in Figure
1. For any given test document (2), we first extract

all the citation tokens found in the text that cor-
respond to a collection-internal reference (a). We
then create a document representation of the refer-
enced document (currently a Vector Space Model,
but liable to change). This representation can be
based on any information found in the document
collection, excluding the document d itself: e.g.
the text of the referenced document and the text of
documents that cite it.

For each citation token we then extract its con-
text (b.i), which becomes the query in IR terms.
One way of doing this that we present here is to
select a list of word tokens around the citation. We
then attempt to resolve the citation by computing
a score for the match between each reference rep-
resentation and the citation context (b.ii). We rank
all collection-internal references by this score in
decreasing order, aiming for the original reference
to be in the first position (b.iii).

In the case where multiple citations share the
same context, that is, they are made in di-
rect succession (e.g. “...compared with previous
approaches (Author (2005), Author and Author
(2007))”), the first n elements of the list of sug-
gested documents all count as the first element.
That is, if any of the references in a multiple ci-
tation of n elements appears in the first n posi-
tions of the list of suggestions, it counts as a suc-
cessful resolution and receives a score of 1. The
final score is averaged over all citation contexts
processed.

The set of experiments we present here apply
this evaluation to test a number of IR techniques
which we detail in the next section.

1. Given document collection D
2. For every test document d

(a) For every reference r in its bibliography R
i. If r is in document collection D

ii. Add all inline citations Cr in d to list C
(b) For each citation c in C

i. Extract context ctxc of c
ii. Choose which document r in R best matches
ctxc
iii. Measure accuracy

Figure 1: Algorithm for citation resolution.

4 Experiments

Our test corpus consists of approx. 9000 papers
from the ACL Anthology 2 converted from PDF to

2http://http://aclweb.org/anthology/

360



XML format. This corpus, the rationale behind its
selection and the process used to convert the files
is described in depth in Ritchie et al. (2006). This
is an ideal corpus for these tests for a large number
of reasons, but these are key for us: all the papers
are freely available, the ratio of collection-internal
references for each paper is high (the authors mea-
sure it at 0.33) and it is a familiar domain for us.

For our tests, we selected the documents of
this corpus with at least 8 collection-internal refer-
ences. This yielded a total of 278 test documents
and a total of 5446 resolvable citations.

We substitute all citations in the text with ci-
tation token placeholders and extract the citation
context for each using a simple window of up to
w words left and w words right around the place-
holder. This produces a list of word tokens that is
equivalent to a query in IR.

This is a frequently employed technique (He et
al., 2010), although it is often observed that this
may be too simplistic a method (Ritchie, 2009).
Other methods have been tried, e.g. full sentence
extraction (He et al., 2012) and comparing these
methods is something we plan to incorporate in
future work.

We then make the document’s collection-
internal references our test collection D and use a
number of methods for generating the document
representation. We use the well-known Vector
Space Model and a standard implementation of tf-
idf and cosine similarity as implemented by the
scikit-learn Python framework 3. At present, we
are applying no cut-off and just rank all of the doc-
ument’s collection-internal references for each ci-
tation context, aiming to rank the correct one in
the first positions in the list.

We tested three different approaches to gener-
ating a document’s VSM representation: internal
representations, which are based on the contents
of the document, external representations, which
are built using a document’s incoming link cita-
tion contexts (following Ritchie (2009) and He et
al. (2010)) and mixed representations, which are
an attempt to combine the two.
• The internal representations of the documents

were generated using three different methods:
title plus abstract, full text and passage. Pas-
sage consists in splitting the document into
half-overlapping passages of a fixed length of
k words and choosing for each document the

3http://scikit-learn.org

passage with the maximum cosine similarity
score with the query. We present the results
of using 250, 300 and 350 as values for k.

• The external representations (inlink context)
are based on extracting the context around ci-
tation tokens to the document from other doc-
uments in the collection, excluding the set of
test papers. This is the same as using the an-
chor text of a hyperlink to improve results in
web-based IR (see Davison (2000) for exten-
sive analyis). This context is extracted in the
same way as the query: as a window, or list
of w tokens surrounding the citation left and
right. We present our best results, using sym-
metrical and asymmetrical windows of w =
[(5, 5), (10, 10), (10, 5), (20, 20), (30, 30)].

• We build the mixed representations by simply
concatenating the internal and external bags-
of-words that represent the documents, from
which we then build the VSM representa-
tion. For this, we combine different window
sizes for the inlink context with: full text, ti-
tle abstract and passage350.

5 Results and discussion

Table 1 presents a selection of the most relevant
results, where the best result and document rep-
resentation method of each type is highlighted.
We present results for the most relevant parameter
values, producing the highest scores of all those
tested.

From a close look at internal methods, we can
see that the passage method with k = 400 beats
both full text and title abstract, suggesting that a
more elaborate way of building a document repre-
sentation should improve results. This is consis-
tent with previous findings: Gay et al. (2005) had
already reported that using selected sections plus
captions of figures and title and abstract to build
the internal document representation improves the
results of their indexing task by 7.4% over just
using title and abstract. Similarly, Jimeno-Yepes
et al. (2013) showed that automatically generated
summaries lead to similar recall and better index-
ing precision than full-text articles for a keyword-
based indexing task.

However, it is immediately clear that purely ex-
ternal methods obtain higher scores than internal
ones. The best score of 0.413 is obtained by the
inlink context method with a window of 10 tokens
left, 5 right, combined with the similarly-sized ex-

361



Method window5 5 window10 10 window10 5 window20 20 window30 30

Internal methods
full text 0.318 0.340 0.337 0.369 0.370
title abstract 0.296 0.312 0.312 0.322 0.311
passage250 0.343 0.367 0.359 0.388 0.382
passage350 0.346 0.371 0.364 0.388 0.381
passage400 0.348 0.371 0.362 0.391 0.380
External methods
inlink context10 0.391 0.406 0.405 0.395 0.387
inlink context20 0.386 0.406 0.413 0.412 0.402
inlink context30 0.380 0.403 0.400 0.411 0.404
Mixed methods
inlink context 20 full text 0.367 0.407 0.399 0.431 0.425
inlink context 20 title abstract 0.419 0.447 0.441 0.453 0.437
inlink context 20 passage250 0.420 0.458 0.451 0.469 0.451
inlink context 10 passage350 0.435 0.465 0.459 0.464 0.450
inlink context 20 passage350 0.426 0.464 0.456 0.469 0.456

Table 1: Accuracy for each document representation method (rows) and context window size (columns).

traction method for the query (window10 10). We
find it remarkable that inlink context is superior to
internal methods, beating the best (passage400) by
0.02 absolute accuracy points. Whether this is be-
cause the descriptions of these papers in the con-
texts of incoming link citations capture the essence
or key relevance of the paper, or whether this ef-
fect is due to authors reusing their work or to these
descriptions originating in a seed paper and be-
ing then propagated through the literature, remain
interesting research questions that we intend to
tackle in future work.

The key finding from our experiments is how-
ever that a mixture of internal and external
methods beats both individually. The highest
score is 0.469, achieved by a combination of in-
link context 20 and the passage method, for a win-
dow of w = 20, with a tie between using 250 and
350 as values for k (passage size). The small dif-
ference in score between parameter values is per-
haps not as relevant as the finding that, taken to-
gether, mixed methods consistently beat both ex-
ternal and internal methods.

These results also show that the task is far from
solved, with the highest accuracy achieved being
just under 47%. There is clear room for improve-
ment, which we believe could firstly come from a
more targeted extraction of text, both for generat-
ing the document representations and for extract-
ing the citation contexts.

Our ultimate goal is matching claims and com-
paring methods, which would likely benefit from
an analysis of the full contents of the document
and not just previous citations of it, so in future
work we also intend to use the context from the

successful external results as training data for a
summarisation stage.

6 Conclusion and future work

In this paper we have presented Citation Reso-
lution: an evaluation method for context-based
citation recommendation (CBCR) systems. Our
method exploits the implicit human relevance
judgements found in existing scientific articles and
so does not require purpose-specific human anno-
tation.

We have employed Citation Resolution to test
three approaches to building a document repre-
sentation for a CBCR system: internal (based on
the contents of the document), external (based on
the surrounding contexts to citations to that doc-
ument) and mixed (a mixture of the two). Our
evaluation shows that: 1) using chunks of a doc-
ument (passages) as its representation yields bet-
ter results that using its full text, 2) external meth-
ods obtain higher scores than internal ones, and 3)
mixed methods yield better results than either in
isolation.

We intend to investigate more sophisticated
ways of document representation and of extract-
ing a citation’s context. Our ultimate goal is not
just to suggest to the author documents that are
“relevant” to a specific chunk of the paper (sen-
tence, paragraph, etc.), but to do so with attention
to rhetorical structure and thus to citation function.
We also aim to apply our evaluation to other docu-
ment collections in different scientific domains in
order to test to what degree these results can be
generalized.

362



References
Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Modeling

local coherence: An entity-based approach. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(1):1–34.

Kannan Chandrasekaran, Susan Gauch, Praveen
Lakkaraju, and Hiep Phuc Luong. 2008. Concept-
based document recommendations for citeseer au-
thors. In Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-
Based Systems, pages 83–92. Springer.

Brian D Davison. 2000. Topical locality in the web. In
Proceedings of the 23rd annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, pages 272–279. ACM.

Clifford W Gay, Mehmet Kayaalp, and Alan R Aron-
son. 2005. Semi-automatic indexing of full text
biomedical articles. In AMIA Annual Symposium
Proceedings, volume 2005, page 271. American
Medical Informatics Association.

Qi He, Jian Pei, Daniel Kifer, Prasenjit Mitra, and Lee
Giles. 2010. Context-aware citation recommenda-
tion. In Proceedings of the 19th international con-
ference on World wide web, pages 421–430. ACM.

Jing He, Jian-Yun Nie, Yang Lu, and Wayne Xin Zhao.
2012. Position-aligned translation model for cita-
tion recommendation. In String Processing and In-
formation Retrieval, pages 251–263. Springer.

Ken Hyland. 2009. Academic discourse: English in a
global context. Bloomsbury Publishing.

Antonio J Jimeno-Yepes, Laura Plaza, James G Mork,
Alan R Aronson, and Alberto Dı́az. 2013. Mesh
indexing based on automatically generated sum-
maries. BMC bioinformatics, 14(1):208.

Maria Liakata, Shyamasree Saha, Simon Dobnik,
Colin Batchelor, and Dietrich Rebholz-Schuhmann.
2012. Automatic recognition of conceptualization
zones in scientific articles and two life science ap-
plications. Bioinformatics, 28(7):991–1000.

Michael H MacRoberts and Barbara R MacRoberts.
1996. Problems of citation analysis. Scientometrics,
36(3):435–444.

Anna Ritchie, Simone Teufel, and Stephen Robertson.
2006. Creating a test collection for citation-based ir
experiments. In Proceedings of the main conference
on Human Language Technology Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association of Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 391–398. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Anna Ritchie. 2009. Citation context analysis for in-
formation retrieval. Technical report, University of
Cambridge Computer Laboratory.

Mark Sanderson. 2010. Test collection based evalua-
tion of information retrieval systems. Now Publish-
ers Inc.

Ulrich Schäfer and Uwe Kasterka. 2010. Scientific au-
thoring support: A tool to navigate in typed citation
graphs. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010
workshop on computational linguistics and writing:
Writing processes and authoring aids, pages 7–14.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Dan Tidhar.
2006. Automatic classification of citation function.
In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
103–110. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

363


