



















































Constructing a Turkish-English Parallel TreeBank


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 112–117,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Constructing a Turkish-English Parallel TreeBank

Olcay Taner Yıldız†, Ercan Solak†, Onur Görgün†,†† and Razieh Ehsani†
† Işık University, Istanbul, Turkey

†† Alcatel Lucent Teletaş Telekomünikasyon A.Ş., Istanbul, Turkey
{olcaytaner,ercan,razieh.ehsani}@isikun.edu.tr

onur.gorgun@alcatel-lucent.com

Abstract

In this paper, we report our preliminary ef-
forts in building an English-Turkish paral-
lel treebank corpus for statistical machine
translation. In the corpus, we manually
generated parallel trees for about 5,000
sentences from Penn Treebank. English
sentences in our set have a maximum of
15 tokens, including punctuation. We con-
strained the translated trees to the reorder-
ing of the children and the replacement
of the leaf nodes with appropriate glosses.
We also report the tools that we built and
used in our tree translation task.

1 Introduction

Turkish is an agglutinative and morphologically
rich language with a free constituent order. Al-
though statistical NLP research on Turkish has
taken significant steps in recent years, much re-
mains to be done. Especially for the annotated cor-
pora, Turkish is still behind similar languages such
as Czech, Finnish, or Hungarian. For example,
EuroParl corpus (Koehn, 2002), one of the biggest
parallel corpora in statistical machine translation,
contains 22 languages (but not Turkish). Although
there exist some recent works to produce paral-
lel corpora for Turkish-English pair, the produced
corpus is only applicable for phrase-based training
(Yeniterzi and Oflazer, 2010; El-Kahlout, 2009).

In recent years, many efforts have been made to
annotate parallel corpora with syntactic structure
to build parallel treebanks. A parallel treebank
is a parallel corpus where the sentences in each
language are syntactically (if necessary morpho-
logically) annotated, and the sentences and words
are aligned. In the parallel treebanks, the syntactic
annotation usually follows constituent and/or de-
pendency structure. Well-known parallel treebank
efforts are

• Prague Czech-English dependency treebank
annotated with dependency structure (Cme-
jrek et al., 2004)

• English-German parallel treebank, annotated
with POS, constituent structures, functional
relations, and predicate-argument structures
(Cyrus et al., 2003)

• Linköping English-Swedish parallel treebank
that contains 1,200 sentences annotated with
POS and dependency structures (Ahrenberg,
2007)

• Stockholm multilingual treebank that con-
tains 1,000 sentences in English, German and
Swedish annotated with constituent structure
(Gustafson-Capkova et al., 2007)

In this study, we report our preliminary efforts
in constructing an English-Turkish parallel tree-
bank corpus for statistical machine translation.
Our approach converts English parse trees into
equivalent Turkish parse trees by applying several
transformation heuristics. The main components
of our strategy are (i) tree permutation, where we
permute the children of a node; and (ii) leaf re-
placement, where we replace English word token
at a leaf node.

This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2,
we give the literature review for parallel treebank
construction efforts in Turkish. In Section 3, we
give a very brief overview on Turkish syntax. We
give the details of our corpus construction strategy
in Section 4 and explain our transformation heuris-
tics in Section 5. Finally, we conclude in Section
6.

2 Literature Review

Turkish Treebank creation efforts started with the
METU-Sabancı dependency Treebank. METU-
Sabancı Treebank explicitly represents the head-
dependent relations and functional categories. In

112



order to adapt the corpus written in 1990’s Turk-
ish to further studies, a subset of 7.262 sentences
of the corpus was manually annotated morpho-
logically and syntactically (Atalay et al., 2003).
METU-Sabancı Treebank is then used in many
Turkish NLP studies (Eryigit and Oflazer, 2006;
Yuret, 2006; Riedel et al., 2006; Ruket and
Baldridge, 2006; Eryigit et al., 2006; Eryigit et al.,
2008).

METU-Sabancı Treebank is also subject to
transformation efforts from dependency-structure
to constituency-structure. Combinatory Categori-
cal Grammar (CCG) is extracted from the METU-
Sabancı Treebank with annotation of lexical cat-
egories (Cakici, 2005). Sub-lexical units reveal-
ing the internal structure of the words are used
to generate a Lexical Grammar Formalism (LGF)
for Turkish with the help of finite state ma-
chines (Cetinoglu and Oflazer, 2006; Cetinoglu
and Oflazer, 2009).

Swedish-Turkish parallel treebank is the first
parallel Treebank effort for Turkish (Megyesi et
al., 2008). The treebank is a balanced syntactically
annotated corpus containing both fiction and tech-
nical documents. In total, it consists of approxi-
mately 160,000 tokens in Swedish and 145,000 in
Turkish. Parallel texts are linguistically annotated
using different layers from part of speech tags and
morphological features to dependency annotation.

English-Swedish-Turkish parallel treebank
(Megyesi et al., 2010), mainly the successor of
the Swedish-Turkish parallel treebank, consists
of approximately 300,000 tokens in Swedish,
160,000 in Turkish and 150,000 in English. The
majority of the original text is written in Swedish
and translated to Turkish and/or English. For
the syntactic description, dependency structure is
chosen instead of the constituent structure. All
data is automatically annotated with syntactic tags
using MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2006a). MaltParser
is trained on the Penn Treebank for English,
on the Swedish treebank Talbanken05 (Nivre et
al., 2006b), and on the METU-Sabancı Turkish
Treebank (Atalay et al., 2003), respectively.

ParGram parallel treebank (Sulger et al., 2013)
is a joint effort for the construction of a par-
allel treebank involving ten languages (English,
Georgian, German, Hungarian, Indonesian, Nor-
wegian, Polish, Turkish, Urdu, Wolof) from six
language families. The treebank is based on deep
Lexical-Functional Grammars that were devel-

oped within the framework of the Parallel Gram-
mar effort. ParGram treebank allows for the align-
ment of sentences at several levels: dependency
structures, constituency structures and POS infor-
mation.

3 Turkish syntax

Turkish is an agglutinative language with rich
derivational and inflectional morphology through
suffixes. Word forms usually have a complex yet
fairly regular morphotactics.

Turkish sentences have an unmarked SOV or-
der. However, depending on the discourse, con-
stituents can be scrambled to emphasize, topical-
ize and focus certain elements. Case markings
identify the syntactic functions of the constituents,
(Kornfilt, 1997).

4 Corpus construction strategy

In order to constrain the syntactic complexity of
the sentences in the corpus, we selected from the
Penn Treebank II 9560 trees which contain a maxi-
mum of 15 tokens. These include 8660 trees from
the training set of the Penn Treebank, 360 trees
from its development set and 540 trees from its
test set. In the first phase of our work, we trans-
lated 4247 trees of the training set and all of those
in the development and the test sets.

4.1 Tools

Manual annotation is an error prone task. From
simple typos to disagreements among annotators,
the range of errors is fairly large. An annotation
tool needs to help reduce these errors and help the
annotator locate them when they occur. Moreover,
the tool needs to present the annotator with a vi-
sual tree that is both easy to understand and ma-
nipulate for the translation task.

We built a range of custom tools to display, ma-
nipulate and save annotated trees in the treebank.
The underlying data structure is still textual and
uses the standard Treebank II style of syntactic
bracketing.

We also implemented a simple statistical helper
function within the tool. When translating an En-
glish word to a gloss in Turkish, the translator may
choose from a list of glosses sorted according their
likelihood calculated over their previous uses in
similar cases. Thus, as the corpus grows in size,
the translators use the leverage of their previous
choices.

113



Figure 1: A screenshot of the tree translation tool

Figure 1 shows a screenshot of our tree transla-
tion tool.

4.2 Tree permutation

In translating an English syntactic tree, we confine
ourselves to two operations. We can permute the
children of a node and we can replace the English
word token at a leaf node. No other modification
of the tree is allowed. In particular, we use the
same set of tags and predicate labels in the non-
leaf nodes and do not use new tags for the Turkish
trees. Adding or deleting nodes are not allowed
either.

This might seem like a rather restrictive view
of translation. Indeed, it is very easy to construct
pairs of translated sentences which involve opera-
tions outside our restricted set when transformed
into each other.

However, we use the following method to alle-
viate the restrictions of the small set of operations.

We use the *NONE* tag when we can not use
any direct gloss for an English token. In itself,
this operation corresponds to effectively mapping
an English token to a null token. However, when
we use the *NONE* tag, permute the nodes and
choose the full inflected forms of the glosses in
the Turkish tree, we have a powerful method to
convert subtrees to an inflected word. The tree in
Figure 2. illustrates this. Note that the POS tag se-
quence VP-RB-MD-PRP in the Turkish sentence

corresponds to the morphological analysis “geç-
NEG-FUT-2SG” of the verb “geçmeyeceksin”. In
general, we try to permute the nodes so as to cor-
respond to the order of inflectional morphemes in
the chosen gloss.

S

VP

VP VB pass

RB not

MD will

NP-SBJ PRP You

S

NP-SBJ PRP *NONE*

VP

MD *NONE*

RB *NONE*

VP VB geçmeyeceksin

Figure 2: The permutation of the nodes and
the replacement of the leaves by the glosses or
*NONE*.

5 Transformation heuristics

When we have a sufficiently rich corpus of paral-
lel trees, our next step is to train a SMT learner
to imitate the human translator who operates un-
der our restricted set of operations. Naturally, hu-
man translators often base their transformation de-
cisions on the whole tree. Still, having a common
set of rules and heuristics helps the translators in
both consistency and speed. In the following, we
illustrate these heuristics.

114



5.1 Constituent and morpheme order

Majority of unmarked Turkish sentences have the
SOV order. When translating English trees, we
permute its shallow subtrees to reflect the change
of constituent order in Turkish.

Also, the agglutinative suffixes of Turkish
words dictate the order when permuting the con-
stituents which correspond to prepositions and
particles.

The semantic aspects expressed by preposi-
tions, modals, particles and verb tenses in En-
glish in general correspond to specific morphemes
attached to the corresponding word stem. For
example, “Ali/NNP will/MD sit/VB on/IN a/DT
chair/NN” is literally translated as
Ali bir sandalye-ye otur-acak.
Ali a chair-DAT sit-FUT.

If we embed a constituent in the morphemes of
a Turkish stem, we replace the English constituent
leaf with *NONE*.

In some cases, the personal pronouns acting as
subjects are naturally embedded in the verb inflec-
tion. In those cases, pronoun in the original tree
is replaced with *NONE* and its subtree is moved
to after the verb phrase. See Figure 3.

S

. .

VP

VP
PP

NP
NN chair

DT the

IN on

VB sit

RB not

MD will

NP-SBJ PRP I

S

. .
NP-SBJ PRP *NONE*

VP

MD *NONE*

RB *NONE*

VP
VB oturmayacaǧım

PP
IN *NONE*

NP
NN sandalyeye

DT *NONE*

Figure 3: Original and translated trees,
sandalye-ye otur-ma-yacaǧ-ım
chair-DAT sit-NEG-FUT-1SG

5.2 The determiner “the”

There is no definite article in Turkish correspond-
ing to “the”. Depending on the context, “the” is
translated either as *NONE* or one of the demon-
strative adjectives in Turkish, corresponding to
“this” and “that” in English. See Figure 3 .

5.3 Case markers

Turkish, being a fairly scrambling language, uses
case markers to denote the syntactic functions of
nouns and noun groups. For example, accusative
case may be used to mark the direct object of a
transitive verb and locative case may be used to
mark the head of a prepositional phrase. In trans-
lation from English to Turkish, the prepositions
are usually replaced with *NONE* and their cor-
responding case is attached to the nominal head of
the phrase. See Figure 4.

S

VP

PP
NP PRP me

IN at

NP
NN ball

DT the

VBD threw

NP NNP Ali

S

VP

VBD attı

PP
IN *NONE*

NP PRP bana

NP
NN topu

DT *NONE*

NP NNP Ali

Figure 4: Original and translated trees,
Ali top-u ban-a at-tı
Ali ball-ACC me-DAT throw-PAST-3SG

5.4 Plural in nouns and verb inflection

Number agreement between the verb in the pred-
icate and the subject is somewhat loose in Turk-
ish. We preserved this freedom in translation and
chose the number inflection that sounds more nat-
ural. Also, plural nouns under NNS tag in the En-
glish tree are sometimes translated as singular. In
those cases, we kept the original POS tag NNS in-
tact but used the singular gloss. See Figure 5.

5.5 Tense ambiguity

It is in general not possible to find an exact map-
ping among the tense classes in a pair of lan-
guages. When translating the trees, we mapped
the English verb tenses to their closest semantic
classes in Turkish while trying to keep the over-
all flow of the Turkish sentence natural. In many
cases, we mapped the perfective tense in English
to the past tense in Turkish. Similarly, we some-
times mapped the present tense to present contin-
uous. See Figure 5.

115



S

VP
VP

NP
NNS apples

CD three

VBN eaten

VBP have

NP
NNS children

DT The

S

VP

VBP *NONE*

VP
VBN yedi

NP
NNS elma

CD üç

NP
NNS çocuklar

DT *NONE*

Figure 5: Original and translated trees,
Çocuk-lar üç elma ye-di
Child-PL three apple eat-PAST-3SG

5.6 WH- Questions

Question sentences require special attention dur-
ing transformation. As opposed to movement
in English question sentences, any constituent in
Turkish can be questioned by replacing it with an
inflected question word. In the Penn Treebank
II annotation, the movement leaves a trace and
is associated with wh- constituent with a numeric
marker. For example, “WHNP-17” and “*T*-17”
are associated.

When we translate the tree for a question
sentence, we replace the wh- constituent with
*NONE* and replace its trace with the appropri-
ate question pronoun in Turkish. See Figure 6.

SBARQ

. ?

SQ

VP
NP -NONE- *T*-1

VB believe

ADVP RB really

NP-SBJ
NNP Bush

NNP George

VBZ does

WHNP-1 WP what

RB So

SBARQ

. ?

SQ

VBZ *NONE*

VP
VB inanıyor

NP -NONE- neye

ADVP RB gerçekten

NP-SBJ
NNP Bush

NNP George

WHNP-1 WP *NONE*

RB Peki

Figure 6: Original and translated trees,
Peki George Bush gerçekten ne-ye inan-ıyor?
So George Bush really what-DAT
believe-PRES-3SG?

5.7 Miscellany

In the translation of nominal clauses, the copula
marker “-dIr” corresponding to verb “be” is often
dropped.

The proper nouns are translated with their com-
mon Turkish gloss if there is one. So, “London”
becomes “Londra”.

Subordinating conjunctions, marked as “IN” in
English sentences, are transformed to *NONE*
and the appropriate participle morpheme is ap-
pended to the stem in the Turkish translation.

A multiword expression may correspond to a
single English word. Conversely, more than one
words in English may correspond to a single word
in Turkish. In the first case, we use the multiword
expression as the gloss. In the latter case, we re-
place some English words with *NONE*.

6 Conclusion

Parallel treebank construction efforts increased
significantly in the recent years. Many parallel
treebanks are produced to build statistically strong
language models for different languages. In this
study, we report our preliminary efforts to build
such a parallel corpus for Turkish-English pair.
We translated and transformed a subset of parse
trees of Penn Treebank to Turkish. We cover more
than 50% of all sentences with a maximum length
of 15-words including punctuation.

This work constitutes the preliminary step of
parallel treebank generation. As a next step, we
will focus on morphological analysis and disam-
biguation of Turkish words. After determining the
correct morphological analysis of Turkish words,
we will use the parts of these analyses to re-
place the leaf nodes that we intentionally left as
“*NONE*”. As a future work, we plan to expand
the dataset to include all Penn Treebank sentences.

References

Lars Ahrenberg. 2007. Lines: An english-swedish par-
allel treebank.

Nart B. Atalay, Kemal Oflazer, and Bilge Say. 2003.
The annotation process in the Turkish treebank. In
4th International Workshop on Linguistically Inter-
preted Corpora.

Ruken Cakici. 2005. Automatic induction of a ccg
grammar for Turkish. In ACL Student Research
Workshop.

116



Ozlem Cetinoglu and Kemal Oflazer. 2006.
Morphology-syntax interface for Turkish lfg. In
Computational Linguistics and Annual Meeting of
the Association.

Ozlem Cetinoglu and Kemal Oflazer. 2009. Integrat-
ing derivational morphology into syntax. In Recent
Advances in Natural Language Processing V.

Martin Cmejrek, Jan Haji, and Vladislav Kubo. 2004.
Prague czech-english dependency treebank: Syntac-
tically annotated resources for machine translation.
In In Proceedings of EAMT 10th Annual Confer-
ence, page 04.

Lea Cyrus, Hendrik Feddes, and Frank Schumacher.
2003. FuSe – a multi-layered parallel treebank.
In Joakim Nivre and Erhard Hinrichs, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Treebanks and
Linguistic Theories, 14–15 November 2003, Växjö,
Sweden (TLT 2003), volume 9 of Mathematical
Modelling in Physics, Engineering and Cognitive
Sciences, pages 213–216, Växjö. Växjö University
Press.

Ilknur D. El-Kahlout. 2009. Statistical machine trans-
lation from english to turkish (ph.d. thesis).

Gulsen Eryigit and Kemal Oflazer. 2006. Statistical
dependency parsing for Turkish. In 11th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Gulsen Eryigit, Esref Adali, and Kemal Oflazer. 2006.
Türkçe cümlelerin kural tabanlı bağlılık analizi. In
15th Turkish Symposium on Artificial Intelligence
and Neural Networks.

Gulsen Eryigit, Joakim Nivre, and Kemal Oflazer.
2008. Dependency parsing of Turkish. Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Sofia Gustafson-Capkova, Yvonne Samuelsson, and
Martin Volk. 2007. Smultron (version 1.0) -
the stockholm multilingual parallel treebank. an
english-german-swedish parallel treebank with sub-
sentential alignments.

Philipp Koehn. 2002. Europarl: A multilingual corpus
for evaluation of machine translation.

J. Kornfilt. 1997. Turkish. Routledge.

Beáta Megyesi, Bengt Dahlqvist, Eva Pettersson, and
Joakim Nivre. 2008. Swedish-turkish parallel tree-
bank. In LREC.

Beáta Megyesi, Bengt Dahlqvist, Éva Á. Csató, and
Joakim Nivre. 2010. The english-swedish-turkish
parallel treebank. In LREC.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, and Jens Nilsson. 2006a.
Maltparser: A data-driven parser-generator for de-
pendency parsing. In In Proc. of LREC-2006, pages
2216–2219.

Joakim Nivre, Jens Nilsson, and Johan Hall. 2006b.
Talbanken05: A swedish treebank with phrase struc-
ture and dependency annotation. In In Proceedings
of the fifth international conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC2006, pages 24–
26.

S. Riedel, Ruket Cakici, and I. Meza-Ruiz. 2006.
Multi-lingual dependency parsing with incremental
integer linear programming.

Ruket and Jason Baldridge. 2006. Projective and non-
projective Turkish parsing. In Fifth International
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories.

Sebastian Sulger, Miriam Butt, Tracy Holloway King,
Paul Meurer, Tibor Laczkó, György Rákosi, Cheikh
M. Bamba Dione, Helge Dyvik, Victoria Rosén,
Koenraad De Smedt, Agnieszka Patejuk, Özlem
Çetinoglu, I Wayan Arka, and Meladel Mistica.
2013. Pargrambank: The pargram parallel treebank.
In ACL (1), pages 550–560.

Reyyan Yeniterzi and Kemal Oflazer. 2010. Syntax-to-
morphology mapping in factored phrase-based sta-
tistical machine translation from english to turkish.
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’10,
pages 454–464, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Deniz Yuret. 2006. Dependency parsing as a classifi-
cation problem. In Proceedings of the Tenth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning.

117


