



















































POS induction with distributional and morphological information using a distance-dependent Chinese restaurant process


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 265–271,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

POS induction with distributional and morphological information
using a distance-dependent Chinese restaurant process

Kairit Sirts
Institute of Cybernetics at

Tallinn University of Technology
sirts@ioc.ee

Jacob Eisenstein
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology

jacobe@gatech.edu

Micha Elsner
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
melsner0@gmail.com

Sharon Goldwater
ILCC, School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
sgwater@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

We present a new approach to inducing the
syntactic categories of words, combining
their distributional and morphological prop-
erties in a joint nonparametric Bayesian
model based on the distance-dependent
Chinese Restaurant Process. The prior
distribution over word clusterings uses a
log-linear model of morphological similar-
ity; the likelihood function is the probabil-
ity of generating vector word embeddings.
The weights of the morphology model
are learned jointly while inducing part-of-
speech clusters, encouraging them to co-
here with the distributional features. The
resulting algorithm outperforms competi-
tive alternatives on English POS induction.

1 Introduction

The morphosyntactic function of words is reflected
in two ways: their distributional properties, and
their morphological structure. Each information
source has its own advantages and disadvantages.
Distributional similarity varies smoothly with syn-
tactic function, so that words with similar syntactic
functions should have similar distributional proper-
ties. In contrast, there can be multiple paradigms
for a single morphological inflection (such as past
tense in English). But accurate computation of
distributional similarity requires large amounts of
data, which may not be available for rare words;
morphological rules can be applied to any word
regardless of how often it appears.

These observations suggest that a general ap-
proach to the induction of syntactic categories
should leverage both distributional and morpho-
logical features (Clark, 2003; Christodoulopoulos

et al., 2010). But these features are difficult to
combine because of their disparate representations.
Distributional information is typically represented
in numerical vectors, and recent work has demon-
strated the utility of continuous vector represen-
tations, or “embeddings” (Mikolov et al., 2013;
Luong et al., 2013; Kim and de Marneffe, 2013;
Turian et al., 2010). In contrast, morphology is
often represented in terms of sparse, discrete fea-
tures (such as morphemes), or via pairwise mea-
sures such as string edit distance. Moreover, the
mapping between a surface form and morphology
is complex and nonlinear, so that simple metrics
such as edit distance will only weakly approximate
morphological similarity.

In this paper we present a new approach for in-
ducing part-of-speech (POS) classes, combining
morphological and distributional information in a
non-parametric Bayesian generative model based
on the distance-dependent Chinese restaurant pro-
cess (ddCRP; Blei and Frazier, 2011). In the dd-
CRP, each data point (word type) selects another
point to “follow”; this chain of following links
corresponds to a partition of the data points into
clusters. The probability of word w1 following w2
depends on two factors: 1) the distributional simi-
larity between all words in the proposed partition
containing w1 and w2, which is encoded using a
Gaussian likelihood function over the word embed-
dings; and 2) the morphological similarity between
w1 and w2, which acts as a prior distribution on the
induced clustering. We use a log-linear model to
capture suffix similarities between words, and learn
the feature weights by iterating between sampling
and weight learning.

We apply our model to the English section of
the the Multext-East corpus (Erjavec, 2004) in or-
der to evaluate both against the coarse-grained and

265



fine-grained tags, where the fine-grained tags en-
code detailed morphological classes. We find that
our model effectively combines morphological fea-
tures with distributional similarity, outperforming
comparable alternative approaches.

2 Related work

Unsupervised POS tagging has a long history in
NLP. This paper focuses on the POS induction
problem (i.e., no tag dictionary is available), and
here we limit our discussion to very recent sys-
tems. A review and comparison of older systems
is provided by Christodoulopoulos et al. (2010),
who found that imposing a one-tag-per-word-type
constraint to reduce model flexibility tended to
improve system performance; like other recent
systems, we impose that constraint here. Recent
work also shows that the combination of morpho-
logical and distributional information yields the
best results, especially cross-linguistically (Clark,
2003; Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 2010). Since then,
most systems have incorporated morphology in
some way, whether as an initial step to obtain pro-
totypes for clusters (Abend et al., 2010), or as
features in a generative model (Lee et al., 2010;
Christodoulopoulos et al., 2011; Sirts and Alumäe,
2012), or a representation-learning algorithm (Yat-
baz et al., 2012). Several of these systems use a
small fixed set of orthographic and/or suffix fea-
tures, sometimes obtained from an unsupervised
morphological segmentation system (Abend et al.,
2010; Lee et al., 2010; Christodoulopoulos et al.,
2011; Yatbaz et al., 2012). Blunsom and Cohn’s
(2011) model learns an n-gram character model
over the words in each cluster; we learn a log-
linear model, which can incorporate arbitrary fea-
tures. Berg-Kirkpatrick et al. (2010) also include
a log-linear model of morphology in POS induc-
tion, but they use morphology in the likelihood
term of a parametric sequence model, thereby en-
couraging all elements that share a tag to have the
same morphological features. In contrast, we use
pairwise morphological similarity as a prior in a
non-parametric clustering model. This means that
the membership of a word in a cluster requires only
morphological similarity to some other element in
the cluster, not to the cluster centroid; which may
be more appropriate for languages with multiple
morphological paradigms. Another difference is
that our non-parametric formulation makes it un-
necessary to know the number of tags in advance.

3 Distance-dependent CRP

The ddCRP (Blei and Frazier, 2011) is an extension
of the CRP; like the CRP, it defines a distribution
over partitions (“table assignments”) of data points
(“customers”). Whereas in the regular CRP each
customer chooses a table with probability propor-
tional to the number of customers already sitting
there, in the ddCRP each customer chooses another
customer to follow, and sits at the same table with
that customer. By identifying the connected compo-
nents in this graph, the ddCRP equivalently defines
a prior over clusterings.

If ci is the index of the customer followed by
customer i, then the ddCRP prior can be written

P (ci = j) ∝
{
f(dij) if i 6= j
α if i = j,

(1)

where dij is the distance between customers i and j
and f is a decay function. A ddCRP is sequential if
customers can only follow previous customers, i.e.,
dij =∞ when i > j and f(∞) = 0. In this case,
if dij = 1 for all i < j then the ddCRP reduces to
the CRP.

Separating the distance and decay function
makes sense for “natural” distances (e.g., the num-
ber of words between word i and j in a document,
or the time between two events), but they can also
be collapsed into a single similarity function. We
wish to assign higher similarities to pairs of words
that share meaningful suffixes. Because we do not
know which suffixes are meaningful a priori, we
use a maximum entropy model whose features in-
clude all suffixes up to length three that are shared
by at least one pair of words. Our prior is then:

P (ci = j|w, α) ∝
{
ew

Tg(i,j) if i 6= j
α if i = j,

(2)

where gs(i, j) is 1 if suffix s is shared by ith and
jth words, and 0 otherwise.

We can create an infinite mixture model by com-
bining the ddCRP prior with a likelihood function
defining the probability of the data given the cluster
assignments. Since we are using continuous-valued
vectors (word embeddings) to represent the distri-
butional characteristics of words, we use a multi-
variate Gaussian likelihood. We will marginalize
over the mean µ and covariance Σ of each clus-
ter, which in turn are drawn from Gaussian and
inverse-Wishart (IW) priors respectively:

Σ ∼ IW (ν0,Λ0) µ ∼ N (µ0,Σ/κ0) (3)

266



The full model is then:

P (X,c,µ,Σ|Θ,w, α) (4)

=
K∏
k=1

P (Σk|Θ)p(µk|Σk,Θ)

×
n∏
i=1

(P (ci|w, α)P (xi|µzi ,Σzi)),

where Θ are the hyperparameters for (µ,Σ) and zi
is the (implicit) cluster assignment of the ith word
xi. With a CRP prior, this model would be an infi-
nite Gaussian mixture model (IGMM; Rasmussen,
2000), and we will use the IGMM as a baseline.

4 Inference

The Gibbs sampler for the ddCRP integrates over
the Gaussian parameters, sampling only follower
variables. At each step, the follower link ci for a
single customer i is sampled, which can implicitly
shift the entire block of n customers fol(i) who fol-
low i into a new cluster. Since we marginalize over
the cluster parameters, computing P (ci = j) re-
quires computing the likelihood P (fol(i),Xj |Θ),
where Xj are the k customers already clustered
with j. However, if we do not merge fol(i)
with Xj , then we have P (Xj |Θ) in the overall
joint probability. Therefore, we can decompose
P (fol(i),Xj |Θ) = P (fol(i)|Xj ,Θ)P (Xj |Θ) and
need only compute the change in likelihood due to
merging in fol(i):1:

P (fol(i)|Xj ,Θ) = π−nd/2 κ
d/2
k |Λk|νk/2

κ
d/2
n+k|Λn+k|νn+k/2

×
d∏
i=1

Γ
(
νn+k+1−i

2

)
Γ
(
νk+1−i

2

) , (5)
where the hyperparameters are updated as κn =
κ0 + n, νn = ν0 + n, and

µn =
κ0µ0 + x̄
κ0 + n

(6)

Λn = Λ0 +Q+ κ0µ0µ0T − κnµnµTn , (7)
where Q =

∑n
i=1 xix

T
i .

Combining this likelihood term with the prior,
the probability of customer i following j is

P (ci = j|X,Θ,w, α)
∝ P (fol(i)|Xj ,Θ)P (ci = j|w, α). (8)

1http://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/˜teh/re-
search/notes/GaussianInverseWishart.pdf

Our non-sequential ddCRP introduces cycles
into the follower structure, which are handled in the
sampler as described by Socher et al. (2011). Also,
the block of customers being moved around can po-
tentially be very large, which makes it easy for the
likelihood term to swamp the prior. In practice we
found that introducing an additional parameter a
(used to exponentiate the prior) improved results—
although we report results without this exponent as
well. This technique was also used by Titov and
Klementiev (2012) and Elsner et al. (2012).

Inference also includes optimizing the feature
weights for the log-linear model in the ddCRP
prior (Titov and Klementiev, 2012). We interleave
L-BFGS optimization within sampling, as in Monte
Carlo Expectation-Maximization (Wei and Tanner,
1990). We do not apply the exponentiation parame-
ter a when training the weights because this proce-
dure affects the follower structure only, and we do
not have to worry about the magnitude of the like-
lihood. Before the first iteration we initialize the
follower structure: for each word, we choose ran-
domly a word to follow from amongst those with
the longest shared suffix of up to 3 characters. The
number of clusters starts around 750, but decreases
substantially after the first sampling iteration.

5 Experiments

Data For our experiments we used the English
word embeddings from the Polyglot project (Al-
Rfou’ et al., 2013)2, which provides embeddings
trained on Wikipedia texts for 100,000 of the most
frequent words in many languages.

We evaluate on the English part of the Multext-
East (MTE) corpus (Erjavec, 2004), which provides
both coarse-grained and fine-grained POS labels
for the text of Orwell’s “1984”. Coarse labels con-
sist of 11 main word classes, while the fine-grained
tags (104 for English) are sequences of detailed
morphological attributes. Some of these attributes
are not well-attested in English (e.g. gender) and
some are mostly distinguishable via semantic anal-
ysis (e.g. 1st and 2nd person verbs). Many tags are
assigned only to one or a few words. Scores for the
fine-grained tags will be lower for these reasons,
but we argue below that they are still informative.

Since Wikipedia and MTE are from different
domains their lexicons do not fully overlap; we

2https://sites.google.com/site/rmyeid/
projects/polyglot

267



Wikipedia tokens 1843M
Multext-East tokens 118K
Multext-East types 9193
Multext-East & Wiki types 7540

Table 1: Statistics for the English Polyglot word embeddings
and English part of MTE: number of Wikipedia tokens used
to train the embeddings, number of tokens/types in MTE, and
number of types shared by both datasets.

take the intersection of these two sets for training
and evaluation. Table 1 shows corpus statistics.

Evaluation With a few exceptions (Biemann,
2006; Van Gael et al., 2009), POS induction sys-
tems normally require the user to specify the num-
ber of desired clusters, and the systems are evalu-
ated with that number set to the number of tags in
the gold standard. For corpora such as MTE with
both fine-grained and coarse-grained tages, pre-
vious evaluations have scored against the coarse-
grained tags. Though coarse-grained tags have
their place (Petrov et al., 2012), in many cases
the distributional and morphological distinctions
between words are more closely aligned with the
fine-grained tagsets, which typically distinguish
between verb tenses, noun number and gender,
and adjectival scale (comparative, superlative, etc.),
so we feel that the evaluation against fine-grained
tagset is more relevant here. For better comparison
with previous work, we also evaluate against the
coarse-grained tags; however, these numbers are
not strictly comparable to other scores reported on
MTE because we are only able to train and evalu-
ate on the subset of words that also have Polyglot
embeddings. To provide some measure of the dif-
ficulty of the task, we report baseline scores using
K-means clustering, which is relatively strong base-
line in this task (Christodoulopoulos et al., 2011).

There are several measures commonly used for
unsupervised POS induction. We report greedy
one-to-one mapping accuracy (1-1) (Haghighi and
Klein, 2006) and the information-theoretic score V-
measure (V-m), which also varies from 0 to 100%
(Rosenberg and Hirschberg, 2007). In previous
work it has been common to also report many-to-
one (m-1) mapping but this measure is particularly
sensitive to the number of induced clusters (more
clusters yield higher scores), which is variable for
our models. V-m can be somewhat sensitive to the
number of clusters (Reichart and Rappoport, 2009)
but much less so than m-1 (Christodoulopoulos

et al., 2010). With different number of induced
and gold standard clusters the 1-1 measure suffers
because some induced clusters cannot be mapped
to gold clusters or vice versa. However, almost half
the gold standard clusters in MTE contain just a
few words and we do not expect our model to be
able to learn them anyway, so the 1-1 measure is
still useful for telling us how well the model learns
the bigger and more distinguishable classes.

In unsupervised POS induction it is standard to
report accuracy on tokens even when the model it-
self works on types. Here we report also type-based
measures because these can reveal differences in
model behavior even when token-based measures
are similar.

Experimental setup For baselines we use K-
means and the IGMM, which both only learn from
the word embeddings. The CRP prior in the IGMM
has one hyperparameter (the concentration param-
eter α); we report results for α = 5 and 20. Both
the IGMM and ddCRP have four hyperparameters
controlling the prior over the Gaussian cluster pa-
rameters: Λ0, µ0, ν0 and κ0. We set the prior scale
matrix Λ0 by using the average covariance from
a K-means run with K = 200. When setting the
average covariance as the expected value of the IW
distribution the suitable scale matrix can be com-
puted as Λ0 = E [X] (ν0 − d− 1), where ν0 is the
prior degrees of freedom (which we set to d + 10)
and d is the data dimensionality (64 for the Poly-
glot embeddings). We set the prior mean µ0 equal
to the sample mean of the data and κ0 to 0.01.

We experiment with three different priors for the
ddCRP model. All our ddCRP models are non-
sequential (Socher et al., 2011), allowing cycles
to be formed. The simplest model, ddCRP uni-
form, uses a uniform prior that sets the distance
between any two words equal to one.3 The second
model, ddCRP learned, uses the log-linear prior
with weights learned between each two Gibbs iter-
ations as explained in section 4. The final model,
ddCRP exp, adds the prior exponentiation. The α
parameter for the ddCRP is set to 1 in all experi-
ments. For ddCRP exp, we report results with the
exponent a set to 5.

Results and discussion Table 2 presents all re-
sults. Each number is an average of 5 experiments

3In the sequential case this model would be equivalent to
the IGMM (Blei and Frazier, 2011). Due to the nonsequen-
tiality this equivalence does not hold, but we do expect to see
similar results to the IGMM.

268



Fine types Fine tokens Coarse tokens

Model K Model K-means Model K-means Model K-means

K-means 104 or 11 16.1 / 47.3 - 39.2 / 62.0 - 44.4 / 45.5 -
IGMM, α = 5 55.6 41.0 / 45.9 23.1 / 49.5 48.0 / 64.8 37.2 / 61.0 48.3 / 58.3 40.8 / 55.0
IGMM, α = 20 121.2 35.0 / 47.1 14.7 / 46.9 50.6 / 67.8 44.7 / 65.5 48.7 / 60.0 48.3 / 57.9
ddCRP uniform 80.4 50.5 / 52.9 18.6 / 48.2 52.4 / 68.7 35.1 / 60.3 52.1 / 62.2 40.3 / 54.2
ddCRP learned 89.6 50.1 / 55.1 17.6 / 48.0 51.1 / 69.7 39.0 / 63.2 48.9 / 62.0 41.1 / 55.1
ddCRP exp, a = 5 47.2 64.0 / 60.3 25.0 / 50.3 55.1 / 66.4 33.0 / 59.1 47.8 / 55.1 36.9 / 53.1

Table 2: Results of baseline and ddCRP models evaluated on word types and tokens using fine-grained tags, and on tokens
using coarse-grained tags. For each model we present the number of induced clusters K (or fixed K for K-means) and 1-1 / V-m
scores. The second column under each evaluation setting gives the scores for K-means with K equal to the number of clusters
induced by the model in that row.

with different random initializations. For each eval-
uation setting we provide two sets of scores—first
are the 1-1 and V-m scores for the given model,
second are the comparable scores for K-means run
with the same number of clusters as induced by the
non-parametric model.

These results show that all non-parametric mod-
els perform better than K-means, which is a strong
baseline in this task (Christodoulopoulos et al.,
2011). The poor performace of K-means can be
explained by the fact that it tends to find clusters
of relatively equal size, although the POS clus-
ters are rarely of similar size. The common noun
singular class is by far the largest in English, con-
taining roughly a quarter of the word types. Non-
parametric models are able to produce cluster of
different sizes when the evidence indicates so, and
this is clearly the case here.

From the token-based evaluation it is hard to
say which IGMM hyperparameter value is better
even though the number of clusters induced differs
by a factor of 2. The type-base evaluation, how-
ever, clearly prefers the smaller value with fewer
clusters. Similar effects can be seen when com-
paring IGMM and ddCRP uniform. We expected
these two models perform on the same level, and
their token-based scores are similar, but on the type-
based evaluation the ddCRP is clearly superior. The
difference could be due to the non-sequentiality,
or becuase the samplers are different—IGMM en-
abling resampling only one item at a time, ddCRP
performing blocked sampling.

Further we can see that the ddCRP uniform and
learned perform roughly the same. Although the
prior in those models is different they work mainly
using the the likelihood. The ddCRP with learned
prior does produce nice follower structures within
each cluster but the prior is in general too weak
compared to the likelihood to influence the cluster-
ing decisions. Exponentiating the prior reduces the

number of induced clusters and improves results,
as it can change the cluster assignment for some
words where the likelihood strongly prefers one
cluster but the prior clearly indicates another.

The last column shows the token-based evalua-
tion against the coarse-grained tagset. This is the
most common evaluation framework used previ-
ously in the literature. Although our scores are not
directly comparable with the previous results, our
V-m scores are similar to the best published 60.5
(Christodoulopoulos et al., 2010) and 66.7 (Sirts
and Alumäe, 2012).

In preliminary experiments, we found that di-
rectly applying the best-performing English model
to other languages is not effective. Different lan-
guages may require different parametrizations of
the model. Further study is also needed to verify
that word embeddings effectively capture syntax
across languages, and to determine the amount of
unlabeled text necessary to learn good embeddings.

6 Conclusion

This paper demonstrates that morphology and dis-
tributional features can be combined in a flexi-
ble, joint probabilistic model, using the distance-
dependent Chinese Restaurant Process. A key ad-
vantage of this framework is the ability to include
arbitrary features in the prior distribution. Future
work may exploit this advantage more thoroughly:
for example, by using features that incorporate
prior knowledge of the language’s morphological
structure. Another important goal is the evaluation
of this method on languages beyond English.

Acknowledgments: KS was supported by the
Tiger University program of the Estonian Infor-
mation Technology Foundation for Education. JE
was supported by a visiting fellowship from the
Scottish Informatics & Computer Science Alliance.
We thank the reviewers for their helpful feedback.

269



References
Omri Abend, Roi Reichart, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.

Improved unsupervised pos induction through pro-
totype discovery. In Proceedings of the 48th An-
nual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 1298–1307.

Rami Al-Rfou’, Bryan Perozzi, and Steven Skiena.
2013. Polyglot: Distributed word representations
for multilingual nlp. In Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth Annual Conference on Natural Language
Learning, pages 183–192, Sofia, Bulgaria. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Alexandre B. Côté, John
DeNero, and Dan Klein. 2010. Painless unsuper-
vised learning with features. In Proceedings of Hu-
man Language Technologies: The Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 582–590.

Chris Biemann. 2006. Unsupervised part-of-speech
tagging employing efficient graph clustering. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 7–12.

David M Blei and Peter I Frazier. 2011. Distance
dependent chinese restaurant processes. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 12:2461–2488.

Phil Blunsom and Trevor Cohn. 2011. A hierarchi-
cal pitman-yor process hmm for unsupervised part
of speech induction. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 865–874.

Christos Christodoulopoulos, Sharon Goldwater, and
Mark Steedman. 2010. Two decades of unsuper-
vised POS induction: How far have we come? In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing.

Christos Christodoulopoulos, Sharon Goldwater, and
Mark Steedman. 2011. A Bayesian mixture model
for part-of-speech induction using multiple features.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Alexander Clark. 2003. Combining distributional and
morphological information for part of speech induc-
tion. In Proceedings of the European chapter of the
ACL.

Micha Elsner, Sharon Goldwater, and Jacob Eisenstein.
2012. Bootstrapping a unified model of lexical and
phonetic acquisition. In Proceedings of the 50th An-
nual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics.

Tomaž Erjavec. 2004. MULTEXT-East version 3:
Multilingual morphosyntactic specifications, lexi-
cons and corpora. In LREC.

A. Haghighi and D. Klein. 2006. Prototype-driven
learning for sequence models. In Proceedings of
the Human Language Technology Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Joo-Kyung Kim and Marie-Catherine de Marneffe.
2013. Deriving adjectival scales from continuous
space word representations. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Yoong Keok Lee, Aria Haghighi, and Regina Barzi-
lay. 2010. Simple type-level unsupervised pos tag-
ging. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
853–861.

Minh-Thang Luong, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D Manning. 2013. Better word representations
with recursive neural networks for morphology. In
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Conference on
Natural Language Learning.

Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig.
2013. Linguistic regularities in continuous space
word representations. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technologies: The Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 746–751.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proceedings of
LREC, May.

Carl Rasmussen. 2000. The infinite Gaussian mixture
model. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 12, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.

Roi Reichart and Ari Rappoport. 2009. The nvi cluster-
ing evaluation measure. In Proceedings of the Ninth
Annual Conference on Natural Language Learning,
pages 165–173.

A. Rosenberg and J. Hirschberg. 2007. V-measure:
A conditional entropy-based external cluster evalua-
tion measure. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 410–42.

Kairit Sirts and Tanel Alumäe. 2012. A hierarchi-
cal Dirichlet process model for joint part-of-speech
and morphology induction. In Proceedings of Hu-
man Language Technologies: The Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 407–416.

Richard Socher, Andrew L Maas, and Christopher D
Manning. 2011. Spectral chinese restaurant pro-
cesses: Nonparametric clustering based on similar-
ities. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
pages 698–706.

270



Ivan Titov and Alexandre Klementiev. 2012. A
bayesian approach to unsupervised semantic role in-
duction. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Joseph Turian, Lev-Arie Ratinov, and Yoshua Bengio.
2010. Word representations: A simple and general
method for semi-supervised learning. In Proceed-
ings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 384–394, Up-
psala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Jurgen Van Gael, Andreas Vlachos, and Zoubin
Ghahramani. 2009. The infinite HMM for unsu-
pervised PoS tagging. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 678–687, Singapore.

Greg CG Wei and Martin A Tanner. 1990. A
monte carlo implementation of the em algorithm
and the poor man’s data augmentation algorithms.
Journal of the American Statistical Association,
85(411):699–704.

Mehmet Ali Yatbaz, Enis Sert, and Deniz Yuret. 2012.
Learning syntactic categories using paradigmatic
representations of word context. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 940–951.

271


