



















































Bilingual Event Extraction: a Case Study on Trigger Type Determination


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 842–847,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Bilingual Event Extraction: a Case Study on Trigger Type Determina-

tion 

Zhu Zhu
†
  Shoushan Li

†*
  Guodong Zhou

†
  Rui Xia

‡
 

 
†
Natural Language Processing Lab 

Soochow University, China 
{zhuzhu0020, 

shoushan.li}@gmail.com, 

gdzhou@suda.edu.cn 

 
‡
Department of Computer Science 

 Nanjing University of Science and 

Technology 
rxia@njust.edu.cn 

 

 

Abstract 

Event extraction generally suffers from the 

data sparseness problem. In this paper, we 

address this problem by utilizing the labeled 

data from two different languages. As a pre-

liminary study, we mainly focus on the sub-

task of trigger type determination in event 

extraction. To make the training data in dif-

ferent languages help each other, we pro-

pose a uniform text representation with bi-

lingual features to represent the samples and 

handle the difficulty of locating the triggers 

in the translated text from both monolingual 

and bilingual perspectives. Empirical studies 

demonstrate the effectiveness of the pro-

posed approach to bilingual classification on 

trigger type determination. 

 

1 Introduction 

Event extraction is an increasingly hot and chal-

lenging research topic in the natural language 

processing (NLP) community (Ahn, 2006; Saun 

et al. 2006; Zhao et al. 2008). It aims to automat-

ically extract certain types of events with the ar-

guments to present the texts under a structured 

form. In event extraction, there are four primary 

subtasks, named trigger identification, trigger 

type determination, argument identification, and 

argument role determination (Chen and NG, 

2012). As an important technology in infor-

mation extraction, event extraction could be ap-

plied to many fields such as information retrieval, 

summarization, text mining, and question an-

swering. 

Recently, the dominative approach to event 

extraction is based on supervised learning where 

a set of labeled samples are exploited to train a 

model to extract the events. However, the availa-

                                                 
 *  Corresponding author 

ble labeled data are rather sparse due to various 

kinds of event categories. For example, the event 

taxonomy in ACE 2005
1

 (Automatic Content 

Extraction) includes 8 types of events, with 33 

subtypes, such as “Marry/Life” (subtype/type), 

and “Transport/Movement”. Moreover, some 

subtypes such as “Nominate/Personnel” and 

“Convict/Justice” contain less than 10 labeled 

samples in the English and Chinese corpus re-

spectively. Apparently, such a small scale of 

training data is difficult to yield a satisfying per-

formance. 

One possible way to alleviate the data sparse-

ness problem in event extraction is to conduct 

bilingual event extraction with training data from 

two different languages. This is motivated by the 

fact that labeled data from a language is highly 

possible to convey similar information in another 

language. For example, E1 is an event sample 

from the English corpus and E2 is another one in 

the Chinese corpus. Apparently, E1 and the Eng-

lish translation text of E2, share some important 

clues such as meet and Iraq which highly indi-

cates the event type of “Meet/Contact”.  

 

E1: Bush arrived in Saint Petersburg on Sat-

urday, when he also briefly met German chancel-

lor Gerhard Schroeder, whose opposition to the 

Iraq war had soured his relationship with Wash-

ington, at a dinner hosted by Putin. 

E2: 美国总统布什将于２月访问德国并与施
罗德会谈 ，伊朗和伊拉克问题将是双方会谈
的重点。(U.S. president George W. Bush   will 
visit Germany in February and meet with   

Schroeder, Iran and Iraq will be the focus of the   

talks the two sides.) 
 

In this paper, we address the data sparseness 

problem in event extraction with a bilingual pro-

                                                 
1http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace/2005 

842



cessing approach which aims to exploit bilingual 

training data to enhance the extraction perfor-

mance in each language. As a preliminary work, 

we mainly focus on the subtask of trigger type 

determination. Accordingly, our goal is to design 

a classifier which is trained with labeled data 

from two different languages and is capable of 

classifying the test data from both languages. 

Generally, this task possesses two main chal-

lenges.  

The first challenge is text representation, 

namely, how to eliminate the language gap be-

tween the two languages. To tackle this, we first 

employ Google Translate
2
, a state-of-the-art ma-

chine translation system, to gain the translation 

of an event instance, similar to what has been 

widely done by previous studies in bilingual 

classification tasks e.g., Wan (2008); Then, we 

uniformly represent each text with bilingual 

word features. That is, we augment each original 

feature vector into a novel one which contains 

the translated features.  

The second challenge is the translation for 

some specific features. It is well-known that 

some specific features, such as the triggers and 

their context features, are extremely important 

for determining the event types. For example, in 

E3, both trigger “left” and named entity “Sad-

dam” are important features to tell the event type, 

i.e., "Transport/Movement". When it is translated 

to Chinese, it is also required to know trigger “离
开”(left) and named entity “萨达姆” (Saddam) 
in E4, the Chinese translation of E3.  

 

E3: Saddam's clan is said to have left for a 

small village in the desert. 

E4: Chinese translation: 据 说  萨 达 姆
(Saddam) 家族 已经 离开(left) 沙漠 中 的 一个 
小 村庄。 

 

However, it is normally difficult to know 

which words are the triggers and surrounding 

entities in the translated sentence. To tackle this 

issue, we propose to locate the trigger from both 

monolingual and bilingual perspectives in the 

translation text. Empirical studies demonstrate 

that adding the translation of these specific fea-

tures substantially improves the classification 

performance.  

The remainder of this paper is organized as 

follows. Section 2 overviews the related work on 

event extraction. Section 3 proposes our ap-

                                                 
2 www.google.com 

proach to bilingual event extraction. Section 4 

gives the experimental studies. In Section 5, we 

conclude our work and give some future work. 

2 Related Work  

In the NLP community, event extraction has 

been mainly studied in both English and Chinese. 

In English, various supervised learning ap-

proaches have been explored recently. Bethard 

and Martin (2006) formulate the event identifica-

tion as a classification problem in a word-

chunking paradigm, introducing a variety of lin-

guistically motivated features. Ahn (2006) pro-

poses a trigger-based method. It first identifies 

the trigger in an event, and then uses a multi-

classifier to implement trigger type determina-

tion. Ji and Grishman (2008) employ an ap-

proach to propagate consistent event arguments 

across sentences and documents. Liao and 

Grishman (2010) apply document level infor-

mation to improve the performance of event ex-

traction. Hong et al. (2011) leverage cross-entity 

information to improve traditional event extrac-

tion, regarding entity type consistency as a key 

feature. More recently, Li et al. (2013) propose a 

joint framework based on structured prediction 

which extracts triggers and arguments together. 

In Chinese, relevant studies in event extraction 

are in a relatively primary stage with focus on 

more special characteristics and challenges. Tan 

et al. (2008) employ local feature selection and 

explicit discrimination of positive and negative 

features to ensure the performance of trigger type 

determination. Chen and Ji (2009) apply lexical, 

syntactic and semantic features in trigger label-

ing and argument labeling to improve the per-

formance. More recently, Li et al. (2012) and Li 

et al. (2013) introduce two inference mechanisms 

to infer unknown triggers and recover trigger 

mentions respectively with morphological struc-

tures.  

In comparison with above studies, we focus on 

bilingual event extraction. Although bilingual 

classification has been paid lots of attention in 

other fields (Wan 2008; Haghighi et al., 2008; 

Ismail et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2011；Li et al., 
2013), there is few related work in event extrac-

tion. The only one related work we find is Ji 

(2009) which proposes an inductive learning ap-

proach to exploit cross-lingual predicate clusters 

to improve the event extraction task with the 

main goal to get the event taggers from extra re-

sources, i.e., an English and Chinese parallel 

corpus. Differently, our goal is to make the la-

843



beled data from two languages help each other 

without any other extra resources, which is origi-

nal in the study of event extraction. 

3 The Proposed Approach 

Trigger type determination aims to determine the 

event type of a trigger given the trigger and its 

context (e.g., a sentence). Existing approaches to 

trigger type determination mainly focus on mon-

olingual classification. Figure 1 illustrates the 

framework for Chinese and English. 

In comparison, our approach exploits the cor-

pora from two different languages. Figure 2 illus-

trates the framework. As shown in the figure, we 

first get the translated corpora of Chinese and 

English origin corpora through machine transla-

tion. Then, we represent each text with bilingual 

features, which enables us to merge the training 

data from both languages so as to make them 

help each other. 

 
Figure 1: The framework of monolingual classifi-

cation for trigger type determination 

 

Figure 2: The framework of bilingual classification 

for trigger type determination 

3.1 Text Representation  

In a supervised learning approach, labeled data is 

trained to obtain a classifier. In this approach, the 

extracted features are the key components to 

make a successful classifier. Table 1 shows some 

typical kinds of features in a monolingual classi-

fication task for trigger type determination. To 

better understand these features, the real feature 

examples in E3 are given in the table. 

Given the feature definition, a monolingual 

sample x  is represented as the combination of all 

the features, i.e.,  

1 2, , , , _ , _ ,

_ , , _ , _

ne e e Tri POS Tri Tri con
x

POS con Ent Ent type Ent subtype

 
  
 

  (1) 

Features Feature examples in E3 

All words 

( 1 2, , ne e e ) 
Saddam, clan, is, ... , 

desert 

Trigger (Tri) left 

POS of the trigger 

(POS_Tri) 
VBN 

Trigger's context 

words (Tri_con) 
...,have, for,... 

POS of trigger's 

context words 

(POS_con) 

...,VB,IN,… 

Entities around trig-

ger (Ent) 
Saddam 

Entity type 

(Ent_type) 
PER 

Entity subtype 

(Ent_subtype) 
individual 

Table 1: The features and some feature examples for 

trigger type determination 

 

In bilingual classification, we represent a sam-

ple with bilingual features, which makes it possi-

ble to train with the data from two languages. To 

achieve this goal, we employ a single feature 

augmentation strategy to augment the monolin-

gual features into bilingual features, i.e.,  

,Chinese Englishx x x                       (2) 

Specifically, a sample x  is represented as fol-

lows: 

1 2

1 2

, , , , _ , _ ,

_ , , _ , _

, , , , , _ , _ ,

_ , , _ , _

m c c c

c c c

n e e e

e e e

c c c Tri POS Tri Tri con

POS con Ent Ent type Ent subtype
x

e e e Tri POS Tri Tri con

POS con Ent Ent type Ent subtype

  
  
  

  
 
   
  

  (3) 

Where the tokens with the ‘c’/‘e’ subscript mean 

the features generated from the Chinese/English 

text. From the features, we can see that some 

Classifier Results 

Chinese event 

corpus 

Machine trans-

lation 

Translated 

samples 

Text representation 

Translated 

samples 

English event 

corpus 
Machine trans-

lation 

Text representation 

Samples with 

bilingual features 

Samples with 

bilingual features 

Trigger type determination 

for Chinese 

Trigger type determination 

for English 

Chinese event 

corpus 

Classifier 

English 

event corpus 

Classifier 

Results Results 

844



features, such as Tri_con and Ent, depend on the 

location of the trigger word. Therefore, locating 

the trigger in the translated text becomes crucial.  

3.2 Locating Translated Trigger 

Without loss of generality, we consider the case 

of translating a Chinese event sample into an 

English one. Formally, the word sequence of a 

Chinese event sample is denoted as 

1 2( , , , )c ns c c c , while the sequence of the 

translated one is denoted as
1 2( , , )e ms e e e . 

Then, the objective is to get the English trigger 

eTri  in es , given the Chinese trigger word  

cTri in cs . The objective function is given as fol-

lows:  

 _
1 ,

argmax k l e
k l m

P e Tri
 

                  (4) 

Where _k le  denotes the substring 1( , , )k k le e e  

in es  and 1 ,k l m  . 

In this paper, the above function could be 

solved in two perspectives: monolingual and bi-

lingual ones. The former uses the English train-

ing data alone to locate the trigger while the lat-

ter exploit the bilingual information to get the 

translated counterpart of the Chinese trigger. 

The monolingual perspective: The objective 

is to locate the trigger with the monolingual in-

formation. That is,  

 _
1 ,

argmax | ,k l e e e
k l m

P e Tri s R
 

            (5) 

Where eR  denotes the training resource in Eng-

lish. In fact, this task is exactly the first subtask 

in event extraction named trigger identification, 

as mentioned in Introduction. For a simplified 

implementation, we first estimate the probabili-

ties of  _k l eP e Tri  in eR  with maximum like-
lihood estimation when _k l ee s .  

The bilingual perspective: The objective is to 

locate the trigger with the bilingual information. 

That is, 

 _
1 ,

argmax | , ,k l e e c c
k l m

P e Tri s s Tri
 

         (6) 

Where cTri  is the trigger word in Chinese and es  

is the translated text towards cs . More generally, 

this can be solved from a standard word align-

ment model in machine translation (Och et al, 

1999; Koehn et al, 2003). However, training a 

word alignment requires a huge parallel corpus 

which is not available here.  

 For a simplified implementation, we first get 

the 
cTri ’s translation， denoted as cTritrans ，

with Google Translate. Then, we estimate 

 _k l eP e Tri  as follows:  

  __
0.9

ck l Tri

k l e

if e trans
P e Tri

others


  


    (7) 

Where 0.9 is an empirical value which makes the 

translation probability become a dominative fac-

tor when the translation of the trigger is found in 

the translated sentence.   is a small value which 
makes the sum of all probabilities equals 1.   

The final decision is made according to both 

the monolingual and bilingual perspectives, i.e., 

 

 

_
1 ,

_

arg max  | ,

              | , ,

k l e e e
k l m

k l e e c c

P e Tri s R

P e Tri s s Tri

 



 

        (8) 

Note that we reduce the computational cost by 

make the word length of the trigger less than 3, 

i.e., 3l k  . 

4 Experimentation 

4.1 Experimental Setting  

Data sets: The Chinese and English corpus for 

even extraction are from ACE2005, which in-

volves 8 types and 33 subtypes. All our experi-

ments are conducted on the subtype case. Due to 

the space limit, we only report the statistics for 

each type, as shown in Table 2. For each subtype, 

80% samples are used as training data while the 

rest are as test data. 

 
# Chinese English total 

Life 389 902 1291 

Movement 593 679 1272 

Transaction 147 379 526 

Business 144 137 281 

Conflict 514 1629 2143 

Contact 263 373 636 

Personnel 203 514 717 

Justice 457 672 1129 

total 2710 5285 7995 

Table 2: Statistics in each event type in both Chinese 

and English data sets 

 

Features: The features have been illustrated in 

Table 1 in Section 3.2.  

845



Classification algorithm: The maximum en-

tropy (ME) classifier is implemented with the 

public tool, Mallet Toolkits3 . 

Evaluation metric: The performance of event 

type recognition is evaluated with F-score. 

4.2 Experimental Results  

In this section, we evaluate the performance of 

our approach to bilingual classification on trigger 

type determination. For comparison, following 

approaches are implemented: 

 Monolingual: perform monolingual classi-
fication on the Chinese and English corpus 

individually, as shown in Figure 1. 

 Bilingual: perform bilingual classification 
with partial bilingual features, ignoring the 

context features (e.g., context words, con-

text entities) under the assumption that the 

trigger location task is not done. 

 Bilingual_location: perform bilingual clas-
sification by translating each sample into 

another language and using a uniform repre-

sentation with all bilingual features as 

shown in Section 3.2. This is exactly our 

approach. The number of the context words 

and entities before or after the trigger words 

is set as 3. 

0.658

0.706

0.677
0.6790.678

0.734

0.62

0.64

0.66

0.68

0.7

0.72

0.74

Chinese Test Data English Test Data

F
-s

co
re

Monolingual Bilingual Bilingual_location

 
Figure 3: Performance comparison of the three ap-

proaches on the Chinese and English test data 

 

Figure 3 shows the classification results of the 

three approaches on the Chinese and English test 

data. From this figure, we can see that Bilin-

gual_location apparently outperform Monolin-

gual, which verifies the effectiveness of using 

bilingual corpus. Specifically, the improvement 

by our approach in Chinese is impressive, reach-

ing 7.6%. The results also demonstrate the im-

portance of the operation of the trigger location, 

                                                 
3 http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/   

without which, bilingual classification can only 

slightly improve the performance, as shown in 

the English test data.  

The results demonstrate that our bilingual 

classification approaches are more effective for 

the Chinese data. This is understandable because 

the size of English data is much larger than that 

of Chinese data, 5285 vs. 2710, as shown in Ta-

ble 2. Specifically, after checking the results in 

each subtype, we find that some subtypes in Chi-

nese have very few samples while corresponding 

subtypes in English have a certain number sam-

ples. For example, the subtype of 

“Elect/Personnel” only contains 30 samples in 

the Chinese data while 161 samples can be found 

in the English data, which leads a very high im-

provement (15.4%) for the Chinese test data. In 

summary, our bilingual classification approach 

provides an effective way to handle the data 

sparseness problem in even extraction. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

This paper addresses the data sparseness problem 

in event extraction by proposing a bilingual clas-

sification approach. In this approach, we use a 

uniform text representation with bilingual fea-

tures and merge the training samples from both 

languages to enlarge the size of the labeled data. 

Furthermore, we handle the difficulty of locating 

the trigger from both the monolingual and bilin-

gual perspectives. Empirical studies show that 

our approach is effective in using bilingual cor-

pus to improve monolingual classification in 

trigger type determination.  

Bilingual event extraction is still in its early 

stage and many related research issues need to be 

investigated in the future work. For example, it is 

required to propose novel approaches to the bi-

lingual processing tasks in other subtasks of 

event extraction. Moreover, it is rather challeng-

ing to consider a whole bilingual processing 

framework when all these subtasks are involved 

together.  

Acknowledgments 

This research work has been partially supported 

by two NSFC grants, No.61375073, and 

No.61273320, one National High-tech Research 

and Development Program of China 

No.2012AA011102, one General Research Fund 

(GRF) project No.543810 and one Early Career 

Scheme (ECS) project No.559313 sponsored by 

the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong, the 

NSF grant of Zhejiang Province No.Z1110551. 

846



References  

Ahn D. 2006. The Stages of Event Extraction. In Pro-

ceedings of the Workshop on Annotating and Rea-

soning about Time and Events, pp.1~8. 

Bethard S. and J. Martin. 2006. Identification of 

Event Mentions and Their Semantic Class. In Pro-

ceedings of EMNLP-2006, pp.146-154. 

Chen C. and V. NG. 2012. Joint Modeling for Chi-

nese Event Extraction with Rich Linguistic Fea-

tures. In Proceedings of COLING-2012, pp. 529-

544. 

Chen Z. and H. Ji. 2009. Language Specific Issue and 

Feature Exploration in Chinese Event Extraction. 

In Proceedings of NAACL-2009, pp. 209-212. 

Haghighi A., P. Liang, T. Berg-Kirkpatrick and D. 

Klein. 2008. Learning Bilingual Lexicons from 

Monolingual Corpora. In Proceedings of ACL-

2008, pp. 771-779. 

Hong Y., J. Zhang., B. Ma., J. Yao., and G. Zhou. 

2011. Using Cross-Entity Inference to Improve 

Event Extraction. In Proceedings of ACL-2011, pp. 

1127–1136. 

Ismail A., and S. Manandhar. 2010. Bilingual Lexicon 

Extraction from Comparable Corpora Using In-

domain Terms. In Proceedings of COLING-2010, 

pp.481-489. 

Ji H. 2009. Cross-lingual Predicate Cluster Acquisi-

tion to Improve Bilingual Event Extraction by In-

ductive Learning. In Proceedings of the Workshop 

on Unsupervised and Minimally Supervised Learn-

ing of Lexical Semantics, pp. 27-35. 

Ji H, and R. Grishman. 2008. Refining Event Extrac-

tion through Cross-Document Inference. In Pro-

ceedings of ACL-2008, pp. 254-262. 

Koehn P., F. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Statistical 

Phrase-based Translation. In Proceedings of HTL-

NAACL-2003, pp. 127-133. 

Li P., and G. Zhou. 2012. Employing Morphological 

Structures and Sememes for Chinese Event Extrac-

tion. In Proceedings of COLING-2012, pp. 1619-

1634. 

Li P., Q. Zhu and G. Zhou. 2013. Using Composition-

al Semantics and Discourse Consistency to Im-

prove Chinese Trigger Identification. In Proceed-

ings of COLING-2013, pp. 399-415. 

Li Q, H Ji, and H. Liang. 2013. Joint Event Extraction 

via Structured Prediction with Global Features. In 

Proceedings of ACL-2013, pp. 73-82. 

Li S, R Wang, H Liu, and CR Huang. 2013. Active 

Learning for Cross-Lingual Sentiment Classifica-

tion. In Proceedings of Natural Language Pro-

cessing and Chinese Computing, pp. 236-246. 

Liao S and R. Grishman. 2010. Using Document Lev-

el Cross-event Inference to Improve Event Extrac-

tion. In Proceedings of ACL-2010, pp. 789-797. 

Lu B., C. Tan, C. Cardie and B. K. Tsou. 2011. Joint 

Bilingual Sentiment Classification with Unlabeled 

Parallel Corpora. In Proceedings of ACL-2011, pp. 

320-330.  

Och F., C. Tillmann, and H. Ney. 1999. Improved 

Alignment Models for Statistical Machine Transla-

tion. In Proceedings of EMNLP-1999, pp.20-28. 

Tan H., T. Zhao, and J. Zheng. 2008. Identification of 

Chinese Event and Their Argument Roles. In Pro-

ceedings of  CITWORKSHOPS-2008,  pp. 14-19. 

Wan X. 2008. Using Bilingual Knowledge and En-

semble Techniques for Unsupervised Chinese Sen-

timent Analysis. In  Proceedings of EMNLP-2008, 

pp. 553-561. 

Zhao Y., Y. Wang, B. Qin, et al. 2008. Research on 

Chinese Event Extraction. In Proceedings of Jour-

nal of  Chinese Information, 22(01), pp. 3-8. 

847


