



















































Assessing the Discourse Factors that Influence the Quality of Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 283–288,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Assessing the Discourse Factors that Influence the Quality of Machine
Translation

Junyi Jessy Li
University of Pennsylvania

ljunyi@seas.upenn.edu

Marine Carpuat
National Research Council Canada
marine.carpuat@nrc.gc.ca

Ani Nenkova
University of Pennsylvania

nenkova@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

We present a study of aspects of discourse
structure — specifically discourse devices
used to organize information in a sen-
tence — that significantly impact the qual-
ity of machine translation. Our analysis
is based on manual evaluations of trans-
lations of news from Chinese and Ara-
bic to English. We find that there is a
particularly strong mismatch in the no-
tion of what constitutes a sentence in Chi-
nese and English, which occurs often and
is associated with significant degradation
in translation quality. Also related to
lower translation quality is the need to em-
ploy multiple explicit discourse connec-
tives (because, but, etc.), as well as the
presence of ambiguous discourse connec-
tives in the English translation. Further-
more, the mismatches between discourse
expressions across languages significantly
impact translation quality.

1 Introduction

In this study we examine how the use of dis-
course devices to organize information in a sen-
tence — and the mismatch in their usage across
languages — influence machine translation (MT)
quality. The goal is to identify discourse process-
ing tasks with high potential for improving trans-
lation systems.

Historically MT researchers have focused their
attention on the mismatch of linear realization of
syntactic arguments (Galley et al., 2004; Collins
et al., 2005), lexico-morphological mismatch
(Minkov et al., 2007; Habash and Sadat, 2006)
and word polysemy (Carpuat and Wu, 2007; Chan
et al., 2007). Discourse structure has largely been
considered irrelevant to MT, mostly due to the as-
sumption that discourse analysis is needed to inter-

pret multi-sentential text while statistical MT sys-
tems are trained to translate a single sentence in
one language into a single sentence in another.

However, discourse devices are at play in the or-
ganization of information into complex sentences.
The mere definition of sentence may differ across
languages. Chinese for example is anecdotally
known to allow for very long sentences which at
times require the use of multiple English sentences
to express the same content and preserve gram-
maticality. Similarly discourse connectives like
because, but, since and while often relate informa-
tion expressed in simple sentential clauses. There
are a number of possible complications in trans-
lating these connectives: they may be ambiguous
between possible senses, e.g., English while is am-
biguous between COMPARISON and TEMPORAL;
explicit discourse connectives may be translated
into implicit discourse relations or translated in
morphology rather than lexical items (Meyer and
Webber, 2013; Meyer and Poláková, 2013).

In our work, we quantify the relationship be-
tween information packaging, discourse devices,
and translation quality.

2 Data and experiment settings

We examine the quality of translations to English
from Chinese and Arabic using Human-targeted
Translation Edit Rates (HTER) (Snover et al.,
2006), which roughly captures the minimal num-
ber of edits necessary to transform the system
output into an acceptable English translation of
the source sentence. By comparing MT output
with post-edited references, HTER provides more
reliable estimates of translation quality than us-
ing translated references, especially at the seg-
ment level. The data for the analysis is drawn
from an extended set of newswire reports in the
2008/2010 NIST Metrics for Machine Translation

283



GALE Evaluation set1. For Chinese, there are
305 sentences (segments) translated to English by
three different translation systems. For Arabic,
there are 363 Arabic sentences (segments) trans-
lated by two systems.

The presence of discourse devices is analyzed
only on the English side: the reference, the system
hypothesis and its edited translation. Discourse
connectives and their senses are identified using
existing tools developed for English. Beyond its
practical limitations, analyzing the reference inter-
estingly reflects the choices made by the human
translator: whether to choose to use a discourse
connective, or to insert one to make an implicit re-
lation on the source side explicit on the target side.

We first conduct analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with HTER as dependent variable and the dis-
course factors as independent variables, and sys-
tems as subjects. We examine within-subject sig-
nificance in each ANOVA model. For discourse
factors that are significant at the 95% confidence
level or higher according to the ANOVA analy-
sis, we provide detailed breakdown of the system
HTER for each value of the discourse factor.

In this paper we do not compare the perfor-
mance of individual systems, but instead seek to
understand if a discourse phenomena is problem-
atic across systems.2

3 Sentence length and HTER

The presence of complex discourse structure is
likely to be associated with longer sentences. It
stands to reason that long sentences will be harder
to process automatically and this reasoning has
motivated the first approaches to text simplifica-
tion (Chandrasekar et al., 1996). So before turning
to the analysis of discourse phenomena, we exam-
ine the correlation between translation quality and
sentence length. A strong correlation between the
two would call for revival of interest in text sim-
plification where syntactically complex sentences
are transformed into several shorter sentences as a
preprocessing step.

We find however that no strong relationship ex-
ists between the two, as shown by the correlation
coefficients between HTER values and the number
of words in each segment in Table 1.

1Data used in this work includes more documents and the
human edits not present in the official release.

2For the readers with keen interest in system comparison,
we note that according to ANOVA none of the differences in
system performance on this data is statistically significant.

Lan. Sys1 Sys2 Sys3
ZH 0.097 (0.099) 0.117 (0.152) 0.144 (0.173)
AR 0.071(0.148) -0.089 (-0.029) -

Table 1: Pearson (Spearman) correlation coeffi-
cient between segment length and HTER values.

Next we examine if sentence–discourse diver-
gence between languages and the presence of (am-
biguous) discourse connectives would be more in-
dicative of the expected translation quality.

4 When a sentence becomes discourse

Some languages allow more information to be
packed into a single sentence than is possible in
another language, making single-sentence transla-
tions cumbersome and often ungrammatical. Chi-
nese is known for sentences of this kind; for exam-
ple, the usage of punctuation is very different in
Chinese in the sense that a comma can sometimes
function as a full stop in English, motivating a se-
ries of disambiguation tasks (Jin et al., 2004; Xue
and Yang, 2011; Xu and Li, 2013). Special han-
dling of long Chinese sentences were also shown
to improve machine translation (Jin and Liu, 2010;
Yin et al., 2007).

To investigate the prevalence of sentences in the
source language (Chinese and Arabic in our case)
that do not confirm to the notion of sentence in the
target language (English for the purposes of this
study), we separate the translation segments in the
source language into two classes: a source sen-
tence is considered 1-1 if the reference translation
consists of exactly one sentence, and 1-many if the
reference contains more than one sentence.

For Chinese, 26.2% of the source segments are
1-many. These sentences tend to be much longer
than average (36.6% of all words in all reference
translations are part of such segments). For Ara-
bic, the numbers are 15.2% and 26.3%, respec-
tively. Below is an example of a 1-many Chinese
segment, along with the human reference and its
translation by one of the systems:
[source] 俄警方宣称，Erinys有一重要竞争对手RISC，
利特维年科生前最后见面的人卢戈沃伊与友人都是从事
这些行业。
[ref] Russian police claim that Erinys has an important com-
petitor RISC. The last people Litvinenko saw while he was
alive, Lugovoi and his friends, were all engaged in these in-
dustries.
[sys] Russian police have claimed that a major competitor,
Litvinenko his last meeting with friends are engaged in these
industries.

We conducted ANOVA on HTER, separately
for each language, with type of segment (1-1 or

284



AOV Arabic Chinese
Pr(> F ) 0.209 0.0045*

1-1 1-many
System HTER HTER

ZH-Sys1 16.22 19.03*
ZH-Sys2 19.54 21.02
ZH-Sys3 20.64 23.86*

Table 2: ANOVA for both languages; average
HTER for the three Chinese to English systems,
stratified on type of segment (1-1 and 1-many). An
(*) denotes significance at p < 0.05.

1-many) as the independent variable and systems
treated as subjects. The test revealed that there is
a significant difference in translation quality be-
tween 1-1 and 1-many segments for Chinese but
not for Arabic. For the Chinese to English systems
we further ran a Wilcoxon rank sum test to iden-
tify the statistical significance in performance for
individual systems. For two of the three systems
the difference is significant, as shown in Table 2.

We have now established that 1-many segments
in Chinese to English translation are highly preva-
lent and their translations are of consistently lower
quality compared to 1-1 segments. This finding
suggests a cross language discourse analysis task
of identifying Chinese sentences that cannot be
translated into single English sentences. This task
may be related to existing efforts in comma dis-
ambiguation in Chinese (Jin et al., 2004; Xue and
Yang, 2011; Xu and Li, 2013) but the relation-
ship between the two problems needs to be clar-
ified in follow up work. Once 1-many segments
are identified, source-side text simplification tech-
niques may be developed (Siddharthan, 2006) to
improve translation quality.

5 Explicit discourse relations

Explicit discourse relations such as COMPARISON,
CONTINGENCY or TEMPORAL are signaled by
an explicit connective, i.e., however or because.
The Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) (Prasad et
al., 2008) provides annotations for the arguments
and relation senses of one hundred pre-selected
discourse connectives over the news portion of
the Penn Treebank corpus (Marcus et al., 1993).
Based on the PDTB, accurate systems for explicit
discourse relation identification have been devel-
oped (Pitler and Nenkova, 2009; Lin et al., 2014).
The accuracy of these systems is 94% or higher,
close to human performance on the task. Here we

AOV Arabic Chinese
Pr(> F ) 0.39 0.0058*

No Conn > 1 Conn
all % data (ZH) 53.77 15.08

1-many % data (ZH) 13.77 5.25
HTER mean HTER mean

all ZH-Sys1 16.11 19.84+

ZH-Sys2 19.96 22.39
ZH-Sys3 20.70 25.00*

1-many ZH-Sys1 16.94 22.75+

ZH-Sys2 20.47 23.25
ZH-Sys3 22.30 29.68*

Table 3: Number of connectives: ANOVA for both
languages; proportion of data in each factor level
and average HTER for the three Chinese-English
systems, of the entire dataset and of 1-many trans-
lations. An (*) or (+) sign denotes significance at
95% and 90% confidence levels, respectively.

study the influence of explicit discourse relations
on machine translation quality and their interac-
tion with 1-1 and 1-many segments.

5.1 Number of connectives

We identify discourse connectives and their senses
(TEMPORAL, COMPARISON, CONTINGENCY or
EXPANSION) in each reference segment using the
system in Pitler and Nenkova (2009)3. We com-
pare the translation quality obtained on segments
with reference translation containing no discourse
connective, exactly one discourse connective and
more than one discourse connective.

The ANOVA indicates that the number of con-
nectives is not a significant factor for Arabic trans-
lation, but significantly impacts Chinese transla-
tion quality. A closer inspection using Wilcoxon
rank sum tests reveals that the difference in trans-
lation quality is statistically significant only be-
tween the groups of segments with no connective
vs. those with more than one connective. Addi-
tionally, we ran Wilcoxon rank sum test over 1-
1 and 1-many segments individually and find that
the presence of discourse connectives is associated
with worse quality only in the latter case. Effects
above are illustrated in Table 3.

5.2 Ambiguity of connectives

A number of discourse connectives are ambiguous
with respect to the discourse relation they convey.
For example, while can signal either COMPARI-

3http://www.cis.upenn.edu/∼epitler/discourse.html; We
used the Stanford Parser (Klein and Manning, 2003).

285



AOV Arabic Chinese
Pr(> F ) 0.57 0.00014*

has-amb-conn no-amb-conn
System HTER mean HTER mean

ZH-Sys1 21.57 16.34*
ZH-Sys2 21.44 19.72
ZH-Sys3 27.47 20.69*

Table 4: ANOVA for both languages; average
HTER for the three Chinese systems for segments
with (11.80% of all data) and without an ambigu-
ous connective in the reference translation. An (*)
denotes significance at p < 0.05.

SON or TEMPORAL relations and since can signal
either CONTINGENCY or TEMPORAL. In transla-
tion this becomes a problem when the ambiguity
is present in one language but not in the other.
In such cases the sense in source ought to be dis-
ambiguated before translation. Here we compare
the translation quality of segments which contain
ambiguous discourse connectives in the reference
translation to those that do not. This analysis gives
lower bound on the translation quality degradation
associated with discourse phenomena as it does
not capture problems arising from connective am-
biguity on the source side.

We base our classification of discourse connec-
tives into ambiguous or not according to the dis-
tribution of their senses in the PDTB. We call a
connective ambiguous if its most frequent sense
among COMPARISON, CONTINGENCY, EXPAN-
SION, TEMPORAL accounts for less than 80% of
occurrence of that connective in the PDTB. Nine-
teen connectives meet this criterion of ambiguity.4

In the ANOVA tests for each language, we com-
pared the quality of segments which contained an
ambiguous connective in the reference with those
that do not, with systems treated as subjects. For
Arabic the presence of ambiguous connective did
not yield a statistically significant difference. The
difference however was highly significant for Chi-
nese, as shown in Table 4.

The finding that discourse connective ambigu-
ity is associated with change in translation quality
for Chinese but not for Arabic is rather interesting.
It appears that the language pair in translation im-
pacts the expected gains from discourse analysis
on translation.

4The ambiguous connectives are: as, as if, as long as, as
though, finally, if and when, in the end, in turn, lest, mean-
while, much as, neither...nor, now that, rather, since, ulti-
mately, when, when and if, while

AOV Event Arabic Chinese
Pr(> F ) Contingency 0.61 0.028*

Comp.:Temp. 0.047* 0.0041*

Chinese HTER HTER
Contingency ¬ Contingency

Sys1 20.15 16.72
Sys2 21.69 19.80
Sys3 25.87 21.16+

Comp.∧Temp. ¬(Comp.∧Temp.)
Sys1 23.58 16.64*
Sys2 26.16 19.63*
Sys3 27.20 21.21+

Table 5: ANOVA for both languages; average
HTER for Chinese sentences containing a CON-
TINGENCY relation (6.89% of all data) or both
COMPARISON and TEMPORAL (4.59% of all data).
An (*) or (+) sign denotes significance at 95% and
90% confidence levels, respectively.

5.3 Relation senses

Here we study whether discourse relations of spe-
cific senses pose more difficulties on translations
than others and whether there are interactions be-
tween senses. In the ANOVA analysis we used a
binary factor for each of the four possible senses.
For example, we compare the translation quality
of segments that contain COMPARISON relations
in the reference translation with those that do not.

The relation sense makes a significant differ-
ence in translation quality for Chinese but not for
Arabic. For Chinese specifically sentences that ex-
press CONTINGENCY relations have worse qual-
ity translations than sentences that do not express
CONTINGENCY. One explanation for this ten-
dency may be that CONTINGENCY in Chinese con-
tains more ambiguity with other relations such as
TEMPORAL, as tense is expressed lexically in Chi-
nese (no morphological tense marking on verbs).
Finally, the interaction between COMPARISON and
TEMPORAL is significant for both languages.

Table 5 shows the effect of relation sense on
HTER values for Chinese.

6 Human edits of discourse connectives

A relation expressed implicitly without a connec-
tive in one language may need to be explicit in
another. Moreover, the expressions themselves
are used differently; for example, the paired con-
nective “虽然...但是” (despite...but) in Chinese
should not be translated into two redundant con-
nectives in English. It is also possible that the
source language contains an explicit discourse

286



connective which is not translated in the target lan-
guage, as has been quantitatively studied recently
by Meyer and Webber (2013). An example from
our dataset is shown below:
[source] 还有些人可到大学的游戏专业深造，而后被聘
请为大游戏厂商的技术顾问等。

[ref] Still some others can receive further professional game
training in universities and later(Temporal) be employed as
technical consultants by large game manufacturers, etc.
[sys] Some people may go to the university games profes-
sional education, which is appointed as the big game manu-
facturers such as technical advisers.
[edited] Some people may go to university to receive profes-
sional game education, and later(Temporal) be appointed by
the big game manufacturers as technical advisers.

The system fails to translate the discourse con-
nective “而后” (later), leading to a probable mis-
interpretation between receiving education and be-
ing appointed as technical advisors.

Due to the lack of reliable tools and resources,
we approximate mismatches between discourse
expressions in the source and MT output using
discourse-related edits. We identify explicit dis-
course connectives and their senses in the system
translation and the human edited version of that
translation. Then we consider the following mu-
tually exclusive possibilities: (i) there are no dis-
course connectives in either the system output or
the edit; (ii) the system output and its edited ver-
sion contain exactly the same discourse connec-
tives with the same senses; (iii) there is a discourse
connective present in the system output but not in
the edit or vice versa. In the ANOVA we use a
factor with three levels corresponding to the three
cases described above. The factor is significant for
both Chinese and Arabic. In both languages, the
mismatch case (iii) involves significantly higher
HTER than either case (i) or (ii). The human edit
rate in the mismatch class is on average four points
greater than that in the other classes.

Obviously, the mismatch in implicit/explicit ex-
pression of discourse relation is related to the
first problem we studied, i.e., if the source seg-
ment is translated into one or multiple sentences
in English, since discourse relations between adja-
cent sentences are more often implicit (than intra-
sentence ones). For this reason we performed a
Wilcoxon rank sum test for the translation qual-
ity of segments with discourse mismatch condi-
tioned on whether the segment was 1-1 or 1-many.
For both languages a significant difference was
found for 1-1 sentences but not 1-many. Table 6
shows the proportion of data in each of the con-
ditioned classes and the average HTER for sen-

% data Mismatch Mismatch ¬Mismatch
(1-1) (1-1)

Arabic 21.27 15.47 69.34
Chinese 29.51 17.05 56.82

AOV Arabic Chinese
Pr(> F ) 4.0× 10−6* 4.1× 10−11*

HTER HTER
¬Mismatch Mismatch

AR-Sys1 11.23 15.92*
AR-Sys2 11.64 15.74*
ZH-Sys1 15.57 20.72*
ZH-Sys2 19.02 22.34*
ZH-Sys3 11.64 15.74*

¬Mismatch|1-1 Mismatch|1-1
AR-Sys1 10.86 16.24*
AR-Sys2 11.58 16.65*
ZH-Sys1 15.47 19.13*
ZH-Sys2 18.68 22.52*
ZH-Sys3 19.57 26.07*

Table 6: Data portions, ANOVA for both lan-
guages and average HTER for segments where
there is a discourse mismatch between system and
edited translations. An (*) denotes significance at
p < 0.05.

tences from the mismatch case (iii) where a dis-
course connective was edited and the others (no
such edits). Translation quality degrades signifi-
cantly for all systems for the mismatch case, over
all data as well as 1-1 segments.

7 Conclusion

We showed that translation from Chinese to En-
glish is made more difficult by various discourse
events such as the use of discourse connectives,
the ambiguity of the connectives and the type of
relations they signal. None of these discourse fac-
tors has a significant impact on translation qual-
ity from Arabic to English. Translation quality
from both languages is adversely affected by trans-
lations of discourse relations expressed implicitly
in one language but explicitly in the other or by
paired connectives. Our experiments indicate that
discourse usage may affect machine translation
between some language pairs but not others, and
for particular relations such as CONTINGENCY.
Finally, we established the need to identify sen-
tences in the source language that would be trans-
lated into multiple sentences in English. Espe-
cially in translating from Chinese to English, there
is a large number of such sentences which are cur-
rently translated much worse than other sentences.

287



References
Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving sta-

tistical machine translation using word sense disam-
biguation. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 61–72.

Yee Seng Chan, Hwee Tou Ng, and David Chiang.
2007. Word sense disambiguation improves statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pages 33–40.

Raman Chandrasekar, Christine Doran, and Bangalore
Srinivas. 1996. Motivations and methods for text
simplification. In Proceedings of the 16th Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics (COLING),
pages 1041–1044.

Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kučerová.
2005. Clause restructuring for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL), pages 531–540.

Michel Galley, Mark Hopkins, Kevin Knight, and
Daniel Marcu. 2004. What’s in a translation rule?
In Proceedings of the Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (NAACL), pages 273–280.

Nizar Habash and Fatiha Sadat. 2006. Arabic prepro-
cessing schemes for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (NAACL): Short Papers, pages 49–52.

Yaohong Jin and Zhiying Liu. 2010. Improving
Chinese-English patent machine translation using
sentence segmentation. In International Conference
on Natural Language Processing and Knowledge
Engineering (NLP-KE), pages 1–6.

Meixun Jin, Mi-Young Kim, Dongil Kim, and Jong-
Hyeok Lee. 2004. Segmentation of Chinese
long sentences using commas. In Proceedings of
the Third SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language
Processing (SIGHAN), pages 1–8.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Fast
exact inference with a factored model for natural
language parsing. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, volume 15.

Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan. 2014. A
PDTB-styled end-to-end discourse parser. Natural
Language Engineering, 20:151–184, 4.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics - Special issue on using large
corpora, 19(2):313–330.

Thomas Meyer and Lucie Poláková. 2013. Machine
translation with many manually labeled discourse
connectives. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Discourse in Machine Translation (DiscoMT), pages
43–50.

Thomas Meyer and Bonnie Webber. 2013. Implicita-
tion of discourse connectives in (machine) transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse
in Machine Translation (DiscoMT), pages 19–26.

Einat Minkov, Kristina Toutanova, and Hisami Suzuki.
2007. Generating complex morphology for machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association of Computational Linguistics
(ACL), pages 128–135.

Emily Pitler and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Using syntax to
disambiguate explicit discourse connectives in text.
In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Confer-
ence: Short Papers, pages 13–16.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC).

Advaith Siddharthan. 2006. Syntactic simplification
and text cohesion. Research on Language and Com-
putation, 4(1):77–109.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of
translation edit rate with targeted human annotation.
In Proceedings of Association for Machine Transla-
tion in the Americas, pages 223–231.

Shengqin Xu and Peifeng Li. 2013. Recognizing Chi-
nese elementary discourse unit on comma. In Inter-
national Conference on Asian Language Processing
(IALP), pages 3–6.

Nianwen Xue and Yaqin Yang. 2011. Chinese sen-
tence segmentation as comma classification. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (HLT): Short Papers, pages
631–635.

Dapeng Yin, F. Ren, Peilin Jiang, and S. Kuroiwa.
2007. Chinese complex long sentences processing
method for Chinese-Japanese machine translation.
In International Conference on Natural Language
Processing and Knowledge Engineering (NLP-KE),
pages 170–175.

288


