



















































Understanding Relation Temporality of Entities


Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 848–853,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Understanding Relation Temporality of Entities

Taesung Lee and Seung-won Hwang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
Pohang, Republic of Korea

{elca4u, swhwang}@postech.edu

Abstract

This paper demonstrates the importance
of relation equivalence for entity trans-
lation pair discovery. Existing approach
of understanding relation equivalence has
focused on using explicit features of co-
occurring entities. In this paper, we ex-
plore latent features of temporality for un-
derstanding relation equivalence, and em-
pirically show that the explicit and latent
features complement each other. Our pro-
posed hybrid approach of using both ex-
plicit and latent features improves relation
translation by 0.16 F1-score, and in turn
improves entity translation by 0.02.

1 Introduction

Understanding relations is important in entity
tasks. In this paper, we illustrate such importance
using named entity (NE) translation mining prob-
lem. Early research on NE translation used pho-
netic similarities, for example, to mine the trans-
lation ‘Mandelson’→‘曼德尔森’[ManDeErSen]
with similar sounds (Knight and Graehl, 1998;
Wan and Verspoor, 1998). However, not all NE
translations are based on transliterations, but they
might be based on semantics (e.g., ‘WTO’→‘世
贸组织’[ShiMaoZuZhi]), or even arbitrary (e.g.,
‘Jackie Chan’→‘成龙’[ChengLong]).

To address this challenge, current state-of-the-
art approaches build an entity graph for each lan-
guage corpus, and align the two graphs by prop-
agating the seed translation similarities (Figure 1)
(Kim et al., 2011; You et al., 2012). For exam-
ple, arbitrary translation pair such as (Jackie Chan,
成龙) can be obtained, if he is connected to his
film ‘Drunken Master’ (醉拳) in both graphs. That
is, we can propagate the seed translation similar-
ity of (Drunken Master,醉拳) to neighbor entities
‘Jackie Chan’ and ‘成龙’ in each graph.

  

(Drunken Master)  

(Kung Fu) 

 

(Hong Kong) 

 

(Jackie Chan) 

Drunken Master 

Kung Fu 

Hong Kong 

Jackie Chan 

English Entity Graph Chinese Entity Graph 

D k M tDr (

Jackie ChanJackie Chan

Known translations 

Propagated translations 

Figure 1: Entity translation by propagation.

When two graphs are obtained from parallel
corpora, graphs are symmetric and “blind prop-
agation” described above is effective. In con-
trast, Lee and Hwang (2013) propose “selective
propagation” for asymmetric graphs, of compar-
ing the semantics of relations. A key contri-
bution of this paper is using relation temporal-
ity for determining relation equivalence. Exist-
ing work (Nakashole et al., 2012; Mohamed et
al., 2011; Lee and Hwang, 2013) uses only co-
occurring entity pairs, or explicit features (EF).
For example, for a relation pay an official visit to,
with a statement (Bush, pay an official visit to, China),
an entity pair (Bush, China) is in the “support
set”, which is a set of co-occurring entity pairs
of pay an official visit to. When its support set is
{(Bush, China), (Mandelson, Moscow), (Rice, Is-
rael)}, and that of visit is {(Bush, China), (Rice,
Israel), (Medvedev, Cuba)}, we can infer their se-
mantic equivalence based on the set intersection:
{(Bush, China), (Rice, Israel)}.

In contrast, we propose to explore corpus latent
features (LF), to complement the sparsity problem
of EF: Out of 158 randomly chosen correct re-
lation translation pairs we labeled, 64% has only
one co-occurring entity pair, which makes EF not
very effective to identify these relation transla-
tions. Therefore, we leverage relation temporality,
which is both orthogonal and complementary to
existing efforts leveraging entity temporality (Kle-

848



mentiev and Roth, 2006; Kim et al., 2012; You
et al., 2013). In particular, we discover three new
challenges on using temporality for relation under-
standing in comparable corpora, which we discuss
in detail in Section 3.2. Based on these challenges,
we identify three new features for LF.

We observe the complementary nature of EF
and LF, then propose a hybrid approach combin-
ing both features. Our new hybrid approach sig-
nificantly improves the relation translation (0.16
higher F1-score than EF), and in turn improves the
entity translation (0.02 higher F1-score).

2 Preliminary: Entity Translation by
Selective Propagation

Selective propagation, leveraging the statements
extracted from bilingual comparable corpora, can
be summarized by several steps.

STEP 1 Initialize entity translation function T (0)N .

STEP 2 Build relation translation function T (t)R us-
ing T (t)N .

STEP 3 Update entity translation function to ac-
quire T (t+1)N using T

(t)
R .

STEP 4 Repeat STEP 2 and STEP 3.

For STEP 1, an existing method for entity trans-
lation is adopted. In our experiments, we use a
non-selective (hence not requiring relation trans-
lations) propagation approach (You et al., 2012)
with (Lam et al., 2007) for a base translation ma-
trix. The focus of this paper is STEP 2, building the
translation score T (t)R (rE , rC) of English relation
rE and Chinese relation rC : We will discuss the
detailed procedure of STEP 2 and propose how to
improve it in Section 3. STEP 3 is the stage that
selective propagation takes place.

STEP 2 and STEP 3 reinforce each other to im-
prove the final entity translation function. While
STEP 3 is well-defined in (Lee and Hwang, 2013),
to propagate entity translation scores when the re-
lation semantics of the edges are equivalent, STEP
2 has been restricted to the explicit feature, i.e., co-
occurring entities or shared context. In clear con-
trast, by discovering novel latent features based on
temporal properties, we can increase the accuracy
of both entity and relation translations. Note that
we omit t for readability in the following sections.

3 Relation Translation

In this section, we present our approaches to ob-
tain relations of equivalent semantics across lan-
guages (e.g., visit→访问). Formally, our goal
is to build the relation translation score function
TR(rE , rC) for English relation rE and Chinese
relation rC .

3.1 Baseline: Explicit Feature Approach (EF)

In this section, we briefly illustrate a baseline
method EF (Lee and Hwang, 2013). As we
mentioned in the introduction, traditional ap-
proaches leverage common co-occurring entity-
pairs. This observation also holds in the bilin-
gual environment by exploiting seed entity trans-
lations. For example, let us say that we have
two extracted statements: (Bruce Willis, star in,
The Sixth Sense) and (布鲁斯·威利斯 (Bruce
Willis),主演 (star in),第六感 (The Sixth Sense)).
Knowing a few seed entity translations using TN ,
‘Bruce Willis’→‘布鲁斯·威利斯’ and ‘The Sixth
Sense’→‘第六感’, we can find star in and主演
are semantically similar.

Specifically, we quantify this similarity based
on the number of such common entity pairs that
we denote as |H(rE , rC)| for an English relation
rE and a Chinese relation rC . The existing ap-
proaches are variations of using |H(rE , rC)|. Our
baseline implementation uses the one by (Lee and
Hwang, 2013), and we refer the reader to the pa-
per for formal definitions and processing steps we
omitted due to the page limit.

Unfortunately, this approach suffers from spar-
sity of the common entity pairs due to the incom-
parability of the corpora and those entities that
cannot be translated by TN . Therefore, we lever-
age corpus latent features as an additional signal
to overcome this problem.

3.2 Latent Feature Approach (LF)

Temporal Feature Discovery

We exploit the temporal distribution d[x](t) of tex-
tual element x during t-th week in statements;
we count the occurrences of the element x on
a weekly basis, and normalize them to observe∑

t d[x](t) = 1. For example, Figure 2a shows the
relation temporal distribution d[visit](t) against
week t. Unlike entities, we can easily observe
the dissimilarity of the temporal distributions of
semantically equivalent relations. We identify the

849



0

0.04

0.08

0 10 20 30 40 50

Week 

visit

 

(a) Atemporality of equivalent relations: d[visit] and
d[访问].

0

0.12

0.24

0 10 20 30 40 50

Week 

(Bush, visit, *)

( , , *) 

(b) Temporality of equivalent entity-relation couplings:
d[Bush, visit, *] and d[布什,访问, *].

0

0.07

0.14

0 10 20 30 40 50

Week 

deploy

...  

(c) Temporality of non-equivalent relations: d[deploy]
and d[在...部署 (deploy at)]

Figure 2: Temporal distributions of a relation, and
a coupling.

three big challenges in exploiting the temporality
in relation translations.

[C1] Considering temporal distributions d[r] of
relations alone is not sufficient. For relations, such
as visit, that involves diverse entities, the temporal
distributions are highly noisy (Figure 2a).

To address the first challenge, we use a finer-
granularity unit for observing the temporality.
More specifically, we exploit a coupling of a re-
lation and an entity: d[e, r, ∗] where e is an en-
tity, r a relation, and * is a placeholder indicating
that any noun phrase is accepted for the second ar-
gument of a statement.1 As shown in Figure 2b,
d[e, r, ∗] is more distinctive and hence a key clue
to find semantically equivalent relations.

[C2] Considering entity-relation coupling dis-
tribution d[e, r, ∗] alone is not sufficient due to
the domination of individual temporality. For ex-
ample, Figure 3 shows entity-dominating entity-
relation temporality. If an entity has a peak at
some period (Figure 3a), most relations that are
coupled with the entity would have a peak at the
very same period (Figure 3b). This makes all re-
lations that appear with this entity very similar to

1We use both d[e, r, ∗] and d[∗, r, e] to measure the rela-
tion translation scores and leverage the average score. But in
this section, we only use d[e, r, ∗] for readability.

0

0.32

0.64

0 10 20 30 40 50

Week 

(a) Temporal distribution of
an entity having a peak.

0

0.32

0.64

0 10 20 30 40 50

Week 

(b) Temporal distribution of
a coupling of a relation and
the entity.

Figure 3: False positive peak of an entity-relation
coupling.

each other regardlessly of semantics. To address
this challenge, we use features to measure whether
d[e, r, ∗] is too close to either of d[e] or d[r].

[C3] Lastly, we have to eliminate false positives
in relation temporality. To illustrate, two relations
deploy and 在...部署 (deploy at) have similar
temporal behaviors (Figure 2c). However, the first
relation takes [person], but the second relation [lo-
cation] for the second argument.

To address this, we check the common co-
occurring entity pair of the relations. For exam-
ple, we can obtain “Russia deployed an aircraft
carrier”, but not “Russia deployed at (在...部署)
an aircraft carrier”. Thus, we cannot acquire any
common entity pair like (Russia, aircraft carrier)
for deploy and在...部署 (deploy at).

Relation Similarity Computation
We compute the similarity of two relations rE in
English and rC in Chinese using the following 2-
steps.

• Compute the similarity SCP (rE , rC , eE , eC) of
temporal distributions of entity-relation cou-
plings for each bilingual entity pair (eE , eC).

• Compute the translation score TLFR (rE , rC) by
aggregating the coupling similarities.

Considering the three challenges, we produce
a list of features {fx(rE , rC , eE , eC)} to mea-
sure the coupling similarity SCP (rE , rC , eE , eC)
as follows.

• [Base feature] fET : TN (eE , eC). The entity
translation score obtained in the previous iter-
ation or the seed entity translation score.

• [C1] fER: 1−JSD(d[eE , rE , ∗], d[eC , rC , ∗]).
The temporal similarity of the couplings, where
JSD(P, Q) is the Jensen-Shannon divergence
of two distributions P and Q, defined as
JSD(P, Q) = 12D(P ||M) + 12D(Q||M),

850



with M = 12(P + Q) and D(P ||M) =∑
i P (i) log

P (i)
M(i) .

• [C2] fD1,E , fD2,E , fD1,C , fD2,C :
JSD(d[eE ], d[eE , rE , ∗]), JSD(d[rE ], d[eE , rE , ∗])
JSD(d[eC ], d[eC , rC , ∗]), JSD(d[rC ], d[eC , rC , ∗])
Entity to entity-relation distribution difference
(D1) and relation to entity-relation distribution
difference (D2), for English and Chinese re-
spectively.

• [C3] fEX : The existence of a common entity
pair using the seed entity translations (boolean).
That is, fEX = 1 if |H(rE , rC)| ≥ 1, and
fEX = 0 otherwise.

Additionally, we use the following features to
consider absolute frequencies freq(·) of textual
elements as well because 1) we are more confi-
dent with more evidence and 2) in the comparable
corpora, the equivalent elements are likely to show
similar frequencies.

• fFW,E , fFW,C : S(freq(eE , rE)) and
S(freq(eC , rC)). S(x) is a normalization
function, for which we use a sigmoid function
over a linear transformation of x.

• fFS1 and fFS2:
min(freq(eE , rE), freq(eC , rC))
max(freq(eE , rE), freq(eC , rC))

,

min(freq(rE), freq(rC))
max(freq(rE), freq(rC))

With these features, we measure the similarity
of a pair of couplings as follows.

SCP (rE , rC , eE , eC) =
∏
x

fx(rE , rC , eE , eC)

(1)
By aggregating coupling similarities, we mea-

sure the translation score of two relations:

TLFR (rE , rC) =
∑

(eE ,eC)∈T
SCP (rE , rC , eE , eC)

(2)
where T = {(eE , eC)|TN (eE , eC) ≥ θ} with θ =
0.6, a set of translation pairs obtained in the seeds
or previous iteration such as (Bush,布什).

We normalize the obtained function values for
each English relations using the top-k Chinese
translations. That is, for (rE , rC), we redefine the
score as TLFR (rE , rC)/

∑
i∈[1,k] T

LF
R (rE , r

ranki
C )

where rrankiC is the i-th rank Chinese relation for
rE by Equation 2. We empirically set k = 4.

English LF EF
visit 访问 (visit) 访问 (visit)

support 向...提供 (provide to ...) -

ratify 讨论 (discuss)2 批准 (ratify)

Table 1: Examples of relation translations.

Person Organization
Method P. R. F1 P. R. F1
LF+EF 0.84 0.80 0.82 0.60 0.52 0.56
EF 0.81 0.79 0.80 0.56 0.52 0.54
Seed 0.80 0.77 0.78 0.49 0.44 0.46

PH+SM 0.59 0.59 0.59 0.29 0.29 0.29

Table 2: Entity translation comparison.

3.3 Hybrid Approach LF+EF
We find that LF and EF are complementary. Ta-
ble 1 shows the examples of relations and their
translations. In general, LF can translate more re-
lations (e.g., support and capture). However,
in some cases like ratify, highly related relations
may induce noise. That is, we always讨论 (dis-
cuss) before we 批准 (ratify) something and
hence the temporal behavior of 讨论 (discuss)
is also very similar to that of ratify. On the other
hand, it can be correctly translated using EF.

Thus, we produce the hybrid relation transla-
tion, and we empirically set λ = 0.4:

T LF+EFR (rE , rC) = λT
LF
R (rE , rC)+(1− λ)T EFR (rE , rC)

(3)

4 Evaluation

In this section, we evaluate the proposed approach
on the entity translation task and the relation trans-
lation task. We extract English and Chinese state-
ments from news articles in 2008 by Xinhua news
who publishes news in both English and Chinese,
which were also used by Lee and Hwang (2013).
The number of English articles is 100,746, and
that of Chinese articles is 88,031. As we can see
from the difference in the numbers of the docu-
ments, the news corpora are not direct translations,
but they have asymmetry of entities and relations.

4.1 Entity Translation
In this section, we present experimental settings
and results on translating entities using our pro-
posed approaches. To measure the effectiveness,

2The correct translation批准 (ratify) is ranked second.

851



Methods Precision Recall F1
LF+EF 0.37 0.44 0.40
LF 0.26 0.25 0.26

EF 0.41 0.17 0.24

Table 3: Relation translation comparison.

we use a set of gold standard entity translation
pairs which consist of 221 person entities and 52
organization entities. We measure precision, re-
call, and F1-score based on the returned trans-
lation pairs for each English entity as it is done
in (Lee and Hwang, 2013).

We compare our hybrid approach, which is de-
noted by LF+EF with EF (Lee and Hwang, 2013),
a combined approach PH+SM of phonetic similar-
ity and letter-wise semantic translation for better
accuracy for organizations (Lam et al., 2007), and
the seed translations Seed that we adopt (You et
al., 2012) with PH+SM as a base translation ma-
trix.3 We process one iteration of the entire frame-
work (STEP 1-3) for both LF+EF and EF.

Table 2 shows the comparison of the methods.
Our proposed approach LF+EF shows higher F1-
score than the baselines. In particular, our ap-
proach outperforms EF. For example, ‘Matthew
Emmons’ is a lesser known entity, and we have
only few statements mentioning him in the cor-
pora. The corpus explicit feature EF alone cannot
translate the relation win and, in turn, ‘Matthew
Emmons’. However, LF+EF translates him cor-
rectly into马修·埃蒙斯 through the relation win.

4.2 Relation Translation

This section considers the relation translation task.
Each relation translation method translates an En-
glish relation rE into a list of Chinese relations,
and we check whether a Chinese relation rC with
the highest translation score is the correct transla-
tion. We consider the relation translation is cor-
rect when the semantics are equivalent. For ex-
ample, 去 (leave for/go to) is a correct trans-
lation of leave for, but 离开 (leave) is not. To-
tal 3342 English-Chinese relation translation pairs
returned by our method and the baselines are ran-
domly shown and labeled. Out of 3342 pairs, 399
are labeled as correct.

3Our results leveraging relational temporality outper-
forms the reported results using entity temporality on the
same data set. The two approaches using temporality are or-
thogonal and can be aggregated, which we leave as our future
directions.

Eng. Rel. C1 C1+C2 C1+C2+C3 EF
visit 15 4 1 1

drop 21 14 1 -

capture 6 4 1 -

Table 4: Rank of correct relation translation. The
symbol ‘-’ indicates no correct translation.

Table 3 shows the comparisons of LF, EF
and their hybrid LF+EF. We can clearly see that
LF shows higher recall than EF while EF shows
higher precision. As we emphasized in Sec-
tion 3.3, we can see their complementary property.
Their hybrid LF+EF has both high precision and
recall, thus has the highest F1-score.

Note that the absolute numbers (due to the harsh
evaluation criteria) may look low. But the top
translations are still relevant (e.g., fight is trans-
lated to 驻 (deploy troops)). In addition, the
lower ranked but correct relation translations also
affect entity translation. Therefore, even lower-
performing EF boosted the entity translations, and
in effect, our approach could achieve higher F1-
score in the entity translation task.

To illustrate the detailed effects of the corpus
latent features, Table 4 shows the ranks of correct
Chinese translations for English relations by meth-
ods using selected features for the challenges. For
comparison, the ranks of the correct translations
when using EF are shown. Our approach using
the entity-relation coupling similarity feature for
[C1] alone often cannot find the correct transla-
tions. But using all features removes such noise.

5 Conclusion

This paper studied temporality features for re-
lation equivalence. With the proposed features,
we devised a hybrid approach combining corpus
latent and explicit features with complementary
strength. We empirically showed the effectiveness
of our hybrid approach on relation translation, and
it, in turn, improved entity translation.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the MSIP (The
Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning),
Korea and Microsoft Research, under IT/SW
Creative research program supervised by the
NIPA(National IT Industry Promotion Agency).
(NIPA-2013-H0503-13-1009).

852



References

Jinhan Kim, Long Jiang, Seung-won Hwang, Young-In
Song, and Ming Zhou. 2011. Mining entity trans-
lations from comparable corpora: a holistic graph
mapping approach. In Proc. 20th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM 2011), pages 1295–1304. ACM.

Jinhan Kim, Seung-won Hwang, Long Jiang, Young-
In Song, and Ming Zhou. 2012. Entity translation
mining from comparable corpora: Combining graph
mapping with corpus latent features. In IEEE Trans-
actions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, pages
1787–1800.

Alexandre Klementiev and Dan Roth. 2006. Named
entity transliteration and discovery from multilin-
gual comparable corpora. In Proc. 8th Annual Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (HLT-NAACL
2006), pages 82–88. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Kevin Knight and Jonathan Graehl. 1998. Ma-
chine transliteration. Computational Linguistics,
24(4):599–612, December.

Wai Lam, Shing-Kit Chan, and Ruizhang Huang.
2007. Named entity translation matching and learn-
ing: With application for mining unseen transla-
tions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
25(1), February.

Taesung Lee and Seung-won Hwang. 2013. Bootstrap-
ping entity translation on weakly comparable cor-
pora. In Proc. 51st Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2013). Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Thahir Mohamed, Estevam Hruschka, and Tom
Mitchell. 2011. Discovering relations between
noun categories. In Proc. 2011 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP 2011), pages 1447–1455. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ndapandula Nakashole, Gerhard Weikum, and
Fabian M. Suchanek. 2012. PATTY: A Taxonomy
of Relational Patterns with Semantic Types. In
Proc. 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL
2012). Association for Computational Linguistics.

Stephen Wan and Cornelia Maria Verspoor. 1998.
Automatic English-Chinese name transliteration for
development of multilingual resources. In Proc.
36th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL 1998) and 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
1998), pages 1352–1356. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Gae-won You, Seung-won Hwang, Young-In Song,
Long Jiang, and Zaiqing Nie. 2012. Efficient en-
tity translation mining: A parallelized graph align-
ment approach. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, 30(4):25:1–25:23, November.

Gae-won You, Young-rok Cha, Jinhan Kim, and
Seung-won Hwang. 2013. Enriching entity transla-
tion discovery using selective temporality. In Proc.
51st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL 2013), pages 201–205. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

853


