



















































Web Information Mining and Decision Support Platform for the Modern Service Industry


Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 97–102,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 23-24, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Web Information Mining and Decision Support Platform for the  

Modern Service Industry 
 

Binyang Li
1,2

, Lanjun Zhou
2,3

, Zhongyu Wei
2,3

, Kam-fai Wong
2,3,4

,  

Ruifeng Xu
5
, Yunqing Xia

6
 

 
1
 Dept. of Information Science & Technology, University of International Relations, China 

2
Dept. of Systems Engineering & Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong 

Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong  
3
MoE Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, China 

4
 Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 

5
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China 

6
Department of Computer Science & Technology, TNList, Tsinghua University, China 

{byli,ljzhou,zywei,kfwong}@se.cuhk.edu.hk  

 

 

Abstract 

This demonstration presents an intelligent infor-

mation platform MODEST. MODEST will pro-

vide enterprises with the services of retrieving 

news from websites, extracting commercial in-

formation, exploring customers’ opinions, and 

analyzing collaborative/competitive social net-

works. In this way, enterprises can improve the 

competitive abilities and facilitate potential col-

laboration activities. At the meanwhile, MOD-

EST can also help governments to acquire in-

formation about one single company or the entire 

board timely, and make prompt strategies for 

better support. Currently, MODEST is applied to 

the pillar industries of Hong Kong, including 

innovative finance, modem logistics, information 

technology, etc. 

1 Introduction 

With the rapid development of Web 2.0, the 

amount of information is exploding. There are 

millions of events towards companies and bil-

lions of opinions on products generated every 

day (Liu, 2012). Such enormous information 

cannot only facilitate companies to improve their 

competitive abilities, but also help government to 

make prompt decisions for better support or 

timely monitor, e.g. effective risk management. 

For this reason, there is a growing demand of 

Web information mining and intelligent decision 

support services for the industries. Such services 

are collectively referred as modern service, 

which includes the following requirements: 

(1) To efficiently retrieve relevant information 

from the websites; 

(2) To accurately determine the latest business 

news and trends of the company; 

(3) To identify and analyze customers’ opinions 

towards the company; 

(4) To explore the collaborative and competitive 

relationship with other companies; 

(5) To leverage the knowledge mined from the 

business news and company social network 

for decision support. 

In this demonstration, we will present a Web 

information mining and decision support plat-

form, MODEST
1
. The objective of MODEST is 

to provide modern services for both enterprises 

and government, including collecting Web in-

formation, making deep analysis, and providing 

supporting decision. The innovation of MOD-

EST is focusing on deep analysis which incor-

porates the following functions: 

 Topic detection and tracking function is to 

cluster the hot events and capture the rela-

tionship between the relevant events based on 

the collected data from websites (event also 

referred as topic in this paper). In order to re-

alize this function, Web mining techniques 

are adopted, e.g. topic clustering, heuristics 

algorithms, etc. 

 The second function is to identify and analyze 

customers’ opinions about the company. 

Opinion mining technology (Zhou et al., 2010) 

is adopted to determine the polarity of those 

news, which can help the company timely and 

appropriately adjust the policy to strengthen 

the dominant position or avoid risks. 

                                                           
1 This work is supported by the Innovation and Technology 

Fund of Hong Kong SAR. 

97



 The third function is to explore and analyze 

social network based on the company centric. 

We utilize social network analysis (SNA) 

technology (Xia et al., 2010) to discover the 

relationships, and we further analyze the con-

tent in fine-grained granularity to identify its 

potential partners or competitors.  

With the help of MODEST, the companies can 

acquire modern service-related information, and 

timely adjust corporate policies and marketing 

plan ahead. Hence, the ability of information ac-

quisition and the competitiveness of the enter-

prises can be improved accordingly. 

In this paper, we will use a practical example 

to illustrate our platform and evaluate the per-

formance of main functions.  

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 

Section 2 will introduce the system description 

as well as the main functions implementation. 

The practical case study will be illustrated in 

Section 3. The performance of MODEST will be 

evaluated in Section 4.Finally, this paper will be 

concluded in Section 5. 

2 System Description 

In this section, we first outline the system archi-

tecture of MODEST, and then describe the im-

plementation of the main functionality in detail.  

2.1 Architecture and Workflow 

The MODEST system consists of three modules: 

data acquisition, data analysis, and result display. 

The system architecture is shown in Figure 1. 

 

Figure 1: System architecture. (The module in 

blue is data acquisition, the module in orange is 

data analysis, and the module in light green is 

result display) 

(1) The core technique in the data acquisition 

module is the crawler, which is developed to 

collect raw data from websites, e.g. news portals, 

blogosphere. Then the system parse the raw web 

pages and extract information to store in the local 

database for further processing. 

(2) The data analysis module can be divided into 

two parts:  

 NLP pre-processor: utilizes NLP (natural 

language processing) techniques and some 

toolkits to perform the pre-processing on the 

raw data in (1), including word segmenta-

tion, part-of-speech (POS) tagging
1
, stop-

word removal, and named entity recognition 

(NER)
2
. We then create knowledgebase for 

individual industry, such as domain-specific 

sentiment word lexicon, name entity collec-

tion, and so on. 

 Miner：makes use of data mining techniques 
to realize four functions, topic detection and 

tracking (TDT), multi-document summari-

zation
3

 (MDS), social network analysis 

(SNA), and opinion mining (OM). The re-

sults of data analysis are also stored in the 

database.  

(3) The result display module read out the analy-

sis results from the database and display them to 

users in the form of plain text, charts, figures, as 

well as video. 

2.2 Function Implementation 

Since the innovation of MODEST is focusing on 

the module of data analysis, we will describe its 

main functions in detail, including topic detec-

tion and tracking, opinion mining, and social 

networks analysis. 

2.2.1 Topic Detection and Tracking 

The TDT function targets on detecting and 

tracking the hot topics for each individual com-

pany. Given a period of data collected from web-

sites, there are various discussions about the 

company. In order to extract these topics, clus-

tering methods (Viermetz et al., 2007 and Yoon 

et al., 2009) are implemented to explore the top-

ics. Note that during the period of data collection, 

different topics with respect to the same compa-

ny may have relations. We, therefore, utilize hi-

erarchical clustering methods
4
to capture the po-

tential relations.  

Due to the large amount of data, it is impossi-

ble to view all the topics at a snapshot. MODEST 

utilizes topic tracking technique (Wang et al., 

2008) to identify related stories with a stream of 

                                                           
1 www.ictclas.org 
2http://ir.hit.edu.cn/demo/ltp 
3http://libots.sourceforge.net/ 
4http://dragon.ischool.drexel.edu/ 

Raw

files

Pre-processed

files
Database

Crawler UI

Word

segmentation

Web

NER

Stopword

removal

POS

tagging

NLP pre-processor

TDT OM

MDS SNS

Miner

Data Layer

98



media. It is convenient for the users to see the 

latest information about the company.  

In summary, TDT function provides the ser-

vices of detecting and tracking the latest and 

emergent topics, analyzing the relationships of 

topics on the dynamics of the company. It meets 

the aforementioned demand, “to accurately grasp 

the latest business news and trends of the com-

pany”. 

2.2.2 Opinion Mining 

The objective of OM function is to discover 

opinions towards a company and classify the 

opinions into positive, negative, or neutral. 

The opinion mining function is redesigned 

based on our own opinion mining engine (Zhou 

et al., 2010). It separates opinion identification 

and polarity classification into two stages.  

Given a set of documents that are relevant to 

the company, we first split the documents into 

sentences, and then identify whether the sentence 

is opinionated or not. We extract the features 

shown in Table 1 for opinion identification. 

(Zhou et al., 2010) 

Table 1: Features adopted in the opinionated 

sentence classifier 

Punctuation level features 
The presence of direct quote punctuation "“" and "”"  

The presence of other punctuations: "?" and "!" 

Word-Level and entity-level features 
The presence of known opinion operators 
The percentage of known opinion word in sentence 

Presence of a named entity 

Presence of pronoun 

Presence of known opinion indicators 

Presence of known degree adverbs 

Presence of known conjunctions 

Bi-gram features 

Named entities + opinion operators 

Pronouns + opinion operators 

Nouns or named entities + opinion words 

Pronouns + opinion words 

Opinion words (adjective) + opinion words(noun) 

Degree adverbs + opinion words 

Degree adverbs + opinion operators 

These features are then combined using a ra-

dial basis function (RBF) kernel and a support 

vector machine (SVM) classifier (Drucker et al., 

1997) is trained based on the NTCIR 8training 

data for opinion identification (Kando, 2010). 

For those opinionated sentences, we then clas-

sify them into positive, negative, or neutral. In 

addition to the features shown in Table 1, we 

incorporate features of s-VSM (Sentiment Vector 

Space Model) (Xia et al., 2008) to enhance the 

performance. The principles of the s-VSM are 

listed as follows: (1) Only sentiment-related 

words are used to produce sentiment features for 

the s-VSM. (2) The sentiment words are appro-

priately disambiguated with the neighboring ne-

gations and modifiers. (3) Negations and modifi-

ers are included in the s-VSM to reflect the func-

tions of inversing, strengthening and weakening. 

Sentiment unit is the appropriate element com-

plying with the above principles. (Zhou et al., 

2010) 

In addition to polarity classification, opinion 

holder and target are also recognized in OM 

function for further identifying the relationship 

that two companies have, e.g. collaborative or 

competitive. Both of the dependency parser and 

the semantic role labeling
1
 (SRL) tool are in-

corporated to identify the semantic roles of each 

chunk based on verbs in the sentence. 

The OM function provides the company with 

services of analyzing the social sentimental 

feedback on the dynamics of the company. It 

meets the aforementioned demand, “to identify 

and analyze customers’ opinions towards the 

company”. 

2.2.3 Social Network Analysis  

SNA function aims at producing the commercial 

network of companies that are hidden within the 

articles.  

To achieve this goal, we maintain two lexicons, 

the commercial named entity lexicon and com-

mercial relation lexicon. Commercial named en-

tity are firstly located within the text and then 

recorded in the commercial entity lexicon in the 

pre-processor NER. Commercial relation lexicon 

record the articles/documents that involve the 

commercial relations. Note that the commercial 

relation lexicon (Table 2) is manually compiled. 

In this work, we consider only two general 

commercial relations, namely cooperation and 

competition.  

 

Table 2: Statistics on relation lexicon. 
Type Amount Examples 

Competition 20 挑战(challenge), 竞争

(compete), 对 手
(opponent) 

Collaboration 18 协作(collaborate),协同

(coordinate), 合 作
(cooperate) 

SNA function produces the social network of a 

centric company, which can provide the compa-

                                                           
1http://ir.hit.edu.cn/demo/ltp 

99



ny with the impact analysis and decision-making 

chain tracking. It meets the aforementioned de-

mand, “to explore the collaborative and competi-

tive relationship between companies”. 

3 Practical Example 

In this section, we use a case study to illustrate 

our system and further evaluate the performance 

of the main functions with respect to those com-

panies. Due to the limited space, we just illus-

trate the main functions of topic detection, opin-

ion mining and social network analysis. 

3.1 Topic Detection and Opinion Mining 

Figure 2(a) showed the results of topic detection 

and opinion mining functions for a Hong Kong 

local financial company Sun Hung Kai Proper-

ties (新鴻基地產). On top of the figure are the 
results of topic detection and tracking function. 

Multi-document summary of the latest news is 

provided for the company and more news with 

the similar topics can be found by pressing the 

button “更多” (more). Since there are a lot of 
duplicates of a piece of news on the websites, the 

summary is a direct way to acquire the recent 

news, which can improve the effectiveness of the 

company.  

The results of opinion mining function are 

shown at the bottom of Figure 2(a), where the 

green line indicates negative while the red line 

indicates positive. In order to give a dynamic 

insight of public opinions, we provide the 

amount changes of positive and negative articles 

with time variant. This is very helpful for the 

company to capture the feedback of their mar-

keting policies. As shown in Figure 2(a), there 

were 14 negative articles (負面信息) on Oct. 29, 

2012, which achieved negative peak within the 6 

months. The users would probably read those 14 

articles and adjust the company strategy accord-

ingly.  

3.2 Social Network Analysis 

Figure 2(b) shows the social network based on 

the centric company in yellow, Sun Hung Kai 

Properties (新鴻基地產). We only list the half 
of the connected companies with collaborative 

relationship from Sun Hung Kai Properties, and 

remove the competitive ones due to limited space. 

The thickness of the line indicates the strength of 

the collaboration between the two companies. 

The social network can explore the potential 

partners/competitors of a company. Furthermore, 

users are allowed to adjust the depth and set the 

nodes count of the network. The above analysis 

can provide a richer insight in to a company.  

In the following section, we will make exper-

iments to investigate the performance of the 

above functions.

 

(a) Topic detection and opinion mining of Sun Hung Kai Properties (新鴻基地產). (For convenience, 
we translate the texts on the button in English) 

Opinion Mining 

Topic Detection 

100



 

(b)Social network of Sun Hung Kai Properties (新鴻基地產). (The rectangle in yellow is the centric) 
 

Figure 2: Screenshot of the MODEST system. 

4 Experiment and Result 

In our evaluation, the experiments were made 

based on 17692 articles collected from 52 Hong 

Kong websites during 6 months (1/7/2012~ 

31/12/2012). We investigate the performance of 

MODEST based on the standard metrics pro-

posed by NIST
1
, including precision, recall, and 

F-score. 

Precision (P) is the fraction of detected articles 

(U) that are relevantto the topic (N). 

  
 

 
      

Recall (R) is the fraction of the articles (T) that 

are relevant to the topic that are successfully de-

tected (N). 

  
 

 
      

Usually, there is an inverse relationship be-

tween precision and recall, where it is possible to 

increase one at the cost of reducing the other. 

Therefore, precision and recall scores are not 

discussed in isolation. Instead, F-Score (F) is 

proposed to combine precision and recall, which 

is the harmonic meanof precision and recall. 

  
 

 

 
 
 

 

      
     

   
      

4.1 Topic Detection and Tracking 

We first assess the performance of the topic de-

tection function. The data is divided into 6 parts 

                                                           
1http://trec.nist.gov/ 

according to the time. For different companies, 

the amount of articles vary a lot. Therefore, we 

calculate the metrics for each individual dataset, 

and then compute the weighted mean value. The 

experimental results are shown in Table 3.  

Table 3: Experimental results on topic detection. 

Dataset Recall Precision F-Score 

1/7/12-31/7/12 85.71% 89.52% 85.38% 

1/8/12-31/8/12 93.10% 93.68% 92.49% 

1/9/12-30/9/12 76.50% 83.13% 76.56% 

1/10/12-31/10/12 83.32% 88.53% 85.84% 

1/11/12-30/11/12 86.11% 89.94% 87.98% 

1/12/12-31/12/12 84.26% 87.65% 85.92% 

Average 85.13% 88.78% 85.69% 

From the experimental results, we can find 

that the average F-Score is about 85.69%.The 

dataset in the second row achieves the best per-

formance while the dataset in the third only get 

76.56% in F-Score. It is because that the amount 

of articles is smaller than the others and the re-

call value is very low. As far as we know, the 

best run of topic detection in (Allan et al., 2007) 

achieved 84%. The performance of topic detec-

tion in MODEST is comparable. 

4.2 Opinion Mining 

We then evaluate the performance of opinion 

mining function. We manually annotated 1568 

articles, which is further divided into 8 datasets 

randomly. Precision, recall, and F-score are also 

used as the metrics for the evaluation. The ex-

perimental results are shown in Table 4. 

101



  From Table 4, we can find that the average 

F-Score can reach 74.09%. Note that the opinion 

mining engine of MODEST is the implementa-

tion of (Zhou et al., 2010), which achieved the 

best run in NTCIR. However, the engine is 

trained on NTCIR corpus, which consists of arti-

cles of general domain, while the test set focuses 

on the financial domain. We further train our 

engine on the data from the financial domain and 

the average F-Score improves to over 80%. 

5 Conclusions 

This demonstration presents an intelligent infor-

mation platform designed to mine Web infor-

mation and provide decisions for modern service, 

MODEST. MODEST can provide the services of 

retrieving news from websites, extracting com-

mercial information, exploring customers’ opin-

ions about a given company, and analyzing its 

collaborative/competitive social networks. Both 

enterprises and government are the target cus-

tomers. For enterprise, MODEST can improve 

the competitive abilities and facilitate potential 

collaboration. For government, MODEST can 

collect information about the entire industry, and 

make prompt strategies for better support. 

In this paper, we first introduce the system ar-

chitecture design and the main functions imple-

mentation, including topic detection and tracking, 

opinion mining, and social network analysis. 

Then a case study is given to illustrate the func-

tions of MODEST. In order to evaluate the per-

formance of MODEST, we also conduct the ex-

periments based on the data from 52 Hong Kong 

websites, and the results show the effectiveness 

of the above functions. 

In the future, MODEST will be improved in 

two directions: 

 Extend to other languages, e.g. English, 

Simplified Chinese, etc. 

 Enhance the compatibility to implement 

on mobile device.  

The demo of MODEST and the related 

toolkits can be found on the homepage: 

http://sepc111.se.cuhk.edu.hk:8080/adcom_hk/ 

Acknowledgements 

This research is partially supported by General Re-

search Fund of Hong Kong (417112), Shenzhen Fun-

damental Research Program (JCYJ201304011720464 

50, JCYJ20120613152557576), KTO(TBF1ENG007), 

National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(61203378, 61370165), and Shenzhen International 

Cooperation Funding (GJHZ20120613110641217). 

References: 

James Allan, Jaime Carbonell, George Doddington, 

Jonathan Yamron, and Yiming Yang. 1998. Topic 

Detection and Tracking Pilot Study: Final Report. 

Proceedings of the DARPA Broadcast News Tran-

scription and Understanding Workshop. 

Harris Drucker, Chris J.C. Burges, Linda Kaufman, 

Alex Smola, and Vladimir Vpnik. 1997. Support 

Vector Regression Machines. Proceedings of Ad-

vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 

pp. 155-161. 

Noriko Kando.2010. Overview of the Eighth NTCIR 

Workshop. Proceedings of NTCIR-8 Workshop. 

Bing Liu. 2012. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion 

Mining. Proceedings of Synthesis Lectures on Hu-

man Language Technologies, pp. 1-167. 

Maximilian Viermetz, and Michal Skubacz. 2007. 

Using Topic Discovery to Segment Large Commu-

nication Graphs for Social Network Analysis. Pro-

ceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International 

Conference on Web Intelligence, pp. 95-99. 

Canhui Wang, Min Zhang, Liyun Ru, and Shaoping 

Ma. 2008. Automatic Online News Topic Ranking 

Using Media Focus and User Attention based on 

Aging Theory. Proceedings of the Conference on 

Information and Knowledge Management. 

Yunqing Xia, Nianxing Ji, Weifeng Su, and Yi Liu. 

2010. Mining Commercial Networks from Online 

Financial News. Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-

tional Conference on E-Business Engineering, pp. 

17-23. 

Ruifeng Xu, Kam-fai Wong, and Yunqing Xia. 2008. 

Coarse-Fine Opinion Mining-WIA in NTCIR-7 

MOAT Task. In NTCIR-7 Workshop, pp. 307-313. 

Seok-Ho Yoon, Jung-Hwan Shin, Sang-Wook Kim, 

and Sunju Park. 2009. Extraction of a Latent Blog 

Community based on Subject. Proceeding of the 18
th

 

ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge 

Management, pp. 1529-1532. 

Lanjun Zhou, Yunqing Xia, Binyang Li, and Kam-fai 

Wong. 2010. WIA-Opinmine System in NTCIR-8 

MOAT Evaluation. Proceedings of NTCIR-8 

Workshop Meeting, pp. 286-292. 

Table 4: Experimental results on opinion mining. 

Dataset Size Precision Recall F-Score 

dataset-1 200 76.57% 78.26% 76.57% 

dataset-2 200 83.55% 89.64% 86.07% 

dataset-3 200 69.12% 69.80% 69.44% 

dataset-4 200 77.13% 75.40% 75.67% 

dataset-5 200 76.21% 77.65% 76.74% 

dataset-6 200 63.76% 66.22% 64.49% 

dataset-7 200 78.56% 78.41% 78.43% 

dataset-8 168 65.72% 65.15% 65.32% 

Average 196 73.83% 75.07% 74.09% 

102


