



















































Generating overspecified referring expressions: the role of discrimination


Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Short Papers), pages 76–82,

Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating overspecified referring expressions: the role of discrimination

Ivandré Paraboni, Michelle Reis Galindo, Douglas Iacovelli
School of Arts, Sciences and Humanities (EACH)

University of São Paulo (USP)
Av. Arlindo Bettio, 1000 - São Paulo, Brazil

{ivandre,michelle.galindo,douglas.iacovelli}@usp.br

Abstract

We present an experiment to compare a
standard, minimally distinguishing algo-
rithm for the generation of relational refer-
ring expressions with two alternatives that
produce overspecified descriptions. The
experiment shows that discrimination -
which normally plays a major role in the
disambiguation task - is also a major influ-
ence in referential overspecification, even
though disambiguation is in principle not
relevant.

1 Introduction

In Natural Language Generation (NLG) systems,
Referring Expression Generation (REG) is the
computational task of providing natural language
descriptions of domain entities (Levelt, 1989; Dale
and Reiter, 1995), as in ‘the second street on the
left’, ‘the money that I found in the kitchen’ etc.
In this paper we will focus on the issue of content
selection of relational descriptions, that is, those
in which the intended target is described via an-
other object, hereby called a landmark. Consider
the example of context in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: A simple visual context. All objects are
grey except for obj5, which is red.

Let us consider the goal of uniquely identify-
ing the target obj1 in the context in Fig.1. Since
the target shares most atomic properties (e.g., type,
colour and size) with other distractor objects in the
context (and particularly so with respect to obj4),
using a relational property (near-obj2) may help
prevent ambiguity. The following (a)-(c) are ex-

amples of descriptions of this kind produced from
the above context.

(a)The cone near the box
(b)The cone near the grey box
(c)The cone near the small box

As in example (a), existing REG algorithms will
usually pay regard to the Gricean maxim of quan-
tity (Grice, 1975), and avoid the inclusion of prop-
erties that are not strictly required for disambigua-
tion. In the case of relational reference, this means
that both target and landmark portions of the de-
scription may be left underspecified, and unique-
ness will follow from the fact that they mutually
disambiguate each other (Teixeira et al., 2014). In
other words, example (a) may be considered felic-
itous even though both ‘cone’ and ‘box’ are am-
biguous if interpreted independently.

Minimally distinguishing descriptions as in (a)
are the standard output of many REG algorithms
that handle relational descriptions as in (Dale
and Haddock, 1991; Krahmer and Theune, 2002;
Krahmer et al., 2003). Human speakers, on the
other hand, are largely redundant (Engelhardt et
al., 2006; Arts et al., 2011; Koolen et al., 2011;
Engelhardt et al., 2011), and will often produce so-
called overspecified descriptions as in (b-c) above.

In this paper we will focus on the issue of gener-
ating overspecified relational descriptions as in ex-
amples (b-c), discussing which properties should
be selected by a REG algorithm assuming that the
decision to overspecify has already been made.
More specifically, we will discuss whether the al-
gorithm should include colour as in (b), size as in
(c), or other alternatives, and we will assess the
impact of a referential overspecification strategy
that favours highly discriminatory properties over
preferences that are well-established in the liter-
ature. Although this may in principle seem as a
narrow research topic, the generation of relational
descriptions is still subject of considerable debate
in the field (e.g., (Viethen and Dale, 2011) and

76



the issue of landmark under/full-specification has
a number of known consequences for referential
identification (e.g., (Paraboni and van Deemter,
2014)).

2 Related work

2.1 Relational REG

One of the first REG algorithms to take relations
into account is the work in (Dale and Haddock,
1991), which generates descriptions that may in-
clude relational properties only as a last resort, that
is, only when it is not possible to obtain a uniquely
identifying descriptions by making use of a set of
atomic properties. The algorithm prevents circu-
larity (e.g., ‘the cup on the table that supports a
cup that...’) and avoids the inclusion of redundant
properties with the aid of consistency networks.
As a result, the algorithm favours the generation
of minimally distinguishing relational descriptions
as example (a) in the previous section.

In the Graph algorithm described in (Krahmer et
al., 2003), the referential context is modelled as a
labelled directed graph with vertices representing
domain entities and edges representing properties
that can be either relational (when connecting two
entities) or atomic (when forming self-loops). The
task of obtaining a uniquely identifying descrip-
tion is implemented as a subgraph construction
problem driven by domain-dependent cost func-
tions associated with the decisions made by the al-
gorithm. The work in (Krahmer et al., 2003) does
not make specific assumptions about the actual at-
tribute selection policy, and by varying the cost
functions it is possible to implement a wide range
of referential strategies. The use of the algorithm
for the generation of relational descriptions is dis-
cussed in (Viethen et al., 2013).

The work in (Paraboni et al., 2006) discusses the
issue of ease of search by focussing on the particu-
lar case of relational description in hierarchically-
ordered domains (e.g., books divided into sections
and subsections etc.) Descriptions that may ar-
guably make search difficult, as in ‘the section
that contains a picture’ are prevented by produc-
ing fully-specified descriptions of each individual
object (i.e., picture, section etc.). As in (Dale and
Haddock, 1991), atomic properties are always at-
tempted first, and each target (e.g., a subsection)
holds only one relation (e.g., to its parent section).
Descriptions of this kind are similar to the exam-
ples (b-c) in the previous section. However, hier-

archical structures are highly specialised domains,
and it is less clear to which extent these findings
are applicable to more general situations of ref-
erence as in, e.g., spatial domains (Byron et al.,
2007; dos Santos Silva and Paraboni, 2015).

2.2 Referential overspecification

Assuming that we would like to add a redun-
dant property to overspecify a certain description,
which property should be selected? Research on
REG, cognitive sciences and related fields has in-
vestigated a number of factors that may play a
role in referential overspecification. First of all,
it has been widely observed that some properties
are simply preferred to others. This seems to
be the case, for instance, of the colour attribute.
Colour is ubiquitously found in both redundant
and non-redundant use (Pechmann, 1989), and
empirical evidence suggests that colour is over-
specified more frequently than size (Belke and
Meyer, 2002).

The inherent preference for colour has how-
ever been recently challenged. The work in (van
Gompel et al., 2014), for instance, points out that
when perceptual salience is manipulated so that
a high contrast between target and distractors is
observed, the size attribute may be preferred to
colour. In other words, a highly preferred prop-
erty may not necessarily match the choices made
by human speakers when producing overspecified
descriptions. Results along these lines are also re-
ported in (Tarenskeen et al., 2014).

Redundant and non-redundant uses of colour
(and possibly other preferred properties) may also
be influenced by the difficulty in encoding visual
properties. In (Viethen et al., 2012), for instance,
it is argued that the colour property is more likely
to be selected when it is maximally different from
the other colours in the context. For instance, a red
object is more likely to be described as ‘red’ when
none of the distractors is red, and less so when a
modifier (e.g., ‘light red’) would be required for
disambiguation.

Closer to our present discussion, we notice that
the issue of discrimination as proposed in (Olson,
1970) has been considered by most REG algo-
rithms to date (e.g., (Dale and Reiter, 1995; Krah-
mer and van Deemter, 2012)), and it has even
motivated a number of greedy or minimally dis-
tinguishing REG strategies (Gardent, 2002; Dale,
2002; Areces et al., 2011). Interestingly, the work

77



in (Gatt et al., 2013) has suggested that small dif-
ferences in discriminatory power do not seem to
influence content selection, but large differences
do, a notion that has been applied to the design
of REG algorithms on at least two occasions: in
(de Lucena et al., 2010) properties are selected in
order of preference regardless of their discrimina-
tory power and, if necessary, an additional, highly
discriminatory property is included; in (van Gom-
pel et al., 2012), a fully distinguishing property is
attempted first and, if necessary for disambigua-
tion, further properties are considered based on
both preference and discrimination.

Discrimination clearly plays a major role in the
disambiguation task, but it less clear whether it is
still relevant when disambiguation is not an issue,
that is, in the case of referential overspecification.
The present work is an attempt to shed light on this
particular issue.

3 Current work

Following (Pechmann, 1989) and others, we may
assume that colour should be generally (or perhaps
always) preferred to size. Moreover, as in (Kelle-
her and Kruijff, 2006), we may follow the prin-
ciple of minimal effort (Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986) and assume that atomic properties such as
colour or size should be preferred to relations that
lead to more complex descriptions. In our current
work, however, we will argue that neither needs
to be the case: under the right circumstances, a
wide range of properties - colour, size and even
spatial relations - may be overspecified depend-
ing on their discriminatory power alone. Thus, it
may be the case that size is preferred to colour (un-
like, e.g., (Pechmann, 1989)), and that longer, re-
lational descriptions are preferred to shorter ones
(unlike, e.g., (Kelleher and Kruijff, 2006)).

The possible preference for highly discrimina-
tory properties in referential overspecification is
easily illustrated by the examples in the introduc-
tion section. Following (Pechmann, 1989), one
might assume that, if a speaker decides to over-
specify the landmark portion of description (a),
she may add the colour attribute, as in (b). This
strategy, however, turns out to be far less common
in language use if a more discriminatory property
is available, as in the example. More specifically,
the availability of a highly discriminatory land-
mark property (size-small) makes (c) much more
likely than (b). This observation gives rise to the

following research hypothesis:

h1: Given the goal of overspecifying a
relational description by using an ad-
ditional landmark property p, p should
correspond to the most discriminatory
property available in the context.

The idea that speakers may take discriminatory
power into account when referring is of course not
novel. What is less obvious, however, is that dis-
crimination may also play a significant role in sit-
uations that do not involve ambiguity, as in the
above examples. To illustrate this, let us consider
a basic REG algorithm - hereby called Baseline
- consisting of a relational implementation of an
Incremental-like algorithm as proposed in (Dale
and Reiter, 1995).

Given the goal of producing a uniquely identify-
ing description L of a target object r, the Baseline
algorithm works as follows: first, an atomic de-
scription is attempted by examining a list of pre-
ferred attributes P and by selecting those that help
disambiguate the reference, as in the standard In-
cremental approach (Dale and Reiter, 1995). If the
description is uniquely identifying, the algorithm
terminates. If not, a relational property relating r
to a landmark object o is included in L, and the
algorithm is called recursively to describe o using
an atomic description if possible.

Since Baseline terminates as soon as a uniquely
identifying description is obtained, the landmark
description will be usually left underspecified as in
example (a) in Section 1. This behaviour is consis-
tent with existing relational REG algorithms (e.g.,
(Dale and Haddock, 1991; Krahmer et al., 2003)).

Using the Baseline descriptions as a starting
point, however, we may decide to fully-specify the
landmark description (e.g., in order to facilitate
search, as in (Paraboni and van Deemter, 2014))
by selecting an additional property p from the re-
mainder P list, hereby called P0.

There are of course many ways of defining p. In
corpus-based REG, for instance, a plausible strat-
egy would be to assume that the definition of p
is domain-dependent, and simply select the most
frequent (but still discriminatory) property in P0
as seen in training data. We will call this variation
the Most Frequent overspecification strategy.

Choosing the most frequent property p may
lead to descriptions that closely resemble those
observed in the data. However, we predict that

78



the availability of a highly discriminatory prop-
erty may change this preference. To illustrate this,
we will also consider a Proposal strategy in which
p is taken to be the most discriminatory property
available in P0. In case of a tie, the most fre-
quent property that appears in P0 is selected. If
P0 does not contain any discriminatory properties,
none will be selected and the landmark descrip-
tion will remain underspecified as in the standard
Baseline approach.

The context in the previous Fig.1 and the ac-
companying examples (a-c) in Section 1 illustrate
the expected output of each of the three algorithms
under consideration. As in previous work on re-
lational REG, the Baseline approach would pro-
duce the minimally distinguishing description (a);
the Most Frequent strategy would overspecify the
landmark portion of the description by adding the
preferred property in the relevant domain (e.g.,
colour) as in (b); and the Proposal strategy would
overspecify by adding the highly discriminatory
property (in this particular example, size) as in (c).

The relation between the three algorithms and
our research hypothesis h1 is straightforward. We
would like to show that the predictions made by
Proposal are more accurate than those made by
Baseline and Most Frequent. An experiment to
verify this claim is described in the next section.

4 Experiment

For evaluation purposes we will make use the
Stars2 corpus of referring expressions1. Stars2 is
an obvious choice for our experiment since these
data convey visual scenes in which objects will
usually have one highly discriminatory property
available for reference. Moreover, descriptions in
this domain may convey up to two relations (e.g.,
‘the cone next to the ball, near the cone’), which
gives rise to multiple opportunities for referential
overspecification.

In addition to this, we will also make use of the
subset of relational descriptions available from the
GRE3D3 (Dale and Viethen, 2009) and GRE3D7
(Viethen and Dale, 2011) corpora. Situations of
reference in the GRE3D3/7 domain are in many
ways simpler than those in Stars2 (i.e., by con-
taining at most one possible relation in each scene,
by not presenting any property whose discrimina-
tory power is substantially higher than others etc.),

1Some of the corpus features are described in (Ferreira
and Paraboni, 2014)

but the comparison is still useful since GRE3D3/7
are among the very few annotated relational REG
corpora made publicly available for research pur-
poses, and which have been extensively used in
previous work.

From the three domains - Stars2, GRE3D3 and
GRE3D7 - we selected all instances of relational
descriptions in which the landmark object was de-
scribed by making use of the type attribute and ex-
actly one additional property p. This amounts to
three Reference sets containing 725 descriptions
in total: 367 descriptions from Stars2, 114 from
GRE3D3 and 244 from GRE3D7.

In the situations of reference available from
these domains, the use of p is never necessary for
disambiguation, and p will never be selected by a
standard REG algorithm as the Baseline strategy
described in the previous section. Thus, our goal
is to investigate which overspecification strategy -
Proposal or Most Frequent, cf. previous section -
will select the correct p, and the corresponding im-
pact of this decision on the overall results of each
algorithm.

From the unused portion of each corpus, we es-
timate attribute frequencies to create the prefer-
ence list P required by the algorithms. The fol-
lowing preference orders were obtained:

P (Stars2) ={type, colour, size, near, in-front-of,
right, left, below, above, behind}

P (GRE3D) ={type, colour, size, above, in-front-of,
hpos, vpos, near, right, left}

In the case of the GRE3D3/7 corpora, we no-
tice that not all attributes appear in both data sets.
Moreover, the attributes hpos and vpos were com-
puted from the existing pos attribute, which was
originally intended to model both horizontal and
vertical screen coordinates as a single property in
(Dale and Viethen, 2009).

Each of the three REG strategies - Baseline,
Proposal and Most Frequent - received as an in-
put the 725 situations of reference represented in
the Reference data and the corresponding P list
for each domain. As a result, three sets of output
descriptions were obtained, hereby called System
sets.

Evaluation was carried out by comparing each
System set to the corresponding Reference cor-
pus descriptions and measuring Dice scores (Dice,
1945) and overall accuracy (that is, the number of
exact matches between each System-Reference de-
scription pair).

79



Table 1: Results
Algorithm Baseline Most frequent Proposal

Dice Accuracy Dice Accuracy Dice Accuracy
Dataset mean sdv mean sdv mean sdv mean sdv mean sdv mean sdv
Stars2 0.63 0.14 0.00 0.00 0.62 0.18 0.11 0.31 0.76 0.18 0.27 0.45
GRE3D3 0.81 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.87 0.10 0.25 0.43 0.90 0.09 0.36 0.48
GRE3D7 0.84 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.92 0.10 0.47 0.50 0.89 0.10 0.34 0.48
Overall 0.73 0.15 0.00 0.00 0.76 0.21 0.25 0.43 0.82 0.16 0.31 0.46

5 Results

Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the eval-
uation of our three algorithms - Baseline, Pro-
posal and Most Frequent - applied to each corpus
- Stars2, GRE3D3 and GRE3D7. Best results are
highlighted in boldface.

Following (Gatt and Belz, 2007) and many
others, we compare Dice scores obtained by the
three algorithms applied to the generation of
the selected descriptions of each domain using
Wilcoxon’s signed-rank test. In the Overall evalua-
tion, Proposal outperforms both alternatives. The
difference is significant (W (338)=-34327, Z=-
9.55, p < 0.0001). Highly discriminatory proper-
ties are indeed those that are normally selected by
human speakers when they decide to overspecify a
landmark description. This supports our research
hypothesis h1.

Individual results are as follows. In the
case of the Stars2 domain, Proposal outperforms
both alternatives. The difference is significant
(W (241)=-26639, Z=-12.29, p < 0.0001). In
the case of GRE3D3, once again Proposal out-
performs the alternatives. The difference is also
significant (W (27)=-248, Z=-2.97, p < 0.03). Fi-
nally, in the case of GRE3D7, an effect in the op-
position direction was observed, i.e., the Most Fre-
quent algorithm outperforms the alternatives. The
difference is significant (W (70)=1477, Z=4.32,
p < 0.0001).

The differences across domains are explained
by the proportion of highly discriminatory land-
mark properties in each corpus. In Stars2, the
nearest landmark has at least one highly discrim-
inatory property in all scenes involving relational
reference. In GRE3D3, the nearest landmark has
a highly discriminatory property in 80% of the
scenes, and in GRE3D7 this is the case in only
50% of the scenes. Thus, given the opportu-
nity, the use of a highly discriminatory property
seems to be preferred. The absence of a prop-
erty that ‘stands out’, by contrast, appears to make

the choice among them a matter of preference, an
observation that is consistent with the findings in
(Gatt et al., 2013).

6 Final remarks

This paper has presented a practical REG experi-
ment to illustrate the impact of discrimination on
the generation of overspecified relational descrip-
tions. The experiment shows that discrimination -
which normally plays a major role in the disam-
biguation task - is also a considerable influence
in referential overspecification, that is, even when
discrimination is in principle not an issue. Our
findings correlate with previous empirical work in
the field, and show that discrimination may effec-
tively trump the inherent preference for absolute
properties and for those that are easier to realise
in surface form. For instance, contrary to (Pech-
mann, 1989) and many others, speakers would
generally prefer referring to size as in (b), despite
evidence suggesting that colour is overspecified
more frequently than size. Moreover, contrary to
(Kelleher and Kruijff, 2006), speakers would also
prefer referring to a spatial relation as in (c) even
though the resulting descriptions turns out to be
more complex.

We are aware that the present work has focussed
on extreme situations in which a highly discrimi-
natory property is available for overspecification.
As future work, it is necessary to further this inves-
tigation by taking into account various degrees of
discrimination. As suggested in (Gatt et al., 2013),
the effect of discrimination may be perceived as a
continuum, and in that case a practical REG algo-
rithm should be able to make more complex deci-
sions that those presently implemented.

Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by FAPESP and by
the University of São Paulo.

80



References
C. Areces, S. Figueira, and D. Gorı́n. 2011. Us-

ing logic in the generation of referring expressions.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference
on Logical Aspects of Computational Linguistics
(LACL 2011), pages 17–32, Montpelier. Springer.

A. Arts, A. Maes, L. G. M. Noordman, and C. Jansen.
2011. Overspecification facilitates object identifica-
tion. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(1):361–374.

E. Belke and A. Meyer. 2002. Tracking the time course
of multidimensional stimulus discrimination. Euro-
pean Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 14(2):237–
266.

D. Byron, A. Koller, J. Oberlander, L. Stoia, and
K. Striegnitz. 2007. Generating instructions in vir-
tual environments (GIVE): A challenge and evalua-
tion testbed for NLG. In Workshop on Shared Tasks
and Comparative Evaluation in Natural Language
Generation.

H. Clark and D. Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22:1–39.

R. Dale and N. J. Haddock. 1991. Content determina-
tion in the generation of referring expressions. Com-
putational Intelligence, 7(4):252–265.

R. Dale and E. Reiter. 1995. Computational interpreta-
tions of the Gricean maxims in the generation of re-
ferring expressions. Cognitive Science, 19(2):233–
263.

Robert Dale and Jette Viethen. 2009. Referring ex-
pression generation through attribute-based heuris-
tics. In Proceedings of ENLG-2009, pages 58–65.

Robert Dale. 2002. Cooking up referring expressions.
In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 68–
75.

Diego Jesus de Lucena, Ivandré Paraboni, and
Daniel Bastos Pereira. 2010. From semantic
properties to surface text: The generation of do-
main object descriptions. Inteligencia Artificial.
Revista Iberoamericana de Inteligencia Artificial,
14(45):48–58.

L. R. Dice. 1945. Measures of the amount of ecologic
association between species. Ecology, 26(3):297–
302.

Diego dos Santos Silva and Ivandré Paraboni. 2015.
Generating spatial referring expressions in interac-
tive 3D worlds. Spatial Cognition and Computation.

P. E. Engelhardt, K. Baileyand, and F. Ferreira. 2006.
Do speakers and listeners observe the Gricean
maxim of quantity? Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 54(4):554–573.

P. E. Engelhardt, S. B. Demiral, and Fernanda Ferreira.
2011. Over-specified referring expressions impair
comprehension: An ERP study. Brain and Cogni-
tion, 77(2):304–314.

Thiago Castro Ferreira and Ivandré Paraboni. 2014.
Referring expression generation: taking speakers’
preferences into account. Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence, 8655:539–546.

C. Gardent. 2002. Generating minimal definite de-
scriptions. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 96–103.

Albert Gatt and Anja Belz. 2007. The attribute selec-
tion for GRE challenge: Overview and evaluation
results. In UCNLG+MT: Language Generation and
Machine Translation.

Albert Gatt, E. Krahmer, R. van Gompel, and K. van
Deemter. 2013. Production of referring expres-
sions: Preference trumps discrimination. In 35th
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, pages
483–488.

H. P. Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In Peter
Cole and Jerry L. Morgan, editors, Syntax and se-
mantics, volume 3. New York: Academic Press.

J. D. Kelleher and G. Kruijff. 2006. Incremental gen-
eration of spatial referring expressions in situated di-
alog. In Proceedings of the 21st International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics and 44th An-
nual Meeting of the ACL, pages 1041–1048.

Ruud Koolen, Albert Gatt, Martijn Goudbeek, and
Emiel Krahmer. 2011. Factors causing overspec-
ification in definite descriptions. Journal of Prag-
matics, 43(13):3231–3250.

Emiel Krahmer and Mariet Theune. 2002. Effi-
cient context-sensitive generation of referring ex-
pressions. In Kees van Deemter and Rodger Kibble,
editors, Information Sharing: Reference and Pre-
supposition in Language Generation and Interpre-
tation, pages 223–264. CSLI Publications, Stanford,
CA.

E. Krahmer and Kees van Deemter. 2012. Computa-
tional generation of referring expressions: A survey.
Computational Linguistics, 38(1):173–218.

Emiel Krahmer, Sebastiaan van Erk, and Andre Verleg.
2003. Graph-based generation of referring expres-
sions. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):53–72.

W. Levelt. 1989. Speaking: From intention to articu-
lation. MIT press, Cambridge, Ma.

D. R. Olson. 1970. Language and thought: aspects
of a cognitive theory of semantics. Psychological
Review, 77(4):257–273.

81



Ivandré Paraboni and Kees van Deemter. 2014. Ref-
erence and the facilitation of search in spatial do-
mains. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience,
29(8):1002–1017.

Ivandré Paraboni, Judith Masthoff, and Kees van
Deemter. 2006. Overspecified reference in hierar-
chical domains: measuring the benefits for readers.
In Proc. of INLG-2006, pages 55–62, Sydney.

T. Pechmann. 1989. Incremental speech produc-
tion and referential overspecification. Linguistics,
27(1):98–110.

Sammie Tarenskeen, Mirjam Broersma, and Bart
Geurts. 2014. Referential overspecification: Colour
is not that special. In RefNet Workshop on Psy-
chological and Computational Models of Reference
Comprehension and Production, Edinburgh, Scot-
land.

Caio V. M. Teixeira, Ivandré Paraboni, Adriano S. R.
da Silva, and Alan K. Yamasaki. 2014. Gener-
ating relational descriptions involving mutual dis-
ambiguation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
8403:492–502.

R. van Gompel, Albert Gatt, E. Krahmer, and K. van
Deemter. 2012. PRO: A computational model
of referential overspecification. In Proceedings of
AMLAP-2012.

Roger van Gompel, Albert Gatt, Emiel Krahmer, and
Kees Van Deemter. 2014. Testing computational
models of reference generation as models of human
language production: The case of size contrast. In
RefNet Workshop on Psychological and Computa-
tional Models of Reference Comprehension and Pro-
duction, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Jette Viethen and Robert Dale. 2011. GRE3D7: A cor-
pus of distinguishing descriptions for objects in vi-
sual scenes. In Proceedings of UCNLG+Eval-2011,
pages 12–22.

Jette Viethen, Martijn Goudbeek, and Emiel Krahmer.
2012. The impact of colour difference and colour
codability on reference production. In Proceedings
of CogSci-2012, pages 1084–1098.

Jette Viethen, Margaret Mitchell, and Emiel Krahmer.
2013. Graphs and spatial relations in the generation
of referring expressions. In Proceedings of the 14th
European Workshop on Natural Language Genera-
tion, pages 72–81, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

82


