



















































Deep Questions without Deep Understanding


Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 889–898,

Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Deep Questions without Deep Understanding 

 

Igor Labutov Sumit Basu Lucy Vanderwende 
Cornell University Microsoft Research Microsoft Research 

124 Hoy Road One Microsoft Way One Microsoft Way 

Ithaca, NY Redmond, WA Redmond, WA 

iil4@cornell.edu sumitb@microsoft.com lucyv@microsoft.com 

 
 

 

Abstract 

We develop an approach for generating 

deep (i.e, high-level) comprehension 

questions from novel text that bypasses 

the myriad challenges of creating a full se-

mantic representation. We do this by de-

composing the task into an ontology-

crowd-relevance workflow, consisting of 

first representing the original text in a 

low-dimensional ontology, then crowd-

sourcing candidate question templates 

aligned with that space, and finally rank-

ing potentially relevant templates for a 

novel region of text. If ontological labels 

are not available, we infer them from the 

text. We demonstrate the effectiveness of 

this method on a corpus of articles from 

Wikipedia alongside human judgments, 

and find that we can generate relevant 

deep questions with a precision of over 

85% while maintaining a recall of 70%. 

1 Introduction 

Questions are a fundamental tool for teachers in 

assessing the understanding of their students. 

Writing good questions, though, is hard work, and 

harder still when the questions need to be deep 

(i.e., high-level) rather than factoid-oriented. 

These deep questions are the sort of open-ended 

queries that require deep thinking and recall rather 

than a rote response, that span significant amounts 

of content rather than a single sentence. Unsur-

prisingly, it is these deep questions that have the 

greatest educational value (Anderson, 1975; An-

dre, 1979; McMillan, 2001). They are thus a key 

assessment mechanism for a spectrum of online 

educational options, from MOOCs to interactive 

tutoring systems. As such, the problem of auto-

matic question generation has long been of inter-

est to the online education community (Mitkov 

and Ha, 2003; Schwartz, 2004), both as a means 

of providing self-assessments directly to students 

and as a tool to help teachers with question author-

ing. Much work to date has focused on questions 

based on a single sentence of the text (Becker et 

al., 2012; Lindberg et al., 2013; Mazidi and Niel-

sen, 2014), and the ideal of creating deep, concep-

tual questions has remained elusive. In this work, 

we hope to take a significant step towards this 

challenge by approaching the problem in a some-

what unconventional way. 

 

Figure 1: Overview of our ontology-crowd-rele-

vance approach. 

While one might expect the natural path to gener-

ating deep questions to involve first extracting a 

semantic representation of the entire text, the 

state-of-the-art in this area is at too early a stage 

to achieve such a representation effectively. Ra-

ther we take a step back from full understanding, 

and instead propose an ontology-crowd-relevance 

workflow for generating high-level questions, 

shown in Figure 1. This involves 1) decomposing 

a text into a meaningful, intermediate, low-dimen-

sional ontology, 2) soliciting high-level templates 

from the crowd, aligned with this intermediate 

representation, and 3) for a target text segment, re-

trieving a subset of the collected templates based 

889



on its ontological categories and then ranking 

these questions by estimating the relevance of 

each to the text at hand. 

In this work, we apply the proposed workflow 

to the Wikipedia corpus. For our ontology, we use 

a Cartesian product of article categories (derived 

from Freebase) and article section names (directly 

from Wikipedia) as the intermediate representa-

tion (e.g. category: Person, section: Early life), 

henceforth referred to as category-section pairs. 

We use these pairs to prompt our crowd workers 

to create relevant templates; for instance, (Person, 

Early Life) might lead a worker to generate the 

question “Who were the key influences on <Per-

son> in their childhood?”, a good example of the 

sort of deep question that can’t be answered from 

a single sentence in the article. We also develop 

classifiers for inferring these categories when ex-

plicit or matching labels are not available. Given 

a database of such category-section-specific ques-

tion templates, we then train a binary classifier 

that can estimate the relevance of each to a new 

document. We hypothesize that the resulting 

ranked questions will be both high-level and rele-

vant, without requiring full machine understand-

ing of the text – in other words, deep questions 

without deep understanding. 

In the sections that follow, we detail the various 

components of this method and describe the ex-

periments showing their efficacy at generating 

high-quality questions. We begin by motivating 

our choice of ontology and demonstrating its cov-

erage properties (Section 3). We then describe our 

crowdsourcing methodology for soliciting ques-

tions and question-article relevance judgments 

(Section 4), and outline our model for determining 

the relevance of these questions to new text (Sec-

tion 5). After this we describe the two datasets that 

we construct for the evaluation of our approach 

and present quantitative results (Section 6) as well 

as examples of our output and an error analysis 

(Section 7) before concluding (Section 8). 

2 Related Work 

We consider three aspects of past research in au-

tomatic question generation: work that focuses on 

the grammaticality of natural language question 

generation, work that focuses on the semantic 

quality of generated questions, i.e. the “what to 

ask about” rather than “how to ask it,” and finally 

work that builds a semantic representation of text 

in order to generate higher-level questions. 

Approaches focusing on the grammaticality of 

question generation date back to the AU-

TOQUEST system (Wolfe, 1976), which exam-

ined the generation of Wh-questions from single 

sentences. Later systems addressing the same goal 

include methods that use transformation rules 

(Mitkov and Ha, 2003), template-based genera-

tion (Chen et al., 2009; Curto et al., 2011) and 

overgenerate-and-rank methods (Heilman and 

Smith, 2010a).  Another approach has been to cre-

ate fill-in-the-blank questions from single sen-

tences to ensure grammaticality (Agarwal et al. 

2011, Becker et al. 2012). 

More relevant to our direction is work on the 

semantic aspect of question generation, which has 

become a more active research area in the past 

several years. Several authors (Mazidi and Niel-

sen 2014; Linberg et al. 2013) generate questions 

according to the semantic role patterns extracted 

from the source sentence. Becker et al. (2012) also 

leverage semantic role labeling within a sentence 

in a supervised setting. We hope to continue in 

this direction of semantic focus, but extend the ca-

pabilities of question generation to include open-

ended questions that go far beyond the scope of a 

single sentence. 

Other work has taken on the challenge of 

deeper questions by attempting to build a seman-

tic representation of arbitrary text. This has in-

cluded work using concept maps over keywords 

(Olney et al. 2012) and minimal recursion seman-

tics (Yao 2010) to reason over concepts in the text. 

While the work of (Olney et al. 2012) is impres-

sive in its possibilities, the range of the types of 

questions that can be generated is restricted by a 

relatively specific set of relations (e.g. Is-A, Part-

Of) captured in the ontology of the domain (biol-

ogy textbook). Mannem et al. (2010) observe as 

we have that "capturing the exact true meaning of 

a paragraph is beyond the reach of current NLP 

systems;" thus, in their system for Shared Task A 

(for paragraph-level questions (Rus et al. 2010)) 

they make use of predicate argument structures 

along with semantic role labeling. However, the 

generation of these questions is restricted to the 

first sentence of the paragraph. Though motivated 

by the same noble impulses of these authors to 

achieve higher-level questions, our hope is that we 

can bypass the challenges and constraints of se-

mantic parsing and generate deep questions via a 

more holistic approach.  

890



3 An Ontology of Categories and Sec-
tions 

The key insight of our approach is that we can lev-

erage an easily interpretable (for crowd workers), 

low-dimensional ontology for text segments in or-

der to crowdsource a set of high-level, reusable 

templates that generalize well to many docu-

ments. The choice of this representation must 

strike a balance between domain coverage and the 

crowdsourcing effort required to obtain that cov-

erage. Inasmuch as Wikipedia is deemed to have 

broad coverage of human knowledge, we can es-

timate domain coverage by measuring what frac-

tion of that corpus is covered by the proposed rep-

resentation. In our work, we have developed a cat-

egory-section ontology using annotations from 

Freebase and Wikipedia (English), and now de-

scribe its structure and coverage in detail.  

For the high-level categories, we make use of 

the Freebase “notable type” for each Wikipedia 

article. In contrast to the noisy default Wikipedia 

categories, the Freebase “notable types” provide a 

clean high-level encapsulation of the topic or en-

tity discussed in a Wikipedia article. As we wish 

to maximize coverage, we compute the histogram 

by type and take the 300 most common ones 

across Wikipedia. We further merge these into 

eight broad categories to reduce crowdsourcing 

effort: Person, Location, Event, Organization, 

Art, Science, Health, and Religion. These eight 

categories cover 78% of Wikipedia articles (see 

Figure 2a); the mapping between Freebase types 

and our categories will be made available as part 

of our corpus (see Section 8). 

 To achieve greater specificity of questions 

within the articles, we make use of Wikipedia sec-

tions, which offer a high-level segmentation of the 

content. The Cartesian product of our categories 

from above and the most common Wikipedia sec-

tion titles (per category) then yield an interpreta-

ble, low-dimensional representation of the article. 

For instance, the set of category-section pairs for 

an article about Albert Einstein contains (Person, 

Early_life), (Person, Awards), and (Person, Polit-

ical_views) as well as several others.  

For each category, the section titles that occur 

most frequently represent central themes in arti-

cles belonging to that category. We therefore hy-

pothesize that question templates authored for 

such high-coverage titles are likely to generalize 

to a large number of articles in that category. Ta-

ble 1 below shows the four most frequent sections 

for each of our eight categories.  
 

Person Location Organiza-

tion 

Art 

Early life History History Plot 

Career Geography Geography Reception 

Pers. life Economy Academics History 

Biography Demo-

graphics 

Demo-

graphics 

Production 

 

Science Event Health Religion 

Descript. Background Treatment Etymology 

Taxonomy Aftermath Diagnosis Icongraphy 

History Battle Causes Worship 

Distributn. Prelude History Mythology 

 

Table 1: Most frequent section titles by category. 

As the crowdsourcing effort is directly propor-

tional to the size of the ontology, our goal is to 

select the smallest set of pairs that will provide 

sufficient coverage. As with categories, the cut-

 

Figure 2: Coverage properties of our category-section representation: (a) fraction of  Wikipedia 

articles covered by the top j most common Freebase types, grouped by our eight higher-level 

categories. (b) Average fraction of sections covered per document if only the top k most frequent 

sections are used; each line represents one of our eight categories. 

891



off for the number of sections used for each cate-

gory is guided by the trade-off between coverage 

and crowdsourcing costs. Figure 2b plots the av-

erage fraction of an article covered by the top k 

sections from each category. We found that the 

top 50 sections cover 30% to 55% of the sections 

of an individual article (on average) across our 

categories. This implies that by only crowdsourc-

ing question templates for those 50 sections per 

category, we would be able to ask questions about 

a third to a half of the sections of any article.  

Of course, if we were to limit ourselves to only 

segments with these labels at runtime, we would 

completely miss many articles as well as texts out-

side of Wikipedia. To extend our reach, we also 

develop the means for category and section infer-

ence from raw text in Section 5 below, for cases 

in which ontological labels are either not available 

or are not contained within our limited set. 

4 Crowdsourcing Methodology 

We designed a two-stage crowdsourcing pipeline 

to 1) collect templates targeted to a set of cate-

gory-section pairs and 2) obtain binary relevance 

judgments for the generated templates in relation 

to a set of article segments (for Wikipedia, these 

are simply sections) that match in category-sec-

tion labels. We recruit Mechanical Turk workers 

for both stages of the pipeline, filtering for work-

ers from the United States due to native English 

proficiency. A total of 307 unique workers partic-

ipated in the two tasks combined (78 and 229 

workers for the generation and ratings tasks re-

spectively). 
 

 

Figure 3: Prompt for the generation task for the 

category-section pair (Person, Legacy). 

4.1 Question generation task 

Following the coverage analysis above, we select 

the 50 most frequent sections for the top two cat-

egories, Person and Location, yielding 100 cate-

gory-section pairs. As these two categories cover 

nearly 50% of all articles on Wikipedia, we be-

lieve that they suffice in demonstrating the effec-

tiveness of the proposed methodology. For each 

category-section pair, we instructed 10 (median) 

workers to generate a question regarding a hypo-

thetical entity belonging to the target with the 

prompt in Figure 3. Additional instructions and an 

interactive tutorial were pre-administered, guid-

ing the workers to formulate appropriately deep 

questions, i.e. questions that are likely to general-

ize to many articles, while avoiding factoid ques-

tions like “When was X born?”  

In total, 995 question templates were added to 

our question database using this methodology 

(only 0.5% of all generated questions were exact 

repeats of existing questions). We confirm in sec-

tion 4.2 that workers were able to formulate deep, 

interesting and relevant questions whose answers 

spanned more than a single sentence and that gen-

eralized to many articles using this prompt.  

In earlier pilots, we tried an alternative prompt 

which also presented the text of a specific article 

segment. In Figure 4, we show the average scope 

and relevance of questions generated by workers 

under both prompt conditions. As the figure 

demonstrates, the alternative prompt showing 

specific article text resulted in questions that gen-

eralized less well (workers’ questions were found 

to be relevant to fewer articles), likely because the 

details in the text distracted the workers from 

thinking broadly about the domain. These ques-

tions also had a smaller scope on average, i.e., an-

swers to these questions were contained in shorter 

spans in the text. The differences in scope and rel-

evance between the two prompt designs were both 

significant (p-values: 0.006 and 4.5e-11 respec-

tively, via two-sided Welch’s t-tests). 

 

 

Figure 4: Average relevance and scope of 

worker-generated questions versus how the 

workers were prompted. 

892



4.2 Question relevance rating task 

For our 100 category-section pairs, 4 (median) ar-

ticle segments within reasonable length for a Me-

chanical Turk task (200-1000 tokens) were drawn 

at random from the Wikipedia corpus; this re-

sulted in a set of 513 article segments. Each 

worker was then presented with one of these seg-

ments alongside at most 10 questions from the 

question template database matching in category-

section; templates were converted into questions 

by filling in the article-specific entity extracted 

from the title. Workers were requested to rate each 

question along three dimensions: relevance, qual-

ity, and scope, as detailed below. Quality and 

scope ratings were only requested when the 

worker determined the question to be relevant.  
 

 Relevance: 1 (not relevant) – 4 (relevant) 
  Does the article answer the question? 

 Quality: 1 (poor) – 4 (excellent) 
  Is this question well-written? 

 Scope: 1 (single-sentence) – 4 (multi-sen-
tence/paragraph) 

  How long is the answer to this question? 
 

A median of 3 raters provided an independent 

judgment for each question-article pair. The mean 

relevance, quality and scope ratings across the 995 

questions were 2.3 (sd=0.83), 3.5 (sd=.65) and 2.6 

(sd=1.0) respectively. Note that the sample sizes 

for scope and quality were smaller, 774 and 778 

respectively, as quality/scope judgments were not 

gathered for questions deemed irrelevant. We note 

that 80% of the relevant crowd-sourced questions 

had a median scope rating larger than 1 sentence, 

and 23% had a median scope rating of 4, defined 

as “the answer to this question can be found in 

many sentences and paragraphs,” corresponding 

to the maximum attainable scope rating. Note that 

while in this work, we have only used the scope 

judgments to report summary statistics about the 

generated questions, in future work these ratings 

could be used to build a scope classifier to filter 

out questions targeting short spans of text. 

As described in Section 5.2, the relevance judg-

ments are converted to binary relevance ratings 

for training the relevance classifier (we consider 

relevance ratings {1, 2} as “not relevant” and {3, 

4} as “relevant”). In terms of agreement between 

raters for these binary relevance labels, we ob-

tained a Fleiss’ Kappa of 0.33, indicating fair 

agreement.  

5 Model 

There are two key models to our system: the first 

is for category and section inference of a novel ar-

ticle segment, which allows us to infer the keys to 

our question database when explicit labels are not 

available. The second is for question relevance 

prediction, which lets us decide which question 

templates from the database’s store for that cate-

gory-section actually apply to the text at hand.  

5.1 Category/section inference 

Both category and section inference were cast as 

standard text-classification problems. Category 

inference is performed on the whole article, while 

section inference is performed on the individual 

article segments (i.e., sections). We trained indi-

vidual logistic regression classifiers for the eight 

categories and the 50 top section types for each 

one (a total of 400) using the default L2 regulari-

zation parameter in LIBLINEAR (Fan, 2008). For 

section inference, a total of 736,947 article seg-

ments were sampled from Wikipedia (June 2014 

snapshot), each belonging to one of the 400 sec-

tion types and within the same length bounds from 

Section 4.2 (200-1000 tokens). For category infer-

ence, we sampled a total of 86,348 articles with at 

least 10 sentences and belonging to one of our 

eight categories.  

In both cases, a binary dataset was constructed 

for a one-against-all evaluation, where the nega-

tive instances were sampled randomly from the 

negative categories or sections (there was an av-

erage 17% and 32% positive skew in the section 

and category datasets, respectively). Basic tf-idf 

features (using a vocabulary of 200,000 after 

eliminating stopwords) were used in both text 

classification tasks. Applying the category/section 

inference to held-out portions of the dataset (30% 

for each category/section) resulted in balanced ac-

curacies of 83%/95% respectively, which gave us 

confidence in the inference. Keep in mind that this 

is not a strict bound on our question generation 

performance, since the inferred category/section, 

while not matching the label perfectly, could still 

be sufficiently close to produce relevant questions 

(for instance, we could misrecognize “Childhood” 

as “Early Life”). We explore the ramifications of 

this in our end-to-end experiments in Section 6. 

5.2 Relevance Classification 

We also cast the problem of question/article rele-

vance prediction as one of binary classification, 

where we map a question-article pair to a rele-

vance score; as such our features had to combine 

893



aspects of both the question and the article. Our 

core approach was to use a vector of the compo-

nent-wise Euclidean distances between individual 

features of the question and article segment, i.e., 

the ith feature vector component 𝑓𝑖  is given by 
𝑓𝑖 = (𝑞𝑖 − 𝑎𝑖)

2, where 𝑞𝑖  and 𝑎𝑖  are the compo-
nents of the question and article feature vectors. 

For the feature representation, we utilized a con-

catenation of continuous embedding features: 300 

features from a Word2Vec embedding (Mikolov, 

2013) and 200,000 tfidf features (as with cate-

gory/section classification above).  

As question templates are typically short, 

though, we found that this representation alone 

performed poorly. As a result, we augmented the 

vector by concatenating additional distance fea-

tures between the target article segment and one 

specific instance of an entire article for which the 

question applied. This augmenting article was se-

lected at random from all those for which the tem-

plate was judged to be relevant. The resulting fea-

ture vector was thus doubled in length, where the 

first 𝑘 distances were between the question tem-
plate and the target segment, and the next 𝑘 were 
between the augmenting article and the target seg-

ment. Note that the augmenting article segments 

were removed from the training/test sets. 

To train this classifier, we assumed that we 

would be able to acquire at least 𝑛 positive rele-
vance labels for each question template, i.e., 𝑛 ar-
ticle segments judged to be relevant to each tem-

plate for inclusion in the training set. We explore 

the effect of increasing values of 𝑛, from 0 (where 
no relevance labels are available) to 3 (referred to 

as conditions T0..T3 in Figure 5). We then trained 

and evaluated the relevance classifier, a single lo-

gistic regression model using LIBLINEAR with 

default L2 regularization, using 10-fold cross-val-

idation on DATASET I (see Section 6).  

Figure 5 depicts a series of ROC curves sum-

marizing the performance of our template rele-

vance classifier on unseen article segments. As 

expected, we see increasing performance with in-

creasing 𝑛. However, the benefit drops off after 3 
instances (i.e., T4 is only marginally better than 

T3). While the character of the curves is modest, 

keep in mind we are already filtering questions by 

retrieving them from the database for the inferred 

category-section (which by itself gives us a preci-

sion of .74 – see green bars in Figure 6); this ROC 

represents the “lift” achieved by further filtering 

the questions with our relevance classifier, result-

ing in far higher precision (.85 to .95 – see blue 

bars in Figure 6).  

 

Figure 5: ROC curves for the task of question-to-

article relevance prediction. Tn means that n pos-

itively labeled article segments were available 

for each question template during training. 

6 Experiments and Results 

In this section, we describe the datasets used for 

training the relevance classifier in Section 5.2 

(DATASET I) as well as for end-to-end perfor-

mance on unlabeled text segments (DATASET II). 

We then evaluate the performance on this second 

dataset under three settings: first, when the cate-

gory and section are known, second, when those 

labels are unavailable, and third, when neither the 

labels nor the relevance classifier are available. 

6.1 DATASET I: for the Relevance Classifier 

The first dataset (DATASET I) was intended for 

training and evaluating the relevance classifier, 

and for this we assumed the category and section 

labels were known. As such, judgments were col-

lected only for questions templates authored for a 

given article’s actual category and section labels. 

After filtering out annotations from unreliable 

workers (based on their pre-test results) as well as 

those with inter-annotator agreement below 60%, 

we were left with a set of 995 rated questions, 

spanning across two categories (Person and Loca-

tion) and 50 sections per category (100 category-

section pairs total). This corresponded to a total of 

4439 relevance tuples (label, question, article) 

where label is a binary relevance rating aggre-

gated via majority vote across multiple raters. The 

relevance labels were skewed towards the positive 

(relevant) class with 63% relevant instances. 

This is of course a mostly unrealistic data set-

ting for applications of question generation 

(known category and section labels), but greatly 

894



useful in developing and evaluating the relevance 

classifier; we thus used this dataset only for that 

purpose (see Section 5.2 and Figure 5). 

6.2 DATASET II: for End-to-End Evaluation 

For an end-to-end evaluation we need to examine 

situations where the category and section labels 

are not available and we must rely on inference 

instead. As this is the more typical use case for our 

method, it is critical to understand how the perfor-

mance will be affected. For DATASET II, then, we 

first sampled articles from the Wikipedia corpus 

at random (satisfying the constraints described in 

Section 3) and then performed category and sec-

tion inference on the article segments. The cate-

gory c with the highest posterior probability was 

chosen as the inferred category, while all section 

types 𝑠𝑖 with a posterior probability greater than 
0.6 were considered as sources for templates. 

Only articles whose inferred category was Person 

or Location were considered, but given the noise 

in inference there was no guarantee that the true 

labels were of these categories. We continued this 

process until we retrieved a total of 12 articles. For 

each article segment in these 12, we drew a ran-

dom subset of at most 20 question templates from 

our database matching the inferred category and 

section(s), then ordered them by their estimated 

relevance for presentation to judges.  

We then solicited an additional 62 Mechanical 

Turk workers to a rating task set up according to 

the same protocol as for DATASET I. After aggre-

gation and filtering in the same way, the second 

dataset contained a total 256 (label, question, ar-

ticle) relevance tuples, skewed towards the posi-

tive class with 72% relevant instances. 

6.3 Information Retrieval–based Evaluation 

As our end-to-end task is framed as the retrieval 

of a set of relevant questions for a given article 

segment, we can measure performance in terms of 

an information retrieval-based metric. Consider a 

user who supplies an article segment (the “query” 

in IR terms) for which she wants to generate a 

quiz: the system then presents a ranked list of re-

trieved questions, ordered according to their esti-

mated relevance to the article. As she makes her 

way down this ranked list of questions, adding a 

question at a time to the quiz (set Q), the behavior 

of the precision and recall (with respect to rele-

vance to the article segment) of the questions in 

Q, summarizes the performance of the retrieval 

system (i.e. the Precision-Recall (PR) curve 

(Manning, 2008)). We summarize the perfor-

mance of our system by averaging the individual 

article segments’ PR curves (linearly interpolated) 

from DATASET II, and present the average preci-

sion over bins of recall values in Figure 6. We 

consider the following experimental conditions: 
 

 Known category/section, using relevance 
classifier (red): This is the case in which the 

actual category and section labels of the query 

article are known, and only the questions that 

match exactly in category and section are con-

sidered for relevance classification (i.e. added 

to Q if found relevant by the classifier). Recall 

is computed with respect to the total number 

of relevant questions in DATASET II, including 

those corresponding to sections different from 

the section label of the article. 

 Inferred category/section, using relevance 
classifier (blue): This is the expected use 

case, where the category/section labels are not 

known. Questions matching in category and 

section(s) to the inferred category and section 

of each article are considered and ranked in Q 

by their score from the relevance classifier. 

Recall is computed with respect to the total 

number of relevant questions in DATASET II. 

 Inferred category/section, ignoring rele-
vance classifier (green): This is a baseline 

where we only use category/section inference 

and then retrieve questions from the database 

without filtering: all questions that match in 

inferred category and section(s) of the article 

are added to Q in a random ranking order, 

without performing relevance classification.  
 

As we examine Figure 6, it is important to point 

out a subtlety in our choice to calculate recall of 

the known category/section condition (red bars) 

with respect to the set of all relevant questions, 

including those that are matched to sections dif-

ferent from the original (labeled) sections. While 

this condition by construction does not have ac-

cess to questions of any other section, the result-

ing limitation in recall underlines the importance 

of performing section inference: without infer-

ence, we achieve a recall of no greater than 0.4.  

As we had hypothesized, while the labels of the 

sections play an instrumental role in instructing 

the crowd to generate relevant questions, the re-

sulting questions often tend to be relevant to con-

tent found under different but semantically related 

sections as well. Leveraging the available ques-

tions of these related sections (by performing in-

ference) boosts recall at the expense of only a 

small degree of precision (blue bars). If we forgo 

relevance classification entirely, we get a constant 

precision of 0.74 (green bars) as mentioned in 

895



Section 5.2; it is clear that the relevance classifier 

results in a significant advantage. 

While there is a slight drop in precision when 

using inference, this is at least partly due to the 

constraints that were imposed during data-collec-

tion and relevance classifier training, i.e., all pairs 

of articles and questions belonged to the same cat-

egory and section. While this constraint made the 

crowdsourcing methodology proposed in this 

work tractable, it also prevented the inclusion of 

training examples for sections that could poten-

tially be inferred at test time. One possible ap-

proach to remedy this would be sample from arti-

cle segments that are similar in text (in terms of 

our distance metric) as opposed to only segments 

exactly matching in category and section. 

 

 Figure 6: Precision-recall results for the end-to-

end experiment, grouped in bins of recall ranges. 

7 Examples and Error Analysis  

In Table 2 we show a set of sample retrieved ques-

tions and the corresponding correctness of the rel-

evance classifier’s decision with respect to the 

judgment labels; examining the errors yields some 

interesting insights. Consider the false positive 

example shown in row 8, where the category cor-

rectly inferred as Location, but section title was 

inferred as Transportation instead of Services. 

This mismatch resulted in the following template 

authored for (Location, Transportation) being re-

trieved: "What geographic factors influence the 

preferred transport methods in <entity>?" To the 

relevance classifier, this particular template (con-

taining the word “transport”) appears to be rele-

vant on the surface level to the text of an article 

segment about schedules (Services) at a railway 

station. However, as this template never appeared 

to judges in the context of a Services segment – a 

section that differs considerably in theme from the 

inferred section (Transportation) – the relevance 

classifier unsurprisingly makes the wrong call. 
 

True 

section 

Inferred 

section 

Re-

sult 

Generated  

Question 

Hon-

ours 

Later 

Life 
TP 

What accomplishments 

characterized the later ca-

reer of Colin Cowdrey? 

Acting 

Career 

Televi-

sion 
TP 

How did Corbin Bern-

stein’s television career 

evolve over time? 

Route 

De-

scrip-

tion 

Geogra-

phy 
TP 

What are some unique ge-

ographic features of 

Puerto Rico Highway 10? 

Athlet-

ics 
Athletics TN 

How much significance do 

people of DeMartha Cath-

olic High School place on 

athletics? 

Route 

De-

scrip-

tion 

Geogra-

phy 
TN 

How does the geography 

of Puerto Rico Highway 

10 impact its resources? 

Work 
Recep-

tion 
FN 

What type of reaction did 

Thornton Dial receive? 

Acting 

Career 

Later  

Career 
FP 

What were the most im-

portant events in the later 

career of Corbin Berstein? 

Ser-

vices 

Transpor-

tation 
FP 

What geographic factors 

influence the preferred 

transport methods in Wey-

mouth Railway Station? 

Later 

Career 
Legacy FP 

How has Freddy Mitch-

ell’s legacy shaped current 

events? 

Table 2: Examples of retrieved questions. TP, TN, 

FP, FN stand for true/false positive/negative with 

respect to the relevance classification. 

In considering additional sources of relevance 

classification errors, recall that we employ a sin-

gle relevant article segment for the purpose of 

augmenting a template’s feature representation. In 

the case of the false negative example (row 6 in 

Table 2), the sensitivity of the classifier to the par-

ticular augmenting article used is apparent. Upon 

inspecting the target article segment (article: 

Thornton Dial, section: Work), and the augment-

ing article segment (article: Syed Masood, section: 

Reception), it’s clear that the inferred section Re-

ception is a reasonable title for the Work section 

of the article on Thornton Dial, making the ques-

tion “What type of reaction did Thornton Dial re-

ceive?” a relevant question to the target article (as 

reflected in the human judgment). However, alt-

hough both segments generally talk about “recep-

tion,” the language across the two segments is dis-

tinct: the critical reception of Thornton Dial the 

visual artist is described in a different way from 

the reception of Syed Masood the actor, resulting 

in little overlap in surface text, and as a result the 

relevance classifier falsely rejects the question.  

896



Reasonable substitutions for inferred sections 

can also lead to false positives, as in row 9, for the 

article Freddy Mitchell. In this case, while Legacy 

(the inferred section) is a believable substitute for 

the true label of Later Career, in this case the ar-

ticle segment did not discuss his legacy. However, 

there was a good match between the augmenting 

article for this template and the section. We hy-

pothesize that in both this and the previous exam-

ples a broader sample of augmenting article seg-

ments for each category/section is likely to be ef-

fective at mitigating these types of errors.  

8 Conclusion 

We have presented an approach for generating rel-

evant, deep questions that are broad in scope and 

apply to a wide range of documents, all without 

constructing a detailed semantic representation of 

the text. Our three primary contributions are 1) 

our insight that a low-dimensional ontological 

document representation can be used as an inter-

mediary for retrieving and generalizing high-level 

question templates to new documents, 2) an effi-

cient crowdsourcing scheme for soliciting such 

templates and relevance judgments (of templates 

to article) from the crowd in order to train a rele-

vance classification model, and 3) using cate-

gory/section inference and relevance prediction to 

retrieve and rank relevant deep questions for new 

text segments. Note that the approach and work-

flow presented here constitute a general frame-

work that could potentially be useful in other lan-

guage generation applications. For example, a 

similar setup could be used for high-level summa-

rization, where question templates would be re-

placed with “summary snippets.”  

Finally, to encourage the community to further 

explore this approach as well as to compare it with 

others, we are releasing all of our data (category 

mappings, generated templates, and relevance 

judgments) at http://research.microsoft.com/~su-

mitb/questiongeneration . 

References 

Manish Agarwal, Rakshit Shah, and Prashanth Man-

nem. 2011. Automatic Question Generation Using 

Discourse Cues. In Proceedings of the 6th Work-

shop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educa-

tional Applications. 

Richard C. Anderson and W. Barry Biddle. 1975. On 

Asking People Questions About What they are 

Reading. Psychology of Learning and Motivation. 

9:90-132.  

Thomas Andre. 1979. Does Answering Higher-level 

Questions while Reading Facilitate Productive 

Learning? Review of Educational Research 49(2): 
280-318. 

Lee Becker, Sumit Basu, and Lucy Vanderwende. 

2012. Mind the Gap: Learning to Choose Gaps for 

Question Generation. In Proceedings of the 2012 

Conference of the North American Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics: Human 

Language Technologies. 

Wei Chen, Gregory Aist, and Jack Mostow. 2009. Gen-

erating Questions Automatically from Informational 

Text. In S. Craig & S. Dicheva (Ed.), Proceedings 

of the 2nd Workshop on Question Generation. 

Sérgio Curto, Ana Cristina Mendes, and Luisa Coheur. 

2011. Exploring Linguistically-rich Patterns for 

Question Generation. In Proceedings of the 

UCNLG+Eval: Language Generation and Evalua-

tion Workshop. 

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-

Rui Wang, Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR: A li-

brary for large linear classification. Journal of Ma-

chine Learning Research 9: 1871-1874. 

Michael Heilman and Noah Smith. 2010. Good Ques-

tion! Statistical Ranking for Question Generation. In 

Proceedings of NAACL/HLT. 

David Lindberg, Fred Popowich, John Nesbit, and Phil 

Winne. 2013. Generating Natural Language Ques-

tions to Support Learning On-line. In Proceedings 

of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Lan-

guage Generation. 

Prashanth Mannem, Rashmi Prasad, and Aravind 

Joshi. 2010. Question generation from paragraphs at 

UPenn: QGSTEC system description. In Proceed-

ings of the Third Workshop on Question Generation. 

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and 

Hinrich Schutze. 2008. Introduction to Information 

Retrieval. Cambridge: Cambridge university press 

Karen Mazidi and Rodney D. Nielsen. 2014. Linguistic 

Considerations in Automatic Question Generation. 

In Proceedings of ACL. 

James H. McMillan. 2001. Secondary Teachers' Class-

room Assessment and Grading Practices." Educa-
tional Measurement: Issues and Practice 20(1): 20-
32. 

 Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S. 

Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed Repre-

sentations of Words and Phrases and their Compo-

sitionality. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems. 

Ruslan Mitkov and Le An Ha. 2003. Computer-Aided 

Generation of Multiple-Choice Tests. In Proceed-

897



ings of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Build-

ing Educational Applications Using Natural Lan-

guage Processing. 

Andrew M. Olney, Arthur C. Graesser, and Natalie K. 

Person. 2012. Question Generation from Concept 

Maps. Dialogue & Discourse 3(2): 75-99. 

Daniel Ramage, David Hall, Ramesh Nallapati, and 

Christopher D. Manning. 2009. Labeled LDA: A 

Supervised Topic Model for Credit Attribution in 

Multi-labeled Corpora. In Proceedings of the 2009 

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-

guage Processing. 

Vasile Rus, Brendan Wyse, Paul Piwek, Mihai Lintean, 

Svetlana Stoyanchev, and Cristian Moldovan. 2010. 

Overview of The First Question Generation Shared 

Task Evaluation Challenge. In Proceedings of the 

Third Workshop on Question Generation. 

Lee Schwartz, Takako Aikawa, and Michel Pahud. 

2004. Dynamic Language Learning Tools. In Pro-

ceedings of STIL/ICALL Symposium on Computer 
Assisted Learning. 

John H. Wolfe. 1976. Automatic Question Generation 

from Text - an Aid to Independent Study. In Pro-

ceedings of ACM SIGCSE-SIGCUE Joint Sympo-

sium on Computer Science Education. 

Xuchen Yao and Yi Zhang. 2010. Question generation 

with minimal recursion semantics. In Proceedings 

of QG2010: The Third Workshop on Question Gen-

eration. 

898


