



















































OMWEdit - The Integrated Open Multilingual Wordnet Editing System


Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2015 System Demonstrations, pages 73–78,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2015 ACL and AFNLP

OMWEdit - The Integrated Open Multilingual Wordnet Editing System

Luís Morgado da Costa and Francis Bond
Linguistics and Mulitingual Studies
Nanyang Technological University

Singapore
{luis.passos.morgado@gmail.com, bond@ieee.org}

Abstract
Wordnets play a central role in many nat-
ural language processing tasks. This pa-
per introduces a multilingual editing sys-
tem for the Open Multilingual Wordnet
(OMW: Bond and Foster, 2013). Word-
net development, like most lexicographic
tasks, is slow and expensive. Moving
away from the original Princeton Word-
net (Fellbaum, 1998) development work-
flow, wordnet creation and expansion has
increasingly been shifting towards an au-
tomated and/or interactive system facili-
tated task. In the particular case of human
edition/expansion of wordnets, a few sys-
tems have been developed to aid the lexi-
cographers’ work. Unfortunately, most of
these tools have either restricted licenses,
or have been designed with a particular
language in mind. We present a web-
based system that is capable of multilin-
gual browsing and editing for any of the
hundreds of languages made available by
the OMW. All tools and guidelines are
freely available under an open license.

1 Introduction

Lexical semantic resources, such as wordnets
(WNs), play a central role in many Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) tasks. Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation (WSD), for example, relies heavily
on existing lexical semantic resources. Likewise,
many other unsolved problems of NLP (e.g. Ma-
chine Translation, Q&A Systems) rely on WSD
and, consequently, indirectly, rely also on the ex-
istence of resources like WNs.
This explains why substantial resources have

been employed in the development of high quality
lexical semantic resources. The Princeton Word-
net (PWN: Fellbaum, 1998) pioneered the devel-
opment of such a resource for English. Following

its steps, many other projects followed PWN into
building similar resources for different languages.
The lexicographic work-flow for these early

projects included hand-typing linked complex data
structures in electronic text files. The result was a
huge net of concepts, senses and definitions linked
through a variety of relations. This kind of work is
ultimately very time consuming and prone to mis-
takes. The direct manipulation of text files makes
it extremely easy to unintentionally violate the data
syntax. In recent times, the creation and expansion
of these resources has been increasingly shifting
into an automated and/or interactive system facili-
tated task. Simple and intuitive user interfaces can
help to both speed-up and to immediately check
for inconsistencies in the data (e.g. relatedness to
nonexistent keys, reduplicated information, typos
or omission of minimal required information). Us-
ing modern relational databases and web-serviced
interactive platforms has also allowed for remote
and parallel collaboration, as well as effective jour-
naling systems.
As the coverage of dictionaries is never com-

plete, WNs are in constant development. Even
should the main lexicon of a language be de-
scribed, as languages evolve, new words and
senses appear, while old senses fade away. For this
reason, maintaining aWN is a demanding task that
should be facilitated in every possible way.
In this paper we present a web-based system de-

signed to exploit the OMWmultilingual structure,
allowing a multilingual editing environment (e.g.
allow multilingual lexicographers to edit multiple
languages at the same time), to allow remote par-
allel access to the editing environment, requiring
minimal to no technical knowledge from the lexi-
cographers side to install/run the editing interface,
and to facilitate the management overhead of man-
taining a WN.1
The system has been tested by the developers
1http://compling.hss.ntu.edu.sg/omw/

73



Figure 1: OMW Browsing / Language Selection

and ten annotators (linguistics students) for over 10
months, who made feature requests and gave feed-
back during the development. The lexicographic
work was done in parallel with the semantic anno-
tation of a portion of the NTUMultilingual Corpus
(NTU-MC: Tan and Bond, 2012) in (Mandarin)
Chinese, English, Indonesian and Japanese (Bond
et al., 2015).
The remainder of this paper is arranged as fol-

lows. In Section 2 we discuss related work, in-
cluding the OMW and other similar tools avail-
able. The main functionality of our system are de-
scribed in Section 3. Section 4 will summarize and
point to our current and future work.

2 Related Work

2.1 The Open Multilingual Wordnet (OMW)
The OMW is a combination of open-licenced
wordnets, along with data extracted from Wik-
tionary and the Unicode Common Locale Data
Repository. In total, OMW has over 2 million
senses for over 100 thousand concepts, linking
over 1.4 million words in hundreds of languages
(Bond and Foster, 2013). It is used as a source
of data for projects such as BabelNet (Navigli
and Ponzetto, 2012) and Google translate. OMW
uses the basic structure of the Princeton Word-

net (PWN: Fellbaum, 1998) to pivot other lan-
guages around PWN3.0 synset IDs. Even though
it is a single resource, data from each language
and project is available separately, respecting their
individual licenses. Figure 1 shows the language
selection menu that allows browsing this resource
as a monolingual or a multilingual resource. The
OMW is also fully integrated with the tools cur-
rently in use for the development of the NTU
Multilingual Corpus (Tan and Bond, 2012). Even
though the specifics of this integration go beyond
the scope of this paper, it is important to note that
most of the development that tested this tool was
according to the needs of the semantic annotation
of the NTU-MC.

2.2 Other Available Systems
Building and expanding large lexical semantic re-
sources is not an easy task. More importantly,
many realized early on that building a WN is not
a simple translation task (e.g., Vossen, 1998a).
Being able to modify its hierarchy and creating
new concepts is important when expressing indi-
vidual languages semantic hierarchies. Still, due to
the lack of resources, manyWN projects bootstrap
themselves by translating the PWN. However, as
individual projects grow, they tend to move away
from the inherited English concept hierarchy. This
is the moment when systems to support easy ma-
nipulation and expansion of their WNs are needed.
Among the available systems we can find Vis-

Dic (Horák et al., 2004) (later developed into DE-
BVisDic, Horák et al., 2006), used for the devel-
opment of BalkaNet (Tufis et al., 2004), plWord-
NetApp (succeeded by WordNetLoom (Piasecki
et al., 2013)) used for the construction of the Polish
Wordnet (Derwojedowa et al., 2008), GernEdiT,
the GermaNet editing tool (Henrich and Hinrichs,
2010), KUI (Sornlertlamvanich et al., 2008, used
in the Asian Wordnet) and Polaris (Louw, 1998)
used in the development of EuroWordnet (Vossen,
1998b).
Out of the above mentioned, we excluded Po-

laris as not being released. Even though GernEdiT
seemed well designed, it was mainly developed
for a monolingual environment and a restrictive
license (i.e. it does not allow redistribution or
commercial use). WordNetLoom, the successor
of plWordNetApp, develops an interesting editing
mode based directly on the WN hierarchy graph,
but the fact that it was not offered as a web-service
limited our interest. VisDic was originally devel-

74



oped in response to Polaris commercial licence,
but the direct manipulation of XML limited its use-
fulness when compared to the original work-flow
of direct manipulation of text files. DEBVisDic
was later developed on top of VisDic, enhacing it
many ways. It can be served as a web applica-
tion and it supports the development of multiple
link wordnets. Unfortunately, while experiment-
ing with it, we found that its installation and user
experience was not intuitive. Its development and
usability is strongly dependent on Mozilla’s Fire-
fox, making any further development less appeal-
ing. And, most importantly, its license also re-
stricts use of the tool to noncommercial, nonprofit
internal research purposes only. KUI was open
source, but only contained functionality for adding
lemmas, not making changes to the wordnet struc-
ture. We decided we had enough motivation to
start the development of a new tool.

3 System Overview and Architecture

OMWEdit follows a simple yet powerful web-
based architecture. It is built on an SQLite
database, allowing fast querying and reliable stor-
age. It is fully tested for Firefox, Chrome and
Safari browsers. Its main focus is on semi-
automation and consistency checking of the WN
development work, supporting the lexicographer’s
work. In this section we discuss the OMWEdit’s
main functionality.

3.1 Browsing and Authentication

TheOMWcan be browsed either monolingually or
multilingually. Figure 1 shows how languages can
be filtered through the navigation interface. Fil-
tering languages is an important feature for both
browsing and editing since many concepts have
data for over 100 languages. This amount of infor-
mation can be overwhelming, especially within the
edition interface. The OMW interface also inte-
grates an authenticationmenu. As guests, users are
free to browse through the resource. Once logged
in (provided they are given access), a user can ac-
cess the editing mode. All changes committed are
immediately available for further browsing, edit-
ing and usage by linked tools (i.e. the OMW is cur-
rently linked to a set of corpus annotation tools).

3.2 Creating and Editing Concepts

The lexicographic work centers around editing ex-
isting concepts and adding new concepts, senses

or relations to the WN. For this reason, our system
has been optimized for these two tasks.
Our system integrates the lexical, concept and

relation levels in a single semi-automated process.
Most of the above mentioned systems sustain a
separate development between lexical entries and
concepts (e.g. in order to be linked to a con-
cept, a lexical unit has to be previously created as
a separate entity). Contrary to this practice, the
OMWEdit has a fully automated lexical manage-
ment — e.g. the creation, linking, unlinking, cor-
rection and deletion of lexical entries is fully auto-
mated behind the concept creation/edition screen.
In order to add a lemma to a concept, for example,
a lexicographer has simply to type the word form
in the appropriate field of creation/editing concept
view. The system then verifies if a new lexical en-
try needs to be created. In the event that the lexical
entry already exists, its ID is automatically fetched
and bound to the concept. Otherwise, a new lexical
entry is created and linked to the concept ID. Like-
wise, correcting an existing lexical entry within a
concept will trigger a similar process. The sys-
tem checks if a lexical entry that matches the cor-
rected version already exists, or if needs to be cre-
ated. The link between the previously corrected
lexical unit is dropped and a new link is created for
the newly corrected form. Lexical entries that are
not linked to any concept are periodically removed
from the database.
Similar processes are put in practice for themain

components of a concept. We currently allow to
edit/add lemmas, definitions, examples and synset
relations. The web interface was designed to be
intuitive and as automated as possible, in order to
shield the lexicographer’s work to include check-
ing. The editing interfaces include quick guide-
lines that summarize the workflow of that partic-
ular task. Typos are avoided by either checking
inputs with regular expressions or through the use
of closed selection lists (see Figure 2). The inputs
are processed for further consistency before being
written in the database (e.g. white-space and punc-
tuation stripping).
Fields such as definitions, examples and lem-

mas are associated with languages. Most of our
lexicographers are, at least, bilingual. Having
the possibility of creating multilingual concepts is
a single submission is, therefore, most efficient.
The languages displayed and available when cre-
ating/editing a concept are constrained by the se-

75



Figure 2: Adding a new concept

lected browsing languages, as seen in Figure 1. It
is especially important to be able to constrain the
languages in the editing mode, since too much in-
formation quickly becomes hard to manage.
The creation of a new synset has been optimized

to fall under one of three categories. Named Enti-
ties have a quick creation setting where only min-
imal information is required (not shown) – as this
system knows where to place them in the hierar-
chy. The creation of new concepts can also be done
from scratch (Figure 2), or through the selection
of a linked concept. In this case, the information
available for the linked concept is displayed and
some information is copied across into the creation
form for further edition.
The tool has a link to a multiple lexicon

search, where the lexicographers can simultane-
ously query multiple lexicons for different lan-
guages (e.g. wiktionary, JMDict for Japanese, CC-
edict for Chinese and so on). This makes it easy to
check the meanings of words without relying too
much on a single source.
Other consistency checks are enforced by the

system. For example, when creating new entries,
the minimal information required to constitute a
concept (name, pos, definition in English, link to
existing synset, at least one lemma) is enforced by
the interface, making it impossible to unwittingly
create an ill-formed entry.

3.3 Journaling and Reporting System
Although the wordnets are stored in a relational
database, they can easily be exported as other stan-
dard formats such as Wordnet LMF (Vossen et al.,
2013) or plain text triples.
The WN development is done directly into this

database. All editable tables are associated with
triggers that record every change committed to the
database, along with the authorship and the times-
tamp of the event. By keeping the metadata in a
separate table, we ensure that the wordnet itself
does not get unwieldy. Both manual and scripted
manipulation of a data is dated and signed. Indi-
vidual lexicographers have to go through an online
login system to be able to see the editing interface.
The authorship of scripted manipulation of data is
often the name of the script — this allows us to
keep track of what was changed when. The ease
of manipulation of the data by scripts is important
to the development — it is easy to develop new
data as a separate project and import it when it is
ready.

This careful database journaling keeps a
tractable history of all the changes in the OWN.
This information allows a better management of
the lexicographers’ workflow, and also a better
control of the quality of data that is inserted. Man-
agement of the lexicographic work is facilitated by
a reporting interface that displays the rate/progress
of each contributor’s work (Figure 3). This in-
terface allows the coordinators to adjudicate and
revert any changes they deem fit, to assert the
work pace of individual contributors and also to
judge the quality of the lexicographer’s work. This
interface also provides some consistency checks
to the quality of the information contained in the
synset, for example lack of senses or definitions,
and how often it appears in the corpus.

76



Figure 3: Reporting Interface (extract of list)

4 Summary and Future Work

We have described the architecture and main func-
tionality of the OMWEdit. Considering its short
development history, our system has proved itself
an increasingly stable and useful tool for the ex-
pansion of a few major Wordnet projects. Our
web-based system architecture has proved itself
ideal for a medium to large scale lexicographic
team, regardless of the location of each member.
During the development of this system, we were
able to confirm an increase in the speed of the lex-
icographer’s workflow. The managing overhead,
such as maintaining consistency and quality of the
introduced changes has also become a much easier
task to accomplish.
Nevertheless, we are aware that the nature of

this kind of system is always open ended, and we
hope to keep supporting and developing it further.
We are aware of some shortcomings and have a list
of ongoing planned development of future imple-
mentation. This list includes (but is not restricted
to):

• the ability to change and/or add lexical rela-
tions and verb frames

• the ability to easily comment on entries and
watch entries for changes

• the ability to express all relations (both lexical
and between concepts) by language— allow-
ing to move away from only using the hierar-
chy given by the PWN

• the ability to seed a new concept by copying a
similar concept (with all its internal structure
and relations)

• the ability to do a live check for similarity
scores in definitions, accounting for probable
matching/mergeable concepts

• further development of the reporting interface

• the development of a graphic component to
help visualizing the best placement of a new
concept in the hierarchy

• Also, considering our multilingual context, to
further develop our support for multilingual
users by translating the user interface.

Even though our system was developed with the
goal of expanding and correcting wordnets, we be-
lieve that our system can also be used to help cre-
ate new wordnets that use the PWN hierarchy as
their backbone. Though the hierarchical relations
are still currently imposed by the PWN, we have
abolished the limitation to a fixed concept inven-
tory by allowing the creation of new concepts.
Although the tool is far from perfect, we encour-

age existing and new projects to use the OMW
and OMWEdit as a platform to for their WN de-
velopment. Furthermore, we intend to feedback
the changes committed to the individual word-
net projects: the Princeton Wordnet (Fellbaum,
1998), the Japanese Wordnet (Isahara et al., 2008),
the Wordnet Bahasa (Nurril Hirfana et al. 2011)
and the Chinese Open Wordnet (Wang and Bond,
2013), respectively, so that changes committed to
the OMW can be incorporated to the original WN
projects.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported in part by the MOE
Tier 2 grant That’s what you meant: a Rich Rep-
resentation for Manipulation of Meaning (MOE
ARC41/13) and Fuji-Xerox Co. Ltd (Joint Re-
search on Multilingual Semantic Analysis). We
would also like to thank our lexicographers for
their feedback during the system’s development.

References

Francis Bond, Luís Morgado da Costa, and
Tuấn Anh Lê. 2015. IMI — a multilingual se-
mantic annotation environment. In ACL-2015
System Demonstrations. (this volume).

77



Francis Bond and Ryan Foster. 2013. Linking
and extending an open multilingual wordnet.
In 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL-2013, pages
1352–1362. Sofia. URL http://aclweb.
org/anthology/P13-1133.

Magdalena Derwojedowa, Maciej Piasecki,
Stanisław Szpakowicz, Magdalena Zaw-
isławska, and Bartosz Broda. 2008. Words,
concepts and relations in the construction of
polish wordnet. In Proceedings of the Global
WordNet Conference, Seged, Hungary, pages
162–177.

Christine Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.

Verena Henrich and Erhard W Hinrichs. 2010.
Gernedit-the germanet editing tool. InACL (Sys-
tem Demonstrations), pages 19–24.

Aleš Horák, Karel Pala, Adam Rambousek, Mar-
tin Povolnỳ, et al. 2006. Debvisdic–first version
of new client-server wordnet browsing and edit-
ing tool. In Proceedings of the Third Interna-
tional Wordnet Conference (GWC-06), Jeju Is-
land, Korea.

Aleš Horák, Pavel Smrž, et al. 2004. Visdic–
wordnet browsing and editing tool. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second International WordNet
Conference–GWC, pages 136–141.

Hitoshi Isahara, Francis Bond, Kiyotaka Uchi-
moto, Masao Utiyama, and Kyoko Kanzaki.
2008. Development of the Japanese WordNet.
In Sixth International conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008). Mar-
rakech.

Michael Louw. 1998. Polaris user’s guide. Eu-
roWordNet (LE-4003), Deliverable D023D024.

Nurril Hirfana Mohamed Noor, Suerya Sapuan,
and Francis Bond. 2011. Creating the open
Wordnet Bahasa. In Proceedings of the 25th Pa-
cific Asia Conference on Language, Information
and Computation (PACLIC 25), pages 258–267.
Singapore.

RobertoNavigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2012.
BabelNet: The automatic construction, evalu-
ation and application of a wide-coverage mul-
tilingual semantic network. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 193:217–250.

Maciej Piasecki, Michał Marcińczuk, Radosław
Ramocki, and Marek Maziarz. 2013. Word-

netloom: a wordnet development system in-
tegrating form-based and graph-based perspec-
tives. International Journal of Data Mining,
Modelling and Management, 5(3):210–232.

Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Thatsanee Charoen-
porn, Kergrit Robkop, and Hitoshi Isahara.
2008. KUI: Self-organizing multi-lingual word-
net construction tool. In Attila Tanács, Dóra
Csendes, Veronika Vincze, Christiane Fellbaum,
and Piek Vossen, editors, 4th Global Word-
net Conference: GWC-2008, pages 417–427.
Szeged, Hungary.

Liling Tan and Francis Bond. 2012. Building and
annotating the linguistically diverse NTU-MC
(NTU-multilingual corpus). International Jour-
nal of Asian Language Processing, 22(4):161–
174.

Dan Tufis, Dan Cristea, and Sofia Stamou. 2004.
Balkanet: Aims, methods, results and perspec-
tives. a general overview. Romanian Journal of
Information science and technology, 7(1-2):9–
43.

Piek Vossen, editor. 1998a. Euro WordNet.
Kluwer.

Piek Vossen. 1998b. A multilingual database with
lexical semantic networks. Springer.

Piek Vossen, Claudia Soria, and Monica Mona-
chini. 2013. LMF - lexical markup frame-
work. In Gil Francopoulo, editor, LMF - Lexical
Markup Framework, chapter 4. ISTE Ltd + John
Wiley & sons, Inc.

Shan Wang and Francis Bond. 2013. Building the
Chinese Open Wordnet (COW): Starting from
core synsets. In Proceedings of the 11th Work-
shop on Asian Language Resources, a Workshop
at IJCNLP-2013, pages 10–18. Nagoya.

78


