



















































The Media Frames Corpus: Annotations of Frames Across Issues


Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Short Papers), pages 438–444,

Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Media Frames Corpus: Annotations of Frames Across Issues

Dallas Card1 Amber E. Boydstun2 Justin H. Gross3 Philip Resnik4 Noah A. Smith1
1School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

2Department of Political Science, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
3Department of Political Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA

4UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
dcard@cmu.edu aboydstun@ucdavis.edu jhgross@polsci.umass.edu

resnik@umiacs.umd.edu nasmith@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We describe the first version of the Me-
dia Frames Corpus: several thousand news
articles on three policy issues, annotated
in terms of media framing. We motivate
framing as a phenomenon of study for
computational linguistics and describe our
annotation process.

1 Introduction

An important part of what determines how infor-
mation will be interpreted by an audience is how
that information is framed. Framing is a phe-
nomenon largely studied and debated in the social
sciences, where, for example, researchers explore
how news media shape debate around policy is-
sues by deciding what aspects of an issue to em-
phasize, and what to exclude. Theories of fram-
ing posit that these decisions give rise to thematic
sets of interrelated ideas, imagery, and arguments,
which tend to cohere and persist over time.

Past work on framing includes many examples
of issue-specific studies based on manual content
analysis (Baumgartner et al., 2008; Berinsky and
Kinder, 2006). While such studies reveal much
about the range of opinions on an issue, they do
not characterize framing at a level of abstraction
that allows comparison across social issues.

More recently, there have also been a handful of
papers on the computational analysis of framing
(Nguyen et al., 2015; Tsur et al., 2015; Baumer et
al., 2015). While these papers represent impres-
sive advances, they are still focused on the prob-
lem of automating the analysis of framing along a
single dimension, or within a particular domain.

We propose that framing can be understood as a
general aspect of linguistic communication about
facts and opinions on any issue. Empirical assess-
ment of this hypothesis requires analyzing framing

in real-world media coverage. To this end, we con-
tribute an initial dataset of annotated news articles,
the Media Frames Corpus (version 1). These an-
notations are based on 15 general-purpose meta-
frames (here called “framing dimensions”) out-
lined below, which are intended to subsume all
specific frames that might be encountered on any
issue of public concern.

Several features of this annotation project dis-
tinguish it from linguistic annotation projects fa-
miliar to computational linguists:

• A degree of subjectivity in framing analysis
is unavoidable. While some variation in an-
notations is due to mistakes and misunder-
standings by annotators (and is to be mini-
mized), much variation is due to valid differ-
ences in interpretation (and is therefore prop-
erly preserved in the coding process).

• Annotator skill appears to improve with prac-
tice; our confidence in the quality of the an-
notations has grown in later phases of the
project, and this attribute is not suppressed in
our data release.

All of the annotations and metadata in this cor-
pus are publicly available, along with tools to ac-
quire the original news articles usable by those
who have an appropriate license to the texts from
their source (Lexis-Nexis).1 This dataset and
planned future extensions will enable computa-
tional linguists and others to develop and empir-
ically test models of framing.

2 What is Framing?

Consider a politically contested issue such as
same-sex marriage. Conflicting perspectives on
this issue compete to attract our attention and in-
fluence our opinions; any communications about

1https://github.com/dallascard/media_
frames_corpus

438



the issue—whether emanating from political par-
ties, activist organizations, or media providers—
will be fraught with decisions about how the issue
should be defined and presented.

In a widely cited definition, Entman (1993) ar-
gues that “to frame is to select some aspects of a
perceived reality and make them more salient in a
communicating text, in such a way as to promote
problem definition, causal interpretation, moral
evaluation, and/or treatment recommendation for
the item described.” Further elaborations have em-
phasized how various elements of framing tend
to align and cohere, eventually being deployed
“packages” which can be evoked through particu-
lar phrases, images, or other synecdoches (Game-
son and Modigliani, 1989; Benford and Snow,
2000; Chong and Druckman, 2007). These may
take the form of simple slogans, such as the war
on terror, or more complex, perhaps unstated, as-
sumptions, such as the rights of individuals, or the
responsibilities of government. The patterns that
emerge from these decisions and assumptions are,
in essence, what we refer to as framing.2

Traditionally, in the social sciences, framing is
studied by developing an extensive codebook of
frames specific to an issue, reading large num-
bers of documents, and manually annotating them
for the presence of the frames in the codebook
(e.g., Baumgartner et al., 2008; Terkildsen and
Schnell, 1997). Computational linguists therefore
have much to offer in formalizing and automating
the analysis of framing, enabling greater scale and
breadth of application across issues.

3 Annotation Scheme

The goal of our annotation process was to pro-
duce a corpus of examples demonstrating how the
choice of language in a document relates to fram-
ing in a non-issue-specific way. To accomplish
this task, we annotated news articles with a set
of 15 cross-cutting framing dimensions, such as
economics, morality, and politics, developed by
Boydstun et al. (2014). These dimensions, sum-
marized in Figure 1, were informed by the fram-
ing literature and developed to be general enough
to be applied to any policy issue.

For each article, annotators were asked to iden-
tify any of the 15 framing dimensions present in

2A distinct though related usage, known as “equivalence
framing” in psychology, refers to different phrasings of se-
mantically equivalent expressions (e.g., is an 8-ounce glass
containing 4 ounces of water half empty or half full?).

Economic: costs, benefits, or other financial implications
Capacity and resources: availability of physical, human
or financial resources, and capacity of current systems
Morality: religious or ethical implications
Fairness and equality: balance or distribution of rights,
responsibilities, and resources
Legality, constitutionality and jurisprudence: rights,
freedoms, and authority of individuals, corporations, and
government
Policy prescription and evaluation: discussion of specific
policies aimed at addressing problems
Crime and punishment: effectiveness and implications of
laws and their enforcement
Security and defense: threats to welfare of the individual,
community, or nation
Health and safety: health care, sanitation, public safety
Quality of life: threats and opportunities for the individ-
ual’s wealth, happiness, and well-being
Cultural identity: traditions, customs, or values of a social
group in relation to a policy issue
Public opinion: attitudes and opinions of the general pub-
lic, including polling and demographics
Political: considerations related to politics and politicians,
including lobbying, elections, and attempts to sway voters
External regulation and reputation: international reputa-
tion or foreign policy of the U.S.
Other: any coherent group of frames not covered by the
above categories

Figure 1: Framing dimensions from Boydstun et al. (2014).

the article and to label spans of text which cued
them. Annotators also identified the dominant
framing of the article headline (if present), as well
as for the entire article, which we refer to as the
“primary frame.” Finally, newspaper corrections,
articles shorter than four lines of text, and articles
about foreign countries were marked as irrelevant.
There were no constraints on the length or com-
position of annotated text spans, and annotations
were allowed to overlap. The last framing dimen-
sion (“Other”) was used to categorize any articles
that didn’t conform to any of the other options
(used in < 10% of cases). An example of two in-
dependent annotations of the same article is shown
in Figure 2.

For the initial version of this corpus, three pol-
icy issues were chosen for their expected diver-
sity of framing and their contemporary political
relevance: immigration, smoking, and same-sex
marriage. Lexis-Nexis was used to obtain all arti-
cles matching a set of keywords published by a set
of 13 national U.S. newspapers between the years
1990 and 2012.3 Duplicate and near-duplicate ar-
ticles were removed and randomly selected arti-
cles were chosen for annotation for each issue (see
supplementary material for additional details).

3The immigration articles extend back to 1969, though
there are few before 1980.

439



Annotation guidelines for the project are docu-
mented in a codebook, which was used for training
the annotators. The codebook for these issues was
refined in an ongoing manner to include examples
from each issue, and more carefully delineate the
boundaries between the framing dimensions.

4 Annotation Process

Our annotation process reflects the less-than-ideal
circumstances faced by academics requiring con-
tent analysis: relatively untrained annotators, high
turnover, and evolving guidelines. Our process is
delineated into three stages, summarized in Ta-
ble 1 and discussed in detail below. Each stage
involved 14–20-week-long rounds of coding; in
each round, annotators were given approximately
100 articles to annotate, and the combinations of
annotators assigned the same articles were rotated
between rounds. Our annotators were undergrad-
uates students at a U.S. research university, and
a total of 19 worked on this project, with 8 be-
ing involved in more than one stage. The aver-
age number of frames identified in an article varied
from 2.0 to 3.7 across annotators, whereas the av-
erage number of spans highlighted per article var-
ied from 3.4 to 10.0. Additional detail is given in
Table 1 in the supplementary material.

Stage Issue Articles Av. annotatorsper article
1 Immigration 4,113 1.2
1 Smoking 4,077 1.2
2 Same-sex marriage 6,298 2.2
3 Immigration 5,549 2.2

Table 1: Summary of the number of articles annotated and
average number of annotators per article

4.1 Stage 1

During the first stage, approximately 4,000 arti-
cles on each of immigration and smoking were an-
notated, with approximately 500 articles in each
group annotated by multiple annotators to mea-
sure inter-annotator agreement. Our goals here
were high coverage and ensuring that the guide-
lines were not too narrowly adapted to any single
issue. Annotators received only minimal feedback
on their agreement levels during this stage.

4.2 Stage 2

In the second stage, annotations shifted to same-
sex marriage articles, again emphasizing general
fit across issues. Beginning in stage 2, each article

[WHERE THE JOBS ARE]Economic
[Critics of illegal immigration can make many
cogent arguments to support the position that
the U.S. Congress and the Colorado legisla-
ture must develop effective and well-enforced
immigration policies that will restrict the
number of people who migrate here legally
and illegally.]Policy prescription
[It’s true that all forms of [immigration ex-
ert influence over our economic and cultural
make-up.]Cultural identity In some ways, im-
migration improves our economy by adding
laborers, taxpayers and consumers, and in
other ways immigration detracts from our
economy by increasing the number of stu-
dents, health care recipients and other ben-
eficiaries of public services.]Economic
[Some economists say that immigrants, le-
gal and illegal, produce a net economic
gain, while others say that they create a net
loss]Economic. There are rational arguments to
support both sides of this debate, and it’s useful
and educational to hear the varying positions.

[WHERE THE JOBS ARE]Economic
[Critics of illegal immigration can make many
cogent arguments to support the position that
the U.S. Congress and the Colorado legisla-
ture must develop effective and well-enforced
immigration policies that will restrict the
number of people who migrate here legally
and illegally.]Public opinion
[It’s true that all forms of immigration ex-
ert influence over our economic and [cultural
make-up.]Cultural identity In some ways, im-
migration improves our economy by adding
laborers, taxpayers and consumers, and in
other ways [immigration detracts from our
economy by increasing the number of stu-
dents, health care recipients and other benefi-
ciaries of public services.]Capacity]Economic
[Some economists say that immigrants, le-
gal and illegal, produce a net economic
gain, while others say that they create a net
loss.]Economic There are rational arguments to
support both sides of this debate, and it’s useful
and educational to hear the varying positions.

Figure 2: Two independent annotations of a 2006 editorial in
the Denver Post. The annotators agree perfectly about which
parts of the article make use of economic framing, but dis-
agree about the first paragraph. Moreover, the second an-
notator identifies an additional dimension (capacity and re-
sources). Although they both identify a reference to cultural
identity, they annotated slightly different spans of text.

440



was assigned to at least two annotators, in order
to track inter-annotator agreement more carefully,
and to better capture the subjectivity inherent in
this task. Since the guidelines had become more
stable by this stage, we also focused on identifying
good practices for annotator training. Annotators
were informed of their agreement levels with each
other, and pairs of framing dimensions on which
annotators frequently disagreed were emphasized.
This information was presented to annotators in
weekly meetings.

4.3 Stage 3

The third stage revisited the immigration articles
from stage 1 (plus an additional group of articles),
with the now well-developed annotation guide-
lines. As in the second stage, almost all articles
were annotated by two annotators, working inde-
pendently. More detailed feedback was provided,
including inter-annotator agreement for the use of
each framing dimension anywhere in articles.

During stage 3, for each article where two an-
notators independently disagreed on the primary
frame, the pair met to discuss the disagreement
and attempt to come to a consensus.4 Disagree-
ments continue to arise, however, reflecting the re-
ality that the same article can cue different frames
more strongly for different annotators. We view
these disagreements not as a weakness, but as a
source of useful information about the diversity of
ways in which the same text can be interpreted by
different audiences (Pan and Kosicki, 1993; Rees
et al., 2001).

The proportion of articles annotated with each
framing dimension (averaged across annotators) is
shown in Figure 3.

5 Inter-annotator Agreement

Because our annotation task is complex (select-
ing potentially overlapping text spans and label-
ing them), there is no single comprehensive mea-
sure of inter-annotator agreement. The simplest
aspect of the annotations to compare is the choice
of primary frame, which we measure using Krip-
pendorff’s α (Krippendorff, 2012).5

4A small secondary experiment, described in supplemen-
tary material, was used to test the reliability of this process.

5Krippendorff’s α is similar to Cohen’s κ, but calculates
expected agreement between annotators based on the com-
bined pool of labels provided by all annotators, rather than
considering each annotators’s frequency of use separately.
Moreover, it can be used for more than two annotators and

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5

Proportion of articles

External regulation
Other

Capacity & resources
Security & defense

Irrelevant
Cultural identity

Quality of life
Public opinion

Morality
Crime & punishment

Fairness & equality
Policy prescription

Economic
Health & safety

Political
Legality

Immigration
Smoking
Same-sex marr.

Figure 3: Proportion of articles annotated with each of the
framing dimensions (averaging across annotators for each ar-
ticle).

Figure 4 shows the inter-annotator agreement
on the primary frame per round. We observe first
that difficulty varies by issue, with same-sex mar-
riage the most difficult. Annotators do appear to
improve with experience. Agreement on immi-
gration articles in stage 3 are significantly higher
(p < 0.05, permutation test) than agreement on
the same articles in stage 1, even though only one
annotator worked on both stages.6

These results demonstrate that consistent per-
formance can be obtained from different groups
of annotators, given sufficient training. Although
we never obtain perfect agreement, this is not sur-
prising, given that the same sentences can and do
cue multiple types of framing, as illustrated by the
example in Figure 2.

Inter-annotator agreement at the level of indi-
vidually selected spans of text can be assessed us-
ing an extension of Krippendorff’s α (αU ) which
measures disagreement between two spans as the
sum of the squares of the lengths of the parts which
do not overlap.7 As with the more common α
statistic, αU is a chance-corrected agreement met-
ric scaled such that 1 represents perfect agreement
and 0 represents the level of chance. This met-

accommodates missing values. See Passonneau and Carpen-
ter (2014) for additional details.

6Note that this is not a controlled experiment on annota-
tion procedures, but rather a difference observed between two
stages of an evolving process.

7For example, in the example shown in Figure 2, the
amount of disagreement on the two Cultural identity annota-
tions would be the square of the length (in characters) of the
non-overlapping part of the annotations (“immigration exert
influence over our economic and”) which is 502 = 2500.

441



0 10 20 30 40

Round

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
K

ri
pp

en
do

rf
f’

s
A

lp
ha

Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3

Immigration
Smoking
Same-sex marriage

Figure 4: Chance-corrected inter-annotator agreement on the
primary frame. Marker size indicates the number of annota-
tions being compared; α = 1 indicates perfect agreement.

ric has been previously recommended for tasks
in computational linguistics that involve unitizing
(Artstein and Poesio, 2008). For a more complete
explanation, see Krippendorff (2004).

The pattern of αU values across rounds is very
similar to that shown in Figure 4, but not surpris-
ingly, average levels of agreement are much lower.
Arguably, this agreement statistic is overly harsh
for our purposes. We do not necessarily expect an-
notators to agree perfectly about where to start and
end each annotated span, or how many spans to
annotate per article, and our codebook and guide-
lines offer relatively little guidance on these low-
level decisions. Nevertheless, it is encouraging
that in all cases, average agreement is greater than
chance. The αU values for all annotated spans of
text (averaged across articles) are 0.16 for immi-
gration (stage 1), 0.23 for tobacco, 0.08 for same-
sex marriage, and 0.20 for immigration (stage 3).

6 Prior Work

Several previous papers in the computer science
literature deal with framing, though usually in a
more restricted sense. Perhaps the most com-
mon approach is to treat the computational anal-
ysis of framing as a variation on sentiment analy-
sis, though this often involves reducing framing to
a binary variable. Various models have been ap-
plied to news and social media datasets with the
goal of identifying political ideology, or “perspec-
tive” (typically on a liberal to conservative scale)
(Ahmed and Xing, 2010; Gentzkow and Shapiro,
2010; Lin et al., 2006; Hardisty et al., 2010; Kle-

banov et al., 2010; Sim et al., 2013; Iyyer et al.,
2014), or “stance” (position for or against an is-
sue) (Walker et al., 2012; Hasan and Ng, 2013).
A related line of work is the analysis of subjec-
tive language or “scientific” language, which has
also been posed in terms of framing (Wiebe et al.,
2004; Choi et al., 2012). While the study of ideol-
ogy, sentiment, and subjectivity are interesting in
their own right, we believe that they fail to cap-
ture the more nuanced nature of framing, which is
often more complex than positive or negative sen-
timent. In discussions of same-sex marriage, for
example, both advocates and opponents may at-
tempt to control whether the issue is perceived as
primarily about politics, legality, or ethics. More-
over, we emphasize that framing is an important
feature of even seemingly neutral or objective lan-
guage.

A different but equally relevant line of work has
focused on text re-use. Leskovec et al. (2009)
perform clustering of quotations and their vari-
ations, uncovering patterns in the temporal dy-
namics of how memes spread through the me-
dia. On a smaller scale, others have examined text
reuse in the development of legislation and the cul-
ture of reprinting in nineteenth-century newspa-
pers (Smith et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2014). While
not the same as framing, identifying this sort of
text reuse is an important step towards analyzing
the “media packages” that social scientists asso-
ciate with framing.

7 Conclusion

Framing is a complex and difficult aspect of lan-
guage to study, but as with so many aspects of
modern NLP, there is great potential for progress
through the use of statistical methods and public
datasets, both labelled and unlabeled. By releas-
ing the Media Frames Corpus, we seek to bring the
phenomenon to the attention of the computational
linguistics community, and provide a framework
that others can use to analyze framing for addi-
tional policy issues. As technology progresses to-
wards ever more nuanced understanding of natural
language, it is important to analyze not just what
is being said, but how, and with what effects. The
Media Frames Corpus enables the next step in that
direction.

Acknowledgments This research was supported
by NSF grants 1211201, 1211266, 1211277, and
1211153.

442



References
Amr Ahmed and Eric P. Xing. 2010. Staying in-

formed: Supervised and semi-supervised multi-view
topical analysis of ideological perspective. In Proc.
of EMNLP.

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder
agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Eric Baumer, Elisha Elovic, Ying Qin, Francesca Pol-
letta, and Geri Gay. 2015. Testing and comparing
computational approaches for identifying the lan-
guage of framing in political news. In Proc. of
NAACL.

Frank R. Baumgartner, Suzanna L. De Boef, and Am-
ber E. Boydstun. 2008. The decline of the death
penalty and the discovery of innocence. Cambridge
University Press.

Robert D. Benford and David A. Snow. 2000. Framing
processes and social movements: An overview and
assessment. Annual Review of Sociology, 26:611–
639.

Adam J. Berinsky and Donald R. Kinder. 2006. Mak-
ing sense of issues through media frames: Under-
standing the Kosovo crisis. Journal of Politics,
68(3):640–656.

Amber E. Boydstun, Dallas Card, Justin H. Gross,
Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2014. Tracking
the development of media frames within and across
policy issues. APSA 2014 Annual Meeting Paper.

Eunsol Choi, Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jennifer Spindel.
2012. Hedge detection as a lens on framing in the
GMO debates: A position paper. In Proc of. ACL
Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Mean-
ing in Computational Linguistics, pages 70–79.

Dennis Chong and James N. Druckman. 2007. Fram-
ing theory. Annual Review of Political Science,
10(1):103–126.

Robert M. Entman. 1993. Framing: Toward clarifica-
tion of a fractured paradigm. Journal of Communi-
cation, 43(4):51–58.

William A. Gameson and Andre Modigliani. 1989.
Media discourse and public opinion on nuclear
power: A constructionist approach. American Jour-
nal of Sociology, 95(1):1–37.

Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. What
drives media slant? Evidence from U.S. daily news-
papers. Econometrica, 78(1):35–71.

Eric Hardisty, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2010. Modeling perspective using adaptor
grammars. In Proc. of EMNLP.

Kazi Saidul Hasan and Vincent Ng. 2013. Stance clas-
sification of ideological debates: Data, models, fea-
tures, and constraints. In Proc. of IJCNLP.

Mohit Iyyer, Peter Enns, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and
Philip Resnik. 2014. Political ideology detection
using recursive neural networks. In Proc. of ACL.

Beata Beigman Klebanov, Eyal Beigman, and Daniel
Diermeier. 2010. Vocabulary choice as an indicator
of perspective. In Proc. of ACL.

Klaus Krippendorff. 2004. Measuring the reliability of
qualitative text analysis data. Quality and Quantity,
38(6):787–800.

Klaus Krippendorff. 2012. Content Analysis: An In-
troduction to its Methodology. SAGE Publications.

Jure Leskovec, Lars Backstrom, and Jon Kleinberg.
2009. Meme-tracking and the dynamics of the news
cycle. In Proc. of KDD.

Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Which side are you
on? Identifying perspectives at the document and
sentence levels. In Proc. of CoNNL.

Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Philip Resnik,
and Kristina Miler. 2015. Tea party in the house: A
hierarchical ideal point topic model and its applica-
tion to Republican legislators in the 112th congress.
In Proc. of ACL.

Zhongdang Pan and Gerald M. Kosicki. 1993. Fram-
ing analysis: An approach to news discourse. Polit-
ical communication, 10(1):55–75.

Rebecca J. Passonneau and Bob Carpenter. 2014. The
benefits of a model of annotation. In Proc. of ACL.

Stephen D. Rees, Oscar H. Gandy Jr., , and August E.
Grant, editors. 2001. Framing public life: Perspec-
tives on media and our understanding of the social
world. Routledge.

Yanchuan Sim, Brice D. L. Acree, Justin H. Gross, and
Noah A. Smith. 2013. Measuring ideological pro-
portions in political speeches. In Proc. of EMNLP.

David A. Smith, Ryan Cordell, and Elizabeth Maddock
Dillon. 2013. Infectious texts: modeling text reuse
in nineteenth-century newspapers. In IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Big Data.

David A. Smith, Ryan Cordel, Elizabeth Maddock Dil-
lon, Nick Stramp, and John Wilkerson. 2014. De-
tecting and modeling local text reuse. In IEEE/ACM
Joint Conference on Digital Libraries.

Nayda Terkildsen and Frauke Schnell. 1997. How me-
dia frames move public opinion: An analysis of the
women’s movement. Political research quarterly,
50(4):879–900.

443



Oren Tsur, Dan Calacci, and David Lazer. 2015.
Frame of mind: Using statistical models for detec-
tion of framing and agenda setting campaigns. In
Proc. of ACL.

Marilyn A. Walker, Pranav Anand, Robert Abbott, and
Ricky Grant. 2012. Stance classification using dia-
logic properties of persuasion. In Proc. of NAACL.

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce,
Matthew Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learn-
ing subjective language. Computational Linguistics,
30(3):277–308.

444


