



















































Tibetan Unknown Word Identification from News Corpora for Supporting Lexicon-based Tibetan Word Segmentation


Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Short Papers), pages 451–457,

Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tibetan Unknown Word Identification from News Corpora for Sup-

porting Lexicon-based Tibetan Word Segmentation 

Minghua Nuo
1
 

minghua@iscas.ac.cn 

 Huidan Liu
1
 

huidan@iscas.ac.cn 

   

Congjun Long
1,2

 
congjun@nfs.iscas.ac.cn 

 Jian Wu
1
 

wujian@iscas.ac.cn 
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; 

2
Institute of Ethnology 

and Anthropology, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, China 
 

Abstract 

In Tibetan, as words are written consecutive-

ly without delimiters, finding unknown word 

boundary is difficult. This paper presents a 

hybrid approach for Tibetan unknown word 
identification for offline corpus processing. 

Firstly, Tibetan named entity is preprocessed 

based on natural annotation. Secondly, other 

Tibetan unknown words are extracted from 

word segmentation fragments using MTC, 

the combination of a statistical metric and a 

set of context sensitive rules. In addition, the 

preliminary experimental results on Tibetan 

News Corpus are reported. Lexicon-based 

Tibetan word segmentation system SegT with 

proposed unknown word extension mecha-

nism is indeed helpful to promote the perfor-
mance of Tibetan word segmentation. It in-

creases the F-score of Tibetan word segmen-

tation by 4.15% on random-selected test set. 

Our unknown word identification scheme can 

find new words in any length and in any field. 

1 Introduction 

Tibetan is a phonetic writing script; it is syllabic, 

like many of the alphabets of India and South 
East Asia. Tibetan sentences are strings of sylla-

bles with no delimiters to mark word boundaries. 

Therefore the initial step for Tibetan processing 
is word segmentation.  However, occurrences of 

unknown words, which are  not  listed  in  the  

dictionary, degraded  significantly  the  perfor-
mances  of  most word  segmentation  methods. 

Currently, the lexicon-based Tibetan word 

segmentation scheme is widely adopted. In gen-

eral, any lexicon is limited and unable to cover 
all the words in real texts. According to our sta-

tistics on a 326,062,576-bytes news corpus from 

the website Tibet Daily, there are about 2.89% 
unknown words. Therefore, unknown word iden-

tification (UWI) became a key technology for 

Tibetan segmentation. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 

In Section 2 we recall related work on UWI 

methods. Semi-automatic Tibetan UWI method 
is provided in Section 3. Section 4 gives the de-

scription of experimental results for evaluation, 

and Section 5 offers concluding remarks. 

2 Related Work 

For unknown words with more regular morpho-

logical structures, such as personal names, mor-
phological  rules  are  commonly  used  for im-

proving  the  performance  by  restricting  the 

structures of extracted words (Chen et al. 1994, 
Sun et al. 1995, Lin et al. 1993, Ma & Chen 

2003). However, it is not possible to list morpho-

logical rules for all kinds of unknown words, 
especially those words with very irregular struc-

tures. Therefore, statistical approaches usually 

play major roles on irregular UWI in most previ-

ous work (Sproat & Shih 1990, Chiang et al. 
1992, Tung & Lee 1995, Palmer 1997, Chang et 

al. 1997, Sun et al. 1998, Ge et al. 1999). 

Many statistical metrics have been proposed, 
including point-wise mutual information (MI) 

(Church et al., 1991), mean and variance, hy-

pothesis testing (t-test, chi-square test, etc.), log-

likelihood ratio (LR) (Dunning, 1993), statistic 
language model (Tomokiyo et al., 2003), con-

text-entropy (on each side) and frequency ratio 

against background corpus (Luo & Song 2004), 
DCF (Hong et al., 2009), and so on. Point-wise 

MI is often used to find interesting bigrams (col-

locations). However, MI is actually better to 
think of it as a measure of independence than of 

dependence (Manning et al., 1999). LR is one of 

the most stable methods for automatic term ex-

traction so far, and more appropriate for sparse 
data than other metrics. However, LR is still bi-

ased to two frequent words that are rarely adja-

cent, such as the pair (the, the) (Pantel et al., 
2001). On the other aspect, MI and LR metrics 

451



are difficult to extend to extract multi-word 

terms.  

There are also many hybrid methods com-

bined statistical metrics with linguistic 
knowledge and machine Learning algorithms, 

such as Part-of-Speech filters (Smadja, 1994; 

Asanee, 1997), roles tagging based (Zhang et al., 
2002), syntactic discriminators (Chen & Ma 

2002), max-margin Markov networks (Qiao and 

Sun, 2010; Li and Chang, 2010), Unsupervised 
Learning Strategy (Sun et al., 2004), Latent Dis-

criminative Model(Sun et al., 2011), boosting-

based ensemble learning (TeCho et al., 2012). 

But POS filters, roles tagging, machine learning 
algorithms does not work for Tibetan UWI. So 

far, there is no Tibetan POS tagger and Tibetan 

parser. We have built large scale Tibetan text 
resources recently, and we are tagging Part-Of-

Speech and labeling role right now, these corpora 

can form training set in the near future. 
Previous research and work in Tibetan word 

segmentation have made great progresses. How-

ever, cases with unknown words are not satisfac-

tory. In recent years, researchers mainly use 
maximum-matching method accompanying with 

some grammar rules (Chen et al. 2003a, Chen et 

al. 2003b, Cai 2009a, Cai 2009b, Qi 2006, Dolha 
2007, Zha 2007, Tashi 2009) to segment Tibetan 

text. Liu et al. (2012) designed and implemented 

a Tibetan word segmentation system named 

“SegT” which is lexicon-based practical system 
with a constant lexicon. However, it has the dif-

ficulty of identifying unknown words in newspa-

per articles and web documents which are highly 
changeable texts with time. 

The research on Tibetan UWI is, however, still 

at its initial stage. There is no public report of 
performance of Tibetan new word or unknown 

word identification. This paper introduces Tibet-

an UWI work which is in progress. 

3 Tibetan Unknown Word Identification 
from News Corpus 

Generally, Tibetan location name and organiza-

tion names are formed from a shorter word or 

proper noun adding a morpheme, river(ཆུང་), 
lake(མཚོ་), beach(ཐང་), gorge(འགག་), ministry(པུའུ), 
bureau(ཅུའུ), association(ཁང),  company(ཀུང་སི), 
province(ཞིང་ཆེན), city(གྲོང་ཁྱེར), county(རྫོང) etc.; some 
are also followed by modifiers, such as postposi-
tion, size, color, shape. We also observe that of-

ten, these morphemes are segmented separately 

during the first-time segmentation process. “Nat-

ural annotation” in our news articles also indi-

cates the occurrence of unknown words. This 

section simply introduces Tibetan script first and 

then aims to detail the two key procedures in Ti-
betan UWI from Tibetan web resources, that is, 

detect unknown words based on natural annota-

tion and based on context sensitive rules.   

3.1 Characteristics of Tibetan Script 

The Tibetan alphabet is syllabic; a syllable con-

tains one or up to seven character(s). Syllables 

are separated by a marker known as intersyllabic 
marks (tsheg), which is simply a superscripted 

dot. Linguistic words are made up of one or more 

syllables and are also separated by the same 

symbol, “tsheg”. Consonant clusters are written 
with special conjunct letters. Tibetan texts con-

sists of a string of syllables without any blanks to 

mark word boundaries except for punctuation’།’, 
called shad, at the end of each sentence, and ‘་’, 
called tsheg, within syllables. Figure 1 shows the 
structure of a Tibetan word which is made up of 

two syllables and means “show” or “exhibition”. 

 
Figure 1. Structure of a Tibetan word 

 

Tibetan sentence consists of one or more 
words, phrases or multi-word units. Another 

marker known as “shad” indicates the sentence 

boundary, which looks like a vertical pipe. Fig-

ure 2 shows a Tibetan sentence. It is segmented 
in line 2 and word by word translation is given in 

line 3. 

 
Figure 2. A Tibetan sentence and its translation 

3.2 Natural Annotation based Identification 

Tibetan unknown word covers both named entity 

and emerging new words in Tibetan web corpus. 

Special attention is paid to those noticeable 
named entities in order to suggest strong word 

candidates. “naturally annotated” means different 

type of annotations on varieties of Web resources 

which are “unconsciously handcrafted” by Web 
users for their own purposes, but can be used by 

452



computational linguists in a conscious and sys-

tematic way for various tasks of natural language 

processing, for examples, punctuation marks in 

Tibetan can benefit word boundaries identifica-
tion, social tags in social media can benefit key-

word extraction, “categories” given in News 

Corpus can benefit text categorization. 
“Space”, “punctuation” and “Tibetan auxiliary 

words” always appear next to a word. Hyperlink 

in web text is a useful explicit natural annotation 
too. In addition, <head> tag of html pages in-

cluding meta data as keywords, author, source, 

description; these are also quite useful natural 

annotation for UWI. Meanwhile, in our Tibetan 
News Corpus, English and Chinese in brackets 

give the hints for their corresponding Tibetan 

translation words. Sentences including this kind 
of annotation are as follow. 

 ༢༠༠༠འཇའ་ ད་ ་མ །(janet gyatso) ག་པ། 
 འཇར་ ་ (germany) ལ་ཁབ་ ་ ན་ ན(münchen ང་ ར་

schloss hohenkammer)མ ་ བ་ ་ གས། 
 ་ ༡༩༩༥ ར་ ར་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ན་ ལ་ནར་(Ernst 

Steinkellner ས་ ་ ་ ་ ་ཡ(Austria ལ་ཁབ་ ་ ་ར་
Graz ང་ ར་ ན་ Schloss Segau)མ ་ བ་ ་ ་ ག་

མཛད། 
 ་ ༡༩༩༨ ར་ ང་ གས་པ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་པར་ ང(Elliot Sper-

ling ས་ཨ་ ་ ང་ ར་ ་ ་ ང་ ན(Bloomington ་ ན་ ་ཡ་
ན/ ་མ ་ བ(Indiana University ་བ གས། 

 ཕ་ ས་ ར（ 帕 米 尔 ）མ ་ ང་ནས་ཤར་ གས་ ་ ན་ ན་ ་ ད
（祁连山脉）བར་འ ད་ ག་ ་31 ག་ ད་ལ། 

These brackets in news texts point out the 

right boundary of lots of location name and 
organization names. We confirm left bounda-

ries relying on pre-

established transliteration table. Thus follow-

ing named entities such as གྷེ་ར་ཛྷི(Graz), བྷུ་ལུ་
མིང་ཊོན(Bloomington), ཨིན་ཌི་ཡ་ནའི་མཐོ་སློབ (Indiana 
University), ཕ་ ས་ ར(帕米尔) can be extract-
ed from examples given above.  

3.3 Contextual Rule based Identification 

We will use a hybrid method MTC, that is, com-

bination of statistical metric and context sensitive 

rules, to recognize the boundary of an unknown 
word. It is applied to segmented texts.  

Beforehand, we analyse the lexicon-based pre-

segmentation of a sentence. Unknown words in 

the text would be incorrectly segmented into 
pieces of single syllable or shorter words through 

pre- segmentation. 

Figure 3 illustrates two possible pre-

segmented results of syllable string, that is, ex-

plicit unknown words in above expression or 

hidden unknown word in below expression.  

 
 

 

In Figure 3, UNK, w and s denotes unknown 
word, word and syllable respectively. Only ex-

plicit unknown words are discussed in this paper. 

Assume S is a sentence; and the right side of 

following equation represents its pre-segmented 
result. 

1 2 1 2 3 3 4 5 6 4

1 2 3 4

1 2 3 4 5 6

 

where    , , ,      Lexibase

              ,        Lexibase 

S w w s s s w s s s w

w w w w

s s s s s s







 

We name consecutive monosyllables (i.e.

1 2 3s s s ) after the first-time word segmentation as 

segmentation fragments. Table 1 gives examples 
of Tibetan word segmentation fragments. 

 

segmentation 

fragments 

Correct  

segmentation 

Translation 

of terms 

་/ རལ་/ ་/ ཝ ་/ 
 

་རལ་ ་ཝ ་  
Turrell wylie 

་/ ་/    ་ ་    Tokyo 
་/ མ་/ ་/ ཡ་/ 

མ ་/ བ/ 
་ མ་ ་ཡ་མ ་ བ Columbia 

university 

Table 1: Example of segmentation fragments. 
 

Column II in Table 1 is the correct segmenta-

tion of these unknown words. After maximum-
matching word segmentation, it is segmented to 

the content in column I. Almost all these un-

known words in our corpus are segmented into 

monosyllables because these words are not in-
cluded in our Tibetan word segmentation lexi-

con. 

At detection stages, the contextual rules were 
applied to detect fragments of unknown words, 

i.e. monosyllabic morphemes. Since it is hard to 

derive a set of morphological rules, which exact-
ly cover all types of unknown words, statistical 

rules are designed without differentiate their ex-

tracted word types.  

Figure 3. Categories of Tibetan unknown words 

453



A corpus-based learning method is proposed 

to derive a set of rules for monosyllabic words 

and monosyllabic morphemes. The idea is that if 

two consecutive morphemes are highly associat-
ed then combines them to form a new word.  

For each bi-seed-gram, the mutual information 

MI and t-score are calculated. These scores re-
flect the co-occurrence affinity between the two 

tokens of the bi-gram. These two scores are cal-

culated by the following formulas: 
2

2

2log
( )( )

a
MI

a b a c


 
                  (1)

( , ) ( ) ( )

1
( , )

( )( )
 

( )

r a b r a r b

r a b

P w w P w P w
t

P w w
N

a b a c
a

a a b c d

 


 
 

  

                       (2) 

where, a, b, c and d are elements of a contingen-

cy table. For example, given a bi-gram contain-

ing tokens x and y, 
a = number of bi-grams in which both x and y 

occur; 

b = number of bi-grams in which only x occurs; 
c = number of bi-grams in which only y occurs; 

d = number of bi-grams in which neither x nor y 

occurs.  

Another measure for Tibetan UWI is seed ex-
tension confidence. Denote Tibetan word (or syl-

lable) grouping of n-grams as ( )TS n , where n 

indicates the length of current word; Extend it to 

an adjacent Tibetan syllable and get ( 1)TS n , so 

the seed extension confidence 
nC defined as: 

1

2

| ( ) ( 1) |

     | ( ) ( 1) |

n mean mean

mean mean

C MI n MI n

T n T n





  

  
                    (3)          

in which meanMI and meanT indicates the mean of 
MI and t-value in the scope of extended Tibetan 

word respectively. 
To characterize Tibetan unknown words and 

their boundaries the extension step will be held. 

For each extension-ready Tibetan seed word, 

note the extension confidence nC ; if nC is greater 

than the threshold, current Tibetan word is ac-

cepted, and extension continues; when nC is less 

than the threshold extension stops. Boundary for 

Tibetan unknown word is obtained at the end of 

extension. Figure 4 shows the detail of extension 
process. High frequency bi-seed-gram can be 

extended to an unknown word (which is in 

brackets in Figure 4) using nC . 

 
Figure 4. Concept of bi-seed-gram extension 

4 Evaluation 

In this section, we first evaluate performance of 
Tibetan unknown word identification; then pre-

sent the performance of Tibetan word segmenta-

tion system SegT with unknown word discovery 
to show the positive effect of UWI. 

4.1 Experimental Data 

We have built the largest Tibetan text resources 

over the internet via an automatic crawler. They 

are from three web sites, that are, Tibet Daily, 
People’s Daily and Qinghai Daily. This News 

Corpus includes different fields such as politics, 

science, technology, education, language and 
culture, religion, tourism, environment and Ti-

betan medicine. Presently, other types of text, 

especially informal discussion on social network 
like Twitter and Wikipedia in Tibetan is in small 

size. Thus, we will utilize above Tibetan News 

Corpus to extract likely new words in this paper. 

Our evaluation data contains 12,027 words from 
737 randomly selected sentences which have 

word checking results (the proportion of un-

known word is more than 1%). 

4.2 Performance of Tibetan UWI 

We will use the precision, recall, f-score of un-

known word (Punk, Runk, Funk) to evaluate the per-

formance of Tibetan UWI. In our 3-fold cross 

validation, 70% of evaluation data is selected as 
training set, and the remainder is test set. Table 1 

shows the Tibetan unknown word identification 

results on our evaluation dataset. 

Method unkP  unkR  unkF  
MT 0.8205 0.7091 0.7607 
MTC 0.8323 0.7606 0.7948 

Table 1. 3-fold cross validation Results of Tibet-

an unknown word identification. 
 

In Table 1, MT denotes statistical metric, and 

MTC denotes the combination of MT and con-
text sensitive rules; the given result is the aver-

age of 3-fold cross validation. As shown in Table 

1, combination of contextual rules with statistical 
measure can promote the performance of Tibetan 

UWI; the f-score reaches 79.48%.  

454



After analyzing the results, we find that 

wrongly identified words can be divided into two 

classes, i.e., Tibetan person name and translit-

erated names. We will add deictic words into 
context sensitive rule and supplement translitera-

tion table to promote identification accuracy of 

these kinds of unknown words. 

4.3 Evaluation for Tibetan Word Segmen-
tation with the Extended Lexicon 

In order to validate the effect of our unknown 

word identification on Tibetan word segmenta-
tion, we conduct following experiments.  

In a typical word segmentation system, once a 

text is segmented using the available lexicon or 

heuristic rules, the segmentation process is fin-
ished. We observe that unknown words make up 

0.5% to 4% of all the words in our Tibetan news 

articles. Therefore, UWI is an important issue for 
a word segmentation algorithm. We add a semi-

automatic unknown word identification compo-

nent to the back-end of the whole segmentation 

process. 
We will evaluate the precision (Pseg), recall 

(Rseg), f-score (Fseg) of Tibetan word segmenta-

tion in this subsection.  

1 2/seg seg segP N N   

1 3/seg seg segR N N   

2 / ( )seg seg seg seg segF P R P R    

where 1segN denotes the number of correctly seg-

mented Tibetan words; 2segN denotes total num-

ber of segmented Tibetan words; 3segN denotes 

the total number of Tibetan words in the testing 

texts. 
The segmentation of original web texts uses a 

basic Segmentor (SegT (Liu et al, 2012)) and a 

general lexicon (with 220,000 Tibetan entries). 
Unknown words (out of our lexicon) are seg-

mented into pieces in this step. The following 

process is to detect possible unknown words 

from word segmentation fragment which are 
very likely to be words. We will compare lexi-

con-based Tibetan segmenter with and without 

unknown word identification component on our 
evaluation data. Presently, there is no Tibetan 

word segmentation specification and standard; in 

addition, there is no large and publicly available 

Tibetan training corpus. Thus make comparison 
with other research papers is difficult. We choose 

the best Tibetan word segmentation system Liu’s 

SegT (Liu et al. 2012) as baseline. 
Table 2 illustrates the results of Tibetan seg-

mentation by SegT with general lexicon and 

SegT with lexicon extension on evaluation. 

SegT+MTC, denotes Tibetan word segmenter 

SegT with lexicon extension; the proposed meth-

od in section 3 has been applied to semi-

automatically extend the lexicon of Tibetan word 
segmentation system SegT. 

 

 segP  segR  segF  

SegT 0.7769 0.8638 0.8181 
SegT + MTC 0.8197 0.8872 0.8521 

Table 2: Effects of Tibetan word segmentation. 

 
Experimental results show that the maximum 

word segmentation performance is got using 

general lexicon extended by MTC. As we see 
from Table 2, the precision, recall and f-score are 

increased by 5.49%, 2.71%, 4.15% respectively 

compared with SegT. The score of SegT+MTC is 

increased significantly because of the higher 
proportion of unknown words. The experimental 

results demonstrate that the Tibetan word seg-

mentation system SegT with proposed unknown 
word extension mechanism is indeed helpful to 

promote the accuracy and recall rates of Tibetan 

word segmentation. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present a hybrid method for 

Tibetan unknown word identification. Its f-score 
reaches around 80%. Compared with English or 

Chinese unknown word recognition work, the 

proposed methods doesn’t achieve satisfactory 
results, however, preliminary experimental re-

sults demonstrate that SegT with proposed un-

known word extension mechanism is indeed 

helpful to promote Tibetan word segmentation 
performance. In the future, the evaluation of pro-

posed method needs to be extended to large-scale 

test corpus and detailed context sensitive rules 
are used to identify Tibetan unknown words. 

Acknowledgements 

We thank the reviewers for their critical and con-
structive comments and suggestions that helped 

us improve the quality of the paper. The research 

is partially supported by National Science Foun-
dation (No.61303165, No.61202219, and 

No.61202220), Major Science and Technology 

Projects in Press and Publishing (No.0610-

1041BJNF2328/23), and Informationization Pro-
ject of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 

(No.XXH12504-1-10).

455



Reference 

Kawtrakul Asanee, Thumkanon Chalatip, Poovora-

wan Yuen, Varasrai Patcharee, Suktarachan Mukda. 

1997. Automatic Thai Unknown Word Recognition.  

Rang-jia Cai. 2009. Research on the Word Categories 

and Its Annotation Scheme for Tibetan Corpus, 
Journal of Chinese Information Processing, 

23(04):107-112.  

Zhi-jie Cai. 2009a. Identification of Abbreviated 

Word in Tibetan Word Segmentation. Journal of 

Chinese Information Processing, 23(01):35-37. 

Zhi-jie Cai. 2009b. The Design of Banzhida Tibetan 

word segmentation system. In: proceedings of the 

12th Symposium on Chinese Minority Information 

Processing. 

Jing-Shin Chang and Keh-Yih Su. 1997a. An Unsu-

pervised Iterative Method for Chinese New Lexi-

con Extraction. International Journal of Computa-
tional  Linguistics  &  Chinese  Language Pro-

cessing. 

Hsin-Hsi Chen and Jen-Chang Lee. 1994. The Identi-

fication of Organization Names in Chinese Texts. 

Communication of Chinese and Oriental Lan-

guages Information Processing Society, 4(2), Sin-

gapore, 1994, pp131-142 (in Chinese). 

Keh-Jiann Chen and Wei-Yun Ma, 2002. Unknown 

Word Extraction for Chinese Documents. In: Pro-

ceedings of COLING 2002, pp 169-175. 

Yu-Zhong Chen, Bao-Li Li and Shi-Wen Yu. 2003a. 
The Design and Implementation of a Tibetan Word 

Segmentation System, Journal of Chinese Infor-

mation Processing, 17(3): 15-20. 

Yu-Zhong Chen, Bao-Li Li, Shi-Wen Yu and Lancu-

oji. 2003b. An Automatic Tibetan Segmentation 

Scheme Based on Case Auxiliary Words and Con-

tinuous Features, Journal of Applied Linguistics, 

(01): 75-82. 

Tung-Hui Chiang, Jing-Shin Chang, Ming-Yu Lin 

and Keh-Yih Su. 1992. Statistical Models for Word 

Segmentation and Unknown Word Resolution. In: 

Proceedings of ROCLING V, pp 121-146.  

Lee-Feng Chien. 1999. PAT-tree-based adaptive 

keyphrase extraction for intelligent Chinese infor-

mation retrieval. Information processing and man-

agement 35:501-521. 

Kenneth Church, William Gale, Patrick Hanks and 

Donald Hindle. 1991. Using Statistics in Lexical 

Analysis. In: Zernik ed. Lexical Acquisition: Ex-

ploiting On-Line Resources to Build a Lexicon. 

Hillsdale, N J: Erlbaum, pp 115-164. 

Dolha, Zhaxijia, Losanglangjie, Ouzhu. 2007. The 

parts-of-speech and tagging set standards of Ti-

betan information process. In: proceedings of the 

11th Symposium on Chinese Minority Information 

Processing.  

Ted E. Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the sta-

tistics of surprise and coincidence. Computational 

Linguistics, 19 (1): 61-74. 

Xian-Ping Ge, Wan-Da Pratt, and Padhraic Smyth. 

1999.  Discovering  Chinese  Words  from  Unseg-

mented Text. In: proceedings of SIGIR ’99, pp 271-

272.  

Chin-ming Hong, Chih-ming Chen, Chao-yang Chiu. 
2009. Automatic extraction of new words based on 

Google News corpora for supporting lexicon-based 

Chinese word segmentation systems. Expert Sys-

tems with Applications, 36:3641-3651. 

Yun-Lun Li, Bao-Bao Chang. 2010. Maximum Mar-

gin Markov Networks-Based Chinese Word Seg-

mentation Method. Journal of Chinese Information 

Processing, 24(l):8-14. 

Ming-yu Lin, Tung-hui Chiang and Keh-Yih Su. 1993. 

A preliminary study on unknown word problem in 

Chinese word segmentation. In: Proceedings of 
1993 R.O.C. Computational Linguistics Confer-

ence, Taiwan, pp 119-137. 

Hui-dan Liu, Wei-na Zhao, Ming-hua Nuo, Li Jiang, 

Jian Wu, Ye-ping He. 2010. Tibetan Number Iden-

tification Based on Classification of Number Com-

ponents in Tibetan Word Segmentation. In: Pro-

ceedings of the 23rd International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics - poster volume (COL-

ING 2010), pp 719-724. 

Hui-dan Liu, Ming-hua Nuo, Wei-na Zhao, Jian Wu, 

Ye-ping He. 2012. SegT: A Practical Tibetan Word 

Segmentation System. Journal of Chinese Infor-
mation Processing, 26(1):97-103. 

Zhi-Yong Luo, Rou Song. 2004. An Integrated Meth-

od for Chinese Unknown Word Extraction. In: Pro-

ceedings of 3rd ACL SIGHAN Workshop. Barcelo-

na, Spain. pp 148-154. 

Wei-Yun Ma and Keh Jiann Chen. 2003. A Bottom-

up Merging Algorithm for Chinese Unknown Word 

Extraction. In: Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN 

Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pp 

31-38.  

Christopher D. Manning, Hinrich Schutze. 1999. 
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Pro-

cessing, MIT Press. 

Palmer D. David. 1997. A Trainable Rule-based Al-

gorithm for Word Segmentation. In: Proceedings of 

the 35th Annual Meeting  of  ACL and 8th 
Conference of the European Chapter of ACL. Ma-

drid. 

Patrick Pantel and De-kang Lin. 2001. A statistical 

corpus based term extractor. In E. Stroulia and S. 

456



Matwin, editors, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelli-

gence, pp 36-46. Springer-Verlag. 

Kunyu Qi. 2006. On Tibetan Automatic Participate 

Research with the Aid of Information Treatment. 

Journal of Northwest University for Nationalities 

(Philosophy and Social Science), (04):92-97.  

Wei Qiao, Mao-song Sun. 2010. Joint Chinese word 

segmentation and named entity recognition based 

on max-margin Markov networks. Journal of 

Tsinghua University (Science & Technology), 50(5): 

758-762. 

Richard  Sproat  and  Chilin  Shih. 1990. A  Statistical 

Method  for  Finding  Word Boundaries  in  Chi-

nese Text. Computer Processing of Chinese and 

Oriental Languages, 4, 336-351. 

Mao-song Sun, Chang-ning Huang, Benjamin K. 

Tsou, Fang Lu and Da-yang Shen.1997. Using 

Character Bigram for Ambiguity Resolution in 

Chinese Word Segmentation. Computer Research 

& Development. 34(5):332-339. 

Mao-song Sun, Chang-ning Huang, Hai-yan Gao, Jie 

Fang. 1995. Identifying Chinese Names in Unre-
stricted Texts. Journal of Chinese Information 

Processing, 9(2):16-27. 

Mao-song Sun, Da-yang Shen and Benjamin  K. Tsou. 

1998. Chinese Word Segmentation without Using 

Lexicon  and  Hand-crafted  Training  Data.  In: 

Proceedings of COLING-ACL ’98, pp1265-1271. 

Xiao Sun, De-gen Huang, Hai-yu Song et al. 2011. 

Chinese new word identification: a latent discrimi-

native model with global features. Journal of com-

puter science and technology, 26(1): 14-24. 

Yuan Sun, Luosangqiangba, Rui Yang and Xiao-Bing 

Zhao. 2009. Design of a Tibetan Automatic Seg-
mentation Scheme. In: proceedings of the 12th 

Symposium on Chinese Minority Information Pro-

cessing. 

Yuan Sun, Xiao-Dong Yan, Xiao-Bing Zhao and 

Guo-Sheng Yang. 2010. A resolution of overlap-

ping ambiguity in Tibetan word segmentation. In: 

Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on 

Computer Science and Information Technology, pp 

222-225. 

Gyal Tashi and Zhujie. 2009. Research on Tibetan 

Segmentation Scheme for Information Processing, 
Journal of Chinese Information Processing, 

23(04):113-117. 

Jakkrit TeCho, Cholwich Nattee, Thanaruk  Theera-

munkong. 2012. Boosting-based ensemble learning 

with penalty profiles for automatic Thai unknown 

word recognition. Computers and Mathematics 

with Applications 63, pp 1117-1134. 

T. Tomokiyo and M. Hurst. 2003. A Language Model 

Approach to Keyphrase Extraction. In: Proceedings 

of ACL-2003 workshop on multiword expressions. 

Sapporo, Japan. pp 33-40. 

C.H. Tung and H. J. Lee. 1995. Identification of un-

known words from corpus. International Journal of 

Computer Processing of Chinese and Oriental Lan-

guages, Vol. 8, Supplement, pp 131-146. 

Xia-Jia Zha, Dolha, Losanglangjie, Ouzhu. 2007. The 

theoretical explanation on “the parts-of-speech and 

tagging set standards of Tibetan information pro-

cess”. In: proceedings of the 11th Symposium on 

Chinese Minority Information Processing.  

Hua-ping Zhang, Qun Liu, Xue-qi Cheng. 2003. Chi-

nese lexical analysis using hierarchical hidden 

Markov model. In: proceedings of Second SIGHAN 

workshop affiliated with 41th ACL. Sapporo Japan, 

pp 63-70. 

Kevin Zhang (Hua-Ping Zhang), Qun Liu, Hao Zhang, 

Xue-qi Cheng. 2002. Automatic Recognition of 

Chinese Unknown Words Based on Role Tagging, 

In: Proceedings of SigHan 2002 Workshop at-

tached with the 19th International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics, Taipei, September. pp 
71-77. 

Ying Zhang, Ralf D. Brown, Robert E. Frederking, 

Alon Lavie. 2001. Pre-processing of Bilingual 

Corpora for Mandarin-English EBMT. In: Proceed-

ings of MT Summit VIII, Santiago de Compostela, 

Spain. 

457


