



















































WA-Continuum: Visualising Word Alignments across Multiple Parallel Sentences Simultaneously


Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2015 System Demonstrations, pages 121–126,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2015 ACL and AFNLP

WA-Continuum: Visualising Word Alignments across
Multiple Parallel Sentences Simultaneously

David Steele
Department of Computer Science

The University of Sheffield
Sheffield, UK

dbsteele1@sheffield.ac.uk

Lucia Specia
Department of Computer Science

The University of Sheffield
Sheffield, UK

l.specia@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

Word alignment (WA) between a pair of
sentences in the same or different lan-
guages is a key component of many nat-
ural language processing tasks. It is com-
monly used for identifying the translation
relationships between words and phrases
in parallel sentences from two different
languages. WA-Continuum is a tool de-
signed for the visualisation of WAs. It was
initially built to aid research studying WAs
and ways to improve them. The tool re-
lies on the automated mark-up of WAs, as
typically produced by WA tools. Differ-
ent from most previous work, it presents
the alignment information graphically in a
WA matrix that can be easily understood
by users, as opposed to text connected by
lines. The key features of the tool are the
ability to visualise WA matrices for mul-
tiple parallel aligned sentences simultane-
ously in a single place, coupled with pow-
erful search and selection components to
find and inspect particular sentences as re-
quired.

1 Introduction

Automatically generated WA of parallel sen-
tences, as introduced by the IBM models (Brown
et al., 1990), is a mapping between source words
and target words. It plays a vital role in Statisti-
cal Machine Translation (SMT) as the initial step
to generate translation rules in most state of the
art SMT approaches. It is also widely classed as
a valuable linguistic resource for multilingual text
processing in general.

Accurate WAs form the basis for construct-
ing probabilistic word or phrase-based translation
dictionaries, as well as the generation of more
elaborate translation rules, such as hierarchical

or syntax-based rules. As WAs improve, it is
expected that the translation rules also improve,
which, in turn, should lead to better Machine
Translation (MT).

Our research involves a careful study and evalu-
ation of the WA process and aims to develop ways
to improve its performance. A substantial part of
evaluating WAs often includes human intervention
where candidate WAs produced by various soft-
ware are examined. Consequently, tools to display
the alignment information are very important for
humans to analyse and readily digest such infor-
mation.

Various tools have been developed in previous
work that enable the visualisation and, in some
cases, direct manipulation of WAs. However, none
of these tools meet important requirements in our
research such as being able to quickly examine
WAs for tens and even hundreds of sentences si-
multaneously in a very clear format and indeed
being able to search, shuffle, and filter those align-
ments according to desired specific criteria. The
WA-Continuum tool was developed to fulfil this
need. It is implemented in Python and outputs to
standard HTML files, utilising the powerful prop-
erties provided by CSS and JavaScript. As the out-
put file is saved as regular HTML it works with
modern web browsers and thus users can make
use of many of the features they provide, such as
‘search and find’.

The remainder of the paper is organised as fol-
lows: Section 2 gives a brief overview of existing
WA visualisation tools. Section 3 highlights the
technical specification of the WA-Continuum soft-
ware as well as a number of useful features. Sec-
tion 4 presents the conclusion along with a brief
overview of future development plans.

2 Visualising Word Alignments

With the continuing attention given to SMT and
the overarching importance of WAs, various tools

121



Figure 1: A simple graphical visualisation of WAs
for an English-Spanish parallel sentence (Jurafsky
and Martin, 2009).

Figure 2: A simple graphical visualisation of WAs
for a German-English parallel sentence. The input
has been segmented into phrases (Koehn, 2013).

have been developed that help evaluate and vi-
sualise such alignments by going beyond us-
ing text alone. To understand the limitations
of text-only visualisation, consider the following
Chinese-English example, where the alignments
are given in terms of the positions of source-target
tokens: 我爱你 ! ||| i love you ! ||| 0-0 1-1 2-2
3-3. For short and simple sentences with numer-
ous 1-to-1 monotone alignments this visualisation
style can be sufficient. However, it is certainly not
suitable for longer and more complex sentences
that may contain more intricate alignments.

Previous tools include Cairo (Smith et al., 2000)
and VisualLIHLA (Caseli et al., 2008) and have
different implementations serving different pur-
poses, but they are usually presented in one of two
main visual styles. The earlier styles show align-
ments by matching words in text boxes, across two
sentences, using arrows or lines to make the con-
nections. Figure 1 shows an example of this style,
where the words in a parallel English and Span-
ish sentence have been aligned. From the example
it can be seen clearly which words map to each
other, where reordering occurs (arrows cross), and
where phrases are mapped to single words (e.g.
‘did not’ is mapped to ‘no’). Figure 2 shows a sim-
ilar mapping, but this time it places whole phrases
within a single text box and shows both word and
phrase alignments. Again, the place where the ar-
rows cross shows some reordering has occurred.
The accuracy of the alignments shown in both fig-
ures is not a concern, as the tools are purely de-
signed for visualisation purposes. The clarity in
how the information is presented, on the other
hand, is critical.

Figure 3: A graphical visualisation of WAs for
the given Spanish-English parallel sentence using
the matrix format. The columns represent Span-
ish words whilst the rows represent English words
(Jurafsky and Martin, 2009).

The second and perhaps more sophisticated
style displays the alignments in a matrix type grid,
where the individual columns of the grid map to
single elements (words or punctuation marks) in
one language and the rows do likewise for single
elements in the other language. Figure 3 shows
the same parallel sentences as those in Figure 1,
but in the grid style. Single blocks show map-
pings between individual elements (e.g. ‘Mary’
and ‘Maria’) whereas multiple blocks appearing
in the same row or column tend to show phrases
mapping to single words or other phrases (e.g. ‘did
not’ maps to ‘no’). As can be seen from Figures
1, 2 and 3 the same information is clearly pre-
sented in two different formats, both of which are
more intuitive than showing text and word position
numbers only.

The tools described so far are static and only
show visual representations of WAs. Tools such as
Yawat (Yet Another Word Alignment Tool) (Ger-
mann, 2008) and the SWIFT Aligner (Gilmanov
et al., 2014), however, allow the direct manipula-
tion and editing of WAs via graphical interfaces.
Picaro – a simple command-line alignment visual-
isation tool (Riesa, 2011) – uses the grid style to
display information. It also has an online demo
web page1 that allows for the demonstration of
the tool within a browser for a single parallel sen-
tence. Although Picaro is a relatively simple tool,
the visual presentation of the grid format on the
demonstration web page is clear and is ideal for

1http://nlg.isi.edu/demos/picaro/

122



quickly understanding WAs. Our research in SMT
requires the use of this type of presentation style
using the grid format, but with a few more pow-
erful features. Consequently, we had to develop
a new tool that had extra features, but maintained
the visual appeal and simplicity of the grid format.

3 Software Features

This section provides an overview of our software
including input format and technical specification,
as well as a number of the pertinent and powerful
features that we have been using.

3.1 Input and Technical Specification

WA-Continuum is written in Python (version 2.7).
The input commands can be typed directly into the
command-line on Mac, Linux and Windows com-
puters or laptops. They can also be passed as ar-
guments in a number of integrated development
environments (IDEs) such as Eclipse2 or Spyder3.

The input for the tool should include at least one
aligned parallel sentence arranged in the following
format:

SOURCE ||| TARGET |||WAs.

For example:
我爱你 ||| i love you ||| 0-0 1-1 2-2

Typically though the input will be a text file
containing a list of many such aligned parallel
sentences, one per line. The file is read along
with an optional user selected keyword or key-
phrase (e.g. -k ‘hello’ or -k ‘as soon as’), which
then only returns sentence pairs containing that
given word or phrase. Once these commands have
been provided, the output is returned as an HTML
page, which uses a mixture of HTML, CSS and
JavaScript. The page is then automatically opened
in the default web browser. This implementa-
tion has been successfully tested with a number of
modern web browsers including Mozilla Firefox,
Internet Explorer 11, Google Chrome and Opera.

A single web page can show thousands of align-
ment grids (it has been tested for 10000+ sen-
tences), but despite the fact that the program pro-
duces the HTML for the output very quickly, it
takes the browser a while to render the page when
thousands of grids are involved. We have found
through testing that up to 1000 grids can be loaded

2https://eclipse.org/
3https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/releases

and rendered fairly quickly (under four seconds on
an Intel dual core i3-3220 (3GHZ) computer with
12GB of RAM running Windows 8.1), and so, for
performance, we have set the current maximum
number of grids to 512 as this is usually enough
per search for inspection and evaluation purposes.

A short video showing a demonstration of the
WA-Continuum software is available online at:
http://wa-continuum.vidmeup.com/
The software itself will be made available for
download at:
http://staffwww.dcs.shef.ac.uk/
people/D.Steele/

3.2 Features

This section provides an overview of the perti-
nent features that have been developed and used
in our research including: keyword search, phrase
search, simple regular expression searches, view-
ing phrase pairs (minimal bi-phrases), and utilis-
ing useful browser features.

For all the given figures in this section exempli-
fying the WA-continuum software, the individual
coordinates for each square in the matrices should
be read as row number first, followed by the col-
umn number. For Figure 4, the alignment point
mapping ‘因为’ to ‘because’ (as highlighted at the
top and right hand side) should be read as align-
ment point 3-5. The three lines of text below each
grid show the source language, target language
and WAs as they appear in the input file.

Keyword Searching

As the main aim of the WA-Continuum soft-
ware is to be able to display clearly WAs for many
sentences (possibly the whole corpus), a keyword
search was implemented to enable users to select
sentences to visualise from the input file, for ex-
ample, for the analysis of particular constructions
such as those using discourse markers.

Figure 4 shows a typical alignment grid re-
turned from using the keyword search ‘because’.
The ‘14’ in the top left of the figure is an indi-
cation that it is the 15th4 grid for ‘because’ that
appears in the output page. Scrolling up the page
will show previous sentences featuring ‘because’,
while scrolling down will show subsequent sen-
tences.

4The sentence count starts at 0 to keep it consistent with
the alignment point numbering, which also starts at 0.

123



Figure 4: An example of a WA grid returned us-
ing the keyword search term ‘because’. The cursor
was placed over the alignment point for ‘because’
and ‘因为’ (point 3-5) so the tokens involved in
the alignment are highlighted.

Phrase Searching

This is simply an extension of the keyword
search, but by enclosing the search term in
quotes it enables the user to input a phrase. For
example, a user could easily run the program
with the search term ‘as soon as’ and only results
containing that complete phrase will be returned.
If the ‘as soon as’ was typed without the quotes,
the tool will return results for the keyword ‘as’.

It is worth noting here that the keyword/phrase
searches also apply to other alphabets/languages
in the input file. For example, a user could do a
search using either ‘china’ (lower case) or ‘中国’.

Support for Simple Regular Expressions

While keyword and phrase searches are use-
ful tools, if the user is looking for more specific
sentences then they can use searches combined
with basic regular expressions (RE). Figure 5 is
an example of WAs returned using the RE search
term ‘if.*, then’ which is being used to examine
sentences containing the if/then conditional.
Using the RE search term ‘if.*, then’ matches
any sentence that contains: ‘if’ followed by any
number of characters (.*) followed by a comma
and space and finally a ‘then’. Being able to use
REs makes the search very flexible and helps to
pinpoint specific examples.

Using Browser Features

Figure 5: A WA grid returned by using the regular
expression search term ‘if.*, then’.

Web browsers often contain many powerful
features, but one that is particularly useful for
searching the output of tens or hundreds of grids
is the ‘search and find’ function. Figure 6 shows
a browser search for ‘go to the airport’ being
performed on all alignment grids returned by
the original command-line keyword search term
‘the’. The figure shows that the sentence being
examined is the fifty-fifth one on the page as well
as it being the second out of eleven containing
matches for ‘go to the airport’. The up and down
arrows next to the search term enables the user to
quickly jump through the matches on the page.
Finally, the small yellow/orange lines on the right
hand side show where the other grids containing a
match appear on the page.

Phrase Pairs (Minimal Bi-phrases)

Koehn (2013) describes the idea of extract-
ing phrase pairs from word alignments for
phrase-based SMT. The reasoning is that if a
phrase pair has been identified, it can then be
used as evidence for the translation of future
occurrences of the phrase. Figure 7 shows an
example where ‘assumes that’ has been mapped
to ‘geht davon aus , dass’. Using this idea we
enabled our software to highlight phrase pairs
in order to better evaluate the WAs not just for
single words, but also for entire phrases. The
input file remains the same, but when the optional

124



Figure 6: Using the web browser features to search
the results. In this case, matches for ‘go to the
airport’ are sought.

‘-b’ switch, for bi-phrases on, is used in the
command-line then the tool recursively extracts
the phrase pairs at runtime and displays them in
the relevant matrices.

Figure 8 shows the first result returned using
the phrase search ‘as soon as’ plus the command-
line flag ‘-b’, which highlights phrase pairs. Each
single block containing the hash symbol repre-
sents the actual word alignment points, whereas
the large block represents phrase alignments.
Phrase alignments will always appear as rectan-
gles and may include blocks that were not origi-
nally aligned (coloured, but no hash symbol). In
the context of Figure 8, the English words ‘to call
you’ have been mapped as a phrase to ‘给你打电
话’ (literally: ‘give you make phone [call]). In this
case, quite a good translation. The process to es-
tablish a phrase pair works as follows. If column 5
(‘call’) is examined it is clear that it contains three
mappings to rows 7, 9 and 10 respectively. This
means that in order to use column 5 in a phrase we
must include every alignment point that occurs in
the column and by extension those that appear in
each of the rows 7, 9 and 10. However, to get from
row 7 to row 9 we must also include everything in
row 8, and so it goes on in a recursive process.

The phrase ‘to call you’ uses columns 4, 5 and
6. Column 4 has an alignment point at row 9 (9-
4). Row 9 in turn also has an alignment point with
column 5 (9-5), which then encompasses the other
alignment points in column 5 (7-5 and 10-5). As
moving through column 5 includes using row 8

Figure 7: A WA grid showing a phrase pair map-
ping of ‘assumes that’ to ‘geht davon aus , dass’
(Koehn, 2013).

then we must also include all alignment points for
that row as well, which in this case is in column 6
(8-6). After this, as there are no more alignment
points to consider outside of that block, then the
phrase is complete. A similar process is applied in
Figure 7, which is why the ‘ , ’ in column 4 must
be included as part of the phrase ‘geht davon aus ,
dass’.

Another point worth noting in Figure 8 is that
the alignment at point 8-6 (highlighted) mapping
‘你’ to ‘you’ is in a different colour. The rea-
son for this is that the software has been devel-
oped to show possible phrases/words that may oc-
cur within a larger phrase (nested phrases), as well
as being a phrase or single aligned word in its own
right. That is, in this case no other item appears
in column 6 or row 8 and so the word alignment
could be extracted in its own right as a mapping
between ‘你’ and ‘you’. None of the other ele-
ments that appear in the phrase ‘to call you’ have
the same property.

Finally columns 7, 8, 9, and row 2 have no
alignment points in them at all. This means
that the alignment software has not found suit-
able alignments for these elements. Using the
grid format enables one to spot this issue right
away. Based on knowledge of Chinese, we can
also quickly spot that the word ‘returns’ (column
11) should be mapped to ‘回来’ (row 2) and ‘as
soon as’ (columns 7, 8 and 9) should be mapped to
‘一’ (row 1). These errors would be much harder
to spot when examining the alignments in a text
only format.

125



Figure 8: A WA grid showing a phrase pair map-
ping of ‘to call you’ to ‘给你打电话’.

Other Features

A number of other features are available to
the user, including the ability to shuffle the results,
select a range of matrices, and filter the results to
include sentences under a certain length. Extra
features such as these are continually being
incorporated into the software as the need arises.
Furthermore, as the software is open source and
well documented, its modular design will enable
others to develop and extend the tool to easily add
further features as required.

4 Conclusion and Future Work

WA-Continuum was designed with one main spe-
cific purpose in mind, which is visualising WAs
for a large number of sentences at once, making it
possible to evaluate them more efficiently. Soft-
ware that enables the visualisation of WAs has
been developed in previous work and they offer
a myriad of features including manual editing of
WAs and text highlighting. However, none of the
tools that we found appeared to offer the full set of
functionalities that were required. WA-Continuum
builds on the idea of displaying WAs in an intuitive
matrix style, but makes accessing and searching
large volumes of data a fairly straightforward task.

In the future we aim to further enhance the soft-
ware by making a number of additions:

• Extra interactivity will be added to enable
manual editing of WAs.

• Phrase pairs could be shown on a separate
page or alongside the main grids, which is
useful where nested phrase pairs occur.

• Results that return a larger number of grids
(e.g. over 1000) will be spread over multi-
ple pages, with a main master page contain-
ing links to each of the sub pages.

• The option to output a small number of grids
to PDF may also be added as it is a useful
format, which could be used consistently in
numerous ways across many devices.

Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank
W Aziz for his valued input (including code snip-
pets), ideas and suggestions.

References
Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen A. Della, Vincent

J. Della Pietra, Fredrick Jelinek, John D. Lafferty,
Robert L. Mercer, and Paul S. Roosin. 1990. A Sta-
tistical Approach to Machine Translation. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 16(2):76-85.

Helena Caseli, Felipe T. Gomes, Thiago A.S. Pardo,
and Maria das Gracas V. Nunes. 2008. Visual-
LIHLA: The Visual Online Tool for Lexical Align-
ment. In XIV Brazilian Symposium on Multimedia
and the Web, pages 378-380. Vila Velha, Brazil.

Ulrich Germann. 2008. Yawat: Yet Another Word
Alignment Tool. ACL-08: HLT Demo Session,
pages 20-23. Columbus, Ohio.

Timur Gilmanov, Olga Scrivner, and Sandra Kubler.
2014. SWIFT Aligner, A Multifunctional Tool for
Parallel Corpora: Visualization, Word Alignment,
and (Morpho)-Syntactic Cross-Language Transfer.
LREC, pages 2913-2919. Reykjavik, Iceland.

Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2009. Speech
and Language Proecessing (2nd ed.). Pearson Pren-
tice Hall, London.

Philipp Koehn. 2013. Statistical Machine Translation.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Patrick Lambert. 2004. Alignment set toolkit.
http://gps-tsc.upc.es/veu/personal/lambert/software/
AlignmentSet.html.

Jason Riesa. 2011. Picaro: A simple
Command-Line Alignment Visualisation Tool.
http://nlg.isi.edu/demos/picaro/.

Noah A. Smith and Michael E. Jahr. 2000. Cairo: An
Alignment Visualisation Tool. In LREC. Athens,
Greece.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2006. ISA and ICA —Two web inter-
faces for interactive alignment of bitexts. In LREC.
Genoa, Italy.

126


