



















































On the Similarities Between Native, Non-native and Translated Texts


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1870–1881,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

On the Similarities Between
Native, Non-native and Translated Texts

Ella RabinovichM? Sergiu Nisioi� Noam Ordan† Shuly Wintner?
MIBM Haifa Research Labs

?Department of Computer Science, University of Haifa
�Solomon Marcus Center for Computational Linguistics, University of Bucharest

†The Arab College for Education, Haifa
{ellarabi,sergiu.nisioi,noam.ordan}@gmail.com, shuly@cs.haifa.ac.il

Abstract

We present a computational analysis of
three language varieties: native, advanced
non-native, and translation. Our goal is
to investigate the similarities and differ-
ences between non-native language pro-
ductions and translations, contrasting both
with native language. Using a collec-
tion of computational methods we estab-
lish three main results: (1) the three types
of texts are easily distinguishable; (2) non-
native language and translations are closer
to each other than each of them is to native
language; and (3) some of these character-
istics depend on the source or native lan-
guage, while others do not, reflecting, per-
haps, unified principles that similarly af-
fect translations and non-native language.

1 Introduction

This paper addresses two linguistic phenomena:
translation and non-native language. Our main
goal is to investigate the similarities and differ-
ences between these two phenomena, and contrast
them with native language. In particular, we are
interested in the reasons for the differences be-
tween translations and originals, on one hand, and
native and non-native language, on the other. Do
they reflect “universal” principles, or are they de-
pendent on the source/native language?

Much research in translation studies indicates
that translated texts have unique characteristics.
Translated texts (in any language) constitute a sub-
language of the target language, sometimes re-
ferred to as translationese (Gellerstam, 1986). The
unique characteristics of translationese have been
traditionally classified into two categories: proper-
ties that stem from interference of the source lan-
guage (Toury, 1979), and universal traits resulting

from the translation process itself, independently
of the specific source and target languages (Baker,
1993; Toury, 1995). The latter so-called transla-
tion universals have triggered a continuous debate
among translation studies researchers (Mauranen
and Kujamäki, 2004; House, 2008; Becher, 2010).

Similarly, over half a century of research on
second language acquisition (SLA) established the
presence of cross-linguistic influences (CLI) in
non-native utterances (Jarvis and Pavlenko, 2008).
CLI is a cover term proposed by Kellerman and
Sharwood-Smith (1986) to denote various phe-
nomena that stem from language contact situa-
tions such as transfer, interference, avoidance, bor-
rowing, etc.1 In addition, universal traits result-
ing from the learning process itself have been no-
ticed regardless of the native language, L1.2 For
example, similar developmental sequences have
been observed for negation, question formation,
and other sentence structures in English (Dulay
and Burt, 1974; Odlin, 1989) for both Chinese and
Spanish natives. Phenomena such as overgener-
alization, strategies of learning (Selinker, 1972),
psychological factors (Ellis, 1985), and cultural
distance (Giles and Byrne, 1982) are also influen-
tial in the acquisition process.

There are clear similarities between translations
and non-native language: both are affected by the
simultaneous presence of (at least) two linguistic
systems, which may result in a higher cognitive
load (Shlesinger, 2003). The presence of the L1
may also cause similar CLI effects on the target
language.

On the other hand, there are reasons to believe

1To avoid terminological conflicts, we shall henceforth
use CLI to denote any influence of one linguistic system over
another, w.r.t. both translations and non-native productions.

2For simplicity, we will use L1 to refer both to the na-
tive language of a speaker and to the source language of a
translated text. We use target language to refer to second and
translation languages (English in this paper).

1870



that translationese and non-native language should
differ from each other. Translations are produced
by native speakers of the target language. Non-
natives, in contrast, arguably never attain native-
like abilities (Coppieters, 1987; Johnson and New-
port, 1991), however this hypothesis is strongly
debated in the SLA community (Birdsong, 1992;
Lardiere, 2006).

Our goal in this work is to investigate three lan-
guage varieties: the language of native speakers
(N), the language of advanced, highly fluent non-
native speakers (NN), and translationese (T). We
use the term constrained language to refer to the
latter two varieties. We propose a unified com-
putational umbrella for exploring two related ar-
eas of research on bilingualism: translation studies
and second language acquisition. Specifically, we
put forward three main hypotheses: (1) The three
language varieties have unique characteristics that
make them easily distinguishable. (2) Non-native
language and translations are closer to each other
than either of them is to native language. (3) Some
of these characteristics are dependent on the spe-
cific L1, but many are not, and may reflect uni-
fied principles that similarly affect translations and
non-native language.

We test these hypotheses using several corpus-
based computational methods. We use super-
vised and unsupervised classification (Section 4)
to show that the three language varieties are easily
distinguishable. In particular, we show that native
and advanced non-native productions can be ac-
curately separated. More pertinently, we demon-
strate that non-native utterances and translations
comprise two distinct linguistic systems.

In Section 5, we use statistical analysis to ex-
plore the unique properties of each language vari-
ety. We show that the two varieties of constrained
language are much closer to each other than they
are to native language: they exhibit poorer lexical
richness, a tendency to use more frequent words, a
different distribution of idiomatic expressions and
pronouns, and excessive use of cohesive devices.
This is an unexpected finding, given that both na-
tives and translators (in contrast to non-natives)
produce texts in their mother tongue.

Finally, in Section 6 we use language modeling
to show that translations and non-native language
exhibit similar statistical properties that clearly re-
flect cross-linguistic influences: experiments with
distinct language families reveal salient ties be-

tween the two varieties of constrained language.
The main contribution of this work is thus the-

oretical: it sheds light on some fundamental ques-
tions regarding bilingualism, and we expect it to
motivate and drive future research in both SLA
and translation studies. Moreover, a better under-
standing of constrained language may also have
some practical import, as we briefly mention in the
following section.

2 Related work

Corpus-based investigation of translationese has
been a prolific field of recent research, laying out
an empirical foundation for the theoretically moti-
vated hypotheses on the characteristics of transla-
tionese. More specifically, identification of trans-
lated texts by means of automatic classification
shed light on the manifestation of translation uni-
versals and cross-linguistic influences as markers
of translated texts (Baroni and Bernardini, 2006;
van Halteren, 2008; Gaspari and Bernardini, 2008;
Kurokawa et al., 2009; Koppel and Ordan, 2011;
Ilisei and Inkpen, 2011; Volansky et al., 2015;
Rabinovich and Wintner, 2015; Nisioi, 2015b),
while Gaspari and Bernardini (2008) introduced
a dataset for investigation of potential common
traits between translations and non-native texts.
Such studies prove to be important for the develop-
ment of parallel corpora (Resnik and Smith, 2003),
the improvement in quality of plagiarism detection
(Potthast et al., 2011), language modeling, and
statistical machine translation (Lembersky et al.,
2012, 2013).

Computational approaches also proved benefi-
cial for theoretical research in second language
acquisition (Jarvis and Pavlenko, 2008). Numer-
ous studies address linguistic processes attributed
to SLA, including automatic detection of highly
competent non-native writers (Tomokiyo and
Jones, 2001; Bergsma et al., 2012), identification
of the mother tongue of English learners (Kop-
pel et al., 2005; Tetreault et al., 2013; Tsvetkov
et al., 2013; Nisioi, 2015a) and typology-driven
error prediction in learners’ speech (Berzak et al.,
2015). These studies are instrumental for language
teaching and student evaluation (Smith and Swan,
2001), and can improve NLP applications such as
authorship profiling (Estival et al., 2007) or gram-
matical error correction (Chodorow et al., 2010).
Most of these studies utilize techniques that are
motivated by the same abstract principles associ-

1871



ated with L1 influences on the target language.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the

first to address both translations and non-native
language under a unifying computational frame-
work, and in particular to compare both with na-
tive language.

3 Methodology and experimental setup

3.1 Dataset

Our dataset3 is based on the highly homogeneous
corpus of the European Parliament Proceedings
(Koehn, 2005). Note that the proceedings are pro-
duced as follows: (1) the utterances of the speak-
ers are transcribed; (2) the transcriptions are sent
to the speaker who may suggest minimal editing
without changing the content; (3) the edited ver-
sion is then translated by native speakers. Note in
particular that the texts are not a product of simul-
taneous interpretation.

In this work we utilize a subset of Europarl in
which each sentence is manually annotated with
speaker information, including the EU state rep-
resented and the original language in which the
sentence was uttered (Nisioi et al., 2016). The
texts in the corpus are uniform in terms of style,
respecting the European Parliament’s formal stan-
dards. Translations are produced by native En-
glish speakers and all non-native utterances are se-
lected from members not representing UK or Ire-
land. Europarl N consists of texts delivered by na-
tive speakers from England.

Table 1 depicts statistics of the dataset.4 In
contrast to other learner corpora such as ICLE
(Granger, 2003), EFCAMDAT (Geertzen et al.,
2013) or TOEFL-11 (Blanchard et al., 2013),
this corpus contains translations, native, and non-
native English of high proficiency speakers. Mem-
bers of the European Parliament have the right to
use any of the EU’s 24 official languages when
speaking in Parliament, and the fact that some of
them prefer to use English suggests a high degree
of confidence in their language skills.

3.2 Preprocessing

All datasets were split by sentence, cleaned
(text lowercased, punctuation and empty lines re-
moved) and tokenized using the Stanford tools

3The dataset is available at http://nlp.unibuc.
ro/resources.html

4Appendix A provides details on the distribution of NN
and T texts by various L1s.

sub-corpus sentences tokens types
native (N) 60,182 1,589,215 28,004
non-native (NN) 29,734 783,742 18,419
translated (T) 738,597 22,309,296 71,144
total 828,513 24,682,253 117,567

Table 1: Europarl corpus statistics: native, non-
native and translated texts.

(Manning et al., 2014). For the classification
experiments we randomly shuffled the sentences
within each language variety to prevent interfer-
ence of other artifacts (e.g., authorship, topic) into
the classification procedure. We divided the data
into chunks of approximately 2,000 tokens, re-
specting sentence boundaries, and normalized the
values of lexical features by the number of to-
kens in each chunk. For classification we used
Platt’s sequential minimal optimization algorithm
(Keerthi et al., 2001; Hall et al., 2009) to train sup-
port vector machine classifiers with the default lin-
ear kernel.

In all the experiments we used (the maximal)
equal amount of data from each category, thus we
always randomly down-sampled the datasets in or-
der to have a comparable number of examples in
each class; specifically, 354 chunks were used for
each language variety: N, NN and T.

3.3 Features

The first feature set we utilized for the classifica-
tion tasks comprises function words (FW), proba-
bly the most popular choice ever since Mosteller
and Wallace (1963) used it successfully for the
Federalist Papers. Function words proved to be
suitable features for multiple reasons:(1) they ab-
stract away from contents and are therefore less
biased by topic; (2) their frequency is so high that
by and large they are assumed to be selected un-
consciously by authors; (3) although not easily in-
terpretable, they are assumed to reflect grammar,
and therefore facilitate the study of how structures
are carried over from one language to another. We
used the list of approximately 400 function words
provided in Koppel and Ordan (2011).

A more informative way to capture (admittedly
shallow) syntax is to use part-of-speech (POS) tri-
grams. Triplets such as PP (personal pronoun) +
VHZ (have, 3sg present) + VBN (be, past partici-
ple) reflect a complex tense form, represented dis-
tinctively across languages. In Europarl, for ex-
ample, this triplet is highly frequent in translations

1872



from Finnish and Danish and much rarer in trans-
lations from Portuguese and Greek. In this work
we used the top-3,000 most frequent POS trigrams
in each corpus.

We also used positional token frequency
(Grieve, 2007). The feature is defined as counts of
words occupying the first, second, third, penulti-
mate and last positions in a sentence. The motiva-
tion behind this feature is that sentences open and
close differently across languages, and it should
be expected that these opening and closing de-
vices will be transferred from L1 if they do not
violate the grammaticality of the target language.
Positional tokens were previously used for trans-
lationese identification (Volansky et al., 2015) and
for native language detection (Nisioi, 2015a).

Translations are assumed to exhibit explicita-
tion: the tendency to render implicit utterances
in the source text more explicit in the translation
product. For example, causality, even though not
always explicitly expressed in the source, is ex-
pressed in the target by the introduction of cohe-
sive markers such as because, due to, etc. (Blum-
Kulka, 1986). Similarly, Hinkel (2001) conducted
a comparative analysis of explicit cohesive de-
vices in academic texts by non-native English stu-
dents, and found that cohesive markers are dis-
tributed differently in non-native English produc-
tions, compared to their native counterparts. To
study this phenomenon, we used the set of over
100 cohesive markers introduced in Hinkel (2001).

4 The status of constrained language

To establish the unique nature of each language
variety in our dataset, we perform multiple pair-
wise binary classifications between N, NN, and T,
as well as three-way classifications. Table 2 re-
ports the results; the figures reflect average ten-
fold cross-validation accuracy (the best result in
each column is boldfaced).

In line with previous works (see Section 2),
classification of N–T, as well as N–NN, yields
excellent results with most features and feature
combinations. NN–T appears to be easily distin-
guishable as well; specifically, FW+POS-trigrams
combination with/without positional tokens yields
99.57% accuracy. The word maybe is among the
most discriminative feature for NN vs. T, being
overused in NN, as opposed to perhaps, which ex-
hibits a much higher frequency in T; this may indi-
cate a certain degree of formality, typical of trans-

lated texts (Olohan, 2003). The words or, which
and too are considerably more frequent in T, im-
plying higher sentence complexity. This trait is
also reflected by shorter NN sentences, compared
to T: the average sentence length in Europarl is 26
tokens for NN vs. 30 for T. Certain decisiveness
devices (sure, very) are underused in T, in accor-
dance with Toury (1995)’s law of standardization
(Vanderauwera, 1985). The three-way classifica-
tion yields excellent results as well; the highest
accuracy is obtained using FW+positional tokens
with/without POS-trigrams.

feature / dataset N-NN N-T NN-T 3-way
FW 98.72 98.72 96.89 96.60
POS (trigrams) 97.45 98.02 97.45 95.10
pos. tok 99.01 99.01 98.30 98.11
cohesive markers 85.59 87.14 82.06 74.19
FW+POS 99.43 99.57 99.57 99.34
FW+pos. tok 99.71 99.85 98.30 99.52
POS+pos. tok 99.57 99.57 99.01 99.15
FW+POS+pos. tok 99.85 99.85 99.57 99.52

Table 2: Pairwise and three-way classification re-
sults of N, NN and T texts.

A careful inspection of the results in Table 2 re-
veals that NN–T classification is a slightly yet sys-
tematically harder task than N–T or N–NN; this
implies that NN and T texts are more similar to
each other than either of them is to N.

To emphasize this last point, we analyze the
separability of the three language varieties by ap-
plying unsupervised classification. We perform bi-
secting KMeans clustering procedure previously
used for unsupervised identification of transla-
tionese by Rabinovich and Wintner (2015). Clus-
tering of N, NN and T using function words into
three clusters yields high accuracy, above 90%.
For the sake of clusters’ visualization in a bidi-
mensional plane, we applied principal component
analysis for dimensionality reduction.

Figure 1: Clustering of N, NN and T into three (a)
and two (b) clusters using function words. Clus-
ters’ centroids in (a) are marked by black circles;
square sign stands for instances clustered wrongly.

1873



The results are depicted in Figure 1 (a). Evi-
dently, NN and T exhibit higher mutual proximity
than either of them with N. Fixing the number of
expected clusters to 2 further highlights this obser-
vation, as demonstrated in Figure 1 (b): both NN
and T instances were assigned to a single cluster,
distinctively separable from the N cluster.

We conclude that the three language varieties
(N, NN, and T) constitute three different, distin-
guishable ontological categories, characterized by
various lexical, syntactic and grammatical proper-
ties; in particular, the two varieties of constrained
language (NN and T) represent two distinct lin-
guistic systems. Nevertheless, we anticipate NN
and T to share more common tendencies and reg-
ularities, when compared to N. In the following
sections, we put this hypothesis to the test.

5 L1-independent similarities

In this section we address L1-independent simi-
larities between NN and T, distinguishing them
from N. We focus on characteristics which are
theoretically motivated by translation studies and
which are considered to be L1-independent, i.e.,
unrelated to cross-linguistic influences. We hy-
pothesize that linguistic devices over- or under-
represented in translation would behave similarly
in highly competent non-native productions, com-
pared to native texts.

To test this hypothesis, we realized various lin-
guistic phenomena as properties that can be easily
computed from N, NN and T texts. We refer to the
computed characteristics as metrics. Our hypoth-
esis is that NN metric values will be similar to T,
and that both will differ from N. We used equally-
sized texts of 780K tokens for N, NN and T; the
exact computation is specified for each metric.

For the sake of visualization, the three values
of each metric (for N, NN and T) were zero-
one scaled by total-sum normalization. Figure 2
graphically depicts the normalized metric values.
We now describe and motivate each metric. We
analyze the results in Section 5.1 and establish
their statistical significance in Section 5.2.

Lexical richness Translated texts tend to exhibit
less lexical diversity (Al-Shabab, 1996). Blum-
Kulka (1986) suggested that translated texts make
do with less words, which is reflected by their
lower type-to-token ratio (TTR) compared to that
of native productions. We computed the TTR met-
ric by dividing the number of unique (lemmatized)

tokens by the total number of tokens.

Mean word rank Halverson (2003) claims that
translators use more prototypical language, i.e.,
they regress to the mean (Shlesinger, 1989). We,
therefore, hypothesize that rarer words are used
more often in native texts than in non-native pro-
ductions and translationese. To compute this met-
ric we used a BNC-based ranked list of 50K En-
glish words5, excluding the list of function words
(see Section 3.3). The metric value was calculated
by averaging the rank of all tokens in a text; tokens
that do not appear in the list of 50K were excluded.

Collocations Collocations are distributed differ-
ently in translations and in originals (Toury, 1980;
Kenny, 2001). Common and frequent colloca-
tions are used almost subconsciously by native
speakers, but will be subjected to a more careful
choice by translators and, presumably, by fluent
non-native speakers (Erman et al., 2014). For ex-
ample, the phrase make sure appears twice more
often in native Europarl texts than in NN, and five
times more than in T; bear in mind has almost
double frequency in N, compared to NN and T.
Expressions such as: bring forward, figure out, in
light of, food chain and red tape appear dozens
of times in N, as opposed to zero occurrences in
NN and T Europarl texts. This metric is defined
by computing the frequency of idiomatic expres-
sions6 in terms of types.

Cohesive markers Translations were proven to
employ cohesion intensively (Blum-Kulka, 1986;
Øverås, 1998; Koppel and Ordan, 2011). Non-
native texts tend to use cohesive markers differ-
ently as well: sentence transitions, the major cohe-
sion category, was shown to be overused by non-
native speakers regardless of their native language
(Hinkel, 2001). The metric is defined as the fre-
quency of sentence transitions in the three lan-
guage varieties.

Qualitative comparison of various markers be-
tween NN and T productions, compared to N in
the Europarl texts, highlights this phenomenon: in
addition is twice as frequent in NN and T than
in N; according, at the same time and thus occur
three times more frequently in NN and T, com-
pared to N; moreover is used four times more fre-

5https://www.kilgarriff.co.uk we used the
list extracted from both spoken and written text.

6Idioms were taken from https://en.
wiktionary.org/wiki/Category:English_
idioms. The list was minimally cleaned up.

1874



lexical richness∗ mean word rank∗ pronouns∗ collocation (types)∗ transitions

0.3

0.35

0.4
ze

ro
-o

ne
sc

al
e

no
rm

al
iz

ed
va

lu
e

native (N) translated (T) non-native (NN)

Figure 2: Metric values in N, NN and T. Tree-way differences are significant in all metric categories and
“*” indicates metrics with higher pairwise similarity of NN and T, compared individually to N.

quently; and to conclude is almost six times more
frequent.

Personal pronouns We expect both non-native
speakers and translators to spell out entities (both
nouns and proper nouns) more frequently, as a
means of explicitation (Olohan, 2002), thus lead-
ing to under-use of personal pronouns, in contrast
to native texts. As an example, his and she are
twice more frequent in N than in NN and T.

We define this metric as the frequency of (all)
personal and possessive pronouns used in the three
language varieties. The over-use of personal pro-
nouns in N utterances, is indeed balanced out by
lower frequency of proper and regular nouns in
these texts, compared to T and NN.7

5.1 Analysis

Evidently (see Figure 2), translationese and non-
native productions exhibit a consistent pattern in
both datasets, compared to native texts: NN and
T systematically demonstrate lower metric values
than N for all characteristics (except sentence tran-
sitions, where both NN and T expectedly share
a higher value). All metrics except mean word
rank exhibit substantial (sometimes dramatic) dif-
ferences between N, on the one hand, and NN and
T, on the other, thus corroborating our hypothe-
sis. Mean word rank exhibits a more moderate
variability in the three language varieties, yield-
ing near identical value in NN and T; yet, it shows
excessive usage in N.

The differences between metric values are sta-
tistically significant for all metrics (Section 5.2).

7Normalized frequencies of nouns and proper nouns are
0.323, 0.331 and 0.345 for N, T, and NN, respectively.

Moreover, in all cases (except transitions), the dif-
ference between NN and T metrics is significantly
lower than the difference between either of them
and N, implying a higher proximity of NN and
T distributions, compared individually to N. This
finding further emphasizes the common tenden-
cies between NN and T.

As shown in Figure 2, NN and T are systemati-
cally and significantly different from N. Addition-
ally, we can see that T is consistently positioned
between N and NN (except for sentence transi-
tions), implying that translations produced by na-
tive speakers tend to resemble native utterances to
a higher degree than non-native productions.

5.2 Statistical significance

Inspired by the results depicted in Figure 2, we
now put to test two statistical hypotheses: (1) N,
NN and T productions do not represent identical
underlying distributions, i.e., at least one pair is
distributed differently; and consequently, (2) NN
and T productions exhibit higher similarity (in
terms of distance) than either of them with N. We
test these hypotheses by applying the bootstrap-
ping statistical analysis.

Bootstrapping is a statistical technique involv-
ing random re-sampling (with replacement) from
the original sample; it is often used to assign a
measure of accuracy (e.g., a confidence interval) to
an estimate. Specifically, let CN, CNN and CT de-
note native, non-native and translated sub-corpora
of equal size (780K tokens). Let CALL denote the
concatenation of all three sub-corpora, resulting
in a total of 2,340M tokens. We further denote
a function computing a metric m by fm; when ap-
plied to C, its value is fm(C). The sum of pair-

1875



wise distances between the three individual dataset
metrics is denoted by Dtotal:

Dtotal = |fm(CN)− fm(CNN)|+
|fm(CN)− fm(CT)|+ |fm(CNN)− fm(CT)|

High values of Dtotal indicate a difference be-
tween the three language varieties. To examine
whether the observed Dtotal is high beyond chance
level, we use the bootstrap approach, and repeat
the following process 1,000 times:8 we sample
CALL with replacement (at sentence granularity),
generating in the j-th iteration equal-sized samples
ĈN

j
, ĈNN

j
, ĈT

j
. The corresponding distance esti-

mate, therefore, is:

D̂total
j

= |fm(ĈNj)− fm(ĈNNj)|+
|fm(ĈNj)− fm(ĈTj)|+ |fm(ĈNNj)− fm(ĈTj)|

We repeat random re-sampling and computation

of D̂total
j

1,000 times, and estimate the p-value
of D̂total by calculation of its percentile within

the series of (sorted) D̂total
j

values, where j ∈
(1, . . . , 1000). In all our experiments the origi-
nal distance Dtotal exceeds the maximum estimate
in the series of D̂total

j
, implying highly significant

difference, with p-value<0.001 for all metrics.
In order to stress this outcome even further, we

now test whether (the constrained) NN and T ex-
hibit higher pairwise similarity, as opposed to N.
We achieve this by assessment of the distance be-
tween NN and T productions, compared to the dis-
tance between N and its closest production (again,
in terms of distance): either NN or T. We sample
CN, CNN and CT (with replacement) separately,
constructing C̃N, C̃NN and C̃T, respectively, and
define the following distance function:

D̃dif
j
= |fm(C̃Nj)−fm(C̃jK)|−|fm(C̃NN

j
)−fm(C̃Tj)|

where

K =


NN if |fm(CN)− fm(CNN)| <

|fm(CN)− fm(CT)|
T otherwise

We repeat re-sampling and computation of
D̃dif

j
1,000 times for each metric value in both

8This sample size is proven sufficient by the highly sig-
nificant results (very low p-value).

datasets and sort the results. The end points of
the 95% confidence interval are defined by esti-
mate values with 2.5% deviation from the min-
imum (min-end-point) and the maximum (max-
end-point) estimates. We assess the p-value of the
test by inspecting the estimate underlying the min-
end-point; specifically, in case the min-end-point
is greater than 0, we consider p<0.05. Metric cat-
egories exhibiting higher NN-T similarity than ei-
ther N-NN or N-T are marked with “*” in Figure 2.

6 L1-related similarities

We hypothesize that both varieties of constrained
language exhibit similar (lexical, grammatical,
and structural) patterns due to the influence of L1
over the target language. Consequently, we antic-
ipate that non-native productions of speakers of a
certain native language (L1) will be closer to trans-
lations from L1 than to translations from other lan-
guages.

Limited by the amount of text available for each
individual language, we set out to test this hypoth-
esis by inspection of two language families, Ger-
manic and Romance. Specifically, the Germanic
family consists of NN texts delivered by speak-
ers from Austria, Germany, Netherlands and Swe-
den; and the Romance family includes NN speak-
ers from Portugal, Italy, Spain, France and Roma-
nia. The respective T families comprise transla-
tions from Germanic and Romance originals, cor-
responding to the same countries. Table 3 provides
details on the datasets.

sentences tokens types
Germanic NN 5,384 132,880 7,841
Germanic T 269,222 7,145,930 43,931
Romance NN 6,384 180,416 9,838
Romance T 307,296 9,846,215 49,925

Table 3: Europarl Germanic and Romance fami-
lies: NN and T.

We estimate L1-related traces in the two va-
rieties of constrained language by the fitness of
a translationese-based language model (LM) to
utterances of non-native speakers from the same
language family. Attempting to trace structural
and grammatical, rather than content similarities,
we compile five-gram POS language models from
Germanic and Romance translationese (GerT and
RomT, respectively).9 We examine the predic-

9For building LMs we used the closed vocabulary of Penn

1876



tion power of these models on non-native produc-
tions of speakers with Germanic and Romance na-
tive languages (GerNN and RomNN), hypothesiz-
ing that an LM compiled from Germanic transla-
tionese will better predict non-native productions
of a Germanic speaker and vice versa. The fitness
of a language model to a set of sentences is esti-
mated in terms of perplexity (Jelinek et al., 1977).

For building and estimating language models
we used the KenLM toolkit (Heafield, 2011), em-
ploying modified Kneser-Ney smoothing without
pruning. Compilation of language-family-specific
models was done using 7M tokens of Germanic
and Romance translationese each; the test data
consisted of 5350 sentences of Germanic and Ro-
mance non-native productions. Consequently, for
perplexity experiments with individual languages
we utilized 500 sentences from each language. We
excluded OOVs from all perplexity computations.

Table 4 reports the results. Prediction of GerNN
by the GerT language model yields a slightly
lower perplexity (i.e., a better prediction) than pre-
diction by RomT. Similarly, RomNN is much bet-
ter predicted by RomT than by GerT. These differ-
ences are statistically significant: we divided the
NN texts into 50 chunks of 100 sentences each,
and computed perplexity values by the two LMs
for each chunk. Significance was then computed
by a two-tailed paired t-test, yielding p-values of
0.015 for GerNN and 6e-22 for RomNN.

LM / NN GerNN LM / NN RomNN
GerT 8.77 GerT 8.64
RomT 8.79 RomT 8.43

Table 4: Perplexity: fitness of Germanic and Ro-
mance translationese LMs to Germanic and Ro-
mance NN test sets.

As a further corroboration of the above re-
sult, we computed the perplexity of the GerT and
RomT language models with respect to the lan-
guage of NN speakers, this time distinguishing
speakers by their country of origin. We used the
same language models and non-native test chunks
of 500 sentences each. Inspired by the outcome
of the previous experiment, we expect that NN
productions by Germanic speakers will be better
predicted by GerT LM, and vice versa. Figure 3
presents a scatter plot with the results.

A clear pattern, evident from the plot, reveals

Treebank POS tag set.

Austria

Netherlands

Sweden

Germany
France

Italy

Romania

Spain

Portugal

Perplexity by GerT

Pe
rp

le
xi

ty
by

R
om

T

Figure 3: Perplexity of the GerT and RomT lan-
guage models with respect to non-native utter-
ances of speakers from various countries.

that all English texts with underlying Romance na-
tive languages (under the diagonal) are better pre-
dicted (i.e., obtain lower perplexity) by the RomT
LM. All Germanic native languages (except Ger-
man), on the other hand, are better predicted by
the GerT LM. This finding further supports the hy-
pothesis that non-native productions and transla-
tionese tend to exhibit similar L1-related traits.

7 Conclusion

We presented a unified computational approach
for studying constrained language, where many
of the features were theoretically motivated. We
demonstrated that while translations and non-
native productions are two distinct language vari-
eties, they share similarities that stem from lower
lexical richness, more careful choice of idiomatic
expressions and pronouns, and (presumably) sub-
conscious excessive usage of explicitation cohe-
sive devices. More dramatically, the language
modeling experiments reveal salient ties between
the native language of non-native speakers and
the source language of translationese, highlighting
the unified L1-related traces of L1 in both scenar-
ios. Our findings are intriguing: native speakers
and translators, in contrast to non-native speakers,
use their native language, yet translation seems to
gravitate towards non-native language use.

The main contribution of this work is empirical,
establishing the connection between these types of
language production. While we believe that these
common tendencies are not incidental, more re-
search is needed in order to establish a theoretical

1877



explanation for the empirical findings, presumably
(at least partially) on the basis of the cognitive load
resulting from the simultaneous presence of two
linguistic systems. We are interested in expanding
the preliminary results of this work: we intend to
replicate the experiments with more languages and
more domains, investigate additional varieties of
constrained language and employ more complex
lexical, syntactic and discourse features. We also
plan to investigate how the results vary when lim-
ited to specific L1s.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Israeli Min-
istry of Science and Technology. We are im-
mensely grateful to Yuval Nov for much advice
and helpful suggestions. We are also indebted to
Roy Bar-Haim, Anca Bucur, Liviu P. Dinu, and
Yosi Mass for their support and guidance during
the early stages of this work, and we thank our
anonymous reviewers for their valuable insights.

References

Omar S. Al-Shabab. 1996. Interpretation and the
language of translation: creativity and conven-
tions in translation. Janus, Edinburgh.

Mona Baker. 1993. Corpus linguistics and trans-
lation studies: Implications and applications. In
Mona Baker, Gill Francis, and Elena Tognini-
Bonelli, editors, Text and technology: in honour
of John Sinclair, John Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pages 233–252.

Marco Baroni and Silvia Bernardini. 2006. A
new approach to the study of Translationese:
Machine-learning the difference between orig-
inal and translated text. Literary and Linguistic
Computing 21(3):259–274.

Viktor Becher. 2010. Abandoning the notion of
“translation-inherent” explicitation: Against a
dogma of translation studies. Across Languages
and Cultures 11(1):1–28.

Shane Bergsma, Matt Post, and David Yarowsky.
2012. Stylometric analysis of scientific arti-
cles. In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 327–337.

Yevgeni Berzak, Roi Reichart, and Boris Katz.
2015. Contrastive analysis with predictive

power: Typology driven estimation of grammat-
ical error distributions in ESL. In Proceedings
of the 19th Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning. pages 94–102.

David Birdsong. 1992. Ultimate attainment in sec-
ond language acquisition. Language 68(4):706–
755.

Daniel Blanchard, Joel Tetreault, Derrick Hig-
gins, Aoife Cahill, and Martin Chodorow. 2013.
TOEFL11: A corpus of non-native english. ETS
Research Report Series 2013(2):i–15.

Shoshana Blum-Kulka. 1986. Shifts of cohe-
sion and coherence in translation. In Ju-
liane House and Shoshana Blum-Kulka, editors,
Interlingual and intercultural communication
Discourse and cognition in translation and sec-
ond language acquisition studies, Gunter Narr
Verlag, volume 35, pages 17–35.

Martin Chodorow, Michael Gamon, and Joel
Tetreault. 2010. The utility of article and prepo-
sition error correction systems for English lan-
guage learners: Feedback and assessment. Lan-
guage Testing 27(3):419–436.

Rene Coppieters. 1987. Competence differences
between native and near-native speakers. Lan-
guage 63(3):544–573.

Heidi C. Dulay and Marina K. Burt. 1974. Natural
sequences in child second language acquisition.
Language learning 24(1):37–53.

Rod Ellis. 1985. Understanding Second Language
Acquisition. Oxford Applied Linguistics. Ox-
ford University Press.

Britt Erman, Annika Denke, Lars Fant, and Fanny
Forsberg Lundell. 2014. Nativelike expression
in the speech of long-residency L2 users: A
study of multiword structures in L2 English,
French and Spanish. International Journal of
Applied Linguistics .

Dominique Estival, Tanja Gaustad, Son Bao
Pham, Will Radford, and Ben Hutchinson.
2007. Author profiling for English emails. In
Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the Pa-
cific Association for Computational Linguistics.
pages 263–272.

Federico Gaspari and Silvia Bernardini. 2008.
Comparing non-native and translated language:
Monolingual comparable corpora with a twist.
In Proceedings of The International Symposium

1878



on Using Corpora in Contrastive and Transla-
tion Studies.

Jeroen Geertzen, Theodora Alexopoulou, and
Anna Korhonen. 2013. Automatic linguistic an-
notation of large scale L2 databases: The EF-
Cambridge open language database (EFCAM-
DAT). In Proceedings of the 31st Second Lan-
guage Research Forum. Cascadilla Proceedings
Project, Somerville, MA.

Martin Gellerstam. 1986. Translationese in
Swedish novels translated from English. In Lars
Wollin and Hans Lindquist, editors, Translation
Studies in Scandinavia, CWK Gleerup, Lund,
pages 88–95.

Howard Giles and Jane L. Byrne. 1982. An inter-
group approach to second language acquisition.
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural De-
velopment 3(1):17–40.

Sylviane Granger. 2003. The international cor-
pus of learner English: a new resource for for-
eign language learning and teaching and second
language acquisition research. Tesol Quarterly
pages 538–546.

Jack Grieve. 2007. Quantitative authorship attri-
bution: An evaluation of techniques. Literary
and Linguistic Computing 22(3):251–270.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bern-
hard Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H.
Witten. 2009. The WEKA data mining soft-
ware: an update. SIGKDD Explorations
11(1):10–18.

Sandra Halverson. 2003. The cognitive basis of
translation universals. Target 15(2):197–241.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and
smaller language model queries. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 187–197.

Eli Hinkel. 2001. Matters of cohesion in L2
academic texts. Applied Language Learning
12(2):111–132.

Juliane House. 2008. Beyond intervention: Uni-
versals in translation? trans-kom 1(1):6–19.

Iustina Ilisei and Diana Inkpen. 2011. Transla-
tionese traits in Romanian newspapers: A ma-
chine learning approach. International Journal
of Computational Linguistics and Applications
2(1-2).

Scott Jarvis and Aneta Pavlenko. 2008. Crosslin-
guistic influence in language and cognition.
Routledge.

Frederick Jelinek, Robert L. Mercer, Lalit R. Bahl,
and J. K. Baker. 1977. Perplexity—a measure of
the difficulty of speech recognition tasks. Jour-
nal of the Acoustical Society of America 62:S63.
Supplement 1.

Jacqueline S. Johnson and Elissa L. Newport.
1991. Critical period effects on universal prop-
erties of language: The status of subjacency in
the acquisition of a second language. Cognition
39(3):215–258.

S.S. Keerthi, S.K. Shevade, C. Bhattacharyya, and
K.R.K. Murthy. 2001. Improvements to platt’s
smo algorithm for svm classifier design. Neural
Computation 13(3):637–649.

Eric Kellerman and Michael Sharwood-Smith.
1986. Crosslinguistic Influence in Second
Language Acquisition. Language Teaching
Methodology Series. Pearson College Division.

Dorothy Kenny. 2001. Lexis and creativity in
translation: a corpus-based study. St. Jerome.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus
for statistical machine translation. MT Summit.

Moshe Koppel and Noam Ordan. 2011. Trans-
lationese and its dialects. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Portland, Oregon, USA,
pages 1318–1326.

Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, and Kfir Zigdon.
2005. Determining an author’s native language
by mining a text for errors. In Proceedings of
the eleventh ACM SIGKDD international con-
ference on Knowledge discovery in data mining.
ACM, pages 624–628.

David Kurokawa, Cyril Goutte, and Pierre Is-
abelle. 2009. Automatic detection of translated
text and its impact on machine translation. In
Proceedings of MT-Summit XII. pages 81–88.

Donna Lardiere. 2006. Ultimate Attainment in
Second Language Acquisition: A Case Study.
L. Erlbaum.

Gennadi Lembersky, Noam Ordan, and Shuly
Wintner. 2012. Language models for machine
translation: Original vs. translated texts. Com-
putational Linguistics 38(4):799–825.

1879



Gennadi Lembersky, Noam Ordan, and Shuly
Wintner. 2013. Improving statistical ma-
chine translation by adapting translation mod-
els to translationese. Computational Linguistics
39(4):999–1023.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John
Bauer, Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and
David McClosky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP
natural language processing toolkit. In Proceed-
ings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: System Demon-
strations. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Baltimore, Maryland, pages 55–60.

A. Mauranen and P. Kujamäki, editors. 2004.
Translation universals: Do they exist?. John
Benjamins.

Frederick Mosteller and David L Wallace. 1963.
Inference in an authorship problem: A compar-
ative study of discrimination methods applied to
the authorship of the disputed Federalist Papers.
Journal of the American Statistical Association
58(302):275–309.

Sergiu Nisioi. 2015a. Feature analysis for native
language identification. In Alexander F. Gel-
bukh, editor, Proceedings of the 16th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and Intelligent Text Processing (CICLing
2015). Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science.

Sergiu Nisioi. 2015b. Unsupervised classification
of translated texts. In Chris Biemann, Siegfried
Handschuh, André Freitas, Farid Meziane, and
Elisabeth Métais, editors, Natural Language
Processing and Information Systems: Proceed-
ings of the 20th International Conference on
Applications of Natural Language to Informa-
tion Systems, NLDB. Springer, volume 9103 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 323–
334.

Sergiu Nisioi, Ella Rabinovich, Liviu P. Dinu,
and Shuly Wintner. 2016. A corpus of native,
non-native and translated texts. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2016.

Terence Odlin. 1989. Language Transfer: Cross-
Linguistic Influence in Language Learning.
Cambridge Applied Linguistics. Cambridge
University Press.

Maeve Olohan. 2002. Leave it out! using a com-
parable corpus to investigate aspects of explic-

itation in translation. Cadernos de Tradução
1(9):153–169.

Maeve Olohan. 2003. How frequent are the con-
tractions? A study of contracted forms in the
translational English corpus. Target 15(1):59–
89.

Lin Øverås. 1998. In search of the third code:
An investigation of norms in literary translation.
Meta 43(4):557–570.

Martin Potthast, Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Benno
Stein, and Paolo Rosso. 2011. Cross-language
plagiarism detection. Language Resources and
Evaluation 45(1):45–62.

Ella Rabinovich and Shuly Wintner. 2015. Unsu-
pervised identification of translationese. Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 3:419–432.

Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith. 2003. The web
as a parallel corpus. Computational Linguistics
29(3):349–380.

Larry Selinker. 1972. Interlanguage. Interna-
tional Review of Applied Linguistics in Lan-
guage Teaching 10(1–4):209–232.

Miriam Shlesinger. 1989. Simultaneous Interpre-
tation as a Factor in Effecting Shifts in the Po-
sition of Texts on the Oral-literate Continuum.
Master’s thesis, Tel Aviv University, Faculty
of the Humanities, Department of Poetics and
Comparative Literature.

Miriam Shlesinger. 2003. Effects of presentation
rate on working memory in simultaneous inter-
preting. The Interpreters Newsletter 12:37–49.

Bernard Smith and Michael Swan. 2001. Learner
English: A teacher’s guide to interference and
other problems. Ernst Klett Sprachen.

Joel Tetreault, Daniel Blanchard, and Aoife Cahill.
2013. A report on the first native language iden-
tification shared task. In Proceedings of the
Eighth Workshop on Building Educational Ap-
plications Using NLP. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Laura Mayfield Tomokiyo and Rosie Jones. 2001.
You’re not from’round here, are you?: naive
Bayes detection of non-native utterance text. In
Proceedings of the second meeting of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics on Language technolo-
gies. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1–8.

1880



Gideon Toury. 1979. Interlanguage and its mani-
festations in translation. Meta 24(2):223–231.

Gideon Toury. 1980. In Search of a Theory of
Translation. The Porter Institute for Poetics and
Semiotics, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv.

Gideon Toury. 1995. Descriptive Translation
Studies and beyond. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam / Philadelphia.

Yulia Tsvetkov, Naama Twitto, Nathan Schnei-
der, Noam Ordan, Manaal Faruqui, Victor
Chahuneau, Shuly Wintner, and Chris Dyer.
2013. Identifying the L1 of non-native writers:
the CMU-Haifa system. In Proceedings of the
Eighth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications. Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 279–287.

Hans van Halteren. 2008. Source language mark-
ers in EUROPARL translations. In Donia Scott
and Hans Uszkoreit, editors, COLING 2008,
22nd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, Proceedings of the Confer-
ence, 18-22 August 2008, Manchester, UK.
pages 937–944.

Ria Vanderauwera. 1985. Dutch Novels Translated
into English: The transformation of a “minor-
ity” literature. Rodopi.

Vered Volansky, Noam Ordan, and Shuly Wintner.
2015. On the features of translationese. Digital
Scholarship in the Humanities 30(1):98–118.

Appendix A - Distribution of L1s in
Translations and Non-native Texts

We assume that native languages of non-native
speakers are highly correlated with (although not
strictly identical to) their country of origin.

country of origin tokens(T) tokens(NN)
Austria - 2K
Belgium - 67K
Bulgaria 25K 6K
Cyprus - 35K
Czech Republic 21K 3K
Denmark 444K 14K
Estonia 32K 50K
Finland 500K 81K
France 3,486K 28K
Germany 3,768K 17K
Greece 944K 13K
Hungary 167K 38K
Italy 1,690K 15K
Latvia 38K 13K
Lithuania 177K 18K
Luxembourg - 46K
Malta 28K 40K
Netherlands 1,746K 64K
Poland 522K 36K
Portugal 1,633K 54K
Romania 244K 29K
Slovakia 88K 6K
Slovenia 43K 1K
Spain 1,836K 54K
Sweden 951K 52K

Table 5: Distribution of L1s by country.

1881


