



















































Character-based Neural Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 357–361,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Character-based Neural Machine Translation

Marta R. Costa-jussà and José A. R. Fonollosa
TALP Research Center

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona
{marta.ruiz,jose.fonollosa}@upc.edu

Abstract

Neural Machine Translation (MT) has
reached state-of-the-art results. However,
one of the main challenges that neural MT
still faces is dealing with very large vo-
cabularies and morphologically rich lan-
guages.

In this paper, we propose a neural MT
system using character-based embeddings
in combination with convolutional and
highway layers to replace the standard
lookup-based word representations. The
resulting unlimited-vocabulary and affix-
aware source word embeddings are tested
in a state-of-the-art neural MT based on
an attention-based bidirectional recurrent
neural network. The proposed MT scheme
provides improved results even when the
source language is not morphologically
rich. Improvements up to 3 BLEU points
are obtained in the German-English WMT
task.

1 Introduction

Machine Translation (MT) is the set of algorithms
that aim at transforming a source language into
a target language. For the last 20 years, one of
the most popular approaches has been statistical
phrase-based MT, which uses a combination of
features to maximise the probability of the tar-
get sentence given the source sentence (Koehn et
al., 2003). Just recently, the neural MT approach
has appeared (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom, 2013;
Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014; Bahdanau
et al., 2015) and obtained state-of-the-art results.

Among its different strengths neural MT does
not need to pre-design feature functions before-
hand; optimizes the entire system at once because

it provides a fully trainable model; uses word em-
beddings (Sutskever et al., 2014) so that words (or
minimal units) are not independent anymore; and
is easily extendable to multimodal sources of in-
formation (Elliott et al., 2015). As for weaknesses,
neural MT has a strong limitation in vocabulary
due to its architecture and it is difficult and com-
putationally expensive to tune all parameters in the
deep learning structure.

In this paper, we use the neural MT baseline
system from (Bahdanau et al., 2015), which fol-
lows an encoder-decoder architecture with atten-
tion, and introduce elements from the character-
based neural language model (Kim et al., 2016).
The translation unit continues to be the word, and
we continue using word embeddings related to
each word as an input vector to the bidirectional
recurrent neural network (attention-based mecha-
nism). The difference is that now the embeddings
of each word are no longer an independent vec-
tor, but are computed from the characters of the
corresponding word. The system architecture has
changed in that we are using a convolutional neu-
ral network (CNN) and a highway network over
characters before the attention-based mechanism
of the encoder. This is a significant difference
from previous work (Sennrich et al., 2015) which
uses the neural MT architecture from (Bahdanau
et al., 2015) without modification to deal with sub-
word units (but not including unigram characters).

Subword-based representations have already
been explored in Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP), e.g. for POS tagging (Santos and
Zadrozny, 2014), name entity recognition (San-
tos and aes, 2015), parsing (Ballesteros et al.,
2015), normalization (Chrupala, 2014) or learning
word representations (Botha and Blunsom, 2014;
Chen et al., 2015). These previous works show
different advantages of using character-level in-
formation. In our case, with the new character-

357



based neural MT architecture, we take advantage
of intra-word information, which is proven to be
extremely useful in other NLP applications (San-
tos and Zadrozny, 2014; Ling et al., 2015a), es-
pecially when dealing with morphologically rich
languages. When using the character-based source
word embeddings in MT, there ceases to be un-
known words in the source input, while the size
of the target vocabulary remains unchanged. Al-
though the target vocabulary continues with the
same limitation as in the standard neural MT sys-
tem, the fact that there are no unknown words
in the source helps to reduce the number of un-
knowns in the target. Moreover, the remaining un-
known target words can now be more successfully
replaced with the corresponding source-aligned
words. As a consequence, we obtain a significant
improvement in terms of translation quality (up to
3 BLEU points).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 briefly explains the architecture of the
neural MT that we are using as a baseline sys-
tem. Section 3 describes the changes introduced in
the baseline architecture in order to use character-
based embeddings instead of the standard lookup-
based word representations. Section 4 reports the
experimental framework and the results obtained
in the German-English WMT task. Finally, sec-
tion 5 concludes with the contributions of the pa-
per and further work.

2 Neural Machine Translation

Neural MT uses a neural network approach to
compute the conditional probability of the tar-
get sentence given the source sentence (Cho et
al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015). The approach
used in this work (Bahdanau et al., 2015) fol-
lows the encoder-decoder architecture.First, the
encoder reads the source sentence s = (s1, ..sI)
and encodes it into a sequence of hidden states
h = (h1, ..hI). Then, the decoder generates a
corresponding translation t = t1, ..., tJ based on
the encoded sequence of hidden states h. Both en-
coder and decoder are jointly trained to maximize
the conditional log-probability of the correct trans-
lation.

This baseline autoencoder architecture is im-
proved with a attention-based mechanism (Bah-
danau et al., 2015), in which the encoder uses
a bi-directional gated recurrent unit (GRU). This
GRU allows for a better performance with long

sentences. The decoder also becomes a GRU and
each word tj is predicted based on a recurrent hid-
den state, the previously predicted word tj−1, and
a context vector. This context vector is obtained
from the weighted sum of the annotations hk,
which in turn, is computed through an alignment
model αjk (a feedforward neural network). This
neural MT approach has achieved competitive re-
sults against the standard phrase-based system in
the WMT 2015 evaluation (Jean et al., 2015).

3 Character-based Machine Translation

Word embeddings have been shown to boost the
performance in many NLP tasks, including ma-
chine translation. However, the standard lookup-
based embeddings are limited to a finite-size vo-
cabulary for both computational and sparsity rea-
sons. Moreover, the orthographic representation
of the words is completely ignored. The standard
learning process is blind to the presence of stems,
prefixes, suffixes and any other kind of affixes in
words.

As a solution to those drawbacks, new alterna-
tive character-based word embeddings have been
recently proposed for tasks such as language mod-
eling (Kim et al., 2016; Ling et al., 2015a), pars-
ing (Ballesteros et al., 2015) or POS tagging (Ling
et al., 2015a; Santos and Zadrozny, 2014). Even
in MT (Ling et al., 2015b), where authors use the
character transformation presented in (Ballesteros
et al., 2015; Ling et al., 2015a) both in the source
and target. However, they do not seem to get clear
improvements. Recently, (Luong and Manning,
2016) propose a combination of word and char-
acters in neural MT.

For our experiments in neural MT, we selected
the best character-based embedding architecture
proposed by Kim et al. (Kim et al., 2016) for lan-
guage modeling. As the Figure 1 shows, the com-
putation of the representation of each word starts
with a character-based embedding layer that as-
sociates each word (sequence of characters) with
a sequence of vectors. This sequence of vectors
is then processed with a set of 1D convolution
filters of different lengths (from 1 to 7 charac-
ters) followed with a max pooling layer. For each
convolutional filter, we keep only the output with
the maximum value. The concatenation of these
max values already provides us with a representa-
tion of each word as a vector with a fixed length
equal to the total number of convolutional ker-

358



nels. However, the addition of two highway layers
was shown to improve the quality of the language
model in (Kim et al., 2016) so we also kept these
additional layers in our case. The output of the
second Highway layer will give us the final vec-
tor representation of each source word, replacing
the standard source word embedding in the neural
machine translation system.

! " # $ % & ' ( )

*)+,)$-)./0.

-1&"&-2)".

)3')!!#$45

6,(2#7().

-/$8/(,2#/$.

0#(2)"5./0.!#00)")$2.

()$4125

6&9./,27,2./0.

)&-1.0#(2)"

:#41;&<.=&<)"

:#41;&<.=&<)"

:#41;&<.=&<)"5

Figure 1: Character-based word embedding

In the target size we are still limited in vocabu-
lary by the softmax layer at the output of the net-
work and we kept the standard target word em-
beddings in our experiments. However, the results
seem to show that the affix-aware representation of
the source words has a positive influence on all the
components of the network. The global optimiza-
tion of the integrated model forces the translation
model and the internal vector representation of the
target words to follow the affix-aware codification
of the source words.

4 Experimental framework

This section reports the data used, its preprocess-
ing, baseline details and results with the enhanced
character-based neural MT system.

4.1 Data

We used the German-English WMT data1 includ-
ing the EPPS, NEWS and Commoncrawl. Pre-
processing consisted of tokenizing, truecasing,
normalizing punctuation and filtering sentences
with more than 5% of their words in a language

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt15/translation-task.html

other than German or English. Statistics are shown
in Table 1.

L Set S W V OOV
De Train 3.5M 77.7M 1.6M -

Dev 3k 63.1k 13.6k 1.7k
Test 2.2k 44.1k 9.8k 1.3k

En Train 3.5M 81.2M 0.8M -
Dev 3k 67.6k 10.1k 0.8k
Test 2.2k 46.8k 7.8k 0.6k

Table 1: Corpus details. Number of sentences (S),
words (W), vocabulary (V) and out-of-vocabulary-
words (OOV) per set and language (L). M standing
for millions, k standing for thousands.

4.2 Baseline systems

The phrase-based system was built using Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007), with standard parameters
such as grow-final-diag for alignment, Good-
Turing smoothing of the relative frequencies, 5-
gram language modeling using Kneser-Ney dis-
counting, and lexicalized reordering, among oth-
ers. The neural-based system was built using the
software from DL4MT2 available in github. We
generally used settings from previous work (Jean
et al., 2015): networks have an embedding of 620
and a dimension of 1024, a batch size of 32, and
no dropout. We used a vocabulary size of 90 thou-
sand words in German-English. Also, as proposed
in (Jean et al., 2015) we replaced unknown words
(UNKs) with the corresponding source word using
the alignment information.

4.3 Results

Table 3 shows the BLEU results for the baseline
systems (including phrase and neural-based, NN)
and the character-based neural MT (CHAR). We
also include the results for the CHAR and NN
systems with post-processing of unknown words,
which consists in replacing the UNKs with the cor-
responding source word (+Src), as suggested in
(Jean et al., 2015). BLEU results improve by al-
most 1.5 points in German-to-English and by more
than 3 points in English-to-German. The reduction
in the number of unknown words (after postpro-
cessing) goes from 1491 (NN) to 1260 (CHAR)
in the direction from German-to-English and from
3148 to 2640 in the opposite direction. Note the

2http://dl4mt.computing.dcu.ie/

359



1 SRC Berichten zufolge hofft Indien darber hinaus auf einen Vertrag zur Verteidigungszusammenarbeit zwischen den beiden Nationen .
Phrase reportedly hopes India , in addition to a contract for the defence cooperation between the two nations .
NN according to reports , India also hopes to establish a contract for the UNK between the two nations .
CHAR according to reports , India hopes to see a Treaty of Defence Cooperation between the two nations .
REF India is also reportedly hoping for a deal on defence collaboration between the two nations .

2 SRC der durchtrainierte Mainzer sagt von sich , dass er ein “ ambitionierter Rennradler “ ist .
Phrase the will of Mainz says that he a more ambitious .
NN the UNK Mainz says that he is a “ ambitious , . “
CHAR the UNK in Mainz says that he is a ’ ambitious racer ’ .
REF the well-conditioned man from Mainz said he was an “ ambitious racing cyclist . “

3 SRC die GDL habe jedoch nicht gesagt , wo sie streiken wolle , so dass es schwer sei , die Folgen konkret vorherzusehen .
Phrase the GDL have , however , not to say , where they strike , so that it is difficult to predict the consequences of concrete .
NN however , the UNK did not tell which they wanted to UNK , so it is difficult to predict the consequences .
CHAR however , the UNK did not say where they wanted to strike , so it is difficult to predict the consequences .
REF the GDL have not said , however , where they will strike , making it difficult to predict exactly what the consequences will be .

4 SRC die Premierminister Indiens und Japans trafen sich in Tokio .
Phrase the Prime Minister of India and Japan in Tokyo .
NN the Prime Minister of India and Japan met in Tokyo
CHAR the Prime Ministers of India and Japan met in Tokyo
REF India and Japan prime ministers meet in Tokyo

5 SRC wo die Beamten es aus den Augen verloren .
Phrase where the officials lost sight of
NN where the officials lost it out of the eyes
CHAR where officials lose sight of it
REF causing the officers to lose sight of it

Table 2: Translation examples.

De->En En->De
Phrase 20.99 17.04
NN 18.83 16.47
NN+Src 20.64 17.15
CHAR 21.40 19.53
CHAR+Src 22.10 20.22

Table 3: De-En BLEU results.

number of out-of-vocabulary words of the test set
is shown in Table 1.

The character-based embedding has an impact
in learning a better translation model at various
levels, which seems to include better alignment,
reordering, morphological generation and disam-
biguation. Table 2 shows some examples of the
kind of improvements that the character-based
neural MT system is capable of achieving com-
pared to baseline systems. Examples 1 and 2 show
how the reduction of source unknowns improves
the adequacy of the translation. Examples 3 and 4
show how the character-based approach is able to
handle morphological variations. Finally, example
5 shows an appropriate semantic disambiguation.

5 Conclusions

Neural MT offers a new perspective in the way
MT is managed. Its main advantages when com-
pared with previous approaches, e.g. statistical
phrase-based, are that the translation is faced with
trainable features and optimized in an end-to-end
scheme. However, there still remain many chal-
lenges left to solve, such as dealing with the limi-

tation in vocabulary size.
In this paper we have proposed a modification to

the standard encoder/decoder neural MT architec-
ture to use unlimited-vocabulary character-based
source word embeddings. The improvement in
BLEU is about 1.5 points in German-to-English
and more than 3 points in English-to-German.

As further work, we are currently studying dif-
ferent alternatives (Chung et al., 2016) to extend
the character-based approach to the target side of
the neural MT system.

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the 7th Framework Pro-
gram of the European Commission through the In-
ternational Outgoing Fellowship Marie Curie Ac-
tion (IMTraP-2011-29951) and also by the Span-
ish Ministerio de Economı́a y Competitividad and
European Regional Developmend Fund, contract
TEC2015-69266-P (MINECO/FEDER, UE).

References
Dimitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua

Bengio. 2015. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. CoRR,
abs/1409.0473.

Miguel Ballesteros, Chris Dyer, and Noah A. Smith.
2015. Improved transition-based parsing by model-
ing characters instead of words with lstms. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 349–
359, Lisbon, Portugal, September. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

360



Jan A. Botha and Phil Blunsom. 2014. Compositional
Morphology for Word Representations and Lan-
guage Modelling. In Proceedings of the 31st Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
Beijing, China, jun. *Award for best application pa-
per*.

Xinxiong Chen, Lei Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun,
and Huan-Bo Luan. 2015. Joint learning of char-
acter and word embeddings. In Qiang Yang and
Michael Wooldridge, editors, IJCAI, pages 1236–
1242. AAAI Press.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van van Merrienboer, Dzmitry
Bahdanau, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. On the
properties of neural machine translation: Encoder–
decoder approaches. In Proc. of the Eighth Work-
shop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statisti-
cal Translation, Doha.

Grzegorz Chrupala. 2014. Normalizing tweets with
edit scripts and recurrent neural embeddings. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2014,
June 22-27, 2014, Baltimore, MD, USA, Volume 2:
Short Papers, pages 680–686.

Junyoung Chung, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2016. A character-level decoder without ex-
plicit segmentation for neural machine translation.
CoRR, abs/1603.06147.

Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, and Eva Hasler. 2015.
Multi-language image description with neural se-
quence models. CoRR, abs/1510.04709.

Sebastien Jean, Orhan Firat, Kyunghun Cho, Roland
Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Montreal
neural machine translation systems for wmt15. In
Proc. of the 10th Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, Lisbon.

Nal Kalchbrenner and Phil Blunsom. 2013. Recurrent
continuous translation models. In Proc. of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, Seattle.

Yoon Kim, Yacine Jernite, David Sontag, and Alexan-
der M. Rush. 2016. Character-aware neural lan-
guage models. In Proceedings of the 30th AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’16).

Philipp Koehn, Franz Joseph Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. In Proc.
of the 41th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch,
Chris Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicolas
Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine
Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar,
Alexandra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007.
Moses: Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine
Translation. In Proc. of the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 177–180.

Wang Ling, Chris Dyer, Alan W Black, Isabel Tran-
coso, Ramon Fermandez, Silvio Amir, Luis Marujo,
and Tiago Luis. 2015a. Finding function in form:
Compositional character models for open vocabu-
lary word representation. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1520–1530, Lisbon, Portu-
gal, September. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Wang Ling, Isabel Trancoso, Chris Dyer, and Alan W.
Black. 2015b. Character-based neural machine
translation. CoRR, abs/1511.04586.

Min-Thang Luong and Cristopher D. Manning. 2016.
Character-based neural machine translation. CoRR,
abs/1511.04586.

Cicero D. Santos and Victor Guimar aes. 2015. Boost-
ing named entity recognition with neural character
embeddings. In Proceedings of the Fifth Named En-
tity Workshop, pages 25–33, Beijing, China, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Cicero D. Santos and Bianca Zadrozny. 2014.
Learning character-level representations for part-of-
speech tagging. In Tony Jebara and Eric P. Xing, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the 31st International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning (ICML-14), pages 1818–
1826.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2015. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. CoRR, abs/1508.07909.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes,
N. D. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
27, pages 3104–3112. Curran Associates, Inc.

361


