



















































MediaGist: A Cross-lingual Analyser of Aggregated News and Commentaries


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics—System Demonstrations, pages 145–150,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

MediaGist: A cross-lingual analyser of aggregated news and
commentaries

Josef Steinberger
University of West Bohemia
Faculty of Applied Sciences

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, NTIS Center
Univerzitni 8, 30614 Pilsen, Czech Republic

jstein@kiv.zcu.cz

Abstract

We introduce MediaGist, an online sys-
tem for crosslingual analysis of aggregated
news and commentaries based on summa-
rization and sentiment analysis technolo-
gies. It is designed to assist journalists
to detect and explore news topics, which
are controversially reported or discussed
in different countries. News articles from
current week are clustered separately in
currently 5 languages and the clusters are
then linked across languages. Sentiment
analysis provides a basis to compute con-
troversy scores and summaries help to ex-
plore the differences. Recognized entities
play an important role in most of the sys-
tem’s modules and provide another way
to explore the data. We demonstrate the
capabilities of MediaGist by listing high-
lights from the last week and present a
rough evaluation of the system.

1 Introduction

News portals publish thousands of articles every
day in various languages. Making sense out of
such data without automated tools is impossible.

There are many news aggregators/analysers and
each of them has its strengths. Google News ag-
gregates headlines and displays the stories accord-
ing to each reader’s interests. IBM Watson News
Explorer gives a more analytical way to read news
through linked data visualizations. Europe Media
Monitor (EMM) produces a summary of news sto-
ries clustered near realtime in various languages
and compares how the same events have been re-
ported in the media written in different languages.

However, there is another source of information
at the news sites – commentaries – which contain
very valuable public opinion about the news top-

ics and has not been explored enough yet. Includ-
ing commentaries opens many new use cases for
journalists, agencies, which study public opinion,
and partially also for readers. Controversial top-
ics, such as the refugee crisis in Europe, or the
Volkswagen’s emission scandal, and their percep-
tion in different countries might be itself a source
for reporting. Focusing on such topics should
bring more traffic and rich discussions to the news
portals. International agencies or political institu-
tions will find useful the comparisons when study-
ing particular public opinions. Crosslingually-
organized news and commentaries will be useful
for readers living in a multicultural environment,
as they can quickly find and understand different
views on the controversial topics.

MediaGist1 builds on the ideas of news aggre-
gators, but adds the comments’ dimension. It con-
tinuously gathers metadata about news articles and
their commentaries, currently in 5 languages. Ar-
ticles from current week are clustered monolin-
gually several times a day. It extracts entities, la-
bels news and commentaries with sentiment scores
and generates summaries on both sides. It also
links the clusters across languages, similarly to
EMM. Having aggregated news on one side and
commentaries on the other side, it compares the
information by sentiment analysis and summariza-
tion. A different sentiment of news and commen-
taries indicate a controversial topic and summaries
help to identify the difference qualitatively. The
crosslingual links allow to discover and explore
topics, which are controversially reported or dis-
cussed in different countries.

The next section (2) relates MediaGist to the
current news aggregation or analytics solutions.
Section 3 describes MediGist from inside. The

1MediaGist is running at: http://mediagist.eu.
A screencast video can be found at: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=ONtKw_l6_X4.

145



overall architecture is followed by a description
of the NLP pipeline. Section 4 gives an overview
of the system’s functionality and shows highlights
from the last week, followed by a rough evaluation
of the system, conclusions and future plans.

2 Related sites

Google News2 is an automatic service that aggre-
gates headlines from more than 50K news sources
worldwide, groups similar stories together, and
displays them according to each reader’s interests.
The content is selected and ranked using many fac-
tors, e.g. coverage, freshness, location, relevance
and diversity of the story. There are more than 70
regional editions in many different languages.

IBM Watson News Explorer3 gives a more an-
alytical way to read news. It gathers 250k articles
a day from 70k sources and converts the unstruc-
tured text into entities and concepts, and connects
the dots through linked data visualizations.

EMM NewsBrief4 is a summary of news stories
(news clusters) from around the world, automati-
cally classified according to thousands of criteria.
It is updated every 10 minutes, and over 100k ar-
ticles in 50+ languages run through it a day. It au-
tomatically detects the stories that are the most re-
ported in each language at the moment. The Alert
system presents the stories in many different clas-
sifications (Atkinson and van der Goot, 2009).

The second EMM’s technology, NewsEx-
plorer5, allows to see the major news stories in
various languages for any specific day and to com-
pare how the same events have been reported in
different languages (Steinberger et al., 2009). It
shows the most mentioned names and other auto-
matically derived information, eg. variant name
spellings or a list of related entities (Pouliquen and
Steinberger, 2009).

To summarize, the current systems gather
masses of news articles and cluster them into sto-
ries. Some systems do it in many languages,
and few link the stories across languages. Ana-
lytical solutions add information extraction (loca-
tions, entities, relations or categories). However,
they do not integrate commentaries, which com-
plement well the stories with public opinion. Me-

2https://news.google.com/
3http://news-explorer.mybluemix.net/
4EMM (Europe Media Monitor) is developed

at Joint Research Centre, European Commission:
http://emm.newsbrief.eu

5http://emm.newsexplorer.eu

diaGist adds the commentaries and uses them for
various monolingual or crosslingual comparisons
resulting in discovering and exploring controver-
sies in the whole data.

3 System overview

MediaGist processing starts with a crawler (see
figure 1). It gathers articles and their comments
from predefined news sites6. It creates an RSS
file for each article, which goes down the NLP
pipeline. The pipeline first recognizes entities, in
both the article and its comments, and assigns a
crosslingual id to each mention. The next step
is performed by the sentiment analyser, which
assigns to each article and comment a tonality
score7. The coreference resolver then enriches the
list of entity mentions by name part references and
definite descriptions. Each entity mention is then
assigned a sentiment score and article comments
are summarized8. These fully annotated article
RSS files enter the clustering phase. Every four
hours, for each language, the clusterer takes the ar-
ticles published during the current week and cre-
ates monolingual clusters. Since this step, RSS
files contain information about all articles in the
cluster. The crosslingual linker then adds to each
cluster links to the most similar cluster in other
languages. The last step is creating a summary of
clustered articles and a summary of cluster’s com-
ments (already summarized per article before).
The RSS now contains all information needed by
the presentation layer, the MediaGist website.

3.1 NER and coreference

The named entity recognizer is based on JRC-
Names9, which is a highly multilingual named en-
tity resource for person and organisation names
(Steinberger et al., 2011c). It consists of large
lists of names and their many spelling variants (up
to hundreds for a single person), including across
scripts (Steinberger and Pouliquen, 2009).

Because the resource does not contain many
morphological variants for Czech, it was extended

6Currently, it gathers data from 7 sources in 5 languages:
English (theguardian.com), Czech (idnes.cz, ihned.cz,
novinky.cz), Italian (corriere.it), French (lemonde.fr) and
German (spiegel.de).

7We call a document-level sentiment ‘tonality’.
8There can be even thousands of comments attached to a

single article. This summarization step largely reduces the
size of the data sent further down the pipeline.

9https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/language-technologies/jrc-
names

146



crawler

NER

article
tonality

comment
tonality

sentiment analyser

coreference
resolver

article
comments'
summarizer

cluster
comments'
summarizer

cluster
articles'

summarizer

monolingual
clusterer

crosslingual
linker

entity
sentiment

summarizer

plain RSS

article RSS 
with all information

cluster RSS 
cluster RSS 

with all
information

Figure 1: The architecture of MediaGist.

by an in-house rule-based morphological analyser.
Coreference resolution was inspired by (Stein-

berger et al., 2011a). In the cases of titles, it uses a
list of person-title associations semi-automatically
compiled over the past few years (Pouliquen and
Steinberger, 2009).

3.2 Sentiment analysis
The sentiment analyser is used for 2 purposes.
Assigning first a document-level tonality score
〈−100; +100〉 to each article and comment, and
second, a sentiment score 〈−100; +100〉 to each
entity mention. It uses highly multilingual and
comparable sentiment dictionaries having similar
sizes and based on a common specification, cre-
ated by triangulation from English and Spanish
(Steinberger et al., 2012). In the case of the tonal-
ity score, it counts subjective terms in an article,
resp. a comment, and in the case of the entity
score, it counts terms around entity mentions. It
includes rules for using negation, intensifiers and
diminishers (Steinberger et al., 2011b). Although
machine learning approaches would produce bet-
ter sentiment predictions, they require training
data per language, and ideally per industry as well.
And such data are currently expensive to create.
With the rule-based approach, the system can eas-
ily process multiple languages.

3.3 Clustering and crosslingual linking
The monolingual clustering algorithm is based
on agglomerative hierarchical clustering with the
group average strategy (Hastie et al., 2009). The
articles are represented by log-likelihood vectors
of its terms and the similarity function is Cosine.

Crosslingual linking uses two kinds of features:
entities and descriptors from EuroVoc10. EuroVoc

10http://eurovoc.europa.eu

is a multilingual, multidisciplinary thesaurus cov-
ering the activities of the EU, the European Parlia-
ment in particular. It contains terms organized in
a hierarchy in 23 EU languages. Using Eurovoc
features ensures that the linked clusters share the
same topic. If at the same time the clusters share
the same entities11, it is very likely that the clus-
ters are about the same story. A similar approach
as in (Steinberger, 2013).

3.4 Summarization
The summarizer is used for three steps of the
pipeline. First, it summarizes article comments,
then articles in the cluster and finally comments of
the cluster. We use an extractive approach based
on latent semantic analysis, which uses both lex-
ical and entity features (Kabadjov et al., 2013).
This approach performed well in the Multiling
evaluation campaigns12.

4 Functionality

The systems has two main views to explore the
media data: cluster view and entity view. We can
select a language, a period (=week) and sort the
data by different criteria13. Each view contains
highlights of the selected period in the left panel.

4.1 The cluster view
It displays title and description, taken from the
central article of the cluster (see figure 2). The left
part shows information about articles and the right
part about commentaries. On both sides, it dis-
plays generated summaries and aggregated tonal-

11The entity ids are unified across languages.
12There were already 3 editions of MultiLing’s multilin-

gual multi-document summarization shared task: 2011 (Gi-
annakopoulos et al., 2011), 2013, and 2015 (Giannakopoulos
et al., 2015).

13The system currently holds data from the last 24 weeks.

147



Figure 2: The top English cluster from the first week of 2016 (Jan 4th-10th). The screenshot does not
include the page header, the left bar with highlights and the footer. More at http://mediagist.eu

ity figures. The central part shows entities and
their sentiment in articles and comments.14 At the
bottom, you can see links to the related clusters in
other languages.

MediaGist computes several controversy scores
for each cluster. Articles’ vs. comments’ contro-
versy compares tonality of articles and comments.
The value correspond to the standard deviation of
the two values. Entities’ controversy compares
sentiment of entity mentions in articles and com-
ments. The value is a macro-average of standard
deviations of each entity sentiment. Crosslingual
rank controversy compares ranks of the cluster in
different languages. Clusters are ranked for each
language based on the number of articles. The
value is a standard deviation of logarithms of the
ranks. Logarithms give larger weights to the top
ranks. This controversy is large if the topic is
ranked at the top for some languages based on
the coverage, while in other languages it is men-
tioned only marginally. Large Crosslingual article
controversy indicates a large difference in articles’
tonality among languages. The value is a stan-
dard deviation of average article tonalities across
languages. This score says whether the topic is
reported with the same tonality in different lan-
guages or not. And finally, a large Crosslingual
comment controversy indicates topics which are
discussed with different tonality across languages.
The score compares average comment tonalities
across languages by the standard deviation.

14Tonality/sentiment range is: 〈−100;+100〉, green col-
umn = positive, orange = neutral, red = negative.

4.2 The entity view

The entity view displays variants of the entity
found in the data (e.g. for David Bowie in week
Jan 11-17, 2016: Bowie (3816 mentions), David
Bowie (914), David (74), singer (60), star (46),
musician (33), popstar (5), etc.). It shows the
aggregated entity sentiment in articles and com-
ments, which is compared by Articles’ vs. com-
ments’ controversy. The sentiment is summa-
rized by the most frequent subjective terms on
both sides. Because we have also the entities
linked across languages, we can compute their
crosslingual controversy in articles and in com-
ments. We can then easily find, which entities
are reported or discussed with different sentiment
across languages. As an example, Volkswagen
is discussed negatively in Czech but positively in
German (when all periods are selected).

4.3 Highlights from the last week

The most international topic during week (Mar 21-
27, 2016) was Fayal Cheffou charged over core
role in Brussels bomb attacks – covered well in all
5 languages. The English summary:

At least 31 dead and more than 200 injured in bombings
claimed by Islamic State. The attackers Brothers Khalid and
Ibrahim el-Bakraoui have been identified as suicide bombers
at the metro station and airport respectively. Before the Brus-
sels attacks, Belgian prosecutors said DNA evidence had
identified Moroccan-born Laachraoui as an accomplice of
Paris attacker Salah Abdeslam. He was one of several men
detained in police raids on Thursday. “What we feared has
happened,” said the Belgian prime minister, Charles Michel,
at a press conference.

The following story was controversial in cov-
erage: Ukrainian pilot given 22-year jail sen-
tence by Russian court – one of the top clus-

148



ters in Czech but only few articles in English and
French. The same topic was seen as controver-
sially reported as well – the tonality of Czech ar-
ticles was much more negative than English and
French ones. A controversially discussed topic:
Sanders: ’We have a path towards victory’ after
win Washington caucuses – while positive in En-
glish, negative in Czech. Reasons of the contro-
versy can be found in the summaries.

Controversial entity in articles: Donald Trump
– negative in English, close to neutral in Italian
and French and positive in German and Czech.
Difference between sentiment in articles and com-
ments: John Key – positive in articles but neg-
ative in comments (English). Controversial en-
tity in comments: George W. Bush – while the
sentiment is balanced in English, it is negative
in Czech and positive in German. The most fre-
quent sentiment terms indicate the reasons: En-
glish: good, helped, better, evil, violence; German:
liebesmüh (love effort), deutlich besser (clearly
better), Czech: zločiny (crimes), odsuzovat (ac-
cusing), špatný (bad).

5 Evaluation

We present a rough evaluation of the key modules
of the system. We discus results of NER, coref-
erence, sentiment analysis and summarization ob-
tained in the previous research. In the case of clus-
tering, crosslingual linking and controversy pre-
dictions we validated the system output to get the
first insight of their accuracy.

5.1 NER and coreference

The precision of the applied NER and coreference
was measured in Steinberger et al. (2011a). From
the current MediaGist’s languages, person recog-
nition performs best for French (98.4%) and worst
for Italian (92.1%). The coreference module re-
solves name parts at precision of 98% and person
title references at 70%. As the title references have
not been continuously updated yet, several wrong
references are caused by the missing temporal di-
mension.

5.2 Sentiment analysis

The accuracy of the sentiment analyser in all Me-
diaGist’s languages was measured in Steinberger
et al. (2011b). For news sentences and entity tar-
gets, we got the best accuracy for English (74%)
and the worst for Italian (66%). However, in

the case of aggregating the polarities per entity
and considering only entities with a larger differ-
ence between positive and negative mentions (ex-
tremely polar entities), 78% of entity classifica-
tions across all languages were correct.

5.3 Summarization

The LSA-based summarizer was evaluated during
the last edition of the Multiling’s multi-document
summarization shared task (Giannakopoulos et al.,
2015) as the top performing system overall (it re-
ceived the lowest sum of ranks over all 10 lan-
guages). From the MediaGist’s languages, it per-
formed best in Czech, English and French. Ger-
man and Italian was not included.

5.4 Clustering and crosslingual linking

In the case of clustering and crosslingual linking,
we asked two annotators to validate the output of
the system. The annotators were not fluent speak-
ers in all 5 languages, but they had enough knowl-
edge to judge the task. We selected the top 5 En-
glish clusters from the first 4 full weeks of 2016.
The clusters were ranked based on the number of
crosslingual links. The task of the clustering val-
idation was to check whether the components of
the cluster are relevant to the cluster’s topic identi-
fied by the title of its central article. In the case of
the crosslingual linking, the task was to check the
similarity of the linked clusters based on their arti-
cle titles. Clustering validation was found not to be
that subjective, the inter-annotator kappa was .89.
The validation of crosslingual links was more dif-
ficult, the annotators did not always agree (kappa
was .63), mainly because of a different view on
the right granularity of the topic (e.g. the clusters
were both discussing the regugee crisis, but in one
language it was about closing the borders and in
the other about a disorder in Germany). From the
total of 235 cluster components, 96% were judged
as correct and from the 59 crosslingual links, 76%
were pointing to the right cluster of the other lan-
guage.

5.5 Controversy scores

We selected the most interesting controversy
score, crosslingual comment controversy, to be
judged by two annotators. For each crosslingual
link evaluated in 5.4, we took the corresponding
comment summaries (each in a different language)
and showed them to an annotator. Her task was to

149



assess whether the view of the topic/entities is dif-
ferent (controversial) in the two languages or not.
The task definition was rather shallow, but still
there was a fair agreement (kappa was .48). We
then produced a gold controversy scores: for in-
stance if we had a topic linked across 5 languages,
there were 10 combinations judged twice. The
Boolean judgements were aggregated and normal-
ized, resulting in a score between 0 and 1. These
golden scores were then compared against the sys-
tem’s crosslingual comment controversy scores by
Pearson correlation: .51. Although the correlation
is not perfect, the measure can already be useful to
indicate controversy.

6 Conclusion

MediaGist uses language technology to detect
controversy in world news. Sentiment analysis
helps to identify controversial topics and entities
across languages, and via summarization it is pos-
sible to explore them in detail. The controversy
scores are much dependent on the quality of sen-
timent analysis. Improving the sentiment mod-
ule will directly lead to better predictions. Fu-
ture plans include increasing the data volume on
on both vertical (sources) and horizontal (histori-
cal data) axes. This will allow to study the evolu-
tion of a news thread or of a person name. The sys-
tem currently consumes raw commentaries. Rep-
resenting a precise opinion of real Internet users
will require to fight trolls and filter the conversa-
tions (Mihaylov et al., 2015).

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by project MediaGist,
EUs FP7 People Programme (Marie Curie Ac-
tions), no. 630786. MediaGist.

References
M. Atkinson and E. van der Goot. 2009. Near real

time information mining in multilingual news. In
Proceedings of the 18th International World Wide
Web Conference (WWW 2009), pages 1153–1154,
Madrid, Spain.

G. Giannakopoulos, M. El-Haj, B. Favre, M. Litvak,
J. Steinberger, and V. Varma. 2011. TAC2011 Mul-
tiLing Pilot Overview. In TAC 2011 Workshop.

G. Giannakopoulos, J. Kubina, J. Conroy, J. Stein-
berger, B. Favre, M. Kabadjov, U. Kruschwitz, and
M. Poesio. 2015. Multiling 2015: Multilingual

summarization of single and multi-documents, on-
line fora, and call-center conversations. In Proceed-
ings of the 16th Annual Meeting of the Special Inter-
est Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 270–
274. ACL.

T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. 2009. The
Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer-Verlag.

M. Kabadjov, J. Steinberger, and R. Steinberger. 2013.
Multilingual statistical news summarization. In
Multilingual Information Extraction and Summa-
rization, volume 2013 of Theory and Applications
of Natural Language Processing, pages 229–252.
Springer.

T. Mihaylov, G. Georgiev, and P. Nakov. 2015. Find-
ing opinion manipulation trolls in news community
forums. In Proceedings of the 19th CoNLL, pages
310–314. ACL.

B. Pouliquen and R. Steinberger. 2009. Automatic
construction of multilingual name dictionaries. In
Learning Machine Translation. MIT Press.

R. Steinberger and B. Pouliquen. 2009. Cross-
lingual named entity recognition. In Named Entities
- Recognition, Classification and Use, volume 19
of Benjamins Current Topics, pages 137–164. John
Benjamins Publishing Company.

R. Steinberger, B. Pouliquen, and C. Ignat. 2009. Us-
ing language-independent rules to achieve high mul-
tilinguality in text mining. In Mining Massive Data
Sets for Security. IOS-Press, Amsterdam, Holland.

J. Steinberger, J. Belyaeva, J. Crawley, L. Della-Rocca,
M. Ebrahim, M. Ehrmann, M. Kabadjov, R. Stein-
berger, and E. Van der Goot. 2011a. Highly mul-
tilingual coreference resolution exploiting a mature
entity repository. In Proceedings of the 8th RANLP
Conference, pages 254–260. Incoma Ltd.

J. Steinberger, P. Lenkova, M. Kabadjov, R. Stein-
berger, and E. van der Goot. 2011b. Multilingual
entity-centered sentiment analysis evaluated by par-
allel corpora. In Proceedings of the 8th RANLP
Conference, pages 770–775.

R. Steinberger, B. Pouliquen, M. Kabadjov,
J. Belyaeva, and E. van der Goot. 2011c. Jrc-
names: A freely available, highly multilingual
named entity resource. In Proceedings of the
International RANLP Conference. Incoma Ltd.

J. Steinberger, M. Ebrahim, M. Ehrmann, A. Hur-
riyetoglu, M. Kabadjov, P. Lenkova, R. Steinberger,
H. Tanev, S. Vzquez, and V. Zavarella. 2012. Cre-
ating sentiment dictionaries via triangulation. Deci-
sion Support Systems, 53(4):689 – 694.

R. Steinberger. 2013. Multilingual and cross-lingual
news analysis in the europe media monitor (emm).
In Multidisciplinary Information Retrieval, volume
8201 of LNCS, pages 1–4. Springer.

150


