



















































Natural Language Generation enhances human decision-making with uncertain information


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 264–268,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Natural Language Generation enhances human decision-making with
uncertain information

Dimitra Gkatzia
School of Computing

Edinburgh Napier University
Edinburgh, EH10 5DT, UK

d.gkatzia@napier.ac.uk

Oliver Lemon
Interaction Lab

Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK
o.lemon@hw.ac.uk

Verena Rieser
Interaction Lab

Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK
v.t.rieser@hw.ac.uk

Abstract

Decision-making is often dependent on
uncertain data, e.g. data associated with
confidence scores or probabilities. We
present a comparison of different informa-
tion presentations for uncertain data and,
for the first time, measure their effects
on human decision-making. We show
that the use of Natural Language Genera-
tion (NLG) improves decision-making un-
der uncertainty, compared to state-of-the-
art graphical-based representation meth-
ods. In a task-based study with 442 adults,
we found that presentations using NLG
lead to 24% better decision-making on av-
erage than the graphical presentations, and
to 44% better decision-making when NLG
is combined with graphics. We also show
that women achieve significantly better re-
sults when presented with NLG output
(an 87% increase on average compared to
graphical presentations).

1 Introduction

Natural Language Generation (NLG) technology
can achieve comparable results to commonly used
data visualisation techniques for supporting accu-
rate human decision-making (Gatt et al., 2009). In
this paper, we investigate whether NLG technol-
ogy can also be used to support decision-making
when the underlying data is uncertain. Current
data-to-text systems assume that the underlying
data is precise and correct – an assumption which
is heavily criticised by other disciplines concerned
with decision support, such as medicine (Gigeren-
zer and Muir Gray, 2011), environmental mod-
elling (Beven, 2009), climate change (Manning
et al., 2004), or weather forecasting (Kootval,
2008). However, simply presenting numerical ex-

pressions of risk and uncertainty is not enough.
Psychological studies on decision making have
found that a high percentage of people do not
understand and can’t act upon numerical uncer-
tainty (Cokely et al., 2012; Galesic and Garcia-
Retamero, 2010). For example, only 28% of Ger-
mans and 25% of Americans are able to answer the
question: “Which of the following numbers rep-
resents the biggest risk of getting a disease: 1 in
100, 1 in 1000, 1 in 10?” (Galesic and Garcia-
Retamero, 2010).

So far, the NLG community has investigated
the conversion of numbers into language (Power
and Williams, 2012) and the use of vague ex-
pressions (van Deemter, 2009). In this work,
we explore how to convert numerical representa-
tions of uncertainty into Natural Language so as to
maximise confidence and correct outcomes of hu-
man decision-making. We consider the exemplar
task of weather forecast generation. We initially
present two NLG strategies which present the un-
certainty in the input data. The two strategies are
based on (1) the World Meteorological Organisa-
tion (WMO) (Kootval, 2008) guidelines and (2)
commercial forecast presentations (e.g. from BBC
presenters). We then evaluate the strategies against
a state-of-the-art graphical system (Stephens et
al., 2011), which presents the uncertain data in a
graphical way. Figure 1 shows an example of this
baseline graphical presentation. We use a game-
based setup (Gkatzia et al., 2015) to perform task-
based evaluation, to investigate the effect that the
different information presentation strategies have
on human decision-making.

Weather forecast generation is a common topic
within the NLG community, e.g. (Konstas and La-
pata, 2012; Angeli et al., 2010; Belz and Kow,
2010; Sripada et al., 2005). Previous approaches
have not focused on how to communicate uncer-
tain information or the best ways of referring to

264



Figure 1: Graphics for temperature data.

probabilities of meteorological phenomena to oc-
cur. In addition, their evaluation is based on user
ratings of grammatically, semantic correctness,
fluency, coherence or via post-edit evaluation. Al-
though these metrics are indicative of the quality
of the text produced, they do not measure the im-
pact the texts might have in people’s comprehen-
sion of uncertainty or on their ability to make de-
cisions based on the information conveyed.

Our contributions to the field are as follows: (1)
We study a principled mapping of uncertainty to
Natural Language and provide recommendations
and data for future NLG systems; (2) We intro-
duce a game-based data collection environment
which extends task-based evaluation by measuring
the impact of NLG on decision-making (measur-
ing user confidence and game/task success); and
(3) We show that effects of the different represen-
tations vary for different user groups, so that user
adaptation is necessary when generating multi-
modal presentations of uncertain information.

2 The Extended Weather Game

In this section, we present our extended version
of the MetOffice’s Weather Game (Stephens et al.,
2011). The player has to choose where to send an
ice-cream vendor in order to maximise sales, given
weather forecasts for four weeks and two loca-
tions. These forecasts describe (1) predicted rain-
fall (Figure 2) and (2) temperature levels together

Likelihood of oc-
currence

Lexicalisation

p >0.99 “extremely likely”
0.90 ≤ p ≤ 0.99 “very likely”
0.70 ≤ p ≤ 0.89 “likely”
0.55 ≤ p ≤ 0.69 “probable - more likely than not”
0.45 ≤ p ≤ 0.54 “equally likely as not”
0.30 ≤ p ≤ 0.44 “possible - less likely than not”
0.10 ≤ p ≤ 0.29 “unlikely”
0.01 ≤ p ≤ 0.09 “very unlikely”
p<0.01 “extremely unlikely”

Table 1: WMO-based mapping of likelihoods.

with their likelihoods in three ways: (a) through
graphical representations (which is the version of
the original game), (b) through textual forecasts,
and (c) through combined graphical and textual
forecasts. We generated the textual format us-
ing two rule-based NLG approaches as described
in the next section. Users are asked to initially
choose the best destination for the ice-cream ven-
dor and then they are asked to state how confident
they are with their choice. Based on their deci-
sions and their confidence levels, the participants
are finally presented with their “monetary gain”.
For example, the higher the likelihood of sunshine,
the higher the monetary gain if the player has de-
clared that s/he is confident that it is not going to
rain and it doesn’t actually rain. In the opposite
scenario, the player would lose money. The de-
cision on whether rain occurred is estimated by
sampling the probability distribution. At the end
of the game, users were scored according to their
“risk literacy” following the Berlin Numeracy Test
(Cokely et al., 2012). Further details are presented
in (Gkatzia et al., 2015).

3 Natural Language Generation from
Uncertain Information

We developed two NLG systems, WMO-based
and NATURAL, using SimpleNLG (Gatt and Re-
iter, 2009), which both generate textual descrip-
tions of rainfall and temperature data addressing
the uncertain nature of forecasts.
WMO-based: This is a rule-based system which
uses the guidelines recommended by the WMO
(Kootval, 2008) for reporting uncertainty, as
shown in Table 1. Consider for instance a fore-
cast of sunny intervals with 30% probability of
rain. This WMO-based system will generate the
following forecast: “Sunny intervals with rain be-
ing possible - less likely than not”.
NATURAL: This system imitates forecasters and

265



Figure 2: Screenshot of the Extended Weather Game (Rainfall: Graphics and WMO condition).

their natural way of reporting weather. The rules
used in this system have been derived by observ-
ing the way that experts (e.g. BBC weather re-
porters) produce forecasts. For the previous exam-
ple (sunny intervals with 30% probability of rain),
this system will generate the following forecast:
“Mainly dry with sunny spells”.

4 Evaluation

In order to investigate what helps people to better
understand and act upon uncertainty in informa-
tion presentations, we use five conditions within
the context of the Extended Weather Game:

1. Graphics only: This representation shows
the users only the graphical representation of
the weather forecasts. For this condition we
used the graphs that scored best in terms of
human comprehension from (Stephens et al.,
2011).

2. Multi-modal Representations:
− Graphics and NATURAL: This is
a multi-modal representation consisting of
graphics (as described in the previous con-
dition) and text produced by the NATURAL
system.
− Graphics and WMO-based: This is also
a multi-modal representation consisting of
graphics and text produced by the WMO-
based system.

3. NLG only:
− NATURAL only: This is a text-only rep-
resentation as described above.
− WMO-based system only: This is also a
text-only representation.

5 Data

We recruited 442 unique players (197 females1,
241 males, 4 non-disclosed) using social me-
dia. We collected 450 unique game instances
(just a few people played the game twice). The
anonymised data will be released as part of this
submission.

6 Results

In order to investigate which representations as-
sist people in decision-making under uncertainty,
we analysed both the players’ scores (in terms of
monetary gain) and their predictions for rainfall
with regard to their confidence scores. As we de-
scribed in Section 2, the game calculates a mone-
tary gain based on both the decisions and the con-
fidence of the player, i.e. the decision-making abil-
ity of the player. Regarding confidence, we asked
users to declare how confident they are on a 10-
point scale. In our analysis we therefore focus on
both confidence and score at the game.

1Women made up 44.5% of the subjects.

266



Monetary gains Confidence
Graphs only 81.15 78.5%
Multi-modal 117.51 83.7%
NLG only 101.33 66%

Table 2: Average Monetary gains and Confidence
scores (All Adults).

6.1 Results for all adults

Multi-modal vs. Graphics-only: We found that
use of multi-modal representations leads to gain-
ing significantly higher game scores (i.e. better
decision-making) than the Graphics-only repre-
sentation (p = 0.03, effect = +36.36). This is a
44% average increase in game score.
Multi-modal vs. NLG-only: However, there is no
significant difference between the NLG only and
the multi-modal representation, for game score.
NLG vs. Graphics-only: We found that the NLG
representations resulted in a 24.8% increase in av-
erage task score (i.e. better decision-making) com-
pared to the Graphics-only condition, see Table 2:
an average score increase of over 20 points. There
was no significant difference found between the
WMO and NATURAL NLG conditions.
Confidence: For confidence, the multi-modal rep-
resentation is significantly more effective than
NLG only (p < 0.01, effect = 17.7%). However,
as Table 2 shows, although adults did not feel very
confident when presented with NLG only, they
were able to make better decisions compared to
being presented with graphics only.
Demographic factors: We further found that
prior experience on making decisions based on
risk, familiarity with weather models, and cor-
rect literacy test results are predictors of the play-
ers’ understanding of uncertainty, which is trans-
lated in both confidence and game scores. In con-
trast, we found that the education level, the gender,
or being native speaker of English does not con-
tribute to players’ confidence and game scores.

6.2 Results for Females

We found that females score significantly higher
at the decision task when exposed to either of the
NLG output presentations, when compared to the
graphics-only presentation (p < 0.05, effect =
+53.03). This is an increase of 87%, also see
Table 3. In addition, the same group of users
scores significantly higher when presented with
the multi-modal output as compared to graphics
only (p = 0.05, effect =60.74%). Interestingly, for

Monetary gains Confidence
Graphs only 60.83 74.6%
Multi-modal 118.41 81.3%
NLG only 113.86 65.8%

Table 3: Average Monetary gains and Confidence
scores (Females).

this group, the multi-modal presentation adds lit-
tle more in effectiveness of decision-making than
the NLG-only condition, but the multi-modal pre-
sentations do enhance their confidence (+15%).
We furthermore found that educated (i.e. holding
a BSc or higher degree) females, who also cor-
rectly answered the risk literacy test, feel signif-
icantly more confident when presented with the
multi-modal representations than with NLG only
(p = 0.01, effect = 16.7%).

6.3 Results for Males

We found that males obtained similar game scores
with all the types of representation. This suggests
that the overall improved scores (for All Adults)
presented above, are largely due to the beneficial
effects of NLG for women. In terms of confidence,
males are more likely to be more confident if they
are presented with graphics only (81% of the time)
or a multi-modal representation (85% of the time)
(p = 0.01).

7 Conclusions and Future Work

We present results from a game-based study on
how to generate descriptions of uncertain data –
an issue which so far has been unexplored by
data-to-text systems. We find that there are sig-
nificant gender differences between multi-modal,
NLG, and graphical versions of the task, where for
women, use of NLG results in a 87% increase in
task success over graphics. Multimodal presenta-
tions lead to a 44% increase for all adults, com-
pared to graphics. People are also more confident
of their judgements when using the multimodal
representations. These are significant findings, as
previous work has not distinguished between gen-
ders when comparing different representations of
data, e.g. (Gatt et al., 2009). It also confirms re-
search on gender effects in multi-modal systems,
as for example reported in (Foster and Oberlan-
der, 2006; Rieser and Lemon, 2008; Weiss et al.,
2012). The results are also related to educational
research, which shows that women perform bet-
ter in verbal-logical tasks than visual-spatial tasks

267



(Zhu, 2007). An interesting investigation for fu-
ture research is the interplay between uncertainty,
risk-taking behaviour and gender, as for example
reported in (Sarin and Wieland, 2016).

Acknowledgments
This research received funding from the EPSRC projects GUI

(EP/L026775/1), DILiGENt (EP/M005429/1) and MaDrI-

gAL (EP/N017536/1).

References
Gabor Angeli, Percy Liang, and Dan Klein. 2010. A

simple domain-independent probabilistic approach
to generation. In Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Anja Belz and Eric Kow. 2010. Extracting parallel
fragments from comparable corpora for data-to-text
generation. In 6th International Natural Language
Generation Conference (INLG).

Keith Beven. 2009. Environmental Modelling: An Un-
certain Future? Routledge.

Edward T. Cokely, Mirta Galesic, Eric Schulz, Saima
Ghazal, and Rocio Garcia-Retamero. 2012. Mea-
suring risk literacy: The berlin numeracy test. Judg-
ment and Decision Making, 7(1):25–47.

Mary Ellen Foster and Jon Oberlander. 2006. Data-
driven generation of emphatic facial displays. In
Proc. of the 11th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL).

Mirta Galesic and Rocio Garcia-Retamero. 2010.
Statistical numeracy for health: A cross-cultural
comparison with probabilistic national samples.
Archives of Internal Medicine, 170(462–468).

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A re-
alisation engine for practical applications. In ENLG.

Albert Gatt, Francois Portet, Ehud Reiter, James
Hunter, Saad Mahamood, Wendy Moncur, and So-
mayajulu Sripada. 2009. From Data to Text in the
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: Using NLG Technol-
ogy for Decision Support and Information Manage-
ment. AI Communications, 22: 153-186.

G. Gigerenzer and J. A. Muir Gray, editors. 2011. Bet-
ter doctors, better patients, better decisions: Envi-
sioning health care 2020. Cambridge MIT Press.

Dimitra Gkatzia, Amanda Cercas Curry, Verena Rieser,
and Oliver Lemon. 2015. A game-based setup for
data collection and task-based evaluation of uncer-
tain information presentation. In Proceedings of
the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation (ENLG), pages 112–113, Brighton, UK,
September. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Ioannis Konstas and Mirella Lapata. 2012. Un-
supervised concept-to-text generation with hyper-
graphs. In Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL).

Haleh Kootval, editor. 2008. Guidelines on Communi-
cating Forecast Uncertainty. World Meteorological
Organisation.

Martin Manning, Michel Petit, David Easterling, James
Murphy, Anand Patwardhan, Hans-Holger Rogner,
Rob Swart, and Gary Yohe. 2004. IPCC Work-
shop on Describing Scientific Uncertainties in Cli-
mate Change to Support Analysis of Risk and of Op-
tions.

Richard Power and Sandra Williams. 2012. Generat-
ing numerical approximations. Computational Lin-
guistics, 38(1):113–134, March.

V. Rieser and O. Lemon. 2008. Learning effective
multimodal dialogue strategies from wizard-of-oz
data: Bootstrapping and evaluation. Proceedings of
ACL, pages 638–646.

Rakesh Sarin and Alice Wieland. 2016. Risk aver-
sion for decisions under uncertainty: Are there gen-
der differences? Journal of Behavioral and Experi-
mental Economics, 60:1 – 8.

Somayajulu G. Sripada, Ehud Reiter, and Lezan Haw-
izy. 2005. Evaluation of an NLG system using post-
edit data. In International Joint Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence (IJCAI).

Liz Stephens, Ken Mylne, and David Spiegelhalter.
2011. Using an online game to evaluate effective
methods of communicating ensemble model output
to different audiences. In American Geophysical
Union, Fall Meeting.

Kees van Deemter. 2009. Utility and language genera-
tion: The case of vagueness. Journal of Philosophi-
cal Logic, 38(6):607–632.

Benjamin Weiss, Sebastian Möller, and Matthias
Schulz. 2012. Modality preferences of different
user groups. In The Fifth International Confer-
ence on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
(ACHI).

Zheng Zhu. 2007. Gender differences in mathemati-
cal problem solving patterns: A review of literature.
International Education Journal, 8(2):187 – 203.

268


