



















































Arabizi Identification in Twitter Data


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics – Student Research Workshop, pages 51–57,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Arabizi Identification in Twitter Data

Taha Tobaili
Knowledge Media Institute

The Open University
taha.tobaili@open.ac.uk

Abstract

In this work we explore some challenges
related to analysing one form of the Ara-
bic language called Arabizi. Arabizi,
a portmanteau of Araby-Englizi, mean-
ing Arabic-English, is a digital trend in
texting Non-Standard Arabic using Latin
script. Arabizi users express their nat-
ural dialectal Arabic in text without fol-
lowing a unified orthography. We address
the challenge of identifying Arabizi from
multi-lingual data in Twitter, a preliminary
step for analysing sentiment from Arabizi
data. We annotated a corpus of Twitter
data streamed across two Arab countries,
extracted linguistic features and trained
a classifier achieving an average Arabizi
identification accuracy of 94.5%. We also
present the percentage of Arabizi usage
on Twitter across both countries providing
important insights for researchers in NLP
and sociolinguistics.

1 Introduction

Arabizi comprises a portion of the Arabic social
media, thus any large dataset crawled from an Ara-
bic public source may contain Modern-Standard
Arabic (MSA), Non-Standard Arabic (NSA), Ara-
bizi and other languages such as English and
French. MSA is the formal Arabic that is mostly
used in news broadcasting channels and maga-
zines to address the entire Arab region. NSA is
informal, dialectal and esoteric to each region. It
varies among North Africa, Egypt, Levant, and the
Arabian Gulf. Arabizi is a descendant of NSA,
where dialectal words are expressed in Latin script
such as ú
æ. J
J.k which means darling written as
7abibi. Apart from being dialectal, people express

their natural voice in text without following a uni-
fied orthographical and grammatical regulations.

A. Bies et al. mention that the use of Arabizi
is prevalent enough to pose a challenge for Ara-
bic NLP research (2014). Basis Technology, a
company that specializes in computational linguis-
tics for digital forensics stated that Arabizi poses
a problem for government analytics since it has no
structure (2012). The way Arabs use Arabizi is
a significant challenge for data scientists for the
following reasons: it is written in Latin script, it
varies among regions, it is not written in a unified
orthographical, syntactical or grammatical struc-
ture, it could be mixed with other languages in
a single sentence, and it often exist within multi-
lingual datasets.

Identification of Arabizi advances the Arabic
NLP, specifically in sentiment analysis for Arabic.
Being able to identify and analyse Arabizi will fill
an important gap in processing Arabic from social
media data. Several researchers working on sen-
timent analysis for Arabic filter out Arabizi from
their datasets, mainly due to the non-availablitiy of
public resources such as word lexicons, stemmers,
and POS taggers to process this type of text. In
a recent survey about sentiment analysis for Ara-
bic, S. Ahmed et al. mention that the use of di-
alect and Arabizi have not been addressed yet in
existing literature (2013). In this paper we ad-
dress the following questions: How frequent is the
usage of Arabizi in Egypt and Lebanon on Twit-
ter, and which methods could be used to automati-
cally identify Arabizi within multi-lingual Twitter
streams.

Public social media data, particularly Twitter,
is important for sentiment analysis as it contains
and reflects the public’s opinion. The type of data
in Twitter is large-scale and diverse, not biased
to certain groups of people or topics. We col-
lect Twitter data from Egypt and Lebanon, pre-

51



process it, and annotate sample datasets. First,
we present the amount of Arabizi usage in each
of Egypt and Lebanon by reporting the percentage
of Arabic, English, and Arabizi tweets. Second,
we extract some linguistic features using Langde-
tect1 (Nakatani, 2010), a language detection li-
brary ported from Google’s language-detection,
and train an SVM classifier to identify Arabizi
from multi-lingual Twitter data. We believe that
being able to identify Arabizi from multi-lingual
data on social media brings us closer to addressing
sentiment analysis for Arabic, inclusive of NSA
and Arabizi.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In
Section II, we investigate what other researchers
have done for analysing Arabizi. In Section III,
we collect, pre-process and annotate Twitter data
and present our approach of extracting linguistic
features and training the classifier. In Section IV,
we present the results and a discussion. In Section
V, we conclude and add a future work plan.

2 Related Work

In this section we survey papers and present the
efforts of other researchers on the percentage of
Arabizi usage, the motive for analysing sentiment
from Arabizi data, and related work in Arabic di-
alect and Arabizi detection.

2.1 Percentage of Arabizi Usage

Several sociolinguistic studies focus on the Ara-
bizi phenomena, where the researchers tend to ex-
plore how this texting style developed and became
a trend in the Arab region. S. Jaran and F. Al-Haq
(Jaran and Al-Haq, 2015) presented how natives
coin and trend Arabizi words by adopting an En-
glish word and conjugating it in their NSA such
as: I miss you → missak, ak is a suffix added
when referring to the pronoun you in the mascu-
line form in several NSA dialects. In (Muhammed
et al., 2011; Yaghan, 2008; Aboelezz, 2009; Al-
abdulqader et al., 2014; Gibson, 2015; Jaran and
Al-Haq, 2015; Keong et al., 2015) the authors
collected information about people who use Ara-
bizi such as age, gender, and level of education
and reported the frequency and context of Ara-
bizi usage within certain groups of people. In Ta-
ble 1 we present these studies that were conducted
by monitoring mobile messaging, distributing sur-
veys among university students, or analysing on-

1https://goo.gl/xn1jJr

line forum comments. The percentage of Arabizi
usage varies in each of these studies depending on
the year the study was conducted, the region, the
medium, and the users. However, most of these
studies are based on private mobile messages, we
on the other hand report the percentage of Arabizi
usage on a public social medium. We investigated
Arabizi from Twitter data across 2 Arab countries,
Egypt and Lebanon; our method can be applied to
any other Arab country.

2.2 Arabizi in Sentiment Analysis
We point to few studies where researchers col-
lected Arabic data for sentiment analysis but fil-
tered out Arabizi, saying that their tools are in-
capable of handling Arabizi. M. Al-Kabi et al.
carried out a research in sentiment analysis on
a dataset of 1,080 NSA reviews collected from
social and news websites filtering out Arabizi
(2013; 2014). R. Duwairi and I. Qarqaz collected
500 Facebook comments in Arabic for sentiment
analysis filtering out Arabizi as well (2014). R.
Duwairi et al. also mention that Arabizi is com-
mon in Arab blogs, highlighting the fact that there
are no Arabizi benchmark datasets nor sentiment
lexicons available (2015).

2.3 Arabic Dialect Detection
Recent studies are focused on detecting dialectal
Arabic from a given text. Most of these stud-
ies rely on annotated dialectal Arabic corpora and
training a classifier with character and word n-
gram features. O. Zaidan and C. Callison-Burch
annotated over 100,000 sentences and trained an
n-gram probabilistic classifier that detects the di-
alect of input sentences (2014). S. Malmasi et al.
used 2 classifiers to predict whether a given sen-
tence is dialectal or MSA (2015). First, a Condi-
tional Random Field (CRF) classifier trained with
word-level features using MADAMIRA (2014)
and other tools. Second, a trained sentence
level classifier covering dialectal statistics, writing
style, and word relatedness features. Other recent
efforts on dialect detection (Cotterell and Callison-
Burch, 2014; Elfardy and Diab, 2013; Sadat et al.,
2014; Al-Badrashiny et al., 2015) include creating
dialectal corpora.

To the best of our knowledge, K. Darwish pre-
sented the only work on Arabizi detection in the
literature (2014). However, his work focuses on
word-level detection. He collected Arabizi words
from tweets and trained a character-level language

52



Reference Year Location Participants Data Size of Data Arabizi English Arabic

(Keong et al., 2015) 2015 Malysia 20 Arab Post Graduates SMS 200 Messages 35% 50% 10%

(Bies et al., 2014) 2014 Egypt 26 Native Arabic Speakers SMS 101,292 Messages 77% - 23%

(Alabdulqader et al., 2014) 2014 Saudi Arabia 61 Students and Non-students SMS, BBM, and Whatsapp 3236 Messages 15% 8% 74%

(Bianchi, 2012) 2012 Jordan - Online Forum 460,220 Posts 35.5% 17.5% 32%

(Al-Khatib and Sabbah, 2008) 2008 Jordan 46 Students SMS 181 Messages 37% 54% 9%

Table 1: Percentage of Arabizi Usage in Related Work

model and a statistical sequence labelling algo-
rithm. In our work, we extract sentence-level fea-
tures using Langdetect and train a classifier to
identify Arabizi tweets.

3 The Approach

3.1 Data Collection and Annotation

We use geographic information2 to stream tweets
coming from within Lebanon and Egypt, where
we specified the coordinates of each region sep-
arately. We collect two datasets, one from each
country, and split each into Arabic and Non-
Arabic, shown in Table 2. The Non-Arabic data
includes any tweet written in Latin script. We take
the Non-Arabic data segment, pre-process it, and
annotate a sample of 5,000 tweets to be used for
reporting the percentage of Arabizi usage and as a
training dataset for the Arabizi identification clas-
sifier.

Country Tweets Arabic Tweets Non-Arabic Tweets

Lebanon 60,364 28,340 32,024

Egypt 249,149 174,821 74,328

Table 2: Distribution of Tweets

Twitter data contains a lot of noisy tweets such
as tweets that contain only URLs, hashtags, user
mentions, laughter, and spam. We pre-process
the data to maximize the number of textual tweets
in each of the Non-Arabic dataset. We filter out
URLs, hashtags, user mentions, laughter, exagger-
ation, and emojis from tweets. Though some of
these features can be used in an extended work for
sentiment analysis, for this task we only aim for
language identification. We filter out hashtags be-
cause most of them are in English. We filter out
laughter expressions and exaggerated words be-
cause Langdetect misdetects sentences containing
words with repetitive letters. From the resulting
data, we deleted tweets that contain no text and

2https://goo.gl/PFJj3H

duplicated tweets. We observed from our datasets
that many tweets aim to gather followers with ex-
pressions such as: follow me, follow insta, and fol-
low plz. We consider such tweets as spam and fil-
ter out any tweet containing the word follow. Our
pre-processed Non-Arabic datasets lessened from
32,024 to 21,878 for Lebanon and from 74,328 to
36,970 for Egypt.

We extracted and annotated 5,000 tweets which
was done manually by one Arab native. Since
Arabizi users might switch between Arabizi
and English within a single sentence, we tag
Arabizi tweets if the number of Arabizi words
are sufficient to imply that the dominant language
used is Arabizi. To tag an Arabizi tweet it should
have more Arabizi words than English words and
the Arabizi words should consist of nouns and
verbs not just connectors and stop words. For
example:

Tweet: honestly allah y3afeke (recovery wish)
that you still cant get over a story thats a year
not my fault ur ex boyfriend was a *** sara7a
(honestly)
Arabizi Words < English Words
Tag: Not Arabizi

Tweet: kel marra b2oul monday bade ballesh diet
bas emta ha yeje hayda lnhar/Everytime I plan
to start a diet on monday but when will this day
come
Arabizi Words > English Words
Tag: Arabizi

Tweet: eh (yes) God bless your mom w (and) your
family
Tag: Not Arabizi

Out of each sample dataset, we tagged 465
Arabzi tweets from Lebanon and 955 Arabizi
tweets from Egypt. However, each sample dataset
is multi-lingual containing tweets in languages
other than English and Arabizi. The annotated

53



datasets can be found on project-rbz.com3

3.2 Arabizi Identification
We utilize Langdetect, a language detection
library that detects one or more languages for
each input sentence, and returns the language
with the highest confidence score. Though it does
not detect Arabizi sentences, it detects irrelevant
languages when tested against Arabizi. It may
detect 3 or more languages, or one irrelevant
language with high confidence. We use those
detections as input features to train a classifier to
identify Arabizi from Twitter data. For example:

Tweet: never been so scared for an exam
Languages Detected: {en:0.99}

Tweet: kan yom eswed yom ma 3reftk /It
was a bad day I didn’t recognize you
Languages Detected: {so: 0.42, cy: 0.42, sv:
0.14}

We use the irrelevant languages detected, the
number of irrelevant languages, and their con-
fidence scores as input features for the Arabizi
identification classifier.

3.2.1 Feature Selection
We extracted the following features during the
streaming and pre-processing of tweets: Language
detected by Twitter API, languages detected by
Langdetect, location of the tweet, country of the
user, language of the user, number of words per
tweet, and count of word occurrences per tweet.

We extracted (language detected by Twitter
API, tweet location, country and language of the
user) from each tweet stream, for example:

id twt lang twt country usr id usr lang usr country
001468231 Hello World EN EGY 48933812 EN EGY

We tested all the features on several classi-
fiers and found that the best results are obtained
from an SVM classifier using (languages detected
by Langdetect, the language detected by Twit-
ter API, and the count of word occurrences per
tweet). The languages detected by Langdetect in-
clude: languages predicted, number of predicted
languages, and the confidence score of each. Al-
though, Langdetect is more accurate than Twit-
ter API when tested against our data, adding the
language detected by Twitter API to the set of

3http://www.project-rbz.com/

features improved the overall accuracy of Arabizi
identification. The count of word occurrences per
tweet helps the classifier identify words that are
frequently used in Arabizi. We disregarded the
other features (location of the tweet, country and
language of the user, and the number of words per
tweet) because they did not have any effect on the
classification results.

3.2.2 Classification

We run Langdetect against our annotated sam-
ple datasets; in Table 3 we present the distribu-
tion of languages detected with high confidence
scores apart from the manual Arabizi annota-
tion. We note that the other languages detected

Country Dataset Size English Arabizi French Other

Lebanon 5,000 3,242 465 158 1,135

Egypt 5,000 2,868 955 0 1,177

Table 3: Distribution of Languages in Sample
Data

are mainly Far-Eastern languages written in Latin
script. Though there are very few tweets in Span-
ish and Dutch, they are negligible. Far-Eastern
expatriates living and working in the Arab region
constitute a large part of the population. Our
findings show that most of the other languages
detected in our Twitter datasets in Lebanon are
Filipino, and Indian in Egypt. For this experi-
ment we filter out all languages other than English
and Arabizi that have confidence score of 0.7 or
higher from our sample datasets. The annotated
datasets are lessened to 3,707 tweets for Lebanon
and 3,823 for Egypt. We note that the remain-
ing datasets contain multi-lingual tweets however
those tweets were not given high confidence scores
by Langdetect.

We carry out two experiments, one with our an-
notated datasets that are filtered from other lan-
guages and another with balanced datasets. Since
the ratio of English to Arabizi tweets is very high,
we under-sample the annotated-filtered datasets to
have an almost equal number of English to Ara-
bizi tweets. We applied a 10-fold cross validation
technique in which we split the data into 80% and
20% for training and testing respectively, and av-
erage the validation results for all folds.

54



4 Results and Discussion

4.1 Arabizi Usage

In Table 4 we present the percentage of Arabic vs
Non-Arabic tweets in each country. In Table 5 we
present the distribution of languages in each of the
Non-Arabic sample dataset.

Country Tweets Arabic Non-Arabic

Lebanon 60,364 47% 53%

Egypt 249,149 70% 30%

Table 4: Arabic vs Non-Arabic Tweets

Country Tweets English Arabizi French Other

Lebanon 5,000 65% 9.3% 3% 22.7%

Egypt 5,000 57% 19% - 23%

Table 5: Distribution of Languages in Non-Arabic
Tweets

As it can be seen from the results, the percent-
age of Arabizi usage differs in each Arab country.
In Lebanon, Arabic and Non-Arabic tweets are
almost equal, however English is dominant in
Non-Arabic tweets. On the other hand, Arabic is
dominant in tweets from Egypt. The total Arabizi
usage is 4.9% for Lebanon and 5.7% for Egypt.
We also observed that not only do the percentage
of Arabizi usage differs between countries but
also they way it is used in text. In Egypt, most
of the Non-English tweets are written either in
English or in Arabizi rather than mixing both in
single tweets as compared to Lebanon. Also, in
Egypt people tend to abbreviate Arabizi words in
many cases by avoiding to write the vowels. For
example:

Tweet from Egypt:
na w nta hn3ml duet m3 b3d /me and you will
perform a duet together
Abbreviations: ana → na, enta → nta, hane3mal
→ hn3ml, ma3 → m3, ba3d → b3d

Tweet from Lebanon:
bonsoir 7ewalit a3melik add 3ala fb bass i didnt
find you can you give me your account /Morning I
tried adding you on fb but...
Languages: English, French, and Arabizi.

4.2 Arabizi Identification

We filtered our sample datasets from languages
other than English and Arabizi that were detected
by Langdetect with high confidence scores. We
selected an SVM classifier with the following fea-
tures: Languages detected by Langdetect, the lan-
guage detected by Twitter API, and the count of
word occurrences per tweet. We present the aver-
aged 10-fold cross validation results in Table 6.

Country Tweets Recall Precision F-Measure Accuracy

Lebanon 3,707 91 88 88 93

Egypt 3,823 96 78 85 96

Table 6: Averaged K-Fold Validation Results for
Sample Datasets

Since Arabizi is only 12% for Lebanon and 25%
for Egypt from the Non-Arabic datasets that are
filtered from other languages, shown in Table 3,
these datasets are considered imbalanced. We bal-
anced the datasets by undersampling the English
tweets and repeated the experiment. We present
the averaged validation results for the balanced
datasets in Table 7.

Country Tweets Recall Precision F-Measure Accuracy

Lebanon 1,150 97 97 97 97

Egypt 2,200 97 97 97 97

Table 7: Averaged Validation Results for Balanced
Sample Datasets

4.3 Discussion

Our results show that the percentage of Arabizi us-
age in Twitter data across both Lebanon and Egypt
is lower than the findings by other researchers
in mobile messaging, as shown in Table 1. We
hypothesize that people prefer to text in Arabizi
on private mediums since Arabizi is generally
perceived as an informal way of communication.
However, 4.9% or 5.7% of a country’s Twitter data
is Arabizi, which is a large amount of data that
might contain valuable information. Therefore it
is important to generate NLP resources to identify,
analyse, and process Arabizi data.

We found that most of the unidentified Ara-
bizi tweets are tweets from Lebanon written in
both English and Arabizi. Langdetect identifies
most of such mixed tweets as English. As for
the false identification, it was due to misidenti-

55



fication of Far-Eastern tweets. Neither Langde-
tect nor Twitter API was able to correctly iden-
tify all Far-Eastern tweets. The classifier could be
enhanced to overcome those errors by extracting
word-level features from tweets, such as TF-IDF,
n-grams, word lengths, and vowel-consonant ra-
tio, and by training it to classify mixed and Far-
Eastern tweets.

The analysis of Arabizi usage on Twitter for dif-
ferent Arab countries provides an insight for re-
searchers who tempt to analyse sentiment from
Arabic data and for sociolinguistic researchers
who study a language in relation to social fac-
tors such as region and dialect. We believe that
creating tools to automatically identify Arabizi is
a necessary step towards sentiment analysis over
this type of text. Arabizi identification could be
applied in automatic creation of an Arabizi corpus
that could be used for classification tasks and in
automatic language detection for machine transla-
tion tools.

Another aspect of research in Arabizi includes
transliteration to Arabic. There are some tools
available such as Yamli4, Microsoft Maren5, and
Google Input Tools6, however those tools are de-
signed to help Arab speakers get MSA text by typ-
ing Arabizi. Using transliterators to convert the
natural Arabizi text, such as tweets, may result in
broken Arabic words. Some researchers are work-
ing on Arabizi transliteration as in (Bies et al.,
2014; May et al., 2014; Chalabi and Gerges, 2012;
Darwish, 2014).

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this work we have studied the usage of Ara-
bizi on Twitter and the creation of tools to au-
tomatically identify Arabizi from multi-lingual
streams of data. We collected Twitter data from
Lebanon and Egypt and presented the percent-
age of each language, particularly Arabizi, pro-
viding an important insight for researchers work-
ing on the analysis of natural text for the Arab re-
gion. We trained an Arabizi identification classi-
fier by annotating sample datasets and extracting
features using Langdetect, an existing language
detection library. We achieved an average classifi-
cation accuracy of 93% and 96% for Lebanon and
Egypt datasets respectively. Our Arabizi identifi-

4http://www.yamli.com/
5https://goo.gl/3zLLOn
6http://www.google.com/inputtools/

cation classifier relies on sentence-level features;
it could be improved by extracting word-level fea-
tures from text. Our aim is to advance the Arabic
NLP research by facilitating analysis on social me-
dia data without the need to filter out complex or
minority languages.

Several researchers have contributed to the anal-
ysis of MSA in the literature, which is useful for
analysing formal blogs and news pages. However
analysing the public’s sentiment requires effort for
NSA and Arabizi as most people from the Arab
region express their opinion on social media us-
ing their mother tongue in text. Though NSA and
Arabizi are written in different scripts, they can be
addressed simultaneously since both share similar
challenges. We plan to extend this work by ex-
ploring the usage of NSA and Arabizi across sev-
eral regions, and by identifying dialect on social
media. We follow by trying to extract sentiment
from NSA and Arabizi which might require the
creation of dialect sentiment lexicons and parsers
to process the heterogeneous Arabic social data.

References
M Aboelezz. 2009. Latinised Arabic and connections

to bilingual ability. In Papers from the Lancaster
University Postgraduate Conference in Linguistics
and Language Teaching.

Shehab Ahmed, Michel Pasquier, and Ghassan Qadah.
2013. Key issues in conducting sentiment analysis
on Arabic social media text. In 9th International
Conference on Innovations in Information Technol-
ogy (IIT), pages 72–77. IEEE.

Mohamed Al-Badrashiny, Heba Elfardy, and Mona
Diab. 2015. Aida2: A hybrid approach for token
and sentence level dialect identification in Arabic.
CoNLL 2015, page 42.

Mohammed Al-Kabi, Amal Gigieh, Izzat Alsmadi,
Heider Wahsheh, and Mohamad Haidar. 2013. An
opinion analysis tool for colloquial and standard
Arabic. In The 4th International Conference on In-
formation and Communication Systems (ICICS).

Mohammed N Al-Kabi, Izzat M Alsmadi, Amal H
Gigieh, Heider A Wahsheh, and Mohamad M
Haidar. 2014. Opinion mining and analy-
sis for Arabic language. International Journal
of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
(IJACSA), 5(5):181–195.

M. A. Al-Khatib and E. H. Sabbah. 2008. Lan-
guage choice in mobile text messages among Jorda-
nian university students. SKY Journal of Linguistics,
21:37–65.

56



Ebtisam Alabdulqader, Majdah Alshehri, Rana Almur-
shad, Alaa Alothman, and Noura Alhakbani. 2014.
Computer mediated communication: Patterns & lan-
guage transformations of youth in Arabic-speaking
populations. Information Technology & Computer
Science (IJITCS), 17(1):85.

Basis-Technology. 2012. The burgeoning challenge of
deciphering Arabic chat.

R. M. Bianchi. 2012. 3arabizi-when local Arabic
meets global nglish. Acta Linguistica Asiatica,
2(1):89–100.

Ann Bies, Zhiyi Song, Mohamed Maamouri, Stephen
Grimes, Haejoong Lee, Jonathan Wright, Stephanie
Strassel, Nizar Habash, Ramy Eskander, and Owen
Rambow. 2014. Transliteration of Arabizi into Ara-
bic orthography: Developing a parallel annotated
Arabizi-Arabic script sms/chat corpus. ANLP 2014,
page 93.

A. Chalabi and H. Gerges. 2012. Romanized Arabic
Transliteration. In 24th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, page 89.

R. Cotterell and C. Callison-Burch. 2014. A multi-
dialect, multi-genre corpus of informal written Ara-
bic. In LREC, pages 241–245.

K. Darwish. 2014. Arabizi Detection and Conversion
to Arabic. ANLP 2014, page 217.

R. M. Duwairi and I. Qarqaz. 2014. Arabic sentiment
analysis using supervised classification. In Interna-
tional Conference on Future Internet of Things and
Cloud (FiCloud), pages 579–583. IEEE.

RM Duwairi, Nizar A Ahmed, and Saleh Y Al-Rifai.
2015. Detecting sentiment embedded in Arabic so-
cial media–a lexicon-based approach. Journal of In-
telligent and Fuzzy Systems.

H. Elfardy and M. T. Diab. 2013. Sentence Level
Dialect Identification in Arabic. In ACL (2), pages
456–461.

M. Gibson. 2015. A framework for measuring
the presence of minority languages in cyberspace.
Linguistic and Cultural Diversity in Cyberspace,
page 61.

S. A. Jaran and F. A. Al-Haq. 2015. The use of hybrid
terms and expressions in colloquial Arabic among
Jordanian college students: A sociolinguistic study.
English Language Teaching, 8(12):86.

Yuen Chee Keong, Othman Rahsid Hameed, and
Imad Amer Abdulbaqi. 2015. The use of Arabizi
in English texting by Arab postgraduate students at
UKM. The English Literature Journal, 2(2):281–
288.

Shervin Malmasi, Eshrag Refaee, and Mark Dras.
2015. Arabic dialect identification using a parallel
multidialectal corpus. In Proceedings of the 14th

Conference of the Pacific Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (PACLING 2015), Bali, Indonesia,
pages 209–217.

Jonathan May, Yassine Benjira, and Abdessamad Echi-
habi. 2014. An Arabizi-English Social Media Sta-
tistical Machine Translation System.

Randa Muhammed, Mona Farrag, Nariman Elshamly,
and Nady Abdel-Ghaffar. 2011. Summary of Ara-
bizi or Romanization: The dilemma of writing Ara-
bic texts. In Jil Jadid Conference, pages 18–19. Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin.

S. Nakatani. 2010. Language Detection Library for
Java.

Arfath Pasha, Mohamed Al-Badrashiny, Mona T Diab,
Ahmed El Kholy, Ramy Eskander, Nizar Habash,
Manoj Pooleery, Owen Rambow, and Ryan Roth.
2014. Madamira: A fast, comprehensive tool for
morphological analysis and disambiguation of Ara-
bic. In LREC, pages 1094–1101.

Fatiha Sadat, Farnazeh Kazemi, and Atefeh Farzindar.
2014. Automatic identification of Arabic language
varieties and dialects in social media. Proceedings
of SocialNLP.

M A Yaghan. 2008. ”arabizi”: A contemporary style
of Arabic slang. Design Issues, 24(2):39–52.

O. F. Zaidan and C. Callison-Burch. 2014. Arabic
Dialect Identification. Computational Linguistics,
40(1):171–202.

57


