



















































DeepLife: An Entity-aware Search, Analytics and Exploration Platform for Health and Life Sciences


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics—System Demonstrations, pages 19–24,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

DeepLife: An Entity-aware Search, Analytics and Exploration Platform
for Health and Life Sciences

Patrick Ernst, Amy Siu, Dragan Milchevski, Johannes Hoffart, Gerhard Weikum
Max-Planck Institute for Informatics

Campus E1 4
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany

{pernst, siu, dmilchev, jhoffart, weikum}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract

Despite the abundance of biomedical lit-
erature and health discussions in online
communities, it is often tedious to retrieve
informative contents for health-centric in-
formation needs. Users can query schol-
arly work in PubMed by keywords and
MeSH terms, and resort to Google for ev-
erything else. This demo paper presents
the DeepLife system, to overcome the lim-
itations of existing search engines for life
science and health topics. DeepLife in-
tegrates large knowledge bases and har-
nesses entity linking methods, to support
search and exploration of scientific litera-
ture, newspaper feeds, and social media, in
terms of keywords and phrases, biomed-
ical entities, and taxonomic categories.
It also provides functionality for entity-
aware text analytics over health-centric
contents.

1 Introduction

There is an ever-growing abundance of biomed-
ical information and health-related contents on
the Internet: scientific publications in PubMed,
ontologies and knowledge bases on genes, pro-
teins, drugs, etc., health portals like the one by
the Mayo Clinic, online communities where pa-
tients and doctors discuss diseases, therapies, drug
side effects, etc., and more. However, this wealth
of information is in contrast to the limited support
of finding relevant contents, especially when lay-
men search for specific topics off the mainstream
or when experts want high recall on advanced top-
ics from many sources. A typical user approach is

to combine keywords with Medical Subject Head-
ings (MeSH) terms when searching PubMed, and
to use Google for everything else.

As an example, consider a user who takes
asthma medication and plans to go for a 3-month
trip to China including rural areas. Which vaccina-
tions are needed, which asthma drugs are not com-
patible with these vaccines or other drugs that may
be needed and purchased during the trip (e.g. diar-
rhea, sinusitis, influenza)? What is the experience
of other travelers? As an example for an expert
user’s needs, consider a medical student who is
investigating the conditions and risk factors under
which Zika spreads and causes health problems.

State of the Art and its Limitations: These
kinds of users face the following shortcomings of
available search engines:

• Restricted search functionality: The search en-
gines for PubMed or health portals like upto-
date.com or mayoclinic.org support only key-
word queries with some support for MeSH-
like annotations, but lack query functionality
that can incorporate hierarchical taxonomies
and linkage with knowledge bases. Search
over social media sites is even more limited.

• Limited coverage and diversity: Other than
Google, all search engines can tap only into
one kind of content: either scholarly publica-
tions or user-provided social media, but never
both. The same holds for intermediate-style
contents like health portals.

• Restriction to molecular entities: For contents
about genes, proteins, pathways, etc., there
are structured-data sites that come with richer
query and exploration functionality. However,
for entities at the level of diseases, therapies,

19



symptoms, risk factors, etc., there are no ser-
vices of this kind.

• Lack of support for interactive exploration:
The only user-friendly support for interac-
tive sessions is auto-completion suggestions
for user queries. However, these are solely
based on the query-and-click history of previ-
ous users. This has no awareness of emerging
topics in the underlying contents and entity-
level background knowledge.

This state of the art for health-related search
is in sharp contrast with the state of the art
for general-purpose search, say over daily news
or general-purpose social media (e.g., discussing
celebrities). Advances in recognizing and dis-
ambiguating textual mentions of named enti-
ties and the linkage to comprehensive knowl-
edge bases like DBpedia, Freebase, Wikidata and
Yago have enabled powerful and user-friendly re-
trieval systems. Google supports entity-centric
search through transparent interlinkage with the
Google Knowledge Graph; Microsoft, Facebook,
etc. have similar functionalities. Academic sys-
tems such as Broccoli (Bast and Buchhold, 2013),
STICS (Hoffart et al., 2014) and Semantic Scholar
(Valenzuela et al., 2015) are highly expressive
in their capabilities for querying and exploration,
with entity-centric auto-completion suggestions
and other advanced features. However, none of
these covers biomedical or health contents.

Our Approach and Contribution: This paper
presents a novel system, called DeepLife, which
provides this kind of user-friendly and expressive
support for health-related contents from a wide va-
riety of sources, including scholarly publications,
newspaper articles and online communities. Our
approach is inspired by the STICS system (Hof-
fart et al., 2014). However, our content is com-
pletely different, and coping with textual men-
tions of biomedical entities is much harder than
recognizing and disambiguating prominent people
or places in news articles. This paper presents
the system architecture of DeepLife, demonstrates
its usefulness for various use cases, and discusses
how we overcame the aforementioned limitations
of prior work and the challenges regarding cover-
age, scale and usability.

Salient features of DeepLife include the follow-
ing novelties:

• integrating large knowledge bases like the
Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)

and KnowLife (Ernst et al., 2015) into a search
engine over a variety of health-related sources
and document feeds,

• providing capabilities for search and explo-
ration based on flexible combinations of key-
words (and phrases), biomedical entities, facts,
and taxonomic categories,

• supporting users by powerful auto-completion
suggestions, interactive query sessions, and
basic forms of entity-aware text analytics.

DeepLife is available for interactive use at
https://gate.d5.mpi-inf.mpg.de/deeplife/

en-health/.

2 Related Work

In the biomedical domain, the majority of in-
formation retrieval systems limit their scopes to
PubMed scientific publications. Kim et al. (2008)
only uses molecular entities for query expan-
sion. The scopes of Textpresso (Müller et al.,
2004), GoPubMed (Doms and Schroeder,
2005), FACTA+ (Tsuruoka et al., 2011),
EVEX (Van Landeghem et al., 2012), Bio-
TextQuest+ (Papanikolaou et al., 2014) and
CRAB (Guo et al., 2014) are restricted to genes,
proteins, or chemicals. MEDIE (Miyao et al.,
2006) and GeneView (Thomas et al., 2012)
annotate PubMed articles with various kinds of
biomedical entities and events, but both systems
do not offer interactive real-time exploration
and analytics. Contrary to the systems afore-
mentioned, PolySearch2 (Liu et al., 2015) goes
beyond scientific publications, but its search and
exploration interface is not entity-aware.

Besides scientific publications, bio-surveillance
systems aggregate and analyze news articles to
identify health threats, such as disease outbreaks
and food hazards. HealthMap (Freifeld et al.,
2008) and EpiSpider (Keller et al., 2009) rely on
user created ProMED reports and do not process
documents automatically. Contrary to these user-
based approaches, Global Health Monitor (Don
et al., 2008) and the Medical Information System
(MedISys) (Rortais et al., 2010) in combination
with PULS (Steinberger et al., 2008) automati-
cally extract entities and events from relevant med-
ical news. However, the amount of entities both
systems can distinguish is limited.

Pang et al. (2015) emphasize the need for better
exploratory search capabilities for health content,

20



Genre Sources Documents
Entity

Occurrences
Distinct
Entities

Clinical
Trials

2 16,476 49,170 8,962

Encyclopedic
Articles

44 11,139 405,795 16,505

News 121 76,534 3,058,111 38,295
Scientific
Publications

15 19,884,225 214,531,153 453,647

Social Media 1 9,473 117,421 4,433

Total 182 19,997,847 218,161,650 454,620

Table 1: Input corpus snapshot on June 1st, 2016

but they do not consider semantic assets, like enti-
ties or a knowledge base.

3 DeepLife’s Knowledge Base

Knowledge bases (KBs) store facts about entities,
their properties, and the relationships between en-
tities. A fact is a triple consisting of two enti-
ties e1, e2, which serve as left- and right-hand
arguments of a relation R, denoted by R(e1, e2).
We augment and integrate two large knowledge
bases to generate DeepLife’s KB covering the en-
tire spectrum of biomedical entities, together with
an extensive type system featuring salient facts.

UMLS: As entity dictionary, we rely on
the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS).
UMLS is the largest collection of biomedical enti-
ties and covers 3,221,702 entities with 12,842,558
entity names. It integrates source vocabularies
from different biomedical domains into a coherent
structure. Due to its broad coverage, we are able to
detect all kinds of entities in text, i.e. entities about
diseases, anatomy, genes, treatments, etc. How-
ever, the UMLS semantic type system is shallow,
i.e. it only assigns 127 types to more than 3 mil-
lion entities. Therefore, we generate our own type
system by automatically augmenting UMLS with
type hierarchies from its source vocabularies. For
each vocabulary, we compute its entity coverage in
our text corpus depending on the entities’ seman-
tic types. The hierarchy of the vocabulary with the
highest coverage for a particular semantic type is
then used, i.e. for genes the Gene Ontology (GO)
is used, for anatomical entities the Foundational
Model of Anatomy (FMA) and for drugs and dis-
eases the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH).

KnowLife: Although UMLS is rich on entities
and types, it lacks cross-domain facts, i.e. relation-
ships connecting different biomedical domains.
To bridge this gap, we integrate KnowLife, a large
knowledge base for health and life sciences, au-

tomatically constructed from Web sources (Ernst
et al., 2015). KnowLife contains more than
500,000 of such cross-domain facts at a preci-
sion of 96% connecting different biomedical ar-
eas such as genes, diseases, anatomic parts, symp-
toms, treatments, as well as environmental and
lifestyle risk factors for diseases. To integrate
the facts into our system, we represent them as
types. For all facts, R(e1, e2), we create a new
type by using the relation R and the right-hand
argument e2 as type name. For example, for all
left-hand arguments e1 appearing in facts such as
isRiskFactor(e1, Asthma) we create the type
RiskFactorsforAsthma.

Altogether, DeepLife’s knowledge base covers
3.2 million entities with around 12.8 million entity
names and synonyms, 64,568 custom types from
source vocabularies and 136,437 fact types.

4 Entity Extraction

DeepLife has currently indexed 19,997,847 doc-
uments and extracted 218,161,650 entities from
a continuous stream of 182 RSS feeds spanning
five text genres. As Table 1 shows, this constantly
growing and diverse corpus covers the full spec-
trum of biomedical information on the web. Clin-
ical trials and scientific publications describe re-
search findings and target professionals. DeepLife
thereby includes the entire Pubmed MEDLINE
collection. Encyclopaedic articles are educational
resources providing insights to laymen. Social
media, such as patient discussion forums, are
mainly used to share experiences and to receive
advice. By including news articles, our system is
always up-to-date on the latest health topics, such
as disease outbreaks or lifestyle information.

Entity Recognition: To process incoming arti-
cles in real-time and to stay up-to-date, our sys-
tem applies an agile entity recognition method.
StanfordCoreNLP is used to split sentences, to-
kenize words and determine part-of-speech tags.
OpenNLP Chunker is used to generate an initial
set of noun chunk candidates. We extend this set
by applying a rule-based approach, e.g. splitting
or merging prepositional phrases, conjunctions, as
well as proper and common nouns. Candidates are
then matched against the entity names in UMLS
using string-similarity, giving preference to the
longest possible matching chunk. To efficiently
handle the large dictionary and volume of candi-
dates, we use our own method which is based on

21



(a) Entity search for aspirin also includes its synonym acetylsalicylic acid

(b) Searching for anti-inflammatory agents expands to all agents in this category

Figure 1: Entity and Category Search

Figure 2: Combined Category and Entity Search for Asthma Risk Factors

22



Figure 3: Entity/Category Auto-completion

locality sensitive hashing (LSH) with min-wise in-
dependent permutations (MinHash) to quickly find
matching candidates (Siu et al., 2013). LSH prob-
abilistically reduces the high-dimensional space
of all character-level 3-grams, while MinHash
quickly estimates the similarity between two sets
of 3-grams. A successful match provides us also
with the entity’s semantic type.

Entity Disambiguation: The entity type infor-
mation is used to disambiguate between multiple
entity candidates matched to the same noun chunk
in the input text. In the first filtering step, we re-
duce the number of entity candidates by only re-
taining the most specifically typed entities accord-
ing to the UMLS semantic type system. Taking
into account that UMLS provides a ranked list of
entities for every possible name, we further disam-
biguate between the remaining candidates by de-
termining the highest ranked entities. In case two
entities share the same rank, we determine their
popularities by the number of occurrences in dif-
ferent UMLS source vocabularies and prefer the
more popular entity. As shown in Table 1, our sys-
tem has currently extracted 218,161,650 mentions
of 454,620 distinct entities.

5 Demo Scenarios

Entities are at the core of our system. Combining
them with facts and types from DeepLife’s knowl-
edge base enables us to realize different use cases
showcasing novel features of our system.

Entity-aware Auto-completion: Formulating
queries with DeepLife is user-friendly and respon-
sive. Providing an entity auto-completion which

combines prefix matching with entity popularity,
the system lets users easily explore and navigate
through an extensive amount of entities and cate-
gories. For a user-provided prefix, the system re-
trieves entity and category candidates, where any
token of their name or synonyms matches the pre-
fix. These candidates are then ranked by corpus
statistics which the system constantly updates. For
example, Figure 3 depicts Arthritis as the second
suggestion, because its synonym Joint Inflamma-
tion matches the prefix, and because of its high
prevalence in the corpus.

Entity and Category Search: The entity-
based search of our system excels over traditional
keyword-based search. It increases recall, since
the system automatically includes all synonyms of
an entity, as well as precision, since the disam-
biguation removes unwanted occurrences. For ex-
ample, as depicted in Figure 1a, if users search
for Aspirin, documents mentioning its synonym
Acetylsalicylic Acid are also retrieved. An im-
portant feature of our system is the possibility to
search for categories of entities. This allows users
to broaden their search request to all entities of the
same type, i.e. entities which share common at-
tributes or features. For example, to search for
all “aspirin like drugs” which share therapeutic
properties, one can search for the category Anti-
inflammatory Agents (see Figure 1b). The sys-
tem automatically determines all entities within
the category via DeepLife’s type system to retrieve
relevant documents. Figure 1b also highlights
DeepLife’s diverse set of sources. The search re-
sults cover news, publications, as well as discus-
sions. To tap into specific sources, users can easily
customize queries with search filters.

Cross-domain Combined Search: DeepLife’s
knowledge base empowers our system to provide
an intuitive method for searching facts by com-
bining category and entity search. This is espe-
cially useful for layman users. Consider a user
who is suffering from asthma and is interested
in finding all risk factors triggering the disease.
In this case, using the category Risk Factors for
Asthma generated from facts together with the en-
tity Asthma as search query, the system retrieves
all documents mentioning Asthma with its risk fac-
tors (see Figure 2). Displaying the individual risk
factors (e.g. HLA Gene, Viral Lower Respiratory
Infection, etc.) as an expansion of the category
provides immediate insights and facilitates further

23



Figure 4: Countries co-occurring with Zika

exploration.
Analytics: Our system offers interactive entity-

based analytics to spot trends and topic shifts.
Such analyses benefit from the improved recall
and precision aspects aforementioned. Statistics,
based on entity occurrences in documents over
time, are computed and visualized. For example
in Figure 4, entity occurrences of Zika and re-
lated countries in our corpus (Y-Axis) are visu-
alized over time (X-Axis). Users can zoom into
specific time frames and explore documents the
statistics are based on. Not only can entities be
tracked individually, the analytics can also be con-
strained on one entity of main interest, i.e. only
those documents in which this entity appears. In
the same example in Figure 4, to gather insights
about countries affected by the virus, the user set
Zika virus disease as the main entity to compute
analytics based on documents where Zika and a
particular country were mentioned.

References
Hannah Bast and Björn Buchhold. 2013. An index for effi-

cient semantic full-text search. In Proc. of CIKM. pages
369–378.

Andreas Doms and Michael Schroeder. 2005. Gopubmed:
exploring pubmed with the gene ontology. Nucleic Acids
Res 33:W783–6.

Son Don, Ai Kawazoe, and Nigel Collier. 2008. Global health
monitor - a web-based system for detecting and mapping
infectious diseases. In Proc. of IJCNLP. pages 951–956.

Patrick Ernst, Amy Siu, and Gerhard Weikum. 2015. Knowl-
ife: a versatile approach for constructing a large knowl-
edge graph for biomedical sciences. BMC Bioinformatics
16(1):1–13.

Clark Freifeld, Kenneth Mandl, Ben Reis, and John Brown-
stein. 2008. Healthmap: Global infectious disease mon-
itoring through automated classification and visualization
of internet media reports. JAMIA 15(2):150–157.

Yufan Guo, Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha, Ilona Silins, Lin Sun, Jo-
han Högberg, Ulla Stenius, and Anna Korhonen. 2014.
Crab 2.0: A text mining tool for supporting literature re-
view in chemical cancer risk assessment. In Proc. of COL-
ING. pages 76–80.

Johannes Hoffart, Dragan Milchevski, and Gerhard Weikum.
2014. Stics: Searching with strings, things, and cats. In
Proc. of SIGIR. pages 1247–1248.

Mikaela Keller, Michael Blench, Herman Tolentino, Clark C.
Freifeld, Kenneth D. Mandl, and Abla Mawudeku et al.
2009. Use of unstructured event-based reports for global
infectious disease surveillance. Emerging Infectious Dis-
ease Journal 15(5):689.

Jung-jae Kim, Piotr Pezik, and Dietrich Rebholz-
Schuhmann. 2008. Medevi: Retrieving textual evidence
of relations between biomedical concepts from medline.
Bioinformatics 24(11):1410–1412.

Yifeng Liu, Yongjie Liang, and David Wishart. 2015. Poly-
search2: a significantly improved text-mining system for
discovering associations between human diseases, genes,
drugs, metabolites, toxins and more. Nucleic Acids Re-
search 43(W1):W535–W542.

Yusuke Miyao, Tomoko Ohta, Katsuya Masuda, Yoshimasa
Tsuruoka, Kazuhiro Yoshida, Takashi Ninomiya, and
Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2006. Semantic retrieval for the accurate
identification of relational concepts in massive textbases.
In Proc. of ACL. pages 1017–1024.

Hans-Michael Müller, Eimear E Kenny, and Paul W Stern-
berg. 2004. Textpresso: An ontology-based information
retrieval and extraction system for biological literature.
PLoS Biol 2(11).

Patrick CI Pang, Karin Verspoor, Jon Pearce, and Shanton
Chang. 2015. Better health explorer: Designing for health
information seekers. In Proc. of OZCHI. pages 588–597.

Nikolas Papanikolaou, Georgios A. Pavlopoulos, Evange-
los Pafilis, Theodosios Theodosiou, Reinhard Schneider,
and Venkata P. et al. Satagopam. 2014. Biotextquest+: a
knowledge integration platform for literature mining and
concept discovery. Bioinformatics 30(22):3249–3256.

Agnès Rortais, Jenya Belyaeva, Monica Gemo, Erik van der
Goot, and Jens Linge. 2010. Medisys: An early-warning
system for the detection of (re-)emerging food- and feed-
borne hazards. Food Research Internat. 43(5):1553–1556.

Amy Siu, Dat Ba Nguyen, and Gerhard Weikum. 2013. Fast
entity recognition in biomedical text. In Proc. of Workshop
on Data Mining for Healthcare at KDD.

Ralf Steinberger, Flavio Fuart, Erik van der Goot, Clive Best,
Peter von Etter, and Roman Yangarber. 2008. Text Min-
ing from the Web for Medical Intelligence, IOS Press, vol-
ume 19.

Philippe Thomas, Johannes Starlinger, Alexander Vowinkel,
Sebastian Arzt, and Ulf Leser. 2012. Geneview: a com-
prehensive semantic search engine for pubmed. Nucleic
Acids Research 40(W1):W585–W591.

Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Makoto Miwa, Kaisei Hamamoto,
Jun’ichi Tsujii, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2011. Discover-
ing and visualizing indirect associations between biomed-
ical concepts. Bioinformatics 27(13):i111–i119.

Marco Valenzuela, Vu Ha, and Oren Etzioni. 2015. Identi-
fying meaningful citations. In Proc. of the Workshop on
Scholarly Big Data at AAAI.

Sofie Van Landeghem, Kai Hakala, Samuel Rönnqvist, Tapio
Salakoski, Yves Van de Peer, and Filip Ginter. 2012.
Exploring biomolecular literature with evex: Connect-
ing genes through events, homology, and indirect associa-
tions. Advances in Bioinformatics 2012:12.

24


