



















































One for All: Towards Language Independent Named Entity Linking


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2255–2264,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

One for All: Towards Language Independent Named Entity Linking

Avirup Sil and Radu Florian
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center

1101 Kitchawan Road
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598

avi@us.ibm.com, raduf@us.ibm.com

Abstract

Entity linking (EL) is the task of dis-
ambiguating mentions in text by associ-
ating them with entries in a predefined
database of mentions (persons, organiza-
tions, etc). Most previous EL research has
focused mainly on one language, English,
with less attention being paid to other lan-
guages, such as Spanish or Chinese. In
this paper, we introduce LIEL, a Lan-
guage Independent Entity Linking system,
which provides an EL framework which,
once trained on one language, works re-
markably well on a number of different
languages without change. LIEL makes
a joint global prediction over the entire
document, employing a discriminative re-
ranking framework with many domain
and language-independent feature func-
tions. Experiments on numerous bench-
mark datasets, show that the proposed sys-
tem, once trained on one language, En-
glish, outperforms several state-of-the-art
systems in English (by 4 points) and the
trained model also works very well on
Spanish (14 points better than a competi-
tor system), demonstrating the viability of
the approach.

1 Introduction

We live in a golden age of information, where
we have access to vast amount of data in various
forms: text, video and audio. Being able to ana-
lyze this data automatically, usually involves fill-
ing a relational database, which, in turn, requires
the processing system to be able to identify actors
across documents by assigning unique identifiers
to them. Entity Linking (EL) is the task of map-
ping specific textual mentions of entities in a text

document to an entry in a large catalog of entities,
often called a knowledge base or KB, and is one
of the major tasks in the Knowledge-Base Popula-
tion track at the Text Analysis Conference (TAC)
(Ji et al., 2014). The task also involves grouping
together (clustering) NIL entities which do not
have any target referents in the KB.

Previous work, pioneered by (Bunescu and
Pasca, 2006; Cucerzan, 2007; Sil et al., 2012;
Ratinov et al., 2011; Guo et al., 2013), have used
Wikipedia as this target catalog of entities be-
cause of its wide coverage and its frequent updates
made by the community. As with many NLP ap-
proaches, most of the previous EL research have
focused on English, mainly because it has many
NLP resources available, it is the most prevalent
language on the web, and the fact that the English
Wikipedia is the largest among all the Wikipedia
datasets. However, there are plenty of web docu-
ments in other languages, such as Spanish (Fahrni
et al., 2013; Ji et al., 2014), and Chinese (Cao
et al., 2014; Shi et al., 2014), with a large num-
ber of speakers, and there is a need to be able to
develop EL systems for these languages (and oth-
ers!) quickly and inexpensively.

In this paper, we investigate the hypothesis that
we can train an EL model that is entirely un-
lexicalized, by only allowing features that com-
pute similarity between the text in the input docu-
ment and the text/information in the KB. For this
purpose, we propose a novel approach to entity
linking, which we call Language Independent En-
tity Linking (henceforth LIEL). We test this hy-
pothesis by applying the English-trained system
on Spanish and Chinese datasets, with great suc-
cess.

This paper has three novel contributions: 1) ex-
tending a powerful inference algorithm for global
entity linking, built using similarity measures, cor-
pus statistics, along with knowledge base statis-

2255



tics, 2) integrates many language-agnostic and
domain independent features in an exponential
framework, and 3) provide empirical evidence on
a large variety of popular benchmark datasets that
the resulting model outperforms or matches the
best published results, and, most importantly, the
trained model transfers well across languages, out-
performing the state-of-the-art (SOTA) in Spanish
and matching it in Chinese.

We organize the paper as follows: the next
section motivates the problem and discusses the
language-independent model along with the fea-
tures. Section 3 describes our experiments and
comparison with the state-of-the-art. Section 4 il-
lustrates the related previous work and Section 5
concludes.

2 Problem Formulation

2.1 Motivation for Language Independence

Our strategy builds an un-lexicalized EL system
by training it on labeled data, which consists of
pairs of mentions in text and entries in a database
extracted from a Wikipedia collection in English.
Unlike traditional EL, however, the purpose here
is to be able to perform entity linking with respect
to any Wikipedia collection. Thus the strategy
must take care to build a model that can transfer
its learned model to a new Wikipedia collection,
without change.

At a first glance, the problem seems
very challenging - learning how to dis-
criminate Lincoln, Nebraska and
Abraham Lincoln 1, the former US Pres-
ident, seemingly bears little resemblance to
disambiguating between different Spanish person
entities named “Ali Quimico”. The crux of the
problem lies in the fact that Wikipedia-driven fea-
tures are language-specific: for instance, counting
how many times the category 2010 Deaths
appears in the context of an entity is highly useful
in the English EL task, but not directly useful for
Spanish EL. Also, learning vocabulary-specific
information like the list of “deaths”, “presidents”,
etc. is very useful for disambiguating person
entities like “Lincoln” in English, but the same
model, most likely, will not work for mentions
like “李娜” in a Chinese document which might
either refer to the famous athlete李娜 (网球运动
员) or the singer李娜 (歌手).

1Teletype font denotes Wikipedia titles and categories.

Practically we assume the existence of a knowl-
edge base that defines the space of entities we want
to disambiguate against, where each entry contains
a document with the entity; Wikipedia is a stan-
dard example for this2. If there are other proper-
ties associated with the entries, such as categories,
in-links, out-links, redirects, etc., the system can
make use of them, but they are theoretically not
required. The task is defined as: given a mention
m in a document d, find the entry e in the knowl-
edge base that m maps to.

We expand on the architecture described in (Sil
and Yates, 2013) (henceforth NEREL), because
of the flexibility provided by the feature-based
exponential framework which results in an En-
glish SOTA EL system. However, we design all
our features in such a way that they measure the
similarity between the context where the mention
m appears in d and the entries in the knowledge
base. For example, instead of counting how
often the category 2010 Deaths 3 appears
in the context around an entity mention, we
create a feature function such as CATEGORY
FREQUENCY(m, e), which counts how often
any category of entity referent e appears in
the context of mention m. For entities like
Lincoln, Nebraska in the English EL,
CATEGORY FREQUENCY will add together
counts for appearances of categories like Cities
in Lancaster County, Nebraska and
Lincoln metropolitan area, among
other categories. At the same time, in the Spanish
EL domain, CATEGORY FREQUENCY will add
together counts for Polı́ticos de Irak
and Militares de Irak for the KB id
corresponding to “Ali Quimico”. This feature is
well-defined in both domains, and larger values
of the feature indicate a better match between m
and e. As mentioned earlier, it is our hypothesis,
that the parameters trained for such features
on one language (English, in our case) can be
successfully used, without retraining, on other
languages, namely Spanish and Chinese.

While training, the system will take as input a
knowledge base in source language S, KBS (ex-
tracted from Wikipedia) and a set of training ex-
amples (mi, ei, gi), where instances mi are men-
tions in a document of language S, ei are en-
tity links, ei ∈ KBS , and gi are Boolean val-

2We will assume, without loss of generality, that the
knowledge base is derived from Wikipedia.

3Or a specific Freebase type.

2256



ues indicating the gold-standard match / mismatch
between mi and ei. During decoding, given
language T 4, the system must classify examples
(mj , ej) drawn from a target language T and
knowledge-base KBT .

2.2 LIEL: Training and Inference
Our language-independent system consists of two
components: 1. extracting mentions of named-
entities from documents and 2. linking the de-
tected mentions to a knowledge base, which in our
case is Wikipedia (focus of this paper). We run
the IBM Statistical Information and Relation Ex-
traction (SIRE) 5 system which is a toolkit that
performs mention detection, relation extraction,
coreference resolution, etc. We use the system to
extract mentions and perform coreference resolu-
tion: in particular, we use the CRF model of IBM
SIRE for mention detection and a maximum en-
tropy clustering algorithm for coreference reso-
lution. The system identifies a set of 53 entity
types. To improve the mention detection and res-
olution, case restoration is performed on the in-
put data. Case restoration is helpful to improve
the mention detection system’s performance, es-
pecially for discussion forum data. Obviously, this
processing step is language-dependent, as the in-
formation extraction system is - but we want to
emphasize that the entity linking system is lan-
guage independent.

In the EL step, we perform a full document
entity disambiguation inference, described as fol-
lows. Given a document d, and a selected mention
m ∈ d, our goal is to identify its label ê that max-
imizes

ê = P (e|m, d) (1)
= arg max

e:m

∑
k,m∈mk1 ,ek1

P
(
mk1 |m, d

)
P
(
ek1 |mk1 , d

)

where mk1 are mentions found in document d, and
ek1 are some label assignment. In effect, we are
looking for the best mention labeling of the en-
tire document mk1 (that contains m) and a label
to these mentions that would maximize the infor-
mation extracted from the entire document. Since
direct inference on Equation 1 is hard, if not in-
tractable, we are going to select the most likely

4Language prediction can be done relatively accurately,
given a document; however, in this paper, we focus on the
EL task, so we assume we know the identity of the target
language T .

5The IBM SIRE system can be currently accessed at :
http://www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/us/en/ibmwatson/
developercloud/relationship-extraction.html

mention assignment instead (as found by an in-
formation extraction system): we will only con-
sider the detected mentions (m1, . . . ,mk), and
other optional information that can be extracted
from the document, such as links l, categories r,
etc. The goal becomes identifying the set of labels
(e1, . . . , ek) that maximize

P
(
ek1|mk1, d

)
(2)

Since searching over all possible sets of (mention,
entity)-pairs for a document is still intractable for
reasonable large values of k, typical approaches
to EL make simplifying assumption on how to
compute the probability in Equation 2. Sev-
eral full-document EL approaches have investi-
gated generating up to N global tuples of en-
tity ids (e1, . . . , ek), and then build a model to
rank these tuples of entity ids (Bunescu and Pasca,
2006; Cucerzan, 2007). However, Ratinov et
al. (Ratinov et al., 2011) argue that this type
of global model provides a relatively small im-
provement over the purely-local approach (where
P
(
ek1|mk1, d

)
=
∏

i P (ei|mi, d)). In this paper,
we follow an approach which combines both of
these strategies.

Following the recent success of (Sil and Yates,
2013), we partition the full set of extracted
mentions, (mi)i= ¯1,n of the input document d into
smaller subsets of mentions which appear near
one another: we consider two mentions that are
closer then 4 words to be in the same connected
component, then we take the transitive closure
of this relation to partition the mention set. We
refer to these sets as the connected components
of d, or CC(d). We perform classification
over the set of entity-mention tuples T (C) ={(
ei1 , . . . , einC |mi1 , . . . ,minC

)
|eij ∈ KB,∀j

}
6 that are formed using candidate entities within
the same connected component C ∈ CC(d).
Consider this small snippet of text:

“. . . Home Depot CEO Nardelli quits . . . ”

In this example text, the phrase “Home Depot
CEO Nardelli” would constitute a connected
component. Two of the entity-mention tu-
ples for this connected component would
be: (Home Depot, Robert Nardelli
|”Home Depot”, “Nardelli”) and (Home Depot,
Steve Nardelli | ”Home Depot”,“Nardelli”).

6For simplicity, we denote by (e|m) the tuple (e, m),
written like that to capture the fact that m is fixed, while e
is predicted.

2257



2.2.1 Collective Classification Model
To estimate P (t|d,C), the probability of an entity-
mention tuple t for a given connected compo-
nent C ∈ CC(d), LIEL uses a maximum-entropy
model:

P (t|d,C) = exp (w · f(t, d, C))∑
t′∈T (C) exp (w · f(t′, d, C))

(3)

where f(t, d, C) is a feature vector associated with
t, d, and C, and w is a weight vector. For training,
we use L2-regularized conditional log likelihood
(CLL) as the objective

CLL(G,w) =
∑

(t,d,C)∈G
logP (t|d,C,w)−σ‖w‖22

(4)
where G is the gold-standard training data, con-
sisting of pairs (t, d, C), where t is the correct tu-
ple of entities and mentions for connected compo-
nent C in document d, and σ is a regularization
parameter. Given that the function 4 is convex, we
use LBFGS (Liu and Nocedal, 1989) to find the
globally optimal parameter settings over the train-
ing data.

2.3 Extracting potential target entities
From the dump of our Wikipedia data, we extract
all the mentions that can refer to Wikipedia titles,
and construct a set of disambiguation candidates
for each mention (which are basically the hyper-
links in Wikipedia). This is, hence, an anchor-title
index that maps each distinct hyperlink anchor-
text to its corresponding Wikipedia titles and also
stores their relative popularity score. For example,
the anchor text (or mention) “Titanic” is used in
Wikipedia to refer both to the ship or to the movie.
To retrieve the disambiguation candidates ei for a
given mention mi, we query the anchor-title in-
dex that we constructed and use lexical sub-word
matching. ei is taken to be the set of titles (or en-
tities, in the case of EL) most frequently linked to
with anchor text mi in Wikipedia. We use only
the top 40 most frequent Wikipedia candidates for
the anchor text for computational efficiency pur-
poses for most of our experiments. We call this
step “Fast Search” since it produces a bunch of
candidate links by just looking up an index.

2.3.1 Decoding
At decoding time, given a document d, we iden-
tify its connected components CC (d) and run in-
ference on each component C containing the de-
sired input mention m. To further reduce the run

time, for each mention mj ∈ C, we obtain the
set of potential labels ej using the algorithm de-
scribed in Section 2.3, and then exhaustively find
the pair that maximizes equation 3. For each can-
didate link, we also add a NIL candidate to fast
match to let the system link mentions to ids not in
a KB.

2.4 Language-Independent Feature
Functions

LIEL makes use of new as well as well-established
features in the EL literature. However, we make
sure to use only non-lexical features. The local
and global feature functions computed from this
extracted information are described below.

Generically, we have two types of basic fea-
tures: one that takes as input a KB entry e, the
mention m and its document and a second type
that scores two KB entries, e1 and e2. When com-
puting the probability in Equation 3, where we
consider a set of KB entries t7, we either sum or
apply a boolean AND operator (in case of boolean
features) among all entities e ∈ t, while the entity-
entity functions are summed/and’ed for consecu-
tive entities in t. We describe the features in these
terms, for simplicity.

2.4.1 Mention-Entity Pair Features
Text-based Features: We assume the existence
of a document with most entries in the KB, and
the system uses similarity between the input
document and these KB documents. The basic
intuition behind these features, inspired by Rati-
nov et al.(2011), is that a mention m ∈ d is more
likely to refer to entity e if its KB page, W (e), has
high textual similarity to input document d. Let
Text (W (e)) be the vector space model associ-
ated with W (e), Top (W (e)) be the vector of the
top most frequently occurring words (excluding
stop-words) from W (e), and Context(W (e)) be
the vector space of the 100 word window around
the first occurrence of m in W (e). Similarly,
we create vector space models Text(m) and
Context(m). We then use cosine similarity over
these vector space models as features:
i. cosine(Text (W (e)) , T ext (m)),
ii. cosine(Text (W (e)) , Context (m)),
iii. cosine(Context (W (e)) , T ext (m)),
iv. cosine(Context (W (e)) , Context (m)),
v. cosine(Top (W (e)) , T ext (m)),

7Recall that the probability is computed for all the entity
assignments for mentions in a clique.

2258



vi. cosine (Top (W (e)) , Context (m)).

KB Link Properties: LIEL can make use of ex-
isting relations in the KB, such as inlinks, outlinks,
redirects, and categories. Practically, for each such
relation l, a KB entry e has an associated set of
strings I(l, e)8; given a mention-side set M (ei-
ther Text(m) or Context(m)), LIEL computes
FREQUENCY feature functions for the names of
the Categories, Inlinks, Outlinks and Redirects,
we compute

f(e,m, d) = |I(l, e) ∩M |

Title Features: LIEL also contains a number of
features that make use of the Wikipedia title of the
entity links in t (remember t = entity mention tu-
ples and not a Wikipedia title) :
• NIL FREQUENCY: Computes the frequency

of entities that link to NIL
• EXACT MATCH FREQUENCY: returns 1 if

the surface form of m is a redirect for e;
• MATCH ALL: returns true if m matches ex-

actly the title of e;
• MATCH ACRONYM: returns true if m is an

acronym for a redirect of e;
• LINK PRIOR: the prior link probability
P (e|m), computed from anchor-title pairs in
KB (described in Section 2.3).

2.4.2 Entity-Entity Pair Features
Coherence Features: To better model consecu-
tive entity assignments, LIEL computes a coher-
ence feature function called OUTLINK OVER-
LAP. For every consecutive pair of entities (e1, e2)
that belongs to mentions in t, the feature com-
putes Jaccard(Out(e1), Out(e2)), where Out(e)
denotes the Outlinks of e. Similarly, we also com-
pute INLINK OVERLAP.

LIEL also uses categories in Wikipedia which
exist in all languages. The first feature EN-
TITY CATEGORY PMI, inspired by Sil and Yates
(2013), make use of Wikipedia’s category infor-
mation system to find patterns of entities that com-
monly appear next to one another. Let C(e) be
the set of Wikipedia categories for entity e. We
manually inspect and remove a handful of com-
mon Wikipedia categories based on threshold fre-
quency on our training data, which are associ-
ated with almost every entity in text, like Living

8For instance, redirect strings for “Obama” are “Barack
Obama”, “Barack Obama Jr.” and “Barack Hussein Obama”.

People etc., since they have lower discriminat-
ing power. These are analogous to all WP lan-
guages. From the training data, the system first
computes point-wise mutual information (PMI)
(Turney, 2002) scores for the Wikipedia categories
of pairs of entities, (e1, e2):

PMI(C(e1), C(e2)) =
ntC−1∑
j=1

1[C(e1) = C(eij ) ∧ C(e2) = C(eij+1)]∑
j

1[C(e1) = C(eij )]×
∑

j

1[C(e2) = C(eij )]

• ENTITY CATEGORY PMI adds these PMI
scores up for every consecutive (e1, e2) pair
in t.
• CATEGORICAL RELATION FREQUENCY

We would like to boost consecutive entity as-
signments that have been seen in the training
data. For instance, for the text “England cap-
tain Broad fined for..”, we wish to encourage
the tuple that links “England” to the entity
id of the team name England cricket
team, and “Broad” to the entity id of the
person Stuart Broad. Wikipedia con-
tains a relation displayed by the category
called English cricketers that indi-
cates that Stuart Broad is a team mem-
ber of England cricket team, and
counts the number of such relations between
every consecutive pair of entities in (e, e′) ∈
t.
• TITLE CO-OCCURRENCE FREQUENCY

feature computes for every pair of consecu-
tive entities (e, e′) ∈ t, the number of times
that e′ appears as a link in the Wikipedia page
for e, and vice versa (similar to (Cucerzan,
2007). It adds these counts up to get a single
number for t.

3 Experiments

We evaluate LIEL’s capability by testing against
several state-of-the-art EL systems on English,
then apply the English-trained system to Spanish
and Chinese EL tasks to test its language tran-
scendability.

3.1 Datasets
English: The 3 benchmark datasets for the En-
glish EL task are: i) ACE (Ratinov et al., 2011), ii)
MSNBC (Cucerzan, 2007) and iii) TAC 2014 (Ji et

2259



Name |M | In KB Not in KB
ACE 257 100% 0
MSNBC 747 90% 10%
TAC En14 5234 54% 46%
TAC Es13 2117 62% 38%
TAC Es14 2057 72% 28%
TAC Zh13 2155 57% 43%
WikiTrain 158715 100% 0%

Table 1: Data statistics: number of mention
queries, % of mention queries that have their
referents present in the Wikipedia/KB, and %
of mention queries that have no referents in
Wikipedia/KB as per our datasets. En=English,
Es=Spanish and Zh=Chinese for the evaluation
data for TAC for the years 2013 and 2014.

al., 2014)9, which contain data from diverse genre
like discussion forum, blogs and news. Table 1
provides key statistics on these datasets. In the
TAC10 evaluation setting, EL systems are given as
input a document and a query mention with its off-
sets in the input document. As the output, systems
need to predict the KB id of the input query men-
tion if it exists in the KB or NIL if it does not.
Further, they need to cluster the mentions which
contain the same NIL ids across queries.

The training dataset, WikiTrain, consists of
10,000 random Wikipedia pages, where all of
the phrases that link to other Wikipedia articles
are treated as mentions, and the target Wikipedia
page is the label. The dataset was made avail-
able by Ratinov et al. and (Sil and Yates, 2013),
added Freebase to Wikipedia mappings resulting
in 158,715 labeled mentions with an average of
12.62 candidates per mention. The total number
of unique mentions in the data set is 77,230 with
a total of 974,381 candidate entities and 643,810
unique candidate entities. The Wikipedia dump
that we used as our knowledge-base for English,
Spanish and Chinese is the April 2014 dump. The
TAC dataset involves the TAC KB which is a dump
of May 2008 of English Wikipedia. LIEL links
entities to the Wikipedia 2014 dump and uses the
redirect information to link back to the TAC KB.

Spanish: We evaluate LIEL on both the 2013

9This is the traditional Entity Linking (EL) task and not
Entity Discovery and Linking (EDL), since we are comparing
the linking capability in this paper.

10For more details on TAC see
http://nlp.cs.rpi.edu/kbp/2014/index.html

and 2014 benchmark datasets of the TAC Spanish
evaluation.

Chinese: We test LIEL on the TAC 2013 Chi-
nese dataset.

3.2 Evaluation Metric
We follow standard measures used in the litera-
ture for the entity linking task. To evaluate EL
accuracy on ACE and MSNBC, we report on a
Bag-of-Titles (BOT) F1 evaluation as introduced
by (Milne and Witten, 2008; Ratinov et al., 2011).
In BOT-F1, we compare the set of Wikipedia ti-
tles output for a document with the gold set of ti-
tles for that document (ignoring duplicates), and
compute standard precision, recall, and F1 mea-
sures. On the TAC dataset, we use standard met-
rics B3+ variant of precision, recall and F1. On
these datasets, the B3 + F1 metric includes the
clustering score for the NIL entities, and hence
systems that only perform binary NIL prediction
would be heavily penalized11.

3.3 Comparison with the State-of-the-art
To follow the guidelines for the TAC NIST evalu-
ation, we anonymize participant system names as
System 1 through 9. Interested readers may look
at their system description and scores in (Ji et al.,
2014; Fahrni et al., 2013; Miao et al., 2013; May-
field, 2013; Merhav et al., 2013). Out of these
systems, System 1 and System 7 obtained the top
score in Spanish and Chinese EL evaluation at
TAC 2013 and hence can be treated as the current
state-of-the-art for the respective EL tasks. We
also compare LIEL with some traditional “wiki-
fiers” like MW08 (Milne and Witten, 2008) and
UIUC (Cheng and Roth, 2013) and also NEREL
(Sil and Yates, 2013) which is the system which
LIEL resembles the most.

3.4 Parameter Settings
LIEL has two tuning parameters: σ, the regular-
ization weight; and the number of candidate links
per mention we select from the Wikipedia dump.
We set the value of σ by trying five possible values
in the range [0.1, 10] on held-out data (the TAC
2009 data). We found σ = 0.5 to work best for
our experiments. We chose to select a maximum
of 40 candidate entities from Wikipedia for each
candidate mention (or fewer if the dump had fewer
than 40 links with nonzero probability).

11For more details on the scoring metric used for TAC EL
see: http://nlp.cs.rpi.edu/kbp/2014/scoring.html

2260



0.728

0.853 0.859 0.862

0.685

0.812
0.846 0.850

0.500

0.550

0.600

0.650

0.700

0.750

0.800

0.850

0.900

MW08 UIUC NEREL LIEL

BO
T-
F1

BOT-F1:	LIEL	vs.	The	State-of-the-art

ACE MSNBC

Figure 1: LIEL outperforms all its competitors on
both ACE and MSNBC.

3.5 Results

English: Figure 1 compares LIEL with previously
reported results by MW08, UIUC and NEREL on
the ACE and MSNBC datasets in (Cheng and
Roth, 2013; Sil and Yates, 2013). LIEL achieves
an F1 score of 86.2 on ACE and 85.0 on MSNBC,
clearly outperforming the others e.g. 3.8% abso-
lute value higher than UIUC on MSNBC. We be-
lieve that LIEL’s strong model comprising rela-
tional information (coherence features from large
corpus statistics), textual and title lets it outper-
form UIUC and MW08 where the former uses re-
lational information and the latter a naive version
of LIEL’s coherence features. Comparison with
NEREL is slightly unfair (though we outperform
them marginally) since they use both Freebase and
Wikipedia as their KB whereas we are comparing
with systems which only use Wikipedia as their
KB.

To test the robustness of LIEL on a diverse
genre of data, we also compare it with some of the
other state-of-the-art systems on the latest bench-
mark TAC 2014 dataset. Figure 2 shows our re-
sults when compared with the top systems in the
evaluation. Encouragingly, LIEL’s performance is
tied with the top performer, System 6, and out-
performs all the other top participants from this
challenging annual evaluation. Note that LIEL ob-
tains 0.13 points more than System 1, the only
other multi-lingual EL system and, in that sense,
LIEL’s major competitor. Several other factors are
evident from the results: System 1 and 2 are sta-
tistically tied and so are System 3, 4 and 5. We
also show the bootstrapped percentile confidence
intervals (Singh and Xie, 2008) for LIEL which
are [0.813, 0.841]: (we do not have access to the
other competing systems).

0.69 0.70

0.76 0.76 0.77

0.82 0.82

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

Ax
is
	T
itl
e

English EL	Test:	LIEL	vs.	other	TAC	EL	systems

Figure 2: Comparison of several state-of-the-art
English EL systems along with LIEL on the latest
TAC 2014 dataset and LIEL obtains the best score.
* indicates systems that perform multilingual EL.

0.55

0.65

0.71
0.74

0.66

0.80

0.50

0.55

0.60

0.65

0.70

0.75

0.80

0.85

System9 System7 System1 LIEL

as
da
sd
a

Spanish	EL	Test:	LIEL	vs.	other	TAC	EL	Systems	

2013 2014

Figure 3: System performance on the TAC 2013
and 2014 Spanish datasets are shown. LIEL out-
performs all the systems in terms of overall F1
score.

3.5.1 Foreign Language Experiments

Note that LIEL was trained only on the English
Wikitrain dataset (Section 3.1), and then applied,
unchanged, to all the evaluation datasets across
languages and domains described in Section 3.1.
Hence, it is the same instance of the model for
all languages. As we will observe, this one sys-
tem consistently outperforms the state of the art,
even though it is using exactly the same trained
model across the datasets. We consider this to be
the take-away message of this paper.
Spanish: LIEL obtains a B3 + F1 score of
0.736 on the TAC 2013 dataset and clearly outper-
forms the SOTA, System 1, which obtains 0.709
as shown in Figure 3 and considerably higher than
the other participating systems. We could only ob-
tain the results for Systems 9 and 7 on 2013. On
the 2014 evaluation dataset, LIEL obtains a higher
gain of 0.136 points (precision of 0.814 and re-
call of 0.787) over its major competitor System
1, showing the power of its language-independent
model.

2261



0.60 0.60

0.63 0.63

0.5

0.52

0.54

0.56

0.58

0.6

0.62

0.64

System	1 LIEL System	8 System	7

Ax
is
	T
itl
e

Chinese	EL	Test:	LIEL	vs.	other	TAC	EL	Systems

Figure 4: LIEL achieves competitive performance
in Chinese EL further proving its robustness to
multilingual data.

Chinese: Figure 4 shows the results of LIEL’s
performance on the Chinese benchmark dataset
compared to the state-of-the-art. Systems 7 and
8 obtains almost similar scores. We observe that
LIEL is tied with System 1 and achieves com-
petitive performance compared to Systems 7 and
8 (note that LIEL has a confidence interval of
[0.597, 0.632]) which requires labeled Chinese
TAC data to be trained on and the same model does
not work for other languages. Emphasizing again:
LIEL is trained only once, on English, and tested
on Chinese unchanged.

3.5.2 Error Analysis
While we see LIEL’s strong multi-lingual empiri-
cal results, it is important to note some of the areas
which confuses the system. Firstly, a major source
of error which affects LIEL’s performance is due
to coreference resolution e.g. from the text “Bel-
tran Leyva, also known as “The Bearded One,”
is ...”, TAC’s mention query asks the systems to
provide the disambiguation for The Bearded One.
LIEL predicts that the The Bearded One refers
to the entity Richard Branson, which is the
most common entity in Wikipedia that refers to
that nickname (based on our dump), while, clearly,
the correct entity should have been Beltran Levya.
We believe that this type of an error can be han-
dled by performing joint EL and coreference res-
olution, which is a promising future research area
for LIEL.

Contextual information can also hurt system
performance e.g. from the text, “.. dijo Alex
Sánchez , analista..”, LIEL predicts the Wikipedia
title Alex Sánchez (outfielder) for the
mention Alex Sánchez since the document talks
about sports and player names. The query men-
tion was actually referring to a journalist, not in

the KB, and hence a NIL. Handling sparse en-
tities, similar to this, are also an important future
direction.

4 Related Work

Entity linking has been introduced and actively
developed under the NIST-organized Text Analy-
sis Conference, specifically the Knowledge Base
Population track. The top performing English
EL system in the TAC evaluation has been the
MS MLI system (Cucerzan and Sil, 2013), which
has obtained the top score in TAC evaluation in the
past 4 years (2011 through 2014): the system links
all mentions in a document simultaneously, with
the constraint that their resolved links should be
globally consistent on the category level as much
as possible. Since global disambiguation can be
expensive, (Milne and Witten, 2008) uses the set
of unambiguous mentions in the text surrounding
a mention to define the mention’s context, and
uses the Normalized Google Distance (Cilibrasi
and Vitanyi, 2007) to compute the similarity be-
tween this context and the candidate Wikipedia en-
try. The UIUC system, (Cheng and Roth, 2013),
another state-of-the-art EL system, which is an ex-
tension of (Ratinov et al., 2011), adds relational
inference for wikification. NEREL (Sil and Yates,
2013) is a powerful joint entity extraction and link-
ing system. However, by construction their model
is not language-independent due to the heavy re-
liance on type systems of structured knowledge-
bases like Freebase. It also makes use of lexical
features from Wikipedia as their model performs
joint entity extraction and disambiguation. Some
of the other systems which use a graph based algo-
rithm such as partitioning are LCC, NYU (Ji et al.,
2014) and HITS (Fahrni et al., 2013) which ob-
tained competitive score in the TAC evaluations.
Among all these systems, only the HITS system
has ventured beyond English and has obtained the
top score in Spanish EL evaluation at TAC 2013.
It is the only multilingual EL system in the lit-
erature which performs reliably well across a se-
ries of languages and benchmark datasets. Re-
cently, (Wang et al., 2015) show a new domain and
language-independent EL system but they make
use of translation tables for non-English (Chi-
nese) EL; thereby not making the system entirely
language-independent. Empirically their perfor-
mance comes close to System 1 which LIEL out-
performs. The BASIS system (Merhav et al.,

2262



2013), is the state-of-the-art for Chinese EL as
it obtained the top score in TAC 2013. The FU-
JITSU system (Miao et al., 2013) obtained similar
scores. It is worth noting that these systems, unlike
LIEL, are heavily language dependent, e.g. per-
forming lexicon specific information extraction,
using inter-language links to map between the lan-
guages or training using labeled Chinese data.

In more specialized domains, Dai et al. (2011)
employed a Markov logic network for building
an EL system with good results in a bio-medical
domain; it would be interesting to find out how
their techniques might extended to other lan-
guages/corpora. Phan et al. (2008) utilize topic
models derived from Wikipedia to help classify
short text segment, while Guo et al. (2013) investi-
gate methods for disambiguating entities in tweets.
Neither of these methods do show how to transfer
the EL system developed for short texts to differ-
ent languages, if at all.

The large majority of entity linking research
outside of TAC involves a closely related task -
wikification (Bunescu and Pasca, 2006; Cucerzan,
2007; Ratinov et al., 2011; Guo et al., 2013), and
has been mainly performed on English datasets,
for obvious reasons (data, tools availability).
These systems usually achieve high accuracy on
the language they are trained on. Multilingual
studies, e.g. (McNamee et al., 2011), use a large
number of pipelines and complex statistical ma-
chine translation tools to first translate the original
document contexts into English equivalents and
transform the cross-lingual EL task into a mono-
lingual EL one. The performance of the entity
linking system is highly dependent on the exis-
tence and potential of the statistical machine trans-
lation system in the given pair of languages.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we discussed a new strategy for
multilingual entity linking that, once trained on
one language source with accompanying knowl-
edge base, performs without adaptation in multi-
ple target languages. Our proposed system, LIEL
is trained on the English Wikipedia corpus, af-
ter building its own knowledge-base by exploit-
ing the rich information present in Wikipedia. One
of the main characteristics of the system is that it
makes effective use of features that are built ex-
clusively around computing similarity between the
text/context of the mention and the document text

of the candidate entity, allowing it to transcend
language and perform inference on a completely
new language or domain, without change or adap-
tation.

The system displays a robust and strong empir-
ical evidence by not only outperforming all state-
of-the-art English EL systems, but also achieving
very good performance on multiple Spanish and
Chinese entity linking benchmark datasets, and it
does so without the need to switch, retrain, or even
translate, a major differentiating factor from the
existing multi-lingual EL systems out there.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers for their suggestions. We also thank Salim
Roukos, Georgiana Dinu and Vittorio Castelli for
their helpful comments. This work was funded
under DARPA HR0011-12-C-0015 (BOLT). The
views and findings in this paper are those of the
authors and are not endorsed by DARPA.

References
R. Bunescu and M. Pasca. 2006. Using encyclope-

dic knowledge for named entity disambiguation. In
EACL.

Ziqiang Cao, Sujian Li, and Heng Ji. 2014. Joint
learning of chinese words, terms and keywords. In
EMNLP.

X. Cheng and D. Roth. 2013. Relational inference
for wikification. In Proc. of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP).

R.L. Cilibrasi and P.M.B. Vitanyi. 2007. The google
similarity distance. IEEE Transactions on Knowl-
edge and Data Engineering, 19(3):370–383.

Silviu Cucerzan and Avirup Sil. 2013. The MSR Sys-
tems for Entity Linking and Temporal Slot Filling at
TAC 2013. In Text Analysis Conference.

Silviu Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity dis-
ambiguation based on wikipedia data. In EMNLP-
CoNLL, pages 708–716.

Hong-Jie Dai, Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, Wen-Lian
Hsu, et al. 2011. Entity disambiguation using a
markov-logic network. In IJCNLP.

Angela Fahrni, Benjamin Heinzerling, Thierry Göckel,
and Michael Strube. 2013. Hits monolingual and
cross-lingual entity linking system at TAC 2013. In
Text Analysis Conference.

2263



Stephen Guo, Ming-Wei Chang, and Emre Kıcıman.
2013. To link or not to link? a study on end-to-end
tweet entity linking. In NAACL.

Heng Ji, HT Dang, J Nothman, and B Hachey. 2014.
Overview of tac-kbp2014 entity discovery and link-
ing tasks. In Proc. Text Analysis Conference
(TAC2014).

D.C. Liu and J. Nocedal. 1989. On the limited memory
method for large scale optimization. Mathematical
Programming B, 45(3):503–528.

James Mayfield. 2013. Overview of the kbp 2013 en-
tity linking track.

Paul McNamee, James Mayfield, Douglas W Oard,
Tan Xu, Ke Wu, Veselin Stoyanov, and David Do-
ermann. 2011. Cross-language entity linking in
maryland during a hurricane. In Text Analysis Con-
ference.

Yuval Merhav, Joel Barry, James Clarke, David Mur-
gatroyd, and One Alewife Center. 2013. Basis tech-
nology at tac 2013 entity linking.

Qingliang Miao, Ruiyu Fang, Yao Meng, and Shu
Zhang. 2013. Frdc’s cross-lingual entity linking
system at tac 2013.

David Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Learning to link
with wikipedia. In CIKM.

Xuan-Hieu Phan, Le-Minh Nguyen, and Susumu
Horiguchi. 2008. Learning to classify short and
sparse text & web with hidden topics from large-
scale data collections. In Proceedings of the 17th
international conference on World Wide Web.

L. Ratinov, D. Roth, D. Downey, and M. Anderson.
2011. Local and global algorithms for disambigua-
tion to wikipedia. In Proc. of the Annual Meeting of
the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Xing Shi, Kevin Knight, and Heng Ji. 2014. How to
speak a language without knowing it. In ACL.

Avirup Sil and Alexander Yates. 2013. Re-ranking
for Joint Named-Entity Recognition and Linking. In
CIKM.

Avirup Sil, Ernest Cronin, Penghai Nie, Yinfei Yang,
Ana-Maria Popescu, and Alexander Yates. 2012.
Linking Named Entities to Any Database. In
EMNLP-CoNLL.

Kesar Singh and Minge Xie. 2008. Bootstrap: a statis-
tical method.

P. D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? se-
mantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifi-
cation of reviews. In Procs. of ACL, pages 417–424.

Han Wang, Jin Guang Zheng, Xiaogang Ma, Peter Fox,
and Heng Ji. 2015. Language and domain indepen-
dent entity linking with quantified collective valida-
tion. In Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP2015).

2264


