



















































Harnessing Cognitive Features for Sarcasm Detection


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1095–1104,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Harnessing Cognitive Features for Sarcasm Detection

Abhijit Mishra†, Diptesh Kanojia†, Seema Nagar ?, Kuntal Dey?,
Pushpak Bhattacharyya†

†Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India
?IBM Research, India

†{abhijitmishra, diptesh, pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in
?{senagar3, kuntadey}@in.ibm.com

Abstract

In this paper, we propose a novel mecha-
nism for enriching the feature vector, for
the task of sarcasm detection, with cogni-
tive features extracted from eye-movement
patterns of human readers. Sarcasm detec-
tion has been a challenging research prob-
lem, and its importance for NLP applica-
tions such as review summarization, dia-
log systems and sentiment analysis is well
recognized. Sarcasm can often be traced
to incongruity that becomes apparent as
the full sentence unfolds. This presence
of incongruity- implicit or explicit- affects
the way readers eyes move through the
text. We observe the difference in the be-
haviour of the eye, while reading sarcastic
and non sarcastic sentences. Motivated by
this observation, we augment traditional
linguistic and stylistic features for sarcasm
detection with the cognitive features ob-
tained from readers eye movement data.
We perform statistical classification using
the enhanced feature set so obtained. The
augmented cognitive features improve sar-
casm detection by 3.7% (in terms of F-
score), over the performance of the best
reported system.

1 Introduction

Sarcasm is an intensive, indirect and complex con-
struct that is often intended to express contempt
or ridicule 1. Sarcasm, in speech, is multi-modal,
involving tone, body-language and gestures along
with linguistic artifacts used in speech. Sarcasm
in text, on the other hand, is more restrictive when
it comes to such non-linguistic modalities. This
makes recognizing textual sarcasm more challeng-
ing for both humans and machines.

1The Free Dictionary

Sarcasm detection plays an indispensable role
in applications like online review summarizers, di-
alog systems, recommendation systems and senti-
ment analyzers. This makes automatic detection
of sarcasm an important problem. However, it
has been quite difficult to solve such a problem
with traditional NLP tools and techniques. This is
apparent from the results reported by the survey
from Joshi et al. (2016). The following discussion
brings more insights into this.

Consider a scenario where an online reviewer
gives a negative opinion about a movie through
sarcasm: “This is the kind of movie you see be-
cause the theater has air conditioning”. It is dif-
ficult for an automatic sentiment analyzer to as-
sign a rating to the movie and, in the absence
of any other information, such a system may
not be able to comprehend that prioritizing the
air-conditioning facilities of the theater over the
movie experience indicates a negative sentiment
towards the movie. This gives an intuition to why,
for sarcasm detection, it is necessary to go beyond
textual analysis.

We aim to address this problem by exploiting
the psycholinguistic side of sarcasm detection, us-
ing cognitive features extracted with the help of
eye-tracking. A motivation to consider cogni-
tive features comes from analyzing human eye-
movement trajectories that supports the conjec-
ture: Reading sarcastic texts induces distinctive
eye movement patterns, compared to literal texts.
The cognitive features, derived from human eye
movement patterns observed during reading, in-
clude two primary feature types:

1. Eye movement characteristic features of
readers while reading given text, comprising
gaze-fixaions (i.e,longer stay of gaze on a vi-
sual object), forward and backward saccades
(i.e., quick jumping of gaze between two po-
sitions of rest).

1095



2. Features constructed using the statistical and
deeper structural information contained in
graph, created by treating words as vertices
and saccades between a pair of words as
edges.

The cognitive features, along with textual fea-
tures used in best available sarcasm detectors, are
used to train binary classifiers against given sar-
casm labels. Our experiments show significant im-
provement in classification accuracy over the state
of the art, by performing such augmentation.

Feasibility of Our Approach
Since our method requires gaze data from human
readers to be available, the methods practicability
becomes questionable. We present our views on
this below.

Availability of Mobile Eye-trackers
Availability of inexpensive embedded eye-trackers
on hand-held devices has come close to reality
now. This opens avenues to get eye-tracking
data from inexpensive mobile devices from a huge
population of online readers non-intrusively, and
derive cognitive features to be used in predic-
tive frameworks like ours. For instance, Co-
gisen: (http://www.sencogi.com) has a patent (ID:
EP2833308-A1) on “eye-tracking using inexpen-
sive mobile web-cams”.

Applicability Scenario
We believe, mobile eye-tracking modules could be
a part of mobile applications built for e-commerce,
online learning, gaming etc. where automatic
analysis of online reviews calls for better solutions
to detect linguistic nuances like sarcasm. To give
an example, let’s say a book gets different reviews
on Amazon. Our system could watch how read-
ers read the review using mobile eye-trackers, and
thereby, decide whether the text contains sarcasm
or not. Such an application can horizontally scale
across the web and will help in improving auto-
matic classification of online reviews.

Since our approach seeks human mediation, one
might be tempted to question the approach of re-
lying upon eye-tracking, an indirect indicator, in-
stead of directly obtaining man-made annotations.
We believe, asking a large number of internet au-
dience to annotate/give feedback on each and ev-
ery sentence that they read online, following a set
of annotation instructions, will be extremely intru-
sive and may not be responded well. Our system,

on the other hand, can be seamlessly integrated
into existing applications and as the eye-tracking
process runs in the background, users will not be
interrupted in the middle of the reading. This,
thus, offers a more natural setting where human
mediation can be availed without intervention.

Getting Users’ Consent for Eye-tracking

Eye-tracking technology has already been uti-
lized by leading mobile technology developers
(like Samsung) to facilitate richer user experiences
through services like Smart-scroll (where a user’s
eye movement determines whether a page has to
be scrolled or not) and Smart-lock (where user’s
gaze position decides whether to lock the screen
or not). The growing interest of users in us-
ing such services takes us to a promising situa-
tion where getting users’ consent to record eye-
movement patterns will not be difficult, though it
is yet not the current state of affairs.

Disclaimer: In this work, we focus on detect-
ing sarcasm in non-contextual and short-text set-
tings prevalent in product reviews and social me-
dia. Moreover, our method requires eye-tracking
data to be available in the test scenario.

2 Related Work

Sarcasm, in general, has been the focus of re-
search for quite some time. In one of the pio-
neering works Jorgensen et al. (1984) explained
how sarcasm arises when a figurative meaning is
used opposite to the literal meaning of the utter-
ance. In the word of Clark and Gerrig (1984), sar-
casm processing involves canceling the indirectly
negated message and replacing it with the impli-
cated one. Giora (1995), on the other hand, de-
fine sarcasm as a mode of indirect negation that re-
quires processing of both negated and implicated
messages. Ivanko and Pexman (2003) define sar-
casm as a six tuple entity consisting of a speaker,
a listener, Context, Utterance, Literal Proposition
and Intended Proposition and study the cognitive
aspects of sarcasm processing.

Computational linguists have previously ad-
dressed this problem using rule based and sta-
tistical techniques, that make use of : (a) Un-
igrams and Pragmatic features (Carvalho et al.,
2009; González-Ibánez et al., 2011; Barbieri et
al., 2014; Joshi et al., 2015) (b) Stylistic patterns
(Davidov et al., 2010) and patterns related to situa-
tional disparity (Riloff et al., 2013) and (c) Hastag

1096



interpretations (Liebrecht et al., 2013; Maynard
and Greenwood, 2014).

Most of the previously done work on sar-
casm detection uses distant supervision based
techniques (ex: leveraging hashtags) and stylis-
tic/pragmatic features (emoticons, laughter ex-
pressions such as “lol” etc). But, detecting
sarcasm in linguistically well-formed structures,
in absence of explicit cues or information (like
emoticons), proves to be hard using such linguis-
tic/stylistic features alone.

With the advent of sophisticated eye-
trackers and electro/magneto-encephalographic
(EEG/MEG) devices, it has been possible to
delve deep into the cognitive underpinnings of
sarcasm understanding. Filik (2014), using a
series of eye-tracking and EEG experiments try
to show that for unfamiliar ironies, the literal
interpretation would be computed first. They
also show that a mismatch with context would
lead to a re-interpretation of the statement, as
being ironic. Camblin et al. (2007) show that in
multi-sentence passages, discourse congruence
has robust effects on eye movements. This also
implies that disrupted processing occurs for dis-
course incongruent words, even though they are
perfectly congruous at the sentence level. In our
previous work (Mishra et al., 2016), we augment
cognitive features, derived from eye-movement
patterns of readers, with textual features to detect
whether a human reader has realized the presence
of sarcasm in text or not.

The recent advancements in the literature dis-
cussed above, motivate us to explore gaze-based
cognition for sarcasm detection. As far as we
know, our work is the first of its kind.

3 Eye-tracking Database for Sarcasm
Analysis

Sarcasm often emanates from incongruity (Camp-
bell and Katz, 2012), which enforces the brain to
reanalyze it (Kutas and Hillyard, 1980). This, in
turn, affects the way eyes move through the text.
Hence, distinctive eye-movement patterns may
be observed in the case of successful processing
of sarcasm in text in contrast to literal texts.
This hypothesis forms the crux of our method
for sarcasm detection and we validate this using
our previously released freely available sarcasm
dataset2 (Mishra et al., 2016) enriched with gaze

2http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/cognitive-nlp

µ S σ S µ NS σ NS t p
P1 319 145 196 97 14.1 5.84E-39
P2 415 192 253 130 14.0 1.71E-38
P3 322 173 214 160 9.5 3.74E-20
P4 328 170 191 96 13.9 1.89E-37
P5 291 151 183 76 11.9 2.75E-28
P6 230 118 136 84 13.2 6.79E-35
P7 488 268 252 141 15.3 3.96E-43

Table 1: T-test statistics for average fixation dura-
tion time per word (in ms) for presence of sarcasm
(represented by S) and its absence (NS) for partic-
ipants P1-P7.

information.

3.1 Document Description

The database consists of 1,000 short texts, each
having 10-40 words. Out of these, 350 are sar-
castic and are collected as follows: (a) 103 sen-
tences are from two popular sarcastic quote web-
sites3, (b) 76 sarcastic short movie reviews are
manually extracted from the Amazon Movie Cor-
pus (Pang and Lee, 2004) by two linguists. (c)
171 tweets are downloaded using the hashtag #sar-
casm from Twitter. The 650 non-sarcastic texts are
either downloaded from Twitter or extracted from
the Amazon Movie Review corpus. The sentences
do not contain words/phrases that are highly topic
or culture specific. The tweets were normalized
to make them linguistically well formed to avoid
difficulty in interpreting social media lingo. Every
sentence in our dataset carries positive or negative
opinion about specific “aspects”. For example, the
sentence “The movie is extremely well cast” has
positive sentiment about the aspect “cast”.

The annotators were seven graduate students
with science and engineering background, and
possess good English proficiency. They were
given a set of instructions beforehand and are ad-
vised to seek clarifications before they proceed.
The instructions mention the nature of the task,
annotation input method, and necessity of head
movement minimization during the experiment.

3.2 Task Description

The task assigned to annotators was to read sen-
tences one at a time and label them with with
binary labels indicating the polarity (i.e., posi-
tive/negative). Note that, the participants were not

3http://www.sarcasmsociety.com,
http://www.themarysue.com/funny-amazon-reviews

1097



instructed to annotate whether a sentence is sar-
castic or not., to rule out the Priming Effect (i.e., if
sarcasm is expected beforehand, processing incon-
gruity becomes relatively easier (Gibbs, 1986)).
The setup ensures its “ecological validity” in two
ways: (1) Readers are not given any clue that they
have to treat sarcasm with special attention. This
is done by setting the task to polarity annotation
(instead of sarcasm detection). (2) Sarcastic sen-
tences are mixed with non sarcastic text, which
does not give prior knowledge about whether the
forthcoming text will be sarcastic or not.

The eye-tracking experiment is conducted by
following the standard norms in eye-movement
research (Holmqvist et al., 2011). At a time,
one sentence is displayed to the reader along
with the “aspect” with respect to which the an-
notation has to be provided. While reading, an
SR-Research Eyelink-1000 eye-tracker (monocu-
lar remote mode, sampling rate 500Hz) records
several eye-movement parameters like fixations (a
long stay of gaze) and saccade (quick jumping of
gaze between two positions of rest) and pupil size.

The accuracy of polarity annotation varies be-
tween 72%-91% for sarcastic texts and 75%-91%
for non-sarcastic text, showing the inherent dif-
ficulty of sentiment annotation, when sarcasm
is present in the text under consideration. An-
notation errors may be attributed to: (a) lack
of patience/attention while reading, (b) issues
related to text comprehension, and (c) confu-
sion/indecisiveness caused due to lack of context.

For our analysis, we do not discard the incor-
rect annotations present in the database. Since
our system eventually aims to involve online read-
ers for sarcasm detection, it will be hard to segre-
gate readers who misinterpret the text. We make
a rational assumption that, for a particular text,
most of the readers, from a fairly large popula-
tion, will be able to identify sarcasm. Under this
assumption, the eye-movement parameters, aver-
aged across all readers in our setting, may not be
significantly distorted by a few readers who would
have failed to identify sarcasm. This assumption
is applicable for both regular and multi-instance
based classifiers explained in section 6.

4 Analysis of Eye-movement Data

We observe distinct behavior during sarcasm read-
ing, by analyzing the “fixation duration on the
text” (also referred to as “dwell time” in the lit-

  

Word ID

Ti
m

e 
( m

i li
s e

co
nd

s )

P1 P2 P3

S2: The lead actress is terrible and I cannot be convinced she is supposed 
to be some forensic genius.

S1: I'll always cherish the original misconception I had of you..

Figure 1: Scanpaths of three participants for two
negatively polar sentences sentence S1 and S2.
Sentence S1 is sarcastic but S2 is not.

erature) and “scanpaths” of the readers.

4.1 Variation in the Average Fixation
Duration per Word

Since sarcasm in text can be expected to induce
cognitive load, it is reasonable to believe that it
would require more processing time (Ivanko and
Pexman, 2003). Hence, fixation duration nor-
malized over total word count should usually be
higher for a sarcastic text than for a non-sarcastic
one. We observe this for all participants in our
dataset, with the average fixation duration per
word for sarcastic texts being at least 1.5 times
more than that of non-sarcastic texts. To test
the statistical significance, we conduct a two-
tailed t-test (assuming unequal variance) to com-
pare the average fixation duration per word for sar-
castic and non-sarcastic texts. The hypothesized
mean difference is set to 0 and the error tolerance
limit (α) is set to 0.05. The t-test analysis, pre-
sented in Table 1, shows that for all participants,
a statistically significant difference exists between
the average fixation duration per word for sar-
casm (higher average fixation duration) and non-
sarcasm (lower average fixation duration). This
affirms that the presence of sarcasm affects the du-
ration of fixation on words.

It is important to note that longer fixations
may also be caused by other linguistic subtleties
(such as difficult words, ambiguity and syntacti-
cally complex structures) causing delay in com-
prehension, or occulomotor control problems forc-
ing readers to spend time adjusting eye-muscles.
So, an elevated average fixation duration per word
may not sufficiently indicate the presence of sar-
casm. But we would also like to share that, for our

1098



  

I will always cherish the

original mis-conception I had of you

Figure 2: Saliency graph of participant P1 for the
sentence I will always cherish the original miscon-
ception I had of you.

dataset, when we considered readability (Flesch
readability ease-score (Flesch, 1948)), number of
words in a sentence and average character per
word along with the sarcasm label as the predic-
tors of average fixation duration following a linear
mixed effect model (Barr et al., 2013), sarcasm la-
bel turned out to be the most significant predictor
with a maximum slope. This indicates that average
fixation duration per word has a strong connection
with the text being sarcastic, at least in our dataset.

We now analyze scanpaths to gain more in-
sights into the sarcasm comprehension process.

4.2 Analysis of Scanpaths

Scanpaths are line-graphs that contain fixations
as nodes and saccades as edges; the radii of the
nodes represent the fixation duration. A scanpath
corresponds to a participant’s eye-movement pat-
tern while reading a particular sentence. Figure 1
presents scanpaths of three participants for the sar-
castic sentence S1 and the non-sarcastic sentence
S2. The x-axis of the graph represents the se-
quence of words a reader reads, and the y-axis rep-
resents a temporal sequence in milliseconds.

Consider a sarcastic text containing incongru-
ous phrases A and B. Our qualitative scanpath-
analysis reveals that scanpaths with respect to sar-
casm processing have two typical characteristics.
Often, a long regression - a saccade that goes to
a previously visited segment - is observed when a
reader starts reading B after skimming through A.
In a few cases, the fixation duration on A and B
are significantly higher than the average fixation
duration per word. In sentence S1, we see long
and multiple regressions from the two incongru-
ous phrases “misconception” and “cherish”, and
a few instances where phrases “always cherish”
and “original misconception” are fixated longer
than usual. Such eye-movement behaviors are not
seen for S2.

Though sarcasm induces distinctive scanpaths

like the ones depicted in Figure 1 in the observed
examples, presence of such patterns is not suffi-
cient to guarantee sarcasm; such patterns may also
possibly arise from literal texts. We believe that a
combination of linguistic features, readability of
text and features derived from scanpaths would
help discriminative machine learning models learn
sarcasm better.

5 Features for Sarcasm Detection

We describe the features used for sarcasm detec-
tion in Table 2. The features enlisted under lex-
ical,implicit incongruity and explicit incongruity
are borrowed from various literature (predomi-
nantly from Joshi et al. (2015)). These features
are essential to separate sarcasm from other forms
semantic incongruity in text (for example ambi-
guity arising from semantic ambiguity or from
metaphors). Two additional textual features viz.
readability and word count of the text are also
taken under consideration. These features are used
to reduce the effect of text hardness and text length
on the eye-movement patterns.

5.1 Simple Gaze Based Features
Readers’ eye-movement behavior, characterized
by fixations, forward saccades, skips and regres-
sions, can be directly quantified by simple statis-
tical aggregation (i.e., either computing features
for individual participants and then averaging or
performing a multi-instance based learning as ex-
plained in section 6). Since these eye-movement
attributes relate to the cognitive process in reading
(Rayner and Sereno, 1994), we consider these as
features in our model. Some of these features have
been reported by Mishra et al. (2016) for modeling
sarcasm understandability of readers. However, as
far as we know, these features are being introduced
in NLP tasks like textual sarcasm detection for the
first time. The values of these features are believed
to increase with the increase in the degree of sur-
prisal caused by incongruity in text (except skip
count, which will decrease).

5.2 Complex Gaze Based Features
For these features, we rely on a graph structure,
namely “saliency graphs”, derived from eye-gaze
information and word sequences in the text.

Constructing Saliency Graphs:
For each reader and each sentence, we construct a
“saliency graph”, representing the reader’s atten-

1099



Subcategory Feature Name Type Intent
Category: Textual Sarcasm Features, Source: Joshi et. al.

Lexical Presence of Unigrams (UNI) Boolean Unigrams in the training corpus
Punctuations (PUN) Real Count of punctuation marks

Implicit In-
congruity

Implicit Incongruity (IMP) Boolean Incongruity of extracted implicit phrases (Rilof et.al,
2013)

Explicit Incongruity (EXP) Integer Number of times a word follows a word of opposite po-
larity

Largest Pos/Neg Subsequence (LAR) Integer Length of the largest series of words with polarities un-
changed

Explicit Positive words (+VE) Integer Number of positive words
Incongruity Negative words (-VE) Integer Number of negative words

Lexical Polarity (LP) Integer Sentence polarity found by supervised logistic regres-
sion

Category: Cognitive Features. We introduce these features for sarcasm detection.
Readability (RED) Real Flesch Readability Ease (Flesch, 1948) score of the sen-

tence
Textual Number of Words (LEN) Integer Number of words in the sentence

Avg. Fixation Duration (FDUR) Real Sum of fixation duration divided by word count
Avg. Fixation Count (FC) Real Sum of fixation counts divided by word count
Avg. Saccade Length (SL) Real Sum of saccade lengths (measured by number of words)

divided by word count
Simple Regression Count (REG) Real Total number of gaze regressions
Gaze Skip count (SKIP) Real Number of words skipped divided by total word count
Based Count of regressions from second half

to first half of the sentence (RSF)
Real Number of regressions from second half of the sentence

to the first half of the sentence (given the sentence is
divided into two equal half of words)

Largest Regression Position (LREG) Real Ratio of the absolute position of the word from which a
regression with the largest amplitude (number of pixels)
is observed, to the total word count of sentence

Edge density of the saliency gaze
graph (ED)

Real Ratio of the number of directed edges to vertices in the
saliency gaze graph (SGG)

Fixation Duration at Left/Source
(F1H, F1S)

Real Largest weighted degree (LWD) and second largest
weighted degree (SWD) of the SGG considering the fix-
ation duration of word i of edge Eij

Complex Fixation Duration at Right/Target
(F2H, F2S)

Real LWD and SWD of the SGG considering the fixation du-
ration of word j of edge Eij

Gaze Forward Saccade Word Count of
Source (PSH, PSS)

Real LWD and SWD of the SGG considering the number of
forward saccades between words i and j of an edge Eij

Based Forward Saccade Word Count of Des-
tination (PSDH, PSDS)

Real LWD and SWD of the SGG considering the total dis-
tance (word count) of forward saccades between words
i and j of an edge Eij

Regressive Saccade Word Count of
Source (RSH, RSS)

Real LWD and SWD of the SGG considering the number of
regressive saccades between words i and j of an edge
Eij

Regressive Saccade Word Count of
Destination (RSDH, RSDS)

Real LWD and SWD of the SGG considering the total
distance (word count) of regressive saccades between
words i and j of an edge Eij

Table 2: The complete set of features used in our system.

tion characteristics. A saliency graph for a sen-
tence S for a readerR, represented asG = (V,E),
is a graph with vertices (V ) and edges (E) where
each vertex v ∈ V corresponds to a word in
S (may not be unique) and there exists an edge
e ∈ E between vertices v1 and v2 if R performs at
least one saccade between the words correspond-
ing to v1 and v2.

Figure 2 shows an example of a saliency
graph.A saliency graph may be weighted, but not
necessarily connected, for a given text (as there
may be words in the given text with no fixation on
them). The “complex” gaze features derived from

saliency graphs are also motivated by the theory
of incongruity. For instance, Edge Density of a
saliency graph increases with the number of dis-
tinct saccades, which could arise from the com-
plexity caused by presence of sarcasm. Similarly,
the highest weighted degree of a graph is expected
to be higher, if the node corresponds to a phrase,
incongruous to some other phrase in the text.

6 The Sarcasm Classifier

We interpret sarcasm detection as a binary clas-
sification problem. The training data constitutes

1100



Features P(1) P(-1) P(avg) R(1) R(-1) R(avg) F(1) F(-1) F(avg) Kappa
Multi Layered Neural Network

Unigram 53.1 74.1 66.9 51.7 75.2 66.6 52.4 74.6 66.8 0.27
Sarcasm (Joshi et. al.) 59.2 75.4 69.7 51.7 80.6 70.4 55.2 77.9 69.9 0.33

Gaze 62.4 76.7 71.7 54 82.3 72.3 57.9 79.4 71.8 0.37
Gaze+Sarcasm 63.4 75 70.9 48 84.9 71.9 54.6 79.7 70.9 0.34

Näive Bayes
Unigram 45.6 82.4 69.4 81.4 47.2 59.3 58.5 60 59.5 0.24

Sarcasm (Joshi et. al.) 46.1 81.6 69.1 79.4 49.5 60.1 58.3 61.6 60.5 0.25
Gaze 57.3 82.7 73.8 72.9 70.5 71.3 64.2 76.1 71.9 0.41

Gaze+Sarcasm 46.7 82.1 69.6 79.7 50.5 60.8 58.9 62.5 61.2 0.26
Original system by Riloff et.al. : Rule Based with implicit incongruity

Ordered 60 30 49 50 39 46 54 34 47 0.10
Unordered 56 28 46 40 42 41 46 33 42 0.16

Original system by Joshi et.al. : SVM with RBF Kernel
Sarcasm (Joshi et. al.) 73.1 69.4 70.7 22.6 95.5 69.8 34.5 80.4 64.2 0.21

SVM Linear: with default parameters
Unigram 56.5 77 69.8 58.6 75.5 69.5 57.5 76.2 69.6 0.34

Sarcasm (Joshi et. al.) 59.9 78.7 72.1 61.4 77.6 71.9 60.6 78.2 72 0.39
Gaze 65.9 75.9 72.4 49.7 86 73.2 56.7 80.6 72.2 0.38

Gaze+Sarcasm 63.7 79.5 74 61.7 80.9 74.1 62.7 80.2 74 0.43
Multi Instance Logistic Regression: Best Performing Classifier

Gaze 65.3 77.2 73 53 84.9 73.8 58.5 80.8 73.1 0.41
Gaze+Sarcasm 62.5 84 76.5 72.6 76.7 75.3 67.2 80.2 75.7 0.47

Table 3: Classification results for different feature combinations. P→ Precision, R→Recall, F→ F˙score,
Kappa→ Kappa statistics show agreement with the gold labels. Subscripts 1 and -1 correspond to sar-
casm and non-sarcasm classes respectively.

Sentence Gold SarcasmGaze Gaze+Sarcasm
1. I would like to live in Manchester, England. The transition between Manch-
ester and death would be unnoticeable. S NS S S

2. Helped me a lot with my panic attacks. I took 6 mg a day for almost 20 years.
Can’t stop of course but it makes me feel very comfortable. NS S NS NS

3. Forgot to bring my headphones to the gym this morning, the music they play
in this gym pumps me up so much! S S NS NS

4. Best show on satellite radio!! No doubt about it. The little doggy company
has nothing even close. NS S NS S

Table 4: Example test-cases with S and NS representing labels for sarcastic and not-sarcastic respectively.

994 examples created using our eye-movement
database for sarcasm detection. To check the ef-
fectiveness of our feature set, we observe the per-
formance of multiple classification techniques on
our dataset through a stratified 10-fold cross val-
idation. We also compare the classification accu-
racy of our system and the best available systems
proposed by Riloff et al. (2013) and Joshi et al.
(2015) on our dataset. Using Weka (Hall et al.,
2009) and LibSVM (Chang and Lin, 2011) APIs,
we implement the following classifiers:

• Näive Bayes classifier

• Support Vector Machines (Cortes and Vap-
nik, 1995) with default hyper-paramaters

• Multilayer Feed Forward Neural Network

• Multi Instance Logistic Regression
(MILR) (Xu and Frank, 2004)

6.1 Results
Table 3 shows the classification results consider-
ing various feature combinations for different clas-
sifiers and other systems. These are:

• Unigram (with principal components of uni-
gram feature vectors),

• Sarcasm (the feature-set reported by Joshi et
al. (2015) subsuming unigram features and
features from other reported systems)

• Gaze (the simple and complex cognitive fea-
tures we introduce, along with readability
and word count features), and

• Gaze+Sarcasm (the complete set of features).

1101



70 80 90 100
60

65

70

75

Training data %

A
vg

.F
-S

co
re

70 80 90 100

0.2

0.4

Training data %

A
vg

.K
ap

pa

(a) (b)

Unigrams Gaze
Sarcasm Sarcasm+Gaze

Figure 3: Effect of training data size on classifica-
tion in terms of (a) F-score and (b) Kappa statistics

20 40 60 80 100

RED
*RDSH*

*ED*
*FC*

*PSS*
*RSH*
*PSH*

+VE
*F1S*

*SKIP*
*SL*

*F1H*
*RSS*

IMP
*F2S*

UNI
LEN

*F2H*
*LREG*
*FDUR*

*RDSH*
*ED*
*FC*

*PSS*
*RSH*
*PSH*

*F1S*
*SKIP*

*SL*
*F1H*
*RSS*

*F2S*

*F2H*
*LREG*
*FDUR*

X: Avg. Merit (Chi-squared)

Y
:F

ea
tu

re
s

20 40 60 80

*RSDH*
*RSDS*

*ED*
*PSS*
*FC*

*RSH*
*F1S*
*PSH*

*SKIP*
+VE

*SL*
*RSS*
*F1H*
*F2S*

IMP
*F2H*

UNI
LEN

*LREG*
*FDUR*

*RSDH*
*RSDS*

*ED*
*PSS*
*FC*

*RSH*
*F1S*
*PSH*

*SKIP*

*SL*
*RSS*
*F1H*
*F2S*

*F2H*

*LREG*
*FDUR*

X: Avg. Merit (InfoGain)

Y
:F

ea
tu

re
s

Figure 4: Significance of features observed by
ranking the features using Attribute Evaluation
based on Information Gain and Attribute Evalu-
ation based on Chi-squared test. The length of the
bar corresponds to the average merit of the feature.
Features marked with * are gaze features.

For all regular classifiers, the gaze features are
averaged across participants and augmented with
linguistic and sarcasm related features. For the
MILR classifier, the gaze features derived from

each participant are augmented with linguistic fea-
tures and thus, a multi instance “bag” of features is
formed for each sentence in the training data. This
multi-instance dataset is given to an MILR clas-
sifier, which follows the standard multi instance
assumption to derive class-labels for each bag.

For all the classifiers, our feature combination
outperforms the baselines (considering only uni-
gram features) as well as (Joshi et al., 2015), with
the MILR classifier getting an F-score improve-
ment of 3.7% and Kappa difference of 0.08. We
also achieve an improvement of 2% over the base-
line, using SVM classifier, when we employ our
feature set. We also observe that the gaze fea-
tures alone, also capture the differences between
sarcasm and non-sarcasm classes with a high-
precision but a low recall.

To see if the improvement obtained is statisti-
cally significant over the state-of-the art system
with textual sarcasm features alone, we perform
McNemar test. The output of the SVM classifier
using only linguistic features used for sarcasm de-
tection by Joshi et al. (2015) and the output of the
MILR classifier with the complete set of features
are compared, setting threshold α = 0.05. There
was a significant difference in the classifier’s accu-
racy with p(two-tailed) = 0.02 with an odds-ratio
of 1.43, showing that the classification accuracy
improvement is unlikely to be observed by chance
in 95% confidence interval.

6.2 Considering Reading Time as a Cognitive
Feature along with Sarcasm Features

One may argue that, considering simple measures
of reading effort like “reading time” as cognitive
feature instead of the expensive eye-tracking fea-
tures for sarcasm detection may be a cost-effective
solution. To examine this, we repeated our ex-
periments with “reading time” considered as the
only cognitive feature, augmented with the tex-
tual features. The F-scores of all the classifiers
turn out to be close to that of the classifiers con-
sidering sarcasm feature alone and the difference
in the improvement is not statistically significant
(p > 0.05). One the other hand, F-scores with
gaze features are superior to the F-scores when
reading time is considered as a cognitive feature.

6.3 How Effective are the Cognitive Features
We examine the effectiveness of cognitive features
on the classification accuracy by varying the input
training data size. To examine this, we create a

1102



stratified (keeping the class ratio constant) random
train-test split of 80%:20%. We train our classifier
with 100%, 90%, 80% and 70% of the training
data with our whole feature set, and the feature
combination from Joshi et al. (2015). The good-
ness of our system is demonstrated by improve-
ments in F-score and Kappa statistics, shown in
Figure 3.

We further analyze the importance of features
by ranking the features based on (a) Chi squared
test, and (b) Information Gain test, using Weka’s
attribute selection module. Figure 4 shows the top
20 ranked features produced by both the tests. For
both the cases, we observe 16 out of top 20 fea-
tures to be gaze features. Further, in each of the
cases, Average Fixation Duration per Word and
Largest Regression Position are seen to be the two
most significant features.

6.4 Example Cases

Table 4 shows a few example cases from the ex-
periment with stratified 80%-20% train-test split.

• Example sentence 1 is sarcastic, and requires
extra-linguistic knowledge (about poor living
conditions at Manchester). Hence, the sar-
casm detector relying only on textual features
is unable to detect the underlying incongruity.
However, our system predicts the label suc-
cessfully, possibly helped by the gaze fea-
tures.

• Similarly, for sentence 2, the false sense of
presence of incongruity (due to phrases like
“Helped me” and “Can’t stop”) affects the
system with only linguistic features. Our sys-
tem, though, performs well in this case also.

• Sentence 3 presents a false-negative case
where it was hard for even humans to get the
sarcasm. This is why our gaze features (and
subsequently the complete set of features) ac-
count for erroneous prediction.

• In sentence 4, gaze features alone false-
indicate presence of incongruity, whereas the
system predicts correctly when gaze and lin-
guistic features are taken together.

From these examples, it can be inferred that,
only gaze features would not have sufficed to rule
out the possibility of detecting other forms of in-
congruity that do not result in sarcasm.

6.5 Error Analysis

Errors committed by our system arise from mul-
tiple factors, starting from limitations of the eye-
tracker hardware to errors committed by linguis-
tic tools and resources. Also, aggregating vari-
ous eye-tracking parameters to extract the cogni-
tive features may have caused information loss in
the regular classification setting.

7 Conclusion

In the current work, we created a novel frame-
work to detect sarcasm, that derives insights from
human cognition, that manifests over eye move-
ment patterns. We hypothesized that distinctive
eye-movement patterns, associated with reading
sarcastic text, enables improved detection of sar-
casm. We augmented traditional linguistic fea-
tures with cognitive features obtained from read-
ers’ eye-movement data in the form of simple
gaze-based features and complex features derived
from a graph structure. This extended feature-set
improved the success rate of the sarcasm detector
by 3.7%, over the best available system. Using
cognitive features in an NLP Processing system
like ours is the first proposal of its kind.

Our general approach may be useful in other
NLP sub-areas like sentiment and emotion anal-
ysis, text summarization and question answering,
where considering textual clues alone does not
prove to be sufficient. We propose to augment this
work in future by exploring deeper graph and gaze
features. We also propose to develop models for
the purpose of learning complex gaze feature rep-
resentation, that accounts for the power of indi-
vidual eye movement patterns along with the ag-
gregated patterns of eye movements.

Acknowledgments

We thank the members of CFILT Lab, especially
Jaya Jha and Meghna Singh, and the students of
IIT Bombay for their help and support.

References
Francesco Barbieri, Horacio Saggion, and Francesco

Ronzano. 2014. Modelling sarcasm in twitter, a
novel approach. ACL 2014, page 50.

Dale J Barr, Roger Levy, Christoph Scheepers, and
Harry J Tily. 2013. Random effects structure for
confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal.
Journal of memory and language, 68(3):255–278.

1103



C. Christine Camblin, Peter C. Gordon, and Tamara Y.
Swaab. 2007. The interplay of discourse congru-
ence and lexical association during sentence pro-
cessing: Evidence from {ERPs} and eye tracking.
Journal of Memory and Language, 56(1):103 – 128.

John D Campbell and Albert N Katz. 2012. Are there
necessary conditions for inducing a sense of sarcas-
tic irony? Discourse Processes, 49(6):459–480.

Paula Carvalho, Luı́s Sarmento, Mário J Silva, and
Eugénio De Oliveira. 2009. Clues for detect-
ing irony in user-generated contents: oh...!! it’s
so easy;-). In Proceedings of the 1st international
CIKM workshop on Topic-sentiment analysis for
mass opinion, pages 53–56. ACM.

Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. LIB-
SVM: A library for support vector machines. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology,
2:27:1–27:27. Software available at http://www.
csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm.

Herbert H Clark and Richard J Gerrig. 1984. On the
pretense theory of irony.

Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-
vector networks. Machine learning, 20(3):273–297.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Semi-supervised recognition of sarcastic sentences
in twitter and amazon. In Proceedings of the Four-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 107–116. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Hartmut; Wallington Katie; Page Jemma Filik,
Ruth; Leuthold. 2014. Testing theories of irony
processing using eye-tracking and erps. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 40(3):811–828.

Rudolph Flesch. 1948. A new readability yardstick.
Journal of applied psychology, 32(3):221.

Raymond W. Gibbs. 1986. Comprehension and mem-
ory for nonliteral utterances: The problem of sarcas-
tic indirect requests. Acta Psychologica, 62(1):41 –
57.

Rachel Giora. 1995. On irony and negation. Discourse
processes, 19(2):239–264.

Roberto González-Ibánez, Smaranda Muresan, and
Nina Wacholder. 2011. Identifying sarcasm in twit-
ter: a closer look. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies: short
papers-Volume 2, pages 581–586. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
ACM SIGKDD explorations newsletter, 11(1):10–
18.

Kenneth Holmqvist, Marcus Nyström, Richard An-
dersson, Richard Dewhurst, Halszka Jarodzka, and
Joost Van de Weijer. 2011. Eye tracking: A com-
prehensive guide to methods and measures. Oxford
University Press.

Stacey L Ivanko and Penny M Pexman. 2003. Context
incongruity and irony processing. Discourse Pro-
cesses, 35(3):241–279.

Julia Jorgensen, George A Miller, and Dan Sperber.
1984. Test of the mention theory of irony. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 113(1):112.

Aditya Joshi, Vinita Sharma, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2015. Harnessing context incongruity
for sarcasm detection. Proceedings of 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Beijing, China, page 757.

Aditya Joshi, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Mark James
Carman. 2016. Automatic sarcasm detection: A
survey. CoRR, abs/1602.03426.

Marta Kutas and Steven A Hillyard. 1980. Reading
senseless sentences: Brain potentials reflect seman-
tic incongruity. Science, 207(4427):203–205.

Christine Liebrecht, Florian Kunneman, and Antal
van den Bosch. 2013. The perfect solution for
detecting sarcasm in tweets# not. WASSA 2013,
page 29.

Diana Maynard and Mark A Greenwood. 2014. Who
cares about sarcastic tweets? investigating the im-
pact of sarcasm on sentiment analysis. In Proceed-
ings of LREC.

Abhijit Mishra, Diptesh Kanojia, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2016. Predicting readers’ sarcasm un-
derstandability by modeling gaze behavior. In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental educa-
tion: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summa-
rization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of
the 42nd annual meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, page 271. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Keith Rayner and Sara C Sereno. 1994. Eye move-
ments in reading: Psycholinguistic studies.

Ellen Riloff, Ashequl Qadir, Prafulla Surve, Lalin-
dra De Silva, Nathan Gilbert, and Ruihong Huang.
2013. Sarcasm as contrast between a positive senti-
ment and negative situation. In EMNLP, pages 704–
714.

Xin Xu and Eibe Frank. 2004. Logistic regression and
boosting for labeled bags of instances. In Advances
in knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 272–
281. Springer.

1104


