



















































Coordination Annotation Extension in the Penn Tree Bank


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 834–842,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Coordination Annotation Extension in the Penn Tree Bank

Jessica Ficler
Computer Science Department

Bar-Ilan University
Israel

jessica.ficler@gmail.com

Yoav Goldberg
Computer Science Department

Bar-Ilan University
Israel

yoav.goldberg@gmail.com

Abstract

Coordination is an important and common
syntactic construction which is not han-
dled well by state of the art parsers. Co-
ordinations in the Penn Treebank are miss-
ing internal structure in many cases, do not
include explicit marking of the conjuncts
and contain various errors and inconsisten-
cies. In this work, we initiated manual an-
notation process for solving these issues.
We identify the different elements in a co-
ordination phrase and label each element
with its function. We add phrase bound-
aries when these are missing, unify incon-
sistencies, and fix errors. The outcome is
an extension of the PTB that includes con-
sistent and detailed structures for coordi-
nations. We make the coordination anno-
tation publicly available, in hope that they
will facilitate further research into coordi-
nation disambiguation. 1

1 Introduction

The Penn Treebank (PTB) (Marcus et al., 1993)
is perhaps the most commonly used resource for
training and evaluating syntax-based natural lan-
guage processing systems. Despite its widespread
adoption and undisputed usefulness, some of the
annotations in PTB are not optimal, and could be
improved. The work of Vadas and Curran (2007)
identified and addressed one such annotation defi-
ciency – the lack of internal structure in base NPs.
In this work we focus on the annotation of coordi-
nating conjunctions.

Coordinating conjunctions (e.g. “John and
Mary”, “to be or not to be”) are a very common
syntactic construction, appearing in 38.8% of the

1The data is available in:
https://github.com/Jess1ca/CoordinationExtPTB

sentences in the PTB. As noted by Hogan (2007),
coordination annotation in the PTB are not con-
sistent, include errors, and lack internal structure
in many cases (Hara et al., 2009; Hogan, 2007;
Shimbo and Hara, 2007). Another issue is that
PTB does not mark whether a punctuation is part
of the coordination or not. This was resolved by
Maier et al. (2012) which annotated punctuation
in the PTB .

These errors, inconsistencies, and in particular
the lack of internal structural annotation turned re-
searchers that were interested specifically in co-
ordination disambiguation away from the PTB
and towards much smaller, domain specific efforts
such as the Genia Treebank (Kim et al., 2003) of
biomedical texts (Hara et al., 2009; Shimbo and
Hara, 2007).

In addition, we also find that the PTB annota-
tion make it hard, and often impossible, to cor-
rectly identify the elements that are being coordi-
nated, and tell them apart from other elements that
may appear in a coordination construction. While
most of the coordination phrases are simple and
include only conjuncts and a coordinator, many
cases include additional elements with other syn-
tactic functions , such as markers (e.g. “Both Al-
ice and Bob”), connectives (e.g. “Fast and thus
useful”) and shared elements (e.g. “Bob’s prin-
ciples and opinions”) (Huddleston et al., 2002).
The PTB annotations do not differentiate between
these elements. For example, consider the follow-
ing coordination phrases which begin with a PP:

(a) “[in the open market]PP , [in private transac-
tions] or [otherwise].”
(b) “[According to Fred Demler]PP , [High-
land Valley has already started operating] and
[Cananea is expected to do so soon].”

Even though the first element is a conjunct
only in (a), both phrases are represented with the

834



marked elements as siblings.
Our goal in this work is to fix these deficiencies.

We aim for an annotation in which:

• All coordination phrases are explicitly
marked and are differentiated from non-
coordination structures.
• Each element in the coordination structure is

explicitly marked with its role within the co-
ordination structure.
• Similar structures are assigned a consistent

annotation.

We also aim to fix existing errors involving coordi-
nation, so that the resulting corpus includes as few
errors as possible. On top of these objectives, we
also like to stay as close as possible to the original
PTB structures.

We identify the different elements that can par-
ticipate in a coordination phrase, and enrich the
PTB by labeling each element with its function.
We add phrase boundaries when these are missing,
unify inconsistencies, and fix errors. This is done
based on a combination of automatic processing
and manual annotation. The result is an extension
of the PTB trees that include consistent and more
detailed coordination structures. We release our
annotation as a diff over the PTB.

The extended coordination annotation fills an
important gap in wide-scale syntactic annotation
of English syntax, and is a necessary first step to-
wards research on improving coordination disam-
biguation.

2 Background

Coordination is a very common syntactic struc-
ture in which two or more elements are linked.
An example for a coordination structure is “Al-
ice and Bob traveled to Mars”. The elements (Al-
ice and Bob) are called the conjuncts and and is
called the coordinator. Other coordinator words
include or, nor and but. Any grammatical function
can be coordinated. For examples: “[relatively
active]ADJP but [unfocused]ADJP ” ; “[in]IN
and [out]IN the market”. While it is common for
the conjuncts to be of the same syntactic category,
coordination of elements with different syntactic
categories are also possible (e.g. “Alice will visit
Earth [tomorrow]NP or [in the next decade]PP ”).

Less common coordinations are those with non-
constituent elements. These are cases such as
“equal to or higher than”, and coordinations from

the type of Argument-Cluster (e.g. “Alice has vis-
ited 4 planets in 2014 and 3 more since then”) and
Gapping (e.g. “Bob lives in Earth and Alice in
Saturn”) (Dowty, 1988).

2.1 Elements of Coordination Structure

While the canonical coordination cases involve
conjuncts linked with a coordinator, other ele-
ments may also take part in the coordination struc-
ture: markers, connective adjectives, parentheti-
cals, and shared arguments and modifiers. These
elements are often part of the same syntactic
phrase as the conjuncts, and should be taken into
account in coordination structure annotation. We
elaborate on the possible elements in a coordina-
tion phrase:

Shared modifiers Modifiers that are related to
each of the conjuncts in the phrase. For instance,
in “Venus’s density and mean temperature are
very high”, Venus’s is a shared modifier of the con-
juncts “density” and “mean temperature” 2.

Shared arguments Phrases that function as ar-
guments for each of the conjuncts. For instance, in
“Bob cleaned and refueled the spaceship.”, “the
spaceship” and “Bob” are arguments of the con-
juncts cleaned and refuel 3.

Markers Determiners such as both and either
that may appear at the beginning of the coordi-
nation phrase (Huddleston et al., 2002). As for
example in “Both Alice and Bob are Aliens” and
“Either Alice or Bob will drive the spaceship”.
In addition to the cases documented by Huddle-
ston et al, our annotation of the Penn Treebank
data reveals additional markers. For examples:
“between 15 million and 20 million ; “first and
second respectively”.

Connective adjectives Adverbs such as so, yet,
however, then, etc. that commonly appear right af-
ter the coordinator (Huddleston et al., 2002). For
instance “We plan to meet in the middle of the way
and then continue together”.

Parenthetical Parenthetical remarks that may
appear between the conjuncts. For examples:

2Here, the NP containing the coordination (“Venus’s den-
sity and mean temperature”) is itself an argument of “are very
high”.

3While both are shared arguments, standard syntactic
analyses consider the subject (Bob) to be outside the VP con-
taining the coordination, and the direct object (the spaceship)
as a part of the VP.

835



“The vacation packages include hotel accommo-
dations and, in some cases, tours”; “Some shows
just don’t impress, he says, and this is one of
them”.

Consider the coordinated PP phrase in “Alice
traveled [both inside and outside the galaxy]PP .”
Here, inside and outside are the conjuncts, both is
a marker, and “the galaxy” is a shared argument.
A good representation of the coordination struc-
ture would allow us to identify the different ele-
ments and their associated functions. As we show
below, it is often not possible to reliably extract
such information from the existing PTB annota-
tion scheme.

3 Coordinations in the Penn Tree Bank

We now turn to describe how coordination is han-
dled in the PTB, focusing on the parts where we
find the annotation scheme to be deficient.

There is no explicit annotation for coordination
phrases Some coordinators do not introduce a
coordination structure. For example, the coordi-
nator “and” can be a discourse marker connect-
ing two sentences (e.g. “And they will even serve
it themselves”), or introduce a parenthetical (e.g.
“The Wall Street Journal is an excellent publica-
tion that I enjoy reading (and must read) daily”).
These are not explicitly differentiate in the PTB
from the case where “and” connects between at
least two elements (e.g. “loyalty and trust”).

NPs without internal structure The PTB
guidelines (Bies et al., 1995) avoid giving any
structure to NPs with nominal modifiers. Follow-
ing this, 4759 NPs that include coordination were
left flat, i.e. all the words in the phrase are at
the same level. For example (NP (NNP chairman)
(CC and) (NP chief executive officer)) which is an-
notated in the PTB as:

[1] NP

NN

chairman

CC

and

JJ

chief

NN

executive

NN

officer

It is impossible to reliably extract conjunct
boundaries from such structures. Although work
has been done for giving internal structures for flat
NPs (Vadas and Curran, 2007), only 48% of the
flat NP coordinators that include more than two

nouns were given an internal structure, leaving
1744 cases of flat NPs with ambiguous conjunct
boundaries.

Coordination parts are not categorized Co-
ordination phrases may include markers, shared
modifiers, shared arguments, connective adjec-
tives and parentheticals. Such elements are anno-
tated on the same level as the conjuncts4. This is
true not only in the case of flat NPs but also in
cases where the coordination phrase elements do
have internal structures. For examples:

• The Both marker in (NP (DT both) (NP the
self) (CC and) (NP the audience))

• The parenthetical maybe in (NP (NP predic-
tive tests) (CC and) (PRN , maybe ,) (NP new
therapies))

• The shared-modifier “the economy’s” in (NP
(NP the economy’s) (NNS ups) (CC and)
(NNS downs))

Automatic categorization of the phrases ele-
ments is not trivial. Consider the coordination
phrase “a phone, a job, and even into a school”,
which is annotated in the PTB where the NPs “a
phone” and “a job”, the ADVP “even” and the PP
“into a school” are siblings. A human reader can
easily deduce that the conjuncts are “a phone”,
“a job” and “into a school”, while “even” is a
connective. However, for an automatic analyzer,
this structure is ambiguous: NPs can be conjoined
with ADVPs as well as PPs, and a coordination
phrase of the form NP NP CC ADVP PP has at
least two possible interpretations: (1) Coord Co-
ord CC Conn Coord (2) Coord Coord CC Coord
Shared.

Inconsistency in shared elements and mark-
ers level The PTB guidelines allows inconsis-
tency in the case of shared ADVP pre-modifiers
of VPs (e.g. “deliberately chewed and winked”).
The pre-modifier may be annotated in the same
level of the VP ((ADVP deliberately) (VP chewed
and winked)) or inside it (VP (ADVP deliberately)
chewed and winked)). In addition to this docu-
mented inconsistency, we also found markers that
are inconsistently annotated in and outside the co-
ordination phrase, such as respectively which is

4shared arguments may appear in the PTB outside the co-
ordination phrase. For example He is an argument for bought
and for sold in ((He) ((bought) (and) (sold) (stocks))).

836



tagged as sibling to the conjuncts in (NP (NP Feb.
1 1990) (CC and) (NP May. 3 1990), (ADVP re-
spectively)) and as sibling to the conjuncts par-
ent in (VP (VBD were) (NP 7.37% and 7.42%),
(ADVP respectively)).

Inconsistency in comparative quantity coordi-
nation Quantity phrases with a second conjunct
of more, less, so, two and up are inconsistently
tagged. Consider the following sentences: “[50]
[or] [so] projects are locked up”, “Street esti-
mates of [$ 1] [or so] are low”. The coordina-
tion phrase is similar in both the sentences but is
annotated differently.

Various errors The PTB coordination struc-
tures include errors. Some are related to flat co-
ordinations (Hogan, 2007). In addition, we found
cases where a conjunct is not annotated as a com-
plete phrase, but with two sequenced phrases. For
instance, the conjuncts in the sentence “But less
than two years later, the LDP started to crumble,
and dissent rose to unprecedented heights” are
“the LDP started to crumble” and “dissent rose to
unprecedented heights”. In the PTB, this sentence
is annotated where the first conjunct is splitted into
two phrases: “[the LDP] [started to crumble], and
[dissent rose to unprecedented heights]”.

4 Extended Coordination Annotation

The PTB annotation of coordinations makes it dif-
ficult to identify phrases containing coordination
and to distinguish the conjuncts from the other
parts of a coordination phrase. In addition it con-
tains various errors, inconsistencies and coordina-
tion phrases with no internal structure. We pro-
pose an improved representation which aims to
solve these problems, while keeping the deviation
from the original PTB trees to a minimum.

4.1 Explicit Function Marking

We add function labels to non-terminal symbols
of nodes participating in coordination structures.
The function labels are indicated by appending a
-XXX suffix to the non-terminal symbol, where
the XXX mark the function of the node. Phrases
containing a coordination are marked with a CCP
label. Nodes directly dominated by a CCP node
are assigned one of the following labels accord-
ing to their function: CC for coordinators, CO-

ORD for conjuncts, MARK for markers5, CONN
for connectives and parentheticals, and SHARED
for shared modifiers/arguments. For shared el-
ements, we deal only with those that are inside
the coordination phrase. We do not assign func-
tion labels to punctuation symbols and empty el-
ements. For example, our annotation for the sen-
tence “. . . he observed among his fellow students
and, more important, among his officers and in-
structors . . . ” is:

PP
CCP

PP
COORD

among his
fellow students

CC
CC

and

ADVP
CONN

more important

PP
COORD

IN

among

NP
CCP

PRP
SHARED

his

NNS
COORD

officers

CC
CC

and

NNS
COORD

instructors

Table 1 summarizes the number of labels for
each type in the enhanced version of the Penn
Treebank.

Function label #
CC 24,572
CCP 24,450
COORD 52,512
SHARED 3372
CONN 526
MARK 522

Table 1: The number of labels that were added to
the Penn Treebank by type.

4.2 Changes in Tree Structure
As a guiding principle, we try not to change the
structure of the original PTB trees. The excep-
tions to this rule are cases where the structure
is changed to provide internal structure when
it is missing, as well as when fixing systematic
inconsistencies and occasional errors.

1. In flat coordination structures which include
elements with more than one word, we add brack-
ets to delimit the element spans. For instance, in
the flat NP in [1] we add brackets to delimit the
conjunct “chief executive officer”. The full phrase

5both, either, between, first, neither, not, not only, respec-
tively and together

837



structure is: (NP-CCP (NN-COORD chairman)
(CC-CC and) (NP-COORD chief executive offi-
cer)).

2. Comparative quantity phrases (“5 dollars or
less”) are inconsistently analyzed in the PTB.
When needed, we add an extra bracket with a
QP label so they are consistently analyzed as
“5 dollars [or less]QP ”. Note that we do not
consider these cases as coordination phrases.

3. We add brackets to delimit the coordination
phrase in flat cases that include coordination be-
tween modifiers while the head is annotated in the
same phrase:

NP

DT

The

NN

broadcast

CC

and

VBG

publishing

NN

company

⇓
NP

DT

The

UCP-CCP

NN-COORD

broadcast

CC-CC

and

VBG-COORD

publishing

NN

company

company, which is the head of the phrase, is
originally annotated at the same level as the
conjuncts broadcast and publishing, and the
determiner the. In such cases, the determiner and
modifiers are related to the head which is not part
of the coordination phrase, requiring the extra
bracketing level to delimit the coordination. This
is in contrast to the case of coordination between
verbs (e.g “Bob (VP cleaned and refueled the
spaceship)”), where the non coordinated elements
(“the spaceship”) are shared.

4. When a conjunct is split into two phrases or
more due to an error, we add extra brackets to de-
limit the conjunct as a complete phrase:

S

NP

Management’s
total

VP

could be
reduced

CC

and

S

NP

the public

VP

could get more⇓

Type #
(1) Flat structures 1872
(2) Comparative quantity phrases 52
(3) Coordination between modifiers 1264
(4) Coordination with errors 213
(5) ADVP inconsistency 206

Table 2: The number of subtrees in the Penn Tree-
bank that were changed in our annotation by type.

S-CCP

S-COORD

NP

Management’s
total

VP

could be
reduced

CC-CC

and

S-COORD

NP

the public

VP

could get more

5. We consolidate cases where markers and ADVP
pre-modifiers are annotated outside the coordina-
tion phrase, so they are consistently annotated in-
side the coordination phrase.

Table 2 summarizes the numbers and types of
subtrees that receive a new tree structure in the en-
hanced version of the Penn Treebank.

5 The Annotation Process

Some of the changes can be done automatically,
while other require human judgment. Our annota-
tion procedure combines automatic rules and man-
ual annotation that was performed by a dedicated
annotator that was trained for this purpose.

5.1 Explicit marking of coordination phrases

We automatically annotate coordination phrases
with a CCP function label. We consider a phrase
as coordination phrase if it includes a coordinator
and at least one phrase on each side of the coor-
dinator, unlike coordinators that function as dis-
course markers or introduce parentheticals, which
appear as the first element in the phrase.

5.2 Assigning internal structure to flat
coordinations

Flat coordinations that include only a coordinator
and two conjuncts (e.g. (NP (NNP Poland) (CC
and) (NNP Hungary))) are trivial and are left with
the same structure. For the rest of the flat co-
ordinations (3498 cases), we manually annotated
the elements spans. For example, given the flat

838



NP: “[General]NNP [Electric]NNP [Co.]NNP
[executives]NNS [and]CC [lawyers]NNS”. The
annotator is expected to provide the analysis:
“[General Electric Co.] [executives] [and]
[lawyers]”. We then add brackets around multi-
token elements (e.g. “General Electric Co.”), and
set the label according the syntactic structure. The
annotation was done while ignoring inner struc-
tures that were given in the NP-Bracketing exten-
sion of Vadas and Curran (2007). We compare
agreement with their annotations in the next sec-
tion.

To handle cases such as in 4.2(3), where the co-
ordination is between modifiers of a head which is
annotated in the PTB on the same level of the con-
juncts, we first identify potential candidate phrases
of this type by looking for coordination phrases
where the last element was not tagged by the an-
notator as a conjunct. Out of this set, we re-
move cases where we can reliably identify the
non-conjunct element as a marker. For the rest
of the cases, we distinguish between NP phrases
and non-NP phrases. For NP phrases, we auto-
matically add extra brackets to delimit the coor-
dination phrase span so that it includes only the
coordinated modifiers. For the rest of the phrases
we found that an such automatic procedure was
not feasible (consider the ADVP phrases: (ADVP
(RBR farther) (CC and) (RBR farther) (RB apart))
; (ADVP (RB up) (CC and) (RB down) (NP (NNP
Florida))). The first phrase head is apart while
in the second phrase, Florida is a complement).
We manually annotated the coordination phrase
boundary in these cases.

When adding an extra tree level in this cases, we
set its syntactic label to UCP when the conjuncts
are from different types and same as the conjuncts
label when the conjuncts are from the same type.6

5.3 Annotating roles within coordination
phrases

Cases where there are only a coordinator and two
siblings in the coordinated phrase are trivial to
automatically annotate, marking both siblings as
conjuncts:

6When the conjuncts are in POS level, a corresponding
syntactic label is set. For example: (NP-CCP (NN-COORD
head) (CC-CC and) (NNS-COORD shoulders))

ADVP-CCP

ADVP-COORD

later this week

CC

or

ADVP-COORD

early next week

To categorize the phrase elements for the rest
of the coordination phrases, we first manually
marked the conjuncts in the sentence (for flat
structures, the conjuncts were already annotated
in the internal structure annotation phase). The
annotator was given a sentence where the coor-
dinator and the coordination phrase boundaries
are marked. For example “Coke has been
able to improve (bottlers’ efficiency

and production, {and} in some cases,
marketing)”. The annotation task was to mark
the conjuncts.7 We automatically concluded the
types of the other elements according to their
relative position – elements before or after the
conjuncts are categorized as markers/shared,
while an element between conjuncts is a connec-
tive or the coordinator itself.

Mismatches with the PTB phrase bound-
aries In 5% of the cases of coordination with
inner structure, a conjunct span as it was an-
notated by our annotator was not consistent
with the elements spans in the PTB. For ex-
ample, the annotator provided the following
annotation: “(The [economic loss], [jobs
lost], [anguish],[frustration] {and}
[humiliation]) are beyond measure”, treat-
ing the determiner “The” as a shared modifier. In
contrast, the PTB analysis considers “The” as part
of the first conjunct (“[The economic loss]”).

The vast majority of the mismatches were on
the point of a specific word such as the (as demon-
strated in the above example), to, a and punctu-
ation symbols. In a small number of cases the
mismatch was because of an ambiguity. For exam-
ple, in “The declaration immediately made
the counties eligible for (temporary

housing, grants {and} low-cost loans to
cover uninsured property losses)” the an-
notator marked “temporary housing”, “grants”,
and “low-cost loans” as conjuncts (leaving
“to cover uninsured property loss” as a shared

7The coordination phrase boundaries were taken from the
PTB annotations and were used to focus the annotators at-
tention, rather than to restrict the annotation. The annotators
were allowed to override them if they thought they were er-
ronous. We did not encounter such cases.

839



modifier, while the PTB annotation considers “to
cover. . . ” as part of the last conjunct. Following
our desiderata of minimizing changes to existing
tree structures, in a case of a mismatch we extend
the conjunct spans to be consistent with the PTB
phrasing (each such case was manually verified).

5.4 Handling inconsistencies and errors
We automatically recognize ADVPs that appear
right before a VP coordination phrase and mark-
ers that are adjunct to a coordination phrase. We
change the structure such that such ADVPs and
markers appear inside the coordination phrase.

Quantity phrases that includes two conjuncts
with a second conjunct of more, less, so, two and
up are automatically recognized and consolidated
by adding an extra level.

Errors in conjuncts span are found during the
manual annotation that is done for the categoriza-
tion. When the manual annotation includes a con-
junct that is originally a combination of two sib-
lings phrases, we add extra brackets and name the
new level according to the syntactic structure.

6 Annotator Agreement

We evaluate the resulting corpus with inter-
annotators agreement for coordination phrases
with inner structure as well as agreement with
the flat conjuncts that were annotated in the NP
bracketing annotation effort of Vadas and Curran
(2007).

6.1 Inter-annotator agreement
To test the inter-annotator agreement, we were as-
sisted with an additional linguist who annotated
1000 out of 7823 coordination phrases with inner
structure. We measured the number of coordina-
tion phrases where the spans are inconsistent at
least in one conjunct. The annotators originally
agreed in 92.8% of the sentences. After revision,
the agreement increased to 98.1%. The disagree-
ments occurred in semantically ambiguous cases.
For instance, “potato salad, baked beans and pud-
ding, plus coffee or iced tea” was tagged differ-
ently by the 2 annotators. One considered “pud-
ding” as the last conjunct and the other marked
“pudding, plus coffee or iced tea”.

6.2 Agreement with NP Bracketing for flat
coordinations

The NP Bracketing extension of Vadas and Curran
(2007) includes inner structures for flat NP phrases

R P F1
PTB + NPB 90.41 86.12 88.21
PTB + NPB + CCP 90.83 91.18 91.01

Table 3: The parser results on section 22.

in the PTB, that are given an internal structure us-
ing the NML tag. For instance, in (NP (NNP Air)
(NNP Force) (NN contract)), “Air Force” is con-
sidered as an independent entity and thus is de-
limited with the NML tag: (NP (NML (NNP Air)
(NNP Force)) (NN contract)).

As mentioned, 48% (1655 sentences) of the
NP flat coordination were disambiguated in this
effort.8 For these, the agreement on the con-
juncts spans with the way they were marked by
our annotators is 88%. The disagreements were in
cases where a modifier is ambiguous. For exam-
ples consider “luxury” in “The luxury airline and
casino company”, “scientific” in “scientific insti-
tutions or researchers” and “Japanese” in “some
Japanese government officials and businessmen”.
In cases of disagreement we followed our annota-
tors decisions.9

7 Experiments

We evaluate the impact of the new annotation
on the PTB parsing accuracy. We use the state-
of-the-art Berkeley parser (Petrov et al., 2006),
and compare the original PTB annotations (in-
cluding Vadas and Curran’s base-NP bracketing
– PTB+NPB) to the coordination annotations in
this work (PTB+NPB+CCP). We use sections 2-
21 for training, and report accuracies on the tra-
ditional dev set (section 22). The parse trees are
scored using EVALB (Sekine and Collins, 1997).

Structural Changes We start by considering
how the changes in tree structures affect the parser
performance. We compared the parsing perfor-
mance when trained and tested on PTB+NPB, to
the parsing performance when trained and tested
on PTB+NPB+CCP. The new function labels were
ignored in both training and testing. The results

8We consider a flat NP coordination as disambiguated if
it includes a coordinator and two other elements, i.e.: (NML
(NML (NN eye) (NN care)) (CC and) (NML (NN skin) (NN
care))) ; (NML (NN buy) (CC or) (NN sell)).

9A by-product of this process is a list of ambiguous mod-
ifier attachment cases, which can be used for future research
on coordination disambiguation, for example in designing er-
ror metrics that take such annotator disagreements into ac-
count.

840



Gold Pred CC CCP COORD MARK SHARED CONN None Err
CC 849 1 5
CCP 552 1 91 205
COORD 3 1405 2 184 200
MARK 9 2 1
SHARED 1 29 85 3
CONN 1 4 2
None 4 124 113 4 26 14

Table 4: Confusion-matrix over the predicted function labels. None indicate no function label (a con-
stituent which is not directly inside a CCP phrase). Err indicate cases in which the gold span was not
predicted by the parser.

are presented in Table 3. Parsing accuracy on
the coordination-enhanced corpus is higher than
on the original trees. However, the numbers are
not strictly comparable, as the test sets contain
trees with somewhat different number of con-
stituents. To get a fairer comparison, we also eval-
uate the parsers on the subset of trees in section 22
whose structures did not change. We check two
conditions: trees that include coordination, and
trees that do not include coordination. Here, we
see a small drop in parsing accuracy when using
the new annotation. When trained and tested on
PTB+NPB+CCP, the parser results are slightly de-
creased compared to PTB+NPB – from 89.89% F1
to 89.4% F1 for trees with coordination and from
91.78% F1 to 91.75% F1 for trees without coordi-
nation. However, the drop is small and it is clear
that the changes did not make the corpus substan-
tially harder to parse. We also note that the pars-
ing results for trees including coordinations are
lower than those for trees without coordination,
highlighting the challenge in parsing coordination
structures.

Function Labels How good is the parser in pre-
dicting the function labels, distinguishing between
conjuncts, markers, connectives and shared modi-
fiers? When we train and test the parser on trees
that include the function labels, we see a rather
large drop in accuracy: from 89.89% F1 (for trees
that include a coordination) to 85.27% F1. A
closer look reveals that a large part of this drop
is superficial: taking function labels into account
cause errors in coordination scope to be punished
multiple times.10 When we train the parser with

10Consider the gold structure (NP (NP-CCP (DT-MARK
a) (NP-COORD b) (CC and) (NP-COORD c) (PP-SHARED
d))) and the incorrect prediction (NP (DT a) (NP-CCP (NP-

function labels but ignore them at evaluation time,
the results climb back up to 87.45% F1. Fur-
thermore, looking at coordination phrases whose
structure was perfectly predicted (65.09% of the
cases), the parser assigned the correct function la-
bel for all the coordination parts in 98.91% of the
cases. The combined results suggest that while the
parser is reasonably effective at assigning the cor-
rect function labels, there is still work to be done
on this form of disambiguation.

The availability of function labels annotation al-
lows us to take a finer-grained look at the parsing
behavior on coordination. Table 4 lists the parser
assigned labels against the gold labels. Common
cases of error are (1) conjuncts identification –
where 200 out of 1794 gold conjuncts were as-
signed an incorrect span and 113 non-conjunct
spans were predicted as participating as conjuncts
in a coordination phrase; and (2) Shared elements
identification, where 74.57% of the gold shared el-
ements were analyzed as either out of the coor-
dination phrase or as part of the last coordinates.
These numbers suggest possible areas of future re-
search with respect to coordination disambigua-
tion which are likely to provide high gains.

8 Conclusions

Coordination is a frequent and important syntactic
phenomena, that pose a great challenge to auto-
matic syntactic annotation. Unfortunately, the cur-
rent state of coordination annotation in the PTB is
lacking. We present a version of the PTB with im-
proved annotation for coordination structure. The

COORD b) (CC and) (NP-COORD c)) (PP d)). When taking
only the syntactic labels into account there is only the mistake
of the coordination span. When taking the coordination roles
into account, there are two additional mistakes – the missing
labels for a and d.

841



new annotation adds structure to the previously flat
NPs, unifies inconsistencies, fix errors, and marks
the role of different participants in the coordina-
tion structure with respect to the coordination. We
make our annotation available to the NLP commu-
nity. This resource is a necessary first step towards
better disambiguation of coordination structures in
syntactic parsers.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by The Allen Insti-
tute for Artificial Intelligence as well as the Ger-
man Research Foundation via the German-Israeli
Project Cooperation (DIP, grant DA 1600/1-1).

References
Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, Robert Mac-

Intyre, Victoria Tredinnick, Grace Kim, Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz, and Britta Schasberger. 1995.
Bracketing guidelines for treebank ii style penn tree-
bank project. University of Pennsylvania, 97:100.

David Dowty. 1988. Type raising, functional com-
position, and non-constituent conjunction. In Cat-
egorial grammars and natural language structures,
pages 153–197. Springer.

Kazuo Hara, Masashi Shimbo, Hideharu Okuma, and
Yuji Matsumoto. 2009. Coordinate structure analy-
sis with global structural constraints and alignment-
based local features. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL
and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2-
Volume 2, pages 967–975. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Deirdre Hogan. 2007. Coordinate noun phrase disam-
biguation in a generative parsing model. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Rodney Huddleston, Geoffrey K Pullum, et al. 2002.
The cambridge grammar of english. Language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pages
1273–1362.

J-D Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi, and Junichi Tsu-
jii. 2003. Genia corpusa semantically annotated
corpus for bio-textmining. Bioinformatics, 19(suppl
1):i180–i182.

Wolfgang Maier, Erhard Hinrichs, Sandra Kübler, and
Julia Krivanek. 2012. Annotating coordination in
the penn treebank. In Proceedings of the Sixth Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop, pages 166–174. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of english: The penn treebank. Compu-
tational linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and
interpretable tree annotation. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 433–
440. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Satoshi Sekine and Michael Collins. 1997. Evalb
bracket scoring program. URL http://nlp. cs. nyu.
edu/evalb/EVALB. tgz.

Masashi Shimbo and Kazuo Hara. 2007. A discrim-
inative learning model for coordinate conjunctions.
In EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 610–619.

David Vadas and James Curran. 2007. Adding noun
phrase structure to the penn treebank. In AN-
NUAL MEETING-ASSOCIATION FOR COMPU-
TATIONAL LINGUISTICS, volume 45, page 240.

842


