



















































Case and Cause in Icelandic: Reconstructing Causal Networks of Cascaded Language Changes


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2421–2430,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Case and Cause in Icelandic:
Reconstructing Causal Networks of Cascaded Language Changes

Fermín Moscoso del Prado Martín and Christian Brendel
University of California, Santa Barbara

Department of Linguistics, South Hall 3521
Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA

fmoscoso@linguistics.ucsb.edu and cdbrendel@gmail.com

Abstract

Linguistic drift is a process that produces
slow irreversible changes in the grammar
and function of a language’s construc-
tions. Importantly, changes in a part of
a language can have trickle down effects,
triggering changes elsewhere in that lan-
guage. Although such causally triggered
chains of changes have long been hypoth-
esized by historical linguists, no explicit
demonstration of the actual causality has
been provided. In this study, we use co-
occurrence statistics and machine learning
to demonstrate that the functions of mor-
phological cases experience a slow, irre-
versible drift along history, even in a lan-
guage as conservative as is Icelandic. Cru-
cially, we then move on to demonstrate
–using the notion of Granger-causality–
that there are explicit causal connections
between the changes in the functions of
the different cases, which are consistent
with documented processes in the history
of Icelandic. Our technique provides a
means for the quantitative reconstruction
of connected networks of subtle linguistic
changes.

1 Introduction

Sapir (1921/2014, p. 123) noticed that “Language
moves down on a current of its own making. It
has a drift” (emphasis added). In Sapir’s view,
the formation of different dialects requires that the
small changes constantly being introduced by the
speakers are not just plain white noise, but rather
random walks in which minute changes accumu-
late over time. The very high dimensionality on
which languages operate makes cumulative lin-
guistic changes irreversible. Once a change has

been effected there is very little chance that the
language will ever return to its original state be-
fore the change, in the same way that a diffu-
sion process in a very high dimensional space is
never going to return to the exact same point in
the space. Drift in language is in this respect
reminiscent of random genetic drift from evolu-
tionary biology (Wright, 1955). However, Sapir’s
idea of drift goes further in that he viewed it as
a directional process, more similar to Wright’s
(1929) concept of a directional drift related to se-
lectional pressures. In Sapir’s view, “language has
a ‘slope”’; the small changes that accumulate in
linguistic drift are not fully random, but rather they
reflect the speakers’ unconscious cognitive ten-
dency to increase the consistency within their lan-
guages. This idea is currently challenged by some
researchers (Croft, 2000; Lupyan and Dale, 2015),
who are of the opinion that purely random drift –
of the same type as that found in genetics–, when
coupled with adequate selection mechanisms, is
sufficient to account for the diachronic changes
observed in the world’s languages. Sapir moti-
vated the need for directional change in what he
saw as apparent causal chains in language change,
which he illustrated with the progressive loss and
functional shift of English oblique case markers,
into an absolutive case-free system encoding ani-
macy and position relative to the head noun.

‘Chain reactions’ along the history of a lan-
guage are particularly well-studied in phonology.
Chain shifts (Martinet, 1952) are processes by
which the position in perceptual/articulatory space
of a phoneme changes in response to the change in
position of another phoneme (either moving away
from the second phoneme, in a ‘push’ chain, or
moving to occupy the space left void by the other,
in a ‘pull’ chain). A famous example of a chain
shift is the Great English Vowel Shift. In a similar
fashion, one could think of functional chain shifts

2421



in morphology, by which a certain morphological
category takes over some of the functions of an-
other, triggering a chain of ‘push’ and/or ‘pull’
movements in other categories. Such cascaded
changes have often been reported in diachronic
linguistics (Biberauer and Roberts, 2008; Fisiak,
1984; Lightfoot, 2002; Wittmann, 1983).

Icelandic is a famously conservative language.
Compared to most other languages, its grammar
has experienced remarkably little change since
the high middle ages. For instance, Barðdal and
Eythórsson (2003) argue that the changes it has
experienced from its old phase (Old West Norse;
mid XI century to mid XIV century) to its cur-
rent phase are comparable to the slight changes oc-
curring from early Modern English (late XV cen-
tury into early XVIII century) into Modern En-
glish (from early XVIII century). In terms of
inflectional morphology, change in Icelandic has
been minimal. For instance, one finds that the
nominal paradigms of Old West Norse, are mostly
the same as those of Modern Icelandic. Notwith-
standing the apparent formal stability of Icelandic
cases, there is evidence that they are experiencing
subtle changes in their functions (Barðdal, 2011;
Barðdal and Eythórsson, 2003; Eythórsson, 2000).
In particular, Barðdal argues that an accumulation
of small syntatico-semantic shifts has finally re-
sulted in a shift in the Icelandic dative’s functions
(i.e., ‘dative sickness’), possibly triggered by ear-
lier changes in nominatives and accusatives (e.g.,
‘nominative sickness’).

In this study, we investigate whether one can re-
liably detect a drift in the functions of Icelandic
case and –crucially– whether there is evidence for
causal chain shifts in these functions. In Sec-
tion 2, we describe the processing of a diachronic
corpus of Icelandic to obtain co-occurrence repre-
sentations of the functions of case types and to-
kens. Section 3 uses machine learning on the co-
occurrence vectors of tokens to demonstrate that
the usage of Icelandic cases has been subject to
a constant drift along history, a drift that is dis-
tinguishable from the overall changes experienced
by the language in this period. We then go on –in
Section 4– to demonstrate using Granger-causality
(Granger, 1969) that there are causal relations be-
tween the changes in the different cases, and it
is possible to reconstruct a directed network of
chain shifts, which is consistent with the directions
of causality hypothesized by Barðdal (2011). Fi-

nally, in Section 5, we discuss the theoretical im-
plications of our results for theories of language
change, as well as the possibilities offered by the
technical innovations presented here.

2 Corpus Processing

2.1 Corpus

We used the Icelandic Parsed Historical Corpus
(Wallenberg et al., 2011), a sample of around
one million word tokens of Icelandic texts that
have been orthographically standardized, man-
ually lemmatized, part-of-speech tagged, and
parsed into context-free derivation trees. An ex-
ample of the lemmatization and part-of-speech
tagging for a sentence is shown in Fig. 1. The
dating of the text samples ranges from 1,150 CE
to 2,008 CE, covering most of the history of Ice-
landic (from its origins in Old West Norse, to the
current official language of Iceland). The corpus
is divided into 61 files of similar sizes (around
18,000 words per file), each file corresponding to
a single document. The documents were chosen
to cover the period in a roughly uniform manner,
sampling from similar genres across the periods.

2.2 Preprocessing

We collapsed into a single file all documents that
were dated on the same year. This left us with
44 files containing texts from distinct years. From
each of the files, we discarded all tokens that
contained anything but valid Icelandic alphabetic
characters or the dollar sign (used for marking en-
clitic breaks within a word, such as the clitic deter-
miner in krossins from the example in Fig. 1). All
remaining word tokens were lower-cased, and the
‘$’ character was removed from the stem elements
of broken stem plus clitic pairs (e.g., kross$ was
changed into kross).

2.3 First Order Co-occurrence Vectors

Ideally, for constructing co-occurrence vectors, it
is best to choose as features those words with high-
est overall informativity, which in fact tend to be
those words with the highest occurrence frequen-
cies (Bullinaria and Levy, 2007; Bullinaria and
Levy, 2012; Lowe and McDonald, 2000). In our
case, however, using plain token frequencies runs
the risk of creating a representational space that is
strongly uninformative about particular periods in
the history of the language. Instead, we used docu-
ment frequencies, as these still provide a measure

2422



En armar kross- -ins merkja ást við Guð og menn
en armur krosur hinn merkja ást við guð og maður

CONJ NS-N N-G D-G VBP N-A P NPR-A CONJ NS-A

Figure 1: Tagging and lemmatization of the Old West Norse sentence (number 819) from the Íslensk
Hómilíubók (“Icelandic Book of Homilies”; late XII century): En armar krossins merkja ást við Guð og
menn. (“But the arms of the cross mark the love of God and man.”)

of word frequency (and therefore informativity),
while at the same time ensuring that those words
chosen as features are most representative across
the history of the language. We selected as fea-
tures all word types that occurred in at least 75%
of the 44 by-year files, that is, all 529 distinct (un-
lemmatized) word forms that had a document fre-
quency in the corpus of at least 33 documents.

For each (unlemmatized) word type (w) oc-
curring at least three times in the whole corpus
(17,741 distinct word types), we computed its
co-occurrence frequency with each of the feature
words (t). In this way, we obtained a matrix of
17,741 × 529 word by feature co-occurrence fre-
quencies (f[w, t]) within a symmetrical window in-
cluding the two preceding and following words.1

The plain co-occurrence matrix was converted into
a matrix of word-feature pointwise mutual infor-
mations M = (mi,j), such that,

mi,j = log
N · f[wi, tj ]

(W1 − 1) · f[wi] · f[tj ] ,

where N = 899,763 tokens is the total num-
ber of tokens in the corpus, W1 = 5 is the to-
tal sliding window size considered, and f[wi] and
f[tj ], are the overall corpus frequencies of words
wi and tj , respectively. In this manner, the row
Mi,· = (mi,1, . . . ,mi,529) represents the contexts
in which the word type wi is found across the
whole corpus.

2.4 Second Order Co-occurrence Vectors
The co-occurrence vectors computed above pro-
vide representations for the average contexts in
which a given word type is found. In order to rep-
resent the specific context of each word token, we
used second order co-occurrence vectors (Schütze
and Pedersen, 1997). These provide important in-
formation about the aspects of a context that are
relevant for inflectional morphology (Moscoso del

1To avoid log 0 values, all frequency counts in this paper
were increased by one.

Prado Martín, 2007). The second order vectors
were computed by passing a symmetrical sliding
window including, for each token, the immedi-
ately preceding and following word. The vector
for each token was computed as the average be-
tween the first order vectors (of Subsection 2.3)
of the preceding and following words. If no first
order vector was available for either the preced-
ing or the following word, the second order vec-
tor directly corresponded to the plain first order
vector of the word for which there was a first or-
der vector. We excluded those tokens for which
we had first order vectors for neither the previ-
ous nor the following word type. We computed
such second order vectors for all tokens in the cor-
pus that had been tagged for grammatical case (a
total of 419,910 vectors, on average 9,453 vec-
tors per year, of which 38.14% were nominatives,
10.91% were genitives, 26.38% were accusatives,
and 24.56% were datives).

2.5 Representation of the Case Prototypes

In order to represent the prototypical usages each
grammatical case (i.e., nominative, genitive, ac-
cusative, and dative) in a given year, we used
the first order co-occurrence technique. For each
of the 44 distinct years –using the same features
identified in Subsection 2.3– we computed first
order co-occurrence vectors collapsing all word
tokens in each grammatical case, and using a
reduced window size including just the preced-
ing and following words (i.e., W2 = 3).2 For
each year (y) we obtained a 4 × 529 element
matrix of co-occurrence frequencies (fy[c, t]), in-
dicating the number of times that each case (c)

2The optimal window sizes for the first order co-
occurrence vectors for words and for case prototypes were
different because they were chosen to optimize different
tasks. The window size for first order vectors for words were
chosen to optimize the machine learning algorithm for iden-
tifying case identities of second order vectors (Section 3),
whereas the first order vectors for case prototypes were opti-
mized for clustering cases across the years (Section 4).

2423



was found to co-occur (within the specified win-
dow) with feature (t). These matrices were trans-
formed into case to feature pointwise mutual in-
formations, resulting in a series of 44 matrices
(M [y] = (m[y]i,j) such that,

m[y]i,j = log
N · fy[ci, tj ]

(W2 − 1) · f[ci] · f[tj ] ,

where N is the total number of tokens in the cor-
pus, f[ci] is the number of instances of case ci, and
f[tj ] denotes the number of instances of word tj
in the corpus. In this way, the rows of the M [y]
matrices provided a representation of the contexts
in which each grammatical case was used in each
year.

(a) (b)

3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4
2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Nominative

Genitive

Accusative

Dative

2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Nominative

Genitive

Accusative

Dative

Figure 2: (a) Representation of the raw case vec-
tors in SVD-reduced space (i.e., SVD dimension
1 vs. dimension 2). (b) Representation of the
case vectors after discounting the average vector
for each year (i.e., SVD dimension 1 vs. dimen-
sion 2).

Fig. 2a plots the spatial organization of the re-
sulting vectors (after reducing to a bidimensional
projection using Singular Value Decomposition;
SVD). Notice that the prototypes for each case
very naturally cluster together across the years.
The scatter is however asymmetric, hinting at a
process of change along the years common for all
four cases. If we compute a yearly overall proto-
type vector as the average vector for the cases in
each year, and we substract it from the correspond-
ing case prototypes, we find that the case ide-
tities become clearly differentiated in space (see
Fig. 2b), demonstrating that the case prototype
vectors do indeed capture the contextual proper-
ties of all four cases, which are highly distinctive.

3 Functional Drift in Icelandic Cases

As was discussed in the Introduction, the inflec-
tional paradigms marking case and number have

barely –if at all– changed along the history of Ice-
landic. On the basis of this fact alone, one could
conclude that the grammatical case system is not
actually experiencing any linguistic drift, but has
rather remained basically static throughout the last
millennium. There is, however, another possibil-
ity. Linguistic drift could have been affecting the
functions of grammatical cases in Icelandic. If this
were the case, one would expect to observe a slow
–constant rate– diachronic change in the contexts
in which each of the four cases is used.

To investigate this latter possibility, for each
of the 44 years documented in the corpus, we
trained a basic logistic classifier in the task of as-
signing grammatical case to the second order co-
occurrence vectors developed in Subsection 2.4.
Once each of the classifiers had been trained, we
tested the classifiers’ performances on the vectors
obtained from each of other 43 years on which
they were not trained. On the one hand, if the func-
tions of the cases have indeed remained constant
along the history of the language, one would ex-
pect that the performance of a classifier tested on
the data from a given year, should remain approx-
imately constant when tested on vectors from all
other years. If, on the other hand, the functions of
Icelandic grammatical cases have been subject to
linguistic drift, the irreversible and cumulative na-
ture of the drift (Sapir, 1921/2014) implies that the
classifier error should grow –if only so slightly–
with each year passed. The reason for this is that
the contexts in which one would use each case
should be slightly different from year to year. One
should then predict that the error of the classifier
should depend on the temporal distance between
the year of the testing vectors and that of the train-
ing ones. Furthermore, the change in error should
be of a linear nature, with a very slight slope.

When tested on the same years in which they
had been trained, the classifiers performed rather
well in inferring the case to which each of the
context vectors belonged (the distribution of errors
across the 44 years was well approximated by a
normal distribution with a mean error of 26.67%,
a standard deviation of 1.99%, and best and worst
classification errors of 22.17% and 30.39%, re-
spectively).3

3Although we chose the best model among different
learning algorithms, including multiple versions of Support
Vector Machines, Classification Trees, and a Softmax Classi-
fier, we have no doubt that the learning performance can be
improved upon. For our purposes, however, it was sufficient

2424



500 0 500

Temporal Distance (years)

30

35

40

45
C

la
ss

if
ic

a
ti

o
n
 E

rr
o
r 

(%
)

β+ = 0. 002, p+ < 0. 001, β− = − 0. 002, p− < 0. 001

Figure 3: Correlation between the classifier er-
ror and the temporal distance from the year from
which the training vectors were obtained to the
year when the testing vectors were obtained. The
solid lines plots a linear regressions.

We then tested the classifiers on the vectors ob-
tained from different years. The results are plot-
ted in Fig. 3. The scatter plots the difference
in years (i.e., the difference values are positive
when the classifier was tested on vectors obtained
after those used for training, and negative when
testing with vectors obtained before the training
ones). When testing on data different from the
training sets, there is a logical loss in performance
(of about 8%) from the baseline of testing on the
same training set. We fitted two linear regressions,
one to the positive differences and another to the
negative differences (plotted by the solid lines in
Fig. 3). The first thing that stands out is that the
performance of the classifier is remarkably good
when tested on vectors obtained at considerable
temporal distances from the time when the train-
ing vectors were obtained. While the error of the
classifier is of about 34% when tested on vectors
from the year after or before the training vectors,
the error remains at 35% for vectors originating
from texts that are five centuries apart. Once again,
this speaks to the remarkable conservativeness of
the Icelandic language. However, these small dif-
ferences are in fact reliable: There are significant
slopes in both regressions (positive differences:
R+ = .161, p+ < .001; negative differences:
R− = −.164, p− < .001). A second remark-
able thing is that both regressions are substantially
symmetrical, in fact their slopes are basically iden-
tical (|β+| = |β−| = .002). This indicates that the
degree to which the usages of the cases at different

to have a classifier with a decent performance, as our goal
was showing that the error is time-dependent.

0 200 400 600 800 1000

Cross-Entropy (nats)

28

30

32

34

36

38

40

42

C
la

ss
if
ic

a
ti

o
n
 E

rr
o
r 

(%
)

β= . 002, z= 5. 009, p < . 001

0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900

Distance in Years

C
la

ss
if
ic

a
ti

o
n
 E

rr
o
r 

(%
)

β= . 001, z= 4. 661, p < . 001

Figure 4: Independent effects of cross-entropy
(left panel) and distance in years between the
training and testing sets (right panel) as estimated
by the linear mixed-effects regression model.

time points have diverged depends on the amount
of time that has intervened, irrespective of whether
it was the training or the testing set that was col-
lected before.

One could argue that the slow drift observed
may not be really due to changes in the functions
of the grammatical cases themselves, but just to
overall changes either in the overall language, or in
the very topics that are addressed (e.g., one might
guess that talk of swords, slaves, and longships
was more frequent in XII century Norse than it
is in Modern Icelandic). To investigate this pos-
sibility we used an information-theoretical mea-
sure of the prototypicality of a set of second order
vectors for a particular year (based on that used
in Moscoso del Prado Martín, 2007). From the
vectors of each year, irrespective of their case, we
fitted a 529-dimensional Gaussian distribution (by
estimating the mean vector for that year, µy, and
the covariance matrix, Σy). The average inade-
quacy of a given set of vectors {v1, . . . ,vn} ob-
tained in year z to the distribution fitted to the vec-
tors obtained in year y is measured by the cross-
entropy, a Monte Carlo estimator of which is given
by,4

H(z, y) ≈ K + 1
2

log |Σy|+ 12n
n∑

i=1

(vi − µy)T Σ−1y (vi − µy),

where K is a constant.5 In addition, one should
also take into account the fact that, for some years,
the classifier might generalize better or worse than
for others (due to irrelevant idiosyncrasies of one
specific text used for training), which could lead
to a distortion of the results.

To investigate whether, after discounting for the
inadequacy of the vectors to the overall distribu-
tion of those in which the classifier was trained,

4Assuming Σy is definite positive so that its inverse exists.
5K = 529

2
log 2π.

2425



there was still evidence for drift in the functions
of the cases, while also accounting for the dif-
ferent generalization powers of the classifiers, we
fitted a linear mixed-effects model to the classi-
fier errors, including fixed-effect predictors of the
cross-entropy described above, and the absolute
value of the difference in years between the train-
ing set and testing set dates (as indicated above,
the effects were equivalent for positive and neg-
ative values in years), and the dating of the test-
ing set as a random effect. As expected, we found
that the cross-entropies had a significant positive
effect (β = .002, z = 5.009, p < .001; left panel
if Fig. 4), indicating that the performances of the
models were indeed worse for less adequate sets
of testing vectors, irrespective of any aspect of
grammatical case. However –crucially– even af-
ter considering the effect of cross-entropy, there
remained a significant positive effect of the tempo-
ral distance (β = .001, z = 4.661, p < .001; right
panel if Fig. 4).6 This result therefore supports the
hypothesis that the function of grammatical case
has been subject to a slight constant change dur-
ing the history of the language: a functional drift.

4 Functional Chain Shifts in Case

In the previous section we have demonstrated that
the functions of Icelandic cases have been subject
to slow linguistic drift. The question now arises of
whether this drift is purely random, or rather it has
some degree of directionality arising from endoge-
nous linguistic factors. It is possible that changes
in the functions of some cases caused changes in
the functions of others. We investigate this possi-
bility using the notion of Granger-causality

4.1 Granger-causality

Granger-causality (Granger, 1969) is a powerful
technique for assessing whether one time series
can be said to be the cause of another one. The ba-
sic idea is that one time series x is said to Granger-
cause another series y if the past of series x pre-
dicts the future of series y over and above any

6The estimated covariance matrices were not definite pos-
itive for two of the years, which were excluded from the anal-
yses. In addition, in 552 out of the remaining 1,849 estimates,
the cross-entropy took unusually large values, orders of mag-
nitude larger than the rest (likely reflecting inadequacy of the
multidimensional Gaussian approximation for these cases),
which distorted the effect estimates. The analyses reported
exclude these 552 points. However, keeping these outlying
values in the regression, both key effects remained signifi-
cant, but the slope estimates were less trustworthy.

predictive power that can be found on y’s own
past. This idea has proven of great value to inves-
tigate the causal connections between economic
variables, sequences of behavioral responses, neu-
ral spikes, or electroencephalographic potentials.
Often, the technique is used to reconstruct direc-
tional networks of variables and processes that
have causal connections.

If x and y are stationary time sequences on time
(τ ), in order to test whether x Granger-causes y,
one begins by fitting autoregressive models (AR)
that predict the values of y from its own n values
lagged into the past. This consists on finding val-
ues a1, a2, . . . , an that minimize the error ε in the
equation,

y[τ ] = a0 +

past of y︷ ︸︸ ︷
a1y[τ − 1] + a2y[τ − 2] + . . .+ any[τ − n] +ε[τ ].

One then augments the autoregression by includ-
ing m lagged values of x, with additional parame-
ters b1, . . . , bm to be fitted,

y[τ ] =a0 +

past of y︷ ︸︸ ︷
a1y[τ − 1] + a2y[τ − 2] + . . .+ any[τ − n] +

+ b1x[τ − 1] + b2x[τ − 2] + . . .+ bmx[τ −m]︸ ︷︷ ︸
past of x

+ε[τ ].

where the ε sequences are uncorrelated (white)
gaussian noises, reflecting the fully random or
chaotic part of the system, which cannot be pre-
dicted from its past (i.e., the error, that is termed by
some the ‘creativity’ of the model). If the second
regression is a significant improvement over the
first, then it can be said that x Granger-causes y,
indicating that past values of x significantly pre-
dict future values of y over and above any predic-
tive power of y’s own past values. This is tested
using an F -test, with the null hypothesis being that
the second model does not improve on the first
one. The selection of the autoregressive order pa-
rameters n and m is achieved by model compar-
isons using information criteria.

When one is interested in reconstructing a net-
work of causal relations between multiple vari-
ables, one can use a mutivariate generalization of
the AR model, the vector autoregressive model
(VAR). The VAR model consists of mutiple AR
equations (one for each variable in the model). If
we consider an autoregressive order of one (i.e.,
m = n = 1), when we are simultaneously consid-
ering p variables Y = {y1, . . . ,yp}, the VAR[1]
model to be fitted can be expressed in matrix no-

2426



tation as,y1[τ ]...
yp[τ ]

 =
a1...
ap

 +
A1,1 . . . A1,p... . . . ...
Ap,1 . . . Ap,p


y1[τ − 1]...
yp[τ − 1]

 +
ε1[τ ]...
εp[τ ]

 .
This model enables testing for Granger-causality
between any pair of variables yi ∈ Y and yj ∈
Y , after partialling out the possible confounding
effects of {yt, t 6= i, t 6= j, 1 ≤ t ≤ p}. yj is said
to Granger-cause yi if the model coefficient Ai,j
is significantly different than zero, and the reverse
holds if Aj,i significantly different than zero (i.e.,
yi Granger-causes yj).

4.2 Granger-causality in Case Drift
To investigate whether the pattern of change in
one case triggers (i.e., Granger-cause) the pattern
of change in another, we made use of the pro-
totype vectors for the cases in each of the years
developed in Subsection 2.5. As a measure of
the amount of contextual change for a given case
in a given year, we computed the city-block dis-
tances between the case prototypes from each year
to the next available time point, which are plot-
ted in Fig. 5a. Notice that there is an overall pat-
tern of change equally affecting all cases, and the
changes are therefore strongly correlated. This re-
flects the overall pattern of historical changes af-
fecting Icelandic as a whole, as well as changes
in the topics that would be discussed in the differ-
ent time periods, as was documented in Subsec-
tion 2.5 and Section 3. Considering the changes
in each case as a component in a four-dimensional
vector, the modulus of this vector (plotted by the
dashed orange line in Fig. 5a) gives the overall
magnitude of the changes that are unspecific to
the cases themselves. To remove this component
from the changes, we fitted a linear regression to
the sequence of changes in each case, using the
overall pattern of change as a predictor. Fig. 5b
plots the resulting residuals, indicating the amount
of change that was specific to each case, over and
above the overall pattern.7

A precondition for testing for Granger-causality
is that the time series under consideration are sta-
tionary. In our case, the series depicted in Fig. 5b
are significantly non-stationary; they exhibit, for
instance, significant temporal trends. In order to
remove the non-stationarities, the series were dif-
ferentiated (i.e., we considered the difference be-
tween each two consecutive points). The result of

7Negative values in this figure indicate changing less than
the average, rather than ‘negative change’.

this differentiation, plotted in Fig. 5c, removed the
non-stationary trends from the original series.

Table 1: Results of the Granger-causality analyses.
Causality directions that remained significant after
FDR correction are highlighted in bold.

Direction F [1, 144] p p (FDR) Direction F [1, 144] p p (FDR)
Nom. → Gen. 2.614 .108 .184 Gen. → Nom. 5.618 .019 .046
Nom. → Dat. 8.295 .005 .018 Dat. → Nom. 3.834 .052 .104
Gen. → Acc. .566 .453 .454 Acc. → Gen. 2.408 .123 .184
Acc. → Nom. 6.802 .010 .030 Nom. → Acc. .644 .424 .454
Acc. → Dat. 10.249 .002 .018 Dat. → Acc. .563 .454 .454
Dat. → Gen. 1.354 .246 .329 Gen. → Dat. 9.034 .003 .018

We fitted a VAR[n] model to the four dif-
ferentiated time-series. The autoregressive order
found to maximize Akaike’s Information Crite-
rion (Akaike, 1974) was n = 1.8 The F statis-
tics and significance values for the coefficients in
the resulting VAR[1] model are given in Tab. 1.
In order to reconstruct the causality network, we
also need to consider that we started out with only
very vague predictions on the possible directions
of causality. As the model involved twelve sepa-
rate p-value tests, the p-value estimates need to be
corrected for multiple comparisons. This correc-
tion was done using the false discovery rate (FDR)
method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995), result-
ing in the corrected p-value estimates listed in the
last column of Tab. 1.

The Granger-causality analysis leads us to re-
construct the causality network depicted in Fig. 6.
It appears that the drift in the functions of Ice-
landic case is not plainly random. Instead, we find
evidence that changes in the functions of the ac-
cusatives and genitives have had a domino effect,
triggering further changes in the functions of nom-
inatives. Finally, changes in all other three cases
result in changes in the functions of the dative.
In summary, the changes observed are consistent
with the idea discussed in the Introduction of a
functional chain shift affecting the morphological
case system of Icelandic.

5 Discussion

We have presented evidence for a steady drift –of
the precise kind advocated by Sapir (1921/2014)–
even in a language as remarkably conservative as
is Icelandic. This supports the claim that hu-
man languages are in a state of ‘perpetual mo-
tion’ (Beckner et al., 2009; Dediu et al., 2013;
Hawkins and Gell-Mann, 1992; Hopper, 1987;

8In fact n = 1 was also found to maximize both Akaike’s
Final Prediction Error and Hannan-Quinn Criteria.

2427



(a) (b) (c)

1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000

Year (CE)

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

C
h
a
n
g
e
 i
n
 U

sa
g
e

nominatives

genitives

accusatives

datives

Overall pattern

1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000

Year (CE)

100

80

60

40

20

0

20

40

60

80

R
e
si

d
u
a
l 
C

h
a
n
g
e
 i
n
 U

sa
g
e

nominatives

genitives

accusatives

datives

1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900

Year (CE)

80

60

40

20

0

20

40

60

80

100

D
if
fe

re
n
ce

 i
n
 R

e
si

d
u
a
l 
C

h
a
n
g
e

nominatives

genitives

accusatives

datives

Figure 5: (a) Overall value of the city-block distances between the prototypical case vectors for consecu-
tive years. (b) Residual value of the distances specific to each case after residualizing the overall pattern
of change. (c) Differentiated values of the residualized distances, removing non-stationarities.

Accusative
p=.030

''

p=.018

##
Nominative

p=.018 // Dative

Genitive

p=.046
77

p=.018

;;

Figure 6: Reconstructed network of Granger-
causal connections between diachronic changes
in case functions. The p-values indicated on the
causal arrows are FDR-corrected.

Larsen-Freeman and Cameron, 2007; Niyogi and
Berwick, 1997). Although we have found that
functional change in Icelandic case has proceeded
at a constant rate, we do not think, as argued by
Nettle (1999a, 1999b), that this rate of change
needs to be constant across languages. There
are strong arguments suggesting that in other lan-
guages such rates might be different (Wichmann,
2008; Wichmann and Holman, 2009).

The crucial innovation presented in this paper
is the reconstruction of the causality network link-
ing the changes in the four cases. Previous ap-
plications of the notion of Granger-causality to
diachronic language change (Moscoso del Prado
Martín, 2014) have focused on the macroscopic
relation between sudden changes in syntax and
morphology. Here, we have demonstrated that
Granger-causality can also be used to reconstruct
detailed networks of slow changes within the mor-
phological system, at a more microscopic scale.
The techniques developed offer a mechanism for
investigating subtle changes in the functions of
linguistic constructions, and the causal relations

between them. Traditionally, historical linguists
have focused on ‘narrative’ accounts of the the
chains of change within a language. Although
such type of accounts are extremely useful, the
often very subtle changes in usage that can occur
from one time-point to another cannot always be
described with such clearcut patterns. Neverthe-
less, we have shown that those very small changes
do accumulate in meaningful ways.

An important question addressed by this study
is the presence of endogenous causal chains in
language change. Lupyan and Dale (2015) argue
that languages are constrained by their ‘ecolog-
ical niches’, the communities in which they are
spoken, and the extralinguistic properties of those
niches can trigger exogenous change in the mor-
phology of the languages. Following on Lupyan
and Dale’s ecosystem analogy, one should see that,
as well as being part of ecosystems, languages are
also ecosystems in themselves, in a nesting similar
to that found in natural ecosystems (i.e., an animal
is part of a particular ecosystem, and its body is
an ecosystem in itself). Sounds, words and con-
structions have their own ecological niches within
the language, and disturbances in the system can
trigger cascaded changes, leading to readaptation
(evolution) of the constructions. This contrasts
with the view of changes in the function of Ice-
landic cases expressed by Eythórsson (2000). He
showed that verbs whose arguments exhibit ‘nom-
inative sickness’ and ‘accusative sickness’ tend to
be clustered along certain syntactic and seman-
tic lines. That it is in these particular niches that
accusatives and datives ended up settling is not,
however, the cause of the language changes. As
we have shown, the case system was subject to a
string of cascaded pressures. That the cases ended

2428



up settling in new syntactico-semantic niches was
the result, rather than the cause of the changes.

References
Hirotogu Akaike. 1974. A new look at the statistical

model identification. IEEE Transactions on Auto-
matic Control, 19:716–723.

Jóhanna Barðdal and Thórhallur Eythórsson. 2003.
The change that never happened: the story of
oblique subjects. Journal of Linguistics, 39:439–
472.

Jóhanna Barðdal. 2011. The rise of dative substitution
in the history of Icelandic. Lingua, 121:60–79.

Clay Beckner, Nick C. Ellis, Richard Blythe, John
Holland, Joan Bybee, Jinyun Ke, Morten H. Chris-
tensen, Diane Larsen-Freeman, William Croft, and
Tom Schoenemann. 2009. Language is a complex
adaptive system: Position paper. Language Learn-
ing, 59:1–26.

Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. 1995. Control-
ling the false discovery rate: a practical and pow-
erful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 57:289–300.

Theresa Biberauer and Ian Roberts. 2008. Cascad-
ing parameter changes: internally driven change in
Middle and Early Modern English. In Thórhallur
Eythórsson, editor, Grammatical Change and Lin-
guistic Theory: The Rosendal Papers, pages 79–
114. John Benjamins, Philadelphia, PA.

John A. Bullinaria and Joseph P. Levy. 2007. Ex-
tracting semantic representations from word co-
occurrence statistics: A computational study. Be-
havior Research Methods, 39:510–526.

John A. Bullinaria and Joseph P. Levy. 2012. Ex-
tracting semantic representations from word co-
occurrence statistics: Stop-lists, stemming and
SVD. Behavior Research Methods, 44:890–907.

William Croft. 2000. Explaining Language Change:
An Evolutionary Approach. Longman, London,
England.

Dan Dediu, Michael Cysouw, Stephen C. Levin-
son, Andrea Baronchelli, Morten H. Christensen,
William Croft, Nicholas Evans, Simon Garrod,
Rusell D. Gray, Anne Kandler, and Elena Lieven.
2013. Cultural evolution of language. In Peter J.
Richerson and Morten H. Christensen, editors, Cul-
tural Evolution: Society, Technology, Language, and
Religion, pages 303–331. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Thórhallur Eythórsson. 2000. Dative vs. nominative:
changes in quirky subjects in Icelandic. Leeds Work-
ing Papers in Linguistics, 8:27–44.

Adam Fisiak, editor. 1984. Historical Syntax. de
Gruyter, Berlin.

Clive W. J. Granger. 1969. Investigating causal re-
lations by econometric models and cross-spectral
methods. Econometrica, 37:424–438.

John Hawkins and Murray Gell-Mann, editors. 1992.
The Evolution of Human Languages. Santa Fe Insti-
tute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity. Addison
Wesley, Reading, MA.

Paul J. Hopper. 1987. Emergent grammar. Proceed-
ings of the Berkeley Linguistic Society, 13:139–157.

Diane Larsen-Freeman and Lynne Cameron. 2007.
Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK.

David Lightfoot, editor. 2002. Syntactic Effects of
Morphological Change. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.

Will Lowe and Scott McDonald. 2000. The direct
route: Mediated priming in semantic space. In Lila
Gleitman and Aravind K. Joshi, editors, Proceedings
of the XXII Annual Conference of the Cognitive Sci-
ence Society, pages 806–811, Austin, TX. Cognitive
Science Society.

Gary Lupyan and Rick Dale. 2015. The role of
adaptation in understanding linguistic diversity. In
Rik De Busser and Randy J. LaPolla, editors, Lan-
guage structure and environment: Social, cultural,
and natural factors, pages 289–316. John Benjamins
Publishing Company, Philadelphia, PA.

André Martinet. 1952. Function, structure, and sound
change. Word, 8:1–32.

Fermín Moscoso del Prado Martín. 2007. Co-
occurrence and the effect of inflectional paradigms.
Lingue e Linguaggio, 6:247–263.

Fermín Moscoso del Prado Martín. 2014. Grammat-
ical change begins within the word: Causal model-
ing of the co-evolution of Icelandic morphology and
syntax. In Paul Bello, Marcello Guarini, Marjorie
McShane, and Brian Scassellati, editors, Proceed-
ings of the XXXVII Annual Conference of the Cogni-
tive Science Society, pages 2657–2662, Austin, TX.
Cognitive Science Society.

Daniel Nettle. 1999a. Using social impact theory to
simulate language change. Lingua, 108:95–117.

Daniel Nettle. 1999b. Is the rate of linguistic change
constant? Lingua, 108:119–136.

Partha Niyogi and Robert C. Berwick. 1997. A dy-
namical systems model for language change. Com-
plex Systems, 11:161–204.

Edward Sapir. 2014. Language: An Introduction to the
Study of Speech. Dover Publications, Mineola, NY.
(Original work published 1921).

2429



Hinrich Schütze and Jan O. Pedersen. 1997. A
cooccurrence-based thesaurus and two applications
to information retrieval. Information Processing &
Management, 33:307–318.

Joel C. Wallenberg, Anton Karl Ingason, Einar Freyr
Sigurðsson, and Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson. 2011. Ice-
landic parsed historical corpus (IcePaHC – v. 0.9).

Søren Wichmann and Eric W. Holman. 2009. Pop-
ulation size and rates of language change. Human
Biology, 81:259–274.

Søren Wichmann. 2008. The emerging field of lan-
guage dynamics. Language & Linguistics Compass,
2:1294–1297.

Henri Wittmann. 1983. Les réactions en chaîne en
morphologie diachronique (“Chain reactions in di-
achronic morphology”). In Actes du colloque de
la Societé Internationale de Linguistique Fonction-
nelle, volume 10, pages 285–292, Québec, Canada.
Université Laval.

Sewall Wright. 1929. The evolution of dominance.
The American Naturalist, 63:556–561.

Sewall Wright. 1955. Classification of the factors of
evolution. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quan-
titative Biology, 20:16–24.

2430


