



















































Unsupervised Multi-Author Document Decomposition Based on Hidden Markov Model


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 706–714,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised Multi-Author Document Decomposition Based on
Hidden Markov Model

Khaled Aldebei Xiangjian He Wenjing Jia
Global Big Data Technologies Centre

University of Technology Sydney
Australia

{Khaled.Aldebei,Xiangjian.He,Wenjing.Jia}@uts.edu.au

Jie Yang
Lab of Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence

Shanghai Jiaotong University
China

Jieyang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

This paper proposes an unsupervised
approach for segmenting a multi-
author document into authorial com-
ponents. The key novelty is that
we utilize the sequential patterns hid-
den among document elements when
determining their authorships. For
this purpose, we adopt Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) and construct a sequen-
tial probabilistic model to capture the
dependencies of sequential sentences
and their authorships. An unsuper-
vised learning method is developed to
initialize the HMM parameters. Exper-
imental results on benchmark datasets
have demonstrated the significant ben-
efit of our idea and our approach has
outperformed the state-of-the-arts on
all tests. As an example of its applica-
tions, the proposed approach is applied
for attributing authorship of a docu-
ment and has also shown promising re-
sults.

1 Introduction
Authorship analysis is a process of inspect-
ing documents in order to extract autho-
rial information about these documents. It
is considered as a general concept that em-
braces several types of authorship subjects, in-
cluding authorship verification, plagiarism
detection and author attribution. Author-
ship verification (Brocardo et al., 2013; Potha
and Stamatatos, 2014) decides whether a given
document is written by a specific author. Pla-
giarism detection (Stein et al., 2011; Keste-
mont et al., 2011) seeks to expose the simi-
larity between two texts. However, it is un-

able to determine if they are written by the
same author. In author attribution (Juola,
2006; Savoy, 2015), a real author of an anony-
mous document is predicted using labeled doc-
uments of a set of candidate authors.

Another significant subject in author-
ship analysis, which has received compara-
tively less attention from research commu-
nity, is authorship-based document decompo-
sition (ABDD). This subject is to group the
sentences of a multi-author document to dif-
ferent classes, of which each contains the sen-
tences written by only one author. Many ap-
plications can take advantage of such a sub-
ject, especially those in forensic investigation,
which aim to determine the authorship of sen-
tences in a multi-author document. Further-
more, this kind of subject is beneficial for de-
tecting plagiarism in a document and defining
contributions of authors in a multi-author doc-
ument for commercial purpose. ABDD can
also be applied to identify which source (re-
garded as an ‘author’ in this paper) a part
of a document is copied from when the doc-
ument is formed by taking contents from var-
ious sources.

In despite of the benefits of ABDD, there
has been little research reported on this sub-
ject. Koppel et al. (2011) are the first re-
searchers who implemented an unsupervised
approach for ABDD. However, their approach
is restricted to Hebrew documents only. The
authors of Akiva and Koppel (2013) addressed
the drawbacks of the above approach by
proposing a generic unsupervised approach for
ABDD. Their approach utilized distance mea-
surements to increase the precision and accu-
racy of clustering and classification phases, re-
spectively. The accuracy of their approach
is highly dependent on the number of au-

706



thors. When the number of authors increases,
the accuracy of the approach is significantly
dropped. Giannella (2015) presented an im-
proved approach for ABDD when the number
of authors of the document is known or un-
known. In his approach, a Bayesian segmenta-
tion algorithm is applied, which is followed by
a segment clustering algorithm. However, the
author tested his approach by using only doc-
uments with a few transitions among authors.
Furthermore, the accuracy of the approach is
very sensitive to the setting of its parameters.
In Aldebei et al. (2015), the authors presented
an unsupervised approach ABDD by exploit-
ing the differences in the posterior probabili-
ties of a Naive-Bayesian model in order to in-
crease the precision and the classification ac-
curacy, and to be less dependent on the num-
ber of authors in comparing with the approach
in Akiva and Koppel (2013). Their work was
tested on documents with up to 400 transi-
tions among authors and the accuracy of their
approach was not sensitive to the setting of
parameters, in contrast with the approach in
Giannella (2015). However, the performance
of their approach greatly depends on a thresh-
old, of which the optimal value for an individ-
ual document is not easy to find.

Some other works have focused on segment-
ing a document into components according to
their topics. For applications where the top-
ics of documents are unavailable, these topic-
based solutions will fail. In this paper, the
ABDD approach is independent of documents’
topics.

All of the existing works have assumed that
the observations (i.e., sentences) are indepen-
dent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). No
consideration has been given to the contextual
information between the observations. How-
ever, in some cases, the i.i.d. assumption is
deemed as a poor one (Rogovschi et al., 2010).
In this paper, we will relax this assumption
and consider sentences of a document as a se-
quence of observations. We make use of the
contextual information hidden between sen-
tences in order to identify the authorship of
each sentence in a document. In other words,
the authorships of the “previous” and “subse-
quent” sentences have relationships with the
authorship of the current sentence. There-

fore, in this paper, a well-known sequential
model, Hidden Markov Model (HMM), is used
for modelling the sequential patterns of the
document in order to describe the authorship
relationships.

The contributions of this article are summa-
rized as follows.

1. We capture the dependencies between
consecutive elements in a document to iden-
tify different authorial components and con-
struct an HMM for classification. It is for
the first time the sequential patterns hidden
among document elements is considered for
such a problem.

2. To build and learn the HMM model, an
unsupervised learning method is first proposed
to estimate its initial parameters, and it does
not require any information of authors or doc-
ument’s context other than how many authors
have contributed to write the document.

3. Different from the approach in Aldebei
et al. (2015), the proposed unsupervised ap-
proach no longer relies on any predetermined
threshold for ABDD.

4. Comprehensive experiments are con-
ducted to demonstrate the superior perfor-
mance of our ideas on both widely-used ar-
tificial benchmark datasets and an authentic
scientific document. As an example of its ap-
plications, the proposed approach is also ap-
plied for attributing authorship on a popular
dataset. The proposed approach can not only
correctly determine the author of a disputed
document but also provide a way for measur-
ing the confidence level of the authorship de-
cision for the first time.

The rest of this article is organised as fol-
lows. Section 2 reviews the HMM. Section 3
presents the details of our proposed approach,
including the processes for initialization and
learning of HMM parameters, and the Viterbi
decoding process for classification. Experi-
ments are conducted in Section 4, followed by
the conclusion in Section 5.

2 Overview of HMM
In this paper, we adopt the widely used se-
quential model, the Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) (Eddy, 1996), to classify sentences of
a multi-author document according to their
authorship. The HMM is a probabilistic

707



model which describes the statistical depen-
dency between a sequence of observations
O = {o1, o2, · · · , oT } and a sequence of hid-
den states Q = {q1, q2, · · · , qT }. The obser-
vations can either be discrete variables, where
each oi takes a value from a set of M sym-
bols W = {w1 , · · · , wM }, or be continuous
variables. On the other hand, each qi takes
one possible value from a set of N symbols,
S = {s1 , · · · , sN }.

The behaviour of the HMM can be deter-
mined by three parameters shown as follows.
1. Initial state probabilities πππ = {π1, · · · , πN},

where πn = p(q1 = sn) and sn ∈ S, for
n = 1, 2, · · · , N .

2. Emission probabilities B, where each emis-
sion probability bn(ot) = p(ot|qt = sn), for
t = 1, 2, · · · , T and n = 1, 2, · · · , N .

3. State transition probabilities A. It is as-
sumed that the state transition probabil-
ity has a time-homogeneous property, i.e.,
it is independent of the time t. Therefore,
a probability p(qt = sl|qt−1 = sn) can be
represented as anl, for t = 1, 2, · · · , T and
l, n = 1, 2, · · · , N .

3 The Proposed Approach
The ABDD proposed in this paper can be for-
mulated as follows. Given a multi-author doc-
ument C, written by N co-authors, it is as-
sumed that each sentence in the document is
written by one of the N co-authors. Further-
more, each co-author has written long succes-
sive sequences of sentences in the document.
The number of authors N is known before-
hand, while typically no information about the
document contexts and co-authors is available.
Our objective is to define the sentences of the
document that are written by each co-author.

Our approach consists of three steps shown
as follows.

1. Estimate the initial values of the HMM
parameters {πππ, B, A} with a novel unsuper-
vised learning method.

2. Learn the values of the HMM parameters
using the Baum − Welch algorithm (Baum,
1972; Bilmes and others, 1998).

3. Apply the V iterbi algorithm (Forney Jr,
1973) to find the most likely authorship of each
sentence.

3.1 Initialization
In our approach, we assume that we do not
know anything about the document C and the
authors, except the number of co-authors of
the document (i.e., N). This approach applies
an HMM in order to classify each sentence
in document C into a class corresponding to
its co-author. The step (see Sub-section 3.2)
for learning of HMM parameters {πππ, B, A} is
heavily dependent on the initial values of these
parameters (Wu, 1983; Xu and Jordan, 1996;
Huda et al., 2006). Therefore, a good initial
estimation of the HMM parameters can help
achieve a higher classification accuracy.

We take advantage of the sequential infor-
mation of data and propose an unsupervised
approach to estimate the initial values of the
HMM parameters. The detailed steps of this
approach are shown as follows.

1. The document C is divided into seg-
ments. Each segment has 30 successive sen-
tences, where the ith segment comprises the
ith 30 successive sentences of the document.
This will produce s segments, where s =
Ceiling(|C|/30) with |C| representing the to-
tal number of sentences in the document. The
number of sentences in each segment (i.e., 30)
is chosen in such a way that each segment is
long enough for representing a particular au-
thor’s writing style, and also the division of the
document gives an adequate number of seg-
ments in order to be used later for estimating
the initial values of HMM parameters.

2. We select the words appearing in the doc-
ument for more than two times. This produces
a set of D words. For each segment, create a
D-dimensional vector where the ith element in
the vector is one (zero) if the ith element in the
selected word set does (not) appear in the seg-
ment. Therefore, s binary D-dimensional vec-
tors are generated, and the set of these vectors
is denoted by X = {x1, · · · , xs}.

3. A multivariate Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMMs) (McLachlan and Peel, 2004) is used
to cluster the D-dimensional vectors X into N
components denoted by {s1, s2, · · · , sN}. Note
that the number of components is equal to the
number of co-authors of the document. Based
on the GMMs, each vector, xi, gets a label
representing the Gaussian component that this
vector xi is assigned to, for i = 1, 2, · · · , s.

708



4. Again, we represent each segment as
a binary vector using a new feature set con-
taining all words appearing in the document
for at least once. Assuming the number of
elements in the new feature set is D′, s bi-
nary D′-dimensional vectors are generated,
and the set of these vectors is denoted by
X ′ = {x′1, · · · , x′s}. Each vector x′i will have
the same label of vector xi, for i = 1, 2, · · · , s.

5. We construct a Hidden Markov model
with a sequence of observations O′ and its cor-
responding sequence of hidden states Q′. In
this model, O′ represents the resulted segment
vectors X ′ of the previous step. Formally, ob-
servation o′i, is the ith binary D′-dimensional
vector x′i, that represents the ith segment of
document C. In contrast, Q′ represents the
corresponding authors of the observation se-
quence O′. Each q′i symbolizes the most likely
author of observation o′i. According to Steps 3
and 4 of this sub-section, each x′i represent-
ing o′i takes one label from a set of N ele-
ments, and the label represents its state, for
i = 1, 2, · · · , s.

By assigning the most likely states to all hid-
den states (i.e., q′i, i = 1, 2, · · · , s), the state
transition probabilities A are estimated.

As long as there is only one sequence of
states in our model, the initial probability of
each state is defined as the fraction of times
that the state appears in the sequence Q′, so
πn = Count(q

′=sn)
Count(q′) , for n = 1, 2, · · · , N .

6. Given the sequence X ′, and the set of all
possible values of labels, the conditional prob-
ability of feature fk in X ′ given a label sn,
p(fk|sn), is computed, for k = 1, 2, · · · , D′ and
n = 1, 2, · · · , N .

7. The document C is partitioned into sen-
tences. Let z = |C| represent the number of
sentences in the document. We represent each
sentence as a binary feature vector using the
same feature set used in Step 4. Therefore,
z binary D′-dimensional vectors, denoted by
O = {o1, · · · , oz}, are generated. By using the
conditional probabilities resulted in Step 6, the
initial values of B are computed as p(oi|sn)
= ∏D′k=1 ofki p(fk|sn), where ofki represents the
value of feature fk in sentence vector oi, for
i = 1, 2, · · · , z and n = 1, 2, · · · , N .

In this approach, we use add-one smooth-
ing (Martin and Jurafsky, 2000) for avoiding

zero probabilities of A and B. Furthermore,
we take the logarithm function of the proba-
bility in order to simplify its calculations.

The initial values of the A, B and πππ are
now available. In next sub-section, the learn-
ing process of these parameter values is per-
formed.

3.2 Learning HMM
After estimating the initial values for the pa-
rameters of HMM, we now find the parame-
ter values that maximize likelihood of the ob-
served data sequence (i.e., sentence sequence).
The learning process of the HMM parameter
values is performed as follows.

1. Construct a Hidden Markov model with
a sequence of observations, O, and a corre-
sponding sequence of hidden states, Q. In
this model, O represents the resulted sentence
vectors (Step 7 in the previous Sub-section).
Formally, the observation oi, is the ith binary
D′-dimensional vector and it represents the
ith sentence of document C. In contrast, Q
represents the corresponding authors of obser-
vation sequence O. Each qi symbolizes the
most likelihood author of observation oi, for
i = 1, 2, · · · , z

2. The Baum-Welch algorithm is applied to
learn the HMM parameter values. The algo-
rithm, also known as the forward−backward
algorithm (Rabiner, 1989), has two steps, i.e.,
E-step and M-step. The E-step finds the ex-
pected author sequence (Q) of the observa-
tion sequence (O), and the M-step updates the
HMM parameter values according to the state
assignments. The learning procedure starts
with the initial values of HMM parameters,
and then the cycle of these two steps contin-
ues until a convergence is achieved in πππ, B and
A.

The learned HMM parameter values will be
used in the next sub-section in order to find
the best sequence of authors for the given sen-
tences.

3.3 Viterbi Decoding
For a Hidden Markov model, there are more
than one sequence of states in generating the
observation sequence. The Viterbi decoding
algorithm (Forney Jr, 1973) is used to deter-
mine the best sequence of states for generat-

709



ing observation sequence. Therefore, by using
the Hidden Markov model that is constructed
in previous sub-section and the learned HMM
parameter values, the Viterbi decoding algo-
rithm is applied to find the best sequence of
authors for the given sentences.

4 Experiments

In this section, we demonstrate the perfor-
mance of our proposed approach by conduct-
ing experiments on benchmark datasets as well
as one authentic document. Furthermore, an
application on authorship attribution is pre-
sented using another popular dataset.

4.1 Datasets
Three benchmark corpora widely used for au-
thorship analysis are used to evaluate our ap-
proach. Furthermore, an authentic document
is also examined.

The first corpus consists of five Biblical
books written by Ezekiel, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Proverbs and Job, respectively. All of these
books are written in Hebrew. The five books
belong to two types of literature genres. The
first three books are related to prophecy liter-
ature and the other two books are related to
a wisdom literature.

The second corpus consists of blogs writ-
ten by the Nobel Prize-winning economist
Gary S. Becker and the renowned jurist
and legal scholar Richard A. Posner. This
corpus, which is titled “The Becker-Posner
Blogs” (www.becker-posner-blog.com), con-
tains 690 blogs. On average, each blog has 39
sentences talking about particular topic. The
Becker-Posner Blogs dataset, which is consid-
ered as a very important dataset for author-
ship analysis, provides a good benchmark for
testing the proposed approach in a document
where the topics of authors are not distinguish-
able. For more challenging documents, Gian-
nella (2015) has manually selected six single-
topic documents from Becker-Posner blogs.
Each document is a combination of Becker and
Posner blogs that are talking about only one
topic. The six merged documents with their
topics and number of sentences of each alter-
native author are shown in Table 1.

The third corpus is a group of New York
Times articles of four columnists. The arti-

Topics Author order and number of sentences
per author

Tenure (Ten) Posner(73), Becker(36), Posner(33),
Becker(19)

Senate Filibuster (SF) Posner(39), Becker(36), Posner(28),
Becker(24)

Tort Reform (TR) Posner(29), Becker(31), Posner(24)
Profiling (Pro) Becker(35), Posner(19), Becker(21)
Microfinance (Mic) Posner(51), Becker(37), Posner(44),

Becker(33)
Traffic Congestion (TC) Becker(57), Posner(33), Becker(20)

Table 1: The 6 merged single-topic documents
of Becker-Posner blogs.

cles are subjected to different topics. In our
experiments, all possible multi-author docu-
ments of articles of these columnists are cre-
ated. Therefore, this corpus permits us to ex-
amine the performance of our approach in doc-
uments written by more than two authors.

The fourth corpus is a very early draft of a
scientific article co-authored by two PhD stu-
dents each being assigned a task to write some
full sections of the paper. We employ this cor-
pus in order to evaluate the performance of our
approach on an authentic document. For this
purpose, we have disregarded its titles, author
names, references, figures and tables. After
that, we get 313 sentences which are written
by two authors, where Author 1 has written
131 sentences and Author 2 has written 182
sentences.

4.2 Results on Document
Decomposition

The performance of the proposed approach is
evaluated through a set of comparisons with
four state-of-the-art approaches on the four
aforementioned datasets.

The experiments on the first three datasets,
excluding the six single-topic documents, are
applied using a set of artificially merged multi-
author documents. These documents are cre-
ated by using the same method that has been
used by Aldebei et al. (2015). This method
aims to combine a group of documents of N
authors into a single merged document. Each
of these documents is written by only one au-
thor. The merged document process starts by
selecting a random author from an author set.
Then, the first r successive and unchosen sen-
tences from the documents of the selected au-
thor are gleaned, and are merged with the first
r successive and unchosen sentences from the
documents of another randomly selected au-

710



thor. This process is repeated till all sentences
of authors’ documents are gleaned. The value
of r of each transition is selected randomly
from a uniform distribution varying from 1
to V . Furthermore, we follow Aldebei et al.
(2015) method and assign the value of 200 to
V .

Bible Books
We utilize the bible books of five authors and
create artificial documents by merging books
of any two possible authors. This produces
10 multi-author documents of which four have
the same type of literature and six have differ-
ent type of literature. Table 2 shows the com-
parisons of classification accuracies of these 10
documents by using our approach and the ap-
proaches developed by Koppel et al. (2011),
Akiva and Koppel (2013)-500CommonWords,
Akiva and Koppel (2013)-SynonymSet and
Aldebei et al. (2015).

Doc. 1 2 3 4 5

D
iff

er
en

t

Eze-Job 85.8% 98.9% 95.0% 99.0% 99.4%
Eze-Prov 77.0% 99.0% 91.0% 98.0% 98.8%
Isa-Prov 71.0% 95.0% 85.0% 98.0% 98.7%
Isa-Job 83.0% 98.8% 89.0% 99.0% 99.4%
Jer-Job 87.2% 98.2% 93.0% 98.0% 98.5%
Jer-Prov 72.2% 97.0% 75.0% 99.0% 99.5%
Overall 79.4% 97.8% 88.0% 98.5% 99.1%

Sa
m

e Job-Prov 85.0% 94.0% 82.0% 95.0% 98.2%Isa-Jer 72.0% 66.9% 82.9% 71.0% 72.1%
Isa-Eze 79.0% 80.0% 88.0% 83.0% 83.2%
Jer-Eze 82.0% 97.0% 96.0% 97.0% 97.3%
Overall 79.5% 84.5% 87.2% 86.5% 87.7%

Table 2: Classification accuracies of merged
documents of different literature or the same
literature bible books using the approaches of
1- Koppel et al. (2011), 2- Akiva and Kop-
pel (2013)-500CommonWords, 3- Akiva and
Koppel (2013)-SynonymSet, 4- Aldebei et al.
(2015) and 5- our approach.

As shown in Table 2, the results of our ap-
proach are very promising. The overall clas-
sification accuracies of documents of the same
literature or different literature are better than
the other four state-of-the-art approaches.

In our approach, we have proposed an un-
supervised method to estimate the initial val-
ues of the HMM parameters (i.e., πππ, B and
A) using segments. Actually, the initial values
of the HMM parameters are sensitive factors
to the convergence and accuracy of the learn-
ing process. Most of the previous works using
HMM have estimated these values by cluster-
ing the original data, i.e., they have clustered

sentences rather than segments. Figure 1 com-
pares the results of using segments with the
results of using sentences for estimating the
initial parameters of HMM in the proposed ap-
proach for the 10 merged Bible documents in
terms of the accuracy results and number of
iterations till convergence, respectively. From
Figures 1, one can notice that the accuracy
results obtained by using segments for esti-
mating the initial HMM parameters are sig-
nificantly higher than using sentences for all
merged documents. Furthermore, the num-
ber of iterations required for convergence for
each merged document using segments is sig-
nificantly smaller than using sentences.

Figure 1: Comparisons between using seg-
ments and using sentences in the unsupervised
method for estimating the initial values of the
HMM of our approach in terms of accuracy
(representd as the cylinders) and number of it-
erations required for convergence (represented
as the numbers above cylinders) using the 10
merged Bible documents.

Becker-Posner Blogs (Controlling for Topics)
In our experiments, we represent Becker-
Posner blogs in two different terms. The
first term is as in Aldebei et al. (2015) and
Akiva and Koppel (2013) approaches, where
the whole blogs are exploited to create one
merged document. The resulted merged docu-
ment contains 26,922 sentences and more than
240 switches between the two authors. We ob-
tain an accuracy of 96.72% when testing our
approach in the merged document. The ob-
tained result of such type of document, which
does not have topic indications to differentiate
between authors, is delightful. The first set of
cylinders labelled “Becker-Posner” in Figure 2
shows the comparisons of classification accu-
racies of our approach and the approaches of
Akiva and Koppel (2013) and Aldebei et al.

711



(2015) when the whole blogs are used to cre-
ate one merged document. As shown in Figure
2, our approach yields better classification ac-
curacy than the other two approaches.

Figure 2: Classification accuracy comparisons
between our approach and the approaches pre-
sented in Akiva and Koppel (2013) and Alde-
bei et al. (2015) in Becker-Posner documents,
and documents created by three or four New
York Times columnists (TF = Thomas Fried-
man, PK = Paul Krugman, MD = Maureeen
Dowd, GC = Gail Collins).

The second term is as in the approach of Gi-
annella (2015), where six merged single-topic
documents are formed. Due to comparatively
shorter lengths of these documents, the num-
ber of resulted segments that are used for
the unsupervised learning in Sub-section 3.1
is clearly not sufficient. Therefore, instead of
splitting each document into segments of 30
sentences length each, we split it into segments
of 10 sentences length each. Figure 3 shows the
classification accuracies of the six documents
using our approach and the approach pre-
sented in Giannella (2015). It is observed that
our proposed approach has achieved higher
classification accuracy than Giannella (2015)
in all of the six documents.

Figure 3: Classification accuracy comparisons
between our approach and the approach pre-
sented in (Giannella, 2015) in the six single-
topic documents of Becker-Posner blogs.

New York Times Articles (N > 2)
We perform our approach on New York Times
articles. For this corpus, the experiments can
be classified into three groups. The first group
is for those merged documents that are created
by combining articles of any pair of the four
authors. The six resulted documents have on
average more than 250 switches between au-
thors. The classification accuracies of these
documents are between 93.9% and 96.3%. It
is notable that the results are very satisfactory
for all documents. For comparisons, the classi-
fication accuracies of the same documents us-
ing the approach presented in Aldebei et al.
(2015) range from 93.3% to 96.1%. Further-
more, some of these documents have produced
an accuracy lower than 89.0% using the ap-
proach of Akiva and Koppel (2013).

The second group is for those merged doc-
uments that are created by combining articles
of any three of the four authors. The four re-
sulted documents have on average more than
350 switches among the authors. The third
group is for the document that are created
by combining articles of all four columnists.
The resulted merged document has 46,851 sen-
tences and more than 510 switches among au-
thors. Figure 2 shows the accuracies of the five
resulted documents regarding the experiments
of the last two groups. Furthermore, it shows
the comparisons of our approach and the ap-
proaches presented in Aldebei et al. (2015) and
Akiva and Koppel (2013). It is noteworthy
that the accuracies of our approach are better
than the other two approaches in all of the five
documents.

Authentic Document
In order to demonstrate that our proposed ap-
proach is applicable on genuine documents as
well, we have applied the approach on first
draft of a scientific paper written by two Ph.D.
students (Author 1 and Author 2) in our re-
search group. Each student was assigned a
task to write some full sections of the paper.
Author 1 has contributed 41.9% of the doc-
ument and Author 2 contributed 58.1%. Ta-
ble 3 shows the number of correctly assigned
sentences of each author and the classifica-
tion accuracy resulted using the proposed ap-
proach. Table 3 also displays the authors’ con-
tributions predicted using our approach. As

712



Author ClassificationAccuracy
Predicted

Contribution
1 98.5% 47.6%
2 89.0% 52.4%

Accuracy 93.0%

Table 3: The classification accuracies and pre-
dicted contributions of the two authors of the
scientific paper using the proposed approach.

shown in Table 3, the proposed approach has
achieved an overall accuracy of 93.0% for the
authentic document.

4.3 Results on Authorship Attribution
One of the applications that can take advan-
tage of the proposed approach is the author-
ship attribution (i.e., determining a real au-
thor of an anonymous document given a set of
labeled documents of candidate authors). The
Federalist Papers dataset have been employed
in order to examine the performance of our
approach for this application. This dataset is
considered as a benchmark in authorship attri-
bution task and has been used in many studies
related to this task (Juola, 2006; Savoy, 2013;
Savoy, 2015). The Federalist Papers consist
of 85 articles published anonymously between
1787 and 1788 by Alexander Hamilton, James
Madison and John Jay to persuade the citizens
of the State of New York to ratify the Con-
stitution. Of the 85 articles, 51 of them were
written by Hamilton, 14 were written by Madi-
son and 5 were written by Jay. Furthermore,
3 more articles were written jointly by Hamil-
ton and Madison. The other 12 articles (i.e.,
articles 49-58 and 62-63), the famous “anony-
mous articles”, have been alleged to be written
by Hamilton or Madison.

To predict a real author of the 12 anony-
mous articles, we use the first five undisputed
articles of both authors, Hamilton and Madi-
son. Note that we ignore the articles of Jay be-
cause the anonymous articles are alleged to be
written by Hamilton or Madison. The five ar-
ticles of Hamilton (articles 1 and 6-9) are com-
bined with the five articles of Madison (articles
10, 14 and 37-39) in a single merged document
where all the articles of Hamilton are inserted
into the first part of the merged document and
all the articles of Madison are inserted into
the second part of the merged document. The
merged document has 10 undisputed articles
covering eight different topics (i.e., each au-

thor has four different topics). Before applying
the authorship attribution on the 12 anony-
mous articles, we have tested our approach on
the resulted merged document and an accu-
racy of 95.2% is achieved in this document.
Note that, the authorial components in this
document are not thematically notable.

For authorship attribution of the 12 anony-
mous articles, we add one anonymous article
each time on the middle of the merged docu-
ment, i.e., between Hamilton articles part and
Madison articles part. Then, we apply our ap-
proach on the resulted document, which has
11 articles, to determine to which part the sen-
tences of the anonymous article are classified
to be sectences of Hamilton or Madison. As
the ground truth for our experiments, all of
these 12 articles can be deemed to have been
written by Madison becuase the results of all
recent state-of-the-art studies testing on these
articles on authorship attribution have clas-
sified the articles to Madison’s. Consistent
with the state-of-the-art approaches, these 12
anonymous articles are also correctly classified
to be Madison’s using the proposed approach.
Actually, all sentences of articles 50,52-58 and
62-63 are classified as Madison’s sentences,
and 81% of the sentences of article 49 and 80%
of article 51 are classified as Madison’s sen-
tences. These percentages can be deemed as
the confidence levels (i.e., 80% conferdence for
articles 49, 81% for 51, and 100% confidences
for all other articles) in making our conclusion
of the authorship contributions.

5 Conclusions

We have developed an unsupervised approach
for decomposing a multi-author document
based on authorship. Different from the state-
of-the-art approaches, we have innovatively
made use of the sequential information hid-
den among document elements. For this pur-
pose, we have used HMM and constructed a
sequential probabilistic model, which is used
to find the best sequence of authors that repre-
sents the sentences of the document. An unsu-
pervised learning method has also been devel-
oped to estimate the initial parameter values
of HMM. Comparative experiments conducted
on benchmark datasets have demonstrated the
effectiveness of our ideas with superior perfor-

713



mance achieved on both artificial and authen-
tic documents. An application of the proposed
approach on authorship attribution has also
achieved perfect results of 100% accuracies to-
gether with confidence measurement for the
first time.

References
[Akiva and Koppel2013] Navot Akiva and Moshe

Koppel. 2013. A generic unsupervised method
for decomposing multi-author documents. Jour-
nal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence and Technology, 64(11):2256–2264.

[Aldebei et al.2015] Khaled Aldebei, Xiangjian He,
and Jie Yang. 2015. Unsupervised decomposi-
tion of a multi-author document based on naive-
bayesian model. ACL, Volume 2: Short Papers,
page 501.

[Baum1972] Leonard E Baum. 1972. An equality
and associated maximization technique in sta-
tistical estimation for probabilistic functions of
markov processes. Inequalities, 3:1–8.

[Bilmes and others1998] Jeff A Bilmes et al. 1998.
A gentle tutorial of the em algorithm and its ap-
plication to parameter estimation for gaussian
mixture and hidden markov models. Interna-
tional Computer Science Institute, 4(510):126.

[Brocardo et al.2013] Marcelo Luiz Brocardo, Issa
Traore, Shatina Saad, and Isaac Woungang.
2013. Authorship verification for short messages
using stylometry. In Computer, Information
and Telecommunication Systems (CITS), 2013
International Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE.

[Eddy1996] Sean R Eddy. 1996. Hidden markov
models. Current opinion in structural biology,
6(3):361–365.

[Forney Jr1973] G David Forney Jr. 1973. The
viterbi algorithm. Proceedings of the IEEE,
61(3):268–278.

[Giannella2015] Chris Giannella. 2015. An im-
proved algorithm for unsupervised decomposi-
tion of a multi-author document. Journal of the
Association for Information Science and Tech-
nology.

[Huda et al.2006] Md Shamsul Huda, Ranadhir
Ghosh, and John Yearwood. 2006. A variable
initialization approach to the em algorithm for
better estimation of the parameters of hidden
markov model based acoustic modeling of speech
signals. In Advances in Data Mining. Applica-
tions in Medicine, Web Mining, Marketing, Im-
age and Signal Mining, pages 416–430. Springer.

[Juola2006] Patrick Juola. 2006. Authorship attri-
bution. Foundations and Trends in information
Retrieval, 1(3):233–334.

[Kestemont et al.2011] Mike Kestemont, Kim Luy-
ckx, and Walter Daelemans. 2011. Intrinsic pla-
giarism detection using character trigram dis-
tance scores. Proceedings of the PAN.

[Koppel et al.2011] Moshe Koppel, Navot Akiva,
Idan Dershowitz, and Nachum Dershowitz.
2011. Unsupervised decomposition of a docu-
ment into authorial components. In Proceed-
ings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies-Volume 1, pages 1356–
1364. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

[Martin and Jurafsky2000] James H Martin and
Daniel Jurafsky. 2000. Speech and language
processing. International Edition.

[McLachlan and Peel2004] Geoffrey McLachlan
and David Peel. 2004. Finite mixture models.
John Wiley & Sons.

[Potha and Stamatatos2014] Nektaria Potha and
Efstathios Stamatatos. 2014. A profile-based
method for authorship verification. In Artificial
Intelligence: Methods and Applications, pages
313–326. Springer.

[Rabiner1989] Lawrence R Rabiner. 1989. A tuto-
rial on hidden markov models and selected ap-
plications in speech recognition. Proceedings of
the IEEE, 77(2):257–286.

[Rogovschi et al.2010] Nicoleta Rogovschi,
Mustapha Lebbah, and Younes Bennani.
2010. Learning self-organizing mixture markov
models. Journal of Nonlinear Systems and
Applications, 1:63–71.

[Savoy2013] Jacques Savoy. 2013. The federal-
ist papers revisited: A collaborative attribution
scheme. Proceedings of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 50(1):1–8.

[Savoy2015] Jacques Savoy. 2015. Estimating the
probability of an authorship attribution. Jour-
nal of the Association for Information Science
and Technology.

[Stein et al.2011] Benno Stein, Nedim Lipka, and
Peter Prettenhofer. 2011. Intrinsic plagiarism
analysis. Language Resources and Evaluation,
45(1):63–82.

[Wu1983] CF Jeff Wu. 1983. On the convergence
properties of the em algorithm. The Annals of
statistics, pages 95–103.

[Xu and Jordan1996] Lei Xu and Michael I Jordan.
1996. On convergence properties of the em al-
gorithm for gaussian mixtures. Neural compu-
tation, 8(1):129–151.

714


