



















































The Value of Semantic Parse Labeling for Knowledge Base Question Answering


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 201–206,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Value of Semantic Parse Labeling for
Knowledge Base Question Answering

Wen-tau Yih Matthew Richardson Christopher Meek Ming-Wei Chang Jina Suh
Microsoft Research

Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{scottyih,mattri,meek,minchang,jinsuh}@microsoft.com

Abstract

We demonstrate the value of collecting se-
mantic parse labels for knowledge base
question answering. In particular, (1)
unlike previous studies on small-scale
datasets, we show that learning from la-
beled semantic parses significantly im-
proves overall performance, resulting in
absolute 5 point gain compared to learn-
ing from answers, (2) we show that with an
appropriate user interface, one can obtain
semantic parses with high accuracy and at
a cost comparable or lower than obtaining
just answers, and (3) we have created and
shared the largest semantic-parse labeled
dataset to date in order to advance research
in question answering.

1 Introduction

Semantic parsing is the mapping of text to a mean-
ing representation. Early work on learning to build
semantic parsers made use of datasets of questions
and their associated semantic parses (Zelle and
Mooney, 1996; Zettlemoyer and Collins, 2005;
Wong and Mooney, 2007). Recent work on
semantic parsing for knowledge base question-
answering (KBQA) has called into question the
value of collecting such semantic parse labels,
with most recent KBQA semantic parsing systems
being trained using only question-answer pairs in-
stead of question-parse pairs. In fact, there is ev-
idence that using only question-answer pairs can
yield improved performance as compared with ap-
proaches based on semantic parse labels (Liang et
al., 2013). It is also widely believed that collect-
ing semantic parse labels can be a “difficult, time
consuming task” (Clarke et al., 2010) even for do-
main experts. Furthermore, recent focus has been
more on the final task-specific performance of a

system (i.e., did it get the right answer for a ques-
tion) as opposed to agreement on intermediate rep-
resentations (Berant et al., 2013; Kwiatkowski et
al., 2013), which allows for KBQA datasets to be
built with only the answers to each question.

In this work, we re-examine the value of se-
mantic parse labeling and demonstrate that seman-
tic parse labels can provide substantial value for
knowledge base question-answering. We focus on
the task of question-answering on Freebase, using
the WEBQUESTIONS dataset (Berant et al., 2013).

Our first contribution is the construction of the
largest semantic parse dataset for KB question-
answering to date. In order to evaluate the costs
and benefits of gathering semantic parse labels, we
created the WEBQUESTIONSSP dataset1, which
contains semantic parses for the questions from
WEBQUESTIONS that are answerable using Free-
base. In particular, we provide SPARQL queries
for 4,737 questions. The remaining 18.5% of the
original WEBQUESTIONS questions are labeled as
“not answerable”. This is due to a number of
factors including the use of a more stringent as-
sessment of “answerable”, namely that the ques-
tion be answerable via SPARQL rather than by
returning or extracting information from textual
descriptions. Compared to the previous seman-
tic parse dataset on Freebase, Free917 (Cai and
Yates, 2013), our WEBQUESTIONSSP is not only
substantially larger, but also provides the semantic
parses in SPARQL with standard Freebase entity
identifiers, which are directly executable on Free-
base.

Our second contribution is a demonstration that
semantic parses can be collected at low cost. We
employ a staged labeling paradigm that enables ef-
ficient labeling of semantic parses and improves
the accuracy, consistency and efficiency of ob-

1Available at http://aka.ms/WebQSP.

201



taining answers. In fact, in a simple comparison
with using a web browser to extract answers from
freebase.com, we show that we can collect se-
mantic parse labels at a comparable or even faster
rate than simply collecting answers.

Our third contribution is an empirical demon-
stration that we can leverage the semantic parse
labels to increase the accuracy of a state-of-the-art
question-answering system. We use a system that
currently achieves state-of-the-art performance on
KBQA and show that augmenting its training with
semantic parse labels leads to an absolute 5-point
increase in average F1.

Our work demonstrates that semantic parse la-
bels can provide additional value over answer la-
bels while, with the right labeling tools, being
comparable in cost to collect. Besides accuracy
gains, semantic parses also have further benefits in
yielding answers that are more accurate and con-
sistent, as well as being updatable if the knowl-
edge base changes (for example, as facts are added
or revised).

2 Collecting Semantic Parses

In order to verify the benefits of having labeled
semantic parses, we completely re-annotated the
WEBQUESTIONS dataset (Berant et al., 2013)
such that it contains both semantic parses and the
derived answers. We chose to annotate the ques-
tions with the full semantic parses in SPARQL,
based on the schema and data of the latest and last
version of Freebase (2015-08-09).

Labeling interface Writing SPARQL queries
for natural language questions using a text editor is
obviously not an efficient way to provide semantic
parses even for experts. Therefore, we designed a
staged, dialog-like user interface (UI) to improve
the labeling efficiency. Our UI breaks the po-
tentially complicated structured-labeling task into
separate, but inter-dependent sub-tasks. Given a
question, the UI first presents entities detected in
the questions using an entity linking system (Yang
and Chang, 2015), and asks the user to pick an en-
tity in the question as the topic entity that could
lead to the answers. The user can also suggest a
new entity if none of the candidates returned by
the entity linking system is correct. Once the en-
tity is selected, the system then requests the user
to pick the Freebase predicate that represents the
relationship between the answers and this topic
entity. Finally, additional filters can be added to

further constrain the answers. One key advantage
of our UI design is that the annotator only needs to
focus on one particular sub-task during each stage.
All of the choices made by the labeler are used to
automatically construct a coherent semantic parse.
Note that the user can easily go back and forth to
each of these three stages and change the previous
choices, before pressing the final submit button.

Take the question “who voiced meg on fam-
ily guy?” for example. The labeler will be pre-
sented with two entity choices: Meg Griffin
and Family Guy, where the former links “meg”
to the character’s entity and the latter links to the
TV show. Depending on the entity selected, legiti-
mate Freebase predicates of the selected entity will
be shown, along with the objects (either proper-
ties or entities). Suppose the labeler chooses Meg
Griffin as the topic entity. He should then pick
actor as the main relationship, meaning the an-
swer should be the persons who have played this
role. To accurately describe the question, the la-
beler should add additional filters like the TV se-
ries is Family Guy and the performance type is
voice in the final stage2.

The design of our UI is inspired by recent work
on semantic parsing that has been applied to the
WEBQUESTIONS dataset (Bast and Haussmann,
2015; Reddy et al., 2014; Berant and Liang, 2014;
Yih et al., 2015), as these approaches use a sim-
pler and yet more restricted semantic representa-
tion than first-order logic expressions. Following
the notion of query graph in (Yih et al., 2015),
the semantic parse is anchored to one of the enti-
ties in the question as the topic entity and the core
component is to represent the relation between the
entity and the answer, referred as the inferential
chain. Constraints, such as properties of the an-
swer or additional conditions the relation needs
to hold, are captured as well. Figure 1 shows an
example of these annotated semantic parse com-
ponents and the corresponding SPARQL query.
While it is clear that our UI does not cover compli-
cated, highly compositional questions, most ques-
tions in WEBQUESTIONS can be covered3.

Labeling process In order to ensure the data
quality, we recruit five annotators who are famil-
iar with design of Freebase. Our goal is to provide

2Screenshots are included in the supplementary material.
3We manually edited the SPARQL queries for about 3.1%

of the questions in WEBQUESTIONS that are not expressible
by our UI.

202



Family Guy

in-tv-program actorMeg Griffin xy0

 who voiced meg on family guy? 

Topic Entity:  Meg Griffin (m.035szd)
Inf. Chain:  in-tv-program – actor
Constraints: (1) y0 – series – Family Guy (m.019nnl)

(2) y0 – performance-type – Voice (m.02nsjvf)

Voice

PREFIX ns: <http://rdf.freebase.com/ns/>
SELECT ?x
WHERE {
  ns:m.035szd ns:tv.tv_character.appeared_in_tv_program ?y0 .
  ?y0 ns:tv.regular_tv_appearance.actor ?x ;
        ns:tv.regular_tv_appearance.series ns:m.019nnl ;
        ns:tv.regular_tv_appearance.special_performance_type 

ns:m.02nsjvf .
}

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Example semantic parse of the ques-
tion (a) “who voiced meg on family guy?” The
three components in (b) record the labels collected
through our dialog-like user interface, and can be
mapped deterministically to either the correspond-
ing query graph (c) or the SPARQL query (d).

correct semantic parses for each of the legitimate
and unambiguous questions in WEBQUESTIONS.
Our labeling instructions (included in the supple-
mentary material) follow several key principles.
For instance, the annotators should focus on giv-
ing the correct semantic parse of a question, based
on the assumption that it will result in correct an-
swers if the KB is complete and correct.

Among all the 5,810 questions in WEB-
QUESTIONS, there are 1,073 questions that the an-
notators cannot provide the complete parses to find
the answers, due to issues with the questions or
Freebase. For example, some questions are am-
biguous and without clear intent (e.g., “where did
romans go?”). Others are questions that Freebase
is not the appropriate information source (e.g.,
“where to watch tv online for free in canada?”).

3 Using Semantic Parses

In order to compare two training paradigms, learn-
ing from question-answer pairs and learning from
semantic parses, we adopt the Staged Query
Graph Generation (STAGG) algorithm (Yih et al.,
2015), which achieves the highest published an-
swer prediction accuracy on the WEBQUESTIONS
dataset. STAGG formulates the output semantic
parse in a query graph representation that mimics

the design of a graph knowledge base. It searches
over potential query graphs for a question, iter-
atively growing the query graph by sequentially
adding a main topic entity, then adding an in-
ferential chain and finally adding a set of con-
straints. During the search process, each candi-
date query graph is judged by a scoring function
on how likely the graph is a correct parse, based
on features indicating how each individual com-
ponent matches the original question, as well as
some properties of the whole query graph. Exam-
ple features include the score output by the entity
linking system, the match score of the inferential
chain to the relation described in the question from
a deep neural network model, number of nodes
in the candidate query graph, and the number of
matching words in constraints. For additional de-
tails see (Yih et al., 2015).

When question-answer pairs are available, we
create a set of query graphs connecting entities in
the question to the answers in the training set, as
in (Yih et al., 2015). We score the quality of a
query graph by using the F1 score between the an-
swer derived from the query graph and the answer
in the training set. These scores are then used in a
learning-to-rank approach to predict high-quality
query graphs.

In the case that semantic parses are available,
we change the score that we use for evaluating
the quality of a query graph. In particular, we
assign the query graph score to be zero when-
ever the query graph is not a subgraph consis-
tent with the semantic parse label and to be the
F1 score described above otherwise. The hope is
that by leveraging the semantic parse, we can sig-
nificantly reduce the number of incorrect query
graphs used during training. For instance, the
predicate music.artist.track was incor-
rectly predicted as the inferential chain for the
question “what are the songs that justin bieber
write?”, where a correct parse should use the re-
lation music.composer.compositions.

4 The Value of Semantic Parses

In this section, we explore the costs of collect-
ing semantic parse labels and the benefits of using
them.

4.1 Benefits of Semantic Parses

Leveraging the new dataset, we study whether a
semantic parser learned using full parses instead

203



Training Signals Prec. Rec. Avg. F1 Acc.
Answers 67.3 73.1 66.8 58.8

Sem. Parses 70.9 80.3 71.7 63.9

Table 1: The results of two different model train-
ing settings: answers only vs. semantic parses.

of just question-answer pairs can answer questions
more accurately, using the knowledge base. Be-
low, we describe our basic experimental setting
and report the main results.

Experimental setting We followed the same
training/testing splits as in the original WEB-
QUESTIONS dataset, but only used questions with
complete parses and answers for training and eval-
uation in our experiments. In the end, 3,098 ques-
tions are used for model training and 1,639 ques-
tions are used for evaluation4. Because there can
be multiple answers to a question, precision, re-
call and F1 are computed for each individual ques-
tion. The average F1 score is reported as the main
evaluation metric. In addition, we also report the
true accuracy – a question is considered answered
correctly only when the predicted answers exactly
match one of the answer sets.

Results Table 1 shows the results of two differ-
ent models: learning from question-answer pairs
vs. learning from semantic parses. With the la-
beled parses, the average F1 score is 4.9-point
higher (71.7% vs. 66.8%). The stricter metric,
complete answer set accuracy, also reflects the
same trend, where the accuracy of training with
labeled parses is 5.1% higher than using only the
answers (63.9% vs. 58.8%).

While it is expected that training using the anno-
tated parses could result in a better model, it is still
interesting to see the performance gap, especially
when the evaluation is on the correctness of the an-
swers rather than the parses. We examined the out-
put answers to the questions where the two models
differ. Although the setting of using answers only
often guesses the correct relations connecting the
topic entity and answers, it can be confused by re-
lated, but incorrect relations as well. Similar phe-
nomena also occur on constraints, which suggests
that subtle differences in the meaning are difficult

4The average F1 score of the original STAGG’s output
to these 1,639 questions is 60.3%, evaluated using WEB-
QUESTIONS. Note that the number is not directly comparable
to what we report in Table 1 because many of the labeled an-
swers in WEBQUESTIONS are either incorrect or incomplete.

Labeling Methods Ans. Ans. Sem. Parses
Annotator MTurkers Experts Experts
Avg. time/Question Unknown 82 sec 21 sec
Labeling Correctness 66% 92% 94%

Table 2: Comparing labeling methods on 50 sampled ques-
tions.

to catch if the semantic parses are automatically
generated using only the answers.

4.2 Costs of Semantic Parses
Our labeling process is very different from that
of the original WEBQUESTIONS dataset, where
the question is paired with answers found on the
Freebase Website by Amazon MTurk workers. To
compare these two annotation methods, we sam-
pled 50 questions and had one expert label them
using two schemes: finding answers using the
Freebase Website and labeling the semantic parses
using our UI. The time needed, as well as the cor-
rectness of the answers are summarized in Table 2.

Interestingly, in this study we found that it ac-
tually took less time to label these questions with
semantic parses using our UI, than to label with
only answers. There could be several possible ex-
planations. First, as many questions in this dataset
are actually “simple” and do not need complicated
compositional structured semantic parses, our UI
can help make the labeling process very efficient.
By ranking the possible linked entities and likely
relations, the annotators are able to pick the cor-
rect component labels fairly easily. In contrast,
simple questions may have many legitimate an-
swers. Enumerating all of the correct answers can
take significantly longer than authoring a semantic
parse that computes them.

When we compare the annotation quality be-
tween labeling semantic parses and answers, we
find that the correctness5 of the answers are about
the same (92% vs 94%). In the original WEB-
QUESTIONS dataset, only 66% of the answers are
completely correct. This is largely due to the
low accuracy (42.9%) of the 14 questions contain-
ing multiple answers. This indicates that to en-
sure data quality, more verification is needed when
leveraging crowdsourcing.

5 Discussion

Unlike the work of (Liang et al., 2013; Clarke et
al., 2010), we demonstrate that semantic parses

5We considered a label to be correct only if the de-
rived/labeled answer set is completely accurate.

204



can improve over state-of-the-art knowledge base
question answering systems. There are a number
of potential differences that are likely to contribute
to this finding. Unlike previous work, we compare
training with answers and training with semantic
parses while making only minimal changes in a
state-of-the-art training algorithm. This enables
a more direct evaluation of the potential benefits
of using semantic parses. Second, and perhaps
the more significant difference, is that our evalu-
ation is based on Freebase which is significantly
larger than the knowledge bases used in the pre-
vious work. We suspect that the gains provided
by semantic parse labels are due a significant re-
duction in the number of paths between candidate
entities and answers when we limit to semantically
valid paths. However, in domains where the num-
ber of potential paths between candidate entities
and answers is small, the value of collecting se-
mantic parse labels might also be small.

Semantic parsing labels provide additional ben-
efits. For example, collecting semantic parse la-
bels relative to a knowledge base can ensure that
the answers are more faithful to the knowledge
base and better captures which questions are an-
swerable by the knowledge base. Moreover, by
creating semantic parses using a labeling system
based on the target knowledge base, the correct-
ness and completeness of answers can be im-
proved. This is especially true for question that
have large answer sets. Finally, semantic labels
are more robust to changes in knowledge base
facts because answers can be computed via exe-
cution of the semantic representation for the ques-
tion. For instance, the answer to “Who does Chris
Hemsworth have a baby with?” might change if
the knowledge base is updated with new facts
about children but the semantic parse would not
need to change.

Notice that besides being used for the full
semantic parsing task, our WEBQUESTIONSSP
dataset is a good test bed for several important se-
mantic tasks as well. For instance, the topic en-
tity annotations are beneficial to training and test-
ing entity linking systems. The core inferential
chains alone are quality annotations for relation
extraction and matching. Specific types of con-
straints are useful too. For example, the temporal
semantic labels are valuable for identifying tem-
poral expressions and their time spans. Because
our dataset specifically focuses on questions, it

complements existing datasets in these individual
tasks, as they tend to target at normal corpora of
regular sentences.

While our labeling interface design was aimed
at supporting labeling experts, it would be valu-
able to enable crowdsourcing workers to provide
semantic parse labels. One promising approach is
to use a more dialog-driven interface using natu-
ral language (similar to (He et al., 2015)). Such
UI design is also crucial for extending our work
to handling more complicated questions. For in-
stance, allowing users to traverse longer paths in a
sequential manner will increase the expressiveness
of the output parses, both in the core relation and
constraints. Displaying a small knowledge graph
centered at the selected entities and relations may
help users explore alternative relations more effec-
tively as well.

Acknowledgments

We thank Andrei Aron for the initial design of the
labeling interface.

References

Hannah Bast and Elmar Haussmann. 2015. More ac-
curate question answering on Freebase. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th ACM International on Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management, pages
1431–1440. ACM.

Jonathan Berant and Percy Liang. 2014. Seman-
tic parsing via paraphrasing. In Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1415–1425, Baltimore, Maryland, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy
Liang. 2013. Semantic parsing on Freebase from
question-answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1533–1544, Seattle, Wash-
ington, USA, October. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Qingqing Cai and Alexander Yates. 2013. Large-
scale semantic parsing via schema matching and lex-
icon extension. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 423–433,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

James Clarke, Dan Goldwasser, Ming-Wei Chang, and
Dan Roth. 2010. Driving semantic parsing from

205



the world’s response. In Proceedings of the Four-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 18–27. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Luheng He, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2015.
Question-answer driven semantic role labeling: Us-
ing natural language to annotate natural language.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
643–653, Lisbon, Portugal, September. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Eunsol Choi, Yoav Artzi, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2013. Scaling semantic parsers with
on-the-fly ontology matching. In Proceedings of
the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1545–1556, Seattle,
Washington, USA, October. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Percy Liang, Michael I Jordan, and Dan Klein. 2013.
Learning dependency-based compositional seman-
tics. Computational Linguistics, 39(2):389–446.

Siva Reddy, Mirella Lapata, and Mark Steedman.
2014. Large-scale semantic parsing without
question-answer pairs. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 2:377–392.

Yuk Wah Wong and Raymond J Mooney. 2007.
Learning synchronous grammars for semantic pars-
ing with lambda calculus. In Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Yi Yang and Ming-Wei Chang. 2015. S-MART: Novel
tree-based structured learning algorithms applied to
tweet entity linking. In Proceedings of the 53rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 504–513, Beijing, China, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Wen-tau Yih, Ming-Wei Chang, Xiaodong He, and
Jianfeng Gao. 2015. Semantic parsing via staged
query graph generation: Question answering with
knowledge base. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 7th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 1321–1331, Beijing, China, July. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

John Zelle and Raymond Mooney. 1996. Learning
to parse database queries using inductive logic pro-
gramming. In Proceedings of the National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1050–1055.

Luke S Zettlemoyer and Michael Collins. 2005.
Learning to map sentences to logical form: Struc-
tured classification with probabilistic categorial
grammars. In Conference on Uncertainty in Arti-
ficial Intelligence (UAI).

206


