



















































Easy Things First: Installments Improve Referring Expression Generation for Objects in Photographs


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 610–620,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Easy Things First: Installments Improve Referring Expression
Generation for Objects in Photographs

Sina Zarrieß David Schlangen
Dialogue Systems Group // CITEC // Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies

Bielefeld University, Germany
first.last@uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

Research on generating referring expres-
sions has so far mostly focussed on “one-
shot reference”, where the aim is to gener-
ate a single, discriminating expression. In
interactive settings, however, it is not un-
common for reference to be established in
“installments”, where referring informa-
tion is offered piecewise until success has
been confirmed. We show that this strat-
egy can also be advantageous in technical
systems that only have uncertain access to
object attributes and categories. We train
a recently introduced model of grounded
word meaning on a data set of REs for
objects in images and learn to predict se-
mantically appropriate expressions. In a
human evaluation, we observe that users
are sensitive to inadequate object names
- which unfortunately are not unlikely to
be generated from low-level visual input.
We propose a solution inspired from hu-
man task-oriented interaction and imple-
ment strategies for avoiding and repair-
ing semantically inaccurate words. We
enhance a word-based REG with context-
aware, referential installments and find
that they substantially improve the refer-
ential success of the system.

1 Introduction

A speaker who wants to refer to an object in a vi-
sual scene will try to produce a referring expres-
sion (RE) that (i) is semantically adequate, i.e. ac-
curately describes the visual properties of the tar-
get referent, and (ii) is pragmatically and contextu-
ally appropriate, i.e. distinguishes the target from

girl in front

man on right

anywhere brown

Figure 1: Example images and REs from the
ReferIt corpus (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014)

other objects in the scene but does not overload the
listener with unnecessary information. Figure 1 il-
lustrates this with two examples from a corpus of
REs collected from human subjects for objects in
images (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014).

Research on referring expression generation
(REG) has mostly focussed on (ii), modeling prag-
matic adequacy in attribute selection tasks, using
as input a fully specified, symbolic representation
of the visual attributes of an object and its distrac-
tors in a scene (Dale and Reiter, 1995; Krahmer
and Van Deemter, 2012).

In this paper, we follow a more recent trend
(Kazemzadeh et al., 2014; Gkatzia et al., 2015)
and investigate REG on real-world images. In this
setting, a low-level visual representation of an im-
age (a scene) segmented into regions (objects), in-
cluding the region of the target referent, consti-
tutes the input. This task is closely related to the
recently very active field of image-to-text gener-
ation, where deep learning approaches have been
used to directly map low-level visual input to nat-
ural language sentences, e.g. (Vinyals et al., 2015;
Chen and Lawrence Zitnick, 2015; Devlin et al.,
2015). Similarly, we propose to cast REG on im-
ages as a word selection task. Thus, we base this
work on a model of perceptually grounded word
meaning, which associates words with classifiers
that predict their semantic appropriateness given

610



the low-level visual features of an object (Ken-
nington and Schlangen, 2015). As our first con-
tribution, we train this model on the ReferIt cor-
pus (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014) and define decod-
ing mechanisms tailored to REG.

Large-scale recognition of objects and their at-
tributes in images is still a non-trivial task. Con-
sequently, REG systems now face the challenge of
dealing with semantically inadequate expressions.
For instance, in Figure 1, the system might not
precisely distinguish between man or woman and
generate an inadequate, confusing RE like man in
the middle. Therefore, we focus on evaluating our
system in an object identification task with users,
in contrast to previous approaches to REG on im-
ages (Mao et al., 2015). In order to assess pos-
sible sources of misunderstanding more precisely,
our set-up also introduces a restricted form of in-
teraction: instead of measuring “one-shot” perfor-
mance only, users have three trials for identifying
a referent. In this set-up, we find that different pa-
rameter settings of the systems (e.g. their visual in-
puts) have a clear effect on the referential success
rates, while automatic evaluation measures reflect
the interactive effectiveness rather poorly.

Research on reference in human interaction has
noticed that conversation partners try to minimize
their joint effort and often prefer to present simple
expressions that can be expanded on or repaired,
if necessary (Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). This
strategy, called “referring in installments” is very
effective for achieving common ground in task-
oriented interaction (Fang et al., 2014) and is at-
tested in dialogue data (Striegnitz et al., 2012).
The connection between reference in installments
on the one and the status of distractors and dis-
tinguishing expressions on the other hand is rela-
tively unexplored, though it seems natural to com-
bine the two perspectives (DeVault et al., 2005).
Figure 1 shows an example for very a simple but
highly effective expression - it mentions color as a
salient and distinguishing property while avoiding
a potentially unclear object name.

As our second contribution, we extend our prob-
abilistic word selection model to work in a sim-
ple interactive installment component that tries to
avoid semantically inadequate words as much as
possible and only expands the expression in case
of misunderstanding. We present an algorithm that
generates these installments depending on the con-
text, based on ideas from traditional REG algo-

rithms like (Dale and Reiter, 1995). We find that
a context-aware installment strategy greatly im-
proves referential success as it helps to avoid and
repair misunderstandings and offers a combined
treatment of semantic and pragmatic adequacy.

2 Background

2.1 Approaches to REG

“One-shot REG” Foundational work in REG
has investigated attribute selection algorithms
(Dale and Reiter, 1995) that compute a dis-
tinguishing referring expression for an object
in a visual scene, which is defined as a tar-
get object r, set of distractor objects D =
{d1, d2, d3, ...} and a set of attributes A =
{type, position, size, color, ...}. A manually
specified database typically associates the target
and distractors in D with atomic values for each
attribute, cf. (Krahmer and Van Deemter, 2012).
In this setting, an attribute a1 ∈ A is said to rule
out a distractor object from D, if the target and dis-
tractor have different values. This is mostly based
on the assumption that we have objects of partic-
ular types (e.g. people, furniture, etc.) and that
the system has perfect knowledge about these ob-
ject types and, consequently, about potential dis-
tractors of the target. This does not apply to REG
on real-world images which, as we will show in
this paper, triggers some new challenges and re-
search questions for this field. Subsequent work
has shown that human speakers do not necessar-
ily produce minimally distinguishing expressions
(van Deemter et al., 2006; Viethen and Dale, 2008;
Koolen et al., 2011), and has tried to account for
the wide range of factors - such as different speak-
ers, modalities, object categories - that are related
to attribute selection, cf. (Mitchell et al., 2010;
Koolen and Krahmer, 2010; Clarke et al., 2013;
Tarenskeen et al., 2015).

Task-oriented REG has looked at reference as
a collaborative process where a speaker and a
listener try to reach a common goal (Clark and
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Heeman and Hirst, 1995;
DeVault et al., 2005). Given the real-time con-
straints of situated interaction, a speaker often has
to start uttering before she has found the optimal
expression, but at the same time, she can tailor,
extend, adapt, revise or correct her referring ex-
pressions in case the listener signals that he did
not understand. Thus, human speakers can flex-

611



ibly split and adapt their REs over several utter-
ances during an interaction, a phenomenon called
“reference in installments”. In a corpus analysis
of the S-GIVE domain, (Striegnitz et al., 2012)
showed that installments are pervasive in human-
human interaction in a task-oriented environment.
However, while there has been research on goal-
oriented and situated REG (Stoia et al., 2006;
Kelleher and Kruijff, 2006; Striegnitz et al., 2011;
Garoufi and Koller, 2013), installments have been
rarely implemented and empirically tested in in-
teractive systems. A noticeable exception is the
work by Fang et al. (2014) who use reinforcement
learning to induce an installment strategy that is
targeted at robots that have uncertain knowledge
about the objects in their environment. Using rel-
atively simple computer-generated scenes and a
standard representations of objects as sets of at-
tributes, they learn a strategy that first guides the
user to objects that the system can recognize with
high confidence. Our work is targeted at more
complex scenes in real-world images and large
domains where no a priori knowledge about ob-
ject types and their attributes is given. Mao et al.
(2015) use a convolutional neural network and an
LSTM to generate REs directly and on the same
data sets as we do in this paper, but they only re-
port automatic evaluation results.

2.2 The ReferIt corpus

We train and evaluate our system on the ReferIt
data set collected by Kazemzadeh et al. (2014).
The basis of the corpus is a collection of “20,000
still natural images taken from locations around
the world” (Grubinger et al., 2006), which was
augmented by Escalante et al. (2010) with seg-
mentation masks identifying objects in the images
(an average of 5 objects per image). This dataset
also provides manual annotations of region labels
and a vector of visual features for each region (e.g.
region area, width, height, and color-related fea-
tures). There are 256 types of objects (i.e. labels),
out of which 140 labels are used for more than 50
regions (Escalante et al., 2010). Kazemzadeh et
al. (2014) collected a large number of expressions
referring to objects (for which segmentations ex-
ist) from these images (130k REs for 96k objects),
using a game-based crowd-sourcing approach, and
they have assembled an annotated test set.

2.3 The WAC model

Given a corpus of REs aligned with objects in
images, we can train a model that predicts se-
mantically appropriate words given the visual rep-
resentation of an image region. We adopt the
WAC (“words-as-classifiers”) model (Kennington
and Schlangen, 2015), which was originally used
for reference resolution in situated dialogue. How-
ever, WAC is essentially a task-independent ap-
proach to predicting semantic appropriateness of
words in visual contexts and can be flexibly com-
bined with task-dependent decoding procedures.

The WAC model pairs each word w in its vocab-
ulary V with an individual classifier that maps the
low-level, real-valued visual properties of an ob-
ject o to a semantic appropriateness score. In or-
der to learn the meaning of e.g. the word red, the
visual properties of all objects described as red in
a corpus of REs are given as positive instances to a
supervised (logistic regression) learner. Negative
instances are randomly samples from the comple-
mentary set of utterances (e.g. not containing red).

We used this relatively simple model in our
work, because first of all we wanted to test wether
it scales from a controlled domain of typical ref-
erence game scenes (Kennington and Schlangen,
2015) to real-world images. Second, as compared
to standard object recognisers that predict abstract
image labels annotated in e.g. ImageNet (Deng et
al., 2009), this model directly captures the rela-
tion between actual words used in REs and visual
properties of the corresponding referents. Follow-
ing (Schlangen et al., 2016), we can easily base
our classifiers on such a high-performance con-
volutional neural network (Szegedy et al., 2015),
by applying it on our images and extracting the fi-
nal fully-connected layer before the classification
layer (see Section 3.1).

3 Word-based REG for Image Objects

We describe a word selection model for REG
on images, which reverses the decoding proce-
dure of our reference resolution model (Kenning-
ton and Schlangen, 2015; Schlangen et al., 2016).
The main question we pursue here is whether we
can predict semantically adequate words for visu-
ally represented target objects in real-world im-
ages and achieve communicative success in a task-
oriented evaluation.

612



3.1 A Basic Algorithm for REG with WAC
Given a visual representation of an object, we
can apply all word classifiers from the vocabulary
of our WAC model and obtain an appropriateness
ranking over words. As these WAC scores do not
reflect appropriateness in the linguistic context,
i.e. the previously generated words, we combine
them with simple language model (bigram) prob-
abilities (LM) computed on our corpus. The com-
bination of WAC and LM scores is used to rank our
vocabulary with respect to appropriateness given
the visual features of the target referent and lin-
guistic context.

Algorithm 1 shows our implementation of the
decoding step, a beam search that iteratively adds
n words with the highest combined LM and WAC
score to a its agenda and terminates after a pre-
specified number of maximum steps.

The algorithm takes the number of iterations as
input, so it searches for the optimal RE given a
fixed length. Deciding how many words have to
be generated is very related to deciding how many
attributes to include in more traditional REG. As
a first approach, we have trained an additional re-
gression classifier that predicts the length of the
RE, given the number of objects in the scene and
the visual properties of the target.

Algorithm 1 Baseline REG with WAC
1: function WORD-GEN(object, maxsteps, V )
2: Agenda← {‘start′}
3: for n ∈ 0..maxsteps do
4: Beam← ∅
5: for re ∈ Agenda do
6: w−1 ← LAST(re)
7: for w ∈ BIGRAMS(w−1, V ) do
8: s = WAC(w, object) + LM(w, w−1)
9: renew ← APPEND(re, word)

10: Beam← Beam ∪ {(renew, s)}
11: end for
12: end for
13: Agenda← K-BEST(Beam, k)
14: end for
15: return K-BEST(Agenda, 1)
16: end function

3.2 Experimental Set-up
Data We use the same test set as Kazemzadeh et
al. (2014) that is divided into the 3 subsets, each
containing 500 objects: “Set A contains objects
randomly sampled from the entire dataset, Set B
was sampled from the most frequently occurring
object categories in the dataset, excluding the less
interesting categories, Set C contains objects sam-
pled from images that contain at least 2 objects of

the same category, excluding the less interesting
categories.”1 For each object, there are 3 human-
generated reference REs. We train the WAC model
on the set of images that are not contained in the
test set, which amounts to 100384 REs.

The classifiers We use Schlangen et al. (2016)’s
WAC model that is a trained on the REFERIT data
(Kazemzadeh et al., 2014) based on the SAIAPR
collection (Grubinger et al., 2006). We train bi-
nary logistic regression classifiers (with `1 regu-
larisation) for the 400 most frequent words from
the training set.2 During training, we only con-
sider non-relational expressions, as words from re-
lational expressions would introduce further noise.
Each classifier is trained with the same balance of
positive and negative examples, a fixed ratio of 1
positive to 7 negative. Additionally, we train a re-
gression classifier that predicts the expected length
of the RE given the visual features of the target ob-
ject and the number of objects in the entire scene.
We also train a simple bigram language model on
the data.

Feature sets In this experiment, we manipulate
the features sets of the underlying word classifiers.
We train it on (i) a small set of 27 low-level vi-
sual features extracted and provided by Escalante
et al. (2010), called SAIAPR features below, and
(ii) a larger set of features automatically learned
by a state-of-the-art convolutional neural network,
“GoogLeNet” (Szegedy et al., 2015). We derive
representations of our visual inputs with this CNN,
that was trained on data from the ImageNet cor-
pus (Deng et al., 2009), and extract the final fully-
connected layer before the classification layer, to
give us a 1024 dimensional representation of the
region. We augment this with 7 features that en-
code information about the region relative to the
image: the (relative) coordinates of two corners,
its (relative) area, distance to the center, and orien-
tation of the image. The full representation hence
is a vector of 1031 features. The feature extraction
for (ii) is described in more detail in (Schlangen et
al., 2016). Generally, the SAIAPR features repre-
sent interpretable visual information on position,
area, and color of an image region, they could be
associated with particular visual attributes. This is
not possible with the GoogLeNet features.

1Where objects mostly located in the background like
‘sky’, ‘mountain’ are considered to be less interesting.

2We used scikit learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011).

613



3.3 Automatic Evaluation

To the best of our knowledge, end-to-end REG
performance has not been reported on the ReferIt
data set before. Table 1 shows corpus-based
BLEU and NIST measures calculated on the test
set (using 3 references for each RE). The results
indicate a minor gain of the GoogLeNet features.
We also evaluate a version of the GoogLeNet-
based system that instantiates the beam search
with the gold length of the RE from the corpus
(GoogLeNetglen). This leads to a small improve-
ment in BLEU and NIST, indicating that the length
prediction is not a critical factor.

BLEU NIST
1-gram 2-gram 1-gram 2-gram

SAIAPR 0.33 0.19 1.5 1.7
GoogLeNet 0.35 0.21 1.9 2.3
GoogLeNetglen 0.38 0.19 2.0 2.6

Table 1: Automatic evaluation for word-based
REG systems

3.4 A Game-based Human Evaluation

Set-up In parallel to the reference game in
(Kazemzadeh et al., 2014), we set up a game be-
tween a computer that generates REs and a human
player who clicks on the location of the described
object that he identifies based on the RE. After
each click, the GUI presents some canned feed-
back and informs the player whether he clicked
on the intended object. In case of an unsuccess-
ful click, the player has two more trials. In the
following, we report the success rates with respect
to each trial and the different test sets. This set-
up will trigger a certain amount of user guesses
such that the success rates do not correspond per-
fectly to semantic accuracies. But it accounts for
the increased difficulty as well as the interactive
nature of the task. See Section 4.4 for an analysis
of learning effects in this set-up and (Gatt et al.,
2009; Belz and Hastie, 2014) for general discus-
sion on REG and NLG evaluation.

Success rate/ trial Error
1st 2nd 3rd red.

SAIAPR 32.2 40.3 46.3 20.8
GoogLeNet 41.6 53.4 59.1 29.9
GoogLeNetglen 37.6 51 58.7 33.8
human 90.6 94.6 98.3 81.9

Table 2: Human success and error reduction rates
in object identification task, for different sets of
visual features

For each player, we randomly sampled the
games from the entire test set, but balanced the
items so that they were equally distributed across
the 3 test subsets A, B, C (see above) and the three
systems. We also included human REs from the
corpus. In total, we collected 1201 games played
by 8 participants.

Results In Table 2, we report the cumulative
success rates for the different systems across the
different trials, i.e. the success rate in the 3rd trial
corresponds to the overall proportion of success-
fully identified referents. First of all, this sug-
gests that the differences in performance between
the systems is much bigger in terms of their com-
municative effectiveness as in terms of the corpus-
based measures (Table 1). Thus, on the one hand,
the GoogLeNet features are clearly superior to SA-
IAPR, whereas differences between GoogLeNet
and GoogLeNetglen are minor. Interestingly, the
GoogLeNet features improve 1st trial as well as
overall success, leading to a much better error re-
duction rate3 in object identification between the
first and third trial. This means that, here, humans
are more likely to recover from misunderstandings
and indicates that REs generated by the SAIAPR
system are more semantically inadequate.

Success rate (3rd trial)
Set A Set B Set C

SAIAPR 35.7 63.8 40.7
GoogLeNet 57 67.7 53.1
GoogLeNetglen 50 74 53
human 99.1 99 96.5

Table 3: Human success rates for baseline REG
systems trained on different visual feature sets

In Table 3, we report the overall success rates
for the different test sets. All systems have a
clearly higher performance on the B Set which
contains the most frequent object types. Surpris-
ingly, all systems have a largely comparable per-
formance on Set A and C whereas only C con-
tains images with distractors in the sense of tra-
ditional REG. This shows that describing objects
which belong to an infrequent type in a semanti-
cally adequate way, which is necessary in Set A,
is equally challenging as reaching pragmatic ade-
quacy which is called for in Set C.

3Calculated as (#error1st − #error3rd)/#error1st

614



3.5 Error Analysis

When users click on a distractor object instead
of the intended referent in our object identifica-
tion task, there can be several sources of misun-
derstanding. For instance, it is possible that the
system produced REs that are interpretable but not
specific and distinguishing enough to identify the
target. It is also possible that the system selected
words that are semantically inadequate such that
the expression becomes completely misleading.
We can get some insight into possible sources of
misunderstanding by comparing the the clicked-on
distractor objects to their intended target, using the
object labels annotated for each image region (see
Section 2.2).

The analysis of mismatches between the ex-
pected label of the target and the label of the object
actually clicked on by the user reveals that many
errors are due to semantic inadequacies and appar-
ently severe interpretation failures: Looking at the
total number of clicks on distractor objects, 80%
are clicks on a distractor with a different label than
the target.4, e.g. the user clicked on a ‘tree’ in-
stead of a ‘man’. This is clear evidence for seman-
tic inadequacies, suggesting that the systems often
generate an inadequate noun for the object type.
An example for such a label mismatch is shown in
Figure 2 where the system generated “person” for
referring to a “sign”, such that the user first clicked
on distractor objects that are persons.

Similarly, we can get some evidence about how
users try to repair misunderstandings, by compar-
ing a distractor clicked on in the first trial to an-
other distractor clicked on in the subsequent sec-
ond, or third trial. Interestingly, we find that users
do not seem to be aware of the fact that the system
does not always generate the correct noun and do
not generally try to click on objects with a differ-
ent label. Only in 39% of the unsuccessful second
trials, users decided for a distractor object with a
different label, even though the first click had been
unsuccessful. For instance, in Figure 2, the user
clicked on the other person in the image in the
second trial, although this referent is clearly not
on the right. This suggests that users do not easily
revise their RE interpretation with respect to the
intended type of referent.

Moreover, we can compare the different dis-
tractor clicks with respect to their spatial distance

4The percentage varies between saiapr (86%),
GoogLeNet (71%)

regenerated: “person on the right”
rehuman: “sign on the blue shelf in the back”

Figure 2: Example for an unsuccessful trial in ob-
ject identification; first click: ©, second click: �,
third click: 4, target: 5)
to the target. We find that after an unsuccess-
ful first trial, users click on an object that has a
greater distance to the target in 70% of the cases
(as e.g. in Figure 2). This means that users of-
ten try to repair the misunderstanding with respect
to the intended location, rather than with respect
to the intended object type. Intuitively, this be-
haviour makes sense: a human speaker is more
likely to confuse e.g. left and right than e.g. man
and tree. From the perspective of the system this
is a problematic situation: words like left and right
are much easier to generate (based on simple po-
sitional features) than nouns like man and tree.

4 Towards interactive, contextual REG

In this Section, we extend our word-based REG
to deal with semantic inadequacies. We take a
first step towards interactive REG and implement
installments, a pervasive strategy in human task-
oriented interaction. The main idea is that the sys-
tem should try to avoid semantically inadequate
expressions wherever possible and, if misunder-
standing occurs, try to react appropriately.

4.1 Procedure

When a speaker or system refers in installments,
they do not need to generate an RE in one shot,
but can start with an initial, simple RE that is ex-
tended or reformulated if this becomes necessary
in the interaction, i.e. if the listener cannot iden-
tify the referent. This setting is a straightforward
extension of our game-based evaluation in Section
3.4, where users had 3 trials for identifying a refer-
ent: instead of generating a single RE for the target

615



and presenting it in every trial, we now produce a
triple (re1, re2, re3), where re1 will be used in the
first trial, re2 in the second trial, etc.

In this set-up, we want to investigate whether
installments and reformulations help to avoid se-
mantic inadequacies and improve referential suc-
cess, i.e. whether a dynamic approach to REG
compares favourably to the non-dynamic version
of our system (see Section 3). This question is,
however, closely linked to another, more intricate
question: what is the best strategy to realize in-
stallments that, on the one hand, provide enough
information so that a user can eventually identify
the referent and, on the other hand, avoid mislead-
ing words? To date, even highly interactive sys-
tems do not generally treat installments, or if they
do, only realise them via templates, e.g. (Stoia et
al., 2006; Staudte et al., 2012; Garoufi and Koller,
2013; Dethlefs and Cuayáhuitl, 2015). As pointed
out by Liu et al. (2012), data-driven approaches
are not straightforward to set-up, due to the “mis-
matched perceptual basis” between a human lis-
tener and an REG system.

Based on the insights of our error analysis in
Section 3.4, we will rely on a general installment
strategy that is mostly targeted at avoiding seman-
tically inadequate object names, and emphasizing
the fact that location words generated by the sys-
tem convey more reliable information. We have
implemented two versions of this general strategy:
(i) pattern-based installments that always avoid
object names in their initial expression and dy-
namically extend this if necessary, (ii) context-
dependent installments that condition the initial
expression on the complexity of the scene and ex-
tend the initial expression accordingly, inspired by
standard approaches to attribute selection in REG
(Krahmer and Van Deemter, 2012). Thus, we do
not test initial or reformulated expressions in iso-
lation, but the strategy as a whole, which is similar
to (Fang et al., 2014).

4.2 Pattern-based Installments

This system generates a triple of REs for each im-
age, corresponding to the respective trials in the
object identification task. The triple for pattern-
based installments is defined as follows:

• re1: a short RE that only contains location words, e.g.
bottom left

• re2: a longer RE that contains location words and an
object name, e.g. the car on the left

• re3: a reformulation of re2 that hedges the object name
and suggests an alternative object name, e.g. vehicle or
bottle on the left

Figure 3(a) illustrates a case where this pattern
is useful: the target is a horse, the biggest and most
salient object in the image, which can be easily
identified with a simple locative expression. As
horses are not frequent in the training data, the sys-
tem unfortunately generates hat guy as the most
likely object name. This RE would be very mis-
leading indeed if presented to a listener, as one of
the distractors actually is a person with a hat.

Generation Procedure In order to generate the
above installment triples with our REG system, we
simply restrict the vocabulary of the underlying
WAC-model. Thus, we divided the 400 word clas-
sifiers into the following subsets:

• V1: 20 location words (manually defined)
• V2: V1 + 183 object names (extracted from annotated

section of the ReferIt corpus)
• V3: entire vocabulary

This basic installment-based system does not
use V3 (but see below). For generating the hedge
of the object name in the third trial (re3) we use
the top-second and top-third word from the rank-
ing that WAC produces over all object type words
given the visual features of the target.

4.3 Context-dependent Installments
Our context-dependent installment strategy deter-
mines the initial RE (re1) based on the surround-
ing scene and generates subsequent reformulations
(re2,re3) accordingly.

Initial REs and Distractors As we do not have
a symbolic representation of the distractor objects
and their properties, we use the word-based REG
system to decide whether an RE can be expected to
be distinguishing for the target in the scene. This is
similar to (Roy, 2002). Algorithm 2 shows the pro-
cedure for determining the initial RE (re1). Same
as before, we restrict the vocabulary of the un-
derlying WAC model, e.g. to contain only location
words. But now, we apply the word generation
function to the target object and to all the other ob-
jects in the set of distractors (D). If the algorithm
generates an identical chunk for the target and one
of its distractors, it continues with a less restricted
vocabulary and a longer expression. It terminates
when it has found an RE that is optimal only for
the target. This algorithm proceeds on the level of

616



chunks, instead of single words, as e.g. location is
often described by several words (e.g. bottom left).

Algorithm 2 A Context-aware REG Algorithm
1: function INC-GEN(object, maxsteps, D, V )
2: for n ∈ 2..maxsteps do
3: Vn ← RESTRICT(V, n)
4: re← WORD-GEN(object, Vn)
5: for d ∈ D do
6: red ← WORD-GEN(d, Vn)
7: if red = re then
8: break
9: end if

10: end for
11: return re
12: end for
13: end function

As we found that the linguistic quality degrades
for longer REs, we limit the maximal RE length to
6 words. We obtain 3 types of initial REs predicted
to be distinguishing for a target by Algorithm 2:

• refloc: 2 word RE, only location words (V1), Figure
3(a)

• refobject: 4 word RE, location words and object names
(V2), Figure 3(b)

• refatt: 6 word RE, all attributes from the entire vocab-
ulary (V3), Figure 3(c)

On our test set, this produces distinguishing
REs for all targets, except 4 cases for which we
use an initial 6 word RE as well.

Reformulations We have several options for
generating the reformulation REs (re2,re3) - e.g.
hedging the object name, extending the RE with
more words, removing potentially misleading
words, etc. - which are more or less appropriate,
depending on the initial RE predicted by Algo-
rithm 2. Therefore, we implemented the follow-
ing types of installment triples that dynamically
extend or reduce the initial RE:

1. (refloc, refobject, refobject,hedge), this corresponds to
the pattern in Section 4.2

2. (refobject, refobject,hedge,refatt)

3. (refatt, refatt,hedge,refloc)

Figure 3 shows examples for each triple.

4.4 Human Evaluation
Set-up We use the task-oriented setup from Sec-
tion 3.4 with 3 trials per image. But instead of pre-
senting the same RE in each trial, the system now
updates the phrases according to the RE triples
described above. We have recruited 5 players
and collected 1200 games, split equally between

(a) Start with Location:

re1: „in front“ 
re2: „hat guy in front“ 
re3: „hat or mountain in 
        front“ 

(b) Start with Location, Object Type:

re1: „building on left side“ 
re2: „house or bus on left  
       side“ 
re3: „yellow house or bus  
        on top left side“ 

(c) Start with Location, Object Type,Other:

re1: „green plants on far 
       right side“ 
re2: „shrub or stand on 
        right side“ 
re3: „on right“ 

Figure 3: Examples for context-dependent install-
ments

the pattern-based installment (Section 4.2) and
the context-dependent installment strategy (Sec-
tion 4.3). In this evaluation, we only use word
classifiers trained on GoogLeNet features.

Results Table 4 shows that even the simple,
pattern-based installment system improves the 1st
trial success rate compared to the non-interactive
baseline (the GoogLeNet-based system from Sec-
tion 3) and is clearly superior with respect to its
overall success and error reduction rate over tri-
als. This suggests that a fair amount of target ob-
jects can be identified by users based on very sim-
ple, locative REs as semantically inadequate ob-
ject names are avoided. Another important find-
ing here is the high rate of error reduction during
the 2nd and 3rd trial achieved by the installment-
based system. In the non-interactive system, users
did not have additional cues for repairing their
misunderstanding and probably guessed other pos-
sible targets in individual, more or less system-
atic ways. Apparently, even simple strategies for
extending and hedging the initially presented RE
provide very helpful cues for repairing initial mis-
understandings.

As we expected, the pattern-based install-
ment system is clearly improved by our context-
dependent approach to generating installments.
This systems seems to strike a much better balance
between generating simple expressions that avoid

617



Success rate/ trial Error
1st 2nd 3rd red.

No install. 41.6 53.4 59.1 29.9
Pattern install. 46.8 69.2 80.9 64.1
Contextual install. 50.5 74.9 86 71.71

Table 4: Human evaluation for installment-based
REG systems

inadequate object names on the one and contextu-
ally appropriate expressions on the other hand. It
improves the pattern-based installments in terms
of 1st trial success rate and overall success and er-
ror reduction rate.

The finding that installment strategies should be
combined with insights from traditional distractor-
oriented REG is further corroborated when we
compare the success rates on the different sub-
sets of our test set, see Table 5. Thus, the perfor-
mance of the context-dependent installment sys-
tem is much more stable on the different subsets
than the pattern-based system which has a clear
dip in success rate on Set C, which contains target
referents with distractors of the same object type.
This result suggests that our approach to determine
distinguishing REs based purely on predictions of
word-based REG (Section 4.3) presents a viable
solution for REG on images, where information
on distractors is not directly assessable in the low-
level representation of the scene.

Success rate (3rd trial)
Set A Set B Set C

No install. 57 67.7 53.1
Pattern install. 80.8 84.3 77.5
Contextual install. 86 87.5 84.5

Table 5: Human evaluation on different test sets
for installment-based REG systems

Finally, the graph in Figure 4 shows the aver-
age success rates over time and provides more evi-
dence for the effectiveness of installments. We ob-
serve a clear learning effect in the non-interactive
system, meaning that users faced unexpected in-
terpretation problems due to inaccurate expres-
sions, but adapted to the situation to some extent.
In contrast, both installment systems have stable
performance over time, which indicates that sys-
tem behaviour is immediately understandable and
predictable for human users.

0 50 100 150 200

# Game

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

1.2

%
 A

cc
u
ra

cy

Context install.

Pattern install.

No install.

Figure 4: Participants’ success rates in object
identification over time

5 Discussion and Conclusion

We have presented an REG system that ap-
proaches the task as a word selection problem and
circumvents manual specification of attributes in
symbolic scene representations as required in tra-
ditional REG (Krahmer and Van Deemter, 2012),
or manual specification of attribute-specific func-
tions that map particular low-level visual fea-
tures to attributes or words as in (Roy, 2002;
Kazemzadeh et al., 2014). This knowledge-lean
approach allows us to use automatically learned
ConvNet features and obtain a promising baseline
that predicts semantically appropriate words based
on visual object representations.

We have argued and demonstrated that REG in
more realistic settings greatly benefits from a task-
oriented, interactive account and should explore
principled strategies for repairing and avoiding
misunderstandings due to semantically inaccurate
REs. In order to achieves this, we have augmented
our approach with some manually designed in-
stallment strategies. An obvious direction for fu-
ture work is to automatically induce such a strat-
egy, based on confidence measures that automati-
cally predict the trust-worthiness of a word for an
object.

Another extension that we have planned for fu-
ture work is to implement relational expressions,
similar to (Kennington and Schlangen, 2015).
Based on relational expressions, we will be able to
generate reformulations and installments tailored
to the interaction with the user. For instance, a
very natural option for installments is to relate the
wrong target object clicked on by the user to the
intended target, e.g. something like to the left of
that one, the bigger object.

618



Acknowledgments
We acknowledge support by the Cluster of
Excellence “Cognitive Interaction Technology”
(CITEC; EXC 277) at Bielefeld University, which
is funded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG).

References
Anja Belz and Helen Hastie. 2014. Comparative evaluation

and shared tasks for nlg in interactive systems. In Amanda
Stent and Srinivas Bangalore, editors, Natural Language
Generation in Interactive Systems, pages 302–350. Cam-
bridge University Press. Cambridge Books Online.

Xinlei Chen and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2015. Mind’s eye: A
recurrent visual representation for image caption genera-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2422–2431.

Herbert H Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Referring
as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22(1):1–39.

Alasdair DF Clarke, Micha Elsner, and Hannah Rohde. 2013.
Where’s wally: the influence of visual salience on refer-
ring expression generation. Frontiers in psychology, 4.

Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter. 1995. Computational interpre-
tations of the gricean maxims in the generation of referring
expressions. Cognitive Science, 19(2):233–263.

Jia Deng, W. Dong, Richard Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and
L. Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchi-
cal Image Database. In CVPR09.

Nina Dethlefs and Heriberto Cuayáhuitl. 2015. Hierarchical
reinforcement learning for situated natural language gen-
eration. Natural Language Engineering, 21(03):391–435.

David DeVault, Natalia Kariaeva, Anubha Kothari, Iris Oved,
and Matthew Stone. 2005. An information-state approach
to collaborative reference. In Proceedings of the ACL
2005 on Interactive poster and demonstration sessions,
pages 1–4.

Jacob Devlin, Hao Cheng, Hao Fang, Saurabh Gupta,
Li Deng, Xiaodong He, Geoffrey Zweig, and Margaret
Mitchell. 2015. Language models for image caption-
ing: The quirks and what works. In Proceedings of the
53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short
Papers), pages 100–105, Beijing, China, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Hugo Jair Escalante, Carlos a. Hernández, Jesus a. Gonza-
lez, a. López-López, Manuel Montes, Eduardo F. Morales,
L. Enrique Sucar, Luis Villaseñor, and Michael Grub-
inger. 2010. The segmented and annotated IAPR TC-12
benchmark. Computer Vision and Image Understanding,
114(4):419–428.

Rui Fang, Malcolm Doering, and Joyce Y. Chai. 2014. Col-
laborative Models for Referring Expression Generation in
Situated Dialogue. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Konstantina Garoufi and Alexander Koller. 2013. Genera-
tion of effective referring expressions in situated context.
Language and Cognitive Processes.

Albert Gatt, Anja Belz, and Eric Kow. 2009. The tuna-reg
challenge 2009: Overview and evaluation results. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Lan-
guage Generation, pages 174–182. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Dimitra Gkatzia, Verena Rieser, Phil Bartie, and William
Mackaness. 2015. From the virtual to the real world:
Referring to objects in real-world spatial scenes. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP 2015. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Michael Grubinger, Paul Clough, Henning Müller, and
Thomas Deselaers. 2006. The IAPR TC-12 benchmark:
a new evaluation resource for visual information systems.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), pages 13–
23, Genoa, Italy.

Peter A Heeman and Graeme Hirst. 1995. Collaborat-
ing on referring expressions. Computational linguistics,
21(3):351–382.

Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and
Tamara L Berg. 2014. ReferItGame: Referring to Ob-
jects in Photographs of Natural Scenes. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP 2014), pages 787–798, Doha,
Qatar.

John D Kelleher and Geert-Jan M Kruijff. 2006. Incremen-
tal generation of spatial referring expressions in situated
dialog. In Proceedings of the 21st International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics and the 44th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 1041–1048.

Casey Kennington and David Schlangen. 2015. Simple
learning and compositional application of perceptually
grounded word meanings for incremental reference res-
olution. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 292–301, Beijing,
China, July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ruud Koolen and Emiel Krahmer. 2010. The d-tuna corpus:
A dutch dataset for the evaluation of referring expression
generation algorithms. In LREC.

Ruud Koolen, Albert Gatt, Martijn Goudbeek, and Emiel
Krahmer. 2011. Factors causing overspecification in def-
inite descriptions. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(13):3231–
3250.

Emiel Krahmer and Kees Van Deemter. 2012. Computa-
tional generation of referring expressions: A survey. Com-
putational Linguistics, 38(1):173–218.

Changsong Liu, Rui Fang, and Joyce Y Chai. 2012. Towards
mediating shared perceptual basis in situated dialogue. In
Proceedings of the 13th Annual Meeting of the Special In-
terest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 140–149.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana Cam-
buru, Alan L. Yuille, and Kevin Murphy. 2015. Genera-
tion and comprehension of unambiguous object descrip-
tions. CoRR, abs/1511.02283.

619



Margaret Mitchell, Kees van Deemter, and Ehud Reiter.
2010. Natural reference to objects in a visual domain.
In Proceedings of the 6th international natural language
generation conference, pages 95–104. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,
R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cour-
napeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

Deb K Roy. 2002. Learning visually grounded words and
syntax for a scene description task. Computer Speech &
Language, 16(3):353–385.

David Schlangen, Sina Zarriess, and Casey Kennington.
2016. Resolving references to objects in photographs
using the words-as-classifiers model. In Proceedings of
the 54rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL 2016).

Maria Staudte, Alexander Koller, Konstantina Garoufi, and
Matthew W Crocker. 2012. Using listener gaze to aug-
ment speech generation in a virtual 3d environment. In
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the Cogni-
tive Science Society. To appear.

Laura Stoia, Darla Magdalene Shockley, Donna K Byron,
and Eric Fosler-Lussier. 2006. Noun phrase generation
for situated dialogs. In Proceedings of the fourth inter-
national natural language generation conference, pages
81–88. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kristina Striegnitz, Alexandre Denis, Andrew Gargett, Kon-
stantina Garoufi, Alexander Koller, and Mariët Theune.
2011. Report on the second second challenge on gener-
ating instructions in virtual environments (give-2.5). In
Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 270–279.

Kristina Striegnitz, Hendrik Buschmeier, and Stefan Kopp.
2012. Referring in installments: a corpus study of spo-
ken object references in an interactive virtual environment.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International Natural Lan-
guage Generation Conference, pages 12–16.

Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet,
Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent
Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. 2015. Going deeper
with convolutions. In CVPR 2015, Boston, MA, USA,
June.

Sammie Tarenskeen, Mirjam Broersma, and Bart Geurts.
2015. hand me the yellow stapler or hand me the yellow
dress: Colour overspecification depends on object cate-
gory. page 140.

Kees van Deemter, Ielka van der Sluis, and Albert Gatt. 2006.
Building a semantically transparent corpus for the genera-
tion of referring expressions. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Natural Language Generation Conference,
pages 130–132. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Jette Viethen and Robert Dale. 2008. The use of spatial re-
lations in referring expression generation. In Proceedings
of the Fifth International Natural Language Generation
Conference, pages 59–67. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and Dumitru
Erhan. 2015. Show and tell: A neural image caption gen-
erator. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.

620


