



















































Suggestion Mining from Opinionated Text


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics – Student Research Workshop, pages 119–125,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Suggestion Mining from Opinionated Text

Sapna Negi
Insight Centre for Data Analytics

National University of Ireland, Galway
sapna.negi@insight-centre.org

Abstract

In addition to the positive and negative
sentiments expressed by speakers, opin-
ions on the web also convey suggestions.
Such text comprise of advice, recommen-
dations and tips on a variety of points
of interest. We propose that suggestions
can be extracted from the available opin-
ionated text and put to several use cases.
The problem has been identified only re-
cently as a viable task, and there is a
lot of scope for research in the direction
of problem definition, datasets, and meth-
ods. From an abstract view, standard al-
gorithms for tasks like sentence classifi-
cation and keyphrase extraction appear to
be usable for suggestion mining. How-
ever, initial experiments reveal that there
is a need for new methods, or variations in
the existing ones for addressing the prob-
lem specific challenges. We present a re-
search proposal which divides the prob-
lem into three main research questions; we
walk through them, presenting our analy-
sis, results, and future directions.

1 Introduction

Online text is becoming an increasingly popular
source to acquire public opinions towards entities
like persons, products, services, brands, events,
social debates etc. State of the art opinion mining
systems primarily utilise this plethora of opinions
to provide summary of positive and negative sen-
timents towards entities or topics. We stress that
opinions also encompass suggestions, tips, and ad-
vice, which are often explicitly sought by stake-
holders. We collaboratively refer to this kind of
information as suggestions. Suggestions about a
variety of topics of interest may be found on opin-

ion platforms like reviews, blogs, social media,
and discussion forums. These suggestions, once
detected and extracted, could be exploited in nu-
merous ways. In the case of commercial entities,
suggestions present among the reviews can con-
vey ideas for improvements to the brand owners,
or tips and advice to customers.

Suggestion extraction can also be employed
for the summarisation of dedicated suggestion fo-
rums1. People often provide the context in such
posts, which gets repetitive over a large number of
posts. Suggestion mining methods can identify the
exact textual unit in the post where a suggestion is
conveyed.

Table 1 provides examples of suggestions found
in opinion mining datasets. In our previous work
(Negi and Buitelaar, 2015b), we showed that sug-
gestions do not always possess a particular senti-
ment polarity. Thus the detection of suggestions
in the text goes beyond the scope of sentiment po-
larity detection, while complements its use cases
at the same time.

In the recent past, suggestions have gained the
attention of the research community. However,
most of the related work so far performs a binary
classification of sentences into suggestions or non-
suggestions, where suggestions are defined as the
sentences which propose improvements in a re-
viewed entity (Brun and Hagege, 2013; Ramanand
et al., 2010; Dong et al., 2013). These studies an-
notated datasets accordingly and developed sys-
tems for the detection of only these type of sug-
gestions; and performed an in-domain evaluation
of the classifier models on these datasets.

We emphasise that in addition to the classi-
fication tasks performed earlier, there are a lot
more aspects associated with the problem, includ-
ing a well-formed and consistent problem defini-

1https://feedly.uservoice.com/forums/192636-
suggestions/category/64071-mobile

119



tion. We divide the study of suggestion mining
into three guiding aspects or research questions:
1) Definition of suggestions in the context of sug-
gestion mining, 2) Their automatic detection from
opinionated text, and 3) Their representation and
summarisation.

A comprehensive research on suggestion min-
ing demands the problem specific adaptation and
integration of common NLP tasks, like text classi-
fication, keyphrase extraction, sequence labelling,
text similarity etc. Last but not least, recent
progress in the adaptation of deep learning based
methods for NLP tasks opens up various possibil-
ities to employ them for suggestion mining.

2 Research Problem

A broad statement of our research problem would
be, mining expressions of suggestions from opin-
ionated text. There are several aspects of the prob-
lem which can lead to a number of research ques-
tions. We identify three broad research questions
which are the guiding map for our PhD research.

• Research Question 1 (RQ1): How do we define
suggestions in suggestion mining?

• Research Question 2 (RQ2): How do we detect
suggestions in a given text ?

• Research Question 3 (RQ3): How can sugges-
tions be represented and summarised ?

The following sections will give a more detailed
description of these aspects, including the prelim-
inary results, challenges, and future directions.

3 Research Methodology

In this section we address each of the research
questions, our findings so far, and the future di-
rections.

3.1 RQ1: Suggestion Definition
The first sense of suggestion as listed in the ox-
ford dictionary is, an idea or plan put forward
for consideration, and the listed synonyms are
proposal, proposition, recommendation, advice,
counsel, hint, tip, clue etc. This definition, how-
ever needs to be defined on a more fine grained
level, in order to perform manual and automatic
labelling of a text as an expression of suggestion.

There have been variations in the definition
of suggestions targeted by the related works,
which renders the system performances from

some of the works incomparable to the others.
We identify three parameters which can lead us
to a well-formed task definition of suggestions
for suggestion mining task: What is the unit of
a suggestion, who is the intended receiver, and
whether the suggestion is expressed explicitly or
not.

Unit: Currently, we consider sentence as a
unit of suggestion, which is in-line with related
works. However, it was observed that some
sentences tend to be very long, where suggestion
markers are present in only one of the constituent
clauses. For example: When we booked the room
the description on the website said it came with
a separate seating area, despite raising the issue
with reception we were basically told this was not
so , I guess someone needs to amend the web-
site. In this sentence, although the full sentence
provides context, the suggestion is identifiable
from the last clause. It is common to witness
such non-uniform choice of punctuation in online
content. Considering this, we intend to build
classification models which can identify the exact
clause/phrase where a suggestion is expressed,
despite of individual instances being sentences.

Receiver: Different applications of suggestion
mining may target different kinds of suggestions,
which can differ on the basis of intended receiver.
For example, in domains like online reviews, there
are two types of intended receivers, brand owners,
and fellow customers. Therefore, suggestions
need to be defined on the basis of the intended
receivers.

How is a suggestion expressed: The first
round of suggestion labelling performed by us
resulted in a very low inter-annotator agreement,
i.e. a kappa score of 0.4 - 0.5. It was observed that
given a layman definition of suggestions, humans
do not distinguish between explicit and implicit
forms of suggestions, since they can inherently
infer suggestions from their implicit forms.
Figure 1 illustrates the two forms. Specifically,
in the case of domains like reviews, annotators
mostly disagreed on whether the implicit ones
are suggestions or not. We define an explicit
suggestion as the text which directly proposes,
recommends, or advices an action or an entity;
whereas the implicit ones provide the information

120



Figure 1: Implicit and explicit forms of sugges-
tions

from which the suggested action or entity can be
inferred. In remainder of the paper, we refer to
explicit suggestions as suggestions.

We observe that certain linguistic properties
consistently mark suggestions across different
datasets (Table 1). One such phenomenon is im-
perative and subjunctive mood (Negi and Buite-
laar, 2015a; Negi and Buitelaar, 2015b). The
presence of these properties makes it more likely,
but does not guarantee a text to be a suggestion.
Another linguistic property is speech act (Searle,
1969). Speech act is a well studied area of com-
putational linguistics, and several typologies for
speech acts exist in literature, some of which con-
sider suggestions as a speech act (Zhang et al.,
2011).

3.2 RQ2: Suggestion Detection

The problem of suggestion detection in a big
dataset of opinions can be defined as a sentence
classification problem: Given a set S of sentences
{s1,s2,s3,...,sn}, predict a label li for each sen-
tence in S, where li ∈ {suggestion, non sugges-
tion}.

The task of suggestion detection rests on the hy-
pothesis that a large amount of opinionated text
about a given entity or topic is likely to contain
suggestions which could be useful to the stake-
holders for that entity or topic. This hypothesis
has been proven to be true when sentences from
reviews and tweets about commercial entities were
manually labeled (Table 1). Also, the survey pre-
sented by Asher et al. (2009) shows that although
in a low proportion, opinionated texts do contain
expressions of advice and recommendations.

The required datasets for suggestion based
sentence classification task are a set of sen-
tences which are labelled as suggestion and
non-suggestion, where the labeled suggestions
should be explicitly expressed.

Existing Datasets: Some datasets on sug-
gestions for product improvement are unavailable
due to their industrial ownership. To the best
of our knowledge, only the below mentioned
datasets are publicly available from the previous
studies:
1) Tweet dataset about Microsoft phones: com-
prises of labeled tweets which give suggestions
about product improvement (Dong et al., 2013).
Due to the short nature of tweets, suggestions are
labeled at the tweet level, rather than the sentence
level.
2) Travel advice dataset: comprises of sentences
from discussion threads labeled as advice (Wicak-
sono and Myaeng, 2013). We observe that the
statements of facts (implicit suggestions/advice)
are also tagged as advice in this dataset, for
example, The temperature may reach upto 40
degrees in summer. Therefore, we re-labeled
the dataset with the annotation guidelines for
explicit suggestions, which reduced the number
of positive instances from 2192 to 1314.
Table 2 lists the statistics of these datasets.

Introduced Datasets: In our previous work
(Negi and Buitelaar, 2015b), we prepared two
datasets from hotel and electronics reviews
(Table 2) where suggestions targeted to the
fellow customers are labeled. Similar to the
existing Microsoft tweets dataset, the number of
suggestions are very low in these datasets. As
stated previously, we also formulate annotation
guidelines for the explicit expression of sugges-
tions, which led to a kappa score of upto 0.86 as
the inter-annotator agreement. In another work
(Negi et al., 2016), we further identify possible
domains and collection methods, which are likely
to provide suggestion rich datasets for training
statistical classifiers.
1) Customer posts from a publicly accessible
suggestion forums for the products Feedly mobile
app2, and Windows App studio3. We crawled

2https://feedly.uservoice.com/forums/192636-
suggestions

3https://wpdev.uservoice.com/forums/110705-universal-
windows-platform

121



Source, En-
tity/Topic

Sentence Intended Re-
ceiver

Sentiment Linguistic Properties

Reviews, Electron-
ics

I would recommend doing the upgrade to be sure you
have the best chance at trouble free operation.

Customer Neutral Subjunctive, Imperative,
lexical clue: recommend

Reviews, Electron-
ics

My one recommendation to creative is to get some mar-
keting people to work on the names of these things

Brand owner Negative Imperative, lexical clue:
recommendation

Reviews, Hotels Be sure to specify a room at the back of the hotel. Customer Neutral Imperative
Tweets, Windows
Phone

Dear Microsoft, release a new zune with your wp7 launch
on the 11th. It would be smart

Brand owner Neutral Imperative, subjunctive

Discussion thread,
Travel

If you do book your own airfare, be sure you don’t have
problems if Insight has to cancel the tour or reschedule it

Thread partici-
pants

Neutral Conditional, imperative

Table 1: Examples of similar linguistic properties in suggestions from different domains, about different
entities and topics, and intended for different receivers

the suggestion for improvement posts for these
products, and labeled only a subset of them due
to the annotation costs. Although all the posts
are about suggestions, they also comprise of
explanatory and informative sentences around
the suggestion sentences. With the availability
of more annotation resources, this dataset can be
easily extended.
2) We also prepared a new tweet dataset, where
the tweets are first collected using the hashtags
suggestion, advice, recommendation, warning,
which appeared as top unigram features in our
SVM based classification experiments. This
sampling method increased the likelihood of the
presence of suggestion tweets as compared to the
Microsoft tweets dataset.
Table 2 details all the currently available datasets
including the old and the new ones.

Sentence Classification: Conventional text
classification approaches, including, rule based
classifiers, and SVM based classifiers have been
previously used for this task. We employ these
two approaches on all the available datasets as
baselines. In addition to the in-domain training
and evaluation of statistical classifiers, we also
perform a cross-domain training and evaluation.
The reason for performing a cross domain training
experiment is that the suggestions possess similar
linguistic properties irrespective of the domain
(Table 1). Since, it is expensive to prepare dedi-
cated training dataset for each domain or use case,
we aim for domain independent classification
models.

We performed a first of its kind study of the
employability of neural network architectures like
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM), and Convo-
lutional Neural Nets (CNN) for suggestion detec-
tion. The F-scores for positive class are shown
in Table 2. A neural network based approach
seems to be promising compared to the baseline

approaches, specifically in the case of domain in-
dependent training. Our intuition is that the ability
of word embeddings to capture semantic and syn-
tactic knowledge, as well as the ability of LSTM
to capture word dependencies are the contributing
factors to this.

There is a lot of scope for improvement in the
current results. One challenge is that the sen-
tences are often longer, whereas the suggestion
is present only as a phrase or clause. Therefore,
a future direction is to explore sequential classi-
fication approaches in this regard, where we can
tag sentences at the word level, and train the clas-
sifiers to predict binary labels corresponding to
whether a word is a part of suggestion or not.
For example, My 1 recommendation 1 is 1 to 1
wait 1 on 1 buying 1 one 1 from 1 this 1 com-
pany 1 as 0 they 0 will 0 surely 0 get 0 sent 0 a 0
message 0 of 0 many 0 returned 0 dvd 0 play-
ers 0 after 0 christmas 0. LSTM NNs have also
been proven to be a good choice for sequence la-
belling tasks (Huang et al., 2015).

3.3 Suggestion Representation and
Summarisation

In order to apply suggestion mining to real life
applications, a more structured representation of
suggestions might be required. After the extrac-
tion of suggestion sentences from large datasets,
there should be a way to cluster suggestions, link
them to relevant topics and entities, and sum-
marise them. One way of achieving this is to fur-
ther extract information from these sentences, as
shown in Table 3.

We start with the task of extracting the cen-
tral phrase from a suggestion, which either cor-
responds to a recommended entity or a suggested
action. As a first step in this direction, we experi-
mented with keyphrase extraction. Keyphrase ex-
traction has been mainly used for the detection of
topical information, and is therefore noun-based

122



Dataset Intended
receiver

No. of sugges-
tions

F1 score

Rules SVM LSTM CNN
In-domain Evaluation

Hotel Reviews Customers 448 / 7534 0.285 0.543 0.639 0.578
Electronics reviews Customers 324 / 3782 0.340 0.640 0.672 0.612
Travel advice Thread partici-

pants
1314 / 5183 0.342 0.566 0.617 0.586

Tweets (Microsoft) Brand owner 238 / 3000 0.325 0.616 0.550 0.441
New Tweets Public 1126 / 4099 0.266 0.632 0.645 0.661
Suggestion Forum Brand owners 1428 / 5724 0.605 0.712 0.727 0.713

Cross-domain Evaluation
Training Dataset Test Dataset No. of sugges-

tions (training)
F1 score

Rules SVM LSTM CNN
Sugg-Forum Hotel 1428 / 5724 0.285 0.211 0.452 0.363
Sugg-Forum Electronics 1428 / 5724 0.340 0.180 0.516 0.393
Sugg-Forum Travel advice 1428 / 5724 0.342 0.273 0.323 0.453
Sugg-Forum + Travel advice Hotel 2742 / 10907 0.285 0.306 0.345 0.393
Sugg-Forum + Travel advice Electronics 2742 / 10907 0.340 0.259 0.503 0.456
New Tweets Microsoft

Tweets
1126 / 4099 0.325 0.117 0.161 0.122

Table 2: Results of suggestion detection across datasets, using different methods

Full suggestion text Entity Beneficiary Keyphrase
If you do end up here, be sure to specify
a room at the back of the hotel

Room Customer Specify a room at the
back of the hotel

If you are here, I recommend a Trabi
safari

Trabi Safari Customer Trabi Safari

Chair upholstry seriously needs to be
cleaned

Chair/Chair
upholstry

Brand
owner

chair upholstry need to
be cleaned

Table 3: Aimed information extraction from suggestions

(Hasan and Ng, 2014). As Table 3 shows, we also
need to detect verb based keyphrases in the case
of advice or action based suggestions, however a
noun based keyphrase would work in the case of
suggestions which recommend an entity.

In the Table 4, we show the examples of
keyphrases extracted using TextRank (Mihalcea
and Tarau, 2004) algorithm on 3 different re-
view datasets, i.e. ebook reader, camera, and ho-
tel. TextRank and almost all of the keyphrase
extraction algorithms rely on the occurrence
and co-occurrence of candidate keyphrases (noun
phrases) in a given corpus. We ran TextRank
on the reviews and obtained a set of keyphrase.
Table 4 shows whether the central phrases con-
tained in a suggestion from the dataset were de-
tected as a keyphrase by the algorithm or not.
In the case of suggestion for improvement i.e.
sentence 1, TextRank is able to capture relevant
noun keyphrases. This can be attributed to a large
number of sentences in the corpus which mention
price, which is an important aspect of the reviewed
entity. However, in the case of suggestions which
are addressed to the other customers, reviewers of-
ten speak about aspects which do not appear fre-
quently in reviews. This can be observed in sen-
tence 2 and 3, where the keyphrase were not de-

tected.
We plan to include keyphrase annotations to

the sequence labels mentioned in section 3.2, in
order to identify the suggestions as well as the
keyphrases within those suggestions at the same
time.

After the representation of suggestions in the
proposed format, we plan to use the methods for
text similarity and relatedness in order to cluster
similar suggestions.

Suggestions Extracted
keyphrase

Desired
keyphrase

Look around and compare
price...the price of the Nook
varies widely between stores.

Price compare price

I suggest that you purchase ad-
ditional memory

none purchase addi-
tional memory

Would recommend the Kohi
Noor indian around the corner,
book in advance as it is small
and well used by locals.

none Kohi Noor In-
dian, book in
advance

Table 4: Sample results from keyphrase extraction
using the textRank algorithm

4 Related Work

To the best of our knowledge, all of the related
work so far focussed on research question 2, i.e.
detection of suggestions in a given text. In recent
years, only a limited number of experiments have

123



been performed in this regard, all of which frame
the task as a sentence classification task.

Suggestion Detection: Ramanand et al. (2010)
and Brun et al. (2013) employed manually crafted
linguistic rules to identify suggestions for product
improvement. Dong et al. (2013) performed clas-
sification of given tweets about Microsoft Win-
dows’ phone as suggestions for improvement or
not. Wicaksono et al. (Wicaksono and Myaeng,
2013) detected advice containing sentences from
travel related discussion threads. They employed
sequential classifiers, based on Hidden Markov
Model, and Conditional Random Fields. Most of
the datasets are not available, and annotations for
the available datasets are ambiguous with no de-
tailed definition of what is considered as a sugges-
tion or advice.
Text Classification using deep learning: Recent
advances in the application of Neural Networks
(NNs) to NLP tasks demonstrate their effective-
ness in some of the text classification problems,
like sentiment classification, pos tagging, and se-
mantic categorisation. Long Short Term Mem-
ory NNs (Graves, 2012), and Convolutional NNs
(Kim, 2014) are the two most popular neural net-
work architectures in this regard. An end to end
combination of CNN and LSTM (Zhou et al.,
2015) has also shown improved results for senti-
ment analysis.

5 Conclusion

In this work we presented a research plan on sug-
gestion mining. The problem in itself introduces
a novel information mining task. Several useful
datasets have already been released, with more to
come. The related work in this direction is very
limited, and has so far focussed on only one aspect
of the problem. Our proposal proposes research
contributions in three research aspects/questions,
and presents initial results and analysis.

Since suggestions tend to exhibit similar lin-
guistic structure, irrespective of topics and in-
tended receiver of the suggestions, there is a scope
of learning domain independent models for sug-
gestion detection. Therefore, we test the discussed
approaches both in a domain-independent setting
as well, in order to test the domain-independence
of models learnt in these approaches. Neural net-
works in general outperformed the results on ex-
isting test datasets, in both domain dependent and
independent training. In light of these findings,

building neural network based classification archi-
tectures for intra-domain feature learning can be
an interesting future direction for us.

The results also point towards the challenges
and complexity of the task of suggestion mining.
Building word level suggestion tagged datasets
seems to be a promising direction in this regard,
which can simultaneously address the tasks of sug-
gestion detection and as keyphrase extraction for
suggestion mining.

Our research findings and datasets can also
be employed to similar problems, like classifica-
tion of speech acts, summarisation, verb based
keyphrase extraction, and cross domain classifica-
tion model learning.

Acknowledgements

This work has been funded by the European
Unions Horizon 2020 programme under grant
agreement No 644632 MixedEmotions, and the
Science Foundation Ireland under Grant Number
SFI/12/RC/2289 (Insight Center).

References
[Asher et al.2009] Nicholas Asher, Farah Benamara,

and Yannick Mathieu. 2009. Appraisal of Opin-
ion Expressions in Discourse. Lingvistic Investiga-
tiones, 31.2:279–292.

[Brun and Hagege2013] C. Brun and C. Hagege. 2013.
Suggestion mining: Detecting suggestions for im-
provements in users comments. In Proceedings of
14th International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics.

[Dong et al.2013] Li Dong, Furu Wei, Yajuan Duan, Xi-
aohua Liu, Ming Zhou, and Ke Xu. 2013. The au-
tomated acquisition of suggestions from tweets. In
Marie desJardins and Michael L. Littman, editors,
AAAI. AAAI Press.

[Graves2012] Alex Graves. 2012. Supervised se-
quence labelling. In Supervised Sequence La-
belling with Recurrent Neural Networks, pages 5–
13. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

[Hasan and Ng2014] Kazi Saidul Hasan and Vincent
Ng. 2014. Automatic keyphrase extraction: A sur-
vey of the state of the art. In Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1262–1273, Baltimore, Maryland, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

[Huang et al.2015] Zhiheng Huang, Wei Xu, and Kai
Yu. 2015. Bidirectional LSTM-CRF models for se-
quence tagging. CoRR, abs/1508.01991.

124



[Kim2014] Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural
networks for sentence classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1408.5882.

[Mihalcea and Tarau2004] R. Mihalcea and P. Tarau.
2004. TextRank: Bringing order into texts. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP-04and the 2004 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, July.

[Negi and Buitelaar2015a] Sapna Negi and Paul Buite-
laar. 2015a. Curse or boon? presence of subjunctive
mood in opinionated text. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Computational Seman-
tics, pages 101–106, London, UK, April. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

[Negi and Buitelaar2015b] Sapna Negi and Paul Buite-
laar. 2015b. Towards the extraction of customer-
to-customer suggestions from reviews. In Proceed-
ings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 2159–2167,
Lisbon, Portugal, September. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

[Negi et al.2016] Sapna Negi, Kartik Asooja, Shubham
Mehrotra, and Paul Buitelaar. 2016. A distant su-
pervision approach to semantic role labeling. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Joint Conference on Lexi-
cal and Computational Semantics, Berlin, Germany,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

[Ramanand et al.2010] J Ramanand, Krishna Bhavsar,
and Niranjan Pedanekar. 2010. Wishful thinking -
finding suggestions and ’buy’ wishes from product
reviews. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analy-
sis and Generation of Emotion in Text, pages 54–61,
Los Angeles, CA, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

[Searle1969] John R. Searle. 1969. Speech Acts: An
Essay in the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, London.

[Wicaksono and Myaeng2013] Alfan Farizki Wicak-
sono and Sung-Hyon Myaeng. 2013. Automatic
extraction of advice-revealing sentences foradvice
mining from online forums. In K-CAP, pages 97–
104. ACM.

[Zhang et al.2011] Renxian Zhang, Dehong Gao, and
Wenjie Li. 2011. What are tweeters doing: Recog-
nizing speech acts in twitter. In Analyzing Microtext,
volume WS-11-05 of AAAI Workshops. AAAI.

[Zhou et al.2015] Chunting Zhou, Chonglin Sun,
Zhiyuan Liu, and Francis C. M. Lau. 2015. A
C-LSTM neural network for text classification.
CoRR, abs/1511.08630.

125


