



















































Finding Optimists and Pessimists on Twitter


Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 320–325,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Finding Optimists and Pessimists on Twitter

Xianzhi Ruan, Steven R. Wilson, and Rada Mihalcea
University of Michigan

Ann Arbor, MI
{rxianzhi, steverw, mihalcea}@umich.edu

Abstract

Optimism is linked to various personal-
ity factors as well as both psychological
and physical health, but how does it re-
late to the way a person tweets? We an-
alyze the online activity of a set of Twit-
ter users in order to determine how well
machine learning algorithms can detect a
person’s outlook on life by reading their
tweets. A sample of tweets from each user
is manually annotated in order to estab-
lish ground truth labels, and classifiers are
trained to distinguish between optimistic
and pessimistic users. Our results sug-
gest that the words in people’s tweets pro-
vide ample evidence to identify them as
optimists, pessimists, or somewhere in be-
tween. Additionally, several applications
of these trained models are explored.

1 Introduction

Optimists believe that future events are going to
work out for the best; pessimists expect the worst
(Carver et al., 2010). Research has shown that op-
timism is correlated with many positive life out-
comes including improvements in life expectancy
(Diener and Chan, 2011), physical health (Peter-
son and Bossio, 2001), and mental health (Achat et
al., 2000). Previously, it was found that optimism
and pessimism are differentiable but related: pes-
simism was principally associated with neuroti-
cism and negative affect while optimism was pri-
marily associated with extraversion and positive
affect (Marshall et al., 1992). Another study found
that optimism was correlated with personality fac-
tors, including extraversion, emotional stability,
conscientiousness, and agreeableness (Sharpe et
al., 2011).

It is clear that optimism relates to a wide vari-
ety of psychological and social variables, but how
might optimism influence the way a person uti-
lizes a social media platform? What features dis-
tinguish optimistic users from pessimistic ones?
In order to answer these questions, we must first
establish a means by which we can measure peo-
ple’s levels of optimism and pessimism. The Life
Orientation Test (LOT) is commonly used to as-
sess the degree to which a person is an optimist
(Scheier and Carver, 1985). This short survey
asks respondents to evaluate their own agreement
with a number of short statements using a five-
point scale. However, distributing such a sur-
vey over a large population requires both time
and a form of incentive. Recent work has shown
that open-ended text samples can be computation-
ally analyzed to provide a more comprehensive
view of a person’s personal values than can be
achieved using a more constrained, forced choice
survey (Boyd et al., 2015). Furthermore, we know
that language use is an independent and meaning-
ful way of exploring personality (Pennebaker and
King, 1999), and personality is correlated with op-
timism (Sharpe et al., 2011). Given a large enough
text corpus, it may therefore be possible to build
computational models that can automatically rec-
ognize optimism itself by looking at the words
people use. The vast amount of publicly available
social media data provides an excellent source of
data that can be used to build models of users’ psy-
chological traits, as was done in previous studies
that trained machines to predict aspects of person-
ality from tweets (Golbeck et al., 2011; Sumner et
al., 2012).

A tool that could identify optimists and pes-
simists by analyzing their text would aid in large
scale studies of optimism among social media or
other web users by providing a large number of
subjects to analyze. This would open the door to

320



massive studies of the relationships between opti-
mism, pessimism, and a range of online behaviors.
On the other hand, an optimism classification sys-
tem could help improve the social platform itself.
For example, by learning more about the psycho-
logical traits of its users, Twitter could improve its
“who to follow” suggestions so that they reflect
people who have a similar outlook on life.

2 Data and Method

As a data source, we chose Twitter because it
is widely used and is ripe with short pieces of
text (i.e., tweets) containing people’s everyday
thoughts, observations, and conversations. We
used Twitter’s basic search function to look for
users whose tweets include words and phrases that
indicate that they might identify as optimistic or
pessimistic. Looking for phrases such as “I am op-
timistic” within a user’s tweets to find potentially
optimistic users, we identified 714 candidates.
Finding pessimistic Twitter users proved more dif-
ficult because users would not usually tweet some-
thing negative such as “I am pessimistic” and
present themselves in an unflattering way. We in-
stead searched for keywords such as “hate,” “un-
fair,” and “disgust,” which may indicate a pes-
simistic nature. This led to 640 potential pes-
simists. For each user, we crawled their 2,000
most recent tweets (or all their tweets if the user
had less than 2,000). In order to verify that the ac-
counts identified were owned mostly by individ-
ual users (as opposed to organizations), we man-
ually inspected a random sample of 50 accounts
and found only one that appeared to be related to
an organization.

Using the collected data set, which we expected
would be more representative of optimistic or pes-
simistic nature than the norm based on the con-
tent of their tweets, we selected a fraction of the
users to create a ground truth set for our task. We
used Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk)1 to ob-
tain human annotatations for a subset of our cor-
pus. We randomly selected 500 users who were
retrieved by the optimistic queries and 500 users
found when searching for pessimists. For each
user, we randomly selected 15 tweets for a total of
15,000 tweets to be labeled on a scale of −3 (very
pessimistic) to 3 (very optimistic) by five indepen-
dent annotators. Before labeling began, we pro-
vided clear definitions of optimism and pessimism

1http://www.mturk.com

to the annotators.
In order to pick the tweets from each user that

had a stronger emotional signal, we took advan-
tage of the “positive emotions” and “negative emo-
tions” word categories included in the Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count Tool (Pennebaker et al.,
2001).2 If any of the original 15 tweets did not
contain at least one word from either category, the
tweet was removed and a new tweet was chosen at
random to replace it. This process was repeated
until we had a set of 15 tweets per user with-
out skewing that user’s true distribution of positive
and negative tweets.

During the MTurk annotation, to identify work-
ers who were quickly selecting options without
even reading the tweets, we added a “check” ques-
tion that asked the workers to choose a specific
value for that question. All the workers who did
not correctly answer this “check” question were
removed from the annotation. When a worker’s
annotations had to be thrown out, the tweets were
put back onto MTurk for reannotation. Addition-
ally, we compared the scores of each annotator
with the average score and removed workers who
deviated significantly from the others. The final
agreement (Krippendorf’s alpha) between the five
annotators was measured at 0.731, assuming an in-
terval scale.

For each individual tweet, we assigned a la-
bel of “optimistic,” “pessimistic,” or “neutral”.
Any tweet with an average score greater than one
(slightly optimistic or higher in the annotation
task) was considered an “optimistic” tweet, and
those with an average score less than one (slightly
pessimistic or lower) were given the “pessimistic”
class label. The tweets with average MTurk anno-
tation scores between -1 and 1 were considered to
be “neutral.”

We also assigned a class label to each user. To
accomplish this, we calculated the average of the
assigned scores, sorted the Twitter users by their
level of optimism, and considered the top 25% of
users as optimists, the bottom 25% as pessimists,
and the remaining ones as neutral.

Before moving on, we decided to investigate the
online behaviors and attributes of the optimistic
and pessimistic users in our new data set. A sum-
mary of some of the differences between the two
groups is shown in Table 1. Interestingly the opti-
mists have more followers and are following more

2The 2007 version of LIWC was used

321



Optimistic Pessimistic
mean followers 6238 1840
mean following 1898 1156
mean tweets 12156 28190
median followers 972 572
median following 718 443
median tweets 5687 17451
std. dev of tweets 17952 37851
min number of tweets 108 28
max number of tweets 99344 231220
tweet rate 10.24 19.184
favorite count 4314.34 8761.2
listed count 112.62 10.23

Table 1: Statistics for the most extreme 100 opti-
mistic & 100 pessimistic users.

other users than the more pessimistic users. On
the other hand, the pessimists tend to tweet much
more frequently, with a mean and median num-
ber of tweets both more than twice as large as the
optimist group. This is not just a factor of the
pessimists having been around longer to build up
a history of tweets- we also compute the “tweet
rate” for each user by dividing their total number
of tweets by the total number of days since the ac-
tivation of their Twitter account. Looking at this
variable, we see that the average number of tweets
per day is much higher for the pessimists. Opti-
mists are also included in more lists, while pes-
simists choose to label things as a “favorite” more
often.

In order to build computational models to dif-
ferentiate between the optimistic and pessimistic
users, we use five different methods from the
scikit-learn python library3: Naive Bayes (NB),
Nearest Neighbor (NN), Decision Tree (DT), Ran-
dom Forest Classifier (RFC), Gradient Boosting
Classifier (GBC) and Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD). The default parameters are used for each.
The preprocessing method was the same for all
different classifiers: the text was preprocessed by
removing mentions (@), web links, and the phrase
RT. We also used the Emoji unicode tables to re-
place all Emoji unicodes to their corresponding
meanings (e.g., “<smiling-face>”). We tried per-
forming classification both with and without re-
moving stopwords to see what the effect was. For
all different classifiers, we tested with different
settings: with and without stopwords; and adding
a user’s profile information as additional features
or not.

3http://scikit-learn.org/stable/

NN DT RFC GBC SGD NB

50

60

70

80

m
od

el
ac

cu
ra

cy
(%

)

two class three class

Figure 1: Tweet level classification accuracy for
the two-way and three-way classification prob-
lems.

3 Results

We first evaluate the ability of our classifiers
to distinguish between optimistic and pessimistic
tweets (two-way classification) or among opti-
mistic, pessimistic, and neutral tweets (three-
way classification). We randomly selected 1,000
tweets from each class. Figure 1 shows the ten-
fold cross validation results obtained using the six
classifiers. During each classification, we made
sure that tweets from the same user were not
shared between the training and testing folds. In
both cases, the best setting was using the Naive
Bayes classifier and not including profile informa-
tion as features. Stopword removal had no notice-
able effect. Note that the majority baseline is a
score of 50% in the two-class case, while it is 33%
in the three-class case.

For additional insight, Table 2 shows some of
the top features for the optimistic and pessimistic
class, sorted by the probability of the feature given
the class. We can see that, as one might ex-
pect, the useful words for detecting optimists are
generally very positive, while the pessimistic fea-
tures are negative and sprinkled with profanity.
Since we formulated the problem as a three-way
classification, it is reasonable that some words
may have high scores for both optimistic and pes-
simistic classes. These words distinguish opti-
mism/pessimism from the neutral class.

We perform our next evaluation at the user level,
which means that we consider all tweets from

322



Optimism Pessimism
love, so, that, be fuck, that, not, so

have, good, am, this like, am, do, hate
on, your, not, day have, be, this, just
like, just, do, will up, life, on, shit
can, get, what, at no, people, can, what

great, make, up, much feel, your, about, I’m
best, we, if, go go, know, get, even

was, from, thing, out want, at, was, off
look, thank, know,he out, kill, if, done

Table 2: Most discriminating features collected
by the Naive Bayes classifier for the three-class
tweet-level prediction setting.

100 150 200 250 300 350 400

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

number of users

m
od

el
ac

cu
ra

cy
(%

)

NB NN DT
RFC GBC SGD

Figure 2: Accuracy on the user-level prediction
task for different data sizes.

a user as a single document. The classification
is performed using a randomly selected set of
100, 200, 300, and 400 users from the annotated
set (each set adds 100 new users to the previous
group). In each case, the 25% users with high-
est annotation score are considered the optimistic
group, 25% users with lowest annotation score as
pessimist group, and the other 50% of users is the
neutral group. The results of the ten-fold cross val-
idation are shown in Figure 2. In this setting, the
Gradient Boosting Classifier usually outperforms
the others and achieves an accuracy of 73.33% on
the 400 user data set.

We also sought to discover how accurate the
classifiers would be if the objective was simply
to identify the top N optimists or pessimists. For
example, if we wanted to find the 10 users out
of a group with the greatest number of optimistic
tweets, how accurately could this be done? To

0 25 50 75

60

70

80

90

100

Top N users predicted by NB

C
um

ul
at

iv
e

ac
cu

ra
cy

(%
)

Pessimistic
Optimistic

Figure 3: Cumulative classification accuracy on
the top N users sorted by Naive Bayes predicted
probabilities

City Neutral Users Optimists Pessimists
Chicago 20.65% 39.27% 40.08%
Los Angeles 14.55% 31.87% 53.58%
New York 20.74% 40.63% 38.63%

Table 3: Predicted optimism & pessimism in three
major cities

carry out this analysis, we sorted the users by the
probabilities that they belonged to either the op-
timistic class or the pessimistic class as predicted
by a Naive Bayes classifier (Figure 3). Then, we
compute the accuracy for the top N optimists and
pessimists. As we can see, it is possible to predict
the most pessimistic 14 users with perfect accu-
racy. On the other hand, some of the most likely
optimistic users actually belonged to another class
based on the ground truth labels. With a larger
number of users to classify, it becomes easier to
correctly label optimists than pessimists.

4 Applications

What kinds of things can we learn with a tool for
classifying optimists and pessimists? First, we
look at groups of users from three major cities in
the United States: Chicago, Los Angeles, and New
York. We found users who listed their location as
one of these three cities (494 users from Chicago,
433 from Los Angeles, 480 from New York), then
collected 2,000 tweets from each user. Using our
best models from the user-level experiments, we
obtain predictions for the optimism/pessimism of
the users. The breakdown of predicted optimists,
pessimists, and neutral users is listed in Table 3.

323



Chicago and New York are fairly balanced with
roughly 40% of people falling into each category
(leaving 20% as neutral). However, pessimists
were predicted much more often than optimists in
Los Angeles.

For a second sample application, we went
to the official twitter accounts of six presiden-
tial candidates: Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump,
Marco Rubio, Martin O’Malley, Bernie Sanders
and Ben Carson. We randomly picked approxi-
mately 500 followers of each of the candidates and
predicted the optimism/pessimism of them (Table
4).4 While these scores are only estimates, we
see that O’Malley’s followers tend to be the users
who posted a greater number of optimistic tweets,
while the users who tweeted lots of pessimistic
tweets are those keeping up-to-date with Rubio’s
campaign. Overall, we see that most of the fol-
lowers of these candidates are optimistic.

Candidate Neutral Users Optimists Pessimists
Clinton 31.52% 49.22% 19.26%
Trump 36.20% 39.46% 24.32%
Rubio 30.00% 49.41% 20.59%
O’Malley 29.22% 64.51% 6.26%
Sanders 44.62% 44.42% 10.96%
Carson 31.54% 49.90% 18.56%

Table 4: Predicted optimism & pessimism of those
following some of the candidates for the 2016
Presidential election.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

We have shown that we can use Twitter to collect
a data set5 of optimistic and pessimistic users, and
predict the most (top 25%) optimistic/pessimistic
users with greater than 70% accuracy. The opti-
mistic users on Twitter tended to have more so-
cial connections, but tweet less often than the pes-
simists. In the future, we hope to explore the social
effects of optimism, such as the degree to which
optimistic users follow one another and whether or
not optimistic comments receive more “favorites”
and retweets. Finally, we would like to compare
the optimism and pessimism scores that our model
predicts with those received when taking the LOT
in order to compare the text-based analysis with a
widely used tool for measuring optimism.

4data collected late December, 2015
5The data set introduced in this paper is avail-

able at http://lit.eecs.umich.edu/research/
downloads.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Seong Ju Park, Tian Bao,
and Yihan Li for their assistance in the initial
project that led to this work. This material is
based in part upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation award #1344257 and
by grant #48503 from the John Templeton Foun-
dation. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation or
the John Templeton Foundation.

References
Helen Achat, Ichiro Kawachi, Avron Spiro, Deborah A

DeMolles, and David Sparrow. 2000. Optimism
and depression as predictors of physical and mental
health functioning: the normative aging study. An-
nals of Behavioral Medicine, 22(2):127–130.

Ryan L Boyd, Steven R Wilson, James W Pennebaker,
Michal Kosinski, David J Stillwell, and Rada Mi-
halcea. 2015. Values in words: Using language to
evaluate and understand personal values. In Ninth
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media.

Charles S Carver, Michael F Scheier, and Suzanne C
Segerstrom. 2010. Optimism. Clinical psychology
review, 30(7):879–889.

Ed Diener and Micaela Y Chan. 2011. Happy peo-
ple live longer: Subjective well-being contributes to
health and longevity. Applied Psychology: Health
and Well-Being, 3(1):1–43.

Jennifer Golbeck, Cristina Robles, Michon Edmond-
son, and Karen Turner. 2011. Predicting per-
sonality from twitter. In Privacy, Security, Risk
and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011 IEEE Third Iner-
national Conference on Social Computing (Social-
Com), 2011 IEEE Third International Conference
on, pages 149–156. IEEE.

Grant N Marshall, Camille B Wortman, Jeffrey W
Kusulas, Linda K Hervig, and Ross R Vickers Jr.
1992. Distinguishing optimism from pessimism:
Relations to fundamental dimensions of mood and
personality. Journal of personality and social psy-
chology, 62(6):1067.

James W Pennebaker and Laura A King. 1999. Lin-
guistic styles: language use as an individual differ-
ence. Journal of personality and social psychology,
77(6):1296.

James W Pennebaker, Martha E Francis, and Roger J
Booth. 2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count:
Liwc 2001. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates, 71:2001.

324



Christopher Peterson and Lisa M. Bossio. 2001. Opti-
mism and physical well-being. In Optimism & pes-
simism: Implications for theory, research, and prac-
tice., pages 127–145. American Psychological As-
sociation (APA).

Michael F Scheier and Charles S Carver. 1985. Opti-
mism, coping, and health: assessment and implica-
tions of generalized outcome expectancies. Health
psychology, 4(3):219.

J Patrick Sharpe, Nicholas R Martin, and Kelly A Roth.
2011. Optimism and the big five factors of personal-
ity: Beyond neuroticism and extraversion. Person-
ality and Individual Differences, 51(8):946–951.

Chris Sumner, Alison Byers, Rachel Boochever, and
Gregory J Park. 2012. Predicting dark triad person-
ality traits from twitter usage and a linguistic anal-
ysis of tweets. In Machine Learning and Applica-
tions (ICMLA), 2012 11th International Conference
on, volume 2, pages 386–393. IEEE.

325


