



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 422–426
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2067

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 422–426
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2067

“Liar, Liar Pants on Fire”:
A New Benchmark Dataset for Fake News Detection

William Yang Wang
Department of Computer Science

University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
william@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract

Automatic fake news detection is a chal-
lenging problem in deception detection,
and it has tremendous real-world politi-
cal and social impacts. However, statis-
tical approaches to combating fake news
has been dramatically limited by the lack
of labeled benchmark datasets. In this
paper, we present LIAR: a new, publicly
available dataset for fake news detection.
We collected a decade-long, 12.8K man-
ually labeled short statements in various
contexts from POLITIFACT.COM, which
provides detailed analysis report and links
to source documents for each case. This
dataset can be used for fact-checking re-
search as well. Notably, this new dataset
is an order of magnitude larger than pre-
viously largest public fake news datasets
of similar type. Empirically, we investi-
gate automatic fake news detection based
on surface-level linguistic patterns. We
have designed a novel, hybrid convolu-
tional neural network to integrate meta-
data with text. We show that this hybrid
approach can improve a text-only deep
learning model.

1 Introduction

In this past election cycle for the 45th President
of the United States, the world has witnessed a
growing epidemic of fake news. The plague of
fake news not only poses serious threats to the
integrity of journalism, but has also created tur-
moils in the political world. The worst real-world
impact is that fake news seems to create real-life
fears: last year, a man carried an AR-15 rifle and
walked in a Washington DC Pizzeria, because he
recently read online that “this pizzeria was harbor-

ing young children as sex slaves as part of a child-
abuse ring led by Hillary Clinton”1. The man was
later arrested by police, and he was charged for
firing an assault rifle in the restaurant (Kang and
Goldman, 2016).

The broadly-related problem of deception de-
tection (Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009) is not
new to the natural language processing commu-
nity. A relatively early study by Ott et al. (2011)
focuses on detecting deceptive review opinions
in sentiment analysis, using a crowdsourcing ap-
proach to create training data for the positive class,
and then combine with truthful opinions from
TripAdvisor. Recent studies have also proposed
stylometric (Feng et al., 2012), semi-supervised
learning (Hai et al., 2016), and linguistic ap-
proaches (Pérez-Rosas and Mihalcea, 2015) to de-
tect deceptive text on crowdsourced datasets. Even
though crowdsourcing is an important approach to
create labeled training data, there is a mismatch
between training and testing. When testing on
real-world review datasets, the results could be
suboptimal since the positive training data was
created in a completely different, simulated plat-
form.

The problem of fake news detection is more
challenging than detecting deceptive reviews,
since the political language on TV interviews,
posts on Facebook and Twitters are mostly short
statements. However, the lack of manually la-
beled fake news dataset is still a bottleneck
for advancing computational-intensive, broad-
coverage models in this direction. Vlachos and
Riedel (2014) are the first to release a public fake
news detection and fact-checking dataset, but it
only includes 221 statements, which does not per-
mit machine learning based assessments.

To address these issues, we introduce the LIAR
1http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/business/media/comet-

ping-pong-pizza-shooting-fake-news-consequences.html

422

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2067
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2067


dataset, which includes 12,836 short statements
labeled for truthfulness, subject, context/venue,
speaker, state, party, and prior history. With such
volume and a time span of a decade, LIAR is an
order of magnitude larger than the currently avail-
able resources (Vlachos and Riedel, 2014; Ferreira
and Vlachos, 2016) of similiar type. Additionally,
in contrast to crowdsourced datasets, the instances
in LIAR are collected in a grounded, more natural
context, such as political debate, TV ads, Face-
book posts, tweets, interview, news release, etc. In
each case, the labeler provides a lengthy analysis
report to ground each judgment, and the links to
all supporting documents are also provided.

Empirically, we have evaluated several pop-
ular learning based methods on this dataset.
The baselines include logistic regression, support
vector machines, long short-term memory net-
works (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997), and a
convolutional neural network model (Kim, 2014).
We further introduce a neural network architecture
to integrate text and meta-data. Our experiment
suggests that this approach improves the perfor-
mance of a strong text-only convolutional neural
networks baseline.

2 LIAR: a New Benchmark Dataset

The major resources for deceptive detection of re-
views are crowdsourced datasets (Ott et al., 2011;
Pérez-Rosas and Mihalcea, 2015). They are very
useful datasets to study deception detection, but
the positive training data are collected from a
simulated environment. More importantly, these
datasets are not suitable for fake statements detec-
tion, since the fake news on TVs and social media
are much shorter than customer reviews.

Vlachos and Riedel (2014) are the first to
construct fake news and fact-checking datasets.
They obtained 221 statements from CHANNEL 42

and POLITIFACT.COM3, a Pulitzer Prize-winning
website. In particular, PolitiFact covers a wide-
range of political topics, and they provide detailed
judgments with fine-grained labels. Recently, Fer-
reira and Vlachos (2016) have released the Emer-
gent dataset, which includes 300 labeled rumors
from PolitiFact. However, with less than a thou-
sand samples, it is impractical to use these datasets
as benchmarks for developing and evaluating ma-
chine learning algorithms for fake news detection.

2http://blogs.channel4.com/factcheck/
3http://www.politifact.com/

Statement: “The last quarter, it was just
announced, our gross domestic product
was below zero. Who ever heard of this?
Its never below zero.”
Speaker: Donald Trump
Context: presidential announcement
speech
Label: Pants on Fire
Justification: According to Bureau of
Economic Analysis and National Bu-
reau of Economic Research, the growth
in the gross domestic product has been
below zero 42 times over 68 years. Thats
a lot more than “never.” We rate his
claim Pants on Fire!

Statement: “Newly Elected Republican
Senators Sign Pledge to Eliminate Food
Stamp Program in 2015.”
Speaker: Facebook posts
Context: social media posting
Label: Pants on Fire
Justification: More than 115,000 so-
cial media users passed along a story
headlined, “Newly Elected Republican
Senators Sign Pledge to Eliminate Food
Stamp Program in 2015.” But they failed
to do due diligence and were snook-
ered, since the story came from a pub-
lication that bills itself (quietly) as a
“satirical, parody website.” We rate the
claim Pants on Fire.

Statement: “Under the health care law,
everybody will have lower rates, better
quality care and better access.”
Speaker: Nancy Pelosi
Context: on ’Meet the Press’
Label: False
Justification: Even the study that
Pelosi’s staff cited as the source of that
statement suggested that some people
would pay more for health insurance.
Analysis at the state level found the
same thing. The general understanding
of the word “everybody” is every per-
son. The predictions dont back that up.
We rule this statement False.

Figure 1: Some random excerpts from the LIAR
dataset.

423



Dataset Statistics
Training set size 10,269
Validation set size 1,284
Testing set size 1,283
Avg. statement length (tokens) 17.9
Top-3 Speaker Affiliations
Democrats 4,150
Republicans 5,687
None (e.g., FB posts) 2,185

Table 1: The LIAR dataset statistics.

Therefore, it is of crucial significance to introduce
a larger dataset to facilitate the development of
computational approaches to fake news detection
and automatic fact-checking.

We show some random snippets from our
dataset in Figure 1. The LIAR dataset4 in-
cludes 12.8K human labeled short statements from
POLITIFACT.COM’s API5, and each statement is
evaluated by a POLITIFACT.COM editor for its
truthfulness. After initial analysis, we found du-
plicate labels, and merged the full-flop, half-flip,
no-flip labels into false, half-true, true labels re-
spectively. We consider six fine-grained labels for
the truthfulness ratings: pants-fire, false, barely-
true, half-true, mostly-true, and true. The distri-
bution of labels in the LIAR dataset is relatively
well-balanced: except for 1,050 pants-fire cases,
the instances for all other labels range from 2,063
to 2,638. We randomly sampled 200 instances to
examine the accompanied lengthy analysis reports
and rulings. Not that fact-checking is not a classic
labeling task in NLP. The verdict requires exten-
sive training in journalism for finding relevant evi-
dence. Therefore, for second-stage verifications,
we went through a randomly sampled subset of
the analysis reports to check if we agreed with the
reporters’ analysis. The agreement rate measured
by Cohens kappa was 0.82. We show the corpus
statistics in Table 1. The statement dates are pri-
marily from 2007-2016.

The speakers in the LIAR dataset include a mix
of democrats and republicans, as well as a sig-
nificant amount of posts from online social me-
dia. We include a rich set of meta-data for each
speaker—in addition to party affiliations, current

4https://www.cs.ucsb.edu/˜william/
data/liar_dataset.zip

5http://static.politifact.com/api/
v2apidoc.html

Figure 2: The proposed hybrid Convolutional
Neural Networks framework for integrating text
and meta-data.

job, home state, and credit history are also pro-
vided. In particular, the credit history includes the
historical counts of inaccurate statements for each
speaker. For example, Mitt Romney has a credit
history vector h = {19, 32, 34, 58, 33}, which cor-
responds to his counts of “pants on fire”, “false”,
“barely true”, “half true”, “mostly true” for histor-
ical statements. Since this vector also includes the
count for the current statement, it is important to
subtract the current label from the credit history
when using this meta data vector in prediction ex-
periments.

These statements are sampled from various
of contexts/venues, and the top categories in-
clude news releases, TV/radio interviews, cam-
paign speeches, TV ads, tweets, debates, Face-
book posts, etc. To ensure a broad coverage of
the topics, there is also a diverse set of subjects
discussed by the speakers. The top-10 most dis-
cussed subjects in the dataset are economy, health-
care, taxes, federal-budget, education, jobs, state-
budget, candidates-biography, elections, and im-
migration.

3 Automatic Fake News Detection

One of the most obvious applications of our
dataset is to facilitate the development of machine
learning models for automatic fake news detec-
tion. In this task, we frame this as a 6-way multi-
class text classification problem. And the research
questions are:

• Based on surface-level linguistic realizations
only, how well can machine learning algo-
rithms classify a short statement into a fine-
grained category of fakeness?

• Can we design a deep neural network archi-
tecture to integrate speaker related meta-data

424



with text to enhance the performance of fake
news detection?

Since convolutional neural networks architec-
tures (CNNs) (Collobert et al., 2011; Kim, 2014;
Zhang et al., 2015) have obtained the state-of-the-
art results on many text classification datasets, we
build our neural networks model based on a re-
cently proposed CNN model (Kim, 2014). Fig-
ure 2 shows the overview of our hybrid convo-
lutional neural network for integrating text and
meta-data.

We randomly initialize a matrix of embedding
vectors to encode the metadata embeddings. We
use a convolutional layer to capture the depen-
dency between the meta-data vector(s). Then,
a standard max-pooling operation is performed
on the latent space, followed by a bi-directional
LSTM layer. We then concatenate the max-pooled
text representations with the meta-data representa-
tion from the bi-directional LSTM, and feed them
to fully connected layer with a softmax activation
function to generate the final prediction.

4 LIAR: Benchmark Evaluation

In this section, we first describe the experimental
setup, and the baselines. Then, we present the em-
pirical results and compare various models.

4.1 Experimental Settings

We used five baselines: a majority baseline, a reg-
ularized logistic regression classifier (LR), a sup-
port vector machine classifier (SVM) (Crammer
and Singer, 2001), a bi-directional long short-term
memory networks model (Bi-LSTMs) (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997; Graves and Schmidhu-
ber, 2005), and a convolutional neural network
model (CNNs) (Kim, 2014). For LR and SVM,
we used the LIBSHORTTEXT toolkit6, which was
shown to provide very strong performances on
short text classification problems (Wang and Yang,
2015). For Bi-LSTMs and CNNs, we used Ten-
sorFlow for the implementation. We used pre-
trained 300-dimensional word2vec embeddings
from Google News (Mikolov et al., 2013) to
warm-start the text embeddings. We strictly tuned
all the hyperparameters on the validation dataset.
The best filter sizes for the CNN model was
(2,3,4). In all cases, each size has 128 filters. The
dropout keep probabilities was optimized to 0.8,

6https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/˜cjlin/libshorttext/

Models Valid. Test
Majority 0.204 0.208
SVMs 0.258 0.255
Logistic Regress0ion 0.257 0.247
Bi-LSTMs 0.223 0.233
CNNs 0.260 0.270
Hybrid CNNs
Text + Subject 0.263 0.235
Text + Speaker 0.277 0.248
Text + Job 0.270 0.258
Text + State 0.246 0.256
Text + Party 0.259 0.248
Text + Context 0.251 0.243
Text + History 0.246 0.241
Text + All 0.247 0.274

Table 2: The evaluation results on the LIAR
dataset. The top section: text-only models. The
bottom: text + meta-data hybrid models.

while no L2 penalty was imposed. The batch size
for stochastic gradient descent optimization was
set to 64, and the learning process involves 10
passes over the training data for text model. For
the hybrid model, we use 3 and 8 as filter sizes,
and the number of filters was set to 10. We con-
sidered 0.5 and 0.8 as dropout probabilities. The
hybrid model requires 5 training epochs.

We used grid search to tune the hyperparame-
ters for LR and SVM models. We chose accuracy
as the evaluation metric, since we found that the
accuracy results from various models were equiv-
alent to f-measures on this balanced dataset.

4.2 Results

We outline our empirical results in Table 2. First,
we compare various models using text features
only. We see that the majority baseline on this
dataset gives about 0.204 and 0.208 accuracy on
the validation and test sets respectively. Standard
text classifier such as SVMs and LR models ob-
tained significant improvements. Due to overfit-
ting, the Bi-LSTMs did not perform well. The
CNNs outperformed all models, resulting in an ac-
curacy of 0.270 on the heldout test set. We com-
pare the predictions from the CNN model with
SVMs via a two-tailed paired t-test, and CNN was
significantly better (p < .0001). When consider-
ing all meta-data and text, the model achieved the
best result on the test data.

425



5 Conclusion

We introduced LIAR, a new dataset for automatic
fake news detection. Compared to prior datasets,
LIAR is an order of a magnitude larger, which en-
ables the development of statistical and computa-
tional approaches to fake news detection. LIAR’s
authentic, real-world short statements from vari-
ous contexts with diverse speakers also make the
research on developing broad-coverage fake news
detector possible. We show that when combin-
ing meta-data with text, significant improvements
can be achieved for fine-grained fake news detec-
tion. Given the detailed analysis report and links to
source documents in this dataset, it is also possible
to explore the task of automatic fact-checking over
knowledge base in the future. Our corpus can also
be used for stance classification, argument min-
ing, topic modeling, rumor detection, and political
NLP research.

References
Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, Michael

Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Pavel Kuksa.
2011. Natural language processing (almost) from
scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research
12(Aug):2493–2537.

Koby Crammer and Yoram Singer. 2001. On the algo-
rithmic implementation of multiclass kernel-based
vector machines. Journal of machine learning re-
search 2(Dec):265–292.

Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. 2012.
Syntactic stylometry for deception detection. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Short
Papers-Volume 2. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 171–175.

William Ferreira and Andreas Vlachos. 2016. Emer-
gent: a novel data-set for stance classification. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
ACL.

Alex Graves and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2005. Frame-
wise phoneme classification with bidirectional lstm
and other neural network architectures. Neural Net-
works 18(5):602–610.

Zhen Hai, Peilin Zhao, Peng Cheng, Peng Yang, Xiao-
Li Li, Guangxia Li, and Ant Financial. 2016. De-
ceptive review spam detection via exploiting task re-
latedness and unlabeled data. In EMNLP.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural computation
9(8):1735–1780.

Cecilia Kang and Adam Goldman. 2016. In washing-
ton pizzeria attack, fake news brought real guns. In
the New York Times.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classification. In Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP).

Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava. 2009. The lie
detector: Explorations in the automatic recognition
of deceptive language. In Proceedings of the ACL-
IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jef-
frey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781 .

Myle Ott, Yejin Choi, Claire Cardie, and Jeffrey T
Hancock. 2011. Finding deceptive opinion spam
by any stretch of the imagination. In Proceed-
ings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies-Volume 1. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 309–319.

Verónica Pérez-Rosas and Rada Mihalcea. 2015. Ex-
periments in open domain deception detection. In
EMNLP. pages 1120–1125.

Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel. 2014. Fact
checking: Task definition and dataset construction.
Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Lan-
guage Technology and Computational Social Sci-
ence .

William Yang Wang and Diyi Yang. 2015. That’s
so annoying!!!: A lexical and frame-semantic em-
bedding based data augmentation approach to au-
tomatic categorization of annoying behaviors using
#petpeeve tweets. In Proceedings of the 2015 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP 2015). ACL, Lisbon, Portugal.

Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015.
Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-
sification. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems. pages 649–657.

426


	"Liar, Liar Pants on Fire": A New Benchmark Dataset for Fake News Detection

