



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 974–984
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1090

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 974–984
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1090

Joint Modeling of Content and Discourse Relations in Dialogues

Kechen Qin1 Lu Wang1 Joseph Kim2
1College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University

2Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

1qin.ke@husky.neu.edu, luwang@ccs.neu.edu
2joseph kim@csail.mit.edu

Abstract

We present a joint modeling approach to iden-
tify salient discussion points in spoken meet-
ings as well as to label the discourse rela-
tions between speaker turns. A variation of
our model is also discussed when discourse
relations are treated as latent variables. Ex-
perimental results on two popular meeting cor-
pora show that our joint model can outperform
state-of-the-art approaches for both phrase-
based content selection and discourse rela-
tion prediction tasks. We also evaluate our
model on predicting the consistency among
team members’ understanding of their group
decisions. Classifiers trained with features
constructed from our model achieve signif-
icant better predictive performance than the
state-of-the-art.

1 Introduction

Goal-oriented dialogues, such as meetings, nego-
tiations, or customer service transcripts, play an
important role in our daily life. Automatically ex-
tracting the critical points and important outcomes
from dialogues would facilitate generating sum-
maries for complicated conversations, understand-
ing the decision-making process of meetings, or
analyzing the effectiveness of collaborations.

We are interested in a specific type of dia-
logues — spoken meetings, which is a common
way for collaboration and idea sharing. Previ-
ous work (Kirschner et al., 2012) has shown that
discourse structure can be used to capture the
main discussion points and arguments put forward
during problem-solving and decision-making pro-
cesses in meetings. Indeed, content of different
speaker turns do not occur in isolation, and should
be interpreted within the context of discourse.
Meanwhile, content can also reflect the purpose of
speaker turns, thus facilitate with discourse rela-
tion understanding. Take the meeting snippet from

D: Three different types of batteries. Um can either use a hand 
dynamo, or the kinetic type ones, you know that they use in 
watches, or else uh a solar powered one. 

B: Um the bat uh the battery for a a watch wouldn't 
require a lot of power, would be my one query. Is a 
kinetic one going to be able to supply enough power? 

D: Yeah, I don't think it would. 
C: Yeah. 

D: We should probably just use conventional batteries. 
B: Which I suppose as well would allow us to 
go off the shelf again, you'd say ?  

D: Yeah. 

Uncertain 

Option 

Figure 1: A sample clip from AMI meeting corpus. B,
C, and D denotes different speakers. Here we highlight
salient phrases (in italics) that are relevant to the major
topic discussed, i.e., “which type of battery to use for
the remote control”. Arrows indicate discourse struc-
ture between speaker turns. We also show some of the
discourse relations for illustration.

AMI corpus (Carletta et al., 2006) in Figure 1 as
an example. This discussion is annotated with dis-
course structure based on the Twente Argumenta-
tion Schema (TAS) by Rienks et al. (2005), which
focuses on argumentative discourse information.
As can be seen, meeting participants evaluate dif-
ferent options by showing doubt (UNCERTAIN),
bringing up alternative solution (OPTION), or giv-
ing feedback. The discourse information helps
with the identification of the key discussion point,
i.e., “which type of battery to use”, by revealing
the discussion flow.

To date, most efforts to leverage discourse in-
formation to detect salient content from dialogues
have focused on encoding gold-standard discourse
relations as features for use in classifier train-
ing (Murray et al., 2006; Galley, 2006; McKeown
et al., 2007; Bui et al., 2009). However, automatic
discourse parsing in dialogues is still a challenging
problem (Perret et al., 2016). Moreover, acquiring
human annotation on discourse relations is a time-
consuming and expensive process, and does not

974

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1090
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1090


scale for large datasets.

In this paper, we propose a joint modeling ap-
proach to select salient phrases reflecting key dis-
cussion points as well as label the discourse re-
lations between speaker turns in spoken meet-
ings. We hypothesize that leveraging the inter-
action between content and discourse has the po-
tential to yield better prediction performance on
both phrase-based content selection and discourse
relation prediction. Specifically, we utilize argu-
mentative discourse relations as defined in Twente
Argument Schema (TAS) (Rienks et al., 2005),
where discussions are organized into tree struc-
tures with discourse relations labeled between
nodes (as shown in Figure 1). Algorithms for joint
learning and joint inference are proposed for our
model. We also present a variation of our model
to treat discourse relations as latent variables when
true labels are not available for learning. We en-
vision that the extracted salient phrases by our
model can be used as input to abstractive meeting
summarization systems (Wang and Cardie, 2013;
Mehdad et al., 2014). Combined with the pre-
dicted discourse structure, a visualization tool can
be exploited to display conversation flow to sup-
port intelligent meeting assistant systems.

To the best of our knowledge, our work is
the first to jointly model content and discourse
relations in meetings. We test our model with
two meeting corpora — the AMI corpus (Car-
letta et al., 2006) and the ICSI corpus (Janin
et al., 2003). Experimental results show that our
model yields an accuracy of 63.2 on phrase selec-
tion, which is significantly better than a classifier
based on Support Vector Machines (SVM). Our
discourse prediction component also obtains bet-
ter accuracy than a state-of-the-art neural network-
based approach (59.2 vs. 54.2). Moreover, our
model trained with latent discourse outperforms
SVMs on both AMI and ICSI corpora for phrase
selection. We further evaluate the usage of se-
lected phrases as extractive meeting summaries.
Results evaluated by ROUGE (Lin and Hovy,
2003) demonstrate that our system summaries ob-
tain a ROUGE-SU4 F1 score of 21.3 on AMI
corpus, which outperforms non-trivial extractive
summarization baselines and a keyword selection
algorithm proposed in Liu et al. (2009).

Moreover, since both content and discourse
structure are critical for building shared under-
standing among participants (Mulder et al., 2002;

Mercer, 2004), we further investigate whether our
learned model can be utilized to predict the con-
sistency among team members’ understanding of
their group decisions. This task is first defined
as consistency of understanding (COU) prediction
by Kim and Shah (2016), who have labeled a por-
tion of AMI discussions with consistency or in-
consistency labels. We construct features from our
model predictions to capture different discourse
patterns and word entrainment scores for discus-
sion with different COU level. Results on AMI
discussions show that SVM classifiers trained with
our features significantly outperform the state-of-
the-art results (Kim and Shah, 2016) (F1: 63.1 vs.
50.5) and non-trivial baselines.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows:
we first summarize related work in Section 2. The
joint model is presented in Section 3. Datasets
and experimental setup are described in Section 4,
which is followed by experimental results (Sec-
tion 5). We then study the usage of our model for
predicting consistency of understanding in groups
in Section 6. We finally conclude in Section 7.

2 Related Work

Our model is inspired by research work that lever-
ages discourse structure for identifying salient
content in conversations, which is still largely
reliant on features derived from gold-standard
discourse labels (McKeown et al., 2007; Mur-
ray et al., 2010; Bokaei et al., 2016). For in-
stance, adjacency pairs, which are paired utter-
ances with question-answer or offer-accept rela-
tions, are found to frequently appear in meeting
summaries together and thus are utilized to extract
summary-worthy utterances by Galley (2006).
There is much less work that jointly predicts the
importance of content along with the discourse
structure in dialogus. Oya and Carenini (2014)
employs Dynamic Conditional Random Field to
recognize sentences in email threads for use in
summary as well as their dialogue acts. Only local
discourse structures from adjacent utterances are
considered. Our model is built on tree structures,
which captures more global information.

Our work is also in line with keyphrase identifi-
cation or phrase-based summarization for conver-
sations. Due to the noisy nature of dialogues, re-
cent work focuses on identifying summary-worthy
phrases from meetings (Fernández et al., 2008;
Riedhammer et al., 2010) or email threads (Loza

975



et al., 2014). For instance, Wang and Cardie
(2012) treat the problem as an information extrac-
tion task, where summary-worthy content repre-
sented as indicator and argument pairs is identi-
fied by an unsupervised latent variable model. Our
work also targets at detecting salient phrases from
meetings, but focuses on the joint modeling of crit-
ical discussion points and discourse relations held
between them.

For the area of discourse analysis in dialogues, a
significant amount of work has been done in pre-
dicting local discourse structures, such as recog-
nizing dialogue acts or social acts of adjacent ut-
terances from phone conversations (Stolcke et al.,
2000; Kalchbrenner and Blunsom, 2013; Ji et al.,
2016), spoken meetings (Dielmann and Renals,
2008), or emails (Cohen et al., 2004). Although
discourse information from non-adjacent turns has
been studied in the context of online discussion fo-
rums (Ghosh et al., 2014) and meetings (Hakkani-
Tur, 2009), none of them models the effect of dis-
course structure on content selection, which is a
gap that this work fills in.

3 The Joint Model of Content and
Discourse Relations

In this section, we first present our joint model in
Section 3.1. The algorithms for learning and in-
ference are described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, fol-
lowed by feature description (Section 3.4).

3.1 Model Description

Our proposed model learns to jointly perform
phrase-based content selection and discourse re-
lation prediction by making use of the interac-
tion between the two sources of information. As-
sume that a meeting discussion is denoted as x,
where x consists of a sequence of discourse units
x = {x1, x2, · · · , xn}. Each discourse unit can be
a complete speaker turn or a part of it. As demon-
strated in Figure 1, a tree-structured discourse dia-
gram is constructed for each discussion with each
discourse unit xi as a node of the tree. In this work,
we consider the argumentative discourse structure
by Twente Argument Schema (TAS) (Rienks et al.,
2005). For each node xi, it is attached to another
node xi′ (i′ < i) in the discussion, and a discourse
relation di is hold on the link 〈xi, xi′〉 (di is empty
if xi is the root). Let t denote the set of links
〈xi, xi′〉 in x. Following previous work on dis-
course analysis in meetings (Rienks et al., 2005;

Hakkani-Tur, 2009), we assume that the attach-
ment structure between discourse units are given
during both training and testing.

A set of candidate phrases are extracted from
each discourse unit xi, from which salient phrases
that contain gist information will be identified. We
obtain constituent and dependency parses for ut-
terances using Stanford parser (Klein and Man-
ning, 2003). We restrict eligible candidate to be a
noun phrase (NP), verb phrase (VP), prepositional
phrase (PP), or adjective phrase (ADJP) with at
most 5 words, and its head word cannot be a stop
word.1 If a candidate is a parent of another can-
didate in the constituent parse tree, we will only
keep the parent. We further merge a verb and a
candidate noun phrase into one candidate if the
later is the direct object or subject of the verb. For
example, from utterance “let’s use a rubber case
as well as rubber buttons”, we can identify can-
didates “use a rubber case” and “rubber buttons”.
For xi, the set of candidate phrases are denoted as
ci = {ci,1, ci,2, · · · , ci,mi}, where mi is the num-
ber of candidates. ci,j takes a value of 1 if the cor-
responding candidate is selected as salient phrase;
otherwise, ci,j is equal to 0. All candidate phrases
in discussion x are represented as c.

We then define a log-linear model with feature
parameters w for the candidate phrases c and dis-
course relations d in x as:

p(c,d|x,w) ∝ exp[w · Φ(c,d,x)]

∝ exp[w ·
n∑

i=1,<xi,xi′>∈t
φ(ci, di, di′ ,x)]

∝ exp[
n∑

i=1,<xi,xi′>∈t
(wc ·

mi∑

j=1

φc(ci,j ,x)

+ wd · φd(di, di′ ,x) + wcd ·
mi∑

j=1

φcd(ci,j , di,x))]

(1)

Here Φ(·) and φ(·) denote feature vectors.
We utilize three types of feature functions: (1)
content-only features φc(·), which capture the im-
portance of phrases, (2) discourse-only features
φd(·), which characterize the (potentially higher-
order) discourse relations, and (3) joint features of
content and discourse φcd(·), which model the in-
teraction between the two. wc, wd, and wcd are

1Other methods for mining candidate phrases, such as
frequency-based method (Liu et al., 2015), will be studied
for future work.

976



corresponding feature parameters. Detailed fea-
ture descriptions can be found in Section 3.4.
Discourse Relations as Latent Variables. As we
mentioned in the introduction, acquiring labeled
training data for discourse relations is a time-
consuming process since it would require human
annotators to inspect the full discussions. There-
fore, we further propose a variation of our model
where it treats the discourse relations as latent
variables, so that p(c|x,w) = ∑d p(c,d|x,w).
Its learning algorithm is slightly different as de-
scribed in the next section.

3.2 Joint Learning for Parameter Estimation

For learning the model parameters w, we em-
ploy an algorithm based on SampleRank (Rohan-
imanesh et al., 2011), which is a stochastic struc-
ture learning method. In general, the learning al-
gorithm constructs a sequence of configurations
for sample labels as a Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) chain based on a task-specific loss func-
tion, where stochastic gradients are distributed
across the chain.

The full learning procedure is described in Al-
gorithm 1. To start with, the feature weights w is
initialized with each value randomly drawn from
[−1, 1]. Multiple epochs are run through all sam-
ples. For each sample, we randomly initialize the
assignment of candidate phrases labels c and dis-
course relations d. Then an MCMC chain is con-
structed with a series of configurations σ = (c, d):
at each step, it first samples a discourse structure
d based on the proposal distribution q(d′|d,x),
and then samples phrase labels conditional on the
new discourse relations and previous phrase labels
based on q(c′|c,d′,x). Local search is used for
both proposal distributions.2 The new configu-
ration is accepted if it improves on the score by
ω(σ′). The parameters w are updated accordingly.

For the scorer ω, we use a weighted combina-
tion of F1 scores of phrase selection (F1c) and
discourse relation prediction (F1d): ω(σ) = α ·
F1c + (1− α) · F1d. We fix α to 0.1.

When discourse relations are treated as latent,
we initialize discourse relations for each sample
with a label in {1, 2, . . . ,K} if there are K rela-
tions indicated, and we only use F1c as the scorer.

2For future work, we can explore other proposal distribu-
tions that utilize the conditional distribution of salient phrases
given sampled discourse relations.

Input : X = {x}: discussions in the training set,
η: learning rate, �: number of epochs,
δ: number of sampling rounds,
ω(·): scoring function, Φ(·): feature functions

Output: feature weights 1|W|
∑

w∈W w

Initialize w;
W ← {w};
for e = 1 to � do

for x in X do
// Initialize configuration for

x
Initialize c and d;
σ = (c,d);
for s = 1 to δ do

// New configuration via
local search

d′ ∼ qd(·|x,d);
c′ ∼ qd(·|x, c,d′);
σ′ = (c′,d′);
σ+ = arg maxσ̃∈{σ,σ′} ω(σ̃);
σ− = arg minσ̃∈{σ,σ′} ω(σ̃);
∇̂ = Φ(σ+)− Φ(σ−);
∆ω = ω(σ+)− ω(σ−);
// Update parameters
if w · ∇̂ < ∆ω & ∆ω 6= 0 then

w← w + η · ∇̂;
Add w inW;

end
// Accept or reject new

configuration
if σ+ == σ′ then

σ = σ′
end

end
end

end
Algorithm 1: SampleRank-based joint learning.

3.3 Joint Inference for Prediction

Given a new sample x and learned parameters w,
we predict phrase labels and discourse relations as
arg maxc,d p(c,d|x,w).

Dynamic programming can be employed to
carry out joint inference, however, it would
be time-consuming since our objective func-
tion has a large search space for both content
and discourse labels. Hence we propose an
alternating optimizing algorithm to search for
c and d iteratively. Concretely, for each it-
eration, we first optimize on d by maximiz-
ing

∑n
i=1,<xi,x′i>∈t(wd · φd(di, di′ ,x) + wcd ·∑mi

j=1 φcd(ci,j , di,x)). Message-passing (Smith
and Eisner, 2008) is used to find the best d.

In the second step, we search for c that max-
imizes

∑n
i=1,<xi,x′i>∈t(wc ·

∑mi
j=1 φc(ci,j ,x) +

wcd ·
∑mi

j=1 φcd(ci,j , di,x)). We believe that can-
didate phrases based on the same concepts should
have the same predicted label. Therefore, can-
didates of the same phrase type and sharing the
same head word are grouped into one cluster. We
then cast our task as an integer linear programming

977



problem.3 We optimize our objective function un-
der constraints: (1) ci,j = ci′,j′ if ci,j and ci′,j′ are
in the same cluster, and (2) ci,j ∈ {0, 1}, ∀i, j.

The inference process is the same for models
trained with latent discourse relations.

3.4 Features

We use features that characterize content, dis-
course relations, and the combination of both.
Content Features. For modeling the salience of
content, we calculate the minimum, maximum,
and average of TF-IDF scores of words and
number of content words in each phrase
based on the intuition that important phrases
tend to have more content words with high
TF-IDF scores (Fernández et al., 2008). We
also consider whether the head word of the
phrase has been mentioned in preceding
turn, which implies the focus of a discus-
sion. The size of the cluster each
phrase belongs to is also included. Number of
POS tags and phrase types are counted
to characterize the syntactic structure. Previous
work (Wang and Cardie, 2012) has found that
a discussion usually ends with decision-relevant
information. We thus identify the absolute
and relative positions of the turn con-
taining the candidate phrase in the discussion.
Finally, we record whether the candidate phrase
is uttered by the main speaker, who
speakers the most words in the discussion.
Discourse Features. For each discourse unit, we
collect the dialogue act types of the cur-
rent unit and its parent node in discourse tree,
whether there is any adjacency pair held be-
tween the two nodes (Hakkani-Tur, 2009), and
the Jaccard similarity between them. We
record whether two turns are uttered by the
same speaker, for example, ELABORATION is
commonly observed between the turns from the
same participant. We also calculate the number
of candidate phrases based on the obser-
vation that OPTION and SPECIALIZATION tend
to contain more informative words than POSI-
TIVE feedback. Length of the discourse unit is
also relevant. Therefore, we compute the time
span and number of words. To incorporate
global structure features, we encode the depth
of the node in the discourse tree and the

3We use lpsolve: http://lpsolve.
sourceforge.net/5.5/.

number of its siblings. Finally, we in-
clude an order-2 discourse relation
feature that encodes the relation between current
discourse unit and its parent, and the relation be-
tween the parent and its grandparent if it exists.
Joint Features. For modeling the interaction be-
tween content and discourse, the discourse rela-
tion is added to each content feature to compose a
joint feature. For example, if candidate c in discus-
sion x has a content feature φ[avg−TFIDF ](c,x)
with a value of 0.5, and its discourse relation d is
POSITIVE, then the joint feature takes the form of
φ[avg−TFIDF,Positive](c, d,x) = 0.5.

4 Datasets and Experimental Setup

Meeting Corpora. We evaluate our joint model
on two meeting corpora with rich annotations: the
AMI meeting corpus (Carletta et al., 2006) and the
ICSI meeting corpus (Janin et al., 2003). AMI
corpus consists of 139 scenario-driven meetings,
and ICSI corpus contains 75 naturally occurring
meetings. Both of the corpora are annotated with
dialogue acts, adjacency pairs, and topic segmen-
tation. We treat each topic segment as one dis-
cussion, and remove discussions with less than
10 turns or labeled as “opening” and “chitchat”.
694 discussions from AMI and 1139 discussions
from ICSI are extracted, and these two datasets
are henceforth referred as AMI-FULL and ICSI-
FULL.
Acquiring Gold-Standard Labels. Both corpora
contain human constructed abstractive summaries
and extractive summaries on meeting level. Short
abstracts, usually in one sentence, are constructed
by meeting participants — participant summaries,
and external annotators — abstractive summaries.
Dialogue acts that contribute to important output
of the meeting, e.g. decisions, are identified and
used as extractive summaries, and some of them
are also linked to the corresponding abstracts.

Since the corpora do not contain phrase-level
importance annotation, we induce gold-standard
labels for candidate phrases based on the follow-
ing rule. A candidate phrase is considered as a
positive sample if its head word is contained in any
abstractive summary or participant summary. On
average, 71.9 candidate phrases are identified per
discussion for AMI-FULL with 31.3% labeled as
positive, and 73.4 for ICSI-FULL with 24.0% of
them as positive samples.

Furthermore, a subset of discussions in AMI-

978



FULL are annotated with discourse structure and
relations based on Twente Argumentation Schema
(TAS) by Rienks et al. (2005)4. A tree-structured
argument diagram (as shown in Figure 1) is cre-
ated for each discussion or a part of the discussion.
The nodes of the tree contain partial or complete
speaker turns, and discourse relation types are la-
beled on the links between the nodes. In total, we
have 129 discussions annotated with discourse la-
bels. This dataset is called AMI-SUB hereafter.
Experimental Setup. 5-fold cross validation is
used for all experiments. All real-valued features
are uniformly normalized to [0,1]. For the joint
learning algorithm, we use 10 epochs and carry out
50 sampling for MCMC for each training sample.
The learning rate is set to 0.01. We run the learn-
ing algorithm for 20 times, and use the average of
the learned weights as the final parameter values.
For models trained with latent discourse relations,
we fix the number of relations to 9.
Baselines and Comparisons. For both phrase-
based content selection and discourse relation pre-
diction tasks, we consider a baseline that always
predicts the majority label (Majority). Previous
work has shown that Support Vector Machines
(SVMs)-based classifiers achieve state-of-the-art
performance for keyphrase selection in meet-
ings (Fernández et al., 2008; Wang and Cardie,
2013) and discourse parsing for formal text (Her-
nault et al., 2010). Therefore, we compare with
linear SVM-based classifiers, trained with the
same feature set of content features or discourse
features. We fix the trade-off parameter to 1.0
for all SVM-based experiments. For discourse re-
lation prediction, we use one-vs-rest strategy to
build multiple binary classifiers.5 We also com-
pare with a state-of-the-art discourse parser (Ji
et al., 2016), which employs neural language
model to predict discourse relations.

5 Experimental Results

5.1 Phrase Selection and Discourse Labeling
Here we present the experimental results on
phrase-based content selection and discourse re-
lation prediction. We experiment with two vari-
ations of our joint model: one is trained on gold-
standard discourse relations, the other is trained by

4There are 9 types of relations in TAS: POSITIVE, NEG-
ATIVE, UNCERTAIN, REQUEST, SPECIALIZATION, ELABO-
RATION, OPTION, OPTION EXCLUSION, and SUBJECT-TO.

5Multi-class classifier was also experimented with, but
gave inferior performance.

Acc F1
Comparisons
Baseline (Majority) 60.1 37.5
SVM (w content features in § 3.4) 57.8 54.6
Our Models
Joint-Learn + Joint-Inference 63.2∗ 62.6∗
Joint-Learn + Separate-Inference 57.9 57.8
Separate-Learn 53.4 52.6
Our Models (Latent Discourse)
w/ True Attachment Structure
Joint-Learn + Joint-Inference 60.3∗ 60.3∗
Joint-Learn + Separate-Inference 56.4 56.2
w/o True Attachment Structure
Joint-Learn + Joint-Inference 56.4 56.4
Joint-Learn + Separate-Inference 52.7 52.3

Table 1: Phrase-based content selection performance
on AMI-SUB with accuracy (acc) and F1. We dis-
play results of our models trained with gold-standard
discourse relation labels and with latent discourse re-
lations. For the later, we also show results based on
True Attachment Structure, where the gold-standard at-
tachments are known, and without the True Attachment
Structure. Our models that significantly outperform
SVM-based model are highlighted with ∗ (p < 0.05,
paired t-test). Best result for each column is in bold.

Acc F1
Comparisons
Baseline (Majority) 51.2 7.5
SVM (w discourse features in § 3.4) 51.2 22.8
Ji et al. (2016) 54.2 21.4
Our Models
Joint-Learn + Joint-Inference 58.0∗ 21.7
Joint-Learn + Separate-Inference 59.2∗ 23.4
Separate-Learn 58.2∗ 25.1

Table 2: Discourse relation prediction performance on
AMI-SUB. Our models that significantly outperform
SVM-based model and Ji et al. (2016) are highlighted
with ∗ (p < 0.05, paired t-test). Best result for each
column is in bold.

treating discourse relations as latent models as de-
scribed in Section 3.1. Remember that we have
gold-standard argument diagrams on the AMI-
SUB dataset, we can thus conduct experiments by
assuming the True Attachment Structure is given
for latent versions. When argument diagrams are
not available, we build a tree among the turns in
each discussion as follows. Two turns are attached
if there is any adjacency pair between them. If one
turn is attached to more than one previous turns,
the closest one is considered. For the rest of the
turns, they are attached to the preceding turn. This
construction is applied on AMI-FULL and ICSI-
FULL.

We also investigate whether joint learning and
joint inference can produce better prediction per-

979



AMI-FULL ICSI-FULL
Acc F1 Acc F1

Comparisons
Baseline (Majority) 61.8 38.2 75.3 43.0
SVM (with content features in § 3.4) 58.6 56.7 66.2 53.1
Our Models (Latent Discourse)
Joint-Learn + Joint-Inference 63.4∗ 63.0∗ 73.5∗ 61.4∗
Joint-Learn + Separate-Inference 57.7 57.5 70.0∗ 62.7∗

Table 3: Phrase-based content selection performance
on AMI-FULL and ICSI-FULL. We display results
of our models trained with latent discourse relations.
Results that are significantly better than SVM-based
model are highlighted with ∗ (p < 0.05, paired t-test).

formance. We consider joint learning with sepa-
rate inference, where only content features or dis-
course features are used for prediction (Separate-
Inference). We further study learning separate
classifiers for content selection and discourse re-
lations without joint features (Separate-Learn).

We first show the phrase selection and discourse
relation prediction results on AMI-SUB in Ta-
bles 1 and 2. As shown in Table 1, our models,
trained with gold-standard discourse relations or
latent ones with true attachment structure, yield
significant better accuracy and F1 scores than
SVM-based classifiers trained with the same fea-
ture sets for phrase selection (paired t-test, p <
0.05). Our joint learning model with separate
inference also outperforms neural network-based
discourse parsing model (Ji et al., 2016) in Table 2.

Moreover, Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate that joint
learning usually produces superior performance
for both tasks than separate learning. Combined
with joint inference, our model obtains the best ac-
curacy and F1 on phrase selection. This indicates
that leveraging the interplay between content and
discourse boost the prediction performance. Sim-
ilar results are achieved on AMI-FULL and ICSI-
FULL in Table 3, where latent discourse relations
without true attachment structure are employed for
training.

5.2 Phrase-Based Extractive Summarization

We further evaluate whether the prediction of the
content selection component can be used for sum-
marizing the key points on discussion level. For
each discussion, salient phrases identified by our
model are concatenated in sequence for use as the
summary. We consider two types of gold-standard
summaries. One is utterance-level extractive sum-
mary, which consists of human labeled summary-
worthy utterances. The other is abstractive sum-

Extractive Summaries as Gold-Standard
ROUGE-1 ROUGE-SU4

Len Prec Rec F1 Prec Rec F1
Longest DA 30.9 64.4 15.0 23.1 58.6 9.3 15.3
Centroid DA 17.5 73.9 13.4 20.8 62.5 6.9 11.3
SVM 49.8 47.1 24.1 27.5 22.7 10.7 11.8
Liu et al. (2009) 62.4 40.4 39.2 36.2 15.5 15.2 13.5
Our Model 66.6 45.4 44.7 41.1∗ 24.1∗ 23.4∗ 20.9∗
Our Model-latent 85.9 42.9 49.3 42.4∗ 21.6 25.7∗ 21.3∗
Abstractive Summaries as Gold-Standard

ROUGE1 ROUGE-SU4
Len Prec Rec F1 Prec Rec F1

Longest DA 30.9 14.8 5.5 7.4 4.8 1.4 1.9
Centroid DA 17.5 24.9 5.6 8.5 11.6 1.4 2.2
SVM 49.8 13.3 9.7 9.5 4.4 2.4 2.4
Liu et al. (2009) 62.4 10.3 16.7 11.3 2.7 4.5 2.8
Our Model 66.6 12.6 18.9 13.1∗ 3.8 5.5∗ 3.7∗
Our Model-latent 85.9 11.4 20.0 12.4∗ 3.3 6.1∗ 3.5∗

Table 4: ROUGE scores for phrase-based extractive
summarization evaluated against human-constructed
utterance-level extractive summaries and abstractive
summaries. Our models that statistically significantly
outperform SVM and Liu et al. (2009) are highlighted
with ∗ (p < 0.05, paired t-test). Best ROUGE score for
each column is in bold.

mary, where we collect human abstract with at
least one link from summary-worthy utterances.

We calculate scores based on ROUGE (Lin and
Hovy, 2003), which is a popular tool for eval-
uating text summarization (Gillick et al., 2009;
Liu and Liu, 2010). ROUGE-1 (unigrams) and
ROUGE-SU4 (skip-bigrams with at most 4 words
in between) are used. Following previous work
on meeting summarization (Riedhammer et al.,
2010; Wang and Cardie, 2013), we consider two
dialogue act-level summarization baselines: (1)
LONGEST DA in each discussion is selected as the
summary, and (2) CENTROID DA, the one with the
highest TF-IDF similarity with all DAs in the dis-
cussion. We also compare with an unsupervised
keyword extraction approach by Liu et al. (2009),
where word importance is estimated by its TF-IDF
score, POS tag, and the salience of its correspond-
ing sentence. With the same candidate phrases
as in our model, we extend Liu et al. (2009) by
scoring each phrase based on its average score of
the words. Top phrases, with the same number of
phrases output by our model, are included into the
summaries. Finally, we compare with summaries
consisting of salient phrases predicted by an SVM
classifier trained with our content features.

From the results in Table 4, we can see that
phrase-based extractive summarization methods
can yield better ROUGE scores for recall and
F1 than baselines that extract the whole sen-
tences. Meanwhile, our system significantly out-

980



Meeting Clip:
D: can we uh power a light in this? can we get a strong
enough battery to power a light?
A: um i think we could because the lcd panel requires
power, and the lcd is a form of a light so that. . .
D: . . .it’s gonna have to have something high-tech about it
and that’s gonna take battery power. . .
D: illuminate the buttons. yeah it glows.
D: well m i’m thinking along the lines of you’re you’re in
the dark watching a dvd and you um you find the thing in the
dark and you go like this . . . oh where’s the volume button
in the dark, and uh y you just touch it . . . and it lights up or
something.
Abstract by Human:
What sort of battery to use. The industrial designer pre-
sented options for materials, components, and batteries and
discussed the restrictions involved in using certain materi-
als.
Longest DA:
well m i’m thinking along the lines of you’re you’re in the
dark watching a dvd and you um you find the thing in the
dark and you go like this.
Centroid DA:
can we uh power a light in this?
Our Method:
- power a light, a strong enough battery,
- requires power, a form,
- a really good battery, battery power,
- illuminate the buttons, glows,
- watching a dvd, the volume button, lights up or something

Figure 2: Sample summaries output by different sys-
tems for a meeting clip from AMI corpus (less relevant
utterances in between are removed). Salient phrases
by our system output are displayed for each turn of the
clip, with duplicated phrases removed for brevity.

performs the SVM-based classifiers when evalu-
ated on ROUGE recall and F1, while achieving
comparable precision. Compared to Liu et al.
(2009), our system also yields better results on all
metrics.

Sample summaries by our model along with two
baselines are displayed in Figure 2. Utterance-
level extract-based baselines unavoidably contain
disfluency and unnecessary details. Our phrase-
based extractive summary is able to capture the
key points from both the argumentation process
and important outcomes of the conversation. This
implies that our model output can be used as input
for an abstractive summarization system. It can
also facilitate the visualization of decision-making
processes.

5.3 Further Analysis and Discussions

Features Analysis. We first discuss salient fea-
tures with top weights learned by our joint model.
For content features, main speaker tends to utter
more salient content. Higher TF-IDF scores also

indicate important phrases. If a phrase is men-
tioned in previous turn and repeated in the current
turn, it is likely to be a key point. For discourse
features, structure features matter the most. For
instance, jointly modeling the discourse relation
of the parent node along with the current node can
lead to better inference. An example is that giv-
ing more details on the proposal (ELABORATION)
tends to lead to POSITIVE feedback. Moreover,
REQUEST usually appears close to the root of the
argument diagram tree, while POSITIVE feedback
is usually observed on leaves. Adjacency pairs
also play an important role for discourse predic-
tion. For joint features, features that compos-
ite “phrase mentioned in previous turn” and rela-
tion POSITIVE feedback or REQUEST yield higher
weight, which are indicators for both key phrases
and discourse relations. We also find that main
speaker information composite with ELABORA-
TION and UNCERTAIN are associated with high
weights.
Error Analysis and Potential Directions. Taking
a closer look at our prediction results, one major
source of incorrect prediction for phrase selection
is based on the fact that similar concepts might be
expressed in different ways, and our model pre-
dicts inconsistently for different variations. For
example, participants use both “thick” and “two
centimeters” to talk about the desired shape of
a remote control. However, our model does not
group them into the same cluster and later makes
different predictions. For future work, semantic
similarity with context information can be lever-
aged to produce better clustering results. Fur-
thermore, identifying discourse relations in dia-
logues is still a challenging task. For instance, “I
wouldn’t choose a plastic case” should be labeled
as OPTION EXCLUSION, if the previous turns talk
about different options. Otherwise, it can be la-
beled as NEGATIVE. Therefore, models that better
handle semantics and context need to be consid-
ered.

6 Predicting Consistency of
Understanding

As discussed in previous work (Mulder et al.,
2002; Mercer, 2004), both content and discourse
structure are critical for building shared under-
standing among discussants. In this section, we
test whether our joint model can be utilized to pre-
dict the consistency among team members’ under-

981



standing of their group decisions, which is defined
as consistency of understanding (COU) in Kim
and Shah (2016).

Kim and Shah (2016) establish gold-standard
COU labels on a portion of AMI discussions,
by comparing participant summaries to determine
whether participants report the same decisions. If
all decision points are consistent, the associated
topic discussion is labeled as consistent; other-
wise, the discussion is identified as inconsistent.
Their annotation covers the AMI-SUB dataset.
Therefore, we run the prediction experiments on
AMI-SUB by using the same annotation. Out of
total 129 discussions in AMI-SUB, 86 discussions
are labeled as consistent and 43 are inconsistent.

We construct three types of features by us-
ing our model’s predicted labels. Firstly, we
learn two versions of our model based on the
“consistent” discussions and the “inconsistent”
ones in the training set, with learned parame-
ters wcon and wincon. For a discussion in the
test set, these two models output two probabili-
ties pcon = maxc,d P (c,d|x,wcon) and pincon =
maxc,d P (c,d|x,wincon). We use pcon − pincon
as a feature.

Furthermore, we consider discourse relations
of length one and two from the discourse struc-
ture tree. Intuitively, some discourse relations,
e.g., ELABORATION followed by multiple POSI-
TIVE feedback, imply consistent understanding.

The third feature is based on word entrainment,
which has been shown to correlate with task suc-
cess for groups (Nenkova et al., 2008). Using
the formula in Nenkova et al. (2008), we com-
pute the average word entrainment between the
main speaker who utters the most words and all
the other participants. The content words in the
salient phrases predicted by our model is consid-
ered for entrainment computation.
Results. Leave-one-out is used for experiments.
For training, our features are constructed from
gold-standard phrase and discourse labels. Pre-
dicted labels by our model is used for constructing
features during testing. SVM-based classifier is
used for experimenting with different sets of fea-
tures output by our model. A majority class base-
line is constructed as well. We also consider an
SVM classifier trained with ngram features (uni-
grams and bigrams). Finally, we compare with the
state-of-the-art method in Kim and Shah (2016),
where discourse-relevant features and head ges-

Acc F1
Comparisons
Baseline (Majority) 66.7 40.0
Ngrams (SVM) 51.2 50.6
Kim and Shah (2016) 60.5 50.5
Features from Our Model
Consistency Probability (Prob) 52.7 52.1
Discourse Relation (Disc) 63.6 57.1∗
Word Entrainment (Ent) 60.5∗ 57.1∗
Prob + Disc+ Ent 68.2∗ 63.1∗
Oracles
Discourse Relation 69.8 62.7
Word Entrainment 61.2 57.8

Table 5: Consistency of Understanding (COU) predic-
tion results on AMI-SUB. Results that statistically sig-
nificantly outperform ngrams-based baseline and Kim
and Shah (2016) are highlighted with ∗ (p < 0.05,
paired t-test). For reference, we also show the pre-
diction performance based on gold-standard discourse
relations and phrase selection labels.

ture features are utilized in Hidden Markov Mod-
els to predict the consistency label.

The results are displayed in Table 5. All SVMs
trained with our features surpass the ngrams-based
baseline. Especially, the discourse features, word
entrainment feature, and the combination of the
three, all significantly outperform the state-of-the-
art system by Kim and Shah (2016).6

7 Conclusion

We presented a joint model for performing phrase-
level content selection and discourse relation pre-
diction in spoken meetings. Experimental results
on AMI and ICSI meeting corpora showed that our
model can outperform state-of-the-art methods for
both tasks. Further evaluation on the task of pre-
dicting consistency-of-understanding in meetings
demonstrated that classifiers trained with features
constructed from our model output produced supe-
rior performance compared to the state-of-the-art
model. This provides an evidence of our model be-
ing successfully applied in other prediction tasks
in spoken meetings.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by National Sci-
ence Foundation Grant IIS-1566382 and a GPU
gift from Nvidia. We thank three anonymous re-
viewers for their valuable suggestions on various
aspects of this work.

6We also experiment with other popular classifiers, e.g.
logistic regression or decision tree, and similar trend is re-
spected.

982



References
Mohammad Hadi Bokaei, Hossein Sameti, and Yang

Liu. 2016. Extractive Summarization of Multi-party
Meetings Through Discourse Segmentation. Natu-
ral Language Engineering 22(01):41–72.

Trung H. Bui, Matthew Frampton, John Dowding,
and Stanley Peters. 2009. Extracting Decisions
from Multi-party Dialogue Using Directed Graph-
ical Models and Semantic Similarity. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Conference: The 10th
Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on
Discourse and Dialogue. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, SIGDIAL
’09, pages 235–243.

Jean Carletta, Simone Ashby, Sebastien Bourban, Mike
Flynn, Mael Guillemot, Thomas Hain, Jaroslav
Kadlec, Vasilis Karaiskos, Wessel Kraaij, Melissa
Kronenthal, Guillaume Lathoud, Mike Lincoln,
Agnes Lisowska, Iain McCowan, Wilfried Post,
Dennis Reidsma, and Pierre Wellner. 2006. The
AMI Meeting Corpus: A Pre-announcement. In
Proceedings of the Second International Conference
on Machine Learning for Multimodal Interaction.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, MLMI’05,
pages 28–39.

William W. Cohen, Vitor R. Carvalho, and Tom M.
Mitchell. 2004. Learning to Classify Email into
“Speech Acts” . In Dekang Lin and Dekai Wu, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Barcelona,
Spain, pages 309–316.

Alfred Dielmann and Steve Renals. 2008. Recogni-
tion of Dialogue Acts in Multiparty Meetings Us-
ing a Switching DBN. IEEE transactions on audio,
speech, and language processing 16(7):1303–1314.

Raquel Fernández, Matthew Frampton, John Dowding,
Anish Adukuzhiyil, Patrick Ehlen, and Stanley Pe-
ters. 2008. Identifying Relevant Phrases to Sum-
marize Decisions in Spoken Meetings. In INTER-
SPEECH. pages 78–81.

Michel Galley. 2006. A Skip-chain Conditional Ran-
dom Field for Ranking Meeting Utterances by Im-
portance. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, EMNLP ’06, pages 364–
372.

Debanjan Ghosh, Smaranda Muresan, Nina Wacholder,
Mark Aakhus, and Matthew Mitsui. 2014. Analyz-
ing Argumentative Discourse Units in Online Inter-
actions. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Argumentation Mining. pages 39–48.

Dan Gillick, Korbinian Riedhammer, Benoit Favre,
and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2009. A Global Opti-
mization Framework for Meeting Summarization.
In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2009.

ICASSP 2009. IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, pages 4769–4772.

Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2009. Towards Automatic Argu-
ment Diagramming of Multiparity Meetings. In
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2009.
ICASSP 2009. IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, pages 4753–4756.

Hugo Hernault, Helmut Prendinger, David A. duVerle,
and Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2010. HILDA: A Discourse
Parser Using Support Vector Machine Classification.
Dialogue & Discourse 1(3):1–33.

Adam Janin, Don Baron, Jane Edwards, Dan Ellis,
David Gelbart, Nelson Morgan, Barbara Peskin,
Thilo Pfau, Elizabeth Shriberg, Andreas Stolcke,
et al. 2003. The ICSI Meeting Corpus. In Acous-
tics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2003. Proceed-
ings.(ICASSP’03). 2003 IEEE International Confer-
ence on. IEEE, volume 1, pages I–I.

Yangfeng Ji, Gholamreza Haffari, and Jacob Eisen-
stein. 2016. A Latent Variable Recurrent Neu-
ral Network for Discourse-Driven Language Mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, San Diego, California, pages 332–342.

Nal Kalchbrenner and Phil Blunsom. 2013. Recurrent
Convolutional Neural Networks for Discourse Com-
positionality. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Continuous Vector Space Models and their Compo-
sitionality. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Sofia, Bulgaria, pages 119–126.

Joseph Kim and Julie A Shah. 2016. Improving
Team’s Consistency of Understanding in Meet-
ings. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Sys-
tems 46(5):625–637.

Paul A Kirschner, Simon J Buckingham-Shum, and
Chad S Carr. 2012. Visualizing Argumentation:
Software Tools for Collaborative and Educational
Sense-making. Springer Science & Business Media.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate Unlexicalized Parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 1. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL
’03, pages 423–430.

Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 2003. Auto-
matic Evaluation of Summaries Using N-gram Co-
occurrence Statistics. In Proceedings of the 2003
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics on Hu-
man Language Technology - Volume 1. pages 71–78.

Fei Liu and Yang Liu. 2010. Using Spoken Utterance
Compression for Meeting Summarization: A Pilot
Study. In Spoken Language Technology Workshop
(SLT), 2010 IEEE. IEEE, pages 37–42.

983



Feifan Liu, Deana Pennell, Fei Liu, and Yang Liu.
2009. Unsupervised Approaches for Automatic
Keyword Extraction Using Meeting Transcripts. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: The
2009 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Boulder, Colorado, pages 620–628.

Jialu Liu, Jingbo Shang, Chi Wang, Xiang Ren, and Ji-
awei Han. 2015. Mining quality phrases from mas-
sive text corpora. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management
of Data. ACM, pages 1729–1744.

Vanessa Loza, Shibamouli Lahiri, Rada Mihalcea, and
Po-Hsiang Lai. 2014. Building a Dataset for Sum-
marization and Keyword Extraction from Emails. In
LREC. pages 2441–2446.

Kathleen McKeown, Lokesh Shrestha, and Owen Ram-
bow. 2007. Using Question-answer Pairs in Extrac-
tive Summarization of Email Conversations. In In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Text Process-
ing and Computational Linguistics. Springer, pages
542–550.

Yashar Mehdad, Giuseppe Carenini, and Raymond T.
Ng. 2014. Abstractive Summarization of Spo-
ken and Written Conversations Based on Phrasal
Queries. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland, pages
1220–1230.

Neil Mercer. 2004. Sociocultural Discourse Analysis.
Journal of applied linguistics 1(2):137–168.

Ingrid Mulder, Janine Swaak, and Joseph Kessels.
2002. Assessing Group Learning and Shared Under-
standing in Technology-mediated Interaction. Edu-
cational Technology & Society 5(1):35–47.

Gabriel Murray, Giuseppe Carenini, and Raymond Ng.
2010. Generating and Validating Abstracts of Meet-
ing Conversations: A User Study. In Proceedings of
the 6th International Natural Language Generation
Conference. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, INLG ’10, pages 105–
113.

Gabriel Murray, Steve Renals, Jean Carletta, and Jo-
hanna Moore. 2006. Incorporating Speaker and Dis-
course Features into Speech Summarization. In Pro-
ceedings of the main conference on Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association of Computational
Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 367–374.

Ani Nenkova, Agustin Gravano, and Julia Hirschberg.
2008. High Frequency Word Entrainment in Spoken
Dialogue. In Proceedings of the 46th annual meet-
ing of the association for computational linguistics

on human language technologies: Short papers. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 169–
172.

Tatsuro Oya and Giuseppe Carenini. 2014. Extrac-
tive Summarization and Dialogue Act Modeling on
Email Threads: An Integrated Probabilistic Ap-
proach. In 15th Annual Meeting of the Special In-
terest Group on Discourse and Dialogue. page 133.

Jérémy Perret, Stergos Afantenos, Nicholas Asher, and
Mathieu Morey. 2016. Integer Linear Programming
for Discourse Parsing. In Proceedings of the 2016
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, San Diego, California, pages 99–
109.

Korbinian Riedhammer, Benoit Favre, and Dilek
Hakkani-Tür. 2010. Long Story Short - Global Un-
supervised Models for Keyphrase Based Meeting
Summarization. Speech Commun. 52(10):801–815.

Rutger Rienks, Dirk Heylen, and E. van der Weijden.
2005. Argument Diagramming of Meeting Conver-
sations. In A. Vinciarelli and J-M. Odobez, editors,
International Workshop on Multimodal Multiparty
Meeting Processing, MMMP 2005, part of the 7th
International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces,
ICMI 2005.

Khashayar Rohanimanesh, Kedar Bellare, Aron Cu-
lotta, Andrew McCallum, and Michael L Wick.
2011. Samplerank: Training Factor Graphs with
Atomic Gradients. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-
11). pages 777–784.

David A Smith and Jason Eisner. 2008. Dependency
Parsing by Belief Propagation. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 145–156.

Andreas Stolcke, Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Eliz-
abeth Shriberg, Rebecca Bates, Daniel Jurafsky,
Paul Taylor, Rachel Martin, Carol Van Ess-Dykema,
and Marie Meteer. 2000. Dialogue Act Mod-
eling for Automatic Tagging and Recognition of
Conversational Speech. Computational linguistics
26(3):339–373.

Lu Wang and Claire Cardie. 2012. Focused Meeting
Summarization via Unsupervised Relation Extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Meeting
of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Di-
alogue. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Seoul, South Korea.

Lu Wang and Claire Cardie. 2013. Domain-
Independent Abstract Generation for Focused Meet-
ing Summarization. In Proceedings of the 51st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria,
pages 1395–1405.

984


	Joint Modeling of Content and Discourse Relations in Dialogues

