



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1426–1435
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1131

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1426–1435
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1131

Understanding and Predicting Empathic Behavior in Counseling Therapy

Verónica Pérez-Rosas1, Rada Mihalcea1, Kenneth Resnicow2
Satinder Singh1 and Lawrence An3

1Computer Science and Engineering, 2School of Public Health
3Center for Health Communications Research

University of Michigan
{vrncapr,mihalcea,kresnic,baveja,lcan}@umich.edu

Abstract

Counselor empathy is associated with bet-
ter outcomes in psychology and behav-
ioral counseling. In this paper, we ex-
plore several aspects pertaining to coun-
seling interaction dynamics and their re-
lation to counselor empathy during mo-
tivational interviewing encounters. Par-
ticularly, we analyze aspects such as par-
ticipants’ engagement, participants’ verbal
and nonverbal accommodation, as well as
topics being discussed during the conver-
sation, with the final goal of identifying
linguistic and acoustic markers of coun-
selor empathy. We also show how we can
use these findings alongside other raw lin-
guistic and acoustic features to build ac-
curate counselor empathy classifiers with
accuracies of up to 80%.

1 Introduction

Behavioral counseling is an important tool to ad-
dress public health issues such as mental health,
substance abuse, and nutrition problems among
others. This has motivated increased interest in
the study of mechanisms associated with success-
ful interventions. Among them, counselor empa-
thy has been identified as a key intervention com-
ponent that relates to positive therapy outcomes.

Displaying empathic behavior helps counselors
to build rapport with their clients. Empathy levels
experienced during counseling have a significant
effect on treatment outcomes, as clients who per-
ceive their counselor as empathic are more likely
to improve than the ones who do not (Moyers and
Miller, 2013).

In this paper, we apply quantitative approaches
to understand the dynamics of the counseling in-
teractions and their relation to counselor empa-

thy. We focus our analysis on counseling con-
ducted using Motivational Interviewing (MI), a
well-established evidence-based counseling style,
where counselor empathy is defined as the active
interest and effort to understand the client’s per-
spective (Miller and Rollnick, 2013).

We address four main research questions. First,
are there differences in how the counselor and the
client engage during empathic conversations? We
explore this question by conducting turn-by-turn
word frequency analyses of participant’s interac-
tions across the counseling conversations. Second,
are there differences in verbal and vocal mimicry
patterns occurring during high and low empathy
interactions? We address this question by measur-
ing the degree of language matching, verbal and
nonverbal coordination, and power dynamics ex-
pressed during the interaction. Third, are there
content differences in counselor discourse during
high and low empathy interactions? We answer
this question by applying topic modeling to iden-
tify the topics that are more salient in high and
low empathy interventions (or in both). Finally,
fourth, can we build accurate classifiers of coun-
selor empathy? We show how the linguistic and
acoustic empathy markers identified in our analy-
ses, together with other raw features, can be used
to construct classifiers able to predict counselor
empathy with accuracies of up to 80%.

2 Related Work

There have been several efforts to study the role
of empathy during counseling interactions. (Xiao
et al., 2012) applied a text-based approach to dis-
criminate empathic from non-empathic encounters
using word-frequency analysis. They conducted a
set of experiments aiming to predict empathy at
the utterance and session level on a manually an-
notated dataset. Results showed that empathy can

1426

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1131
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1131


be predicted at reasonable accuracy levels, compa-
rable to human assessments. (Gibson et al., 2015)
presented a more refined approach for this task,
which in addition to n-grams included features
derived from the Linguistic Inquire Word Count,
LIWC (Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010) as well
as psycholinguistic norms.

Other research has focused on exploring aspects
related to counselor empathy skills, such as their
ability to match the client language. (Lord et al.,
2015) analyzed the language coordination be-
tween client and counselor using Language Style
Synchrony (LSS), a measure of the degree of sim-
ilarity in word usage among speakers in adjacent
talking turns. They found that empathy scores are
positively related to LSS, and that higher levels of
LSS are likely to result in higher empathy scores.

Another line of work has explored the use of
the acoustic component to predict empathy lev-
els during counseling encounters. (Xiao et al.,
2014) presented a study on the automatic evalua-
tion of counselor empathy based on the analysis of
correlation between prosody patterns and the de-
gree of empathy showed by the therapist during
the counseling interactions. More recently, (Xiao
et al., 2015) addressed the empathy prediction task
by deriving language models from transcripts ob-
tained by an automatic speech recognition system,
thus eliminating the need of human intervention
during speaker segmentation and transcription.

Most of this previous research has focused on
the prediction task, and explored a variety of lin-
guistic and acoustic representations for this goal.
While some of this work has explored the lin-
guistic accommodation between speakers, previ-
ous methods have not fully explored the conversa-
tional aspects of the counseling interaction.

In this paper, we seek to explore how conver-
sational aspects such as engagement, accommo-
dation, and discourse topics are related to coun-
selor empathy by using strategies such as turn-by-
turn word frequency analysis, language coordina-
tion, power dynamics analysis, and topic model-
ing. Furthermore, we build accurate empathy clas-
sifiers that rely on acoustic and linguistic cues in-
spired by our conversational analyses.

3 Counseling Empathy Dataset

The dataset used in this study consists of 276
MI audio-recorded sessions from: two clinical re-
search studies on smoking cessation and medica-

tion adherence (Catley et al., 2012; Goggin et al.,
2013); recordings of MI students from a graduate-
level MI course; wellness coaching phone calls;
brief medical encounters in dental practice and
student counseling. The dataset was obtained from
a previous study conducted by the authors. Further
details can be found in (Pérez-Rosas et al., 2016).

The counseling sessions target three behavior
changes: diet changes (72 sessions), smoking ces-
sation (95 sessions), medication adherence (93
sessions). In addition, there are 16 sessions on
miscellaneous topics. The full set comprises 97.8
hours of audio with an average session length of
20.8 minutes with a standard deviation of 11.5
minutes.

3.1 Data Preprocessing

Before conducting our analysis on the collected
dataset, we performed several preprocessing steps
to ensure the confidentiality of the data and to en-
able automatic text and audio feature extraction.

First, all the counseling recordings were sub-
jected to an anonymization process. This includes
manually trimming the audio to remove introduc-
tions, and inserting silences to replace references
to participant’s name and location.

Next, 162 sessions for which transcripts were
not readily available were transcribed via Mechan-
ical Turk (Marge et al., 2010) using the follow-
ing guidelines: 1) transcribe speech turn by turn,
2) clearly identify the speaker (either client or
counselor), 3) include speech disfluencies, such as
false starts, repetitions of whole words or parts of
words, and fillers. Transcriptions were manually
verified at random points to avoid spam and en-
sure their quality.

Since sessions were recorded in natural condi-
tions, we applied speech enhancement methods to
remove noise and improve the speech signal qual-
ity. We started by converting the audio signal
from a stereo to a mono channel and to a uniform
sample rate of 16k. We then applied the Mean
Square Error estimation of spectral amplitude for
audio denoising, as implemented in the Voicebox
Speech Processing toolbox (Brookes, 2003). To
allow for a turn-by-turn audio analysis of the coun-
seling interaction, we processed the speech sig-
nal to separate client and counselor speech seg-
ments. To accomplish this task, we used on au-
tomatic speech-to-text forced alignment API.1 We

1YouTube Data API

1427



then used the automatically-obtained time stamps
to segment the audio and derive speaker-specific
speech segments for each counseling dyad.

3.2 Data Annotation

Empathy assessments were obtained using the
Motivational Interviewing Treatment Integrity
(MITI) coding scheme version 4.1 (Moyers,
2014). Each session was assigned an empathy
score using a 5-point Likert scale, which mea-
sures the extent to which the clinician understands
or makes an effort to grasp the client’s perspec-
tive and feelings. The coding was conducted by
two independent teams of three coders who had
previous experience in MI and MI coding. An-
notations were conducted using the session audio
recording along with its transcript. The inter-rater
reliability, measured in a random sample of 20
double coded sessions using the Intra-Class Cor-
relation Coefficient was 0.60,2 suggesting that the
annotators showed moderate agreement on empa-
thy assessments. The reported annotation agree-
ment was calculated on the original 5-scale em-
pathy score and it is within the ranges reported in
previous Motivational Interviewing studies (0.60-
0.62). Because of the skewed frequency distribu-
tion of the empathy scores in the dataset, we de-
cided to conduct our analyses using empathy as a
binary outcome, by classifying scores from 1 to 3
as low empathy, and scores of 4 and 5 as high em-
pathy. This resulted in 179 high empathy sessions
and 97 low empathy sessions.

4 Empathic vs Non-Empathic
Interactions: Counselor Engagement

We start by exploring differences in verbal ex-
change length between low and high empathy en-
counters as an indirect measure of participants en-
gagement during the conversation. In this anal-
ysis, we account for the time dimension by seg-
menting the conversation into five equal portions.
First, we look at the ratio of words exchanged be-
tween the counselor and the client for the different
fractions of the conversation.3 As shown in Fig-
ure 1, low empathy interactions present noticeably

2ICC scores were obtained using a two-way mixed model
with absolute agreement.

3This ratio is calculated for each pair of turns in the con-
versation, and it is simply measured as the number of words
uttered by the counselor divided by the number of words ut-
tered by the client. The turn-level word ratios are then aver-
aged for all the turns included in a portion of the conversation.

0 20 40 60 80 100
0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Portion of conversation (% of turns)

C
lie

nt
/C

ou
ns

el
or

w
or

d
ra

tio
by

tu
rn

High empathy

Low empathy

Figure 1: Word ratio by turn between clients and
counselors as the conversation progresses.

0 20 40 60 80 100
15

20

25

30

35

Portion of conversation (% of turns)

A
ve

ra
ge

w
or

ds
pe

rt
ur

n

High empathy - Counselor

Low empathy - Counselor

High empathy - Client

Low empathy - Client

Figure 2: Average words per turn by counselors
and clients as the conversation progresses.

lower ratio of words exchanged between coun-
selors and clients across the interaction, while high
empathy exchanges show consistently higher lev-
els of interaction. This can be further observed in
Figure 2, which shows that more empathic coun-
selors speak considerably less than their clients,
and that their less empathic counterparts. This is
in line with findings in MI literature indicating that
counselors who reduce the amount of time they
talk with their clients are likely to allow more time
for the patient to talk and explore their concerns,
thus improving the perception of empathy and un-
derstanding.

5 The Role of Verbal and Nonverbal
Accommodation in Empathy

Accommodation in health care communication in-
volves counselor and client coordination includ-
ing participation in communication and decision
making, and shared understanding (D’Agostino

1428



and Bylund, 2014). We analyze the accommoda-
tion and its relation to empathy by exploring ver-
bal and nonverbal behaviors exhibited by counsel-
ing participants during MI encounters. In addi-
tion to accommodation assessments, we explore
the direction of the accommodation phenomena,
i.e., whether the counselor is mirroring or leading
the client.

5.1 Verbal Accommodation

In order to explore how verbal accommodation
phenomena in our dataset relate to the MITI
empathy assessments, we use two methods that
are drawn from the Conversation Accommoda-
tion Theory. The first one is the Linguistic Style
Matching (LSM) proposed in (Gonzales et al.,
2009) to quantify to which extent one speaker,
i.e., the counselor, matches the language of the
other, i.e., the client. The second one is the Lin-
guistic Style Coordination (LSC) metric proposed
in (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2011), which
quantifies the degree to which one individual im-
mediately echoes the linguistic style of the person
they are responding to. Both metrics are evaluated
across eight linguistic markers from the LIWC
dictionary (Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010) (i.e.,
quantifiers, conjunctions, adverbs, auxiliary verbs,
prepositions, articles, personal pronouns and im-
personal pronouns).

LSM produces a score ranging between 0 and
1 indicating how much one person uses types of
words comparable to the other person, while LSC
generates a coordination score in the range of -1
to 1 indicating the degree of immediate coordi-
nation between speakers. While both measures
are designed to analyze verbal synchrony, they
can reveal different aspects of the counseling in-
teraction. We use LSM to explore the potential
match of language between counselors and clients
across the counseling interaction, and we use LSC
to quantify whether the counselor use of a spe-
cific linguistic marker in a given turn increases
the probability of the client using the same marker
during their reply. In addition, we use LSC to
investigate power differences during the conver-
sation based on the amount of coordination dis-
played by either counselor or client, under the
assumption that the speaker who accommodates
less holds the most power during the conversa-
tion (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012).

Figure 3 shows the average LSM scores for

0-20 40-60 60-80 80-100

0.6

0.7

0.8

Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

L
in

gu
is

tic
St

yl
e

M
at

ch
in

g

High empathy

Low empathy

Figure 3: Linguistic style matching across five
equal segments of the conversation duration.

eight linguistic markers measured on five equal
segments of the conversation duration. As ex-
pected, we observe an increasing trend of lan-
guage style matching during the counseling in-
teraction in both high-empathic and low-empathic
encounters, as people usually match their lan-
guage unconsciously and regardless of the out-
come of the conversation (Niederhoffer and Pen-
nebaker, 2002). Interestingly, counselors and
clients present a higher degree of language match-
ing during high empathy encounters, while speak-
ers in low empathy encounters show lower levels
of style matching.

We evaluate the immediate LSC in two direc-
tions: coordination of counselors toward clients,
and coordination of clients toward counselors. Re-
sults indicate low levels of immediate coordina-
tion in both cases, with values ranging between
-0.06 and 0.1. Nonetheless, the results also sug-
gest that clients coordinate more than counselors,
with LSC(client,counselor)=-0.030 compared to
LSC(counselor, client)=-0.038, which further sug-
gests that counselors have more power (control)
during the conversation.4

Analyses of the LSC levels from counselors to
clients on different linguistic markers across high-
empathic and low-empathic interactions provide
interesting findings. While counselors generally
show lower levels of coordination in the use of
prepositions, auxiliary verbs, and personal pro-
nouns (Figure 4), low-empathic counselors show
higher LSC levels than their high-empathic coun-
terparts. This can be attributed to the use of con-

4The differences in coordination showed during the anal-
yses are statistically significant (two tailed t-test, p=0.0156)

1429



−0.06 −0.04 −0.02

PREP
AUXVERB

PPRON

OTHER

Linguistic style coordination

High empathy

Low empathy

Figure 4: Linguistic style coordination from coun-
selors to clients. OTHER include: quantifiers,
conjunctions, adverbs, articles, and impersonal
pronouns.

−0.06 −0.04 −0.02 0

OTHER

ART
QUANT

Linguistic style coordination

High empathy

Low empathy

Figure 5: Linguistic style coordination from
clients to counselors. OTHER include: conjunc-
tions, adverbs, auxiliary verbs, prepositions, per-
sonal pronouns and impersonal pronouns.

frontational language (e.g., I, could, should, and
have), which is often associated with low empa-
thy. Similar analyses on the client side, shown in
Figure 5, indicate significant differences in the use
of linguistic markers by the client (except for ar-
ticles and quantifiers). In particular, during low
empathy encounters, clients coordinate more on
the use of conjunctions, adverbs, auxiliary verbs,
prepositions, personal pronouns, and impersonal
pronouns.

5.2 Nonverbal Accommodation

Empathy is also shown through nonverbal chan-
nels such as visual and acoustics (Regenbogen
et al., 2012). We explore the role of nonverbal
mirroring in empathy by looking at vocal syn-
chrony patterns shared between counselors and
clients during the counseling interaction. We fo-
cus our analysis on vocal pitch, which is defined
as the psychological perception of the voice fre-
quency in terms of how high or how low it sounds.
Pitch carries information about the speaker’s emo-
tional state, and has been shown to be related to
the perception of empathy in psychotherapy (Re-
ich et al., 2014).

We evaluate speech synchrony during turn-
taking trajectories in the conversation. We con-

20 40 60 80 100
4 · 10−2

6 · 10−2

8 · 10−2

0.1

0.12

0.14

Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

Pi
tc

h
co

rr
el

at
io

n

High empathy

Low empathy

Figure 6: Pitch correlation among participants
during counselor following turns as the conversa-
tion progresses.

sider two cases: sequences where the counselor
replies to the client statements (e.g., rephrasing),
and sequences where the counselor leads the in-
teraction (e.g., asking questions). Starting with the
turn-by-turn segmentation,5 we extract pitch (F0)
on each speaker-specific segment using OpenEar
(Eyben et al., 2009).6 We then measure the corre-
lation of all pitch values during counselor follow-
ing turns and during counselor leading turns across
the entire therapy session.7

Figures 6 and 7 show the trends in pitch syn-
chrony across high-empathic and low-empathic
encounters in the dataset. In the first figure, we
observe that when replying to clients, counselors
who are given low empathy scores show higher
vocal synchrony levels than counselors who re-
ceive higher empathy scores. A potential expla-
nation for this finding is that a counselor who mir-
rors the client pitch might amplify the emotional
distress of the client, or may suggest the coun-
selor’s lack of confidence or knowledge (Reich
et al., 2014).

On the other hand, we observe the opposite
trend for the counselor leading sequences, where
higher vocal synchrony levels are observed dur-
ing high empathy interactions, which can be at-

5On average, there are approximately 40 counselor-client
turns per conversation

6The feature extraction was done at audio-frame level ev-
ery 10ms with a 25ms Hamming window.

7The terms of “counselor following” and “counselor lead-
ing” simply refer to how the correlation is computed. In
“counselor following,” we consider the set of counselor utter-
ances and the previous client utterances; in “counselor lead-
ing,” we consider the set of counselor utterances and the fol-
lowing client utterances.

1430



20 40 60 80 100
6 · 10−2

8 · 10−2

0.1

0.12

0.14

Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

Pi
tc

h
co

rr
el

at
io

n

High empathy

Low empathy

Figure 7: Pitch correlation among participants
during counselor leading turns as the conversation
progresses.

tributed to clients mirroring the counselor speech.
The similarity is noticeably higher at the begin-
ning of the conversation and gradually decreases
as the conversation progresses. Moreover, the dif-
ferences are not significant for the 40-100% turns,
but results for the first 20% suggest significant dif-
ferences at least in the beginning of the conversa-
tion (p < 0.05). This further confirm similarities
during verbal and nonverbal accommodation, sim-
ilar to how in section 5.1 we found that during
high-empathic encounters, counselors hold con-
trol of the conversation and clients accommodate
more than counselors.

6 Topics Discussed during Counseling
Interaction and their Relation to
Empathy

We also conduct content analysis on the coun-
seling interactions, to identify themes discussed
in high-empathic and low-empathic encounters.
For this task, we employ the Meaning Extraction
Method (MEM) (Chung and Pennebaker, 2008),
a topic extraction method that identifies the most
common words used in a set of documents, and
clusters them into coherent themes by analyz-
ing their co-occurrences. MEM has been used
in the past in the psychotherapy domain to ana-
lyze salient topics in depression forums (Ramirez-
Esparza et al., 2008) and also to investigate dif-
ferences in topics discussed by patients given their
therapy outcomes, i.e., therapeutic gain or unsuc-
cessful therapy (Wolf et al., 2010).

Our analyses are conducted on counselor turns
only, thus all the client turns are removed from

Behavior target Sample words

Medication adherence
Adherence, dose, window,
target, adherent, maintain,
track

Smoking cessation Cigarette, nicotine, risk, ad-diction, smoke, withdrawal

Weight management diet, weight, eat, food, meal,lose, gain, cook, exercise

Table 1: Three behavior change targets in the
dataset

each session transcript. We use the Meaning Ex-
traction Helper tool (Boyd, 2016) to conduct the
text preprocessing tasks, which include tokenizing
and lemmatizing the words in each session, as well
as removing function words. We keep only words
who appear in at least 10% of the transcripts with
a minimum frequency of 50. From the resulting
list, we remove adjectives, adverbs, and verbs and
keep only nouns as they usually refer to one defi-
nite class thus helping us to identify less ambigu-
ous topics. Using the resulting noun list, with 339
entries, we generate a binary vector for each doc-
ument, indicating the presence or absence of each
noun in the document. We then run a Principal
Component Analysis (PCA), followed by varimax
rotation on the document matrix to find clusters of
co-occurring nouns.

The initial PCA shows that the first three com-
ponents consist mainly of domain specific nouns.
Notably, this accurately captures the presence of
the three main behavior change targets discussed
in the dataset, i.e., medication adherence, smoking
cessation, and weight management; sample words
from each component are shown in Table 1.

In order to identify topics potentially related to
the counseling skill, we decided to remove the do-
main words from the analysis, which resulted in
250 nouns. Next, we use the same PCA config-
uration on the binary document matrix and rerun
the experiment, which this time leads to 98 com-
ponents. Following PCA literature recommen-
dations (Velicer and Fava, 1998), we retain only
components with at least three variables with load-
ings greater than 0.30, which leads to 14 compo-
nents. We then re-run PCA forcing a 14 compo-
nents solution; these components explain 35% of
the total variance in the original matrix. Finally,
we use the method proposed in (Wilson et al.,
2016) to measure the degree to which a particu-
lar MEM topic (component) is used during high-
empathic and low-emphatic encounters.

1431



Topic Sample nouns Score

Concerns Concern, scare, overwhelm, di-agnose 2.52

Importance Importance, reason, maintain,sense, increase 1.41

Inform Information, schedule, discuss,read 1.14

Reflections sound, start, look, mention, past,notice 1.19

Change Health, past, experience, deci-sion, realize, difficult, impact 1.27

Goals Reach, choose, period, stick,idea, study, record 1.57

Motivation Plan, motivate, routine, motiva-tion, group, progress, fun 1.10

Support Family, care, worry, job,lifestyle, job, focus, issue 0.92

Feelings Worry, deal, stuck, struggle,leave 0.91

Guide Stop, reduce, attempt, spend, re-placement 0.79

Resistance Trouble, barrier, fear, reach, in-volve, cover 073

Persuade Routine, track, strategy, recom-mend, affect 0.64

Persuade Stop, increase, decrease, benefit,consequences 0.455

Plan Activity, strategy, barrier, couple 0.292

Table 2: Topics extracted by the MEM from MI
sessions, along with sample nouns and salient
topic scores.

Table 2 shows the scores assigned to each
topic. In this table, scores greater than 1 corre-
spond to topics salient in high empathy encounters
while scores lower than 1 indicate topics salient
in low empathy encounters. From this table, we
can derive interesting observations. First, dur-
ing high-empathic encounters, counselors seem to
pay more attention to patient concerns, provide in-
formation, use reflective language, and talk about
change. Second, during less empathic encounters,
counselors seem to persuade and direct more, as
well as focus on client’s resistance to change. In-
terestingly, topics that are identified as dominant
in less empathic interactions are also related to
MI non-adherent behavior, which means the coun-
selors are not following the MI strategy (Rollnick
et al., 2008). Finally, regardless of the empathy
shown during the encounter, counselors discuss
patients’ support system and feelings at similar
rates (values closer to 1), which is expected when
following the MI strategy.

7 Prediction of Counselor Empathy

In the previous sections, we provided evidence of
important differences in linguistic and verbal be-

haviors exhibited by counselors and clients during
high-empathic and low-empathic MI encounters.
In this section, we explore the use of linguistic and
acoustic cues to build a computational model that
predicts counselor empathy during MI encounters.

The feature set consists of the cues identified
during our exploratory analyses as potential indi-
cators of counselor empathy, as well as additional
text and audio features used during standard NLP
and acoustic feature extraction.

The text-based features are extracted from the
manual transcripts of the sessions, while the
audio-based features are extracted from audio seg-
ments obtained by force-aligning each session
transcript with its corresponding audio. However,
as future work, we are considering to automatize
this process by conducting automatic speaker di-
arization and transcription via automatic speech
recognition.

During our experiments, we first explore the
predictive power of each cue separately, followed
by an integrated model that attempts to combine
the linguistic and acoustic cues to improve the pre-
diction of counselor empathy.

All the experiments are performed using a Ran-
dom Forest (Breiman, 2001) classifier. Given the
large number of features, we use feature selection
based on information gain to identify the best set
of features during each experiment. During this
process we keep at least 20% of the features in
each set. Evaluations are conducted using leave-
one-session-out cross-validation. The feature se-
lection algorithm is run on each training fold be-
fore the model is trained, and the final model in-
cludes the best subset of attributes. As a refer-
ence value, we use a majority class baseline, ob-
tained by selecting high empathy as the default
class, which corresponds to 64% accuracy.

7.1 Linguistic and Acoustic Features

Engagement: These features represent the partic-
ipant’s engagement during the conversation as de-
scribed in Section 4. They are evaluated at 20%
increments of the conversation duration and also
at conversation (session) level. The features are
listed in Table 3.
Linguistic accommodation: We measure the
LSM and LSC metrics as described in section 5.2
over 74 LIWC categories and measured at 20% in-
crements of the encounter duration.

8Calculated using the LSC metric

1432



Feature C T
Counselor talk time based on syllable
counting

X

Length of conversation setter, length of
setter response, ratio between setter and
response

X

Counselor turns, client turns X X
Average words during client and coun-
selor turns

X X

Ratio of counselor and client words in
each turn

X X

Rate of verbal mirroring on each LIWC
category 8

X

Table 3: Engagement features extracted at a) (C)
conversation level, and b) (T) 20% increments of
the conversation duration, in percentage of turns.

Nonverbal accommodation: This set includes
the counselor-leading and counselor-following
synchrony scores, calculated as described in sec-
tion 5.2, and evaluated at 20% increments of the
encounter duration.
Discourse topics: These features consist of the
14 topics identified in section 6 as frequently dis-
cussed during the MI encounters. The features are
obtained by calculating the product of the princi-
pal components matrix and the binary document-
term matrix.
Raw linguistic features: We extract a large set of
linguistic features derived from the session tran-
script to model the counselor language. We in-
clude: unigrams and bigrams (ngrams), repre-
sented as a vector containing their frequencies
in the session; psycholinguistic-inspired features
that capture differences in semantic meaning (lex-
icons), represented as the total frequency counts of
all the words in a lexicon-category that are present
in the transcript; syntactic features that encode
syntax patterns in the counselor statements (CFG),
represented as a vector containing the frequency
of lexicalized and unlexicalized production rules
from the Context Free Grammar parse trees9 of
each transcript. The final linguistic features set
consists of 13,648 features.
Raw acoustic features: This feature set includes
a large number of speech features extracted with
the OpenEar toolkit (Eyben et al., 2009). We use a
predefined feature set, EmoLarge, which consists
of a set of 6,552 features used for emotion recog-
nition tasks. The features are derived from 25 low-
level speech descriptors including intensity, loud-
ness, 12 Mel frequency coefficients, pitch (F0),

9Extracted with the Stanford parser (Klein and Manning,
2003).

Feature set
Empathy

F-score
Acc. HE LE

Linguistic
Engagement 71.01% 0.80 0.40
Ling Accom 73.19% 0.82 0.44
Topics 75.72% 0.83 0.57
N-grams 78.62% 0.86 0.58
Lexicons 76.09% 0.84 0.55
CFG 76.09% 0.84 0.53
All linguistic 80.07% 0.87 0.62

Acoustic
Nonverb Accom 64.86% 0.79 0.00
Raw acoustic 73.91% 0.82 0.53
All acoustic 75.72% 0.83 0.56

Linguistic+ Acoustic
Ling+acoustic (early) 76.81% 0.84 0.56
Ling+acoustic (late) 79.35% 0.86 0.71

Table 4: Overall prediction results and F-scores
for high empathy (HE) and low empathy (LE) us-
ing linguistic and acoustic feature sets.

probability of voicing, F0 envelope, zero-crossing
rate, and 8 line spectral frequencies.

7.2 Classification Results

Classification results for each feature set are
shown in Table 4. For the linguistic and acoustic
modalities, almost all the feature sets provide clas-
sification accuracies above the baseline, with good
F-scores for both high and low empathy. The only
exception are the nonverbal accommodation fea-
tures, which have an accuracy comparable to the
baseline (64.86% vs. 64%).

When combining all the feature sets for each
modality, we observe performance gains in the
range of 10 to 15%, as compared to the models
that use one feature set at a time.

We also conduct multimodal experiments where
we combine linguistic and acoustic features using
either early fusion by concatenating all the feature
vectors, or late fusion by aggregating the outputs
of each classifier using a rule-based score level fu-
sion that assigns a weight of 0.8 to the linguistic
classifier, and 0.2 to the acoustic classifier.10

Overall, the results show performance gains
when using late fusion as compared to early fu-
sion. While the late fusion model does not outper-
form the best linguistic model in terms of accuracy
and high empathy F-score, the multimodal late fu-
sion classifier has significantly better F-score per-
formance in the classification of low empathy en-
counters, thus suggesting potential benefits of fus-

10Weights empirically determined on a development set by
evaluating increments of 0.2 for each classifier weight.

1433



ing acoustic and linguistic cues during the predic-
tion of counselor empathy.

8 Conclusions

In this paper, we presented an extensive analysis
of counselors and clients behaviors during MI en-
counters, and found significant differences in the
way counselors and clients behave during high and
low empathy encounters. We specifically explored
the engagement, coordination, and discourse of
counselors during MI interventions. Our main
findings include:
Engagement: Empathic counselors show more
engagement during the conversation by a) showing
levels of verbal interaction consistent with their
client, and b) reducing their relative talking time
with clients.
Coordination: Empathic counselors match the
linguistic style of their clients across the session,
but maintain control of the conversation by coor-
dinating less at immediate conversation turn-level.
Conversation content: Empathic counselors use
reflective language and talk about behavior
change, while less empathic counselors persuade
more and focus on client resistance toward change.

The results of these analyses were used to build
accurate counselor empathy classifiers that rely on
linguistic and acoustic cues, with accuracies of up
to 80%.

In the future, we plan to build upon the acquired
knowledge and the developed classifiers to create
automatic tools that provide accurate evaluative
feedback of counseling practice.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Prof. Berrin Yanikoglu for her
very useful input on the machine learning frame-
work. This material is based in part upon work
supported by the University of Michigan under
the M-Cube program, by the National Science
Foundation (grant #1344257), the John Templeton
Foundation (grant #48503), and the Michigan In-
stitute for Data Science. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the University of
Michigan, the National Science Foundation, the
John Templeton Foundation, or the Michigan In-
stitute for Data Science.

References
Ryan. L. Boyd. 2016. Meh: Meaning extraction helper

(version 1.4.14) [software].

Leo Breiman. 2001. Random forests. Machine learn-
ing 45(1):5–32.

Michael Brookes. 2003. Voicebox: Speech processing
toolbox for matlab.

Delwyn Catley, Kari J Harris, Kathy Goggin, Kimber
Richter, Karen Williams, Christi Patten, Ken Resni-
cow, Edward Ellerbeck, Andrea Bradley-Ewing,
Domonique Malomo, et al. 2012. Motivational in-
terviewing for encouraging quit attempts among un-
motivated smokers: study protocol of a random-
ized, controlled, efficacy trial. BMC public health
12(1):456.

Cindy K Chung and James W Pennebaker. 2008.
Revealing dimensions of thinking in open-ended
self-descriptions: An automated meaning extraction
method for natural language. Journal of Research in
Personality 42(1):96–132.

Thomas A D’Agostino and Carma L Bylund. 2014.
Nonverbal accommodation in health care communi-
cation. Health communication 29(6):563–573.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Michael Gamon,
and Susan Dumais. 2011. Mark my words!: lin-
guistic style accommodation in social media. In
Proceedings of the 20th international conference on
World Wide Web. ACM, pages 745–754.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: Language effects and power differences in
social interaction. In Proceedings of WWW. pages
699–708.

Florian Eyben, Martin Wöllmer, and Björn Schuller.
2009. Openear introducing the munich open-source
emotion and affect recognition toolkit. In 2009 3rd
International Conference on Affective Computing
and Intelligent Interaction and Workshops. IEEE,
pages 1–6.

James Gibson, Nikolaos Malandrakis, Francisco
Romero, David C Atkins, and Shrikanth Narayanan.
2015. Predicting therapist empathy in motivational
interviews using language features inspired by psy-
cholinguistic norms. In Sixteenth Annual Confer-
ence of the International Speech Communication As-
sociation.

Kathy Goggin, Mary M Gerkovich, Karen B Williams,
Julie W Banderas, Delwyn Catley, Jannette Berkley-
Patton, Glenn J Wagner, James Stanford, Sally
Neville, Vinutha K Kumar, et al. 2013. A random-
ized controlled trial examining the efficacy of mo-
tivational counseling with observed therapy for an-
tiretroviral therapy adherence. AIDS and Behavior
17(6):1992–2001.

1434



Amy L Gonzales, Jeffrey T Hancock, and James W
Pennebaker. 2009. Language style matching as a
predictor of social dynamics in small groups. Com-
munication Research .

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics-Volume 1. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 423–430.

Sarah Peregrine Lord, Elisa Sheng, Zac E Imel, John
Baer, and David C Atkins. 2015. More than re-
flections: Empathy in motivational interviewing in-
cludes language style synchrony between therapist
and client. Behavior therapy 46(3):296–303.

Matthew Marge, Satanjeev Banerjee, Alexander Rud-
nicky, et al. 2010. Using the amazon mechanical
turk for transcription of spoken language. In Acous-
tics Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2010
IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, pages
5270–5273.

William R Miller and Stephen Rollnick. 2013. Motiva-
tional interviewing: Helping people change, Third
edition. The Guilford Press.

Theresa B. Manuel Jennifer K. Ernst Denise Moy-
ers. 2014. Motivational Interviewing Treatment In-
tegrity Coding Manual 4.1. Unpublished manual..

Theresa B Moyers and William R Miller. 2013. Is low
therapist empathy toxic? Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors 27(3):878.

Kate G Niederhoffer and James W Pennebaker. 2002.
Linguistic style matching in social interaction. Jour-
nal of Language and Social Psychology 21(4):337–
360.

Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Rada Mihalcea, Kenneth Resni-
cow, Lawrence An, and Satinder Singh. 2016.
Building a motivational interviewing dataset. In
NAACL Workshop on Clinical Psychology.

Nairan Ramirez-Esparza, Cindy K. Chung, Ewa
Kacewicz, and James W. Pennebaker. 2008. The
psychology of word use in depression forums in en-
glish and in spanish: Testing two text analytic ap-
proaches. In In Proc. ICWSM 2008.

Christina Regenbogen, Daniel A Schneider, Andreas
Finkelmeyer, Nils Kohn, Birgit Derntl, Thilo Keller-
mann, Raquel E Gur, Frank Schneider, and Ute Ha-
bel. 2012. The differential contribution of facial ex-
pressions, prosody, and speech content to empathy.
Cognition & emotion 26(6):995–1014.

Catherine M Reich, Jeffrey S Berman, Rick Dale, and
Heidi M Levitt. 2014. Vocal synchrony in psy-
chotherapy. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychol-
ogy 33(5):481.

Stephen Rollnick, William R Miller, Christopher C
Butler, and Mark S Aloia. 2008. Motivational in-
terviewing in health care: helping patients change
behavior. COPD: Journal of Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease 5(3):203–203.

Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: Liwc and comput-
erized text analysis methods. Journal of language
and social psychology 29(1):24–54.

Wayne F Velicer and Joseph L Fava. 1998. Affects of
variable and subject sampling on factor pattern re-
covery. Psychological methods 3(2):231.

Steven R. Wilson, Rada Mihalcea, Ryan L. Boyd, and
James W. Pennebaker. 2016. Cultural influences on
the measurement of personal values through words,
AI Access Foundation, volume SS-16-01 - 07, pages
314–317.

Markus Wolf, Cindy K Chung, and Hans Kordy. 2010.
Inpatient treatment to online aftercare: e-mailing
themes as a function of therapeutic outcomes. Psy-
chotherapy Research 20(1):71–85.

Bo Xiao, Daniel Bone, Maarten Van Segbroeck, Zac E
Imel, David C Atkins, Panayiotis G Georgiou, and
Shrikanth S Narayanan. 2014. Modeling therapist
empathy through prosody in drug addiction counsel-
ing. In Fifteenth Annual Conference of the Interna-
tional Speech Communication Association.

Bo Xiao, Dogan Can, Panayiotis G Georgiou, David
Atkins, and Shrikanth S Narayanan. 2012. Ana-
lyzing the language of therapist empathy in motiva-
tional interview based psychotherapy. In Signal &
Information Processing Association Annual Summit
and Conference (APSIPA ASC), 2012 Asia-Pacific.
IEEE, pages 1–4.

Bo Xiao, Zac E Imel, Panayiotis G Georgiou, David C
Atkins, and Shrikanth S Narayanan. 2015. ” rate my
therapist”: Automated detection of empathy in drug
and alcohol counseling via speech and language pro-
cessing. PloS one 10(12):e0143055.

1435


	Understanding and Predicting Empathic Behavior in Counseling Therapy

