



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 411–416
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2065

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 411–416
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2065

Automatic Compositor Attribution in the First Folio of Shakespeare

Maria Ryskina∗ Hannah Alpert-Abrams† Dan Garrette‡ Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick∗

∗ Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, {mryskina,tberg}@cs.cmu.edu
†Comparative Literature Program, University of Texas at Austin, halperta@gmail.com

‡ Google, dhgarrette@google.com

Abstract

Compositor attribution, the clustering of
pages in a historical printed document by
the individual who set the type, is a bib-
liographic task that relies on analysis of
orthographic variation and inspection of
visual details of the printed page. In
this paper, we introduce a novel unsuper-
vised model that jointly describes the tex-
tual and visual features needed to distin-
guish compositors. Applied to images of
Shakespeare’s First Folio, our model pre-
dicts attributions that agree with the man-
ual judgements of bibliographers with an
accuracy of 87%, even on text that is the
output of OCR.

1 Introduction

Within literary studies, the field of bibliography
has an unusually long tradition of quantitative
analysis. One particularly relevant area is that
of compositor attribution—the clustering of pages
in a historical printed document by the individ-
ual (the compositor) who set the type. Like sty-
lometry, a long-standing area of NLP that has
largely focused on attributing the authorship of
text (Holmes, 1994; Hope, 1994; Juola, 2006;
Koppel et al., 2009; Jockers and Witten, 2010),
the analysis of orthographic patterns is fundamen-
tal to compositor attribution. Additionally, com-
positor attribution often makes use of visual fea-
tures, such as whitespace layout, introducing new
challenges. These analyses have traditionally been
done by hand, but efforts are painstaking due to the
difficulty of manually recording these features.

In this paper, we present an unsupervised model
specifically designed for compositor attribution
that incorporates both textual and visual sources
of evidence traditionally used by bibliographers
(Hinman, 1963; Taylor, 1981; Blayney, 1991).

spelling
variation

spacing variation
medial comma

Figure 1: The compositor of the left page tended to use the
spellings doe and deere, while the compositor for the right
page used spellings do and deare, indicating these pages
were likely set by different people. The varying width of the
medial comma whitespace also distinguishes the typesetters.

Our model jointly describes the patterns of vari-
ation both in orthography and in the whitespace
between glyphs, allowing us to cluster pages
by discovering patterns of similarity and differ-
ence. When applied to digital scans of histori-
cal printed documents, our approach learns ortho-
graphic and whitespace preferences of individual
compositors and predicts groupings of pages set
by the same compositor.1 This is, to our knowl-
edge, the first attempt to perform compositor at-
tribution automatically. Prior work has proposed
automatic approaches to authorship attribution—
which is typically viewed as the supervised prob-
lem of identifying a particular author given sam-
ples of their writing. In contrast, compositor attri-
bution lacks supervision because compositors are
unknown and, in addition, focuses on different lin-
guistic patterns. We explain spellings of words
conditioned on word choice, not the word choice
itself.

1The validity of compositor attribution has sparked an on-
going and heated debate among bibliographers (McKenzie,
1969, 1984; Rizvi, 2016); while some reject parts or all of
this approach, it continues to be cited in authoritative bib-
liographical texts (Gaskell, 2007; Blayney, 1996). Without
taking a position in this debate, we seek only to automate
the methods that remain in use by particular bibliographers
(Blayney, 1996; Burrows, 2013).

411

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2065
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-2065


ci

sik

mij

dij

dear

deere
Ki Ji

I

Compositor

C! !! !! !

Edit operation weights:

C

wc
Word variant weights:

Figure 2: In our model, a compositor
ci is generated for page i from a multi-
nomial prior. Then, each diplomatic
word, dij , is generated conditioned on
ci and the corresponding modern word,
mij , from a distribution parameterized
by weight vectorwc. Finally, each me-
dial comma spacing width (measured
in pixels), sik, is generated conditioned
on ci from a distribution parameterized
by θc.

To evaluate our approach, we fit our model to
digital scans of Shakespeare’s First Folio (1623)—
a document with well established manual judge-
ments of compositor attribution. We find that even
when relying on noisy OCR transcriptions of tex-
tual content, our model predicts compositor attri-
butions that agree with manual annotations 87% of
the time, outperforming several simpler baselines.
Our approach opens new possibilities for consid-
ering patterns across a larger vocabulary of words
and at a higher visual resolution than has been pos-
sible historically. Such a tool may enable scalable
first-pass analysis in understudied domains as a
complement to humanistic studies of composition.

2 Background

In this paper we focus on modeling the same types
of observations made by scholars and demonstrate
agreement with authoritative attributions. We use
compositor studies of Shakespeare’s First Folio
to inform our approach, drawing on the meth-
ods proposed by Hinman (1963), Howard-Hill
(1973), and Taylor (1981). Hinman’s landmark
1963 study clustered the pages of the First Fo-
lio according to five different compositors based
on variations in spelling among three common
words. Figure 1, for example, shows portions of
two pages of the First Folio with different spelling
variants for the words dear and do: one compos-
itor used deere and doe, while the other used
deare and do. Hinman relied on the assumption
that each compositor was consistent in their pref-
erences for the sake of convenience in the typeset-
ting process (Blayney, 1991). Subsequent studies
looked at larger sets of words and more general
orthographic preferences (e.g. the preference to
terminate words with -ie instead of -y), lead-
ing to modifications of Hinman’s original analysis

(Howard-Hill, 1973; Taylor, 1981). In this paper
we propose a probabilistic model designed to cap-
ture both word-specific preferences and general
orthographic patterns. To separate the effect of
the compositor from the choices made by the au-
thor or editor, we condition on a modernized (col-
lated) version of Shakespeare’s text as was done
by scholars.

Visual features, including typeface usage and
whitespace layout, also inform compositor attribu-
tion. For example, the highlighted spacing in Fig-
ure 1 shows different choices after medial commas
(commas that occur before the end of the line).
Bibliographers produced new hypotheses about
how many compositors were involved in produc-
tion based on the analysis of the use of spaces
before and after punctuation (Howard-Hill, 1973;
Taylor, 1981). We additionally incorporate this
source of evidence into to our automatic approach
by modeling pixel-level whitespace distances.

Bibliographers also use contextual information
to inform their analyses, including copy text or-
thography, printing house records, collation, type
case usage, and the use of type with cast-on
spaces. In our model, we restrict our analysis to
only those features that can be derived from the
OCR output and simple visual analysis.

3 Model

Our computational approach to compositor attri-
bution operates on the sources of evidence that
have been considered by bibliographers. In par-
ticular, we focus on jointly modeling patterns
of orthographic variation and spacing preferences
across pages of a document, treating composi-
tor assignments as latent variables in a generative
model. We assume access to a diplomatic tran-
scription of the document (a transcription faith-

412



ful to the original orthography), which we auto-
matically align with a modernized version.2 We
experiment with both manually and automatically
(OCR) produced transcriptions, and assume ac-
cess to pixel-level spacing information on each
page, which can be extracted using OCR as de-
scribed in Section 4.

Figure 2 shows the generative process. In
our model, each of I total pages is generated
independently. The compositor assignment for
the ith page is represented by the variable ci ∈
{1, . . . , C} and is generated from a multinomial
prior. For page i, each diplomatic word, dij , is
generated conditioned on the corresponding mod-
ern word, mij , and the compositor who set the
page, ci. Finally, the model produces the pixel
width of the space after each medial comma, sik,
again conditioned on the compositor, ci. The joint
distribution for page i, conditioned on modern
text, takes the following form:

P ({dij}, {sik}, ci|{mij}) =
P (ci) [Prior on compositors]

·
Ji∏

j=1

P (dij |mij , ci;wci) [Orthographic model]

·
Ki∏

k=1

P (sik|ci;θci) [Whitespace model]

3.1 Orthographic Preference Model

We choose the parameterization of the distribu-
tion of diplomatic words in order to capture two
types of spelling preference: (1) general prefer-
ences for certain character groups (such as -ie)
and (2) preferences that only pertain to a particu-
lar word and do not indicate a larger pattern. Since
it is unknown which of the two behaviors is dom-
inant, we let the model describe both and learn to
separate their effects. Using a log-linear parame-
terization,

P (d|m, c;w) ∝ exp(w>c f(m, d))

we introduce features to capture both effects.
Here, f(m, d) is a feature function defined on
modern word m paired with diplomatic word d,
whilewc is a weight vector corresponding to com-
positor c.

2Modern editions are common for many books that are of
interest to bibliographers, though future work could consider
how to cope with their absence.

To capture word-specific preferences we add an
indicator feature for each pair of modern word m
and diplomatic spelling d. We refer to these as
WORD features below. To capture general ortho-
graphic preferences we introduce an additional set
of features based on the edit operations involved in
the computation of Levenshtein distance between
m and d. In particular, each operation is added
as a separate feature, both with and without local
context (previous or next character of the modern
word). We refer to this group as EDIT features.
The weight vector for each compositor represents
their unique biases, as shown in the depiction of
these parameters in Figure 2.

3.2 Whitespace Preference Model
Manual analysis of spacing has revealed differ-
ences across pages. In particular, the choice of
spaced or non-spaced punctuation marks is hy-
pothesized by biobliographers to be indicative of
compositor preference and specific typecase. We
add whitespace distance to our model to capture
those observations. While bibliographers only
made a coarse distinction between spaced or non-
spaced commas, in our model we generate medial
comma spacing widths, sik, that are measured in
pixels to enable finer-grained analysis. We use a
simple multinomial parameterization where each
pixel width is treated as a separate outcome up to
some maximum allowable width:

sik|ci ∼Mult(θci)
Here, θc represents the vector of multinomial
spacing parameters corresponding to compositor
c. We choose this parameterization because it can
capture non-unimodal whitespace preference dis-
tributions, as depicted in Figure 2, and it makes
learning simple.

3.3 Learning and Inference
Modern and diplomatic words and spacing vari-
ables are observed, while compositor assignments
are latent. In order to fit the model to an input doc-
ument we estimate the orthographic preference pa-
rameters, wc, and spacing preference parameters,
θc, for each compositor using EM. The E-step is
accomplished via a tractable sum over composi-
tor assignments, while the M-step for wc is ac-
complished via gradient ascent (Berg-Kirkpatrick
et al., 2010). The M-step for spacing parameters,
θc, uses the standard multinomial update. Pre-
dicting compositor groups is accomplished via an

413



Model Setup
Bodleian Transcription Ocular OCR Transcription

Hinman Attr Blayney Attr Hinman Attr Blayney Attr
1-to-1 M-to-1 1-to-1 M-to-1 1-to-1 M-to-1 1-to-1 M-to-1

RANDOM 22.5 49.6 16.7 49.6 22.5 49.6 16.7 49.6
BASIC w/ HINMAN 67.9 71.8 60.4 67.3 66.6 70.5 47.1 63.8

w/ AUTO 64.3 81.0 58.8 81.3 64.9 81.1 53.7 80.7
FEAT w/ EDIT 75.3 79.1 77.1 83.1 76.8 77.4 76.1 76.0

w/ EDIT + WORD 81.1 81.1 80.7 80.6 75.1 75.0 74.4 74.4
w/ EDIT + SPACE 87.6 87.5 87.3 87.2 86.7 86.6 85.9 85.8
w/ ALL 83.8 83.7 83.5 83.4 82.5 82.4 82.4 82.2

Table 1: The experi-
mental results for all se-
tups of the model. In the
experiments with BASIC
model, we compare the
short HINMAN word list
with the automatically
filtered AUTO word list.
We show results for sev-
eral variants of our full
model, labeled as FEAT,
both with and without
spacing generation. A
random baseline is in-
cluded for comparison.

independent argmax over each ci. In all experi-
ments we run 75 iterations of EM with 100 ran-
dom restarts, choosing the learned parameters cor-
responding the best model likelihood.

4 Experiments

Data: To evaluate our model when it has ac-
cess to perfectly transcribed historical text, we use
the Bodleian diplomatic transcription of the First
Folio.3 To test whether our approach can also
work with untranscribed books, we ran the Ocu-
lar OCR system (Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 2013) on
the Bodleian facsimile images to create an auto-
matic diplomatic transcription. In both cases, we
used Ocular’s estimates of glyph bounding boxes
on the complete First Folio images to extract spac-
ing information. The modern text was taken from
MIT Complete Works of Shakespeare4 and was
aligned with diplomatic transcriptions by running
a word-level edit distance calculation. The ex-
tracted substitutions form the model’s observed
modern-diplomatic word pairs.

Evaluation: To compare the recovered attribu-
tion with those proposed by bibliographers, we
evaluate against an authoritative attribution com-
piled by Peter Blayney (1996) which includes the
work of various scholars (Hinman, 1963; Howard-
Hill, 1973, 1976, 1980; Taylor, 1981; O’Connor,
1975; Werstine, 1982). We also evaluate our sys-
tem against an earlier, highly influential model
proposed by Hinman (1963), which we approx-
imate by reverting certain compositor divisions
in Blayney’s attribution. Hinman’s attribution
posited five compositors, while Blayney’s posited
eight. In experiments, we set the model’s maxi-
mum number of compositors to C = 5 when eval-
uating on Hinman’s attribution, and use C = 8

3http://firstfolio.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/
4http://shakespeare.mit.edu/

with Blayney’s. We compute the one-to-one
and many-to-one accuracy, mapping the recov-
ered page groups to the gold compositors to max-
imize accuracy, as is standard for many unsuper-
vised clustering tasks, e.g. POS induction (see
Christodoulopoulos et al. (2010)).

BASIC model variant: We evaluate a simple base-
line model that uses a multinomial parameteriza-
tion for generating diplomatic words and does not
incorporate spacing information. We use two dif-
ferent options for selection of spelling variants to
be considered by the model. First, we consider
only the three words selected by Hinman: do, go
and here (referred to as HINMAN). Second, we
use a larger, automatically selected, word list (re-
ferred to as AUTO). Here, we select all modern
words with frequency greater than 70 that are not
names and that exhibit sufficient variance in diplo-
matic spellings (most common diplomatic spelling
occurs in less than 80% of aligned tokens). For
our full model, described in the next section, we
always use the larger AUTO word list.

FEAT model variant: We run experiments with
several variants of our full model, described in
Section 3 (referred to as FEAT since they use
a feature-based parameterization of diplomatic
word generation.) We try ablations of WORD and
EDIT features, as well as model variants with and
without the spacing generation component (re-
ferred to as SPACE.) We refer to the full model
that includes both types of features and spacing
generation as ALL.

5 Results

Our experimental results are presented in Table 1.
The BASIC variant, modeled after Hinman’s orig-
inal procedure, substantially outperforms the ran-
dom baseline, with the HINMAN word list outper-
forming the larger AUTO word list. However, use

414



! ! ! ! ! ! ! !

!u   o
u   w!
u   DEL!

B AC E D

! ! ! !

! ! ! !! ! ! !

! ! ! !

! ! ! !

! ! ! !

Comp B Comp AComp C Comp E Comp D

! ! ! !

Figure 3: Learned behaviors of the Fo-
lio compositors. Our model only de-
tected the presence of five compositors
(ranked according to number of pages
the compositor set in our model’s pre-
diction). Compositor D’s habit of omit-
ting u (yong vs. young) and compos-
itor C’s usage of spaced medial commas
were also noticed in Taylor (1981).

of the larger word list with feature-based models
yields large gains in all scenarios, including evalu-
ation on Hinman’s original attributions and while
using OCR diplomatic transcriptions. The best-
performing model for both manually transcribed
and OCR text uses EDIT features in conjunction
with spacing generation and achieves an accuracy
of up to 87%. Including WORD features on top
of this leads to slightly reduced performance, per-
haps as a result of the substantially increased num-
ber of free parameters. In the OCR scenario, the
addition of WORD features on top of EDIT de-
creases accuracy, unlike the same experiment with
the manual transcription. This is possibly a result
of the reduced reliability of full word forms due to
mistakes in OCR.

Particularly interesting is the result that spac-
ing, rarely a factor considered in NLP models,
improves the accuracy significantly for our sys-
tem when compared with EDIT features alone.
Because pixel-level visual information and arbi-
trary orthographic patterns are also the most diffi-
cult features to measure manually, our results give
strong evidence to the assertion that NLP-style
models can aid bibliographers.

6 Discussion

The results on OCR (character error rate for most
plays≈ 10−15%) transcripts are only marginally
worse than those on manual transcripts, which
shows that our approach can be generalized for the
common case where manual diplomatic transcrip-
tions are not available. For our experiments, we
also chose a common modern edition of Shake-
speare instead of more carefully produced mod-
ernized transcription of the facsimile—our goal
being to again show that this approach can be
generalized, perhaps to documents where careful
modernizations of the facsimile are not available.
Together, these results suggest that our model may
be sufficiently robust to aid bibliographers in their
analysis of less studied texts.

Figure 3 shows an example of the feature

weights and spacing parameters learned by the
FEAT w/ ALL model. Our statistical approach is
able to successfully explain some of the observa-
tions scholars made. For example, Taylor (1981)
notices that compositors C and D prefer to omit
u in young but A does not. Our model reflects
this by giving u → DEL high weight for D and
low weight for A. However, the weight of a single
feature is difficult to interpret in isolation. This
might be the reason why our model only moder-
ately agrees in case of compositor C. Another ex-
ample can be seen in spacing patterns: according
to Taylor (1981), compositor C uses spaced me-
dial commas unlike A and D. Our model learns
the same behavior.

7 Conclusion

Our primary goal is to scale the methods of com-
positor attribution, including both textual and vi-
sual modes of evidence, for use across books and
corpora. By using principled statistical techniques
and considering evidence at a larger scale, we of-
fer a more robust approach to compositor identi-
fication than has previously been possible. The
fact that our system works well on OCR texts
means that we are not restricted to only those
documents for which we have manually produced
transcriptions, opening up the possibility for bib-
liographic study on a much larger class of texts.
Though we are unable to incorporate the kinds
of world knowledge used by bibliographers, our
ability to include more information and more fine-
grained information allows us to recreate their re-
sults. Having validated these techniques on the
First Folio, where historical claims are well es-
tablished, we hope future work can extend these
methods and their application.

Acknowledgements

We thank the three anonymous reviewers for their
valuable feedback. This project is funded in part
by the NSF under grant 1618044.

415



References
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Alexandre Bouchard-Côté,

John DeNero, and Dan Klein. 2010. Painless un-
supervised learning with features. In Proceedings of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies.

Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Greg Durrett, and Dan Klein.
2013. Unsupervised transcription of historical doc-
uments. In Proceedings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Peter W. M. Blayney. 1991. The First Folio of Shake-
speare: In Conjunction with the Exhibition at the
Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, DC, April
1, 1991-September 21, 1991. Folger Shakespeare
Library.

Peter W. M. Blayney, editor. 1996. The First Folio of
Shakespeare: The Norton Facsimile. Norton.

Ian R. Burrows. 2013. ”The peryod of my blisse”:
Commas, ends and utterance in Solyman and
Perseda. Textual Cultures: Texts, Contexts, Inter-
pretation 8(2):95–120.

Christos Christodoulopoulos, Sharon Goldwater, and
Mark Steedman. 2010. Two decades of unsuper-
vised POS induction: How far have we come? In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing.

Philip Gaskell. 2007. A New Introduction to Bibliogra-
phy. Oak Knoll Press.

Charlton Hinman. 1963. The printing and proof-
reading of the First Folio of Shakespeare, volume 1.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

David I. Holmes. 1994. Authorship attribution. Com-
puters and the Humanities 28(2):87–106.

Jonathan Hope. 1994. The authorship of Shakespeare’s
plays: A socio-linguistic study. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Trevor H. Howard-Hill. 1973. The compositors of
Shakespeare’s Folio Comedies. Studies in bibliog-
raphy 26:61–106.

Trevor H. Howard-Hill. 1976. Compositors B and E in
the Shakespeare First Folio and Some Recent Stud-
ies. Self-published.

Trevor H. Howard-Hill. 1980. New light on compos-
itor E of the Shakespeare First Folio. The Library
6(2):156–178.

Matthew L. Jockers and Daniela M. Witten. 2010. A
comparative study of machine learning methods for
authorship attribution. Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting 25(2):215–223.

Patrick Juola. 2006. Authorship attribution. Founda-
tions and Trends in Information Retrieval 1(3):233–
334.

Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, and Shlomo Arga-
mon. 2009. Computational methods in authorship
attribution. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 60(1):9–
26. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.v60:1.

D. F. McKenzie. 1969. Printers of the mind: Some
notes on bibliographical theories and printing-house
practices. Studies in Bibliography 22:1–75.

D. F. McKenzie. 1984. Stretching a point: Or, the case
of the spaced-out comps. Studies in Bibliography
37:106–121.

John O’Connor. 1975. Compositors D and F of the
Shakespeare First Folio. Studies in Bibliography
28:81–117.

Pervez Rizvi. 2016. Use of spellings for compositor
attribution in the First Folio. The Papers of the Bib-
liographical Society of America 110:1–53.

Gary Taylor. 1981. The shrinking compositor A of
the Shakespeare First Folio. Studies in Bibliography
34:96–117.

Paul Werstine. 1982. Cases and compositors in the
Shakespeare First Folio Comedies. Studies in Bib-
liography 35:206–234.

416


	Automatic Compositor Attribution in the First Folio of Shakespeare

