



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 773–783
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1072

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 773–783
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1072

Friendships, Rivalries, and Trysts:
Characterizing Relations between Ideas in Texts

Chenhao Tan∗ Dallas Card† Noah A. Smith∗
∗Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering †School of Computer Science

University of Washington Carnegie Mellon University
Seattle, WA 98195, USA Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

chenhao@chenhaot.com dcard@cmu.edu nasmith@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

Understanding how ideas relate to each
other is a fundamental question in many
domains, ranging from intellectual his-
tory to public communication. Because
ideas are naturally embedded in texts, we
propose the first framework to systemat-
ically characterize the relations between
ideas based on their occurrence in a cor-
pus of documents, independent of how
these ideas are represented. Combining
two statistics—cooccurrence within doc-
uments and prevalence correlation over
time—our approach reveals a number of
different ways in which ideas can cooper-
ate and compete. For instance, two ideas
can closely track each other’s prevalence
over time, and yet rarely cooccur, almost
like a “cold war” scenario. We observe
that pairwise cooccurrence and prevalence
correlation exhibit different distributions.
We further demonstrate that our approach
is able to uncover intriguing relations be-
tween ideas through in-depth case studies
on news articles and research papers.

1 Introduction

Ideas exist in the mind, but are made manifest in
language, where they compete with each other for
the scarce resource of human attention. Milton
(1644) used the “marketplace of ideas” metaphor
to argue that the truth will win out when ideas
freely compete; Dawkins (1976) similarly likened
the evolution of ideas to natural selection of genes.
We propose a framework to quantitatively charac-
terize competition and cooperation between ideas
in texts, independent of how they might be repre-
sented.

By “ideas”, we mean any discrete conceptual

units that can be identified as being present or ab-
sent in a document. In this work, we consider
representing ideas using keywords and topics ob-
tained in an unsupervised fashion, but our way of
characterizing the relations between ideas could
be applied to many other types of textual repre-
sentations, such as frames (Card et al., 2015) and
hashtags.

What does it mean for two ideas to compete in
texts, quantitatively? Consider, for example, the
issue of immigration. There are two strongly com-
peting narratives about the roughly 11 million peo-
ple1 who are residing in the United States without
permission. One is “illegal aliens”, who “steal”
jobs and deny opportunities to legal immigrants;
the other is “undocumented immigrants”, who are
already part of the fabric of society and deserve a
path to citizenship (Merolla et al., 2013).

Although prior knowledge suggests that these
two narratives compete, it is not immediately ob-
vious what measures might reveal this competition
in a corpus of writing about immigration. One
question is whether or not these two ideas cooc-
cur in the same documents. In the example above,
these narratives are used by distinct groups of peo-
ple with different ideologies. The fact that they
don’t cooccur is one clue that they may be in com-
petition with each other.

However, cooccurrence is insufficient to express
the selection process of ideas, i.e., some ideas fade
out over time, while others rise in popularity, anal-
ogous to the populations of species in nature. Of
the two narratives on immigration, we may expect
one to win out at the expense of another as pub-
lic opinion shifts. Alternatively, we might expect
to see these narratives reinforcing each other, as
both sides intensify their messaging in response
to growing opposition, much like the U.S.S.R. and

1As of 2014, according to the most recent numbers from
the Center for Migration Studies (Warren, 2016).

773

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1072
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1072


anti-correlated correlated

lik
el

y
to

co
oc

cu
r tryst friendship

1980 1990 2000 2010

immigration, deportation
detainee, detention

1980 1990 2000 2010

immigrant,
undocumented
obama, president

un
lik

el
y

to
co

oc
cu

r head-to-head arms-race

1980 1990 2000 2010

immigrant,
undocumented
illegal, alien

1980 1990 2000 2010

immigration, deportation
republican, party

Figure 1: Relations between ideas in the space of cooccurrence and prevalence correlation (prevalence
correlation is shown explicitly and cooccurrence is encoded in row captions). We use topics from LDA
(Blei et al., 2003) to represent ideas. Each topic is named with a pair of words that are most strongly
associated with the topic in LDA. Subplots show examples of relations between topics found in U.S.
newspaper articles on immigration from 1980 to 2016, color coded to match the description in text. The
y-axis represents the proportion of news articles in a year (in our corpus) that contain the corresponding
topic. All examples are among the top 3 strongest relations in each type except (“immigrant, undocumented”,
“illegal, alien”), which corresponds to the two competing narratives. We explain the formal definition of
strength in §2.

the U.S. during the cold war. To capture these pos-
sibilities, we use prevalence correlation over time.

Building on these insights, we propose a frame-
work that combines cooccurrence within docu-
ments and prevalence correlation over time. This
framework gives rise to four possible types of rela-
tion that correspond to the four quadrants in Fig. 1.
We explain each type using examples from news
articles in U.S. newspapers on immigration from
1980 to 2016. Here, we have used LDA to iden-
tify ideas in the form of topics, and we denote each
idea with a pair of words most strongly associated
with the corresponding topic.

Friendship (correlated over time, likely to cooc-
cur). The “immigrant, undocumented” topic tends
to cooccur with “obama, president” and both topics
have been rising during the period of our dataset,
likely because the “undocumented immigrants”
narrative was an important part of Obama’s fram-
ing of the immigration issue (Haynes et al., 2016).

Head-to-head (anti-correlated over time, unlikely
to cooccur). “immigrant, undocumented” and “ille-
gal, alien” are in a head-to-head competition: these
two topics rarely cooccur, and “immigrant, undocu-

mented” has been growing in prevalence, while the
usage of “illegal, alien” in newspapers has been de-
clining. This observation agrees with a report from
Pew Research Center (Guskin, 2013).

Tryst (anti-correlated over time, likely to cooc-
cur). The two off-diagonal examples use topics
related to law enforcement. Overall, “immigration,
deportation” and “detention, jail” often cooccur but
“detention, jail” has been declining, while “immigra-
tion, deportation” has been rising. This possibly re-
lates to the promises to overhaul the immigration
detention system (Kalhan, 2010).2

Arms-race (correlated over time, unlikely to
cooccur). One of the above law enforcement top-
ics (“immigration, deportation”) and a topic on the
Republican party (“republican, party”) hold an arms-
race relation: they are both growing in prevalence
over time, but rarely cooccur, perhaps suggesting
an underlying common cause.

2The tryst relation is the least intuitive, yet is nevertheless
observed. The pattern of being anti-correlated yet likely to
cooccur is typically found when two ideas exhibit a friend-
ship pattern (cooccurring and correlated), but only briefly,
and then diverge.

774



Note that our terminology describes the rela-
tions between ideas in texts, not necessarily be-
tween the entities to which the ideas refer. For
example, we find that the relation between “Is-
rael” and “Palestine” is “friendship” in news ar-
ticles on terrorism, based on their prevalence cor-
relation and cooccurrence in that corpus.

We introduce the formal definition of our frame-
work in §2 and apply it to news articles on five
issues and research papers from ACL Anthology
and NIPS as testbeds. We operationalize ideas us-
ing topics (Blei et al., 2003) and keywords (Mon-
roe et al., 2008).

To explore whether the four relation types exist
and how strong these relations are, we first exam-
ine the marginal and joint distributions of cooccur-
rence and prevalence correlation (§3). We find that
cooccurrence shows a unimodal normal-shaped
distribution but prevalence correlation demon-
strates more diverse distributions across corpora.
As we would expect, there are, in general, more
and stronger friendship and head-to-head relations
than arms-race and tryst relations.

Second, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework through in-depth case studies (§4). We
not only validate existing knowledge about some
news issues and research areas, but also identify
hypotheses that require further investigation. For
example, using keywords to represent ideas, a top
pair with the tryst relation in news articles on ter-
rorism is “arab” and “islam”; they are likely to
cooccur, but “islam” is rising in relative prevalence
while “arab” is declining. This suggests a conjec-
ture that the news media have increasingly linked
terrorism to a religious group rather than an ethnic
group. We also show relations between topics in
ACL that center around machine translation.

Our work is a first step towards understanding
relations between ideas from text corpora, a com-
plex and important research question. We provide
some concluding thoughts in §6.

2 Computational Framework

The aim of our computational framework is to
explore relations between ideas. We thus as-
sume that the set of relevant ideas has been iden-
tified, and those expressed in each document have
been tabulated. Our open-source implementation
is at https://github.com/Noahs-ARK/
idea_relations/. In the following, we in-
troduce our formal definitions and datasets.

∀x, y ∈ I, P̂MI(x, y) = log P̂ (x, y)
P̂ (x)P̂ (y)

= C + log
1+
∑

t

∑
k 1{x∈dtk}·1{y∈dtk}

(1+
∑

t

∑
k 1{x∈dtk})·(1+

∑
t

∑
k 1{y∈dtk})

(1)

r̂(x, y) =

∑
t

(
P̂ (x|t)−P̂ (x|t)

)(
P̂ (y|t)−P̂ (y|t)

)

√
∑

t

(
P̂ (x|t)−P̂ (x|t)

)2√∑
t

(
P̂ (y|t)−P̂ (y|t)

)2

(2)

Figure 2: Eq. 1 is the empirical pointwise mutual
information for two ideas, our measure of cooccur-
rence of ideas; note that we use add-one smooth-
ing in estimating PMI. Eq. 2 is the Pearson corre-
lation between two ideas’ prevalence over time.

2.1 Cooccurrence and Prevalence
Correlation

As discussed in the introduction, we focus on two
dimensions to quantify relations between ideas:

1. cooccurrence reveals to what extent two ideas
tend to occur in the same contexts;

2. similarity between the relative prevalence of
ideas over time reveals how two ideas relate
in terms of popularity or coverage.

Our input is a collection of documents, each rep-
resented by a set of ideas and indexed by time. We
denote a static set of ideas as I and a text corpus
that consists of these ideas as C = {D1, . . . , DT },
where Dt = {dt1 , . . . , dtNt} gives the collection
of documents at timestep t, and each document,
dtk , is represented as a subset of ideas in I. Here
T is the total number of timesteps, and Nt is the
number of documents at timestep t. It follows that
the total number of documents N =

∑T
t=1Nt.

In order to formally capture the two dimensions
above, we employ two commonly-used statistics.
First, we use empirical pointwise mutual informa-
tion (PMI) to capture the cooccurrence of ideas
within the same document (Church and Hanks,
1990); see Eq. 1 in Fig. 2. Positive P̂MI indi-
cates that ideas occur together more frequently
than would be expected if they were independent,
while negative P̂MI indicates the opposite.

Second, we compute the correlation between
normalized document frequency of ideas to cap-
ture the relation between the relative prevalence
of ideas across documents over time; see Eq. 2 in
Fig. 2. Positive r̂ indicates that two ideas have
similar prevalence over time, while negative r̂ sug-

775



gests two anti-correlated ideas (i.e., when one goes
up, the other goes down).

The four types of relations in the introduction
can now be obtained using P̂MI and r̂, which cap-
ture cooccurrence and prevalence correlation re-
spectively. We further define the strength of the
relation between two ideas as the absolute value
of the product of their P̂MI and r̂ scores:

∀x, y ∈ I, strength(x, y) = |P̂MI(x, y)×r̂(x, y)|.
(3)

2.2 Datasets and Representation of Ideas
We use two types of datasets to validate our frame-
work: news articles and research papers. We
choose these two domains because competition
between ideas has received significant interest in
history of science (Kuhn, 1996) and research on
framing (Chong and Druckman, 2007; Entman,
1993; Gitlin, 1980; Lakoff, 2014). Furthermore,
interesting differences may exist in these two do-
mains as news evolves with external events and
scientific research progresses through innovations.
• News articles. We follow the strategy in Card

et al. (2015) to obtain news articles from Lex-
isNexis on five issues: abortion, immigration,
same-sex marriage, smoking, and terrorism. We
search for relevant articles using LexisNexis
subject terms in U.S. newspapers from 1980 to
2016. Each of these corpora contains more than
25,000 articles. Please refer to the supplemen-
tary material for details.

• Research papers. We consider full texts of pa-
pers from two communities: our own ACL com-
munity captured by papers from ACL, NAACL,
EMNLP, and TACL from 1980 to 2014 (Radev
et al., 2009); and the NIPS community from
1987 to 2016.3 There are 4.8K papers from
the ACL community and 6.6K papers from
the NIPS community. The processed datasets
are available at https://chenhaot.com/
pages/idea-relations.html.

In order to operationalize ideas in a text corpus,
we consider two ways to represent ideas.
• Topics. We extract topics from each document

by running LDA (Blei et al., 2003) on each cor-
pus C. In all datasets, we set the number of top-
ics to 50.4 Formally, I is the 50 topics learned
3 http://papers.nips.cc/.
4We chose 50 topics based on past experience, though

this could be tuned for particular applications. Recall that

from the corpus, and each document is repre-
sented as the set of topics that are present with
greater than 0.01 probability in the topic distri-
bution for that document.

• Keywords. We identify a list of distinguish-
ing keywords for each corpus by comparing its
word frequencies to the background frequencies
found in other corpora using the informative
Dirichlet prior model in Monroe et al. (2008).
We set the number of keywords to 100 for all
corpora. For news articles, the background cor-
pus for each issue is comprised of all articles
from the other four issues. For research papers,
we use NIPS as the background corpus for ACL
and vice versa to identify what are the core con-
cepts for each of these research areas. Formally,
I is the 100 top distinguishing keywords in the
corpus and each document is represented as the
set of keywords within I that are present in the
document. Refer to the supplementary material
for a list of example keywords in each corpus.

In both procedures, we lemmatize all words and
add common bigram phrases to the vocabulary fol-
lowing Mikolov et al. (2013). Note that in our
analysis, ideas are only present or absent in a doc-
ument, and a document can in principle be mapped
to any subset of ideas in I. In our experiments
90% of documents are marked as containing be-
tween 7 and 14 ideas using topics, 8 and 33 ideas
using keywords.

3 Characterizing the Space of Relations

To provide an overview of the four relation types
in Fig. 1, we first examine the empirical distribu-
tions of the two statistics of interest across pairs of
ideas. In most exploratory studies, however, we
are most interested in pairs that exemplify each
type of relation, i.e., the most extreme points in
each quadrant. We thus look at these pairs in
each corpus to observe how the four types differ
in salience across datasets.

3.1 Empirical Distribution Properties

To the best of our knowledge, the distributions of
pairwise cooccurrence and prevalence correlation
have not been examined in previous literature. We
thus first investigate the marginal distributions of
cooccurrence and prevalence correlation and then

our framework is to analyze relations between ideas, so this
choice is not essential in this work.

776



-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
prevalence correlation

-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

co
oc

cu
rr

en
ce

pearsonr = 0.37

(a) Terrorism topics

-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
prevalence correlation

-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6

co
oc

cu
rr

en
ce

pearsonr = 0.55

(b) Immigration topics

-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
prevalence correlation

-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

co
oc

cu
rr

en
ce

pearsonr = 0.5

(c) ACL topics

Figure 3: Overall distributions of cooccurrence and prevalence correlation. In the main plot, each point
represents a pair of ideas: color density shows the kernel density estimation of the joint distribution
(Scott, 2015). The plots along the axes show the marginal distribution of the corresponding dimension.
In each plot, we give the Pearson correlation, and all Pearson correlations’ p-values are less than 10−40.
In these plots, we use topics to represent ideas.

their joint distribution. Fig. 3 shows three exam-
ples: two from news articles and one from re-
search papers. We will also focus our case studies
on these three corpora in §4. The corresponding
plots for keywords have been relegated to supple-
mentary material due to space limitations.
Cooccurrence tends to be unimodal but not
normal. In all of our datasets, pairwise cooccur-
rence (P̂MI) presents a unimodal distribution that
somewhat resembles a normal distribution, but it
is rarely precisely normal. We cannot reject the
hypothesis that it is unimodal for any dataset (us-
ing topics or keywords) using the dip test (Harti-
gan and Hartigan, 1985), though D’Agostino’s K2

test (D’Agostino et al., 1990) rejects normality in
almost all cases.
Prevalence correlation exhibits diverse distri-
butions. Pairwise prevalence correlation fol-
lows different distributions in news articles com-
pared to research papers: they are unimodal in
news articles, but not in ACL or NIPS. The dip
test only rejects the unimodality hypothesis in
NIPS. None follow normal distributions based on
D’Agostino’s K2 test.
Cooccurrence is positively correlated with
prevalence correlation. In all of our datasets,
cooccurrence is positively correlated with preva-
lence correlation whether we use topics or key-
words to represent ideas, although the Pearson
correlation coefficients vary. This suggests that
there are more friendship and head-to-head rela-
tions than tryst and arms-race relations. Based on
the results of kernel density estimation, we also
observe that this correlation is often loose, e.g., in

ACL topics, cooccurrence spreads widely at each
mode of prevalence correlation.

3.2 Relative Strength of Extreme Pairs
We are interested in how our framework can iden-
tify intriguing relations between ideas. These po-
tentially interesting pairs likely correspond to the
extreme points in each quadrant instead of the ones
around the origin, where PMI and prevalence cor-
relation are both close to zero. Here we com-
pare the relative strength of extreme pairs in each
dataset. We will discuss how these extreme pairs
confirm existing knowledge and suggest new hy-
potheses via case studies in §4.

For each relation type, we average the strengths
of the 25 pairs with the strongest relations in that
type, with strength defined in Eq. 3. This heuristic
(henceforth collective strength) allows us to col-
lectively compare the strengths of the most promi-
nent friendship, tryst, arms-race, and head-to-head
relations. The results are not sensitive to the
choice of 25.

Fig. 4 shows the collective strength of the four
types in all of our datasets. The most common
ordering is:

friendship > head-to-head > arms-race > tryst.

The fact that friendship and head-to-head relations
are strong is consistent with the positive correla-
tion between cooccurrence and prevalence corre-
lation. In news, friendship is the strongest relation
type, but head-to-head is the strongest in ACL top-
ics and NIPS topics. This suggests, unsurprisingly,
that there are stronger head-to-head competitions

777



terro
rismabor

tion
marr

iage

imm
igrat

ion
toba

cco ACL NIPS new
s

rese
arch

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

co
lle

ct
iv

e
st

re
ng

th

friends
tryst
head-to-head
arms-race

(a) Topics

terro
rismabor

tion
marr

iage

imm
igrat

ion
toba

cco ACL NIPS new
s

rese
arch

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8

co
lle

ct
iv

e
st

re
ng

th

friends
tryst
head-to-head
arms-race

(b) Keywords

Figure 4: Collective strength of the four relation types in each dataset (news is the average of the news
corpora and research is for ACL and NIPS). Fig. 4a uses topics to represent ideas, while Fig. 4b uses
keywords to represent ideas. Each bar presents the average strength of the top 25 pairs in a relation type
in the corresponding dataset. Error bars represent standard errors calculated in the usual way, but note
that since the top 25 pairs are not random samples, they cannot be interpreted in the usual way.

(i.e., one idea takes over another) between ideas in
scientific research than in news. We also see that
topics show greater strength in our scientific arti-
cle collections, while keywords dominate in news,
especially in friendship. We conjecture that terms
in scientific literature are often overloaded (e.g., a
tree could be a parse tree or a decision tree), neces-
sitating some abstraction when representing ideas.
In contrast, news stories are more self-contained
and seek to employ consistent usage.

4 Exploratory Studies

We present case studies based on strongly re-
lated pairs of ideas in the four types of relation.
Throughout this section, “rank” refers to the rank
of the relation strength between a pair of ideas in
its corresponding relation type.

4.1 International Relations in Terrorism

Following a decade of declining violence in the
90s, the events of September 11, 2001 precipi-
tated a dramatic increase in concern about ter-
rorism, and a major shift in how it was framed
(Kern et al., 2003). As a showcase, we consider
a topic which encompasses much of the U.S. gov-
ernment’s response to terrorism: “federal, state”.5

We observe two topics engaging in an “arms race”
with this one: “afghanistan, taliban” and “pakistan, in-
dia”. These correspond to two geopolitical regions
closely linked to the U.S. government’s concern
with terrorism, and both were sites of U.S. mili-
tary action during the period of our dataset. Events
abroad and the U.S. government’s responses fol-
low the arms-race pattern, each holding increasing

5As in §1, we summarize each topic using a pair of
strongly associated words, instead of assigning a name.

1980 1990 2000 2010
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

fre
qu

en
cy

arab
islam

Figure 6: Tryst relation between arab and islam us-
ing keywords to represent ideas (#2 in tryst): these
two words tend to cooccur but are anti-correlated
in prevalence over time. In particular, islam was
rarely used in coverage of terrorism in the 1980s.

attention with the other, likely because they share
the same underlying cause.

We also observe two head-to-head rivals to the
“federal, state” topic: “iran, libya” and “israel, pales-
tinian”. While these topics correspond to regions
that are hotly debated in the U.S., their coverage
in news tends not to correlate temporally with the
U.S. government’s responses to terrorism, at least
during the time period of our corpus. Discussion
of these regions was more prevalent in the 80s
and 90s, with declining media coverage since then
(Kern et al., 2003).

The relations between these topics are consis-
tent with structural balance theory (Cartwright
and Harary, 1956; Heider, 1946), which suggests
that the enemy of an enemy is a friend. The
“afghanistan, taliban” topic has the strongest friend-
ship relation with the “pakistan, india” topic, i.e.,
they are likely to cooccur and are positively corre-
lated in prevalence. Similarly, the “iran, libya” topic
is a close “friend” with the “israel, palestinian” topic
(ranked 8th in friendship).

778



pakistan, india

federal, state

afghanistan, taliban

israel, palestinian

iran, libya

arms-race (#5)

fr
ie

nd
s

(#
1)

head-to-head (#2)friends
(#8)

arm
s-ra

ce (
#2)

hea
d-to

-he
ad

(#1
1)

(a) Relations between a United States topic and
international topics.

1980 1990 2000 2010
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

fre
qu

en
cy

federal, state
afghanistan, taliban

(b) (“federal, state”,
“afghanistan, taliban”)

1980 1990 2000 2010
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

fre
qu

en
cy

federal, state
iran, libya

(c) (“federal, state”, “iran,
libya”)

Figure 5: Fig. 5a shows the relations between the “federal, state” topic and four international topics. Edge
colors indicate relation types and the number in an edge label presents the ranking of its strength in the
corresponding relation type. Fig. 5b and Fig. 5c represent concrete examples in Fig. 5a: “federal, state”
and “afghanistan, taliban” follow similar trends, although “afghanistan, taliban” fluctuates over time due to
significant events such as the September 11 attacks in 2001 and the death of Bin Laden in 2011; while
“iran, lybia” is negatively correlated with “federal, state”. In fact, more than 70% of terrorism news in the
80s contained the “iran, lybia” topic.

When using keywords to represent ideas, we
observe similar relations between the term home-
land security and terms related to the above foreign
countries. In addition, we highlight an interest-
ing but unexpected tryst relation between arab and
islam (Fig. 6). It is not surprising that these two
words tend to cooccur in the same news articles,
but the usage of islam in the news is increasing
while arab is declining. The increasing prevalence
of islam and decreasing prevalence of arab over this
time period can also be seen, for example, using
Google’s n-gram viewer, but it of course provides
no information about cooccurrence.

This trend has not been previously noted to the
best of our knowledge, although an article in the
Huffington Post called for news editors to distin-
guish Muslim from Arab.6 Our observation sug-
gests a conjecture that the news media have in-
creasingly linked terrorism to a religious group
rather than an ethnic group, perhaps in part due to
the tie between the events of 9/11 and Afghanistan,
which is not an Arab or Arabic-speaking country.
We leave it to further investigation to confirm or
reject this hypothesis.

To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach, we compare a pair’s rank using only
cooccurrence or prevalence correlation with its
rank in our framework. Table 1 shows the results
for three pairs above. If we had looked at only
cooccurrence or prevalence correlation, we would
probably have missed these interesting pairs.

6http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
haroon-moghul/even-the-new-york-times-d_
b_766658.html

PMI Corr

“federal, state”, “afghanistan, taliban”
(#2 in arms-race) 43 99
“federal, state”, “iran, lybia”
(#2 in head-to-head) 36 56
arab, islam (#2 in tryst) 106 1,494

Table 1: Ranks of pairs by using the absolute value
of only cooccurrence or prevalence correlation.

4.2 Ethnicity Keywords in Immigration

In addition to results on topics in §1, we observe
unexpected patterns about ethnicity keywords in
immigration news. Our observation starts with
a top tryst relation between latino and asian. Al-
though these words are likely to cooccur, their
prevalence trajectories differ, with the discussion
of Asian immigrants in the 1990s giving way to a
focus on the word latino from 2000 onward. Pos-
sible theories to explain this observation include
that undocumented immigrants are generally per-
ceived as a Latino issue, or that Latino voters are
increasingly influential in U.S. elections.

Furthermore, latino holds head-to-head relations
with two subgroups of Latin American immi-
grants: haitian and cuban. In particular, the strength
of the relation with haitian is ranked #18 in head-
to-head relations. Meanwhile, haitian and cuban
have a friendship relation, which is again consis-
tent with structural balance theory. The decreas-
ing prevalence of haitian and cuban perhaps speaks
to the shifting geographical focus of recent immi-
gration to the U.S., and issues of the Latino pan-
ethnicity. In fact, a majority of Latinos prefer to
identify with their national origin relative to the

779



latino

asian cuban

haitian

trys
t (#

8) HtH (#305)
H

tH
(#

18
) friendship

(#19)

(a) Relations graph.

1980 1990 2000 2010
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

fre
qu

en
cy

latino
asian

(b) (latino, asian)

1980 1990 2000 2010
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

fre
qu

en
cy

latino
haitian

(c) (latino, haitian)

1980 1990 2000 2010
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

fre
qu

en
cy

cuban
haitian

(d) (cuban, haitian)

Figure 7: Relations between ethnicity keywords in immigration news (HtH for head-to-head): latino holds
a tryst relation with asian and head-to-head relations with two subgroups from Latin America, haitian and
cuban. We do not show the relations between asian and haitian, cuban, because their strength is close to 0.

machine translation

rule,forest methods

word alignment

sentiment analysis

discourse (coherence)

trys
t (#

5)

frie
nds

hip
(#1

)

arms-race (#1)

head-to-head (#1)

head-to-head (#38)

ar
m

s-
ra

ce
(#

23
) arm

s-race
(#2)

head-to-head (#7)

Figure 8: Top relations between the topics in ACL
Anthology. The top 10 words for the rule, forest
methods topic are rule, grammar, derivation, span,
algorithm, forest, parsing, figure, set, string.

pan-ethnic terms (Taylor et al., 2012). However,
we should also note that much of this coverage re-
lates to a set of specific refugee crises, temporarily
elevating the political importance of these nations
in the U.S. Nevertheless, the underlying social and
political reasons behind these head-to-head rela-
tions are worth further investigation.

4.3 Relations between Topics in ACL

Finally, we analyze relations between topics in the
ACL Anthology. It turns out that “machine transla-
tion” is at a central position among top ranked re-
lations in all the four types (Fig. 8).7 It is part of
the strongest relation in all four types except tryst
(ranked #5).

The full relation graph presents further patterns.
Friendship demonstrates transitivity: both “ma-
chine translation” and “word alignment” have similar
relations with other topics. But such transitiv-
ity does not hold for tryst: although the preva-
lence of “rule, forest methods” is anti-correlated with
both “machine translation” and “sentiment analysis”,
“sentiment analysis” seldom cooccurs with “rule, for-

7In the ranking, we filtered a topic where the top words
are ion, ing, system, process, language, one, input, natural
language, processing, grammar. For the purposes of this cor-
pus, this is effectively a stopword topic.

est methods” because “sentiment analysis” is seldom
built on parsing algorithms. Similarly, “rule, forest
methods” and “discourse (coherence)” hold an arms-
race relation: they do not tend to cooccur and both
decline in relative prevalence as “machine transla-
tion” rises.

The prevalence of each of these ideas in com-
parison to machine translation is shown in in Fig. 9,
which reveals additional detail.

5 Related Work

We present two strands of related studies in addi-
tion to what we have discussed.
Trends in ideas. Most studies have so far exam-
ined the trends of ideas individually (Michel et al.,
2011; Hall et al., 2008; Rule et al., 2015). For in-
stance, Hall et al. (2008) present various trends in
our own computational linguistics community, in-
cluding the rise of statistical machine translation.
More recently, rhetorical framing has been used to
predict these sorts of patterns (Prabhakaran et al.,
2016). An exception is that Shi et al. (2010) use
prevalence correlation to analyze lag relations be-
tween topics in publications and research grants.
Anecdotally, Grudin (2009) observes a “head-to-
head” relation between artificial intelligence and
human-computer interaction in research funding.
However, to our knowledge, our work is the first
study to systematically characterize relations be-
tween ideas.
Representation of ideas. In addition to topics and
keywords, studies have also sought to operational-
ize the “memes” metaphor using quotes and text
reuse in the media (Leskovec et al., 2009; Nic-
ulae et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2013; Wei et al.,
2013). In topic modeling literature, Blei and Laf-
ferty (2006) also point out that topics do not cooc-
cur independently and explicitly model the cooc-
currence within documents.

780



anti-correlated correlated

lik
el

y
to

co
oc

cu
r tryst friendship

1980 1990 2000 2010

machine translation
rule,forest methods

1980 1990 2000 2010

machine translation
word alignment

un
lik

el
y

to
co

oc
cu

r head-to-head arms-race

1980 1990 2000 2010

machine translation
discourse (coherence)

1980 1990 2000 2010

machine translation
sentiment analysis

Figure 9: Relations between topics in ACL Anthology in the space of cooccurrence and prevalence
correlation (prevalence correlation is shown explicitly and cooccurrence is encoded in row captions),
color coded to match the text. The y-axis represents the relative proportion of papers in a year that
contain the corresponding topic. The top 10 words for the rule, forest methods topic are rule, grammar,
derivation, span, algorithm, forest, parsing, figure, set, string.

6 Concluding Discussion

We proposed a method to characterize relations
between ideas in texts through the lens of cooc-
currence within documents and prevalence corre-
lation over time. For the first time, we observe that
the distribution of pairwise cooccurrence is uni-
modal, while the distribution of pairwise preva-
lence correlation is not always unimodal, and
show that they are positively correlated. This com-
bination suggests four types of relations between
ideas, and these four types are all found to varying
extents in our experiments.

We illustrate our computational method by ex-
ploratory studies on news corpora and scientific
research papers. We not only confirm existing
knowledge but also suggest hypotheses around the
usage of arab and islam in terrorism and latino and
asian in immigration.

It is important to note that the relations found
using our approach depend on the nature of the
representation of ideas and the source of texts. For
instance, we cannot expect relations found in news
articles to reflect shifts in public opinion if news
articles do not effectively track public opinion.

Our method is entirely observational. It remains
as a further stage of analysis to understand the un-
derlying reasons that lead to these relations be-

tween ideas. In scientific research, for example, it
could simply be the progress of science, i.e., newer
ideas overtake older ones deemed less valuable at
a given time; on the other hand, history suggests
that it is not always the correct ideas that are most
expressed, and many other factors may be impor-
tant. Similarly, in news coverage, underlying so-
ciological and political situations have significant
impact on which ideas are presented, and how.

There are many potential directions to improve
our method to account for complex relations be-
tween ideas. For instance, we assume that both
ideas and relations are statically grounded in key-
words or topics. In reality, ideas and relations both
evolve over time: a tryst relation might appear as
friendship if we focus on a narrower time period.
Similarly, new ideas show up and even the same
idea may change over time and be represented by
different words.
Acknowledgments. We thank Amber Boydstun,
Justin Gross, Lillian Lee, anonymous reviewers,
and all members of Noah’s ARK for helpful com-
ments and discussions. This research was made
possible by a Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada Postgraduate Schol-
arship (to D.C.) and a University of Washington
Innovation Award.

781



References
David M. Blei and John Lafferty. 2006. Correlated

topic models. In NIPS.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 3:993–1022.

Dallas Card, Amber E. Boydstun, Justin H. Gross,
Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2015. The Me-
dia Frames Corpus: Annotations of frames across
issues. In Proceedings of ACL.

Dorwin Cartwright and Frank Harary. 1956. Structural
balance: A generalization of Heider’s theory. Psy-
chological Review 63(5):277.

Dennis Chong and James N. Druckman. 2007. A the-
ory of framing and opinion formation in competi-
tive elite environments. Journal of Communication
57(1):99–118.

Kenneth W. Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word
association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-
raphy. Computational Linguistics 16(1):22–29.

Ralph B. D’Agostino, Albert Belanger, and Ralph B.
D’Agostino Jr. 1990. A suggestion for using power-
ful and informative tests of normality. The American
Statistician 44(4):316–321.

Richard Dawkins. 1976. The Selfish Gene. Oxford
University Press.

Robert M. Entman. 1993. Framing: Toward clarifica-
tion of a fractured paradigm. Journal of Communi-
cation 43(4):51–58.

Todd Gitlin. 1980. The Whole World is Watching:
Mass Media in the Making and Unmaking of the
New Left. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Jonathan Grudin. 2009. AI and HCI: Two fields di-
vided by a common focus. AI Magazine 30(4):48.

Emily Guskin. 2013. ‘Illegal’, ‘undocumented’, ‘unau-
thorized’: News media shift language on immigra-
tion. Pew Research Center.

David Hall, Daniel Jurafsky, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. Studying the history of ideas using topic
models. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

John A. Hartigan and P. M. Hartigan. 1985. The dip
test of unimodality. The Annals of Statistics pages
70–84.

Chris Haynes, Jennifer L. Merolla, and S. Karthick
Ramakrishnan. 2016. Framing Immigrants: News
Coverage, Public Opinion, and Policy. Russell Sage
Foundation.

Fritz Heider. 1946. Attitudes and cognitive organiza-
tion. The Journal of Psychology 21(1):107–112.

Anil Kalhan. 2010. Rethinking immigration detention.
Columbia Law Review Sidebar 110:42.

Montague Kern, Marion Just, and Pippa Norris. 2003.
The lessons of framing terrorism. In Pippa Norris,
Montague Kern, and Marion Just, editors, Framing
Terrorism: The News Media, the Government and
the Public, Routledge.

Thomas S. Kuhn. 1996. The Structure of Scientific Rev-
olutions. University of Chicago Press.

George Lakoff. 2014. The All New Don’t Think of an
Elephant!: Know your Values and Frame the De-
bate. Chelsea Green Publishing.

Jure Leskovec, Lars Backstrom, and Jon M. Kleinberg.
2009. Meme-tracking and the dynamics of the news
cycle. In Proceedings of KDD.

Jennifer Merolla, S. Karthick Ramakrishnan, and Chris
Haynes. 2013. “Illegal,”, “undocumented,” or
“unauthorized”: Equivalency frames, issue frames,
and public opinion on immigration. Perspectives on
Politics 11(03):789–807.

Jean-Baptiste Michel, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva Presser
Aiden, Adrian Veres, Matthew K. Gray, The
Google Books Team, Joseph P. Pickett, Dale
Hoiberg, Dan Clancy, Peter Norvig, Jon Orwant,
Steven Pinker, Martin A. Nowak, and Erez Lieber-
man Aiden. 2011. Quantitative analysis of cul-
ture using millions of digitized books. Science
331(6014):176–182.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S. Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In NIPS.

John Milton. 1644. Areopagitica, A speech of Mr. John
Milton for the Liberty of Unlicenc’d Printing to the
Parliament of England.

Burt L. Monroe, Michael P. Colaresi, and Kevin M.
Quinn. 2008. Fightin’ words: Lexical feature se-
lection and evaluation for identifying the content of
political conflict. Political Analysis 16(4):372–403.

Vlad Niculae, Caroline Suen, Justine Zhang, Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jure Leskovec. 2015.
Quotus: The structure of political media coverage
as revealed by quoting patterns. In Proceedings of
WWW.

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, William L. Hamilton, Dan
McFarland, and Dan Jurafsky. 2016. Predicting the
rise and fall of scientific topics from trends in their
rhetorical framing. In Proceedings of ACL.

Dragomir R. Radev, Pradeep Muthukrishnan, and Va-
hed Qazvinian. 2009. The ACL anthology network
corpus. In Proceedings of ACL Workshop on Natu-
ral Language Processing and Information Retrieval
for Digital Libraries.

Alix Rule, Jean-Philippe Cointet, and Peter S. Bear-
man. 2015. Lexical shifts, substantive changes, and

782



continuity in state of the union discourse, 1790-
2014. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 112(35):10837–10844.

David W. Scott. 2015. Multivariate Density Estima-
tion: Theory, Practice, and Visualization. John Wi-
ley & Sons.

Xiaolin Shi, Ramesh Nallapati, Jure Leskovec, Dan
McFarland, and Dan Jurafsky. 2010. Who leads
whom: Topical lead-lag analysis across corpora. In
Proceedings of NIPS Workshop on Computational
Social Science.

David A. Smith, Ryan Cordell, and Elizabeth M. Dil-
lon. 2013. Infectious texts: Modeling text reuse in
nineteenth-century newspapers. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Big Humanities.

Paul Taylor, Mark H. Lopez, Jessica Martı́nez, and
Gabriel Velasco. 2012. When labels don’t fit: His-
panics and their views of identity. Washington, DC:
Pew Hispanic Center .

Robert Warren. 2016. US undocumented population
drops below 11 million in 2014, with continued
declines in the Mexican undocumented population.
Journal on Migration and Human Security 4(1):1–
15.

Xuetao Wei, Nicholas Valler, B. Aditya Prakash, Iulian
Neamtiu, Michalis Faloutsos, and Christos Falout-
sos. 2013. Competing memes propagation on net-
works: A network science perspective. IEEE Jour-
nal on Selected Areas in Communications 31:1049–
1060.

783


	Friendships, Rivalries, and Trysts: Characterizing Relations between Ideas in Texts

