



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 603–612
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1056

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 603–612
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1056

Alignment at Work: Using Language to Distinguish the Internalization
and Self-Regulation Components of Cultural Fit in Organizations

Gabriel Doyle
Department of Psychology

Stanford University
gdoyle@stanford.edu

Amir Goldberg
Graduate School of Business

Stanford University
amirgo@stanford.edu

Sameer B. Srivastava
Haas School of Business

UC Berkeley
srivastava@haas.berkeley.edu

Michael C. Frank
Department of Psychology

Stanford University
mcfrank@stanford.edu

Abstract

Cultural fit is widely believed to affect the
success of individuals and the groups to
which they belong. Yet it remains an elu-
sive, poorly measured construct. Recent
research draws on computational linguis-
tics to measure cultural fit but overlooks
asymmetries in cultural adaptation. By
contrast, we develop a directed, dynamic
measure of cultural fit based on linguis-
tic alignment, which estimates the influ-
ence of one person’s word use on another’s
and distinguishes between two encultura-
tion mechanisms: internalization and self-
regulation. We use this measure to trace
employees’ enculturation trajectories over
a large, multi-year corpus of corporate
emails and find that patterns of alignment
in the first six months of employment are
predictive of individuals downstream out-
comes, especially involuntary exit. Fur-
ther predictive analyses suggest referential
alignment plays an overlooked role in lin-
guistic alignment.

1 Introduction

Entering a new group is rarely easy. Adjusting to
unfamiliar behavioral norms and donning a new
identity can be cognitively and emotionally taxing,
and failure to do so can lead to exclusion. But suc-
cessful enculturation to the group often yields sig-
nificant rewards, especially in organizational con-
texts. Fitting in has been tied to positive career
outcomes such as faster time-to-promotion, higher
performance ratings, and reduced risk of being
fired (O’Reilly et al., 1991; Goldberg et al., 2016).

A major challenge for enculturation research
is distinguishing between internalization and self-

regulation. Internalization, a more inwardly fo-
cused process, involves identifying as a group
member and accepting group norms, while self-
regulation, a more outwardly oriented process, en-
tails deciphering the group’s normative code and
adjusting one’s behavior to comply with it. Ex-
isting approaches, which generally rely on self-
reports, are subject to various forms of reporting
bias and typically yield only static snapshots of
this process. Recent computational approaches
that use language as a behavioral signature of
group integration uncover dynamic traces of en-
culturation but cannot distinguish between inter-
nalization and self-regulation.

To overcome these limitations, we introduce a
dynamic measure of directed linguistic accommo-
dation between a newcomer and existing group
members. Our approach differentiates between
an individual’s (1) base rate of word use and (2)
linguistic alignment to interlocutors. The former
corresponds to internalization of the group’s lin-
guistic norms, whereas the latter reflects the ca-
pacity to regulate one’s language in response to
peers’ language use. We apply this language
model to a corpus of internal email communica-
tions and personnel records, spanning a seven-year
period, from a mid-sized technology firm. We
show that changes in base rates and alignment,
especially with respect to pronoun use, are con-
sistent with successful assimilation into a group
and can predict eventual employment outcomes—
continued employment, involuntary exit, or volun-
tary exit—at levels above chance. We use this pre-
dictive problem to investigate the nature of linguis-
tic alignment. Our results suggest that the com-
mon formulation of alignment as a lexical-level
phenomenon is incomplete.

603

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1056
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1056


2 Linguistic Alignment and Group Fit

Linguistic alignment Linguistic alignment is
the tendency to use the same or similar words
as one’s conversational partner. Alignment is
an instance of a widespread and socially impor-
tant human behavior: communication accommo-
dation, the tendency of two interacting people
to nonconsciously adopt similar behaviors. Ev-
idence of accommodation appears in many be-
havioral dimensions, including gestures, postures,
speech rate, self-disclosure, and language or di-
alect choice (see Giles et al. (1991) for a review).
More accommodating people are rated by their
interlocutors as more intelligible, attractive, and
cooperative (Feldman, 1968; Ireland et al., 2011;
Triandis, 1960). These perceptions have mate-
rial consequences—for example, high accommo-
dation requests are more likely to be fulfilled, and
pairs who accommodate more in how they ex-
press uncertainty perform better in lab-based tasks
(Buller and Aune, 1988; Fusaroli et al., 2012).

Although accommodation is ubiquitous, indi-
viduals vary in their levels of accommodation in
ways that are socially informative. Notably, more
powerful people are accommodated more strongly
in many settings, including trials (Gnisci, 2005),
online forums (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.,
2012), and Twitter (Doyle et al., 2016). Most rel-
evant for this work, speakers may increase their
accommodation to signal camaraderie or decrease
it to differentiate from the group. For example,
Bourhis and Giles (1977) found that Welsh En-
glish speakers increased their use of the Welsh
accent and language in response to an English
speaker who dismissed it.

Person-group fit and linguistic alignment
These findings suggest that linguistic alignment is
a useful avenue for studying how people assimi-
late into a group. Whereas traditional approaches
to studying person-group fit rely on self-reports
that are subject to various forms of reporting bias
and cannot feasibly be collected with high gran-
ularity across many points in time, recent stud-
ies have proposed language-based measures as a
means to tracing the dynamics of person-group fit
without having to rely on self-reports. Building on
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2013)’s research
into language use similarities as a proxy for so-
cial distance between individuals, Srivastava et al.
(forthcoming) and Goldberg et al. (2016) devel-

oped a measure of cultural fit based on the sim-
ilarity in linguistic style between individuals and
their colleagues in an organization. Their time-
varying measure highlights linguistic compatibil-
ity as an important facet of cultural fit and reveals
distinct trajectories of enculturation for employees
with different career outcomes.

While this approach can help uncover the dy-
namics and consequences of an individual’s fit
with her colleagues in an organization, it cannot
disentangle the underlying reasons for this align-
ment. For two primary reasons, it cannot distin-
guish between fit that arises from internalization
and fit produced by self-regulation. First, Gold-
berg et al. (2016) and Srivastava et al. (forthcom-
ing) define fit using a symmetric measure, the
Jensen-Shannon divergence, which does not take
into account the direction of alignment. Yet the
distinction between an individual adapting to peers
versus peers adapting to the individual would ap-
pear to be consequential. Second, this prior work
considers fit across a wide range of linguistic cate-
gories but does not interrogate the role of particu-
lar categories, such as pronouns, that can be espe-
cially informative about enculturation. For exam-
ple, a person’s base rate use of the first-person sin-
gular (I) or plural (we) might indicate the degree
of group identity internalization, whereas adjust-
ment to we usage in response to others’ use of the
pronoun might reveal the degree of self-regulation
to the group’s normative expectations.

Modeling fit with WHAM To address these
limitations, we build upon and extend the WHAM
alignment framework (Doyle and Frank, 2016) to
analyze the dynamics of internalization and self-
regulation using the complete corpus of email
communications and personnel records from a
mid-sized technology company over a seven-year
period. WHAM uses a conditional measure of
alignment, separating overall homophily (uncon-
ditional similarity in people’s language use, driven
by internalized similarity) from in-the-moment
adaptation (adjusting to another’s usage, corre-
sponding to self-regulation). WHAM also pro-
vides a directed measure of alignment, in that it
estimates a replier’s adaptation to the other con-
versational participant separately from the partici-
pant’s adaptation to the replier.

Level(s) of alignment The convention within
linguistic alignment research, dating back to early

604



work on Linguistic Style Matching (Niederhoffer
and Pennebaker, 2002), is to look at lexical align-
ment: the repetition of the same or similar words
across conversation participants. From a commu-
nication accommodation standpoint, this is justi-
fied by assuming that one’s choice of words repre-
sents a stylistic signal that is partially independent
of the meaning one intends to express—similar to
the accommodation on paralinguistic signals dis-
cussed above. The success of previous linguistic
alignment research shows that this is valid.

However, words are difficult to divorce from
their meanings, and sometimes repeating a word
conflicts with repeating its referent. In particular,
pronouns often refer to different people depending
on who uses the pronoun. While there is evidence
that one person using a first-person singular pro-
noun increases the likelihood that her conversa-
tion partner will as well (Chung and Pennebaker,
2007), we may also expect that one person us-
ing first-person singular pronouns may cause the
other to use more second-person pronouns, so
that both people are referring to the same per-
son. This is especially important under the In-
teractive Alignment Model view (Pickering and
Garrod, 2004), where conversants align their en-
tire mental representations, which predicts both
lexical and referential alignment behaviors will
be observed. Discourse-strategic explanations for
alignment also predict alignment at multiple levels
(Doyle and Frank, 2016).

Since we have access to a high-quality corpus
with meaningful outcome measures, we can inves-
tigate the relative importance of these two types
of alignment. We will show that referential align-
ment is more predictive of employment outcomes
than is lexical alignment, suggesting a need for
alignment research to consider both levels rather
than just the latter.

3 Data: Corporate Email Corpus

We use the complete corpus of internal emails
exchanged among full-time employees at a mid-
sized US-based technology company between
2009 to 2014 (Srivastava et al., forthcoming).
Each email was summarized as a count of word
categories in its text. These categories are a sub-
set of the Linguistic Information and Word Count
system (Pennebaker et al., 2007). The categories
were chosen because they are likely to be indica-

tive of one’s standing/role within a group.1

We divided email chains into message-reply
pairs to investigate conditional alignment between
a message and its reply. To limit these pairs to
cases where the reply was likely related to the pre-
ceding message, we removed all emails with more
than one sender or recipient (including CC/BCC),
identical sender and recipient, or where the sender
or recipient was an automatic notification system
or any other mailbox that was not specific to a sin-
gle employee. We also excluded emails with no
body text or more than 500 words in the body text,
and pairs with more than a week’s latency between
message and reply.

Finally, because our analyses involve encultura-
tion dynamics over the first six months of employ-
ment, we excluded replies sent by an employee
whose overall tenure was less than six months.
This resulted in a collection of 407,779 message-
reply pairs, with 485 distinct replying employ-
ees. We combined this with monthly updates of
employees joining and leaving the company and
whether they left voluntarily or involuntarily. Of
the 485, 66 left voluntarily, 90 left involuntarily,
and 329 remained employed at the end of the ob-
servation period.

Privacy protections and ethical considerations
Research based on employees’ archived electronic
communications in organizational settings poses
potential threats to employee privacy and com-
pany confidentiality. To address these concerns,
and following established ethical guidelines for
the conduct of such research (Borgatti and Molina,
2003), we implemented the following procedures:
(a) raw data were stored on secure research servers
behind the company’s firewall; (b) messages ex-
changed with individuals outside the firm were
eliminated; (c) all identifying information such
as email addresses was transformed into hashed
identifiers, with the company retaining access to
the key code linking identifying information to
hashed identifiers; and (d) raw message content
was transformed into linguistic categories so that
identities could not be inferred from message con-
tent. Per terms of the non-disclosure agreement
we signed with the firm, we are not able to share
the data underlying the analyses reported below.

1Six pronoun categories (first singular (I), first plural (we),
second (you), third singular personal (he, she), third sin-
gular impersonal (it, this), and third plural (they)) and five
time/certainty categories (past tense, present tense, future
tense, certainty, and tentativity).

605



We can, however, share the code and dummy test
data, both of which can be accessed at http:
//github.com/gabedoyle/acl2017.

4 Model: An Extended WHAM
Framework

To assess alignment, we use the Word-Based Hi-
erarchical Alignment Model (WHAM) framework
(Doyle and Frank, 2016). The core principle of
WHAM is that alignment is a change, usually an
increase, in the frequency of using a word category
in a reply when the word category was used in the
preceding message. For instance, a reply to the
message What will we discuss at the meeting?, is
likely to have more instances of future tense than
a reply to the message What did we discuss at the
meeting? Under this definition, alignment is the
log-odds shift from the baseline reply frequency,
the frequency of the word in a reply when the pre-
ceding message did not contain the word.

WHAM is a hierarchical generative modeling
framework, so it uses information from related ob-
servations (e.g., multiple repliers with similar de-
mographics) to improve its robustness on sparse
data (Doyle et al., 2016). There are two key pa-
rameters, shown in Figure 2: ηbase, the log-odds of
a given word category c when the preceding mes-
sage did not contain c, and ηalign, the increase in
the log-odds of c when the preceding message did
contain c.

A dynamic extension To understand encultura-
tion, we need to track changes in both the align-
ment and baseline over time. We add a month-by-
month change term to WHAM, yielding a piece-
wise linear model of these factors over the course
of an employee’s tenure. Each employee’s tenure
is broken into two or three segments: their first six
months after being hired, their last six months be-
fore leaving (if they leave), and the rest of their
tenure.2 The linear segments for their alignment
are fit as an intercept term ηalign, based at their
first month (for the initial period) or their last
month (for the final period), and per-month slopes
α. Baseline segments are fit similarly, with pa-
rameters ηbase and β.3 To visualize the align-

2Within each segment, the employee’s alignment model
is similar to that of Yurovsky et al. (2016), who introduced
a constant by-month slope parameter to model changes in
parent-child alignment during early linguistic development.

3The six month timeframe was chosen as previous re-
search has found it to be a critical period for early encultura-
tion (Bauer et al., 1998). Pilot investigations into the change

align
base

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

−2.7

−2.6

−2.5

−2.4

Time

Lo
g−

od
ds

 p
ar

am
et

er
 e

st
im

at
es

ηalignstart

ηalignmid

ηalignend

α
end

α st
ar

t

β star
t

β
end

ηbasemid

ηbasestart

ηbaseend

Figure 1: Sample sawhorse plot with key variables
labelled. The η point parameters (first month,
last month, and middle average) and α (or β) by-
month slope (start, end) parameters are estimated
by WHAM for each word category and employee
group.

ment behaviors and the parameter values, we cre-
ate “sawhorse” plots, with an example in Figure
1.

In our present work, we are focused on changes
in cultural fit during the transitions into or out of
the group, so we collapse observations outside the
first/last six months into a stable point estimate,
constraining their slopes to be zero. This simplifi-
cation also circumvents the issue of different em-
ployees having different middle-period lengths.4

Model structure The graphical model for our
instantiation of WHAM is shown in Figure 2.
For each word category c, WHAM’s generative
model represents each reply as a series of token-
by-token independent draws from a binomial dis-
tribution. The binomial probability µ is dependent
on whether the preceding message did (µalign)
or did not (µbase) contain a word from category
c, and the inferred alignment value is the differ-
ence between these probabilities in log-odds space
(ηalign).

The specific values of these variables depend
on three hierarchical features: the word category
c, the group g that a given employee falls into,
and the time period t (a piece of the piece-wise

in baseline usage over time showed roughly linear changes
over the first/last six months, but our linearity assumption
may mask interesting variation in the enculturation trajecto-
ries.

4As shown in Figure 1, the pieces do not need to de-
fine a continuous function. Alignment behaviors continue
to change in the middle of an employee’s tenure (Srivastava
et al., forthcoming), so alignment six months in to the job is
unlikely to be equal to alignment six months from leaving, or
the average alignment over the middle tenure.

606



C

N

N

N αg,t αc,g,t

ηalignc η
align
c,g,t η

align
c,g,t,m µ

align
c,g,t,m C

align
c,g,t,m

ηbasec η
base
c,g,t ηbasec,g,t,m µbasec,g,t,m Cbasec,g,t,m

βg,t βc,g,t
N

N

N N logit−1

Binom

N N

logit−1

Binom

Nbasec,g,t,m

N alignc,g,t,m

m

month

group, time

category

Figure 2: The Word-Based Hierarchical Alignment Model (WHAM). Hierarchical chains of normal
distributions capture relationships between word categories, individuals, outcome groups, and time, and
generate linear predictors η, which are converted into probabilities µ for binomial draws of the words in
replies.

linear function: beginning, middle, or end). Note
that the hierarchical ordering is different for the η
chains and the α/β chains; c is above g and t for
the η chains, but below them for the α/β chains.
This is because we expect the static (η) values for
a given word category to be relatively consistent
across different groups and at different times, but
we expect the values to be independent across the
different word categories. Conversely, we expect
that the enculturation trajectories across word cat-
egories (α/β) will be similar, while the trajecto-
ries may vary substantially across different groups
and different times. Lastly, the month m in which
a reply is written (measured from the start of the
time period t) has a linear effect on the η value, as
described below.

To estimate alignment, we first divide the
replies up by group, time period, and calendar
month. We separate the replies into two sets based
on whether the preceding message contained the
category c (the “alignment” set) or not (the “base-
line” set). All replies within a set are then aggre-
gated in a single bag-of-words representation, with
category token counts Calignc,g,t,m and C

base
c,g,t,m, and

total token counts N basec,g,t,m and N
base
c,g,t,m compris-

ing the observed variables on the far right of the
model. Moving from right to left, these counts are
assumed to come from binomial draws with prob-

ability µalignc,g,t,m or µ
base
c,g,t,m. The µ values are then

in turn generated from η values in log-odds space
by an inverse-logit transform, similar to linear pre-
dictors in logistic regression.

The ηbase variables are representations of the
baseline frequency of a marker in log-odds space,
and µbase is simply a conversion of ηbase to proba-
bility space, the equivalent of an intercept term in
a logistic regression. ηalign is an additive value,
with µalign = logit−1(ηbase + ηalign), the equiv-
alent of a binary feature coefficient in a logistic
regression. The specific month’s η variables are
calculated as a linear function: ηalignc,g,t,m = η

align
c,g,t +

mαc,g,t, and similarly with β for the baseline.
The remainder of the model is a hierarchy of

normal distributions that integrate social structure
into the analysis. In the present work, we have
three levels in the hierarchy: category, group, and
time period. In Analysis 1, employees are grouped
by their employment outcome (stay, leave volun-
tarily, leave involuntarily); in Analyses 2 & 3,
where we predict the employment outcomes, each
group is a single employee. The normal distri-
butions that connect these levels have identical
standard deviations σ2 = .25.5 The hierarchies

5The deviation is not a theoretically motivated choice, and
was chosen as a good empirical balance between reasonable
parameter convergence (improved by smaller σ2) and good
model log-probability (improved by larger σ2).

607



are headed by a normal distribution centered at
0, except for the ηbase hierarchy, which has a
Cauchy(0, 2.5) distribution.6

Message and reply length can affect alignment
estimates; the WHAM model was developed in
part to reduce this effect. As different employees
had different email length distributions, we further
accounted for length by dividing all replies into
five quintile length bins, and treated each bin as
separate observations for each employee. This de-
sign choice adds an additional control factor, but
results were qualitatively similar without it. All
of our analyses are based on parameter estimates
from RStan fits of WHAM with 500 iterations over
four chains.

While previous research on cultural fit has em-
phasized either its internalization (O’Reilly et al.,
1991) or self-regulation (Goldberg et al., 2016)
components, our extension to the WHAM frame-
work helps disentangle them by estimating them
as separate baseline and alignment trajectories.
For example, we can distinguish between an
archetypal individual who initially aligns to her
colleagues and then internalizes this style of com-
munication such that her baseline use also shifts
and another archetypal person who aligns to her
colleagues but does not change her baseline usage.
The former exhibits high correspondence between
internalization and self-regulation, whereas the
latter demonstrates an ability to decouple them.

5 Analyses

We perform three analyses on this data. First,
we examine the qualitative behaviors of pro-
noun alignment and how they map onto employee
outcomes in the data. Second, we show that
these qualitative differences in early encultura-
tion are meaningful, with alignment behaviors
predicting employment outcome above chance.
Lastly, we consider lexical versus referential lev-
els of alignment and show that predictions are im-
proved under the referential formulation, suggest-
ing that alignment is not limited to low-level word-
repetition effects.

6As ηbase is the log-odds of each word in a reply being a
part of the category c, it is expected to be substantially nega-
tive. For example, second person pronouns (you), are around
2% of the words in replies, approximately −4 in log-odds
space. We follow Gelman et al. (2008)’s recommendation of
the Cauchy prior as appropriate for parameter estimation in
logistic regression.

I You We

align
base

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

−4.5

−4.0

−3.5

Time

Lo
g−

od
ds

 p
ar

am
et

er
 e

st
im

at
es

Figure 3: Sawhorse plots showing the dynam-
ics of pronoun alignment behavior across employ-
ees. Vertical axis shows log-odds for baseline and
alignment. Top row shows estimated alignment,
highest for we and smallest for you. Bottom row
shows baseline dynamics, with employees shifting
toward the average usage as they enculturate. The
shaded region is one standard deviation over pa-
rameter samples.

5.1 Analysis 1: Dynamic Qualitative Changes

We begin with descriptive analyses of the behav-
ior of pronouns, which are likely to reflect incor-
poration into the company. In particular, we look
at first-person singular (I), first-person plural (we),
and second-person pronouns (you). We expect that
increases in we usage will occur as the employee
is integrated into the group, while I and you us-
age will decrease, and want to understand whether
these changes manifest on baseline usage (i.e., in-
ternalization), alignment (i.e., self-regulation), or
both.

Design We divided each employee’s emails by
calendar month, and separated them into the em-
ployee’s first six months, their last six months (if
an employee left the company within the observa-
tion period), and the middle of their tenure. Em-
ployees with fewer than twelve months at the com-
pany were excluded from this analysis, so that
their first and last months did not overlap.

We fit two WHAM models in this analysis. The
first aggregated all employees, regardless of em-
ployment outcome, to minimize noise; the second
separated them by outcome to analyze cultural fit
differences.

Outcome-aggregated model We start with the
aggregated behavior of all employees, shown in
Figure 3. For baselines, we see decreased use of I

608



I You We

align
base

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

−5.0

−4.5

−4.0

−3.5

Time

Lo
g−

od
ds

 p
ar

am
et

er
 e

st
im

at
es

Outcome: invol stay vol

Figure 4: Sawhorse plots split by employment out-
come. Mid-tenure points are jittered for improved
readability.

and you over the first six months, with we usage
increasing over the same period, confirming the
expected result that incorporating into the group
is accompanied by more inclusive pronoun usage.
Despite the baseline changes, alignment is fairly
stable through the first six months. Alignment on
first-person singular and second-person pronouns
is lower than first-person plural pronouns, likely
due to the fact that I or you have different referents
when used by the two conversants, while both con-
versants could use we to refer to the same group.
We will consider this referential alignment in more
detail in Analysis 3. Since employees with dif-
ferent outcomes have much different experiences
over their last six months, we will not discuss them
in aggregate, aside from noting the sharp decline
in we alignment near the end of the employees’
tenures.

Outcome-separated model Figure 4 shows
outcome-specific trajectories, with green lines
showing involuntary leavers (i.e., those who are
fired or downsized), blue showing voluntary
leavers, and orange showing employees who re-
mained at the company through the final month of
the data. The use of I and you is similar to the
aggregates in Figure 3, regardless of group. The
last six months of I usage show an interesting dif-
ference, where involuntary leavers align more on I
but retain a stable baseline while voluntary leavers
retain a stable alignment but increase I overall,
which is consistent with group separation.

The most compelling result we see here, though,
is the changes in we usage by different groups of
employees. Employees who eventually leave the

company involuntarily show signs of more self-
regulation than internalization over the first six
months, increasing their alignment while decreas-
ing their baseline use (though they return to more
similar levels as other employees later in their
tenure). Employees who stay at the company, as
well as those who later leave voluntarily, show
signs of internalization, increasing their baseline
usage to the company average, as well as adapting
their alignment levels to the mean. This finding
suggests that how quickly the employees internal-
ize culturally-standard language use predicts their
eventual employment outcome, even if they even-
tually end up near the average.

5.2 Analysis 2: Predicting Outcomes

This analysis tests the hypothesis that there are
meaningful differences in employees’ initial en-
culturation, captured by alignment behaviors. We
examine the first six months of communications
and attempt to predict whether the employee will
leave the company. We find that, even with a sim-
ple classifier, alignment behaviors are predictive
of employment outcome.

Design We fit the WHAM model to only the first
six months of email correspondence for all em-
ployees who had at least six months of email. The
model estimated the initial level of baseline use
(ηbase) and alignment (ηalign) for each employee,
as well as the slope (α, β) for baseline and align-
ment over those first six months, over all 11 word
categories mentioned in Section 3.

We then created logistic regression classifiers,
using the parameter estimates to predict whether
an employee would leave the company. We fit
separate classifiers for leaving voluntarily or in-
voluntarily. Our results show that early alignment
behaviors are better at identifying employees who
will leave involuntarily than voluntarily, consistent
with Srivastava et al.’s (forthcoming) findings that
voluntary leavers are similar to stayers until late in
their tenure. We fit separate classifiers using the
alignment parameters and the baseline parameters
to investigate their relative informativity.

For each model, we report the area under
the curve (AUC). This value is estimated from
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve,
which plots the true positive rate against the false
positive rate over different classification thresh-
olds. An AUC of 0.5 represents chance per-
formance. We use balanced, stratified cross-

609



validation to reduce AUC misestimation due to
unbalanced outcome frequencies and high noise
(Parker et al., 2007).

Results The left column of Figure 5 shows the
results over 10 runs of 10-fold balanced logis-
tic classifiers with stratified cross-validation in R.
The alignment-based classifiers are both above
chance at predicting that an employee will leave
the company, whether involuntarily or voluntarily.
The baseline-based classifiers perform worse, es-
pecially on voluntary leavers. This finding is con-
sistent with the idea that voluntary leavers resem-
ble stayers (who form the bulk of the employees)
until late in their tenure when their cultural fit de-
clines.

We fit a model using both alignment and base-
line parameters, but this model yielded an AUC
value below the alignment-only classifier. This
suggests that where alignment and baseline be-
haviors are both predictive, they do not provide
substantially different predictive power and lead
to overfitting. A more sophisticated classifier may
overcome these challenges; our goal here was not
to achieve maximal classification performance but
to test whether alignment provided any useful in-
formation about employment outcomes.

5.3 Analysis 3: Types of Alignment

Our final analysis investigates the nature of lin-
guistic alignment: specifically, whether there is an
effect of referential alignment beyond that of the
more commonly used lexical alignment.

Testing this hypothesis requires a small change
to the alignment calculations. Lexical alignment is
based on the conditional probability of the replier
using a word category c given that the preceding
message used that same category c. For referential
alignment, we examine the conditional probability
of the replier using a word category cj given that
the preceding message used the category ci, where
ci and cj are likely to be referentially linked. We
also consider cases where ci is likely to transition
to cj throughout the course of the conversation,
such as present tense verbs turning into past tense
as the event being described recedes into the past.
The pairs of categories that are likely to be refer-
entially or transitionally linked are: (you, I); (we,
I); (you, we); (past, present); (present, future); and
(certainty, tentativity). We include both directions
of these pairs, so this provides approximately the
same number of predictor variables for both situa-

lexical referential

invol
vol

align base align base

0.50

0.54

0.58

0.62

0.50

0.54

0.58

0.62

Parameter set

C
la

ss
ifi

er
 A

U
C

Figure 5: AUC values for 10 runs of 10-fold cross-
validated logistic classifiers, with 95% confidence
intervals on the mean AUC. Both lexical (left col-
umn) and referential (right column) alignment pa-
rameters lead to above chance classifier perfor-
mance, but referential alignment outperforms lex-
ical alignment at predicting both voluntary and in-
voluntary departures.

tions to maximize comparability (12 for the refer-
ential alignments, 11 for the lexical). This modifi-
cation does not change the structure of the WHAM
model, but rather changes its C and N counts by
reclassifying replies between the baseline or align-
ment pathways.

Results Figure 5 plots the differences in predic-
tive model performance using lexical versus ref-
erential alignment parameters. We find that the
semantic parameters provide more accurate clas-
sification than the lexical both for voluntarily and
involuntarily-leaving employees. This suggests
that while previous work looking at lexical align-
ment successfully captures social structure, refer-
ential alignment may reflect a deeper and more
accurate representation of the social structure. It
is unclear if this behavior holds in less formal
situations or with weaker organizational structure
and shared goals, but these results suggest that the
traditional alignment approach of only measuring
lexical alignment should be augmented with ref-
erential alignment measures for a more complete
analysis.

6 Discussion

A key finding from this work is that pronoun
usage behaviors in employees’ email communi-
cation are consistent with social integration into
the group; employees use “I” pronouns less and

610



“we” pronouns more as they integrate. Further-
more, we see the importance of using an align-
ment measure such as WHAM for distinguish-
ing the base rate and alignment usage of words.
Employees who leave the company involuntarily
show increased “we” usage through greater align-
ment, using “we” more when prompted by a col-
league, but introducing it less of their own ac-
cord. This suggests that these employees do not
feel fully integrated into the group, although they
are willing to identify as a part of it when a more
fully-integrated group member includes them, cor-
responding to self-regularization over internaliza-
tion. The fact that these alignment measures alone,
without any job productivity or performance met-
rics, have some predictive capability for employ-
ees’ leaving the company suggests the potential
for support or intervention programs to help high-
performing but poorly-integrated employees inte-
grate into the company better.

More generally, the prominence of
pronominally-driven communication changes
suggest that alignment analyses can provide
insight into a range of social integration settings.
This may be especially helpful in cases where
there is great pressure to integrate smoothly, and
people would be likely to adopt a self-regulating
approach even if they do not internalize their
group membership. Such settings not only include
the high-stakes situation of keeping one’s job, but
of transitioning from high school to college or
moving to a new country or region. Maximizing
the chances for new members to become comfort-
able within a group is critical both for spreading
useful aspects of the group’s existing culture
to new members and for integrating new ideas
from the new members’ knowledge and practices.
Alignment-based approaches can be a useful tool
in separating effective interventions that cause
internalization of the group dynamics from those
that lead to more superficial self-regularization
changes.

7 Conclusions

This paper described an effort to use directed
linguistic alignment as a measure of cultural fit
within an organization. We adapted a hierarchical
alignment model from previous work to estimate
fit within corporate email communications, focus-
ing on changes in language during employees’ en-
try to and exit from the company. Our results

showed substantial changes in the use of pronouns,
with pronoun patterns varying by employees’ out-
comes within the company.The use of the first-
person plural “we” during an employee’s first six
months is particularly instructive. Whereas stay-
ers exhibited increased baseline use, indicating in-
ternalization, those eventually departing involun-
tarily were on the one hand decreasingly likely
to introduce “we” into conversation, but increas-
ingly responsive to interlocutors’ use of the pro-
noun. While not internalizing a shared identity
with their peers, involuntarily departed employees
were overly self-regulating in response to its invo-
cation by others.

Quantitatively, rates of usage and alignment in
the first six months of employment carried infor-
mation about whether employees left involuntar-
ily, pointing towards fit within the company cul-
ture early on as an indicator of eventual employ-
ment outcomes. Finally, we saw ways in which
the application of alignment to cultural fit might
help to refine ideas about alignment itself: prelimi-
nary analysis suggested that referential, rather than
lexical, alignment was more predictive of employ-
ment outcomes. More broadly, these results sug-
gest ways that quantitative methods can be used to
make precise application of concepts like “cultural
fit” at scale.

8 Acknowledgments

This work was supported by NSF Grant
#1456077; The Garwood Center for Corpo-
rate Innovation at the Haas School of Business,
University of California, Berkeley; the Stanford
Data Science Initiative; and the Stanford Graduate
School of Business.

611



References
Talya N. Bauer, Elizabeth Wolfe Morrison, and

Ronda Roberts Callister. 1998. Socialization re-
search: A review and directions for future research.
In Research in Personnel and Human Resources
Management, Emerald Group, Bingley, UK, vol-
ume 16, pages 149–214.

Stephen P. Borgatti and José Luis Molina. 2003. Ethi-
cal and strategic issues in organizational social net-
work analysis. The Journal of Applied Behavioral
Science 39(3):337–349.

Richard Y. Bourhis and Howard Giles. 1977. The lan-
guage of intergroup distinctiveness. In H Giles, ed-
itor, Language, Ethnicity, and Intergroup Relations,
Academic Press, London, pages 119–135.

David B. Buller and R. Kelly Aune. 1988. The effects
of vocalics and nonverbal sensitivity on compliance:
A speech accommodation theory explanation. Hu-
man Communication Research 14:301–32.

Cindy Chung and James W. Pennebaker. 2007. The
psychological functions of function words. In
K Fiedler, editor, Social communication, Psychol-
ogy Press, New York, chapter 12, pages 343–359.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: Language effects and power differences
in social interaction. In Proceedings of the 21st
international conference on World Wide Web. page
699. https://doi.org/10.1145/2187836.2187931.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Robert West, Dan
Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec, and Christopher Potts.
2013. No country for old members: user lifecy-
cle and linguistic change in online communities. In
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on World Wide Web. pages 307–318.

Gabriel Doyle and Michael C. Frank. 2016. Investigat-
ing the sources of linguistic alignment in conversa-
tion. In Proceedings of ACL.

Gabriel Doyle, Dan Yurovsky, and Michael C. Frank.
2016. A robust framework for estimating linguistic
alignment in Twitter conversations. In Proceeedings
of WWW.

R. E. Feldman. 1968. Response to compatriots and
foriegners who seek assistance. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology 10:202–14.

Riccardo Fusaroli, Bahador Bahrami, Karsten Olsen,
Andreas Roepstorff, Geraint Rees, Chris Frith,
and Kristian Tylén. 2012. Coming to Terms:
Quantifying the Benefits of Linguistic Coordi-
nation. Psychological Science 23(8):931–939.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612436816.

Andrew Gelman, Aleks Jakulin, Maria Grazia Pittau,
and Yu-Sung Su. 2008. A weakly informative de-
fault prior distribution for logistic and other regres-
sion models. The Annals of Applied Statistics .

Howard Giles, Nikolas Coupland, and Justine Coup-
land. 1991. Accommodation theory: Communica-
tion, context, and consequences. In Howard Giles,
Justine Coupland, and Nikolas Coupland, editors,
Contexts of accommodation: Developments in ap-
plied sociolinguistics, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Augusto Gnisci. 2005. Sequential strategies of accom-
modation: A new method in courtroom. British
Journal of Social Psychology 44(4):621–643.

Amir Goldberg, Sameer B. Srivastava, V. Govind Ma-
nian, and Christopher Potts. 2016. Fitting in or
standing out? The tradeoffs of structural and cul-
tural embeddedness. American Sociological Review
.

Molly E. Ireland, Richard B. Slatcher, Paul W.
Eastwick, Lauren E. Scissors, Eli J. Finkel,
and James W. Pennebaker. 2011. Language
style matching predicts relationship initiation
and stability. Psychological Science 22:39–44.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610392928.

Kate G. Niederhoffer and James W. Pennebaker. 2002.
Linguistic style matching in social interaction. Jour-
nal of Language and Social Psychology 21(4):337–
360. http://jls.sagepub.com/content/21/4/337.short.

Charles A. O’Reilly, Jennifer Chatman, and David F.
Caldwell. 1991. People and organizational culture:
a profile comparison approach to assessing person-
organization fit. Academy of Management Journal
34(3):487–516.

Brian J Parker, Simon Günter, and Justin Bedo. 2007.
Stratification bias in low signal microarray studies.
BMC bioinformatics 8(1):1.

James W. Pennebaker, Cindy K. Chung, Molly Ireland,
Amy Gonzalez, and Roger J. Booth. 2007. The de-
velopment and psychometric properties of liwc2007.
Technical report, LIWC.net.

Martin J. Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. To-
ward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue.
Behavioral and brain sciences 27(2):169–190.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X04000056.

Sameer B. Srivastava, Amir Goldberg, V. Govind Ma-
nian, and Christopher Potts. forthcoming. Encul-
turation trajectories: Language, cultural adaptation,
and individual outcomes in organizations. Manage-
ment Science .

Harry C. Triandis. 1960. Cognitive similarity and com-
munication in a dyad. Human Relations 13:175–
183.

Dan Yurovsky, Gabriel Doyle, and Michael C. Frank.
2016. Linguistic input is tuned to children’s devel-
opmental level. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.

612


	Alignment at Work: Using Language to Distinguish the Internalization and Self-Regulation Components of Cultural Fit in Organizations

