



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 1–6
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4001

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 1–6
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4001

Annotating tense, mood and voice for English, French and German

Anita Ramm1,4 Sharid Loáiciga2,3 Annemarie Friedrich4 Alexander Fraser4
1Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Universität Stuttgart

2Département de Linguistique, Université de Genève
3Department of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala University

4Centrum für Informations- und Sprachverarbeitung, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
ramm@ims.uni-stuttgart.de sharid.loaiciga@unige.ch

{anne,fraser}@cis.uni-muenchen.de

Abstract

We present the first open-source tool for
annotating morphosyntactic tense, mood
and voice for English, French and Ger-
man verbal complexes. The annotation is
based on a set of language-specific rules,
which are applied on dependency trees
and leverage information about lemmas,
morphological properties and POS-tags of
the verbs. Our tool has an average accu-
racy of about 76%. The tense, mood and
voice features are useful both as features
in computational modeling and for corpus-
linguistic research.

1 Introduction

Natural language employs, among other devices
such as temporal adverbials, tense and aspect to
locate situations in time and to describe their tem-
poral structure (Deo, 2012). The tool presented
here addresses the automatic annotation of mor-
phosyntactic tense, i.e., the tense-aspect combi-
nations, expressed in the morphology and syntax
of verbal complexes (VC). VCs are sequences of
verbal tokens within a verbal phrase. We address
German, French and English, in which the mor-
phology and syntax also includes information on
mood and voice. Morphosyntactic tenses do not
always correspond to semantic tense (Deo, 2012).
For example, the morphosyntactic tense of the En-
glish sentence “He is leaving at noon.” is present
progressive, while the semantic tense is future. In
the remainder of this paper, we use the term tense
to refer to the morphological tense and aspect in-
formation encoded in finite verbal complexes.

Corpus-linguistic research, as well as automatic
modeling of mono- and cross-lingual use of tense,
mood and voice will strongly profit from a reliable
automatic method for identifying these clausal

features. They may, for instance, be used to clas-
sify texts with respect to the epoch or region in
which they have been produced, or for assigning
texts to a specific author. Moreover, in cross-
lingual research, tense, mood, and voice have been
used to model the translation of tense between
different language pairs (Santos, 2004; Loáiciga
et al., 2014; Ramm and Fraser, 2016)). Identi-
fying the morphosyntactic tense is also a neces-
sary prerequisite for identifying the semantic tense
in synthetic languages such as English, French
or German (Reichart and Rappoport, 2010). The
extracted tense-mood-voice (TMV) features may
also be useful for training models in computational
linguistics, e.g., for modeling of temporal relations
(Costa and Branco, 2012; UzZaman et al., 2013).

As illustrated by the examples in Figure 1, rel-
evant information for determining TMV is given
by syntactic dependencies and partially by part-
of-speech (POS) tags output by analyzers such as
Mate (Bohnet and Nivre, 2012). However, the
parser’s output is not sufficient for determining
TMV features; morphological features and lexical
information needs to be taken into account as well.
Learning TMV features from an annotated corpus
would be an alternative; however, to the best of
our knowledge, no such large-scale corpora exist.

A sentence may contain more than one VC, and
the tokens belonging to a VC are not always con-
tiguous in the sentence (see VCs A and B in the
English sentence in Figure 1). In a first step, our
tool identifies the tokens that belong to a VC by
analysing their POS tags as well as the syntactic
dependency parse of the sentence. Next, TMV
values are assigned according to language specific
hand-crafted sets of rules, which have been devel-
oped based on extensive data analysis. The system
contains approximately 32 rules for English and
26 rules for German and for French. The TMV
values are output along with some additional in-

1

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4001
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4001


(1) Output of MATE parser:

It will , I hope , be examined in a positive light .
PRP MD PRP VBP VB VBN IN DT JJ NN

ROOT

SBJ

VC

SBJ VC VC LOC

PMOD

NMOD

NMOD

Er sagt , die Briefe seien schon beantwortet worden .
PPER VVFIN ART NN VAFIN ADV VVPP VAPP

sg|3|pres|ind pl|3|pres|subj

ROOT

SB NK SB

OC

MO

OC

OC

OC

Elle sera , je l’ espère , examinée dans un esprit positif .
CLS V CLS CLO V VPP P DET NC ADJ

ind|s|3|fut ind|s|3|pst |f|part|s|past

root

suj
suj

suj

mod
ats

mod det
obj.p

mod

(2) Extraction of verbal complexes based on dependencies;
(3) Assignment of TMV features based on POS sequences, morphological features and lexical rules:

A will be examined MD[will] VB[be] VBN → futureI indicative passive
B hope VBP → present indicative active
C sagt VFIN[pres/ind] → present indicative active
D seien beantwortet worden VAFIN[pres/ind] VVPP VVPP[worden] → present indicative passive
E sera examinée V[ind/fut] VPP[part/past] → futureI indicative passive
F espère V[ind/pst] → present indicative active

Figure 1: Example for TMV extraction.

formation about the VCs into a TSV file which can
easily be used for further processing.

Related work. Loáiciga et al. (2014) use rules
to automatically annotate tense and voice informa-
tion in English and French parallel texts. Ramm
and Fraser (2016) use similar tense annotation
rules for German. Friedrich and Pinkal (2015)
provide a tool which, among other syntactic-
semantic features, derives the tense of English ver-
bal complexes. This tense annotation is based on
the set of rules used by Loáiciga et al. (2014)

For English, PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005)
contains annotations for tense, aspect and voice,
but there are no annotations for subjunctive con-
structions including modals. The German TüBa-
D/Z corpus only contains morphological features.1

Contributions. To the best of our knowledge,
our system represents the first open-source2 sys-
tem which implements a reliable set of derivation

1http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/ascl/
ressourcen/corpora/tueba-dz.html

2https://github.com/aniramm/
tmv-annotator

rules for annotating tense, mood and voice for En-
glish, French and German. Furthermore, the on-
line demo3 version of the tool allows for fast text
processing without installing the tool.

2 Properties of the verbal complexes

In this section, we describe the morphosyntactic
features that we extract for verbal complexes.

2.1 Finite and non-finite VCs

We define a verbal complex (VC) as a sequence
of verbs within a verbal phrase, i.e. a sentence
may include more than one VC. In addition to the
verbs, a VC can also contain verbal particles and
negation words but not arguments. We distinguish
between finite VCs which need to have at least one
finite verb (e.g. “sagt” in Figure 1), and non-finite
VCs which do not; the latter consist of verb forms
such as gerunds, participles or infinitives (e.g. “to
support”). Infinitives in English and German have
to occur with the particles to or zu, respectively,

3https://clarin09.ims.uni-stuttgart.
de/tmv/

2



while in French, infinitives may occur alone. We
do not assign the TMV features to non-finite VCs.
Our tool marks finiteness of a VC using a binary
feature “yes” (finite) and “no” (non-finite).

2.2 Tense, mood, voice

The identification of TMV features for a VC re-
quires the analysis of lexical and grammatical in-
formation, such as inflections, given by the combi-
nation of verbs. For example, the English present
continuous requires the auxiliary be in present
tense and the gerundive form of the main verb (e.g.
“(I) am speaking”).

Mood refers to the distinction between indica-
tive and subjunctive. Both of these values are
expressed in the inflection of finite verbs in all
the considered languages. For example, the En-
glish verb “shall” is indicative, while its subjunc-
tive form is “should.” In English, tense forms used
in subjunctive mood are often called conditionals;
for German, they are referred to as Konjunktiv.

Voice differentiates between active and passive
constructions. In all three languages, the passive
voice can be recognized by searching for a specific
verb. For example, the passive voice in English
requires the auxiliary be in a tense-specific form,
e.g., “(I) am being seen” for present progressive
or “(he) has been seen” for present perfect.

Details on how our tool automatically identifies
TMV features will be described in Section 3.

2.3 Negation

VCs may include negation. Our tool outputs a bi-
nary negation value to VCs depending on whether
a negation word (identified by checking for a
language-specific POS-tag) is part of the verbal
dependency chain. If a negation exists, the feature
value is “yes”, and “no” otherwise.

2.4 Main verb

Within a VC, the main verb bears the semantic
meaning. For example, in the English VC “would
have read,” the participle “read” is considered to
be the main verb. The main verb feature may con-
tain a single verb or a combination of a verb with
the verb particle. In the following, we describe the
detection of the main verbs for each of the three
languages under consideration.

English and French. In English and French
VCs, the very last verb in the VC is considered
to be the main verb. For example, in the English

VC “will be examined”, “examined” is marked as
the main verb. Verb particles are considered as a
part of the main verb and are attached to the cor-
responding main verb, e.g., the main verb of the
non-finite English VC “to move up” is “move-up.”

German In general, the main verbs in German
have specific POS-tags (VV*) (see, for example,
(Scheible et al., 2013)). In most German VCs,
there is only one verb with such a POS-tag. How-
ever, there are a few exceptions. For exam-
ple, the recipient passive is built with full verbs
bekommen, kriegen, as well as lernen, lassen,
bleiben and an additional meaning-bearing full
verb. Thus, in such constructions, there are two
verbs tagged as VV* (e.g. “Ich bekommeV V FIN
das Buch geschenktV V PP .” (“I receive the book
donated”)). Recipient verbs are not treated as main
verbs if they occur with an additional full verb. In
case there are no verbs tagged with VV*, the last
verb in the chain is considered to be the main verb.

3 Deriving tense, mood and voice

In this section, we give a short overview of the
methods used to derive TMV information.

3.1 Extraction of VCs

The tokens of a VC are not necessarily contiguous.
They may be separated by a coordination, adver-
bials, etc., or even include nested VCs as in Figure
1. This makes it necessary to take syntactic de-
pendencies into account. The extraction of VCs
in our tool is based on dependency parse trees in
the CoNLL format.4 The first step is the identi-
fication of all VC-beginning elements vb within
a sentence, which include finite verbs (English,
French and German) and infinitival particles (En-
glish, German). They are identified by searching
for specific POS-tags. For each vb, the remain-
ing elements of the VC are collected by following
the dependency relations between verbs. Consider
for example the finite verb “will” in Figure 1. It
is identified as a vb because of its POS tag MD.
We now follow the dependency path from “will”
to “be” and from “be” to ”examined”. The result-
ing VC is thus “will be examined.”

4In this work, we use the Mate parser for all three lan-
guages. https://code.google.com/archive/p/
mate-tools/wikis/ParserAndModels.wiki.

3



finite mood tense voice example (active voice)

ind

present (I) work
presProg (I) am working
presPerf (I) have worked
presPerfProg (I) have been working
past (I) worked
pastProg (I) was working
pastPerf (I) had worked
pastPerfProg act (I) have been working

yes futureI pass (I) will work
futureIProg (I) will be working
futureII (I) will have worked
futureIIProg (I) will have been working

subj

condI (I) would work
condIProg (I) would be working
condII (I) would have worked
condIIProg (I) would have been working

no - - - to work

Table 1: TMV combinations for English.

3.2 TMV extraction rules

English. The rules for English make use of the
combinations of the functions of the verbs within
a given VC. Such functions are for instance finite
verb or passive auxiliary. According to the POS
combination of a VC and lexical information, first,
the function of each verb within the VC is deter-
mined. Subsequently, the combination of the de-
rived functions is mapped to TMV values. For ex-
ample, the following functions will be assigned to
the verbs of the VC “will be examined” in Fig-
ure 1: “will” → finite-modal, “be”→ passive-
auxiliary, “examined” → past-participle. This
particular combination of verb functions leads to
the TMV combination futureI/indicative/passive.
Table 1 contains the set of possible TMV combi-
nations that our tool extracts for English.

French. The rules for French are defined on the
basis of the reduction of the verbs to their mor-
phological features. The morphological features
of the verbs are derived from the morphologi-
cal analysis of the verbs, as well as their POS-
tags. The rules specify TMV values for each of
the possible sequences of the morphological fea-
tures. For example, the VC “sera examinée” is
mapped to the morphological feature combination
V-indfut-V-partpast which, according to our rule
set, leads to the TMV futureI/indicative/passive.
In some cases, the lexical information is used to
decide between ambiguous configurations. For ex-
ample, some perfect/active forms are ambiguous
with present/passive forms. For instance, “Jean est
parti” and “Jean est menacé” are both composed of
the verb “est” + past participle, but they have dif-
ferent meaning: “Jean has left” vs. “Jean is threat-
ened.” Information about the finite verb helps to

finite mood tense voice example (active voice)

ind

present (je) travaille
presPerf (je) viens de travailler
perfect (j’)ai travaillé
imperfect (je) travaillais
pastSimp (je) travaillai
pastPerf (j’)eus travaillé
pluperfect act (j’)avais travaillé

yes futureI pass (je) travaillerai
futureII (j’)aurai travaillé
futureProc (je) vais travailler

subj
present (je) travaille
past (j’)aie travaillé
imperfect (je) travaillasse

no - - - travailler

Table 2: TMV Combinations for French.

finite mood tense voice example (active voice)

ind

present (ich) arbeite
perfect (ich) habe gearbeitet
imperfect (ich) arbeitete
pluperfect act (ich) hatte gearbeitet

yes futureI pass (ich) werde arbeiten
futureII (ich) werde gearbeitet haben

konjI present (er) arbeite/arbeitetepast (er) habe/hätte gearbeitetkonjII futureI+II (er) würde arbeiten / gear-
beitet haben

no - - - zu arbeiten

Table 3: TMV combinations for German.

distinguish between the two constructions. Table
2 shows the French TMV combinations.

German. The rules are based on POS tags, mor-
phological analysis of the finite verbs and the lem-
mas of the verbs. We group the rules by the num-
ber of tokens contained in the VC, as we have ob-
served that each combination of TMV features re-
quires a particular number of tokens in the VC. For
each length, we specify which tense and mood of
the finite verb lead to a specific TMV. Similarly to
French, in some contexts, we need to use lexical
information to decide on TMV.

Take for example the VC “seien beantwortet
worden” from Figure 1. Its POS sequence is
VAFIN-VVPP-VAPP, so we use rules defined for
the POS length of 3. We first check the mood
of the finite verb “seien” which is subj (subjunc-
tive). The combination of subj with the morpho-
logical tense of the finite verb pres leads to the
mood value konjunktivI and the tense value past.
As the verb werden, which is used for passive con-
structions in German, occurs in the VC, we derive
the voice value passive. Thus, the resulting anno-
tation is past/konjunktivI/passive. Table 3 shows
TMV value combinations for German.

4



3.3 Extraction of voice

In all three languages, it is difficult to distin-
guish between stative passive and tenses in the
active voice. For instance, the German VCs “ist
geschrieben (is written)” and “ist gegangen (has
gone)” are both built with the auxiliary sein and
a past participle. The combination of POS tags is
same for both cases, and the morphological fea-
tures of the finite verb (pres/ind) correspond to the
German perfect tense in active voice. This, how-
ever, holds only for verbs of movement and a few
other verbs. Verbs such as “schreiben (to write)”
are in this specific context present/passive (sta-
tive passive in present tense) and not perfect/active
which is the case for the VC “ist gegangen”.

To disambiguate between these constructions,
we use a semi-automatically crafted list of
the German and French verbs that form per-
fect/active with the auxiliary sein/être (be) instead
of haben/avoir (have), which is used for the ma-
jority of the verbs. We extract these lists from dif-
ferent corpora by counting how often verbs occur
with sein/haben and être/avoir, respectively. We
manually validate the resulting verb lists.

When a VC with a POS sequence that is am-
biguous in the above explained way is detected,
we check whether the main verb is in the list of
“sein/être” verbs. If that is the case, the corre-
sponding active tense is annotated. Otherwise, the
VC is assigned the corresponding passive tense.

In the case of English, the disambiguation is
somewhat easier. To differentiate between “is
written” and “has written,” we use information
about the finite verb within the VC. In the case
where we have be, we assume to have passive
voice in combination with an appropriate tense. In
case of have, the voice is active.

4 Annotation tool

The tool is implemented in Python. It takes as in-
put the parsed text file in the CoNLL format. For
the rule development, as well as evaluation, we
used the Mate parser (Bohnet and Nivre, 2012),
which can be applied on all of the three languages
addressed here. For German and French, we use
the joint model for parsing, tagging and morpho-
logical analysis including lemmatization. For En-
glish, only tagging and parsing is required. In gen-
eral, the TMV annotation tool is applicable on the
output of arbitrary parsers as long as their models
use the same POS- and dependency tags as Mate.

The tool outputs a TSV file with TMV annota-
tions. An example output is shown in Table 4. The
columns are specified as follows: sentence num-
ber, indices of the elements of a VC separated by
a comma, elements of a VC separated by a comma,
finite, main verb (if more than one, separated by a
comma), tense, mood, voice, progressive (only for
English), coordination and negation. The German
TSV output has an additional column with bound-
aries of a clause in which a VC is placed.5 We ad-
ditionally provide a script for the conversion of the
annotations into HTML format which allows for
quick and easy examination of the annotations.

5 Evaluation

We manually evaluate annotations for 157 German
VCs, 151 English Vcs and 137 French VCs ex-
tracted from a set of randomly chosen sentences
from Europarl (Koehn, 2005). The results are
shown in Table 5.

Language tense mood voice all

EN 81.5 88.1 86.1 76.8
DE 80.8 84.0 81.5 76.4
FR 86.1 93.4 82.5 75.2

Table 5: Accuracy of TMV features according to
manual evaluation.

For French, the overall acurracy is 75%, while
the accuracy of German and English annotations
is 76%. Based on the manually annotated sam-
ple, we estimate that 23/59/85% (for EN/DE/FR)
of the erroneous annotations are due to parsing
errors. For instance, in the case of English, the
VC extraction process sometimes adds gerunds to
the VC and interprets them as a present participle.
Similarly, for French, a past participle is added,
which erroneously causes the voice assignment
to be passive. Contrary to German and English,
French has higher mood accuracy, since mood is
largely encoded unambiguously in the verb mor-
phology. For German, false or missing morpho-
logical annotation of the finite verbs causes some
errors, and there are cases not covered by our rules
for identifying stative passive.

Our rule sets have been developed based on ex-
tensive data analysis. This evaluation presents a

5The clause boundary identification is based on the sen-
tence punctuation (e.g. comma, colon, semicolon, hyphen,
etc). For more sophisticated clause boundary identification
for German, please refer to (Sidarenka et al., 2015).

5



sent verb main
num id(s) VC verb fin tense mood voice neg coord

1 6,7 has climbed climbed yes presPerf indicative active no no
2 4,5 has crossed crossed yes presPerf indicative active no no
2 13,14 can ’t increase increase yes present indicative active yes no

Table 4: TSV output of the annotation tool for two English sentences: “Since then, the index has climbed
above 10,000. Now that gold has crossed the magic $1,000 barrier, why can’t it increase ten-fold, too?”

snapshot of the tool’s performance. The findings
of this analysis will lead to improvement of the
rules’ precision in future development iterations.

6 Conclusion

We have presented an automatic tool which an-
notates English, French and German verbal com-
plexes with tense, mood and voice. Our tool com-
pensates for the lack of annotated data on this sub-
ject. It allows for large-scale studies of verbal
tenses and their use within and across the three
languages. This includes for instance typological
studies of the temporal interpretation of tenses, or
discourse studies interested in the referential prop-
erties of tense. Large-scale annotated data with
reliable accuracy also creates the possibility to
train classifiers, machine translation systems and
other NLP tools. The same approach for extracting
tense, aspect and mood could also be implemented
for other languages.

Acknowledgment

This work has received funding from the DFG
grant Models of Morphosyntax for Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (Phase 2), the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreement No. 644402 (HimL), and
from the European Research Council (ERC) under
grant agreement No. 640550.

We thank André Blessing for developing the
demo version of the tool.

References

Bernd Bohnet and Joakim Nivre. 2012. A transition-
based system for joint part-of-speech tagging and
labeled non-projective dependency parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on EMNLP.
Jeju Island, Korea.

Francisco Costa and António Branco. 2012. Aspectual
type and temporal relation classification. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th Conference of the EACL. Avi-
gnon, France.

Ashwini Deo. 2012. Morphology. In Robert I. Bin-
nick, editor, The Oxford Handbook of Tense and As-
pect, OUP.

Annemarie Friedrich and Manfred Pinkal. 2015. Auto-
matic recognition of habituals: a three-way classifi-
cation of clausal aspect. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on EMNLP. Lisbon, Portugal.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Conference Pro-
ceedings: the tenth Machine Translation Summit.
Phuket, Thailand.

Sharid Loáiciga, Thomas Meyer, and Andrei Popescu-
Belis. 2014. English-French verb phrase alignment
in Europarl for tense translation modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Conference on
LREC. Reykjavik, Iceland.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Cor-
pus of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics
31(1):71–106.

Anita Ramm and Alexander Fraser. 2016. Modeling
verbal inflection for English to German SMT. In
Proceedings of the the First Conference on Machine
Translation (WMT). Berlin, Germany.

Roi Reichart and Ari Rappoport. 2010. Tense sense
disambiguation: a new syntactic polysemy task. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on EMNLP.
Massachusetts, USA.

Diana Santos. 2004. Translation-based corpus studies
Contrasting English and Portuguese tense and as-
pect systems. Rodopi.

Silke Scheible, Sabine Schulte im Walde, Marion
Weller, and Max Kisselew. 2013. A compact but
linguistically detailed database for german verb sub-
categorisation relying on dependency parses from a
web corpus: Tool, guidelines and resource. In In
Proceedings of the WAC-8. Lancaster, UK.

Uladzimir Sidarenka, Andreas Peldszus, and Manfred
Stede. 2015. Discourse segmentation of German
texts. Journal for Language Technology and Com-
putational Linguistics 30(1):71–98.

Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, Leon Derczyn-
ski, James Allen, Marc Verhagen, and James Puste-
jovsky. 2013. SemEval-2013 Task 1: TempEval-
Events, and Temporal Relations. In Proceedings of
the SemEval 2013. Atlanta, Georgia.

6


	Annotating tense, mood and voice for English, French and German

