



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics- Student Research Workshop, pages 142–149
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3023

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics- Student Research Workshop, pages 142–149
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3023

Negotiation of Antibiotic Treatment in Medical Consultations:
A Corpus based Study

Nan Wang
University of California, Los Angeles

nwang3@ucla.edu

Abstract

Doctor-patient conversation is considered
a contributing factor to antibiotic over-
prescription. Some language practices
have been identified as parent pressuring
doctors for prescribing; other practices are
considered as likely to engender parent re-
sistance to non-antibiotic treatment rec-
ommendations. In social science stud-
ies, approaches such as conversation anal-
ysis have been applied to identify those
language practices. Current research for
dialogue systems offer an alternative ap-
proach. Past research proved that corpus-
based approaches have been effectively
used for research involving modeling dia-
logue acts and sequential relations. In this
proposal, we propose a corpus-based study
of doctor-patient conversations of antibi-
otic treatment negotiation in pediatric con-
sultations. Based on findings from conver-
sation analysis studies, we use a compu-
tational linguistic approach to assist anno-
tating and modeling of doctor-patient lan-
guage practices, and analyzing their influ-
ence on antibiotic over-prescribing.

1 Introduction

“How to do things with words” has long been a
topic interested to researchers from various disci-
plines, such as pragmatics (Austin, 1962; Levin-
son, 1983), conversation analysis (CA) (Drew and
Heritage, 1992; Heritage and Maynard, 2006), and
computational linguistics (Stolcke et al., 2000;
Williams et al., 2013; Schlöder and Fernandez,
2015). Although computational methods have
been widely used to conduct text mining tasks
such as detecting reader bias and predicting mood
shift in vast populations (Flaounas et al., 2013;

Lansdall-Welfare et al., 2012; Ritter et al., 2011),
studies on computational modeling of human nat-
ural conversational acts are rare, especially for
investigating associations with social behavioral
outcomes.

Doctor-patient conversations have been proved
highly consequential on a lot of worldwide public
health problems and population health outcomes
(Zolnierek and DiMatteo., 2009; Mangione-Smith
et al., 2015). Over-prescription of antibiotics is of-
ten related to interaction-generated problems aris-
ing from doctor-patient conversations, which has
little to do with rational medical judgments (Mac-
farlane et al., 1997). For example, some par-
ent language practices are frequently understood
by physicians as advocating antibiotics, resulting
in significantly higher likelihood of inappropri-
ate prescriptions (Mangione-Smith et al., 1999;
Stivers, 2002, 2007).

This antibiotic resistance and over-prescription
phenomenon also has its presence in China. Pre-
scription rates of antibiotics is high (Li et al., 2012;
Wang et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2012); multiple
types of antibiotic resistant pathogens have been
discovered nationwide. However, determinants of
the over-prescription problem in China have not
been well studied, especially the impact of doctor-
patient conversation in medical consultations.

In this proposal, we propose a corpus based
study to examine doctor-patient conversation of
antibiotic treatment negotiation in Chinese pedi-
atric settings, using a mixed methodology of con-
versation analysis and computational linguistics.
Particularly, we aim to discover (1) how parent
requests of antibiotic prescriptions are made in
doctor-patient conversations and their effects on
prescribing decision outcomes; (2) how physi-
cians’ non-antibiotic treatment recommendations
are delivered and responded by parents; In con-
ducting this study, our findings about doctor-

142

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3023
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3023


patient conversation are expected to be extended
beyond medical setting to natural human conver-
sations. These findings include:

• How actions are formulated with various
forms of language practice in conversations;

• How meaning of language practices is under-
stood by speakers as performing a certain ac-
tion;

• How choice of one form of language prac-
tices in performing an action is associated
with its response of various kinds.

In conducting this study, we attempt to bridge
the gap between social scientific methods and
computational methods in researching the afore-
mentioned questions.

In the following sections, we will introduce our
corpus, preliminary findings from CA, and related
computational approaches. This is followed by a
discussion of contributions of the proposed study.

2 Data

The corpus of this study is constructed from nat-
ural human conversations. In order to obtain the
conversations, 318 video-recorded doctor-patient
conversations were collected in 6 Chinese hospi-
tals between September and December in 2013.
Each conversation is around 5 minutes in length,
resulting in 30 hours of video-recordings in to-
tal. The conversations were mostly between doc-
tors and patients’ caregivers regarding patients’
health conditions and lifestyle-related issues that
are commonly discussed in pediatrics.

Video-recordings were then transcribed manu-
ally. Six researchers were employed to transcribe
the data, including one manager and five anno-
tators. All of them are native speakers of Chi-
nese. The five annotators received basic training
in CA and its transcribing conventions before they
started transcribing. The manager is a specialist
in CA, who controlled the work flow and trouble-
shot during the transcribing process.

Following the Jeffersonian transcribing conven-
tions (Jefferson, 2004), the video-recorded conver-
sational data were transcribed with considerable
details with respect to speech production, includ-
ing the speech text verbatim and other paralinguis-
tic features such as intonations, overlaps, visible
non-verbal activities and noticeable timed silence
(Auer et al., 1992).

TID SID RID UID Speech text
1 1 0 M 您好 . 就 是 咳嗽.

Hello. He’s just coughing.
2 2 0 D ((处理病历文件))

((Processing medical docu-
ment))

3 3 0 D 来 看 过 的, 是 啊?
You have visited us for this,
have you?

4 3 3 M 嗯, 那 天 晚 上
来 挂 了 急诊 室,=
Yeah, we came to the emer-
gency room that night.

5 4 4 D =嗯, 嗯.
Yeah, yeah.

Table 1: An example of annotated conversation.

To answer our research questions, we devel-
oped an annotation schema, capturing the follow-
ing aspects of the conversations, including (1)
turn-taking and speakership (TID, UID), (2) multi-
turn dependency relations, such as adjacency pair1

(SID) and rhetorical relations2 (RID). In addition,
the speech text was also word segmented corre-
sponding to Chinese Penn Tree Bank segmenta-
tion guideline (Xia et al., 2000). An example of
the corpus is shown in Table 1.

The current annotated corpus contains 318 con-
versations with nearly 40K turns and 470K Chi-
nese characters. It has on average 123 turns and 81
adjacency pairs in each conversation. The average
number of participants is 3 in each conversation,
with a minimum of 2 speakers and a maximum of
8 speakers.

3 Conversation Analysis

Conversation analysis (CA) is used to identify the
dialogue acts in the corpus. CA views sequence
organization a core feature of conversation that is
important for understanding the meaning of an ut-
terance and its significance as an action in con-
versation (Schegloff, 1968). The idea is that the
action which some talk is doing can be grounded
in its position, not just its composition. Therefore,
some talk (e.g. “It’s raining.”) can be heard as an
answer to a question (e.g. “Are we going to the
game?”), even they are apparently semantically
unrelated. The relationship of adjacency between
turns is central to the ways in which talk in con-
versation is organized and understood (Schegloff,

1A basic sequential relationship defined in conventional
conversation analysis literature, to be explained in the next
section.

2RID: Information reflecting topical relevances across
turns.

143



2007). The adjacency relationship most power-
fully operates in two ways: (1) backwards - next
turns are understood by co-participants to display
their speaker’s understanding of the prior turn and
to embody an action responsive to the prior turn
so understood; (2) prospective - a first pair part in
an adjacency pair projects some prospective rele-
vance rules for the second pair part. Specifically,
it makes relevant a limited set of possible second
pair parts, and thereby sets some terms by which a
next turn will be understood (Schegloff, 2007).

The methodology of CA relies on audio or
video-recordings of naturally occurring conversa-
tions, which are then transcribed in details for
analyses of turns and sequences in the conversa-
tion (Sidnell et al., 2013) and the embodied actions
that speakers use to accomplish their goals in so-
cial interactions (Drew and Heritage, 1992; Drew
et al., 2001). In general, CA looks for patterns
in the conversation which form evidence of sys-
tematic usage that can be identified as a ’practice’
through which people accomplish a social action.
To be identified as a practice, a particular commu-
nication behavior must be seen to be recurrent and
to be routinely treated by recipients in a way such
that it can be discriminated from related or similar
practices (Heritage, 1984; Stivers, 2005).

Utilizing CA, we identify parent practices of
making requests and physician practices making
treatment recommendations in our corpus. These
findings are then used for developing an annota-
tion schema for computational modeling of these
dialogue acts and the associations with their re-
sponses or action outcomes.

4 Preliminary Results

Based on conversation analytical study, we find
that four parent language practices are recurrently
treated by physicians as requesting antibiotic treat-
ment:

• Explicit requests of an antibiotic treatment;

• Desire statements of an antibiotic treatment;

• Inquiries about an antibiotic treatment;

• Evaluations of a past treatment.

Among the four language practices, only the first
practice takes a canonical form of request (e.g.,
“Can you prescribe me some antibiotics?”), while
the other three practices take less explicit language

formats, putting varying degree of impositions on
physicians’ responsive acts.

For example, an explicit request of antibiotic
treatment is the strongest form of request as it puts
the highest degree of impositions on physicians’
responsive action, by making physicians’ grant or
rejection of the request relevant in the next turn. In
contrast, a statement of desire for antibiotic treat-
ment does not put physicians under any constraint
for granting an antibiotic prescription, but it gener-
ates an understanding that prescribing antibiotics
is a desirable act under this circumstance. Simi-
larly, an inquiry about antibiotics raises antibiotic
treatment as a topic for discussion and implicates
a preference for the treatment, yet it does not put
physicians under the constraint as an explicit re-
quest does. Moreover, a positive evaluation of
past experience with antibiotics may be subject
to physicians’ understanding as desiring for an-
tibiotics for the current condition, yet it does not
even require any response physicians as an inquiry
about antibiotics does.

The CA study of the requesting practices en-
ables us to identify the utterances that are recur-
rently understood or subject to speakers’ under-
standing as doing the act of requesting. In addi-
tion, we find that explicit requests are least fre-
quently used by parents, while less explicit forms
of requests occur more frequently. Table 2 de-
scribes the frequency (number of cases) and per-
centage of the requesting practices out of total
number of cases in the corpus.

In order to quantitatively investigate the correla-
tion between the presence of the requesting prac-
tices and the prescribing decision outcomes, we
conduct a Pearson’s χ2 test between the two vari-
ables X and Y , where X is whether parents use at
least one of the four requesting practices, and Y is
whether they receive an antibiotic treatment by the
end of the consultation. The χ2 test suggests that
parents using at least one of the four requesting
practices is significantly associated with that they
receive an antibiotic treatment (χ2=5.625, df =
13, p = 0.0184). It is worth noting that this is an
approximation of the correlation between parent
use of the requesting practices and the prescribing
outcomes. Investigation of correlations between
individual parent requesting practices and the pre-
scribing outcomes will be carried out in our ongo-

3Degrees of freedom.
4At the 0.05 significance level.

144



Request Frequency Percentage
Explicit requests 23 7.23%
Desire statements 38 11.94%
Inquiries 90 28.30%
Evaluations 69 21.70%
Total 220 69.17%

Table 2: Distribution of requesting practices in the
corpus. Each cell reports the number of cases (and
percentage) containing the practice.

ing work. Moreover, computational methods will
also be introduced to examine the correlations.

In examining what kind of treatment recom-
mendations are more likely to be resisted by par-
ents, we investigate the association between physi-
cians’ non-antibiotic treatment recommendations
and parents’ responses in the next turn.

One way to distinguish the delivery format
of a non-antibiotic treatment recommendation is
whether it is negative-format or positive-format
(Stivers, 2005). A negative-format recommenda-
tion is to recommend against a particular treatment
(e.g., “She doesn’t need any antibiotics.”); while
a positive-format one is to recommend for a par-
ticular treatment (e.g., “I’m gonna give her some
cough medicine.”). Findings from the American
pediatric settings show that physicians’ positive-
format recommendations are less likely to engen-
der parent resistant response to a non-antibiotic
treatment recommendation than negative-format
recommendations, and thus suggests that rec-
ommendations delivered in an affirmative, spe-
cific form are most receptive to parents for non-
antibiotic treatment (Stivers, 2005).

Beyond distinguishing the recommendations
into positive-format and negative-format, there are
many other features which could be taken into
consideration regarding to their consequences on
parents’ responses (e.g. epistemic stances5 and
deontic stances6 that are embodied in the rec-
ommending practices). For example, physicians’
treatment recommendations can be produced with
the following types, including assertions, propos-
als and offers. The assertions are recommen-

5The epistemic stance refers to speakers’ orientation to-
ward the relative primacy/subordination in terms of their
knowledge access. See (Heritage and Raymond, 2005) for
more details.

6The deontic stance refers to speakers’ orientation toward
their relative primacy/subordination in terms of their rights to
decide future events. See (Stevanovic and Peräkylä, 2014) for
more details.

Recommendation Frequency Percentage
Assertions 128 51.00%
Proposals 87 34.66%
Offers 31 12.35%
Total 246 98.01%

Table 3: Distribution of recommending practices
in the corpus. Each cell reports the number of
cases (and percentage) containing the correspond-
ing practice.

dations such as “You have to take some fever
medicine.”. Proposals are such as “Why don’t
you take some cough syrup?”. Offers are mostly
recommendations that are offered following par-
ent indication of their treatment preference or de-
sires, e.g. “I’ll give you some fever medicine if
you want.”. The assertions index higher physi-
cian epistemic and deontic rights in terms of who
knows the best about the treatment and who deter-
mines what the patient needs to do respectively.
Compared to assertions, physicians claim less
epistemic and deontic authority by using the pro-
posal format; and offers embody the least amount
epistemic and deontic primacy. Table 3 describes
the distribution of physicians’ practices of making
treatment recommendations across the corpus.

We also conduct a Pearson’s χ2 test between
physicians’ choice of recommending practice and
parent response. The test shows that we cannot
reject the null hypothesis that physicians’ choices
of recommending practice type are independent
of parent response types (χ2=0.327, df = 2,
p = 0.849). Thus our ongoing work is to exam-
ine other complexities of treatment recommending
practices and their effect on parents’ response.

5 Computational Approach

Conversation analysis allows us to manually iden-
tify language practices that are recurrently under-
stood and subject to speaker understanding of do-
ing a particular act; while computational approach
is used to assist tasks such as entity type recog-
nition, dialogue act classification, and analyses of
interested correlations in a more scalable way.

Early research (Jurafsky et al., 1998; Stolcke
et al., 2000) on computational modeling of conver-
sational language has demonstrated that automatic
modeling based on manually transcribed conver-
sational data by including features such as speak-
ership, dependency relations have achieved supe-

145



rior performance results compared to datasets oth-
erwise. In using the computational approach in
our study, several techniques will be used. In gen-
eral, we can divide our computational tasks into
two categories, fundamental and dialogue specific
tasks.

5.1 Fundamental Tasks

Fundamental tasks mainly involve solving general
problems that are across all language processing
tasks, e.g. named entity recognition and corefer-
ence resolution. This part of work lays founda-
tions for more advanced dialogue specific tasks to
be discussed in the next section.

5.1.1 Named Entity Recognition

Entities are very important in spoken language un-
derstanding, as it conveys key information in de-
termining task objectives, intents, etc. In the med-
ical domain, entity recognition is particularly cru-
cial in identifying information such as treatment or
prescriptions. As a fundamental natural language
processing (NLP) technique for various tasks, e.g.
machine translation (Babych and Hartley, 2003),
information retrieval (Guo et al., 2009), named en-
tity recognition (NER) (Nadeau and Sekine, 2007)
is also used in our study. Using NER in our study
has several challenges. For example, utterances
in dialogues are shorter compared to other types
of texts. Also, NER is conducted on Chinese.
Thus, domain specific word segmentation (Song
and Xia, 2012) is a prerequisite if we extend our
work to larger datasets in a more scalable way.
However, using NER in our study has the advan-
tage that utterances in dialogues are not isolated.
The sequential relations between the utterances
thus potentially provides us with more informa-
tion to build a better model. Previous work (We-
ston et al., 2015) proved that information extrac-
tion which takes into account information from
previous utterances with recurrent neural networks
was more effective. NER in our study can provide
more in-depth annotations to the corpus, allow-
ing models trained on the corpus to incorporate
more information. To accelerate the annotation
process, semi-supervised methods are used for di-
alogue acts recognition and classification. Specif-
ically, we annotate some seed data, use the trained
model to automatically annotate the rest, and fi-
nally check the automatically generated annota-
tions manually.

5.1.2 Coreference Resolution
In natural language, reference is used widely for
communication efficiency. In dialogue environ-
ments, person reference and even omissions are
very common. Therefore, coreference resolution
can help us add useful semantic information into
our language models (Recasens et al., 2013; Clark
and Manning, 2015). General coreference resolu-
tion is usually performed on multiple sentences in
a document; however, the relations of these sen-
tences are vague. Based on our multi-turn rhetori-
cal relation annotations, information that are ab-
sent or abstract in a turn can be extracted from
turns that are rhetorically related. This could ef-
fectively enhance the performance of coreference
resolution and provide more accurate information
about the referent. For example, the pronoun that
may not be clear about what it refers to in one ut-
terance; however, the co-reference resolution tech-
nique links it to previous turns which contain the
information of its referent.

5.2 Dialogue Specific Tasks

Our research is closely related to the studies on di-
alogue systems (Henderson, 2015), in which mod-
els are built to structure conversations. To achieve
our research goals, models are built to track states
in a dialogue and to build connections between ut-
terances and action outcomes.

5.2.1 Dialogue State Modeling
One important task is to classify types of an utter-
ance and types of the action required. For exam-
ple, to judge whether an utterance is a question,
answer, or other dialogue act, classification can be
performed, taking into account turns in previous
context. Previous work (Henderson et al., 2013;
Ren et al., 2014) demonstrated that using a clas-
sifier was effective for modeling user intents and
utterance types. In our research, we will use this
approach to classify utterances into different types
such as dialogue acts, parent responses and treat-
ment decisions. In order to perform such classifi-
cation, further annotations are conducted based on
the findings of conversation analyses, including:

• Dialogue act - parent requests for antibiotic
treatment, physician treatment recommenda-
tions;

• Treatment type - antibiotic or non-antibiotic
treatment;

146



• Response type - grant or rejection to recom-
mendation.

By using these classifiers, it allows us to investi-
gate the features that are most important for clas-
sifying the utterances, and then align them with
the qualitative findings from CA studies.

Another way to model dialogue states is treating
dialogues as a sequence of observations and then
build models (e.g., CRF (Lafferty et al., 2001),
LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)) to
perform labeling or classification based on that.
This is a natural way of modeling dialogues in
terms of the problem proximity. Current state-of-
the-art studies suggest that LSTM is a good choice
for modeling not only sequences of turns, but also
sequences of words (or other basic units) within a
turn (Zilka and Jurcı́cek, 2015). Using our corpus,
an LSTM model can be trained to achieve the same
goal as static classifiers for practice type classi-
fication, and to model the sequential relationship
between turns in real conversations.

Previous studies (Lee and Eskenazi, 2013;
Williams, 2014; Henderson et al., 2014) found that
systems combining the classifier approach and the
sequence model approach showed competitive re-
sults. In doing so, one can train several differ-
ent models with different sets of parameters and
join their results accordingly (Henderson et al.,
2014). For the aforementioned classification and
sequence modeling tasks, the combined model is
expected to outperform individual models.

5.2.2 Domain Adaptation
Since our data is of the particular domain of
medicine, domain adaptation is another task in-
volved in our research. Almost all of the afore-
mentioned tasks can be affected by domain spe-
cific variance. Besides, conversational data in
medical domain is also lacking. Therefore, ac-
quiring more data from other or general domain
can be useful in completing the tasks in the med-
ical domain, and improving the capability of con-
versational understanding, Training data selec-
tion/acquisition (Axelrod et al., 2011; Song et al.,
2012) could be the first step to solve the problem
of domain variance, without the need to modify
the existing models to fit our domain. Moreover,
when this work has to be extended to other do-
mains, e.g., law, education, etc., domain adapta-
tion is required to transfer the knowledge from this
domain to another.

6 Discussion

In this proposal, we propose a study on doctor-
patient conversations based on a corpus of natu-
rally occurring medical conversation that are tran-
scribed and annotated manually. With the com-
bination of the social science research method of
conversation analysis and computational methods
for language modeling, we aim to discover how
language practices in doctor-patient conversation
influence antibiotic over-prescribing.

Although previous studies (Macfarlane et al.,
1997; Mangione-Smith et al., 1999; Stivers, 2007)
proved that doctor-patient conversation were con-
sequential on medical decision-making and pop-
ulation health outcomes, findings from the extant
social science research are still limited in answer-
ing the question “in what way the language prac-
tices that doctors and patients use in medical con-
sultations influence the decision outcomes”.

Based on our preliminary findings from the CA
studies, we propose to use the computational ap-
proach to help answer our research questions. In
doing so, language patterns that are interested in
CA studies can be automatically modeled and pre-
dicted with classifier or sequence models, leading
us to more interesting findings. Also, by using the
computational approach, we can also build a di-
alogue system based on our corpus. This system
can be useful for analyzing doctor-patient conver-
sation and assisting decision-making process in
medical consultations.

In addition, we constructed a manually tran-
scribed and annotated corpus. Our ongoing work
involves formalizing and adding additional anno-
tations to the corpus. We will release the cor-
pus to the community in near future. It will be a
unique resource for both social scientific and com-
putational linguistic studies of conversations in the
medical domain.

References
Peter Auer, Frank Muller, and Elizabeth Couper-

Kuhlen. 1992. Language in Time: The Rhythm and
Tempo of Spoken Interaction. Oxford University
Press, New York.

John Langshaw Austin. 1962. How to do things with
words. William James Lectures. Oxford University
Press.

Amittai Axelrod, Xiaodong He, and Jianfeng Gao.
2011. Domain adaptation via pseudo in-domain data

147



selection. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-2011). pages 355–362.

Bogdan Babych and Anthony Hartley. 2003. Im-
proving machine translation quality with automatic
named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the
7th International EAMT Workshop on MT and Other
Language Technology Tools, Improving MT Through
Other Language Technology Tools: Resources and
Tools for Building MT . Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, EAMT
’03, pages 1–8.

Kevin Clark and Christopher D. Manning. 2015.
Entity-centric coreference resolution with model
stacking. In Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL).

Paul Drew, John Chatwin, and Sarah Collins. 2001.
Conversation Analysis: A Aethod for Research into
Interactions between Patients and Health-care Pro-
fessionals. Health Expectations 4:58–70.

Paul Drew and John Heritage. 1992. Analyzing talk
at work: an introduction. In Paul Drew and John
Heritage, editors, Talk at work: interaction in insti-
tutional settings, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, pages 3–65.

Ilias Flaounas, Omar Ali, Thomas Lansdall-Welfare,
Tijl De Bie, Nick Mosdell, Justin Lewis, and Nello
Cristianini. 2013. Research methods in the age of
digital journalism. Digital Journalism 1(1):102–
116.

Jiafeng Guo, Gu Xu, Xueqi Cheng, and Hang Li. 2009.
Named entity recognition in query. In Proceed-
ings of the 32Nd International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval. ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGIR ’09,
pages 267–274.

Matthew Henderson. 2015. Machine learning for dia-
log state tracking: A review. In Proceedings of The
First International Workshop on Machine Learning
in Spoken Language Processing.

Matthew Henderson, Blaise Thomson, and Steve
Young. 2013. Deep neural network approach for the
dialog state tracking challenge. In Proceedings of
the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference. Metz, France, pages
467–471.

Matthew Henderson, Blaise Thomson, and Steve
Young. 2014. Word-based dialog state tracking with
recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the
15th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group
on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL). Philadel-
phia, PA, U.S.A., pages 292–299.

John Heritage. 1984. Garfinkel and Ethnomethodol-
ogy. Polity Press, Cambridge.

John Heritage and Douglas W. Maynard. 2006. Com-
munication in Medical Care: Interaction between
Primary Care Physicians and Patients. Number 20
in Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.

John Heritage and Geoffrey Raymond. 2005. The
terms of agreement: Indexing epistemic authority
and subordination in assessment sequences. Social
Psychology Quarterly 68:15–38.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
short-term memory. Neural Comput. 9(8):1735–
1780.

Gail Jefferson. 2004. Glossary of transcript symbols
with an introduction. In Gene H. Lerner, editor,
Conversation Analysis: Studies from the First Gen-
eration, John Benjamins, Amsterdam / Philadelphia,
chapter 2, pages 13–31.

Daniel Jurafsky, Rebecca Bates, Noah Coccaro,
Rachel Martin, Marie Meteer, Klaus Ries, Elizabeth
Shriberg, Andreas Stolcke, Paul Taylor, and Carol
Van Ess-Dykema. 1998. Switchboard discourse lan-
guage modeling project report. Center for Speech
and Language Processing, Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity, Baltimore, MD .

John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA, ICML ’01, pages 282–289.

Thomas Lansdall-Welfare, Vasileios Lampos, and
Nello Cristianini. 2012. Effects of the recession on
public mood in the uk. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on World Wide Web. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, pages 1221–1226.

Sungjin Lee and Maxine Eskenazi. 2013. Recipe for
building robust spoken dialog state trackers: Dialog
state tracking challenge system description. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Metz, France,
pages 414–422.

Stephen C. Levinson. 1983. Pragmatics. Cambridge
University Press.

Yongbin Li, Jing Xu, Fang Wang, Bin Wang, Liqun
Liu, Wanli Hou, Hong Fan, Yeqing Tong, Juan
Zhang, and Zuxun Lu. 2012. Overprescribing in
china, driven by financial incentives, results in very
high use of antibiotics, injections, and corticos-
teroids. Health Affairs (Project Hope) 31(5):1075–
1082.

J. Macfarlane, W. Holmes, R. Macfarlane, and N. Brit-
ten. 1997. Influence of patients’ expectations on an-
tibiotic management of acute lower respiratory tract
illness in general practice: questionnaire study. BMJ
315(7117):1211–1214.

148



R. Mangione-Smith, E. A. McGlynn, M. N. Elliott,
P. Krogstad, and R. H. Brook. 1999. The relation-
ship between perceived parental expectations and
pediatrician antimicrobial prescribing behavior. Pe-
diatrics 103(4):711–718.

R. Mangione-Smith, C. Zhou, J. D. Robinson, J. A.
Taylor, M. N. Elliott, and J. Heritage. 2015. Com-
munication practices and antibiotic use for acute res-
piratory tract infections in children. Annals of Fam-
ily Medicine 13(3):221–227.

David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A survey
of named entity recognition and classification. Lin-
guisticae Investigationes 30(1):3–26.

Marta Recasens, Matthew Can, and Dan Jurafsky.
2013. Same referent, different words: Unsupervised
mining of opaque coreferent mentions. In North
American Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (NAACL).

Hang Ren, Weiqun Xu, and Yonghong Yan. 2014.
Markovian discriminative modeling for dialog state
tracking. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting
of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Di-
alogue (SIGDIAL). Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A., pages
327–331.

Alan Ritter, Colin Cherry, and William B. Dolan.
2011. Data-driven Response Generation in Social
Media. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, EMNLP ’11, pages 583–
593.

Emanuel Schegloff. 2007. Sequence organization in
interaction: Volume 1: A primer in conversation
analysis. Cambridge University Press.

Emanuel A. Schegloff. 1968. Sequencing in Con-
versational Openings. American Anthropologist
70(6):1075–1095.

Julian J. Schlöder and Raquel Fernandez. 2015. Clar-
ifying Intentions in Dialogue: A Corpus Study. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Computational Semantics. London, UK, pages 46–
51.

Jack Sidnell, Tanya Stivers, and Eds. 2013. The Hand-
book of Conversation Analysis. Wiley-Blackwell.

Yan Song, Prescott Klassen, Fei Xia, and Chunyu Kit.
2012. Entropy-based Training Data Selection for
Domain Adaptation. In Proceedings of COLING-
2012. Mumbai, India, pages 1191–1200.

Yan Song and Fei Xia. 2012. Using a Goodness Mea-
surement for Domain Adaptation: A Case Study
on Chinese Word Segmentation. In Proceedings of
LREC-2012. Istanbul, Turkey, pages 3853–3860.

Melisa Stevanovic and Anssi Peräkylä. 2014. Three
Orders in the Organization of Human Action: On

the Interface between Knowledge, Power, and Emo-
tion in interaction and social relations. Language in
Society 43(2):185–207.

Tanya Stivers. 2002. Participating in Decisions about
Treatment: Overt Parent Pressure for Antibiotic
Medication in Pediatric Encounters. Social Science
and Medicine 54(7):1111–1130.

Tanya Stivers. 2005. Non-antibiotic treatment rec-
ommendations: Delivery formats and implications
for parent resistance. Social Science & Medicine
5(60):949–964.

Tanya Stivers. 2007. Prescribing under Pressure:
Parent-physician Conversations and Antibiotics.
Oxford University Press, London.

Andreas Stolcke, Noah Coccaro, Rebecca Bates, Paul
Taylor, Carol Van Ess-Dykema, Klaus Ries, Eliza-
beth Shriberg, Daniel Jurafsky, Rachel Martin, and
Marie Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for au-
tomatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational Linguistics 26(3):339–373.

Jin Wang, Pan Wang, Xinghe Wang, Yingdong Zheng,
and Yonghong Xiao. 2014. Use and prescription of
antibiotics in primary health care settings in china.
JAMA Internal Medicine 174(12):1914–1920.

Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2015. Towards ai-complete ques-
tion answering: A set of prerequisite toy tasks.
ArXiv pre-prints abs/1502.05698.

Jason Williams, Antoine Raux, Deepak Ramachan-
dran, and Alan Black. 2013. The Dialog State
Tracking Challenge. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL
2013 Conference. Metz, France, pages 404–413.

Jason D Williams. 2014. Web-style ranking and slu
combination for dialog state tracking. In Proceed-
ings of the 15th Annual Meeting of the Special Inter-
est Group on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL).
Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A., pages 282–291.

Fei Xia, Martha Palmer, Nianwen Xue, Mary Ellen
Okurowski, John Kovarik, Fudong Chiou, Shizhe
Huang, Tony Kroch, and Mitch Marcus. 2000. De-
veloping Guidelines and Ensuring Consistency for
Chinese Text Annotation. In Proceedings of the
Second Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference (LREC).

YH Xiao, P Shen, ZQ Wei, YB Chen, and HS Kong.
2012. Mohnarin report of 2011, monitoring of bac-
terial resistance in China. Chinese Journal of Noso-
comiology 22:4946–4952.

Lukás Zilka and Filip Jurcı́cek. 2015. Incremental
lstm-based dialog state tracker. ArXiv pre-prints
abs/1507.03471.

Kelly B. Haskard Zolnierek and M. Robin DiMatteo.
2009. Physician communication and patient adher-
ence to treatment: A meta-analysis. Medical care
47(8):826–834.

149


	Negotiation of Antibiotic Treatment in Medical Consultations: A Corpus Based Study

