



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics- Student Research Workshop, pages 75–81
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3013

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics- Student Research Workshop, pages 75–81
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3013

Word Embedding for Response-To-Text Assessment of Evidence

Haoran Zhang
Department of Computer Science

University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

colinzhang@cs.pitt.edu

Diane Litman
Department of Computer Science & LRDC

University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

litman@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

Manually grading the Response to Text
Assessment (RTA) is labor intensive.
Therefore, an automatic method is being
developed for scoring analytical writing
when the RTA is administered in large
numbers of classrooms. Our long-term
goal is to also use this scoring method
to provide formative feedback to students
and teachers about students’ writing qual-
ity. As a first step towards this goal, in-
terpretable features for automatically scor-
ing the evidence rubric of the RTA have
been developed. In this paper, we present a
simple but promising method for improv-
ing evidence scoring by employing the
word embedding model. We evaluate our
method on corpora of responses written by
upper elementary students.

1 Introduction

In Correnti et al. (2013), it was noted that the
2010 Common Core State Standards emphasize
the ability of young students from grades 4-8
to interpret and evaluate texts, construct logi-
cal arguments based on substantive claims, and
marshal relevant evidence in support of these
claims. Correnti et al. (2013) relatedly developed
the Response to Text Assessment (RTA) for as-
sessing students’ analytic response-to-text writing
skills. The RTA was designed to evaluate writing
skills in Analysis, Evidence, Organization, Style,
and MUGS (Mechanics, Usage, Grammar, and
Spelling) dimensions. To both score the RTA and
provide formative feedback to students and teach-
ers at scale, an automated RTA scoring tool is now
being developed (Rahimi et al., 2017).

This paper focuses on the Evidence dimension
of the RTA, which evaluates students’ ability to

find and use evidence from an article to support
their position. Rahimi et al. (2014) previously de-
veloped a set of interpretable features for scoring
the Evidence rubric of RTA. Although these fea-
tures significantly improve over competitive base-
lines, the feature extraction approach is largely
based on lexical matching and can be enhanced.

The contributions of this paper are as follows.
First, we employ a new way of using the word em-
bedding model to enhance the system of Rahimi
et al. (2014). Second, we use word embeddings
to deal with noisy data given the disparate writing
skills of students at the upper elementary level.

In the following sections, we first present re-
search on related topics, describe our corpora,
and review the interpretable features developed by
Rahimi et al. (2014). Next, we explain how we use
the word embedding model for feature extraction
to improve performance by addressing the limita-
tions of prior work. Finally, we discuss the results
of our experiments and present future plans.

2 Related Work

Most research studies in automated essay scor-
ing have focused on holistic rubrics (Shermis and
Burstein, 2003; Attali and Burstein, 2006). In
contrast, our work focuses on evaluating a sin-
gle dimension to obtain a rubric score for stu-
dents’ use of evidence from a source text to sup-
port their stated position. To evaluate the content
of students’ essays, Louis and Higgins (2010) pre-
sented a method to detect if an essay is off-topic.
Xie et al. (2012) presented a method to evaluate
content features by measuring the similarity be-
tween essays. Burstein et al. (2001) and Ong et al.
(2014) both presented methods to use argumen-
tation mining techniques to evaluate the students’
use of evidence to support claims in persuasive es-
says. However, those studies are different from

75

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3013
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3013


this work in that they did not measure how the es-
say uses material from the source article. Further-
more, young students find it difficult to use sophis-
ticated argumentation structure in their essays.

Rahimi et al. (2014) presented a set of inter-
pretable rubric features that measure the related-
ness between students’ essays and a source article
by extracting evidence from the students’ essays.
However, evidence from students’ essays could
not always be extracted by their word matching
method. There are some potential solutions us-
ing the word embedding model. Rei and Cum-
mins (2016) presented a method to evaluate topical
relevance by estimating sentence similarity using
weighted-embedding. Kenter and de Rijke (2015)
evaluated short text similarity with word embed-
ding. Kiela et al. (2015) developed specialized
word embedding by employing external resources.
However, none of these methods address highly
noisy essays written by young students.

3 Data

Our response-to-text essay corpora were all col-
lected from classrooms using the following pro-
cedure. The teacher first read aloud a text while
students followed along with their copy. After
the teacher explained some predefined vocabu-
lary and discussed standardized questions at des-
ignated points, there is a prompt at the end of the
text which asks students to write an essay in re-
sponse to the prompt. Figure 1 shows the prompt
of RTAMV P

Two forms of the RTA have been developed,
based on different articles that students read be-
fore writing essays in response to a prompt. The
first form is RTAMV P and is based on an arti-
cle from Time for Kids about the Millennium Vil-
lages Project, an effort by the United Nations to
end poverty in a rural village in Sauri, Kenya. The
other form is RTASpace, based on a developed ar-
ticle about the importance of space exploration.
Below is a small excerpt from the RTAMV P ar-
ticle. Evidence from the text that expert human
graders want to see in students’ essays are in bold.

“Today, Yala Sub-District Hospital has
medicine, free of charge, for all of the
most common diseases. Water is con-
nected to the hospital, which also has a
generator for electricity. Bed nets are
used in every sleeping site in Sauri.”

Space MV PL MV PH
Score 1 538 535 317

(26%) (30%) (27%)
Score 2 789 709 488

(38%) (39%) (42%)
Score 3 512 374 242

(25%) (21%) (21%)
Score 4 237 186 119

(11%) (10%) (10%)
Total 2076 1804 1166

Double-Rated 2076 847 1156
Kappa 0.338 0.490 0.479

QWKappa 0.651 0.775 0.734

Table 1: The distribution of Evidence scores, and
grading agreement of two raters.

Two corpora of RTAMV P from lower and
higher age groups were introduced in Correnti
et al. (2013). One group included grades 4-6 (de-
noted by MV PL), and the other group included
grades 6-8 (denoted by MV PH ). The students in
each age group represent different levels of writing
proficiency. We also combined these two corpora
to form a larger corpus, denoted by MV PALL.
The corpus of the RTASpace is collected only
from students of grades 6-8 (denoted by Space).

Based on the rubric criterion shown in Table 2,
the essays in each corpus were annotated by two
raters on a scale of 1 to 4, from low to high.
Raters are experts and trained undergraduates. Ta-
ble 1 shows the distribution of Evidence scores
from the first rater and the agreement (Kappa, and
Quadratic Weighted Kappa) between two raters of
the double-rated portion. All experiment perfor-
mances will be measured by Quadratic Weighted
Kappa between the score from prediction and the
first rater. The reason to only use the score of the
first rater is that the first rater graded more essays.
Figure 1 shows an essay with a score of 3.

4 Rubric Features

Based on the rubric criterion for the evidence di-
mension, Rahimi et al. (2014) developed a set of
interpretable features. By using this set of fea-
tures, a predicting model can be trained for auto-
mated essay scoring in the evidence dimension.

Number of Pieces of Evidence (NPE): A good
essay should mention evidence from the article as
much as possible. To extract the NPE feature, they
manually craft a topic word list based on the arti-

76



1 2 3 4
Number of Pieces of ev-
idence

Features one or no pieces of evi-
dence (NPE)

Features at least 2 pieces of evi-
dence (NPE)

Features at least 3 pieces of evi-
dence (NPE)

Features at least 3 pieces of evi-
dence (NPE)

Relevance of evidence Selects inappropriate or irrele-
vant details from the text to sup-
port key idea (SPC); references
to text feature serious factual er-
rors or omissions

Selects some appropriate and
relevant evidence to support key
idea, or evidence is provided for
some ideas, but not actually the
key idea (SPC); evidence may
contain a factual error or omis-
sion

Selects pieces of evidence from
the text that are appropriate and
relevant to key idea (SPC)

Selects evidence from the text
that clearly and effectively sup-
ports key idea

Specificity of evidence Provides general or cursory evi-
dence from the text (SPC)

Provides general or cursory evi-
dence from the text (SPC)

Provides specific evidence from
the text (SPC)

Provides pieces of evidence that
are detailed and specific (SPC)

Elaboration of Evidence Evidence may be listed in a sen-
tence (CON)

Evidence provided may be listed
in a sentence, not expanded upon
(CON)

Attempts to elaborate upon evi-
dence (CON)

Evidence must be used to sup-
port key idea / inference(s)

Plagiarism Summarize entire text or copies
heavily from text (in these cases,
the response automatically re-
ceives a 1)

Table 2: Rubric for the Evidence dimension of RTA. The abbreviations in the parentheses identify the
corresponding feature group discussed in the Rubric Features section of this paper that is aligned with
that specific criteria (Rahimi et al., 2017).

cle. Then, they use a simple window-based algo-
rithm with a fixed size window to extract this fea-
ture. If a window contains at least two words from
the topic list, they consider this window to contain
evidence related to a topic. To avoid redundancy,
each topic is only counted once. Words from the
window and crafted list will only be considered a
match if they are exactly the same. This feature
is an integer to represent the number of topics that
are mentioned by the essay.

Concentration (CON): Rather than list all the
topics in the essay, a good essay should explain
each topic with details. The same topic word list
and simple window-based algorithm are used for
extracting the CON feature. An essay is concen-
trated if the essay has fewer than 3 sentences that
mention at least one of the topic words. Therefore,
this feature is a binary feature. The value is 1 if the
essay is concentrated, otherwise it is 0.

Specificity (SPC): A good essay should use rel-
evant examples as much as possible. For matching
SPC feature, experts manually craft an example
list based on the article. Each example belongs to
one topic, and is an aspect of a specific detail about
the topic. For each example, the same window-
based algorithm is used for matching. If the win-
dow contains at least two words from an example,
they consider the window to mention this exam-
ple. Therefore, the SPC feature is an integer vec-
tor. Each value in the vector represents how many
examples in this topic were mentioned by the es-
say. To avoid redundancy, each example is only
to be counted at most one time. The length of the
vector is the same as the number of categories of
examples in the crafted list.

Word Count (WOC): The SPC feature can
capture how many evidences were mentioned in
the essay, but it cannot represent if these pieces of
evidence support key ideas effectively. From pre-
vious work, we know longer essays tend to have
higher scores. Thus, they use word count as a po-
tentially helpful fallback feature. This feature is
an integer.

5 Word Embedding Feature Extraction

Based on the results of Rahimi et al. (2014), the in-
terpretable rubric-based features outperform com-
petitive baselines. However, there are limitations
in their feature extraction method. It cannot ex-
tract all examples mentioned by the essay due to
the use of simple exact matching.

First, students use their own vocabularies other
than words in the crafted list. For instance, some
students use the word “power” instead of “electric-
ity” from the crafted list.

Second, according to our corpora, students at
the upper elementary level make spelling mis-
takes, and sometimes they make mistakes in the
same way. For example, around 1 out of 10 stu-
dents misspell “poverty” as “proverty” instead.
Therefore, evidence with student spelling mistakes
cannot be extracted. However, the evidence di-
mension of RTA does not penalize students for
misspelling words. Rahimi et al. (2014) showed
that manual spelling corrections indeed improves
performance, but not significantly.

Finally, tenses used by students can sometimes
be different from that of the article. Although a
stemming algorithm can solve this problem, some-
times there are words that slip through the process.

77



Prompt: The author provided one spe-
cific example of how the quality of life
can be improved by the Millennium Vil-
lages Project in Sauri, Kenya. Based on
the article, did the author provide a con-
vincing argument that winning the fight
against poverty is achievable in our life-
time? Explain why or why not with 3-4
examples from the text to support your
answer.

Essay: In my opinion I think that they
will achieve it in lifetime. During the
years threw 2004 and 2008 they made
progress. People didnt have the money
to buy the stuff in 2004. The hospital
was packed with patients and they didnt
have alot of treatment in 2004. In 2008
it changed the hospital had medicine,
free of charge, and for all the common
dieases. Water was connected to the
hospital and has a generator for electric-
ity. Everybody has net in their site. The
hunger crisis has been addressed with
fertilizer and seeds, as well as the tools
needed to maintain the food. The school
has no fees and they serve lunch. To me
thats sounds like it is going achieve it in
the lifetime.

Figure 1: The prompt of RTAMV P and an exam-
ple essay with score of 3.

For example, “went” is the past tense of “go”, but
stemming would miss this conjugation. Therefore,
“go” and “went” would not be considered a match.

To address the limitations above, we introduced
the Word2vec (the skip-gram (SG) and the con-
tinuous bag-of-words (CBOW)) word embedding
model presented by Mikolov et al. (2013a) into
the feature extraction process. By mapping words
from the vocabulary to vectors of real numbers,
the similarity between two words can be calcu-
lated. Words with high similarity can be consid-
ered a match. Because words in the same context
tend to have similar meaning, they would therefore
have higher similarity.

We use the word embedding model as a sup-
plement to the original feature extraction process,
and use the same searching window algorithm pre-
sented by Rahimi et al. (2014). If a word in a stu-

dent’s essay is not exactly the same as the word
in the crafted list, the cosine similarity between
these two words is calculated by the word embed-
ding model. We consider them matching, if the
similarity is higher than a threshold.

In Figure 1, the phrases in italics are exam-
ples extracted by the existing feature extraction
method. For instance, “water was connected to the
hospital” can be found because “water” and “hos-
pital” are exactly the same as words in the crafted
list. However, “for all the common dieases” can-
not be found due to misspelling of “disease”. Ad-
ditional examples that can be extracted by the
word embedding model are in bold.

6 Experimental Setup

We configure experiments to test several hypothe-
ses: H1) the model with the word embedding
trained on our own corpus will outperform or at
least perform equally well as the baseline (denoted
by Rubric) presented by Rahimi et al. (2014). H2)
the model with the word embedding trained on our
corpus will outperform or at least perform equally
well as the model with off-the-shelf word embed-
ding models. H3) the model with word embedding
trained on our own corpus will generalize better
across students of different ages. Note that while
all models with word embeddings use the same
features as the Rubric baseline, the feature ex-
traction process was changed to allow non-exact
matching via the word embeddings.

We stratify each corpus into 3 parts: 40% of
the data are used for training the word embedding
models; 20% of the data are used to select the best
word embedding model and best threshold (this is
the development set of our model); and another
40% of data are used for final testing.

For word embedding model training, we also
add essays not graded by the first rater (Space
has 229, MV PL has 222, MV PH has 296, and
MV PALL has 518) to 40% of the data from the
corpus in order to enlarge the training corpus to get
better word embedding models. We train multi-
ple word embedding models with different param-
eters, and select the best word embedding model
by using the development set.

Two off-the-shelf word embeddings are used for
comparison. Mikolov et al. (2013b) presented vec-
tors that have 300 dimensions and were trained on
a newspaper corpus of about 100 billion words.
The other is presented by Baroni et al. (2014) and

78



includes 400 dimensions, with the context window
size of 5, 10 negative samples and subsampling.

We use 10 runs of 10-fold cross validation in the
final testing, with Random Forest (max-depth = 5)
implemented in Weka (Witten et al., 2016) as the
classifier. This is the setting used by Rahimi et al.
(2014). Since our corpora are imbalanced with re-
spect to the four evidence scores being predicted
(Table 1), we use SMOTE oversampling method
(Chawla et al., 2002). This involves creating “syn-
thetic” examples for minority classes. We only
oversample the training data. All experiment per-
formances are measured by Quadratic Weighted
Kappa (QWKappa).

7 Results and Discussion

We first examine H1. The results shown in Table 3
partially support this hypothesis. The skip-gram
embedding yields a higher performance or per-
forms equally well as the rubric baseline on most
corpora, except for MV PH . The skip-gram em-
bedding significantly improves performance for
the lower grade corpus. Meanwhile, the skip-gram
embedding is always significantly better than the
continuous bag-of-words embedding.

Second, we examine H2. Again, the results
shown in Table 3 partially support this hypoth-
esis. The skip-gram embedding trained on our
corpus outperform Baroni’s embedding on Space
and MV PL. While Baroni’s embedding is sig-
nificantly better than the skip-gram embedding on
MV PH and MV PALL.

Third, we examine H3, by training models from
one corpus and testing it on 10 disjointed sets of
the other test corpus. We do it 10 times and av-
erage the results in order to perform significance
testing. The results shown in Table 4 support
this hypothesis. The skip-gram word embedding
model outperform all other models.

As we can see, the skip-gram embedding out-
performs the continuous bag-of-words embedding
in all experiments. One possible reason for this
is that the skip-gram is better than the continu-
ous bag-of-words for infrequent words (Mikolov
et al., 2013b). In the continuous bag-of-words,
vectors from the context will be averaged before
predicting the current word, while the skip-gram
does not. Therefore, it remains a better represen-
tation for rare words. Most students tend to use
words that appear directly from the article, and
only a small portion of students introduce their

own vocabularies into their essays. Therefore, the
word embedding is good with infrequent words
and tends to work well for our purposes.

In examining the performances of the two off-
the-shelf word embeddings, Mikolov’s embed-
ding cannot help with our task, because it has
less preprocessing of its training corpus. There-
fore, the embedding is case sensitive and contains
symbols and numbers. For example, it matches
“2015” with “000”. Furthermore, its training cor-
pus comes from newspapers, which may contain
more high-level English that students may not use,
and professional writing has few to no spelling
mistakes. Although Baroni’s embedding also has
no spelling mistakes, it was trained on a corpus
containing more genres of writing and has more
preprocessing. Thus, it is a better fit to our work
compared to Mikolov’s embedding.

In comparing the performance of the skip-gram
embedding and Baroni’s embedding, there are
many differences. First, even though the skip-
gram embedding partially solves the tense prob-
lem, Baroni’s embedding solves it better because
it has a larger training corpus. Second, the larger
training corpus contains no or significantly fewer
spelling mistakes, and therefore it cannot solve
the spelling problem at all. On the other hand,
the skip-gram embedding solves the spelling prob-
lem better, because it was trained on our own
corpus. For instance, it can match “proverty”
with “poverty”, while Baroni’s embedding can-
not. Third, the skip-gram embedding cannot ad-
dress a vocabulary problem as well as the Ba-
roni’s embedding because of the small training
corpus. Baroni’s embedding matches “power”
with “electricity”, while the skip-gram embedding
does not. Nevertheless, the skip-gram embedding
still partially addresses this problem, for example,
it matches “mosquitoes” with “malaria” due to re-
latedness. Last, Baroni’s embedding was trained
on a corpus that is thousands of times larger than
our corpus. However, it does not address our prob-
lems significantly better than the skip-gram em-
bedding due to generalization. In contrast, our
task-dependent word embedding is only trained on
a small corpus while outperforming or at least per-
forming equally well as Baroni’s embedding.

Overall, the skip-gram embedding tends to find
examples by implicit relations. For instance, “win-
ning against poverty possible achievable lifetime”
is an example from the article and in the meantime

79



Off-the-Shelf On Our Corpus
Corpus Rubric(1) Baroni(2) Mikolov(3) SG(4) CBOW(5)
Space 0.606(2) 0.594 0.606(2) 0.611(2,5) 0.600(2)
MV PL 0.628 0.666(1,3,5) 0.623 0.682(1,2,3,5) 0.641(1,3)
MV PH 0.599(3,4,5) 0.593(3,4,5) 0.582(5) 0.583(5) 0.556
MV PALL 0.624(5) 0.645(1,3,4,5) 0.634(1,5) 0.634(1,5) 0.614

Table 3: The performance (QWKappa) of the off-the-shelf embeddings and embeddings trained on
our corpus compared to the rubric baseline on all corpora. The numbers in parenthesis show the model
numbers over which the current model performs significantly better. The best results in each row are in
bold.

Off-the-Shelf On Our Corpus
Train Test Rubric(1) Baroni(2) Mikolov(3) SG(4) CBOW(5)
MV PL MV PH 0.582(3) 0.609 (1,3,5) 0.555 0.615(1,2,3,5) 0.596(1,3)
MV PH MV PL 0.604 0.629(1,3,5) 0.620(1,5) 0.644(1,2,3,5) 0.605

Table 4: The performance (QWKappa) of the off-the-shelf embeddings and embeddings trained on our
corpus compared to the rubric baseline. The numbers in parenthesis show the model numbers over which
the current model performs significantly better. The best results in each row are in bold.

the prompt asks students “Did the author provide a
convincing argument that winning the fight against
poverty is achievable in our lifetime?”. Conse-
quently, students may mention this example by
only answering “Yes, the author convinced me.”.
However, the skip-gram embedding can extract
this implicit example.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented several simple but promising
uses of the word embedding method that improve
evidence scoring in corpora of responses to texts
written by upper elementary students. In our re-
sults, a task-dependent word embedding model
trained on our small corpus was the most helpful
in improving the baseline model. However, the
word embedding model still measures additional
information that is not necessary in our work. Im-
proving the word embedding model or the feature
extraction process is thus our most likely future
endeavor.

One potential improvement is re-defining the
loss function of the word embedding model, since
the word embedding measures not only the simi-
larity between two words, but also the relatedness
between them. However, our work is not helped
by matching related words too much. For exam-
ple, we want to match “poverty” with “proverty”,
while we do not want to match “water” with “elec-
tricity”, even though students mention them to-
gether frequently. Therefore, we could limit this

measurement by modifying the loss function of the
word embedding. Kiela et al. (2015) presented a
specialized word embedding by employing an ex-
ternal thesaurus list. However, it does not fit to our
task, because the list contains high-level English
words that will not be used by young students.

Another area for future investigation is improv-
ing the word embedding models trained on our
corpus. Although they improved performance,
they were trained on a corpus from one form of the
RTA and tested on the same RTA. Thus, another
possible improvement is generalizing the model-
from one RTA to another RTA.

Acknowledgments

We would like to show our appreciation to every
member of the RTA group for sharing their pearls
of wisdom with us. We are also immensely grate-
ful to Dr. Richard Correnti, Deanna Prine, and
Zahra Rahimi for their comments on an earlier ver-
sion of the paper.

The research reported here was supported, in
whole or in part, by the Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through
Grant R305A160245 to the University of Pitts-
burgh. The opinions expressed are those of the
authors and do not represent the views of the Insti-
tute or the U.S. Department of Education.

80



References
Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. 2006. Automated essay

scoring with e-rater R© v. 2. The Journal of Technol-
ogy, Learning and Assessment 4(3).

Marco Baroni, Georgiana Dinu, and Germán
Kruszewski. 2014. Don’t count, predict! a
systematic comparison of context-counting vs.
context-predicting semantic vectors. In ACL (1).
pages 238–247.

Jill Burstein, Karen Kukich, Susanne Wolff, Chi Lu,
and Martin Chodorow. 2001. Enriching automated
essay scoring using discourse marking. .

Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall,
and W Philip Kegelmeyer. 2002. Smote: synthetic
minority over-sampling technique. Journal of artifi-
cial intelligence research 16:321–357.

Richard Correnti, Lindsay Clare Matsumura, Laura
Hamilton, and Elaine Wang. 2013. Assessing stu-
dents’ skills at writing analytically in response to
texts. The Elementary School Journal 114(2):142–
177.

Tom Kenter and Maarten de Rijke. 2015. Short text
similarity with word embeddings. In Proceedings of
the 24th ACM International on Conference on Infor-
mation and Knowledge Management. ACM, pages
1411–1420.

Douwe Kiela, Felix Hill, and Stephen Clark. 2015.
Specializing word embeddings for similarity or re-
latedness. In EMNLP. pages 2044–2048.

Annie Louis and Derrick Higgins. 2010. Off-topic es-
say detection using short prompt texts. In Proceed-
ings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Fifth Workshop on In-
novative Use of NLP for Building Educational Ap-
plications. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 92–95.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jef-
frey Dean. 2013a. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781 .

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013b. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. pages 3111–3119.

Nathan Ong, Diane Litman, and Alexandra
Brusilovsky. 2014. Ontology-based argument
mining and automatic essay scoring. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation
Mining. pages 24–28.

Zahra Rahimi, Diane Litman, Richard Correnti, Elaine
Wang, and Lindsay Clare Matsumura. 2017. As-
sessing students use of evidence and organization
in response-to-text writing: Using natural language

processing for rubric-based automated scoring. In-
ternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Edu-
cation pages 1–35.

Zahra Rahimi, Diane J Litman, Richard Correnti, Lind-
say Clare Matsumura, Elaine Wang, and Zahid Kisa.
2014. Automatic scoring of an analytical response-
to-text assessment. In International Conference on
Intelligent Tutoring Systems. Springer, pages 601–
610.

Marek Rei and Ronan Cummins. 2016. Sentence sim-
ilarity measures for fine-grained estimation of top-
ical relevance in learner essays. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.03144 .

Mark D Shermis and Jill C Burstein. 2003. Auto-
mated essay scoring: A cross-disciplinary perspec-
tive. Routledge.

Ian H Witten, Eibe Frank, Mark A Hall, and Christo-
pher J Pal. 2016. Data Mining: Practical machine
learning tools and techniques. Morgan Kaufmann.

Shasha Xie, Keelan Evanini, and Klaus Zechner. 2012.
Exploring content features for automated speech
scoring. In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 103–111.

81


	Word Embedding for Response-To-Text Assessment of Evidence

