



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 49–54
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4009

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 49–54
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4009

Interactive Visual Analysis of Transcribed Multi-Party Discourse

Mennatallah El-Assady1, Annette Hautli-Janisz1, Valentin Gold2,
Miriam Butt1, Katharina Holzinger1, and Daniel Keim1

1University of Konstanz, Germany
2University of Göttingen, Germany

Abstract

We present the first web-based Visual
Analytics framework for the analysis of
multi-party discourse data using verbatim
text transcripts. Our framework supports
a broad range of server-based processing
steps, ranging from data mining and sta-
tistical analysis to deep linguistic parsing
of English and German. On the client-side,
browser-based Visual Analytics compo-
nents enable multiple perspectives on the
analyzed data. These interactive visualiza-
tions allow exploratory content analysis,
argumentation pattern review and speaker
interaction modeling.

1 Introduction

With the increasing availability of large amounts
of multi-party discourse data, the breadth and
complexity of questions that can be answered with
natural language processing (NLP) is expanding.
Discourses can be analyzed with respect to what
topics are discussed, who contributes to which
topic to what extent, how the turn-taking plays
out, how speakers convey their opinions and ar-
guments, what Common Ground is assumed and
what the speaker stance is. The challenge pre-
sented for NLP lies in the automatic identification
of relevant cues and in providing assistance to-
wards the analysis of these primarily pragmatic
features via the automatic processing of large
amounts of discourse data. The challenge is ex-
acerbated by the fact that linguistic data is inher-
ently multidimensional with complex feature in-
teraction being the norm rather than the exception.
The problem becomes particularly difficult when
one moves on to compare multi-party discourse
strategies across different languages.

In this paper we present a novel Visual Ana-
lytics framework that encodes various layers of
discourse properties and allows for an analysis of

multi-party discourse. The system combines dis-
course features derived from shallow text min-
ing with more in-depth, linguistically-motivated
annotations from a discourse processing pipeline.
Based on this hybrid technology, users from polit-
ical science, journalism or digital humanities are
able to draw inferences regarding the progress of
the debate, speaker behavior and discourse con-
tent in large amounts of data at-a-glance, while
still maintaining a detailed view on the underlying
data. To the best of our knowledge, our VisArgue
system offers the first web-based, interactive Vi-
sual Analytics approach of multi-party discourse
data using verbatim text transcripts.1

2 Related work

Discourse processing A large amount of work
in discourse processing focuses on analyzing dis-
course relations, annotated in different granularity
and style in RST (Mann and Thompson, 1988) or
SDRT (Asher and Lascarides, 2003). While a large
amount of work is for English and based on land-
mark corpora such as the Penn Discourse Tree-
bank (Prasad et al., 2008), the parsing of discourse
relations in German has only lately received at-
tention (Versley and Gastel, 2012; Stede and Neu-
mann, 2014; Bögel et al., 2014).

Another strand of research is concerned with di-
alogue act annotation, to which end several anno-
tation schemes have been proposed (Bunt et al.,
2010, inter alia). Those have also been applied
across a range of German corpora (Jekat et al.,
1995; Zarisheva and Scheffler, 2015). Another
area deals with the classification of speaker stance
(Mairesse et al., 2007; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
et al., 2013; Sridhar et al., 2015).

Despite the existing variety of previous work
in discourse processing, our contribution is novel.
For one, we combine different levels of analysis

1Accessible at http://visargue.inf.uni.kn/.
Accounts (beyond the demo) are available upon request.

49

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4009
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4009


and integrate information that has not been dealt
with intensively in discourse processing before,
for instance regarding rhetorical framing. For an-
other, we provide an innovation with respect to the
type of data the system can handle in that the sys-
tem is designed to deal with noisy transcribed nat-
ural speech, a genre underresearched in the area.

Visual Analytics Visualizing the features and
dynamics of communication has been gaining in-
terest in information visualization, due to the di-
versity and ambiguity of this data. Erickson and
Kellogg (2000) introduce a general framework for
the design of such visualization systems. Other
approaches attempt to model the social interac-
tions in chat systems, e.g. Chat Circles (Donath
and Viégas, 2002) and GroupMeter (Leshed and
et al., 2009). Conversation Clusters (Bergstrom
and Karahalios, 2009) and MultiConVis (Hoque
and Carenini, 2016) group the content of conver-
sations dynamically. Overall, the majority of these
systems are designed to model the dynamics and
changes in the content of conversations and do not
rely on a rich set of linguistic features.

3 Computational linguistic processing

Our automatic annotation system is based on a
linguistically-informed, hand-crafted set of rules
that deals with the disambiguation of explicit lin-
guistic markers and the identification of spans
and relations in the text. For that, we divide all
utterances into smaller units of text in order to
work with a more fine-grained structure of the dis-
course. Although there is no consensus in the lit-
erature on what exactly these units have to com-
prise, it is generally assumed that each discourse
unit describes a single event (Polanyi et al., 2004).
Following Marcu (2000), we term these units ele-

mentary discourse units (EDUs). For German, we
approximate the assumption made by Polanyi et al.
(2004) by inserting a boundary at every punctua-
tion mark and every clausal connector (conjunc-
tions, complementizers). For English we rely on
clause-level splitting of the Stanford PCFG parser
(Klein and Manning, 2003) and create EDUs at the
SBAR, SBARQ, SINV and SQ clause level. The an-
notation is performed on the level of these EDUs,
therefore relations that span multiple units are
marked individually at each unit.

We were not able to use an off the shelf
parser for German. For instance, an initial ex-
periment using the German Stanford Dependency
parser (Rafferty and Manning, 2008) showed that
60% of parses are incorrect due to interrup-
tions, speech repairs and multiple embeddings. We
therefore hand-crafted our own rules on the ba-
sis of morphological and POS information from
DMOR (Schiller, 1994). For English, the data con-
tained less noise and we were able to use the POS
tags from the Stanford parser.

Levels of analysis With respect to discourse re-
lations, we annotate spans as to whether they
represent: reasons, conclusions, contrasts, conces-
sions, conditions or consequences. For German,
we rely on the connectors in the Potsdam Com-
mentary Corpus (Stede and Neumann, 2014), for
English we use the PDTP-style parser (Ziheng Lin
and Kan, 2014).

In order to identify relevant speech acts, we
compiled lists of speech act verbs comprising
agreement, disagreement, arguing, bargaining and
information giving/seeking/refusing. In order to
gage emotion, we use EmoLex, a crowdsourced
emotion lexicon (Mohammad and Turney, 2010)
available for a number of languages, plus our own
curated lexicon of politeness markers. With re-

(a) Overview (b) Zooming and Highlighting (c) Close-Reading

Figure 1: Lexical Episode Plots

50



spect to event modality, we take into account all
modal verbs and adverbs signaling obligation, per-
mission, volition, reluctance or alternative. Con-
cerning epistemic modality and speaker stance
we use modal expressions conveying certainty,
probability, possibility and impossibility. Finally,
we added a category called rhetorical framing
(Hautli-Janisz and Butt, 2016), which accounts for
the illocutionary contribution of German discourse
particles. Here we look at different ways of invok-
ing Common Ground, hedging and signaling ac-
commodation in argumentation, for example.

Disambiguation Many of the crucial linguis-
tic markers are ambiguous. We developed hand-
crafted rules that take into account the surround-
ing context to achieve disambiguation. Important
features include position in the EDU (for instance
for lexemes which can be discourse connectors at
the beginning of an EDU but not at the end, and
vice versa) or the POS of other lexical items in the
context. Overall, the German system features 20
disambiguation rules, the English one has 12.

Relation identification After disambiguation is
complete, a second set of rules annotates the spans
and the relations that the lexical items trigger. In
this module, we again take into account the con-
text of the lexical item. An important factor is
negation, which in some cases reverses the contri-
bution of the lexical item, e.g. in the case of ‘pos-
sible’ to ‘not possible’.

With respect to discourse connectors, for in-
stance the German causal markers da, denn,
darum and daher ‘because/thus’, we only analyze
relations within a single utterance of a speaker,
i.e., relations that are expressed in a sequence of

clauses which a speaker utters without interfer-
ence from another speaker. As a consequence, the
annotation system does not take into account rela-
tions that are split up between utterances of one
speaker or utterances of different speakers. For
causal relations (reason and conclusion spans), we
show in Bögel et al. (2014) that the system per-
forms with an F-score of 0.95.

4 Visual Analytics Framework

The web-based Visual Analytics framework is de-
signed to give analysts multiple perspectives on
the same datasets. The transcripts are uploaded
through the web interface to undergo the previ-
ously discussed linguistic processing and other
visualization-dependent processing steps. The vi-
sualizations are classified into four categories.
(1) Basic Data Exploration Views, which en-
able the user to explore the annotations and dy-
namically create statistical charts using all com-
puted features. (2) Content Analysis Views are
designed to allow the user to explore what is be-
ing said. (3) Argumentation Analysis Views rely
on the linguistic parsing to address the question of
how it is being said. (4) Speaker Analysis Views
are focused on giving an insight into the speaker
dynamics to answer the question by whom it is be-
ing said. In the following, we will discuss a sam-
ple of the visualization components using the tran-
scriptions of the three televised US presidential
election debates from 2012 between Obama and
Romney. In the visualizations, the three speakers
in the debate are distinguished through their set
colors and icons: Obama as Democrat (blue);
Romney as Republican (red) and all modera-
tors combined as Moderator (green).

(a) Text-Level View (b) Entity-Level View (c) Entity Graph

Figure 2: Named-Entity Relationship Explorer

51



4.1 Content Analysis Views
Lexical Episode Plots This visualization is de-
signed to give a high-level overview of the con-
tent of the transcripts, based on the concept of lex-
ical chaining. For this, we compute word chains
that appear with a high density in a certain
part of the text and determine their importance
through the compactness of their appearance. Lex-
ical Episodes (Gold et al., 2015) are defined as a
portion of the word sequence where a certain word
appears more densely than expected from its fre-
quency in the whole text. These episodes are vi-
sualized as bars on the left-hand side of the text
(Figure 1). The text is shown on the right and
each utterance is abstracted by one box with each
sentence as one line. This visualization supports
a smooth uniform zooming from the text level
to the high-level overview, which enables both a
close-reading (Figure 1c) of the text and a distant-
reading using the episodes. The user can also se-
lect episodes which are then highlighted in the
text (Figure 1b). The level of detail is adjusted by
changing the significance level of the episode de-
tection. Figure 1a shows an overview of the three
presidential debates, with a high significance level
selected to achieve a high level of detail.

Named-Entity Relationship Explorer This vi-
sualization (El-Assady et al., 2017) enables the
analysis of different concepts and their re-
lation in the utterances. We categorize rele-
vant named-entities and concepts from the text
and abstract them into ten classes: Persons,

Geo-Locations, Organizations, Date-Time,
Measuring Units, Measures, Context-

Keywords, Positive- and Negative-Emotion
Indicators, and Politeness-Keywords. We then
abstract the text from the Text-Level View (Fig-
ure 2a) to the Entity-Level View (Figure 2b) to al-
low a high-level overview of the entity distribution
across utterances.

(a) Binary (b) Numerical (c) Bi-Polar

Figure 4: Data-type color mapping for glyphs.

In order to extract their relations, we devise
a tailored distance-restricted entity-relationship
model to comply with the often ungrammatical
structure of verbatim transcriptions. This model
relates two entities if they are present in the same
sentence within a small distance window defined
by a user-selected threshold. The concept map
of the conversations, which builds up as the dis-
course progresses, can then be explored in the En-
tity Graph (Figure 2c). All views support a rich set
of interactions, e.g., linking, brushing, selection,
querying and interactive parameter adjustment.

4.2 Argumentation Analysis Views

Argumentation Feature Fingerprinting In an
attempt to measure the deliberative quality of dis-
course (Gold and Holzinger, 2015), we use the
annotations discussed in Section 3 and create a
fingerprint of all utterances, the Argumentation
Glyph. The glyph maps the
four theoretic dimensions of
deliberation in its four quad-
rants which are separated by
the axes: NW (Accommoda-
tion), NE (Atmosphere & Re-
spect), SE (Participation), SW (Argumentation
& Justification). In each row, we group features
that are thematically related, e.g. speech acts of
information-giving/seeking/refusing. Each feature
is represented as a small rectangular box. The
strength of each value is encoded via a divergent
color mapping, with each type of data (binary,
numerical, bipolar) having a different color scale
(Figure 4). The small circular icon at the bottom
left shows the average length of each utterance.

This glyph-based fingerprinting of discourse
features can be used to analyze sets of aggregated
utterances, e.g. Figure 3 displays one glyph for ev-
ery speaker representing the average of all their ut-
terances. These speaker profiles are used for the
identification of individual behavior patterns. In
addition, the glyphs can be aggregated for topics,
speaker parties, and combinations of these.

Figure 3: Speaker Profiles with Argumentation Glyphs

52



(a) Top-Level Alignment Overview

(b) Interactive Pattern Selection and Highlighting (c) Comparative Close-Reading View

Figure 5: Argumentation Feature Alignment for Discourse Pattern Detection

Argumentation Feature Alignment The user
can also form hypotheses about the occurrences
of these discourse features in the data. To facil-
itate their verification across multiple conversa-
tions we use sequential pattern mining to cre-
ate feature alignment views (Jentner et al., 2017)
based on selected features. Figure 5 shows align-
ment views created using the following three fea-
tures: Speakers ( Obama, Romeny, Mod-
erator); Topic Shift ( Progressive, Recur-
ring); and Arrangement ( Agreement, Dis-
agreement). The sidefigure shows the pattern
of Obama making a statement, followed by
a topic shift and a turn of Rom-
ney and the moderator, fol-
lowed by an agreement. This pattern can be found
across all three presidential debates, shown in Fig-
ure 5b. For further analysis, the user can switch
to a comparative close-reading view to investigate
two occurrences of the found pattern on the text
level, as shown in Figure 5c.

4.3 Speaker Analysis Views

Topic-Space Views In this visualization, we
model the interactions between speakers using the
metaphor of a closed discussion floor. We de-
signed a radial plot, the topic space, in which the
speakers interact over the course of a discussion.
Using this metaphor, we created a set of different
(static and animated) views to highlight the vari-
ous aspects of the speaker interactions. Figure 6
displays one time-frame of the utterance sedimen-
tation view (El-Assady et al., 2016) of the accu-
mulated presidential debates. In this animation, all
discussed topics (ordered by their similarity to a
selected base-topic at 12 o’clock) span the radial
topic space. The length of the arch representing
a topic is mapped to the size of the topic. All
currently active speakers are displayed as moving

dots with motion chart trails. A gradual visual-
decay function blends out non-active speakers
over time. Using a sedimentation metaphor, all
past utterances are pulled to their top topic by a
radial gravitation.

Figure 6: Topic Space View

5 Summary

The VisArgue framework provides a novel visual
analytics toolbox for exploratory and confirmatory
analyses of multi-party discourse data. Overall,
each of the presented visualizations support dis-
entangling speaker and discourse patterns.

Acknowledgments

The research carried out in this paper was sup-
ported by the Bundesministerium für Bildung und
Forschung (BMBF) under grant no. 01461246
(eHumanities VisArgue project).

References
Nick Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics of Con-

versation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Tony Bergstrom and Karrie Karahalios. 2009. Con-
versation clusters: grouping conversation topics
through human-computer dialog. In Proc. of the
SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems. pages 2349–2352.

Tina Bögel, Annette Hautli-Janisz, Sebastian Sulger,
and Miriam Butt. 2014. Automatic Detection of
Causal Relations in German Multilogs. In Proc. of
the EACL 2014 CAtCL Workshop. pages 20–27.

53



Harry Bunt, Jan Alexandersson, and Jean Carletta et al.
2010. Towards an ISO standard for dialogue act an-
notation. In Proc. of LREC’10. pages 2548–2555.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Moritz Sudhof,
Dan Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec, and Christopher Potts.
2013. A computational approach to politeness with
application to social factors. In Proc. of ACL’13.
pages 250–259.

Judith Donath and Fernanda B Viégas. 2002. The
chat circles series: explorations in designing abstract
graphical communication interfaces. In Proc. of
the 4th conference on Designing interactive systems.
pages 359–369.

Mennatallah El-Assady, Valentin Gold, Carmela
Acevedo, Christopher Collins, and Daniel Keim.
2016. ConToVi: Multi-Party Conversation Explo-
ration using Topic-Space Views. Computer Graph-
ics Forum 35(3):431–440.

Mennatallah El-Assady, Rita Sevastjanova, Bela Gipp,
Daniel Keim, and Christopher Collins. 2017.
NEREx: Named-Entity Relationship Exploration in
Multi-Party Conversations. Computer Graphics Fo-
rum .

Thomas Erickson and Wendy A Kellogg. 2000. So-
cial translucence: an approach to designing systems
that support social processes. ACM transactions on
computer-human interaction (TOCHI) 7(1):59–83.

Valentin Gold and Katharina Holzinger. 2015. An Au-
tomated Text-Analysis Approach to Measuring De-
liberative Quality. Annual Meeting of the Midwest
Political Science Association (Chicago).

Valentin Gold, Christian Rohrdantz, and Mennatallah
El-Assady. 2015. Exploratory Text Analysis using
Lexical Episode Plots. In E. Bertini, J. Kennedy,
and E. Puppo, editors, Eurographics Conference on
Visualization (EuroVis) - Short Papers.

Annette Hautli-Janisz and Miriam Butt. 2016. On the
role of discourse particles for mining arguments in
German dialogs. In Proc. of the COMMA 2016 FLA
workshop. pages 10–17.

Enamul Hoque and Giuseppe Carenini. 2016. Multi-
convis: A visual text analytics system for exploring
a collection of online conversations. In Proc. of In-
telligent User Interfaces. ACM, IUI, pages 96–107.

Susanne Jekat, Alexandra Klein, Elisabeth Maier, Ilona
Maleck, Marion Mast, and J. Joachim Quantz.
1995. Dialgue acts in verbmobil. Technical report,
Saarländische Universitäts- und Landesbibliothek.

Wolfgang Jentner, Mennatallah El-Assady, Bela Gipp,
and Daniel Keim. 2017. Feature Alignment for
the Analysis of Verbatim Text Transcripts. EuroVis
Workshop on Visual Analytics (EuroVA) .

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate unlexicalized parsing. In Proc. of ACL 2003.
pages 423–430.

Gilly Leshed and Diego Perez et al. 2009. Visualiz-
ing real-time language-based feedback on teamwork
behavior in computer-mediated groups. In Proc. of
the SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. pages 537–546.

Francois Mairesse, Marilyn A. Walker, Matthias R.
Mehl, and Roger K. Moore. 2007. Using Linguis-
tic Cues for the Automatic Recognition of Person-
ality in Conversation and Text. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research 30:457–500.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Towards a theory of text
organization. Text 8(3):243–281.

Daniel Marcu. 2000. The Theory and Practice of Dis-
course Parsing and Summarization. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2010. Emo-
tions evoked by common words and phrases: Using
mechanical turk to create and emotion lexicon. In
Proc. of the NAACL 2015 WASSA Workshop. pages
26–34.

Livia Polanyi, Chris Culy, Martin van den Berg,
Gian Lorenzo Thione, and David Ahn. 2004. Sen-
tential structure and discourse parsing. In Proc.
of the ACL’04 Workshop on Discourse Annotation.
pages 80–87.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.
In Proc. of LREC’08. pages 2961–2968.

Anne N. Rafferty and Christopher D. Manning. 2008.
Parsing three german treebanks: Lexicalized and un-
lexicalized baselines. In Proc. of the ACL-08 PaGe-
08 workshop. pages 40–46.

Anne Schiller. 1994. DMOR - User’s Guide. Technical
report, IMS, Universität Stuttgart.

Dhanya Sridhar, James Foulds, Marilyn Walker, Bert
Huang, and Lise Getoor. 2015. Joint models of dis-
agreement and stance in online debate. In Proc. of
ACL 2015. pages 26–31.

Manfred Stede and Arne Neumann. 2014. Potsdam
commentary corpus 2.0: Annotation for discourse
research. In Proc. of LREC’14. pages 925–929.

Yannick Versley and Anna Gastel. 2012. Linguistic
Tests for Discourse Relations in the Tüba-D/Z Cor-
pus of Written German. Dialogue and Discourse
1(2):1–24.

Elina Zarisheva and Tatjana Scheffler. 2015. Dialogue
act annotation for twitter data. In Proc. of SIGDIAL
2015. pages 114–123.

Hwee Tou Ng Ziheng Lin and Min-Yen Kan. 2014. A
PDTB-Styled End-to-End Discourse Parser. Natu-
ral Language Engineering 20:151–184.

54


	Interactive Visual Analysis of Transcribed Multi-Party Discourse

