



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 91–96
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4016

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 91–96
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4016

SEMEDICO:
A Comprehensive Semantic Search Engine for the Life Sciences

Erik Faessler
Jena University Language & Information

Engineering (JULIE) Lab
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena

Jena, Germany
erik.faessler@uni-jena.de

Udo Hahn
Jena University Language & Information

Engineering (JULIE) Lab
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena

Jena, Germany
udo.hahn@uni-jena.de

Abstract

SEMEDICO is a semantic search engine
designed to support literature search in
the life sciences by integrating the seman-
tics of the domain at all stages of the
search process—from query formulation
via query processing up to the presenta-
tion of results. SEMEDICO excels with
an ad-hoc search approach which directly
reflects relevance in terms of information
density of entities and relations among
them (events) and, a truly unique feature,
ranks interaction events by certainty infor-
mation reflecting the degree of factuality
of the encountered event.

1 Introduction

The exponential growth of scientific publications
in the life science domain (Lu, 2011) has inspired
a wide range of information retrieval services
over the last decade (for a brief survey, see Sec-
tion 2). Simple term-based retrieval techniques,
including frequency-based approaches based on
TF-IDF scores, rapidly hit their limits given the
enormous complexity of the sublanguage in the
life sciences, not only due to the sheer vocabulary
size (amounting to millions of specialized terms)
but also due to factors such as excessive ambiguity,
non-canonicity of complex phrases, extensive ter-
minological paraphrasing, etc.

Overly long hit lists returned for standard
queries in PUBMED (Lu, 2011), the most promi-
nent literature hub for life scientists, make focused
search strategies a major desideratum. Cur-
rent search mechanisms are unable to distinguish
between semantically tightly bound informational
units, like semantic relations (events) between
entities (e.g., protein-protein interactions), and
much looser relations between entities, like co-

occurrence of search terms within the same para-
graph or entire document.

Hence, in order to improve literature search,
a retrieval system should take into account the
domain knowledge of the domain under scrutiny,
connect it with the contents of the publications
in the document collection in a meaningful way,
decide which information pieces to present with
high priority and display them to the user in an
easily digestable way. However, existing search
engines only partially match these requirements.

As an alternative, we here present the semantic
search engine SEMEDICO. It features a front-
end with interactive disambiguation for query con-
cepts that share a common name with other con-
cepts, including abbreviations which have been
automatically extracted from documents. Due to
the incorporation of several life science ontologies
(see Section 3) all subordinates of search terms are
included in a search. This semantic enrichment
not only plays a major role in retrieving relevant
documents (implicitly, all subordinates are OR-ed)
but also supports searchers in the formulation of
adequate queries since it makes conceptual neigh-
borhoods lucid, thus easing query formulation.

At the back end side, gene interactions are
scored relative to the degree of factuality explic-
itly expressed in the document (“we have evi-
dence for the interaction of X and Y” is a stronger
claim than “X might potentially interact with Y”
and will thus be ranked higher than the second
statement; see Section 5). For ranking, we also
take into account the proximity of occurrences of
search terms within well-defined document por-
tions. We deem shorter text passages populated
by several query terms to be more informative to
the researcher than wider dispersed term occur-
rences. The most informative units, from this
perspective, are tightly connected semantic rela-
tions where constituent entities are syntactically

91

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4016
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4016


related as well. This means that SEMEDICO
prefers shorter passage matches over larger ones
and scores document hits accordingly. In the final
hit list, matching entities and relations are high-
lighted in order to orient the reader immediately
to the relevant text parts (as defined by the query).

2 Related Semantic Search Engines

Several search engines for the life sciences have
been developed to address the needs of researchers
(for a survey, cf. Lu (2011)). A common charac-
eristic of these systems is the incorporation of the
semantics of the underlying domain, by design,
in terms of domain-specific terminologies, the-
sauri and ontologies. GOPUBMED (Doms and
Schroeder, 2005) integrates the Medical Subject
Headings (MESH),1 GENE ONTOLOGY (GO)2

and UNIPROT.3 It allows to browse PUBMED
citations taxonomically structured by the MESH
and GO. Search results also include hits for tax-
onomic descendants of search concepts, as does
SEMEDICO. However, GOPUBMED does not inte-
grate any relational information (such as protein-
protein interactions) or factuality detection and
operates on PUBMED abstracts only.

FACTA+ (Tsuruoka et al., 2011) recognizes a
range of biomedical entity types (genes/proteins,
diseases, symptoms, drugs, enzymes and com-
pounds) in MEDLINE abstracts and analyzes doc-
uments for biomedical event triggers (Kim et al.,
2008). FACTA+ offers multiple search modes.
The Find Associated Concepts mode finds indi-
rect associations between entities in the spirit of
Swanson’s notion of undiscovered public knowl-
edge (Swanson, 1986) and thus is not the focus of
this comparison. The View Documents mode is the
information retrieval part of the system and lists
highlighted MEDLINE titles and abstracts. This
mode retrieves keyword-based results without
making use of conceptual knowledge. FACTA+
detects event triggers and also gene mentions,
but it does not include the gene arguments in its
event model. Thus, one cannot search specifically,
for example, a regulation of the gene BRCA1.
SEMEDICO, on the other hand, exploits its onto-
logical resources for concept synonyms, recog-
nizes event trigger-argument structures and stores
them as searchable items in the index.

1https://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/
2http://www.geneontology.org/
3http://www.uniprot.org/

QUETZAL (Coppernoll-Blach, 2011) stores
hundreds of millions (250 million as of 2011)
subject-verb-object relations that are matched
against query terms to produce focused sentence-
level retrieval results. In this regard, QUETZAL
shares the basic idea of SEMEDICO that semantic
relations between query terms are more rele-
vant than longer text passages mentioning the
query terms only in a loosely connected way.
QUETZAL includes arbitrary relations of all kinds
rather than domain-specific types of relations like
SEMEDICO. The advantage of this approach is
a higher domain coverage. On the downside,
QUETZAL’s restriction fails to account for a large
number of interactions which are expressed using
nouns, e.g., “the regulation of mTOR”. QUETZAL
does not incorporate factuality information to the
best of our knowledge.

FERRET’s (Srinivasan et al., 2015) focus lies on
the exploration of sentence-level gene-centric rela-
tionships in MEDLINE citations. The system per-
forms gene name disambiguation and allows for
query expansion via gene homologues. Retrieved
sentences contain findings for gene-gene or gene-
keyword pairs. SEMEDICO, in contradistinction,
flexibly searches genes in a larger variety of text
segment block sizes, including sentences.

POLYSEARCH2 (Liu et al., 2015) finds associa-
tions between an extensive range of entity types.
Given a query with a specified entity class, the
user may ask for relationships to another entity
class. POLYSEARCH2 searches associations in
a wide range of resources, including PUBMED,
PUBMED CENTRAL, Wikipedia and life-science
related databases. It does not support ad hoc free-
text queries and does not employ dedicated recog-
nition tools for entities or relations and always
operates on the sentence level, much in contrast
to SEMEDICO.

GENEVIEW (Thomas et al., 2012) employs an
large variety of named entity recognition tools
to automatically annotate different entity classes
in MEDLINE and PUBMED CENTRAL, including
SNPs, species, chemicals, histone modifications,
genes, protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and
more. Document scoring includes field length nor-
malization, such that term matches in titles achieve
higher scores than comparable matches across a
whole section. In this way, GENEVIEW imple-
ments the idea that shorter text portions with entity
matches are more relevant than longer stretches

92



of texts in a similar way as SEMEDICO does,
but is restricted to formal title, abstract and full
text sections. Unlike SEMEDICO, which auto-
matically searches gene name query terms within
molecular events, GENEVIEW requires the exact
database identifier (e.g., NCBI GENE ID to search
for a gene or an input of the form PPI:GENEID
to search for PPIs including the given gene ID).
There is no possibility to rank PPIs according to
the degree of factuality.

HYPOTHESISFINDER (Malhotra et al., 2013)
is one of the few life science search engines
besides SEMEDICO that employs factuality state-
ments. Accordingly, it provides the user with
speculative sentences from MEDLINE matching a
keyword query. Its goal is to explicitly provide
speculative statements in order to find scientific
hypotheses, yet there is no ranking for factuality
in the sense of SEMEDICO, nor makes it use of
sophisticated entity or event extraction methods.

3 Resources Used in SEMEDICO

Literature input for SEMEDICO comes from two
sources, viz. more than 27 million life science
abstracts from MEDLINE/PUBMED45 and approx-
imately 1,5 million life science full texts from the
open access subset of PUBMED CENTRAL. They
are stored in a POSTGRESQL database.6

Domain knowledge for the life sciences is gath-
ered from several terminological and ontological
resources. Each document from MEDLINE is
indexed with entries from the Medical Subject
Headings (MESH), a hierarchically organized the-
saurus with rather general entries at the top (e.g.,
”Anatomy”) and quite specific entries at the hier-
archy’s leaves (e.g., ”Ankle”). SEMEDICO makes
use of the MESH headings as encoded in the orig-
inal XML files, while it also recognizes mentions
of MESH entry terms within the document text by
its named entity recognizers.

Another extensively used resource is the NCBI
GENE database.7 Our gene recognition and nor-
malization engine (see Section 4) maps gene men-
tions in document text to unique NCBI GENE
database entries to handle gene name synonymy
and ambiguity. Additionally, SEMEDICO inte-
grates the GENE ONTOLOGY and the GENE REG-

4https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
5https://www.nlm.nih.gov/databases/

download/pubmed_medline.html
6https://www.postgresql.org/
7https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene

ULATION ONTOLOGY (GRO)8 for the semantic
description of different types of gene events.

All resources are stored in a NEO4J9 graph
database for direct access to their hierarchical
structure. All terminologies, ontologies and
databases are converted into a common JSON
format. This format is then imported into NEO4J
using a custom NEO4J server plugin.

4 Text Analytics

The complete document set of all MED-
LINE/PUBMED abstracts and PMC full texts
(roughly, 28,5m documents) is represented in
SEMEDICO’s index. Before indexing, each doc-
ument undergoes an extensive text analytics as
depicted in Figure 1. The goal is to identify
textual units referring to gene/protein mentions,
MESH headings, ontology concepts, gene inter-
action events and associated factuality markers.

document input:
MEDLINE,

PMC

sentence splitter

tokenizer

PoS tagger

acronym resolver

species tagger

gene name
normalization

gene event
extraction

factuality
rating

concept tagging:
MESH, GO,

GRO

ELASTICSEARCH

Figure 1: SEMEDICO’s text analytics pipeline.

The morpho-syntactic analysis includes the res-
olution of acronyms (Schwartz and Hearst, 2003).
This step is crucial for the interactive disambigua-
tion feature of SEMEDICO. For most of these
tasks, we employ JCORE (Hahn et al., 2016),
our UIMA (Unstructured Information Manage-
ment Architecture)10 component repository.

Semantic analysis includes species tagging by
the LINNAEUS tagger (Gerner et al., 2010), gene
mention tagging and normalization using GENO

8https://bioportal.bioontology.org/
ontologies/GRO

9https://neo4j.com/
10https://uima.apache.org/

93



(Wermter et al., 2009), gene / protein event recog-
nition with BIOSEM (Bui et al., 2013) and identi-
fication of event confidence ratings using the fac-
tuality rating determined by Hahn and Engelmann
(2014). For BIOSEM, we use a model trained on
the BIONLP SHARED TASK 2011 (Kim et al.,
2011) training data that includes abstracts as well
as full texts. MESH, GO and GRO concepts are
tagged by a dictionary component. We then store
the annotation results together with the original,
raw documents in the document database.

In a last step, the analysis results are sent to an
ELASTICSEARCH cluster for indexing. We use a
custom ELASTICSEARCH plugin to have ELAS-
TICSEARCH accept a term format that allows to
exactly specify index terms within the ELASTIC-
SEARCH index. This way, the exact linguistic
analysis results are channeled into the index.

5 Document Indexing and Scoring

All concepts, i.e., entities like species, MESH
headings, GO or GRO concepts, are indexed
including their taxonomical ascendants such that
a search for Dementia also includes text mentions
of Alzheimer’s Disease or Huntington’s Disease.

As the basic document scoring algorithm,
ELASTICSEARCH’s TF-IDF scoring function is
used. Additionally to this concept-centric scoring
strategy, SEMEDICO splits MEDLINE citations and
PMC full texts into their titles, sentences, abstract
sections, paragraphs, full text sections, table and
figure captions and the complete document text, if
applicable. In a technically similar manner, rela-
tions between genes/proteins are extracted directly
from the documents and stored as searchable items
in the ELASTICSEARCH index as nested docu-
ments, still being connected to the original docu-
ment. Relations are stored with information about
the event types playing a role in the gene/protein
interaction (e.g., Binding, Phosphorylation, Pos-
itive/Negative Regulation, etc.) and the actual
gene/protein arguments involved.

Additionally, each relation item in the index
is assigned an ordinal value representing the fac-
tuality status of the relation as expressed by the
authors through explicit linguistic signals using
epistemic modalities (such as ‘could’, ‘prob-
ably’, ‘we believe’, etc.). Based on experiments
described in Hahn and Engelmann (2014), each
lexical indicator for the expression of factuality is
assigned an empirically determined “likelihood”

value which is subsequently transferred to each
relation that carries such an epistemic labeling.
The lowest likelihood value is issued when a nega-
tion is encountered because the authors express the
firm belief that such a statement is false. If no
epistemic modalities are detected in a sentence, we
assign the highest likelihood.

SEMEDICO uses such factuality information to
rank gene interaction relations according to their
certainty, by default prioritizing statements with
a higher factuality rating over lower ones. The
final document score for the result list ranking
is derived from the individual text portion and
relation scores the document has, weighted by
ELASTICSEARCH field length normalization on
the basis of the spatial proximity of the text por-
tions in which search terms co-occur. This way,
SEMEDICO prefers query matches on shorter text
passages over those in larger ones.

6 Web Application

SEMEDICO is realized as an APACHE TAPESTRY
5 web application.11 Its start page presents itself
with an input field for query input. It expects
the user to enter query terms and prompts sugges-
tions derived from the items in the NEO4J concept
database (see Section 3) as soon as the user types
into the input field (see Figure 2).

Figure 2: SEMEDICO finds suggestions in the con-
cept database.

We use an adapted version of the JQUERY
TOKEN PLUGIN12 to segment the query into
“tokens” to clarify what is searched for. A token

11http://tapestry.apache.org/
12http://loopj.com/jquery-tokeninput/

94



Figure 3: SEMEDICO highlights query concept matches in document snippets and allows explicit disam-
biguation of concept names.

may consist of multiple words and either repre-
sents a database concept or a keyword that cannot
be (or, as decided by the user, should not be)
resolved to a concept name.

If the user does not select any of these sugges-
tions, SEMEDICO automatically recognizes con-
cepts in the query. For query portions which
can be mapped to multiple concepts, SEMEDICO
assigns a specific graphical styling to the query
tokens in question after the search process and dis-
plays disambiguation options when the cursor is
hovered over the tokens (see Figure 3). All disam-
biguation options are concepts from the database
and contain their synonyms as tooltips to help the
user in the disambiguation process.

SEMEDICO makes extensive use of highlighting
to clarify at first glance why a document match
was deemed relevant. Since SEMEDICO does
not only search for the exact query concepts but
also for their taxonomic subordinates, subordinate
matches are also highlighted. For example, Figure
3 shows that a search for Enzymes also leads to
matches like E3 ubiquitin ligase, which is a taxo-
nomic descendant of the Enzymes heading in the
MESH. Again, matches in shorter text snippets

are expected to be more valuable to the user than
those in larger text portions, and are thus displayed
to the user with higher preference. On the left
side, SEMEDICO shows concepts occurring in the
document result list, sorted either by frequency or
by using the ELASTICSEARCH “Significant Terms
Aggregation”.13 These concepts may be added to
the current query for refinement.

Clicking on an article title opens a new page
showing the abstract with highlighted search con-
cept matches and, for PMC hits, a list of high-
lighted full text matches, showing the highest
ranking query matches without the need for fur-
ther search within a – possibly very long – doc-
ument. Links to PUBMED, PMC and publisher
full text sources allow easy access to the original
publication.

7 Conclusion

We presented SEMEDICO, a semantic search
engine for PUBMED and PUBMED CENTRAL
that assists users with query formulation by con-

13https://www.elastic.co/guide/
en/elasticsearch/guide/2.x/
significant-terms.html

95



cept suggestion, recognition and interactive dis-
ambiguation. SEMEDICO covers multiple levels
of semantics, from simple abbreviation resolu-
tion over entity recognition to relation extraction
for gene interaction events. Sentences are tagged
for varying degrees of factuality and relations are
ranked by scoring these degrees. The semantic
units are further scored by varying levels of textual
proximity—first, looking for explicitly expressed
gene relations, co-occurrences of query concepts
within sentences, paragraphs or even larger text
blocks. All sources of evidence are translated into
a measure of semantic tightness between query
concepts. Furthermore, the ranking reflects a pref-
erence for grouping query terms together in a
closer textual context, while textually more dis-
persed co-occurrences are sorted on lower ranks.

Acknowledgments.

This work is part of the Collaborative Research
Center AQUADIVA (SFB 1076: AQUADIVA)
established at Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
and funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG). Initial funding of SEMEDICOwas due to
the German Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) for the Jena Centre of Systems Biology of
Ageing (JENAGE) (grant no. 0315581D).

References
Quoc-Chinh Bui, David Campos, Erik M. van Mul-

ligen, and Jan A. Kors. 2013. A fast rule-
based approach for biomedical event extraction. In
BioNLP 2013 — Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared
Task 2013 Workshop @ ACL 2013. Sofia, Bulgaria,
August 9, 2013. pages 104–108.

Penny Coppernoll-Blach. 2011. Quertle: The con-
ceptual relationships alternative search engine for
PubMed. Journal of the Medical Library Associa-
tion 99(2):176–177.

Andreas Doms and Michael Schroeder. 2005. GoPub-
Med: exploring PubMed with the Gene Ontology.
Nucleic Acids Research 33(Suppl 2):W783–W786.

Martin Gerner, Goran Nenadic, and Casey M.
Bergman. 2010. Linnaeus: a species name identifi-
cation system for biomedical literature. BMC Bioin-
formatics 11:#85.

Udo Hahn and Christine Engelmann. 2014. Grounding
epistemic modality in speakers’ judgments. In Duc-
Nghia Pham and Seong-Bae Park, editors, Trends in
Artificial Intelligence. PRICAI 2014 — Proceedings
of the 13th Pacific Rim International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. Gold Coast, Australia, 1-5
Dec, 2014. Springer, number 8862 in Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence, pages 654–667.

Udo Hahn, Franz Matthies, Erik Faessler, and Johannes
Hellrich. 2016. UIMA-based JCoRe 2.0 goes
GitHub and Maven Central: state-of-the-art soft-
ware resource engineering and distribution of NLP
pipelines. In LREC 2016 — Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation. Portorož, Slovenia, 23-28 May
2016. pages 2502–2509.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii.
2008. Corpus annotation for mining biomedical
events from literature. BMC Bioinformatics 9:10.

Jin-Dong Kim, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Robert
Bossy, Ngan Nguyen, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2011.
Overview of BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In
BioNLP 2011 — Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared
Task 2011 Workshop @ ACL-HLT 2011. Portland,
Oregon, USA, 24 June 2011. pages 1–6.

Yifeng Liu, Yongjie Liang, and David S. Wishart. 2015.
PolySearch2: a significantly improved text-mining
system for discovering associations between human
diseases, genes, drugs, metabolites, toxins and more.
Nucleic Acids Research 43(W1):W535–W542.

Zhiyong Lu. 2011. Pubmed and beyond: a survey
of web tools for searching biomedical literature.
Database: The Journal of Biological Databases and
Curation page #baq036.

Ashutosh Malhotra, Erfan Younesi, Harsha Gurulin-
gappa, and Martin Hofmann-Apitius. 2013.
’HypothesisFinder:’ a strategy for the detection
of speculative statements in scientific text. PLoS
Computational Biology 9(7):e1003117.

Ariel S. Schwartz and Marti A. Hearst. 2003. A simple
algorithm for identifying abbreviation definitions in
biomedical text. In PSB 2003 – Proceedings of the
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2003. Kauai,
Hawaii, USA, January 3-7, 2003. pages 451–462.

Padmini Srinivasan, Xiao-Ning Zhang, Roxane
Bouten, and Caren Chang. 2015. Ferret: a
sentence-based literature scanning system. BMC
Bioinformatics 16(1):#198.

Don R. Swanson. 1986. Fish oil, Raynaud’s Syndrome,
and undiscovered public knowledge. Perspectives in
Biology and Medicine 30(1):7–18.

Philippe E. Thomas, Johannes Starlinger, Alexander
Vowinkel, Sebastian Arzt, and Ulf Leser. 2012.
GeneView: a comprehensive semantic search
engine for PubMed. Nucleic Acids Research
40(W1):W585–W591.

Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Makoto Miwa, Kaisei
Hamamoto, Jun’ichi Tsujii, and Sophia Anani-
adou. 2011. Discovering and visualizing indirect
associations between biomedical concepts. Bioin-
formatics 27(13):i111–i119.

Joachim Wermter, Katrin Tomanek, and Udo Hahn.
2009. High-performance gene name normalization
with GeNo. Bioinformatics 25(6):815–821.

96


	Semedico: A Comprehensive Semantic Search Engine for the Life Sciences

