



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics- Student Research Workshop, pages 1–3
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3001

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics- Student Research Workshop, pages 1–3
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3001

Computational characterization of mental states: A natural language
processing approach

Facundo Carrillo
Computer Science Dept, School of Science,

Buenos Aires University
fcarrillo@dc.uba.ar

Abstract

Psychiatry is an area of medicine that
strongly bases its diagnoses on the psychi-
atrists subjective appreciation. The task
of diagnosis loosely resembles the com-
mon pipelines used in supervised learning
schema. Therefore, we propose to aug-
ment the psychiatrists diagnosis toolbox
with an artificial intelligence system based
on natural language processing and ma-
chine learning algorithms. This approach
has been validated in many works in which
the performance of the diagnosis has been
increased with the use of automatic classi-
fication.

1 Introduction

Psychiatry is an area of medicine that strongly
bases its diagnoses on the psychiatrists subjective
appreciation. More precisely, speech is used al-
most exclusively as a window to the patients mind.
Few other cues are available to objectively justify
a diagnostic, unlike what happens in other disci-
plines which count on laboratory tests or imag-
ing procedures, such as X-rays. Daily practice is
based on the use of semi-structured interviews and
standardized tests to build the diagnoses, heavily
relying on her personal experience. This method-
ology has a big problem: diagnoses are commonly
validated a posteriori in function of how the phar-
macological treatment works. This validation can-
not be done until months after the start of the
treatment and, if the patient condition does not
improve, the psychiatrist often changes the diag-
nosis and along with the pharmacological treat-
ment. This delay prolongs the patient’s suffering
until the correct diagnosis is found. According to
NIMH, more than 1% and 2 % of US population
is affected by Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder,

respectively. Moreover, the WHO reported that
the global cost of mental illness reached $2.5T in
2010 (Mathers et al., 2008) .

The task of diagnosis, largely simplified, mainly
consists of understanding the mind state through
the extraction of patterns from the patient’s speech
and finding the best matching pathology in the
standard diagnostic literature. This pipeline, con-
sisting of extracting patterns and then classify-
ing them, loosely resembles the common pipelines
used in supervised learning schema. Therefore,
we propose to augment the psychiatrists diagnosis
toolbox with an artificial intelligence system based
on natural language processing and machine learn-
ing algorithms. The proposed system would assist
in the diagnostic using a patients speech as input.
The understanding and insights obtained from cus-
tomizing these systems to specific pathologies is
likely to be more broadly applicable to other NLP
tasks, therefore we expect to make contributions
not only for psychiatry but also within the com-
puter science community. We intend to develop
these ideas and evaluate them beyond the lab set-
ting. Our end goal is to make it possible for a prac-
titioner to integrate our tools into her daily practice
with minimal effort.

2 Methodology

In order to complement the manual diagnosis it is
necessary to have samples from real patients. To
collect these samples, we have ongoing collabo-
rations with different psychiatric institutions from
many countries: United States, Colombia, Brazil
and Argentina. These centers provide us with ac-
cess to the relevant patient data and we jointly col-
laborate testing different protocols in a variety lan-
guages. We have already started studies with two
pathologies: Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder.

Regarding our technical setup, we are using and

1

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3001
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-3001


developing tools to capture different characteris-
tics of the speech. In all cases, we work with high-
quality transcriptions of speech. Our experiments
are focused on analyzing different aspects of the
speech: 1) Grammatical-morphological changes
based on topology of Speech Graphs. 2) Coher-
ence Algorithm: Semantic coherence using prox-
imity in semantic embeddings. 3) Changes in
Emotional language and other semantic categories

3 Preliminary Results

Many groups have already validated this paradigm
(Roark et al., 2011; Fraser et al., 2014; Resnik
et al., 2013; Lehr et al., 2012; Fraser et al., 2016;
Mitchell et al., 2015). First, Speech Graphs has
been used in different pathologies (schizophrenic
and bipolar), results are published in (Carrillo
et al., 2014; Mota et al., 2014, 2012). In (Carrillo
et al., 2014), the autors can automatically diag-
nose based on the graphs with an accuracy greater
than 85%. This approach consists in modeling the
language, or a transformation of it (for example
the part of speech symbols of a text), as a graph.
With this new representation the authors use graph
topology features (average grade of nodes, num-
ber of loops, centrality, etc) as features of patient
speech. Regarding coherence analysis, some re-
searchers has developed an algorithm that quanti-
fies the semantic divergence of the speech. To do
that, they used semantic embeddings (like Latent
Semantic Analysis(Landauer and Dumais, 1997),
Word2vec(Mikolov et al., 2013), or Twitter Se-
mantic Similarity(Carrillo et al., 2015)) to mea-
sure when consecutive sentences of spontaneous
speech differ too much. The authors used this
algorithm, combined with machine learning clas-
sifiers, to predict which high-risk subjects would
have their first psychotic episode within 2 years
(with 100% accuracy) (Bedi et al., 2015). The lat-
ter result was very relevant because it presented
evidence that this automatic diagnostic methodol-
ogy could not only perform at levels comparable to
experts but also, under some conditions, even out-
perform experts (classical medical tests achieved
40% of accuracy). Dr. Insel, former director of
National Institute of Mental Health cited this work
in his blog on his post: Look who is getting into
mental health research as one.

Regarding Emotional language, some re-
searchers presented evidence of how some en-
docrine regulations change the language. This

methods are based on quantifying different emo-
tional levels. This methodology has been used
to diagnose depression and postpartum depres-
sion by Eric Horvitz (De Choudhury et al., 2013).
Others researchers also have used this method to
diagnose patients with Parkinsons disease(Garcı́a
et al., 2016).

4 Current Work

Currently, we are working on the coherence al-
gorithm (Bedi et al., 2015), understanding some
properties and its potential applications, such as
automatic composition of text and feature extrac-
tion for bot detection. Meanwhile, we are receiv-
ing new speech samples from 3 different mental
health hospitals in Argentina provided by patients
with new pathologies like frontotemporal demen-
tia and anxiety. We are also building methods
to detect depression in young patients using the
change of emotions in time.

5 Future work

The tasks for the following 2/3 years are: 1) Im-
prove implementations of developed algorithms
and make them open source. 2) Integrate the dif-
ferent pipelines of features extraction and classi-
fication to generate a generic classifier for sev-
eral pathologies. 3) Build a mobile application
for medical use (for this aim, Google has awarded
our project with the Google Research Awards for
Latin America 2016: Prognosis in a Box: Compu-
tational Characterization of Mental State). At the
moment the data is recorded and then transcribed
by an external doctor. We want a full automatic
procedure, from the moment when the doctor per-
forms the interview to the moment when she re-
ceives the results. 4) Write the PhD thesis.

References
Gillinder Bedi, Facundo Carrillo, Guillermo A Cec-

chi, Diego Fernández Slezak, Mariano Sigman,
Natália B Mota, Sidarta Ribeiro, Daniel C Javitt,
Mauro Copelli, and Cheryl M Corcoran. 2015.
Automated analysis of free speech predicts psy-
chosis onset in high-risk youths. npj Schizophrenia
1:15030.

Facundo Carrillo, Guillermo A Cecchi, Mariano Sig-
man, and Diego Fernández Slezak. 2015. Fast
distributed dynamics of semantic networks via so-
cial media. Computational intelligence and neuro-
science 2015:50.

2



Facundo Carrillo, Natalia Mota, Mauro Copelli,
Sidarta Ribeiro, Mariano Sigman, Guillermo Cec-
chi, and Diego Fernandez Slezak. 2014. Automated
speech analysis for psychosis evaluation. In Inter-
national Workshop on Machine Learning and Inter-
pretation in Neuroimaging. Springer, pages 31–39.

Munmun De Choudhury, Michael Gamon, Scott
Counts, and Eric Horvitz. 2013. Predicting depres-
sion via social media. In ICWSM. page 2.

Kathleen C Fraser, Jed A Meltzer, Naida L Graham,
Carol Leonard, Graeme Hirst, Sandra E Black, and
Elizabeth Rochon. 2014. Automated classification
of primary progressive aphasia subtypes from narra-
tive speech transcripts. Cortex 55:43–60.

Kathleen C Fraser, Jed A Meltzer, and Frank Rudz-
icz. 2016. Linguistic features identify alzheimers
disease in narrative speech. Journal of Alzheimer’s
Disease 49(2):407–422.

Adolfo M Garcı́a, Facundo Carrillo, Juan Rafael
Orozco-Arroyave, Natalia Trujillo, Jesús F Vargas
Bonilla, Sol Fittipaldi, Federico Adolfi, Elmar Nöth,
Mariano Sigman, Diego Fernández Slezak, et al.
2016. How language flows when movements dont:
An automated analysis of spontaneous discourse in
parkinsons disease. Brain and Language 162:19–
28.

Thomas K Landauer and Susan T Dumais. 1997. A
solution to plato’s problem: The latent semantic
analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and rep-
resentation of knowledge. Psychological review
104(2):211.

Maider Lehr, Emily Prud’hommeaux, Izhak Shafran,
and Brian Roark. 2012. Fully automated neuropsy-
chological assessment for detecting mild cognitive
impairment. In Thirteenth Annual Conference of the
International Speech Communication Association.

C Mathers, T Boerma, and D Ma Fat. 2008. The global
burden of disease: 2004 update: World health organ-
isation .

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. pages 3111–3119.

Margaret Mitchell, Kristy Hollingshead, and Glen
Coppersmith. 2015. Quantifying the language of
schizophrenia in social media. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL
HLT). page 11.

Natália B Mota, Raimundo Furtado, Pedro PC Maia,
Mauro Copelli, and Sidarta Ribeiro. 2014. Graph
analysis of dream reports is especially informative
about psychosis. Scientific reports 4:3691.

Natalia B Mota, Nivaldo AP Vasconcelos, Nathalia
Lemos, Ana C Pieretti, Osame Kinouchi,
Guillermo A Cecchi, Mauro Copelli, and Sidarta
Ribeiro. 2012. Speech graphs provide a quantitative
measure of thought disorder in psychosis. PloS one
7(4):e34928.

Philip Resnik, Anderson Garron, and Rebecca Resnik.
2013. Using topic modeling to improve predic-
tion of neuroticism and depression. In Proceedings
of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural. Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 1348–1353.

Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, John-Paul Hosom,
Kristy Hollingshead, and Jeffrey Kaye. 2011. Spo-
ken language derived measures for detecting mild
cognitive impairment. IEEE transactions on audio,
speech, and language processing 19(7):2081–2090.

3


	Computational Characterization of Mental States: A Natural Language Processing Approach

