



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 541–551
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1050

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 541–551
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1050

Predicting Native Language from Gaze

Yevgeni Berzak
MIT CSAIL

berzak@mit.edu

Chie Nakamura
MIT Linguistics

chienak@mit.edu

Suzanne Flynn
MIT Linguistics

sflynn@mit.edu

Boris Katz
MIT CSAIL

boris@mit.edu

Abstract

A fundamental question in language learn-
ing concerns the role of a speaker’s
first language in second language acqui-
sition. We present a novel methodol-
ogy for studying this question: analysis
of eye-movement patterns in second lan-
guage reading of free-form text. Using this
methodology, we demonstrate for the first
time that the native language of English
learners can be predicted from their gaze
fixations when reading English. We pro-
vide analysis of classifier uncertainty and
learned features, which indicates that dif-
ferences in English reading are likely to
be rooted in linguistic divergences across
native languages. The presented frame-
work complements production studies and
offers new ground for advancing research
on multilingualism.1

1 Introduction

The influence of a speaker’s native language on
learning and performance in a foreign language,
also known as cross-linguistic transfer, has been
studied for several decades in linguistics and psy-
chology (Odlin, 1989; Martohardjono and Flynn,
1995; Jarvis and Pavlenko, 2008; Berkes and
Flynn, 2012; Alonso, 2015). The growing avail-
ably of learner corpora has also sparked interest
in cross-linguistic influence phenomena in NLP,
where studies have explored the task of Native
Language Identification (NLI) (Tetreault et al.,
2013), as well as analysis of textual features in
relation to the author’s native language (Jarvis
and Crossley, 2012; Swanson and Charniak, 2013;
Malmasi and Dras, 2014). Despite these advances,

1The experimental data collected in this study will be
made publicly available.

the extent and nature of first language influence in
second language processing remains far from be-
ing established. Crucially, most prior work on this
topic focused on production, while little is cur-
rently known about cross-linguistic influence in
language comprehension.

In this work, we present a novel framework
for studying cross-linguistic influence in language
comprehension using eyetracking for reading and
free-form native English text. We collect and ana-
lyze English newswire reading data from 182 par-
ticipants, including 145 English as Second Lan-
guage (ESL) learners from four different native
language backgrounds: Chinese, Japanese, Por-
tuguese and Spanish, as well as 37 native English
speakers. Each participant reads 156 English sen-
tences, half of which are shared across all partic-
ipants, and the remaining half are individual to
each participant. All the sentences are manually
annotated with part-of-speech (POS) tags and syn-
tactic dependency trees.

We then introduce the task of Native Language
Identification from Reading (NLIR), which re-
quires predicting a subject’s native language from
gaze while reading text in a second language. Fo-
cusing on ESL participants and using a log-linear
classifier with word fixation times normalized for
reading speed as features, we obtain 71.03 NLIR
accuracy in the shared sentences regime. We fur-
ther demonstrate that NLIR can be generalized
effectively to the individual sentences regime, in
which each subject reads a different set of sen-
tences, by grouping fixations according to linguis-
tically motivated clustering criteria. In this regime,
we obtain an NLIR accuracy of 51.03.

Further on, we provide classification and feature
analyses, suggesting that the signal underlying
NLIR is likely to be related to linguistic charac-
teristics of the respective native languages. First,
drawing on previous work on ESL production, we

541

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1050
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1050


observe that classifier uncertainty in NLIR corre-
lates with global linguistic similarities across na-
tive languages. In other words, the more similar
are the languages, the more similar are the read-
ing patterns of their native speakers in English.
Second, we perform feature analysis across na-
tive and non-native English speakers, and discuss
structural and lexical factors that could potentially
drive some of the non-native reading patterns in
each of our native languages. Taken together, our
results provide evidence for a systematic influence
of native language properties on reading, and by
extension, on online processing and comprehen-
sion in a second language.

To summarize, we introduce a novel frame-
work for studying cross-linguistic influence in lan-
guage learning by using eyetracking for reading
free-form English text. We demonstrate the util-
ity of this framework in the following ways. First,
we obtain the first NLIR results, addressing both
the shared and the individual textual input scenar-
ios. We further show that reading preserves lin-
guistic similarities across native languages of ESL
readers, and perform feature analysis, highlight-
ing key distinctive reading patterns in each native
language. The proposed framework complements
and extends production studies, and can inform
linguistic inquiry on cross-linguistic influence.

This paper is structured as follows. In sec-
tion 2 we present the data and our experimental
setup. Section 3 describes our approach to NLIR
and summarizes the classification results. We ana-
lyze cross-linguistic influence in reading in section
4. In section 4.1 we examine NLIR classification
uncertainty in relation to linguistic similarities be-
tween native languages. In section 4.2 we discuss
several key fixation features associated with dif-
ferent native languages. Section 5 surveys related
work, and section 6 concludes.

2 Experimental Setup

Participants

We recruited 182 adult participants. Of those, 37
are native English speakers and 145 are ESL learn-
ers from four native language backgrounds: Chi-
nese, Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish. All the
participants in the experiment are native speakers
of only one language. The ESL speakers were
tested for English proficiency using the grammar
and listening sections of the Michigan English test
(MET), which consist of 50 multiple choice ques-

tions. The English proficiency score was calcu-
lated as the number of correctly answered ques-
tions on these modules. The majority of the par-
ticipants scored in the intermediate-advanced pro-
ficiency range. Table 1 presents the number of par-
ticipants and the mean English proficiency score
for each native language group. Additionally, we
collected metadata on gender, age, level of ed-
ucation, duration of English studies and usage,
time spent in English speaking countries and pro-
ficiency in any additional language spoken.

# Participants English Score
Chinese 36 42.0
Japanese 36 40.3
Portuguese 36 41.1
Spanish 37 42.4
English 37 NA

Table 1: Number of participants and mean MET
English score by native language group.

Reading Materials

We utilize 14,274 randomly selected sentences
from the Wall Street Journal part of the Penn Tree-
bank (WSJ-PTB) (Marcus et al., 1993). To sup-
port reading convenience and measurement preci-
sion, the maximal sentence length was set to 100
characters, leading to an average sentence length
of 11.4 words. Word boundaries are defined as
whitespaces. From this sentence pool, 78 sen-
tences (900 words) were presented to all partic-
ipants (henceforth shared sentences) and the re-
maining 14,196 sentences were split into 182 in-
dividual batches of 78 sentences (henceforth indi-
vidual sentences, averaging 880 words per batch).

All the sentences include syntactic annotations
from the Universal Dependency Treebank project
(UDT) (McDonald et al., 2013). The annotations
include PTB POS tags (Santorini, 1990), Google
universal POS tags (Petrov et al., 2012) and depen-
dency trees. The dependency annotations of the
UDT are converted automatically from the manual
phrase structure tree annotations of the WSJ-PTB.

Gaze Data Collection

Each participant read 157 sentences. The first
sentence was presented to familiarize participants
with the experimental setup and was discarded
during analysis. The following 156 sentences
consisted of 78 shared and 78 individual sen-

542



tences. The shared and the individual sentences
were mixed randomly and presented to all partic-
ipants in the same order. The experiment was di-
vided into three parts, consisting of 52 sentences
each. Participants were allowed to take a short
break between experimental parts.

Each sentence was presented on a blank screen
as a one-liner. The text appeared in Times font,
with font size 23. To encourage attentive reading,
upon completion of sentence reading participants
answered a simple yes/no question about its con-
tent, and were subsequently informed if they an-
swered the question correctly. Both the sentences
and the questions were triggered by a 300ms gaze
on a fixation target (fixation circle for sentences
and the letter “Q” for questions) which appeared
on a blank screen and was co-located with the be-
ginning of the text in the following screen.

Throughout the experiment, participants held a
joystick with buttons for indicating completion of
sentence reading and answering the comprehen-
sion questions. Eye-movement of participants’
dominant eye was recorded using a desktop mount
Eyelink 1000 eyetracker, at a sampling rate of
1000Hz. Further details on the experimental setup
are provided in appendix A.

3 Native Language Identification from
Reading

Our first goal is to determine whether the native
language of ESL learners can be decoded from
their gaze patterns while reading English text. We
address this question in two regimes, correspond-
ing to our division of reading input into shared and
individual sentences. In the shared regime, all the
participants read the same set of sentences. Nor-
malizing over the reading input, this regime facil-
itates focusing on differences in reading behavior
across readers. In the individual regime, we use
the individual batches from our data to address
the more challenging variant of the NLIR task in
which the reading material given to each partici-
pant is different.

3.1 Features

We seek to utilize features that can provide robust,
simple and interpretable characterizations of read-
ing patterns. To this end, we use speed normalized
fixation duration measures over word sequences.

Fixation Measures
We utilize three measures of word fixation dura-
tion:

• First Fixation duration (FF) Duration of the
first fixation on a word.

• First Pass duration (FP) Time spent from
first entering a word to first leaving it (includ-
ing re-fixations within the word).

• Total Fixation duration (TF) The sum of all
fixation times on a word.

We experiment with fixations over un-
igram, bigram and trigram sequences
seqi,k = wi, ..., wi+k−1, k ∈ {1, 2, 3}, where for
each metric M ∈ {FF, FP, TF} the fixation
time for a sequence Mseqi,k is defined as the
sum of fixations on individual tokens Mw in the
sequence2.

Mseqi,k =
∑

w′∈seqi,k
Mw′ (1)

Importantly, we control for variation in reading
speeds across subjects by normalizing each sub-
jects’s sequence fixation times. For each metric
M and sequence seqi,k we normalize the sequence
fixation time Mseqi,k relative to the subject’s se-
quence fixation times in the textual context of the
sequence. The context C is defined as the sen-
tence in which the sequence appears for the Words
in Fixed Context feature-set and the entire textual
input for the Syntactic and Information clusters
feature-sets (see definitions of feature-sets below).
The normalization term SM,C,k is accordingly de-
fined as the metric’s fixation time per sequence of
length k in the context:

SM,C,k =
1

|C|
∑

seqk∈C
Mseqk (2)

We then obtain a normalized fixation time
Mnormseqi,k as:

Mnormseqi,k =
Mseqi,k
SM,C,k

(3)

2Note that for bigrams and trigrams, one could also mea-
sure FF and FP for interest regions spanning the sequence,
instead, or in addition to summing these fixation times over
individual tokens.

543



Feature Types
We use the above presented speed normalized fix-
ation metrics to extract three feature-sets, Words in
Fixed Context (WFC), Syntactic Clusters (SC) and
Information Clusters (IC). WFC is a token-level
feature-set that presupposes a fixed textual input
for all participants. It is thus applicable only in
the shared sentences regime. SC and IC are type-
level features which provide abstractions over se-
quences of words. Crucially, they can also be ap-
plied when participants read different sentences.

• Words in Fixed Context (WFC) The WFC
features capture fixation times on word se-
quences in a specific sentence. This feature-
set consists of FF, FP and TF times for each
of the 900 unigram, 822 bigram, and 744 tri-
gram word sequences comprising the shared
sentences. The fixation times of each metric
are normalized for each participant relative
to their fixations on sequences of the same
length in the surrounding sentence. As noted
above, the WFC feature-set is not applicable
in the individual regime, as it requires identi-
cal sentences for all participants.

• Syntactic Clusters (SC) CS features are av-
erage globally normalized FF, FP and TF
times for word sequences clustered by our
three types of syntactic labels: universal
POS, PTB POS, and syntactic relation labels.
An example of such a feature is the average
of speed-normalized TF times spent on the
PTB POS bigram sequence DT NN. We take
into account labels that appear at least once
in the reading input of all participants. On
the four non-native languages, considering all
three label types, we obtain 104 unigram, 636
bigram and 1,310 trigram SC features per fix-
ation metric in the shared regime, and 56 un-
igram, 95 bigram and 43 trigram SC features
per fixation metric in the individual regime.

• Information Clusters (IC) We also obtain
average FF, FP and TF for words clustered
according to their length, measured in num-
ber of characters. Word length was previ-
ously shown to be a strong predictor of infor-
mation content (Piantadosi et al., 2011). As
such, it provides an alternative abstraction to
the syntactic clusters, combining both syntac-
tic and lexical information. As with SC fea-
tures, we take into account features that ap-

pear at least once in the textual input of all
participants. For our set of non-native lan-
guages, we obtain for each fixation metric 15
unigram, 21 bigram and 23 trigram IC fea-
tures in the shared regime, and 12 unigram,
18 bigram and 18 trigram IC features in the
individual regime. Notably, this feature-set is
very compact, and differently from the syn-
tactic clusters, does not rely on the availabil-
ity of external annotations.

In each feature-set, we perform a final prepro-
cessing step for each individual feature, in which
we derive a zero mean unit variance scaler from
the training set feature values, and apply it to trans-
form both the training and the test values of the
feature to Z scores.

3.2 Model
The experiments are carried out using a log-linear
model:

p(y|x; θ) = exp(θ · f(x, y))∑
y′∈Y exp(θ · f(x, y′))

(4)

where y is the reader’s native language, x is the
reading input and θ are the model parameters. The
classifier is trained with gradient descent using L-
BFGS (Byrd et al., 1995).

3.3 Experimental Results
In table 2 we report 10-fold cross-validation re-
sults on NLIR in the shared and the individual ex-
perimental regimes for native speakers of Chinese,
Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish. We introduce
two baselines against which we compare the per-
formance of our feature-sets. The majority base-
line selects the native language with the largest
number of participants. The random clusters base-
line clusters words into groups randomly, with the
number of groups set to the number of syntactic
categories in our data.

In the shared regime, WFC fixations yield the
highest classification rates, substantially outper-
forming the cluster feature-sets and the two base-
lines. The strongest result using this feature-
set, 71.03, is obtained by combining unigram, bi-
gram and trigram fixation times. In addition to
this outcome, we note that training binary classi-
fiers in this setup yields accuracies ranging from
68.49 for the language pair Portuguese and Span-
ish, to 93.15 for Spanish and Japanese. These re-
sults confirm the effectiveness of the shared input

544



Shared Sentences Regime Individual Sentences Regime
Majority Class 25.52 25.52
Random Clusters 22.76 22.07

unigrams +bigrams +trigrams unigrams +bigrams +trigrams
Information Clusters (IC) 41.38 44.14 46.21 38.62 32.41 32.41
Syntactic Clusters (SC) 45.52 57.24 58.62 48.97 43.45 48.28
SC+IC 51.72 57.24 60.0 51.03 46.21 49.66
Words in Fixed Context (WFC) 64.14 68.28 71.03 NA

Table 2: Native Language Identification from Reading results with 10-fold cross-validation for native
speakers of Chinese, Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish. In the Shared regime all the participants read
the same 78 sentences. In the Individual regime each participant reads a different set of 78 sentences.

regime for performing reliable NLIR, and suggest
a strong native language signal in non-native read-
ing fixation times.

SC features yield accuracies of 45.52 to 58.62
on the shared sentences, while IC features exhibit
weaker performance in this regime, with accura-
cies of 41.38 to 46.21. Both results are well above
chance, but lower than WFC fixations due to the
information loss imposed by the clustering step.
Crucially, both feature-sets remain effective in the
individual input regime, with 43.45 to 48.97 accu-
racy for SC features and 32.41 to 38.62 accuracy
for IC features. The strongest result in the individ-
ual regime is 51.03, obtained by concatenating IC
and SC features over unigrams. We also note that
using this setup in a binary classification scheme
yields results ranging from chance level 49.31 for
Portuguese versus Spanish, to 84.93 on Spanish
versus Japanese.

Generally, we observe that adding bigram and
trigram fixations in the shared regime leads to per-
formance improvements compared to using un-
igram features only. This trend does not hold
for the individual sentences, presumably due to a
combination of feature sparsity and context vari-
ation in this regime. We also note that IC and
SC features tend to perform better together than
in separation, suggesting that the information en-
coded using these feature-sets is to some extent
complementary.

The generalization power of our cluster based
feature-sets has both practical and theoretical con-
sequences. Practically, they provide useful ab-
stractions for performing NLIR over arbitrary tex-
tual input. That is, they enable performing this
task using any textual input during both training
and testing phases. Theoretically, the effectiveness
of linguistically motivated features in discerning
native languages suggests that linguistic factors

play an important role in the ESL reading process.
The analysis presented in the following sections
will further explore this hypothesis.

4 Analysis of Cross-Linguistic Influence
in ESL Reading

As mentioned in the previous section, the ability to
perform NLIR in general, and the effectiveness of
linguistically motivated features in particular, sug-
gest that linguistic factors in the native and sec-
ond languages are pertinent to ESL reading. In
this section we explore this hypothesis further, by
analyzing classifier uncertainty and the features
learned in the NLIR task.

4.1 Preservation of Linguistic Similarity

Previous work in NLP suggested a link between
textual patterns in ESL production and linguistic
similarities of the respective native languages (Na-
gata and Whittaker, 2013; Nagata, 2014; Berzak
et al., 2014, 2015). In particular, Berzak et al.
(2014) has demonstrated that NLI classification
uncertainty correlates with similarities between
languages with respect to their typological fea-
tures. Here, we extend this framework and exam-
ine if preservation of native language similarities
in ESL production is paralleled in reading.

Similarly to Berzak et al. (2014) we define the
classification uncertainty for a pair of native lan-
guages y and y′ in our data collection D, as the
average probability assigned by the NLIR classi-
fier to one language given the other being the true
native language. This approach provides a robust
measure of classification confusion that does not
rely on the actual performance of the classifier. We
interpret the classifier uncertainty as a similarity
measure between the respective languages and de-

545



note it as English Reading Similarity ERS.

ERSy,y′ =

∑
(x,y)∈Dy

p(y′|x;θ)+ ∑
(x,y′)∈Dy′

p(y|x;θ)

|Dy |+|Dy′ |
(5)

We compare these reading similarities to the lin-
guistic similarities between our native languages.
To approximate these similarities, we utilize fea-
ture vectors from the URIEL Typological Com-
pendium (Littel et al., 2016) extracted using the
lang2vec tool (Littell et al., 2017). URIEL ag-
gregates, fuses and normalizes typological, phy-
logenetic and geographical information about the
world’s languages.

We obtain all the 103 available morpho-
syntactic features in URIEL, which are derived
from the World Atlas of Language Structures
(WALS) (Dryer and Haspelmath, 2013), Syntac-
tic Structures of the World’s Languages (SSWL)
(Collins and Kayne, 2009) and Ethnologue (Lewis
et al., 2015). Missing feature values are completed
with a KNN classifier. We also extract URIEL’s
3,718 language family features derived from Glot-
tolog (Hammarström et al., 2015). Each of these
features represents membership in a branch of
Glottolog’s world language tree. Truncating fea-
tures with the same value for all our languages, we
remain with 76 features, consisting of 49 syntactic
features and 27 family tree features. The linguistic
similarity LS between a pair of languages y and y′

is then determined by the cosine similarity of their
URIEL feature vectors.

LSy,y′ =
vy · vy′
‖vy‖‖vy′‖

(6)

Figure 1 presents the URIEL based linguistic
similarities for our set of non-native languages
against the average NLIR classification uncertain-
ties on the cross-validation test samples. The re-
sults presented in this figure are based on the un-
igram IC+SC feature-set in the individual sen-
tences regime. We also provide a graphical il-
lustration of the language similarities for each
measure, using the Ward clustering algorithm
(Ward Jr, 1963). We observe a correlation be-
tween the two measures which is also reflected
in similar hierarchies in the two language trees.
Thus, linguistically motived features in English re-
veal linguistic similarities across native languages.
This outcome supports the hypothesis that English

reading differences across native languages are re-
lated to linguistic factors.

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Linguistic Similarity

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

NL
IR
 C
la
ss

ifi
ca

tio
n 
Un

ce
rt
ai
nt
y

Chinese
Japanese

Chinese
Portuguese

Chinese
Spanish

Japanese
Portuguese

Japanese
Spanish

Portuguese
Spanish

(a) Linguistic similarities against mean NLIR classification
uncertainty. Error bars denote standard error.

Portuguese Spanish Chinese Japanese
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

(b) Linguistic tree

Portuguese Spanish Chinese Japanese
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

(c) English reading tree

Figure 1: (a) Linguistic versus English reading
language similarities. The horizontal axis repre-
sents typological and phylogenetic similarity be-
tween languages, obtained by vectorizing linguis-
tic features form URIEL, and measuring their co-
sine similarity. The vertical axis represents the av-
erage uncertainty of the NLIR classifier in distin-
guishing ESL readers of each language pair. (b)
Ward hierarchical clustering of linguistic similar-
ities between languages. (c) Ward hierarchical
clustering of NLIR average pairwise classification
uncertainties.

We note that while comparable results are ob-
tained for the IC and SC feature-sets, together and
in separation in the shared regime, WFC features
in the shared regime do not exhibit a clear un-
certainty distinction when comparing across the
pairs Japanese and Spanish, Japanese and Por-
tuguese, Chinese and Spanish, and Chinese and
Portuguese. Instead, this feature-set yields very
low uncertainty, and correspondingly very high
performance ranging from 90.41 to 93.15, for all
four language pairs.

546



4.2 Feature Analysis

Our framework enables not only native language
classification, but also exploratory analysis of na-
tive language specific reading patterns in English.
The basic question that we examine in this respect
is on which features do readers of different native
language groups spend more versus less time. We
also discuss several potential relations of the ob-
served reading time differences to usage patterns
and grammatical errors committed by speakers of
our four native languages in production. We obtain
this information by extracting grammatical error
counts from the CLC FCE corpus (Yannakoudakis
et al., 2011), and from the ngram frequency anal-
ysis in Nagata and Whittaker (2013).

In order to obtain a common benchmark
for reading time comparisons across non-native
speakers, in this analysis we also consider our
group of native English speakers. In this context,
we train four binary classifiers that discern each of
the non-native groups from native English speak-
ers based on TF times over unigram PTB POS
tags in the shared regime. The features with the
strongest positive and negative weights learned by
these classifiers are presented in table 3. These
features serve as a reference point for selecting the
case studies discussed below.

Interestingly, some of the reading features that
are most predictive of each native language lend
themselves to linguistic interpretation with respect
to structural factors. For example, in Japanese and
Chinese we observe shorter reading times for de-
terminers (DT), which do not exist in these lan-
guages. Figure 2a presents the mean TF times for
determiners in all five native languages, suggest-
ing that native speakers of Portuguese and Span-
ish, which do have determiners, do not exhibit re-
duced reading times on this structure compared to
natives. In ESL production, missing determiner
errors are the most frequent error for native speak-
ers of Japanese and third most common error for
native speakers of Chinese.

In figure 2b we present the mean TF read-
ing times for pronouns (PRP), where we also see
shorter reading times by natives of Japanese and
Chinese as compared to English natives. In both
languages pronouns can be omitted both in object
and subject positions. Portuguese and Spanish, in
which pronoun omission is restricted to the subject
position present similar albeit weaker tendency.

Negative (Fast) Positive (Slow)
Chinese DT JJR

PRP NN
Japanese DT NN

CD VBD
Portuguese NNS NN-POS

PRP VBZ
Spanish NNS MD

PRP RB

Table 3: PTB POS features with the strongest
weights learned in non-native versus native clas-
sification for each native language in the shared
regime. Feature types presented in figure 2 are
highlighted in bold.

Chinese English Japanese Portuguese Spanish0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

(a) Determiners (DT)

Chinese English Japanese Portuguese Spanish0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

(b) Pronouns (PRP)

Chinese English Japanese Portuguese Spanish0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

(c) Possessives (NN+POS)

Chinese English Japanese Portuguese Spanish0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

(d) Nouns (NN)

Figure 2: Mean speed-normalized Total Fixation
duration for Determiners (DT), Pronouns (PRP),
singular noun possessives (NN+POS), and singu-
lar nouns (NN) appearing in the shared sentences.
Error bars denote standard error.

In figure 2c we further observe that differ-
ently from natives of Chinese and Japanese, native
speakers of Portuguese and Spanish spend more
time on NN+POS in head final possessives such as
“the public’s confidence”. While similar construc-
tions exist in Chinese and Japanese, the NN+POS
combination is expressed in Portuguese and Span-
ish as a head initial NN of NN. This form exists in
English (e.g. “the confidence of the public”) and
is preferred by speakers of these languages in ESL
writing (Nagata and Whittaker, 2013). As an ad-
ditional baseline for this construction, we provide
the TF times for NN in figure 2d. There, relative to
English natives, we observe longer reading times
for Japanese and Chinese and comparable times
for Portuguese and Spanish.

The reading times of NN in figure 2d also give

547



rise to a second, potentially competing interpreta-
tion of differences in ESL reading times, which
highlights lexical rather than structural factors.
According to this interpretation, increased read-
ing times of nouns are the result of substantially
smaller lexical sharing with English by Chinese
and Japanese as compared to Spanish and Por-
tuguese. Given the utilized speed normalization,
lexical effects on nouns could in principle account
for reduced reading times on determiners and pro-
nouns. Conversely, structural influence leading
to reduced reading times on determiners and pro-
nouns could explain longer dwelling on nouns. A
third possibility consistent with the observed read-
ing patterns would allow for both structural and
lexical effects to impact second language reading.
Importantly, in each of these scenarios, ESL read-
ing patterns are related to linguistic factors of the
reader’s native language.

We note that the presented analysis is prelimi-
nary in nature, and warrants further study in future
research. In particular, reading times and classi-
fier learned features may in some cases differ be-
tween the shared and the individual regimes. In the
examples presented above, similar results are ob-
tained in the individual sentences regime for DT,
PRP and NN. The trend for the NN+POS construc-
tion, however, diminishes in that setup with simi-
lar reading times for all languages. On the other
hand, one of the strongest features for predicting
Portuguese and Spanish in the individual regime
are longer reading times for prepositions (IN), an
outcome that holds in the shared regime only rel-
ative to Chinese and Japanese, but not relative to
native speakers of English.

Despite these caveats, our results suggest that
reading patterns can potentially be related to lin-
guistic factors of the reader’s native language.
This analysis can be extended in various ways,
such as inclusion of additional feature types and
fixation metrics, as well as utilization of other
comparative methodologies. Combined with ev-
idence from language production, this line of in-
vestigation can be instrumental for informing lin-
guistic theory of cross-linguistic influence.

5 Related Work

Eyetracking and second language reading Sec-
ond language reading has been studied using eye-
tracking, with much of the work focusing on
processing of syntactic ambiguities and analysis

of specific target word classes such as cognates
(Dussias, 2010; Roberts and Siyanova-Chanturia,
2013). In contrast to our work, such studies typ-
ically use controlled, rather than free-form sen-
tences. Investigation of global metrics in free-
form second language reading was introduced
only recently by Cop et al. (2015). This study
compared ESL and native reading of a novel by
native speakers of Dutch, observing longer sen-
tence reading times, more fixations and shorter
saccades in ESL reading. Differently from this
study, our work focuses on comparison of reading
patterns between different native languages. We
also analyze a related, but different metric, namely
speed normalized fixation durations on word se-
quences.

Eyetracking for NLP tasks Recent work in
NLP has demonstrated that reading gaze can serve
as a valuable supervision signal for standard NLP
tasks. Prominent examples of such work include
POS tagging (Barrett and Søgaard, 2015a; Barrett
et al., 2016), syntactic parsing (Barrett and Sø-
gaard, 2015b) and sentence compression (Klerke
et al., 2016). Our work also tackles a traditional
NLP task with free-form text, but differs from this
line of research in that it addresses this task only
in comprehension. Furthermore, while these stud-
ies use gaze recordings of native readers, our work
focuses on non-native readers.

NLI in production NLI was first introduced
in Koppel et al. (2005) and has been drawing
considerable attention in NLP, including a recent
shared-task challenge with 29 participating teams
(Tetreault et al., 2013). NLI has also been driving
much of the work on identification of native lan-
guage related features in writing (Tsur and Rap-
poport, 2007; Jarvis and Crossley, 2012; Brooke
and Hirst, 2012; Tetreault et al., 2012; Swanson
and Charniak, 2013, 2014; Malmasi and Dras,
2014; Bykh and Meurers, 2016). Several studies
have also linked usage patterns and grammatical
errors in production to linguistic properties of the
writer’s native language (Nagata and Whittaker,
2013; Nagata, 2014; Berzak et al., 2014, 2015).
Our work departs from NLI in writing and intro-
duces NLI and related feature analysis in reading.

6 Conclusion and Outlook

We present a novel framework for studying cross-
linguistic influence in multilingualism by measur-
ing gaze fixations during reading of free-form En-

548



glish text. We demonstrate for the first time that
this signal can be used to determine a reader’s na-
tive language. The effectiveness of linguistically
motivated criteria for fixation clustering and our
subsequent analysis suggest that the ESL reading
process is affected by linguistic factors. Specifi-
cally, we show that linguistic similarities between
native languages are reflected in similarities in
ESL reading. We also identify several key fea-
tures that characterize reading in different native
languages, and discuss their potential connection
to structural and lexical properties of the native
langauge. The presented results demonstrate that
eyetracking data can be instrumental for develop-
ing predictive and explanatory models of second
language reading.

While this work is focused on NLIR from fix-
ations, our general framework can be used to ad-
dress additional aspects of reading, such as anal-
ysis of saccades and gaze trajectories. In future
work, we also plan to explore the role of native
and second language writing system characteris-
tics in second language reading. More broadly,
our methodology introduces parallels with produc-
tion studies in NLP, creating new opportunities for
integration of data, methodologies and tasks be-
tween production and comprehension. Further-
more, it holds promise for formulating language
learning theory that is supported by empirical find-
ings in naturalistic setups across language process-
ing domains.

Acknowledgements

We thank Amelia Smith, Emily Weng, Run Chen
and Lila Jansen for contributions to stimuli prepa-
ration and data collection. We also thank An-
drei Barbu, Guy Ben-Yosef, Yen-Ling Kuo, Roger
Levy, Jonathan Malmaud, Karthik Narasimhan
and the anonymous reviewers for valuable feed-
back on this work. This material is based upon
work supported by the Center for Brains, Minds,
and Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF STC
award CCF-1231216.

References
Rosa Alonso Alonso. 2015. Crosslinguistic Influence

in Second Language Acquisition, volume 95. Multi-
lingual Matters.

Maria Barrett, Joachim Bingel, Frank Keller, and An-
ders Søgaard. 2016. Weakly supervised part-of-

speech tagging using eye-tracking data. In ACL. vol-
ume 2, pages 579–584.

Maria Barrett and Anders Søgaard. 2015a. Reading
behavior predicts syntactic categories. In CoNLL.
pages 345–349.

Maria Barrett and Anders Søgaard. 2015b. Using read-
ing behavior to predict grammatical functions. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Cognitive As-
pects of Computational Language Learning. pages
1–5.

Éva Berkes and Suzanne Flynn. 2012. Multilingual-
ism: New perspectives on syntactic development.
The Handbook of Bilingualism and Multilingualism,
Second Edition pages 137–167.

Yevgeni Berzak, Roi Reichart, and Boris Katz. 2014.
Reconstructing native language typology from for-
eign language usage. In Eighteenth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL).

Yevgeni Berzak, Roi Reichart, and Boris Katz. 2015.
Contrastive analysis with predictive power: Typol-
ogy driven estimation of grammatical error distribu-
tions in esl. In Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (CoNLL).

Julian Brooke and Graeme Hirst. 2012. Measuring in-
terlanguage: Native language identification with l1-
influence metrics. In LREC. pages 779–784.

Serhiy Bykh and Detmar Meurers. 2016. Advanc-
ing linguistic features and insights by label-informed
feature grouping: An exploration in the context of
native language identification. In COLING.

Richard H Byrd, Peihuang Lu, Jorge Nocedal, and
Ciyou Zhu. 1995. A limited memory algorithm for
bound constrained optimization. SIAM Journal on
Scientific Computing 16(5):1190–1208.

Chris Collins and Richard Kayne. 2009. Syn-
tactic Structures of the world’s languages.
http://sswl.railsplayground.net.

Uschi Cop, Denis Drieghe, and Wouter Duyck. 2015.
Eye movement patterns in natural reading: A com-
parison of monolingual and bilingual reading of a
novel. PLOS ONE 10(8):1–38.

Matthew S. Dryer and Martin Haspelmath, editors.
2013. WALS Online. Max Planck Institute for Evo-
lutionary Anthropology, Leipzig. http://wals.info/.

Paola E Dussias. 2010. Uses of eye-tracking data in
second language sentence processing research. An-
nual Review of Applied Linguistics 30:149–166.

Harald Hammarström, Robert Forkel, Martin Haspel-
math, and Sebastian Bank. 2015. Glottolog 2.6.
Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary An-
thropology. http://glottolog.org.

549



Scott Jarvis and Scott A Crossley. 2012. Approach-
ing Language Transfer Through Text Classification:
Explorations in the Detection-based Approach, vol-
ume 64. Multilingual Matters.

Scott Jarvis and Aneta Pavlenko. 2008. Crosslinguistic
influence in language and cognition. Routledge.

Sigrid Klerke, Yoav Goldberg, and Anders Søgaard.
2016. Improving sentence compression by learning
to predict gaze. NAACL-HLT .

Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, and Kfir Zigdon.
2005. Determining an author’s native language by
mining a text for errors. In Proceedings of the
eleventh ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery in data mining. ACM, pages
624–628.

Paul M. Lewis, Gary F. Simons, and Charles D.
Fennig, editors. 2015. Ethnologue: Languages
of the World. SIL International, Dallas, Texas.
http://www.ethnologue.com.

Patrick Littel, David Mortensen, and Lori Levin,
editors. 2016. URIEL Typological Database.
Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University.
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ dmortens/uriel.html.

Patrick Littell, David Mortensen, Ke Lin, Katherine
Kairis, Carlisle Turner, and Lori Levin. 2017. Uriel
and lang2vec: Representing languages as typologi-
cal, geographical, and phylogenetic vectors. EACL
2017 page 8.

Shervin Malmasi and Mark Dras. 2014. Language
transfer hypotheses with linear svm weights. In
EMNLP. pages 1385–1390.

Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The penn treebank. Computa-
tional linguistics 19(2):313–330.

Gita Martohardjono and Suzanne Flynn. 1995. Lan-
guage transfer: what do we really mean. In L. Eu-
bank, L. Selinker, and M. Sharwood Smith, edi-
tors, The current state of Interlanguage: studies in
honor of William E. Rutherford, John Benjamins:
The Netherlands, pages 205–219.

Ryan T McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuzman
Ganchev, Keith B Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao Zhang, Os-
car Täckström, et al. 2013. Universal dependency
annotation for multilingual parsing. In ACL. pages
92–97.

Ryo Nagata. 2014. Language family relationship pre-
served in non-native english. In COLING. pages
1940–1949.

Ryo Nagata and Edward W. D. Whittaker. 2013. Re-
constructing an indo-european family tree from non-
native english texts. In ACL. pages 1137–1147.

Terence Odlin. 1989. Language transfer: Cross-
linguistic influence in language learning. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In LREC.

Steven T Piantadosi, Harry Tily, and Edward Gibson.
2011. Word lengths are optimized for efficient com-
munication. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 108(9):3526–3529.

Leah Roberts and Anna Siyanova-Chanturia. 2013.
Using eye-tracking to investigate topics in l2 acqui-
sition and l2 processing. Studies in Second Lan-
guage Acquisition 35(02):213–235.

Beatrice Santorini. 1990. Part-of-speech tagging
guidelines for the penn treebank project (3rd revi-
sion). Technical Reports (CIS) .

Ben Swanson and Eugene Charniak. 2013. Extracting
the native language signal for second language ac-
quisition. In HLT-NAACL. pages 85–94.

Ben Swanson and Eugene Charniak. 2014. Data driven
language transfer hypotheses. EACL page 169.

Joel Tetreault, Daniel Blanchard, and Aoife Cahill.
2013. A report on the first native language identi-
fication shared task. In Proceedings of the Eighth
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building
Educational Applications. Citeseer, pages 48–57.

Joel R Tetreault, Daniel Blanchard, Aoife Cahill, and
Martin Chodorow. 2012. Native tongues, lost and
found: Resources and empirical evaluations in na-
tive language identification. In COLING. pages
2585–2602.

Oren Tsur and Ari Rappoport. 2007. Using classifier
features for studying the effect of native language
on the choice of written second language words. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Aspects
of Computational Language Acquisition. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 9–16.

Joe H Ward Jr. 1963. Hierarchical grouping to opti-
mize an objective function. Journal of the American
statistical association 58(301):236–244.

Helen Yannakoudakis, Ted Briscoe, and Ben Medlock.
2011. A new dataset and method for automatically
grading esol texts. In ACL. pages 180–189.

A Supplemental Material

Eyetracking Setup We use a 44.5x30cm screen
with 1024x768px resolution to present the read-
ing materials, and a desktop mount Eyelink 1000
eyetracker (1000Hz) to record gaze. The screen,
eyetracker camera and chinrest are horizontally
aligned on a table surface. The screen center
(x=512, y=384) is 79cm away from the center of

550



the forehead bar, and 13cm below it. The eye-
tracker camera knob is 65cm away from forehead
bar. Throughout the experiment participants hold
a joystick with a button for indicating sentence
completion, and two buttons for answering yes/no
questions. We record gaze of the participant’s
dominant eye.

Text Parameters All the textual material in the
experiment is presented using Times font, normal
style, with font size 23. In our setup, this cor-
responds to 0.36 degrees (11.3px) average lower
case letter width, and 0.49 degrees (15.7px) av-
erage upper case letter width. We chose a non-
monospace font, as such fonts are generally more
common in reading. They are also more com-
pact compared to monospace fonts, allowing to
substantially increase the upper limit for sentence
length.

Calibration We use 3H line calibration with
point repetition on the central horizontal line
(y=384), using 16px outer circle, 6px inner circle,
fixation points. At least three calibrations are per-
formed during the experiment, one at the begin-
ning of each experimental section. We also recali-
brate upon failure to produce a 300ms fixation on
any fixation trigger preceding a sentence or a ques-
tion within 4 seconds after its appearance. The
mean validation error for calibrations across sub-
jects is 0.146 degrees (std 0.038).

551


	Predicting Native Language from Gaze

