



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 55–60
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4010

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 55–60
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4010

Life-iNet: A Structured Network-Based Knowledge Exploration and
Analytics System for Life Sciences

Xiang Ren1, Jiaming Shen1, Meng Qu1, Xuan Wang1, Zeqiu Wu1, Qi Zhu1, Meng Jiang1
Fangbo Tao1, Saurabh Sinha1,2, David Liem3, Peipei Ping3, Richard Weinshilboum4, Jiawei Han1

1 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
2Institute of Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA

3School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
4Department of Pharmacology, Mayo Clinic, MN, USA

1,2{xren7, js2, xwang174, mengqu2, zeqiuwu1, qiz3, mjiang89, ftao2, sinhas, hanj}@illinois.edu
3{dliem, pping}@mednet.ucla.edu 4weinshilboum.richard@mayo.edu

Abstract

Search engines running on scientific liter-
ature have been widely used by life sci-
entists to find publications related to their
research. However, existing search en-
gines in the life-science domain, such as
PubMed, have limitations when applied
to exploring and analyzing factual knowl-
edge (e.g., disease-gene associations) in
massive text corpora. These limitations
are mainly due to the problems that fac-
tual information exists as an unstructured
form in text, and also keyword and MeSH
term-based queries cannot effectively im-
ply semantic relations between entities.
This demo paper presents the Life-iNet
system to address the limitations in exist-
ing search engines on facilitating life sci-
ences research. Life-iNet automatically
constructs structured networks of factual
knowledge from large amounts of back-
ground documents, to support efficient ex-
ploration of structured factual knowledge
in the unstructured literature. It also pro-
vides functionalities for finding distinctive
entities for given entity types, and gener-
ating hypothetical facts to assist literature-
based knowledge discovery (e.g., drug tar-
get prediction).

1 Introduction

Scientific literature is an important resource in
facilitating life science research, and a primary
medium for communicating novel research results.
However, even though vast amounts of biomedi-
cal textual information are available online (e.g.,
publications in PubMed, encyclopedic articles in
Wikipedia, ontologies on genes, drugs, etc.), there
exists only limited support of exploring and ana-
lyzing relevant factual knowledge in the massive

BRCA1

MDC1

Physical	
Interaction

Associated	
with

May treat

May prevent

CCR4

Genetic	
Interaction

May treat

May treat

BRAF

Target

RAP2A

Co-
expression

Pathway

Kawasaki	
Disease

Breast
Cancer

Aspirin

Tafinlar CBDCA CDDP

Gene

Drug

Disease

Disease

Neoplasms

Type Path NSAID

Drug

Type Path

May treat

Breast Neoplasms

Figure 1: A snapshot of the structured network in Life-iNet.

literature (Tao et al., 2014), or of gaining new in-
sights from the existing factual information (Mc-
Donald et al., 2005; Riedel and McCallum, 2011).
Users typically search PubMed using keywords
and Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, and
then rely on Google and external biomedical on-
tologies for everything else. Such an approach,
however, might not work well on capturing differ-
ent entity relationships (i.e., facts), or identifying
publications related to facts of interest.

For example, a biologist who is inter-
ested in cancer might need to check what
specific diseases belong to the category of
breast neoplasms (e.g., breast cancer) and
what genes (e.g., BRCA1) and drugs (e.g., As-
pirin, Tafinlar) are related to breast cancer,
and might need a list of related papers which
study and discuss about these disease-gene rela-
tions. For cancer experts, they might want to
learn about what genes are distinctively associ-
ated with breast neoplasms (as compared
to other kinds of cancers), whether there exists
other genes that are potentially associated with
breast neoplasms entities, and whether there
exist other drugs that can also treat breast cancer.

• Previous Efforts and Limitations. In life sci-
ences domain, recent studies (Ernst et al., 2016;
Szklarczyk et al., 2014; Thomas et al., 2012;

55

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4010
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4010


Kim et al., 2008) rely on biomedical entity in-
formation associated with the documents to sup-
port entity-centric literature search. Most exist-
ing information retrieval systems exploit either
the MeSH terms manually annotated for each
PubMed article (Kim et al., 2008) or textual men-
tions of biomedical entities automatically recog-
nized within the documents (Thomas et al., 2012),
to capture the entity-document relatedness. Com-
pared with traditional keyword-based systems,
current entity-centric retrieval systems can iden-
tify and index entity information for documents in
a more accurate way (to enable effective literature
exploration), but encounter several challenges, as
shown below, in supporting exploration and anal-
ysis of factual knowledge (i.e., entities and their
relationships) in a given corpus.

• Lack of Factual Structures: Most ex-
isting entity-centric systems compute the
document/corpus-level co-occurrence statis-
tics between two biomedical entities to capture
the relations between them, but cannot identify
the semantic relation types between two enti-
ties based on the textual evidence in a specific
sentence. For example, in Fig. 1, relations
between gene entities should be categorized as
CoExpression, GeneticInteraction,
PhysicalInteraction, Pathway, etc.
Extracting typed entity relationships from un-
structured text corpus enables: (1) structured
search over the factual information in the given
corpus; (2) fine-grained exploration of the docu-
ments at the sentence level; and (3) more accurate
identification of entity relationships.

• Limited Diversity and Coverage: There exist
several biomedical knowledge bases (KBs) (e.g.,
Gene Ontology, UniProt, STRING (Szklarczyk
et al., 2014), Literome (Poon et al., 2014)) that
support search and data exploration functionality.
However, each of these KBs is highly specialized
and covers only a relatively narrow topic within
life sciences (Ernst et al., 2016). Also, there is
limited inter-linkage between entities in these KBs
(e.g., between drug, disease and gene enti-
ties). An integrative view on all aspects of life
sciences knowledge is still missing. Moreover,
many newly emerged entities are not covered in
current KBs, as the manual curation process is
time-consuming and costly.

• Restricted Analytic Functionality: Due to
the lack of notion for factual structures, current
retrieval and exploration systems have restricted
functionality at analyzing entity relationships—

they mainly focus on entity-centric literature
search (Ernst et al., 2016; Thomas et al., 2012) and
exploring entity co-occurrences (Kim et al., 2008).
In practice, analytic functionality over factual in-
formation (e.g., drug-disease targeting prediction
and distinctive disease-gene association identifica-
tion) is highly desirable.

Proposed Approach. This paper presents a novel
system, called Life-iNet, which transforms an un-
structured corpus into a structured network of fac-
tual knowledge, and supports multiple exploratory
and analytic functions over the constructed net-
work for knowledge discovery. Life-iNet automat-
ically detects token spans of entities mentioned
from text, labels entity mentions with semantic
categories, and identifies relationships of various
relation types between the detected entities. These
inter-related pieces of information are integrated
to form a unified, structured network, where nodes
represent different types of entities and edges de-
note relationships of different relation types be-
tween the entities (see Fig. 1 for example). To
address the issue of limited diversity and coverage,
Life-iNet relies on the external knowledge bases to
provide seed examples (i.e., distant supervision),
and identifies additional entities and relationships
from the given corpus (e.g., using multiple text re-
sources such as scientific literature and encyclope-
dia articles) to construct a structured network. By
doing so, we integrate the factual information in
the existing knowledge bases with those extracted
from the corpus. To support analytic functional-
ity, Life-iNet implements link prediction functions
over the constructed network and integrates a dis-
tinctive summarization function to provide insight
analysis (e.g., answering questions such as “which
genes are distinctively related to the given disease
type under GeneDiseaseAssociation rela-
tion?”).

To systematically incorporate these ideas, Life-
iNet leverages the novel distantly-supervised in-
formation extraction techniques (Ren et al., 2017,
2016a, 2015) to implement an effort-light network
construction framework (see Fig. 2). Specially, it
relies on distant supervision in conjunction with
external knowledge bases to (1) detect quality en-
tity mentions (Ren et al., 2015), (2) label entity
mentions with fine-grained entity types in a given
type hierarchy (Ren et al., 2016a), and (3) iden-
tify relationships of different types between enti-
ties (Ren et al., 2017). In particular, we design
specialized loss functions to faithfully model “ap-
propriate” labels and remove “false positive” la-

56



PubMed
Corpus

Structured Network Construction

SegPhrase

ClusType

CoType

AFET

Construction
Algorithm pool

Knowledge
Bases

Temp
Result Network

Database

Full-text
Index

Storage Data Visualization

Network Analysis Engine

Query Interpreter

User Query

User

LINECaseOLAP

Network 
Analysis

Algorithm pool

1. Entity 
Recognition

2. Distant 
Supervision

3. Entity Typing 4. Relation Extraction

TransECDA

Network Exploration Engine

Figure 2: System Architecture of Life-iNet.

bels for the training instances (heuristically gen-
erated by distant supervision), regarding the spe-
cific context where an instance is mentioned (Ren
et al., 2017, 2016a). By doing so, we can construct
corpus-specific information extraction models by
using distant supervision in a noise-robust way.
The proposed network construction framework is
domain-independent—it can be quickly ported to
other disciplines and sciences without additional
human labeling effort. With the constructed net-
work, Life-iNet further applies link prediction al-
gorithms (Tang et al., 2015; Bordes et al., 2013)
to infer new entity relationships, and distinctive
summarization algorithm (Tao et al., 2016) to find
other entities that are distinctively related to the
query entity (or the given entity types).
Contributions. The contributions and features of
the Life-iNet system are summarized as follows.

1. A novel knowledge exploration and analysis
system for life sciences that integrates existing
knowledge bases and factual information ex-
tracted from massive literature.

2. An effort-light framework that leverages distant
supervision in a robust way to automatically
construct a structured network of factual knowl-
edge from the given unstructured text corpus.

3. Capabilities for exploration and analysis over
the constructed structured network to facilitate
life sciences research.

The Life-iNet demo system will be made avail-
able online for interactive use after its demonstra-
tion in the conference.

2 The Life-iNet System

At a high level, Life-iNet consists of two ma-
jor components: a structured network construc-
tion pipeline and a network exploration and anal-
ysis engine. The former (i.e., the network con-

Background corpora Cancer Heart Disease
#PubMed publications 2,936,615 2,105,257
#PMC full-text papers 95,008 38,205
#Wikipedia articles 37,128 25,577
#Sentences in total 38M 23M
#Entity types 1,116 1,086
#Relation types 414 384
#KB-mapped (seed) entity mentions 59M 33M
#KB-mapped (seed) relation mentions 47M 23M
#Nodes in Life-iNet (i.e., entities) 64M 39M
#Edges in Life-iNet (i.e., facts) 186M 82M

Table 1: Data statistics of corpora and networks in Life-iNet.

struction pipeline) includes four functional mod-
ules: (1) entity mention detection, (2) distant su-
pervision generation, (3) entity typing, and (4) re-
lation extraction; whereas the latter (i.e., the net-
work exploration and analysis engine) implements
network exploratory functions, relationship pre-
diction algorithms (e.g., LINE (Tang et al., 2015))
and network-based distinctive summarization al-
gorithms (e.g., CaseOLAP (Tao et al., 2016)), and
operates on the constructed network to support an-
swering different user queries. Fig. 2 shows its
system architecture. The functional modules are
presented in detail as follows.

2.1 Structured Network Construction
The network construction pipeline automatically
extracts factual structures (i.e., entities, relations)
from given corpora with (potentially noisy) dis-
tant supervision, and integrates them with existing
knowledge bases to build a unified structured net-
work. In particular, to extract high-quality, typed
entities and relations, we design noise-robust ob-
jective functions to select the “most appropriate”
training labels when constructing models from la-
beled data (heuristically obtained by distant super-
vision) (Ren et al., 2016b,a, 2017).
Data Collection. To obtain background text cor-
pora for network construction, we consider two
kinds of textual resources, i.e., scientific publica-
tions and encyclopedia articles. For scientific pub-
lications, we collect titles and abstracts of 26M pa-
pers from the entire PubMed1 dump, and full-text
paper content of 2.2M papers from PubMed Cen-
tral (PMC)2. For encyclopedia articles, we collect
62,705 related articles through Wikipedia Health
Portal3. For demonstration purpose, we select
documents related to two kinds of important dis-
eases, i.e., cancer and heart diseases to form the
background corpora for Life-iNet. Table 1 sum-
marizes the statistics of the background corpora.
Entity Mention Detection. The entity mention
detection module in Life-iNet runs a data-driven

1
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/

2
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/

3
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Health_and_

fitness

57



text segmentation algorithm, SegPhrase (Liu et al.,
2015), to extract high-quality words/phrases as en-
tity candidates. SegPhrase uses entity names from
KBs as positive examples to train a quality clas-
sifier, and then efficiently segments the corpus
by maximizing the joint probability based on the
trained classifier. Table 1 shows the statistics of
detected entity mentions for the corpora.

Distant Supervision Generation.. Distant su-
pervisions (Mintz et al., 2009; Ren et al., 2017,
2016a) leverages the information overlap between
external KBs and given corpora to automatically
generate large amounts of training data. A typical
workflow is as follows: (1) map detected entity
mentions to entities in KB, (2) assign, to the entity
type set of each entity mention, KB types of its
KB-mapped entity, and (3) assign, to the relation
type set of each entity mention pair, KB relations
between their KB-mapped entities. Such a label
generation process may introduce noisy type la-
bels (Ren et al., 2017). Our network construction
pipeline faithfully incorporates the noisy labels in
training to learn effective extraction models. In
Life-iNet, we use a publicly-available KB, UMLS
(Unified Medical Language System)4, and further
enrich its entity type ontology with MeSH tree
structures5. This yields a KB with 6.7M unique
entities, 10M entity relationships, 56k entity types,
and 581 relation types. Table 1 shows the data
statistics of distant supervision.

Entity Typing. The entity typing module is
concerned with predicting a single type-path
in the given entity type hierarchy for each
unlinkable entity mention (i.e., mentions that
cannot be mapped to entities in KB) based
on its local context (e.g., sentence). Life-iNet
adopts a two-step entity typing process, which
first identifies the coarse type label for each
mention (e.g., disease, gene, protein,
drug, symptom), then refines the coarse
label into a more fine-grained type-path (e.g.,
disease::heart disease::arrhythmias).
Specifically, we first run ClusType (Ren et al.,
2015) to predict coarse type label for each unlink-
able mention. Then, using coarse type label as
constraints, we apply AFET (Ren et al., 2016a)
to estimate a single type path for each mention.
AFET models the noisy candidate type set gener-
ated by distant supervision to learn a predictive
typing model for unseen entity mentions.

Relation Extraction. The task of relation extrac-
4
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/

5
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/intro_trees.html

Figure 3: Screen shot of the user interface for relation-based
exploration and relationship prediction in Life-iNet.

tion focuses on determining whether a relationship
of interest (i.e., in given relation type set) is ex-
pressed between a pair of entity mentions in a spe-
cific sentence, and label them with the appropri-
ate relation type if a specific relation is expressed.
Life-iNet relies on a distantly-supervised relation
extraction framework, CoType (Ren et al., 2017),
to extract typed relation mentions from text. Co-
Type leverages a variety of text features extracted
from the local context of a pair of entity mentions,
and jointly embeds relation mentions, text features
and relation type labels into a low-dimensional
space, where, in that space, objects with similar
type semantics are also close to each other. It then
performs nearest neighbor search to estimate the
relation type for a relation mention.

Performance of Network Construction. Per-
formance comparisons with state-of-the-art
(distantly-supervised) information extraction
systems demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed pipeline (Ren et al., 2017)—CoType
achieves a 25% F1 score improvement on relation
extraction and a 6% enhancement in F1 score
for entity recognition and typing, on the public
BioInfer corpus (manually labeled biomedical
papers). Table 1 summarizes the statistics of
the constructed structures networks—Life-iNet
discovers over 250% more facts compared to
those generated by distant supervision.

2.2 Network Exploration and Analysis

The network exploration and analysis engine in-
dexes the network structures and their related tex-
tual evidence to support fast exploration. It also
implements several network mining algorithms to
facilitate knowledge discovery.

58



Network Exploration. For each entity ei, we in-
dex its entity types Ti, and sentences Si (and docu-
ments Di) where it is mentioned. For each relation
mention zi = (e1, e2; s), we index its sentence s and
relation type ri. With this data model, Life-iNet
can support several structured search queries: (1)
find entities of a given entity type, (2) find entities
that have a specific relation to a given entity (entity
type), and (3) find papers related to given entities,
entity types, relationships, or relation types. We
use raw frequency discounted by object popularity
to rank the results.
Relationship Prediction. We adopt state-of-
the-art heterogeneous network-based link predic-
tion algorithms, LINE (Tang et al., 2015) and
TransE (Bordes et al., 2013), to discover new
relationships in the network. The intuition be-
hind these algorithms is straightforward: if two
nodes share similar neighbors in the network, they
should be related. Following this idea, the algo-
rithms embed the network into a low-dimensional
space based on distributional assumption. A new
edge will be formed if the similarity between the
embedding vectors of the corresponding entity ar-
guments are larger than a pre-defined threshold δ,
i.e., sim(vec(e1), vec(e2)) > δ. The prediction can
be further interpreted using existing network struc-
tures, by retrieving indirect paths between the two
entities (if there exists).
Distinctive Summarization. In biomedical do-
main, some high-popularity entities may form re-
lationships with many other entities simultane-
ously. For example, some genes may be associ-
ated with multiple heart disease types. It is de-
sirable to find genes that are distinctively asso-
ciated with each heart disease type. This moti-
vates us to apply CaseOLAP (Tao et al., 2016), a
context-aware, multi-dimensional summarization
algorithm to generate distinctive entities. The ba-
sic idea is that: an entity is distinctively related
to the target entity type if it is relevant to entities
of the target entity type but relatively irrelevant to
entities of the other entity types. We pre-compute
the distinctive summarization results between dif-
ferent entity types and materialize the temporary
results for efficient user query answering.

3 Demo Scenarios

3.1 Relation-Based Exploration
Life-iNet indexes the extracted factual struc-
tures along with their support documents. Our
demo provides an exploration interface (see
Fig. 3), where users can enter an argument

triple to specify the entity and relation types
they want to explore (user will be prompted
with type candidates). Suppose a biologist
is interested in finding genes associated with
cardiomyopathies, he/she can enter type
gene as argument 1, cardiomyopathies as
argument 2, and GeneDiseaseAssociation
as the relation. Life-iNet will then retrieve
and visualize a sub-network to show differ-
ent cardiomyopathies entities (e.g., Endo-
cardial Fibroelastoses, Centronuclear Myopathy,
Carvajal syndrome), and their associated gene
entities (e.g., TAZ, BIN1, DSC2). When a user
moves his/her mouse cursor to an edge (or node) in
the sub-network, Life-iNet will return a ranked list
of supporting papers (also linked to PubMed) re-
lated to the target relationship (or entity), based on
the pre-computed relevance measures. Note that
Life-iNet also supports specific entities as input
for arguments 1 and 2 in the interface.

3.2 Hypothetical Relationship Generation
In life sciences, some entity relation-
ships (e.g., of type DrugTargetGene,
GeneDiseaseAssociation) may not be
explicitly expressed in the existing literature.
However, indirect connections between two
isolated entities in the constructed network may
provide good hints on predicting whether a
specific relation exists between them. Life-iNet
generates high-confidence predictions of new
edges for the constructed network and forms
hypothetical entity relationships to facilitate
scientific research (e.g., discovering a new drug
that can target a specific gene). We integrate this
analysis function into our relation-exploration
interface. For example, when exploring the sub-
network for gene-heart disease associations, users
can click on the “Show Predicted Relationships”
to see hypothetical relationships that Life-iNet
generates (highlighted as dash-line edges in
the network). In particular, Life-iNet provides
explanation of the prediction, using the existing
network structures—the indirect paths between
two isolated entities will be highlighted when a
user clicks on the predicted edge. Thus, a user can
further retrieve papers related to the edges on the
indirect paths to gain better understanding about
the hypothetical relationships.

3.3 Distinctive Entity Summarization

Life-iNet provides a separate user interface
for distinctive summarization function (see
Fig. 4). In many cases, a user would need to

59



Figure 4: Screen shot for distinctive summarization function.

compare sets of entities (e.g., proteins) related
to several entity types (e.g., different types
of heart diseases), to discover the distinctive
entities related to each entity type. For ex-
ample, she may want to know what genes are
often associated with arrhythmia but are
unlikely associated with other kinds of heart
diseases such as cardiomyopathy and
heart valve disease. Life-iNet allows
a user to enter: (1) an entity type to specify
the target domain (e.g., heart disease),
(2) several sub-types of the target entity type
for comparison (e.g., cardiomyopathy,
arrhythmia, heart valve disease), (3)
an entity type to specify the list of related entities
(e.g., protein), and (4) a relation type (e.g.,
protein associated with disease).
With user input queries, Life-iNet produces a
structured table to summarize the distinctive
entities for each entity sub-type. It also shows
the distinctiveness score for each entity. A
user can click on each distinctive entity to find
documents related to the relationship (similar to
the use case in relation-based exploration). An
example output of the distinctive summarization
for heart disease is shown in Fig. 4.

Acknowledgement

Research was sponsored in part by the U.S. Army
Research Lab. under Cooperative Agreement
No. W911NF-09-2-0053 (NSCTA), National Sci-
ence Foundation IIS-1320617 and IIS 16-18481,
and grant 1U54GM114838 awarded by NIGMS
through funds provided by the trans-NIH Big Data
to Knowledge (BD2K) initiative. The views and
conclusions contained in this paper are those of
the authors and should not be interpreted as repre-
senting any funding agencies.

References
Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Ja-

son Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko. 2013. Translating
embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In NIPS.

Patrick Ernst, Amy Siu, Dragan Milchevski, Johannes Hof-
fart, and Gerhard Weikum. 2016. Deeplife: An entity-
aware search, analytics and exploration platform for health
and life sciences. In ACL.

Jung-jae Kim, Piotr Pezik, and Dietrich Rebholz-
Schuhmann. 2008. Medevi: retrieving textual evidence
of relations between biomedical concepts from medline.
Bioinformatics .

Jialu Liu, Jingbo Shang, Chi Wang, Xiang Ren, and Jiawei
Han. 2015. Mining quality phrases from massive text cor-
pora. In SIGMOD.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Seth Kulick, Scott Win-
ters, Yang Jin, and Pete White. 2005. Simple algo-
rithms for complex relation extraction with applications
to biomedical ie. In ACL.

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky.
2009. Distant supervision for relation extraction without
labeled data. In ACL.

Hoifung Poon, Chris Quirk, Charlie DeZiel, and David Heck-
erman. 2014. Literome: Pubmed-scale genomic knowl-
edge base in the cloud. Bioinformatics .

Xiang Ren, Ahmed El-Kishky, Chi Wang, Fangbo Tao,
Clare R Voss, and Jiawei Han. 2015. ClusType: effec-
tive entity recognition and typing by relation phrase-based
clustering. In KDD.

Xiang Ren, Wenqi He, Meng Qu, Lifu Huang, Heng Ji, and
Jiawei Han. 2016a. AFET: Automatic fine-grained en-
tity typing by hierarchical partial-label embedding. In
EMNLP.

Xiang Ren, Wenqi He, Meng Qu, Clare R Voss, Heng Ji, and
Jiawei Han. 2016b. Label noise reduction in entity typing
by heterogeneous partial-label embedding. In KDD.

Xiang Ren, Zeqiu Wu, Meng Qu, Clare R. Voss, Heng Ji,
Tarek F. Abdelzaher, and Jiawei Han. 2017. CoType: Joint
extraction of typed entities and relations with knowledge
bases. In WWW.

Sebastian Riedel and Andrew McCallum. 2011. Fast and
robust joint models for biomedical event extraction. In
EMNLP.

Damian Szklarczyk, Andrea Franceschini, Stefan Wyder,
Kristoffer Forslund, Davide Heller, Milan Simonovic,
Alexander Roth, Alberto Santos, Kalliopi P Tsafou, et al.
2014. String v10: protein–protein interaction networks,
integrated over the tree of life. Nucleic acids research .

Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang, Jun Yan,
and Qiaozhu Mei. 2015. Line: Large-scale information
network embedding. In WWW.

Fangbo Tao, George Brova, Jiawei Han, Heng Ji, Chi Wang,
Brandon Norick, Ahmed El-Kishky, Jialu Liu, Xiang Ren,
and Yizhou Sun. 2014. Newsnetexplorer: automatic con-
struction and exploration of news information networks.
In SIGMOD.

Fangbo Tao, Honglei Zhuang, Chi Wang Yu, Qi Wang, Tay-
lor Cassidy, Lance Kaplan, Clare Voss, and Jiawei Han.
2016. Multi-dimensional, phrase-based summarization in
text cubes. Data Engineering page 74.

Philippe Thomas, Johannes Starlinger, Alexander Vowinkel,
Sebastian Arzt, and Ulf Leser. 2012. Geneview: a com-
prehensive semantic search engine for pubmed. Nucleic
acids research 40(1):585–591.

60


	Life-iNet: A Structured Network-Based Knowledge Exploration and Analytics System for Life Sciences

