



















































Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics


Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 243–254
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1023

Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 243–254
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1023

Obtaining referential word meanings from visual and distributional
information: Experiments on object naming

Sina Zarrieß and David Schlangen
Dialogue Systems Group // CITEC // Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies

Bielefeld University, Germany
{sina.zarriess,david.schlangen}@uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

We investigate object naming, which is an
important sub-task of referring expression
generation on real-world images. As op-
posed to mutually exclusive labels used in
object recognition, object names are more
flexible, subject to communicative pref-
erences and semantically related to each
other. Therefore, we investigate models
of referential word meaning that link vi-
sual to lexical information which we as-
sume to be given through distributional
word embeddings. We present a model
that learns individual predictors for object
names that link visual and distributional
aspects of word meaning during training.
We show that this is particularly benefi-
cial for zero-shot learning, as compared to
projecting visual objects directly into the
distributional space. In a standard object
naming task, we find that different ways of
combining lexical and visual information
achieve very similar performance, though
experiments on model combination sug-
gest that they capture complementary as-
pects of referential meaning.

1 Introduction

Expressions referring to objects in visual scenes
typically include a word naming the type of the
object: E.g., house in Figure 1 (a), or, as a very
general type, thingy in Figure 1 (d). Determin-
ing such a name is a crucial step for referring
expression generation (REG) systems, as many
other decisions concerning, e.g., the selection of
attributes follow from it (Dale and Reiter, 1995;
Krahmer and Van Deemter, 2012). For a long
time, however, research on REG mostly assumed
the availability of symbolic representations of ref-

(a)“house” (b)“buildings”

(c)“large structure” (d)“roof thingy”

Figure 1: Examples of object names in the
REFERIT corpus referring to instances of buildings

erent and scene, and sidestepped questions about
how speakers actually choose these names, due
to the lack of models capable of capturing what
a word like house refers to in the real world.

Recent advances in image processing promise
to fill this gap, with state-of-the-art computer vi-
sion systems being able to classify images into
thousands of different categories (e.g. Szegedy
et al. (2015)). However, classification is not nam-
ing (Ordonez et al., 2016). Standard object clas-
sification schemes are inherently “flat”, and treat
object labels as mutually exclusive (Deng et al.,
2014). A state-of-the-art object recognition sys-
tem would be trained to classify the object in e.g.
Figure 1 (a) as either house or building, ignoring
the lexical similarity between these two names. In
contrast, humans seem to be more flexible as to
the chosen level of generality. Depending on the
prototypicality of the object to name, and possi-
bly other visual properties, a general name might
be more or less appropriate. For instance, a robin
can be named bird, but a penguin is better referred

243

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1023
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1023


to as “penguin” (Rosch, 1978); along the same
lines, the rather unusual building in Figure 1 (c)
that is not easy to otherwise categorise was named
“structure”.

Other work at the intersection of image and
language processing has investigated models that
learn to directly associate visual objects with a
continuous representation of word meaning, i.e.
through cross-modal transfer into distributional
vector spaces (Frome et al., 2013; Norouzi et al.,
2013). Here, the idea is to exploit a powerful
model of lexical similarity induced from large
amounts text for being able to capture inherent lex-
ical relations between object categories. Thus, un-
der the assumption that such semantic spaces rep-
resent, in some form at least, taxonomic knowl-
edge, this makes labels on different levels of speci-
ficity available for a given object. Moreover, if the
mapping is sufficiently general, it should be able
to map objects to an appropriate label, even if dur-
ing training of the mapping this label has not been
seen (zero-shot learning).

While cross-modal transfer seems to be a con-
ceptually attractive model for learning object
names, it is based on an important assumption that,
in our view, has not received sufficient attention
in previous works: it assumes that a given distri-
butional vector space constitutes an optimal target
representation that visual instances of objects can
be mapped to. However, distributional represen-
tations of word meaning are known to capture a
rather fuzzy notion of lexical similarity, e.g. car is
similar to van and to street. A cross-modal transfer
model is “forced” to learn to map objects into the
same area in the semantic space if their names are
distributionally similar, but regardless of their ac-
tual visual similarity. Indeed, we have found in a
recent study that the contribution of distributional
information to learning referential word meanings
is restricted to certain types of words and does
not generalize across the vocabulary (Zarrieß and
Schlangen, 2017).

The goal of this work is to learn a model of
referential word meaning that makes accurate ob-
ject naming predictions and goes beyond treat-
ing words as independent, mutually exclusive la-
bels in a flat classification scheme. We extend
upon work on learning models of referential word
use from corpora of images paired with referring
expressions (Schlangen et al., 2016; Zarrieß and
Schlangen, 2017) that treats words as individual

predictors capturing referential appropriateness.
We explore different ways of linking these predic-
tors to distributional knowledge, during applica-
tion and during training. We find that these differ-
ent models achieve very similar performance in a
standard object naming task, though experiments
on model combination suggest that they capture
complementary aspects of referential meaning. In
a zero-shot setup of an object naming task, we find
that combining lexical and visual information dur-
ing training is most beneficial, outperforming vari-
ants of cross-modal transfer.

2 Related Work

Grounding and Reference An early example
for work in REG that goes beyond Dale and Re-
iter (1995)’s dominant symbolic paradigm is Deb
Roy’s work from the early 2000s (Roy et al., 2002;
Roy, 2002, 2005). Roy et al. (2002) use com-
puter vision techniques to process a video feed,
and to compute colour, positional and spatial fea-
tures. These features are then associated in a learn-
ing process with certain words, resulting in an
association of colour features with colour words,
spatial features with prepositions, etc., and based
on this, these words can be interpreted with refer-
ence to the scene currently presented to the video
feed. Whereas Roy’s work still looked at relatively
simple scenes with graphical objects, research on
REG has recently started to investigate set-ups
based on real-world images (Kazemzadeh et al.,
2014; Gkatzia et al., 2015; Zarrieß and Schlangen,
2016; Mao et al., 2015). Importantly, the low-
level visual features that can be extracted from
these scenes correspond less directly to particu-
lar word classes. Moreover, the visual scenes con-
tain many different types of objects, which poses
new challenges for REG. For instance, Zarrieß and
Schlangen (2016) find that semantic errors related
to mismatches between nouns (e.g. the system
generates tree vs. man) are particularly disturb-
ing for users. Whereas Zarrieß and Schlangen
(2016) propose a strategy to avoid object names
when the systems confidence is low, we focus on
improving the generation of object names, using
distributional knowledge as an additional source.
Similarly, Ordonez et al. (2016) have studied the
problem of deriving appropriate object names, or
so-called entry-level categories, from the output
of an object recognizer. Their approach focusses
on linking abstract object categories in ImageNet

244



to actual words via various translation procedures.
We are interested in learning referential appropri-
ateness and extensional word meanings directly
from actual human referring expressions (REs)
paired with objects in images, using an existing
object recognizer for feature extraction.

Multi-modal distributional semantics Distri-
butional semantic models are a well-known
method for capturing lexical word meaning in a
variety of tasks (Turney and Pantel, 2010; Mikolov
et al., 2013; Erk, 2016). Recent work on multi-
modal distributional vector spaces (Feng and La-
pata, 2010; Silberer and Lapata, 2014; Kiela and
Bottou, 2014; Lazaridou et al., 2015b; Kottur
et al., 2016) has aimed at capturing semantic simi-
larity even more accurately by integrating distri-
butional and perceptual features associated with
words (mostly taken from images) into a single
representation.

Cross-modal transfer Rather than fusing dif-
ferent modalities into a single, joint space, other
work has looked at cross-modal mapping between
spaces. Herbelot and Vecchi (2015) present a
model that learns to map vectors in a distributional
space to vectors in a set-theoretic space, showing
that there is a functional relationship between dis-
tributional information and conceptual knowledge
representing quantifiers and predicates. More re-
lated to our work are cross-modal mapping mod-
els,that learn to transfer from a representation of
an object or image in the visual space to a vec-
tor in a distributional space (Socher et al., 2013;
Frome et al., 2013; Norouzi et al., 2013; Lazari-
dou et al., 2014). Here, the motivation is to exploit
the rich lexical knowledge encoded in a distribu-
tional space for learning visual classifications. In
practice, these models are mostly used for zero-
shot learning where the test set contains object
categories not observed during training. When
tested on standard object recognition tasks, trans-
fer, however, comes at a price. Frome et al.
(2013) and Norouzi et al. (2013) both find that
it slightly degrades performance as compared to
a plain object classification using standard accu-
racy metrics (called flat “hit @k metric” in their
paper). Interestingly though, Frome et al. (2013)
report better performance using “hierarchical pre-
cision”, which essentially means that transfer pre-
dicts words that are ontologically closer to the gold
label and makes “semantically more reasonable er-

rors”. To the best of our knowledge, this pattern
has not been systematically investigated any fur-
ther. Another known problem with cross-modal
transfer is that it seems to generalize less well than
expected, i.e. tends to reproduce word vectors ob-
served during training (Lazaridou et al., 2015a). In
this work, we present a model that exploits distri-
butional knowledge for learning referential word
meaning as well, but explore and compare differ-
ent ways of combining visual and lexical aspects
of referential word meaning.

3 Task and Data

We define object naming as follows: Given an ob-
ject x in an image, the task is to predict a word
w that could be used as the head noun of a real-
istic referring expression. (Cf. discussion above:
“bird” when naming a robin, but “penguin” when
naming a penguin.) To get at this, we develop our
approach using a corpus of referring expressions
produced by human users under natural, interac-
tive conditions (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014), and
train and test on the corresponding head nouns in
these REs. This is similar to picture naming setups
used in psycholinguistic research (cf. Levelt et al.
(1991)) and based on the simplifying assumption
that the name used for referring to an object can be
determined successfully without looking at other
objects in the image.

We now summarise the details of our setup:

Corpus We train and test on the REFERIT cor-
pus (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014), which is based
on the SAIAPR image collection (Grubinger et al.,
2006) (99.5k image regions;120K REs). We fol-
low (Schlangen et al., 2016) and select words with
a minimum frequency of 40 in these two data sets,
which gives us a vocabulary of 793 words.

Names For most of our experiments, we only
use a subset of this vocabulary, namely the set of
object names. As the REs contain nouns that can-
not be considered to be object names (background,
bottom, etc.), we extract a list of names from the
semantically annotated held-out set released with
the REFERIT. These correspond to ‘entry-level’
nouns mentioned in Kazemzadeh et al. (2014).
This gives us a list of 159 names. This set cor-
responds to the majority of object names in the
corpus: out of the 99.5K available image regions,
we use 80K for training and testing. Thus, our
experiments are on a smaller scale as compared

245



to (Ordonez et al., 2016). Nevertheless, the data
is challenging, as the corpus contains references
to objects that fall outside of the object labeling
scheme that available object recognition systems
are typically optimized for, cf. Hu et al. (2015)’s
discussion on “stuff” entities such “sky” or “grass”
in the REFERIT data. For testing, we remove re-
lational REs (containing a relational preposition
such as ‘left of X’), because here we cannot be
sure that the head noun of the target is fully infor-
mative; we also remove REs with more than one
head noun from our list (i.e. these are mostly rela-
tional expressions as well such as ‘girl laughing at
boy’). We pair each image region from the test set
with its corresponding names from the remaining
REs.

Image and Word Embeddings Following
Schlangen et al. (2016), we derive representations
of our visual inputs with a convolutional neural
network, ‘GoogleNet’ (Szegedy et al., 2015),
which was trained on the ImageNet corpus (Deng
et al., 2009), and extract the final fully-connected
layer before the classification layer, to give us a
1024 dimensional representation of the region.
We add 7 features that encode information about
the region relative to the image, thus representing
each object as a vector of 1031 features. As dis-
tributional word vectors, we use the word2vec
representations provided by Baroni et al. (2014)
(trained with CBOW, 5-word context window, 10
negative samples, 400 dimensions).

4 Three Models of Interfacing Visual and
Distributional Information

4.1 Direct Cross-Modal Mapping

Following Lazaridou et al. (2014), referential
meaning can be represented as a translation func-
tion that projects visual representations of objects
to linguistic representations of words in a distribu-
tional vector space. Thus, in contrast to standard
object recognition systems or the other models we
will use here, cross-modal mapping does not treat
words as individual labels or classifiers, but learns
to directly predict continuous representations of
words in a vector space, such as the space defined
by the word2vec embeddings that we use in this
work. This model will be called TRANSFER below.

During training, we pair each object with the
distributional embedding of its name, and use
standard Ridge regression for learning the trans-

formation. Lazaridou et al. (2014) and Lazaridou
et al. (2015a) test a range of technical tweaks and
different algorithms for cross-modal mapping. For
ease of comparison with other models, we stick
with simple Ridge Regression in this work.

For decoding, we map an object into the dis-
tributional space, and retrieve the nearest neigh-
bors of the predicted vector using cosine similar-
ity. In theory, the model should generalize easily
to words that it has not observed in a pair with an
object during training as it can map an object any-
where in the distributional space.

4.2 Lexical Mapping Through Individual
Word Classifiers

Another approach is to keep visual and distribu-
tional information separate, by training a separate
visual classifier for each word w in the vocabu-
lary. Predictions can then be mapped into distribu-
tional space during application time via the vectors
of the predicted words. Here, we use Schlangen
et al. (2016)’s WAC model, building the training
set for each word w as follows: all visual objects
in a corpus that have been referred to as w are
used as positive instances, the remaining objects
as negative instances. Thus, the classifiers learn
to predict referential appropriateness for individ-
ual words based on the visual features of the ob-
jects they refer to, in isolation of other words.

During decoding, we apply all word classifiers
from the model’s vocabulary to the given object,
and take the argmax over the individual word
probabilities. The model predicts names directly,
without links into a distributional space.

In order to extend the model’s vocabulary for
zero-shot learning, we follow Norouzi et al. (2013)
and associate the top n words with their corre-
sponding distributional vector and compute the
convex combination of these vectors. Then, in par-
allel to cross-modal mapping, we retrieve the near-
est neighbors of the combined embedding from the
distributional space. Thus, with this model, we use
two different modes of decoding: one that projects
into distributional space, one that only applies the
available word classifiers.

We did some small-scale experiments to find
an optimal value for n, similar to Norouzi et al.
(2013). In our case, performance started to de-
crease systematically with n > 10, but did not dif-
fer significantly for values below 10. In Section 5,
we will report results for n set to 5 and 10.

246



4.3 Word Prediction via Cross-Modal
Similarity Mapping

Finally, we implement an approach that combines
ideas from cross-modal mapping with the WAC
model: we train individual predictors for each
word in the vocabulary, but, during training, we
exploit lexical similarity relations encoded in a
distributional space. Instead of treating a word as a
binary classifier, we annotate its training instances
with a fine-grained similarity signal according to
their object names. When building the training set
for such a word predictor w, instead of simply di-
viding objects into w and ¬w instances, we label
each object with a real-valued similarity obtained
from cosine similarity between w and v in a dis-
tributional vector space, where v is the word that
was used to refer to the object. Thus, we task the
model with jointly learning similarities and refer-
ential appropriateness, by training it with Ridge
regression on a continuous output space. Object
instances where v = w (i.e., the positive instances
in the binary setup) have maximal similarity; the
remaining instances have a lower value which is
more or less close to maximal similarity. This is
the SIM-WAP model, recently proposed in Zarrieß
and Schlangen (2017).

Importantly, and going beyond Zarrieß and
Schlangen (2017), this model allows for an in-
novative treatment of words that only exist in a
distributional space (without being paired with vi-
sual referents in the image corpus): as the predic-
tors are trained on a continuous output space, no
genuine positive instances of a word’s referent are
needed. When training a predictor for such a word
w, we use all available objects from our corpus and
annotate them with the expected lexical similarity
between w and the actual object names v, which
for all objects will be below the maximal value that
marks genuine positive instances. During decod-
ing, this model does not need to project its pre-
dictions into a distributional space, but it simply
applies all available predictors to the object, and
takes the argmax over the predicted referential ap-
propriateness scores.

5 Experiment 1: Naming Objects

This Section reports on experiments in a stan-
dard setup of the object naming task where all
object names are paired with visual instances of
their referents during training. In a compara-
ble task, i.e. object recognition with known ob-

ject categories, cross-modal projection or trans-
fer approaches have been reported to perform
worse than standard object classification methods
(Frome et al., 2013; Norouzi et al., 2013). This
seems to suggest that lexical or at least distri-
butional knowledge is detrimental when learning
what a word refers to in the real world and that
referential meaning should potentially be learned
from visual object representation only.

5.1 Model comparison

Setup We use the train/test split of REFERIT data
as in (Schlangen et al., 2016). We consider image
regions with non-relational referring expressions
that contain at least one of the 159 head nouns
from the list of entry-level nouns (see section 3).
This amounts to 6208 image regions for testing
and 73K instances for training.

Results Table 1 shows accuracies in the object
naming task for the TRANSFER, WAC and SIM-
WAP models according to their accuracies in the
top n, including two variants of WAC where its
top 5 and top 10 predictions are projected into the
distributional space. Overall, the models achieve
very similar performance. However, there is an in-
teresting pattern when comparing accuracies @1
and @2 to accuracies in the top 5 predictions.
Thus, looking at accuracies for the top (two) pre-
dictions, the various models that link referential
meaning to word representations in the distribu-
tional space all perform slightly worse than the
plain WAC model, i.e. individual word classifiers
trained on visual features only. This might sug-
gest that certain aspects of referential word mean-
ing are learned less accurately when mapping from
visual to distributional space (which replicates re-
sults reported in the literature on standard object
recognition benchmarks). On the other hand, the
SIM-WAP model is on a par with WAC in terms of
the @5 accuracy. This effect suggests that dis-
tributional knowledge that SIM-WAP has access
to during training sometimes distracts the model
from predicting the exact name chosen by a hu-
man speaker, but that SIM-WAP is still able to rank
it among the most probable names. As a simple
accuracy-based evaluation is not suited to fully ex-
plain this pattern, we carry out a more detailed
analysis in Section 5.3.

247



hit @k(%)
@1 @2 @5

transfer 48.34 60.49 74.89
wac 49.34 61.86 75.35
wac, project top5 48.73 61.10 74.07
wac, project top10 48.68 61.23 74.31
sim-wap 48.13 60.60 75.40

Table 1: Accuracies in object naming

hit @k(%)
1 5 10

sim-wap + transfer 49.10 61.78 75.81
sim-wap + wac 51.10 63.45 77.92
transfer + wac 51.13 63.76 77.84
wac + transfer + sim-wap 52.19 64.71 78.40

Table 2: Object naming acc., combined models

5.2 Model combination
In order to get more insight into why the TRANS-
FER and SIM-WAP models produce slightly worse
results than individual visual word classifiers, we
now test to what extent the different models are
complementary and combine them by aggregating
over their naming predictions. If the models are
complementary, their combination should lead to
more confident and accurate naming decisions.

Setup We combine TRANSFER, SIM-WAP and
WAC by aggregating the scores they predict for
different object names for a given object. Dur-
ing testing, we apply all models to an image re-
gion and consider words ranked among the top
10. We first normalize the referential appropri-
ateness scores in each top-10 list and then com-
pute their sum. This aggregation scheme will give
more weight to words that appear in the top 10 list
of different models, and less weight to words that
only get top-ranked by a single model. We test on
the same data as in Section 5.1.

Results Table 2 shows that all model combi-
nations improve over the results of their isolated
models in Table 1, suggesting that WAC, TRANS-
FER and SIM-WAP indeed do capture complemen-
tary aspects of referential word meaning. On their
own, the distributionally informed models are less
tuned to specific word occurrences than the visual
word classifiers in the WAC model, but they can
add useful information which leads to a clear over-
all improvement. We take this as a promising find-
ing, supporting our initial hypothesis that knowl-
edge on lexical distributional meaning should and

Av. cosine similarity
among top k gold - top k

5 10 5 10

transfer 0.32 0.27 0.28 0.25
wac 0.18 0.20 0.18 0.16
sim-wap 0.32 0.26 0.28 0.25

Table 3: Cosine similarities between word2vec
embeddings of nouns generated in the top k

can be exploited when learning how to use words
for reference.

5.3 Analysis

Figure 2 illustrates objects from our test set where
the combination of TRANSFER, SIM-WAP and
WAC predicts an accurate name, whereas the mod-
els in isolation do not. These examples give some
interesting insight into why the models capture
different aspects of referential word meaning.

Word Similarities Many of the examples in
Figure 2 suggest that the object names ranked
among the top 3 by the TRANSFER and SIM-
WAP model are semantically similar to each other,
whereas WAC generates object names on top that
describe very different underlying object cate-
gories, such as seal / rock in Figure 2(a), animal /
lamp in Figure 2(g) or chair / shirt in Figure 2(c).
To quantify this general impression, Table 3 shows
cosine similarities among words in the top n gen-
erated by our models, using their word2vec em-
beddings. The average cosine similarity between
words in our vocabulary is 0.17. The TRANSFER
and SIM-WAP model rank words on top that are
clearly more similar to each other than word pairs
on average, whereas words ranked top by the WAC
model are more dissimilar to each other. Another
remarkable finding is that the words generated by
TRANSFER and SIM-WAP are not only more simi-
lar among the top predictions, but also more sim-
ilar to the gold name (Table 3 , right columns).
This result is noteworthy since the accuracies for
the top predictions shown in Table 1 are slightly
below WAC. In general, this suggests that there is
a trade-off between optimizing a model of refer-
ential word meaning to exact naming decisions,
or tailoring it to make lexically consistent pre-
dictions. This parallels findings by Frome et al.
(2013) who found that their transfer-based object
recognition made “semantically more reasonable”
errors than a standard convolutional network while

248



not improving accuracies for object recognition,
see discussion in Section 2. Additional evaluation
metrics, such as success rates in a human evalua-
tion (cf. Zarrieß and Schlangen (2016)), would be
an interesting direction for more detailed investi-
gation here.

Word Use But even though the WAC classifiers
lack knowledge on lexical similarities, they seem
to able to detect relatively specific instances of
word use such as hut in Figure 2(b), shirt in 2(c) or
lamp in 2(h). Here, the combination with TRANS-
FER and SIM-WAP is helpful to give more weight
to the object name that is taxonomically correct
(sometimes pushing up words below the top-3 and
hence not shown in Figure 2). In Figure 1(e), SIM-
WAP and TRANSFER give more weight to typical
names for persons, whereas WAC top-ranks more
unusual names, reflecting that the person is diffi-
cult to identify visually. Another observation is
that the mapping models have difficulties deal-
ing with object names in singular and plural. As
these words have very similar representations in
the distributional space, they are often predicted as
likely variants among the top 10 by SIM-WAP and
TRANSFER, whereas the WAC model seems to pre-
dict inappropriate plural words less often among
the top 3. Such specific phenomena at the intersec-
tion of visual and semantic similarity have found
very little attention in the literature. We will in-
vestigate them further in our Experiments on zero-
shot naming in the following Section.

6 Zero-Shot Naming

Zero-shot learning is an attractive prospect for
REG from images, as it promises to overcome de-
pendence on pairings of visual instances and nat-
ural names being available for all names, if vi-
sual/referential data can be generalised from other
types of information. Previous work has looked
at the feasibility of zero-shot learning as a func-
tion of semantic similarity or ontological close-
ness between unknown and known categories, and
confirmed the intuition that the task is harder the
less close unknown categories are to known ones
(Frome et al., 2013; Norouzi et al., 2013).

Our experiments on object naming in Section 5
suggest that lexical similarities encoded in a dis-
tributional space might not always fully carry over
to referential meaning. This could constitute an
additional challenge for zero-shot learning, as dis-
tributional similarities might be misleading when

the model has to fully rely on them for learning
referential word meanings. Therefore, the fol-
lowing experiments investigate the performance of
our models in zero-shot naming as a function of
the lexical relation between unknown and known
object names, i.e. namely hypernyms and singu-
lar/plurals. Both relations are typically captured
by distributional models of word meaning in terms
of closeness in the vector space, but their visual
and referential relation is clearly different.

6.1 Vocabulary Splits and Testsets

Random As in previous work on zero-shot
learning, we consider zero-shot naming for words
of varying degrees of similarity. We randomly
split our 159 names from Experiment 1 into 10
subsets. We train the models on 90% of the nouns
(and all their visual instances in the image cor-
pus) and test on the set of image regions that are
named with words which the model did not ob-
serve during training. Results reported in Table
4 on the random test set correspond to averaged
scores from cross-validation over the 10 splits.

Hypernyms We manually split the model’s vo-
cabulary into set of hypernyms (see Appendix A)
and the remaining nouns. We train the models on
those 84K image regions that where not named
with a hypernym, and test on 8895 image regions
that were named with a hypernym in the corpus.
We checked that for each of these hypernyms, the
vocabulary contains at least one or two names that
can be considered as hyponyms, i.e. the model
sees objects during training that are instances of
vehicle for example, but never encounters actual
uses of that name. This test set is particularly inter-
esting from an REG perspective, as objects named
with very general terms by human speakers are of-
ten difficult to describe with more common, but
more specific terms, as is illustrated by the uses of
structure and thingy in Figure 1.

Singulars/Plurals We pick 68 words from our
vocabulary that can be grouped into 34 singular-
plural noun pairs (see Appendix A). From each
pair, we randomly include the singular or plural
noun in the set of zero-shot nouns. Thus, we make
sure that the model encounters singular and plu-
ral names during training, but it never encounters
both variants of a name. This results training split
of 23K image regions and a test split of 13825 in-
stances.

249



(a)
wac: seal, rock, water
sim-wap: side, rock,rocks
transfer: rocks, rock, water
combination: rock

(c)
wac: chair, shirt, guy
sim-wap: woman, man, girl
transfer: door, woman, window
combination: shirt

(e)
wac: chick, person, guy
sim-wap: man, person, woman
transfer: man, guy, girl
combination: person

(g)
wac: animal, lamp, table
sim-wap: man, girl, person
transfer: man, clouds, cloud
combination: person

(b)
wac: cactus, hut, mountain
sim-wap: side, rock, mountain
transfer: mountain, rocks, rock
combination: hut

(d)
wac: roof, house, building
sim-wap: building, house, trees
transfer: building, house, trees
combination: house

(f)
wac: bush, bushes, tree
sim-wap: trees, tree, grass
transfer: trees, tree, bushes
combination: bushes

(h)
wac: post, light, lamp
sim-wap: tree, sky, pole
transfer: tree, sky, trees
combination: lamp

Figure 2: Examples from object naming experiment where model combination is accurate

Zero-shot Model full vocab disjoint vocab
names @1 @2 @5 @10 @1 @2

Random

transfer 0.05 2.38 16.57 35.71 41.49 62.34
wac, project top10 0.00 4.42 21.16 39.17 38.03 58.07
wac, project top5 0.00 4.39 21.63 40.01 37.46 57.36
sim-wap 3.71 13.13 36.49 54.44 42.28 64.26

Hypernyms

transfer 0.07 1.25 7.75 29.93 59.88 73.88
wac, project top10 0.00 3.01 15.55 36.99 50.51 66.33
wac, project top5 0.00 2.78 16.75 38.13 47.73 64.38
sim-wap 3.16 10.33 31.14 49.62 57.55 70.15

Singulars/Plurals

transfer 0.01 22.84 44.30 72.85 34.56 51.79
wac, project top10 0.00 22.21 43.43 68.95 31.46 48.76
wac, project top5 0.00 22.18 43.93 69.33 31.46 48.88
sim-wap 15.39 34.73 56.62 77.32 37.24 54.02

Table 4: Accuracies in zero-shot object naming on different vocabulary splits

250



6.2 Evaluation

Some previous work on zero-shot image labeling
assumes additional components that first identify
whether an image should be labelled by a known
or unknown word (Frome et al., 2013). We fol-
low Lazaridou et al. (2014) and let the model de-
cide whether to refer to an object by a known or
unknown name. Related to that, distinct evalua-
tion procedures have been used in the literature on
zero-shot learning:

Testing on full vocabulary A realistic way to
test zero-shot learning performance is to consider
all words from a given vocabulary during testing,
though the testset only contains instances of ob-
jects that have been named with a ‘zero-shot word’
(for which no visual instances were seen during
training). Accuracies in this setup reflect how well
the model is able to generalize, i.e. how often it
decides to deviate from the words it was trained
on, and (implicitly) predicts that the given object
requires a “new” name. In case of the (i) hyper-
nym and (ii) singular/plural test set, this accuracy
also reflects to what extent the model is able to de-
tect cases where (i) a more general or vague term
is needed, where (ii) an unknown singular/plural
counterpart of a known object type occurs.

Testing on disjoint vocabulary Alternatively,
the model’s vocabulary can be restricted during
testing to zero-shot words only, such that names
encountered during training and testing are dis-
joint, see e.g. (Lampert et al., 2009, 2013). This
setup factors out the generalization problem, and
assesses to what extent a model is able to cap-
ture the referential meaning of a word that does
not have instances in the training data.

6.3 Results

As compared to Experiment 1 where models
achieved similar performance, differences are
more pronounced in the zero-shot setup, as shown
in Table 4. In particular, we find that the SIM-
WAP model which induces individual predictors
for words that have not been observed in the train-
ing data is clearly more successful than TRANS-
FER or WAC that project predictions into the dis-
tributional space. When tested on the full vocabu-
lary, we find that TRANSFER and WAC very rarely
generate names whose referents were excluded
from training, which is in line with observations
made by Lazaridou et al. (2015a). The SIM-WAP

predictors generalize much better, in particular on
the singular/plural testset.

An interesting exception is the good perfor-
mance of the TRANSFER model on the hypernym
test set, when evaluated with a disjoint vocabu-
lary. This corroborates evidence from Experiment
1, namely that the transfer model captures tax-
onomic aspects of object names better than the
other models. Projection via individual word clas-
sifiers, on the other hand, seems to generalize bet-
ter than TRANSFER, at least when looking at ac-
curacies @2 ... @10. Thus, combining several
vectors predicted by a model of referential word
meaning can provide additional information, as
compared to mapping an object to a single vec-
tor in distributional space. More work is needed to
establish how these approaches can be integrated
more effectively.

7 Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper, we have investigated models of refer-
ential word meaning, using different ways of com-
bining visual information about a word’s referent
and distributional knowledge about its lexical sim-
ilarities. Previous cross-modal mapping models
essentially force semantically similar objects to be
mapped into the same area in the semantic space
regardless of their actual visual similarity. We
found that cross-modal mapping produces seman-
tically appropriate and mutually highly similar ob-
ject names in its top-n list, but does not preserve
differences in referential word use (e.g. appropri-
atness of person vs. woman) especially within the
same semantic field. We have shown that it is
beneficial for performance in standard and zero-
shot object naming to treat words as individual
predictors that capture referential appropriateness
and are only indirectly linked to a distributional
space, either through lexical mapping during ap-
plication or through cross-modal similarity map-
ping during training. As we have tested these ap-
proaches on a rather small vocabulary, which may
limit generality of conclusions, future work will
be devoted to scaling up these findings to larger
test sets, as e.g. recently collected through conver-
sational agents (Das et al., 2016) that circumvent
the need for human-human interaction data. Also
from an REG perspective, various extensions of
this approach are possible, such as the inclusion of
contextual information during object naming and
its combination with attribute selection.

251



Acknowledgments

We acknowledge support by the Cluster of
Excellence “Cognitive Interaction Technology”
(CITEC; EXC 277) at Bielefeld University, which
is funded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG). We thank the anonymous reviewers for
their very valuable, very detailed and highly in-
teresting comments.

References
Marco Baroni, Georgiana Dinu, and Germán

Kruszewski. 2014. Don’t count, predict! a
systematic comparison of context-counting vs.
context-predicting semantic vectors. In Proceedings
of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Baltimore, Maryland, pages 238–247.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P14-1023.

Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter. 1995. Computational
interpretations of the gricean maxims in the gener-
ation of referring expressions. Cognitive Science
19(2):233–263.

Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, Khushi Gupta,
Avi Singh, Deshraj Yadav, José M. F.
Moura, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra.
2016. Visual dialog. CoRR abs/1611.08669.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.08669.

Jia Deng, Nan Ding, Yangqing Jia, Andrea Frome,
Kevin Murphy, Samy Bengio, Yuan Li, Hartmut
Neven, and Hartwig Adam. 2014. Large-scale ob-
ject classification using label relation graphs. In Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision. Springer,
pages 48–64.

Jia Deng, W. Dong, Richard Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and
L. Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierar-
chical Image Database. In CVPR09.

Katrin Erk. 2016. What do you know about
an alligator when you know the company it
keeps? Semantics and Pragmatics 9(17):1–63.
https://doi.org/10.3765/sp.9.17.

Yansong Feng and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Visual in-
formation in semantic representation. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 91–99.

Andrea Frome, Greg S Corrado, Jon Shlens, Samy
Bengio, Jeff Dean, Marc Aurelio Ranzato, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2013. Devise: A deep visual-
semantic embedding model. In C. J. C. Burges,
L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K. Q.
Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 26, Curran Associates, Inc.,
pages 2121–2129.

Dimitra Gkatzia, Verena Rieser, Phil Bartie, and
William Mackaness. 2015. From the virtual to
the realworld: Referring to objects in real-world
spatial scenes. In Proceedings of the 2015 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, pages 1936–1942.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/D15-1224.

Michael Grubinger, Paul Clough, Henning Müller, and
Thomas Deselaers. 2006. The IAPR TC-12 bench-
mark: a new evaluation resource for visual informa-
tion systems. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2006). Genoa, Italy, pages 13–23.

Aurélie Herbelot and Eva Maria Vecchi. 2015. Build-
ing a shared world: mapping distributional to model-
theoretic semantic spaces. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, pages 22–32.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/D15-1003.

Ronghang Hu, Huazhe Xu, Marcus Rohrbach, Jiashi
Feng, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. 2015. Natu-
ral language object retrieval. CoRR abs/1511.04164.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.04164.

Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten,
and Tamara L Berg. 2014. ReferItGame: Referring
to Objects in Photographs of Natural Scenes. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2014).
Doha, Qatar, pages 787–798.

Douwe Kiela and Léon Bottou. 2014. Learning image
embeddings using convolutional neural networks for
improved multi-modal semantics. In Proceedings of
the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Doha, Qatar, pages 36–
45. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D14-1005.

Satwik Kottur, Ramakrishna Vedantam, José MF
Moura, and Devi Parikh. 2016. Visual word2vec
(vis-w2v): Learning visually grounded word embed-
dings using abstract scenes. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pages 4985–4994.

Emiel Krahmer and Kees Van Deemter. 2012. Compu-
tational generation of referring expressions: A sur-
vey. Computational Linguistics 38(1):173–218.

Christoph H Lampert, Hannes Nickisch, and Stefan
Harmeling. 2009. Learning to detect unseen object
classes by between-class attribute transfer. In IEEE
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE,
pages 951–958.

Christoph H. Lampert, Hannes Nickisch, and Stefan
Harmeling. 2013. Attribute-based classification for
zero-shot visual object categorization. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence 36(3):453–465.

252



Angeliki Lazaridou, Elia Bruni, and Marco Baroni.
2014. Is this a wampimuk? Cross-modal map-
ping between distributional semantics and the visual
world. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers). pages 1403–1414.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Georgiana Dinu, and Marco
Baroni. 2015a. Hubness and pollution: Delv-
ing into cross-space mapping for zero-shot learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 7th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Beijing, China, pages 270–280.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P15-1027.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Nghia The Pham, and Marco Ba-
roni. 2015b. Combining language and vision with a
multimodal skip-gram model. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Denver, Colorado, pages
153–163. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N15-
1016.

Willem JM Levelt, Herbert Schriefers, Dirk Vor-
berg, Antje S Meyer, Thomas Pechmann, and Jaap
Havinga. 1991. The time course of lexical access in
speech production: A study of picture naming. Psy-
chological review 98(1):122.

Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana
Camburu, Alan L. Yuille, and Kevin Murphy. 2015.
Generation and comprehension of unambiguous ob-
ject descriptions. ArXiv / CoRR abs/1511.02283.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.02283.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg
Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed
representations of words and phrases and
their compositionality. In Proceedings of
the 26th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. Curran As-
sociates Inc., USA, NIPS’13, pages 3111–3119.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2999792.2999959.

Mohammad Norouzi, Tomas Mikolov, Samy Bengio,
Yoram Singer, Jonathon Shlens, Andrea Frome,
Greg S Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Zero-shot
learning by convex combination of semantic embed-
dings. International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR) .

Vicente Ordonez, Wei Liu, Jia Deng, Yejin Choi,
Alexander C. Berg, and Tamara L. Berg. 2016.
Learning to name objects. Commun. ACM
59(3):108–115.

Eleanor Rosch. 1978. Principles of Categorization.
In Eleanor Rosch and Barbara B. Lloyd, editors,
Cognition and Categorization, Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, N.J., USA, pages 27—-48.

Deb Roy. 2005. Grounding words in perception and
action: Computational insights. Trends in Cognitive
Sciene 9(8):389–396.

Deb Roy, Peter Gorniak, Niloy Mukherjee, and Josh
Juster. 2002. A trainable spoken language under-
standing system for visual object selection. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Speech
and Language Processing 2002 (ICSLP 2002). Col-
orado, USA.

Deb K. Roy. 2002. Learning visually-grounded words
and syntax for a scene description task. Computer
Speech and Language 16(3).

David Schlangen, Sina Zarriess, and Casey Kenning-
ton. 2016. Resolving references to objects in pho-
tographs using the words-as-classifiers model. In
Proceedings of the 54rd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2016).

Carina Silberer and Mirella Lapata. 2014. Learn-
ing grounded meaning representations with autoen-
coders. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland, pages 721–
732. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P14-1068.

Richard Socher, Milind Ganjoo, Christopher D Man-
ning, and Andrew Ng. 2013. Zero-shot learning
through cross-modal transfer. In Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems. pages 935–943.

Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre
Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Ra-
binovich. 2015. Going deeper with convolutions. In
CVPR 2015. Boston, MA, USA.

Peter D Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of se-
mantics. Journal of artificial intelligence research
37(1):141–188.

Sina Zarrieß and David Schlangen. 2016. Easy
things first: Installments improve referring expres-
sion generation for objects in photographs. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Berlin, Germany, pages 610–620.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P16-1058.

Sina Zarrieß and David Schlangen. 2017. Is this a
child, a girl or a car? exploring the contribution of
distributional similarity to learning referential word
meanings. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 86–91.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/E17-2014.

253



A Vocabulary Splits for Zero-Shot
Naming

Hypernyms animal, animals, plant, plants, ve-
hicle, person, persons, food, thing, object, area,
things, thingy, toy, anyone, clothes, dish, building,
land, structure, item, water

Singulars/Plurals . . .

. . . training on instances of: animals, plants,
cars, people, buildings, trees, man, kid, guy,
girl, boy, flower, bird, hill, orange, cloud,
curtain, window, shrub, apple, light, house,
glass, bottle, dude, leg, book, wall, bananas,
carrots, pillows, bushes, mountains, bags

. . . testing on instances of: animal, plant, car,
person, building, tree, men, kids, guys, girls,
boys, flowers, birds, hills, oranges, clouds,
curtains, windows, shrubs, apples, lights,
houses, glasses, bottles, dudes, legs, books,
walls, banana, carrot, pillow, bush, mountain,
bag

254


	Obtaining referential word meanings from visual and distributional information: Experiments on object naming

