



















































Cross-Target Stance Classification with Self-Attention Networks


Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 778–783
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

778

Cross-Target Stance Classification with Self-Attention Networks

Chang Xu, Cécile Paris, Surya Nepal, and Ross Sparks
CSIRO Data61, Marsfield, NSW, Australia

{Chang.Xu, Cecile.Paris, Surya.Nepal, Ross.Sparks}@data61.csiro.au

Abstract

In stance classification, the target on which
the stance is made defines the boundary of
the task, and a classifier is usually trained
for prediction on the same target. In this
work, we explore the potential for general-
izing classifiers between different targets,
and propose a neural model that can apply
what has been learned from a source target
to a destination target. We show that our
model can find useful information shared
between relevant targets which improves
generalization in certain scenarios.

1 Introduction

Stance classification is the task of automatically
identifying users’ positions about a specific target
from text (Mohammad et al., 2017). Table 1 shows
an example of this task, where the stance of the
sentence is recognized as favorable on the target
climate change is concern. Traditionally, this task
is approached by learning a target-specific classi-
fier that is trained for prediction on the same tar-
get of interest (Hasan and Ng, 2013; Mohammad
et al., 2016; Ebrahimi et al., 2016). This implies
that a new classifier has to be built from scratch on
a well-prepared set of ground-truth data whenever
predictions are needed for an unseen target.

An alternative to this approach is to conduct
a cross-target classification, where the classifier
is adapted from different but related targets (Au-
genstein et al., 2016), which allows benefiting
from the knowledge of existing targets. For ex-
ample, in our project we are interested in online
users’ stances on the approvals of particular min-
ing projects in the country. It might be useful to
start with a classifier that is adapted from a related
target such as climate change is concern (presum-
ably available and annotated), as in both cases

Sentence: We need to protect our islands and stop the
destruction of coral reef.
Target: Climate Change is Concern Stance: Favor

Table 1: An example of stance classification task.

users could discuss the impacts from the targets
to some common issues, such as the environment
or communities.

Cross-target stance classification is a more chal-
lenging task simply because the language models
may not be compatible between different targets.
However, for some targets that can be recognized
as being related to the same and more general do-
mains, it could be possible to generalize through
certain aspects of the domains that reflect users’
major concerns. For example, from the following
sentence, whose stance is against the approval of a
mining project, “Environmentalists warn the $16
billion coal facility will damage the Great Barrier
Reef”, it can be seen that both this sentence and
the one in Table 1 mention the same aspect “reef
destruction/damage”, which is closely related to
the “environment” domain.

In this paper, we focus on cross-target stance
classification and explore the limits of generaliz-
ing models between different but domain-related
targets1. The basic idea is to learn a set of domain-
specific aspects from a source target, and then
apply them to prediction on a destination target.
To this end, we propose CrossNet, a novel neu-
ral model that implements the above idea based
on the self-attention mechanism. Our preliminary
analysis shows that the proposed model can find
useful domain-specific information from a stance-
bearing sentence and that the classification perfor-
mance is improved in certain domains.

1In this work, the source target is chosen based on com-
mon sense. Exploring more sophisticated source target selec-
tion methods will be our future work.



779

Figure 1: The Architecture of CrossNet.

2 Model

In this section, we introduce the proposed model,
CrossNet, for cross-target stance classification.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of CrossNet. It
consists of four layers from the Embedding Layer
(bottom) to the Prediction Layer (top). It works
by taking a stance-bearing sentence and a target
as input and yielding the predicted stance label as
output. In the following, we present the imple-
mentation of each layer in CrossNet.

2.1 Embedding Layer
There are two inputs in CrossNet: a stance-bearing
sentence P and a descriptive target T (e.g, cli-
mate change is concern in Table 1). We use word
embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) to represent
each word in the input as a dense vector. The
output of this layer are two sequences of vectors
P = {p1, ...,p|P |} and T = {t1, ..., t|T |}, where
p, t are word vectors.

2.2 Context Encoding Layer
In this layer, we encode the contextual informa-
tion in the input sentence and target. We use a
bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory Network
(BiLSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) to
capture the left and right contexts of each word in
the input. Moreover, to account for the impact of
the target on stance inference, we borrow the idea
of conditional encoding (Augenstein et al., 2016)
to model the dependency of the sentence on the
target. Formally, we first use a BiLSTMT to en-
code the target:

[
−→
h Ti
−→c Ti ] =

−−−−→
LSTMT (ti,

−→
h Ti−1,

−→c Ti−1)

[
←−
h Ti
←−c Ti ] =

←−−−−
LSTMT (ti,

←−
h Ti+1,

←−c Ti+1)
(1)

where h ∈ Rh and c ∈ Rh are the hidden state and
cell state of LSTM. The symbol −→(←−) indicates
the forward (backward) pass. ti is the input word
vector at time step i.

Then, we learn a conditional encoding of the
sentence P , by initializing BiLSTMP (a different
BiLSTM) with the final states of BiLSTMT :

[
−→
h P1
−→c P1 ] =

−−−−→
LSTMP (p1,

−→
h T|T |,

−→c T|T |)

[
←−
h P|P |

←−c P|P |] =
←−−−−
LSTMP (p|P |,

←−
h T1 ,
←−c T1 )

(2)

It can be seen that the initialization is done by
aligning the forward (backward) pass of the two
BiLSTMs. The output is a contextually-encoded
sequence, HP = {hP1 , ...,hP|P |}, where h =
[
−→
h ;
←−
h ] ∈ R2h with [; ] as the vector concatena-

tion operation.

2.3 Aspect Attention Layer

In this layer, we implement the idea of discover-
ing domain-specific aspects for cross-target stance
inference. In particular, the key observation we
make is that the domain aspects that reflect users’
major concerns are usually the core of understand-
ing their stances, and could be mentioned by mul-
tiple users in a discussion. For example, we find
that many users in our corpus mention the aspect
“reef” to express their concerns about the impact
of a mining project on the Great Barrier Reef.
Based on this observation, the perception of the
domain aspects can be boiled down to finding the
sentence parts that not only carry the core idea of a
stance-bearing sentence but also tend to be recur-
ring in the corpus.

First, to capture the recurrences of the domain
aspects, a simple way is to make every input sen-
tence be consumed by this layer (see Figure 1), so
that the layer parameters are shared across the cor-
pus for being stimulated by all appearances of the
domain aspects.

Then, we utilize self-attention to signal the core
parts of a stance-bearing sentence. Self-attention
is an attention mechanism for selecting specific
parts of a sequence by relating its elements at
different positions (Vaswani et al., 2017; Cheng
et al., 2016). In our case, the self-attention pro-
cess is based on the assumption that the core parts
of a sentence are those that are compatible with
the semantics of the entire sentence. To this end,
we introduce a compatibility function to score the
semantic compatibility between the encoded se-



780

quence HP and each of its hidden states hP :

ci = w
>
2 σ(W1h

P
i + b1) + b2 (3)

where W1 ∈ Rd×2h, w2 ∈ Rd, b1 ∈ Rd, and b2 ∈
R are trainable parameters, and σ is the activation
function. Note that all the above parameters are
shared by every hidden state in HP . Next, we
compute the attention weight ai for each hPi based
on its compatibility score via softmax operation:

ai =
exp(ci)∑|P |
j=1 exp(cj)

(4)

Finally, we can obtain the domain aspect encoded
representation based on the attention weights:

AP =

|P |∑
i=1

aih
P
i (5)

where AP ∈ R2h is the domain aspect encoding
for sentence P and also the output of this layer.

2.4 Prediction Layer

We predict the stance label of the sentence based
on its domain aspect encoding:

ŷ = softmax(MLP(AP )) (6)

where we use a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to
consume the domain aspect encoding AP and ap-
ply the softmax to get the predicted probability for
each of the C classes, ŷ = {y1, ..., yC}.

2.5 Model Training

For model training, we use multi-class cross-
entropy loss,

J (θ) = −
N∑
i

C∑
j

y
(i)
j log ŷ

(i)
j + λ‖Θ‖ (7)

whereN is the size of training set. y is the ground-
truth label indicator for each class, and ŷ is the
predicted probability. λ is the coefficient for L2-
regularization. Θ denotes the set of all trainable
parameters in our model.

3 Experiments

This section reports the results of quantitative and
qualitative evaluations of the proposed model.

Target %Favor %Against %Neither #Total

CC 59.4 4.6 36.0 564
FM 28.2 53.8 18.0 949
HC 16.6 57.4 26.0 984
LA 17.9 58.3 23.8 933
DT 20.9 42.3 36.8 707

Table 2: SemEval-2016 Task 6 Tweet Stance De-
tection dataset used in our evaluation.

3.1 Datasets

SemEval-2016: the first dataset is from SemEval-
2016 Task 6 on Twitter stance detection, which
contains stance-bearing tweets on different targets.
We use the following five targets for our experi-
ments: Climate Change is Concern (CC), Feminist
Movement (FM), Hillary Clinton (HC), Legaliza-
tion of Abortion (LA), and Donald Trump (DT).
The class labels are favor, against, and neither,
and their distributions are shown in Table 2.
Tweets on an Australian mining project (AM):
the second is our collection of tweets on a mining
project in Australia obtained using Twitter API. It
includes 220,067 tweets posted from January 2016
to June 2017 that contain the project name in the
text. We remove all URL-only tweets and dupli-
cate tweets, and obtain a set of 40,852 (unlabeled)
tweets. Due to the lack of annotation, this dataset
is only used for our qualitative evaluation.

To align with our scenario, the above targets
can be categorized into three different domains:
Women’s Rights (FM, LA), American Politics
(HC, DT), and Environments (CC, AM).

3.2 Metric

We use F1-score to measure the classification
performance. Due to the imbalanced class dis-
tributions of the SemEval dataset, we com-
pute both micro-averaged (large classes dominate)
and macro-averaged (small classes dominate) F1-
scores (Manning et al., 2008), and use their aver-
age as the metric, i.e., F = 12(Fmicro + Fmacro).

To evaluate the effectiveness of target adapta-
tion, we use the metric transfer ratio (Glorot et al.,
2011) to compare the cross-target and in-target
performance of a model: Q = F (S,D)Fb(D,D) , where
F (S,D) is the cross-target F1-score of a model
trained on the source target S and tested on the
destination target D, and Fb(D,D) is the in-target
F1-score of a baseline model trained and tested
on the same target D, which serves as the perfor-
mance calibration for target adaptation.



781

3.3 Training setup

The word embeddings are initialized with the pre-
trained 200d GloVe word vectors on the 27B Twit-
ter corpus (Pennington et al., 2014), and fixed dur-
ing training. The model is trained (90%) and val-
idated (10%) on a source target, and tested on
a destination target. The following model set-
tings are selected based on a small grid search on
the validation set: the LSTM hidden size of 60,
the MLP layer size of 60, and dropout 0.1. The
L2-regularization coefficient λ in the loss is 0.01.
ADAM (Kingma and Ba, 2014) is used as the op-
timizer, with a learning rate of 10−3. Stratified
10-fold cross-validation is conducted to produce
averaged results.

3.4 Classification Performance

This section reports the results of our model and
two baseline approaches on cross-target stance
classification.
BiLSTM: this is a base model for our task. It has
two BiLSTMs for encoding the sentence and tar-
get separately. Then, the concatenation of the re-
sulting encodings is fed into the final Prediction
Layer to generate predicted stance labels. In our
evaluation, this model is treated as the baseline
model for deriving the in-target performance cali-
bration Fb(D,D).
MITRE (Augenstein et al., 2016): this is the

Domain Target BiLSTM MITRE CrossNet

In-target performance (F1-score)

Women’s FM 51.4(2.6)∗ 53.7(3.9) 55.9(4.6)
Rights LA 59.4(6.4) 61.9(6.3) 61.8(4.7)

American HC 55.5(4.7)∗ 56.0(3.1)∗ 60.0(3.3)
Politics DT 57.9(6.0)∗ 59.6(5.8)∗ 60.2(5.1)

Cross-target performance (F1-score)

Women’s FM→LA 40.1(2.3)∗ 40.3(2.2)∗ 44.2(1.3)
Rights LA→FM 37.9(2.9)∗ 39.2(1.5)∗ 43.1(1.3)

American HC→DT 43.3(2.4)∗ 44.2(3.2) 46.1(3.7)
Politics DT→HC 40.1(2.6) 40.8(2.2) 41.8(3.2)

Transfer ratio

Women’s FM→LA 0.67 0.67 0.74
Rights LA→FM 0.74 0.76 0.83

American HC→DT 0.75 0.76 0.79
Politics DT→HC 0.72 0.73 0.75

(Standard deviation in parentheses)
∗ Improvements over baselines at p <.05 with paired t-test

Table 3: Classification performance of our model
and other baselines on 4 targets: Feminist Move-
ment (FM), Hillary Clinton (HC), Legalization of
Abortion (LA), and Donald Trump (DT).

best system in SemEval-2016 Task 6. It uti-
lizes the conditional encoding to learn a target-
dependent representation for the input sentence.
The conditional encoding is realized in the same
way as the Context Encoding Layer does in
our model, namely by using the hidden states
of the target-encoding BiLSTM to initialize the
sentence-encoding BiLSTM.

Table 3 shows the results (in-target and cross-
target) on the two domains: Women’s Rights
and American Politics. First, it is observed that
MITRE outperforms BiLSTM over all target con-
figurations, suggesting that, compared to simple
concatenation, the conditional encoding of the tar-
get information could be more helpful to capture
the dependency of the sentence on the target.

Second, our model is shown to achieve better
results than the two baselines in almost all cases
(only slightly worse than MITRE on LA under the
in-target setting, and the difference is not statis-
tically significant), which implies that the aspect
attention mechanism adopted in our model could
benefit target-level generalization while it does not
hurt the in-target performance. Moreover, by com-
paring the performance of our model under differ-
ent target configurations, we see that the improve-
ments brought by our model are more significant
on the cross-target task than they are on the in-
target task, with an average improvement of 6.6%
(cross-target) vs. 3.0% (in-target) over MITRE in
F1-score, which demonstrates a greater advantage
of our model in the cross-target task.

Finally, according to the transfer ratio results,
the general drop from the in-target to cross-target
performance (26% averaged over all cases) could
imply that while the target-independent informa-
tion (i.e., the domain-specific aspects) is shown to
benefit generalization, it could be important to also
consider the information that is specific to the des-
tination target for model building (which has not
yet been explored in this work).

3.5 Visualization of Attention

To show that our model can select sentence parts
that are related to domain aspects, we visualize the
self-attention results on some tweet examples that
are correctly classified by our model in Table 4.

We can see that the most highlighted parts in
each example are relevant to the respective do-
main. For example, “feminist”, “rights”, and
“equality” are commonly used when talking about
women’s rights, and “president” and “dreams” of-



782

ID Target Tweet

1 FM→LA Abortion has nothing to do with feminism . Its about the BABYS body , not yours. (A)
2 LA→FM All humans , male and female, should have equal political , economic and social rights . Equality . (F)
3 HC→DT Trumps presidential dreams r about as real as KimJonguns unicorns. (A)
4 DT→HC Maybe a woman should be President . (F)
5 CC→AM [N] still will destroy the reef . It is criminal that QLD federal govts are promoting it. (A)
6 CC→AM [N] , who are trying to change our laws , ’forgot’ to tell us about their CEO’s environmental disaster ! (A)

Table 4: The heatmap of the attention weights assigned by the Aspect Attention Layer to the tweets with
stance labels favor (F) and against (A). “[N]” denotes the mining project’s name of interest.

Domain Sample
Women’s
Rights
(FM↔LA)

feminist, victim, fight, equality,
children, women, mom, great, love,
fight, beautiful, girl, housewife,
wrong, fear, safe, good, life, crime

American
Politics
(HC↔DT)

american, winning, welfare, obama,
society, wall, crazy, money, repub-
lican, nation, great, vote, amazing,
stupid, justice, government, future

Environments
(CC→AM)

environment, reverse, needs, bad,
weather, solution, important, rain,
earth, generation, humans, power,
heat, future, strategy, together, idea

Table 5: Samples of the learned domain aspects.

ten appear in text about politics. It is also interest-
ing to note that words that are specific to the des-
tination target may not be captured by the model
learned from the source target, such as “abortion”
in sentence 1 and “trumps” in sentence 3. This
makes sense because those words are rare in the
source target corpus and thus not well noticed by
the model.

Finally, for our project, we can see from the
last two sentences that the model learned from
climate change is concern is able to concentrate
on words that are central to understanding the
authors’ stances on the approval of the mining
project, such as “reef”, “destroy”, “environmen-
tal”, and “disaster”. Overall, the above visual-
ization demonstrates that our model could bene-
fit stance inference across related targets through
capturing domain-specific information.

3.6 Learned Domain-Specific Aspects

Finally, it is also possible to show the learned do-
main aspects by extracting all sentence parts in
a corpus that are highly attended by our model.
Table 5 presents a number of samples from the
intersections between the sets of highly-attended
words on the respective targets in the three do-
mains. Again, we see that these highly-attended
words are specific to the respective domains. We

also notice that besides the domain-aspect words,
our model can find words that carry sentiments
as well, such as “great”, “crazy”, and “beautiful”,
which contribute to stance prediction.

4 Conclusion and Future Work

In this work, we study cross-target stance clas-
sification and propose a novel self-attention neu-
ral model that can extract target-independent in-
formation for model generalization. Experimental
results show that the proposed model can perceive
high-level domain-specific information in a sen-
tence and achieves superior results over a number
of baselines in certain domains. In the future, there
are several ways of extending our model.

First, selecting the effective source targets to
generalize from is crucial for achieving satisfying
results on the destination targets. One possibil-
ity could be to learn certain correlations between
target closeness and generalization performance,
which could further be used for guiding the target
selection process. Second, our current model for
identifying users’ stances on mining projects only
generalizes from one source target (i.e., Climate
Change is Concern). However, a mining project
in general could affect other aspects of our soci-
ety such as community and economics. It could
be useful to also consider other related sources
for knowledge transfer. Finally, it would be in-
teresting to evaluate our model in a multilingual
scenario (Taulé et al., 2017), in order to examine
its generalization ability (whether it can attend to
useful domain-specific information in a new lan-
guage) and multilingual scope.

Acknowledgments

We thank all anonymous reviewers for their valu-
able comments. We would also like to thank Keith
Vander Linden for his helpful comments on drafts
of this paper.



783

References
Isabelle Augenstein, Tim Rocktäschel, Andreas Vla-

chos, and Kalina Bontcheva. 2016. Stance detec-
tion with bidirectional conditional encoding. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). pages
876–885.

Jianpeng Cheng, Li Dong, and Mirella Lapata. 2016.
Long short-term memory-networks for machine
reading. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP). pages 551–561.

Javid Ebrahimi, Dejing Dou, and Daniel Lowd. 2016.
Weakly supervised tweet stance classification by re-
lational bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the 2016
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. pages 1012–1017.

Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio.
2011. Domain adaptation for large-scale sentiment
classification: A deep learning approach. In Pro-
ceedings of the 28th international conference on ma-
chine learning (ICML). pages 513–520.

Kazi Saidul Hasan and Vincent Ng. 2013. Stance clas-
sification of ideological debates: Data, models, fea-
tures, and constraints. In Proceedings of the 6th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing. pages 1348–1356.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural Computation
9(8):1735–1780.

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 .

Christopher D Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, Hinrich
Schütze, et al. 2008. Introduction to information re-
trieval, volume 1. Cambridge university press Cam-
bridge.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems (NIPS). pages 3111–3119.

Saif Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Parinaz Sob-
hani, Xiao-Dan Zhu, and Colin Cherry. 2016.
Semeval-2016 task 6: Detecting stance in tweets. In
SemEval@ NAACL-HLT . pages 31–41.

Saif M Mohammad, Parinaz Sobhani, and Svetlana
Kiritchenko. 2017. Stance and sentiment in tweets.
ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT)
17(3):26.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP). pages 1532–1543.

Mariona Taulé, M Antonia Martı́, Francisco M Rangel,
Paolo Rosso, Cristina Bosco, Viviana Patti, et al.
2017. Overview of the task on stance and gen-
der detection in tweets on catalan independence at
ibereval 2017. In 2nd Workshop on Evaluation
of Human Language Technologies for Iberian Lan-
guages, IberEval 2017. CEUR-WS, volume 1881,
pages 157–177.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems (NIPS). pages 6000–6010.


