















































Robust Distant Supervision Relation Extraction via Deep Reinforcement Learning


Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Long Papers), pages 2137–2147
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

2137

Robust Distant Supervision Relation Extraction via Deep Reinforcement
Learning

Pengda Qin], Weiran Xu], William Yang Wang[
]Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China

[University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
{qinpengda, xuweiran}@bupt.edu.cn

{william}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract

Distant supervision has become the stan-
dard method for relation extraction. How-
ever, even though it is an efficient method,
it does not come at no cost—The re-
sulted distantly-supervised training sam-
ples are often very noisy. To combat
the noise, most of the recent state-of-the-
art approaches focus on selecting one-
best sentence or calculating soft attention
weights over the set of the sentences of
one specific entity pair. However, these
methods are suboptimal, and the false
positive problem is still a key stumbling
bottleneck for the performance. We ar-
gue that those incorrectly-labeled candi-
date sentences must be treated with a hard
decision, rather than being dealt with soft
attention weights. To do this, our pa-
per describes a radical solution—We ex-
plore a deep reinforcement learning strat-
egy to generate the false-positive indicator,
where we automatically recognize false
positives for each relation type without
any supervised information. Unlike the
removal operation in the previous studies,
we redistribute them into the negative ex-
amples. The experimental results show
that the proposed strategy significantly im-
proves the performance of distant supervi-
sion comparing to state-of-the-art systems.

1 Introduction

Relation extraction is a core task in informa-
tion extraction and natural language understand-
ing. The goal of relation extraction is to predict
relations for entities in a sentence (Zelenko et al.,
2003; Bunescu and Mooney, 2005; GuoDong
et al., 2005). For example, given a sentence

Negative set

Positive set

False Positive

Negative set

Positive set

False Positive

Policy Based Agent

Policy Gradient Training

Redistribute Training
Dataset

𝑅𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑

𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

Classifier𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛

Figure 1: Our deep reinforcement learning frame-
work aims at dynamically recognizing false posi-
tive samples, and moving them from the positive
set to the negative set during distant supervision.

“Barack Obama is married to Michelle Obama.”,
a relation classifier aims at predicting the relation
of “spouse”. In downstream applications, rela-
tion extraction is the key module for construct-
ing knowledge graphs, and it is a vital compo-
nent of many natural language processing applica-
tions such as structured search, sentiment analysis,
question answering, and summarization.

A major issue encountered in the early devel-
opment of relation extraction algorithms is the
data sparsity issue—It is extremely expensive, and
almost impossible for human annotators to go
through a large corpus of millions of sentences
to provide a large amount of labeled training in-
stances. Therefore, distant supervision relation ex-
traction (Mintz et al., 2009; Hoffmann et al., 2011;
Surdeanu et al., 2012) becomes popular, because
it uses entity pairs from knowledge bases to se-
lect a set of noisy instances from unlabeled data.
In recent years, neural network approaches (Zeng
et al., 2014, 2015) have been proposed to train the
relation extractor under these noisy conditions. To
suppress the noisy(Roth et al., 2013), recent stud-



2138

ies (Lin et al., 2016) have proposed the use of at-
tention mechanisms to place soft weights on a set
of noisy sentences, and select samples. However,
we argue that only selecting one example or based
on soft attention weights are not the optimal strat-
egy: To improve the robustness, we need a system-
atic solution to make use of more instances, while
removing false positives and placing them in the
right place.

In this paper, we investigate the possibility of
using dynamic selection strategies for robust dis-
tant supervision. More specifically, we design a
deep reinforcement learning agent, whose goal is
to learn to choose whether to remove or remain
the distantly supervised candidate instance based
on the performance change of the relation classi-
fier. Intuitively, our agent would like to remove
false positives, and reconstruct a cleaned set of
distantly supervised instances to maximize the re-
ward based on the classification accuracy. Our
proposed method is classifier-independent, and it
can be applied to any existing distant supervision
model. Empirically, we show that our method
has brought consistent performance gains in var-
ious deep neural network based models, achieving
strong performances on the widely used New York
Times dataset (Riedel et al., 2010). Our contribu-
tions are three-fold:

• We propose a novel deep reinforcement
learning framework for robust distant super-
vision relation extraction.

• Our method is model-independent, meaning
that it could be applied to any state-of-the-art
relation extractors.

• We show that our method can boost the per-
formances of recently proposed neural rela-
tion extractors.

In Section 2, we will discuss related works on
distant supervision relation extraction. Next, we
will describe our robust distant supervision frame-
work in Section 3. In Section 4, empirical evalu-
ation results are shown. And finally, we conclude
in Section 5.

2 Related Work

Mintz et al. (2009) is the first study that combines
dependency path and feature aggregation for dis-
tant supervision. However, this approach would

introduce a lot of false positives, as the same en-
tity pair might have multiple relations. To alleviate
this issue, Hoffmann et al. (2011) address this is-
sue, and propose a model to jointly learn with mul-
tiple relations. Surdeanu et al. (2012) further pro-
pose a multi-instance multi-label learning frame-
work to improve the performance. Note that these
early approaches do not explicitly remove noisy
instances, but rather hope that the model would be
able to suppress the noise.

Recently, with the advance of neural network
techniques, deep learning methods (Zeng et al.,
2014, 2015) are introduced, and the hope is to
model noisy distant supervision process in the hid-
den layers. However, their approach only selects
one most plausible instance per entity pair, in-
evitably missing out a lot of valuable training in-
stances. Recently, Lin et al. (2016) propose an
attention mechanism to select plausible instances
from a set of noisy instances. However, we believe
that soft attention weight assignment might not
be the optimal solution, since the false positives
should be completely removed and placed in the
negative set. Ji et al. (2017) combine the external
knowledge to rich the representation of entity pair,
in which way to improve the accuracy of atten-
tion weights. Even though these above-mentioned
methods can select high-quality instances, they ig-
nore the false positive case: all the sentences of
one entity pair belongs to the false positives. In
this work, we take a radical approach to solve this
problem—We will make use of the distantly la-
beled resources as much as possible, while learn-
ing a independent false-positive indicator to re-
move false positives, and place them in the right
place. After our ACL submission, we notice that
a contemporaneous study Feng et al. (2018) also
adopts reinforcement learning to learn an instance
selector, but their reward is calculated from the
prediction probabilities. In contrast, while in our
method, the reward is intuitively reflected by the
performance change of the relation classifier. Our
approach is also complement to most of the ap-
proaches above, and can be directly applied on top
of any existing relation extraction classifiers.

3 Reinforcement Learning for Distant
Supervision

We introduce a performance-driven, policy-based
reinforcement learning method to heuristically
recognize false positive samples. Comparing to



2139

a prior study that has underutilized the distantly-
supervised samples (Lin et al., 2016), we consider
an RL agent for robust distant supervision rela-
tion extraction. We first describe the definitions of
our RL method, including the policy-based agent,
external environment, and pre-training strategy.
Next, we describe the retraining strategy for our
RL agent. The goal of our agent is to deter-
mine whether to retain or remove a distantly-
supervised sentence, based on the performance
change of relation classifier. Finally, we describe
the noisy-suppression method, where we teach our
policy-based agent to make a redistribution for a
cleaner distant supervision training dataset.

Distant supervision relation extraction is to pre-
dict the relation type of entity pair under the
automatically-generated training set. However,
the issue is that these distantly-supervised sen-
tences that mention this entity pair may not ex-
press the desired relation type. Therefore, what
our RL agent should do is to determine whether
the distantly-supervised sentence is a true posi-
tive instance for this relation type. For reinforce-
ment learning, external environment and RL agent
are two necessary components, and a robust agent
is trained from the dynamic interaction between
these two parts (Arulkumaran et al., 2017). First,
the prerequisite of reinforcement learning is that
the external environment should be modeled as
a Markov decision process (MDP). However, the
traditional setting of relation extraction cannot sat-
isfy this condition: the input sentences are inde-
pendent of each other. In other words, we cannot
merely use the information of the sentence being
processed as the state. Thus, we add the informa-
tion from the early states into the representation of
the current state, in which way to model our task
as a MDP problem (Fang et al., 2017). The other
component, RL agent, is parameterized with a pol-
icy network πθ(s, a) = p(a|s; θ). The probability
distribution of actions A = {aremove, aremain} is
calculated by policy network based on state vec-
tors. What needs to be noted is that, Deep Q Net-
work (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2013) is also a widely-
used RL method; however, it is not suitable for
our case, even if our action space is small. First,
we cannot compute the immediate reward for ev-
ery operation; In contrast, the accurate reward
can only be obtained after finishing processing the
whole training dataset. Second, the stochastic pol-
icy of the policy network is capable of prevent-

ing the agent from getting stuck in an intermedi-
ate state. The following subsections detailedly in-
troduce the definitions of the fundamental compo-
nents in the proposed RL method.

States In order to satisfy the condition of MDP,
the state s includes the information from the cur-
rent sentence and the sentences that have been re-
moved in early states. The semantic and syntactic
information of sentence is represented by a con-
tinuous real-valued vector. According to some
state-of-the-art supervised relation extraction ap-
proaches (Zeng et al., 2014; Nguyen and Grish-
man, 2015), we utilize both word embedding and
position embedding to convert sentence into vec-
tor. With this sentence vector, the current state is
the concatenation of the current sentence vector
and the average vector of the removed sentences
in early states. We give relatively larger weight for
the vector of the current sentence, in which way to
magnify the dominating influence of the current
sentence information for the decision of action.

Actions At each step, our agent is required to
determine whether the instance is false positive
for target relation type. Each relation type has
a agent1. There are two actions for each agent:
whether to remove or retain the current instance
from the training set. With the initial distantly-
supervised dataset that is blended with incorrectly-
labeled instances, we hope that our agent is ca-
pable of using the policy network to filter noisy
instances; Under this cleaned dataset, distant su-
pervision is then expected to achieve better per-
formance.

Rewards As previously mentioned, the intuition
of our model is that, when the incorrectly-labeled
instances are filtered, the better performance of re-
lation classifier will achieve. Therefore, we use the
change of performance as the result-driven reward
for a series of actions decided by the agent. Com-
pared to accuracy, we adopt the F1 score as the
evaluation criterion, since accuracy might not be
an indicative metric in a multi-class classification
setting where the data distribution could be imbal-
anced. Thus, the reward can be formulated as the

1We also tried the strategy that just builds a single agent
for all relation types: a binary classifier(TP/FP) or a multi-
class classifier(rela1/rela2/.../FP). But, it has the limitation
in the performance. We found that our one-agent-for-one-
relation strategy obtained better performance than the single
agent strategy.



2140

RL Agent Train
Relation
Classifier

𝐹"#$"

𝐹"#
×	 +𝓡# + 		×(−𝓡#)

Noisy
dataset
𝑃-./# Cleaned dataset

𝑃-
#$"

Cleaned dataset
𝑃-
#

Removed
part

Removed
part

Train

𝓡# = 𝛼(𝐹"# -	𝐹"#$")

Relation
ClassifierRL Agent

Epoch		𝑖 − 1 :

Epoch 	𝑖 :
Noisy
dataset
𝑃-./#

+𝑁-
./#

{𝑃6#$",𝑁6#$"}

𝑁-
#$"

𝑁-
./# +

𝑁-
#

{𝑃6#,𝑁6#}

Figure 2: The proposed policy-based reinforcement learning framework. The agent tries to remove the
wrong-labeled sentences from the distantly-supervised positive dataset P ori. In order to calculate the
reward, P ori is split into the training part P orit and the validation part P

ori
v ; their corresponding negative

part are represented asNorit andN
ori
v . In each epoch i, the agent performs a series of actions to recognize

the false positive samples from P orit and treat them as negative samples. Then, a new relation classifier
is trained under the new dataset {P it , N it}. With this relation classifier, F1 score is calculated from the
new validation set {P iv, N iv}, where P iv is also filtered by the current agent. After that, the current reward
is measured as the difference of F1 between the adjacent epochs.

difference between the adjacent epochs:

Ri = α(F
i
1 − F i−11 ) (1)

As this equation shows, in step i, our agent is given
a positive reward only if F1 gets improved; oth-
erwise, the agent will receive a negative reward.
Under this setting, the value of reward is propor-
tional to the difference of F1, and α is used to con-
vert this difference into a rational numeric range.
Naturally, the value of the reward is in a contin-
uous space, which is more reasonable than a bi-
nary reward (−1 and 1), because this setting can
reflect the number of wrong-labeled instance that
the agent has removed. In order to avoid the ran-
domness of F1, we use the average F1 of last five
epochs to calculate the reward.

Policy Network For each input sentence, our
policy network is to determine whether it ex-
presses the target relation type and then make re-
moval action if it is irrelevant to the target rela-
tion type. Thus, it is analogous to a binary re-
lation classifier. CNN is commonly used to con-
struct relation classification system (Santos et al.,
2015; Xu et al., 2015; Shen and Huang, 2016),
so we adopt a simple CNN with window size
cw and kernel size ck, to model policy network
π(s; θ). The reason why we do not choice the vari-
ants of CNN (Zeng et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2016)

that are well-designed for distant supervision is
that these two models belong to bag-level mod-
els (dealing with a bag of sentences simultane-
ously) and deal with the multi-classification prob-
lem; We just need a model to do binary sentence-
level classification. Naturally, the simpler network
is adopted.

3.1 Training Policy-based Agent

Unlike the goal of distant supervision relation ex-
traction, our agent is to determine whether an an-
notated sentence expresses the target relation type
rather than predict the relationship of entity pair,
so sentences are treated independently despite be-
longing to the same entity pair. In distant su-
pervision training dataset, one relation type con-
tains several thousands or ten thousands sentences;
moreover, reward R can only be calculated after
processing the whole positive set of this relation
type. If we randomly initialize the parameters of
policy network and train this network by trial and
errors, it will waste a lot of time and be inclined to
poor convergence properties. In order to overcome
this problem, we adopt a supervised learning pro-
cedure to pre-train our policy network, in which
way to provide a general learning direction for our
policy-based agent.



2141

3.1.1 Pre-training Strategy
The pre-training strategy, inspired from
AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016), is a common
strategy in RL related works to accelerate the
training of RL agents. Normally, they utilize a
small part of the annotated dataset to train policy
networks before reinforcement learning. For
example, AlphaGo uses the collected experts
moves to do a supervised learning for Go RL
agent. However, in distant supervision relation
extraction task, there is not any supervised in-
formation that can be used unless let linguistic
experts to do some manual annotations for part
of the entity pairs. However, this is expensive,
and it is not the original intention of distant
supervision. Under this circumstance, we propose
a compromised solution. With well-aligned
corpus, the true positive samples should have
evident advantage in quantity compared with
false positive samples in the distantly-supervised
dataset. So, for a specific relation type, we
directly treat the distantly-supervised positive
set as the positive set, and randomly extract
part of distantly-supervised negative set as the
negative set. In order to better consider prior
information during this pre-training procedure,
the amount of negative samples is 10 times of
the number of positive samples. It is because,
when learning with massive negative samples, the
agent is more likely to develop toward a better
direction. Cross-entropy cost function is used
to train this binary classifier, where the negative
label corresponds to the removing action, and the
positive label corresponds to the retaining action.

(2)
J(θ) =

∑
i

yilog[π(a = yi|si; θ)]

+ (1− yi)log[1− π(a = yi|si; θ)]

Due to the noisy nature of the distantly-labeled in-
stances, if we let this pre-training process overfit
this noisy dataset, the predicted probabilities of
most samples tend to be close to 0 or 1, which
is difficult to be corrected and unnecessarily in-
creases the training cost of reinforcement learning.
So, we stop this training process when the accu-
racy reaches 85% ∼ 90%. Theoretically, our ap-
proach can be explained as increasing the entropy
of the policy gradient agent, and preventing the en-
tropy of the policy being too low, which means
that the lack of exploration may be a concern.

3.1.2 Retraining Agent with Rewards

As shown in Figure 2, in order to discover
incorrectly-labeled instances without any super-
vised information, we introduce a policy-based
RL method. What our agent tries to deal with is
the noisy samples from the distantly-supervised
positive dataset; Here we call it as the DS pos-
itive dataset. We split it into the training posi-
tive set P orit and the validation positive set P

ori
v ;

naturally, both of these two set are noisy. Cor-
respondingly, the training negative set Norit and
the validation negative setNoriv are constructed by
randomly selected from the DS negative dataset.
In every epoch, the agent removes a noisy sam-
ple set Ψi from P orit according to the stochastic
policy π(a|s), and we obtain a new positive set
Pt = P

ori
t − Ψi. Because Ψi is recognized as

the wrong-labeled samples, we redistribute it into
the negative set Nt = Norit + Ψi. Under this set-
ting, the scale of training set is constant for each
epoch. Now we utilize the cleaned data {Pt, Nt}
to train a relation classifier. The desirable situa-
tion is that RL agent has the capacity to increase
the performance of relation classifier through relo-
cating incorrectly-labeled false positive instances.
Therefore, we use the validation set {P oriv , Noriv }
to measure the performance of the current agent.
First, this validation set is filtered and redistributed
by the current agent as {Pv, Nv}; the F1 score of
the current relation classifier is calculated from it.
Finally, the difference of F1 scores between the
current and previous epoch is used to calculate re-
ward. Next, we will introduce several strategies to
train a more robust RL agent.

Removing the fixed number of sentences in
each epoch In every epoch, we let the RL agent
to remove a fixed number of sentences or less
(when the number of the removed sentences in
one epoch does not reach this fixed number during
training), in which way to prevent the case that the
agent tries to remove more false positive instances
by removing more instances. Under the restriction
of fixed number, if the agent decides to remove
the current state, it means the chance of removing
other states decrease. Therefore, in order to obtain
a better reward, the agent should try to remove a
instance set that includes more negative instances.

Loss function The quality of the RL agent is re-
flected by the quality of the removed part. After
the pre-training process, the agent just possesses



2142

Algorithm 1 Retraining agent with rewards for relation k. For a clearer expression, k is omitted in the
following algorithm.
Require: Positive set {P orit , P oriv }, Negative set {Norit , Noriv }, the fixed number of removal γt, γv

1: Load parameters θ from pre-trained policy network
2: Initialize s∗ as the all-zero vector with the same dimension of sj
3: for epoch i = 1→ N do
4: for sj ∈ P orit do
5: s̃j = concatenation(sj , s

∗)
6: Randomly sample aj ∼ π(a|s̃j ; θ); compute pj = π(a = 0|s̃j ; θ)
7: if aj == 0 then
8: Save tuple tj = (s̃j , pj) in T and recompute the average vector of removed sentences s∗

9: end if
10: end for
11: Rank T based on pj from high to low, obtain Trank
12: for ti in Trank[: γt] do
13: Add ti[0] into Ψi
14: end for
15: P it = P

ori
t − Ψi, N it = Norit + Ψi, and generate the new validation set {P iv, N iv} with current

agent
16: Train the relation classifier based on {P it , N it}
17: Calculate F i1 on the new validation set {P iv, N iv}, and Save F i1, Ψi
18: R = α(F i1 − F

i−1
1 )

19: Ωi−1 = Ψi−1 −Ψi ∩Ψi−1; Ωi = Ψi −Ψi ∩Ψi−1
20:

21: Updata θ: g ∝ 5θ
∑Ωi log π(a|s; θ)R+5θ∑Ωi−1 log π(a|s; θ)(−R)

22: end for

the ability to distinguish the obvious false posi-
tive instances, which means the discrimination of
the indistinguishable wrong-labeled instances are
still ambiguous. Particularly, this indistinguish-
able part is the criterion to reflect the quality of
the agent. Therefore, regardless of these easy-
distinguished instances, the different parts of the
removed parts in different epochs are the determi-
nant of the change of F1 scores. Therefore, we
definite two sets:

Ωi−1 = Ψi−1 − (Ψi ∩Ψi−1) (3)
Ωi = Ψi − (Ψi ∩Ψi−1) (4)

where Ψi is the removed part of epoch i. Ωi−1 and
Ωi are represented with the different colors in Fig-
ure 2. If F1 score increases in the epoch i, it means
the actions of the epoch i is more reasonable than
that in the epoch i− 1. In other words, Ωi is more
negative than Ωi−1. Thus, we assign the positive
reward to Ωi and the negative reward to Ωi−1, and
vice versa. In summary, the ultimate loss function

is formulated as follow:

(5)
J(θ) =

Ωi∑
log π(a|s; θ)R

+

Ωi−1∑
log π(a|s; θ)(−R)

3.2 Redistributing Training Dataset with
Policy-based Agents

Through the above reinforcement learning proce-
dure, for each relation type, we obtain a agent as
the false-positive indicator. These agents possess
the capability of recognizing incorrectly-labeled
instances of the corresponding relation types. We
adopt these agents as classifiers to recognize false
positive samples in the noisy distantly-supervised
training dataset. For one entity pair, if all the sen-
tence aligned from corpus are classified as false
positive, then this entity pair is redistributed into
the negative set.

4 Experiments

We adopt a policy-based RL method to generate
a series of relation indicators and use them to re-



2143

distribute training dataset by moving false positive
samples to negative sample set. Therefore, our ex-
periments are intended to demonstrate that our RL
agents possess this capability.

4.1 Datast and Evaluation Metrics

We evaluate the proposed method on a commonly-
used dataset2, which is first presented in Riedel
et al. (2010). This dataset is generated by aligning
entity pairs from Freebase with New York Times
corpus(NYT). Entity mentions of NYT corpus are
recognized by the Stanford named entity recog-
nizer (Finkel et al., 2005). The sentences from the
years 2005-2006 are used as the training corpus
and sentences from 2007 are used as the testing
corpus. There are 52 actual relations and a special
relation NA which indicates there is no relation
between the head and tail entities. The sentences
of NA are from the entity pairs that exist in the
same sentence of the actual relations but do not
appear in the Freebase.

Similar to the previous works, we adopt the
held-out evaluation to evaluate our model, which
can provide an approximate measure of the clas-
sification ability without costly human evaluation.
Similar to the generation of the training set, the
entity pairs in test set are also selected from Free-
base, which will be predicted under the sentences
discovered from the NYT corpus.

4.2 Experimental Settings

4.2.1 Policy-based Agent
The action space of our RL agent just includes two
actions. Therefore, the agent can be modeled as a
binary classifier. We adopt a single-window CNN
as this policy network. The detailed hyperparam-
eter settings are presented in Table 1. As for word
embeddings, we directly use the word embedding
file released by Lin et al. (2016)3, which just keeps
the words that appear more than 100 times in
NYT. Moreover, we have the same dimension set-
ting of the position embedding, and the maximum
length of relative distance is −30 and 30 (“-” and
“+” represent the left and right side of the enti-
ties). The learning rate of reinforcement learning
is 2e−5. For each relation type, the fixed num-
ber γt, γv are according to the pre-trained agent.
When one relation type has too many distant-
supervised positive sentences (for example, /lo-

2http://iesl.cs.umass.edu/riedel/ecml/
3https://github.com/thunlp/NRE

Hyperparameter Value
Window size cw 3
Kernel size ck 100

Batch size 64
Regulator α 100

Table 1: Hyperparameter settings.

ID Relation Original Pretrain RL
1 /peo/per/pob 55.60 53.63 55.74
2 /peo/per/n 78.85 80.80 83.63
3 /peo/per/pl 86.65 89.62 90.76
4 /loc/loc/c 80.78 83.79 85.39
5 /loc/cou/ad 90.9 88.1 89.86
6 /bus/per/c 81.03 82.56 84.22
7 /loc/cou/c 88.10 93.78 95.19
8 /loc/adm/c 86.51 85.56 86.63
9 /loc/nei/n 96.51 97.20 98.23
10 /peo/dec/p 82.2 83.0 84.6

Table 2: Comparison of F1 scores among
three cases: the relation classifier is trained
with the original dataset, the redistributed
dataset generated by the pre-trained agent, and
the redistributed dataset generated by our RL
agent respectively. The name of relation
types are abbreviated: /peo/per/pob represents
/people/person/place of birth

cation/location/contains has 75768 sentences), we
sample a subset of size 7,500 sentences to train
the agent. For the average vector of the removed
sentences, in the pre-training process and the first
state of the retraining process, it is set as all-zero
vector.

4.2.2 Relation Classifier for Calculating
Reward

In order to evaluate a series of actions by agent, we
use a simple CNN model, because the simple net-
work is more sensitive to the quality of the training
set. The proportion between P orit and P

ori
v is 2:1,

and they are all derived from the training set of
Riedel dataset; the corresponding negative sample
setsNorit andN

ori
v are randomly selected from the

Riedel negative dataset, whose size is twice that of
their corresponding positive sets.

4.3 The Effectiveness of Reinforcement
Learning

In Table 2, we list the F1 scores before and after
adopting the proposed RL method. Even though
there are 52 actual relation types in Riedel dataset,
only 10 relation types have more than 1000 pos-



2144

0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4
Recall

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Pr
ec
is
io
n

CNN+ONE
CNN+ONE+RL
CNN+ATT
CNN+ATT+RL

Figure 3: Aggregate PR curves of CNN˙based
model.

0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4

Recall

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Pr
ec
is
io
n

PCNN+ONE
PCNN+ONE+RL
PCNN+ATT
PCNN+ATT+RL

Figure 4: Aggregate PR curves of PCNN˙based
model.

itive instances4. Because of the randomness of
deep neural network on the small-scale dataset, we
just train policy-based agents for these 10 relation
types. First, compared with Original case, most of
the Pretrain agents yield obvious improvements:
It not only demonstrates the rationality of our pre-
training strategy, but also verifies our hypothe-
sis that most of the positive samples in Riedel
dataset are true positive. More significantly, af-
ter retraining with the proposed policy-based RL
method, the F1 scores achieve further improve-
ment, even for the case the Pretrain agents per-
form bad. These comparable results illustrate that
the proposed policy-based RL method is capable
of making agents develop towards a good direc-
tion.

4The supervised relation classification task Semeval-2010
Task 8 (Hendrickx et al., 2009) annotates nearly 1,000 in-
stances for each relation type.

Model - +RL p-value
CNN+ONE 0.177 0.190 1.24e-4
CNN+ATT 0.219 0.229 7.63e-4
PCNN+ONE 0.206 0.220 8.35e-6
PCNN+ATT 0.253 0.261 4.36e-3

Table 3: Comparison of AUC values between pre-
vious studies and our RL method, and the p-value
of t-test.

4.4 Impact of False Positive Samples

Zeng et al. (2015) and Lin et al. (2016) are both
the robust models to solve wrong labeling problem
of distant supervision relation extraction. Zeng
et al. (2015) combine at-least-one multi-instance
learning with deep neural network to extract only
one active sentence to predict the relation between
entity pair; Lin et al. (2016) combine all sen-
tences of one entity pair and assign soft attention
weights to them, in which way to generate a com-
positive relation representation for this entity pair.
However, the false positive phenomenon also in-
cludes the case that all the sentences of one en-
tity pair are wrong, which is because the corpus is
not completely aligned with the knowledge base.
This phenomenon is also common between Riedel
dataset and Freebase through our manual inspec-
tion. Obviously, there is nothing the above two
methods can do in this case.

The proposed RL method is to tackle this prob-
lem. We adopt our RL agents to redistribute Riedel
dataset by moving false positive samples into the
negative sample set. Then we use Zeng et al.
(2015) and Lin et al. (2016) to predict relations on
this cleaned dataset, and compare the performance
with that on the original Riedel dataset. As shown
in Figure 3 and Figure 4, under the assistant of our
RL agent, the same model can achieve obvious im-
provement with more reasonable training dataset.
In order to give the more intuitive comparison, we
calculate the AUC value of each PR curve, which
reflects the area size under these curves. These
comparable results also indicate the effectiveness
of our policy-based RL method. Moreover, as can
be seen from the result of t-test evaluation, all the
p-values are less than 5e-02, so the improvements
are significant.

4.5 Case Study

Figure 5 indicates that, for different relations, the
scale of the detected false positive samples is not



2145

Relation /people/person/place of birth
FP 1. GHETTO SUPERSTAR ( THE MAN THAT I AM) – Ranging from Pittsburgh

to Broadway, Billy Porter performs his musical memoir.
FP 1. “They are trying to create a united front at home in the face of the pressures Syria

is facing,“ said Sami Moubayed, a political analyst and writer here.
2. “Iran injected Syria with a lot of confidence: stand up, show defiance,“ said Sami
Moubayed, a political analyst and writer in Damascus.

Relation /people/deceased person/place of death
FP 1. Some New York city mayors – William O’Dwyer, Vincent R. Impellitteri and

Abraham Beame – were born abroad.
2. Plenty of local officials have, too, including two New York city mayors, James J.
Walker, in 1932, and William O’Dwyer, in 1950.

Table 4: Some examples of the false positive samples detected by our policy-based agent. Each row
denotes the annotated sentences of one entity pair.

proportional to the original scale, which is in ac-
cordance with the actual accident situation. At
the same time, we analyze the correlation between
the false positive phenomenon and the number of
sentences of entity pairs : With this the number
ranging from 1 to 5, the corresponding percent-
ages are [55.9%, 32.0%, 3.7%, 4.4%, 0.7%]. This
distribution is consistent with our assumption. Be-
cause Freebase is, to some extent, not completely
aligned with the NYT corpus, entity pairs with
fewer sentences are more likely to be false posi-
tive, which is the major factor hindering the per-
formance of the previous systems. In Table 4, we
present some false positive examples selected by
our agents. Taking entity pair (Sami Moubayed,
Syria) as an example, it is obvious that there is not
any valuable information reflecting relation /peo-
ple/person/place of birth. Both of these sentences
talks about the situation analysis of Syria from the
political analyst Sami Moubayed. We also found
that, for some entity pairs, even though there are
multiple sentences, all of them are identical. This
phenomenon also increases the probability of the
appearance of false positive samples.

5 Conclusion

In this work, we propose a deep reinforcement
learning framework for robust distant supervision.
The intuition is that, in contrast to prior works that
utilize only one instance per entity pair and use
soft attention weights to select plausible distantly
supervised examples, we describe a policy-based
framework to systematically learn to relocate the
false positive samples, and better utilize the un-
labeled data. More specifically, our goal is to

0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

EN
TI
TY

PA
IR

AM
O
U
N
T

RELATION ID

Removed Total

Figure 5: This figure presents the scale of the re-
moved part for each relation type, where the hori-
zontal axis corresponds to the IDs in Table 2.

teach the reinforcement agent to optimize the se-
lection/redistribution strategy that maximizes the
reward of boosting the performance of relation
classification. An important aspect of our work
is that our framework does not depend on a spe-
cific form of the relation classifier, meaning that it
is a plug-and-play technique that could be poten-
tially applied to any relation extraction pipeline. In
experiments, we show that our framework boosts
the performance of distant supervision relation ex-
traction of various strong deep learning baselines
on the widely used New York Times - Freebase
dataset.

Acknowledge

This work was supported by National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (61702047), Beijing
Natural Science Foundation (4174098), the Fun-
damental Research Funds for the Central Univer-
sities (2017RC02) and National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61703234)



2146

References
Kai Arulkumaran, Marc Peter Deisenroth, Miles

Brundage, and Anil Anthony Bharath. 2017. A
brief survey of deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.05866.

Razvan Bunescu and Raymond J Mooney. 2005. Sub-
sequence kernels for relation extraction. In NIPS,
pages 171–178.

Meng Fang, Yuan Li, and Trevor Cohn. 2017. Learning
how to active learn: A deep reinforcement learning
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02383.

Jun Feng, Minlie Huang, Li Zhao, Yang Yang, and Xi-
aoyan Zhu. 2018. Reinforcement learning for rela-
tion classification from noisy data.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs
sampling. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual meet-
ing on association for computational linguistics,
pages 363–370. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Zhou GuoDong, Su Jian, Zhang Jie, and Zhang Min.
2005. Exploring various knowledge in relation ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual meeting
on association for computational linguistics, pages
427–434. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Iris Hendrickx, Su Nam Kim, Zornitsa Kozareva,
Preslav Nakov, Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha, Sebastian
Padó, Marco Pennacchiotti, Lorenza Romano, and
Stan Szpakowicz. 2009. Semeval-2010 task 8:
Multi-way classification of semantic relations be-
tween pairs of nominals. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Semantic Evaluations: Recent
Achievements and Future Directions, pages 94–99.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Raphael Hoffmann, Congle Zhang, Xiao Ling, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Daniel S Weld. 2011. Knowledge-
based weak supervision for information extraction
of overlapping relations. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies-
Volume 1, pages 541–550. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Guoliang Ji, Kang Liu, Shizhu He, Jun Zhao, et al.
2017. Distant supervision for relation extraction
with sentence-level attention and entity descriptions.
In AAAI, pages 3060–3066.

Yankai Lin, Shiqi Shen, Zhiyuan Liu, Huanbo Luan,
and Maosong Sun. 2016. Neural relation extraction
with selective attention over instances. In ACL (1).

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Juraf-
sky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation extrac-
tion without labeled data. In Proceedings of the
Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the

ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP: Vol-
ume 2-Volume 2, pages 1003–1011. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Sil-
ver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
stra, and Martin Riedmiller. 2013. Playing atari
with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.5602.

Thien Huu Nguyen and Ralph Grishman. 2015. Event
detection and domain adaptation with convolutional
neural networks. In ACL (2), pages 365–371.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCal-
lum. 2010. Modeling relations and their mentions
without labeled text. In Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pages 148–163.
Springer.

Benjamin Roth, Tassilo Barth, Michael Wiegand, and
Dietrich Klakow. 2013. A survey of noise reduction
methods for distant supervision. In Proceedings of
the 2013 workshop on Automated knowledge base
construction, pages 73–78. ACM.

Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Bing Xiang, and Bowen
Zhou. 2015. Classifying relations by ranking with
convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.06580.

Yatian Shen and Xuanjing Huang. 2016. Attention-
based convolutional neural network for semantic re-
lation extraction. In Proceedings of COLING 2016,
the 26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur
Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Ju-
lian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Pan-
neershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. 2016. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree
search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489.

Mihai Surdeanu, Julie Tibshirani, Ramesh Nallapati,
and Christopher D Manning. 2012. Multi-instance
multi-label learning for relation extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 455–
465. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kun Xu, Yansong Feng, Songfang Huang, and
Dongyan Zhao. 2015. Semantic relation clas-
sification via convolutional neural networks
with simple negative sampling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.07650.

Dmitry Zelenko, Chinatsu Aone, and Anthony
Richardella. 2003. Kernel methods for relation ex-
traction. Journal of machine learning research,
3(Feb):1083–1106.



2147

Daojian Zeng, Kang Liu, Yubo Chen, and Jun Zhao.
2015. Distant supervision for relation extraction via
piecewise convolutional neural networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Lis-
bon, Portugal, pages 17–21.

Daojian Zeng, Kang Liu, Siwei Lai, Guangyou Zhou,
Jun Zhao, et al. 2014. Relation classification via
convolutional deep neural network. In COLING,
pages 2335–2344.


