











































A Multi-Axis Annotation Scheme for Event Temporal Relations


Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Long Papers), pages 1318–1328
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

1318

A Multi-Axis Annotation Scheme for Event Temporal Relations

Qiang Ning,1 Hao Wu,2 Dan Roth1,2
Department of Computer Science

1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
2University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
qning2@illinois.edu, {haowu4,danroth}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

Existing temporal relation (TempRel) an-
notation schemes often have low inter-
annotator agreements (IAA) even between
experts, suggesting that the current anno-
tation task needs a better definition. This
paper proposes a new multi-axis modeling
to better capture the temporal structure of
events. In addition, we identify that event
end-points are a major source of confu-
sion in annotation, so we also propose to
annotate TempRels based on start-points
only. A pilot expert annotation effort us-
ing the proposed scheme shows signifi-
cant improvement in IAA from the con-
ventional 60’s to 80’s (Cohen’s Kappa).
This better-defined annotation scheme fur-
ther enables the use of crowdsourcing to
alleviate the labor intensity for each anno-
tator. We hope that this work can foster
more interesting studies towards event un-
derstanding.1

1 Introduction

Temporal relation (TempRel) extraction is an im-
portant task for event understanding, and it has
drawn much attention in the natural language
processing (NLP) community recently (UzZaman
et al., 2013; Chambers et al., 2014; Llorens et al.,
2015; Minard et al., 2015; Bethard et al., 2015,
2016, 2017; Leeuwenberg and Moens, 2017; Ning
et al., 2017, 2018a,b).

Initiated by TimeBank (TB) (Pustejovsky et al.,
2003b), a number of TempRel datasets have been
collected, including but not limited to the verb-
clause augmentation to TB (Bethard et al., 2007),

1The dataset is publicly available at https://
cogcomp.org/page/publication_view/834.

TempEval1-3 (Verhagen et al., 2007, 2010; UzZa-
man et al., 2013), TimeBank-Dense (TB-Dense)
(Cassidy et al., 2014), EventTimeCorpus (Reimers
et al., 2016), and datasets with both temporal
and other types of relations (e.g., coreference and
causality) such as CaTeRs (Mostafazadeh et al.,
2016) and RED (O’Gorman et al., 2016). These
datasets were annotated by experts, but most
still suffered from low inter-annotator agreements
(IAA). For instance, the IAAs of TB-Dense, RED
and THYME-TimeML (Styler IV et al., 2014)
were only below or near 60% (given that events
are already annotated). Since a low IAA usually
indicates that the task is difficult even for humans
(see Examples 1-3), the community has been look-
ing into ways to simplify the task, by reducing
the label set, and by breaking up the overall, com-
plex task into subtasks (e.g., getting agreement on
which event pairs should have a relation, and then
what that relation should be) (Mostafazadeh et al.,
2016; O’Gorman et al., 2016). In contrast to other
existing datasets, Bethard et al. (2007) achieved
an agreement as high as 90%, but the scope of its
annotation was narrowed down to a very special
verb-clause structure.

(e1, e2), (e3, e4), and (e5, e6): TempRels that are diffi-
cult even for humans. Note that only relevant events are
highlighted here.
Example 1: Serbian police tried to eliminate the pro-
independence Kosovo Liberation Army and (e1:restore) or-
der. At least 51 people were (e2:killed) in clashes between
Serb police and ethnic Albanians in the troubled region.
Example 2: Service industries (e3:showed) solid job gains,
as did manufacturers, two areas expected to be hardest
(e4:hit) when the effects of the Asian crisis hit the Amer-
ican economy.
Example 3: We will act again if we have evidence he is
(e5:rebuilding) his weapons of mass destruction capabili-
ties, senior officials say. In a bit of television diplomacy,
Iraq’s deputy foreign minister (e6:responded) from Bagh-
dad in less than one hour, saying that . . .

This paper proposes a new approach to handling

https://cogcomp.org/page/publication_view/834
https://cogcomp.org/page/publication_view/834


1319

these issues in TempRel annotation. First, we in-
troduce multi-axis modeling to represent the tem-
poral structure of events, based on which we an-
chor events to different semantic axes; only events
from the same axis will then be temporally com-
pared (Sec. 2). As explained later, those event
pairs in Examples 1-3 are difficult because they
represent different semantic phenomena and be-
long to different axes. Second, while we repre-
sent an event pair using two time intervals (say,
[t1start, t

1
end] and [t

2
start, t

2
end]), we suggest that

comparisons involving end-points (e.g., t1end vs.
t2end) are typically more difficult than comparing
start-points (i.e., t1start vs. t2start); we attribute this
to the ambiguity of expressing and perceiving du-
rations of events (Coll-Florit and Gennari, 2011).
We believe that this is an important consideration,
and we propose in Sec. 3 that TempRel annotation
should focus on start-points. Using the proposed
annotation scheme, a pilot study done by experts
achieved a high IAA of .84 (Cohen’s Kappa) on
a subset of TB-Dense, in contrast to the conven-
tional 60’s.

In addition to the low IAA issue, TempRel
annotation is also known to be labor intensive.
Our third contribution is that we facilitate, for
the first time, the use of crowdsourcing to col-
lect a new, high quality (under multiple metrics
explained later) TempRel dataset. We explain
how the crowdsourcing quality was controlled and
how vague relations were handled in Sec. 4, and
present some statistics and the quality of the new
dataset in Sec. 5. A baseline system is also shown
to achieve much better performance on the new
dataset, when compared with system performance
in the literature (Sec. 6). The paper’s results are
very encouraging and hopefully, this work would
significantly benefit research in this area.

2 Temporal Structure of Events

Given a set of events, one important question in
designing the TempRel annotation task is: which
pairs of events should have a relation? The answer
to it depends on the modeling of the overall tem-
poral structure of events.

2.1 Motivation

TimeBank (Pustejovsky et al., 2003b) laid the
foundation for many later TempRel corpora, e.g.,
(Bethard et al., 2007; UzZaman et al., 2013; Cas-

sidy et al., 2014).2 In TimeBank, the annotators
were allowed to label TempRels between any pairs
of events. This setup models the overall structure
of events using a general graph, which made an-
notators inadvertently overlook some pairs, result-
ing in low IAAs and many false negatives.

Example 4: Dense Annotation Scheme.
Serbian police (e7:tried) to (e8:eliminate) the pro-
independence Kosovo Liberation Army and (e1:restore) or-
der. At least 51 people were (e2:killed) in clashes between
Serb police and ethnic Albanians in the troubled region.
Given 4 NON-GENERIC events above, the dense scheme
presents 6 pairs to annotators one by one: (e7, e8), (e7,
e1), (e7, e2), (e8, e1), (e8, e2), and (e1, e2). Apparently,
not all pairs are well-defined, e.g., (e8, e2) and (e1, e2),
but annotators are forced to label all of them.

To address this issue, Cassidy et al. (2014)
proposed a dense annotation scheme, TB-Dense,
which annotates all event pairs within a slid-
ing, two-sentence window (see Example 4). It
requires all TempRels between GENERIC3 and
NON-GENERIC events to be labeled as vague,
which conceptually models the overall structure
by two disjoint time-axes: one for the NON-
GENERIC and the other one for the GENERIC.

However, as shown by Examples 1-3 in which
the highlighted events are NON-GENERIC, the
TempRels may still be ill-defined: In Example 1,
Serbian police tried to restore order but ended up
with conflicts. It is reasonable to argue that the at-
tempt to e1:restore order happened before the con-
flict where 51 people were e2:killed; or, 51 people
had been killed but order had not been restored
yet, so e1:restore is after e2:killed. Similarly,
in Example 2, service industries and manufactur-
ers were originally expected to be hardest e4:hit
but actually e3:showed gains, so e4:hit is before
e3:showed; however, one can also argue that the
two areas had showed gains but had not been hit,
so e4:hit is after e3:showed. Again, e5:rebuilding
is a hypothetical event: “we will act if rebuild-
ing is true”. Readers do not know for sure if
“he is already rebuilding weapons but we have
no evidence”, or “he will be building weapons in
the future”, so annotators may disagree on the re-
lation between e5:rebuilding and e6:responded.
Despite, importantly, minimizing missing annota-

2EventTimeCorpus (Reimers et al., 2016) is based on
TimeBank, but aims at anchoring events onto explicit
time expressions in each document rather than annotating
TempRels between events, which can be a good complemen-
tary to other TempRel datasets.

3For example, lions eat meat is GENERIC.



1320

tions, the current dense scheme forces annotators
to label many such ill-defined pairs, resulting in
low IAA.

2.2 Multi-Axis Modeling

Arguably, an ideal annotator may figure out the
above ambiguity by him/herself and mark them
as vague, but it is not a feasible requirement for
all annotators to stay clear-headed for hours; let
alone crowdsourcers. What makes things worse
is that, after annotators spend a long time figur-
ing out these difficult cases, whether they disagree
with each other or agree on the vagueness, the final
decisions for such cases will still be vague.

As another way to handle this dilemma, TB-
Dense resorted to a 80% confidence rule: anno-
tators were allowed to choose a label if one is 80%
sure that it was the writer’s intent. However, as
pointed out by TB-Dense, annotators are likely to
have rather different understandings of 80% confi-
dence and it will still end up with disagreements.

In contrast to these annotation difficulties, hu-
mans can easily grasp the meaning of news arti-
cles, implying a potential gap between the diffi-
culty of the annotation task and the one of under-
standing the actual meaning of the text. In Ex-
amples 1-3, the writers did not intend to explain
the TempRels between those pairs, and the orig-
inal annotators of TimeBank4 did not label rela-
tions between those pairs either, which indicates
that both writers and readers did not think the
TempRels between these pairs were crucial. In-
stead, what is crucial in these examples is that
“Serbian police tried to restore order but killed
51 people”, that “two areas were expected to be
hit but showed gains”, and that “if he rebuilds
weapons then we will act.” To “restore order”,
to be “hardest hit”, and “if he was rebuilding”
were only the intention of police, the opinion of
economists, and the condition to act, respectively,
and whether or not they actually happen is not the
focus of those writers.

This discussion suggests that a single axis is too
restrictive to represent the complex structure of
NON-GENERIC events. Instead, we need a model-
ing which is more restrictive than a general graph
so that annotators can focus on relation annota-
tion (rather than looking for pairs first), but also
more flexible than a single axis so that ill-defined

4Recall that they were given the entire article and only
salient relations would be annotated.

Event Type Category
INTENTION, OPINION On an orthogonal axis

HYPOTHESIS, GENERIC On a parallel axis
NEGATION Not on any axis

STATIC, RECURRENT Other

Table 1: The interpretation of various event types that
are not on the main axis in the proposed multi-axis
modeling. The names are rather straightforward; see
examples for each in Appendix A.

relations are not forcibly annotated. Specifically,
we need axes for intentions, opinions, hypotheses,
etc. in addition to the main axis of an article. We
thus argue for multi-axis modeling, as defined in
Table 1. Following the proposed modeling, Ex-
amples 1-3 can be represented as in Fig. 1. This
modeling aims at capturing what the author has
explicitly expressed and it only asks annotators to
look at comparable pairs, rather than forcing them
to make decisions on often vaguely defined pairs.

tried e2: killed

e1:restore order

Main axis

Intention axis of “tried”

e5:rebuilding have evidence act

e6:responded
saying

officials say
Main axis

Hypothetical axis

crisis hit America

e3:showed

e4:hardest hit

Main axis

Opinion axis of “expected”

expectedAsian crisis

Figure 1: A multi-axis view of Examples 1-3. Only
events on the same axis are compared.

In practice, we annotate one axis at a time: we
first classify if an event is anchorable onto a given
axis (this is also called the anchorability anno-
tation step); then we annotate every pair of an-
chorable events (i.e., the relation annotation step);
finally, we can move to another axis and repeat the
two steps above. Note that ruling out cross-axis re-
lations is only a strategy we adopt in this paper to
separate well-defined relations from ill-defined re-
lations. We do not claim that cross-axis relations
are unimportant; instead, as shown in Fig. 2, we
think that cross-axis relations are a different se-
mantic phenomenon that requires additional inves-
tigation.



1321

2.3 Comparisons with Existing Work

There have been other proposals of temporal struc-
ture modelings (Bramsen et al., 2006; Bethard
et al., 2012), but in general, the semantic phenom-
ena handled in our work are very different and
complementary to them. (Bramsen et al., 2006) in-
troduces “temporal segments” (a fragment of text
that does not exhibit abrupt changes) in the med-
ical domain. Similarly, their temporal segments
can also be considered as a special temporal struc-
ture modeling. But a key difference is that (Bram-
sen et al., 2006) only annotates inter-segment re-
lations, ignoring intra-segment ones. Since those
segments are usually large chunks of text, the se-
mantics handled in (Bramsen et al., 2006) is in a
very coarse granularity (as pointed out by (Bram-
sen et al., 2006)) and is thus different from ours.

(Bethard et al., 2012) proposes a tree struc-
ture for children’s stories, which “typically have
simpler temporal structures”, as they pointed out.
Moreover, in their annotation, an event can only
be linked to a single nearby event, even if multiple
nearby events may exist, whereas we do not have
such restrictions.

In addition, some of the semantic phenomena
in Table 1 have been discussed in existing work.
Here we compare with them for a better position-
ing of the proposed scheme.

2.3.1 Axis Projection
TB-Dense handled the incomparability between
main-axis events and HYPOTHESIS/NEGATION
by treating an event as having occurred if the
event is HYPOTHESIS/NEGATION.5 In our multi-
axis modeling, the strategy adopted by TB-Dense
falls into a more general approach, “axis pro-
jection”. That is, projecting events across dif-
ferent axes to handle the incomparability be-
tween any two axes (not limited to HYPOTHE-
SIS/NEGATION). Axis projection works well for
certain event pairs like Asian crisis and e4:hardest
hit in Example 2: as in Fig. 1, Asian crisis is be-
fore expected, which is again before e4:hardest
hit, so Asian crisis is before e4:hardest hit.

Generally, however, since there is no direct ev-
idence that can guide the projection, annotators
may have different projections (imagine project-
ing e5:rebuilding onto the main axis: is it in the
past or in the future?). As a result, axis projec-

5In the case of Example 3, it is to treat rebuilding as actu-
ally happened and then link it to responded.

tion requires many specially designed guidelines
or strong external knowledge. Annotators have
to rigidly follow the sometimes counter-intuitive
guidelines or “guess” a label instead of looking for
evidence in the text.

When strong external knowledge is involved in
axis projection, it becomes a reasoning process
and the resulting relations are a different type. For
example, a reader may reason that in Example 3,
it is well-known that they did “act again”, imply-
ing his e5:rebuilding had happened and is before
e6:responded. Another example is in Fig. 2. It is
obvious that relations based on these projections
are not the same with and more challenging than
those same-axis relations, so in the current stage,
we should focus on same-axis relations only.

worked hard attended

submit a paper

Main axis

Intention axis

Figure 2: In I worked hard to submit a paper . . . I at-
tended the conference, the projection of submit a paper
onto the main axis is clearly before attended. However,
this projection requires strong external knowledge that
a paper should be submitted before attending a confer-
ence. Again, this projection is only a guess based on
our external knowledge and it is still open whether the
paper is submitted or not.

2.3.2 Introduction of the Orthogonal Axes
Another prominent difference to earlier work is
the introduction of orthogonal axes, which has not
been used in any existing work as we know. A spe-
cial property is that the intersection event of two
axes can be compared to events from both, which
can sometimes bridge events, e.g., in Fig. 1, Asian
crisis is seemingly before hardest hit due to their
connections to expected. Since Asian crisis is on
the main axis, it seems that e4:hardest hit is on
the main axis as well. However, the “hardest hit”
in “Asian crisis before hardest hit” is only a pro-
jection of the original e4:hardest hit onto the real
axis and is valid only when this OPINION is true.

Nevertheless, OPINIONS are not always true
and INTENTIONS are not always fulfilled. In Ex-
ample 5, e9:sponsoring and e10:resolve are the
opinions of the West and the speaker, respectively;
whether or not they are true depends on the au-



1322

thors’ implications or the readers’ understandings,
which is often beyond the scope of TempRel an-
notation.6 Example 6 demonstrates a similar sit-
uation for INTENTIONS: when reading the sen-
tence of e11:report, people are inclined to believe
that it is fulfilled. But if we read the sentence of
e12:report, we have reason to believe that it is not.
When it comes to e13:tell, it is unclear if everyone
told the truth. The existence of such examples in-
dicates that orthogonal axes are a better modeling
for INTENTIONS and OPINIONS.

Example 5: Opinion events may not always be true.
He is ostracized by the West for (e9:sponsoring) terrorism.
We need to (e10:resolve) the deep-seated causes that have
resulted in these problems.
Example 6: Intentions may not always be fulfilled.
A passerby called the police to (e11:report) the body.
A passerby called the police to (e12:report) the body. Un-
fortunately, the line was busy.
I asked everyone to (e13:tell) the truth.

2.3.3 Differences from Factuality
Event modality have been discussed in many exist-
ing event annotation schemes, e.g., Event Nugget
(Mitamura et al., 2015), Rich ERE (Song et al.,
2015), and RED. Generally, an event is classified
as Actual or Non-Actual, a.k.a. factuality (Saurı́
and Pustejovsky, 2009; Lee et al., 2015).

The main-axis events defined in this paper seem
to be very similar to Actual events, but with sev-
eral important differences: First, future events are
Non-Actual because they indeed have not hap-
pened, but they may be on the main axis. Sec-
ond, events that are not on the main axis can also
be Actual events, e.g., intentions that are fulfilled,
or opinions that are true. Third, as demonstrated
by Examples 5-6, identifying anchorability as de-
fined in Table 1 is relatively easy, but judging if an
event actually happened is often a high-level un-
derstanding task that requires an understanding of
the entire document or external knowledge.

Interested readers are referred to Appendix B
for a detailed analysis of the difference between
Anchorable (onto the main axis) and Actual on a
subset of RED.

3 Interval Splitting

All existing annotation schemes adopt the interval
representation of events (Allen, 1984) and there

6For instance, there is undoubtedly a causal link between
e9:sponsoring and ostracized.

are 13 relations between two intervals (for read-
ers who are not familiar with it, please see Fig. 4
in the appendix). To reduce the burden of annota-
tors, existing schemes often resort to a reduced set
of the 13 relations. For instance, Verhagen et al.
(2007) merged all the overlap relations into a sin-
gle relation, overlap. Bethard et al. (2007); Do
et al. (2012); O’Gorman et al. (2016) all adopted
this strategy. In Cassidy et al. (2014), they further
split overlap into includes, included and equal.

Let [t1start, t1end] and [t
2
start, t

2
end] be the time in-

tervals of two events (with the implicit assumption
that tstart  tend). Instead of reducing the rela-
tions between two intervals, we try to explicitly
compare the time points (see Fig. 3). In this way,
the label set is simply before, after and equal,7

while the expressivity remains the same. This in-
terval splitting technique has also been used in
(Raghavan et al., 2012).

[!"#$%#& , !()*& ] [!"#$%#+ , !()*+ ]
time

Figure 3: The comparison of two event time intervals,
[t1start, t

1
end] and [t

2
start, t

2
end], can be decomposed into

four comparisons t1start vs. t2start, t1start vs. t2end, t
1
end

vs. t2start, and t1end vs. t
2
end, without loss of generality.

In addition to same expressivity, interval split-
ting can provide even more information when the
relation between two events is vague. In the con-
ventional setting, imagine that the annotators find
that the relation between two events can be either
before or before and overlap. Then the result-
ing annotation will have to be vague, although the
annotators actually agree on the relation between
t1start and t2start. Using interval splitting, however,
such information can be preserved.

An obvious downside of interval splitting is the
increased number of annotations needed (4 point
comparisons vs. 1 interval comparison). In prac-
tice, however, it is usually much fewer than 4 com-
parisons. For example, when we see t1end < t

2
start

(as in Fig. 3), the other three can be skipped be-
cause they can all be inferred. Moreover, although
the number of annotations is increased, the work
load for human annotators may still be the same,
because even in the conventional scheme, they still
need to think of the relations between start- and

7We will discuss vague in Sec. 4.



1323

end-points before they can make a decision.

3.1 Ambiguity of End-Points
During our pilot annotation, the annotation quality
dropped significantly when the annotators needed
to reason about relations involving end-points of
events. Table 2 shows four metrics of task diffi-
culty when only t1start vs. t2start or t1end vs. t

2
end

are annotated. Non-anchorable events were re-
moved for both jobs. The first two metrics, quali-
fying pass rate and survival rate are related to the
two quality control protocols (see Sec. 4.1 for de-
tails). We can see that when annotating the re-
lations between end-points, only one out of ten
crowdsourcers (11%) could successfully pass our
qualifying test; and even if they had passed it, half
of them (56%) would have been kicked out in the
middle of the task. The third line is the overall
accuracy on gold set from all crowdsourcers (ex-
cluding those who did not pass the qualifying test),
which drops from 67% to 37% when annotating
end-end relations. The last line is the average re-
sponse time per annotation and we can see that it
takes much longer to label an end-end TempRel
(52s) than a start-start TempRel (33s). This im-
portant discovery indicates that the TempRels be-
tween end-points is probably governed by a differ-
ent linguistic phenomenon.

Metric t1start vs. t2start t1end vs. t
2
end

Qualification pass rate 50% 11%
Survival rate 74% 56%

Accuracy on gold 67% 37%
Avg. response time 33s 52s

Table 2: Annotations involving the end-points of events
are found to be much harder than only comparing the
start-points.

We hypothesize that the difficulty is a mixture
of how durative events are expressed (by authors)
and perceived (by readers) in natural language.
In cognitive psychology, Coll-Florit and Gennari
(2011) discovered that human readers take longer
to perceive durative events than punctual events,
e.g., owe 50 bucks vs. lost 50 bucks. From the
writer’s standpoint, durations are usually fuzzy
(Schockaert and De Cock, 2008), or assumed to
be a prior knowledge of readers (e.g., college
takes 4 years and watching an NBA game takes a
few hours), and thus not always written explicitly.
Given all these reasons, we ignore the comparison
of end-points in this work, although event duration
is indeed, another important task.

4 Annotation Scheme Design

To summarize, with the proposed multi-axis mod-
eling (Sec. 2) and interval splitting (Sec. 3), our
annotation scheme is two-step. First, we mark
every event candidate as being temporally An-
chorable or not (based on the time axis we are
working on). Second, we adopt the dense annota-
tion scheme to label TempRels only between An-
chorable events. Note that we only work on verb
events in this paper, so non-verb event candidates
are also deleted in a preprocessing step. We design
crowdsourcing tasks for both steps and as we show
later, high crowdsourcing quality was achieved on
both tasks. In this section, we will discuss some
practical issues.

4.1 Quality Control for Crowdsourcing
We take advantage of the quality control feature
in CrowdFlower in our crowdsourcing jobs. For
any job, a set of examples are annotated by ex-
perts beforehand, which is considered gold and
will serve two purposes. (i) Qualifying test: Any
crowdsourcer who wants to work on this job has to
pass with 70% accuracy on 10 questions randomly
selected from the gold set. (ii) Surviving test:
During the annotation process, questions from the
gold set will be randomly given to crowdsourcers
without notice, and one has to maintain 70% accu-
racy on the gold set till the end of the annotation;
otherwise, he or she will be forbidden from work-
ing on this job anymore and all his/her annotations
will be discarded. At least 5 different annotators
are required for every judgement and by default,
the majority vote will be the final decision.

4.2 Vague Relations
How to handle vague relations is another issue in
temporal annotation. In non-dense schemes, anno-
tators usually skip the annotation of a vague pair.
In dense schemes, a majority agreement rule is ap-
plied as a postprocessing step to back off a deci-
sion to vague when annotators cannot pass a ma-
jority vote (Cassidy et al., 2014), which reminds
us that annotators often label a vague relation as
non-vague due to lack of thinking.

We decide to proactively reduce the possibil-
ity of such situations. As mentioned earlier, our
label set for t1start vs. t2start is before, after,
equal and vague. We ask two questions: Q1=Is
it possible that t1start is before t2start? Q2=Is it
possible that t2start is before t1start? Let the an-



1324

swers be A1 and A2. Then we have a one-
to-one mapping as follows: A1=A2=yes7!vague,
A1=A2=no7!equal, A1=yes, A2=no 7!before, and
A1=no, A2=yes 7!after. An advantage is that one
will be prompted to think about all possibilities,
thus reducing the chance of overlook.

Finally, the annotation interface we used is
shown in Appendix C.

5 Corpus Statistics and Quality

In this section, we first focus on annotations on
the main axis, which is usually the primary story-
line and thus has most events. Before launching
the crowdsourcing tasks, we checked the IAA be-
tween two experts on a subset of TB-Dense (about
100 events and 400 relations). A Cohen’s Kappa
of .85 was achieved in the first step: anchorabil-
ity annotation. Only those events that both ex-
perts labeled Anchorable were kept before they
moved onto the second step: relation annotation,
for which the Cohen’s Kappa was .90 for Q1 and
.87 for Q2. Table 3 furthermore shows the distri-
bution, Cohen’s Kappa, and F1 of each label. We
can see the Kappa and F1 of vague (=.75, F1=.81)
are generally lower than those of the other labels,
confirming that temporal vagueness is a more dif-
ficult semantic phenomenon. Nevertheless, the
overall IAA shown in Table 3 is a significant im-
provement compared to existing datasets.

b a e v Overall
Distribution .49 .23 .02 .26 1

IAA: Cohen’s  .90 .87 1 .75 .84
IAA: F1 .92 .93 1 .81 .90

Table 3: IAA of two experts’ annotations in a pilot
study on the main axis. Notations: before, after, equal,
and vague.

With the improved IAA confirmed by experts,
we sequentially launched the two-step crowd-
sourcing tasks through CrowdFlower on top of
the same 36 documents of TB-Dense. To evalu-
ate how well the crowdsourcers performed on our
task, we calculate two quality metrics: accuracy
on the gold set and the Worker Agreement with
Aggregate (WAWA). WAWA indicates the average
number of crowdsourcers’ responses agreed with
the aggregate answer (we used majority aggrega-
tion for each question). For example, if N individ-
ual responses were obtained in total, and n of them
were correct when compared to the aggregate an-
swer, then WAWA is simply n/N . In the first step,

crowdsourcers labeled 28% of the events as Non-
Anchorable to the main axis, with an accuracy on
the gold of .86 and a WAWA of .79.

With Non-Anchorable events filtered, the re-
lation annotation step was launched as another
crowdsourcing task. The label distribution is
b=.50, a=.28, e=.03, and v=.19 (consistent with
Table 3). In Table 4, we show the annotation
quality of this step using accuracy on the gold set
and WAWA. We can see that the crowdsourcers
achieved a very good performance on the gold set,
indicating that they are consistent with the authors
who created the gold set; these crowdsourcers also
achieved a high-level agreement under the WAWA
metric, indicating that they are consistent among
themselves. These two metrics indicate that the
annotation task is now well-defined and easy to
understand even by non-experts.

No. Metric Q1 Q2 All
1 Accuracy on Gold .89 .88 .88
2 WAWA .82 .81 .81

Table 4: Quality analysis of the relation annotation step
of MATRES. “Q1” and “Q2” refer to the two ques-
tions crowdsourcers were asked (see Sec. 4.2 for de-
tails). Line 1 measures the level of consistency be-
tween crowdsourcers and the authors and line 2 mea-
sures the level of consistency among the crowdsourcers
themselves.

We continued to annotate INTENTION and
OPINION which create orthogonal branches on
the main axis. In the first step, crowdsourcers
achieved an accuracy on gold of .82 and a WAWA
of .89. Since only 16% of the events are in this cat-
egory and these axes are usually very short (e.g.,
allocate funds to build a museum.), the annotation
task is relatively small and two experts took the
second step and achieved an agreement of .86 (F1).

We name our new dataset MATRES for Multi-
Axis Temporal RElations for Start-points. Each
individual judgement cost us $0.01 and MATRES
in total cost about $400 for 36 documents.

5.1 Comparison to TB-Dense
To get another checkpoint of the quality of the new
dataset, we compare with the annotations of TB-
Dense. TB-Dense has 1.1K verb events, between
which 3.4K event-event (EE) relations are anno-
tated. In the new dataset, 72% of the events (0.8K)
are anchored onto the main axis, resulting in 1.6K
EE relations, and 16% (0.2K) are anchored onto
orthogonal axes, resulting in 0.2K EE relations.



1325

The following comparison is based on the 1.8K EE
relations in common. Moreover, since TB-Dense
annotations are for intervals instead of start-points
only, we converted TB-Dense’s interval relations
to start-point relations (e.g., if A includes B, then
tAstart is before tBstart).

b a e v All
b 455 11 5 42 513
a 45 309 16 68 438
e 13 7 2 10 32
v 450 138 20 192 800

All 963 465 43 312 1783

Table 5: An evaluation of MATRES against TB-Dense.
Horizontal: MATRES. Vertical: TB-Dense (with inter-
val relations mapped to start-point relations). Please
see explanation of these numbers in text.

The confusion matrix is shown in Table 5.
A few remarks about how to understand it:
First, when TB-Dense labels before or after,
MATRES also has a high-probability of having
the same label (b=455/513=.89, a=309/438=.71);
when MATRES labels vague, TB-Dense is also
very likely to label vague (v=192/312=.62). This
indicates the high agreement level between the two
datasets if the interval- or point-based annotation
difference is ruled out. Second, many vague re-
lations in TB-Dense are labeled as before, after
or equal in MATRES. This is expected because
TB-Dense annotates relations between intervals,
while MATRES annotates start-points. When du-
rative events are involved, the problem usually be-
comes more difficult and interval-based annotation
is more likely to label vague (see earlier discus-
sions in Sec. 3). Example 7 shows three typical
cases, where e14:became, e17:backed, e18:rose
and e19:extending can be considered durative. If
only their start-points are considered, the crowd-
sourcers were correct in labeling e14 before e15,
e16 after e17, and e18 equal to e19, although TB-
Dense says vague for all of them. Third, equal
seems to be the relation that the two dataset mostly
disagree on, which is probably due to crowd-
sourcers’ lack of understanding in time granularity
and event coreference. Although equal relations
only constitutes a small portion in all relations, it
needs further investigation.

6 Baseline System

We develop a baseline system for TempRel ex-
traction on MATRES, assuming that all the events
and axes are given. The following commonly-

Example 7: Typical cases that TB-Dense annotated
vague but MATRES annotated before, after, and equal,
respectively.
At one point , when it (e14:became) clear controllers could
not contact the plane, someone (e15:said) a prayer.
TB-Dense: vague; MATRES: before
The US is bolstering its military presence in the gulf, as
President Clinton (e16:discussed) the Iraq crisis with the
one ally who has (e17:backed) his threat of force, British
prime minister Tony Blair.
TB-Dense: vague; MATRES: after
Average hourly earnings of nonsupervisory employees
(e18:rose) to $12.51. The gain left wages 3.8 percent higher
than a year earlier, (e19:extending) a trend that has given
back to workers some of the earning power they lost to in-
flation in the last decade.
TB-Dense: vague; MATRES: equal

used features for each event pair are used: (i) The
part-of-speech (POS) tags of each individual event
and of its neighboring three words. (ii) The sen-
tence and token distance between the two events.
(iii) The appearance of any modal verb between
the two event mentions in text (i.e., will, would,
can, could, may and might). (iv) The appear-
ance of any temporal connectives between the two
event mentions (e.g., before, after and since).
(v) Whether the two verbs have a common syn-
onym from their synsets in WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998). (vi) Whether the input event mentions
have a common derivational form derived from
WordNet. (vii) The head words of the preposition
phrases that cover each event, respectively. And
(viii) event properties such as Aspect, Modality,
and Polarity that come with the TimeBank dataset
and are commonly used as features.

The proposed baseline system uses the averaged
perceptron algorithm to classify the relation be-
tween each event pair into one of the four relation
types. We adopted the same train/dev/test split of
TB-Dense, where there are 22 documents in train,
5 in dev, and 9 in test. Parameters were tuned on
the train-set to maximize its F1 on the dev-set, af-
ter which the classifier was retrained on the union
of train and dev. A detailed analysis of the base-
line system is provided in Table 6. The perfor-
mance on equal and vague is lower than on be-
fore and after, probably due to shortage in these
labels in the training data and the inherent dif-
ficulty in event coreference and temporal vague-
ness. We can see, though, that the overall perfor-
mance on MATRES is much better than those in
the literature for TempRel extraction, which used
to be in the low 50’s (Chambers et al., 2014; Ning
et al., 2017). The same system was also retrained



1326

and tested on the original annotations of TB-Dense
(Line “Original”), which confirms the significant
improvement if the proposed annotation scheme
is used. Note that we do not mean to say that
the proposed baseline system itself is better than
other existing algorithms, but rather that the pro-
posed annotation scheme and the resulting dataset
lead to better defined machine learning tasks. In
the future, more data can be collected and used
with advanced techniques such as ILP (Do et al.,
2012), structured learning (Ning et al., 2017) or
multi-sieve (Chambers et al., 2014).

Training Testing
P R F1 P R F1

Before .74 .91 .82 .71 .80 .75
After .73 .77 .75 .55 .64 .59
Equal 1 .05 .09 - - -
Vague .75 .28 .41 .29 .13 .18
Overall .73 .81 .77 .66 .72 .69
Original .44 .67 .53 .40 .60 .48

Table 6: Performance of the proposed baseline sys-
tem on MATRES. Line “Original” is the same system
retrained on the original TB-Dense and tested on the
same subset of event pairs. Due to the limited number
of equal examples, the system did not make any equal
predictions on the testset.

7 Conclusion

This paper proposes a new scheme for TempRel
annotation between events, simplifying the task by
focusing on a single time axis at a time. We have
also identified that end-points of events is a major
source of confusion during annotation due to rea-
sons beyond the scope of TempRel annotation, and
proposed to focus on start-points only and handle
the end-points issue in further investigation (e.g.,
in event duration annotation tasks). Pilot study by
expert annotators shows significant IAA improve-
ments compared to literature values, indicating a
better task definition under the proposed scheme.
This further enables the usage of crowdsourcing
to collect a new dataset, MATRES, at a lower time
cost. Analysis shows that MATRES, albeit crowd-
sourced, has achieved a reasonably good agree-
ment level, as confirmed by its performance on the
gold set (agreement with the authors), the WAWA
metric (agreement with the crowdsourcers them-
selves), and consistency with TB-Dense (agree-
ment with an existing dataset). Given the fact that
existing schemes suffer from low IAAs and lack of
data, we hope that the findings in this work would

provide a good start towards understanding more
sophisticated semantic phenomena in this area.

Acknowledgements

We thank Martha Palmer, Tim O’Gorman, Mark
Sammons and all the anonymous reviewers for
providing insightful comments and critique in ear-
lier stages of this work. This research is sup-
ported in part by a grant from the Allen Insti-
tute for Artificial Intelligence (allenai.org); the
IBM-ILLINOIS Center for Cognitive Computing
Systems Research (C3SR) - a research collabo-
ration as part of the IBM AI Horizons Network;
by DARPA under agreement number FA8750-13-
2-0008; and by the Army Research Laboratory
(ARL) under agreement W911NF-09-2-0053 (the
ARL Network Science CTA).

The U.S. Government is authorized to repro-
duce and distribute reprints for Governmental
purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation
thereon. The views and conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as necessarily representing the official
policies or endorsements, either expressed or im-
plied, of DARPA, of the Army Research Labora-
tory or the U.S. Government. Any opinions, find-
ings, conclusions or recommendations are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view
of the ARL.

References
James F Allen. 1984. Towards a general theory of ac-

tion and time. Artificial intelligence 23(2):123–154.

Steven Bethard, Leon Derczynski, Guergana Savova,
James Pustejovsky, and Marc Verhagen. 2015.
SemEval-2015 Task 6: Clinical TempEval. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Se-

mantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Denver, Colorado, pages
806–814.

Steven Bethard, Oleksandr Kolomiyets, and Marie-
Francine Moens. 2012. Annotating story timelines
as temporal dependency structures. In Proceed-
ings of the eighth international conference on lan-

guage resources and evaluation (LREC). ELRA,
pages 2721–2726.

Steven Bethard, James H Martin, and Sara Klingen-
stein. 2007. Timelines from text: Identification of
syntactic temporal relations. In IEEE International
Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC). pages
11–18.



1327

Steven Bethard, Guergana Savova, Wei-Te Chen, Leon
Derczynski, James Pustejovsky, and Marc Verhagen.
2016. SemEval-2016 Task 12: Clinical TempEval.
In Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2016). Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, San Diego, Cal-
ifornia, pages 1052–1062.

Steven Bethard, Guergana Savova, Martha Palmer,
and James Pustejovsky. 2017. SemEval-2017 Task
12: Clinical TempEval. In Proceedings of the
11th International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-

ation (SemEval-2017). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 565–572.

Philip Bramsen, Pawan Deshpande, Yoong Keok Lee,
and Regina Barzilay. 2006. Inducing temporal
graphs. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods for Natural Language Processing

(EMNLP). pages 189–198.

Taylor Cassidy, Bill McDowell, Nathanel Chambers,
and Steven Bethard. 2014. An annotation frame-
work for dense event ordering. In Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics (ACL). pages 501–506.

Nathanael Chambers, Taylor Cassidy, Bill McDowell,
and Steven Bethard. 2014. Dense event ordering
with a multi-pass architecture. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics 2:273–
284.

Marta Coll-Florit and Silvia P Gennari. 2011. Time in
language: Event duration in language comprehen-
sion. Cognitive psychology 62(1):41–79.

Quang Xuan Do, Wei Lu, and Dan Roth. 2012. Joint
inference for event timeline construction. In Proc.
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural

Language Processing (EMNLP).

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press.

Kenton Lee, Yoav Artzi, Yejin Choi, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2015. Event detection and factuality as-
sessment with non-expert supervision. In Proceed-
ings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods

in Natural Language Processing. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, pages
1643–1648.

Tuur Leeuwenberg and Marie-Francine Moens. 2017.
Structured learning for temporal relation extraction
from clinical records. In Proceedings of the 15th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-

tion for Computational Linguistics.

Hector Llorens, Nathanael Chambers, Naushad UzZa-
man, Nasrin Mostafazadeh, James Allen, and James
Pustejovsky. 2015. SemEval-2015 Task 5: QA
TEMPEVAL - evaluating temporal information un-
derstanding with question answering. In Proceed-
ings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic

Evaluation (SemEval 2015). pages 792–800.

Anne-Lyse Minard, Manuela Speranza, Eneko
Agirre, Itziar Aldabe, Marieke van Erp, Bernardo
Magnini, German Rigau, Ruben Urizar, and Fon-
dazione Bruno Kessler. 2015. SemEval-2015 Task
4: TimeLine: Cross-document event ordering. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop

on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015). pages
778–786.

Teruko Mitamura, Yukari Yamakawa, Susan Holm,
Zhiyi Song, Ann Bies, Seth Kulick, and Stephanie
Strassel. 2015. Event nugget annotation: Processes
and issues. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Events at NAACL-HLT .

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Alyson Grealish, Nathanael
Chambers, James Allen, and Lucy Vanderwende.
2016. CaTeRS: Causal and temporal relation
scheme for semantic annotation of event structures.
In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Events: Def-
inition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation.
pages 51–61.

Qiang Ning, Zhili Feng, and Dan Roth. 2017. A struc-
tured learning approach to temporal relation extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods for Natural Language Processing

(EMNLP). Copenhagen, Denmark.

Qiang Ning, Hao Wu, Haoruo Peng, and Dan Roth.
2018a. Improving temporal relation extraction with
a globally acquired statistical resource. In Proceed-
ings of the Annual Meeting of the North American

Association of Computational Linguistics (NAACL).
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Qiang Ning, Zhongzhi Yu, Chuchu Fan, and Dan Roth.
2018b. Exploiting partially annotated data for tem-
poral relation extraction. In The Joint Conference on
Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM). As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Tim O’Gorman, Kristin Wright-Bettner, and Martha
Palmer. 2016. Richer event description: Integrating
event coreference with temporal, causal and bridg-
ing annotation. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop
on Computing News Storylines (CNS 2016). Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Austin, Texas,
pages 47–56.

James Pustejovsky, José M Castano, Robert Ingria,
Roser Sauri, Robert J Gaizauskas, Andrea Set-
zer, Graham Katz, and Dragomir R Radev. 2003a.
TimeML: Robust specification of event and tempo-
ral expressions in text. New directions in question
answering 3:28–34.

James Pustejovsky, Patrick Hanks, Roser Sauri, An-
drew See, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer,
Dragomir Radev, Beth Sundheim, David Day, Lisa
Ferro, et al. 2003b. The TIMEBANK corpus. In
Corpus linguistics. volume 2003, pages 647–656.

Preethi Raghavan, Eric Fosler-Lussier, and Albert M
Lai. 2012. Learning to temporally order medical



1328

events in clinical text. In Proceedings of the 50th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics: Short Papers-Volume 2. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 70–74.

Nils Reimers, Nazanin Dehghani, and Iryna Gurevych.
2016. Temporal anchoring of events for the time-
bank corpus. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-

guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany, pages
2195–2204.

Roser Saurı́ and James Pustejovsky. 2009. FactBank:
a corpus annotated with event factuality. Language
resources and evaluation 43(3):227.

Steven Schockaert and Martine De Cock. 2008. Tem-
poral reasoning about fuzzy intervals. Artificial In-
telligence 172(8-9):1158–1193.

Zhiyi Song, Ann Bies, Stephanie Strassel, Tom Riese,
Justin Mott, Joe Ellis, Jonathan Wright, Seth Kulick,
Neville Ryant, and Xiaoyi Ma. 2015. From light
to rich ere: Annotation of entities, relations, and
events. In Proceedings of the The 3rd Workshop on
EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and

Representation. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Denver, Colorado, pages 89–98.

William F Styler IV, Steven Bethard, Sean Finan,
Martha Palmer, Sameer Pradhan, Piet C de Groen,
Brad Erickson, Timothy Miller, Chen Lin, Guergana
Savova, et al. 2014. Temporal annotation in the clin-
ical domain. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics 2:143.

Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, James Allen, Leon
Derczynski, Marc Verhagen, and James Pustejovsky.
2013. SemEval-2013 Task 1: TempEval-3: Evaluat-
ing time expressions, events, and temporal relations.
In Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Compu-
tational Semantics. volume 2, pages 1–9.

Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder,
Mark Hepple, Graham Katz, and James Pustejovsky.
2007. SemEval-2007 Task 15: TempEval temporal
relation identification. In SemEval. pages 75–80.

Marc Verhagen, Roser Sauri, Tommaso Caselli, and
James Pustejovsky. 2010. SemEval-2010 Task 13:
TempEval-2. In SemEval. pages 57–62.


