
























































Learning-based Composite Metrics for Improved Caption Evaluation


Proceedings of ACL 2018, Student Research Workshop, pages 14–20
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

14

Learning-based Composite Metrics for Improved Caption Evaluation

Naeha Sharif, Lyndon White, Mohammed Bennamoun and Syed Afaq Ali Shah,

{naeha.sharif, lyndon.white}@research.uwa.edu.au,
and {mohammed.bennamoun, afaq.shah}@uwa.edu.au

The University of Western Australia.
35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, Western Australia

Abstract

The evaluation of image caption quality is
a challenging task, which requires the as-
sessment of two main aspects in a caption:
adequacy and fluency. These quality as-
pects can be judged using a combination of
several linguistic features. However, most
of the current image captioning metrics fo-
cus only on specific linguistic facets, such
as the lexical or semantic, and fail to meet
a satisfactory level of correlation with hu-
man judgements at the sentence-level. We
propose a learning-based framework to in-
corporate the scores of a set of lexical
and semantic metrics as features, to cap-
ture the adequacy and fluency of captions
at different linguistic levels. Our experi-
mental results demonstrate that composite
metrics draw upon the strengths of stand-
alone measures to yield improved correla-
tion and accuracy.

1 Introduction

Automatic image captioning requires the under-
standing of the visual aspects of images to gen-
erate human-like descriptions (Bernardi et al.,
2016). The evaluation of the generated captions
is crucial for the development and fine-grained
analysis of image captioning systems (Vedantam
et al., 2015). Automatic evaluation metrics aim
at providing efficient, cost-effective and objective
assessments of the caption quality. Since these
automatic measures serve as an alternative to the
manual evaluation, the major concern is that such
measures should correlate well with human as-
sessments. In other words, automatic metrics are
expected to mimic the human judgement process
by taking into account various aspects that humans
consider when they assess the captions.

The evaluation of image captions can be charac-
terized as having two major aspects: adequacy and

fluency. Adequacy is how well the caption reflects
the source image, and fluency is how well the cap-
tion conforms to the norms and conventions of hu-
man language (Toury, 2012). In the case of man-
ual evaluation, both adequacy and fluency tend to
shape the human perception of the overall caption
quality. Most of the automatic evaluation metrics
tend to capture these aspects of quality based on
the idea that “the closer the candidate description
to the professional human caption, the better it is
in quality” (Papineni et al., 2002). The output in
such case is a score (the higher the better) reflect-
ing the similarity.

The majority of the commonly used metrics for
image captioning such as BLEU (Papineni et al.,
2002) and METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005)
are based on the lexical similarity. Lexical mea-
sures (n-gram based) work by rewarding the n-
gram overlaps between the candidate and the ref-
erence captions. Thus, measuring the adequacy
by counting the n-gram matches and assessing the
fluency by implicitly using the reference n-grams
as a language model (Mutton et al., 2007). How-
ever, a high number of n-gram matches cannot al-
ways be indicative of a high caption quality, nor
a low number of n-gram matches can always be
reflective of a low caption quality (Giménez and
Màrquez, 2010). A recently proposed semantic
metric SPICE (Anderson et al., 2016), overcomes
this deficiency of lexical measures by measuring
the semantic similarity of candidate and reference
captions using Scene Graphs. However, the major
drawback of SPICE is that it ignores the fluency of
the output caption.

Integrating assessment scores of different mea-
sures is an intuitive and reasonable way to improve
the current image captioning evaluation methods.
Through this methodology, each metric plays the
role of a judge, assessing the quality of captions
in terms of lexical, grammatical or semantic accu-
racy. For this research, we use the scores conferred



15

by a set of measures that are commonly used for
captioning and combine them through a learning-
based framework. In this work:
1. We evaluate various combinations of a chosen
set of metrics and show that the proposed com-
posite metrics correlate better with human judge-
ments.
2. We analyse the accuracy of composite metrics
in terms of differentiating between pairs of cap-
tions in reference to the ground truth captions.

2 Literature Review

The success of any captioning system depends
on how well it transforms the visual informa-
tion to natural language. Therefore, the signifi-
cance of reliable automatic evaluation metrics is
undeniable for the fine-grained analysis and ad-
vancement of image captioning systems. While
image captioning has drawn inspiration from the
Machine Translation (MT) domain for encoder-
decoder based captioning networks (Vinyals et al.,
2015), (Xu et al., 2015), (Yao et al., 2016), (You
et al., 2016), (Lu et al., 2017), it has also benefited
from automatic metrics which were initially pro-
posed to evaluate machine translations/text sum-
maries, such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), ME-
TEOR (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014) and ROUGE
(Lin, 2004).

In the past few years, two metrics CIDEr
(Vedantam et al., 2015) and SPICE (Anderson
et al., 2016) were developed specifically for im-
age captioning. Compared to the previously used
metrics, these two show a better correlation with
human judgements. The authors in (Liu et al.,
2016) proposed a linear combination of SPICE
and CIDEr called SPIDEr and showed that op-
timizing image captioning models for SPIDEr’s
score can lead to better quality captions. How-
ever, SPIDEr was not evaluated for its correlation
with human judgements. Recently, (Kusner et al.,
2015) proposed the use of a document similar-
ity metric Word Mover’s Distance (WMD), which
uses the word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) embed-
ding space to determine the distance between two
texts.

The metrics used for caption evaluation can be
broadly categorized as lexical and semantic mea-
sures. Lexical metrics reward the n-gram matches
between candidate captions and human generated
reference texts (Giménez and Màrquez, 2010), and
can be further categorized as unigram and n-gram

based measures. Unigram based methods such as
BLEU-1 (Papineni et al., 2002), assess only the
lexical correctness of the candidate. However, in
the case of METEOR or WMD, where some sort
of synonym-matching/stemming is also involved,
unigram-overlaps help to evaluate both the lexi-
cal and to some degree the semantic aptness of
the output caption. N-gram based metrics such
as ROUGE and CIDEr primarily assess the lex-
ical correctness of the caption, but also measure
some amount of syntactic accuracy by capturing
the word order.

The lexical measures have received criticism
based on the argument that the n-gram overlap
is neither an adequate nor a necessary indicative
measure of the caption quality (Anderson et al.,
2016). To overcome this limitation, semantic met-
rics such as SPICE, capture the sentence meaning
to evaluate the candidate captions. Their perfor-
mance however is highly dependent on a success-
ful semantic parsing. Purely syntactic measures,
which capture the grammatical correctness, exist,
and have been used in MT (Mutton et al., 2007),
but not in the captioning domain.

While fluency (well-formedness) of a candidate
caption can be attributed to the syntactic and lexi-
cal correctness (Fomicheva et al., 2016), adequacy
(informativeness) depends on the lexical and se-
mantic correctness (Rios et al., 2011). We hypoth-
esize that by combining scores from different met-
rics, which have different strengths in measuring
adequacy and fluency, a composite metric that is
of overall higher quality is created (Sec. 5).

Machine learning offers a systematic approach
to integrate the scores of stand-alone metrics.
In the MT evaluation, various successful learn-
ing paradigms have been proposed (Bojar et al.,
2016), (Bojar et al., 2017) and the existing
learning-based metrics can be categorized as
binary functions–“which classify the candidate
translation as good or bad” (Kulesza and Shieber,
2004), (Guzmán et al., 2015) or continuous func-
tions–“which score the quality of translation on an
absolute scale” (Song and Cohn, 2011), (Albrecht
and Hwa, 2008). Our research is conceptually
similar to the work in (Kulesza and Shieber, 2004),
which induces a “human-likeness” criteria. How-
ever, our approach differs in terms of the learning
algorithm as well as the features used. Moreover,
the focus of this work is to assess various combina-
tions of metrics (that capture the caption quality at



16

Figure 1: Overall framework of the proposed Composite Metrics

different linguistic levels) in terms of their correla-
tion with human judgements at the sentence level.

3 Proposed Approach

In our approach, we use scores conferred by a set
of existing metrics as an input to a multi-layer
feed-forward neural network. We adopt a training
criteria based on a simple question: is the caption
machine or human generated? Our trained classi-
fier sets a boundary between good and bad quality
captions, thus classifying them as human or ma-
chine produced. Furthermore, we obtain a contin-
uous output score by using the class-probability,
which can be considered as some “measure of be-
lievability” that the candidate caption is human
generated. Framing our learning problem as a
classification task allows us to create binary train-
ing data using the human generated captions and
machine generated captions as positive and nega-
tive training examples respectively.

Our proposed framework shown in Figure 1 first
extracts a set of numeric features using the can-
didate “C” and the reference sentences “S”. The
extracted feature vector is then fed as an input to
our multi-layer neural network. Each entity of the
feature vector corresponds to the score generated
by one of the four measures: METEOR, CIDEr,
WMD1 and SPICE respectively. We chose these
measures because they show a relatively better
correlation with human judgements compared to

1We convert the WMD distance score to similarity by us-
ing a negative exponential, to use it as a feature.

the other commonly used ones for captioning (Kil-
ickaya et al., 2016). Our composite metrics are
named EvalMS , EvalCS , EvalMCS , EvalWCS ,
EvalMWS and EvalMWCS . The subscript let-
ters in each name corresponds to the first letter
of each individual metric. For example, EvalMS
corresponds to the combination of METEOR and
SPICE. Figure 2 shows the linguistic aspects cap-
tured by the stand-alone2 and the composite met-
rics. SPICE is based on sentence meanings, thus it
evaluates the semantics. CIDEr covers the syntac-
tic and lexical aspects, whereas Meteor and WMD
assess the lexical and semantic components. The
learning-based metrics mostly fall in the region
formed by the overlap of all three major linguis-
tics facets, leading to better a evaluation.

We train our metrics to maximise the classifica-
tion accuracy on the training dataset. Since we are
primarily interested in maximizing the correlation
with human judgements, we perform early stop-
ping based on Kendalls τ (rank correlation) with
the validation set.

4 Experimental Setup

To train our composite metrics, we source data
from Flicker30k dataset (Plummer et al., 2015)
and three image captioning models namely: (1)
show and tell (Vinyals et al., 2015), (2) show, at-
tend and tell (soft-attention) (Xu et al., 2015), and
(3) adaptive attention (Lu et al., 2017). Flicker30k

2The stand-alone metrics marked with an * in the Figure 2
are used as features for this work.



17

Figure 2: Various automatic measures (stand-
alone and combined) and their respective linguis-
tic levels. See Sec. 3 for more details.

dataset consists of 31,783 photos acquired from
Flicker3, each paired with 5 captions obtained
through the Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)
(Turk, 2012). For each image in Flicker30k, we
randomly select three of the human generated cap-
tions as positive training examples, and three ma-
chine generated (one from each image captioning
model) captions as negative training examples. We
combined the Microsoft COCO (Chen et al., 2015)
training and validation set (containing 123,287 im-
ages in total, each paired with 5 or more captions),
to train the image captioning models using their
official codes. These image captioning models
achieved state-of-the-art performance when they
were published.

In order to obtain reference captions for each
training example, we again use the human writ-
ten descriptions of Flicker30k. For each neg-
ative training example (machine-generated cap-
tion), we randomly choose 4 out of 5 human writ-
ten captions originally associated with each im-
age. Whereas, for each positive training example
(human-generated caption), we use the 5 human
written captions associated with each image, se-
lecting one of these as a human candidate caption
(positive example) and the remaining 4 as refer-
ences. In Figure 3, a possible pairing scenario is
shown for further clarification.

For our validation set, we source data from
Flicker8k (Young et al., 2014). This dataset
contains 5,822 captions assessed by three expert
judges on a scale of 1 (the caption is unrelated
to the image) to 4 (the caption describes the im-

3https://www.flickr.com/

Table 1: Kendall’s correlation co-efficient of au-
tomatic evaluation metrics and proposed compos-
ite metrics against human quality judgements. All
correlations are significant at p<0.001

Individual
Metrics

Kendall
τ

Composite
Metrics

Kendall
τ

BLEU 0.202 EvalMS 0.386
ROUGE-L 0.216 EvalCS 0.384
METEOR 0.352 EvalMCS 0.386
CIDEr 0.356 EvalWCS 0.379
SPICE 0.366 EvalMWS 0.367
WMD 0.336 EvalMWCS 0.378

age without any errors). From our training set,
we remove the captions of images which overlap
with the captions in the validation and test sets
(discussed in Sec. 5), leaving us with a total of
132,984 non-overlapping captions for the training
of the composite metrics.

5 Results and Discussion

5.1 Correlation

The most desirable characteristic of an automatic
evaluation metric is its strong correlation with hu-
man scores (Zhang and Vogel, 2010). A stronger
correlation with human judgements indicates that
a metric captures the information that humans use
to assess a candidate caption. To evaluate the
sentence-level correlation of our composite met-
rics with human judgements, we source data from
a dataset collected by the authors in (Aditya et al.,
2017). We use 6993 manually evaluated human
and machine generated captions from this set,
which were scored by AMT workers for correct-
ness on the scale of 1 (low relevance to image) to
5 (high relevance to image). Each caption in the
dataset is accompanied by a single judgement. In
Table 1, we report the Kendalls τ correlation co-
efficient for the proposed composite metrics and
other commonly used caption evaluation metrics.

It can be observed from Table 1 that composite
metrics outperform stand-alone metrics in terms
of sentence-level correlation. The combination
of Meteor and SPICE (EvalMS) and METEOR,
CIDEr and SPICE (EvalMCS) showed the most
promising results. The success of these com-
posite metrics can be attributed to the individ-
ual strengths of Meteor, CIDEr and SPICE. ME-
TEOR is a strong lexical measure based on un-
igram matching, which uses additional linguistic
knowledge for word matching, such as the mor-
phological variation in words via stemming and



18

Figure 3: Shows an example of a candidate and reference pairing that is used in the training set. (a)
Image, (b) human and machine generated captions for the image, and (c) candidate and reference pairings
for the image.

dictionary based look-up for synonyms and para-
phrases (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005). CIDEr uses
higher order n-grams to account for fluency and
down-weighs the commonly occurring (less infor-
mative) n-grams by performing Term Frequency
Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) weighting
for each n-gram in the dataset (Vedantam et al.,
2015). SPICE on the other hand is a strong in-
dicator of the semantic correctness of a caption.
Together these metrics assess the lexical, seman-
tic and syntactic information. The composite met-
rics which included WMD in the combination
achieved a lower performance, compared to the
ones in which WMD was not included. One possi-
ble reason is that WMD heavily penalizes shorter
candidate captions when the number of words be-
tween the output and the reference captions are not
equal (Kusner et al., 2015). This penalty might not
be consistently useful as it is possible for a shorter
candidate caption to be both fluent and adequate.
Therefore, WMD is a better suited metric for mea-
suring document distance.

5.2 Accuracy

We follow the framework introduced in (Vedan-
tam et al., 2015) to analyse the ability of a met-
ric to discriminate between pairs of captions with
reference to the ground truth caption. A met-
ric is considered accurate if it assigns a higher
score to the caption preferred by humans. For
this experiment, we use PASCAL-50s (Vedan-
tam et al., 2015), which contains human judge-
ments for 4000 triplets of descriptions (one refer-
ence caption with two candidate captions). Based
on the pairing, the triplets are grouped into four
categories (comprising of 1000 triplets each) i.e.,

Table 2: Comparative accuracy results (in percent-
age) on four kinds of pairs tested on PASCAL-50s

Metrics HC HI HM MM AVG
BLEU 53.7 93.2 85.6 61.0 73.4
ROUGE-L 56.5 95.3 93.4 58.5 75.9
METEOR 61.1 97.6 94.6 62.0 78.8
CIDEr 57.8 98.0 88.8 68.2 78.2
SPICE 58.0 96.7 88.4 71.6 78.7
WMD 56.2 98.4 91.7 71.5 79.5
EvalMS 62.8 97.9 93.5 69.6 80.9
EvalCS 59.5 98.3 90.7 71.3 79.9
EvalMCS 60.2 98.3 91.8 71.8 80.5
EvalWCS 58.2 98.7 91.7 70.6 79.8
EvalMWS 56.9 98.4 91.3 71.2 79.4
EvalMWCS 59.0 98.5 90.7 70.2 79.6

Human-Human Correct (HC), Human-Human In-
correct (HI), Human-Machine (HM), Machine-
Machine (MM). We follow the original approach
of (Vedantam et al., 2015) and use 5 reference
captions per candidate to assess the accuracy of
the metrics and report them in Table 2. Table 2
shows that on average composite measures pro-
duce better accuracy compared to the individual
metrics. Amongst the four categories, HC is the
hardest, in which all metrics show the worst per-
formance. Differentiating between two good qual-
ity (human generated) correct captions is challeng-
ing as it involves a fine-grained analysis of the two
candidates. EvalMS achieves the highest accu-
racy in HC category which shows that as caption-
ing systems continue to improve, this combination
of lexical and semantic metrics will continue to
perform well. Moreover, human generated cap-
tions are usually fluent. Therefore, a combination
of strong indicators of adequacy such as SPICE
and METEOR is the most suitable for this task.
EvalMCS shows the highest accuracy in differ-



19

entiating between machine captions, which is an-
other important category as one of the main goals
of automatic evaluation is to distinguish between
two machine algorithms. Amongst the composite
metrics, EvalMS is again the best in distinguish-
ing human captions (good quality) from machine
captions (bad quality) which was our basic train-
ing criteria.

6 Conclusion and Future Works

In this paper we propose a learning-based ap-
proach to combine various metrics to improve cap-
tion evaluation. Our experimental results show
that metrics operating along different linguistic di-
mensions can be successfully combined through
a learning-based framework, and they outperform
the existing metrics for caption evaluation in term
of correlation and accuracy, with EvalMS and
EvalMCS giving the best overall performance.

Our study reveals that the proposed approach is
promising and has a lot of potential to be used for
evaluation in the captioning domain. In the fu-
ture, we plan to integrate features (components)
of metrics instead of their scores for a better per-
formance. We also intend to use syntactic mea-
sures, which to the best of our knowledge have
not yet been used for caption evaluation (except
in an indirect way by the n-gram measures which
capture the word order) and study how they can
improve the correlation at the sentence level. Ma-
jority of the metrics for captioning focus more on
adequacy as compared to fluency. This aspect also
needs further attention and a combination of met-
rics/features that can specifically assess the flu-
ency of captions needs to be devised.

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Nvidia for providing
Titan-Xp GPU, which was used for the experi-
ments. This research is supported by Australian
Research Council, ARC DP150100294.

References
Somak Aditya, Yezhou Yang, Chitta Baral, Yiannis

Aloimonos, and Cornelia Fermüller. 2017. Image
understanding using vision and reasoning through
scene description graph. Computer Vision and Im-
age Understanding.

Joshua S Albrecht and Rebecca Hwa. 2008. Regres-
sion for machine translation evaluation at the sen-
tence level. Machine Translation, 22(1-2):1.

Peter Anderson, Basura Fernando, Mark Johnson, and
Stephen Gould. 2016. Spice: Semantic propo-
sitional image caption evaluation. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 382–398.
Springer.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An
automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings
of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evalu-
ation measures for machine translation and/or sum-
marization, pages 65–72.

Raffaella Bernardi, Ruket Cakici, Desmond Elliott,
Aykut Erdem, Erkut Erdem, Nazli Ikizler-Cinbis,
Frank Keller, Adrian Muscat, Barbara Plank, et al.
2016. Automatic description generation from im-
ages: A survey of models, datasets, and evaluation
measures. J. Artif. Intell. Res.(JAIR), 55:409–442.

Ondřej Bojar, Yvette Graham, Amir Kamran, and
Miloš Stanojević. 2016. Results of the wmt16 met-
rics shared task. In Proceedings of the First Con-
ference on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared
Task Papers, volume 2, pages 199–231.

Ondřej Bojar, Jindřich Helcl, Tom Kocmi, Jindřich Li-
bovickỳ, and Tomáš Musil. 2017. Results of the
wmt17 neural mt training task. In Proceedings of the
Second Conference on Machine Translation, pages
525–533.

Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakr-
ishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and
C Lawrence Zitnick. 2015. Microsoft coco captions:
Data collection and evaluation server. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.00325.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor
universal: Language specific translation evaluation
for any target language. In Proceedings of the ninth
workshop on statistical machine translation, pages
376–380.

Marina Fomicheva, Núria Bel, Lucia Specia, Iria
da Cunha, and Anton Malinovskiy. 2016. Cobaltf:
a fluent metric for mt evaluation. In Proceedings of
the First Conference on Machine Translation: Vol-
ume 2, Shared Task Papers, volume 2, pages 483–
490.

Jesús Giménez and Lluı́s Màrquez. 2010. Linguistic
measures for automatic machine translation evalua-
tion. Machine Translation, 24(3-4):209–240.

Francisco Guzmán, Shafiq Joty, Lluı́s Màrquez, and
Preslav Nakov. 2015. Pairwise neural machine
translation evaluation. In Proceedings of the 53rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 805–814.

Mert Kilickaya, Aykut Erdem, Nazli Ikizler-Cinbis,
and Erkut Erdem. 2016. Re-evaluating automatic
metrics for image captioning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.07600.



20

Alex Kulesza and Stuart M Shieber. 2004. A learn-
ing approach to improving sentence-level mt evalu-
ation. In Proceedings of the 10th International Con-
ference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in
Machine Translation, pages 75–84.

Matt Kusner, Yu Sun, Nicholas Kolkin, and Kilian
Weinberger. 2015. From word embeddings to docu-
ment distances. In International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, pages 957–966.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. Text Summarization
Branches Out.

Siqi Liu, Zhenhai Zhu, Ning Ye, Sergio Guadarrama,
and Kevin Murphy. 2016. Improved image caption-
ing via policy gradient optimization of spider. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.00370.

Jiasen Lu, Caiming Xiong, Devi Parikh, and Richard
Socher. 2017. Knowing when to look: Adaptive at-
tention via a visual sentinel for image captioning. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), volume 6.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.

Andrew Mutton, Mark Dras, Stephen Wan, and Robert
Dale. 2007. Gleu: Automatic evaluation of
sentence-level fluency. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 344–351.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Bryan A Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M Cervantes,
Juan C Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and Svet-
lana Lazebnik. 2015. Flickr30k entities: Col-
lecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer
image-to-sentence models. In Computer Vision
(ICCV), 2015 IEEE International Conference on,
pages 2641–2649. IEEE.

Miguel Rios, Wilker Aziz, and Lucia Specia. 2011.
Tine: A metric to assess mt adequacy. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 116–122. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Xingyi Song and Trevor Cohn. 2011. Regression and
ranking based optimisation for sentence level ma-
chine translation evaluation. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 123–129. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Gideon Toury. 2012. Descriptive Translation Studies
and beyond: revised edition, volume 100. John Ben-
jamins Publishing.

Amazon Mechanical Turk. 2012. Amazon mechanical
turk. Retrieved August, 17:2012.

Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi
Parikh. 2015. Cider: Consensus-based image de-
scription evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition, pages 4566–4575.

Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and
Dumitru Erhan. 2015. Show and tell: A neural im-
age caption generator. In Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), 2015 IEEE Conference
on, pages 3156–3164. IEEE.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhudinov, Rich Zemel,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and tell:
Neural image caption generation with visual at-
tention. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 2048–2057.

Ting Yao, Yingwei Pan, Yehao Li, Zhaofan Qiu, and
Tao Mei. 2016. Boosting image captioning with at-
tributes. OpenReview, 2(5):8.

Quanzeng You, Hailin Jin, Zhaowen Wang, Chen Fang,
and Jiebo Luo. 2016. Image captioning with seman-
tic attention. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
4651–4659.

Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia
Hockenmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to
visual denotations: New similarity metrics for se-
mantic inference over event descriptions. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2:67–78.

Ying Zhang and Stephan Vogel. 2010. Significance
tests of automatic machine translation evaluation
metrics. Machine Translation, 24(1):51–65.


