



















































Eyes are the Windows to the Soul: Predicting the Rating of Text Quality Using Gaze Behaviour


Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Long Papers), pages 2352–2362
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

2352

Eyes are the Windows to the Soul: Predicting the Rating of Text Quality
Using Gaze Behaviour

FSandeep Mathias, F,♣,♦Diptesh Kanojia, FKevin Patel, FSamarth Agrawal
♠Abhijit Mishra, FPushpak Bhattacharyya

FCSE Department, IIT Bombay
♣IITB-Monash Research Academy

♦Monash University, Australia
♠IBM Research, India

F,♣{sam,diptesh,kevin.patel,samartha,pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in
♠abhijimi@in.ibm.com

Abstract

Predicting a reader’s rating of text quality
is a challenging task that involves estimat-
ing different subjective aspects of the text,
like structure, clarity, etc. Such subjec-
tive aspects are better handled using cogni-
tive information. One such source of cog-
nitive information is gaze behaviour. In
this paper, we show that gaze behaviour
does indeed help in effectively predicting
the rating of text quality. To do this, we
first model text quality as a function of
three properties - organization, coherence
and cohesion. Then, we demonstrate how
capturing gaze behaviour helps in predict-
ing each of these properties, and hence the
overall quality, by reporting improvements
obtained by adding gaze features to tra-
ditional textual features for score predic-
tion. We also hypothesize that if a reader
has fully understood the text, the corre-
sponding gaze behaviour would give a bet-
ter indication of the assigned rating, as op-
posed to partial understanding. Our exper-
iments validate this hypothesis by show-
ing greater agreement between the given
rating and the predicted rating when the
reader has a full understanding of the text.

1 Introduction

Automatically rating the quality of a text is an
interesting challenge in NLP. It has been stud-
ied since Page’s seminal work on automatic es-
say grading in the mid-1960s (Page, 1966). This
is due to the dependence of quality on different
aspects such as the overall structure of the text,
clarity, etc. that are highly qualitative in nature,
and whose scoring can vary from person to person
(Person, 2013).

Scores for such qualitative aspects cannot be
inferred solely from the text and would benefit
from psycholinguistic information, such as gaze
behaviour. Gaze based features have been used
for co-reference resolution (Ross et al., 2016),
sentiment analysis (Joshi et al., 2014) and trans-
lation annotation complexity estimation (Mishra
et al., 2013). They could also be very useful for
education applications, like evaluating readability
(Mishra et al., 2017) and in automatic essay grad-
ing.

In this paper, we consider the following quali-
tative properties of text: Organization, Coherence
and Cohesion. A text is well-organized if it begins
with an introduction, has a body and ends with a
conclusion. One of the other aspects of organiza-
tion is the fact that it takes into account how the
content of the text is split into paragraphs, with
each paragraph denoting a single idea. If the text is
too long, and not split into paragraphs, one could
consider the text to be badly organized1.

A text is coherent if it makes sense to a reader.
A text is cohesive if it is well connected. Coher-
ence and cohesion are two qualities that are closely
related. A piece of text that is well-connected usu-
ally makes sense. Conversely, a piece of text that
makes sense is usually well-connected. However,
it is possible for texts to be coherent but lack co-
hesion. Table 1 provides some examples for texts
that are coherent and cohesive, as well as those
that lack one of those qualities.

There are different ways to model coherence
and cohesion. Since coherence is a measure of
how much sense the text makes, it is a semantic
property of the text. It requires sentences within
the text to be interpreted, by themselves, as well as
with other sentences in the text (Van Dijk, 1980).

On the other hand, cohesion makes use of
1Refer supplementary material for example. We have

placed it there due to space constraints.



2353

Example Comments
My favourite colour is blue. I like it because it is calming and
it relaxes me. I often go outside in the summer and lie on the
grass and look into the clear sky when I am stressed. For this
reason, I’d have to say my favourite colour is blue.

Coherent and cohesive.

My favourite colour is blue. I’m calm and relaxed. In the sum-
mer I lie on the grass and look up.

Coherent but not cohesive. There is no link between the sen-
tences. However, the text makes sense due to a lot of implicit
clues (blue, favourite, relaxing, look up (and see the blue sky)).

My favourite colour is blue. Blue sports cars go very fast. Driv-
ing in this way is dangerous and can cause many car crashes. I
had a car accident once and broke my leg. I was very sad be-
cause I had to miss a holiday in Europe because of the injury.

Cohesive but not coherent. The sentences are linked by words
(that are in italics or in bold) between adjacent sentences. As
we can see, every pair of adjacent sentences are connected by
words / phrases, but the text does not make sense, since it first
starts with blue, and describes missing a holiday due to injury.

Table 1: Examples of coherence and cohesion2.

linguistic cues, such as references (demonstra-
tives, pronouns, etc.), ellipsis (leaving out implicit
words - Eg. Sam can type and I can [type] too),
substitution (use of a word or phrase to replace
something mentioned earlier - Eg. How’s the
croissant? I’d like to have one too.), conjunction
(and, but, therefore, etc.), cohesive nouns (prob-
lem, issue, investment, etc.) and lexis (linking dif-
ferent pieces of text by synonyms, hyponyms, lex-
ical chains, etc.) (Halliday and Hasan, 1976).

Using these properties, we model the overall
text quality rating. We make use of a Likert scale
(Likert, 1932) with a range of 1 to 4, for measur-
ing each of these properties; the higher the score,
the better is the text in terms of that property. We
model the text quality rating on a scale of 1 to 10,
using the three scores as input. In other words,

Quality(T ) = Org(T )+Chr(T )+Chs(T )−2,

where Quality(T ) is the text quality rating of
the text T . Org(T ), Chr(T ), and Chs(T ) cor-
respond to the Organization, Coherence, and
Cohesion scores respectively, for the text T , that
are given by a reader. We subtract 2 to scale the
scores from a range of 3 - 12, to a range of 1 - 10
for quality.

Texts with poor organization and/or cohesion
can force readers to regress i.e. go to previous sen-
tences or paragraphs. Texts with poor coherence
may lead readers to fixate more on different por-
tions of text to understand them. In other words,
such gaze behaviour indirectly captures the effort
needed by human readers to comprehend the text
(Just and Carpenter, 1980), which, in turn, may
influence the ratings given by them. Hence, these

2We took the examples from this site for
explaining coherence and cohesion: http:
//gordonscruton.blogspot.in/2011/08/
what-is-cohesion-coherence-cambridge.
html

properties seem to be a good indicators for overall
quality of texts.

In this paper, we address the following ques-
tion: Can information obtained from gaze be-
haviour help predict reader’s rating of quality of
text by estimating text’s organization, coherence,
and cohesion? Our work answers that question
in the affirmative. We found that using gaze fea-
tures does contribute in improving the prediction
of qualitative ratings of text by users.

Our work has the following contributions.
Firstly, we propose a novel way to predict read-
ers’ rating of text by recording their eye move-
ments as they read the texts. Secondly, we show
that if a reader has understood the text com-
pletely, their gaze behaviour is more reliable.
Thirdly, we also release our dataset3 to help in
further research in using gaze features in other
tasks involving predicting the quality of texts.

In this paper, we use the following terms related
to eye tracking. The interest area (IA) is an area
of the screen that is under interest. We mainly look
at words as interest areas. A fixation takes place
when the gaze is focused on a point of the screen.
A saccade is the movement of gaze between two
fixations. A regression is a special type of saccade
in which the reader refers back to something that
they had read earlier.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 describes the motivation behind our
work. Section 3 describes related work in this
field. Section 4 describes the different features that
we used. Sections 5 and 6 describes our experi-
ments and results. Section 6 also contains analysis
of our experiments. Section 7 concludes our paper
and mentions future work.

3The dataset can be downloaded from http://www.
cfilt.iitb.ac.in/cognitive-nlp/

http://gordonscruton.blogspot.in/2011/08/what-is-cohesion-coherence-cambridge.html
http://gordonscruton.blogspot.in/2011/08/what-is-cohesion-coherence-cambridge.html
http://gordonscruton.blogspot.in/2011/08/what-is-cohesion-coherence-cambridge.html
http://gordonscruton.blogspot.in/2011/08/what-is-cohesion-coherence-cambridge.html
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/cognitive-nlp/
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/cognitive-nlp/


2354

Figure 1: Sample text showing fixations, saccades and regressions. This text was given scores of 4, 4,
and 3 for organization, coherence and cohesion. The circles denote fixations, and the lines are saccades.
Radius of the circles denote the duration of the fixation (in milliseconds), which is centred at the centre
of the circle. This is the output from SR Research Data Viewer software.

2 Motivation

Reader’s perception of text quality is subjective
and varies from person to person. Using cognitive
information from the reader can help in predicting
the score he / she will assign to the text. A well-
written text would not have people fixate too long
on certain words, or regress a lot to understand,
while a badly written text would do so.

Figure 1 shows the gaze behaviour for a sample
text. The circles denote fixations, and the arrows
denote saccades. If we capture the gaze behaviour,
as well as see how well the reader has understood
the text, we believe that we can get a clearer pic-
ture of the quality rating of the text.

One of the major concerns is How are we go-
ing to get the gaze data? This is because capa-
bility to gather eye-tracking data is not available
to the masses. However, top mobile device man-
ufacturers, like Samsung, have started integrat-
ing basic eye-tracking software into their smart-
phones (Samsung Smart Scroll) that are able to
detect where the eye is fixated, and can be used
in applications like scrolling through a web page.
Start-ups, like Cogisen4, have started using gaze
features in their applications, such as using gaze
information to improve input to image processing
systems. Recently, SR Research has come up with
a portable eye-tracking system5.

4www.cogisen.com
5https://www.sr-research.com/products/

eyelink-portable-duo/

3 Related Work

A number of studies have been done showing how
eye tracking can model aspects of text. Word
length has been shown to be positively correlated
with fixation count (Rayner, 1998) and fixation
duration (Henderson and Ferreira, 1993). Word
predictability (i.e. how well the reader can predict
the next word in a sentence) was also studied by
Rayner (1998), where he found that unpredictable
words are less likely to be skipped than predictable
words.

Shermis and Burstein (2013) gives a brief
overview of how text-based features are used in
multiple aspects of essay grading, including gram-
matical error detection, sentiment analysis, short-
answer scoring, etc. Their work also describes a
number of current essay grading systems that are
available in the market like E-rater R© (Attali and
Burstein, 2004). In recent years, there has been a
lot of work done on evaluating the holistic scores
of essays, using deep learning techniques (Alikan-
iotis et al., 2016; Taghipour and Ng, 2016; Dong
and Zhang, 2016).

There has been little work done to model text
organization, such as Persing et al. (2010) (us-
ing machine learning) and Taghipour (2017) (us-
ing neural networks). However, there has been a
lot of work done to model coherence and cohesion,
using methods like lexical chains (Somasundaran
et al., 2014), an entity grid (Barzilay and Lapata,
2005), etc. An interesting piece of work to model
coherence was done by Soricut and Marcu (2006)

www.cogisen.com
https://www.sr-research.com/products/eyelink-portable-duo/
https://www.sr-research.com/products/eyelink-portable-duo/


2355

where they used a machine translation-based ap-
proach to model coherence. Zesch et al. (2015) use
topical overlap to model coherence for essay grad-
ing. Discourse connectors are used as a heuristic
to model cohesion by Zesch et al. (2015) and Pers-
ing and Ng (2015). Our work is novel because it
makes use of gaze behaviour to model and predict
coherence and cohesion in text.

In recent years, there has been some work in
using eye-tracking to evaluate certain aspects of
the text, like readability (Gonzalez-Garduño and
Søgaard, 2017; Mishra et al., 2017), grammatical-
ity (Klerke et al., 2015), etc.. Our work uses eye-
tracking to predict the score given by a reader to
a complete piece of text (rather than just a sen-
tence as done by Klerke et al. (2015)) and show
that the scoring is more reliable if the reader has
understood the text.

4 Features

In order to predict the scores of the different prop-
erties of the text, we use the following text and
gaze features.

4.1 Text-based Features

We use a set of text-based features to come up with
a baseline system to predict the scores for different
properties.

The first set of features that we use are length
and count-based features, such as word length,
word count, sentence length, count of transition
phrases6 etc. (Persing and Ng, 2015; Zesch et al.,
2015).

The next set of features that we use are com-
plexity features, namely the degree of polysemy,
coreference distance, and the Flesch Reading Ease
Score (FRES) (Flesch, 1948). These features help
in normalizing the gaze features for text complex-
ity. These features were extracted using Stan-
ford CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014), and Mor-
phAdorner (Burns, 2013).

The third set of features that we use are stylis-
tic features such as the ratios of the number of
adjectives, nouns, prepositions, and verbs to the
number of words in the text. These features are
used to model the distributions of PoS tags in good
and bad texts. These were extracted using NLTK7

(Loper and Bird, 2002).

6https://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/
Transitions.html

7http://www.nltk.org/

The fourth set of features that we use are word
embedding features. We use the average of word
vectors of each word in the essay, using Google
News word vectors (Mikolov et al., 2013). The
word embeddings are 300 dimensions. We also
calculate the mean and maximum similarities be-
tween the word vectors of the content words in ad-
jacent sentences of the text, using GloVe word em-
beddings8 (Pennington et al., 2014).

The fifth set of features that we use are lan-
guage modeling features. We use the count of
words that are absent in Google News word vec-
tors and misspelled words using the PyEnchant9

library. In order to check the grammaticality of the
text, we construct a 5-gram language model, using
the Brown Corpus (Francis and Kucera, 1979).

The sixth set of features are sequence features.
These features are particularly useful in modeling
organization (sentence and paragraph sequence
similarity) (Persing et al., 2010), coherence and
cohesion (PoS and lemma similarity). Pitler et al.
(2010) showed that cosine similarity of adjacent
sentences as one of the best predictors of linguis-
tic quality. Hence, we also create vectors for the
PoS tags and lemmas for each sentence in the text.
The dimension of the vector is the number of dis-
tinct PoS tags / lemmas.

The last set of features that we look at are en-
tity grid features. We define entities as the nouns
in the document, and do coreference resolution to
resolve pronouns. We then construct an entity grid
(Barzilay and Lapata, 2005) - a 1 or 0 grid that
checks whether an entity is present or not in a
given sentence. We take into account sequences of
entities across sentences that possess at least one
1, that are either bigrams, trigrams or 4-grams. A
sequence with multiple 1s denote entities that are
close to each other, while sequences with a soli-
tary 1 denote that an entity is just mentioned once
and we do not come across it again for a number
of sentences.

4.2 Gaze-based Features

The gaze-based features are dependent on the gaze
behaviour of the participant with respect to interest
areas.

8We found that using GloVe here and Google News for
the mean word vectors worked best.

9https://pypi.python.org/pypi/
pyenchant/

https://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/Transitions.html
https://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/Transitions.html
http://www.nltk.org/
https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyenchant/
https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyenchant/


2356

Fixation Features
The First Fixation Duration (FFD) shows the
time the reader fixates on a word when he / she
first encounters it. An increased FFD intuitively
could mean that the word is more complex and
the reader spends more time in understanding the
word (Mishra et al., 2016).

The Second Fixation Duration (SFD) is the
duration in which the reader fixates on a partic-
ular interest area the second time. This happens
during a regression, when a reader is trying to link
the word he / she just read with an earlier word.

The Last Fixation Duration (LFD) is the du-
ration in which the reader fixates on a particular
interest area the final time. At this point, we be-
lieve that the interest area has been processed.

The Dwell Time (DT) is the total time the
reader fixates on a particular interest area. Like
first fixation, this also measures the complexity of
the word, not just by itself, but also with regard to
the entire text (since it takes into account fixations
when the word was regressed, etc.)

The Fixation Count (FC) is the number of fixa-
tions on a particular interest area. A larger fixation
count could mean that the reader frequently goes
back to read that particular interest area.

Regression Features
IsRegression (IR) is the number of interest areas
where a regression happened before reading ahead
and IsRegressionFull (IRF) is the number of in-
terest areas where a regression happened. The Re-
gression Count (RC) is the total number of regres-
sions. The Regression Time (RT) is the duration
of the regressions from an interest area. These re-
gression features could help in modeling semantic
links for coherence and cohesion.

Interest Area Features
The Skip Count (SC) is the number of interest
areas that have been skipped. The Run Count
(RC) is the number of interest areas that have at
least one fixation. A larger run count means that
more interest areas were fixated on. Badly writ-
ten texts would have higher run counts (and lower
skip counts), as well as fixation counts, because
the reader will fixate on these texts for a longer
time to understand them.

5 Experiment Details

In this section, we describe our experimental
setup, creation of the dataset, evaluation metric,

classifier details, etc.

5.1 Ordinal Classification vs. Regression

For each of the properties - organization, coher-
ence and cohesion, we make use of a Likert scale,
with scores of 1 to 4. Details of the scores are
given in Table 2. For scoring the quality, we use
the formula described in the Introduction. Since
we used a Likert scale, we make use of ordinal
classification, rather than regression. This is be-
cause each of the grades is a discrete value that can
be represented as an ordinal class (where 1 < 2 <
3 < 4), as compared to a continuous real number.

5.2 Evaluation Metric

For the predictions of our experiments, we use Co-
hen’s Kappa with quadratic weights - quadratic
weighted Kappa (QWK) (Cohen, 1968) because
of the following reasons. Firstly, unlike accuracy
and F-Score, Cohen’s Kappa takes into account
whether or not agreements happen by chance. Sec-
ondly, weights (either linear or quadratic) take into
account distance between the given score and the
expected score, unlike accuracy and F-score where
mismatches (either 1 vs. 4, or 1 vs.2) are penalized
the same. Quadratic weights reward matches and
penalize mismatches more than linear weights.

To measure the Inter-Annotator Agreement of
our raters, we make use of Gwet’s second-order
agreement coefficient (Gwet’s AC2) as it can han-
dle ordinal classes, weights, missing values, and
multiple raters rating the same document (Gwet,
2014).

5.3 Creation of the Dataset

In this subsection, we describe how we created
our dataset. We describe the way we made the
texts, the way they were annotated and the inter-
annotator agreements for the different properties.

Details of Texts
To the best of our knowledge there isn’t a pub-
licly available dataset with gaze features for tex-
tual quality. Hence, we decided to create our own.
Our dataset consists of a diverse set of 30 texts,
from Simple English Wikipedia (10 articles), En-
glish Wikipedia (8 articles), and online news ar-
ticles (12 articles)10. We did not wish to over-
burden the readers, so we kept the size of texts to

10The sources for the articles were https://simple.
wikipedia.org, https://en.wikipedia.org,
and https://newsela.com

https://simple.wikipedia.org
https://simple.wikipedia.org
https://en.wikipedia.org
https://newsela.com


2357

Property Grade Guidelines

Organization

1 Bad. There is no organization in the text.
2 OK. There is little / no link between the paragraphs, but they each describe an idea.
3 Good. Some paragraphs may be missing, but there is an overall link between them.
4 Very Good. All the paragraphs follow a flow from the Introduction to Conclusion.

Coherence

1 Bad. The sentences do not make sense.
2 OK. Groups of sentences may make sense together, but the text still may not make sense.
3 Good. Most of the sentences make sense. The text, overall, makes sense.
4 Very Good. The sentences and overall text make sense.

Cohesion

1 Bad. There is little / no link between any 2 adjacent sentences in the same paragraph.
2 OK. There is little / no link between adjacent paragraphs. However, each paragraph is cohesive
3 Good. All the sentences in a paragraph are linked to each other and contribute in understanding the paragraph.
4 Very Good. The text is well connected. All the sentences are linked to each other and help in understanding the text.

Table 2: Annotation guidelines for different properties of text.

approximately 200 words each. The original arti-
cles ranged from a couple hundred words (Simple
English Wikipedia) to over a thousand words (En-
glish Wikipedia). We first summarized the longer
articles manually. Then, for the many articles over
200 words, we removed a few of the paragraphs
and sentences. In this way, despite all the texts
being published, we were able to introduce some
poor quality texts into our dataset. The articles
were sampled from a variety of genres, such as
History, Science, Law, Entertainment, Education,
Sports, etc.

Details of Annotators
The dataset was annotated by 20 annotators in the
age group of 20-25. Out of the 20 annotators, the
distribution was 9 high school graduates (current
college students), 8 college graduates, and 3 anno-
tators with a post-graduate degree.

In order to check the eyesight of the annotators,
we had each annotator look at different parts of the
screen. While they did that, we recorded how their
fixations were being detected. Only if their fixa-
tions to particular parts of the screen tallied with
our requests, would we let them participate in an-
notation.

All the participants in the experiment were flu-
ent speakers of English. A few of them scored
over 160 in GRE Verbal test and/or over 110 in
TOEFL. Irrespective of their appearance in such
exams, each annotator was made to take an En-
glish test before doing the experiments. The par-
ticipants had to read a couple of passages, answer
comprehension questions and score them for orga-
nization, coherence and cohesion (as either good /
medium / bad). In case they either got both com-
prehension questions wrong, or labeled a good
passage bad (or vice versa), they failed the test11.

1125 annotators applied, but we chose only 20. 2 of the

Property Full Overall
Organization 0.610 0.519
Coherence 0.688 0.633
Cohesion 0.675 0.614

Table 3: Inter-Annotator Agreements (Gwet’s
AC2) for each of the properties.

In order to help the annotators, they were given
5 sample texts to differentiate between good and
bad organization, coherence and cohesion. Table
1 has some of those texts12.

Inter-Annotator Agreement
Each of the properties were scored in the range of
1 to 4. In addition, we also evaluated the partici-
pant’s understanding of the text by asking them a
couple of questions on the text. Table 3 gives the
inter-annotator agreement for each of the 3 prop-
erties that they rated. The column Full shows
the agreement only if the participant answered
both the questions correct. The Overall column
shows the agreement irrespective of the partici-
pant’s comprehension of the text.

5.4 System Details
We conducted the experiment by following stan-
dard norms in eye-movement research (Holmqvist
et al., 2011). The display screen is kept about 2
feet from the reader, and the camera is placed mid-
way between the reader and the screen. The reader
is seated and the position of his head is fixed using
a chin rest.

Before the text is displayed, we calibrate the
camera by having the participant fixate on 13

rejected annotators failed the test, while the other 3 had bad
eyesight.

12The texts for good and bad organization are too long to
provide in this paper. They will be uploaded in supplemen-
tary material.



2358

points on the screen and validate the calibration
so that the camera is able to predict the location of
the eye on the screen accurately. After calibration
and validation, the text is displayed on the screen
in Times New Roman typeface with font size 23.
The reader reads the text and while that happens,
we record the reader’s eye movements. The read-
ers were allowed to take as much time as they
needed to finish the text. Once the reader has fin-
ished, the reader moves to the next screen.

The next two screens each have a question that
is based on the passage. These questions are used
to verify that the reader did not just skim through
the passage, but understood it as well. The ques-
tions were multiple choice, with 4 options13. The
questions test literal comprehension (where the
reader has to recall something they read), and in-
terpretive comprehension (where the reader has to
infer the answer from the text they read). After
this, the reader scores the texts for organization,
coherence and cohesion. The participants then
take a short break (about 30 seconds to a couple
of minutes) before proceeding with the next text.
This is done to prevent reading fatigue over a pe-
riod of time. After each break, we recalibrate the
camera and validate the calibration again.

For obtaining gaze features from a participant,
we collect gaze movement patterns using an SR
Research Eye Link 1000 eye-tracker (monocular
stabilized head mode, sampling rate 500Hz). It
is able to collect all the gaze details that we re-
quire for our experiments. Reports are generated
for keyboard events (message report) and gaze be-
haviour (interest area report) using SR Research
Data Viewer software.

5.5 Classification Details
We also process the articles for obtaining the text
features as described in Section 4. Given that we
want to show the utility of gaze features, we ran
each of the following classifiers with 3 feature sets
- only text, only gaze, and all features.

We split the data into a training - test split of
sizes 70% and 30%. We used a Feed Forward
Neural Network with 1 hidden layer containing
100 neurons (Bebis and Georgiopoulos, 1994)14.

13Example Passage Text: The text in Figure 1
Question: “How many states did Ronald Reagan win in both
his Presidential campaigns?”
Correct Answer: “93” (44+49)

14We also used other classifiers, like Naive Bayes, Logistic
Regression and Random Forest. However, the neural network
outperformed them.

The size of the input vector was 361 features. Out
of these, there were 49 text features, plus 300
dimension word embeddings features, 11 gaze
features, and 1 class label. The data was split
using stratified sampling, to ensure that there is a
similar distribution of classes in each of the train-
ing and test splits. The Feed Forward Neural Net-
work was implemented using TensorFlow (Abadi
et al., 2015) in Python. We ran the neural network
over 10,000 epochs, with a learning rate of 0.001
in 10 batches. The loss function that we used was
the mean square error.

In order to see how much the participant’s un-
derstanding of the text would reflect on their scor-
ing, we also looked at the data based on how the
participant scored in the comprehension questions
after they read the article. We split the articles into
2 subsets here - Full, denoting that the partici-
pant answered both the questions correctly, and
Partial, denoting that they were able to answer
only one of the questions correctly. The read-
ers showed Full understanding in 269 instances
and Partial understanding in 261 instances. We
used the same setup here (same training - test split,
stratified sampling, and feed forward neural net-
work). We omit the remaining 70 instances where
the participant got none of the questions correct,
as the participant could have scored the texts com-
pletely randomly.

6 Results and Analysis

Table 4 shows the results of our experiments us-
ing the feed forward neural network classifier. The
first column is the property being evaluated. The
next 3 columns denote the results for the Text,
Gaze and Text+Gaze feature sets.

Property Text Gaze Text+Gaze
Organization 0.237 0.394 0.563
Coherence 0.261 0.285 0.550
Cohesion 0.120 0.229 0.451
Quality 0.230 0.304 0.552

Table 4: QWK scores for the three feature sets on
different properties.

The QWK scores are the predictions which we
obtain with respect to the scores of all the 30 doc-
uments, scored by all 20 raters. Textual features
when augmented with gaze based features show
significant improvement for all the properties.



2359

Figure 2: Relation between some of the different gaze features and the score. The gaze features are (a)
RD, (b) SFD, (c) FC and (d) RC. For figures (a) and (b), the units on the y-axis are milliseconds. For
figures (c) and (d) the numbers are a ratio to the number of interest areas in the text. The x-axis in all 4
graphs is the score given by the annotators.

We check the statistical significance of im-
provement of adding gaze based features for the
results in Table 4. To test our hypothesis - that
adding gaze features make a statistically signifi-
cant improvement - we run the t-test. Our null hy-
pothesis: Gaze based features do not help in pre-
diction, any more than text features themselves,
and whatever improvements happen when gaze
based features are added to the textual features,
are not statistically significant. We choose a sig-
nificance level of p < 0.001. For all the improve-
ments, we found them to be statistically significant
above this α level, rejecting our null hypothesis.

We also evaluate how the participant’s under-
standing of the text affects the way they score the
text. Table 5 shows the results of our experiments
taking the reader’s comprehension into account.
The first column is the property being evaluated.
The second column is the level of comprehension
- Full for the passages where the participant an-
swered both the questions correctly, and Partial
for the passages where the participant answered
one question correctly. The next 3 columns show
the results using the Text feature set, the Gaze fea-
ture set, and both (Text+Gaze) feature sets. From
this table, we see that wherever the gaze features
are used, there is far greater agreement for those

with Full understanding as compared to Partial
understanding.

Property Comp. Text Gaze Text+Gaze

Organization Full 0.319 0.319 0.563
Partial 0.115 0.179 0.283

Coherence Full 0.255 0.385 0.601
Partial 0.365 0.343 0.446

Cohesion Full 0.313 0.519 0.638
Partial 0.161 0.155 0.230

Quality Full 0.216 0.624 0.645
Partial 0.161 0.476 0.581

Table 5: QWK scores for the three feature sets
on different properties categorized on the basis of
reader comprehension.

Figure 2 shows a clear relationship between
some of the gaze features and the scores given by
readers for the properties - organization, cohesion
and coherence. In all the charts, we see that texts
with the lowest scores have the longest durations
(regression / fixation) as well as counts (of fixa-
tions and interest areas fixated).

Figure 3 shows the fixation heat maps for 3 texts
whose quality scores were good (10), medium (6)
and bad (3), read by the same participant. From
these heat maps, we see that the text rated good has
highly dense fixations for only a part of the text,



2360

(a) Good (rated 10) (b) Medium (rated 6) (c) Bad (rated 3)

Figure 3: Fixation heatmap examples for one of the participants from SR Research Data Viewer software.

as compared to the medium and bad texts. This
shows that badly written texts force the readers to
fixate a lot more than well-written texts.

6.1 Ablation Tests

In order to see which of the gaze feature sets is
important, we run a set of ablation tests. We ablate
the fixations, regressions and interest area feature
sets one at a time. We also ablated each of the
individual gaze features.

Property Fixation Regression Interest Areas
Organization -0.102 -0.017 -0.103
Coherence -0.049 -0.077 -0.088
Cohesion -0.015 -0.040 0.037
Quality 0.002 0.016 -0.056

Table 6: Difference in QWK scores when ablat-
ing three gaze behaviour feature sets for different
properties.

Table 6 gives the result of our ablation tests
on the three feature sets - fixation, regression and
interest area feature sets. The first column is
the property that we are measuring. The next 3
columns denote the difference between the pre-
dicted QWK that we got from ablating the fixation,
regression and interest area feature sets. We found
that the Interest Area feature set was the most im-
portant, followed by fixation and regression.

Among the individual features, Run Count
(RC) was found to be the most important for or-
ganization and quality. First Fixation Duration
(FFD) was the most important feature for coher-
ence, and IsRegressionFull (IRF) was the most
important feature for cohesion. We believe that
this is because the number of interest areas that are
fixated on at least once and the number of interest
areas that are skipped play an important role in de-
termining how much of the text was read and how
much was skipped. However, for cohesion, regres-
sion features are the most important, because they
show a link between the cohesive clues (like lexis,

references, etc.) in adjacent sentences.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented a novel approach to predict reader’s
rating of texts. The approach estimates the over-
all quality on the basis of three properties - orga-
nization, coherence and cohesion. Although well
defined, predicting the score of these properties
for a text is quite challenging. It has been estab-
lished that cognitive information such as gaze be-
haviour can help in such subjective tasks (Mishra
et al., 2013, 2016). We hypothesized that gaze
behavior will assist in predicting the scores of
text quality. To evaluate this hypothesis, we col-
lected gaze behaviour data and evaluated the pre-
dictions using only the text-based features. When
we took gaze behaviour into account, we were
able to significantly improve our predictions of or-
ganization, coherence, cohesion and quality. We
found out that, in all cases, there was an improve-
ment in the agreement scores when the participant
who rated the text showed full understanding, as
compared to partial understanding, using only the
Gaze features and the Text+Gaze features. This in-
dicated that gaze behaviour is more reliable when
the reader has understood the text.

To the best of our knowledge, our work is pi-
oneering in using gaze information for predicting
text quality rating. In future, we plan to use use
approaches, like multi-task learning (Mishra et al.,
2018), in estimating gaze features and using those
estimated features for text quality prediction.

Acknowledgements

We’d like to thank all the anonymous reviewers
for their constructive feedback in helping us im-
prove our paper. We’d also like to thank Anoop
Kunchukuttan, a research scholar from the Centre
for Indian Language Technology, IIT Bombay for
his valuable input.



2361

References
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene

Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Cor-
rado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin,
Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp,
Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal
Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh
Levenberg, Dan Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore,
Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon
Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Tal-
war, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Va-
sudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete
Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan
Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. 2015. TensorFlow:
Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous sys-
tems. Software available from tensorflow.org.
https://www.tensorflow.org/.

Dimitrios Alikaniotis, Helen Yannakoudakis, and
Marek Rei. 2016. Automatic text scoring using neu-
ral networks. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany, pages
715–725.

Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. 2004. Automated essay
scoring with e-rater R© v. 2.0. ETS Research Report
Series 2004(2).

Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Mod-
eling local coherence: An entity-based approach.
In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL’05). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Ann Arbor, Michigan, pages 141–148.
https://doi.org/10.3115/1219840.1219858.

George Bebis and Michael Georgiopoulos. 1994.
Feed-forward neural networks. IEEE Potentials
13(4):27–31.

Philip R Burns. 2013. Morphadorner v2: A java li-
brary for the morphological adornment of english
language texts. Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL .

Jacob Cohen. 1968. Weighted kappa: Nominal scale
agreement provision for scaled disagreement or par-
tial credit. Psychological bulletin 70(4):213.

Fei Dong and Yue Zhang. 2016. Automatic features
for essay scoring – an empirical study. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Austin, Texas, pages
1072–1077.

Rudolph Flesch. 1948. A new readability yardstick.
Journal of applied psychology 32(3):221.

W Nelson Francis and Henry Kucera. 1979. The brown
corpus: A standard corpus of present-day edited
american english. Providence, RI: Department of
Linguistics, Brown University [producer and dis-
tributor] .

Ana Valeria Gonzalez-Garduño and Anders Søgaard.
2017. Using gaze to predict text readabil-
ity. In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on
Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational
Applications. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Copenhagen, Denmark, pages 438–443.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-5050.

Kilem L Gwet. 2014. Handbook of inter-rater relia-
bility: The definitive guide to measuring the extent
of agreement among raters. Advanced Analytics,
LLC.

Michael Alexander Kirkwood Halliday and Ruqaiya
Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in english. Longman Group
Ltd.

John M Henderson and Fernanda Ferreira. 1993. Eye
movement control during reading: Fixation mea-
sures reflect foveal but not parafoveal process-
ing difficulty. Canadian Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology/Revue canadienne de psychologie
expérimentale 47(2):201.

Kenneth Holmqvist, Marcus Nyström, Richard An-
dersson, Richard Dewhurst, Halszka Jarodzka, and
Joost Van de Weijer. 2011. Eye tracking: A com-
prehensive guide to methods and measures. OUP
Oxford.

Aditya Joshi, Abhijit Mishra, Nivvedan Senthamilsel-
van, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2014. Measuring
sentiment annotation complexity of text. In ACL (2).
pages 36–41.

Marcel A Just and Patricia A Carpenter. 1980. A theory
of reading: From eye fixations to comprehension.
Psychological review 87(4):329.

Sigrid Klerke, Héctor Martı́nez Alonso, and An-
ders Søgaard. 2015. Looking hard: Eye track-
ing for detecting grammaticality of automatically
compressed sentences. In Proceedings of the
20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguis-
tics (NODALIDA 2015). Linköping University Elec-
tronic Press, Sweden, Vilnius, Lithuania, pages 97–
105. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1814.

Rensis Likert. 1932. A technique for the measurement
of attitudes. Archives of psychology .

Edward Loper and Steven Bird. 2002. Nltk: The natu-
ral language toolkit. In Proceedings of the ACL-02
Workshop on Effective tools and methodologies for
teaching natural language processing and computa-
tional linguistics-Volume 1. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 63–70.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John
Bauer, Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard,
and David McClosky. 2014. The Stanford
CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit.
In Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL) System Demonstrations. pages 55–60.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5010.

https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://doi.org/10.3115/1219840.1219858
https://doi.org/10.3115/1219840.1219858
https://doi.org/10.3115/1219840.1219858
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-5050
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-5050
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-5050
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1814
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1814
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1814
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1814
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5010
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5010
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5010


2362

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. pages 3111–3119.

Abhijit Mishra, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Michael
Carl. 2013. Automatically predicting sentence
translation difficulty. In Proceedings of the 51st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers). Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria,
pages 346–351.

Abhijit Mishra, Diptesh Kanojia, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2016. Predicting readers’ sarcasm under-
standability by modeling gaze behavior. In AAAI.
pages 3747–3753.

Abhijit Mishra, Diptesh Kanojia, Seema Nagar, Kuntal
Dey, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2017. Scanpath
complexity: Modeling reading effort using gaze in-
formation. In AAAI. pages 4429–4436.

Abhijit Mishra, Srikanth Tamilselvam, Riddhiman
Dasgupta, Seema Nagar, and Kuntal Dey. 2018.
Cognition-cognizant sentiment analysis with multi-
task subjectivity summarization based on annotators
gaze behavior .

Ellis B Page. 1966. The imminence of... grading essays
by computer. The Phi Delta Kappan 47(5):238–243.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Doha, Qatar, pages 1532–1543.

Isaac Persing, Alan Davis, and Vincent Ng. 2010.
Modeling organization in student essays. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Cambridge, MA,
pages 229–239.

Isaac Persing and Vincent Ng. 2015. Modeling ar-
gument strength in student essays. In Proceedings
of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 7th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Beijing, China, pages 543–552.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P15-1053.

Robert Person. 2013. Blind truth: An examination of
grading bias.

Emily Pitler, Annie Louis, and Ani Nenkova. 2010.
Automatic evaluation of linguistic quality in multi-
document summarization. In Proceedings of the
48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Uppsala, Sweden, pages 544–
554. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P10-1056.

Keith Rayner. 1998. Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research. Psy-
chological bulletin 124(3):372.

Joe Cheri Ross, Abhijit Mishra, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2016. Leveraging annotators gaze be-
haviour for coreference resolution. In Proceedings
of the 7th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Com-
putational Language Learning. pages 22–26.

Mark D Shermis and Jill Burstein. 2013. Handbook of
automated essay evaluation: Current applications
and new directions. Routledge.

Swapna Somasundaran, Jill Burstein, and Martin
Chodorow. 2014. Lexical chaining for measur-
ing discourse coherence quality in test-taker essays.
In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers. Dublin City University and Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, Ire-
land, pages 950–961.

Radu Soricut and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Discourse gen-
eration using utility-trained coherence models. In
Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Con-
ference Poster Sessions. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Sydney, Australia, pages 803–
810. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P06/P06-
2103.

Kaveh Taghipour. 2017. Robust Trait-Specific Essay
Scoring Using Neural Networks and Density Esti-
mators. Ph.D. thesis.

Kaveh Taghipour and Hwee Tou Ng. 2016. A neural
approach to automated essay scoring. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Austin, Texas, pages
1882–1891.

Teun Adrianus Van Dijk. 1980. Text and context explo-
rations in the semantics and pragmatics of discourse
.

Torsten Zesch, Michael Wojatzki, and Dirk Scholten-
Akoun. 2015. Task-independent features for auto-
mated essay grading. In Proceedings of the Tenth
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building
Educational Applications. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Denver, Colorado, pages 224–
232. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-0626.

http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P15-1053
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P15-1053
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P15-1053
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P10-1056
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P10-1056
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P10-1056
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P06/P06-2103
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P06/P06-2103
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P06/P06-2103
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P06/P06-2103
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-0626
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-0626
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-0626

