




































BCSAT : A Benchmark Corpus for Sentiment Analysis in Telugu Using Word-level Annotations


Proceedings of ACL 2018, Student Research Workshop, pages 99–104
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

99

BCSAT : A Benchmark Corpus for Sentiment Analysis in Telugu Using
Word-level Annotations

Sreekavitha Parupalli, Vijjini Anvesh Rao and Radhika Mamidi
Language Technologies Research Center (LTRC)

International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad
{sreekavitha.parupalli, vijjinianvesh.rao}@research.iiit.ac.in

radhika.mamidi@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

The presented work aims at generating
a systematically annotated corpus that
can support the enhancement of senti-
ment analysis tasks in Telugu using word-
level sentiment annotations. From On-
toSenseNet, we extracted 11,000 adjec-
tives, 253 adverbs, 8483 verbs and sen-
timent annotation is being done by lan-
guage experts. We discuss the methodol-
ogy followed for the polarity annotations
and validate the developed resource. This
work aims at developing a benchmark cor-
pus, as an extension to SentiWordNet, and
baseline accuracy for a model where lex-
eme annotations are applied for sentiment
predictions. The fundamental aim of this
paper is to validate and study the possi-
bility of utilizing machine learning algo-
rithms, word-level sentiment annotations
in the task of automated sentiment identifi-
cation. Furthermore, accuracy is improved
by annotating the bi-grams extracted from
the target corpus.

1 Introduction

Sentiment analysis deals with the task of determin-
ing the polarity of text. To distinguish positive
and negative opinions in simple texts such as re-
views, blogs, and news articles, sentiment analysis
(or opinion mining) is used. Over time, it evolved
from focusing on explicit opinion expressions to
addressing a type of opinion inference which is a
result of opinions expressed towards events having
positive or negative effects on entities.

There are three ways in which one can perform
sentiment analysis : document-level, sentence-
level, entity or word-level. These determine the

polarity value considering the whole document,
sentence-wise polarity, word-wise in some given
text respectively (Naidu et al., 2017). Despite ex-
tensive research, the existing solutions and sys-
tems have a lot of scope for improvement, to meet
the standards of the end users. The main prob-
lem arises while cataloging the possibly infinite
set of conceptual rules that operate behind the an-
alyzing the hidden polarity of the text (Das and
Bandyopadhyay, 2011). In this paper, we perform
a word-level sentiment annotation to validate the
usage of such techniques for improving sentiment
analysis task. Furthermore, we use word embed-
dings of the word-level sentiment annotated lexi-
con to predict the sentiment label of a document.
We experiment with various machine learning al-
gorithms to analyze the affect of word-level sen-
timent annotations on (document-level) sentiment
analysis.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2
we discuss the previous works in the field of sen-
timent analysis, existing resources for Telugu and
specific advances that are made in Telugu. Section
3 describes our corpus and annotation scheme. 4
section describes several experiments that are car-
ried out and the accuracies obtained. We also ex-
plain the results in detail in 4.3. Section 5 show-
cases our conclusions and section 6 shows the
scope for future work.

2 Related Work

• Sentiment Analysis: Several ap-
proaches have been proposed to capture the
sentiment in the text where each approach ad-
dresses the issue at different levels of granu-
larity. Some researchers have proposed meth-
ods for document-level sentiment classifica-
tion (Pang et al., 2002; Turney and Littman,
2003). At the top level of granularity, it is



100

often impossible to infer the sentiment ex-
pressed about any particular entity, because
a document may convey different opinions
for different entities. Hence, when we con-
sider the tasks of opinion mining where the
sole aim is to capture the sentiment polari-
ties about entities, such as products in prod-
uct reviews, it has been shown that sentence-
level and phrase-level analysis lead to a per-
formance gain (Wilson et al., 2005; Choi and
Wiebe, 2014). In the context of Indian lan-
guages, (Das et al., 2012) proposes an alter-
nate way to build the resources for multilin-
gual affect analysis where translations into
Telugu are done using WordNet.

• SentiWordNet : (Das and Bandyopad-
hyay, 2010) proposes multiple computational
techniques like, WordNet based, dictionary
based, corpus based and generative ap-
proaches to generate Telugu SentiWordNet.
(Das and Bandyopadhyay, 2011) proposes a
tool Dr Sentiment where it automatically cre-
ates the PsychoSentiWordNet which is an ex-
tension of SentiWordNet that presently holds
human psychological knowledge on a few as-
pects along with sentiment knowledge.

• Advances in Telugu: (Naidu et al.,
2017) utilizes Telugu SentiWordNet on the
news corpus to perform the task of Senti-
ment Analysis. (Mukku and Mamidi, 2017)
developed a polarity annotated corpus where
positive, negative, neutral polarities are as-
signed to 5410 sentences in the corpus col-
lected from several sources. They developed
a gold standard annotated corpus of Telugu
sentences aimed at improving sentiment anal-
ysis in Telugu. To minimize the dependence
of machine learning(ML) approaches for sen-
timent analysis on abundance of corpus, this
paper proposes a novel method to learn rep-
resentations of resource-poor languages by
training them jointly with resource-rich lan-
guages using a siamese network (Choudhary
et al., 2018a). A novel approach to clas-
sify sentences into their corresponding sen-
timent using contrastive learning is proposed
by (Choudhary et al., 2018b) which utilizes
the shared parameters of siamese networks.

(Gangula and Mamidi, 2018) and (Mukku
and Mamidi, 2017) are the only reported

works for Telugu sentiment analysis using
sentence-level annotations who developed
annotated corpora. Ours is the first of it’s
kind NLP research which uses sentiment an-
notation of bi-grams for sentiment analysis
(opinion mining).

3 Building the Benchmark Corpus

Lexicons play an important role in sentiment anal-
ysis. Having annotated lexicon is key to carry out
sentiment analysis efficiently. The primary task in
sentiment analysis is to identify the polarity of text
in any given document. The polarity may be either
positive, negative or neutral (Naidu et al., 2017).
Sentiment is a property of human intelligence and
is not entirely based on the features of a language.
Thus, peoples involvement is required to capture
the sentiment (Das and Bandyopadhyay, 2011).
Having said this, we establish that annotated lex-
icons are of immense importance in any language
for sentiment analysis (a.k.a opinion mining).

For our experiments, we utilize the reviews
dataset from Sentiraama 1 corpus. It contains
668 reviews in total for 267 movies, 201 prod-
ucts and 200 books. Product reviews has 101 pos-
itive and 100 negative entries; movie reviews has
136 positive and 132 negative reviews; book re-
views data has 100 positive and 100 negative en-
tries. Since the obtained corpus is only annotated
with document-level sentiment labels, we perform
the word-level sentiment annotation manually.

3.1 Annotation Procedure

In this paper, sentiment polarities are classified
into 4 labels : positive, negative, neutral and am-
biguous. Positive and negative labels are given
in case of positive and negative sentiments in the
word respectively. Ambiguous label is given to
words which acquire sentiment based on the words
it is used along with or it’s position in a sentence.
Neutral label is given when the word has no senti-
ment in it. However, neutral and ambiguous sen-
timent labels are of no significant use for the task
of sentiment analysis. Henceforth, those labels are
ignored in our experiments.

Sentiment annotations are performed on two
different kinds of data. Table 1 showcases the dis-
tribution of sentiment labels at the word-level.

1https://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?
filename=downloads/sentiraama/

https://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?filename=downloads/sentiraama/
https://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?filename=downloads/sentiraama/


101

• Unigrams: We obtain 7,663 words from
Telugu SentiWordNet 2 resource to calculate
the base-line accuracy of any word-level sen-
timent annotated model. These words are al-
ready annotated for sentiment/polarity. How-
ever, it doesn’t provide extensive coverage of
Telugu. Later on, we discover a newly de-
veloped large resource of Telugu words by
(Parupalli and Singh, 2018), OntoSenseNet,
which has a collection of 21,000 words (ad-
jectives+verbs+adverbs). We perform the
task of word-level sentiment annotation on
the words obtained from this resource and we
refer to these annotated words as unigrams
throughout this paper. Language experts who
performed the annotations are given some
guidelines to follow. Experts are implored
to look at the word, it’s gloss and then de-
cide which one of the four sentiment labels is
more apt for a given word. Aforementioned
word-level sentiment annotation is an attempt
to improve the coverage of SentiWordNet.

• Bigrams: Furthermore, sentiment cannot
always be captured in a single word.This pa-
per aims to check if bigram annotation is
a suitable approach for improving the effi-
ciency of sentiment analysis. To validate the
hypothesis, we extract bigrams, which oc-
curred at least more than once, only from
the target corpus - Sentiraama dataset de-
veloped by (Gangula and Mamidi, 2018).
For example, consider the bigram (’DhokA’,
’ledu’). The words individually mean ‘hur-
dle (DhokA)’, ‘no (ledu)’. Thus, in word-
level annotation task they would be given a
negative label. However, the bigram means
there is ‘nothing that can stop’ which invokes
a positive sentiment. Such occurrences are
quite common in the text, especially reviews,
which lead us to believe that bigram polar-
ity has potential to enhance sentiment anal-
ysis, opinion mining. The usage of this de-
veloped resource in experiments performed is
explained in section 4.

3.2 Validation

Annotations are done by 2 native speakers of Tel-
ugu. If the annotators aren’t able to decide which

2http://amitavadas.com/sentiwordnet.
php

label to assign, they are advised to tag it as uncer-
tain. In case of a disagreement, the label given by
the annotator with more experience is given pri-
ority. Validation of the developed resource is done
using Cohen’s Kappa (Cohen, 1968). By consider-
ing the uncertain cases as borderline cases (where
at least one annotator tagged the word as uncer-
tain), Kappa value is seen as 0.91. This shows
almost perfect agreement and this proves the con-
sistency in annotation task. This is especially high
because when both the annotators are uncertain,
we did a re-iteration to finalize the tag. Such re-
iterative task is done for about 2,400 words during
the development of our resource.

4 Experiments and Results

In this section we will analyze and observe how
word-level polarity affects overall sentiment of the
text through majority polling approach and ma-
chine learning based classification approaches.

4.1 Majority Polling Approach

A simple intuitive approach to identify the senti-
ment label of the text is to calculate the sum of
positive(+1) and negative(-1) polarity values in it.
If the sum is positive, it shows that number of pos-
itive words have outnumbered the number of neg-
ative words thus resulting in a positive sentiment
on the whole. Otherwise, the polarity of the text is
negative. Cases where the sum equals to 0 are ig-
nored. Following are the word-level polarities we
consider for positive and negative labels:

• Unigram: We use the annotated unigram
data that is discussed in 3. For each review,
we consider the unigram labels to carry the
majority polling approach.

• Bigram: The extracted bigrams are anno-
tated for positive and negative polarity. Ini-
tially, we divide our data into training and
testing sets in 7:3 ratio. We only consider the
annotated bigrams from the training corpus
to predict the sentiment polarity of reviews in
the test data.

• Unigram+Bigram: In this trial, we com-
bine the unigram and bigram data to perform
majority polling. We consider the whole un-
igram data whereas bigrams extracted from
the training set are only considered for pre-
dictions.

http://amitavadas.com/sentiwordnet.php
http://amitavadas.com/sentiwordnet.php


102

Resource Positive Negative Neutral Ambiguous Total
SentiWordNet 3 2135 4076 359 1093 7663

Dictionary (Parupalli and Singh, 2018) 3080 4232 3391 10199 20896
Bigrams 1978 1762 8990 1996 14826

Table 1: Distribution of Sentiment Labels in Several Resources

Furthermore, as Telugu is agglutinative in na-
ture (Pingali and Varma, 2006), we experiment
with the above mentioned approaches after per-
forming morphological segmentation provided by
Indic NLP library 4. Morphological segmentation
is performed on the original reviews data and n-
grams (positive and negative labels) to see if we
could get more accurate sentiment prediction of
the reviews due to increment in the coverage.

4.2 Machine Learning Based Classification
Approach

In this section, we perform document-level senti-
ment analysis task with word embedding models,
specifically Word2Vec. We utilize a Word2Vec
model that is trained on corpus consisting of
scrapped data from Telugu websites, with 270 mil-
lion non-unique tokens on the whole. Further-
more, to obtain vectors for each review, we take
word vector of every word in the review and calcu-
late their average to get a single document vector.

Figure 1: Comparative analysis of percentage ac-
curacies produced by various classifiers

Though traditional vector-based word represen-
tations help us accomplish various natural lan-
guage processing tasks, they often lack informa-
tion related to sentiment analysis. Thus, we aim to
enrich the Word2Vec vectors obtained from cor-
pus by incorporating word-level polarity features.
We do this by adding the features we propose
in 4.1 to the original averaged Word2Vec vector,

4http://anoopkunchukuttan.github.io/
indic_nlp_library/

which is expected to increase the accuracy of po-
larity prediction. The additional features we added
are: positive unigrams (number of positive po-
larity unigrams in the review), negative unigrams
(number of negative polarity unigrams in the re-
view), positive bigrams (number of positive polar-
ity bigrams in the review), negative bigrams (num-
ber of negative polarity bigrams in the review).
We partition these document vectors into training
and testing sets to develop various classifier mod-
els. In this paper, we have implemented 5 classi-
fiers, namely, Linear SVM, Gaussian SVM, Ran-
dom Forest, Neural Network, K Nearest Neigh-
bor (KNN). Percentage accuracies are illustrated
along with the improvement in accuracies after ad-
dition of our proposed features in Figure 1 and re-
sults are discussed in 4.3.

4.3 Results

In this section, we showcase and analyze the re-
sults of the two experiments we have done in sec-
tion 4.

4.3.1 Majority Polling Approach :

Results illustrated in Table 2 show that certain
word-level features do capture information rele-
vant to document-level sentiment analysis. Our
hypothesis in Section 3.1 shows that bigram po-
larity annotations have potential to enhance senti-
ment analysis. High accuracy obtained by using
only bigrams for majority polling proves our hy-
pothesis. However, there is a trade-off between
coverage and accuracy. This can be depicted from
the huge increase in the count of unclassified re-
views in case of bigram majority poling. We also
observe that effect of morphological segmentation
on accuracy is hardly positive. This indicates that
in case of Telugu, morphological data has rele-
vance to sentiment expressed and morphological
segmentation would result in loss of such valuable
information for sentiment analysis tasks.

http://anoopkunchukuttan.github.io/indic_nlp_library/
http://anoopkunchukuttan.github.io/indic_nlp_library/


103

SentiWordNet Our resource Bigram Uni+Bigrams
Before Segmentation 61.86 62.84 78.97 55.44
Unclassified reviews 23/201 14/201 108/201 10/201
After Segmentation 60.23 58.29 49.46 57.89
Unclassified reviews 20/201 18/201 36/201 8/201

Table 2: Comparison of accuracies obtained through majority polling on different resources.

4.3.2 Machine Learning Based Classification
Approach:

This approach shows that across all the classifiers,
addition of word-level polarity features improves
the process of classification. Therefore, classi-
fiers can predict document-level sentiment polar-
ity with better accuracies. Hence, our hypothe-
sis is validated once again. Accuracies doesn’t
improve significantly over the baseline value but
show a small increment always. KNN classifier
shows a huge drop in accuracy after inclusion of
the new features proposed. This is observed be-
cause KNN assumes all features to hold equal
importance for classification. Hence, KNN fails
to ignore the noisy features which explains the
drop. Random forest and neural network classi-
fiers don’t show significant learning from the pro-
posed features. Finally, we observe that linear
SVM classifier works best to identify the polar-
ity of a text for our features indicating linear sep-
arability of the data. This also explains the bad
performance of Gaussian SVM. Linear SVM pro-
duces an accuracy of 84.08% when SentiWord-
Net words alone are used as a feature, which can
be considered as the baseline accuracy. It gives
an accuracy of 83.44% ,84.34% and 86.57% for
unigrams, bigrams and unigrams+bigrams respec-
tively as features of Linear SVM classifier.

5 Conclusions

In this paper, efforts are made to develop an an-
notated corpus of 21,000 words to enrich Telugu
SentiWordNet. This is a work in progress. We
perform annotations of 14,000 bigrams that are
extracted from target corpus to validate their im-
portance. This is a first-of-it’s-kind approach in
Telugu to enhance sentiment analysis. Manual an-
notations done show perfect agreement which val-
idates the developed resource. Furthermore, we
provide a justification to why word-level senti-
ment annotation of bigrams enhances sentiment
analysis though an intuitive majority polling ap-

proach, by using several ML classifiers. The re-
sults are analyzed for further insights.

6 Future Work

We extract bigrams only from the target corpus
because we wanted to mainly validate the impor-
tance of bigrams in sentiment analysis. However,
attempts should be made to enhance the Senti-
WordNet with, at least, some most occurring bi-
grams in Telugu. We hope this corpus can serve
as a basis for more work to be done in the area
of sentiment analysis for Telugu. A continuation
to this paper could be handling the enrichment of
adjectives and adverbs available in OntoSenseNet
for Telugu.

6.1 Crowd sourcing

We can develop a crowd sourcing platform where
the annotations can be done by several language
experts instead of a few. This helps in the annota-
tion of large corpora. We aim to develop a crowd
sourcing model for the same in near future. This
would be of immense help in annotation of 21,000
unigrams extracted from the dictionary developed
by (Parupalli and Singh, 2018).

7 Acknowledgements

This work is part of the ongoing MS thesis in Ex-
act Humanities under the guidance of Prof. Rad-
hika Mamidi. I am immensely grateful to Vijaya
Lakshmi for helping me with data collection. I
would like to thank Nurendra Choudary for re-
viewing the paper and for his part in the ideation.
I would like to extend my gratitude to Abhilash
Reddy for annotating the dataset, reviewing the
work carefully and constantly pushing us to do
better. I want to thank Rama Rohit Reddy for his
support and for validating the novelty of this re-
search at several points. I acknowledge the support
of Google in the form of an International Travel
Grant, which enabled me to attend this conference.



104

References
Yoonjung Choi and Janyce Wiebe. 2014. +/-

effectwordnet: Sense-level lexicon acquisition for
opinion inference. In Proceedings of the 2014 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 1181–1191.

Nurendra Choudhary, Rajat Singh, Ishita Bindlish, and
Manish Shrivastava. 2018a. Emotions are univer-
sal: Learning sentiment based representations of
resource-poor languages using siamese networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00805.

Nurendra Choudhary, Rajat Singh, Ishita Bindlish, and
Manish Shrivastava. 2018b. Sentiment analysis of
code-mixed languages leveraging resource rich lan-
guages. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00806.

Jacob Cohen. 1968. Weighted kappa: Nominal scale
agreement provision for scaled disagreement or par-
tial credit. Psychological bulletin, 70(4):213.

Amitava Das and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2010. Sen-
tiwordnet for indian languages. In Proceedings of
the Eighth Workshop on Asian Language Resouces,
pages 56–63.

Amitava Das and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2011. Dr sen-
timent knows everything! In Proceedings of the
49th annual meeting of the association for compu-
tational linguistics: human language technologies:
systems demonstrations, pages 50–55. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Dipankar Das, Soujanya Poria, Chandra Mohan Dasari,
and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2012. Building re-
sources for multilingual affect analysis–a case study
on hindi, bengali and telugu. In Workshop Pro-
gramme, page 54.

Rama Rohit Reddy Gangula and Radhika Mamidi.
2018. Resource creation towards automated senti-
ment analysis in telugu (a low resource language)
and integrating multiple domain sources to enhance
sentiment prediction. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2018), Paris, France. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Sandeep Sricharan Mukku and Radhika Mamidi. 2017.
Actsa: Annotated corpus for telugu sentiment anal-
ysis. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Building Linguistically Generalizable NLP Systems,
pages 54–58.

Reddy Naidu, Santosh Kumar Bharti, Korra Sathya
Babu, and Ramesh Kumar Mohapatra. 2017. Sen-
timent analysis using telugu sentiwordnet.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
ACL-02 conference on Empirical methods in natural
language processing-Volume 10, pages 79–86. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Sreekavitha Parupalli and Navjyoti Singh. 2018. En-
richment of ontosensenet: Adding a sense-annotated
telugu lexicon. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02186.

Prasad Pingali and Vasudeva Varma. 2006. Hindi
and telugu to english cross language information re-
trieval at clef 2006. In CLEF (Working Notes).

Peter D Turney and Michael L Littman. 2003. Mea-
suring praise and criticism: Inference of semantic
orientation from association. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS), 21(4):315–346.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the con-
ference on human language technology and empiri-
cal methods in natural language processing, pages
347–354. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.


