















































Sentence Suggestion of Japanese Functional Expressions for Chinese-speaking Learners


Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 56–61
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

56

 
 
 
 

 

Sentence Suggestion of Japanese Functional Expressions                      
for Chinese-speaking Learners 

 
Jun Liu1, Hiroyuki Shindo1,2 and Yuji Matsumoto1,2 

1Nara Institute of Science and Technology 
2RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP) 

{liu.jun.lc3, shindo, matsu}@is.naist.jp 
 
 

Abstract 

We present a computer-assisted learning 
system, Jastudy1, which is particularly de-
signed for Chinese-speaking learners of 
Japanese as a second language (JSL) to 
learn Japanese functional expressions with 
suggestion of appropriate example sen-
tences. The system automatically recog-
nizes Japanese functional expressions us-
ing a free Japanese morphological analyz-
er MeCab, which is retrained on a Condi-
tional Random Fields (CRF) model. In or-
der to select appropriate example sentenc-
es, we apply Support Vector Machines for 
Ranking (SVMrank) to estimate the com-
plexity of the example sentences using 
Japanese-Chinese homographs as an im-
portant feature. In addition, we cluster the 
example sentences that contain Japanese 
functional expressions to discriminate dif-
ferent meanings and usages, based on part-
of-speech, conjugation forms and semantic 
attributes, using the k-means clustering al-
gorithm. Experimental results demonstrate 
the effectiveness of our approach. 

1 Introduction 

In the process of Japanese learning, learners must 
study many vocabulary words as well as various 
functional expressions. Since a large number of 
Chinese characters (Kanji characters in Japanese) 
are commonly used both in Chinese and Japa-
nese, one of the most difficult and challenging 
problem for Chinese-speaking learners of Japa-
nese as a second language (JSL) is the acquisition 
of Japanese functional expressions (Dongli Han, 
and Xin Song. 2011). Japanese has various types 
of compound functional expressions that consist 
of more than one word including both content 
words and functional words, such as “ざるをえ

                                                        
1 http://jastudy.net/jastudy.php 

ない (have to)”, “ことができる (be able to)”. 
Due to various meanings and usages of Japanese 
functional expressions, it is fairly difficult for JSL 
learners to learn them. 
    In recent years, certain online Japanese learn-
ing systems are developed to support JSL learn-
ers, such as Reading Tutor2, Asunaro3, Rikai4, and 
WWWJDIC5. Some of these systems are particu-
larly designed to enable JSL learners to read and 
write Japanese texts by offering the word infor-
mation with their corresponding difficulty infor-
mation or translation information (Ohno et al., 
2013; Toyoda 2016). However, learners’ native 
language background has not been taken into ac-
count in these systems. Moreover, these systems 
provide learners with limited information about 
the various types of Japanese functional expres-
sions, which learners actually intend to learn as a 
part of the procedure for learning Japanese. 
Therefore, developing a learning system that can 
assist JSL learners to learn Japanese functional 
expressions is crucial in Japanese education.  
    In this paper, we present Jastudy, a computer-
assisted learning system, aiming at helping Chi-
nese-speaking JSL learners with their study of 
Japanese functional expressions. We train a CRF 
model and use a Japanese morphological analyzer 
MeCab 6  to detect Japanese functional expres-
sions. To select the appropriate example sentenc-
es, we take Japanese-Chinese homographs as an 
important feature to estimate the complexity of 
example sentences using SVMrank7. In addition, 
in order to suggest example sentences that con-
tain the target Japanese functional expression 
with the same meaning and usage, we cluster the 
                                                        
2 http://language.tiu.ac.jp/ 
3 https://hinoki-project.org/asunaro/ 
4 http://www.rikai.com/perl/Home.pl 
5 http://nihongo.monash.edu/cgi-bin/wwwjdic?9T 
6 http://taku910.github.io/mecab/ 
7 https://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/tj/svm_light/ 
  svm_rank.html 



57

 
 
 
 

 

example sentences, based on part-of-speech, con-
jugation forms and semantic attributes of the 
neighboring words, using the k-means clustering 
algorithm in Scikit-learn8. 

2 General Method 

As shown in Figure 1, our proposed system is 
mainly composed of three processes: automatic 
detection of Japanese functional expressions, sen-
tence complexity estimation and sentence cluster-
ing. In this section, we explain them in detail. 
 

 
Figure 1: The processing stages of the system 

2.1 Detection of Functional Expressions 
Several previous researches have been especially 
paid attention on automatic detection of Japanese 
functional expressions (Tsuchiya et al., 2006; 
Shime et al., 2007; Suzuki et al., 2012). However, 
recognition of Japanese functional expressions is 
still a difficult problem. For automatic detection of 
Japanese functional expressions, we apply a Japa-
nese morphological analyzer Mecab, which em-
ploys CRF algorithm to build the feature-based 
statistical model for morphological analysis. 
    While MeCab provides a pre-trained model us-
ing RWCP Text Corpus as well as Kyoto Univer-
sity Corpus (KC), we train a new CRF model us-
ing our training corpus, hoping MeCab can detect 
more Japanese functional expressions. To prepare 
the training corpus, we firstly referenced certain 
Japanese grammar dictionaries (Xiaoming Xu and 
Reika, 2013; Estuko Tomomastu, Jun Miyamoto 
and Masako Wakuki, 2016) to construct a list of 

                                                        
8 http://scikitlearn.org/stable/modules/ 
  clustering.html#clustering 

Japanese functional expressions. As a result, we 
collected approximately 4,600 types of various 
surface forms in our list. Then we gathered 21,435 
sentences from Tatoeba9 corpus, HiraganaTime10 
corpus, BCCWJ11 and some grammar dictionaries 
(Jamashi and Xu, 2001; Xu and Reika, 2013) and 
segmented each sentence into word level using 
MeCab. Finally, we manually annotated part-of-
speech information for each Japanese functional 
expression in our training corpus. Figure 2 shows 
an example sentence after pre-processing. 

 

 
Figure 2: An example sentence (I will go to sleep 

after I take a bath.) after pre-processing. In the 
sentence, the Japanese functional expression and 

its part-of-speech information are in bold. 

2.2 Sentence Complexity Estimation 
There are a large number of Japanese words writ-
ten with Chinese characters. Most of the words 
share identical or similar meaning with the Chi-
nese words. We define these words as Japanese-
Chinese homographs in our study. For Chinese-
speaking learners, it is easy to understand their 
meanings even though they have never learned 
Japanese. Therefore, Japanese-Chinese homo-
graphs should be considered as an important fea-
ture in estimating sentence complexity. 

In order to construct a list of Japanese-Chinese 
homographs, we firstly extracted Japanese words 
written only with Chinese characters from two 
Japanese dictionaries: IPA (mecab-ipadic-2.7.0-
20070801)12 and UniDic (unidic-mecab 2.1.2)13. 
These two dictionaries are used as the standard 
dictionaries for the Japanese morphological ana-
lyzer MeCab, with appropriate part-of-speech in-
formation for each expression. We then extracted 
the Chinese translations of these Japanese words 
from two online dictionary websites: Wiktionary14 

                                                        
9 https://tatoeba.org/eng/ 
10 http://www.hiraganatiomes.com/ 
11 http://pj.ninjal.ac.jp/corpus_center/bccwj/en/ 
12 https://sourceforge.net/projects/mecab/files/ 
   mecab-ipadic/2.7.0-20070801/mecab-ipadic-2.7.0-  
   20070801.tar.gz/download 
13 http://osdn.net/project/unidic/ 
14 http://ja.wictionary.org/wiki/ 

Input 

Functional Expression Detection CRF++ 

Example Sentence Extraction 

Sentence Complexity Estimation SVMrank 

Example Sentence Clustering K-means 

Example Sentence Suggestion 
ordered from Easy to Difficult  

お	 接頭詞,名詞接続,*,*,*,*,お,オ,オ	

風呂	 名詞,一般,*,*,*,*,風呂,フロ,フロ	

に	 助詞,格助詞,一般,*,*,*,に,ニ,ニ	

入っ	 動詞,自立,*,*,五段・ラ行,連用タ接続,入る,ハイッ,ハイッ	

てから	 助詞,接続助詞,機能表現,*,*,*,てから,テカラ,テカラ	

寝	 動詞,自立,*,*,一段,連用形,寝る,ネ,ネ	

ます	 助動詞,*,*,*,特殊・マス,基本形,ます,マス,マス	

。	 記号,句点,*,*,*,*,。,。,。	



58

 
 
 
 

 

and Weblio15. We compared the character forms of 
Japanese words with their Chinese translations to 
identify whether the Japanese word is a Japanese-
Chinese homograph or not. Since Japanese words 
use both the simplified Chinese characters and the 
traditional Chinese characters, we first replaced all 
the traditional Chinese characters with the corre-
sponding simplified Chinese characters. If the 
character form of a Japanese word is the same as 
the character form of the Chinese translation, the 
Japanese word is recognized as a Japanese-
Chinese homograph, as illustrated in Table 1.  

Considering unknown words in the above 
online dictionaries, we also referenced an online 
Chinese encyclopedia: Baike Baidu16 and a Japa-
nese dictionary: Kojien fifth Edition (Shinmura, 
1998). If a Japanese word and its corresponding 
Chinese translation share an identical or a similar 
meaning, the Japanese word is also identified as a 
Japanese-Chinese homograph. Ultimately, we cre-
ated a list of Japanese-Chinese homographs that 
consists of approximately 14,000 words. 
 

Original  
Japanese  

word 

Simplified 
Chinese 

characters 

Chinese 
translation 

Japanese-
Chinese 

homographs 
社会 (society) 社会 社会 Yes 
緊張 (nervous) 紧张 紧张 Yes 
手紙 (letter) 手纸 信件 No 
Table 1: Examples of Identification of Japanese–

Chinese homographs 
 
To estimate sentence complexity, we follow the 

standard of the JLPT (Japanese Language Profi-
ciency Test). The JLPT consists of five levels, 
ranging from N5 (the least difficult level) to N1 
(the most difficult level)17. We employ the follow-
ing 12 features as the baseline feature set: 

 
l Numbers of N0–N5 Japanese words in a 

sentence (Here, N0 implies unknown 
words in the vocabulary list of JLPT.) 

l Numbers of N1–N5 Japanese functional 
expressions in a sentence 

l Length of a sentence 
 
Different from the standard of the JLPT, the 

words in the list of Japanese–Chinese homographs 
(JCHs) were categorized separately as a new fea-
ture. Ultimately, we combine the following new 
                                                        
15 http://cjjc.weblio.jp 
16 https://baike.baidu.com 
17 http://jlpt.jp/e/about/levelsummary.html 

features with the baseline features (all 17 fea-
tures), forming our feature set. 
 

l Numbers of JCHs in a sentence 
l Numbers of verbs in a sentence 
l Numbers of syntactic dependencies in a 

sentence 
l Average length of syntactic dependencies 
l Maximum number of child phrases 

 
    The last three features are to measure syntactic 
complexity of a sentence. We used a well-known 
Japanese dependency structure analyzer Cabo-
Cha 18  to divide an example sentence into base 
phrases (called bunsetsu) and to obtain its syntac-
tic dependency structure. For example, the exam-
ple sentence “彼は人生に満足して死んだ。
(He died content with his life.)” is divided into 
four phrases: “彼は”, “人生に”, “満足して”, “死
んだ”. In this sentence, the first, and the third 
phrases depend on the fourth, and the second 
phrase depends on the third. The numbers of syn-
tactic dependencies in this sentence is 3. The 
length of syntactic dependencies is the numbers of 
phrases between arbitrary phrase and its depend-
ent. In this sentence, the average length of syntac-
tic dependencies is 1.7 (the length of syntactic de-
pendency between the first and the fourth is 3, the 
length of syntactic dependency between the se-
cond and the third is 1, and the length of syntactic 
dependency between the third and the fourth is 1). 
The fourth phrase has two child’s phrases while 
the third has only one child phrase, so the maxi-
mum number of child phrases in this sentence is 2. 

2.3 Sentence Clustering 
Some Japanese functional expressions have two 
or more meanings and usages. For example, the 
following two example sentences contain the 
identical Japanese functional expression “そう
だ”, but have different meanings. However, we 
can distinguish the meaning of “そうだ” through 
part-of-speech and conjugation forms of the words 
that appear just before “そうだ”.  
 
雨が降りそうだ。 (It looks like it will rain.) 
雨が降るそうだ。 (It’s heard that it will rain.) 
 

To obtain example sentences for each of dis-
tinct usages of a functional expression, we apply a 
                                                        
18 https://taku910.github/cabocha/ 



59

 
 
 
 

 

clustering algorithm with a small number of 
known examples (those appear in dictionaries) 
and a large number of untagged example sentenc-
es. For the features of sentence clustering, we uti-
lize the following features: part-of-speech, conju-
gation form, and semantic attribute of the word 
that appear just before or after the target Japanese 
functional expression. 

3 Experiments and Results 

3.1 Automatically Detecting Japanese Func-
tional Expressions 

This experiment evaluates automatic detection of 
Japanese functional expressions. 

We apply CRF++19, which is an open source 
implementation of CRF for segmenting sequential 
data. We utilized nine features including surface 
forms and their part-of-speech in our training. The 
training corpus mentioned in Section 2.1 was used 
in the CRF++. The CRF++ learned the training 
corpus and outputted a model file as the learning 
result. We then applied MeCab, trained on our 
training corpus, to automatically recognize the 
Japanese functional expressions. 

For the test data, we randomly extracted 200 
example sentences from Tatoeba, HiraganaTimes 
and BCCWJ. Table 2 shows some examples of de-
tected Japanese functional expressions by our sys-
tem. The final evaluation results are shown in Ta-
ble 3. We obtained 86.5% accuracy, indicating our 
approach has certain validity. 
 

Correctly detected Japanese functional expressions 
Input: 今、雪が降っている。 (It is snowing now.) 
Output: 今	、	雪	が	降っ	ている	。 
Input: この箱を開けてください。 (Please open this box.)	
Output: この	箱	を	開け	てください	。	
Incorrectly detected Japanese functional expressions 
Input: 彼女は火にあたってからだを暖めた。 
(She warmed herself by the fire.)	
Output: 彼女	は	火	にあたって	からだ	を	暖め	た	。 

Table 2: Detection of Japanese functional expres-
sions. In the sentences, Japanese functional ex-

pressions are in bold and underlined. 
 

Correctly recognized 173 (86.5%) 
Incorrectly recognized 27(13.5%) 
Total 200 (100%) 

Table 3: Experimental results on detection of Jap-
anese functional expressions 

                                                        
19 https://taku910.github.io/crfpp/ 

3.2 Estimating Sentence Complexity 
This experiment evaluates sentence complexity 
estimation, using an online machine learning tool 
SVMrank. 
    We first collected 5,000 example sentences 
from Tatoeba, HiraganaTimes, BCCWJ and ran-
domly paired them and constructed 2,500 sen-
tence pairs. Then 15 native Chinese-speaking JSL 
learners, all of whom have been learning Japanese 
for about one year, were invited to read the pairs 
of example sentences and asked to choose the one 
which is easier to understand. We asked three 
learners to compare each pair and the final deci-
sion was made by majority voting. We finally ap-
plied a set of five-fold cross-validations with each 
combination of 4,000 sentences as the training da-
ta and 1,000 sentences as the test data. 

The experimental results using baseline features 
and our method using all of the proposed features 
are presented in Tables 4 and 5. Compared with 
the results using the baseline features, our method 
enhances the average accuracy by 3.3%, partially 
demonstrating the effectiveness of our features. 
 

Features Cross-validations Accuracy 

Baseline Features 

1 83.2% 
2 84% 
3 80.4% 
4 82% 
5 81.8% 

Average 82.3% 
   Table 4: Experimental results using baseline 

features. 
 

Features Cross-validations Accuracy 

Proposed Features 

1 87.6% 
2 86.4% 
3 84.6% 
4 83.8% 
5 85.4% 

Average 85.6% 
        Table 5: Experimental results using our 

proposed features 
 

3.3 Clustering Example Sentences 
This experiment evaluates the performance of sen-
tence clustering, using the k-means clustering al-
gorithm in Scikit-learn. 

Here in our study, we took five different types 
of Japanese functional expressions as the exam-
ples. For the test data, we collected 10 example 
sentences, which were used for the reference, 
from Japanese functional expression dictionaries 



60

 
 
 
 

 

and 20 example sentences from Tatoeba, Hiraga-
naTimes, and BCCWJ for each type of Japanese 
functional expressions, respectively. We conduct-
ed our experiments with the number of clusters 
ranging from four to six. The clustering result was 
evaluated based on whether the test data that was 
clustered into one cluster share the same usage of 
a Japanese functional expression. The experi-
mental results are shown in Table 6. The average 
results of accuracies for the number of clusters 
ranging from four to six are 89%, 93%, 92%, in-
dicating the usefulness of the sentence clustering 
method for classifying sentences in the same us-
age. 
 

Functional 
Expressions 

Numbers of 
Clusters Accuracy 

そうだ	
(it looks like / 
it’s heard that)	

4 97% 
5 97% 
6 97% 

とともに	
(together with / 

at the same time)	

4 87% 
5 97% 
6 87% 

ため（に）	
(because / 
in order to)	

4 83% 
5 83% 
6 90% 

に対して	

(to / every / 
in contrast to)	

4 87% 
5 93% 
6 93% 

次第（だ）	

(as soon as / 
depends on)	

4 93% 
5 93% 
6 93% 

Average 
4 89% 
5 93% 
6 92% 

       Table 6: Experimental results of sentence 
clustering 

4 Featured functions of the Demo 
In our proposed demo, we have implemented the 
following main functions. 
    1. The function to detect Japanese functional 
expressions. Given a sentence, Jastudy automati-
cally segments the input sentence into individual 
words using MeCab. Difficult Japanese functional 
expressions (N2 and above) in the input sentence 
are simplified with easier Japanese functional ex-
pressions (N3 and below) or with phrases and 
shown in the output sentence, using a “Simple 
Japanese Replacement List” (Jun Liu and Yuji 
Matsumoto, 2016). An example is shown in Fig-
ure 3. Moreover, Jastudy represents detailed in-
formation about the surface-form, part-of-speech 
of each word in the input sentence and the output 
sentence, respectively. 

 

 
Figure 3: “投資しようにも金がない。(I have no 

money to invest.)” is typed in the system. 
 

2. The function to provide JSL learners with the 
detail information about the meaning, usage and 
example sentences of the Japanese functional ex-
pression which appears in the input sentence and 
the output sentence, respectively. An example is 
shown in Figure 4. Learners can also choose the 
Japanese functional expressions they want to 
learn, based on their Japanese abilities.  

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    (a)                                               (b) 
Figure 4: Detailed information of Japanese func-
tional expressions appeared in the input sentence 

(a) and the output sentence (b). 
 
    3. The function to suggest comprehensive ex-
ample sentences. The JSL learners can search 
more example sentences through the following 
three aspects: 1) only keyword, 2) only usage, 3) 
both keyword and usage. For example, the learner 
inputs the Japanese functional expression “そう
だ” as a keyword and selects its meaning and us-
age “it looks like” from drop-down list, a list of 



61

 
 
 
 

 

example sentences that contain the functional ex-
pression sharing the same meaning are retrieved 
to form the corpus, as shown in Figure 5. The only 
sentences whose complexity is equal to or below 
the learner’s level are retrieved. 

 

 
Figure 5: Example sentences suggested by the 

system, given “そうだ” with its meaning as “様
態(it looks like)” 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we presented a computer-assisted 
leaning system of Japanese language for Chinese-
speaking learners with their study of Japanese 
functional expressions. The system detects Japa-
nese functional expressions using MeCab that 
employs the CRF model we trained. We apply 
SVMrank to estimate sentence complexity using 
the Japanese-Chinese homographs as an important 
feature to suggest example sentences that are easy 
to understand for Chinese-speaking JSL learners. 
Moreover, we cluster example sentences contain-
ing the Japanese functional expressions with the 
same meanings and usages. The experimental re-
sults indicate effectiveness of our method. 
    We plan to examine the run-time effectiveness 
of the system for JSL learners. This will be our fu-
ture task for improving the performance of our 
system. 

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank anonymous reviewers for 
their detailed comments and advice. 

References  
Dongli Han, and Xin Song. 2011. Japanese Sentence 

Pattern Learning with the Use of Illustrative Ex-
amples Extracted from the Web. IEEJ Transac-
tions on Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 
6(5): 490–496. 

Group Jamashi, Yiping Xu. 2001. Chubunban Nihon-
go Kukei Jiten-Nihongo Bunkei Jiten (in Chinese 
and Japanese). Tokyo: Kurosio Publishers. 

Jun Liu, Yuji matsumoto. 2016. Simplification of Ex-
ample Sentences for Learners of Japanese Func-
tional Expressions. In Proceedings of the 3rd 
Workshop on Natural Language Processing Tech-
niques for Educational Applications, pages 1–5. 

Takahiro Ohno, Zyunitiro Edani, Ayato Inoue, and 
Dongli Han. 2013. A Japanese Learning Support 
System Matching Individual Abilities. In Proceed-
ing of the PACLIC 27 Workshop on Computer-
Assisted Language Learning, pages 556–562. 

Takao Shime, Masatoshi Tsuchiya, Suguru Ma-
tsuyoshi, Takehito Utsuro, Satoshi Sato. 2007. Au-
tomatic Detection of Japanese Compound Func-
tional Expressions and its Application to Statistical 
Dependency Analysis, Journal of Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Vol (14). No.5: 167-196. 

Izuru Shinmura (Ed. In chief). 1998. Kojien 5th Edi-
ton (in Japanese). Tokyo: Iwanani Press. 

Takafumi Suzuki, Yusuke Abe, Itsuki Toyota, Take-
hito Utsuro, Suguru Matsuyoshi, Masatoshi 
Tsuchiya. 2012. Detecting Japanese Compound 
Functional Expressions using Canoni-
cal/Derivational Relation, In Proceedings of the 
Eighth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC-2012).  

Estuko Tomomastu, Jun Miyamoto and Masako 
Wakuki. 2016. Japanese Expressions Dictionary. 
Aruku Press. 

Etsuko Toyoda. 2016. Evaluation of computerized 
reading-assistance systems for reading Japanese 
texts – from a linguistic point of view. Australa-
sian Journal of Educational Technology, 32(5): 94-
97.  

Masatoshi Tsuchiya, Takao Shime, Toshihiro Takagi, 
Takehito Utsuro, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Suguru Ma-
tsuyoshi, Satoshi Sato, Seiichi Nakagawa. 2006. 
Chunking Japanese compound functional expres-
sions by machine learning, In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Multi-word-expressions in a Multi-
lingual Context, pages 25-32. 

Xiaoming Xu and Reika. 2013, Detailed introduction 
of the New JLPT N1-N5 grammar. East China 
University of Science and Technology Press. 


