











































Event2Mind: Commonsense Inference on Events, Intents, and Reactions


Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Long Papers), pages 463–473
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

463

Event2Mind: Commonsense Inference on Events, Intents, and Reactions

Hannah Rashkin†⇤ Maarten Sap†⇤ Emily Allaway† Noah A. Smith† Yejin Choi†‡
†Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington

‡Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
{hrashkin,msap,eallaway,nasmith,yejin}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

We investigate a new commonsense in-
ference task: given an event described
in a short free-form text (“X drinks cof-
fee in the morning”), a system reasons
about the likely intents (“X wants to stay
awake”) and reactions (“X feels alert”) of
the event’s participants. To support this
study, we construct a new crowdsourced
corpus of 25,000 event phrases covering
a diverse range of everyday events and
situations. We report baseline perfor-
mance on this task, demonstrating that
neural encoder-decoder models can suc-
cessfully compose embedding represen-
tations of previously unseen events and
reason about the likely intents and reac-
tions of the event participants. In addition,
we demonstrate how commonsense infer-
ence on people’s intents and reactions can
help unveil the implicit gender inequality
prevalent in modern movie scripts.

1 Introduction

Understanding a narrative requires commonsense
reasoning about the mental states of people in re-
lation to events. For example, if “Alex is dragging
his feet at work”, pragmatic implications about
Alex’s intent are that “Alex wants to avoid do-
ing things” (Figure 1). We can also infer that
Alex’s emotional reaction might be feeling “lazy”
or “bored”. Furthermore, while not explicitly
mentioned, we can infer that people other than
Alex are affected by the situation, and these people
are likely to feel “frustrated” or “impatient”.

This type of pragmatic inference can potentially
be useful for a wide range of NLP applications

⇤These two authors contributed equally.

PersonX drags 
PersonX's feet

PersonX cooks 
thanksgiving

dinner

PersonX reads 
PersonY's diary

to avoid doing things

lazy, bored

frustrated, impatient

to impress their family

tired, a sense of belonging

impressed

to be nosey, know secrets

guilty, curious

angry, violated, betrayed

X's intent

X's reaction

Y's reaction

X's intent

X's reaction

Y's reaction

X's intent

X's reaction

Y's reaction

Figure 1: Examples of commonsense inference on
mental states of event participants. In the third ex-
ample event, common sense tells us that Y is likely
to feel betrayed as a result of X reading their diary.

that require accurate anticipation of people’s in-
tents and emotional reactions, even when they are
not explicitly mentioned. For example, an ideal
dialogue system should react in empathetic ways
by reasoning about the human user’s mental state
based on the events the user has experienced, with-
out the user explicitly stating how they are feel-
ing. Similarly, advertisement systems on social
media should be able to reason about the emo-
tional reactions of people after events such as mass
shootings and remove ads for guns which might
increase social distress (Goel and Isaac, 2016).
Also, pragmatic inference is a necessary step to-
ward automatic narrative understanding and gen-
eration (Tomai and Forbus, 2010; Ding and Riloff,
2016; Ding et al., 2017). However, this type of so-
cial commonsense reasoning goes far beyond the
widely studied entailment tasks (Bowman et al.,
2015; Dagan et al., 2006) and thus falls outside
the scope of existing benchmarks.

In this paper, we introduce a new task, corpus,



464

PersonX’s Intent Event Phrase PersonX’s Reaction Others’ Reactions

to express anger
to vent their frustration
to get PersonY’s full

attention

PersonX starts to
yell at PersonY

mad
frustrated
annoyed

shocked
humiliated
mad at PersonX

to communicate something
without being rude

to let the other person think
for themselves

to be subtle

PersonX drops a hint
sly
secretive
frustrated

oblivious
surprised
grateful

to catch the criminal
to be civilized
justice

PersonX reports
to the police

anxious
worried
nervous

sad
angry
regret

to wake up
to feel more energized

PersonX drinks
a cup of coffee

alert
awake
refreshed

NONE

to be feared
to be taken seriously
to exact revenge

PersonX carries
out PersonX’s threat

angry
dangerous
satisfied

sad
afraid
angry

NONE It startssnowing NONE
calm
peaceful
cold

Table 1: Example annotations of intent and reactions for 6 event phrases. Each annotator could fill in up
to three free-responses for each mental state.

and model, supporting commonsense inference on
events with a specific focus on modeling stereo-
typical intents and reactions of people, described
in short free-form text. Our study is in a similar
spirit to recent efforts of Ding and Riloff (2016)
and Zhang et al. (2017), in that we aim to model
aspects of commonsense inference via natural lan-
guage descriptions. Our new contributions are:
(1) a new corpus that supports commonsense in-
ference about people’s intents and reactions over
a diverse range of everyday events and situations,
(2) inference about even those people who are not
directly mentioned by the event phrase, and (3) a
task formulation that aims to generate the textual
descriptions of intents and reactions, instead of
classifying their polarities or classifying the infer-
ence relations between two given textual descrip-
tions.

Our work establishes baseline performance on
this new task, demonstrating that, given the
phrase-level inference dataset, neural encoder-
decoder models can successfully compose phrasal
embeddings for previously unseen events and rea-
son about the mental states of their participants.

Furthermore, in order to showcase the practical
implications of commonsense inference on events
and people’s mental states, we apply our model
to modern movie scripts, which provide a new in-
sight into the gender bias in modern films beyond
what previous studies have offered (England et al.,
2011; Agarwal et al., 2015; Ramakrishna et al.,
2017; Sap et al., 2017). The resulting corpus in-
cludes around 25,000 event phrases, which com-
bine automatically extracted phrases from stories
and blogs with all idiomatic verb phrases listed in
the Wiktionary. Our corpus is publicly available.1

2 Dataset

One goal of our investigation is to probe whether
it is feasible to build computational models that
can perform limited, but well-scoped common-
sense inference on short free-form text, which we
refer to as event phrases. While there has been
much prior research on phrase-level paraphrases
(Pavlick et al., 2015) and phrase-level entailment
(Dagan et al., 2006), relatively little prior work fo-
cused on phrase-level inference that requires prag-

1
https://tinyurl.com/event2mind

https://tinyurl.com/event2mind


465

matic or commonsense interpretation. We scope
our study to two distinct types of inference: given
a phrase that describes an event, we want to reason
about the likely intents and emotional reactions of
people who caused or affected by the event. This
complements prior work on more general com-
monsense inference (Speer and Havasi, 2012; Li
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017), by focusing on
the causal relations between events and people’s
mental states, which are not well covered by most
existing resources.

We collect a wide range of phrasal event de-
scriptions from stories, blogs, and Wiktionary id-
ioms. Compared to prior work on phrasal em-
beddings (Wieting et al., 2015; Pavlick et al.,
2015), our work generalizes the phrases by in-
troducing (typed) variables. In particular, we re-
place words that correspond to entity mentions or
pronouns with typed variables such as PersonX
or PersonY, as shown in examples in Table 1.
More formally, the phrases we extract are a com-
bination of a verb predicate with partially instan-
tiated arguments. We keep specific arguments
together with the predicate, if they appear fre-
quently enough (e.g., PersonX eats pasta
for dinner). Otherwise, the arguments are
replaced with an untyped blank (e.g., PersonX
eats for dinner). In our work, only
person mentions are replaced with typed variables,
leaving other types to future research.

Inference types The first type of pragmatic in-
ference is about intent. We define intent as an
explanation of why the agent causes a volitional
event to occur (or “none” if the event phrase was
unintentional). The intent can be considered a
mental pre-condition of an action or an event. For
example, if the event phrase is PersonX takes
a stab at , the annotated intent might be
that “PersonX wants to solve a problem”.

The second type of pragmatic inference is about
emotional reaction. We define reaction as an ex-
planation of how the mental states of the agent and
other people involved in the event would change
as a result. The reaction can be considered a men-
tal post-condition of an action or an event. For
example, if the event phrase is that PersonX
gives PersonY as a gift, PersonX
might “feel good about themselves” as a result,
and PersonY might “feel grateful” or “feel thank-
ful”.

Source # UniqueEvents
# Unique

Verbs
Average



ROC Story 13,627 639 0.57
G. N-grams 7,066 789 0.39
Spinn3r 2,130 388 0.41
Idioms 1,916 442 0.42

Total 24,716 1,333 0.45

Table 2: Data and annotation agreement statistics
for our new phrasal inference corpus. Each event
is annotated by three crowdworkers.

2.1 Event Extraction
We extract phrasal events from three different cor-
pora for broad coverage: the ROC Story train-
ing set (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016), the Google
Syntactic N-grams (Goldberg and Orwant, 2013),
and the Spinn3r corpus (Gordon and Swanson,
2008). We derive events from the set of verb
phrases in our corpora, based on syntactic parses
(Klein and Manning, 2003). We then replace the
predicate subject and other entities with the typed
variables (e.g., PersonX, PersonY), and selec-
tively substitute verb arguments with blanks ( ).
We use frequency thresholds to select events to
annotate (for details, see Appendix A.1). Addi-
tionally, we supplement the list of events with all
2,000 verb idioms found in Wiktionary, in order to
cover events that are less compositional.2 Our fi-
nal annotation corpus contains nearly 25,000 event
phrases, spanning over 1,300 unique verb predi-
cates (Table 2).

2.2 Crowdsourcing
We design an Amazon Mechanical Turk task to
annotate the mental pre- and post-conditions of
event phrases. A snippet of our MTurk HIT de-
sign is shown in Figure 2. For each phrase, we ask
three annotators whether the agent of the event,
PersonX, intentionally causes the event, and if
so, to provide up to three possible textual de-
scriptions of their intents. We then ask anno-
tators to provide up to three possible reactions
that PersonX might experience as a result. We
also ask annotators to provide up to three pos-
sible reactions of other people, when applicable.
These other people can be either explicitly men-
tioned (e.g., “PersonY” in PersonX punches
PersonY’s lights out), or only implied

2We compiled the list of idiomatic verb phrases by cross-
referencing between Wiktionary’s English idioms category
and the Wiktionary English verbs categories.



466

Event
PersonX punches PersonY's lights out

1. Does this event make sense enough for you to answer 
questions 2-5?

(Or does it have too many meanings?)

 Yes, can answer
  No, can't answer or has too many meanings

Before the event
2. Does PersonX willingly cause this event?

 Yes
 No

a). Why?

(Try to describe without reusing words from the event)

Because PersonX
wants ...

to (be)
[write a reason]

[write another reason - optional]

[write another reason - optional]

Figure 2: Intent portion of our annotation task. We
allow annotators to label events as invalid if the
phrase is unintelligible. The full annotation setup
is shown in Figure 8 in the appendix.

(e.g., given the event description PersonX
yells at the classroom, we can infer
that other people such as “students” in the class-
room may be affected by the act of PersonX). For
quality control, we periodically removed workers
with high disagreement rates, at our discretion.

Coreference among Person variables With
the typed Person variable setup, events involv-
ing multiple people can have multiple meanings
depending on coreference interpretation (e.g.,
PersonX eats PersonY’s lunch has
very different mental state implications from
PersonX eats PersonX’s lunch). To
prune the set of events that will be annotated
for intent and reaction, we ran a preliminary
annotation to filter out candidate events that have
implausible coreferences. In this preliminary
task, annotators were shown a combinatorial list
of coreferences for an event (e.g., PersonX
punches PersonX’s lights out,
PersonX punches PersonY’s lights

out) and were asked to select only the plausible
ones (e.g., PersonX punches PersonY’s
lights out). Each set of coreferences was
annotated by 3 workers, yielding an overall
agreement of  =0.4. This annotation excluded
8,406 events with implausible coreference from
our set (out of 17,806 events).

2.3 Mental State Descriptions
Our dataset contains nearly 25,000 event phrases,
with annotators rating 91% of our extracted events
as “valid” (i.e., the event makes sense). Of those
events, annotations for the multiple choice por-
tions of the task (whether or not there exists in-
tent/reaction) agree moderately, with an average
Cohen’s  = 0.45 (Table 2). The individual 
scores generally indicate that turkers disagree half
as often as if they were randomly selecting an-
swers.

Importantly, this level of agreement is accept-
able in our task formulation for two reasons. First,
unlike linguistic annotations on syntax or seman-
tics where experts in the corresponding theory
would generally agree on a single correct label,
pragmatic interpretations may better be defined as
distributions over multiple correct labels (e.g., af-
ter PersonX takes a test, PersonX might
feel relieved and/or stressed; de Marneffe et al.,
2012). Second, because we formulate our task as
a conditional language modeling problem, where a
distribution over the textual descriptions of intents
and reactions is conditioned on the event descrip-
tion, this variation in the labels is only as expected.

A majority of our events are annotated as will-
ingly caused by the agent (86%, Cohen’s  =
0.48), and 26% involve other people ( = 0.41).
Most event patterns in our data are fully instan-
tiated, with only 22% containing blanks ( ).
In our corpus, the intent annotations are slightly
longer (3.4 words on average) than the reaction an-
notations (1.5 words).

3 Models

Given an event phrase, our models aim to gener-
ate three entity-specific pragmatic inferences: Per-
sonX’s intent, PersonX’s reaction, and others’ re-
actions. The general outline of our model archi-
tecture is illustrated in Figure 3.

The input to our model is an event pattern de-
scribed through free-form text with typed vari-
ables such as PersonX gives PersonY
as a gift. For notation purposes, we describe
each event pattern E as a sequence of word em-
beddings he1, e2, . . . , eni 2 Rn⇥D. This input is
encoded as a vector hE 2 RH that will be used
for predicting output. The output of the model is
its hypotheses about PersonX’s intent, PersonX’s
reaction, and others’ reactions (vi,vx, and vo, re-
spectively). We experiment with representing the



467

PersonX’s Intent 
decoder

vi: start, a, fight vx: powerful vo: defensive

PersonX’s Reaction 
decoder

Others’ Reaction 
decoder

Pre-condition Post-condition

Event2mind Encoder

PersonX punches PersonY’s lights out

E = e1…en

f (e1…en)

hE

softmax(Wi hE+bi) softmax(Wx hE+bx) softmax(Wo hE+bo)

Figure 3: Overview of the model architecture.
From an encoded event, our model predicts intents
and reactions in a multitask setting.

output in two decoding set-ups: three vectors in-
terpretable as discrete distributions over words and
phrases (n-gram reranking) or three sequences of
words (sequence decoding).

Encoding events The input event phrase E is
compressed into an H-dimensional embedding hE
via an encoding function f : Rn⇥D ! RH :

hE = f(e1, . . . , en)

We experiment with several ways for defining f ,
inspired by standard techniques in sentence and
phrase classification (Kim, 2014). First, we exper-
iment with max-pooling and mean-pooling over
the word vectors {ei}ni=1. We also consider a con-
volutional neural network (ConvNet; LeCun et al.,
1998) taking the last layer of the network as the en-
coded version of the event. Lastly, we encode the
event phrase with a bi-directional RNN (specifi-
cally, a GRU; Cho et al., 2014), concatenating the
final hidden states of the forward and backward
cells as the encoding: hE = [

�!
hn;
 �
h1]. For hyper-

parameters and other details, we refer the reader to
Appendix B.

Though the event sequences are typically rather
short (4.6 tokens on average), our model still ben-
efits from the ConvNet and BiRNN’s ability to
compose words.

Pragmatic inference decoding We use three
decoding modules that take the event phrase em-
bedding hE and output distributions of possible
PersonX’s intent (vi), PersonX’s reactions (vx),
and others’ reactions (vo). We experiment with
two different decoder set-ups.

First, we experiment with n-gram re-ranking,
considering the |V | most frequent {1, 2, 3}-
grams in our annotations. Each decoder projects
the event phrase embedding hE into a |V |-
dimensional vector, which is then passed through
a softmax function. For instance, the distribution
over descriptions of PersonX’s intent is given by:

vi = softmax(WihE + bi)

Second, we experiment with sequence generation,
using RNN decoders to generate the textual de-
scription. The event phrase embedding hE is set as
the initial state hdec of three decoder RNNs (using
GRU cells), which then output the intent/reactions
one word at a time (using beam-search at test
time). For example, an event’s intent sequence
(vi = v

(0)
i v

(1)
i . . .) is computed as follows:

v(t+1)i = softmax(Wi RNN(v
(t)
i , h

(t)
i,dec) + bi)

Training objective We minimize the cross-
entropy between the predicted distribution over
words and phrases, against the one actually ob-
served in our dataset. Further, we employ multi-
task learning, simultaneously minimizing the loss
for all three decoders at each iteration.

Training details We fix our input embeddings,
using 300-dimensional skip-gram word embed-
dings trained on Google News (Mikolov et al.,
2013). For decoding, we consider a vocabulary of
size |V | = 14,034 in the n-gram re-ranking setup.
For the sequence decoding setup, we only con-
sider the unigrams in V , yielding an output space
of 7,110 at each time step.

We randomly divided our set of 24,716
unique events (57,094 annotations) into a train-
ing/dev./test set using an 80/10/10% split. Some
annotations have multiple responses (i.e., a crowd-
worker gave multiple possible intents and reac-
tions), in which case we take each of the combina-
tions of their responses as a separate training ex-
ample.

4 Empirical Results

Table 3 summarizes the performance of different
encoding models on the dev and test set in terms
of cross-entropy and recall at 10 predicted intents
and reactions. As expected, we see a moderate
improvement in recall and cross-entropy when us-
ing the more compositional encoder models (Con-
vNet and BiRNN; both n-gram and sequence de-



468

Development Test

Encoding
Function Decoder

Average
Cross-Ent

Recall @10 (%) Average
Cross-Ent

Recall @10 (%)
Intent XReact OReact Intent XReact OReact

max-pool n-gram 5.75 31 35 68 5.14 31 37 67
mean-pool n-gram 4.82 35 39 69 4.94 34 40 68
ConvNet n-gram 4.85 36 42 69 4.81 37 44 69
BiRNN 300d n-gram 4.78 36 42 68 4.74 36 43 69
BiRNN 100d n-gram 4.76 36 41 68 4.73 37 43 68

mean-pool sequence 4.59 39 36 67 4.54 40 38 66
ConvNet sequence 4.44 42 39 68 4.40 43 40 67
BiRNN 100d sequence 4.25 39 38 67 4.22 40 40 67

Table 3: Average cross-entropy (lower is better) and recall @10 (percentage of times the gold falls within
the top 10 decoded; higher is better) on development and test sets for different modeling variations. We
show recall values for PersonX’s intent, PersonX’s reaction and others’ reaction (denoted as “Intent”,
“XReact”, and “OReact”). Note that because of two different decoding setups, cross-entropy between
n-gram and sequence decoding are not directly comparable.

coding setups). Additionally, BiRNN models out-
perform ConvNets on cross-entropy in both de-
coding setups. Looking at the recall split across
intent vs. reaction labels (“Intent”, “XReact” and
“OReact” columns), we see that much of the im-
provement in using these two models is within the
prediction of PersonX’s intents. Note that recall
for “OReact” is much higher, since a majority of
events do not involve other people.

Human evaluation To further assess the qual-
ity of our models, we randomly select 100 events
from our test set and ask crowd-workers to rate
generated intents and reactions. We present 5
workers with an event’s top 10 most likely in-
tents and reactions according to our model and ask
them to select all those that make sense to them.
We evaluate each model’s precision @10 by com-
puting the average number of generated responses
that make sense to annotators.

Figure 4 summarizes the results of this evalu-
ation. In most cases, the performance is higher
for the sequential decoder than the corresponding
n-gram decoder. The biggest gain from using se-
quence decoders is in intent prediction, possibly
because intent explanations are more likely to be
longer. The BiRNN and ConvNet encoders consis-
tently have higher precision than the mean-pooling
with the BiRNN-seq setup slightly outperforming
other models. Unless otherwise specified, this is
the model we employ in further sections.

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

Intent XReact OReact

mean-pool ngram mean-pool seq
ConvNet ngram ConvNet seq
BiRNN ngram BiRNN seq

Figure 4: Average precision @10 of each model’s
top ten responses in the human evaluation. We
show results for various encoder functions (mean-
pool, ConvNet, BiRNN-100d) combined with two
decoding setups (n-gram re-ranking, sequence
generation).

Error analyses We test whether certain types
of events are easier for predicting commonsense
inference. In Figure 6, we show the difference
in cross-entropy of the BiRNN 100d model on
predicting different portions of the development
set including: Blank events (events containing
non-instantiated arguments), 2+ People events
(events containing multiple different Person vari-
ables), and Idiom events (events coming from
the Wiktionary idiom list). Our results show that,
while intent prediction performance remains sim-



469

learn, get a job,  
learn a new skill,  

get better

relax,  
get somewhere, 

go home, get 
some exercise

relax, go home,  
get somewhere,  

get home

learn, graduate, 
learn a new skill,  

get a job

learn, graduate, 
learn a new skill,  

learn more
Intent

PersonX’s  
Reaction

Event1 Event2

satisfied,  
refreshed, 

accomplished, 
exhausted

satisfied, 
healthy, sad,  
exhausted, 
relieved

tired, sad, 
scared, pain, 

hurt

refreshed,  
clean, 

accomplished, 
good

clean, refreshed, 
satisfied, 

accomplished, 
wet

Others’ 
Reaction

angry, upset, 
sad, annoyed, 

hurt

grateful, 
annoyed, 

angry, upset 

grateful,  
thankful,  

relieved, happy, 
satisfied

hurt, angry, sad, 
upset, dead, 

scared

hurt, angry, sad, 
upset, annoyed, 

scared

PersonX 
takes PersonY 

to the 
emergency room

PersonX goes 
 to school

PersonX 
washes 

PersonX’s 
legs

PersonX 
punches 

PersonY’s 
face

PersonX cuts 
PersonX’s 

legs

PersonX 
comes home 

after school

Figure 5: Sample predictions from homotopic embeddings (gradual interpolation between Event1 and
Event2), selected from the top 10 beam elements decoded in the sequence generation setup. Examples
highlight differences captured when ideas are similar (going to and coming from school), when only a
single word differs (washes versus cuts), and when two events are unrelated.

R
ec

al
l @

10
 (%

)  
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

Blanks 2+ People Idioms Full Dev

6767

43

68

38

20

3837 39
31

41

30

Intent XReact OReact

Figure 6: Recall @ 10 (%) on different subsets
of the development set for intents, PersonX’s re-
actions, and other people’s reactions, using the
BiRNN 100d model. “Full dev” represents the re-
call on the entire development dataset.

ilar for all three sets of events, it is 10% behind
intent prediction on the full development set. Ad-
ditionally, predicting other people’s reactions is
more difficult for the model when other people are
explicitly mentioned. Unsurprisingly, idioms are
particularly difficult for commonsense inference,
perhaps due to the difficulty in composing mean-
ing over nonliteral or noncompositional event de-
scriptions.

To further evaluate the geometry of the em-
bedding space, we analyze interpolations between
pairs of event phrases (from outside the train set),
similar to the homotopic analysis of Bowman et al.
(2016). For a handful of event pairs, we decode
intents, reactions for PersonX, and reactions for
other people from points sampled at equal inter-

vals on the interpolated line between two event
phrases. We show examples in Figure 5. The
embedding space distinguishes changes from gen-
erally positive to generally negative words and
is also able to capture small differences between
event phrases (such as “washes” versus “cuts”).

5 Analyzing Bias via Event2Mind
Inference

Through Event2Mind inference, we can attempt to
bring to the surface what is implied about people’s
behavior and mental states. We employ this infer-
ence to analyze implicit bias in modern films. As
shown in Figure 7, our model is able to analyze
character portrayal beyond what is explicit in text,
by performing pragmatic inference on character
actions to explain aspects of a character’s mental
state. In this section, we use our model’s infer-
ence to shed light on gender differences in intents
behind and reactions to characters’ actions.

5.1 Processing of Movie Scripts
For our portrayal analyses, we use scene descrip-
tions from 772 movie scripts released by Gorin-
ski and Lapata (2015), assigned to over 21,000
characters as done by Sap et al. (2017). We ex-
tract events from the scene descriptions, and gen-
erate their 10 most probable intent and reaction se-
quences using our BiRNN sequence model (as in
Figure 7).

We then categorize generated intents and reac-
tions into groups based on LIWC category scores
of the generated output (Tausczik and Pennebaker,
2016).3 The intent and reaction categories are then

3We only consider content word categories: ‘Core Drives



470

Vivian sits on her bed,
lost in thought. Her 
bags are packed, ...

PersonX sits on PersonX's 
bed , lost in thought

Rea
ctio
n

Juno laughs and hugs her 
father, planting a smooch 
on his cheek.

PersonX hugs ___ , planting 
a smooch on PersonY's cheek

Intent

show affection

show love

loving

none

funny

friendly

nice

express love

worried

sad

upset

embarrassed

sick

scared

lonely

bad

Figure 7: Two scene description snippets from
Juno (2007, top) and Pretty Woman (1990, bot-
tom), augmented with Event2mind inferences on
the characters’ intents and reactions. E.g., our
model infers that the event PersonX sits on
PersonX’s bed, lost in thought im-
plies that the agent, Vivian, is sad or worried.

aggregated for each character, and standardized
(zero-mean and unit variance).

We compute correlations with gender for each
category of intent or reaction using a logis-
tic regression model, testing significance while
using Holm’s correction for multiple compar-
isons (Holm, 1979).4 To account for the gender
skew in scene presence (29.4% of scenes have
women), we statistically control for the total num-
ber of words in a character’s scene descriptions.
Note that the original event phrases are all gen-
der agnostic, as their participants have been re-
placed by variables (e.g., PersonX). We also find
that the types of gender biases uncovered remain
similar when we run these analyses on the human
annotations or the generated words and phrases
from the BiRNN with n-gram re-ranking decoding
setup.

and Needs’, ‘Personal Concerns’, ‘Biological Processes’,
‘Cognitive Processes’, ‘Social Words’, ‘Affect Words’, ‘Per-
ceptual Processes’. We refer the reader to Tausczik and
Pennebaker (2016) or http://liwc.wpengine.com/
compare-dictionaries/ for a complete list of cate-
gory descriptions.

4Given the data limitation, we represent gender as a bi-
nary, but acknowledge that gender is a more complex social
construct.

5.2 Revealing Implicit Bias via Explicit
Intents and Reactions

Female: intents
AFFILIATION, FRIEND, FAMILY
BODY, SEXUAL, INGEST
SEE, INSIGHT, DISCREP

Male: intents
DEATH, HEALTH, ANGER, NEGEMO
RISK, POWER, ACHIEVE, REWARD, WORK
CAUSE, TENTATIVE‡

Female: reactions
POSEMO, AFFILIATION, FRIEND, REWARD
INGEST, SEXUAL‡, BODY‡

Male: reactions
WORK, ACHIEVE, POWER, HEALTH†

Female: others’ reactions
POSEMO, AFFILIATION, FRIEND
INGEST, SEE, INSIGHT

Male: others’ reactions
ACHIEVE, RISK†

SAD, NEGEMO‡, ANGER†

Table 4: Select LIWC categories correlated with
gender. All results are significant when corrected
for multiple comparisons at p < 0.001, except
†p < 0.05 and ‡p < 0.01.

Our Event2Mind inferences automate portrayal
analyses that previously required manual annota-
tions (Behm-Morawitz and Mastro, 2008; Pren-
tice and Carranza, 2002; England et al., 2011).
Shown in Table 4, our results indicate a gender
bias in the behavior ascribed to characters, consis-
tent with psychology and gender studies literature
(Collins, 2011). Specifically, events with female
semantic agents are intended to be helpful to other
people (intents involving FRIEND, FAMILY, and
AFFILIATION), particularly relating to eating and
making food for themselves and others (INGEST,
BODY). Events with male agents on the other hand
are motivated by and resulting in achievements
(ACHIEVE, MONEY, REWARDS, POWER).

Women’s looks and sexuality are also empha-
sized, as their actions’ intents and reactions are
sexual, seen, or felt (SEXUAL, SEE, PERCEPT).
Men’s actions, on the other hand, are motivated by
violence or fighting (DEATH, ANGER, RISK), with
strong negative reactions (SAD, ANGER, NEGA-
TIVE EMOTION).

Our approach decodes nuanced implications

http://liwc.wpengine.com/compare-dictionaries/
http://liwc.wpengine.com/compare-dictionaries/


471

into more explicit statements, helping to identify
and explain gender bias that is prevalent in modern
literature and media. Specifically, our results indi-
cate that modern movies have the bias to portray
female characters as having pro-social attitudes,
whereas male characters are portrayed as being
competitive or pro-achievement. This is consis-
tent with gender stereotypes that have been studied
in movies in both NLP and psychology literature
(Agarwal et al., 2015; Madaan et al., 2017; Pren-
tice and Carranza, 2002; England et al., 2011).

6 Related Work

Prior work has sought formal frameworks for in-
ferring roles and other attributes in relation to
events (Baker et al., 1998; Das et al., 2014; Schuler
et al., 2009; Hartshorne et al., 2013, inter alia),
implicitly connoted by events (Reisinger et al.,
2015; White et al., 2016; Greene, 2007; Rashkin
et al., 2016), or sentiment polarities of events
(Ding and Riloff, 2016; Choi and Wiebe, 2014;
Russo et al., 2015; Ding and Riloff, 2018). In ad-
dition, recent work has studied the patterns which
evoke certain polarities (Reed et al., 2017), the
desires which make events affective (Ding et al.,
2017), the emotions caused by events (Vu et al.,
2014), or, conversely, identifying events or rea-
soning behind particular emotions (Gui et al.,
2017). Compared to this prior literature, our work
uniquely learns to model intents and reactions over
a diverse set of events, includes inference over
event participants not explicitly mentioned in text,
and formulates the task as predicting the textual
descriptions of the implied commonsense instead
of classifying various event attributes.

Previous work in natural language inference has
focused on linguistic entailment (Bowman et al.,
2015; Bos and Markert, 2005) while ours fo-
cuses on commonsense-based inference. There
also has been inference or entailment work that
is more generation focused: generating, e.g., en-
tailed statements (Zhang et al., 2017; Blouw and
Eliasmith, 2018), explanations of causality (Kang
et al., 2017), or paraphrases (Dong et al., 2017).
Our work also aims at generating inferences from
sentences; however, our models infer implicit in-
formation about mental states and causality, which
has not been studied by most previous systems.

Also related are commonsense knowledge
bases (Espinosa and Lieberman, 2005; Speer and
Havasi, 2012). Our work complements these ex-

isting resources by providing commonsense rela-
tions that are relatively less populated in previ-
ous work. For instance, ConceptNet contains only
25% of our events, and only 12% have relations
that resemble intent and reaction. We present a
more detailed comparison with ConceptNet in Ap-
pendix C.

7 Conclusion

We introduced a new corpus, task, and model for
performing commonsense inference on textually-
described everyday events, focusing on stereotyp-
ical intents and reactions of people involved in the
events. Our corpus supports learning representa-
tions over a diverse range of events and reason-
ing about the likely intents and reactions of pre-
viously unseen events. We also demonstrate that
such inference can help reveal implicit gender bias
in movie scripts.

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful comments. We also thank xlab members
at the University of Washington, Martha Palmer,
Tim O’Gorman, Susan Windisch Brown, Ghaza-
leh Kazeminejad as well as other members at the
University of Colorado at Boulder for many help-
ful comments for our development of the annota-
tion pipeline. This work was supported in part by
National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship Program under grant DGE-1256082,
NSF grant IIS-1714566, and the DARPA CwC
program through ARO (W911NF-15-1-0543).

References
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene

Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Cor-
rado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin,
Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp,
Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal
Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh
Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry
Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schus-
ter, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever,
Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke,
Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals,
Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke,
Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. 2015. TensorFlow:
Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous sys-
tems. Software available from tensorflow.org.

Apoorv Agarwal, Jiehan Zheng, Shruti Kamath, Sri-
ramkumar Balasubramanian, and Shirin Ann Dey.
2015. Key female characters in film have more to

https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://www.tensorflow.org/


472

talk about besides men: Automating the bechdel
test. In NAACL, pages 830–840, Denver, Colorado.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The berkeley framenet project. In COLING-
ACL.

Elizabeth Behm-Morawitz and Dana E Mastro. 2008.
Mean girls? The influence of gender portrayals in
teen movies on emerging adults’ gender-based atti-
tudes and beliefs. Journalism & Mass Communica-
tion Quarterly, 85(1):131–146.

Peter Blouw and Chris Eliasmith. 2018. Using neu-
ral networks to generate inferential roles for natural
language. Frontiers in Psychology, 8:2335.

Johan Bos and Katja Markert. 2005. Recognising tex-
tual entailment with robust logical inference. In
MLCW.

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
In EMNLP.

Samuel R. Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, An-
drew M. Dai, Rafal Józefowicz, and Samy Ben-
gio. 2016. Generating sentences from a continuous
space. In CoNLL.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Dzmitry Bah-
danau, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. On the properties
of neural machine translation: Encoder-decoder ap-
proaches. In SSST@EMNLP.

Yoonjung Choi and Janyce Wiebe. 2014. +/-
effectwordnet: Sense-level lexicon acquisition for
opinion inference. In EMNLP.

Rebecca L Collins. 2011. Content analysis of gender
roles in media: Where are we now and where should
we go? Sex Roles, 64(3-4):290–298.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges. Eval-
uating Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classi-
fication, and Recognising Textual Entailment, pages
177–190. Springer.

Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, André F. T. Martins,
Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2014.
Frame-semantic parsing. Computational Linguis-
tics, 40(1):9–56.

Haibo Ding, Tianyu Jiang, and Ellen Riloff. 2017.
Why is an event affective? Classifying affective
events based on human needs. In AAAI Workshop
on Affective Content Analysis.

Haibo Ding and Ellen Riloff. 2016. Acquiring knowl-
edge of affective events from blogs using label prop-
agation. In AAAI.

Haibo Ding and Ellen Riloff. 2018. Weakly supervised
induction of affective events by optimizing semantic
consistency. In AAAI.

Li Dong, Jonathan Mallinson, Siva Reddy, and Mirella
Lapata. 2017. Learning to paraphrase for question
answering. In EMNLP.

Dawn Elizabeth England, Lara Descartes, and
Melissa A Collier-Meek. 2011. Gender role por-
trayal and the Disney princesses. Sex roles, 64(7-
8):555–567.

José H. Espinosa and Henry Lieberman. 2005. Event-
net: Inferring temporal relations between common-
sense events. In MICAI.

Vindu Goel and Mike Isaac. 2016. Face-
book Moves to Ban Private Gun Sales on
its Site and Instagram. https://www.
nytimes.com/2016/01/30/technology/

facebook-gun-sales-ban.html. Ac-
cessed: 2018-02-19.

Yoav Goldberg and Jon Orwant. 2013. A dataset of
syntactic-ngrams over time from a very large corpus
of english books. In SEM2013.

Andrew S Gordon and Reid Swanson. 2008. Sto-
ryUpgrade: finding stories in internet weblogs. In
ICWSM.

Philip John Gorinski and Mirella Lapata. 2015. Movie
script summarization as graph-based scene extrac-
tion. In NAACL, pages 1066–1076.

Stephan Charles Greene. 2007. Spin: Lexical seman-
tics, transitivity, and the identification of implicit
sentiment.

Lin Gui, Jiannan Hu, Yulan He, Ruifeng Xu, Qin Lu,
and Jiachen Du. 2017. A question answering ap-
proach for emotion cause extraction. In EMNLP.

Joshua K. Hartshorne, Claire Bonial, and Martha
Palmer. 2013. The verbcorner project: Toward an
empirically-based semantic decomposition of verbs.
In EMNLP.

Sture Holm. 1979. A simple sequentially rejective
multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of
statistics, pages 65–70.

Dongyeop Kang, Varun Gangal, Ang Lu, Zheng Chen,
and Eduard H. Hovy. 2017. Detecting and explain-
ing causes from text for a time series event. In
EMNLP.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classification. In EMNLP.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate unlexicalized parsing. In ACL.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick
Haffner. 1998. Gradient-based learning applied to
document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE,
86(11):2278–2324.

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02335
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02335
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02335
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/30/technology/facebook-gun-sales-ban.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/30/technology/facebook-gun-sales-ban.html
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/30/technology/facebook-gun-sales-ban.html


473

Xiang Li, Aynaz Taheri, Lifu Tu, and Kevin Gimpel.
2016. Commonsense knowledge base completion.
In ACL.

Nishtha Madaan, Sameep Mehta, Taneea S. Agrawaal,
Vrinda Malhotra, Aditi Aggarwal, and Mayank Sax-
ena. 2017. Analyzing gender stereotyping in bolly-
wood movies. CoRR, abs/1710.04117.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Christopher Potts. 2012. Did it happen?
the pragmatic complexity of veridicality assessment.
Computational Linguistics, 38:301–333.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Gregory S. Corrado,
and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of
word representations in vector space. CoRR,
abs/1301.3781.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong
He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Vanderwende,
Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016. A cor-
pus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding
of commonsense stories. In NAACL.

Ellie Pavlick, Pushpendre Rastogi, Juri Ganitkevitch,
Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris Callison-Burch.
2015. PPDB 2.0: Better paraphrase ranking, fine-
grained entailment relations, word embeddings, and
style classification. In ACL.

Deborah A Prentice and Erica Carranza. 2002. What
women and men should be, shouldn’t be, are al-
lowed to be, and don’t have to be: The contents
of prescriptive gender stereotypes. Psychology of
women quarterly, 26(4):269–281.

Anil Ramakrishna, Victor R Martı́nez, Nikolaos Ma-
landrakis, Karan Singla, and Shrikanth Narayanan.
2017. Linguistic analysis of differences in portrayal
of movie characters. In ACL, pages 1669–1678,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Hannah Rashkin, Sameer Singh, and Yejin Choi. 2016.
Connotation frames: A data-driven investigation. In
ACL.

Lena Reed, JiaQi Wu, Shereen Oraby, Pranav Anand,
and Marilyn A. Walker. 2017. Learning lexico-
functional patterns for first-person affect. In ACL.

Drew Reisinger, Rachel Rudinger, Francis Ferraro,
Craig Harman, Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin Van
Durme. 2015. Semantic proto-roles. TACL, 3:475–
488.

Irene Russo, Tommaso Caselli, and Carlo Strapparava.
2015. Semeval-2015 task 9: Clipeval implicit polar-
ity of events. In SemEval@NAACL-HLT.

Maarten Sap, Marcella Cindy Prasetio, Ari Holtzman,
Hannah Rashkin, and Yejin Choi. 2017. Connota-
tion frames of power and agency in modern films.
In EMNLP, pages 2329–2334.

Karin Kipper Schuler, Anna Korhonen, and Su-
san Windisch Brown. 2009. Verbnet overview, ex-
tensions, mappings and applications. In NAACL.

Robert Speer and Catherine Havasi. 2012. Represent-
ing general relational knowledge in conceptnet 5. In
LREC.

Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2016. The
psychological meaning of words: LIWC and com-
puterized text analysis methods. J. Lang. Soc. Psy-
chol.

Emmett Tomai and Ken Forbus. 2010. Using narrative
functions as a heuristic for relevance in story under-
standing. In Proceedings of the Intelligent Narrative
Technologies III Workshop, page 9. ACM.

Hoa Trong Vu, Graham Neubig, Sakriani Sakti,
Tomoki Toda, and Satoshi Nakamura. 2014. Acquir-
ing a dictionary of emotion-provoking events. In
EACL.

Aaron Steven White, Drew Reisinger, Keisuke Sak-
aguchi, Tim Vieira, Sheng Zhang, Rachel Rudinger,
Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2016.
Universal decompositional semantics on universal
dependencies. In EMNLP.

John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2015. From paraphrase database to compo-
sitional paraphrase model and back. TACL, 3:345–
358.

Sheng Zhang, Rachel Rudinger, Kevin Duh, and Ben-
jamin Van Durme. 2017. Ordinal common-sense in-
ference. TACL, 5:379–395.


