



















































The PhotoBook Dataset: Building Common Ground through Visually-Grounded Dialogue


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1895–1910
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1895

The PhotoBook Dataset:
Building Common Ground through Visually-Grounded Dialogue

Janosch Haber∗ Tim Baumgärtner♣ Ece Takmaz♣ Lieke Gelderloos‡
Elia Bruni† and Raquel Fernández♣

♣University of Amsterdam, ∗Queen Mary University of London
‡Tilburg University, †Universitat Pompeu Fabra

{raquel.fernandez|ece.takmaz}@uva.nl
j.haber@qmul.ac.uk, {baumgaertner.t|elia.bruni}@gmail.com

l.j.gelderloos@tilburguniversity.edu

Abstract

This paper introduces the PhotoBook dataset,
a large-scale collection of visually-grounded,
task-oriented dialogues in English designed to
investigate shared dialogue history accumu-
lating during conversation. Taking inspira-
tion from seminal work on dialogue analysis,
we propose a data-collection task formulated
as a collaborative game prompting two online
participants to refer to images utilising both
their visual context as well as previously estab-
lished referring expressions. We provide a de-
tailed description of the task setup and a thor-
ough analysis of the 2,500 dialogues collected.
To further illustrate the novel features of the
dataset, we propose a baseline model for ref-
erence resolution which uses a simple method
to take into account shared information accu-
mulated in a reference chain. Our results show
that this information is particularly important
to resolve later descriptions and underline the
need to develop more sophisticated models of
common ground in dialogue interaction.1

1 Introduction

The past few years have seen an increasing inter-
est in developing computational agents for visually
grounded dialogue, the task of using natural lan-
guage to communicate about visual content in a
multi-agent setup. The models developed for this
task often focus on specific aspects such as im-
age labelling (Mao et al., 2016; Vedantam et al.,
2017), object reference (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014;
De Vries et al., 2017a), visual question answer-
ing (Antol et al., 2015), and first attempts of vi-
sual dialogue proper (Das et al., 2017), but fail to
produce consistent outputs over a conversation.

1The PhotoBook dataset is being released by the Dialogue
Modelling Group led by Raquel Fernández at the University
of Amsterdam. The core of this work was done while Janosch
Haber and Elia Bruni were affiliated with the group.

We hypothesise that one of the main reasons
for this shortcoming is the models’ inability to
effectively utilise dialogue history. Human in-
terlocutors are known to collaboratively establish
a shared repository of mutual information dur-
ing a conversation (Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986;
Clark, 1996; Brennan and Clark, 1996). This
common ground (Stalnaker, 1978) then is used to
optimise understanding and communication effi-
ciency. Equipping artificial dialogue agents with a
similar representation of dialogue context thus is a
pivotal next step in improving the quality of their
dialogue output.

To facilitate progress towards more consis-
tent and effective conversation models, we in-
troduce the PhotoBook dataset: a large collec-
tion of 2,500 human-human goal-oriented English
conversations between two participants, who are
asked to identify shared images in their respec-
tive photo books by exchanging messages via writ-
ten chat. This setup takes inspiration from ex-
perimental paradigms extensively used within the
psycholinguistics literature to investigate partner-
specific common ground (for an overview, see
Brown-Schmidt et al., 2015), adapting them to
the requirements imposed by online crowdsourc-
ing methods. The task is formulated as a game
consisting of five rounds. Figure 1 shows an exam-
ple of a participant’s display. Over the five rounds
of a game, a selection of previously displayed im-
ages will be visible again, prompting participants
to re-refer to images utilising both their visual con-
text as well as previously established referring ex-
pressions. The resulting dialogue data therefore
allows for tracking the common ground develop-
ing between dialogue participants.

We describe in detail the PhotoBook task and
the data collection, and present a thorough analy-
sis of the dialogues in the dataset. In addition, to
showcase how the new dataset may be exploited



1896

for computational modelling, we propose a refer-
ence resolution baseline model trained to identify
target images being discussed in a given dialogue
segment. The model uses a simple method to take
into account information accumulated in a refer-
ence chain. Our results show that this information
is particularly important to resolve later descrip-
tions and highlight the importance of developing
more sophisticated models of common ground in
dialogue interaction.

The PhotoBook dataset, together with the data
collection protocol, the automatically extracted
reference chains, and the code used for our analy-
ses and models are available at the following site:
https://dmg-photobook.github.io.

2 Related Work

Seminal works on cooperative aspects of dialogue
have developed their hypotheses and models based
on a relatively small number of samples collected
through lab-based conversation tasks (e.g., Krauss
and Weinheimer, 1964, 1966; Clark and Wilkes-
Gibbs, 1986; Brennan and Clark, 1996; Anderson
et al., 1991). Recent datasets inspired by this line
of work include the REX corpora (Takenobu et al.,
2012) and PentoRef (Zarrieß et al., 2016). With
the development of online data collection meth-
ods (von Ahn et al., 2006) a new, game-based ap-
proach to quick and inexpensive collection of di-
alogue data became available. PhotoBook builds
on these traditions to provide a large-scale dataset
suitable for data-driven development of computa-
tional dialogue agents.

The computer vision community has re-
cently developed large-scale datasets for visually
grounded dialogue (Das et al., 2017; De Vries
et al., 2017b). These approaches extend earlier
work on visual question answering (Antol et al.,
2015) to a multi-turn setup where two agents, each
with a pre-determined Questioner or Answerer
role, exchange sequences of questions and an-
swers about an image. While data resulting from
these tasks provides interesting opportunities to
investigate visual grounding, it suffers from fun-
damental shortcomings with respect to the collab-
orative aspects of natural goal-oriented dialogue
(e.g., fixed, pairwise structuring of question and
answers, no extended dialogue history). In con-
trast, PhotoBook includes natural and free-from
dialogue data with a variety of dialogue acts and
opportunities for participant collaboration.

Resolving referring expressions in the visual
modality has also been studied in computer vi-
sion. Datasets such as ReferIt (Kazemzadeh et al.,
2014), Flicker30k Entities (Plummer et al., 2015)
and Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017) map re-
ferring expressions to regions in a single image.
Referring expressions in the PhotoBook dataset
differ from this type of data in that the candi-
date referents are independent but similar images
and, most importantly, are often part of a reference
chain in the participants’ dialogue history.

3 Task Description and Setup

In the PhotoBook task, two participants are paired
for an online multi-round image identification
game. In this game, participants are shown collec-
tions of images that resemble the page of a photo
book (see Figure 1). Each of these collections
is a randomly ordered grid of six similar images
depicting everyday scenes extracted from the MS
COCO Dataset (Lin et al., 2014). On each page
of the photo book, some of the images are present
in the displays of both participants (the common
images). The other images are each shown to
one of the participants only (different). Three of
the images in each display are highlighted through
a yellow bar under the picture. The participants
are tasked to mark these highlighted target im-
ages as either common or different by chatting with
their partner.2 The PhotoBook task is symmetric,
i.e., participants do not have predefined roles such
as instruction giver and follower, or questioner
and answerer. Consequently, both participants can
freely and naturally contribute to the conversation,
leading to more natural dialogues.

Once the two participants have made their se-
lections on a given page, they are shown a feed-
back screen and continue to the next round of the
game, a new page of the photo book displaying a
different grid of images. Some of the images in
this grid will be new to the game while others will
have appeared before. A full game consists of la-
belling three highlighted target images in each of
five consecutive rounds.

Each highlighted image is displayed exactly five
times throughout a game while the display of im-
ages and the order of rounds is randomised to pre-
vent participants from detecting any patterns. As

2Pilot studies showed that labelling all six images took
participants about half an hour, which appeared to be too long
for the online setting, resulting in large numbers of discon-
nects and incomplete games.

https://dmg-photobook.github.io


1897

Figure 1: Screenshot of the Amazon Mechanical Turk user interface designed to collect the PhotoBook dataset.

a result of this carefully designed setup, dialogues
in the PhotoBook dataset contain multiple descrip-
tions of each of the target images and thus pro-
vide a valuable resource for investigating partici-
pant cooperation, and specifically collaborative re-
ferring expression generation and resolution with
respect to the conversation’s common ground.

Image Sets The task setup requires each game
of five rounds to display 12 unique but similar im-
ages to elicit non-trivial referring expressions. We
use the object category annotations in MS COCO
to group all landscape, unmarked, colour images
where the two largest objects belong to the same
category across all images in the set (e.g., all im-
ages in the set prominently feature a person and
a cat).3 This produced 30 sets of at least 20 im-
ages from which 12 were selected at random. As
a given game highlights only half of the images
from a given set, each image set produces two dif-
ferent game sets with different target images to be
highlighted, for a total of 60 unique games and 360
unique images. More details on the PhotoBook
setup and image sets are provided in Appendix A.

4 Data Collection

We use the ParlAI framework (Miller et al., 2017)
to implement the task and interface with crowd-
sourcing platform Amazon Mechanical Turk
(AMT) to collect the data. To control the quality
of collected dialogues, we require AMT workers
to be native English speakers and to have com-
pleted at least 100 other tasks on AMT with a

3All images where the two largest objects cover less than
30k pixels (∼10% of an average COCO image) were rejected.

minimum acceptance rate of 90%. Workers are
paired through an algorithm based on whether or
not they have completed the PhotoBook task be-
fore and which of the individual games they have
played. In order to prevent biased data, work-
ers can complete a maximum of five games, each
participant can complete a given game only once,
and the same pair of participants cannot complete
more than one game.

Participants are instructed about the task and
first complete a warming-up round with only three
images per participant (two of them highlighted).
In order to render reference grounding as clean as
possible and facilitate automatic processing of the
resulting dialogue data, participants are asked to
try to identify the common and different images as
quickly as possible, only describe a single image
per message, and directly select an image’s label
when they agree on it. The compensation scheme
is based on an average wage of 10 USD per hour
(Hara et al., 2018). See Appendix B for a full ac-
count of the instructions and further details on par-
ticipant payment.

During data collection, we recorded
anonymised participant IDs, the author, timestamp
and content of all sent messages, label selections
and button clicks, plus self-reported collaboration
performance scores. For a period of two months,
data collection produced human-human dialogues
for a total of 2,506 completed games. The
resulting PhotoBook dataset contains a total of
164,615 utterances, 130,322 actions and spans a
vocabulary of 11,805 unique tokens.

Each of the 60 unique game sets was played
between 15 and 72 times, with an average of 41



1898

1 2 3 4 5
Game Round

80

100

120

140

160

180
Bl

ue
: D

ur
at

io
n 

(in
 S

ec
on

ds
)

5.600

5.625

5.650

5.675

5.700

5.725

5.750

5.775

5.800

Re
d:

 R
ou

nd
 S

co
re

 (o
ut

 o
f 6

)
(a)

1 2 3 4 5
Game Round

0.48

0.50

0.52

0.54

0.56

Co
nt

en
t T

ok
en

/T
ot

al
 T

ok
en

 R
at

io
(b)

1 2 3 4 5
Game Round

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Ra
tio

 o
f N

ew
 C

on
te

nt
 T

ok
en

s

(c)

NOUN VERB ADJ ADV
POS-Tag

-30%

-20%

-10%

  0%

 10%

 20%

 30%

Ch
an

ge
 in

 re
la

tic
ve

 D
ist

rib
ut

io
n

(d)

Figure 2: (a) Average completion times (solid blue) and scores (dashed red) per game round. (b) Ratio of content
tokens over total token count per round with best linear fit. (c) Ratio of new content tokens over total content token
count per round. (d) Relative change in distribution of main content POS between the first and last game round.

games per set. The task was completed by 1,514
unique workers, of which 472 only completed
a single game, 448 completed between two and
four games, and 594 the maximum of five games.
Completing a full five-round game took an average
of 14.2 minutes. With three highlighted images
per player per round, during a full game of five
rounds 30 labelling decisions have to be made. On
average, participants correctly labelled 28.62 out
of these 30.

5 Dataset Analysis

In this paper, we focus on the analysis of partici-
pants’ interaction during a game of five labelling
rounds.4 Our data here largely confirms the ob-
servations concerning participants’ task efficiency
and language use during a multi-round communi-
cation task made by seminal, small-scale experi-
ments such as those by Krauss and Weinheimer
(1964); Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986); Brennan
and Clark (1996) and, due to its scale, offers addi-
tional aspects for further investigation.

5.1 Task Efficiency

Completing the first round of the PhotoBook task
takes participants an average of almost three min-
utes. Completing the fifth round on the other hand
takes them about half that time. As Figure 2a
shows, this decline roughly follows a negative log-
arithmic function, with significant differences be-
tween rounds 1, 2, 3 and 4, and plateauing towards
the last round. The number of messages sent by
participants as well as the average message length
follow a similar pattern, significantly decreasing

4Tracking participant IDs, for example, also allows for an
analysis of differences in behaviour across different games.

between consecutive game rounds. The average
number of correct image labels, on the other hand,
significantly increases between the first and last
round of the game (cf. the red dashed graph in Fig-
ure 2a). As a result, task efficiency as calculated
by points per minute significantly increases with
each game round.

5.2 Linguistic Properties of Utterances

To get a better understanding of how participants
increase task efficiency and shorten their utter-
ances, we analyse how the linguistic characteris-
tics of messages change over a game.

We calculated a normalised content word ratio
by dividing the count of content words by the to-
tal token count.5 This results in an almost linear
increase of content tokens over total token ratio
throughout a game (average Pearson’s r per game
of 0.34, p� 0.05, see Figure 2b). With refer-
ring expressions and messages in general getting
shorter, content words thus appear to be favoured
to remain. We also observe that participants reuse
these content words. Figure 2c shows the num-
ber of novel content tokens per game round, which
roughly follows a negative logarithmic function.
This supports the hypothesis of participants estab-
lishing a conceptual pact on the referring expres-
sion attached to a specific referent: Once accepted,
a referring expression is typically refined through
shortening rather than by reformulating or adding
novel information (cf., Brennan and Clark, 1996).

We also analysed in more detail the distribu-
tion of word classes per game round by tagging
messages with the NLTK POS-Tagger. Figure 2d

5We filtered out function words with NLTK’s stopword
list http://www.nltk.org/.

http://www.nltk.org/


1899

displays the relative changes in content-word-class
usage between the first round and last round of a
game. All content word classes but verbs show a
relative increase in occurrence, most prominently
nouns with a 20% relative increase. The case of
adverbs, which show a 12% relative increase, is
particular: Manual examination showed that most
adverbs are not used to described images but rather
to flag that a given image has already appeared be-
fore or to confirm/reject (‘again’ and ‘too’ make
up 21% of all adverb occurrences; about 36% are
‘not’, ‘n’t’ and ‘yes’). These results indicate that
interlocutors are most likely to retain the nouns
and adjectives of a developing referring expres-
sion, while increasingly dropping verbs, as well
as prepositions and determiners. A special role
here takes definite determiner ‘the’, which, in spite
of the stark decline of determiners in general, in-
creases by 13% in absolute occurrence counts be-
tween the first and last round of a game, suggest-
ing a shift towards known information.

Finally, in contrast to current visual dialogue
datasets (Das et al., 2017; De Vries et al., 2017b)
which exclusively contain sequences of question-
answer pairs, the PhotoBook dataset includes
diverse dialogue acts. Qualitative examination
shows that, not surprisingly, a large proportion
of messages include an image description. These
descriptions however are interleaved with clarifi-
cation questions, acceptances/rejections, and ac-
knowledgements. For an example, see the dia-
logue excerpt in Figure 1. Further data samples
are available in Appendix C. A deeper analysis of
the task-specific dialogue acts would require man-
ual annotation, which could be added in the future.

5.3 Reference Chains

In a small-scale pilot study, Ilinykh et al. (2018)
find that the pragmatics of goal-oriented dialogue
leads to consistently more factual scene descrip-
tions and reasonable referring expressions than
traditional, context-free labelling of the same im-
ages. We argue that in the PhotoBook task refer-
ring expressions are not only adapted based on the
goal-oriented nature of the interaction but also by
incorporating the developing common ground be-
tween the participants. This effect becomes most
apparent when collecting all referring expressions
for a specific target image produced during the dif-
ferent rounds of a game in its coreference chain.
The following excerpt displays such a coreference

chain extracted from the PhotoBook dataset:

1. A: Do you have a boy with a teal coloured shirt
with yellow holding a bear with a red shirt?

2. B: Boy with teal shirt and bear with red shirt?
3. A: Teal shirt boy?

To quantify the effect of referring expression re-
finement, we compare participants’ first and last
descriptions to a given target image with the im-
age’s captions provided in the MS COCO dataset.
For this purpose we manually annotated the first
and last expressions referring to a set of six tar-
get images across ten random games in the Photo-
Book dataset. Several examples are provided in
Appendix C. Table 1 shows their differences in
token count before and after filtering for content
words with the NLTK stopword list.

Source # Tokens # Content Distance
COCO captions 11.167 5.255 –
First description 9.963 5.185 0.091
Last description 5.685 5.128 0.156

Table 1: Avg. token counts in COCO captions and the
first and last descriptions in PhotoBook, plus their co-
sine distance to the caption’s cluster mean vector. The
distance between first and last descriptions is 0.083.

Before filtering, first referring expressions do
not significantly differ in length from the COCO
captions. Last descriptions however are signifi-
cantly shorter than both the COCO captions and
first descriptions. After filtering for content words,
no significant differences remain. We also calcu-
late the cosine distance between the three different
descriptions based on their average word vectors.6

Non-function words here should not significantly
alter an utterance’s mean word vector, which is
confirmed in our results. Before as well as after fil-
tering, the distance between last referring expres-
sion and COCO captions is almost double the dis-
tance between the first referring expressions and
the captions (see last column in Table 1). Compar-
ing the distribution of word classes in the captions
and referring expressions finally revealed a sim-
ilar distribution in first referring expressions and
COCO captions, and a significantly different dis-
tribution in last referring expressions, among other
things doubling the relative frequency of nouns.

6We average pretrained word vectors from
Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) in gensim (https:
//radimrehurek.com/gensim/) to generate utter-
ance vectors. The five COCO captions are represented by a
cluster mean vector.

https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/


1900

6 Reference Chain Extraction

Collecting reference chains from dialogue data is
a non-trivial task which normally requires man-
ual annotation (Yoshida, 2011). Here we propose
a simple procedure to automatically extract refer-
ence chains made up of dialogue segments. A dia-
logue segment is defined as a collection of consec-
utive utterances that, as a whole, discuss a given
target image and include expressions referring to
it. All dialogue segments within a game that refer
to the same target image form its reference chain.

In order to automatically segment the collected
dialogues in this way, we developed a rule-based
heuristics exploiting participants’ image labelling
actions to detect segment boundaries and their re-
spective targets. The heuristics is described in de-
tail in Appendix D. Since the task instructs par-
ticipants to label images as soon as they identify
them as either common or different, the majority
of registered labelling actions can be assumed to
conclude the current dialogue segment. The fol-
lowing excerpt displays a segment extracted from
a game’s first round, discussing one target image
before a participant selects its label:

B: I have two kids (boys) holding surf
boards walking.

A: I do not have that one.
B: marks #340331 as different

Image selections however do not always delimit
segments in the cleanest way possible. For ex-
ample, a segment may refer to more than one tar-
get image, i.e., the participants may discuss two
images and only after this discussion be able to
identify them as common/different. 72% of the
extracted segments are linked to only one target;
25% to two. Moreover, reference chains do not
necessarily contain one segment for each of the
five game rounds. They may contain fewer or
more segments than rounds in a game, since par-
ticipants may discuss the same image more than
once in a single round and some of the extracted
chains may be noisy, as explained in the evaluation
section below. 75% of the automatically extracted
chains contain three to six segments.

Evaluation To evaluate the segmentation, two
annotators independently reviewed segments ex-
tracted from 20 dialogues. These segments were
annotated by marking all utterances u in a segment
S with target images I that refer to an image i′

where i′ /∈ I to determine precision, and marking
all directly preceding and succeeding utterances u′

outside of a segment S that refer to a target image
i ∈ I to determine recall. Additionally, if a seg-
ment S did not include any references to any of its
target images I , it was labelled as improper. 95%
of annotated segments were assessed to be proper
(Cohen’s κ of 0.87), with 28.4% of segments con-
taining non-target references besides target refer-
ences (Cohen’s κ of 0.97). Recall across all re-
viewed segments is 99% (Cohen’s κ of 0.93).

7 Experiments on Reference Resolution

Using the automatically extracted dialogue seg-
ments, we develop a reference resolution model
that aims at identifying the target images referred
to in a dialogue segment. We hypothesise that later
segments within a reference chain might be more
difficult to resolve, because they rely on referring
expressions previously established by the dialogue
participants. As a consequence, a model that is
able to keep track of the common ground should
be less affected by this effect. To investigate these
issues, we experiment with two conditions: In the
NO-HISTORY condition, the model only has ac-
cess to the current segment and to the visual fea-
tures of each of the candidate images. In the HIS-
TORY condition, on the other hand, the model also
has access to the previous segments in the refer-
ence chain associated with each of the candidate
images, containing the linguistic common ground
built up by the participants.

We keep our models very simple. Our aim is to
propose baselines against which future work can
be compared.

7.1 Data
The automatically extracted co-reference chains
per target image were split into three disjoint sets
for training (70%), validation (15%) and testing
(15%), aiming at an equal distribution of target im-
age domains in all three sets. The raw numbers per
data split are shown in Table 2.

Split Chains Segments Targets Non-Targets
Train 12,694 30,992 40,898 226,993
Val 2,811 6,801 9,070 50,383
Test 2,816 6,876 9,025 49,774

Table 2: Number of reference chains, dialogue seg-
ments, and image types (targets and non-targets) in
each data split.



1901

Dot
product

Dot
product

Dot
product

LSTM Segment Encoder
A: two people with bikes next to a train both wearing the same helmet?
B: yes i have that one 

0.32

0.21

0.78

Seg 1
Seg 2
Seg 3

Candidate
images

Segment to 
be resolved

...

LSTM Ref
Chain

Encoder

Image has not been discussed
before; no available chain

...

Seg 1
Seg 2

LSTM Ref
Chain

Encoder

Figure 3: Diagram of the model in the HISTORY condition. For simplicity, we only show three candidate images.
Some candidate images may not have a reference chain associated with them, while others may be linked to chains
of different length, reflecting how many times an image has been referred to in the dialogue so far. In this example,
the model predicts that the bottom candidate is the target referent of the segment to be resolved.

7.2 Models

Our resolution model encodes the linguistic fea-
tures of the dialogue segment to be resolved with
a recurrent neural network with Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM, Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997). The last hidden state of the LSTM is
then used as the representation for the dialogue
segment. For each candidate image in the con-
text, we obtain image features using the activa-
tions from the penultimate layer of a ResNet-152
(He et al., 2016) pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009). These image features, which are
of size 2048, are projected onto a smaller dimen-
sion equal to the hidden dimension of LSTM units.
Projected image features go through ReLU non-
linearity and are normalised to unit vectors. To
assess which of the candidate images is a target,
in the NO-HISTORY condition we take the dot
product between the dialogue segment representa-
tion and each image feature vector, ending up with
scalar predictions for all N images in the context:
s = {s0, ..., sN}.

For the HISTORY condition, we propose a sim-
ple mechanism for taking into account linguistic
common ground about each image. For each can-
didate image, we consider the sequence of pre-
vious segments within its reference chain. This
shared linguistic background is encoded with an-
other LSTM, whose last hidden state is added
to the corresponding image feature that was pro-
jected to the same dimension as the hidden state
of the LSTM. The resulting representation goes
through ReLU, is normalised, and compared to
the target dialogue segment representation via dot

product, as in NO-HISTORY (see Figure 3).
As an ablation study, we train a HISTORY model

without visual features. This allows us to establish
a baseline performance only involving language
and to study whether the HISTORY model with vi-
sual features learns an efficient multi-modal repre-
sentation. We hypothesise that some descriptions
can be successfully resolved by just comparing the
current segment and the reference chain in the his-
tory (e.g., when descriptions are detailed and re-
peated). However, performance should be signifi-
cantly lower than with visual features, for example
when referring expressions are ambiguous.

Sigmoid is applied element-wise over the scalar
predictions in all three models. As a result, each
image can be assessed independently using a deci-
sion threshold (set to 0.5). This allows the model
to predict multiple images as referents.7 We use
Binary Cross Entropy Loss to train the models.
Since distractor images make up 84.74% of the
items to be classified in the training set and tar-
get images constitute only the 15.26% of them, we
provided 84.74/15.26 ≈ 5.5 as the weight of the
target class in the loss function.

All models were implemented in PyTorch,
trained with a learning rate of 0.001 and a batch
size of 512. The dimension of the word embed-
dings and the hidden dimensions of the LSTM
units were all set to 512. The parameters were
optimised using Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014).
The models were trained until the validation loss
stopped improving, after which we selected the

7As explained in Section 6, 25% of segments are linked to
two targets; 3% to more. See Appendix D for further details.



1902

model with the best weighted average of the tar-
get and non-target F-scores.

7.3 Results
We report precision, recall, and F-score for the tar-
get images in Table 3. Results for non-target im-
ages are available in Appendix E. Every candidate
image contributes individually to the scores, i.e.,
the task is not treated as multi-label for evaluation
purposes. Random baseline scores are obtained by
taking the average of 10 runs with a model that
predicts targets and non-targets randomly for the
images in the test set.

Given the low ratio of target to distractor images
(see Table 2 in Section 7.1), the task of identify-
ing target images is challenging and the random
baseline achieves an F-score below 30%. The re-
sults show that the resolution capabilities of our
model are well above the baseline. The HISTORY
model achieves higher recall and F-score than the
NO-HISTORY model, while precision is compara-
ble across these two conditions.

Model Precision Recall F1
Random baseline 15.34 49.95 23.47
NO-HISTORY 56.65 75.86 64.86
HISTORY 56.66 77.41 65.43
HISTORY /No image 35.66 63.18 45.59

Table 3: Results for the target images in the test set.

For a more in-depth analysis of the results, we ex-
amine how precision and recall vary depending on
the position of the to-be-resolved segment within
a reference chain. Figure 4 displays this informa-
tion. As hypothesised, we observe that resolution
performance is lower for later segments in a refer-
ence chain. For example, while precision is close
to 60% for first mentions (position 1 in a chain), it
declines by around 20 points for last mentions.

1 2 3 4 5 6

40

60

80

100
Precision

No history
History
No image

1 2 3 4 5 6

40

60

80

100
Recall

Figure 4: Precision and recall (y axis) for target images,
given the position of the segment to be resolved in a
reference chain (x axis).

The plots in Figure 4 also show the impact of tak-
ing into account the common ground accumulated

over a reference chain. This is most prominent
with regard to the recall of target images. The
HISTORY model yields higher results than the NO-
HISTORY model when it comes to resolving seg-
ments that refer to an image that has already been
referred to earlier within the dialogue (positions
> 1). Yet, the presence of linguistic context does
not fully cancel out the effect observed above: The
performance of the HISTORY model also declines
for later segments in a chain, indicating that more
sophisticated methods are needed to fully exploit
shared linguistic information.

Experiments with the HISTORY model without
visual features (HISTORY/No image) confirm our
hypothesis. The HISTORY model outperforms the
“blind” model by about 21 points in precision and
14 points in recall. We thus conclude that even
our simple fusion mechanism already allows for
learning an efficient multimodal encoding and res-
olution of referring expressions.

7.4 Qualitative Analysis

The quantitative dataset analysis presented in Sec-
tion 5 showed that referring expressions become
shorter over time, with interlocutors being most
likely to retain nouns and adjectives. Qualita-
tive inspection of the reference chains reveals that
this compression process can lead to very non-
standard descriptions. We hypothesise that the
degree to which the compressed descriptions rely
on visual information has an impact on the per-
formance of the models. For example, the NO-
HISTORY model can be effective when the par-
ticipants converge on a non-standard description
which highlights a visual property of the target im-
age that clearly discriminates it from the distrac-
tors. This is the case in the example shown on the
left-hand side of Figure 5. The target image shows
a woman holding what seems to be a plastic carrot.
This feature stands out in a domain where all the
candidate images include a person and a TV.8 Af-
ter an initial, longer description (‘a woman sitting
in front of a monitor with a dog wallpaper while
holding a plastic carrot’), the participants use the
much more compact description ‘the carrot lady’.
Arguably, given the saliency of the carrot in the
given context, relying on the preceding linguistic
history is not critical in this case, and thus both the
NO-HISTORY and the HISTORY model succeed in

8The COCO annotations for this image seem to be slightly
off: The image is tagged as including a TV but in fact shows
a computer monitor.



1903

Figure 5: Reference chain for each of the two displayed images. The dialogue segments in the chains are slightly
simplified for space reasons. Left: Both the HISTORY and the NO-HISTORY models succeed at identifying this
image as the target of the segment to be resolved. Right: The NO-HISTORY model fails to recognise this image as
the target of the segment to be resolved, while the HISTORY model succeeds. The distractor images for these two
examples are available in Appendix E.

identifying the target.
We observe that the HISTORY model is partic-

ularly helpful when the participants converge on
a non-standard description of a target image that
cannot easily be grounded on visual information.
The image and reference chain on the right-hand
side of Figure 5 illustrate this point, where the
description to be resolved is the remarkably ab-
stract ‘strange’. Here the HISTORY model suc-
ceeds while the NO-HISTORY model fails. As in
the previous example, the referring expression in
the first segment of the reference chain for this im-
age (‘a strange bike with two visible wheels in the
back’) includes more descriptive content – indeed,
it is similar to a caption, as shown by our analy-
sis in Section 5.3. By exploiting shared linguistic
context, the HISTORY model can not only inter-
pret the non-standard phrase, but also recover ad-
ditional properties of the image not explicit in the
segment to be resolved, which presumably help to
ground it.

8 Conclusion

We have presented the first large-scale dataset of
goal-oriented, visually grounded dialogues for in-
vestigating shared linguistic history. Through the
data collection’s task setup, participants repeat-
edly refer to a controlled set of target images,
which allows them to improve task efficiency if
they utilise their developing common ground and
establish conceptual pacts (Brennan and Clark,
1996) on referring expressions. The collected di-
alogues exhibit a significant shortening of utter-
ances throughout a game, with final referring ex-
pressions starkly differing from both standard im-
age captions and initial descriptions. To illustrate
the potential of the dataset, we trained a baseline
reference resolution model and showed that infor-
mation accumulated over a reference chain helps

to resolve later descriptions. Our results suggest
that more sophisticated models are needed to fully
exploit shared linguistic history.

The current paper showcases only some of
the aspects of the PhotoBook dataset, which
we hereby release to the public (https://
dmg-photobook.github.io). In future
work, the data can be used to further inves-
tigate common ground and conceptual pacts;
be extended through manual annotations for a
more thorough linguistic analysis of co-reference
chains; exploit the combination of vision and lan-
guage to develop computational models for refer-
ring expression generation; or use the PhotoBook
task in the ParlAI framework for Turing-Test-like
evaluation of dialogue agents.

Acknowledgements

The PhotoBook dataset was collected thanks to
funding in the form of a Facebook ParlAI Re-
search Award to Raquel Fernández. We are grate-
ful to the ParlAI team, in particular Jack Urbanek
and Jason Weston, for their continued support
and assistance in using the ParlAI framework dur-
ing the data collection, which was coordinated by
Janosch Haber. We warmly thank the volunteers
who took part in pilot experiments. Thanks also
go to Aashish Venkatesh for his valuable contri-
butions in brainstorming sessions about the task
design and for preliminary modelling efforts. Fi-
nally, we are grateful to the participants of two
Faculty Summits at Facebook AI Research NYC
for their feedback.

References
Luis von Ahn, Mihir Kedia, and Manuel Blum. 2006.

Verbosity: A game for collecting common-sense
facts. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.

https://dmg-photobook.github.io
https://dmg-photobook.github.io
https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124784
https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124784


1904

Anne H. Anderson, Miles Bader, Ellen Gurman Bard,
Elizabeth Boyle, Gwyneth Doherty, Simon Garrod,
Stephen Isard, Jacqueline Kowtko, Jan McAllister,
Jim Miller, et al. 1991. The HCRC Map Task cor-
pus. Language and Speech, 34(4):351–366.

Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Mar-
garet Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick,
and Devi Parikh. 2015. VQA: Visual Question An-
swering. In Proceedings of ICCV.

Susan E. Brennan and Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Con-
ceptual pacts and lexical choice in conversation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 22:1482–1493.

Sarah Brown-Schmidt, Si On Yoon, and Rachel Anna
Ryskin. 2015. People as contexts in conversation. In
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, volume 62,
chapter 3, pages 59–99. Elsevier.

Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. ’Using’ Lin-
guistic Books. Cambridge University Press.

Herbert H. Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986.
Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition,
22(1):1 – 39.

Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, Khushi Gupta, Avi
Singh, Deshraj Yadav, José M.F. Moura, Devi
Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2017. Visual Dialog. In
Proceedings of CVPR.

Harm De Vries, Florian Strub, Sarath Chandar, Olivier
Pietquin, Hugo Larochelle, and Aaron Courville.
2017a. Guesswhat?! visual object discovery
through multi-modal dialogue. In Proc. of CVPR.

Harm De Vries, Florian Strub, Jérémie Mary, Hugo
Larochelle, Olivier Pietquin, and Aaron Courville.
2017b. Modulating early visual processing by lan-
guage. In Proceedings of NIPS.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai
Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet: A Large-Scale
Hierarchical Image Database. In Proc. of CVPR.

Kotaro Hara, Abigail Adams, Kristy Milland, Saiph
Savage, Chris Callison-Burch, and Jeffrey P
Bigham. 2018. A Data-Driven Analysis of Workers’
Earnings on Amazon Mechanical Turk. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems.

He He, Anusha Balakrishnan, Mihail Eric, and Percy
Liang. 2017. Learning symmetric collaborative di-
alogue agents with dynamic knowledge graph em-
beddings. In Proceedings of ACL.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of CVPR.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural Computation,
9(8):1735–1780.

Nikolai Ilinykh, Sina Zarrieß, and David Schlangen.
2018. The task matters: Comparing image caption-
ing and task-based dialogical image description. In
Proceedings of INLG.

Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten,
and Tamara L. Berg. 2014. ReferIt Game: Refer-
ring to Objects in Photographs of Natural Scenes.
In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR,
abs/1412.6980.

Robert M. Krauss and Sidney Weinheimer. 1964.
Changes in reference phrases as a function of fre-
quency of usage in social interaction: a preliminary
study. Psychonomic Science, 1(1):113–114.

Robert M. Krauss and Sidney Weinheimer. 1966. Con-
current feedback, confirmation, and the encoding of
referents in verbal communication. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 4(3):343–346.

Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin John-
son, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen,
Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma,
et al. 2017. Visual Genome: Connecting language
and vision using crowdsourced dense image anno-
tations. International Journal of Computer Vision,
123(1):32–73.

Rensis Likert. 1932. A technique for the measurement
of attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 22 140:55–55.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár,
and C. Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft COCO:
Common Objects in Context. In Proc. of ECCV.

Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana
Camburu, Alan Yuille, and Kevin Murphy. 2016.
Generation and comprehension of unambiguous ob-
ject descriptions. In Proceedings of CVPR.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed represen-
tations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In Proceedings of NIPS.

Alexander Miller, Will Feng, Dhruv Batra, Antoine
Bordes, Adam Fisch, Jiasen Lu, Devi Parikh, and Ja-
son Weston. 2017. ParlAI: A Dialog Research Soft-
ware Platform. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Bryan A Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M Cervantes,
Juan C Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and Svetlana
Lazebnik. 2015. Flickr30k entities: Collecting
region-to-phrase correspondences for richer image-
to-sentence models. In Proceedings of ICCV.

Robert Stalnaker. 1978. Assertion. In P. Cole, edi-
tor, Pragmatics, volume 9 of Syntax and Semantics,
pages 315–332. New York Academic Press.

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511620539
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(86)90010-7
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01648683
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01648683
http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.07130
http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.07130
http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.07130
https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03342817
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03342817
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03342817
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0023705
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0023705
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0023705
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.9
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.9
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2999792.2999959
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2999792.2999959
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2999792.2999959
http://aclweb.org/anthology/D17-2014
http://aclweb.org/anthology/D17-2014


1905

Tokunaga Takenobu, Iida Ryu, Terai Asuka, and
Kuriyama Naoko. 2012. The REX corpora: A col-
lection of multimodal corpora of referring expres-
sions in collaborative problem solving dialogues. In
Proceedings of LREC.

Ramakrishna Vedantam, Samy Bengio, Kevin Murphy,
Devi Parikh, and Gal Chechik. 2017. Context-aware
captions from context-agnostic supervision. In Pro-
ceedings of CVPR.

Etsuko Yoshida. 2011. Referring expressions in En-
glish and Japanese: patterns of use in dialogue pro-
cessing, volume 208. John Benjamins Publishing.

Sina Zarrieß, Julian Hough, Casey Kennington,
Ramesh Manuvinakurike, David DeVault, Raquel
Fernández, and David Schlangen. 2016. PentoRef:
A Corpus of Spoken References in Task-oriented Di-
alogues. In Proceedings of LREC.

Appendices

A Task Setup

Image Sets The images used in the PhotoBook
task are taken from the MS COCO 2014 Train-
set (Lin et al., 2014). Images in MS COCO were
collected from the Flickr9 image repository, which
contains labelled photos predominantly uploaded
by amateur photographers. The pictures largely
are snapshots of everyday situations, placing ob-
jects in a natural and often rich context (hence
the name Common Objects in COntext) instead of
showing an iconic view of objects. In the MS
COCO Trainset, images are manually annotated
with the outlines of the depicted objects as well as
their object categories. We use this information to
select similar pictures to display in the PhotoBook
task. Through the filtering described in Section 3,
we obtained 30 sets of similar images with differ-
ent pairings of their most prominent objects. In
total there are 26 unique object categories in the
image sets. The most frequent object category in
the image sets is person, which is one of the two
main objects in 19 sets.

Specification of Games We developed a simple
function to select which images of a set should be
shown to which participant in which round of a
game in order to guarantee that the task setup elic-
its sufficient image (re-)references for collecting
co-reference chains. In this function, the 12 im-
ages in a set of similar photographs are randomly
indexed and then assigned to a participant’s dis-
play based on the schema displayed in Table 4.

9https://www.flickr.com/

With this schema, each photograph is displayed
exactly five times while the order of images and
the order of rounds can be randomised to prevent
participants from detecting patterns in the display.
Each of these sets then is duplicated and assigned a
different selection of highlighted images to obtain
the 60 game sets of the PhotoBook task. While
most highlighted images recur five times during a
game, they can be highlighted for both participants
in the same round. As a result, any given image is
highlighted in an average of 3.42 rounds of a game
(see Table 5 for the highlighting schema).

Round Participant A Participant B
1 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8
2 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 11
3 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 11
4 1, 2, 5, 8, 11, 12 1, 4, 5, 8, 10, 12
5 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12

Table 4: Assignment of image IDs to the different par-
ticipants and rounds of a game schema. The order of
rounds and the arrangement of images on the partici-
pant’s display can be randomised without effect on the
game setup.

Game Round Statistics
1 2 3 4 5 H

ID A B A B A B A B A B T 1 2 R
1 1 1 1 1 1 5 5 0 3
2 2 2 2 2 2 5 0 5 4
3 1 1 1 1 1 5 5 0 3
4 2 2 2 1 2 5 4 1 3
5 1 1 1 1 1 5 0 5 4
6 2 2 2 2 2 5 5 0 4
7 1 1 1 1 1 5 0 5 3
8 2 1 2 1 1 5 2 3 3
9 2 2 1 2 2 5 4 1 3

10 2 2 2 2 2 5 5 0 4
11 1 1 1 1 1 5 0 5 4
12 2 2 2 2 2 5 5 0 3

Table 5: Schema of referent image highlighting in the
PhotoBook task. The left part of the table indicates
whether a given image is highlighted for one of the two
participants (A and B) in a given game round in either
game 1 or 2. T indicates the total count of highlights
(which is 5 always), H counts the highlights per game
and R the number of rounds that an image is high-
lighted in.

B Task Instructions

HIT Preview When the PhotoBook task envi-
ronment is initialised, it publishes a specified num-
ber of Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) titled
Game: Detect common images by chatting with
another player on Amazon Mechanical Turk (see

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.120
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.120
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/563_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/563_Paper.pdf
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/563_Paper.pdf
https://www.flickr.com/


1906

Figure 6 for a full print of the descriptions). Par-
ticipants entering the HIT are shown a preview
screen with the central task details as shown in
Figure 7.

Game Round Mechanics The PhotoBook task
AMT user interface is designed in such a way that
the six images per round are displayed in a 2 × 3
grid, with a coloured bar under each image: If the
image is highlighted, this bar is yellow and con-
tains a radio button option for the common and
different labels. If they are not highlighted for a
player, the bar is greyed out and empty. The sub-
mit button is deactivated as long as not all high-
lighted images have been labelled. As soon as both
players submitted their selection, a feedback page
is shown where the bars under the highlighted im-
ages either colour green to indicate a correct se-
lection or red to indicate a wrong one. Figure 8(b)
shows a screenshot of the feedback display.

The radio buttons are disabled in the feedback
screens so players cannot revise their selection -
they can however communicate about their mis-
takes or pass any other feedback to their part-
ner. The title of a page indicates the current page
number so participants can always check their
progress; the text input field is limited to a max-
imum of hundred characters to prevent listings of
multiple images or overly elaborate descriptions -
which, if necessary, can be conveyed in a number
of subsequent messages.

Feedback Questionnaire In order to facilitate a
qualitative analysis of dialogue agents developed
for the PhotoBook task, we also collect a gold-
standard benchmark of participant’s self-reported
satisfaction scores. These scores later can be com-
pared with those obtained by pairing human par-
ticipants with an artificial dialogue agent in order
to assess it in a Turing Test-like setting. Follow-
ing He et al. (2017), we ask participants to rate
three statements on a five-point Likert scale (Lik-
ert, 1932), ranging from strongly agree to strongly
disagree:

1. Overall collaboration with my partner worked
well.

2. I understood my partner’s descriptions well.

3. My partner seemed to understand me well.

Warming-Up Round During an initial series of
pilot runs we observed that for new participants
the first round of their first game took significantly

longer than any other ones. Although we do ex-
pect that participants get more efficient over time,
we argue that this effect is largely related to the
fact that participants need to get familiar with the
task’s mechanics when it is the first time they are
exposed to it. In order to control for this effect, we
added a warming-up round with three images per
participant10 for each pair of new participants (see
Figure 8a). This strongly reduced the completion
time of new participants’ first game rounds.

Matching Participants In order to collect un-
biased samples of the referring expression gener-
ation process, we aim to prevent both, i) partic-
ipants completing the same game multiple times
(as here they could re-use referring expressions
that worked well during the last one) and ii)
specific pairs of participants completing multiple
games (as they might have established some kind
of strategy or code already). We however also aim
at designing the task in such a way that the degree
of the partner-specificity in established canoni-
cal expressions could be assessed. To achieve
this, the participant matching should create set-
tings where a re-entering participant is assigned a
game with the same image set as in the game be-
fore, but paired with a different conversation part-
ner changes (compare for example Brennan and
Clark, 1996). In order to maximise the number of
this second game setting, we encourage workers to
continue playing by paying them a bonus of 0.25
USD for each 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th game.

Worker Payment The HIT description also de-
tails the worker’s payment. We want to pro-
vide fair payment to workers, which we calculated
based on an average wage of 10 USD per hour
(Hara et al., 2018).11 An initial set of runs resulted
in an average completion time of 12 minutes,
which indicated an expected expense of about 2
USD per participant per game. More experienced
workers however managed to complete a full game
in six to ten minutes, meaning that for them we
would often surpass the 10 USD/h guideline based
on this calculation. Other workers – especially
new ones - took up to 25 minutes for the first game,
which means that they on the other hand would be
strongly under-payed with a rigid per-game pay-
ment strategy. To mitigate this effect, we devel-
oped the following payment schema: Each worker

10Warming-Up image categories are disjoint from the reg-
ular PhotoBook image sets.

11See also DynamoWiki.

http://wiki.wearedynamo.org/index.php?title=Fair_payment


1907

Figure 6: Screenshot of the PhotoBook task AMT HIT details shown to a participant.

Figure 7: Screenshot of the PhotoBook task AMT HIT preview page.

that completes a full game is payed a base-amount
of 1.75 USD – which is indicated in the HIT de-
scription. If the game took longer than ten min-
utes, the participants are payed a bonus amount of
0.10 USD per minute, up to an additional bonus
payment of 1.50 USD for 25 or more minutes.
In order to not encourage workers to play slowly,
we only inform them about this bonus at the end
of a HIT. With this bonus and the 20% AMT fee
on each transaction, we expected an average cost
of about 5 USD per game, which due to connec-
tion problems in the framework ultimately accu-
mulated to 6 USD for a completed game. The to-
tal cost of the data collection, including pilot runs,
was 16,350 USD.

C Dataset Samples

Through the goal-oriented nature of participants’
interactions in the PhotoBook dataset, we do not
only collect image descriptions but rather the full,
collaborative process of establishing, grounding
and refining referring expressions throughout the

subsequent rounds of the PhotoBook task. As a
result, we capture a wide range of dialogue acts
such as clarification questions, corrections, exten-
sions, (self-)repairs as well as interactions con-
cerning game mechanics. Consider for example
the following interactions:

A: Man with dog on lap looking at his com-
puter?

B: I don’t have that, but could it be a TV in
yours? Mine has a man sitting with his
dog watching TV.

A: yes, TV - sorry!
B: Okay.

A: Do you have someone on a big motorcy-
cle and their head isn’t visible?

A: There is a blue car in the background
B: No
A: In any of the pictures?
B: No
A: Okay, thank you



1908

(a) Screenshot of the PhotoBook task’s display for one of the
participants during the warming-up round.

(b) Example screenshot of the PhotoBook AMT feedback dis-
play.

Figure 8: Example screenshots for a participant’s display during the warming-up round and feedback screen.

B: Woman with hot dog
A: Older girl with glasses holding a hot

dog?
B: sitting
A: Yeah

A: Do you have a picture with a lady in a
fancy dress standing by a motorcycle?

B: no
B: wait
B: yes, in black?
A: Yes, it’s a black dress with white trim.

A: Is there anything else?
B: Do you have the old lady in the white

hat/blue pants reading?
A: Yes, I do.
B: Okay, that’s all for me

In most cases, referring expressions agreed upon
during the first rounds of a game are further re-
fined and optimised while re-referring to the same
target object in later rounds of the game. These
refinements often are manifested in an omission
of detail while retaining core features of the target
object.

A: Do you have a boy with a teal coloured
shirt with yellow holding a bear with a
red shirt?

B: Yes
–

B: Boy with teal shirt and bear with red
shirt?

A: Yes!
–

A: Teal shirt boy?
B: No

Collecting all utterances that refer to a specific
target image during a given game creates its co-
reference chain. Consider the following examples
of first (F) and last (L) referring expressions from
co-reference chains manually extracted from the
PhotoBook dataset:

F: Two girls near TV playing wii
One in white shirt, one in grey

L: Girls in white and grey

F: A person that looks like a monk sitting
on a bench
He’s wearing a blue and white ball cap

L: The monk

F: A white, yellow, and blue bus being
towed by a blue tow truck

L: Yellow/white bus being towed by blue

D Reference Chain Extraction

As explained in Section 6, instead of collecting co-
reference chains from manual annotation, we use a
heuristics to automatically extract reference chains
of dialogue segments likely to contain referring
expressions to a chain’s target image. We consider
participants’ image labelling actions to signal that
a previously discussed target image was identi-
fied as either common or different and therefore
concluding the current dialogue segment. Due
to the spontaneous and unrestricted nature of the
PhotoBook dialogues, these labelling actions how-
ever do not always indicate segment boundaries
as cleanly as possible. To improve the quality of
extracted dialogue segments and reference chains,
we therefore developed a more context-sensitive
heuristics to automate segmentation. The heuris-
tics is implemented as a binary decision tree that



1909

uses labelling actions as well as any preceding and
subsequent messages and additional labelling ac-
tions to better decide on segment boundaries and
associated target images. It considers 32 combi-
nations of eight different factors. The first case of
the heuristics, for example, states that if

1. the current turn is a message,
2. the previous turn was an image labelling action,
3. the previous turn was by the other participant,
4. the next turn is an image selection action,
5. the next turn is by the current participant,
6. the next labelling action assigns a common la-

bel,
7. the other participant’s previous labelling and

the current participant’s next labelling address
the same target image, and

8. there is a non-empty, currently developing dia-
logue segment,

then we assume that after one speaker selected an
image as common, the other speaker makes one
utterance and marks the same image as common,
which is resolved by saving the currently develop-
ing segment with the common image as referent
and initialising a new segment with the trailing ut-
terance of the second speaker. This prevents creat-
ing a segment with just the trailing utterance (that
cannot be a complete segment) which would be
the naive decision if segmenting was based solely
on labelling actions. Other cases include whether
the next turn is a message by the other participant
followed by them labelling a second image as dif-
ferent (likely to indicate that two images were dis-
cussed and the segment should be extended by the
following message as well as the second target im-
age) or whether none of the preceding and subse-
quent turns contains labelling actions (indicating
an ongoing dialogue segment).

The following shows a typical example of an au-
tomatically extracted chain of dialogue segments
associated with the image in Figure 9:

B: Hello
A: Hi
A: Do you have a woman with a black

coat with buttons, glasses and a piece
of pizza on table

B: no

Figure 9: Sample image MS COCO #449904.

A: Lady with black shirt, glasses with pizza
on table?

B: yes
A: Table with orange bowl with lemons and

liquor, cups?
B: no

A: Orange bowl with lemons, liquor?
B: lady pizza
A: No lady pizza
B: yes

B: woman and pizza
A: Empty kitchen wood coloured cabinets?
A: No woman pizza
B: no

About 72% of all segments are assigned to a sin-
gle co-reference chain, 25% were automatically
assigned to co-reference chains of two different
target images and the remaining 3% to 3 or more
chains.

E Reference Resolution Experiments

Data and Results In addition to the results re-
ported on Table 3 in Section 7, which concern the
target images in the test set, here we report the
scores for target images on the validation set (Ta-
ble 6) and the scores for non-target images (Ta-
ble 7). The latter constitute the large majority
of candidate images, and thus results are substan-
tially higher for this class.

Model Precision Recall F1
NO HISTORY 56.37 75.91 64.70
HISTORY 56.32 78.10 65.45
NO IMAGE 34.61 62.49 44.55

Table 6: Results for target images in the validation set.



1910

Model Precision Recall F1
NO HISTORY 95.34 (95.37) 89.48 (89.42) 92.31 (92.30)
HISTORY 95.61 (95.76) 89.26 (89.10) 92.33 (92.31)
No image 92.24 (92.10) 79.33 (78.74) 85.30 (84.90)

Table 7: Results for non-target images in the test set
(and the validation set, in brackets).

Finally, Table 8 reports the overall number of
reference chains in the dataset broken down by
length, that is, by the number of dialogue segments
they contain.

Length (# segments) of the reference chains
Split 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Train 1783 1340 3400 4736 1322 110 3
Val 398 295 754 1057 281 30 1
Test 400 296 754 1057 281 23 0

Table 8: Total number of reference chains per length
(i.e., # segments in the chain) in each of the data splits.

Qualitative Analysis Figures 10 and 11 show
the distractor images for the examples provided in
Figure 5 and discussed in Section 7.4.

Figure 10: Set of distractors for the target image and
segment to be resolved on the left-hand side of Fig. 5.

Figure 11: Set of distractors for the target image and
segment to be resolved on the right-hand side of Fig. 5.


