



















































Know More about Each Other: Evolving Dialogue Strategy via Compound Assessment


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5382–5391
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

5382

Know More about Each Other: Evolving Dialogue Strategy via
Compound Assessment

Siqi Bao, Huang He, Fan Wang, Rongzhong Lian and Hua Wu
Baidu Inc., China

{baosiqi, hehuang, wangfan04, lianrongzhong, wu hua}@baidu.com

Abstract

In this paper, a novel Generation-Evaluation
framework is developed for multi-turn conver-
sations with the objective of letting both par-
ticipants know more about each other. For the
sake of rational knowledge utilization and co-
herent conversation flow, a dialogue strategy
which controls knowledge selection is instan-
tiated and continuously adapted via reinforce-
ment learning. Under the deployed strategy,
knowledge grounded conversations are con-
ducted with two dialogue agents. The gener-
ated dialogues are comprehensively evaluated
on aspects like informativeness and coherence,
which are aligned with our objective and hu-
man instinct. These assessments are integrated
as a compound reward to guide the evolution
of dialogue strategy via policy gradient. Com-
prehensive experiments have been carried out
on the publicly available dataset, demonstrat-
ing that the proposed method outperforms the
other state-of-the-art approaches significantly.

1 Introduction

Intelligent dialogue systems have become popu-
lar in our daily life, such as the chit-chat XiaoIce
and the task-oriented Echo. These systems serve
as smart agents to facilitate more effective inter-
action with users in various situations, like ticket
booking or recreation offering. Primary dialogue
systems (Vinyals and Le, 2015; Shang et al., 2015)
try to mimic human beings to generate fluent utter-
ances, whereas paying little attention to the intrin-
sic factors of human conversations: exchanging
information and enhancing interaction (Li et al.,
2017). Therefore, they are prone to generate dull
and generic responses.

To address this problem, in recent years, sev-
eral approaches have been developed to generate
informative responses based on external knowl-
edge. Recently, a knowledge grounded model is

proposed in Ghazvininejad et al. (2018), where
relevant factual texts are encoded into memory and
replies are decoded via attention mechanism. In-
stead of using unstructured text knowledge, CCM
(Zhou et al., 2018) relies on structured knowledge
to generate rich-information response. However,
all these approaches are designed for the single-
round settings. While applied to the real-world
scenarios (where dialogues are conducted for mul-
tiple rounds), the dialogue quality will be severely
limited due to the lack of coordination among dif-
ferent rounds.

As discussed above, one of the ultimate goals
in human conversation is that information can be
exchanged effectively through interaction. Par-
ticularly, we argue that successful multi-turn di-
alogues are determined by the joint experience
of both participants in the conversation, i.e., both
participants need to get aware of their counter-
parts and express themselves effectively. To this
end, we propose the objective of letting both sides
know more about each other. With this objective,
a novel Generation-Evaluation framework is intro-
duced for the multi-turn dialogues.

As the name Generation-Evaluation indicates,
there are two fundamental modules in our frame-
work. In the module of dialogue generation, a
two-stage generative model is employed, where
the dialogue strategy determines which knowledge
to use for the current turn and the decoder uses this
knowledge to produce the response. In the mod-
ule of evaluation, the generated dialogues are as-
sessed from the following two aspects: informa-
tiveness, which measures the effectiveness of in-
formation exchange and coherence, which reflects
the response’s suitableness. Both modules are as-
sembled within a unified reinforcement learning
pipeline. The generation module simulates knowl-
edge grounded conversations with two dialogue
agents and receives compound reward from the



5383

! "

Namaste. How are you today?

I am doing great. How are you?

Great, thanks. My children and I were 
just about to watch Game of Thrones.

Nice. How old are you children?

…

Dialogue Generation

Informativeness Coherence

Strategy Evaluation

Compound Reward

Dialogue

Reward

Backgrounds

I have four children
I love watching Game of Thrones…

…

I like to ski
I hate Mexican food

Encourage informative &
concise conversations to

exchange information

Generate coherent & 
proper responses to 
enhance interaction

Coverage Duplication Relevance Consistency

Figure 1: Framework overview. Left: dialogue generation. Right: strategy evaluation.

evaluation module. By keeping adapted for higher
evaluation rewards, the generation module will be
continuously evolving for better dialogue quality.
As suggested in Yarats and Lewis (2018), apply-
ing reinforcement learning on the decoder might
bring in adverse impacts on the linguistic quality.
As such, in the generation module, the decoder is
pre-trained with supervised learning and the dia-
logue strategy keeps evolving with reinforcement
learning.

The contributions of this work are summarized
as follows:

• With the objective of letting both partici-
pants know more about each other, we pro-
pose a novel Generation-Evaluation frame-
work, which facilitates the generation of in-
formative and coherent dialogues.

• To evaluate the effectiveness of dialogue
strategy, two metrics are specially designed
on informativeness and coherence, which are
further integrated as a compound reward. To-
wards maximizing this reward, the strategy of
knowledge selection is able to evolve via re-
inforcement learning.

• Intensive and extensive experiments have
been carried out on PersonaChat. As com-
pared with other state-of-the-art approaches,
our method obtains superior performances on
both automatic and human evaluations.

2 Methodology

2.1 Framework Overview

Our Generation-Evaluation framework is illus-
trated in Figure 1. Under the deployed strategy
of knowledge selection, two dialogue agents in-
troduce themselves alternately in accordance with
corresponding backgrounds and make responses

Utterance
Encoder

Context
Encoder

Knowledge
Encoder

!"#$

%

&"#$

…

MLP-ATT

MLP-ATT

+

Decoder Response !"

Sampling

()

()*

!"#$*

&"#$*

%*

+(%|&")

Em
be

dd
in

g 
La

ye
r

Figure 2: Architecture of dialogue generation.

to their counterparts in a proper way. The gen-
erated dialogues together with the agents’ back-
grounds are collected for strategy evaluation in
terms of two essential aspects: informativeness
and coherence. Then these assessments are inte-
grated as a compound reward, acting as the rein-
forcing signal for the evolution of knowledge in-
teraction strategy.

In the following parts, we will first introduce the
process of dialogue generation, present the metrics
utilized in strategy evaluation and then describe
the strategy evolution via compound assessment.

2.2 Dialogue Generation

The detailed network architecture of dialogue gen-
eration is illustrated in Figure 2. With the con-
text and background knowledge as input, our di-
alogue strategy selects one piece of appropriate
knowledge to generate informative and coherent
response. The background Z = {z1, z2, · · · , zM}
includes a set of knowledge, where a piece of
knowledge zi is presented by one sentence, such
as “i like to ski”. Utterance ut−1 is the last re-
sponse from the other participant and the context
ct = concat(u1, u2, · · · , ut−1) is the current con-
versation history.

It is worth noting that in our dialogue gener-
ation, the input context ct is separated into two
parts, with independent encoders employed for ut-
terance ut−1 and context ct−1 respectively. The
motivation to do so lies in two aspects: for the



5384

sake of coherence, the knowledge utilized in t-th
turn is supposed to be semantically related to the
partner’s last utterance ut−1; to avoid repetition,
the knowledge utilized in t-th turn should be dis-
similar with the former dialogue history ct−1.

After passing through the embedding layer and
the encoders of gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Cho
et al., 2014), the inputs obtain their corresponding
feature representation: knowledge zGi , utterance
uGt−1 and context c

G
t−1. ZG = {zG1 , zG2 , · · · , zGM}

is the set of knowledge representation. With dis-
criminative representations uGt−1, c

G
t−1 and ZG

obtained, the prior distribution over knowledge
p(Z|ct) can be estimated through MLP attention
(MLP-ATT) (Bahdanau et al., 2015):

p(Z|ct) = p(Z|ut−1) ∗ 0.5 + p(Z|ct−1) ∗ 0.5,
p(zi|ut−1) = softmax

(
MLP-ATT(uGt−1, z

G
i )
)
,

p(zi|ct−1) = softmax
(
MLP-ATT(cGt−1, z

G
i )
)
,

(1)

where softmax is defined as softmax(si) =
esi/

∑
j e

sj (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015). And the
computation of MLP-ATT is given as follows:

MLP-ATT(x, y) = V T1 tanh(xW1 + yW2),

where W1,W2 ∈ Rd×d and V1 ∈ Rd are
the weight matrices. p(Z|ct) is the proba-
bility distribution for knowledge selection and∑M

i=1 p(zi|ct) = 1. (If p(zi|ct) = 0.2, it means
that the probability to select knowledge zi is 0.2.)
According to the estimated prior probability dis-
tribution p(Z|ct), one piece of knowledge can be
sampled zi ∼ p(Z|ct) and sent to the decoder for
response generation p(ut|zi, ut−1).

It is obvious that the key component for in-
formative and coherent conversation is the ap-
propriate knowledge selection, shown as Blue ar-
eas in Figure 2. Nevertheless, a high-fidelity de-
coder p(ut|zi, ut−1), which is able to express the
given knowledge accurately, is also indispensable.
To this end, the pre-training is carried out us-
ing those target responses associated with ground-
truth knowledge via supervised learning. The
training data is in the format of {ut−1, zi, ut},
where ut−1 is the last utterance from the part-
ner, ut is the target response and zi is the ground
truth knowledge used in ut. Major steps in the
pre-training are listed as follows: (1) the encoders
convert the knowledge and utterance into zGi and
uGt−1; (2) the decoder tries to generate the response
ut based on the ground-truth knowledge zi and last

0 0 1 0 0

0 1 0 0 0

0 0 1 0 0

!"

!#

!$

0 0 1 0 0

0 1 1 0 0

0 1 1 0 0

Activation %& Coverage '& Repetition (&

0 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 0

0 0 1 0 0

)" )# )$ )* )+ )" )# )$ )* )+ )" )# )$ )* )+
Knowledge

Co
nv

er
sa

tio
n

Figure 3: Toy example of informativeness assessment:
activation at records whether a piece of knowledge is
expressed in ut, coverage vt keeps track of expressed
knowledge and repetition dt detects reiteration.

utterance ut−1; (3) parameters in the encoders and
decoder (Gray areas) are optimized via supervised
leaning, with the loss functions defined in Zhao
et al. (2017). For the rest of the parameters re-
lated to the knowledge selection strategy (Blue ar-
eas), they will keep evolving through Generation-
Evaluation reinforcement learning, which will be
discussed in detail.

2.3 Strategy Evaluation

Multi-turn knowledge grounded conversations are
generated by two dialogue agents. To evaluate the
effectiveness of deployed strategy, generated con-
versations and agents’ background knowledge are
collected for evaluation and two metrics are judi-
ciously designed – informativeness and coherence.

2.3.1 Informativeness
Information is a crucial ingredient in generating
meaningful conversations. Although many ap-
proaches have been introduced to boost the gen-
eration of informative utterances, due to a lack
of thorough control on effective information uti-
lization, they are prone to generating repetitive ut-
terances in multi-turn conversations. In this pa-
per, we design a novel informativeness metric to
measure the effective exploitation of information
in the conversation level, which encourages exten-
sive coverage and avoids unnecessary repetition.

To illustrate the informativeness assessment, a
toy example is given in Figure 3. Assume that
there are five pieces of background knowledge zi
within the conversation participants. For each gen-
erated utterance ut, it will be assessed whether zi
is expressed by ut or not, which can be approxi-
mately inferred through keyword matching (in the
form of binary variable 0/1). Such estimation over
the background knowledge is stored in the activa-
tion vector at. If relying on at as the informa-



5385

tiveness metric, it is able to boost informative re-
sponse generation on the utterance level. How-
ever, it inevitably produces repetitive responses
due to the lack of information utilization control
on the conversation level.

Inspired by the coverage mechanism in machine
translation (Tu et al., 2016) and text summariza-
tion (See et al., 2017), we propose to maintain
one coverage vector vt to keep track of the ac-
tivation on each piece of information during the
conversation flow. From the toy example, it can
be observed that the coverage vector vt increases
with the amount of expressed knowledge. In other
words, a higher mean value of vt indicates that
the participants have expressed more background
knowledge, which gives a better chance for them
to know more about each other.

Although the coverage mechanism stimulates
extensive knowledge expression, it still lacks ef-
fective and explicit control on the reiteration.
For the sake of user experience, we also main-
tain one repetition vector dt to detect information
redundancy, whose estimation is carried out by
jointly considering current information activation
and last-step coverage status:

dt = min(at, vt−1), (2)

where the function min(·) calculates the element-
wise minimum value between two vectors. As
shown in Figure 3, when utterance u3 reiterates the
same information as before, it does not increase
knowledge coverage and leads to unnecessary rep-
etition.

In summary, instead of focusing on the informa-
tion activation of the single-round response, our
informativeness metric considers the effective in-
formation utilization in the scope of multi-turn
conversation. For a conversation with T turns, its
informativeness is estimated as follows:

rI = mean(vT )−
T∑
t=1

mean(dt), (3)

where the function mean(·) calculates the mean
value of a vector. By maintaining information cov-
erage and internal repetition simultaneously, the
conversation level informativeness is able to en-
courage informative and concise conversations.

2.3.2 Coherence
For the sake of natural interaction, coherence is
another indispensable ingredient in strategy eval-
uation. In addition to relevance with the context,

Utterance GRU

Context

Backgrounds H-GRU

MLP

⨁ MLP

Coherence

"#

$#

%

H-GRU

"#&

$#'

('E
m

be
dd

in
g 

La
ye

r

Figure 4: Illustration of coherence assessment, where
H-GRU refers to hierarchical GRU and the symbol ⊕
denotes vector concatenation.

the coherence assessment also evaluates the con-
versation consistency with the backgrounds. The
motivation to enforce background consistency is
to confine the massive and loose interactive re-
sponses into a reasonable space. Considering that
the essence of coherence is semantic relevance be-
tween two inputs and many deep learning based
approaches have demonstrated their superiority
at capturing semantic relevance, such as DSSM
(Huang et al., 2013), SMN (Wu et al., 2017) and
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), we use a symmetric
neural network for the coherence assessment in
this paper.

As shown in Figure 4, for a generated utterance
ut, its coherence with the context ct and corre-
sponding backgroundsZ can be estimated through
this symmetric network. The utterance is fed into
the embedding layer, followed by gated recurrent
unit (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014) and multilayer per-
ceptron (MLP) to capture discriminative represen-
tation. As for the context and backgrounds, they
are fed into the embedding layer and the hier-
archical GRU for better feature extractions (Sor-
doni et al., 2015), which are further concatenated
together to obtain comprehensive representation.
The final coherence is estimated as the inner prod-
uct between two vectors:

rCt = σ
(
MLP(uGt ) ·MLP([cHt , zH ])

)
,

where MLP(x) = σ(xW1 + b1)W2 + b2 .
(4)

σ(·) is the sigmoid activation, [·, ·] denotes vector
concatenation and MLP includes two linear trans-
formations with a sigmoid activation in between.

The above equation evaluates the coherence for
each generated utterance ut, by considering exist-
ing conversation history and corresponding back-
ground, which is further summed up over all utter-
ances as conversation-level coherence assessment.



5386

2.3.3 Compound Assessment
To provide a united reinforcement signal for strat-
egy evolution, the informativeness and coherence
assessments are further integrated as a compound
reward. For a conversation τ with T turns, the
compound assessment is defined as:

R(τ) =
T∑
t=1

rCt + rI . (5)

The two intrinsic factors in human conversations –
exchanging information and enhancing interaction
have been included in our compound reward.

2.4 Strategy Evolution

From the perspective of reinforcement learning,
the knowledge selection within a conversation can
be regarded as sequential actions taken within a
trajectory. As such, the objective of knowledge
grounded dialogue generation can be written as:

max J(θ) = Eτ∼p(τ ;θ)R(τ), (6)

where θ refers to the network parameters of dia-
logue generation, τ ∼ p(τ ; θ) is a multi-turn con-
versation generated under the deployed strategy
and R(τ) is the compound assessment of strategy
evaluation. Gradient update of the above objective
can be further derived as follows:

OθJ(θ) =
T∑
t=1

Oθ log
(
p(zi|ct)p(ut|zi, ut−1)

)(
R(τ)− b

)
,

=

T∑
t=1

Oθ log p(zi|ct)
(
R(τ)− b

)
+

T∑
t=1

Oθ log p(ut|zi, ut−1)
(
R(τ)− b

)
,

(7)

where b is the reward baseline estimated
with K times Monte Carlo sampling: b =∑

k R(τ
(k))/K. In Equation (7), the first term is

about the dialogue strategy of appropriate knowl-
edge selection and the second term is about the
decoding process with the selected knowledge. As
suggested in (Lewis et al., 2017; Yarats and Lewis,
2018), applying reinforcement learning on the de-
coder might lead to poor linguistic quality. As
such, in this paper, the focus is on the strategy evo-
lution and gradient update is further simplified:

OθJ(θ) =
T∑
t=1

Oθ log p(zi|ct)
(
R(τ)− b

)
. (8)

The physical meaning of the above equation is
given as follows: the strategies that lead to higher
conversation rewards will be encouraged and those
that result in lower conversation rewards will be
suppressed.

As demonstrated in Equation (8), the network
parameters related to dialogue strategy (Blue ar-
eas in Figure 2) will keep evolving via compound
assessment. For the rest parameters, they are pre-
trained with supervised learning and will be kept
fixed during strategy evolution.

3 Experiments

3.1 Settings
All experiments have been carried out on the pub-
licly available dataset – PersonaChat (Zhang et al.,
2018), which provides both human annotated
conversations and the participants’ background
knowledge (persona profiles). PersonaChat has
separated training and testing set. In total, there
are 8,939 dialogues (131,438 turns) in the training
set and 968 dialogues (15,024 turns) in the testing
set. Comprehensive comparisons have been made
to the following methods:

• Sequence to sequence with attention
(Seq2Seq) (Vinyals and Le, 2015) is the clas-
sic response generation approach, without
using any extra knowledge.

• The knowledge grounded memory network
(Mem-Net) (Ghazvininejad et al., 2018) en-
codes text knowledge into memory to boost
the generation of informative responses.

• The KG-Net (Lian et al., 2019) makes use of
posterior knowledge distribution in the train-
ing process for accurate informative response
generation and achieves the state-of-the-art
results on PersonaChat.

• Li et al. (2016b) first employed reinforce-
ment learning for dialogue generation (RL-
DG), where simple Seq2Seq was used as the
generation model. In the experiments, to im-
prove RL-DG’s performance, KG-Net is uti-
lized as the base model for informative gen-
eration.

In our strategic knowledge interaction, the pa-
rameters of knowledge encoder, utterance en-
coder and decoder were pre-trained with super-
vised learning. For the learnable parameters (Blue



5387

areas in Figure 2), the context encoder was initial-
ized with the utterance encoder and random ini-
tialization was employed for the rest layers1. The
training process was carried out using Adam opti-
mizer, with a learning rate of 2e-4. The conversa-
tion turns T was set to 8, batch size was set to 8
and Monte Carlo sampling times K was set to 16.

3.2 Experimental Results
The training curves of reinforcement learning are
shown in Figure 5, which are the results averaged
over 5 random seeds. The horizontal axis refers
to the number of trained dialogues. The vertical
axis stands for the compound episode reward, in-
formativeness and coherence, respectively. These
results demonstrate that all rewards increase stably
within the training process and remarkable incre-
ments are achieved after convergence.

3.2.1 Automatic Evaluation
The experimental results with automatic measure-
ments are summarized in Table 1, with highest
value written in bold. Distinct-1/2 (Li et al.,
2016a) measures the diversity of generated con-
versations, which is defined as the amount of
distinct unigrams or bigrams divided by the to-
tal number of generated words. Knowledge-
Recall/Precision/F1 (Dinan et al., 2019b) mea-
sures the informativeness of generated conversa-
tions with regarding to background knowledge,
defined as:

Recall =
|WG ∩WK |
|WK |

,

Precision =
|WG ∩WK |
|WG|

,

F1 = 2× Recall× Precision
Recall + Precision

,

(9)

where WG and WK refer to the set of non-stop
words in generated conversations and background
knowledge.

From Table 1, it demonstrates that the pro-
posed method obtains the best results. The distinct
measurement indicates that more diverse words or
phrases are produced by our method. The knowl-
edge measurement verifies the effectiveness of our
approaches on the knowledge utilization in multi-
turn conversations. As compared with the state-of-
the-art KG-Net, the knowledge F1 of our method

1Our code and model will be released at https:
//github.com/PaddlePaddle/models/tree/
develop/PaddleNLP/Research/ACL2019-SEEDS.

Table 1: Experimental results with automatic measure-
ments, with highest value written in bold.

is increased by 3.6%, which is a significant im-
provement.

3.2.2 Human Evaluation

Currently, most automatic metrics are not aligned
well with human beings in dialogue evaluation
(Liu et al., 2016), such as BLEU, ROUGE, etc.
In our experiments, extensive evaluations have
been carried out with crowd-sourced human be-
ings. With the background knowledge (persona
profiles of two participants) and the first start ut-
terance in the testing set, simulated dialogues were
generated using each method. There are 8 turns in
the simulated conversations (1 start utterance fol-
lowed by 7 successive generated responses).

Our method is compared with the rest state-of-
the-art approaches and each group contains 100
pairs of simulated dialogues, randomly selected
from the testing set. For each pair of conver-
sations, they share the same background knowl-
edge and 3 crowd-sourced workers are asked to
compare these two simulated conversations at the
same time. The human evaluations include the fol-
lowing aspects: (1) Overall refers to the general
preference towards the two conversations, with
a joint consideration of effective information ex-
change and coherent interaction. (2) Coverage
measures the amount of knowledge expressed dur-
ing conversations. (3) Concise considers the infor-
mation repetition and utterance reiteration within
conversations. (4) Coherence estimates the con-
sistency and appropriateness within the interaction
between participants.

The final comparison results by crowd-sourced
workers are determined through majority voting,
which are summarized in Table 2. These results
demonstrate that our method is consistently and
significantly better than the other state-of-the-art
approaches.

https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/models/tree/develop/PaddleNLP/Research/ACL2019-SEEDS
https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/models/tree/develop/PaddleNLP/Research/ACL2019-SEEDS
https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/models/tree/develop/PaddleNLP/Research/ACL2019-SEEDS


5388

1e71e7 1e7

Ep
iso

de
 re

w
ar

d

In
fo

rm
at

iv
en

es
s

Co
he

re
nc

e

# Dialogues# Dialogues # Dialogues

Figure 5: Training curves of reinforcement learning.

Table 2: Experimental results with human evaluation, with highest value written in bold.

Table 3: Simulated dialogues with the same personas and start utterance.



5389

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
0.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

Figure 6: Visualisation of knowledge utilization in conversations of our method (Upper) and KG-Net (Bottom).
Horizontal: background knowledge in the first 12 simulated dialogues, separated by Purple lines. Vertical: knowl-
edge selection probability of each response by one participant.

3.3 Discussions
3.3.1 Case Analysis
Table 3 provides several detailed cases of the sim-
ulated dialogues generated by each method, un-
der the same background knowledge (persona pro-
files) and the start utterance. It can be observed
that Mem-Net tends to generate general and fluent
responses, like “what about you”, while expresses
limited background knowledge. Although infor-
mative utterances can be generated by KG-Net,
due to a lack of control on information utilization,
serious repetition has emerged in the simulated
conversation. In addition to redundant responses,
another problem with RL-DG is the poor linguistic
quality, which might be caused by the decoder up-
date via RL (Lewis et al., 2017; Yarats and Lewis,
2018). Our method is able to generate informative
and coherent conversations because the decoder is
fixed and only the knowledge selection strategy
keeps evolving via compound assessment

Visualization of knowledge utilization in con-
versations is displayed in Figure 6, where the
first 12 simulated dialogues from the testing set
are presented. The horizontal axis is the back-
ground knowledge in the dialogues, separated by
Purple lines. The vertical axis shows the knowl-
edge selection probability p(zi|ct) of each utter-
ance, made by one participant in the simulated
dialogues (in total 4 utterances). The upper part
(our method) demonstrates extensive knowledge
coverage, while the bottom part (KG-Net) exhibits
repetitive knowledge utilization (highlighted with
red circles).

3.3.2 Correlation Analysis
The correlation statistics between automatic met-
rics (including the distinct-1/2, knowledge-R/P/F1
and our compound reward) and human annotations
are provided in Table 4. The Pearson correlation
coefficient (Benesty et al., 2009) is estimated us-
ing the annotated overall score of our method v.s.

Table 4: Correlation between automatic metrics and
human evaluations, with highest value written in bold.

Table 5: Comparison with Lost in Conversation, with
highest value written in bold.

KG-Net. These results indicate our designed com-
pound reward is aligned better with human beings
than commonly used metrics.

3.3.3 Further Evaluation of the Dialogue
Strategy

The PersonaChat dataset is also employed by the
ConvAI2 challenge (Dinan et al., 2019a), where
the team Lost in Conversation obtained the best
performance. The network of Lost in Conversa-
tion involves 12 transformer layers, which requires
extra training data in addition to PersonaChat. For
fair comparison, our dialogue strategy is also im-
plemented with the same number of transformer
layers and training settings used by Lost in Con-
versation. The comparison is summarized in Table
5, which verifies the superiority of our proposed
method over the advanced transformer network.

4 Related Work

Our work is related with knowledge grounded
response generation and multi-turn conversation
with reinforcement learning.

As conventional Seq2Seq (Vinyals and Le,
2015) tends to generate general and dull re-



5390

sponses, some knowledge grounded approaches
have been introduced to increase the informative-
ness with extra knowledge. MemNet (Ghazvinine-
jad et al., 2018) encodes factual texts into memory
and decodes via attention mechanism for informa-
tive generation. CCM (Zhou et al., 2018) relies on
structured knowledge to generate rich-information
response. In Lian et al. (2019), the posterior distri-
bution is estimated and accurate knowledge is se-
lected to boost informative generation. However,
without thorough consideration and control on the
knowledge utilization in multi-turn conversations,
the above approaches are prone to produce repeti-
tive and incoherent utterances.

The technique of reinforcement learning has
been applied to multi-turn dialogue systems in
several scenarios. In RL-DG (Li et al., 2016b),
three rewards are defined and combined together
to boost diverse response generation. Due to a
lack of effective control on knowledge utilization,
RL-DG is unable to express extensive information
during conversations. As RL-DG relies on the re-
inforcement signal to update all components in the
dialogue system, including decoder, it suffers from
poor linguistic quality. In Yao et al. (2018), re-
inforcement learning is employed to plan a cue
word (topic) path for a dialogue, where the cue
word at t-th turn will assist the corresponding
response generation. Different from these chit-
chat approaches, our dialogue generation is con-
ducted under the objective of facilitating effec-
tive information exchange and letting both partici-
pates know more about each. With judiciously de-
sign of evaluation metrics, our compound reward
is aligned well with human beings and provides
meaningful reinforcement signal to evolve the di-
alogue strategy.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, a novel Generation-Evaluation
framework is proposed for informative and coher-
ent multi-turn dialogue generation. Knowledge
grounded conversations are generated under the
dialogue strategy, which is able to continuously
evolve via reinforcement learning with the com-
pound reward. Comprehensive experimental re-
sults demonstrate that the proposed method ob-
tains superior performances than the other state-
of-the-art methods on both automatic measure-
ments and human evaluations.

In the future, our work can be potentially im-

proved by enriching the assessments with more
fine-grained criteria, which can fully integrate
turn-level cohesion and dialogue-level coherence.
We will also explore to make full use of knowl-
edge to guide the selection of policy strategies for
multi-turn conversation.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the ACL reviewers for
their constructive suggestions and Jinhua Peng,
Chaotao Chen, Min Xie for the helpful discus-
sions. This work was supported by the Natural
Science Foundation of China (No.61533018).

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-

gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.

Jacob Benesty, Jingdong Chen, Yiteng Huang, and Is-
rael Cohen. 2009. Pearson correlation coefficient.
In Noise reduction in speech processing, pages 1–4.
Springer.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Dzmitry Bah-
danau, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. On the proper-
ties of neural machine translation: Encoder–decoder
approaches. In Proceedings of Eighth Workshop on
Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Trans-
lation, pages 103–111.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.

Emily Dinan, Varvara Logacheva, Valentin Malykh,
Alexander Miller, Kurt Shuster, Jack Urbanek,
Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, Iulian Serban, Ryan
Lowe, et al. 2019a. The second conversational
intelligence challenge (convai2). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.00098.

Emily Dinan, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Angela
Fan, Michael Auli, and Jason Weston. 2019b. Wiz-
ard of wikipedia: Knowledge-powered conversa-
tional agents. International Conference on Learning
Representations.

Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei
Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng Gao, Wen-tau Yih, and
Michel Galley. 2018. A knowledge-grounded neural
conversation model. In Thirty-Second AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence.

Po-Sen Huang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng,
Alex Acero, and Larry Heck. 2013. Learning deep
structured semantic models for web search using
clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM



5391

international conference on Conference on informa-
tion & knowledge management, pages 2333–2338.
ACM.

Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann Dauphin, Devi Parikh,
and Dhruv Batra. 2017. Deal or no deal? end-to-end
learning of negotiation dialogues. In Proceedings of
the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 2443–2453.

Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao,
and Bill Dolan. 2016a. A diversity-promoting ob-
jective function for neural conversation models. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 110–119.

Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky,
Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2016b. Deep rein-
forcement learning for dialogue generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1192–
1202.

Yanran Li, Hui Su, Xiaoyu Shen, Wenjie Li, Ziqiang
Cao, and Shuzi Niu. 2017. Dailydialog: A manually
labelled multi-turn dialogue dataset. In Proceedings
of the Eighth International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing, volume 1, pages 986–
995.

Rongzhong Lian, Min Xie, Fan Wang, Jinhua Peng,
and Hua Wu. 2019. Learning to select knowledge
for response generation in dialog systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.04911.

Chia-Wei Liu, Ryan Lowe, Iulian Serban, Mike Nose-
worthy, Laurent Charlin, and Joelle Pineau. 2016.
How not to evaluate your dialogue system: An em-
pirical study of unsupervised evaluation metrics for
dialogue response generation. In Proceedings of the
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 2122–2132.

Abigail See, Peter J Liu, and Christopher D Manning.
2017. Get to the point: Summarization with pointer-
generator networks. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, volume 1, pages 1073–1083.

Lifeng Shang, Zhengdong Lu, and Hang Li. 2015.
Neural responding machine for short-text conversa-
tion. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing, volume 1, pages 1577–1586.

Alessandro Sordoni, Yoshua Bengio, Hossein Vahabi,
Christina Lioma, Jakob Grue Simonsen, and Jian-
Yun Nie. 2015. A hierarchical recurrent encoder-
decoder for generative context-aware query sugges-
tion. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International
on Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement, pages 553–562. ACM.

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason Weston, Rob Fergus, et al.
2015. End-to-end memory networks. In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pages
2440–2448.

Zhaopeng Tu, Zhengdong Lu, Yang Liu, Xiaohua Liu,
and Hang Li. 2016. Modeling coverage for neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, volume 1, pages 76–85.

Oriol Vinyals and Quoc Le. 2015. A neural conversa-
tional model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05869.

Yu Wu, Wei Wu, Chen Xing, Ming Zhou, and Zhou-
jun Li. 2017. Sequential matching network: A
new architecture for multi-turn response selection
in retrieval-based chatbots. In Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, volume 1, pages 496–505.

Lili Yao, Ruijian Xu, Chao Li, Dongyan Zhao, and Rui
Yan. 2018. Chat more if you like: Dynamic cue
words planning to flow longer conversations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.07631.

Denis Yarats and Mike Lewis. 2018. Hierarchical text
generation and planning for strategic dialogue. In
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 80, pages 5591–5599.

Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Per-
sonalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you
have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 2204–2213.

Tiancheng Zhao, Ran Zhao, and Maxine Eskenazi.
2017. Learning discourse-level diversity for neural
dialog models using conditional variational autoen-
coders. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, volume 1, pages 654–664.

Hao Zhou, Tom Young, Minlie Huang, Haizhou Zhao,
Jingfang Xu, and Xiaoyan Zhu. 2018. Com-
monsense knowledge aware conversation generation
with graph attention. In Proceedings of the 27th
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 4623–4629.


