



















































A Just and Comprehensive Strategy for Using NLP to Address Online Abuse


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 3658–3666
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

3658

A Just and Comprehensive Strategy for
Using NLP to Address Online Abuse

David Jurgens
University of Michigan
School of Information

jurgens@umich.edu

Eshwar Chandrasekharan
Georgia Tech

School of Interactive Computing
eshwar3@gatech.edu

Libby Hemphill
University of Michigan
School of Information
libbyh@umich.edu

Abstract

Online abusive behavior affects millions and
the NLP community has attempted to mitigate
this problem by developing technologies to de-
tect abuse. However, current methods have
largely focused on a narrow definition of abuse
to detriment of victims who seek both vali-
dation and solutions. In this position paper,
we argue that the community needs to make
three substantive changes: (1) expanding our
scope of problems to tackle both more subtle
and more serious forms of abuse, (2) develop-
ing proactive technologies that counter or in-
hibit abuse before it harms, and (3) reframing
our effort within a framework of justice to pro-
mote healthy communities.

1 Introduction

Online platforms have the potential to enable sub-
stantial, prolonged, and productive engagement
for many people. Yet, the lived reality on social
media platforms falls far short of this potential
(Papacharissi, 2004). In particular, the promise of
social media has been hindered by antisocial, abu-
sive behaviors such as harassment, hate speech,
trolling, and the like. Recent surveys indicate that
abuse happens much more frequently than many
people suspect (40% of Internet users report be-
ing the subject of online abuse at some point),
and members of underrepresented groups are tar-
geted even more often (Herring et al., 2002; Drake,
2014; Anti-Defamation League, 2019).

The NLP community has responded by de-
veloping technologies to identify certain types
of abuse and facilitating automatic or computer-
assisted content moderation. Current technol-
ogy has primarily focused on overt forms of abu-
sive language and hate speech, without consid-
ering both (i) the success and failure of tech-
nology beyond getting the classification correct,
and (ii) the myriad forms that abuse can take.

Risk of Physical Danger
Fr

eq
ue

nc
y

Hate 
speech

Insults

Condescension

Microagression

Physical 
Threats Doxxing

Promoting
Self Harm

Figure 1: Abusive behavior online falls along a spec-
trum, and current approaches focus only on a narrow
range (shown in red text), ignoring nearby problems.
Impact comes from both the frequency (on left) and
real-world consequences (on right) of behaviors. This
figure illustrates the spectrum of online abuse in an
hypothetical manner, with its non-exhaustive examples
inspired from prior surveys of online experiences (Dug-
gan, 2017; Salminen et al., 2018).

As Figure 1 shows, a large spectrum of abu-
sive behavior exists—some with life-threatening
consequences—much of which is currently unad-
dressed by language technologies. Explicitly hate-
ful speech is just one tool of hate, and related tac-
tics such as rape threats, gaslighting, First Amend-
ment panic, and veiled insults are effectively em-
ployed both off- and online to silence, scare, and
exclude participants from what should be inclu-
sive, productive discussions (Filipovic, 2007).

In this position paper, we argue that to pro-
mote healthy online communities, three changes
are needed. First, the NLP community needs to
rethink and expand what constitutes abuse. Sec-
ond, current methods are almost entirely reactive
to abuse, entailing that harm occurs. Instead, the
community needs to develop proactive technolo-
gies that assist authors, moderators, and platform
owners in preventing abuse before it occurs. Fi-
nally, we argue that both of these threads point to
a need for a broad re-aligning of our community
goals towards justice, rather than simply the elim-



3659

ination of abusive behavior. In arguing for these
changes, we outline how each effort offers new
challenging NLP tasks that have concrete benefits.

2 Rethinking What Constitutes Abuse

The classifications we adopt and computation-
ally enforce have real and lasting consequences
by defining both what is and what is not abuse
(Bowker and Star, 2000). Abusive behavior is
an omnibus term that often includes harassment,
threats, racial slurs, sexism, unexpected porno-
graphic content, and insults—all of which can
be directed at other users or at whole communi-
ties (Davidson et al., 2017; Nobata et al., 2016).
However, NLP has largely considered a far nar-
rower scope of what constitutes abuse through its
selection of which types of behavior to recog-
nize (Waseem et al., 2017; Schmidt and Wiegand,
2017; Fortuna and Nunes, 2018). We argue that
NLP needs to expand its computational efforts to
recognize two additional general types of abuse:
(a) infrequent and physically dangerous abuse, and
(b) more common but subtle abuse. Additionally,
we need to develop methods that respect commu-
nity norms in classification decisions. These cate-
gories of abuse and the importance of community
norms have been noted elsewhere (Liu et al., 2018;
Guberman and Hemphill, 2017; Salminen et al.,
2018; Blackwell et al., 2017) but have not yet re-
ceived the same level of attention in NLP.

Who has a right to speak and in what manner are
subjective decisions that are guided by social rela-
tionships (Foucault, 1972; Noble, 2018), and the
specific choices our algorithms make about what
speech to allow and what to silence have pow-
erful effects. For instance, rejecting behavior as
not being abusive because it is outside the scope
of our classification can cause substantial harm to
victims (Blackwell et al., 2017), tacitly involving
the NLP community in algorithmic bias that sanc-
tions certain forms of abuse. Thus, categorization
is particularly thorny: a broad categorization is
likely too computationally inefficient, yet a narrow
categorization risks further marginalizing affected
community members and can lead to lasting harm.
Following, we outline three key directions for the
community to expand its definitions.

2.1 Physically Threatening Online Abuse

We outline three computational challenges related
to infrequent but overt physically-manifesting

abuse that NLP could be applied to solve. First,
such behaviors do not necessarily adopt the lan-
guage of hate speech or more common forms of
hate speech and may in some contexts appear in-
nocuous but are clearly dangerous in others. For
example, posting a phone number to call could
be acceptable if one is encouraging others to call
their political representative, yet would be a seri-
ous breach of privacy (doxxing) if posted as part of
a public harassment campaign. Similarly, declara-
tions of “keep up the weight loss!” may be positive
in a dieting community, yet reinforce dangerous
behavior in a pro-anorexia community. Speech
that in isolation appears offensive, such as impo-
liteness or racial slurs, may serve pro-social func-
tions such as promoting intimacy (Culpeper, 1996)
or showing camaraderie (Allan, 2015).

Second, behaviors such as swatting, human traf-
ficking, or pedophilia have all occurred on pub-
lic social media platforms (Jaffe, 2016; Latonero,
2011; Holt et al., 2010). However, methods have
yet to be developed for recognizing when users are
engaging in these behaviors, which may involve
coded language, and require recognizing these al-
ternative forms. Current approaches for learning
new explicitly-hateful symbols could be adapted
to this task (e.g., Roy, 2016; Gao et al., 2017).

Third, online platforms have been used to in-
cite mobs of people to violence (Siegel, 2015).
These efforts often use incendiary fake news that
plays upon factional rivalries (Samory and Mitra,
2018). Abusive language detection methods can
build upon recent advances at detecting fake news
to identify content-sharing likely to lead to vio-
lence (McLaughlin, 2018; Oshikawa et al., 2018).

2.2 Subtle Abuse

Many forms of abusive behavior are linguistically
subtle and implicit. Behaviors such as condescen-
sion, minimization (e.g., “your situation isn’t that
bad”), benevolent stereotyping, and microagres-
sions are frequently experienced by members of
minority social groups (Sue et al., 2007; Glick and
Fiske, 2001). While subtle, such abuse can still
be as emotionally harmful as overt abuse to some
individuals (Sue, 2010; Nadal et al., 2014). The
NLP community has two clear paths for growth
into this area.

First, although recognized within the larger
NLP abuse typology (Waseem et al., 2017), only a
handful of approaches have attempted these prob-



3660

lems, such as identifying benevolent sexism (Jha
and Mamidi, 2017), and new methods must be de-
veloped to identify the implicit signals. Successful
approaches will likely require advances in natu-
ral language understanding, as the abuse requires
reasoning about the implications of the proposi-
tions. A notable example of such an approach is
Dinakar et al. (2012) who extract implicit assump-
tions in statements and use common sense reason-
ing to identify social norm violations that would
be considered insults.

Second, new methods should identify dispar-
ity in treatment of social groups. For exam-
ple, in a study of the respectfulness of police
language, Voigt et al. (2017) found that officers
were consistently less likely to use respectful lan-
guage with black community members than with
white community members—a disparity in a pos-
itive social dimension. As NLP solutions have
been developed for other social dimensions of
language such as politeness (Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil et al., 2013; Munkova et al., 2013; Chhaya
et al., 2018) and formality (Brooke et al., 2010;
Sheikha and Inkpen, 2011; Pavlick and Tetreault,
2016), these methods could be readily adapted for
identifying such systematic bias for additional so-
cial categories and settings.

2.3 Community Norms Need to be Respected

Social norms are rules and standards that are un-
derstood by members of a group, and that guide
and constrain social behavior without the force of
laws (Triandis, 1994; Cialdini and Trost, 1998).
Norms can be nested, in that they can be adopted
from the general social context (e.g., use of pejo-
rative adjectives are rude), and more general in-
ternet comment etiquette (e.g., using all caps is
equivalent to shouting). Yet, norms for what is
considered acceptable can vary significantly from
one community to another, making it challenging
to build one abuse detection system that works for
all communities (Chandrasekharan et al., 2018).

Current NLP methods are largely context- and
norm-agnostic, which leads to situations where
content is removed unnecessarily when deemed
inappropriate (i.e., false positives), eroding com-
munity trust in the use of computational tools to
assist in moderation. A common failure mode for
sociotechnical interventions like automated mod-
eration is failing to understand the online com-
munity where they are being deployed (Krishna,

2018). Such community-specific norms and con-
text are important to take into account, as NLP re-
searchers are doubling down on context-sensitive
approaches to define (e.g., Chandrasekharan and
Gilbert, 2019) and detect abuse (e.g., Gao and
Huang, 2017).

However, not all community norms are so-
cially acceptable within the broader world. Even
behavior considered harmful in one community
might be celebrated in another, e.g., Reddit’s
r/fatpeoplehate (Chandrasekharan et al., 2017),
and Something Awful Forums (Pater et al., 2014).
The existence of problematic normative behaviors
within certain atypical online communities poses
a challenge to abuse detection systems. Fraser
(1990) notes that when a public space is governed
by a dominant group, its norms about participation
end up perpetuating inequalities. One approach to
address this challenge would be to work closely
with the different stakeholders involved in online
governance, like platform administrators, policy
makers, users and moderators. This will enable
the development of solutions that cater to a wider
range of expectations around moderating abusive
behaviors on the platform, especially when deal-
ing with deviant communities.

2.4 Challenges for Creating New NLP
Shared Tasks on Abusive Behavior

Shared tasks have long been an NLP tradition
for establishing evaluating metrics, defining data
guidelines, and, more broadly, bringing together
researchers. The broad nature of abusive behavior
creates significant challenges for the shared task
paradigm. Here, we outline three opportunities
for new shared tasks in this area. First, new NLP
shared tasks should develop annotation guidelines
accurately define what constitutes abusive behav-
ior in the target community. Recent works have
begun to make progress in this area by modeling
the context in which a comment is made through
user and community-level features (Qian et al.,
2018; Mishra et al., 2018; Ribeiro et al., 2018),
yet often the norms in these settings are implicit
making it difficult to transfer the techniques and
models to other settings. As one potential solu-
tion, Chandrasekharan et al. (2018) studied com-
munity norms on Reddit in a large-scale, data-
driven manner, and released a dataset of over 40K
removed comments from Reddit labeled according
to the specific type of norm being violated (Chan-



3661

drasekharan and Gilbert, 2019).
Second, new NLP shared tasks must address

the data scarcity faced by abuse detection research
while minimizing harm caused by the data. Con-
stant exposure to abusive content has been found
to negatively and substantially affect the mental
health of moderators and users (Roberts, 2014;
Gillespie, 2018; Saha et al., 2019). However, la-
beled ground truth data for building and evaluating
classifiers is hard to obtain because platforms typ-
ically do not share moderated content due to pri-
vacy, ethical and public relations concerns. One
possibility for significant progress is to work with
platform administrators and stakeholders to make
proprietary data available as private test sets on
platforms like Codalab, thereby keeping annota-
tions in line with community norms and still al-
lowing researchers to evaluate on real behavior.

Third, tasks must clearly define who is the end-
user of the classification labels. For example, will
moderators use the system to triage abusive con-
tent, or is the goal to automatically remove abu-
sive content? Current solutions are often trained
and evaluated in a static manner, only using pre-
existing data; whether these solutions are effective
upon deployment remains relatively unexplored.
Evaluation must go beyond just traditional mea-
sures of performance like precision and recall, and
instead begin optimizing for metrics like reduction
in moderator effort, speed of response, targeted re-
call for severe types of abuse, moderator trust and
fairness in predictions.

3 Proactive Approaches for Abuse

Existing computational approaches to handle abu-
sive language are primarily reactive and intervene
only after abuse has occurred. A complementary
approach is developing proactive technologies that
prevent the harm from occurring in the first place,
and we motivate three proactive computational ap-
proaches to prevent abuse here.

First, bystanders can have a profound effect on
the course of an interaction by steering the direc-
tion of the conversation away from abuse (Markey,
2000; Dillon and Bushman, 2015). Prior work
has used experimenter-based intervention but a
substantial opportunity exists to operationalize
these interventions through computational means.
Munger (2017) developed a simple, but effective,
computational intervention for the use of toxic
language (the n-word), where a human-looking

bot account would reply with a fixed comment
about the harm such language caused and an ap-
peal to empathy, leading to long-term behavior
change in the offenders. Identifying how to best
respond to abusive behavior—or whether to re-
spond at all—are important computational next
steps for this NLP strategy and one that likely
needs to be done in collaboration with researchers
from fields such as Psychology. Prior work has
shown counter speech to be effective for limit-
ing the effects of hate speech (Schieb and Preuss,
2016; Mathew et al., 2018; Stroud and Cox, 2018).
Wright et al. (2017) notes that real-world exam-
ples of bystanders intervening can be found on-
line, thereby providing a potential source of train-
ing data but methods are needed to reliably iden-
tify such counter speech examples.

Second, interventions that occur after a point of
escalation may have little positive effect in some
circumstances. For example, when two individu-
als have already begun insulting one another, both
have already become upset and must lose face to
reconcile (Rubin et al., 1994). At this point, de-
escalation may prevent further abuse but does lit-
tle for restoring the situation to a constructive dia-
log (Gottman, 1999). However, interventions that
occur before the point of abuse can serve to shift
the conversation. Recent work has shown that it
is possible to predict whether a conversation will
become toxic on Wikipedia (Zhang et al., 2018)
and whether bullying will occur on Instagram (Liu
et al., 2018). These predictable abuse trajectories
open the door to developing new models for pre-
emptive interventions that directly mitigate harm.

Third, messages that are not intended as offen-
sive create opportunities to nudge authors towards
correcting their text if the offense is pointed out.
This strategy builds upon recent work on explain-
able ML for identifying which parts of a mes-
sage are offensive (Carton et al., 2018; Noever,
2018), and work on paraphrase and style transfer
for suggesting an appropriate inoffensive alterna-
tive (Santos et al., 2018; Prabhumoye et al., 2018).
For example, parts of a message could be para-
phrased to adjust the level of politeness in order
to minimize any cumulative disparity towards one
social group (Sennrich et al., 2016).

4 Justice Frameworks for NLP

Martin Luther King Jr. wrote that the biggest ob-
stacle to Black freedom is the “white moderate,



3662

who is more devoted to ‘order’ than to justice,
who prefers a negative peace which is the absence
of tension to a positive peace which is the pres-
ence of justice” (King, 1963). Analogously, by fo-
cusing only on classifying individual unacceptable
speech acts, NLP risks being the same kind of ob-
stacle as the white moderate: Instead of seeking
the absence of certain types of speech, we should
seek the presence of equitable participation. We
argue that NLP should consider supporting three
types of justice—social justice, restorative justice,
and procedural justice—that describe (i) what ac-
tions are allowed and encouraged, (ii) how wrong-
doing should be handled, and (iii) what procedures
should be followed.

First, the capabilities approach to social justice
focuses on what actions people can do within a so-
cial setting (Sen, 2011; Nussbaum, 2003) and pro-
vides a useful framework for thinking about what
justice online could look like. Nussbaum (2003)
provides a set of 10 fundamental capabilities for
a just society, such as the ability to express emo-
tion and to have an affiliation. These capabili-
ties provide a blueprint for articulating the val-
ues and opportunities an online community pro-
vides: Instead of a negative articulation—an ever-
growing list of prohibited behaviors—we should
use a positive phrasing (e.g., “you will be able
to”) of capabilities in an online community. Such
effort naturally extends our proposal for detect-
ing community-specific abuse to one of promot-
ing community norms. Accordingly, NLP tech-
nologies can be developed to identify positive be-
haviors and ensure individuals are able to fulfill
these capabilities. Several recent works have made
strides in this direction by examining positive be-
haviors such as how constructive conversations
are (Kolhatkar and Taboada, 2017; Napoles et al.,
2017), whether dialog on contentious topics can
exist without devolving into squabbling (Tan et al.,
2016), or the level of support given between com-
munity members (Wang and Jurgens, 2018).

Second, once we have adequately articulated
what people in a community should be able to
do, we must address how the community han-
dles transgressions. The notion of restorative jus-
tice is a useful theoretical tool for thinking about
how wrongdoing should be handled. Restorative
justice theory emphasizes repair and uses a pro-
cess in which stakeholders, including victims and
transgressors, decide together on consequences.

A restorative process may produce a punishment,
such as banning, but can include consequences
such as apology and reconciliation (Braithwaite,
2002). Just responses consider the emotions of
both perpetrators and victims in designing the
right response (Sherman, 2003). A key problem
here is identifying which community norm is vio-
lated and NLP technologies can be introduced to
aid this process of elucidating violations through
classification or use of explainable ML techniques.
Here, NLP can aid all parties (platforms, victims,
and transgressors) in identifying appropriate av-
enues for restorative actions.

Third, just communities also require just means
of addressing wrongdoing. The notion of proce-
dural justice explains that people are more likely
to comply with a community’s rules if they be-
lieve the authorities are legitimate (Tyler and Huo,
2002; Sherman, 2003). For NLP, it means that
our systems for detecting non-compliance must be
transparent and fair. People will comply only if
they accept the legitimacy of both the platform and
the algorithms it employs. Therefore, abuse detec-
tion methods are needed to justify why a particu-
lar act was a violation to build legitimacy; a natu-
ral starting point for NLP in building legitimacy is
recent work from explainable ML (Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Lei et al., 2016; Carton et al., 2018).

5 Conclusion

Abusive behavior online affects a substantial
amount of the population. The NLP community
has proposed computational methods to help mit-
igate this problem, yet has also struggled to move
beyond the most obvious tasks in abuse detec-
tion. Here, we propose a new strategy for NLP
to tackling online abuse in three ways. First, ex-
panding our purview for abuse detection to include
both extreme behaviors and the more subtle—
but still offensive—behaviors like microaggres-
sions and condescension. Second, NLP must de-
velop methods that go beyond reactive identify-
and-delete strategies to one of proactivity that in-
tervenes or nudges individuals to discourage harm
before it occurs. Third, the community should
contextualize its effort inside a broader frame-
work of justice—explicit capabilities, restorative
justice, and procedural justice—to directly support
the end goal of productive online communities.



3663

Acknowledgements

This material is based upon work supported by
the Mozilla Research Grants program and by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1822228.

References
Keith Allan. 2015. When is a slur not a slur? the use

of nigger in ‘pulp fiction’. Lang. Sci., 52:187–199.

Anti-Defamation League. 2019. Online hate and ha-
rassment: The american experience. https://www.
adl.org/onlineharassment. Accessed: 2019-3-4.

Lindsay Blackwell, Jill Dimond, Sarita Schoenebeck,
and Cliff Lampe. 2017. Classification and its con-
sequences for online harassment: Design insights
from heartmob. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction, 1(CSCW):24.

Geoffrey C Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sort-
ing things out: Classification and its consequences.
MIT press.

John Braithwaite. 2002. Restorative Justice & Respon-
sive Regulation. Oxford University Press.

Julian Brooke, Tong Wang, and Graeme Hirst. 2010.
Automatic acquisition of lexical formality. In Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics: Posters, pages 90–98.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Samuel Carton, Qiaozhu Mei, and Paul Resnick. 2018.
Extractive adversarial networks: High-recall expla-
nations for identifying personal attacks in social me-
dia posts. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Eshwar Chandrasekharan and Eric Gilbert. 2019. Hy-
brid approaches to detect comments violating macro
norms on reddit. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03596.

Eshwar Chandrasekharan, Umashanthi Pavalanathan,
Anirudh Srinivasan, Adam Glynn, Jacob Eisenstein,
and Eric Gilbert. 2017. You can’t stay here: The
efficacy of reddit’s 2015 ban examined through
hate speech. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction, 1(CSCW):31.

Eshwar Chandrasekharan, Mattia Samory, Shagun
Jhaver, Hunter Charvat, Amy Bruckman, Cliff
Lampe, Jacob Eisenstein, and Eric Gilbert. 2018.
The internet’s hidden rules: An empirical study
of reddit norm violations at micro, meso, and
macro scales. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction, 2(CSCW):32.

Niyati Chhaya, Kushal Chawla, Tanya Goyal, Projjal
Chanda, and Jaya Singh. 2018. Frustrated, polite,
or formal: Quantifying feelings and tone in email.
In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Compu-
tational Modeling of Peoples Opinions, Personality,
and Emotions in Social Media, pages 76–86.

Robert B Cialdini and Melanie R Trost. 1998. So-
cial influence: Social norms, conformity and com-
pliance. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, and G. Lindzey,
editors, The handbook of social psychology, pages
151–192. McGraw-Hill.

Jonathan Culpeper. 1996. Towards an anatomy of im-
politeness. J. Pragmat., 25(3):349–367.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Moritz Sudhof,
Dan Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec, and Christopher Potts.
2013. A computational approach to politeness with
application to social factors. In Proceedings of the
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).

Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley, Michael Macy,
and Ingmar Weber. 2017. Automated hate speech
detection and the problem of offensive language.
In Eleventh International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media.

Kelly P Dillon and Brad J Bushman. 2015. Unrespon-
sive or un-noticed?: Cyberbystander intervention in
an experimental cyberbullying context. Computers
in Human Behavior, 45:144–150.

Karthik Dinakar, Birago Jones, Catherine Havasi,
Henry Lieberman, and Rosalind Picard. 2012. Com-
mon sense reasoning for detection, prevention, and
mitigation of cyberbullying. ACM Transactions on
Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), 2(3):18.

Bruce Drake. 2014. The darkest side of on-
line harassment: Menacing behavior. Pew
Research Center, http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2015/06/01/the-darkest-side-of-online-
harassment-menacing-behavior/.

Maeve Duggan. 2017. Online harassment 2017.

Jill Filipovic. 2007. Blogging while female: How in-
ternet misogyny parallels “Real-World” harassment.
Yale J. Law Fem., 19(1).

Paula Fortuna and Sérgio Nunes. 2018. A survey on
automatic detection of hate speech in text. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(4):85.

Michel Foucault. 1972. The Archaeology of Knowl-
edge & The Discourse on Language. Pantheon
Books, New York.

Nancy Fraser. 1990. Rethinking the public sphere:
A contribution to the critique of actually existing
democracy. Social Text, (25/26):56–80.

Lei Gao and Ruihong Huang. 2017. Detecting online
hate speech using context aware models. In Pro-
ceedings of RANLP.

Lei Gao, Alexis Kuppersmith, and Ruihong Huang.
2017. Recognizing explicit and implicit hate speech
using a weakly supervised two-path bootstrapping
approach. In Proceedings of ICJNLP.

https://www.adl.org/onlineharassment
https://www.adl.org/onlineharassment


3664

Tarleton Gillespie. 2018. Custodians of the Internet:
Platforms, content moderation, and the hidden de-
cisions that shape social media. Yale University
Press.

Peter Glick and Susan T Fiske. 2001. An ambivalent
alliance: Hostile and benevolent sexism as comple-
mentary justifications for gender inequality. Ameri-
can psychologist, 56(2):109.

John Mordechai Gottman. 1999. The marriage clinic:
A scientifically-based marital therapy. WW Norton
& Company.

Joshua Guberman and Libby Hemphill. 2017. Chal-
lenges in modifying existing scales for detecting ha-
rassment in individual tweets. In Proceedings of
the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences.

Susan Herring, Kirk Job-Sluder, Rebecca Scheckler,
and Sasha Barab. 2002. Searching for safety online:
Managing” trolling” in a feminist forum. The infor-
mation society, 18(5):371–384.

Thomas J Holt, Kristie R Blevins, and Natasha Burkert.
2010. Considering the pedophile subculture online.
Sexual Abuse, 22(1):3–24.

Elizabeth M Jaffe. 2016. Swatting: the new cyberbul-
lying frontier after elonis v. united states. Drake L.
Rev., 64:455.

Akshita Jha and Radhika Mamidi. 2017. When does
a compliment become sexist? analysis and classifi-
cation of ambivalent sexism using twitter data. In
Proceedings of the second workshop on NLP and
computational social science, pages 7–16.

Martin Luther King. 1963. Letter from a birmingham
jail.

Varada Kolhatkar and Maite Taboada. 2017. Construc-
tive language in news comments. In Proceedings
of the First Workshop on Abusive Language Online,
pages 11–17.

Rachael Krishna. 2018. Tumblr launched an algo-
rithm to flag porn and so far it’s just caused chaos,
dec 2018. https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/
krishrach/ tumblr-porn-algorithm-ban.

Mark Latonero. 2011. Human trafficking online: The
role of social networking sites and online classifieds.
Available at SSRN.

Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. 2016.
Rationalizing neural predictions. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Ping Liu, Joshua Guberman, Libby Hemphill, and
Aron Culotta. 2018. Forecasting the presence and
intensity of hostility on instagram using linguistic
and social features. In Twelfth International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media.

Patrick M Markey. 2000. Bystander intervention in
computer-mediated communication. Computers in
Human Behavior, 16(2):183–188.

Binny Mathew, Hardik Tharad, Subham Rajgaria, Pra-
jwal Singhania, Suman Kalyan Maity, Pawan Goyal,
and Animesh Mukherje. 2018. Thou shalt not
hate: Countering online hate speech. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.04409.

Timothy McLaughlin. 2018. How what-
sapp fuels fake news and violence in india.
https://www.wired.com/story/how-whatsapp-fuels-
fake-news-and-violence-in-india/.

Pushkar Mishra, Marco Del Tredici, Helen Yan-
nakoudakis, and Ekaterina Shutova. 2018. Author
profiling for abuse detection. In Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING), pages 1088–1098.

Kevin Munger. 2017. Tweetment effects on the
tweeted: Experimentally reducing racist harass-
ment. Political Behavior, 39(3):629–649.

Dasa Munkova, Michal Munk, and Zuzana Fráterová.
2013. Identifying social and expressive factors in
request texts using transaction/sequence model. In
Proceedings of RANLP, pages 496–503.

Kevin L. Nadal, Katie E. Griffin, Yinglee Wong,
Sahran Hamit, and Morgan Rasmus. 2014. The im-
pact of racial microaggressions on mental health:
Counseling implications for clients of color. Jour-
nal of Counseling and Development, 92(1):57–66.

Courtney Napoles, Joel Tetreault, Aasish Pappu, En-
rica Rosato, and Brian Provenzale. 2017. Finding
good conversations online: The yahoo news anno-
tated comments corpus. In Proceedings of the 11th
Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 13–23.

Chikashi Nobata, Joel Tetreault, Achint Thomas,
Yashar Mehdad, and Yi Chang. 2016. Abusive lan-
guage detection in online user content. In Proceed-
ings of the 25th International Conference on World
Wide Web, WWW ’16, pages 145–153, Republic and
Canton of Geneva, Switzerland. International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Safiya Umoja Noble. 2018. Algorithms of Oppression:
How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. NYU Press.

David Noever. 2018. Machine learning suites
for online toxicity detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.01869.

Martha Nussbaum. 2003. Capabilities as fundamental
entitlements: Sen and social justice. Feminist Eco-
nomics, 9(2-3):33–59.

Ray Oshikawa, Jing Qian, and William Yang Wang.
2018. A survey on natural language process-
ing for fake news detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.00770.

https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/krishrach/tumblr-porn-algorithm-ban
https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/krishrach/tumblr-porn-algorithm-ban
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C18-1093
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C18-1093
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.2014.00130.x
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.2014.00130.x
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.2014.00130.x


3665

Zizi Papacharissi. 2004. Democracy online: Civility,
politeness, and the democratic potential of online
political discussion groups. New media & society,
6(2):259–283.

Jessica Annette Pater, Yacin Nadji, Elizabeth D My-
natt, and Amy S Bruckman. 2014. Just awful
enough: the functional dysfunction of the something
awful forums. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual
ACM conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pages 2407–2410. ACM.

Ellie Pavlick and Joel Tetreault. 2016. An empiri-
cal analysis of formality in online communication.
Transactions of the Association of Computational
Linguistics (TACL), 4(1):61–74.

Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yulia Tsvetkov, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Alan W Black. 2018. Style
transfer through back-translation. In Proceedings of
ACL.

Jing Qian, Mai ElSherief, Elizabeth Belding, and
William Yang Wang. 2018. Leveraging intra-
user and inter-user representation learning for au-
tomated hate speech detection. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL), pages 118–123.

Manoel Horta Ribeiro, Pedro H Calais, Yuri A Santos,
Virgı́lio AF Almeida, and Wagner Meira Jr. 2018.
Characterizing and detecting hateful users on twitter.
In Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2016. Why should i trust you?: Explain-
ing the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings
of KDD, pages 1135–1144. ACM.

Sarah T Roberts. 2014. Behind the screen: The hid-
den digital labor of commercial content modera-
tion. Ph.D. thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.

Jessica Roy. 2016. ”’cuck,”snowflake,”masculinist’:
A guide to the language of the’alt-
right’. http://www.latimes.com/nation/
la-na-pol-alt-right-terminology-20161115-story.
html).LosAngelesTimes.

Jeffrey Z Rubin, Dean G Pruitt, and Sung Hee Kim.
1994. Social conflict: Escalation, stalemate, and
settlement. Mcgraw-Hill Book Company.

Koustuv Saha, Eshwar Chandrasekharan, and Munmun
De Choudhury. 2019. Prevalence and psychological
effects of hateful speech in online college communi-
ties. In WebSci.

Joni Salminen, Hind Almerekhi, Milica Milenković,
Soon-gyo Jung, Jisun An, Haewoon Kwak, and
Bernard J Jansen. 2018. Anatomy of online hate:
developing a taxonomy and machine learning mod-
els for identifying and classifying hate in online

news media. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Interna-
tional AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media
(ICWSM).

Mattia Samory and Tanushree Mitra. 2018. Conspira-
cies online: User discussions in a conspiracy com-
munity following dramatic events. In Twelfth Inter-
national AAAI Conference on Web and Social Me-
dia.

Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Igor Melnyk, and Inkit
Padhi. 2018. Fighting offensive language on social
media with unsupervised text style transfer. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL.

Carla Schieb and Mike Preuss. 2016. Governing hate
speech by means of counterspeech on facebook. In
Proceedings of ICA, pages 1–23.

Anna Schmidt and Michael Wiegand. 2017. A survey
on hate speech detection using natural language pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Workshop on Natural Language Processing for So-
cial Media, pages 1–10.

Amartya Sen. 2011. The Idea of Justice, reprint edi-
tion edition. Belknap Press: An Imprint of Harvard
University Press.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Controlling politeness in neural machine
translation via side constraints. In Proceedings of
NAACL, pages 35–40.

Fadi Abu Sheikha and Diana Inkpen. 2011. Generation
of formal and informal sentences. In Proceedings of
the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, pages 187–193. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Lawrence W Sherman. 2003. Reason for emotion:
Reinventing justice with theories, innovations, and
research—the american society of criminology 2002
presidential address. Criminology, 41(1):1–38.

Alexandra Siegel. 2015. Sectarian Twitter Wars:
Sunni-Shia Conflict and Cooperation in the Digital
Age, volume 20. Carnegie Endowment for Interna-
tional Peace.

Scott R Stroud and William Cox. 2018. The varieties
of feminist counterspeech in the misogynistic on-
line world. In Mediating Misogyny, pages 293–310.
Springer.

Derald Wing Sue. 2010. Microaggressions in Everyday
Life: Race, Gender, and Sexual Orientation. Wiley,
Hoboken, NJ.

Derald Wing Sue, Christina M Capodilupo, Gina C
Torino, Jennifer M Bucceri, Aisha M.B. B. Holder,
Kevin L Nadal, and Marta Esquilin. 2007. Racial
microaggressions in everyday life: Implications
for clinical practice. American Psychologist,
62(4):271–286.

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-2019
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-2019
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-2019
http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-pol-alt-right-terminology-20161115-story.html). Los Angeles Times
http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-pol-alt-right-terminology-20161115-story.html). Los Angeles Times
http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-pol-alt-right-terminology-20161115-story.html). Los Angeles Times
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.4.271
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.4.271
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.4.271


3666

Chenhao Tan, Vlad Niculae, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2016. Win-
ning arguments: Interaction dynamics and persua-
sion strategies in good-faith online discussions. In
Proceedings of the 25th international conference
on world wide web, pages 613–624. International
World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Harry Charalambos Triandis. 1994. Culture and social
behavior. McGraw-Hill New York.

Tom R Tyler and Yuen Huo. 2002. Trust in the Law:
Encouraging Public Cooperation with the Police
and Courts. Russell Sage Foundation.

Rob Voigt, Nicholas P Camp, Vinodkumar Prab-
hakaran, William L Hamilton, Rebecca C Hetey,
Camilla M Griffiths, David Jurgens, Dan Jurafsky,
and Jennifer L Eberhardt. 2017. Language from
police body camera footage shows racial dispari-
ties in officer respect. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(25):6521–6526.

Zijian Wang and David Jurgens. 2018. It’s going to be
okay: Measuring access to support in online com-
munities. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 33–45.

Zeerak Waseem, Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley,
and Ingmar Weber. 2017. Understanding abuse: A
typology of abusive language detection subtasks. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Abusive Lan-
guage.

Lucas Wright, Derek Ruths, Kelly P Dillon, Haji Mo-
hammad Saleem, and Susan Benesch. 2017. Vectors
for counterspeech on twitter. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Abusive Language Online, pages
57–62.

Justine Zhang, Jonathan P Chang, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, Lucas Dixon, Yiqing Hua, Nithum
Thain, and Dario Taraborelli. 2018. Conversations
gone awry: Detecting early signs of conversational
failure. In Proceedings of ACL.


