



















































Persuasion for Good: Towards a Personalized Persuasive Dialogue System for Social Good


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5635–5649
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

5635

Persuasion for Good:
Towards a Personalized Persuasive Dialogue System for Social Good

Xuewei Wang∗1, Weiyan Shi∗2, Richard Kim2, Yoojung Oh2
Sijia Yang3, Jingwen Zhang2 and Zhou Yu2

1 Zhejiang University,2 University of California, Davis,3 University of Pennsylvania

cheriewang@zju.edu.cn,{wyshi, khgkim, yjeoh}@ucdavis.edu,
sijia.yang@asc.upenn.edu,{jwzzhang, joyu}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract

Developing intelligent persuasive conversa-
tional agents to change people’s opinions and
actions for social good is the frontier in ad-
vancing the ethical development of automated
dialogue systems. To do so, the first step is to
understand the intricate organization of strate-
gic disclosures and appeals employed in hu-
man persuasion conversations. We designed
an online persuasion task where one partici-
pant was asked to persuade the other to do-
nate to a specific charity. We collected a
large dataset with 1,017 dialogues and anno-
tated emerging persuasion strategies from a
subset. Based on the annotation, we built
a baseline classifier with context information
and sentence-level features to predict the 10
persuasion strategies used in the corpus. Fur-
thermore, to develop an understanding of per-
sonalized persuasion processes, we analyzed
the relationships between individuals’ demo-
graphic and psychological backgrounds in-
cluding personality, morality, value systems,
and their willingness for donation. Then, we
analyzed which types of persuasion strategies
led to a greater amount of donation depend-
ing on the individuals’ personal backgrounds.
This work lays the ground for developing a
personalized persuasive dialogue system. 1

1 Introduction

Persuasion aims to use conversational and messag-
ing strategies to change one specific person’s atti-
tude or behavior. Moreover, personalized persua-
sion combines both strategies and user informa-
tion related to the outcome of interest to achieve
better persuasion results (Kreuter et al., 1999;
Rimer and Kreuter, 2006). Simply put, the goal
of personalized persuasion is to produce desired

* Equal contribution.
1The dataset and code are released at https://

gitlab.com/ucdavisnlp/persuasionforgood.

changes by making the information personally rel-
evant and appealing. However, two questions
about personalized persuasion still remain unex-
plored. First, we concern about how personal in-
formation would affect persuasion outcomes. Sec-
ond, we question about what strategies are more
effective considering different user backgrounds
and personalities.

The past few years have witnessed the rapid
development of conversational agents. The pri-
mary goal of these agents is to facilitate task-
completion and human-engagement in practi-
cal contexts (Luger and Sellen, 2016; Bickmore
et al., 2016; Graesser et al., 2014; Yu et al.,
2016b). While persuasive technologies for behav-
ior change have successfully leveraged other sys-
tem features such as providing simulated experi-
ences and behavior reminders (Orji and Moffatt,
2018; Fogg, 2002), the development of automated
persuasive agents remains lagged due to the lack
of synergy between the social scientific research
on persuasion and the computational development
of conversational systems.

In this work, we introduced the foundation work
on building an automatic personalized persuasive
dialogue system. We first collected 1,017 human-
human persuasion conversations (PERSUASION-
FORGOOD) that involved real incentives to par-
ticipants. Then we designed a persuasion strat-
egy annotation scheme and annotated a subset of
the collected conversations. In addition, we came
to classify 10 different persuasion strategies us-
ing Recurrent-CNN with sentence-level features
and dialogue context information. We also an-
alyzed the relations among participants’ demo-
graphic backgrounds, personality traits, value sys-
tems, and their donation behaviors. Lastly, we an-
alyzed what types of persuasion strategies worked
more effectively for what types of personal back-
grounds. These insights will serve as important el-

https://gitlab.com/ucdavisnlp/persuasionforgood
https://gitlab.com/ucdavisnlp/persuasionforgood


5636

ements during our design of the personalized per-
suasive dialogue systems in the next phase.

2 Related Work

In social psychology, the rationale for personal-
ized persuasion comes from the Elaboration Like-
lihood Model (ELM) theory (Petty and Cacioppo,
1986). It argues that people are more likely to en-
gage with persuasive messages when they have the
motivation and ability to process the information.
The core assumption is that persuasive messages
need to be associated with the ways different indi-
viduals perceive and think about the world. Hence,
personalized persuasion is not simply capitalizing
on using superficial personal information such as
name and title in the communication; rather, it
requires a certain degree of understanding of the
individual to craft unique messages that can en-
hance his or her motivation to process and comply
with the persuasive requests (Kreuter et al., 1999;
Rimer and Kreuter, 2006; Dijkstra, 2008).

There has been an increasing interest in persua-
sion detection and prediction recently. Hidey et al.
(2017) presented a two-tiered annotation scheme
to differentiate claims and premises, and differ-
ent persuasion strategies in each of them in an on-
line persuasive forum (Tan et al., 2016). Hidey
and McKeown (2018) proposed to predict persua-
siveness by modelling argument sequence in so-
cial media and showed promising results. Yang
et al. (2019) proposed a hierarchical neural net-
work model to identify persuasion strategies in a
semi-supervised fashion. Inspired by these prior
work in online forums, we present a persuasion
dialogue dataset with user demographic and psy-
chological attributes, and study personalized per-
suasion in a conversational setting.

In the past few years, personalized dialogue sys-
tems have come to people’s attention because user-
targeted personalized dialogue system is able to
achieve better user engagement (Yu et al., 2016a).
For instance, Shi and Yu (2018) exploited user
sentiment information to make dialogue agent
more user-adaptive and effective. But how to
get access to user personal information is a limit-
ing factor in personalized dialogue system design.
Zhang et al. (2018) introduced a human-human
chit-chat dataset with a set of 1K+ personas. In
this dataset, each participant was randomly as-
signed a persona that consists of a few descrip-
tive sentences. However, the brief description of

user persona lacks quantitative analysis of users’
sociodemographic backgrounds and psychologi-
cal characteristics, and therefore is not sufficient
for interaction effect analysis between personali-
ties and dialogue policy preference.

Recent research has advanced the dialogue sys-
tem design on certain negotiation tasks such as
bargain on goods (He et al., 2018; Lewis et al.,
2017). The difference between negotiation and
persuasion lies in their ultimate goal. Negotia-
tion strives to reach an agreement from both sides,
while persuasion aims to change one specific per-
son’s attitude and decision. Lewis et al. (2017)
applied end-to-end neural models with self-play
reinforcement learning to learn better negotiation
strategies. In order to achieve different negotiation
goals, He et al. (2018) decoupled the dialogue act
and language generation which helped control the
strategy with more flexibility. Our work is differ-
ent in that we focus on the domain of persuasion
and personalized persuasion procedure.

Traditional persuasive dialogue systems have
been applied in different fields, such as law (Gor-
don, 1993), car sales (André et al., 2000), intelli-
gent tutoring (Yuan et al., 2008). However, most
of them overlooked the power of personalized de-
sign and didn’t leverage deep learning techniques.
Recently, Lukin et al. (2017) considered person-
ality traits in single-turn persuasion dialogues on
social and political issues. They found that per-
sonality factors can affect belief change, with con-
scientious, open and agreeable people being more
convinced by emotional arguments. However, it’s
difficult to utilize such a single-turn dataset in the
design of multi-turn dialogue systems.

3 Data Collection

We designed an online persuasion task to col-
lect emerging persuasion strategies from human-
human conversations on the Amazon Mechanical
Turk platform (AMT). We utilized ParlAI (Miller
et al., 2017), a python-based platform that enables
dialogue AI research, to assist the data collection.
We picked Save the Children2 as the charity to do-
nate to, because it is one of the most well-known
charity organizations around the world.

Our task consisted of four parts, a pre-task sur-
vey, a persuasion dialogue, a donation confirma-
tion and a post-task survey. Before the conver-
sation began, we asked the participants to com-

2https://www.savethechildren.org/

https://www.savethechildren.org/


5637

Role Utterance Annotation
ER Hello, are you interested in protection of rights of children? Source-related inquiry
EE Yes, definitely. What do you have in mind?

ER There is an organisation called Save the Children and donations are essential to ensure children’s rights to health,education and safety. Credibility appeal

EE Is this the same group where people used to ”sponsor” a child?
ER Here is their website, https://www.savethechildren.org/. Credibility appeal

They help children all around the world. Credibility appeal
For instance, millions of Syrian children have grown up facing the daily threat of violence. Emotion appeal
In the first two months of 2018 alone, 1,000 children were reportedly killed or injured in intensifying violence. Emotion appeal

EE I can’t imagine how terrible it must be for a child to grow up inside a war zone.
ER As you mentioned, this organisation has different programs, and one of them is to ”sponsor” child. Credibility appeal

You choose the location. Credibility appeal
EE Are you connected with the NGO yourself?
ER No, but i want to donate some amount from this survey. Self-modeling

Research team will send money to this organisation. Donation information
EE That sounds great. Does it come from our reward/bonuses?
ER Yes, the amount you want to donate is deducted from your reward. Donation information
EE What do you have in mind?
ER I know that my small donation is not enough, so i am asking you to also donate some small percentage from reward. Proposition of donation
EE I am willing to match your donation.
ER Well, if you go for full 0.30 i will have no moral right to donate less. Self-modeling

EE That is kind of you. My husband and I have a small NGO in Mindanao, Philippines, and it is amazing what a little bitof money can do to make things better.
ER Agree, small amount of money can mean a lot for people in third world countries. Foot-in-the-door

So agreed? We donate full reward each?? Donation confirmation
EE Yes, let’s donate $0.30 each. That’s a whole lot of rice and flour. Or a whole lot of bandages.

Table 1: An example persuasion dialogue. ER and EE refer to the persuader and the persuadee respectively.

plete a pre-task survey to assess their psycho-
logical profile variables. There were four sub-
questionnaires in our survey, the Big-Five person-
ality traits (Goldberg, 1992) (25 questions), the
Moral Foundations endorsement (Graham et al.,
2011) (23 questions), the Schwartz Portrait Value
(10 questions) (Cieciuch and Davidov, 2012), and
the Decision-Making style (4 questions) (Hamil-
ton and Mohammed, 2016). From the pre-task
survey, we obtained a 23-dimension psychological
feature vector where each element is the score of
one characteristic, such as extrovert and agreeable.

Next, we randomly assigned the roles of per-
suader and persuadee to the two participants. The
random assignment helped to eliminate the corre-
lation between the persuader’s persuasion strate-
gies and the targeted persuadee’s characteristics.
In this task, the persuader needed to persuade the
persuadee to donate part of his/her task earning to
the charity, and the persuader could also choose to
donate. Please refer to Fig. 6 and 7 in Appendix
for the data collection interface. For persuaders,
we provided them with tips on different persuasion
strategies along with some example sentences. For
persuadees, they only knew they would talk about
a specific charity in the conversation. Participants
were encouraged to continue the conversation un-
til an agreement was reached. Each participant
was required to complete at least 10 conversational
turns and multiple sentences in one turn were al-
lowed. An example dialogue is shown in Table 1.

After completing the conversation, both the per-

Dataset Statistics
# Dialogues 1,017
# Annotated Dialogues (ANNSET) 300
# Participants 1,285
Avg. donation $0.35
Avg. turns per dialogue 10.43
Avg. words per utterance 19.36
Total unique tokens 8,141
Participants Statistics
Metric Persuader Persuadee
Avg. words per utterance 22.96 15.65
Donated 424 (42%) 545 (54%)
Not donated 593 (58%) 472 (46%)

Table 2: Statistics of PERSUASIONFORGOOD

suader and the persuadee were asked to input the
intended donation amount privately though a text
box. The max amount of donation was the task
payment. After the conversation ended, all par-
ticipants were required to finish a post-survey as-
sessing their sociodemographic backgrounds such
as age and income. We also included several ques-
tions about their engagement in this conversation.

The data collection process lasted for two
months and the statistics of the collected dataset
named PERSUASIONFORGOOD are presented in
Table 2. We observed that on average persuaders
chose to say longer utterances than persuadees
(22.96 tokens compared to 15.65 tokens). During
the data collection phase, we were glad to receive
some positive comments from the workers. Some
mentioned that it was one of the most meaning-
ful tasks they had ever done on the AMT, which



5638

shows an acknowledgement to our task design.

4 Annotation

Category Amount
Logical appeal 325
Emotion appeal 237
Credibility appeal 779
Foot-in-the-door 134
Self-modeling 150
Personal story 91
Donation information 362
Source-related inquiry 167
Task-related inquiry 180
Personal-related inquiry 151
Non-strategy dialogue acts 1737
Total 4313

Table 3: Statistics of persuasion strategies in ANNSET.

After the data collection, we designed an an-
notation scheme to annotate different persua-
sion strategies persuaders used. Content analy-
sis method (Krippendorff, 2004) was employed to
create the annotation scheme. Since our data was
from typing conversation and the task was rather
complicated, we observed that half of the conver-
sation turns contained more than two sentences
with different semantic meanings. So we chose
to annotate each complete sentence instead of the
whole conversation turn.

We also designed a dialogue act annotation
scheme for persuadee’s utterances, shown in Ta-
ble 6 in Appendix, to capture persuadee’s general
conversation behaviors. We also recorded if the
persuadee agreed to donate, and the intended do-
nation amount mentioned in the conversation.

We developed both persuader and persuadee’s
annotation schemes using theories of persuasion
and a preliminary examination of 10 random con-
versation samples. Four research assistants in-
dependently coded 10 conversations, discussed
disagreement, and revised the scheme accord-
ingly. The four coders conducted two iterations of
coding exercises on five additional conversations
and reached an inter-coder reliability of Krippen-
dorff’s alpha of above 0.70 for all categories. Once
the scheme was finalized, each coder separately
coded the rest of the conversations. We named the
300 annotated conversations as the ANNSET.

Annotations for persuaders’ utterances included
diverse argument strategies and task-related non-

persuasive dialogue acts. Specifically, we iden-
tified 10 persuasion strategy categories that can
be divided into two types, 1) persuasive appeal
and 2) persuasive inquiry. Non-persuasive dia-
logue acts included general ones such as greeting,
and task-specific ones such as donation proposi-
tion and confirmation. Please refer to Table 7 in
Appendix for the persuader dialogue act scheme.

The seven strategies below belong to persua-
sive appeal, which tries to change people’s atti-
tudes and decisions through different psychologi-
cal mechanisms.
Logical appeal refers to the use of reasoning and
evidence to convince others. For instance, a per-
suader can convince a persuadee that the donation
will make a tangible positive impact for children
using reasons and facts.
Emotion appeal refers to the elicitation of spe-
cific emotions to influence others. Specifically, we
identified four emotional appeals: 1) telling sto-
ries to involve participants, 2) eliciting empathy,
3) eliciting anger, and 4) eliciting the feeling of
guilt. (Hibbert et al., 2007).
Credibility appeal refers to the uses of creden-
tials and citing organizational impacts to establish
credibility and earn the persuadee’s trust. The in-
formation usually comes from an objective source
(e.g., the organization’s website or other well-
established websites).
Foot-in-the-door refers to the strategy of starting
with small donation requests to facilitate compli-
ance followed by larger requests (Scott, 1977). For
instance, a persuader first asks for a smaller do-
nation and extends the request to a larger amount
after the persuadee shows intention to donate.
Self-modeling refers to the strategy where the per-
suader first indicates his or her own intention to
donate and chooses to act as a role model for the
persuadee to follow.
Personal story refers to the strategy of using
narrative exemplars to illustrate someone’s dona-
tion experiences or the beneficiaries’ positive out-
comes, which can motivate others to follow the ac-
tions.
Donation information refers to providing specific
information about the donation task, such as the
donation procedure, donation range, etc. By pro-
viding detailed action guidance, this strategy can
enhance the persuadee’s self-efficacy and facili-
tates behavior compliance.

The three strategies below belong to persuasive



5639

inquiry, which tries to facilitate more personal-
ized persuasive appeals and to establish better in-
terpersonal relationships by asking questions.
Source-related inquiry asks if the persuadee is
aware of the organization (i.e., the source in our
specific donation task).
Task-related inquiry asks about the persuadee’s
opinion and expectation related to the task, such
as their interests in knowing more about the orga-
nization.
Personal-related inquiry asks about the per-
suadee’s previous personal experiences relevant to
charity donation.

The statistics of the ANNSET are shown in Ta-
ble 3, where we listed the number of times each
persuasion strategy appears. Most of the further
studies are on the ANNSET. Example sentences
for each persuasion strategy are shown in Table 4.

We first explored the distribution of different
strategies across conversation turns. We present
the number of different persuasion strategies at
different conversation turn positions in Fig. 1 (for
persuasive appeal) and Fig. 2 (for persuasive in-
quiry). As shown in Fig. 1, Credibility appeal oc-
curred more at the beginning of the conversations.
In contrast, Donation information occurred more
in the latter part of the conversations. Logical ap-
peal and Emotion appeal share a similar distribu-
tion and also frequently appeared in the middle of
the conversations. The rest of the strategies, Per-
sonal story, Self-modeling and Foot-in-the-door,
are spread out more evenly across the conversa-
tions, compared with the other strategies. For per-
suasive inquiries in Fig. 2, Source-related inquiry
mainly appeared in the first three turns, and the
other two kinds of inquiries have a similar distri-
bution.

Figure 1: Distributions of the seven persuasive appeals
across turns.

Figure 2: Distributions of the three persuasive in-
quiries across turns.

5 Donation Strategy Classification

FC-Layer(50)

Softmax

Context Embedding

will … donateI donation … children.Your

Semantic FC-Layer

Sentiment
embedding
Character
embedding

Turn	Position
embedding

FC-Layer(11)

Max pooling

Sentence Embedding

Figure 3: The hybrid RCNN model combines sentence
embedding, context embedding and sentence-level fea-
tures. “+” represents vector concatenation. The blue
dotted box shows the sentence embedding part. The
orange dotted box shows the context embedding part.
The green dotted box shows the sentence-level features.

In order to build a persuasive dialogue system,
we need to first understand human persuasion pat-
terns and differentiate various persuasion strate-
gies. Therefore, we designed a classifier for the
10 persuasion strategies plus one additional “non-
strategy” class for all the non-strategy dialogue
acts in the ANNSET. We proposed a hybrid RCNN
model which combined the following features, 1)
sentence embedding, 2) context embedding and 3)
sentence-level feature, for the classification. The
model structure is shown in Fig. 3.
Sentence embedding used recurrent convolu-
tional neural network (RCNN), which combined
CNN and RNN to extract both the global and local
semantics, and the recurrent structure may reduce
noise compared to the window-based neural net-
work (Lai et al., 2015). We concatenated the word



5640

Persuasion Strategy Example

Logical appeal Your donation could possible go to this problem and help many young children.You should feel proud of the decision you have made today.

Emotion appeal Millions of children in Syria grow up facing the daily threat of violence.This should make you mad and want to help.

Credibility appeal And the charity is highly rated with many positive rewards.You can find reports associated with the financial information by visiting this link.

Foot-in-the-door And sometimes even a small help is a lot, thinking many others will do the same.By people like you, making a a donation of just $1 a day, you can feed a child for a month.

Self-modeling I will donate to Save the Children myself.I will match your donation.

Personal story I like to give a little money to charity each month.My brother and I replaced birthday gifts with charity donations a few years ago.

Donation information Your donation will be directly deducted from your task payment.The research team will collect all donations and send it to Save the Children.

Source-related inquiry Have you heard of Save the Children?Are you familiar with the organization?

Task-related inquiry Do you want to know the organization more?What do you think of the charity?

Personal-related inquiry Do you have kids?Have you donated to charity before?

Table 4: Example sentences for the 10 persuasion strategies.

embedding and the hidden state of the LSTM as
the sentence embedding st. Next, a linear seman-
tic transformation was applied on st to obtain the
input to a max-pooling layer. Finally, the pooling
layer was used to capture the effective information
throughout the entire sentence.
Context embedding was composed of the previ-
ous persuadee’s utterance. Considering the rela-
tively long context, we used the last hidden state of
the context LSTM as the initial hidden state of the
RCNN. We also experimented with other methods
to extract context and will detail them in Section 6.

We also designed three sentence-level features
to capture meta information other than embed-
dings. We describe them below.
Turn position embedding. According to the pre-
vious analysis, different strategies have different
distributions across conversation turns, so the turn
position may help the strategy classification. We
condensed the turn position information into a 10-
dimension embedding vector.
Sentiment. We also extracted sentiment features
for each sentence using VADER (Gilbert, 2014), a
rule-based sentiment analyzer. It generates nega-
tive, positive, neutral scores from zero to one. It
is interesting to note that for Emotion appeal, the
average negative sentiment score is 0.22, higher
than the average positive sentiment score, 0.10.
It seems negative sentiment words are used more
frequently in Emotion appeal because persuaders
tend to describe sad facts to arouse empathy in
Emotion appeal. In contrast, positive words are

used more frequently in Logical appeal, because
persuaders tend to describe more positive results
from donation when using Logical appeal.
Character embedding. For short text, character
level features can be helpful. Bothe et al. (2018)
utilized character embedding to improve the dia-
logue act classification accuracy. Following Bothe
et al. (2018), we chose the pre-trained multiplica-
tive LSTM (mLSTM) network on 80 million Ama-
zon product reviews to extract 4096-dimension
character-level features (Radford et al., 2017)3.
Given the output character embedding, we applied
a linear transformation layer with output size 50 to
obtain the final character embedding.

6 Experiments

Because human-human typing conversations are
complex, one sentence may belong to multiple
strategy categories; out of the concern for model
simplicity, we chose to predict the most salient
strategy for each sentence. Table 3 shows the
dataset is highly imbalanced, so we used the
macro F1 as the evaluation metric, in addition to
accuracy. We conducted five-fold cross validation,
and used the average scores across folds to
compare the performance of different models. We
set the initial learning rate to be 0.001 and applied
exponential decay every 100 steps. The training
batch size was 32 and all models were trained for
20 epochs. In addition, dropout (Srivastava et al.,

3https://github.com/openai/
generating-reviews-discovering-sentiment

https://github.com/openai/generating-reviews-discovering-sentiment
https://github.com/openai/generating-reviews-discovering-sentiment


5641

2014) with a probability of 0.5 was applied to re-
duce over-fitting. We adopted the 300-dimension
pre-trained FastText (Bojanowski et al., 2017)
as word embedding. The RCNN model used a
single-layer bidirectional LSTM with a hidden
size of 200. We describe two baseline models
below for comparison.

Self-attention BLSTM (BLSTM) only consid-
ers a single-layer bidirectional LSTM with self-
attention mechanism. After finetuning, we set the
attention dimension to be 150.
Convolutional neural network (CNN) uses mul-
tiple convolution kernels to extract textual fea-
tures. A softmax layer was applied in the end to
generate the probability for each category. The
hyperparameters in the original implementation
(Kim, 2014) were used.

6.1 Experimental Results

Models Accuracy Macro F1
Majority vote 18.1% 5.21%
BLSTM + All features 73.4% 57.1%
CNN + All features 73.5% 58.0%
Hybrid RCNN with different features
Sentence only 74.3% 59.0%
Sentence + Context CNN 72.5% 54.5%
Sentence + Context Mean 74.0% 58.5%
Sentence + Context RNN 74.4% 59.3%
Sentence + Context tf-idf 73.5% 57.6%
Sentence + Turn position 73.8% 59.4%
Sentence + Sentiment 73.6% 59.7%
Sentence + Character 74.5% 59.3%
All features 74.8% 59.6%

Table 5: All the features include sentence embedding,
context embedding, turn position embedding, senti-
ment and character embedding. The hybrid RCNN
model with all the features performed the best on the
ANNSET. Baseline models in the upper section also
used all the features but didn’t perform as good as the
hybrid RCNN.

As shown in Table 5, the hybrid RCNN with
all the features (sentence embedding, context em-
bedding, turn position embedding, sentiment and
character embedding) reached the highest accu-
racy (74.8%) and F1 (59.6%). Baseline models
in the upper section of Table 5 also used all the
features but didn’t perform as good as the hy-
brid RCNN. We further performed ablation study
on the hybrid RCNN to discover different fea-
tures’ impact on the model’s performance. We
experimented with four different context embed-
ding methods, 1) CNN, 2) the mean of word em-
beddings, 3) RNN (the output of the RNN was

the RCNN’s initial hidden state), and 4) tf-idf.
We found RNN achieved best result (74.4%) and
F1 (59.3%). The experimental results suggest in-
corporating context improved the model perfor-
mance slightly but not significantly. This may
be because in persuasion conversations, sentences
are relatively long and contain complex semantic
meanings, which makes it hard to encode the con-
text information. This suggests we develop better
methods to extract important semantic meanings
from the context in the future. Besides, all three
sentence-level features improved the model’s F1.
Although the sentiment feature only has three di-
mensions, it still increased the model’s F1 score.

To further analyze the results, we plotted the
confusion matrix for the best model in Fig. 5 in
Appendix. We found the main error comes from
the misclassification of Personal story. Sometimes
sentences of Personal story were misclassified as
Emotion appeal, because a subjective story can
contain sentimental words, which may confuse the
model. Besides, Task-related inquiry was hard to
classify due to the diversity of inquiries. In ad-
dition, Foot-in-the-door strategy can be mistaken
for Logical appeal, because when using Foot-in-
the-door, people would sometimes make logical
arguments about the small donation, such as de-
scribing the tangible effects of the small donation.
For example, the sentence “Even five cents can
help save children’s life.” also mentioned the ben-
efits from the small donation. Besides, certain sen-
tences of Logical appeal may contain emotional
words, which led to the confusion between Logi-
cal appeal and Emotion appeal. In summary, due
to the complex nature of human-human typing di-
alogues, one sentence may convey multiple mean-
ings, which led to misclassifications.

7 Donation Outcome Analysis

After identifying and categorizing the persuasion
strategies, the next step is to analyze the fac-
tors that contribute to the final donation deci-
sion. Specifically, understanding the effects of
the persuader’s strategies, the persuadee’s per-
sonal backgrounds, and their interactions on dona-
tion can greatly enhance the conversational agent’s
capability to engage in personalized persuasion.
Given the skewed distribution of intended dona-
tion amount from the persuadees, the outcome
variable was dichotomized to indicate whether
they donated or not (1 = making any amount of



5642

donation and 0 = none). Duplicate survey data
from participants who did the task more than once
were removed before the analysis, and for such du-
plicates, only data from the first completed task
were retained. This pruning process resulted in
an analytical sample of 252 unique persuadees in
the ANNSET. All measured demographic vari-
ables and psychological profile variables were en-
tered into logistic models. Results are presented in
Section A.2 in Appendix. Our analysis consisted
of three parts, including the effects of persuasion
strategies on the donation outcome, the effects of
persuadees’ psychological backgrounds on the do-
nation outcome, and the interaction effects among
all strategies and personal backgrounds.

7.1 Persuasion Strategies and Donation
Overall, among the 10 persuasion strategies, Do-
nation information showed a significant positive
effect on the donation outcome (p < 0.05), as
shown in Table 8 in Appendix. This confirms
previous research which showed efficacy informa-
tion increases persuasion. More specifically, be-
cause Donation information gives the persuadee
step-by-step instructions on how to donate, which
makes the donation procedure more accessible and
as a result, increases the donation probability. An
alternative explanation is that persuadees with a
strong donation intention were more likely to ask
about the donation procedure, and therefore Do-
nation information appeared in most of the suc-
cessful dialogues resulting in a donation. These
compounding factors led us to further analyze the
effects of psychological backgrounds on the dona-
tion outcome.

7.2 Psychological Backgrounds and Donation
We collected data on demographics and four types
of psychological characteristics, including moral
foundation, decision style, Big-Five personality,
and Schwartz Portrait Value, to analyze what types
of people are more likely to donate and respond
differently to different persuasive strategies.

Results of the analysis on demographic char-
acteristics in Table 11 show that the donation
probability increases as the participant’s age
increases (p < 0.05). This may be due to the fact
that older participants may have more money and
may have children themselves, and therefore are
more willing to contribute to the children’s char-
ity. The Big-Five personality analysis shows that
more agreeable participants are more likely to

donate (p < 0.001); the moral foundation anal-
ysis shows that participants who care for oth-
ers more have a higher probability for donation
(p < 0.001); the portrait value analysis shows that
participants who endorse benevolence more are
also more likely to donate (p < 0.05). These re-
sults suggest people who are more agreeable, car-
ing about others, and endorsing benevolence are in
general more likely to comply with the persuasive
request (Hoover et al., 2018; Graham et al., 2013).
On the decision style side, participants who are
rational decision makers are more likely to do-
nate (p < 0.05), whereas intuitive decision mak-
ers are less likely to donate.

Another observation reveals participants’ in-
consistent donation behaviors. We found that
some participants promised to donate during the
conversation but reduced the donation amount or
didn’t donate at all in the end. In order to analyze
these inconsistent behaviors, we selected the 236
persudees who agreed to donate in the ANNSET.
Among these persuadees, 11% (22) individuals re-
duced the actual donation amount and 43% (88)
individuals did not donate. Also, there are 3%
(7) individuals donated more than they mentioned
in the conversation. We fitted the Big-Five traits
score and the inconsistent behavior with a logistic
regression model. The results in Table 9 in Ap-
pendix show that people who are more agreeable
are more likely to match their words with their do-
nation behaviors. But since the dataset is relatively
small, the result is not significant and we should
caution against overinterpreting these effects until
we obtain more annotated data.

7.3 Interaction Effects of Persuasion
Strategies and Psychological
Backgrounds

To provide the necessary training data to build a
personalized persuasion agent, we are interested
in assessing not only the main effects of persua-
sion strategies employed by human persuaders,
but more importantly, the presence of (or lack of)
heterogeneity of such main effects on different in-
dividuals. In the case where the heterogeneous ef-
fects were absent, the task of building the persua-
sive agent would be simplified because it wouldn’t
need to pay any attention to the targeted audience’s
attribute. Given the evidence shown in personal-
ized persuasion, our expectation was to observe
variations in the effects of persuasion strategies



5643

conditioned upon the persuadee’s personal traits,
especially the four psychological profile variables
identified in the previous analysis (i.e., agreeable-
ness, endorsement of care and benevolence, and
rational decision making style).

Table 12, 13 and 10 present evidence for het-
erogeneity, conditioned upon the Big-Five person-
ality traits, the moral foundation scores and the
decision style. For example, although Source-
related inquiry does not show a significant main
effect averaged across all participants, it showed
a significant positive effect on the donation prob-
ability of participants who are more open (p <
0.05). This suggests when encountering more
open persuadees, the agent can initiate Source-
related inquiry more.

Besides, Personal-related inquiry significantly
increases the donation probability of people
who endorse freedom and care (p < 0.05), but
is negatively associated with the donation prob-
ability of people who endorse fairness and au-
thority. Given the relatively small dataset, we
caution against overinterpreting these interaction
effects until further confirmed after all the conver-
sations in our dataset were content coded. With
that said, the current set of evidence supports the
presence of heterogeneity in the effects of persua-
sion strategies, which provide the basis for our
next step to design a personalized persuasive sys-
tem that aims to automatically identify and tailor
persuasive messages to different individuals.

8 Ethical Considerations

Persuasion is a double-edged sword and has been
used for good or evil throughout the history. Given
the fast development of automated dialogue sys-
tems, an ethical design principle must be in place
throughout all stages of the development and eval-
uation. As the Roman rhetorician Quintilian de-
fined a persuader as “a good man speaking well”,
when developing persuasive agents, building an
ethical and good intention that benefits the per-
suadees must come before designing and engineer-
ing the conversational capability to persuade. For
instance, we choose to use the donation task as a
first step to develop a persuasive dialogue system
because the relatively simple task involves persua-
sion to benefit children. Other persuasive con-
texts can consider designing persuasive agents to
help individuals fulfill their goals such as engag-
ing in more exercises or sustaining environmen-

tally friendly actions. Second, when deploying the
persuasive agents in real conversations, it is impor-
tant to keep the persuadees informed of the nature
of the dialogue system so they are not deceived.
By revealing the identity of the persuasive agent,
the persuadees need to have options to communi-
cate directly with the human team behind the sys-
tem. Similarly, the purpose of the collection of
persuadees personal information and analysis on
their psychological traits must be clearly commu-
nicated to the persuadees and the use of their data
requires active consent procedure. Lastly, the de-
sign needs to ensure that the generated responses
are appropriate and nondiscriminative. This re-
quires continuous monitoring of the conversations
to make sure the conversations comply with both
universal and local ethical standards.

9 Conclusions and Future Work

A key challenge in persuasion study is the lack
of high-quality data and the interdisciplinary re-
search between computational linguistics and so-
cial science. We proposed a novel persuasion task,
and collected a rich human-human persuasion dia-
logue dataset with comprehensive user psycholog-
ical study and persuasion strategy annotation. We
have also shown that a classifier with three types of
features (sentence embedding, context embedding
and sentence-level features) can reach good results
on persuasion strategy prediction. However, much
future work is still needed to further improve the
performance of the classifier, such as including
more annotations and more dialogue context into
the classification. Moreover, we found evidence
about the interaction effects between psycholog-
ical backgrounds and persuasion strategies. For
example, when facing participants who are more
open, we can consider using the Source-related
inquiry strategy. This project lays the ground-
work for the next step, which is to design a user-
adaptive persuasive dialogue system that can ef-
fectively choose appropriate strategies based on
user profile information to increase the persuasive-
ness of the conversational agent.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by an Intel research gift.
We thank Saurav Sahay, Eda Okur and Shachi Ku-
mar for valuable discussions.



5644

References
Elisabeth André, Thomas Rist, Susanne Van Mulken,

Martin Klesen, and Stefan Baldes. 2000. The
automated design of believable dialogues for ani-
mated presentation teams. Embodied conversational
agents, pages 220–255.

Timothy W Bickmore, Dina Utami, Robin Matsuyama,
and Michael K Paasche-Orlow. 2016. Improving ac-
cess to online health information with conversational
agents: a randomized controlled experiment. Jour-
nal of medical Internet research, 18(1).

Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.

Chandrakant Bothe, Sven Magg, Cornelius Weber, and
Stefan Wermter. 2018. Conversational analysis us-
ing utterance-level attention-based bidirectional re-
current neural networks. Proc. Interspeech 2018,
pages 996–1000.

J. Cieciuch and E. Davidov. 2012. A comparison of the
invariance properties of the pvq-40 and the pvq-21
to measure human values across german and polish
samples. Survey Research Methods, 6(1):37–48.

Arie Dijkstra. 2008. The psychology of tailoring-
ingredients in computer-tailored persuasion. Social
and personality psychology compass, 2(2):765–784.

Brian J Fogg. 2002. Persuasive technology: using
computers to change what we think and do. Ubiq-
uity, 2002(December):5.

CJ Hutto Eric Gilbert. 2014. Vader: A parsimo-
nious rule-based model for sentiment analysis of so-
cial media text. In Eighth International Confer-
ence on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM-14).
Available at (20/04/16) http://comp. social. gatech.
edu/papers/icwsm14. vader. hutto. pdf.

Lewis R. Goldberg. 1992. The development of mark-
ers for the big-five factor structure. Psychological
Assessment, 4(1):26–42.

Thomas F Gordon. 1993. The pleadings game. Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Law, 2(4):239–292.

Arthur C Graesser, Haiying Li, and Carol Forsyth.
2014. Learning by communicating in natural lan-
guage with conversational agents. Current Direc-
tions in Psychological Science, 23(5):374–380.

J. Graham, B. A. Nosek, J. Haidt, R. Iyer, S. Kol-
eva, and P. H. Ditto. 2011. Mapping the moral do-
main. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
101(2):366–385.

Jesse Graham, Jonathan Haidt, Sena Koleva, Matt
Motyl, Ravi Iyer, Sean P Wojcik, and Peter H Ditto.
2013. Moral foundations theory: The pragmatic va-
lidity of moral pluralism. In Advances in experimen-
tal social psychology, volume 47, pages 55–130. El-
sevier.

Shih S. I. Hamilton, K. and S. Mohammed. 2016. The
development and validation of the rational and in-
tuitive decision styles scale. Journal of personality
assessment, 98(5):523–535.

He He, Derek Chen, Anusha Balakrishnan, and Percy
Liang. 2018. Decoupling strategy and generation in
negotiation dialogues. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 2333–2343.

Sally Hibbert, Andrew Smith, Andrea Davies, and
Fiona Ireland. 2007. Guilt appeals: Persuasion
knowledge and charitable giving. Psychology &
Marketing, 24(8):723–742.

Christopher Hidey, Elena Musi, Alyssa Hwang,
Smaranda Muresan, and Kathy McKeown. 2017.
Analyzing the semantic types of claims and
premises in an online persuasive forum. In Proceed-
ings of the 4th Workshop on Argument Mining, pages
11–21.

Christopher Thomas Hidey and Kathleen McKeown.
2018. Persuasive influence detection: The role of
argument sequencing. In Thirty-Second AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence.

Joe Hoover, Kate Johnson, Reihane Boghrati, Jesse
Graham, and Morteza Dehghani. 2018. Moral fram-
ing and charitable donation: Integrating exploratory
social media analyses and confirmatory experimen-
tation. Collabra: Psychology, 4(1).

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural net-
works for sentence classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1408.5882.

Matthew W Kreuter, Victor J Strecher, and Bernard
Glassman. 1999. One size does not fit all: the case
for tailoring print materials. Annals of behavioral
medicine, 21(4):276.

Klaus Krippendorff. 2004. Reliability in content
analysis: Some common misconceptions and rec-
ommendations. Human communication research,
30(3):411–433.

Siwei Lai, Liheng Xu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao.
2015. Recurrent convolutional neural networks for
text classification. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
AAAI’15, pages 2267–2273. AAAI Press.

Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann Dauphin, Devi Parikh,
and Dhruv Batra. 2017. Deal or no deal? end-to-end
learning of negotiation dialogues. In Proceedings of
the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 2443–2453.

Ewa Luger and Abigail Sellen. 2016. Like having a
really bad pa: the gulf between user expectation and
experience of conversational agents. In Proceedings
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 5286–5297. ACM.

https://doi.org/10.18148/srm/2012.v6i1.5091
https://doi.org/10.18148/srm/2012.v6i1.5091
https://doi.org/10.18148/srm/2012.v6i1.5091
https://doi.org/10.18148/srm/2012.v6i1.5091
https://doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.4.1.26
https://doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.4.1.26
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021847
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021847
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2886521.2886636
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2886521.2886636


5645

Stephanie Lukin, Pranav Anand, Marilyn Walker, and
Steve Whittaker. 2017. Argument strength is in the
eye of the beholder: Audience effects in persua-
sion. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, vol-
ume 1, pages 742–753.

Alexander Miller, Will Feng, Dhruv Batra, Antoine
Bordes, Adam Fisch, Jiasen Lu, Devi Parikh, and
Jason Weston. 2017. Parlai: A dialog research soft-
ware platform. In Proceedings of the 2017 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 79–84.

Rita Orji and Karyn Moffatt. 2018. Persuasive tech-
nology for health and wellness: State-of-the-art
and emerging trends. Health informatics journal,
24(1):66–91.

Richard E Petty and John T Cacioppo. 1986. The elab-
oration likelihood model of persuasion. In Commu-
nication and persuasion, pages 1–24. Springer.

Alec Radford, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Ilya Sutskever.
2017. Learning to generate reviews and discovering
sentiment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01444.

Barbara K Rimer and Matthew W Kreuter. 2006. Ad-
vancing tailored health communication: A persua-
sion and message effects perspective. Journal of
communication, 56:S184–S201.

Carol A Scott. 1977. Modifying socially-conscious be-
havior: The foot-in-the-door technique. Journal of
Consumer Research, 4(3):156–164.

Weiyan Shi and Zhou Yu. 2018. Sentiment adaptive
end-to-end dialog systems. In Proceedings of the
56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), vol-
ume 1, pages 1509–1519.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014.
Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 15:1929–1958.

Chenhao Tan, Vlad Niculae, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2016. Win-
ning arguments: Interaction dynamics and persua-
sion strategies in good-faith online discussions. In
Proceedings of the 25th international conference
on world wide web, pages 613–624. International
World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Diyi Yang, Jiaao Chen, Zichao Yang, Dan Jurafsky,
and Eduard Hovy. 2019. Lets make your request
more persuasive: Modeling persuasive strategies via
semi-supervised neural nets on crowdfunding plat-
forms. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
3620–3630.

Zhou Yu, Xinrui He, Alan W Black, and Alexander I
Rudnicky. 2016a. User engagement study with vir-
tual agents under different cultural contexts. In In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents,
pages 364–368. Springer.

Zhou Yu, Ziyu Xu, Alan W Black, and Alexander Rud-
nicky. 2016b. Strategy and policy learning for non-
task-oriented conversational systems. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th Annual Meeting of the Special Inter-
est Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 404–
412.

Tangming Yuan, David Moore, and Alec Grierson.
2008. A human-computer dialogue system for ed-
ucational debate: A computational dialectics ap-
proach. International Journal of Artificial Intelli-
gence in Education, 18(1):3–26.

Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Per-
sonalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you
have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages
2204–2213.

http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.html
http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.html


5646

A Appendices

A.1 Annotation Scheme

Table 6 and 7 show the annotation schemes for
selected persuadee acts and persuader acts respec-
tively. For the full annotation scheme, please refer
to https://gitlab.com/ucdavisnlp/
persuasionforgood. In the persuader’s
annotation scheme, there is a series of acts
related to persuasive proposition (proposition of
donation, proposition of amount, proposition of
confirmation, and proposition of more donation).
In general, proposition is needed in persuasive
requests because the persuader needs to clarify
the suggested behavior changes. In our specific
task, donation propositions have to happen in
every conversation regardless of the donation
outcome, and therefore is not influential on the
final outcome. Further, its high frequency might
dilute the results. Given these reasons, we didn’t
consider propositions as a strategy in our specific
context.

Category Description

Ask org info
Ask questions about the
charity

Ask donation
procedure

Ask questions about how to
donate

Positive reac-
tion

Express opinions/thoughts
that may lead to a donation

Neutral reac-
tion

Express opinions/thoughts
neutral towards a donation

Negative reac-
tion

Express opinions/thoughts
against a donation

Agree dona-
tion

Agree to donate

Disagree
donation

Decline to donate

Positive to in-
quiry

Show positive responses to
persuader’s inquiry

Negative to in-
quiry

Show negative responses to
persuader’s inquiry

Table 6: Descriptions of selected important persuadee
dialogue acts.

A.2 Donation Outcome Analysis Results

We used ANNSET for the analysis except for
Fig. 4 and Table 11. Estimated coefficients of the
logistic regression models predicting the donation
probability (1 = donation, 0 = no donation) with
different variables are shown in Table 8, 9, 10, 11,

Category Description
Proposition of
donation

Propose donation

Proposition of
amount

Ask the specific donation
amount

Proposition of
confirmation

Confirm donation

Proposition of
more donation

Ask the persuadee to do-
nate more

Experience af-
firmation

Comment on the per-
suadee’s statements

Greeting Greet the persuadee
Thank Thank the persuadee

Table 7: Descriptions of selected important non-
strategy persuader dialogue acts.

12, and 13. Two-tailed tests are applied for statis-
tical significance where *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01
and ***p < 0.001 .

Persuasion Strategy Coefficient
Logical appeal 0.06
Emotion appeal 0.03
Credibility appeal -0.11
Foot-in-the-door 0.06
Self-modeling -0.02
Personal story 0.36
Donation information 0.31*
Source-related inquiry 0.11
Task-related inquiry -0.004
Personal-related inquiry 0.02

Table 8: Associations between the persuasion strate-
gies and the donation (dichotomized). *p < 0.05.
ANNSET was used for the analysis.

Big-Five Coefficient
extrovert 0.22
agreeable -0.34
conscientious -0.27
neurotic -0.11
open -0.19

Table 9: Associations between the Big-Five
traits and the inconsistent donation behavior (di-
chotomized, 1 = inconsistent donation behavior, 0 =
consistent behavior). *p < 0.05. ANNSET was used
for the analysis.

A.3 Classification Confusion Matrix

Fig. 5 shows the classification confusion matrix.

https://gitlab.com/ucdavisnlp/persuasionforgood
https://gitlab.com/ucdavisnlp/persuasionforgood


5647

Figure 4: Big-Five traits score distribution for peo-
ple who donated and didn’t donate. For all the 471
persuadees who did not donate in the PERSUASION-
FORGOOD, we compared their personalities score with
the other 546 persuadees who donated. The result
shows that people who donated have a higher score
on agreeableness and openness in the Big-Five anal-
ysis. Because strategy annotation was not involved in
the psychological analysis, we used the whole dataset
(1017 dialogues) for this analysis.

Decision Style by Strategy Coefficient
Rational by
Logical appeal 0.01
Emotion appeal 0.08
Credibility appeal -0.01
Foot-in-the-door -0.25
Self-modeling 0.007
Personal story 0.26
Donation information 0.09
Source-related inquiry 0.33
Task-related inquiry -0.03
Personal-related inquiry -0.03
Intuitive by
Logical appeal 0.04
Emotion appeal -0.07
Credibility appeal -0.02
Foot-in-the-door 0.37
Self-modeling 0.01
Personal story -0.27
Donation information -0.02
Source-related inquiry -0.43
Task-related inquiry 0.05
Personal-related inquiry 0.04

Table 10: Interaction effects between decision style
and the donation (dichotomized). *p < 0.05 . Coeffi-
cients of the logistic regression predicting the donation
probability (1 = donation, 0 = no donation) are shown
here. ANNSET was used for the analysis.

Predictor Coefficient
Demographics
Age 0.02*
Sex: Male vs. Female -0.11
Sex: Other vs. Female -0.14
Race: White vs. Other 0.28
Less Than Four-Year College vs.

0.16
Four-Year College
Postgraduate vs. Four-Year College -0.20
Marital: Unmarried vs. Married -0.21
Employment: Other vs. Employed 0.17
Income (continuous) -0.01
Religion: Catholic vs. Atheist 0.34
Religion: Other Religion vs. Atheist 0.21
Religion: Protestant vs. Atheist 0.15
Ideology: Liberal vs. Conservative 0.11
Ideology: Moderate vs. Conservative -0.04
Big-Five Personality Traits
Extrovert -0.17
Agreeable 0.58***
Conscientious -0.15
Neurotic 0.09
Open -0.01
Moral Foundation
Care/Harm 0.38***
Fairness/Cheating 0.08
Loyalty/Betrayal 0.09
Authority/Subversion 0.04
Purity/Degradation -0.02
Freedom/Suppression -0.13
Schwartz Portrait Value
Conform -0.07
Tradition 0.06
Benevolence 0.18*
Universalism 0.05
Self-Direction -0.06
Stimulation -0.08
Hedonism -0.10
Achievement -0.03
Power -0.05
Security 0.09
Decision-Making Style
Rational 0.25*
Intuitive -0.02

Table 11: Associations between the psychological
profile and the donation (dichotomized). *p < 0.05,
***p < 0.001 . Estimated coefficients from a logis-
tic regression predicting the donation probability ((1 =
donation, 0 = no donation)) are shown here. Because
strategy annotation is not involved in the demograph-
ical and psychological analysis, we used the whole
dataset (1017 dialogues) for this analysis.

A.4 Data Collection Interface
Fig. 6 and 7 shows the data collection interface.



5648

Figure 5: Confusion matrix for the ten persuasion strategies and the non-strategy category on the ANNSET using
the hybrid RCNN model with all the features.

Figure 6: Screenshot of the persuader’s chat interface

Figure 7: Screenshot of the persuadee’s chat interface



5649

Big-Five by Strategy Coefficient
Extrovert by
Logical appeal -0.06
Emotion appeal 0.15
Credibility appeal 0.07
Foot-in-the-door 0.21
Self-modeling -0.28
Personal story -0.18
Donation information -0.11
Source-related inquiry -0.02
Task-related inquiry -0.26
Personal-related inquiry 0.09
Agreeable by
Logical appeal -0.11
Emotion appeal 0.25
Credibility appeal 0.25
Foot-in-the-door -0.02
Self-modeling -0.30
Personal story 0.77
Donation information 0.08
Source-related inquiry -0.84
Task-related inquiry -0.61
Personal-related inquiry -0.07
Neurotic by
Logical appeal 0.12
Emotion appeal -0.14
Credibility appeal -0.03
Foot-in-the-door 0.05
Self-modeling -0.20
Personal story -0.22
Donation information 0.15
Source-related inquiry -0.22
Task-related inquiry 0.03
Personal-related inquiry 0.23
Open by
Logical appeal 0.13
Emotion appeal 0.21
Credibility appeal -0.20
Foot-in-the-door -0.97
Self-modeling 0.38
Personal story -0.17
Donation information -0.33
Source-related inquiry 1.21*
Task-related inquiry 0.63
Personal-related inquiry -0.21
Conscientious by
Logical appeal -0.02
Emotion appeal -0.40
Credibility appeal -0.14
Foot-in-the-door 0.67
Self-modeling 0.34
Personal story -0.28
Donation information 0.33
Source-related inquiry -0.03
Task-related inquiry 0.21
Personal-related inquiry 0.06

Table 12: Interaction effects between Big-Five
personality scores and the donation (dichotomized).
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. Coefficients of the logistic
regression predicting the donation probability (1 =
donation, 0 = no donation) are shown here. ANNSET
was used for the analysis.

Moral Foundation by Strategy Coefficient
Care by
Logical appeal 0.05
Emotion appeal -0.19
Credibility appeal 0.21
Foot-in-the-door 0.03
Self-modeling 0.54
Personal story 0.12
Donation information -0.21
Source-related inquiry 0.14
Task-related inquiry 0.09
Personal-related inquiry 1.10*
Fairness by
Logical appeal 0.12
Emotion appeal 0.06
Credibility appeal -0.10
Foot-in-the-door -0.40
Self-modeling -0.09
Personal story -0.30
Donation information 0.06
Source-related inquiry 0.46
Task-related inquiry 0.41
Personal-related inquiry -1.15*
Loyalty by
Logical appeal -0.10
Emotion appeal -0.13
Credibility appeal 0.07
Foot-in-the-door 0.45
Self-modeling 0.04
Personal story -0.31
Donation information -0.25
Source-related inquiry 0.57
Task-related inquiry -0.26
Personal-related inquiry -0.04
Authority by
Logical appeal 0.31
Emotion appeal -0.12
Credibility appeal 0.10
Foot-in-the-door -0.31
Self-modeling 0.08
Personal story -0.19
Donation information 0.03
Source-related inquiry -0.23
Task-related inquiry -0.14
Personal-related inquiry -0.86*
Purity by
Logical appeal -0.30
Emotion appeal 0.25
Credibility appeal -0.15
Foot-in-the-door -0.004
Self-modeling -0.21
Personal story 0.43
Donation information 0.30
Source-related inquiry -0.41
Task-related inquiry 0.31
Personal-related inquiry 0.44
Freedom by
Logical appeal 0.10
Emotion appeal -0.05
Credibility appeal -0.16
Foot-in-the-door -0.50
Self-modeling -0.35
Personal story 0.32
Donation information 0.17
Source-related inquiry -0.13
Task-related inquiry -0.29
Personal-related inquiry 0.60*

Table 13: Interaction effects between moral founda-
tion and the donation (dichotomized). *p < 0.05.


