



















































Effective Cross-lingual Transfer of Neural Machine Translation Models without Shared Vocabularies


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1246–1257
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1246

Effective Cross-lingual Transfer of Neural Machine Translation Models
without Shared Vocabularies

Yunsu Kim Yingbo Gao Hermann Ney
Human Language Technology and Pattern Recognition Group

RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
{surname}@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

Transfer learning or multilingual model is
essential for low-resource neural machine
translation (NMT), but the applicability is
limited to cognate languages by sharing their
vocabularies. This paper shows effective tech-
niques to transfer a pre-trained NMT model
to a new, unrelated language without shared
vocabularies. We relieve the vocabulary
mismatch by using cross-lingual word embed-
ding, train a more language-agnostic encoder
by injecting artificial noises, and generate
synthetic data easily from the pre-training
data without back-translation. Our methods
do not require restructuring the vocabulary
or retraining the model. We improve plain
NMT transfer by up to +5.1% BLEU in five
low-resource translation tasks, outperforming
multilingual joint training by a large margin.
We also provide extensive ablation studies
on pre-trained embedding, synthetic data,
vocabulary size, and parameter freezing for a
better understanding of NMT transfer.

1 Introduction

Despite recent success of neural machine transla-
tion (NMT) (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al.,
2017), its major improvements and optimizations
cannot be easily applied to low-resource language
pairs. Basic training procedure of NMT does not
function well with only a handful of bilingual
data (Koehn and Knowles, 2017), while collecting
bilingual resource is arduous for many languages.

Multilingual NMT solves the problem of lack-
ing bilingual data by training a shared model along
with other related languages (Firat et al., 2016;
Johnson et al., 2017). For this to work in prac-
tice, however, we need a considerable effort to
gather bilingual data over multiple languages and
preprocess them jointly before training. This has
two critical issues: 1) The languages for training

should be linguistically related in order to build a
shared vocabulary. 2) It is not feasible to add a
new language to a trained model, since the train-
ing vocabulary must be redefined; one may need
to re-train the model from scratch.

In transfer learning (Zoph et al., 2016), adapting
to a new language is conceptually simpler; given
an NMT model pre-trained on a high-resource lan-
guage pair (parent), we can just continue the train-
ing with bilingual data of another language pair
(child). Here, the vocabulary mismatch between
languages is still a problem, which seriously limits
the performance especially for distant languages.

This work proposes three novel ideas to make
transfer learning for NMT widely applicable to
various languages:

• We alleviate the vocabulary mismatch be-
tween parent and child languages via cross-
lingual word embedding.

• We train a more general encoder in the parent
training by injecting artificial noises, making
it easier for the child model to adapt to.

• We generate synthetic data from parallel
data of the parent language pair, improv-
ing the low-resource transfer where the con-
ventional back-translation (Sennrich et al.,
2016b) fails.

These techniques give incremental improvements
while we keep the transfer unsupervised, i.e. it
does not require bilingual information between the
transferor and the transferee. Note that adapting
to a new language is done without shared vocabu-
laries; we need neither to rearrange joint subword
units nor to restart the parent model training.

Experiments show that our methods offer sig-
nificant gain in translation performance up to
+5.1% BLEU over plain transfer learning, even
when transferring to an unrelated, low-resource



1247

language. The results significantly outperform
multilingual joint training (Johnson et al., 2017) in
all of our experiments. We also provide in-depth
analyses of the following aspects to understand the
behavior of NMT transfer and maximize its perfor-
mance: type of the pre-trained embedding, syn-
thetic data generation methods, size of the trans-
ferred vocabulary, and parameter freezing.

2 Neural Machine Translation

Before describing our transfer learning approach,
this section covers basics of an NMT model. Ex-
planations here are not based on a specific ar-
chitecture but extendable to more complex model
variants.

For a source sentence fJ1 = f1, ..., fj , ..., fJ
(length J) and a corresponding target sentence
eI1 = e1, ..., ei, ..., eI (length I), NMT models
the probability p(eI1|fJ1 ) with several components:
source/target word embeddings, an encoder, a de-
coder, and an output layer.

Source word embedding Esrc maps a discrete
word f (as a one-hot vector) to a continuous rep-
resentation (embedding) of that word Esrc(f). In
practice, it is implemented by a lookup table and
stored in a matrix in RD×V src , where D is the
number of dimensions of the embedding. Target
word embedding is analogous.

An encoder takes a sequence of source word
embeddings Esrc(fJ1 ) and produces a sequence
of hidden representations hJ1 for the source sen-
tence. The encoder can be modeled with recurrent
(Sutskever et al., 2014), convolutional (Gehring
et al., 2017), or self-attentive layers (Vaswani
et al., 2017). The encoder is responsible for mod-
eling syntactic and semantic relationships among
the source words, including word order.

A decoder generates target words for each tar-
get position i from its internal state si, which de-
pends on hJ1 , E

tgt(ei−1), and si−1. It keeps track
of the generated hypothesis up to position i-1 and
relates the generation with source representations
hJ1 . For shared vocabularies between source and
target languages, the target embedding weights
can be tied with the source embedding weights,
i.e. Esrc = Etgt.

The model is trained on a parallel corpus by
optimizing for the cross-entropy loss with the
stochastic gradient descent algorithm. Translation
is carried out with a beam search. For more de-
tails, we refer the reader to Bahdanau et al. (2015)

and Vaswani et al. (2017).

3 Transfer Learning for NMT

In general, transfer learning is reusing the knowl-
edge from other domains/tasks when facing a new
problem (Thrun and Pratt, 2012). It has been of
continued interest in machine learning for the past
decades, especially when there is not enough train-
ing data for the problem at hand. Much attention
is given to transfer learning for neural networks,
since hidden layers of the network can implicitly
learn general representations of data; the knowl-
edge can be readily transferred by copying the hid-
den layer weights to another network (Caruana,
1995; Bengio, 2012).

For NMT, the easiest case of transfer learning
is across text domains. Having an NMT model
trained on some data, we can continue the training
from the same network parameters with data from
another domain (Luong and Manning, 2015; Fre-
itag and Al-Onaizan, 2016). Transfer from another
natural language processing task is also straight-
forward; for example, we can initialize the param-
eters of NMT models with pre-trained language
models of corresponding languages, since the en-
coder and decoder are essentially language models
except a few additional translation-specific com-
ponents (Ramachandran et al., 2017; Lample and
Conneau, 2019).

German
Encoder

English
Decoder

Basque
Encoder

English
Decoder

Pre-train Fine-tune

Copy
Parameters

Copy
Parameters

Figure 1: Diagram of transfer learning for NMT from
German→English to Basque→English.

However, it is inherently difficult to transfer
NMT models between languages, i.e. pre-train
a model for a high-resource language pair and
use the trained parameters for a low-resource lan-
guage pair (Figure 1). Changing a language intro-
duces a completely different data space that does
not fit to the pre-trained model. In the following,
we describe this discrepancy in detail and propose



1248

our solutions. We focus on switching source lan-
guages, while the target language is fixed.

3.1 Cross-lingual Word Embedding

The biggest challenge of cross-lingual transfer is
the vocabulary mismatch. A natural language vo-
cabulary is discrete and unique for each language,
while the mapping between two different vocab-
ularies is non-deterministic and arbitrary. There-
fore, when we merely replace a source language,
the NMT encoder will see totally different input
sequences; pre-trained encoder weights do not get
along with the source embedding anymore.

A popular solution to this is sharing the vocab-
ulary among the languages of concern (Nguyen
and Chiang, 2017; Kocmi and Bojar, 2018). This
is often implemented with joint learning of sub-
word units (Sennrich et al., 2016c). Despite its
effectiveness, it has an intrinsic problem in prac-
tice: A parent model must be trained already with
a shared vocabulary with child languages. Such a
pre-trained parent model can be transferred only
to those child languages using the same shared
vocabulary. When we adapt to a new language
whose words are not included in the shared vo-
cabulary, we should learn a joint subword space
again with the new language and retrain the parent
model accordingly—very inefficient and not scal-
able.

A shared vocabulary is also problematic in that
it must be divided into language-specific portions.
When many languages share it, an allocated por-
tion for each will be smaller and accordingly less
expressive. This is the reason why the vocabulary
is usually shared only for linguistically related lan-
guages, effectively increasing the portion of com-
mon surface forms.

In this work, we propose to keep the vocabular-
ies separate, but share their embedding spaces in-
stead of surface forms. This can be done indepen-
dently from the parent model training and requires
only monolingual data of the child language:

1. Learn monolingual embedding of the child
language Emonochild , using e.g. the skip-gram al-
gorithm (Mikolov et al., 2013).

2. Extract source embedding Esrcparent from a
pre-trained parent NMT model.

3. Learn a cross-lingual linear mapping W ∈
RD×D between 1 and 2 by minimizing the

German
Encoder

Basque
Encoder

Copy
Parameters

German
Embedding

Basque
Embedding

W

Figure 2: Cross-lingual mapping of a child (Basque)
embedding to the parent (German) embedding.

objective below:∑
(f,f ′)∈S

‖WEmonochild (f)− Esrcparent(f ′)‖2 (1)

4. Replace source embedding of the parent
model parameters with the learned cross-
lingual embedding.

Esrcparent ←WEmonochild (2)

5. Initialize the child model with 4 and start the
NMT training on the child language pair.

The dictionary S in Step 3 can be obtained in
an unsupervised way by adversarial training (Con-
neau et al., 2018) or matching digits between the
parent and child languages (Artetxe et al., 2017).
The mapping W can be also iteratively refined
with self-induced dictionaries of mutual parent-
child nearest neighbors (Artetxe et al., 2017),
which is still unsupervised. The cross-lingually
mapped child embeddings fit better as input to
the parent encoder, since they are adjusted to a
space similar to that of the parent input embed-
dings (Figure 2).

Note that in Step 4, the mapping W is not ex-
plicitly inserted as additional parameters in the
network. It is multiplied by Emonochild and the result is
used as the initial source embedding weights. The
initialized source embedding is also fine-tuned
along with the other parameters in the last step.

These steps do not involve rearranging a joint
vocabulary or retraining of the parent model. Us-
ing our method, one can pre-train a single parent
model once and transfer it to many different child
languages efficiently.

Our method is also effective for non-related lan-
guages that do not share surface forms, since we
address the vocabulary mismatch in the embed-
ding level. After each word is converted to its
embedding, it is just a continuous-valued vector
in a mathematical space; matching vocabularies is
done by transforming the vectors irrespective of
language-specific alphabets.



1249

German
Encoder

Ich hier arbeite .Ich arbeite hier .
Noise

Figure 3: Injecting noise into a German (parent) source
sentence.

3.2 Artificial Noises

Another main difference between languages is the
word order, namely syntactic structure of sen-
tences. Neural sequence-to-sequence models are
highly dependent on sequential ordering of the in-
put, i.e. absolute/relative positions of input tokens.

When we train an encoder for a language, it
learns the language-specific word order conven-
tions, e.g. position of a verb in a clause, struc-
ture of an adverb phrase, etc. If the input language
is changed, the encoder should adjust itself to un-
familiar word orders. The adaptation gets more
difficult for non-related languages.

To mitigate this syntactic difference in cross-
lingual transfer for NMT, we suggest to generalize
the parent encoder so that it is not overoptimized
to the parent source language. We achieve this
by modifying the source side of the parent train-
ing data, artificially changing its word orders with
random noises (Figure 3). The noise function in-
cludes (Hill et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2018):

• Inserting a word between original words uni-
formly with a probability pins at each posi-
tion, choosing the inserted word uniformly
from the top Vins frequent words

• Deleting original words uniformly with a
probability pdel at each position

• Permuting original word positions uniformly
within a limited distance dper

The noises are injected into every source sen-
tence differently for each epoch. The encoder then
sees not only word orders of the parent source
language but also other various sentence struc-
tures. Since we set limits to the randomness of
the noises, the encoder is still able to learn general
monotonicity of natural language sentences. This
makes it easier for the parent encoder to adapt to a
child source language, effectively transferring the
pre-trained language-agnostic knowledge of input
sequence modeling.

3.3 Synthetic Data from Parent Model
Training Data

Transfer learning for NMT is particularly neces-
sary for low-resource language pairs where the
bilingual data is scarce. The standard technique to
address the scarcity is generating synthetic paral-
lel data from target monolingual corpora via back-
translation (Sennrich et al., 2016b). However, this
works only if the generated source sentences are
of sufficiently acceptable quality. In low-resource
translation tasks, it is hard to train a good target-to-
source translation model, which is used to produce
the source hypotheses.

For these scenarios, we devise a simple trick
to create additional parallel data for the child
language pair without training a target-to-source
translation model. The idea is to reuse the parallel
data already used for training the parent model. In
the source side, we retain only those tokens that
exist in the child vocabulary and replace all other
tokens with a predefined token, e.g. <unk> (Fig-
ure 4). The target side stays the same as we do not
switch the languages.

Basque
Encoder

<unk> , John !Hallo , John !

(Basque)(German)

Basque

Vocabulary

Figure 4: Synthetic Basque sentence generated from a
German sentence.

The source side of this synthetic data consists
only of the overlapping vocabulary entries be-
tween the parent and child languages. By includ-
ing this data in the child model training, we pre-
vent an abrupt change of the input to the pre-
trained model while keeping the parent and child
vocabularies separated. It also helps to avoid over-
fitting to a tiny parallel data of the child language
pair.

In addition, we can expect a synergy with cross-
lingual word embedding (Section 3.1), where the
source embedding space of the child task is trans-
formed into that of the parent task. In this cross-
lingual space, an overlapping token between par-
ent and child vocabularies should have a very sim-
ilar embedding to that in the original parent em-
bedding space, to which the pre-trained encoder
is already familiar. This helps to realize a smooth



1250

Source Data (→English)
Family Language [#sents]

Germanic German 10,111,758

Isolate Basque 5,605

Slavic
Slovenian 17,103
Belarusian 4,509

Turkic
Azerbaijani 5,946

Turkish 9,998

Table 1: Language families and parallel data statistics.

transition from parent source input to child source
input in the transfer process.

4 Main Results

We verify the effect of our techniques in trans-
fer learning setups with five different child source
languages: Basque (eu), Slovenian (sl), Belaru-
sian (be), Azerbaijani (az), and Turkish (tr). Tar-
get language is fixed to English (en) and we use
German→English as the parent language pair.

Data: The parent model was trained on parallel
data of WMT 2018 news translation task1 and syn-
thetic data released by Sennrich et al. (2016a). For
the child language pairs, we used IWSLT 2018
low-resource MT task data (eu-en) (Jan et al.,
2018), IWSLT 2014 MT task data (sl-en) (Cet-
tolo et al., 2014), TED talk data from (Qi et al.,
2018) (be-en/az-en), and subsampling of WMT
2018 news translation task data (tr-en). Statistics
of the parallel corpora are given in Table 1. Note
that the child source languages are linguistically
far from the parent source.

Every training dataset was preprocessed with
the Moses tokenizer2, where the source side was
lowercased and the target side was frequent-cased.

Transfer learning: All NMT models in our ex-
periments follow the base 6-layer Transformer ar-
chitecture of Vaswani et al. (2017), except that
the source and target embedding weights are not
tied. Each source language was encoded with byte
pair encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2016c) with
20k merge operations, while the target language
was encoded with 50k BPE merges. Dropout with
probability of 0.3 was applied to Transformer pre-
post/activation/attention components in both par-

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt18/translation-task.html
2http://www.statmt.org/moses/

ent and child model trainings. Training was car-
ried out with Sockeye (Hieber et al., 2017) us-
ing the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014)
with the default parameters. The maximum sen-
tence length was set to 100 and the batch size to
4,096 words. We stopped the training when per-
plexity on a validation set was not improving for
12 checkpoints. We set checkpoint frequency to
10,000 updates for the parent model and 1,000
updates for the child models. The parent model
yields 39.2% BLEU on WMT German→English
newstest2016 test set.

Baseline: As a baseline child model without
transfer learning, we used the same setting as
above but learned a shared source-target BPE
vocabulary with 20k merge operations. We
also tied source and target embeddings as sug-
gested for low-resource settings in Schamper et al.
(2018). Dropout was applied also to the embed-
ding weights for the baselines.

Multilingual: We also compare our transfer learn-
ing with the multilingual training where a single,
shared NMT model is trained for the parent and
child language pairs together from scratch (John-
son et al., 2017). For each child task, we learned a
joint BPE vocabulary of all source and target lan-
guages in the parent/child tasks with 32k merge
operations. The training data for the child task was
oversampled so that each mini-batch has roughly
1:1 ratio of the parent/child training examples.

Note that we built a different multilingual model
for each child task. Since they depend on shared
vocabularies, we should restructure the vocabulary
and retrain the model for each of the new language
pairs we wish to adapt to.

Cross-lingual word embedding: To pre-train
word embeddings, we used Wikimedia dumps3 of
timestamp 2018-11-01 for all child languages ex-
cept Turkish for which we used WMT News Crawl
2016-2017. From Wikimedia dumps, the actual
articles were extracted first4, which were split
to sentences using the StanfordCoreNLP toolkit
(Manning et al., 2014). Monolingual embed-
dings were trained with fasttext (Bojanowski et al.,
2017) with minimum word count 0. For learn-
ing the cross-lingual mappings, we ran 10 epochs
of adversarial training and another 10 epochs of
dictionary-based refinement using MUSE (Con-

3https://dumps.wikimedia.org/
4https://github.com/attardi/wikiextractor/



1251

BLEU [%]
System eu-en sl-en be-en az-en tr-en

Baseline 1.7 10.1 3.2 3.1 0.8
Multilingual (Johnson et al., 2017) 5.1 16.7 4.2 4.5 8.7

Transfer (Zoph et al., 2016) 4.9 19.2 8.9 5.3 7.4
+ Cross-lingual word embedding 7.4 20.6 12.2 7.4 9.4

+ Artificial noises 8.2 21.3 12.8 8.1 10.1
+ Synthetic data 9.7 22.1 14.0 9.0 11.3

Table 2: Translation results of different transfer learning setups.

neau et al., 2018). We chose top 20k types as dis-
criminator inputs and 10k as maximum dictionary
rank.

Artificial noises: Following Kim et al. (2018), we
used these values for the noise model: pins = 0.1,
Vins = 50, pdel = 0.1, and dper = 3. We empir-
ically found that these values are optimal also for
our purpose. The parent model trained with noises
gives 38.2% BLEU in WMT German→English
newstest2016: 1.0% worse than without noises.

Synthetic data: We uniformly sampled 1M
sentence pairs from German→English parallel
data used for the parent training and processed
them according to Section 3.3. The child model
parallel data was oversampled to 500k sentence
pairs, making an overall ratio of 1:2 between
the parallel and synthetic data. We also tried
other ratio values, e.g. 1:1, 1:4, or 2:1, but the
performance was consistently worse.

Table 2 presents the results. Plain transfer learn-
ing already gives a boost but is still far from a sat-
isfying quality, especially for Basque→-English
and Azerbaijani→English. On top of that, each
of our three techniques offers clear, incremental
improvements in all child language pairs with a
maximum of 5.1% BLEU in total.

Cross-lingual word embedding shows a huge
improvement up to +3.3% BLEU, which exhibits
the strength of connecting parent-child vocabular-
ies on the embedding level. If we train the par-
ent model with artificial noises on the source side,
the performance is consistently increased by up to
+0.8% BLEU. This occurs even when dropout is
used in the parent model training; randomizing
word orders provides meaningful regularization
which cannot be achieved via dropout. Finally,
our synthetic data extracted from the parent par-

allel data is proved to be effective in low-resource
transfer to substantially different languages: We
obtain an additional gain of at most +1.5% BLEU.

Our results also surpass the multilingual joint
training by a large margin in all tasks. One shared
model for multiple language pairs inherently lim-
its the modeling capacity for each task. Particu-
larly, if one language pair has much smaller train-
ing data than the other, oversampling the low-
resource portion is not enough to compensate the
scale discrepancy in multilingual training. Trans-
fer learning with our add-on techniques is more ef-
ficient to exploit knowledge of high-resource lan-
guage pairs and fine-tune the performance towards
a child task.

5 Analysis

In this section, we further investigate our methods
in detail in comparison to their similar variants,
and also perform ablation studies for the NMT
transfer in general.

5.1 Types of Pre-trained Embedding

Pre-trained embedding BLEU [%]

None 5.3
Monolingual 6.3
Cross-lingual (az-de) 7.4
Cross-lingual (az-en) 7.1

Table 3: Azerbaijani→English translation results with
different types of pre-trained source embeddings.

We analyze the effect of the cross-linguality of
pre-trained embeddings in Table 3. We observe
that monolingual embedding without a cross-
lingual mapping also improves the transfer learn-
ing, but is significantly worse than our proposed
embedding, i.e. mapped to the parent source (de)



1252

embedding. The mapping can be learned also with
the target (en) side with the same procedure as
in Section 3.1. The target-mapped embedding is
not compatible with the pre-trained encoder but di-
rectly guides the child model to establish the con-
nection between the new source and the target. It
also improves the system, but our method is still
the best among the three embedding types.

5.2 Synthetic Data Generation

Synthetic data BLEU [%]

None 8.2
Back-translation 8.3
Empty source 8.2
Copied target 8.9
Parent model data 9.7
+ Cross-lingual replacement 8.7

Table 4: Basque→English translation results with syn-
thetic data generated using different methods.

In Table 4, we compare our technique in Section
3.3 with other methods of generating synthetic
data. For a fair comparison, we used the same tar-
get side corpus (1M sentences) for all these meth-
ods.

As explained in Section 3.3, back-translation
(Sennrich et al., 2016b) is not beneficial here be-
cause the generated source is of too low qual-
ity. Empty source sentence is proposed along with
back-translation as its simplification, which does
not help either in transfer learning. Copying tar-
get sentences to the source side is yet another easy
way to obtain synthetic data (Currey et al., 2017).
It gives an improvement to a certain extent; how-
ever, our method of using the parent model data
works much better in transfer learning.

We manually looked at the survived tokens in
the source side of our synthetic data. We ob-
served lots of overlapping tokens over the parent
and child source vocabularies even if they were not
shared: 4,487 vocabulary entries between Basque
and German. Approximately 2% of them are
punctuation symbols and special tokens, 7% are
digits, and 62% are made of Latin alphabets, a
large portion of which is devoted to English words
(e.g. named entities) or their parts. The rest of the
vocabulary is mostly of noisy tokens with exotic
alphabets.

As Figure 4 illustrates, just punctuation sym-
bols and named entities can already define a basic

structure of the original source sentence. Such to-
kens play the role of anchors in translation; they
are sure to be copied to the target side. The
surrounding <unk> tokens are spread according
to the source language structure, whereas merely
copying the target sentence to the source (Currey
et al., 2017) ignores the structural difference be-
tween source and target sentences. Note that our
trick applies also to the languages with completely
different alphabets, e.g. Belarusian and German
(see Table 2).

We also tested an additional processing for our
synthetic data to reduce the number of unknown
tokens. We replaced non-overlapping tokens in the
German source side with the closest Basque token
in the cross-lingual word embedding space. The
result is, however, worse than not replacing them;
we noticed that this subword-by-subword transla-
tion produces many Basque phrases with wrong
BPE merges (Kim et al., 2018).

5.3 Vocabulary Size

BLEU [%]
BPE merges sl-en be-en

10k 21.0 11.2
20k 20.6 12.2
50k 20.2 10.9
70k 20.0 10.9

Table 5: Translation results with different sizes of the
source vocabulary.

Table 5 estimates how large the vocabulary
should be for the language-switching side in NMT
transfer. We varied the number of BPE merges on
the source side, fixing the target vocabulary to 50k
merges. The best results are with 10k or 20k of
BPE merges, which shows that the source vocab-
ulary should be reasonably small to maximize the
transfer performance. Less BPE merges lead to
more language-independent tokens; it is easier for
the cross-lingual embedding to find the overlaps in
the shared semantic space.

If the vocabulary is excessively small, we might
lose too much language-specific details that are
necessary for the translation process. This is
shown in the 10k merges of Belarusian→English.

5.4 Freezing Parameters
Lastly, we conducted an ablation study of freez-
ing parent model parameters in the child training



1253

Frozen parameters BLEU [%]

None 21.0

Target embedding 21.4
+ Target self-attention 22.1

+ Encoder-decoder attention 21.8
+ Feedforward sublayer 21.3

+ Output layer 21.9

Table 6: Slovenian→English translation results with
freezing different components of the decoder.

process (Table 6). We show only the results when
freezing the decoder; in our experiments, freezing
any component of the encoder always degrades the
translation performance. The experiments were
done at the final stage with all of our three pro-
posed methods applied.

Target embedding and target self-attention parts
are independent of the source information, so it
makes sense to freeze those parameters even when
the source language is changed. On the con-
trary, encoder-decoder attention represents the re-
lation between source and target sentences, so it
should be redefined for a new source language.
The performance deteriorates when freezing feed-
forward sublayers, since it is directly influenced
by the encoder-decoder attention layer. The last
row means that we freeze all parameters of the de-
coder; it is actually better than freezing all but the
output layer.

6 Related Work

Transfer learning is first introduced for NMT in
Zoph et al. (2016), yet with a small RNN architec-
ture and on top frequent words instead of using
subword units. Nguyen and Chiang (2017) and
Kocmi and Bojar (2018) use shared vocabularies
of BPE tokens to improve the transfer learning, but
this requires retraining of the parent model when-
ever we transfer to a new child language.

Multilingual NMT trains a single model with
parallel data of various translation directions
jointly from scratch (Dong et al., 2015; Johnson
et al., 2017; Firat et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2018).
Their methods also rely on shared subword vocab-
ularies so it is hard for their model to adapt to a
new language.

Cross-lingual word embedding is studied for
the usages in MT as follows. In phrase-based
SMT, Alkhouli et al. (2014) builds translation

models with word/phrase embeddings. Kim et al.
(2018) uses cross-lingual word embedding as a ba-
sic translation model for unsupervised MT and at-
tach other components on top of it. Artetxe et al.
(2018c) and Lample et al. (2018a) initialize their
unsupervised NMT models with pre-trained cross-
lingual word embeddings. Qi et al. (2018) do the
same initialization for supervised cases, observing
only improvements in multilingual setups.

Artificial noises for the source sentences are
used to counteract word-by-word training data in
unsupervised MT (Artetxe et al., 2018c; Lample
et al., 2018a; Kim et al., 2018), but in this work,
they are used to regularize the NMT.

Neubig and Hu (2018) study adapting a mul-
tilingual NMT system to a new language. They
train for a child language pair with additional par-
allel data of its similar language pair. Our syn-
thetic data method does not rely on the relatedness
of languages but still shows a good performance.
They learn just a separate subword vocabulary for
the child language without a further care, which
we counteract with cross-lingual word embedding.

Sachan and Neubig (2018) show ablation stud-
ies on parameter sharing and freezing in one-to-
many multilingual setup with shared vocabularies.
Our work conduct the similar experiments in the
transfer learning setting with separate vocabular-
ies.

Platanios et al. (2018) augment a multilingual
model with language-specific embeddings from
which the encoder and decoder parameters are
inferred with additional linear transformations.
They only mention its potential to transfer to an
unseen language without any results on it. Our
work focuses on transferring a pre-trained model
to a new language without any change in the
model architecture but with an explicit guidance
for cross-linguality on the word embedding level.

Wang et al. (2019) address the vocabulary mis-
match in multilingual NMT by using shared em-
beddings of character n-grams and common se-
mantic concepts. Their method has a strict as-
sumption that the languages should be related or-
thographically with shared alphabets, while our
method is not limited to similar languages and
directly benefits from advances in cross-lingual
word embedding for distant languages.

Another line of research on low-resource MT
is unsupervised learning (Lample et al., 2018a,b;
Lample and Conneau, 2019; Artetxe et al.,



1254

2018b,c; Kim et al., 2018), training translation
models only with monolingual data. However,
these methods are verified mostly in high-resource
language pairs, e.g. French↔English, where
there is no need to restrict the training data to
only monolingual corpora. In low-resource lan-
guage pairs with little linguistic similarity, Neu-
big and Hu (2018) and Guzmán et al. (2019) show
that unsupervised MT methods do not function
at all. We tested an unsupervised MT software
Lample and Conneau (2019) internally, which
also resulted in failure, e.g. 1% BLEU at the
Basque→English task of Section 4. Moreover,
unsupervised MT methods usually require a very
long training time—at least 1-2 weeks with a sin-
gle GPU—due to its iterative nature, while our
cross-lingual transfer needs only a couple of hours
of training once you have a parent model.

Alternatively, one might consider using parallel
data involving a pivot language, either by decod-
ing in two consecutive steps (Kauers et al., 2002;
De Gispert and Marino, 2006; Utiyama and Isa-
hara, 2007; Costa-Jussà et al., 2011) or by cre-
ating pivot-based synthetic data (De Gispert and
Marino, 2006; Bertoldi et al., 2008; Zheng et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2017). These methods cannot
be applied to most of the language pairs from/to
English, because it is extremely difficult to col-
lect parallel data with another third language other
than English.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we address the problem of transfer-
ring an NMT model to unseen, unrelated language
pairs. We propose three novel techniques to im-
prove the transfer without vocabulary sharing be-
tween parent and child source languages.

Firstly, we transform monolingual embeddings
of the new language into the embedding space of
the parent NMT model. This accomplishes an ef-
fective transition of vocabularies on the embed-
ding level. Secondly, we randomize the word or-
ders in the parent model training to avoid overfit-
ting to the parent source language. This makes
it easier for the encoder to adapt to the new lan-
guage syntax. For the first time, we show a practi-
cal usage of artificial noises to regularize an NMT
model. Lastly, we reuse parallel data of the parent
language pair in the child training phase to avoid
an abrupt change of the training data distribution.

All three methods significantly improve over

plain transfer learning with a total gain of up to
+5.1% BLEU in our experiments, consistently out-
performing multilingual joint training. Our meth-
ods do not require retraining of a shared vocabu-
lary or the parent model, enabling an incremental
transfer of the same parent model to various (pos-
sibly unrelated) languages. Our implementation of
the proposed methods is available online.5

As for future work, we will test our methods
in the NMT transfer where the target language is
switched. We also plan to compare different al-
gorithms for learning the cross-lingual mapping
(Artetxe et al., 2018a; Xu et al., 2018; Joulin et al.,
2018) to optimize the transfer performance.

Acknowledgments

This work has received funding from the European
Research Council (ERC) (under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme, grant agreement No 694537, project
”SEQCLAS”) and the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG; grant agreement NE 572/8-1,
project ”CoreTec”). The GPU cluster used for the
experiments was partially funded by DFG Grant
INST 222/1168-1. The work reflects only the au-
thors’ views and none of the funding agencies is
responsible for any use that may be made of the
information it contains.

References
Tamer Alkhouli, Andreas Guta, and Hermann Ney.

2014. Vector space models for phrase-based ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of SSST-8, Eighth
Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in
Statistical Translation, pages 1–10.

Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, and Eneko Agirre. 2017.
Learning bilingual word embeddings with (almost)
no bilingual data. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL 2017), volume 1, pages 451–462.

Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, and Eneko Agirre.
2018a. A robust self-learning method for fully un-
supervised cross-lingual mappings of word embed-
dings. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 789–798.

5
https://github.com/yunsukim86/sockeye-transfer

https://github.com/yunsukim86/sockeye-transfer


1255

Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, and Eneko Agirre.
2018b. Unsupervised statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 3632–3642.

Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, Eneko Agirre, and
Kyunghyun Cho. 2018c. Unsupervised neural ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of 6th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR 2018).

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In Proceedings of the
2015 International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR 2015).

Yoshua Bengio. 2012. Deep learning of representa-
tions for unsupervised and transfer learning. In Pro-
ceedings of ICML Workshop on Unsupervised and
Transfer Learning, pages 17–36.

Nicola Bertoldi, Madalina Barbaiani, Marcello Fed-
erico, and Roldano Cattoni. 2008. Phrase-based sta-
tistical machine translation with pivot languages. In
International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation (IWSLT) 2008.

Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.

Rich Caruana. 1995. Learning many related tasks at
the same time with backpropagation. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pages 657–
664.

Mauro Cettolo, Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stüker, Luisa
Bentivogli, and Marcello Federico. 2014. Report on
the 11th iwslt evaluation campaign, iwslt 2014. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on
Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2011), pages
2–17, Hanoi, Vietnam.

Yun Chen, Yang Liu, Yong Cheng, and Victor OK
Li. 2017. A teacher-student framework for zero-
resource neural machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 1925–1935.

Alexis Conneau, Guillaume Lample, Marc’Aurelio
Ranzato, Ludovic Denoyer, and Hervé Jégou. 2018.
Word translation without parallel data. In Proceed-
ings of 6th International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR 2018).

Marta R Costa-Jussà, Carlos Henrı́quez, and Rafael E
Banchs. 2011. Enhancing scarce-resource language
translation through pivot combinations. In Proceed-
ings of 5th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1361–1365.

Anna Currey, Antonio Valerio Miceli Barone, and Ken-
neth Heafield. 2017. Copied monolingual data im-
proves low-resource neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Second Conference on Machine
Translation, pages 148–156.

Adrià De Gispert and Jose B Marino. 2006. Catalan-
english statistical machine translation without par-
allel corpus: bridging through spanish. In 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), pages 65–68.

Daxiang Dong, Hua Wu, Wei He, Dianhai Yu, and
Haifeng Wang. 2015. Multi-task learning for mul-
tiple language translation. In Proceedings of the
53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 1723–1732.

Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
2016. Multi-way, multilingual neural machine
translation with a shared attention mechanism. In
Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT 2016), pages 866–875.

Markus Freitag and Yaser Al-Onaizan. 2016. Fast
domain adaptation for neural machine translation.
arXiv:1612.06897.

Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, De-
nis Yarats, and Yann N Dauphin. 2017. Convolu-
tional sequence to sequence learning. In Proceed-
ings of the 34th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML 2017), pages 1243–1252.

Jiatao Gu, Hany Hassan, Jacob Devlin, and Victor OK
Li. 2018. Universal neural machine translation for
extremely low resource languages. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long Papers), volume 1, pages 344–354.

Francisco Guzmán, Peng-Jen Chen, Myle Ott, Juan
Pino, Guillaume Lample, Philipp Koehn, Vishrav
Chaudhary, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2019. Two
new evaluation datasets for low-resource machine
translation: Nepali-english and sinhala-english.
arXiv:1902.01382.

Felix Hieber, Tobias Domhan, Michael Denkowski,
David Vilar, Artem Sokolov, Ann Clifton, and Matt
Post. 2017. Sockeye: A toolkit for neural machine
translation. arXiv:1712.05690.

Felix Hill, Kyunghyun Cho, and Anna Korhonen. 2016.
Learning distributed representations of sentences
from unlabelled data. In Proceedings of the 15th An-
nual Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT 2016),
pages 1367–1377.



1256

Niehues Jan, Roldano Cattoni, Stüker Sebastian,
Mauro Cettolo, Marco Turchi, and Marcello Fed-
erico. 2018. The iwslt 2018 evaluation campaign. In
Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on
Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2018), pages
2–6.

Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V Le, Maxim
Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat,
Fernanda Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado,
et al. 2017. Google’s multilingual neural machine
translation system: Enabling zero-shot translation.
Transactions of the Association of Computational
Linguistics (TACL), 5(1):339–351.

Armand Joulin, Piotr Bojanowski, Tomas Mikolov,
Hervé Jégou, and Edouard Grave. 2018. Loss in
translation: Learning bilingual word mapping with a
retrieval criterion. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 2979–2984.

Manuel Kauers, Stephan Vogel, Christian Fügen, and
Alex Waibel. 2002. Interlingua based statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Spoken Language Processing
(ICSLP 2002).

Yunsu Kim, Jiahui Geng, and Hermann Ney. 2018.
Improving unsupervised word-by-word translation
with language model and denoising autoencoder.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
862–868. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014.
Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv:1412.6980.

Tom Kocmi and Ondřej Bojar. 2018. Trivial trans-
fer learning for low-resource neural machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on
Machine Translation: Research Papers, pages 244–
252. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn and Rebecca Knowles. 2017. Six chal-
lenges for neural machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st ACL Workshop on Neural Machine
Translation (WNMT 2017), pages 28–39.

Guillaume Lample and Alexis Conneau. 2019.
Cross-lingual language model pretraining.
arXiv:1901.07291.

Guillaume Lample, Ludovic Denoyer, and
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2018a. Unsupervised
machine translation using monolingual corpora
only. In Proceedings of 6th International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR 2018).

Guillaume Lample, Myle Ott, Alexis Conneau, Lu-
dovic Denoyer, et al. 2018b. Phrase-based & neu-
ral unsupervised machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 5039–5049.

Minh-Thang Luong and Christopher D Manning. 2015.
Stanford neural machine translation systems for spo-
ken language domains. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation (IWSLT 2015), pages 76–79.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL) System Demonstrations,
pages 55–60.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. arXiv:1301.3781.

Graham Neubig and Junjie Hu. 2018. Rapid adapta-
tion of neural machine translation to new languages.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
875–880.

Toan Q Nguyen and David Chiang. 2017. Trans-
fer learning across low-resource, related languages
for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Eighth International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers),
volume 2, pages 296–301.

Emmanouil Antonios Platanios, Mrinmaya Sachan,
Graham Neubig, and Tom Mitchell. 2018. Contex-
tual parameter generation for universal neural ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 425–435.

Ye Qi, Devendra Sachan, Matthieu Felix, Sarguna Pad-
manabhan, and Graham Neubig. 2018. When and
why are pre-trained word embeddings useful for
neural machine translation? In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Pa-
pers), volume 2, pages 529–535.

Prajit Ramachandran, Peter Liu, and Quoc Le. 2017.
Unsupervised pretraining for sequence to sequence
learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 383–391.

Devendra Sachan and Graham Neubig. 2018. Parame-
ter sharing methods for multilingual self-attentional
translation models. In Proceedings of the Third
Conference on Machine Translation: Research Pa-
pers, pages 261–271. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Julian Schamper, Jan Rosendahl, Parnia Bahar, Yunsu
Kim, Arne Nix, and Hermann Ney. 2018. The
rwth aachen university supervised machine transla-
tion systems for wmt 2018. In Proceedings of the
Third Conference on Machine Translation: Shared
Task Papers, pages 496–503.



1257

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016a. Edinburgh neural machine translation sys-
tems for wmt 16. In Proceedings of the First Con-
ference on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared
Task Papers, volume 2, pages 371–376.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016b. Improving neural machine translation mod-
els with monolingual data. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), vol-
ume 1, pages 86–96.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016c. Neural machine translation of rare words
with subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1,
pages 1715–1725.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Proceedings of the 27th Interna-
tional Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems-Volume 2, pages 3104–3112. MIT Press.

Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Pratt. 2012. Learning to
learn. Springer Science & Business Media.

Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2007. A com-
parison of pivot methods for phrase-based statistical
machine translation. In Human Language Technolo-
gies 2007: The Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics; Proceedings of the Main Conference, pages
484–491.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 5998–6008.

Xinyi Wang, Hieu Pham, Philip Arthur, and Graham
Neubig. 2019. Multilingual neural machine transla-
tion with soft decoupled encoding. In Proceedings
of the 2019 International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR 2019).

Ruochen Xu, Yiming Yang, Naoki Otani, and Yuexin
Wu. 2018. Unsupervised cross-lingual transfer of
word embedding spaces. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 2465–2474.

Hao Zheng, Yong Cheng, and Yang Liu. 2017.
Maximum expected likelihood estimation for zero-
resource neural machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence, pages 4251–4257. AAAI Press.

Barret Zoph, Deniz Yuret, Jonathan May, and Kevin
Knight. 2016. Transfer learning for low-resource
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2016), pages 1568–
1575.


