



















































What Makes a Good Counselor? Learning to Distinguish between High-quality and Low-quality Counseling Conversations


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 926–935
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

926

What Makes a Good Counselor? Learning to Distinguish between
High-quality and Low-quality Counseling Conversations

Verónica Pérez-Rosas1, Xinyi Wu1, Kenneth Resnicow2, Rada Mihalcea1
1Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, USA

2School of Public Health, University of Michigan, USA
{vrncapr,wuxinyi,kresnic,mihalcea}@umich.edu

Abstract
The quality of a counseling intervention re-
lies highly on the active collaboration between
clients and counselors. In this paper, we ex-
plore several linguistic aspects of the collab-
oration process occurring during counseling
conversations. Specifically, we address the dif-
ferences between high-quality and low-quality
counseling. Our approach examines partici-
pants’ turn-by-turn interaction, their linguistic
alignment, the sentiment expressed by speak-
ers during the conversation, as well as the dif-
ferent topics being discussed. Our results sug-
gest important language differences in low-
and high-quality counseling, which we further
use to derive linguistic features able to capture
the differences between the two groups. These
features are then used to build automatic clas-
sifiers that can predict counseling quality with
accuracies of up to 88%.

1 Introduction

An increasing number of people are suffering from
behavioral health problems, including substance
abuse, smoking cessation, or eating disorders. Be-
cause behavior is something that is generally seen
as changeable, behavioral counseling has emerged
as an important strategy for helping people to iden-
tify and potentially change self-destructive or un-
healthy behaviors (Rollnick et al., 2008).

Despite its practical benefits, such as combating
addiction and providing broader disease preven-
tion and management, the process behind success-
ful behavioral counseling has not been fully elu-
cidated (Moyers et al., 2009), which in turn raises
the question of what makes a good counselor.

Seeking to answer this question, our paper ex-
plores differences between high- and low-quality
counseling conversations. Since the quality of
a counseling intervention relies highly on the
active collaboration between clients and coun-
selors (Gaume et al., 2009; Vader et al., 2010),

we explore which aspects of the collaboration pro-
cess occurring between counseling participants are
related to counseling quality. Our categorization
of counseling quality relies on general counsel-
ing principles taken from the literature on client-
centered counseling (Miller and Rollnick, 2013).
Thus, conversations where the counselor centers
on the client and expresses empathy are consid-
ered as high-quality interactions. In contrast, con-
versations where the counselor mainly provides
instruction and advice, and the client complies are
regarded as low-quality interactions.

Our work makes three important contributions.
First, we explore the use of noisy counseling data
obtained from public sources for the analysis of
counseling quality. Second, we conduct exten-
sive analyses on conversational aspects such as
turn-by-turn interaction, the sentiment expressed
during the interaction, linguistic alignment, and
salient topics during the conversation to obtain in-
sights into what are the patterns of high-quality
counseling. Hence, identifying specific conversa-
tional strategies used by good counselors. Third,
we show that features derived from our analyses,
along with standard Ngram features, lead to sig-
nificant improvement in the classification of coun-
seling quality.

2 Related Work

Computational approaches for the analysis of
counseling interactions have focused on two main
lines of work.

First, seeking to develop tools for the auto-
matic evaluation of counseling practice, several
linguistic-based approaches have been proposed to
aid the automatic identification of counselor and
client behaviors that are correlated to successful
interventions (Klonek et al., 2015). Can et al.
(2012) used n-grams, similarity features between



927

counselor and client speech, and dialog meta-
features to automatically detect and code coun-
selors’ reflective listening. A method based on la-
beled topic models is presented in (Atkins et al.,
2012, 2014), where authors focus on automatically
identifying conversation topics that relate to coun-
selor behaviors such as reflective listening, ques-
tions, support, and empathy. Methods that com-
bine acoustic and linguistic datastreams have also
been proposed to evaluate the quality of coun-
seling interactions. Xiao et al. (2014) presented
a study on the automatic evaluation of coun-
selor empathy based on analyzing correlations be-
tween prosody patterns and empathy showed by
the counselor during the counseling interactions.

Second, aiming to improve the understanding of
counseling interactions, researchers have started to
explore Natural Language Processing (NLP) ap-
proaches to study aspects such as language mirror-
ing, empathy, and reflective listening. Tanana et al.
(2015) addressed the identification of counselor
statements that discuss client change talk using
recursive neural networks to model sequences of
counselor and client verbal exchanges. Lord et al.
(2015) analyzed the language style synchrony be-
tween counselors and clients. Their approach re-
lies on the psycholinguistic categories from the
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) lex-
icon (Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010) to measure
the degree in which counselors match their clients’
language. More recently, Althoff et al. (2016) ex-
plored language style and symmetry in counseling
interactions by analyzing a large sample of text-
message-based counseling. Their main findings
suggest that the counselors who are more success-
ful act with more control in the conversations and
show lower levels of verbal coordination (mirror-
ing) than their less successful counterparts.

Following this line of work, this paper presents
the development of a counseling dataset that can
be used to implement data-driven methods for
the automatic evaluation of counseling quality.
Specifically, we conduct several linguistically in-
spired analyses on high-quality and low-quality
counseling interactions with the final goal of pro-
viding insights into conversational strategies used
by good counselors.

3 Counseling Dataset from Web Sources

Most of the current work on automatically ana-
lyzing counseling interaction has been conducted

on psychotherapy corpora with ethical and pri-
vacy constraints that limit their public accessibil-
ity (Can et al., 2012; Xiao et al., 2014). This, in
turn, has made it difficult to replicate and improve
upon previous research findings. In this paper,
we address this drawback by exploring the use of
counseling conversations collected from the web.

3.1 Data Collection

We start by identifying video clips contain-
ing counseling conversations from public video-
sharing sources such as YouTube and Vimeo.
Since the final goal of this study is to get in-
sights into counseling quality, we followed two
main strategies to search for videos that portray ei-
ther high-quality or low-quality counseling. First,
since the evaluation of counseling quality changes
across counseling strategies (Gottheil et al., 2002),
we focus on counseling conducted using motiva-
tional interviewing (MI) only. MI is a well es-
tablished behavioral counseling strategy that has
been successful in achieving behavioral health
outcomes (Apodaca et al., 2014). Thus, we re-
stricted our search to video titles indicating that
the counseling was conducted using MI and (op-
tionally) including information about the quality
of the interaction. Specifically, we use keywords
such as effective MI, using MI, good MI, MI coun-
seling demonstration, role play MI, ineffective MI,
bad MI, bad MI counseling, and how not to do
MI. Second, to make sure that the videos por-
tray counseling conversations we also enforce the
following requirements: the video should include
only two participants, i.e., counselor and client;
the video should not include (or include minimal)
background narratives, music, or animations; the
conversation should address a behavior change,
e.g., smoking cessation or quit drinking; and fi-
nally, the conversation should last at least three
minutes.

After collecting our initial set of videos us-
ing the described guidelines, we conduct a sec-
ond filtering step to verify that the counseling is
conducted using MI and that the video caption
matches the video content. To evaluate the use
of MI (or the lack of it) we follow general guide-
lines based on the MI literature (Miller and Roll-
nick, 2013). The criteria to label the quality of
a counseling conversation are as follows: during
high-quality counseling, counselors should use (to
some extent) reflective listening, ask questions,



928

LOW-QUALITY COUNSELING HIGH-QUALITY COUNSELING
T: How much are you drinking?
C: I don’t think I’m drinking that much I mean it’s, it’s
mainly for social gatherings like ... it’s nothing that I do
like by myself or whatever it’s just that
T: Is it like every weekend?
C: Every other weekend I would say
T: NAME I’m just so concerned you know can’t you think
of anything better to do

T: So, the last thing you’d want is for your daughter to start
smoking
C: I smoked when I was young and I’d certainly don’t want
it for her
T: And it sounds like you’re smoking setting an example
those are some things that that you’re also a bit concerned
about but as you said earlier not, not really ready to put
down your cigarettes immediately

Table 1: Transcript excerpts from low-quality and high-quality counseling conversations. C stands for client and T
stands for counselor (therapist)

provide support to the client decisions, and col-
laborate with the client. In contrast, in low-quality
conversations, counselors should show a lack of
listening and a predominant directing style, with
the counselor confronting the client and provid-
ing advice without asking for permission. Follow-
ing these guidelines, we manually inspected all the
videos. During this process, we discarded videos
that did not fit our criteria. The final video set
includes 259 counseling conversations, with 155
video clips labeled as high-quality counseling and
104 labeled as low-quality counseling. The length
of the conversations in the dataset ranges from 5-
20 minutes.

Our final set of videos consist of MI coun-
seling demonstrations by professional counselors,
and MI role-play counseling by psychology stu-
dents. Each video portrays different speakers and
the conversations cover various health topics in-
cluding smoking cessation, alcohol consumption,
substance abuse, weight management, and medi-
cation adherence. It is important to note that de-
spite the fact that some of these conversations do
not portray real patients, they are still valuable as a
data source as clinical studies often use simulated
patients1 to improve the communication skills of
medical practitioners (Imel et al., 2014).

3.2 Preprocessing and Transcription

All the videos in the dataset are first converted into
standard mp4 format and then preprocessed to ad-
dress issues frequently present in user-generated
video content such as introductory titles, anima-
tions, and narratives. In most cases, these interrup-
tions appear only at the beginning of the video so
we manually trim that portion of the video until the
counselor-client interaction starts. We obtain the
corresponding video transcripts using YouTube
automatic captioning and align it to the selected
segments using the transcript time stamps. To en-

1Also known as standardized patients.

Label Words Turns Words/turnMean Std Mean Std Mean Std
Counselor

High 811 500 25 18 36 16
Low 423 368 15 13 33 19

Client
High 674 439 25 18 31 17
Low 273 253 15 13 22 19
All 1168.4 837.0 42 34 31 14

Table 2: Word and turn statistics for low and high-
quality sessions by counselors and clients in the coun-
seling dataset.

able separate analyses on the counselor and client
side, we manually label the conversation turns as
either counselor or client. Note that the speaker la-
beling can also be performed using automatic di-
arization, however since automatic speaker label-
ing on medical data is very challenging we decided
to conduct this step manually.

Table 1 shows transcript excerpts of the two
types of counseling conversations in the dataset.
Word statistics of the final transcription set are
provided in Table 2.

3.3 Annotation of Counseling Skills

In addition to our empirical assessments of coun-
seling quality, for each conversation in the final
set, we obtain standard measurements of MI ad-
herence, which can be used as a proxy of MI qual-
ity. Specifically, we annotate two micro-skills that
are frequently used in the evaluation of MI coun-
seling: reflective listening and questions (Tollison
et al., 2008). During this process, we used the Mo-
tivational Interviewing Treatment Integrity (MITI)
coding scheme (Moyers et al., 2016), which is the
current gold standard for MI fidelity evaluation.

The annotation was conducted by two under-
graduate students who were trained in the use of
the MITI 4.0. Before annotating the full set, we
measured the reliability of the coding on a sample
of 20 double-coded conversations, with an even



929

Code Sample utterance
Question What do you think it would take to change your mind about participating in physical activity?
Reflection It sounds like you’re concerned by your weight and you want to start to make positive changes.

Table 3: Verbal examples of questions and reflections in the dataset

distribution for the low-quality and high-quality
categories. The resulting intra-class correlation
scores for both Questions and Reflections are 0.96
and 0.94, respectively, thus showing good levels
of agreement between the two annotators. Next,
we split the remaining sessions among the two an-
notators to be coded independently. During the
coding process, the annotators used both the audio
recording and the transcript. The annotation was
conducted at conversation turn-level using RQDA,
an R package for Qualitative Data Analysis.2

The final annotation set consists of 1,981 ques-
tions and 1,180 reflections. Sample reflections and
questions in our dataset are shown in Table 3.

4 Conversational Analyses

The goal of this paper is not only to learn mod-
els able to predict counseling quality but also to
gain a better understanding of what makes a good
counselor. Since the quality of counseling inter-
ventions relies highly on the active collaboration
between counselors and clients, we analyze sev-
eral linguistic aspects of the conversation in rela-
tion to counseling quality. Specifically, we focus
on language exchange patterns over the conversa-
tion, sentiment trends, linguistic alignment, and
topics discussed during the conversation.

4.1 Interaction at Turn Level

To explore the differences between low-quality
and high-quality counseling we start by analyzing
the counselor and client dialog interaction. Specif-
ically, we analyze their turn-by-turn interaction by
examining the average number of words used by
each speaker as well as their word ratio. To visu-
alize these aspects over time, we divide the session
into five stages of nearly identical number of turns.
Then, we calculate the average number of words
per turn up to each stage.

The motivation for this split is to treat the coun-
seling process as a sequence of continuous up-to-
now information. Figures 1 and 2 show the words
per turn by counselors and clients respectively.3

2http://rqda.r-forge.r-project.org/
3The error bars shown in all graphs are calculated using

bootstrapping with a 95% confidence interval.

20 40 60 80 100
Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

20.0

22.5

25.0

27.5

30.0

32.5

35.0

37.5

Av
er
ag
e 
nu
m
be
r o

f w
or
ds
 p
er
 tu

rn

Low quality
High quality

Figure 1: Average words per turn by counselors as the
conversation progresses.

20 40 60 80 100
Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

15

20

25

30

35

Av
er
ag

e 
nu

m
be

r o
f w

or
ds

 p
er
 tu

rn

Low quality
High quality

Figure 2: Average words per turn by clients as the con-
versation progresses.

20 40 60 80 100
Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Ra
tio

Low quality
High quality

Figure 3: Word ratio by turn between counselors and
clients as the conversation progresses.

From these graphs, we observe significant differ-
ences in the way clients participate in the counsel-
ing dialog, with clients speaking substantially less
in low-quality conversations. Conversely, coun-
selors seem to speak more during low-quality con-
versations; however, this difference is not statis-
tically significant as there is a noticeable overlap
between the two plots (p < 0.05; bootstrap re-
sampling test). To take a closer look at the word
exchange trends during the conversation, we also
plot the counselor to client word ratio per conver-
sation turn. The graph, shown in Figure 3, not
only confirms this result but also suggests a more
balanced word exchange between counselors and
clients during high-quality interactions.

http://rqda.r-forge.r-project.org/


930

Question Reflection
0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

Tu
rn
 ra

tio

Low quality
High quality

Figure 4: Number of questions and reflections per turn
during low quality and high quality counseling.

In addition, we examine whether counselor
skills, measured by the questions and reflections
asked during the conversation, differ based on the
quality of the counseling. We thus compare the
count of questions and reflections in the two types
of counseling normalized by the number of turns
in the session. The purpose of normalization is
to filter out the effect of length and focus on the
density of the behaviors. Figure 4 shows the re-
sults. The plot shows that reflection density in
low-quality counseling is significantly lower than
in high-quality counseling. On the other hand,
question density does not seem to be significantly
different between the two groups. These results
are in line with previous findings of reflective lis-
tening being a skill associated with high-quality
counseling (Glynn and Moyers, 2010)

4.2 Sentiment Trends

The sentiment expressed by counselors during the
conversation can provide important insights into
whether counselors focus on positive or negative
aspects of client communication. We thus ana-
lyze the sentiment expressed across the conver-
sation in relation to conversation quality. Given
the effort required to manually annotate the senti-
ment in each conversation turn, we opt for using an
automatic off-the-shelf sentiment classifier from
the Stanford Core NLP package (Manning et al.,
2014). Using this tool, we obtain the sentiment
score for each conversation turn. The score ranges
from very negative to very positive −−, −, 0, +
and ++, representing five sentiment categories in
the order of increasing positiveness. Since −−
and ++ rarely occur in our dataset we treat both
−− and− as negative, 0 as neutral, and + and ++
as positive. Figure 5 shows the distribution of the
three sentiment categories in low- and high-quality
counseling respectively, where we observe that
neutral sentiment occurs most frequently while the

negative neutral positive
Sentiment

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Pe
rc
en

ta
ge

Low quality
High quality

Figure 5: Distribution of positive, negative, and neutral
sentiment by counseling quality.

20 40 60 80 100
Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

Pe
rc
en
ta
ge

Low quality
High quality

Figure 6: Distribution of positive sentiment over 20%
splits of the conversation.

positive sentiment occurs the least.
We also examine sentiment changes throughout

the conversation. As before, we divide the turns in
each session into five splits and calculated the fre-
quency of positive, negative and neutral sentiment
at each stage. Figure 6 shows the positive sen-
timent trend in both low-quality and high-quality
conversations.4 The graph shows that during high-
quality counseling, the counselors tend to express
more positive sentiment than counselors in low-
quality counseling. This suggests that positive lan-
guage is a particular strategy of good counselors as
they seem to show higher levels of positive senti-
ment across the conversation as compared to coun-
selors in low-quality encounters. Furthermore, the
U-shaped curve observed for the distribution of
positive sentiment over the course of the conversa-
tions also points to counselors being more positive
and friendly at the beginning of the conversation
and ending the conversation with positive remarks.

5 Linguistic Alignment

The degree of language coordination that speak-
ers show during a conversation is an indicator of
whether they are able to establish a successful in-
teraction (Pickering and Garrod, 2004). We exam-
ine the counselor and client language coordination

4We did plot the negative and neutral sentiment, how-
ever, we did not find significant differences between the two
groups.



931

20 40 60 80 100
Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Av
er
ag

e 
of
 sc

or
es

Low quality
High quality

Figure 7: Linguistic style matching across five equal
segments of the conversation duration.

20 40 60 80 100
Portion of the conversation (% of turns)

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

Av
er
ag
e 
of
 sc
or
es

Lo  quality
High quality

Figure 8: Linguistic style coordination across five
equal segments of the conversation duration.

using the Linguistic Style Matching (LSM) (Gon-
zales et al., 2009) and Linguistic Style Coordi-
nation (LSC) metrics. These metrics quantify
to which extent one speaker, i.e., the counselor,
matches the language of the other, i.e., the client.
Both metrics are evaluated at turn-level across
eight linguistic markers from the LIWC dictio-
nary (Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010), including
quantifiers, conjunctions, adverbs, auxiliary verbs,
prepositions, articles, personal pronouns, and im-
personal pronouns. Figures 7 and 8 show each
metric trends across the two types of counseling.

Overall, the graphs suggest that during high-
quality interactions, counselors show higher levels
of linguistic alignment. This trend is more notice-
able at the turn by turn level where steady and in-
creased levels of linguistic matching are observed.
Interestingly, this analysis shows the opposite be-
havior from the study by (Althoff et al., 2016),
where successful counselors acted more in control
over the conversation. We attribute this difference
to two important aspects: 1) the type of conver-
sation being analyzed, i.e., synchronous (face-to-
face) vs asynchronous communication (text mes-
sages); and 2) the counseling strategy being im-
plemented, i.e., in our case MI counseling, which
is client-centered and thus the counselor’s role is
more supportive than directive.

6 Topics Discussed During the
Conversations

During behavioral counseling, counselors should
make an active effort to have a good understand-
ing of the client’s values and priorities (Miller,
1995). We explore how the conversation con-
tent relates to counseling quality by examining
the topics discussed by counselors and clients.
For this task, we apply the Meaning Extraction
Method (MEM) (Chung and Pennebaker, 2008),
a topic extraction method that identifies the most
common words used in a set of documents, and
cluster them into coherent themes by analyzing
their co-occurrences. This method has been used
in the past in the psychotherapy domain to ana-
lyze salient topics in depression forums (Ramirez-
Esparza et al., 2008) and also to investigate dif-
ferences in topics discussed by clients given their
therapy outcomes (Wolf et al., 2010).

We first identify unique words that are exclu-
sively used by either counselors or clients. During
this process, we applied part of speech tagging to
the counselor and client speech and remove do-
main related nouns such as drinking, alcohol, and
smoking in order to obtain general topics. We
also remove words with a frequency lower than
five and keep words that appear at least in 5% of
the speaker turns. Using the resulting word lists,
we generate counselor and client matrices contain-
ing binary vectors indicating the use of each word
by a specific speaker. Finally, we run a Principal
Component Analysis (PCA), followed by varimax
rotation on each document matrix to find clus-
ters of co-occurring nouns. This process results
in 10 and 8 components (topics) for counselors
and clients respectively, explaining at least 35%
of the total variance. To identify which topics are
more salient for each speaker we use the method
proposed in (Wilson et al., 2016) to measure the
degree to which a particular MEM topic (compo-
nent) is used during high-quality and low-quality
encounters.

Results are shown in Table 4, which shows the
scores assigned to each topic. In this table, scores
greater than 1 correspond to topics salient in high-
quality counseling, while scores lower than 1 indi-
cate topics salient in low-quality counseling.

The analyses hint on interesting differences in
the topics used by counselors during the conversa-
tions. In general, during high-quality interactions
the counselors seem to focus on the client’s mo-



932

Counselor Client
Component Sample nouns Score Component Sample nouns Score
Motivation Future, motivate, list, scale 1.62 Plan Follow, focus,decide, plan, mind 1.17

Plan Happen, explain, share, strategy,manage, successfully 1.27 Change
Difficult, lifestyle, kid, busy, ready,
manage, important, realize 1.15

Importance Importance, aware, scare, relate 1.25 Experience Experience, past, happen, situation 1.06

Encourage Confidence, experience, change,follow, support 1.22 Social
Parent, college, friend, group,
school 1.04

Reasons Concern, appreciate, tough, bring,interest 1.21 Concerns
Scary, risk, trouble, concern, upset,
worse 1.02

Reflection Connect, difficult, different, signifi-cant, tough, sound, deal 1.19 Family
Husband, child, mom, son, daugh-
ter, kid, house, love 0.99

Social Parent, family, social, friend, child,role, wife, people 1.16
Reasons to
Change

Habit, interest, break, consider,
hard, important, sure 0.94

Persuade Wrong, avoid, consequence, abso-lutely, worse 0.93 Uncertainty Choice, confuse, young, deal 0.80

Plan Plan, discuss, commit, focus 0.77
Time Talk, start, today, time, work 0.68

Table 4: Themes used by clients and counselors during counseling conversations, along with sample nouns and
salient theme scores. In this table, scores greater than 1 correspond to topics salient in high-quality counseling
conversations while scores lower than 1 indicate topics salient in low-quality conversations.

tivations, reasons to change, and encouragement.
Similarly, the clients discuss topics reflecting their
desire to change and describe their experiences
and concerns. In contrast, low-quality counsel-
ing shows more persuasion and uncertainty. Fi-
nally, scores closer to 1 indicate that regardless of
the counseling quality, both counselors and clients
discuss social and family topics as potential drives
for change, which further confirms the use of MI
in the conversations.

7 Discriminating Between Low- and
High-quality Counseling

7.1 Linguistic Features

We explore the use of linguistic cues to build
a computational model that predicts the over-
all quality of the counseling conversation. The
feature set consists of the cues identified during
our exploratory analyses as potential indicators of
counseling quality, as well as additional text fea-
tures used during standard NLP feature extraction,
i.e., ngrams. The features are extracted from the
conversation transcripts.

During our experiments, we first explore the
predictive power of each cue separately, followed
by an integrated model that attempts to combine
all the linguistic cues to improve the prediction of
counseling quality. The different features are as
follows:
N-grams: These features represent the language
used by the conversation participants and include
all the unique words and word-pairs present in the
transcript. We extract a vector containing the fre-

quencies of each word and word pair present in the
transcript.
Semantic information: We use categories from
the LIWC (Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010),
Opinion Finder (Wilson et al., 2005) and the
Wordnet Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004)
lexicons to derive features that identify words be-
longing to semantic categories that are potential
markers for conversation quality.
Metafeatures: We also extracted a set of metafea-
tures that describe the conversation interaction, in-
cluding the number of counselor turns, the num-
ber of client turns, the average words during client
and counselor turns, and the ratio of counselor and
client words in each turn.
Sentiment: These features are designed to cap-
ture the sentiment trend in the counselor responses
during the conversation. The set includes the per-
centage of positive, negative, and neutral turns, the
number of times the sentiment changes during the
conversation i.e., positive to negative, negative to
positive, and positive/negative to neutral, as well
as counts of sequences increasing and decreasing
sentiment intensity.
Linguistic Alignment: We measure the LSM and
LSC metrics as described in section 4 over 74
LIWC categories and measured at 20% increments
of the encounter duration.
Discourse topics: These features consist of the
10 topics identified in section 4 as frequently dis-
cussed during the MI encounters by counselors.
The features are obtained by using regression-
based factor scores.
MITI behaviors: This set includes the number of



933

Feature set
Counseling Quality

F-score
Acc. Low High

Baseline 59.846%
N-grams 87.259% 0.849 0.890
Semantic 80.309% 0.763 0.832
Metafeatures 72.587% 0.297 0.830
Sentiment 74.517% 0.298 0.844
Alignment 72.587% 0.640 0.779
Topics 81.081% 0.768 0.840
MITI Behav 79.537% 0.787 0.808
All features 88.031% 0.857 0.897

Table 5: Overall prediction results and F-scores for
counseling quality using linguistic feature sets

reflections and questions by the counselor during
the conversation as well as the ratio of reflections
to questions. The counts were derived from the
manual annotations described in section 3.

7.2 Classification Results
We use the different feature sets described in sec-
tion 7.1 to build classifiers that distinguish be-
tween high-quality and low-quality counseling.
The experiments are performed using Support
Vector Machine classifiers and evaluated using
leave-one-out cross-validation. Our choice of the
classification algorithm is motivated by the rel-
atively small size of our dataset, which makes
neural-based approaches less effective as they
rapidly overfit. As a reference value, we use a ma-
jority class baseline, obtained by selecting high-
quality as the default class label, which corre-
sponds to 59.84% accuracy.

Table 5 shows the classification performance
obtained when using each feature set at the time.
We measure the performance of the classifiers
in terms of accuracy and F-score, which pro-
vide overall and class-specific performance as-
sessments. Compared to the majority baseline, all
the feature sets demonstrate a clear improvement
in the classification of counseling quality. Among
all feature sets, N-grams attain the best perfor-
mance, followed by discourse topics and the se-
mantic feature sets. Furthermore, the combination
of all the features sets achieve the best accuracy
values.

To better understand the contribution of the dif-
ferent feature sets to the overall classifier perfor-
mance, we conduct an ablation study, where we
remove one group of features at a time. We per-
form feature ablation only for the features sets that
represent linguistic aspects identified as good dis-
criminators of counseling quality during our ex-

Feature set
Counseling Quality

F-score
Acc. Low High

All features 88.031% 0.857 0.897
– Alignment 86.100% 0.836 0.879
– Topics 88.031% 0.857 0.897
– MITI Behaviors 88.031% 0.857 0.897
– N-grams 76.448% 0.702 0.805

Table 6: Feature ablation study

ploratory analyses.5 Table 6 shows the classifi-
cation results obtained when removing the align-
ment features, the topics, the MITI behaviors, and
the N-grams. The removal of the linguistic align-
ment features showed an important drop in ac-
curacy values, thus confirming our findings from
Section 4 that linguistic alignment plays an im-
portant role in counseling quality. Excluding topic
features does not seem to affect the model, sug-
gesting that these features might provide redun-
dant information already captured by the other fea-
tures. More importantly, the results show that the
automatically generated features can provide com-
parable performance to manually coded features
(MITI behaviors) as the model does not show per-
formance loss when removing this set. Finally,
we also experimented with removing the N-gram
features, which lead to the highest drop in per-
formance, hence showing the importance of these
features in the model.

8 Conclusions

We presented an extensive analysis of linguistic
aspects of the collaboration process during coun-
seling conversations in relation to counseling qual-
ity. We specifically analyzed participants’ turn-by-
turn interaction, linguistic alignment, and topics
discussed, as well as the sentiment expressed by
the counselor during the conversation. Our main
findings are summarized below.
Turn-by-turn interaction: During high-quality
counseling, counselors achieve a more balanced
word exchange with clients as the conversation
progresses. This was also confirmed by our analy-
sis of counseling micro-skills, which showed that
good counselors use more reflective listening, thus
suggesting that they speak less and listen more. In
contrast, during low-quality conversations coun-
selors tend to speak more than their clients thus

5The sentiment trends (sentiment) and turn-level met-
rics (metafeatures) did show important differences between
groups but were not as stable as the other cues.



934

making it difficult to understand their needs.
Sentiment: Good counselors tend to express
more positive sentiment than less successful coun-
selors, which suggest that they focus on the posi-
tive aspects of the conversations rather than on the
negative aspects.
Linguistic alignment: Good counselors mirror
the language of their clients as high-quality inter-
actions showed higher levels of linguistic align-
ment. This trend is more noticeable at turn-by-turn
level where steady and increased levels of linguis-
tic mirroring were observed.
Topics: Good counselors discuss topics related to
behavior change and commitment whereas their
counterparts focus more on resistance and persua-
sion. However, the general trend is to discuss top-
ics related to family and social interactions, re-
gardless of the counseling quality.

The results of our analyses were used to build
accurate counseling quality classifiers that rely
on linguistic aspects, with accuracies of up to
88% as compared to a majority baseline of 60%.
Our experimental results showed that the proposed
features can provide comparable performance to
manually coded features for this task, thus poten-
tially bypassing the need for manual annotations,
which are usually costly and time-consuming.
This is an important finding as an open problem in
the counseling field is the need for computational
tools that allow scaling-up the evaluation of the
quality of MI interventions (Atkins et al., 2014).

In the future, we plan to build upon the acquired
knowledge and the developed classifiers to gener-
ate systems able to provide actionable feedback on
how to achieve high-quality counseling. Such sys-
tems can aid the process of acquiring or improving
counseling skills for both novice and experienced
MI counselors.

Finally, an important contribution of this
work is the dataset collected, which is pub-
licly available at http://lit.eecs.umich.
edu/downloads.html.

Acknowledgements

This material is based in part upon work sup-
ported by the Michigan Institute for Data Sci-
ence, by the National Science Foundation (grant
#1815291), and by the John Templeton Founda-
tion (grant #61156). Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author and do not neces-

sarily reflect the views of the Michigan Institute
for Data Science, the National Science Founda-
tion, or John Templeton Foundation.

References
Tim Althoff, Kevin Clark, and Jure Leskovec. 2016.

Large-scale Analysis of Counseling Conversations:
An Application of Natural Language Processing to
Mental Health. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Timothy R Apodaca, Brian Borsari, Kristina M Jack-
son, Molly Magill, Richard Longabaugh, Nadine R
Mastroleo, and Nancy P Barnett. 2014. Sustain
talk predicts poorer outcomes among mandated col-
lege student drinkers receiving a brief motivational
intervention. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors,
28(3):631.

David C Atkins, Timothy N Rubin, Mark Steyvers,
Michelle A Doeden, Brian R Baucom, and Andrew
Christensen. 2012. Topic models: A novel method
for modeling couple and family text data. Journal of
family psychology, 26(5):816.

David C Atkins, Mark Steyvers, Zac E Imel, and
Padhraic Smyth. 2014. Scaling up the evaluation of
psychotherapy: evaluating motivational interview-
ing fidelity via statistical text classification. Imple-
mentation Science, 9(1):49.

Dogan Can, Panayiotis G. Georgiou, David C. Atkins,
and Shrikanth S. Narayanan. 2012. A case study:
Detecting counselor reflections in psychotherapy for
addictions using linguistic features. In INTER-
SPEECH, pages 2254–2257. ISCA.

Cindy K Chung and James W Pennebaker. 2008.
Revealing dimensions of thinking in open-ended
self-descriptions: An automated meaning extraction
method for natural language. Journal of Research in
Personality, 42(1):96–132.

Jacques Gaume, Gerhard Gmel, Mohamed Faouzi, and
Jean-Bernard Daeppen. 2009. Counselor skill influ-
ences outcomes of brief motivational interventions.
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 37(2):151 –
159.

Lisa H Glynn and Theresa B Moyers. 2010. Chasing
change talk: The clinician’s role in evoking client
language about change. Journal of substance abuse
treatment, 39(1):65–70.

Amy L Gonzales, Jeffrey T Hancock, and James W
Pennebaker. 2009. Language style matching as a
predictor of social dynamics in small groups. Com-
munication Research.

Edward Gottheil, Charles Thornton, and Stephen Wein-
stein. 2002. Effectiveness of high versus low struc-
ture individual counseling for substance abuse. The
American journal on addictions, 11(4):279–290.

http://lit.eecs.umich.edu/downloads.html
http://lit.eecs.umich.edu/downloads.html
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2008.12.001
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2008.12.001


935

Zac E Imel, Scott A Baldwin, John S Baer, Bryan Hart-
zler, Chris Dunn, David B Rosengren, and David C
Atkins. 2014. Evaluating therapist adherence in mo-
tivational interviewing by comparing performance
with standardized and real patients. Journal of con-
sulting and clinical psychology, 82(3):472.

Florian E Klonek, Vicenç Quera, and Simone Kauf-
feld. 2015. Coding interactions in motivational in-
terviewing with computer-software: What are the
advantages for process researchers? Computers in
Human Behavior, 44:284–292.

Sarah Peregrine Lord, Elisa Sheng, Zac E Imel, John
Baer, and David C Atkins. 2015. More than re-
flections: empathy in motivational interviewing in-
cludes language style synchrony between therapist
and client. Behavior therapy, 46(3):296–303.

Christopher Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The stanford corenlp natural language pro-
cessing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd annual
meeting of the association for computational lin-
guistics: system demonstrations, pages 55–60.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–
41.

William R Miller and Stephen Rollnick. 2013. Motiva-
tional interviewing: Helping people change, Third
edition. The Guilford Press.

Theresa B Moyers, Tim Martin, Jon M Houck,
Paulette J Christopher, and J Scott Tonigan. 2009.
From in-session behaviors to drinking outcomes: a
causal chain for motivational interviewing. Journal
of consulting and clinical psychology, 77(6):1113.

Theresa B. Moyers, Lauren N. Rowell, Jennifer K.
Manuel, Denise Ernst, and Jon M. Houck. 2016.
The motivational interviewing treatment integrity
code (miti 4): Rationale, preliminary reliability and
validity. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,
65(Supplement C):36 – 42. Motivational Interview-
ing in Substance Use Treatment.

Martin J Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. Toward
a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral
and brain sciences, 27(2):169–190.

Nairan Ramirez-Esparza, Cindy K. Chung, Ewa
Kacewicz, and James W. Pennebaker. 2008. The
psychology of word use in depression forums in en-
glish and in spanish: Testing two text analytic ap-
proaches. In In Proc. ICWSM 2008.

Stephen Rollnick, William R Miller, Christopher C
Butler, and Mark S Aloia. 2008. Motivational in-
terviewing in health care: helping patients change
behavior. COPD: Journal of Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease, 5(3):203–203.

C. Strapparava and A. Valitutti. 2004. WordNet-Affect:
an affective extension of WordNet. In Proceedings
of LREC, volume 4, pages 1083–1086.

Michael Tanana, Kevin Hallgren, Zac Imel, David
Atkins, Padhraic Smyth, and Vivek Srikumar. 2015.
Recursive Neural Networks for Coding Therapist
and Patient Behavior in Motivational Interviewing.
2nd Workshop on Computational Linguistics and
Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to
Clinical Reality, pages 71–79.

Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: Liwc and comput-
erized text analysis methods. Journal of language
and social psychology, 29(1):24–54.

Sean J. Tollison, Christine M. Lee, Clayton Neigh-
bors, Teryl A. Neil, Nichole D. Olson, and Mary E.
Larimer. 2008. Questions and reflections: The use
of motivational interviewing microskills in a peer-
led brief alcohol intervention for college students.
Behavior Therapy, 39(2):183 – 194.

Amanda M Vader, Scott T Walters, Gangamma Ch-
enenda Prabhu, Jon M Houck, and Craig A Field.
2010. The language of motivational interviewing
and feedback: counselor language, client language,
and client drinking outcomes. Psychology of Addic-
tive Behaviors, 24(2):190.

Steven R. Wilson, Rada Mihalcea, Ryan L. Boyd, and
James W. Pennebaker. 2016. Cultural influences on
the measurement of personal values through words,
volume SS-16-01 - 07, pages 314–317. AI Access
Foundation.

Theresa Wilson, Paul Hoffmann, Swapna Somasun-
daran, Jason Kessler, Janyce Wiebe, Yejin Choi,
Claire Cardie, Ellen Riloff, and Siddharth Patward-
han. 2005. Opinionfinder: A system for subjectivity
analysis. In Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP on Inter-
active Demonstrations, HLT-Demo ’05, pages 34–
35. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Markus Wolf, Cindy K Chung, and Hans Kordy. 2010.
Inpatient treatment to online aftercare: e-mailing
themes as a function of therapeutic outcomes. Psy-
chotherapy Research, 20(1):71–85.

Bo Xiao, Daniel Bone, Maarten Van Segbroeck, Zac E
Imel, David C Atkins, Panayiotis G Georgiou, and
Shrikanth S Narayanan. 2014. Modeling therapist
empathy through prosody in drug addiction counsel-
ing. In Fifteenth Annual Conference of the Interna-
tional Speech Communication Association.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2014.11.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2014.11.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2014.11.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2014.11.002
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2016.01.001
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2016.01.001
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2016.01.001
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2007.07.001
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2007.07.001
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2007.07.001
https://doi.org/10.3115/1225733.1225751
https://doi.org/10.3115/1225733.1225751

