



















































Finding Your Voice: The Linguistic Development of Mental Health Counselors


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 936–947
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

936

Finding Your Voice:
The Linguistic Development of Mental Health Counselors

Justine Zhang
Cornell University
jz727@cornell.edu

Robert Filbin
Crisis Text Line

bob@crisistextline.org

Christine Morrison
Crisis Text Line

christine@crisistextline.org

Jaclyn Weiser
Crisis Text Line

jweiser@crisistextline.org

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil ∗
Cornell University

cristian@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

Mental health counseling is an enterprise with
profound societal importance where conver-
sations play a primary role. In order to ac-
quire the conversational skills needed to face a
challenging range of situations, mental health
counselors must rely on training and on con-
tinued experience with actual clients. How-
ever, in the absence of large scale longitudi-
nal studies, the nature and significance of this
developmental process remain unclear. For
example, prior literature suggests that expe-
rience might not translate into consequential
changes in counselor behavior. This has led
some to even argue that counseling is a profes-
sion without expertise.

In this work, we develop a computational
framework to quantify the extent to which in-
dividuals change their linguistic behavior with
experience and to study the nature of this evo-
lution. We use our framework to conduct
a large longitudinal study of mental health
counseling conversations, tracking over 3,400
counselors across their tenure. We reveal
that overall, counselors do indeed change their
conversational behavior to become more di-
verse across interactions, developing an in-
dividual voice that distinguishes them from
other counselors. Furthermore, a finer-grained
investigation shows that the rate and nature
of this diversification vary across functionally
different conversational components.

1 Introduction

Conversations are central to many human en-
deavors and professions, from academic advis-
ing, to business negotiations, to customer ser-
vice, to mental health counseling. The choice
of conversational language has been shown to
correlate with a broad spectrum of consequential

∗Corresponding senior author.

outcomes such as success in persuasion (Haber-
nal and Gurevych, 2016; Tan et al., 2016; Zhang
et al., 2016; Packard et al., 2018), in team
performance (Yang et al., 2015; Niculae and
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, 2016), or in social sup-
port (Atkins et al., 2014; Althoff et al., 2016;
Choudhury and Kıcıman, 2017). However, sur-
prisingly little is known about how adults de-
velop conversational skills. Understanding this
challenging process has the potential to help with
tracking and fostering behavioral development in
conversation-focused endeavors.

In this work, we address this knowledge gap by
examining how individuals change their conversa-
tional language in a domain with profound soci-
etal importance, where conversations play a pri-
mary role: mental health counseling. Counselors
in this setting face a daunting task: through con-
versations, they need to empathetically respond to
and support clients undergoing psychological dis-
tress (Althoff et al., 2016).

Initial training can orient counselors towards the
principles of counseling conversations, but cannot
cover the broad range of situations they will in-
evitably encounter. Practical experience, on the
other hand, comes with scarce direct feedback: it
is hard for counselors to gauge whether a client
was positively affected by a conversation. Per-
haps as a result, prior studies find no consequential
change in counselor behavior or effectiveness be-
yond their initial training (Dawes, 1996; Hill et al.,
2015; Goldberg et al., 2016). This lack of evi-
dence has led some to even argue that psychologi-
cal counseling is a “profession without any exper-
tise” (Tracey et al., 2014).

However, even in the absence of feedback,
multiple forces could lead counselors to change
their behavior with experience. First, practice
exposes—and perhaps familiarizes—the coun-
selor to a wide range of client situations, far be-



937

yond what training can encompass. This could en-
able them to increasingly adapt to the situations
they encounter, differentiating their behavior in
one conversation from their behavior in another
(within-counselor diversification).

Second, counselors come into the domain with
individual personalities and conversational styles.
A strict adherence to training materials can lead to
unnatural and robotic conversations, which can be
taxing on the counselors (Orlinsky and Rønnestad,
2005) and detrimental to the client (Henry et al.,
1993; Castonguay et al., 1996). A counselor
might therefore seek to adapt training principles
to their own personality, finding a voice that dis-
tinguishes them from other counselors (between-
counselor diversification).

However, change is far from guaranteed, and
several forces potentially counteract the two vec-
tors of change outlined above. The challenging na-
ture and high (sometimes literally life-and-death)
stakes of the conversations might lead to an overly
cautious approach, deterring counselors from de-
parting from language exemplified in the training
material and instead leading them to seek “security
in a restrictive practice routine” (Skovholt et al.,
1997). The lack of feedback might exacerbate this
stagnation and inflexibility, since counselors have
no direct way to assess the potential effects of be-
havioral changes (Shanteau, 1992; Kahneman and
Klein, 2009).

In this work, we design a computational
methodology to quantitatively track systematic
changes along the two dimensions of within- and
between-counselor linguistic diversification. Our
framework additionally exposes the rate at which
these changes happen across individuals and high-
lights particular functional components of their
language where this change is especially salient.

We apply this framework to conduct a large-
scale longitudinal study of mental health coun-
seling conversations on Crisis Text Line, a text-
based crisis counseling platform,1 tracking the
conversational behavior of over 3,400 counselors
across their tenure. Our study reveals that over-
all, counselors do indeed systematically change
their conversational behavior, becoming more lin-
guistically diverse across their own conversations
as well as among each other. Furthermore, this
diversification process advances at different rates

1This study was done in collaboration with Crisis Text
Line, using anonymized data and following IRB approval.
Details of the data access are included in Section 3.

in different functional components of the con-
versation; in particular, within-counselor diver-
sification is amplified in components concerning
the client’s specific problems. This suggests that
counselors accumulate domain fluency, perhaps
enabling them to better address the particular situ-
ations they encounter.

We complement this intuition by examining
how counselor vocabulary shifts with experience:
which words increase in usage or fall out of fa-
vor as counselors gain experience? We find that
as they advance in tenure, counselors adopt more
specialized as well as more colloquial language,
while slowly abandoning language from the train-
ing material.

Overall, these results provide the first evidence
of a systematic development of mental health
counselors with experience, thus contributing to
open questions about expertise from the counsel-
ing and psychotherapy literature. From a practi-
cal standpoint, our framework could aid counsel-
ing platforms to automatically identify counselors
that stagnate. Additionally, by highlighting con-
versational practices that require more experience
to grasp, this type of understanding can inform
sustained training programs across a counselor’s
career (Tracey et al., 2014).

More broadly, our work takes initial steps in un-
derstanding how individuals develop their conver-
sational behavior. Beyond mental health counsel-
ing, this methodology can potentially provide in-
sights into other domains where having conversa-
tions is crucial but potentially hard to teach, such
as academic advising and customer service.

2 Further Related Work

Our work draws on prior literature concerning lan-
guage use in conversational settings like counsel-
ing, as well as on studies of linguistic change.
Language in the mental health domain. Prior
literature has underlined the importance of linguis-
tic choices and conversational behavior in mental
health-related contexts. Qualitative (Labov and
Fanshel, 1977; Miller and Mount, 2001; Catley
et al., 2006; Gaume et al., 2010) and computa-
tional (Atkins et al., 2014; Tanana et al., 2015,
2016; Althoff et al., 2016; Pérez-Rosas et al.,
2018) studies of dialogic interactions in counsel-
ing and psychotherapy have highlighted the po-
tential benefits of conversational skills—such as
a counselor’s ability to reflect on a client’s par-



938

ticular concerns. Other work has considered a
broader range of settings such as online forums,
exploring how psychological support is sought and
provided (Choudhury and Kıcıman, 2017; Ernala
et al., 2017; Yates et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2017,
2019; Pruksachatkun et al., 2019). While these
studies have focused on linguistic behaviors in the
scope of single interactions, we seek to understand
how these behaviors develop over time.
Linguistic behavior in conversations. Our work
relates more broadly to other computational stud-
ies of conversations. As in the mental health set-
ting, these studies have largely considered the be-
havior of interlocutors in a single conversation, ty-
ing it to outcomes such as persuasion, problem-
solving and incivility (Curhan and Pentland, 2007;
Rosenthal and McKeown, 2015; Wang et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2018), or to social correlates such as
power, gender and age (Gonzales et al., 2010; Ire-
land et al., 2011; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.,
2012; Nguyen et al., 2013; Prabhakaran et al.,
2014). In contrast, our work seeks to chart the de-
velopment of linguistic tendencies of individuals
as they engage in many conversations.
Linguistic change. Prior studies have examined
language change in offline (Labov, 1966, 1972,
2011; Eckert, 2005; Tagliamonte, 2011) and on-
line (Cassell et al., 2006; Lam, 2008; Nguyen
and Rosé, 2011; Garley and Hockenmaier, 2012;
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2013; Bamman
et al., 2014; Eisenstein et al., 2014; Nguyen et al.,
2015; Kulkarni et al., 2015, 2016; Goel et al.,
2016) settings. A core component of such stud-
ies of linguistic socialization has been the pres-
ence of external social influences that may impose
linguistic norms—for instance, individuals are of-
ten able to observe the language used in posts by
other members of an online community. In con-
trast, such social pressures are minimized in the
counseling domain we consider. Our study hence
reflects an alternate set of possible mechanisms for
linguistic change, disentangling individual experi-
ence from normative influence.

3 Domain: Mental Health Counseling

In this work we study the linguistic development
of counselors in Crisis Text Line, a large text-
based mental health counseling platform. The
platform offers a free 24/7 service for individu-
als undergoing mental health crises—henceforth
texters—to have one-on-one conversations with

counselors via text messages. In collaboration
with the platform, and in accordance with an
IRB, we accessed the complete collection of
anonymized conversations up to September 2018.2

Counselors. The service is driven by a dedicated
roster of mental health counselors, comprised of
volunteers who join the platform via an applica-
tion process.3 Each counselor starts by complet-
ing a standardized training curriculum; once they
graduate they can then sign up for shifts during
which they take conversations with texters. To
gain a better understanding of the domain, the first
author completed the training curriculum and par-
ticipated in a shift.

Many counselors are quite committed to the ser-
vice: the median counselor takes 43 conversations
while a quarter take at least 120. In taking a lon-
gitudinal view, we focus on this latter subpopu-
lation of counselors who have taken at least 120
conversations, and who started their tenure after
July 2015.4 The 3,475 counselors in this subset
took their first 120 conversations over an average
of 5 months; in total they have taken 1,055,924
conversations, accounting for 73% of all the con-
versations on the platform to date.

We analyze a counselor’s behavior at different
experience levels by dividing their tenure into a
series of consecutive life-stages S0,S1, . . . of s
conversations each; unless otherwise indicated we
take s = 20. Our particular focus is on examining
counselor behavior over their first 120 conversa-
tions. We refer to a counselor as tenured once they
have taken at least 100 conversations, and denote
the life-stage consisting of a counselor’s 100th to
120th conversations as S. Our subsequent analyses
compare behavior in earlier life-stages to S, using
this eventual tenured state as a reference point.
Counseling conversations. In each conversation,
a counselor is faced with a challenging task: guid-

2This study was done as part of a research fellowship pro-
gram organized by Crisis Text Line, which granted the au-
thors access to an anonymized version of the dataset, sub-
ject to an IRB. The program is open to other researchers by
application: https://www.crisistextline.org/
open-data-collaborations. Pisani et al. (2019) de-
scribes the extensive privacy and ethical considerations, and
the policies implemented by the platform to address them.

3Just over half of counselors have no prior experience in
a psychology-related domain. Our results are qualitatively
similar over the subset of counselors who do not have a
psychology-related background.

4We enforce the start time to account for variations in the
training curriculum; our results are qualitatively similar under
slight modifications to the start month, and over counselors
with shorter tenures.

https://www.crisistextline.org/open-data-collaborations
https://www.crisistextline.org/open-data-collaborations


939

ing a texter through a moment of crisis towards
a better mental state. This process requires the
counselor to empathetically engage with the tex-
ter, often in difficult, high-stakes situations. The
complexity of this inherently interactional task
gives rise to substantive conversations—averaging
14 counselor messages per conversation and 28
words per counselor message—that yield a rich ar-
ray of linguistic behaviors (Atkins et al., 2014; Al-
thoff et al., 2016). We focus on tracking counselor
behavior over conversations with at least 10 coun-
selor messages (comprising 64% of our dataset).

The challenge of taking conversations is com-
pounded by the diversity of texters who contact the
service. Texters can come with a wide range of is-
sues, from anxiety to family problems to suicidal
ideation. The platform assigns each texter to an
available counselor; under the assignment mech-
anism, counselors cannot select which conversa-
tions they take, such that longitudinal changes
in behavior cannot be accounted for by shifts in
counselors’ preferences. In addition, many texters
only contact the service once and the mechanism
does not specifically assign returning texters to the
same counselor, distinguishing this setting from
psychotherapy contexts with sustained counselor-
client relationships considered in other work.

One salient guiding force for new counselors in
this challenging domain is the training curriculum,
through which counselors develop skills such as
active listening and collaborative problem-solving
in a 35-hour-long course. Beyond this initial train-
ing, other forces may also act to shape a coun-
selor’s behavior through the remainder of their
tenure. For instance, as counselors take more con-
versations, they are exposed to a broader range of
texter situations beyond what the curriculum can
account for; these experiences may further rein-
force or alter their linguistic practices and fill in-
evitable gaps in the training.5

Feasibility check: Is there linguistic change?
We first provide a coarse demonstration that the
linguistic behavior of counselors does indeed
change with experience in a systematic way. We
consider a toy classification task: determining
whether a conversation is taken by a new coun-

5Each shift is overseen by supervisors who can offer occa-
sional feedback to counselors during their shifts; counselors
can also interact with one another and solicit high-level ad-
vice. While in this context the level of social feedback is
minimal, an interesting line of future work could more explic-
itly consider the interplay between an individual’s behavioral
development and such interactions.

selor who has experienced less than 20 conver-
sations (S0), versus a tenured counselor who has
taken between 100 and 120 (S), on the basis of
the language in the counselor’s messages. In par-
ticular, we formulate a paired prediction prob-
lem of distinguishing between two conversations
taken by the same counselor at S0 and S. Over
a random subset of 10% of counselors in our
data—comprising 3,075 conversation pairs—we
train a logistic regression model using bigrams in
counselor messages as features; we perform 10-
fold cross-validation and ensure that no counselor
spans multiple folds.6

The model gets a cross-validation accuracy of
86%, underlining that counselors undergo dra-
matic linguistic changes with experience; the high
accuracy also highlights that such changes exhibit
systematic consistencies across different coun-
selors. Moreover, an analogous model that consid-
ers texters’ messages achieves only 57% accuracy,
suggesting that changes in counselor behavior do
not merely reflect changes in the texters they in-
teract with.7 This linguistic development is also
not solely encompassed by population-wide shifts
in trivial surface-level attributes—there is no sys-
tematic change in the word-counts of counselors’
messages or the lengths of their conversations.

In the remainder of this work, we will develop a
methodology to characterize the systematic nature
of this linguistic change.

4 Measures of Linguistic Diversity

As discussed in the introduction, certain circum-
stantial forces can drive counselors to diversify
their conversational language with experience,
while others can lead to linguistic stagnation. In
order to operationalize these intuitions, we first
design a general framework aimed at capturing
the degree of linguistic diversity across conversa-
tions and individuals.8 We then instantiate this
framework in the counseling domain and esti-

6We use logistic regression models with `1 loss, tf-idf
transforming features, and grid-searching over C, the num-
ber and the maximum document frequency of bigrams.

7That this low accuracy nonetheless exceeds the 50% ran-
dom baseline suggests that changes in counselor behavior are
reflected in aspects of a texter’s behavior as well. Indeed,
prior work (Althoff et al., 2016) has suggested that texters
can be influenced within a conversation; future work could
further model whether the nature of this influence on the tex-
ter also varies with counselor experience.

8To encourage its application to other conversational do-
mains, we release an implementation of this framework as
part of ConvoKit: https://convokit.cornell.edu

https://convokit.cornell.edu


940

mate the relation between the linguistic diversity
of counselors and their effectiveness in engender-
ing positive outcomes. Finally, we use the result-
ing high-level linguistic characterization to ana-
lyze the evolution of a counselor’s behavior over
their tenure—the main focus of this work.
Types of diversity. We can measure linguistic
diversity in conversations relative to two refer-
ence points. First, an individual can linguistically
vary across the different conversations they have;
second, their language can deviate from that of
other individuals. We develop two complementary
language-model-based measures corresponding to
these reference points.
Within-individual diversity. Formally, for a
particular individual I and life-stage Si, we di-
vide the set of conversations in that stage into
two temporally-interleaved subsets, henceforth the
training and test sets. We train a unigram language
model LiI over all of the individual’s messages in
conversations in the training set. For each con-
versation c in the test set, we can then compute
its within-cross-entropy H(c,LiI) to I’s language
model in Si. We average within-cross-entropies
across all test set conversations to quantify I’s
within-individual diversity during Si.9
Between-individual diversity. We can analo-
gously define I’s between-individual diversity by
replacing I’s language model at life-stage Si with
the language model of another individual J at
the same life-stage, where J is randomly-selected
among I’s peers. In this way, we calculate the
between-cross-entropy H(c,LiJ ) for each conver-
sation c in I’s test set of conversations, which we
average to quantify I’s between-individual diver-
sity during Si.

Cross-entropy is known to be sensitive to the
amount of text used to train LiI , as well as to the
length of the document c (Genzel and Charniak,
2002). To mitigate trivial length-based effects and
ensure that our measures of diversity afford mean-
ingful comparisons across life-stages and across
individuals, we randomly sample W words from
each training set to construct the language mod-
els, and w words from each conversation to com-
pute the cross-entropies. For robustness, we take
averages over several samples for each measure,
and over randomly selected peers J for between-
cross-entropy.

9For computational efficiency, we account for unseen vo-
cabulary with an approximate form of smoothing by treating
unseen words as tokens with frequency 1 in the training set.

Relative diversity. We note that within- and
between-individual diversity are intrinsically re-
lated. If an individual’s own conversations are
closer to each other than they are from conversa-
tions of other individuals we can say that the coun-
selor has a distinctive voice. This would not be the
case if the between-individual diversity would be
entirely explained by their within-individual diver-
sity. To capture this intuitive notion we can mea-
sure I’s linguistic distinctiveness during each Si
as the average difference between the within- and
between-cross-entropies of each of their conver-
sations in the corresponding test set. We interpret
high relative diversities as indicative of individuals
who have a consistent voice that stands out when
compared to others.
Application to the counseling domain. To ap-
ply these methods to analyze mental health coun-
selors, we construct language models from W =
2, 000 words of each counselor and life-stage,
compute cross-entropies with w = 200 words
per conversation and average over i = 50 random
samples.10 To account for potential differences in
peer groups that may have been trained with dif-
ferent curricula, for between-counselor diversity
we consider as peers counselors who started tak-
ing conversations in the same month.
Relation to counselor effectiveness. Before we
analyze the dynamics of linguistic diversity, we
briefly consider its downstream implications for
conversation outcome—to what extent is linguis-
tic diversity positively reflective of a counselor’s
skill? Higher diversity can signal the ability to
hold more natural interactions and to better ad-
dress specific texter situations, which according to
literature might translate into positive counseling
outcomes (Gaume et al., 2010; Atkins et al., 2014;
Pérez-Rosas et al., 2018).

Determining the quality of a counseling conver-
sation is a fundamental difficulty in this domain
(Tracey et al., 2014). As one imperfect indicator
of quality, we make use of texter responses to a
survey given after each conversation, asking the
texter whether or not they felt helped by the inter-
action. In our data, 26% of conversations received
a rating, out of which 87% were rated as helpful.
We consider the proportion of positive ratings a
counselor received in a particular life-stage as an
indication of their effectiveness.11

10These parameters are chosen to ensure sufficient data
was used to characterize a counselor’s language.

11Here, we ignore conversations where no response was



941

To gauge the implications of a counselor’s lin-
guistic diversity, we compare the effectiveness of
the most and least diverse counselors, in terms of
both diversity measures. In the following discus-
sion, we focus on experienced counselors, in the
life-stage comprising their 80th to 120th conver-
sations,12 and compare the top and bottom third of
counselors for each measure.

We find that both within- and between-
individual diversities are positive signals of
effectiveness—for instance, the average effective-
ness of the most within-individual diverse coun-
selors is 89% while the effectiveness of the
least within-individual diverse counselors is 86%
(Mann Whitney U test p < 0.001).

We note that the observed correspondences be-
tween diversity and effectiveness have a poten-
tially trivial explanation: a counselor may have an
easier time varying their language across a series
of texters with less complicated issues who may
more readily give good ratings, independent of the
counselor’s actual skill. To discount this some-
what circular explanation, we can estimate the
counselor’s diversity in an earlier life-stage (40th
to 80th conversations), and relate it with their ef-
fectiveness in the subsequent life-stage (80th to
120th conversations). The above differences still
hold with statistical significance in this new set-
ting, showing that diversity is non-trivially infor-
mative of a counselor’s future effectiveness.13

5 Analyzing Counselor Diversification

We are now equipped to analyze how linguistic di-
versity develops as counselors gain experience.
Do counselors diversify? We first quantify the
extent to which any development occurs. To this
ends, we compute the percentage of counselors
that increased their diversity from their initial con-
versations during S0 to their tenured life-stage S.
We find that, overall, counselors tend to diversify
as they gain experience: 58% increase in within-
individual diversity—indicating that they grow to
vary their language to a greater extent between

received and consider only counselors in life-stages where
they received at least four ratings.

12Our results are similar, with some loss of significance,
for alternate experience levels.

13Developing a model that can estimate the future effec-
tiveness of a counselor constitutes an interesting avenue for
future work. We note that this task would be distinct from
that of predicting the effectiveness of a presently-observed
conversation, as was addressed in prior work (Atkins et al.,
2014; Althoff et al., 2016; Pérez-Rosas et al., 2018).

different conversations they take—, and 73% in-
crease in between-individual diversity—indicating
that they become more linguistically distant from
their similarly-experienced peers. Taking these
measures together, we also find that most coun-
selors increase in relative diversity (72%), becom-
ing linguistically further away from their peers
than from themselves. Overall, these trends sug-
gest an increasing inclination for counselors to
move away from an initial linguistic rigidity, even-
tually finding their own distinctive voice.14

When do counselors diversify? Is this ob-
served diversification sustained over the coun-
selors’ tenures, or concentrated in an initial
change? Answering this question is important for
understanding, and potentially assisting, the de-
velopmental trajectory of mental health counselors
(Tracey et al., 2014). As before, we consider as a
reference the language of tenured counselors dur-
ing S, and show in Figure 1 (top row) the per-
centage of counselors that increase in diversity be-
tween each of their earlier life-stages and S. We
observe that both types of diversity increase over
an extended span of counselors’ tenures, but grad-
ually level off to match the diversity of S (i.e., per-
centages approach 50%), suggesting that linguistic
development plateaus with experience.
What diversifies? Conversations are not
uniform—different aspects of the interaction may
engender differing evolution dynamics. In this
particular domain, conversations follow a well-
defined structure that is taught as a central
element of the training curriculum, proceed-
ing through functionally distinctive segments—
henceforth components—where counselors (1)
build initial rapport with the texter (hello),
(2) explore the texter’s problems (problem
exploration), (3) identify the texter’s goals and
past attempts to cope (goal identification),
(4) collaboratively explore steps towards achiev-
ing those goals (problem solving), and finally
(5) close the conversation (goodbye). As a rough
proxy to capture these functional components, we
divide a conversation into fifths, as in prior work
(Althoff et al., 2016).15 Characteristic words for

14We note that the time it takes for the counselors to reach
their tenured life-stage is only mildly correlated to each di-
versity measure (ρ < 0.2 for each).

15For this analysis, we only consider conversations with at
least 20 counselor messages to ensure meaningful conversa-
tion segments. While we found that this coarse segmentation
was satisfactory for our analyses, future work could consider
more involved approaches to segmenting conversations.



942

Figure 1: Temporal diversification trends across different counselor life-stages (left to right). Each cell shows
the percentage of counselors that increase in diversity from that life-stage to their tenured life-stage S; *’s indicate
statistical significance (binomial test p < 0.05, comparing to 50% by chance). The topmost row shows the temporal
trend across the entire conversation, and the subsequent rows separate this trend by conversational component.

each component are shown in Figure 2. To chart
linguistic development with respect to our mea-
sures across functionally-different aspects of the
conversation, we compute each measure sepa-
rately over the messages in each fifth of the con-
versation, and repeat our temporal analysis per
component (Figure 1, bottom rows).

We observe that development in within-
individual diversity is largely concentrated in
situation-specific segments of the conversation
(problem exploration, goal identification,
problem solving); in these segments the devel-
opment is sustained throughout counselor tenures.
This could suggest that as counselors encounter
more diverse situations, they become linguistically
better equipped to approach them in a specialized
fashion. In contrast, in conversational components
which have functions that generalize across tex-
ter problems there is no systematic increase in
diversity (hello), and there is even a slight de-
crease (goodbye)—perhaps indicating that coun-
selors develop routines to close the conversation.

On the other hand, between-individual diversity
exhibits a comparatively more uniform increase
across each component. This could suggest that
counselors adopt individually distinguishing lin-
guistic styles throughout the conversation.

In the next section we provide further support
for these intuitions through a finer-grained analy-
sis of vocabulary changes.

6 Development of Counselor Vocabulary

Thus far, we have tracked the evolution of coun-
selors according to high-level characterizations
of their linguistic diversification. We now ana-
lyze this evolution at a complementary granular-
ity: tracking changes in counselors’ use of differ-
ent words over the course of their tenure, as tangi-
ble and interpretable indicators of linguistic devel-
opment. This analysis offers concrete examples of
lexical changes that reflect the intuitions gleaned
from our preceding examination.

A counselor may grow to use some words more
often, perhaps reflecting continued exposure to
particular texter situations or the development of
a personal style. Such adoptions could enrich
and diversify a counselor’s vocabulary, and per-
haps distinguish them from others; they could also
mark aspects that converge to a common coun-
selor language, counterbalancing the diversifica-
tion process. Alternatively, some words may fall
out of favor, getting used less frequently over time.
This possibility is especially pertinent given the
initial training process, since the curriculum illus-
trates many of the counseling practices by way of
presenting examples of messages for counselors
to build on. These serve as a linguistic reference
point for starting counselors; linguistic divergence
could then arise as more experienced counselors
start to move beyond this reference point.

To examine such changes in counselor vocabu-
lary, we quantify the population-wide usage shift
of a word as the log-ratio between the proportion



943

Figure 2: Top: the overall distribution of usage shifts of the words at the core of the counselor vocabulary (i.e.,
those used by at least 20% of counselors). Bottom: usage shift distributions per subset of core words characteristic
to each conversational component, along with examples. Words are ordered by, and colored according to their
usage shift, such that blue words tend to be used more by counselors in their earlier conversations while red words
tend to be used more by counselors with more experience. Dashed lines indicate the respective medians.

of conversations in S in which counselors used that
word, and the proportion of conversations in S0 in
which counselors used that word.16 Thus, a posi-
tive shift indicates that the word’s usage increases
with tenure, while a negative shift means that its
usage declines after the counselor’s first conversa-
tions. Figure 2 (top) shows a histogram of usage
shifts for the core of the counselors’ vocabulary,
i.e., the 3,461 words used by at least 20% of the
long-serving counselors considered in the preced-
ing analyses.
The interplay of lexical shifts and function. Our
prior analyses revealed that diversification patterns
vary by functionally-different conversational com-
ponents. To tie usage shifts to these observed con-
trasts, we examine the usage shifts of words char-
acteristic to each component. Concretely, we con-
sider a word to be characteristic of a component
if the proportion of messages containing it in the
corresponding fifth of the conversation is greater
than the proportion of messages with the word
overall (in particular, the log-ratio of the within-
component frequency of the word to its overall fre-
quency is at least 0.2). Figure 2 (bottom) shows
usage shifts over words in each component, to-
gether with example words sorted by their shift.

16To avoid spurious effects akin to Simpson’s paradox,
we only consider conversations taken by counselors with at
least 120 conversations, such that each counselor contributes
equally to both the S and S0 components of the measure.

Across each component, we see that counselors
shift away from using words which are relatively
general and more formal in tone (negative shift,
in blue). Many of these words reflect coun-
seling practices as presented in the training ma-
terial, echoing the language used in training to
exemplify these practices. For instance, during
the first component (hello), counselors are told
to build rapport and bootstrap the exploration of
the texter’s concerns by having texters elaborate
on what prompted them to contact the platform;
as counselors proceed in this exploration process
(problem exploration) they are taught to reflect
on and validate the texter’s concerns as under-
standable and normal.

That counselors eventually use such words less
often does not necessarily mean that the prac-
tices underlying them are abandoned with expe-
rience; rather, counselors may gravitate towards
new words that accomplish the same purposes
(valid, unfair). Words used in the first two compo-
nents are especially prone to decreasing in usage
with experience. This suggests that while incom-
ing counselors use the training material as a lin-
guistic guide for initiating conversations, they tend
to eventually shift towards more informal and less
standardized language, moving away from using
words in the core of the counselors’ vocabulary.17

17We note that our usage shift methodology only captures



944

Conversely, many words which counselors
adopt later in their tenure (positive shift, in
red) are more specialized, especially in the goal
identification and problem solving compo-
nents. Intuitively, counselors accumulate domain
knowledge with experience, allowing them to bet-
ter differentiate between cases, especially in terms
of potential coping mechanisms (e.g., therapist,
meditation, apps). This type of specialization
suggests that much of the broadening in within-
individual diversity we observed in these conver-
sational segments (Figure 1, left) may be func-
tional in nature.

Other words which increase in usage with expe-
rience are characterized by a relatively colloquial
tone (hey, :), gotcha), pointing to a diversification
process that is social rather than functional. This
linguistic relaxation may trace the observed trend
towards higher between-individual diversity (Fig-
ure 1, right) as counselors become more at ease
in their task. Shifts towards such colloquial lan-
guage are especially prominent in the last compo-
nent (goodbye), potentially as counselors develop
individual routines for closing conversations, and
echoing the decrease in within-individual diversity
observed in that component (Figure 1, left).

Overall, these observations complement our
prior discussion about the rate at which counselors
diversify their language, suggesting functional and
social mechanics that may be in play.

7 Discussion and Future Work

Having good conversations is challenging and
hard to teach, especially in domains where the
stakes are high and where feedback is scarce.
Computational tools could help us understand
how people acquire conversational skills, and may
eventually assist in their development. In this
work we provide an initial and limited case study
in a highly consequential domain, showing that we
can track diversification in the linguistic practices
of mental health counselors.

Our approach is necessarily limited in scope.
Future work could adapt our framework to exam-
ine more complex forms of conversational devel-
opment. In particular, we observed that counselors
diversify linguistically, perhaps signaling a benefi-

population-wide changes in how counselors use a subset of
core words, so it cannot characterize changes outside this
general vocabulary. Future work could examine individual-
level lexical changes (such as the development of uniquely
personal catchphrases).

cial increase in flexibility that enables them to bet-
ter address the specific concerns of a texter. Fu-
ture work could more directly model how coun-
selors respond to texter behaviors, hence gauging
the extent to which counselors evolve in their in-
teractional practices. Furthermore, while our ap-
proach captures linguistic changes in aggregate, a
complementary line of work could explore the tra-
jectories of individuals, and probe the factors de-
termining whether particular individuals diversify
or stagnate.

The framework we have started to design could
eventually help platforms provide counselors with
personalized feedback on their development. It
could assist in identifying counselors who accli-
matize quickly and those that require more guid-
ance. Understanding how different components in
a conversation change with experience could also
inform the particular aspects to focus their training
on. In order to derive such prescriptive recommen-
dations, further work is needed to causally connect
our signals of linguistic experience with actual ex-
pertise and skill, as reflected in conversational out-
comes. For instance, increased diversification may
point to flexibility and specialization that are ben-
eficial, but might also signal detrimental devia-
tions from good counseling practices. Other ap-
proaches, such as qualitative labeling by domain
experts, could examine whether such changes in
language use also result in better conversations.

Our methodology could also be extended to ex-
amine other conversational contexts such as aca-
demic advising or business interactions, where in-
dividuals are expected to learn from experience.
Such domains may contain crucial differences that
motivate extensions to our framework; for exam-
ple, feedback might be more readily available and
conversational partners may recur, both of which
can interact with experience to further shape lin-
guistic development.

Acknowledgments. Thanks to Crisis Text Line for making
this work possible. We are grateful to the anonymous re-

viewers for their thoughtful comments and suggestions, and

to Jonathan P. Chang, Liye Fu, Sendhil Mullainathan and

Andrew Wang for helpful conversations. This research has

been supported in part by NSF CAREER Award IIS1750615,

NSF Grant SES-1741441, and a Microsoft Research PhD Fel-

lowship. The collaboration with Crisis Text Line was sup-

ported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; the views

expressed here do not necessarily reflect the views of the

foundation.



945

References
Tim Althoff, Kevin Clark, and Jure Leskovec. 2016.

Large-scale Analysis of Counseling Conversations:
An Application of Natural Language Processing to
Mental Health. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 4.

David C. Atkins, Mark Steyvers, Zac E. Imel, and
Padhraic Smyth. 2014. Scaling up the evaluation of
psychotherapy: Evaluating motivational interview-
ing fidelity via statistical text classification. Imple-
mentation Science, 9(1).

David Bamman, Jacob Eisenstein, and Tyler Schnoe-
belen. 2014. Gender identity and lexical variation in
social media. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 18.

Justine Cassell, David Huffaker, Dona Tversky, and
Kim Ferriman. 2006. The language of online leader-
ship: Gender and youth engagement on the Internet.
Developmental Psychology, 42.

Louis Georges Castonguay, Marvin R. Goldfried, Su-
san Wiser, Patrick J. Raue, and Adele M. Hayes.
1996. Predicting the effect of cognitive therapy for
depression: A study of unique and common fac-
tors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 64(3).

Delwyn Catley, Kari Jo Harris, Matthew S. Mayo, San-
dra Hall, Kolawole S. Okuyemi, Thuy Boardman,
and Jasjit S. Ahluwalia. 2006. Adherence to Princi-
ples of Motivational Interviewing and Client Within-
Session Behavior. Behavioural and Cognitive Psy-
chotherapy, 34(1).

Munmun De Choudhury and Emre Kıcıman. 2017.
The Language of Social Support in Social Media and
its Effect on Suicidal Ideation Risk. In Proceedings
of ICWSM.

Jared R. Curhan and Alex Pentland. 2007. Thin slices
of negotiation: Predicting outcomes from conversa-
tional dynamics within the first 5 minutes. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 92.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: Language effects and power differences in
social interaction. In Proceedings of WWW.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Robert West, Dan
Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec, and Christopher Potts.
2013. No Country for Old Members: User Lifecy-
cle and Linguistic Change in Online Communities.
In Proceedings of WWW.

Robyn Dawes. 1996. House of Cards. Free Press, New
York.

Penelope Eckert. 2005. Variation, convention, and so-
cial meaning. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting
of the Linguistic Society of America.

Jacob Eisenstein, Brendan O’Connor, Noah A. Smith,
and Eric P. Xing. 2014. Diffusion of lexical change
in social media. PLoS One, 9.

Sindhu Kiranmai Ernala, Asra F. Rizvi, Michael L.
Birnbaum, John M. Kane, and Munmun De Choud-
hury. 2017. Linguistic Markers Indicating Ther-
apeutic Outcomes of Social Media Disclosures of
Schizophrenia. In Proceeding of CSCW.

Matt Garley and Julia Hockenmaier. 2012. Beefmoves:
Dissemination, Diversity, and Dynamics of English
Borrowings in a German Hip Hop Forum. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL.

Jacques Gaume, Nicolas Bertholet, Mohamed Faouzi,
Gerhard Gmel, and Jean-Bernard Daeppen. 2010.
Counselor motivational interviewing skills and
young adult change talk articulation during brief
motivational interventions. Journal of Substance
Abuse Treatment, 39(3).

Dmitriy Genzel and Eugene Charniak. 2002. Entropy
Rate Constancy in Text. In Proceedings of ACL.

Rahul Goel, Sandeep Soni, Naman Goyal, John Pa-
parrizos, Hanna Wallach, Fernando Diaz, and Ja-
cob Eisenstein. 2016. The Social Dynamics of Lan-
guage Change in Online Networks. In Proceedings
of SocInfo.

Simon B. Goldberg, Tony Rousmaniere, Scott D.
Miller, Jason Whipple, Stevan Lars Nielsen,
William T. Hoyt, and Bruce E. Wampold. 2016. Do
psychotherapists improve with time and experience?
A longitudinal analysis of outcomes in a clinical set-
ting. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 63(1).

Amy L. Gonzales, Jeffrey T. Hancock, and James W.
Pennebaker. 2010. Language style matching as a
predictor of social dynamics in small groups. Com-
munication Research, 37.

Ivan Habernal and Iryna Gurevych. 2016. What makes
a convincing argument? Empirical analysis and de-
tecting attributes of convincingness in Web argu-
mentation. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

William P. Henry, Hans H. Strupp, Stephen F. Butler,
Thomas E. Schacht, and Jeffrey L. Binder. 1993.
Effects of training in time-limited dynamic psy-
chotherapy: Changes in therapist behavior. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61(3).

Clara E. Hill, Ellen Baumann, Naama Shafran, Shu-
darshana Gupta, Ashley Morrison, Andrés E. Pérez
Rojas, Patricia T. Spangler, Shauna Griffin, Laura
Pappa, and Charles J. Gelso. 2015. Is training ef-
fective? A study of counseling psychology doctoral
trainees in a psychodynamic/interpersonal training
clinic. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 62(2).

Molly E. Ireland, Richard B. Slatcher, Paul W. East-
wick, Lauren E. Scissors, Eli J. Finkel, and James W.
Pennebaker. 2011. Language style matching pre-
dicts relationship initiation and stability. Psycholog-
ical Science, 22.



946

Daniel Kahneman and Gary Klein. 2009. Conditions
for intuitive expertise: A failure to disagree. Ameri-
can Psychologist, 64(6).

Vivek Kulkarni, Rami Al-Rfou, Bryan Perozzi, and
Steven Skiena. 2015. Statistically significant detec-
tion of linguistic change. In Proceedings of WWW.

Vivek Kulkarni, Bryan Perozzi, and Steven Skiena.
2016. Freshman or Fresher? Quantifying the Geo-
graphic Variation of Language in Online Social Me-
dia. In Proceedings of ICWSM.

William Labov. 1966. The Social Stratification of En-
glish in New York City. The Social Stratification of
English in New York City. Washington, D.C.: Cen-
ter for Applied Linguistics.

William Labov. 1972. Sociolinguistic Patterns. Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press.

William Labov. 2011. Principles of Linguistic Change,
Cognitive and Cultural Factors. Wiley-Blackwell.

William Labov and David Fanshel. 1977. Therapeutic
Discourse: Psychotherapy as Conversation. Aca-
demic Press.

Wan Shun Eva Lam. 2008. Language Socialization
in Online Communities. In Nancy H. Hornberger,
editor, Encyclopedia of Language and Education.
Springer US.

William R. Miller and Kathy A. Mount. 2001. A small
study of training in motivational interviewing: Does
one workshop change clinician and client behavior?
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 29(4).

Dong Nguyen, A. Seza Doğruöz, Carolyn P. Rosé, and
Franciska de Jong. 2015. Computational Sociolin-
guistics: A Survey. Computational Linguistics.

Dong Nguyen, Rilana Gravel, Dolf Trieschnigg, and
Theo Meder. 2013. How Old Do You Think I Am?:
A Study of Language and Age in Twitter. In Pro-
ceedings of ICWSM.

Dong Nguyen and Carolyn P. Rosé. 2011. Language
use as a reflection of socialization in online commu-
nities. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Language
in Social Media.

Vlad Niculae and Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil.
2016. Conversational Markers of Constructive Dis-
cussions. In Proceedings of NAACL.

David E. Orlinsky and Michael Helge Rønnestad.
2005. How Psychotherapists Develop: A Study of
Therapeutic Work and Professional Growth. How
Psychotherapists Develop: A Study of Therapeutic
Work and Professional Growth. American Psycho-
logical Association.

Grant Packard, Sarah G. Moore, and Brent McFerran.
2018. (I’m) Happy to Help (You): The Impact of
Personal Pronoun Use in Customer–Firm Interac-
tions. Journal of Marketing Research, 55(4).

Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Xuetong Sun, Christy Li,
Yuchen Wang, Kenneth Resnicow, and Rada Mi-
halcea. 2018. Analyzing the Quality of Counseling
Conversations: The Tell-Tale Signs of High-quality
Counseling. In Proceedings of LREC.

Anthony R. Pisani, Nitya Kanuri, Bob Filbin, Carlos
Gallo, Madelyn Gould, Lisa S. Lehmann, Robert
Levine, John E. Marcotte, Brian Pascal, David
Rousseau, Shairi Turner, Shirley Yen, and Megan L.
Ranney. 2019. Protecting User Privacy and Rights
in Academic Data-Sharing Partnerships: Principles
From a Pilot Program at Crisis Text Line. Journal
of Medical Internet Research, 21(1).

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily E. Reid, and Owen
Rambow. 2014. Gender and Power: How Gender
and Gender Environment Affect Manifestations of
Power. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Yada Pruksachatkun, Sachin R. Pendse, and Amit
Sharma. 2019. Moments of Change: Analyzing
Peer-Based Cognitive Support in Online Mental
Health Forums. In Proceedings of CHI.

Sara Rosenthal and Kathy McKeown. 2015. I Couldn’t
Agree More: The Role of Conversational Structure
in Agreement and Disagreement Detection in Online
Discussions. In Proceedings of SIGDIAL.

James Shanteau. 1992. Running Head: Competence in
Experts.

Thomas M. Skovholt, Michael Helge Rønnestad, and
Len Jennings. 1997. Searching for Expertise in
Counseling, Psychotherapy, and Professional Psy-
chology. Educational Psychology Review, 9(4).

Sali Tagliamonte. 2011. Variationist Sociolinguis-
tics: Change, Observation, Interpretation. Wiley-
Blackwell.

Chenhao Tan, Vlad Niculae, Christian Danescu-
Niculescu, and Lillian Lee. 2016. Winning Argu-
ments: Interaction Dynamics and Persuasion Strate-
gies in Good-faith Online Discussions. In Proceed-
ings of WWW.

Michael Tanana, Kevin A. Hallgren, Zac E. Imel,
David C. Atkins, Padhraic Smyth, and Vivek Sriku-
mar. 2015. Recursive Neural Networks for Cod-
ing Therapist and Patient Behavior in Motivational
Interviewing. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology.

Michael Tanana, Kevin A. Hallgren, Zac E. Imel,
David C. Atkins, and Vivek Srikumar. 2016. A
Comparison of Natural Language Processing Meth-
ods for Automated Coding of Motivational Inter-
viewing. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 65.

Terence J. G. Tracey, Bruce E. Wampold, James W.
Lichtenberg, and Rodney K. Goodyear. 2014. Ex-
pertise in psychotherapy: An elusive goal? The
American Psychologist, 69(3).

http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.07544
http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.07544


947

Lu Wang, Nick Beauchamp, Sarah Shugars, and
Kechen Qin. 2017. Winning on the Merits: The
Joint Effects of Content and Style on Debate Out-
comes. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 5.

Diyi Yang, Robert Kraut, and John M. Levine. 2017.
Commitment of Newcomers and Old-timers to On-
line Health Support Communities. In Proceedings
of CHI.

Diyi Yang, Robert Kraut, Tenbroeck Smith, Eli-
jah Mayfield, and Dan Jurafsky. 2019. Seekers,
Providers, Welcomers, and Storytellers: Modeling
Social Roles in Online Health Communities. In Pro-
ceedings of CHI.

Diyi Yang, Miaomiao Wen, and Carolyn Penstein
Rosé. 2015. Weakly Supervised Role Identification
in Teamwork Interactions. In Proceedings of ACL.

Andrew Yates, Arman Cohan, and Nazli Goharian.
2017. Depression and Self-Harm Risk Assessment
in Online Forums. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Justine Zhang, Jonathan P. Chang, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, Lucas Dixon, Nithum Thain,
Yiqing Hua, and Dario Taraborelli. 2018. Conver-
sations Gone Awry: Detecting Early Signs of Con-
versational Failure. In Proceedings of ACL.

Justine Zhang, Ravi Kumar, Sujith Ravi, and Cris-
tian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2016. Conversa-
tional flow in Oxford-style debates. In Proceedings
of NAACL.


