



















































Argument Invention from First Principles


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1013–1026
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

1013

Argument Invention from First Principles

Yonatan Bilu , Ariel Gera, Daniel Hershcovich, Benjamin Sznajder, Dan Lahav,
Guy Moshkowich, Anael Malet, Assaf Gavron, Noam Slonim

IBM Research
{yonatanb,arielge,benjams,dan.lahav,guy.moshkowitch,assaf.gavron,noams}@il.ibm.com,

daniel.hershcovich@gmail.com, anael.malet@sciencespo.fr

Abstract

Competitive debaters often find themselves
facing a challenging task – how to debate a
topic they know very little about, with only
minutes to prepare, and without access to
books or the Internet? What they often do is
rely on ”first principles”, commonplace argu-
ments which are relevant to many topics, and
which they have refined in past debates. In this
work we aim to explicitly define a taxonomy
of such principled recurring arguments, and,
given a controversial topic, to automatically
identify which of these arguments are relevant
to the topic. As far as we know, this is the first
time that this approach to argument invention
is formalized and made explicit in the context
of NLP. The main goal of this work is to show
that it is possible to define such a taxonomy.
While the taxonomy suggested here should be
thought of as a ”first attempt” it is nonetheless
coherent, covers well the relevant topics and
coincides with what professional debaters ac-
tually argue in their speeches, and facilitates
automatic argument invention for new topics.

1 Introduction

In his treatise De Inventione Cicero defines the five
canons of classical rhetoric as: inventio (inven-
tion), dispositio (arrangement), elocutio (style),
memoria (memory), and pronuntiatio (delivery).
The first of these, Inventio, is defined as a sys-
tematic search for arguments (Glenn et al., 2008),
with applicability to a wide variety of situations
often seen as a desired property (Lauer, 2004).
This problem has been referred to in the context
of NLP as the task of Argument Invention (Wal-
ton and Gordon, 2012, 2017), but did not receive
abundant attention.

One natural way people go through the pro-
cess of inventio is to look for arguments in rele-
vant texts, or, if they are familiar with the topic,
rely on their knowledge and memoria for doing

so. This is reminiscent of the way Argument Min-
ing algorithms operate (see e.g. Lippi and Torroni,
2015, 2016). However, we often find ourselves in
situations where that is not possible. For exam-
ple, when arguing politics over lunch, we might
find ourselves backed into a corner, facing a topic
with which we are not very familiar, but somehow
nonetheless need to justify or oppose. This often
happens because we were initially arguing some
principle, and now we need to apply it to an unfa-
miliar example.

Professional debaters often face this problem.
Presented with an unfamiliar topic they need to
quickly come up with relevant arguments. The
main technique for doing so is called arguing from
”first principles” – relying on a ”bank” of princi-
pled arguments, which are relevant to a wide vari-
ety of topics1.

A common example is the Black market argu-
ment: banning a product or a service may lead
to the creation of a black market, which in turn
makes products or services obtained therein less
safe, leads to exploitation, attracts criminal ele-
ments, and so on. Hence, even if we agree that
something should not be encouraged, it is advis-
able to have it legal and regulated.

This kind of argument can be made, mutatis mu-
tandis, when debating quite different topics, such
as legalizing organ trade, or banning pornography.
However, it is not always relevant when debating
whether to legalize or ban something; For exam-
ple, when debating whether to legalize polygamy
or ban breastfeeding in public, the black market
argument seems less appropriate.

Here, we aim to create a knowledge base of such
principled arguments, which, when given a topic
for debate or a critical essay, would readily yield
the relevant ones. We do this in a framework of

1This is reminiscent of, yet different from, the Aristotelian
use of this term, which refers to self-evident propositions.



1014

certain types of motions (section 3). Specifically,
we define several commonplace themes which
are likely to be a point of contention – that is,
where arguments of opposing stance can be made
around this theme2. We show that for most mo-
tions there exist relevant arguments within the sug-
gested knowledge base, and that they can be iden-
tified automatically with reasonable precision and
recall. Moreover, we show that professional hu-
man debaters often allude to such arguments when
they debate.

2 Related work

Previous computational work on argument inven-
tion was mainly done within the field of argument
mining, where – as the name implies – the focus is
on identifying arguments within a given text. Most
works (e.g. Stab and Gurevych, 2014; Palau and
Moens, 2009; Eger et al., 2017) assume that a rel-
evant text is provided, while some include the task
of extracting such text from a large open-domain
corpus (e.g. Levy et al., 2014; Rinott et al., 2015;
Shnarch et al., 2018; Al-Khatib et al., 2016; Levy
et al., 2018). The work here complements such
techniques by providing a dataset of arguments
whose manual construction facilitates automatic
retrieval for topics of interest and ensures quality,
validity, style and so on.

A somewhat similar approach is suggested in
work of Walton and Gordon (2017, 2018), where
arguments are constructed from a database (Reed
and Rowe, 2004) of smaller argumentative build-
ing blocks. However, these building blocks are
topic-specific and can not readily provide argu-
ments for topics not in the database.

The attempt to categorize arguments by look-
ing for commonalities dates back to ancient times,
such as Aristotle’s list of 28 topoi (Aristotle and
Kennedy, 1991). Modern works, such as Perel-
man (1971); Walton et al. (2008); Walton (2013),
expanded on these ideas, similarly focusing on
how an argument’s conclusion is inferred from
its premises. Unlike these efforts, the taxonomy
suggested here is of recurring principled seman-
tic themes. That is, arguments which in this work
would be categorized as belonging to a specific ar-
gument theme could be of various topoi and follow
different argumentation schemes.

In modern competitive debating the notion of
commonalities between topics is prevalent due to

2In the context of debates, these are called ”clashes”.

the advantages they serve in overcoming knowl-
edge barriers and in speeding up argument gen-
eration3. Armed with limited facts on the topic,
the task of locating recurring patterns in order to
argue the motion abstractly is composed of under-
standing what are the fundamental ’clashes’ in the
debate (cf. Sonnreich (2012), ”debating from first
principles”), similar to the taxonomy herein.

Our approach bears similarities to work in so-
cial sciences that attempts to describe different
types of information framing, usually in the con-
text of the news media (e.g. Semetko and Valken-
burg, 2000). Recurring themes, like Fairness and
equality or Crime and punishment, can be iden-
tified in the way the news media frames a certain
policy issue or event (Card et al., 2015). de Vreese
(2005) differentiates between specific and generic
frames, characterizing the latter as those that can
be applied to a wide range of events and contexts.
Similarly, our work aims to categorize common-
place themes and identify their relevance (at a con-
siderably larger scale), in the context of framing a
topic that is subject to debate.

Our work also has some commonalities with
psychological research on ideology (e.g. Alte-
meyer, 1981; Sidanius and Pratto, 2001; Jost et al.,
2003). For example, Everett (2013) lists a 12-item
scale to assess conservative ideology - of these,
some map to our taxonomy (e.g. Welfare), while
others are too specific. Moreover, conservatism in
itself gives rise to one class of recurring arguments
in our work.

3 Definitions

In the context of parliamentary debate, a motion
is a proposal that is to be deliberated by two sides
(government and opposition). Here we formally
define a motion as a pair (action, topic), where
topic is a Wikipedia title (or a redirect to one),
and action is a term coming from a closed set of
allowed actions (Appendix A), and describes the
government’s proposal w.r.t. topic. For example,
the motion (ban, smoking) should be interpreted
as the government suggesting to ban smoking, and
can be explicitly phrased as ”we should ban smok-
ing”4. Note that not all combinations of action and
topic make for a good motion – the implied pro-

3E.g. https://debate.uvm.edu/dcpdf/WUDC%
20Malaysia_2014_Debating_and_Judging_
Manual.pdf

4In the context of competitive debate, the phrasing would
usually be ”This House would ban smoking”.

https://debate.uvm.edu/dcpdf/WUDC%20Malaysia_2014_Debating_and_Judging_Manual.pdf
https://debate.uvm.edu/dcpdf/WUDC%20Malaysia_2014_Debating_and_Judging_Manual.pdf
https://debate.uvm.edu/dcpdf/WUDC%20Malaysia_2014_Debating_and_Judging_Manual.pdf


1015

posal should be worth deliberating; one for which
reasonable arguments can be made by either side.

One often discerns between policy motions
where the government proposes a concrete policy,
and analysis motions in which the government de-
clares its opinion on the topic. For the sake of sim-
plicity and brevity (and with some abuse of nota-
tion) we will ignore this distinction. In particular,
one of the allowed ”actions” is brings more harm
than good, which would usually be considered as
indicating an analysis motion.

We define a Class of Principled Arguments, or
CoPA, as a set of arguments revolving around a
principled recurring theme (we define the name of
the CoPA as this theme), alongside a set of mo-
tions to which this theme is relevant. Formally, a
CoPA is a pair c = (A, M), where A is a set of argu-
ments, and M is a set of motions, s.t. every a ∈ A
is an argument that can plausibly be made when
deliberating any motion m ∈ M . For every a ∈ A
we say that a is an argument in c, and similarly
that every m ∈ M is a motion in c, and that m and
c match.

In this work we focus on modelling debate
clashes, and hence are interested in A’s which
contain arguments of opposing stances towards
the class’s theme. For the sake of simplicity
we consider only A’s of size 2, and only sim-
ple arguments, which are essentially just claims or
premises (appendix B). Note that this is indeed a
simplification, and that for many CoPAs several
distinct arguments can be naturally included in A
(cf. Section 7).

The pair of claims may directly contradict each
other, denoting a disagreement about facts. But
by and large we tried to select pairs of claims that
people tend to agree with5, but would assign dif-
ferent valuation depending on their point of view
(see Kock, 2009). For example, one of the CoPAs
we define is Clean energy, with A = {”Humanity
must embrace clean energy in order to fight cli-
mate change”, ”Ecological concerns add further
strain on the economy”}, and M including mo-
tions such as (subsidize, renewable energy) and
(fight, global warming). Most people would agree
that on the one hand climate change is a problem,
and on the other that moving towards clean energy
will be expensive. When debating motions where
clean energy is a relevant theme the two sides are

5This is somewhat similar to what Perelman (1971) call
”Values” and also close to what Aristotle calls Endoxa (Aris-
totle and Kennedy, 1991).

likely to agree that both claims have some merit,
yet disagree on which supersedes the other. The
valuation might very well depend on their subjec-
tive viewpoints, but also on the specific motion.

4 Data

4.1 Initial data

The definition above is a functional one, ori-
ented towards facilitating labeling motion-class
matches, so some care is required in CoPA con-
struction. A pair of claims with one saying that
the policy will not work, and the other that it will,
defines a CoPA that essentially covers all policy
motions. Conversely, very particular claims will
yield a class for which relevant motions are hard
to come by.

The set discussed in this work was defined
based on the following guidelines:

1. One is able to define two concise claims of
opposing stance towards the CoPA’s theme.

2. One can think of at least three motions (not
necessarily from the initial set) which would
belong to the CoPA, and are not overly simi-
lar to one another.

Our motivation for requirement 1 was to model
”clashes”, the recurring themes in debates which
are points of contention, since our main use-case
is, given a motion, to suggest argumentative text
with a clear stance towards the motion. Other
use cases may relax this requirement, according to
their goals. Requirement 2 ensures that the CoPA
indeed captures a recurring theme, rather than a
specific one.

Two annotators were presented with these
guidelines and an initial list of 100 motions to
make the task more concrete6. They authored a
list of about 60 CoPAs which was manually cu-
rated by two of the authors to a more concise, final
list of 37 CoPAs, to avoid redundancy and ease the
following labeling task.

Appendix B lists these 37 CoPAs and the claims
therein. They are quite varied – some revolve
around public policy (e.g. Environment, Public
health), others on basic rights and freedoms (e.g.
Right to privacy, Freedom of religion), some on
the effect of a policy (e.g. Black market, Greater

6see supplementary materials in www.research.
ibm.com/haifa/dept/vst/debating_data.
shtml

www.research.ibm.com/haifa/dept/vst/debating_data.shtml
www.research.ibm.com/haifa/dept/vst/debating_data.shtml
www.research.ibm.com/haifa/dept/vst/debating_data.shtml


1016

good), while yet others are very general (Fixable,
Conservatism, and Framework)7.

Next, the same two annotators annotated all 100
motions for membership in the suggested CoPAs.
In total, 92 motions were matched to at least one
CoPA, and on average each motion was matched
to 2.03 CoPAs. In our dataset, the greatest number
of CoPAs a motion is a member of is 5, with two
motions achieving this number – (legalize, pros-
titution) and (ban, infant circumcision). The full
annotation is provided in the supplementary mate-
rials.

In order to validate this annotation, a sample
of motion-CoPA pairs was annotated via crowd-
sourcing platform Figure-Eight8. For each mo-
tion, argument pairs from 2 randomly chosen non-
matching CoPAs and (up to) 2 randomly chosen
matching ones were annotated by 5 labelers. Aver-
age inter-annotator Cohen’s kappa agreement was
0.63. Then, taking the majority vote for each pair
as the crowd-sourced label, we computed agree-
ment between it and our initial labeling, yielding a
kappa score of 0.78. These indicate a rather high
agreement, especially in the context of computa-
tional argumentation (Passonneau and Carpenter,
2014; Habernal and Gurevych, 2016).

4.2 Expanded data

The initial construction of CoPAs was done with
the aim of identifying themes which are recur-
rent in general, not just in the initial 100 motions.
To verify that they generalize to other motions,
we collected 589 additional motions, and anno-
tated them for CoPA membership (the same anno-
tators who did the initial annotation). On this new
dataset, we found that 503 motions were matched
to at least one CoPA (85%), and on average each
motion was matched to 1.94 CoPAs. Hence, while
our modeling may be biased by the initial set of
motions, it seems to generalize well to new ones.

As with the initial set of motions, we used
crowd-sourced annotations of a similarly-sampled
portion of the dataset to verify the full annotation,
attaining an average inter-annotator kappa score of
0.60, and a kappa score of 0.76 when comparing
the majority vote to the full annotation.

The full dataset can be found in the supplemen-
tary material.

7When analyzing our data, it will sometimes be interest-
ing to omit these three classes, to ascertain they do not signif-
icantly skew the results.

8https://www.figure-eight.com/

4.3 CoPA claims in recorded speeches

It is natural to ask whether the claims authored
for each CoPA are an artificial construct for fa-
cilitating motion assignment, or are actual claims,
likely to be made by people deliberating these mo-
tions. To this end we considered the speeches we
recorded in Mirkin et al. (2018). Each such speech
is given in the context of a motion, all of which
are included in our dataset. For each motion we
extracted the CoPAs to which it belongs accord-
ing to our annotation, yielding 184 speeches with
at least one matching CoPA. 7 Figure-Eight an-
notators were presented with speeches in both au-
dio and written form, alongside the claims from
the matching CoPAs. They were asked whether
each claim was (i) explicitly made by the speaker,
was (ii) implicit in the speech or was (iii) not
mentioned at all. A total of 800 (speech, claim)
pairs were annotated, with one half of them being
claims of a stance opposing that of the speaker.

In order to analyze agreement between annota-
tors, we considered (i) and (ii) as a positive label
and (iii) as negative. The average inter-annotator
Cohen Kappa score was 0.54. Moreover, since
we showed both CoPA claims to the annotators
we checked whether claims whose stance opposed
that of the speaker were ever marked positive.
With only 5% of the annotations being so, we con-
cluded that the annotation was of reasonable qual-
ity (cf. section 6.2).

5 Matching Methods

Having a sizable dataset of (motion, CoPA) pairs,
we examined several classifiers over it. That is,
given a motion and a CoPA, the classifier aims to
determine whether they match. Since the CoPAs
are quite varied, we examined various classifiers,
some focused on a motion’s action, some on its
topic, and some on a combination of both.

Specifically, we examined the following classi-
fiers:
By action (BA-k): Some actions are strongly in-
dicative for (some of) the CoPAs a motion belongs
to. To utilize this, this classifier trains by comput-
ing, for each allowed action a, and each CoPA c,
the probability p(c, a) that a motion with action
a will belong to c. Prediction for a new motion
m = (a, t) is done by assigning each CoPA c
the score p(c, a). In addition, if the number of
(training-set) motions in c with action a is less than
some parameter k, this method makes no predic-



1017

tion.
By topic, nearest neighbors (KNN): Given a left-
out motion, m = (a, t) the algorithm goes over the
motions mi = (ai, ti) in the training set, looking
for those such that ti is most similar to t (using
the similarity measure of Ein Dor et al., 2018).
It keeps only those whose similarity is above a
threshold of 0.5. If there are less than 3 such mo-
tions, no prediction is made. Otherwise it takes the
(at most) top 5 motions. For each CoPA c, the as-
signed score is the fraction of these motions which
belongs to c. This is then used to predict member-
ship.
By topic, word2vec features (W2V): Each mo-
tion m = (a, t) is represented as the word2vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013) embedding vector of t (if t
is a multi-word expression the vectors are summed
and normalized). This vector is then used as a fea-
ture vector for a logistic regression classifier. That
is, each CoPA is assigned the classification score
of the classifier so trained. As a safeguard mech-
anism, we also determine an actions blacklist, Bc,
for each CoPA c. An action a is in Bc if in the
training set no motion with action a is in c. Dur-
ing prediction, if the left-out motion’s action is in
Bc, it will not be predicted as belonging to c.
By topic, Naive Bayes (NB) and Recurrent Neu-
ral Network (RNN): Following the work of Ra-
binovich et al. (2018) each motion m = (a, t) is
associated with a set of retrieved sentences con-
taining the term t. For a given CoPA c, all the sen-
tences associated with motions in c are considered
as positive examples, and those of motions not in
c as negative examples. For NB, A Naive Bayes
classifier is then trained over the unigrams of these
sentences, and uses its score for prediction. In ad-
dition, the same blacklist safeguard mechanism as
for W2V above is used.
Similarly, these sentences were used to train an
RNN to differentiate between positively-labeled
sentences and negatively-labeled ones. See Rabi-
novich et al. (2018) for more details on these meth-
ods.
By topic and action (LR): We defined 17 fea-
tures based on similarities between a motion and
a CoPA, and on co-occurrence counts, similar to
the one used in BA-k. A logistic regression clas-
sifier was trained and scored on the resulting fea-
ture vectors over pairs of (motion, CoPA). See ap-
pendix C for details.
Ensemble: For completeness, all 6 methods above

were aggregated by simply assigning each CoPA
the highest score it attained among all of them.
We note that this is a very naive approach; while
all methods produce scores in [0, 1], it is not clear
that they are comparable. In practice one would
probably use an aggregation method that differen-
tiates between the different classification methods,
and between different CoPAs.

All classifiers (except one9) were evaluated in a
leave-one-motion-out framework, over all motions
and over relevant CoPAs. That is, each classifier
was trained and tested 689 times – in each itera-
tion it was trained over 688 motions and the rele-
vant CoPAs, and then predicted whether the left-
out motion matched these CoPAs. More precisely,
each CoPA is assigned a score. We vary the score
threshold, and determine membership by whether
the assigned score exceeds the threshold.

6 Results

6.1 Complete dataset

All in all, our dataset describes the motion-CoPA
relations of 689 motions and 37 CoPAs. Figure
1 shows a histogram of the CoPA sizes in this
dataset. The two biggest CoPAs (Fixable and Con-
servatism) include nearly one third of the motions
(207 motions and 211 motions respectively), while
at the other end, the class Self determination con-
tains only 3 motions. Most CoPAs (32 out of the
37) are of modest size, containing less than 10%
of the motions.

Figure 1: Distribution of the number of motions per
CoPA.

Importantly, the CoPAs capture different facets

9For technical reasons we trained and evaluated the RNN
method using 3-fold cross-validation.



1018

of a motion, rather than induce a partition of the
motions set. On average, a CoPA has a non empty
intersection with 11.95 other CoPAs, with the av-
erage intersection size being 21% of the CoPA
size. Figure 2 shows the inter-connectivity graph
among CoPAs. The aforementioned CoPA Self de-
termination is an isolated vertex in this graph, but
other than that the graph is connected. This is es-
pecially noteworthy, considering that many of the
CoPAs are rather small. Figure 3 shows a heat-
map of overlap sizes.

In the complete dataset, 87% of the motions be-
long to at least one CoPA, and on average each
motion belongs to 1.95 CoPAs. That is, while this
is certainly only a first step toward modeling prin-
cipled recurring arguments, the suggested CoPAs
are indeed a concise set that covers distinct argu-
mentative themes and offers a good coverage w.r.t.
the world of motions defined here.

6.2 CoPA claims in recorded speeches

Of the 184 annotated speeches of Mirkin et al.
(2018), 87% had at least one CoPA-claim anno-
tated as positive10, and in total, 66% of the 400
(speech, claim) pairs (where the stance of the
claim and the speaker were aligned) were marked
as positive. However, in the vast majority of
cases the claim was marked as implicit in the
speech – according to the annotation only 10% of
the speeches contain a CoPA-claim explicitly, and
only 5% of the pairs are labeled as an explicit men-
tion.

One reason for this may be the three ”general”
CoPAs, since their claims are so general that they
would usually be at least implicit in a speech.
When removing these CoPAs from the analysis
62% of the speeches have at least one positive
claim, and 39% of the pairs are positive. Hence,
even without these classes, most speeches implic-
itly mention at least one claim from the dataset.
This is probably due to the rather generic phrasing
of the claims, which in the first place were con-
structed to be applicable ”as-is” in multiple con-
texts. In other words, this annotation not only con-
firms that the CoPA claims convey arguments ac-
tually alluded to by humans, but that they do so at
a rather high level, and so capture arguments that
are not only plausible for a motion but also proba-
ble.

10A pair is considered positive if a majority of annotators
chose option (i) or (ii); cf. section 4.3.

Conversely, for each CoPA, we also examined
the speeches to which it matched, and computed
the fraction of these speeches in which the CoPA’s
claim was annotated as positive. Of the 37 CoPAs,
29 match motions in Mirkin et al. (2018). For all
but one (Sexual morality), in at least 25% of the
relevant speeches, the CoPA’s claim (of the correct
stance) was labeled positive. For 24 CoPAs at least
50% were so labeled.

6.3 Motion-CoPA matching

As noted in section 5, we evaluated the proposed
matching methods in a leave-one-out framework.
For the action-based method, BA-k, we set k = 5
and consider only CoPAs which contains at least 5
motions with the same action. For the topic-based
methods we considered only CoPAs which were
manually marked as topic-based (see appendix B)
and contain at least 10 motions. The LR method
was naturally evaluated on all CoPAs.

Figure 4 describes the precision-recall trade-off
for each of the 7 methods from section 5, which
is computed over all (motion, CoPA) pairs: preci-
sion is the fraction of matching pairs whose score
is above the threshold from among all pairs with
such a score; recall is the ratio between the num-
ber of matching pairs with such a score, and the
total number of matching pairs.

Note that for methods which look at only a sub-
set of the CoPAs recall is bound to be low, since
recall calculation takes into consideration all Co-
PAs, not just this subset.

With the task of Argument Invention in mind,
a use-case of interest is, given a motion, to pro-
vide (at least) one CoPA from which argumenta-
tive content can be extracted. Accordingly, Figure
5 evaluates the precision for the highest scoring
CoPA of each motion – for a given threshold, the
figure depicts the fraction of motions whose high-
est scoring CoPA is both a match and above the
threshold, as a function of the fraction of motions
for which at least one CoPA passes the thresh-
old. As can be seen, for a threshold that yields
CoPA prediction for half the motions, the ensem-
ble method has 86% precision for its top predic-
tion.

Finally, recall that the three ”general” CoPAs
(Conservatism, Fixable, Framework) might dom-
inate the predictions analyzed above. Omitting
them from the analysis does reduce precision
somewhat, but nonetheless, the top prediction of



1019

Figure 2: Graph of CoPAs, where edges indicate non-empty intersection and distance between vertices is indicative
of intersection size. Not shown is ”Self determination”, an isolated vertex.

Figure 3: Fraction of overlapping motions among
classes; the value of entry (i,j) is the fraction of motions
in class i which also appear in class j. Green indicates
high values, red low ones.

the ensemble method for a threshold yielding a
prediction for half the motions attains a precision
of 75% (Figure 6; For this analysis the ”general”
classes were not included in the recall computa-
tion).

A naive baseline would always (and only) pre-
dict the CoPA with the largest number of motions
as a match. When considering all CoPAs, this at-
tains a precision of 30% (for Conservatism), and
when omitting the three general CoPAs, a preci-
sion of 12% (for Coercion).

Figure 4: Precision-Recall curve for the various
motion-CoPA matching methods.

7 Discussion

The most basic argument model is probably Aris-
totle’s categorical syllogism, which consists of a
major premise, a minor premise and a conclusion
(Aristotle and Kennedy, 1991); with the minor
premise being a categorical proposition connect-
ing between the major premise and the conclusion.
The canonical example is:

All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.
Therefore, Socrates is mortal.

It is interesting to consider the CoPAs and the
claims they contain in this context. When aim-



1020

Figure 5: P@1 vs. coverage of the various motion-
CoPA matching methods.

Figure 6: Precision results when ignoring the three gen-
eral classes, Conservatism, Fixable, Framework

ing to argue for a motion, and identify a CoPA to
which it belongs, one can create a syllogistic-like
argument as follows. The major premise would be
the CoPA claim, the minor premise would explain
why the motion is a member of the CoPA, and
the conclusion would be that the motion should
stand11.

11Since the major premise here is not a categorical proposi-
tion, the argument will not be true in the propositional, modus

For example, when deliberating the motion (fur-
ther exploit, solar energy), and identifying that it
belongs to the CoPA Clean energy, the resulting
(heuristic) argument could be:

Humanity must embrace clean energy in
order to fight climate change.
Solar energy is a form of clean energy.
Therefore, humanity must further ex-
ploit solar energy.

Similarly, a very basic model for describing de-
liberation is Hegelian dialectics: The deliberation
or debate starts with a thesis, which is countered
by an antithesis, and is then resolved with synthe-
sis. The CoPA’s claims can be seen as providing
a thesis and an antithesis in the context of a mem-
ber motion, with the synthesis dependent on the
motion and on the valuation of the claims by the
adjudicator.

A major challenge in constructing the CoPAs
herein was finding an explicit phrasing for the ar-
guments, one that would be suitable without fur-
ther context. One example for this is the backlash
argument – an argument stating that implementing
the policy will be counter-productive, since it will
create a backlash reaction. While this is a com-
mon argument, arguing why a backlash reaction
will occur and how it will be counterproductive
may well depend on context. Moreover, it is diffi-
cult to phrase an appropriate claim of the opposite
stance without further context.

However, the CoPAs can actually provide us
with an appropriate context needed for phrasing
such arguments. Thus, one could phrase more
specific backlash arguments for the CoPA Subsi-
dies or Coercion (with different phrasings), and
use them when the CoPA is matched to a motion.
In other words, we can expand the set of CoPA
arguments to include more than just 2 claims; it
could include further instances of principled argu-
ments, each perhaps tailored to the specific CoPA.
Recall that our motivation is Argument Invention
– when a CoPA is matched, the underlying system
can present all arguments the CoPA contains.

Indeed, with the aim of assisting critical writ-
ing in mind, one need not limit CoPAs to claims
or even to coherent arguments. CoPAs could
very well be rhetorical loci for relevant anecdotes,
proverbs, memes, quotes from famous people and

ponens sense. But if the claim is indeed an endoxa, the argu-
ment should be one that most people consider plausible.



1021

so on. They could also include text written in
different styles to accommodate different types
of presentations (pronuntiatio). In response to a
topic, a system making use of the CoPAs knowl-
edge base could present all these texts to the users,
or filter them according to their preferences.

An interesting research direction in this respect
is to include in a CoPA, for each claim it con-
tains, a rebuttal argument that counters it. This
can enable an argumentative dialog system (Rach
et al., 2018), along the lines alluded to in Mirkin
et al. (2018) – one can envision a system that per-
forms listening comprehension, identifies the rele-
vant CoPAs, checks whether any of the claims in
the CoPA were mentioned in the audio, and, for
those that do, responds with the rebuttal arguments
matching this claim. This is similar to scripted di-
alog systems, with the important difference that
the texts are not written for a specific scenario.
They are principled arguments which can be used
in many different contexts, allowing for an open-
domain dialog system. We intend to describe such
a system in future work.

Furthermore, a CoPA can include complex ar-
gumentative structures such as those in Araucari-
aDB (Reed and Rowe, 2004), from which multi-
layered arguments can be constructed, e.g. using
the Carneades Argumentation System of Walton
and Gordon (2012). That is, instead of having such
data per topic, as is currently the case in Araucari-
aDB, having such data for commonplace princi-
pled arguments facilitates their use over a wide
range of topics. Note that for this the stance of
the argument w.r.t the CoPA and the motion is im-
portant. For the sake of simplicity and brevity we
have ignored this issue in this manuscript, but the
relevant stance labeling is available in the supple-
mentary material.

In the field of computational argumentation, de
novo argument synthesis has received relatively
little attention. One naive attempt is that of Bilu
and Slonim (2016), where claims are generated by
pasting together a topic and short predicate. The
framework suggested here may provide a richer
and more stable basis for argumentative text gen-
eration. That is, a CoPA may include structured
data which describes its principal theme. Then,
when presented with a motion in this CoPA, the
system would automatically generate, de novo, ar-
gumentative text based on this structured data and
the topic. For example, this could be an NLG neu-

ral net trained on a large corpus of claims extracted
using argument mining for motions in the CoPA.

Finally, let us reappraise the basic intuition of
the corpus-wide argument-mining approach to ar-
gument invention – that an effective argumentation
is one that draws on the widest possible array of
proofs and arguments. Rhetoricians have charac-
terized the art of convincing as starting from gen-
eral and basic views, facts and opinions accepted
by everyone (Perelman, 1971; Kock, 2009). In
other words, an efficient argument starts not from
the most original and unseen premises, but from
what the audience takes as consensual, and only
then progresses to what is controversial. There-
fore, the need for principled arguments is not only
a question of time and practicality, but also stems
from the essential nature of rhetoric: it is the ne-
cessity to call on the general views and opinions
shared by everyone and to show that they uphold
the desired conclusion.

8 Conclusion

We presented a novel framework – 689 controver-
sial motions with a variety of topics and actions –
in which the Argument Invention task can be for-
malized and assessed. We formalized the notion
of commonplace principled arguments, and sug-
gested a concrete and diverse taxonomy for them.
While this taxonomy can certainly be expanded
and refined, it nonetheless has the basic desired
properties: most motions in our framework belong
to it, annotators tend to agree on CoPA-motion
matching, this matching can be done automati-
cally with reasonable success, and human debaters
tend to allude to the ascribed arguments when de-
bating these motions.

9 Acknowledgments

We thank Uri Zakai for insightful discussions
which helped initiate this work. We thank Anatoly
Polnarov and Noga Zaslawsky for their help in
developing the taxonomy and data sets presented
here.

References

Khalid Al-Khatib, Henning Wachsmuth, Matthias Ha-
gen, Jonas Köhler, and Benno Stein. 2016. Cross-
domain mining of argumentative text through dis-
tant supervision. In Proceedings of the 2016 confer-
ence of the north american chapter of the associa-



1022

tion for computational linguistics: human language
technologies, pages 1395–1404.

Bob Altemeyer. 1981. Right-wing authoritarianism.
University of Manitoba press.

Aristotle and George Alexander Kennedy. 1991. On
rhetoric: A theory of civic discourse. Oxford Uni-
versity Press New York.

Yonatan Bilu and Noam Slonim. 2016. Claim synthe-
sis via predicate recycling. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), vol-
ume 2, pages 525–530.

Dallas Card, Amber E. Boydstun, Justin H. Gross,
Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2015. The media
frames corpus: Annotations of frames across issues.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Short Papers), pages 438–444.

Steffen Eger, Johannes Daxenberger, and Iryna
Gurevych. 2017. Neural end-to-end learning for
computational argumentation mining. In Proceed-
ings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), volume 1, pages 11–22.

Liat Ein Dor, Alon Halfon, Yoav Kantor, Ran Levy,
Yosi Mass, Ruty Rinott, Eyal Shnarch, and Noam
Slonim. 2018. Semantic relatedness of wikipedia
concepts-benchmark data and a working solution.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2018).

Jim AC Everett. 2013. The 12 item social and
economic conservatism scale (secs). PloS one,
8(12):e82131.

Cheryl Glenn, Melissa A Goldthwaite, and Robert
Connors. 2008. The St. Martin’s guide to teaching
writing. Bedford/St. Martin’s.

Ivan Habernal and Iryna Gurevych. 2016. Which ar-
gument is more convincing? analyzing and predict-
ing convincingness of web arguments using bidirec-
tional lstm. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 1589–
1599.

John T Jost, Sally Blount, Jeffrey Pfeffer, and György
Hunyady. 2003. Fair market ideology: Its cognitive-
motivational underpinnings. Research in organiza-
tional behavior, 25:53–91.

Christian Kock. 2009. Choice is not true or false: The
domain of rhetorical argumentation. Argumenta-
tion, 23(1):61–80.

Janice M Lauer. 2004. Invention in rhetoric and com-
position. Parlor Press LLC.

Ran Levy, Yonatan Bilu, Daniel Hershcovich, Ehud
Aharoni, and Noam Slonim. 2014. Context depen-
dent claim detection. In Proceedings of COLING
2014, the 25th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages 1489–
1500.

Ran Levy, Ben Bogin, Shai Gretz, Ranit Aharonov,
and Noam Slonim. 2018. Towards an argumenta-
tive content search engine using weak supervision.
In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, pages 2066–2081.

Marco Lippi and Paolo Torroni. 2015. Argument min-
ing: A machine learning perspective. In Interna-
tional Workshop on Theory and Applications of For-
mal Argumentation, pages 163–176. Springer.

Marco Lippi and Paolo Torroni. 2016. Argumenta-
tion mining: State of the art and emerging trends.
ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT),
16(2):10.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781.

Shachar Mirkin, Guy Moshkowich, Matan Orbach,
Lili Kotlerman, Yoav Kantor, Tamar Lavee, Michal
Jacovi, Yonatan Bilu, Ranit Aharonov, and Noam
Slonim. 2018. Listening comprehension over argu-
mentative content. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 719–724.

Raquel Mochales Palau and Marie-Francine Moens.
2009. Argumentation mining: the detection, clas-
sification and structure of arguments in text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th international conference on ar-
tificial intelligence and law, pages 98–107. ACM.

Rebecca J Passonneau and Bob Carpenter. 2014. The
benefits of a model of annotation. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2:311–326.

Chaim Perelman. 1971. The new rhetoric. In Pragmat-
ics of natural languages, pages 145–149. Springer.

Ella Rabinovich, Benjamin Sznajder, Artem Spector,
Ilya Shnayderman, Ranit Aharonov, David Konop-
nicki, and Noam Slonim. 2018. Learning concept
abstractness using weak supervision. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 4854–4859.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Niklas Rach, Saskia Langhammer, Wolfgang Minker,
and Stefan Ultes. 2018. Utilizing argument mining
techniques for argumentative dialogue systems. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop On
Spoken Dialogue Systems (IWSDS).

Chris Reed and Glenn Rowe. 2004. Araucaria: Soft-
ware for argument analysis, diagramming and rep-
resentation. International Journal on Artificial In-
telligence Tools, 13(04):961–979.

http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781
http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781
http://aclweb.org/anthology/D18-1522
http://aclweb.org/anthology/D18-1522


1023

Ruty Rinott, Lena Dankin, Carlos Alzate Perez,
Mitesh M Khapra, Ehud Aharoni, and Noam
Slonim. 2015. Show me your evidence-an automatic
method for context dependent evidence detection.
In Proceedings of the 2015 conference on empiri-
cal methods in natural language processing, pages
440–450.

Holli A Semetko and Patti M Valkenburg. 2000. Fram-
ing european politics: A content analysis of press
and television news. Journal of communication,
50(2):93–109.

Eyal Shnarch, Carlos Alzate, Lena Dankin, Mar-
tin Gleize, Yufang Hou, Leshem Choshen, Ranit
Aharonov, and Noam Slonim. 2018. Will it blend?
blending weak and strong labeled data in a neu-
ral network for argumentation mining. In Proceed-
ings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), volume 2, pages 599–605.

Jim Sidanius and Felicia Pratto. 2001. Social domi-
nance: An intergroup theory of social hierarchy and
oppression. Cambridge University Press.

Tim Sonnreich. 2012. Monash association of debaters
guide to debating (tips, tactics and first principles).

Christian Stab and Iryna Gurevych. 2014. Annotating
argument components and relations in persuasive es-
says. In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics: Technical Papers, pages 1501–1510.

Claes H. de Vreese. 2005. News framing: Theory and
typology. Information Design Journal, 13:51–62.

Douglas Walton. 2013. Argumentation schemes for
presumptive reasoning. Routledge.

Douglas Walton and Thomas F Gordon. 2012. The
carneades model of argument invention. Pragmat-
ics & Cognition, 20(1):1–31.

Douglas Walton and Thomas F Gordon. 2017. Ar-
gument invention with the carneades argumentation
system. SCRIPTed, 14:168.

Douglas Walton and Thomas F Gordon. 2018. How
computational tools can help rhetoric and infor-
mal logic with argument invention. Argumentation,
pages 1–27.

Douglas Walton, Christopher Reed, and Fabrizio
Macagno. 2008. Argumentation schemes. Cam-
bridge University Press.



1024

A Allowed actions

Action #motions

a criminal offence 3

abandon 52

abolish 57

adopt 45

ban 90

brings/bring/brought more good than harm 3

brings/bring/brought more harm than good 3

cancel 13

close 4

criminalize 4

decrease 2

disband 29

discourage 6

encourage 6

end 33

exaggerated 2

fight 25

fight for 5

further exploit 21

increase 49

introduce 22

justified 6

legalize 16

limit 23

lower 5

mandatory 18

nationalize 6

not abandon 2

not ban 2

not mandatory 1

not subsidize 6

not tax 2

oppose 3

privatize 13

prohibit 17

protect 19

raise 4

reduce 2

subsidize 58

support 6

tax 3

unjustified 3

B Classes of Principled Arguments

This appendix lists the 37 CoPAs. In each, the
number of motions associated with it follows the
class’s name, and two opposing CoPA-claims are

listed in the entries below it. CoPAs marked with
a superscript t are those deemed as topic-related.

Adolescent rights (9 motions)
Many adolescents can
not make responsible
decisions

Adolescents are as ca-
pable as adults

Animal rightst (21 motions)
Animals should not be
treated as property

There is nothing wrong
with using animals to
further human interests

Big government (21 motions)
Public utility is best
served by actions coor-
dinated by central gov-
ernment

Public interest is best
served and propelled by
voluntary interactions,
and not ones dictated by
government

Black markett (35 motions)
Prohibiting products
and activities makes
them less visible and
available, and thus less
harmful

Prohibition is counter-
productive and only
leads to increased
demand

Clean energyt (25 motions)
Humanity must em-
brace clean energy in
order to fight climate
change

Ecological concerns
add further strain on
the economy

Coercion (81 motions)
A decisive and enforced
policy is the best way to
deliver a message

Enforcement tends to
be less effective than
persuasion and educa-
tion

Conservatism (211 motions)
The current system is
working, and making
such a change could
have negative conse-
quences

It is time to change the
old ways and try some-
thing new

Criminal deterrence (8 motions)
When people will have
to pay for their actions
there will be less crime

Strict punishment is not
effective in preventing
criminal behavior

Discriminationt (19 motions)
It is a fact that there
are differences between
people. Hence, there
should sometimes be
differences in the way
people are treated.

All people should be
treated equally

Environmentt (44 motions)
People must protect na-
ture and respect its bio-
logical communities

Environmentalism
stands in the way of
technological progress
and economic growth



1025

Fair trialt (17 motions)
Upholding the rights of
the accused and ensur-
ing a fair process is the
best way to maintain
justice

The focus should not be
on the rights of crimi-
nals, but on protecting
the law-abiding public
from harm

Fixable (207 motions)
There are some issues
here that need address-
ing, but that doesn’t
mean it should all be
eliminated

Due to the many
problems associated
with [TOPIC], the best
course of action would
be to put an end to it

Framework (102 motions)
[TOPIC] works
efficiently

[TOPIC] fails to
achieve its goals

Freedom of choice (35 motions)
People have the right
to make their own
choices, including bad
ones

It is the duty of society
to protect people from
their own bad choices

Freedom of religion (10 motions)
People should be free to
practice their religion

Religions are outdated,
irrational and harmful

Gender equalityt (5 motions)
Banishing the mis-
guided notions of
gender roles in society
is the way to achieve
true equality for
women

Gender roles reflect
true biological dif-
ferences between the
sexes. It doesn’t make
sense to ignore them

Greater good (40 motions)
The safety and well-
being of the community
is more important than
individual freedom

Individual freedom is a
sacred value. It cannot
be subordinated to sub-
jective opinions decid-
ing what is best for so-
ciety

Immigrationt (5 motions)
People who come in
search of a safer and
better life should not be
turned away

Mass immigration
threatens social
cohesion

Media’s impactt (15 motions)
Media consumption has
no significant social or
behavioral effects

Stereotypes distributed
in the media lead to a
distorted view of soci-
ety and of the other

National security (19 motions)
Some rights and free-
doms need to be lim-
ited in the interest of
national security

Security does not
justify brushing aside
fundamental rights and
freedoms

Objectification (9 motions)
Women should have the
power to use and show
their bodies as they
would like to

Society cannot allow
women to be treated as
commodities

Offensive speech (13 motions)
Freedom of expression
is meaningless if it does
not apply to troubling
and controversial ideas

The freedom of expres-
sion does not legitimize
offending people’s val-
ues and beliefs

Playing god (20 motions)
People can, and there-
fore should, interfere
with nature in order to
take care of their needs

Only God should de-
termine how life comes
into being and how it
comes to an end

Price interference (46 motions)
Price regulation is use-
ful for achieving social
and economic goals

Market forces should
determine the rates of
prices and fees

Privatization (30 motions)
Privatization often
leads to improved
efficiency and quality

The state is a better and
a more natural provider
of public goods and ser-
vices

Public healtht (17 motions)
It is the government’s
duty to safeguard pub-
lic health and promote
healthy life choices

The state should have
no role in encouraging
or discouraging partic-
ular lifestyle choices

Religiont (23 motions)
Religion creates a sense
of community for peo-
ple, and organizes hu-
man life

Religion has proven
over the years that it is
a harmful, destructive
force

Right to privacyt (23 motions)
The right to privacy is a
fundamental right

Privacy is not abso-
lute. There are in-
stances when it must be
compromised in order
to protect society

Self-determination (3 motions)
The political status of a
territorial entity should
be defined by its popu-
lation

Self-determination can-
not be handed freely,
especially not as a prize
for violence

Sexual morality (17 motions)
Sexual morality must
be protected by oppos-
ing immoral lifestyles,
and not ignoring them

The sexual behaviors
and preferences of indi-
viduals are private and
are not the business of
the authorities

Subsidies (70 motions)
Providing support for
[TOPIC] would bene-
fit society, and is there-
fore a worthwhile use
of government money

There are better ways
to make use of public
funds

Technologyt (15 motions)
[TOPIC] is better than
the older options

These new technologies
are not as reliable as
conventional ones



1026

Tradition (66 motions)
A society should re-
spect its traditions and
try to avoid changes for
the sake of change

Society should move
on with the times, in-
stead of clinging to old
and obsolete traditions
which are no longer rel-
evant

Value of sciencet (9 motions)
Theories which are
not based on scientific
methods should not be
supported

Not everything can be
explained by science

Virtual lifet (12 motions)
The virtual world en-
riches our lives in ways
that other forms do not

In the virtual world,
people lose touch with
reality

Wealth distribution (11 motions)
Society has a duty to
minimize inequality by
allocating resources
more evenly

The way to achieve
a fair distribution of
wealth is to let it be de-
termined by the market
forces

Welfare state (30 motions)
The state has a duty to
provide for the social
and economic security
of its citizens

State-sponsored
welfare is coun-
terproductive and
actually exacerbates
the problem

Note the special token [TOPIC] which, during
labeling and application, is replaced by the topic of
the relevant motion. For example, when labeling
the motion (disband, NATO) for the CoPA Frame-
work, the claims presented to the annotators were
NATO works efficiently and NATO fails to achieve
its goals.

C Features engineered for (motion,
CoPA) pairs

For each CoPA c we manually listed a set cm
of Wikipedia titles as related to it. With this in
hand, we define a set of 17 features (listed below)
that aim to capture the similarity between the mo-
tion and the class. These include similarities be-
tween the motion’s action and topic and the list
of Wikipedia titles as well as similarities between
the motion’s topic and the topics of other motions
in the class (as in KNN above). In addition to
these similarity features, we also included counts-
based features. Using this feature a logistic regres-
sion classifier was trained, and each CoPA was as-
signed the score computed by it.

C.1 Similarity features

We associate a motion m with two sets of texts.
mt = action, topic is simply the set containing

the text of the action and the text of the topic. The
second set aims to identify Wikipedia titles related
to the topic. Each Wikipedia title linked to in the
topic’s Wikipedia article is scored by the p-value
computed for it for its appearance in the article
compared to a set of random articles, using the
hypergeometric distribution. mw is the set of (at
most) 10 titles with the lowest p-value.

We also associate each CoPA with two sets of
texts. The first is the aforementioned manually-
generated list, cm. The second is the set of topics
of motions in the CoPA, ct (when doing leave-one-
out analysis, we always ignore occurrences of the
topic of the left-out motion).

Given some method to compute similarity be-
tween two terms, we define the similarity between
two sets of terms as the average over all pairs of
terms, one from each set. We employ three types
of similarity scores: word2vec (Mikolov et al.
(2013)), that of Ein Dor et al. (2018), and cosine
similarity of Tf-Idf vectors. All in all this defines
12 similarity features.

In addition, we take all terms in cm which also
appear in the Wikipedia article of the topic, and
take their average Idf score as a 13th similarity
feature.

C.2 Counts-based features
For a motion m = (a, t), Let Ma be the set of
all motions with action a. Let M∗ be the set
of all motions in our dataset. For m and CoPA
c = (Ac,Mc) we define the following four counts-
based features:

1. |Ma|/|M∗|

2. |Ma ∩Mc|/|Ma ∪Mc|

3. |Ma ∩Mc|/|Ma|

4. |Ma ∩Mc|/|Mc|


