



















































Psycholinguistics Meets Continual Learning: Measuring Catastrophic Forgetting in Visual Question Answering


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 3601–3605
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

3601

Psycholinguistics meets Continual Learning:
Measuring Catastrophic Forgetting in Visual Question Answering

Claudio Greco1
claudio.greco@unitn.it

Barbara Plank2
bplank@itu.dk

Raquel Fernández3
raquel.fernandez@uva.nl

Raffaella Bernardi1,4
raffaella.bernardi@unitn.it

1CIMeC and 4DISI
University of Trento

2Dept. of Computer Science
IT University of Copenhagen

3ILLC
University of Amsterdam

Abstract

We study the issue of catastrophic forgetting in
the context of neural multimodal approaches
to Visual Question Answering (VQA). Moti-
vated by evidence from psycholinguistics, we
devise a set of linguistically-informed VQA
tasks, which differ by the types of questions
involved (Wh-questions and polar questions).
We test what impact task difficulty has on con-
tinual learning, and whether the order in which
a child acquires question types facilitates com-
putational models. Our results show that dra-
matic forgetting is at play and that task diffi-
culty and order matter. Two well-known cur-
rent continual learning methods mitigate the
problem only to a limiting degree.

1 Introduction

Supervised machine learning models are incapable
of continuously learning new tasks, as they for-
get how to perform the previously learned ones.
This problem, called catastrophic forgetting, is
prominent in artificial neural networks (McClel-
land et al., 1995). Continual Learning (CL) ad-
dresses this problem by trying to equip models
with the capability to continuously learn new tasks
over time (Ring, 1997). Catastrophic forgetting
and CL have received considerable attention in
computer vision (e.g., Zenke et al., 2017; Kirk-
patrick et al., 2017), but far less attention within
Natural Language Processing (NLP).

We investigate catastrophic forgetting in the
context of multimodal models for Visual Question
Answering (Antol et al., 2015) motivated by ev-
idence from psycholinguistics. VQA is the task
of answering natural language questions about an
image. Evidence from child language acquisi-
tion indicates that children learn Wh-questions
before polar (Yes/No) questions (Moradlou and
Ginzburg, 2016; Moradlou et al., 2018). Mo-
tivated by this finding, we design a set of

fA fB fCL

.. .. .. ..

Wh-q: y ∈ {metal, blue, sphere,..,large} 
Q: What is the material of the large 
object that is the same shape as the tiny 
yellow thing? A: metal

Yes/No-q: y ∈ {Yes, No} 
Q: Does the cyan ball have the same 
material as the large object behind the 
green ball? A: Yes

CLEVR (Johnson et al., 2017)

Continual Learning (CL) - Single-head Setup:

no task identifier providedtasks

single softmax over all y
Training phase Testing phase

 M
ul

tim
od

al
 ta

sk
s:

Figure 1: Overview of our linguistically-informed CL
setup for VQA.

linguistically-informed experiments: i) to inves-
tigate whether the order in which children ac-
quire question types facilitates continual learning
for computational models and, accordingly, the
impact of task order on catastrophic forgetting;
ii) to measure how far two well-known CL ap-
proaches help to overcome the problem (Robins,
1995; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017)1.

Contributions: Our study contributes to the lit-
erature on CL in NLP. In particular: i) we intro-
duce a CL setup based on linguistically-informed
task pairs which differ with respect to question
types and level of difficulty; ii) we show the im-
portance of task order, an often overlooked as-
pect, and observe asymmetric synergetic effects;
iii) our results show that our VQA model suffers
from extreme forgetting; rehearsal gives better re-
sults than a regularization-based method. Our er-
ror analysis shows that the latter approach encoun-
ters problems even in discerning Task A after hav-
ing been trained on Task B. Our study opens the
door to deeper investigations of CL on linguistic

1Code and data are available at the link http://
continual-vista.github.io/.

http://continual-vista.github.io/
http://continual-vista.github.io/


3602

skills with different levels of difficulty based of
psycholinguistics findings.

2 Task Setup

As a first step towards understanding the connec-
tion between linguistic skills and the impact on
CL, we design a set of experiments within VQA
where tasks differ with respect to the type of ques-
tion and the level of difficulty according to the psy-
cholinguistics literature. The overall setup is illus-
trated in Figure 1 and described next.

Dataset CLEVR (Johnson et al., 2017a) allows
to study the ability of VQA agents. It requires
compositional language and basic spatial reason-
ing skills. Every question in CLEVR is derived
by a Functional Program (FP) from a scene graph
of the associated image. The scene graph defines
the objects and attributes in the image. The FP
contains functions corresponding to skills, e.g.,
querying object attributes or comparing values
(see Fig. 1, upper). Questions are categorized by
their type. CLEVR consists of five question types
whose answer labels range over 15 attributes, 10
numbers, and “yes”/“no” (in total 27 labels).

Multimodal Tasks We select the CLEVR sub-
tasks ‘query_attribute’ and ‘equal_attribute’ with
attributes color, shape, material, and size. The two
types of questions differ by answer type y ∈ Y:
• Wh-questions (Wh-q): Questions about the

attribute of an object, e.g., “What is the
material of the large object. . . ?”, where
y ∈ {blue, cube, small, . . . ,metal} spans over
|color| = 8, |shape| = 3, |size| = 2 and
|material| = 2 (in total |Y| = 15).

• Yes/No questions (Y/N-q): Questions that com-
pare objects with respect to an attribute, e.g.,
“Does the cyan ball have the same material as
. . . ?”, with y ∈ {yes, no} (in total |Y| = 2).

Task Order We learn Task A followed by Task
B (TASKA→TASKB), but experiment with both
directions, i.e., by first assigning Wh-q to Task A
and Y/N-q to Task B, and vice versa. We expect
that the inherent difficulty of a task and the order
in which tasks are learned have an impact on CL.

Single-head Evaluation CL methods can be
tested in two ways. We opt for a single-head eval-
uation setup (see Fig. 1, lower) with an output
space over labels for all tasks (here: all CLEVR

labels). In contrast, in a multi-head setup predic-
tions are restricted to task labels, as the task iden-
tifier is provided. Single-head is more difficult yet
more realistic (Chaudhry et al., 2018).

3 Models and Experiments

VQA Model We take the model proposed
by Yang et al. (2016) as a starting point, us-
ing the code released by Johnson et al. (2017b)
(LSTM+CNN+SA). Questions are encoded with
a recurrent neural network with Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) units. Images are encoded
with a ResNet-101 Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) pre-trained on ImageNet (He et al., 2016).
The two representations are combined using Spa-
tial Attention (SA) (Yang et al., 2016) to focus on
the most salient objects and properties in the im-
age and text. The final answer distribution is pre-
dicted with a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP).

Baselines In order to measure catastrophic for-
getting, we first consider per-task baselines: A
random baseline (i.e., random stratified sample of
the label distribution per task) and the results of
a model trained independently on each task (i.e.,
over task-specific Y). For CL, we report again
a random baseline (this time a random stratified
sample drawing predictions according to the an-
swer distribution of both tasks), and we consider
the Naive and Cumulative baselines proposed by
Maltoni and Lomonaco (2018). The Naive model
is fine-tuned across tasks: It is first trained on Task
A and then on Task B starting from the previ-
ously learned parameters. The Cumulative model
is trained from scratch on the training sets of both
Task A and Task B. This is a kind of upper bound,
or performance that a CL model should achieve.

Continual Learning Models In CL there are
two broad families of methods: Those that assume
memory and access to explicit previous knowl-
edge (instances), and those that have only ac-
cess to compressed knowledge, such as previously
learned parameters. These two families corre-
spond to rehearsal and regularization, respectively.
A widely-used regularization-based approach is
Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC, Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017). A regularization term, parametrized
by λ, is added to the loss function aiming the
model to converge to parameters where it has a
low error for both tasks. In the Rehearsal ap-
proach (Robins, 1995), the model is first trained on



3603

Task A, then the parameters are fine-tuned through
batches taken from a dataset containing a small
number of examples of Task A and the training
set of Task B. The selection of training examples
of Task A is done through uniform sampling.

Data and Training Details Since CLEVR has
no published ground-truth answers for the test set,
we split the original validation set into a valida-
tion and a test set. To avoid performance impact
due to different training data sizes, we downsam-
ple the training sets to the same size (Y/N-q data
size), resulting in 125,654 training instances per
task. The validation and test sets contain, respec-
tively, 26,960 and 26,774 data points for Wh-q and
13,417 and 13,681 data points for Y/N-q.

For the baselines, we select the model which
reaches maximum accuracy on the validation set
of each task. For CL, we choose the model with
the highest CL score computed according to the
validation set of each task pair. Details on hyper-
parameters and evaluation metrics are provided in
the supplementary material (SM).

4 Results and Analysis

The main results are provided in Table 1. There
are several take-aways.

Task Difficulty The results of the per-task mod-
els (cf. first two rows in Table 1) show that there
is a large performance gap between the two tasks.
Wh-q is easier (.81) than Y/N-q (.52), regardless
of the fact that a priori the latter should be eas-
ier (as shown by the respective task-specific ran-
dom baselines). The Y/N-q task-specific model
performs only slightly above chance (.52, in
line with what Johnson et al. (2017a) report for
‘equal_attribute’ questions). This shows that de-
spite the limited output space of the Y/N-q task,
such type of questions in CLEVR are complex and
require reasoning skills (Johnson et al., 2017a).

Catastrophic Forgetting We observe that ex-
treme forgetting is at play. Naive forgets the pre-
viously learned skill completely: When tested on
Task A after having been fine-tuned on Task B,
it achieves 0.0 accuracy on the first task for both
directions (I and II, cf. Table 1 lower). The Cu-
mulative model by nature cannot forget, since it
is trained on both tasks simultaneously, achieving
.81 and .74 on Wh-q and Y/N-q, respectively. In-
terestingly, we observe an asymmetric synergetic
effect. Being exposed to the Wh-q task helps the

Random (per-task) WH: 0.09 Y/N: 0.50
LSTM+CNN+SA WH: 0.81 Y/N 0.52

CL SETUPS: I) WH→Y/N II) Y/N→WH
Wh Y/N Y/N Wh

Random (both tasks) 0.04 0.25 0.25 0.04
Naive 0.00 0.61 0.00 0.81
EWC 0.25 0.51 0.00 0.83
Rehearsal 0.75 0.51 0.51 0.80
Cumulative 0.81 0.74 0.74 0.81

Table 1: Mean accuracy over 3 runs: Trained on each
task independently (first two rows; per-task label space
Y) vs. CL setups (single-head label space over all Y).

Cumulative model improve on Y/N-q, reaching re-
sults beyond the task-specific model (from .52 to
.74). The effect is not symmetric as the accuracy
on Wh-q does not further increase.

Does CL Help? Current CL methods show only
limiting (or no) effect. EWC performs bad overall:
In the II) setup (Y/N→WH, harder task first), EWC
does not yield any improvement over the Naive
model; in the WH→Y/N setup, the model’s result
on Task A is above chance level (.25 vs. .04) but
far off per-task performance (.81). The Rehearsal
model forgets less than Naive and EWC in both
setups: In the Y/N→WH setup, it is above chance
level (.51 vs. .25) reaching per-task random base-
line results on Y/N questions (i.e., the model is
able to identify Task A, despite the harder single-
head setting, in contrast to the Naive and EWC
models). There is no boost derived from being ex-
posed to the Wh-q task in any of the two setups.

Task Order The results in Table 1 show that the
order of tasks plays an important role: WH→Y/N
facilitates CL more than the opposite order: less
forgetting is at place when WH is learned first.
This confirms psycholinguistic evidence. Overall,
Rehearsal works better than EWC, but mitigates
forgetting only to a limiting degree.

Analysis To get a deeper understanding of the
models, we analyze the penultimate hidden layer
on a sample of 512 questions from the test sets of
both tasks (cf. Fig. 2) and relate the representa-
tions to confusion matrices of the whole test sets
(provided in the SM) and test results (Table 1).

First of all, the model trained on Wh-q discrimi-
nates Wh-questions about different attributes very
well, reflected in overall high accuracy (.81). It
otherwise clusters all instances from the other task



3604

50 0 50
40

20

0

20

40

Wh

25 0 25 50

20

0

20

40

60
Cumulative

25 0 25 50

20

0

20

40

EWC

25 0 25

40

20

0

20

40

Rehearsal

equal_color
equal_material

equal_shape
equal_size

query_color
query_material

query_shape
query_size

Figure 2: Analysis of the neuron activations on the penultimate hidden layer for the I) WH→ Y/N setup.
“equal_{shape,color,material,size}” refers to Y/N-q, “query_{..}” refers to WH-questions.

(Y/N-q, which it has not been trained on) around
Wh-questions related to size.

The Cumulative model, in contrast, is able to
further tease the different kinds of Y/N questions
apart. Questions about different attributes become
distinguishable in the plot, although overall Y/N
questions remain closer together than the clusters
for Wh-q. This is in line with the lower perfor-
mance of Cumulative on Y/N-q. Our examination
of the confusion matrices confirms that the two
question types are never confused by the Cumu-
lative model. In contrast, the Naive model is very
prone to this type of mistake (see plot in SM).

As for the CL models, Fig. 2 (two right-
most plots) shows that EWC learns representations
which are rather similar to those learned by the
model trained on Wh-q independently: Y/N ques-
tions result in a big hard-to-distinguish “blob”, and
are confused with Wh-q about size, as visible in
Fig. 2 and the confusion matrix analysis (in the
SM). In contrast, Rehearsal remembers how to
distinguish among all kinds of Wh-q and between
Wh-q and Y/N-q. The error analysis confirms that
the model hardly makes any mistakes related to
task confusion. However, despite the higher per-
formance than EWC, Rehearsal is still not able to
discern well between different kinds of Y/N-q.

5 Related Work

Early work on life-long learning (Chen et al.,
2015; Mitchell et al., 2015) is related to ours,
but typically concerns a single task (e.g., rela-
tion extraction). Lee (2017) aims to transfer con-
versational skills from a synthetic domain to a
customer-specific application in dialogue agents,
while Yogatama et al. (2019) show that current
models for different NLP tasks are not able to

properly reuse previously learned knowledge.
In general, continual learning has been mostly

studied in computer vision. To the best of our
knowledge, little has been done on catastrophic
forgetting in VQA. A study on forgetting in the
context of VQA and closest to ours is Perez et al.
(2018). They show that their model forgets af-
ter being fine-tuned on data including images with
objects of colors other than those previously seen.
We took this work as starting point and extended it
to consider different types of questions and to test
different CL methods beyond fine-tuning.

6 Conclusion

We assessed to what extent a multimodal model
suffers from catastrophic forgetting in a VQA task.
We built two tasks involving different linguistic
characteristics which are known to be learned se-
quentially by children and on which multimodal
models reach different performance.

Our results show that dramatic forgetting is at
play in VQA, and for the tested task pairs we
empirically found Rehearsal to work better than
a regularization-based method (EWC). More im-
portantly, we show that the order in which mod-
els learn tasks is important, WH→Y/N facilitates
continual learning more than the opposite order,
thereby confirming psycholinguistic evidence.

Our error analysis highlights the importance of
taking the kind of mistakes made by the models
into account: A model that does not detect Task
A after having been exposed to Task B should be
penalized more than a model that answers Task A
with wrong task-related labels, but is still capa-
ble of identifying the task. Most importantly, our
study revealed that differences in the inherent dif-
ficulty of the tasks at hand can have a strong im-



3605

pact on continual learning. Regularization-based
methods like EWC appear to work less well when
applied to tasks with different levels of difficulty,
as in our experiments. We reserve a deeper inves-
tigation of this aspect to future research.

Acknowledgements

We kindly acknowledge the support of NVIDIA
Corporation with the donation of the GPUs used
in our research to the University of Trento and
IT University of Copenhagen. R. Fernández was
funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Sci-
entific Research (NWO) under VIDI grant nr. 276-
89-008, Asymmetry in Conversation.

References
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Mar-

garet Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick,
and Devi Parikh. 2015. VQA: Visual question an-
swering. In International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV).

Arslan Chaudhry, Puneet K Dokania, Thalaiyasingam
Ajanthan, and Philip Torr. 2018. Riemannian walk
for incremental learning: Understanding forgetting
and intransigence. In ECCV.

Zhiyuan Chen, Nianzu Ma, and Bing Liu. 2015. Life-
long learning for sentiment classification. In ACL.
Short paper.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–
778.

Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der
Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross
Girshick. 2017a. CLEVR: A diagnostic dataset for
compositional language and elementary visual rea-
soning. In CVPR.

Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der
Maaten, Judy Hoffman, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zit-
nick, and Ross Girshick. 2017b. Inferring and exe-
cuting programs for visual reasoning. In ICCV.

James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz,
Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu,
Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Ag-
nieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. 2017. Over-
coming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks.
PNAS.

Sungjin Lee. 2017. Toward continual learning for con-
versational agents. In ACL.

Davide Maltoni and Vincenzo Lomonaco. 2018. Con-
tinuous learning in single-incremental-task scenar-
ios. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08568.

James L McClelland, Bruce L McNaughton, and Ran-
dall C O’reilly. 1995. Why there are complementary
learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex:
insights from the successes and failures of connec-
tionist models of learning and memory. Psychol. Re-
view, 102(3).

T. Mitchell, W. Cohen, E. Hruscha, P. Talukdar,
J. Betteridge, A. Carlson, B. Dalvi, M. Gardner,
B. Kisiel, J. Krishnamurthy, N. Lao, K. Mazaitis,
T. Mohammad, N. Nakashole, E. Platanios, A. Rit-
ter, M. Samadi, B. Settles, R. Wang, D. Wijaya,
A. Gupta, X. Chen, A. Saparov, M. Greaves, and
J. Welling. 2015. Never-ending learning. In AAAI.

Sara Moradlou and Jonathan Ginzburg. 2016. Young
children’s answers to questions. In Workshop on the
Role of Pragmatic Factors on Child Language Pro-
cessing.

Sara Moradlou, Xiaobei Zheng, Ye Tian, and Jonathan
Ginzburg. 2018. Wh-questions are understood be-
fore polars. In Proceedings of Architectures and
Mechanisms for Language Processing (AMLaP).

Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent
Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. 2018. Film: Vi-
sual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In
AAAI.

Mark Ring. 1997. CHILD: A first step towards contin-
ual learning. Machine Learning, 28(1).

Anthony Robins. 1995. Catastrophic forgetting, re-
hearsal and pseudorehearsal. Connection Science,
7(2):123–146.

Zichao Yang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng,
and Alex Smola. 2016. Stacked attention networks
for image question answering. In CVPR.

Dani Yogatama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Jerome
Connor, Tomas Kocisky, Mike Chrzanowski, Ling-
peng Kong, Angeliki Lazaridou, Wang Ling, Lei
Yu, Chris Dyer, et al. 2019. Learning and evalu-
ating general linguistic intelligence. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.11373.

Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli.
2017. Continual learning through synaptic intelli-
gence. In ICML.


