



















































Modeling Semantic Compositionality with Sememe Knowledge


Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5706–5715
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

5706

Modeling Semantic Compositionality with Sememe Knowledge
Fanchao Qi1∗, Junjie Huang2∗†, Chenghao Yang3†, Zhiyuan Liu1,

Xiao Chen4, Qun Liu4, Maosong Sun1‡
1Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems, Tsinghua University

2School of ASEE, Beihang University 3Software College, Beihang Unviersity
4Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

qfc17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {hjj1997,alanyang}@buaa.edu.cn
{liuzy,sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {chen.xiao2,qun.liu}@huawei.com

Abstract

Semantic compositionality (SC) refers to the
phenomenon that the meaning of a complex
linguistic unit can be composed of the mean-
ings of its constituents. Most related works
focus on using complicated compositional-
ity functions to model SC while few works
consider external knowledge in models. In
this paper, we verify the effectiveness of se-
memes, the minimum semantic units of hu-
man languages, in modeling SC by a confir-
matory experiment. Furthermore, we make
the first attempt to incorporate sememe knowl-
edge into SC models, and employ the sememe-
incorporated models in learning representa-
tions of multiword expressions, a typical task
of SC. In experiments, we implement our mod-
els by incorporating knowledge from a famous
sememe knowledge base HowNet and perform
both intrinsic and extrinsic evaluations. Exper-
imental results show that our models achieve
significant performance boost as compared to
the baseline methods without considering se-
meme knowledge. We further conduct quan-
titative analysis and case studies to demon-
strate the effectiveness of applying sememe
knowledge in modeling SC. All the code and
data of this paper can be obtained on https:
//github.com/thunlp/Sememe-SC.

1 Introduction

Semantic compositionality (SC) is defined as the
linguistic phenomenon that the meaning of a syn-
tactically complex unit is a function of meanings
of the complex unit’s constituents and their combi-
nation rule (Pelletier, 1994). Some linguists regard
SC as the fundamental truth of semantics (Pel-
letier, 2016). In the field of NLP, SC has proved
effective in many tasks including language model-

∗Indicates equal contribution
†Work done during internship at Tsinghua University
‡Corresponding author

ing (Mitchell and Lapata, 2009), sentiment analy-
sis (Maas et al., 2011; Socher et al., 2013b), syn-
tactic parsing (Socher et al., 2013a), etc.

Most literature on SC pays attention to using
vector-based distributional models of semantics
to learn representations of multiword expressions
(MWEs), i.e., embeddings of phrases or com-
pounds. Mitchell and Lapata (2008) conduct a pi-
oneering work in which they introduce a general
framework to formulate this task:

p = f(w1,w2, R,K)1, (1)

where f is the compositionality function, p de-
notes the embedding of an MWE, w1 and w2 rep-
resent the embeddings of the MWE’s two con-
stituents, R stands for the combination rule and K
refers to the additional knowledge which is needed
to construct the semantics of the MWE.

Among the proposed approaches for this task,
most of them ignore R and K, centering on re-
forming compositionality function f (Baroni and
Zamparelli, 2010; Grefenstette and Sadrzadeh,
2011; Socher et al., 2012, 2013b). Some try to
integrate combination ruleR into SC models (Bla-
coe and Lapata, 2012; Zhao et al., 2015; Weir
et al., 2016; Kober et al., 2016). Few works con-
sider external knowledge K. Zhu et al. (2016)
try to incorporate task-specific knowledge into an
LSTM model for sentence-level SC. As far as we
know, however, no previous work attempts to use
general knowledge in modeling SC.

In fact, there exists general linguistic knowl-
edge which can be used in modeling SC, e.g., se-
memes. Sememes are defined as the minimum
semantic units of human languages (Bloomfield,
1926). It is believed that the meanings of all the

1This formula only applies to two-word MWEs but can
be easily extended to longer MWEs. In fact, we also focus on
modeling SC for two-word MWEs in this paper because they
are the most common.

https://github.com/thunlp/Sememe-SC
https://github.com/thunlp/Sememe-SC


5707

SCD Our Computation Formulae
Examples

MWEs and Constituents Sememes

3 Sp = Sw1 ∪ Sw2
农民起义(peasant uprising) 事情|fact,职位|occupation,政|politics,暴动|uprise,人|human,农|agricultural
农民 (peasant) 职职职位位位|occupation,人人人|human,农农农|agricultural
起义(uprising) 暴暴暴动动动|uprise,事事事情情情|fact,政政政|politics

2 Sp ( (Sw1 ∪ Sw2)
几何图形(geometric figure) 数学|math,图像|image
几何 (geometry; how much) 数数数学学学|math,知识|knowledge,疑问|question,功能词|funcword
图形(figure) 图图图像像像|image

1
Sp ∩ (Sw1 ∪ Sw2) 6= ∅
∧ Sp 6⊂ (Sw1 ∪ Sw2)

应考(engage a test) 考试|exam,从事|engage
应 (deal with; echo; agree) 处理|handle,回应|respond,同意|agree,遵循|obey,功能词|funcword,姓|surname
考(quiz; check) 考考考试试试|exam,查|check

0 Sp ∩ (Sw1 ∪ Sw2) = ∅
画句号(end) 完毕|finish
画 (draw) 画|draw,部件|part,图像|image,文字|character,表示|express
句号(period) 符号|symbol,语文|text

Table 1: Sememe-based semantic compositionality degree computation formulae and examples. Bold sememes of
constituents are shared with the constituents’ corresponding MWE.

words can be composed of a limited set of se-
memes, which is similar to the idea of semantic
primes (Wierzbicka, 1996). HowNet (Dong and
Dong, 2003) is a widely acknowledged sememe
knowledge base (KB), which defines about 2,000
sememes and uses them to annotate over 100,000
Chinese words together with their English trans-
lations. Sememes and HowNet have been suc-
cessfully utilized in a variety of NLP tasks includ-
ing sentiment analysis (Dang and Zhang, 2010),
word representation learning (Niu et al., 2017),
language modeling (Gu et al., 2018), etc.

In this paper, we argue that sememes are ben-
eficial to modeling SC2. To verify this, we first
design a simple SC degree (SCD) measurement
experiment and find that the SCDs of MWEs
computed by simple sememe-based formulae are
highly correlated with human judgment. This re-
sult shows that sememes can finely depict mean-
ings of MWEs and their constituents, and cap-
ture the semantic relations between the two sides.
Therefore, we believe that sememes are appropri-
ate for modeling SC and can improve the perfor-
mance of SC-related tasks like MWE representa-
tion learning.

We propose two sememe-incorporated SC mod-
els for learning embeddings of MWEs, namely
Semantic Compositionality with Aggregated Se-
meme (SCAS) model and Semantic Composition-
ality with Mutual Sememe Attention (SCMSA)
model. When learning the embedding of an MWE,
SCAS model concatenates the embeddings of the
MWE’s constituents and their sememes, while
SCMSA model considers the mutual attention be-

2Since HowNet mainly annotates Chinese words with se-
memes, we experiment on Chinese MWEs in this paper. But
our methods and findings are also applicable to other lan-
guages.

tween a constituent’s sememes and the other con-
stituent. We also integrate the combination rule,
i.e.,R in Eq. (1), into the two models. We evaluate
our models on the task of MWE similarity compu-
tation, finding our models obtain significant per-
formance improvement as compared to baseline
methods. Furthermore, we propose to evaluate SC
models on a downstream task sememe prediction,
and our models also exhibit favorable outcomes.

2 Measuring SC Degree with Sememes

In this section, we conduct a confirmatory SCD
measurement experiment to present evidence that
sememes are appropriate for modeling SC.

2.1 Sememe-based SCD Computation
Formulae

Although SC widely exists in MWEs, not every
MWE is fully semantically compositional. In fact,
different MWEs show different degrees of SC. We
believe that sememes can be used to measure SCD
conveniently. To this end, based on the assumption
that all the sememes of a word accurately depict
the word’s meaning, we intuitively design a set of
SCD computation formulae, which we believe are
consistent with the principle of SCD.

The formulae are illustrated in Table 1. We de-
fine four SCDs denoted by number 3, 2, 1 and
0, where larger numbers mean higher SCDs. Sp,
Sw1 and Sw2 represent the sememe sets of an
MWE, its first and second constituent respectively.

Next, we give a brief explanation for these SCD
computation formulae: (1) For SCD 3, the se-
meme set of an MWE is identical to the union of
the two constituents’ sememe sets, which means
the meaning of the MWE is exactly the same
as the combination of the constituents’ meanings.



5708

Therefore, the MWE is fully semantically compo-
sitional and should have the highest SCD. (2) For
SCD 0, an MWE has totally different sememes
from its constituents, which means the MWE’s
meaning cannot be derived from its constituents’
meanings. Hence the MWE is completely non-
compositional, and its SCD should be the lowest.
(3) As for SCD 2, the sememe set of an MWE is
a proper subset of the union of its constituents’
sememe sets, which means the meanings of the
constituents cover the MWE’s meaning but cannot
precisely infer the MWE’s meaning. (4) Finally,
for SCD 1, an MWE shares some sememes with
its constituents, but both the MWE itself and its
constituents have some unique sememes.

In Table 1, we also show an example for each
SCD, including a Chinese MWE, its two con-
stituents and their sememes3.

2.2 Evaluating SCD Computation Formulae
To evaluate our sememe-based SCD computation
formulae, we construct a human-annotated SCD
dataset. We ask several native speakers to la-
bel SCDs for 500 Chinese MWEs, where there
are also four degrees to choose. Before labeling
an MWE, they are shown the dictionary defini-
tions of both the MWE and its constituents. Each
MWE is labeled by 3 annotators, and the average
of the 3 SCDs given by them is the MWE’s final
SCD. Eventually, we obtain a dataset containing
500 Chinese MWEs together with their human-
annotated SCDs.

Then we evaluate the correlativity between
SCDs of the MWEs in the dataset computed by
sememe-based rules and those given by humans.
We find Pearson’s correlation coefficient is up to
0.75, and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient
is 0.74. These results manifest remarkable capa-
bility of sememes to compute SCDs of MWEs and
provide proof that sememes of a word can finely
represent the word’s meaning. Accordingly, we
believe that this characteristic of sememes can also
be exploited in modeling SC.

3 Sememe-incorporated SC Models

In this section, we first introduce our two basic
sememe-incorporated SC models in detail, namely
Semantic Compositionality with Aggregated Se-
meme (SCAS) and Semantic Compositionality

3In Chinese, most MWEs are words consisting of more
than two characters which are actually single-morpheme
words.

Figure 1: Semantic Compositionality with Aggregated
Sememe (SCAS) model.

with Mutual Sememe Attention (SCMSA). SCAS
model simply concatenates the embeddings of the
MWE’s constituents and their sememes, while
SCMSA model takes account of the mutual at-
tention between a constituent’s sememes and the
other constituent. Then we describe how to inte-
grate combination rules into the two basic mod-
els. Finally, we present the training strategies and
losses for two different tasks.

3.1 Incorporating Sememes Only
Following the notations in Eq. (1), for an MWE
p = {w1, w2}, its embedding can be represented
as:

p = f(w1,w2,K), (2)

where p,w1,w2 ∈ Rd and d is the dimension
of embeddings. K denotes the sememe knowl-
edge here, and we assume that we only know the
sememes of w1 and w2, considering that MWEs
are normally not in the sememe KBs. We use S
to indicate the set of all the sememes and Sw =
{s1, ..., s|Sw|} ⊂ S to signify the sememe set of
w, where | · | represents the cardinality of a set.
In addition, s ∈ Rd denotes the embedding of se-
meme s.

SCAS Model
The first model we propose is SCAS model, which
is illustrated in Figure 1. The idea of SCAS model
is straightforward, i.e., simply concatenating word
embedding of a constituent and the aggregation of
its sememes’ embeddings. Formally, we have:

w
′
1 =

∑
si∈Sw1

si, w
′
2 =

∑
sj∈Sw2

sj, (3)

where w
′
1 and w

′
2 represent the aggregated se-

meme embeddings of w1 and w2 respectively.
Then p can be obtained by:

p = tanh(Wc[w1 + w2;w
′
1 + w

′
2] + bc), (4)



5709

where Wc ∈ Rd×2d is the composition matrix and
bc ∈ Rd is a bias vector.

SCMSA Model
The SCAS model simply uses the sum of all
the sememes’ embeddings of a constituent as the
external information. However, a constituent’s
meaning may vary with the other constituent, and
accordingly, the sememes of a constituent should
have different weights when the constituent is
combined with different constituents (we show an
example in later case study). Correspondingly, we
propose SCMSA model (Figure 2), which adopts
the mutual attention mechanism to dynamically
endow sememes with weights.

Formally, we have:

e1 = tanh(Waw1 + ba),

a2,i =
exp (si · e1)∑

sj∈Sw2
exp (sj · e1)

,

w
′
2 =

∑
si∈Sw2

a2,isi,

(5)

where Wa ∈ Rd×d is the weight matrix and ba ∈
Rd is a bias vector.

Similarly, we can calculate w′1. Then we still
use Eq. (4) to obtain p.

3.2 Integrating Combination Rules

In this section, we further integrate combination
rules into our sememe-incorporated SC models. In
other words,

p = f(w1,w2,K,R). (6)

We can use totally different composition matri-
ces for MWEs with different combination rules:

Wc = W
r
c , r ∈ Rs (7)

where Wrc ∈ Rd×2d and Rs refers to combination
rule set containing syntax rules of MWEs, e.g.,
adjective-noun and noun-noun.

However, there are many different combination
rules and some rules have sparse instances which
are not enough to train the corresponding compo-
sition matrices with d×2d parameters. In addition,
we believe that the composition matrix should
contain common compositionality information ex-
cept the combination rule-specific compositional-
ity information. Hence we let composition matrix
Wc be the sum of a low-rank matrix containing

Figure 2: Semantic Compositionality with Mutual Se-
meme Attention (SCMSA) model.

combination rule information and a matrix con-
taining common compositionality information:

Wc = U
rVr + Wcc, (8)

where Ur ∈ Rd×hr , Vr ∈ Rhr×2d, hr ∈ N+ is a
hyper-parameter and may vary with the combina-
tion rule, and Wcc ∈ Rd×2d.

3.3 Training

We use the MWE embeddings obtained by above-
mentioned SC models in downstream tasks. For
different tasks, we adopt different training strate-
gies and loss functions.

Training for MWE Similarity Computation

For the task of MWE similarity computation, we
use the squared Euclidean distance loss following
Luong et al. (2013). For an MWE p, its training
loss is:

Lp = ‖pc − pr‖22 , (9)

where pc ∈ Rd is the embedding of p obtained
by our SC models , i.e., previous p, and pr ∈ Rd
is the corresponding reference embedding, which
might be obtained by regarding the MWE as a
whole and applying word representation learning
methods.

And the overall loss function is as follows:

L =
∑
p∈Pt

Lp +
λ

2

∑
θ∈Θ
‖θ‖22 , (10)

where Pt is the training set, Θ refers to the pa-
rameter set including Wc and Wa, and λ is the
regularization parameter.



5710

Training for MWE Sememe Prediction
Sememe prediction is a well-defined task (Xie
et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Qi et al., 2018),
aimed at selecting appropriate sememes for unan-
notated words or phrases from the set of all the
sememes. Existing works model sememe predic-
tion as a multi-label classification problem, where
sememes are regarded as the labels of words and
phrases.

For doing MWE sememe prediction, we employ
a single-layer perceptron as the classifier:

ŷp = σ(Ws · p), (11)

where ŷp ∈ R|S|, Ws ∈ R|S|×d and σ is the sig-
moid function. [ŷp]i, the i-th element of ŷp, de-
notes the predicted score of i-th sememe, where
the higher the score is, the more probable the se-
meme is selected. And Ws = [s1, · · · , s|S|]> is
made up of the embeddings of all the sememes.

As for the training loss of the classifier, con-
sidering the distribution of sememes over words
is quite imbalanced, we adopt the weighted cross-
entropy loss:

L =
∑
p∈Pt

|S|∑
i=1

(
k × [yp]i log[ŷp]i

+ (1− [yp]i) log(1− [ŷp]i)
)
,

(12)

where [yp]i ∈ {0, 1} is the i-th element of yp,
which is the true sememe label of p, and k stands
for the weight parameter.

4 Experiments

We evaluate our sememe-incorporated SC models
on two tasks including MWE similarity computa-
tion and MWE sememe prediction. For the latter,
we also conduct further quantitative analysis and
case study.

4.1 Dataset
We choose HowNet as the source of sememe
knowledge. In HowNet, there are 118,346 Chi-
nese words annotated with 2,138 sememes in to-
tal. Following previous work (Xie et al., 2017; Jin
et al., 2018), we filter out the low-frequency se-
memes, which are considered unimportant. The
final number of sememes we use is 1,335.

We use pretrained word embeddings of MWEs
(needed for training in the MWE similarity task)
and constituents, which are trained using GloVe

(Pennington et al., 2014) on the Sogou-T corpus4.
We also utilize pretrained sememe embeddings
obtained from the results of a sememe-based word
representation learning model5 (Niu et al., 2017).

And we build a dataset consisting of 51,034
Chinese MWEs, each of which and its two con-
stituents are annotated with sememes in HowNet
and have pretrained word embeddings simultane-
ously. We randomly split the dataset into training,
validation and test sets in the ratio of 8 : 1 : 1.

4.2 Experimental Settings
Baseline Methods We choose several typical
SC models as the baseline methods, including: (1)
ADD and MUL, the simple additive and element-
wise multiplicative models (Mitchell and Lapata,
2008); (2) RAE, the recursive autoencoder model
(Socher et al., 2011); (3) RNTN, the recursive neu-
ral tensor network (Socher et al., 2013b); (4) TIM,
the tensor index model (Zhao et al., 2015); and (5)
SCAS-S, the ablated version of our SCAS model
which removes sememe knowledge6. These base-
line methods range from the simplest additive
model to complicated tensor-based model, all of
which take no knowledge into consideration.

Combination Rules For simplicity, we divide
all the MWEs in our dataset into four combination
types, i.e., adjective-noun (Adj-N), noun-noun (N-
N), verb-noun (V-N) and other (Other), whose in-
stance numbers are 1302, 8276, 4242 and 37214
respectively. And we use the suffix +R to signify
integrating combination rules into the model.

Hyper-parameters and Training The dimen-
sion of word and sememe embeddings d is em-
pirically set to 200. hr in Eq. (8) is simply set
to 5 for all the four combination types. The regu-
larization parameter λ is 10−4 , and k in Eq. (12)
is 100. As for training, we use Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) for optimization. The learning rate
is initialized to 0.01 and 0.2 for the two tasks re-
spectively, and decays by 1% every iteration. Dur-
ing training, word embeddings of an MWE’s con-
stituents are frozen while the sememe embeddings
are fine-tuned. For the baseline methods, they all
use the same pre-trained word embeddings as our

4Sogou-T is a corpus of web pages containing 2.7
billion words. https://www.sogou.com/labs/
resource/t.php

5https://github.com/thunlp/SE-WRL-SAT
6SCAS-S is very similar to RAE, and the only difference

between them is that the former concatenates the embeddings
of two constituents while the latter chooses addition.

https://www.sogou.com/labs/resource/t.php
https://www.sogou.com/labs/resource/t.php
https://github.com/thunlp/SE-WRL-SAT


5711

model and their hyper-parameters are tuned to the
best on the validation set. We also use SGD to
train them.

4.3 MWE Similarity Computation

In this subsection, we evaluate our sememe-
incorporated SC models and baseline methods on
an intrinsic task, MWE similarity computation.

Evaluation Datasets and Protocol
We use two popular Chinese word similarity
datasets, namely WordSim-240 (WS240) and
WordSim-297 (WS297) (Chen et al., 2015), and
a newly built one, COS960 (Huang et al., 2019),
all of which consist of word pairs together with
human-assigned similarity scores. The first two
datasets have 86 and 97 word pairs appearing in
our MWE dataset respectively, and their human-
assigned similarity scores are based on related-
ness. On the other hand, COS960 has 960 word
pairs and all of them are in our MWE dataset.
Moreover, its similarity scores are based on sim-
ilarity. We calculate the Spearman’s rank cor-
relation coefficient between cosine similarities of
word pairs computed by word embeddings of SC
models and human-annotated scores.

Experimental Results

Framework Method WS240 WS297 COS960

f(w1,w2)

ADD 50.8 53.1 49.1
MUL 19.6 21.6 −3.9
TIM 47.4 54.2 50.5

RNTN 42.5 53.6 55.8
RAE 61.3 59.9 59.6

SCAS-S 61.4 57.0 60.1

f(w1,w2,K)
SCAS 60.2 60.5 61.4

SCMSA 61.9 58.7 60.5

f(w1,w2,K,R)
SCAS+R 59.0 60.8 61.8

SCMSA+R 61.4 61.2 60.4

Table 2: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (ρ ×
100) between similarity scores assigned by composi-
tional models with human ratings.

The experimental results of MWE similarity
computation7 are listed in Table 2. We can find
that:

(1) By incorporating sememe knowledge, our
two SC models SCAS and SCMSA both achieve
overall performance enhancement, especially on
the COS960 dataset which has the largest size and

7Before training, we remove the MWEs which are in these
three datasets from the training set.

reflects true word similarity. This result can prove
the effectiveness of sememe knowledge in mod-
eling SC. Although SCAS-S even performs bet-
ter than SCAS on WS240, which is presumably
because too few word pairs are used, SCAS sig-
nificantly outperforms SCAS-S on the other two
datasets.

(2) After further integrating combination rules,
our two SC models basically produce better per-
formance except on WS240, which can demon-
strate the usefulness of combination rules to some
extent.

(3) By comparing our two models SCAS and
SCMSA, as well as their variants SCAS+R and
SCMSA+R, we find no apparent advantage of
attention-considered SCMSA over simple SCAS.
We attribute it to insufficient training because
SCMSA has more parameters.

(4) Among the baseline methods, MUL per-
forms particularly poorly on all the three datasets.
Although Mitchell and Lapata (2008) report that
multiplicative model yields better results than
additive model based on distributional semantic
space (SDS) word embeddings, we find it can-
not fit the word embeddings obtained by currently
popular methods like GloVe, which is consistent
with the findings of previous work (Zhao et al.,
2015).

4.4 MWE Sememe Prediction

According to the conclusion of the confirmatory
experiment in Sec. 2, the sememes of a word
(or an MWE) can finely depict the semantics of
the word (MWE). On the other hand, the high-
quality embedding of a word (MWE) is also sup-
posed to accurately represent the meaning of the
word (MWE). Therefore, we believe that the bet-
ter the embedding is, the better sememes it can
predict. More specifically, whether an SC model
can predict correct sememes for MWEs reflects
the SC model’s ability to learn the representations
of MWEs. Correspondingly, we regard MWE se-
meme prediction as a credible extrinsic evaluation
of SC models.

Evaluation Dataset and Protocol
We use the above-mentioned test set for evalua-
tion. As for the evaluation protocol, we adopt
mean average precision (MAP) and F1 score fol-
lowing previous sememe prediction works (Xie
et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2018). Since our SC models
and baseline methods yield a score for each se-



5712

meme in the whole sememe set, we pick the se-
memes with scores higher than δ to compute F1
score, where δ is a hyper-parameter and also tuned
to the best on the validation set.

Overall Results

Framework Method
Sememe Prediction

MAP F1 Score

f(w1,w2)

ADD 40.7 23.2
MUL 11.2 0.3
TIM 46.8 35.3

RNTN 47.7 35.3
RAE 44.0 30.8

SCAS-S 39.0 27.9

f(w1,w2,K)
SCAS 52.2 41.3

SCMSA 55.1 43.4

f(w1,w2,K,R)
SCAS+R 56.8 46.1

SCMSA+R 58.3 46.0

Table 3: Overall MWE sememe prediction results of all
the models.

The overall sememe prediction results are ex-
hibited in Table 3. We can observe that:

(1) The effectiveness of sememe knowledge in
modeling SC is definitively proved again by com-
paring our sememe-incorporated SC models with
baseline methods, especially by the comparison of
SCAS and its sememe-ablated version SCAS-S.
Besides, the combination rule-integrated variants
of our models perform better than corresponding
original models, which makes the role of combi-
nation rules recognized more obviously.

(2) Our two models considering mutual atten-
tion, namely SCMSA and SCMSA+R models,
produce considerable improvement by comparison
with SCAS and SCAS+R models, which mani-
fests the benefit of mutual attention mechanism.

(3) MUL still performs the worst, which is con-
sistent with the results of the last experiment.

Effect of SCD
In this experiment, we explore the effect of SCD
(in Sec. 2) on sememe prediction performance.
We split the test set into four subsets according to
MWE’s SCD, which is computed by the sememe-
based SCD methods in Table 1. Then we evaluate
sememe prediction performance of our models on
the four subsets. From the results shown in Table
4, we find that:

(1) MWEs with higher SCDs have better se-
meme prediction performance, which is easy to
explain. MWEs with higher SCDs possess more

Method
SCD

3 2 1 0

SCAS 88.4 63.8 46.9 13.3
SCAS+R 95.9 69.8 50.6 14.3
SCMSA 85.3 66.1 51.5 16.1
SCMSA+R 91.2 71.2 53.3 14.5

Table 4: Sememe prediction MAP of our models on
MWEs with different SCDs. The numbers of MWEs
with the four SCDs are 180, 2540, 1686 and 698 re-
spectively.

meanings from their constituents, and conse-
quently, SC models can better capture the mean-
ings of these MWEs.

(2) No matter integrating combination rules or
not, our mutual attention models perform better
than the aggregated sememe models, other than
on the subset of SCD 3. According to previous
SCD formulae, an MWE whose SCD is 3 has to-
tally the same sememes as its constituents. That
means in sememe prediction, each sememe of its
constituents is equally important and should be
recommended to the MWE. SCAS model simply
adds all the sememes of constituents, which fits
the characteristics of MWEs whose SCDs are 3.
Thus, SCAS model yields better performance on
these MWEs.

Effect of Combination Rules
In this experiment, we investigate the effect of
combination rules on sememe prediction perfor-
mance. Table 5 shows the MAPs of our models on
MWEs with different combination rules.

Adj-N N-N V-N Other

Average SCD 1.52 1.65 1.37 1.38

SCAS 61.4 64.9 55.5 48.2
SCAS+R 63.1 68.7 61.0 53.0
SCMSA 59.6 66.2 58.8 51.8
SCMSA+R 62.1 69.4 60.7 55.0

Table 5: Sememe prediction MAP of our models on
MWEs with different combination rules and average
SCDs of the four subsets. The numbers of MWEs with
the four combination rules are 157, 893, 443 and 3,611
respectively.

We find that integrating combination rules into
SC models is beneficial to sememe prediction of
MWEs with whichever combination rule. In addi-
tion, sememe prediction performance varies with
the combination rule. To explain this, we calculate
the average SCDs of the four subsets with different



5713

Words Sememes

参 (join; ginseng; impeach) 从事|engage,纳入|include,花草|FlowerGrass,药物|medicine,控告|accuse,警|police,政|politics

参战 (enter a war) 争争争斗斗斗|fight,军军军|military,事事事情情情|fact,从从从事事事|engage,政|politics

丹参 (red salvia) 药药药物物物|medicine,花花花草草草|FlowerGrass,红|red,生殖|reproduce,中国|China

Table 6: An example of sememe prediction when two MWEs share the same constituent 参. Top5 predicted
sememes are presented in the second and third lines. Bold sememes are correct.

combination rules, and find that their sememe pre-
diction performance is positively correlated with
their average SCDs basically (the average Pear-
son’s correlation coefficient of different models is
up to 0.87). This conforms to the conclusion of the
last experiment.

Case Study
Here, we give an example of sememe prediction
for MWEs comprising polysemous constituents,
to show that our model can capture the correct
meanings of constituents in SC.

As shown in Table 6, the Chinese word 参 has
three senses including “join”, “ginseng” and “im-
peach”, and these meanings are represented by
their different sememes. For the MWE 参战,
whose meaning is “enter a war”, 参 expresses
its first sense “join”. In the top 5 predicted se-
memes of our SC model, the first four are the se-
memes annotated in HowNet, including the se-
meme “从事|engage” from 参. In addition, the
fifth sememe “politics” is also related to the mean-
ing of the MWE. For another MWE 丹参, which
means “red salvia”, a kind of red Chinese herbal
medicine resembling ginseng, the meaning of 参
here is “ginseng”. Our model also correctly pre-
dicts the two sememes “药物|medicine” and “花
草|FlowerGrass”, which are both annotated to
参 in HowNet. In addition, other predicted se-
memes given by our model like “红|red” and “中
国|China” are also reasonable.

This case demonstrates that our sememe-
incorporated SC model can capture the correct
meanings of an MWE’s constituents, especially
the polysemous constituents. And going further,
sememe knowledge is beneficial to SC and our SC
model can take advantage of sememes.

5 Related Work

5.1 Semantic Compositionality
Based on the development of distributional se-
mantics, vector-based SC modeling has been ex-
tensively studied in recent years. Most exist-

ing work concentrates on using better composi-
tionality functions. Mitchell and Lapata (2008)
first make a detailed comparison of several simple
compositionality functions including addition and
element-wise multiplication. Then various com-
plicated models are proposed in succession, such
as vector-matrix models (Baroni and Zamparelli,
2010; Socher et al., 2012), matrix-space mod-
els (Yessenalina and Cardie, 2011; Grefenstette
and Sadrzadeh, 2011) and tensor-based models
(Grefenstette et al., 2013; Van de Cruys et al.,
2013; Socher et al., 2013b).

There are also some works trying to inte-
grate combination rules into semantic composi-
tion models (Blacoe and Lapata, 2012; Zhao et al.,
2015; Kober et al., 2016; Weir et al., 2016). But
few works explore the role of external knowledge
in SC. Zhu et al. (2016) incorporate prior senti-
mental knowledge into LSTM models, aiming to
improve sentiment analysis performance of sen-
tences. To the best our knowledge, there is no
work trying to take account of general linguistic
knowledge in SC, especially for the MWE repre-
sentation learning task.

5.2 Sememes and HowNet

HowNet, as the most well-known sememe KB, has
attracted wide research attention. Previous work
applies the sememe knowledge of HowNet to var-
ious NLP applications, such as word similarity
computation (Liu and Li, 2002), word sense dis-
ambiguation (Gan and Wong, 2000; Zhang et al.,
2005; Duan et al., 2007), sentiment analysis (Zhu
et al., 2006; Dang and Zhang, 2010; Fu et al.,
2013), word representation learning (Niu et al.,
2017), language modeling (Gu et al., 2018), lex-
icon expansion (Zeng et al., 2018) and semantic
rationality evaluation (Liu et al., 2018).

To tackle the challenge of high cost of annotat-
ing sememes for new words, Xie et al. (2017) pro-
pose the task of automatic sememe prediction to
facilitate sememe annotation. And they also pro-
pose two simple but effective models. Jin et al.



5714

(2018) further incorporate Chinese character in-
formation into their sememe prediction model and
achieve performance boost. Li et al. (2018) ex-
plore the effectiveness of words’ descriptive text
in sememe prediction task. In addition, Qi et al.
(2018) make the first attempt to use cross-lingual
sememe prediction to construct sememe KBs for
other languages.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we focus on utilizing sememes to
model semantic compositionality (SC). We first
design an SC degree (SCD) measurement exper-
iment to preliminarily prove the usefulness of se-
memes in modeling SC. Then we make the first
attempt to employ sememes in a typical SC task,
namely MWE representation learning. In exper-
iments, our proposed sememe-incorporated mod-
els achieve impressive performance gain on both
intrinsic and extrinsic evaluations in comparison
with baseline methods without considering exter-
nal knowledge.

In the future, we will explore the following di-
rections: (1) context information is also essential
to MWE representation learning, and we will try
to combine both internal information and external
context information to learn better MWE repre-
sentations; (2) many MWEs lack sememe annota-
tion and we will seek to calculate an MWE’s SCD
when we only know the sememes of the MWE’s
constituents; (3) our proposed models are also ap-
plicable to the MWEs with more than two con-
stituents and we will extend our models to longer
MWEs; (4) sememe is universal linguistic knowl-
edge and we will explore to generalize our meth-
ods to other languages.

Acknowledgments

This research is jointly supported by the Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China (NSFC) project
under the grant No. 61661146007 and the
NExT++ project, the National Research Founda-
tion, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its
IRC@Singapore Funding Initiative. Moreover, it
is also funded by the NSFC and the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG) in Project Crossmodal
Learning, NSFC 61621136008 / DFG TRR-169,
as well as the NSFC project under the grant No.
61572273. Furthermore, we thank the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable comments and sugges-
tions.

References
Marco Baroni and Roberto Zamparelli. 2010. Nouns

are Vectors, Adjectives are Matrices: Representing
Adjective-noun Constructions in Semantic Space.
In Proceedings of EMNLP.

William Blacoe and Mirella Lapata. 2012. A Compar-
ison of Vector-based Representations for Semantic
Composition. In Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL.

Leonard Bloomfield. 1926. A Set of Postulates for the
Science of Language. Language, 2(3):153–164.

Xinxiong Chen, Lei Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun,
and Huanbo Luan. 2015. Joint Learning of Charac-
ter and Word Embeddings. In Proceedings of IJCAI.

Lei Dang and Lei Zhang. 2010. Method of Discrim-
inant for Chinese Sentence Sentiment Orientation
Based on HowNet. Application Research of Com-
puters, 4:43.

Zhendong Dong and Qiang Dong. 2003. HowNet-a
Hybrid Language and Knowledge Resource. In Pro-
ceedings of NLP-KE.

Xiangyu Duan, Jun Zhao, and Bo Xu. 2007. Word
Sense Disambiguation through Sememe Labeling.
In Proceedings of IJCAI.

Xianghua Fu, Guo Liu, Yanyan Guo, and Zhiqiang
Wang. 2013. Multi-aspect Sentiment Analysis for
Chinese Online Social Reviews Based on Topic
Modeling and HowNet Lexicon. Knowledge-Based
Systems, 37:186–195.

Kok Wee Gan and Ping Wai Wong. 2000. Annotat-
ing Information Structures in Chinese Texts Using
HowNet. In Proceedings of Second Chinese Lan-
guage Processing Workshop.

Edward Grefenstette, Georgiana Dinu, Mehrnoosh
Sadrzadeh, Marco Baroni, et al. 2013. Multi-step
Regression Learning for Compositional Distribu-
tional Semantics. In Proceedings of IWCS.

Edward Grefenstette and Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh. 2011.
Experimental Support for a Categorical Composi-
tional Distributional Model of Meaning. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP.

Yihong Gu, Jun Yan, Hao Zhu, Zhiyuan Liu, Ruobing
Xie, Maosong Sun, Fen Lin, and Leyu Lin. 2018.
Language Modeling with Sparse Product of Sememe
Experts. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Junjie Huang, Fanchao Qi, Chenghao Yang, Zhiyuan
Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2019. COS960: A Chinese
Word Similarity Dataset of 960 Word Pairs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.00247.

Huiming Jin, Hao Zhu, Zhiyuan Liu, Ruobing Xie,
Maosong Sun, Fen Lin, and Leyu Lin. 2018. In-
corporating Chinese Characters of Words for Lexi-
cal Sememe Prediction. In Proceedings of ACL.



5715

Thomas Kober, Julie Weeds, Jeremy Reffin, and David
Weir. 2016. Improving Sparse Word Represen-
tations with Distributional Inference for Semantic
Composition. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Wei Li, Xuancheng Ren, Damai Dai, Yunfang Wu,
Houfeng Wang, and Xu Sun. 2018. Sememe Predic-
tion: Learning Semantic Knowledge from Unstruc-
tured TYextual Wiki Descriptions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.05437.

Qun Liu and Sujian Li. 2002. Word Similarity Com-
puting Based on HowNet. International Journal
of Computational Linguistics & Chinese Language
Processing, 7(2):59–76.

Shu Liu, Jingjing Xu, Xuancheng Ren, and Xu Sun.
2018. Evaluating Semantic Rationality of a
Sentence: A Sememe-Word-Matching Neural
Network Based on HowNet. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.03999.

Thang Luong, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2013. Better Word Representations with
Recursive Neural Networks for Morphology. In
Proceedings of CoNLL.

Andrew L Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan
Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts. 2011.
Learning Word Vectors for Sentiment Analysis. In
Proceedings of ACL.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Vector-based
Models of Semantic Composition. In Proceedings
of ACL.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Language
Models Based on Semantic Composition. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP.

Yilin Niu, Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong
Sun. 2017. Improved Word Representation Learn-
ing with Sememes. In Proceedings of ACL.

Francis Jeffry Pelletier. 1994. The Principle of Seman-
tic Compositionality. Topoi, 13(1):11–24.

Francis Jeffry Pelletier. 2016. Semantic Composition-
ality, volume 1.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global Vectors for
Word Representation. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Fanchao Qi, Yankai Lin, Maosong Sun, Hao Zhu,
Ruobing Xie, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2018. Cross-lingual
Lexical Sememe Prediction. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Richard Socher, John Bauer, Christopher D Manning,
et al. 2013a. Parsing with Compositional Vector
Grammars. In Proceedings of ACL.

Richard Socher, Brody Huval, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2012. Semantic Compo-
sitionality through Recursive Matrix-vector Spaces.
In Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL.

Richard Socher, Jeffrey Pennington, Eric H. Huang,
Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher D. Manning. 2011.
Semi-Supervised Recursive Autoencoders for Pre-
dicting Sentiment Distributions. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
and Christopher Potts. 2013b. Recursive Deep Mod-
els for Semantic Compositionality over a Sentiment
Treebank. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Tim Van de Cruys, Thierry Poibeau, and Anna Ko-
rhonen. 2013. A Tensor-based Factorization Model
of Semantic Compositionality. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT.

David Weir, Julie Weeds, Jeremy Reffin, and Thomas
Kober. 2016. Aligning Packed Dependency Trees:
a Theory of Composition for Distributional Seman-
tics. Computational Linguistics, special issue on
Formal Distributional Semantics, 42(4):727–761.

Anna Wierzbicka. 1996. Semantics: Primes and Uni-
versals: Primes and Universals. Oxford University
Press, UK.

Ruobing Xie, Xingchi Yuan, Zhiyuan Liu, and
Maosong Sun. 2017. Lexical Sememe Prediction
via Word Embeddings and Matrix Factorization. In
Proceedings of IJCAI.

Ainur Yessenalina and Claire Cardie. 2011. Composi-
tional Matrix-space Models for Sentiment Analysis.
In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Xiangkai Zeng, Cheng Yang, Cunchao Tu, Zhiyuan
Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2018. Chinese LIWC Lex-
icon Expansion via Hierarchical Classification of
Word Embeddings with Sememe Attention. In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI.

Yuntao Zhang, Ling Gong, and Yongcheng Wang.
2005. Chinese Word Sense Disambiguation Using
HowNet. In Proceedings of International Confer-
ence on Natural Computation.

Yu Zhao, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2015.
Phrase Type Sensitive Tensor Indexing Model for
Semantic Composition. In Proceedings of AAAI.

Xiaodan Zhu, Parinaz Sobhani, and Hongyu Guo.
2016. DAG-Structured Long Short-Term Memory
for Semantic Compositionality. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT.

Yan-Lan Zhu, Jin Min, Ya-qian Zhou, Xuan-jing
Huang, and Li-De Wu. 2006. Semantic Orientation
Computing Based on HowNet. Journal of Chinese
information processing, 20(1):14–20.


