








































Dynamically Shaping the Reordering Search Space
of Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation

Arianna Bisazza and Marcello Federico
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Trento, Italy
{bisazza,federico}@fbk.eu

Abstract

Defining the reordering search space is a cru-
cial issue in phrase-based SMT between dis-
tant languages. In fact, the optimal trade-
off between accuracy and complexity of de-
coding is nowadays reached by harshly lim-
iting the input permutation space. We pro-
pose a method to dynamically shape such
space and, thus, capture long-range word
movements without hurting translation qual-
ity nor decoding time. The space defined
by loose reordering constraints is dynamically
pruned through a binary classifier that predicts
whether a given input word should be trans-
lated right after another. The integration of
this model into a phrase-based decoder im-
proves a strong Arabic-English baseline al-
ready including state-of-the-art early distor-
tion cost (Moore and Quirk, 2007) and hierar-
chical phrase orientation models (Galley and
Manning, 2008). Significant improvements in
the reordering of verbs are achieved by a sys-
tem that is notably faster than the baseline,
while BLEU and METEOR remain stable, or
even increase, at a very high distortion limit.

1 Introduction

Word order differences are among the most impor-
tant factors determining the performance of statisti-
cal machine translation (SMT) on a given language
pair (Birch et al., 2009). This is particularly true in
the framework of phrase-based SMT (PSMT) (Zens
et al., 2002; Koehn et al., 2003; Och and Ney, 2002),
an approach that remains highly competitive despite
the recent advances of the tree-based approaches.

During the PSMT decoding process, the output
sentence is built from left to right, while the input
sentence positions can be covered in different or-
ders. Thus, reordering in PSMT can be viewed as
the problem of choosing the input permutation that
leads to the highest-scoring output sentence. Due to
efficiency reasons, however, the input permutation
space cannot be fully explored, and is therefore lim-
ited with hard reordering constraints.

Although many solutions have been proposed to
explicitly model word reordering during decoding,
PSMT still largely fails to handle long-range word
movements in language pairs with different syntac-
tic structures1. We believe this is mostly not due to
deficiencies of the existing reordering models, but
rather to a very coarse definition of the reorder-
ing search space. Indeed, the existing reordering
constraints are rather simple and typically based on
word-to-word distances. Moreover, they are uni-
form throughout the input sentence and insensitive
to the actual words being translated. Relaxing this
kind of constraints means dramatically increasing
the size of the search space and making the reorder-
ing model’s task extremely complex. As a result,
even in language pairs where long reordering is reg-
ularly observed, PSMT quality degrades when long
word movements are allowed to the decoder.

We address this problem by training a binary
classifier to predict whether a given input position
should be translated right after another, given the
words at those positions and their contexts. When
this model is integrated into the decoder, its predic-

1For empirical evidence, see for instance (Birch et al., 2009;
Galley and Manning, 2008; Bisazza and Federico, 2012).

327

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 1 (2013) 327–340. Action Editor: Philipp Koehn.
Submitted 1/2013; Revised 5/2013; Published 7/2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics.



tions can be used not only as an additional feature
function, but also as an early indication of whether
or not a given reordering path should be further ex-
plored. More specifically, at each hypothesis ex-
pansion, we consider the set of input positions that
are reachable according to the usual reordering con-
straints, and prune it based only on the reorder-
ing model score. Then, the hypothesis can be ex-
panded normally by covering the non-pruned posi-
tions. This technique makes it possible to dynami-
cally shape the search space while decoding with a
very high distortion limit, which can improve trans-
lation quality and efficiency at the same time.

The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. After an overview of the relevant literature,
we describe in detail our word reordering model. In
the following section, we introduce early pruning of
reordering steps as a way to dynamically shape the
input permutation space. Finally, we present an em-
pirical analysis of our approach, including intrinsic
evaluation of the model and SMT experiments on a
well-known Arabic-English news translation task.

2 Previous Work

In this paper, we focus on methods that guide the
reordering search during the phrase-based decoding
process. See for instance (Costa-jussà and Fonol-
losa, 2009) for a review of pre- and post-reordering
approaches that are not treated here.

Assuming a one-to-one correspondence between
source and target phrases, reordering in PSMT can
be viewed as the problem of searching through a set
of permutations of the input sentence. Thus, two
sub-problems arise: defining the set of allowed per-
mutations (reordering constraints) and scoring the
allowed permutations according to some likelihood
criterion (reordering model). We begin with the lat-
ter, returning to the constraints later in this section.

2.1 Reordering modeling
In its original formulation, the PSMT approach
includes a basic reordering model, called distor-
tion cost, that exponentially penalizes longer jumps
among consecutively translated phrases (f̃i−1, f̃i):

d(f̃i−1, f̃i) = e−|start(f̃i) − end(f̃i−1) − 1|

A number of more sophisticated solutions have

been proposed to explicitly model word reorder-
ing during decoding. These can mostly be grouped
into three families: phrase orientation models, jump
models and source decoding sequence models.

Phrase orientation models (Tillmann, 2004;
Koehn et al., 2005; Zens and Ney, 2006; Galley and
Manning, 2008), also known as lexicalized reorder-
ing models, predict the orientation of a phrase with
respect to the last translated one, by classifying it
as monotone, swap or discontinuous. These mod-
els have proven very useful for short and medium-
range reordering and are among the most widely
used in PSMT. However, their coarse classification
of reordering steps makes them unsuitable to predict
long-range reorderings.

Jump models (Al-Onaizan and Papineni, 2006;
Green et al., 2010; Yahyaei and Monz, 2010) predict
the direction and length of a jump to perform after
a given input word2. Both these works achieve their
best Arabic-English results within a rather small DL:
namely, 8 in (Al-Onaizan and Papineni, 2006) and
5 in (Green et al., 2010), thus failing to capture the
rare but crucial long reorderings that were their main
motivation. A drawback of this approach is that
long jumps are typically penalized because of their
low frequency compared to short jumps. This strong
bias is undesirable, given that we are especially in-
terested in detecting probable long reorderings.

Source decoding sequence models predict which
input word is likely to be translated at a given state
of decoding. For instance, reordered source lan-
guage models (Feng et al., 2010) are smoothed n-
gram models trained on a corpus of source sentences
reordered to match the target word order. When inte-
grated into the SMT system, they assign a probabil-
ity to each newly translated word given the n-1 pre-
viously translated words. Finally, source word pair
reordering models (Visweswariah et al., 2011) esti-
mate, for each pair of input words i and j, the cost
of translating j right after i given various features of
i, j and their respective contexts. Differently from
reordered source LMs, these models are discrimina-
tive and can profit from richer feature sets. At the
same time, they do not employ decoding history-
based features, which allows for more effective hy-

2In this paper, input (or source) word denotes the word at a
given position of the input sentence, rather than a word type.

328



pothesis recombination. The model we are going to
present belongs to this last sub-group, which we find
especially suitable to predict long reorderings.

2.2 Reordering constraints

The reordering constraint originally included in the
PSMT framework and implemented in our reference
toolkit, Moses (Koehn et al., 2007), is called dis-
tortion limit (DL). This consists in allowing the de-
coder to skip, or jump, at most k words from the last
translated phrase to the next one. More precisely, the
limit is imposed on the distortion D between consec-
utively translated phrases (f̃i−1, f̃i):

D(f̃i−1, f̃i) =
∣∣∣start(f̃i) − end(f̃i−1) − 1

∣∣∣ ≤ DL

Limiting the input permutation space is necessary
for beam-search PSMT decoders to function in lin-
ear time. Reordering constraints are also important
for translation quality because the existing models
are typically not discriminative enough to guide the
search over very large sets of reordering hypotheses.

Despite their crucial effects on the complexity of
reordering modeling, though, reordering constraints
have drawn less attention in the literature. The ex-
isting reordering constraints are typically based on
word-to-word distances – IBM (Berger et al., 1996)
and DL (Koehn et al., 2007) – or on permutation pat-
terns – ITG (Wu, 1997). Both kinds of constraints
are uniform throughout the input sentence, and in-
sensitive to the word being translated and to its con-
text. This results in a very coarse definition of the
reordering search space, which is problematic in lan-
guage pairs with different syntactic structures.

To address this problem, Yahyaei and Monz
(2010) present a technique to dynamically set the
DL: they train a classifier to predict the most prob-
able jump length after each input word, and use the
predicted value as the DL after that position. Un-
fortunately, this method can generate inconsistent
constraints leading to decoding dead-ends. As a so-
lution, the dynamic DL is relaxed when needed to
reach the first uncovered position. Translation im-
provements are reported only on a small-scale task
with short sentences (BTEC), over a baseline that in-
cludes a very simple reordering model. In our work
we develop this idea further and use a reordering
model to predict which specific input words, rather

than input intervals, are likely be translated next.
Moreover, our solution is not affected by the con-
straint inconsistency problem (see Sect. 4).

In another related work, Bisazza and Federico
(2012) generate likely reorderings of the input sen-
tence by means of language-specific fuzzy rules
based on shallow syntax. Long jumps are then sug-
gested to the PSMT decoder by reducing the distor-
tion cost for specific pairs of input words. In com-
parison to the dynamic DL, that is a much finer way
to define the reordering space, leading to consistent
improvements of both translation quality and effi-
ciency over a strong baseline. However, the need of
specific reordering rules makes the method harder to
apply to new language pairs.

3 The WaW reordering model

We model reordering as the problem of deciding
whether a given input word should be translated
after another (Word-after-Word). This formulation
is particularly suitable to help the decoder decide
whether a reordering path is promising enough to
be further explored. Moreover, when translating a
sentence, choosing the next source word to translate
appears as a more natural problem than guessing
how much to the left or to the right we should
move from the current source position. The WaW
reordering model addresses a binary decision task
through the following maximum-entropy classifier:

P (Ri,j=Y |fJ1 , i, j) =

exp[
∑

m λmhm(f
J
1 , i, j, Ri,j=Y )]∑

Y ′ exp[
∑

m λmhm(f
J
1 , i, j, Ri,j=Y

′)]

where fJ1 is a source sentence of J words, hm are
feature functions and λm the corresponding feature
weights. The outcome Y can be either 1 or 0, with
Ri,j=1 meaning that the word at position j is trans-
lated right after the word at position i.

Our WaW reordering model is strongly related to
that of Visweswariah et al. (2011) – hereby called
Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) model – with
few important differences: (i) we do not include
in the features any explicit indication of the jump
length, in order to avoid the bias on short jumps;
(ii) they train a linear model with MIRA (Cram-
mer and Singer, 2003) by minimizing the number

329



of input words that get placed after the wrong po-
sition, while we use a maximum-entropy classifier
trained by maximum-likelihood; (iii) they use an
off-the shelf TSP solver to find the best source sen-
tence permutation and apply it as pre-processing to
training and test data. By contrast, we integrate the
maximum-entropy classifier directly into the SMT
decoder and let all its other models (phrase orien-
tation, translation, target LM etc.) contribute to the
final reordering decision.

3.1 Features

Like the TSP model (Visweswariah et al., 2011),
the WaW model builds on binary features similar
to those typically employed for dependency parsing
(McDonald et al., 2005): namely, combinations of
surface forms or POS tags of the words i and j and
their context. Our feature templates are presented in
Table 1. The main novelties with respect to the TSP
model are the mixed word-POS templates (rows 16-
17) and the shallow syntax features. In particular, we
use the chunk types of i, j and their context (18-19),
as well as the chunk head words of i and j (20). Fi-
nally we add a feature to indicate whether the words
i and j belong to the same chunk (21). The jump
orientation – forward/backward – is included in the
features that represent the words comprised between
i and j (rows 6, 7, 14, 15). No explicit indication of
the jump length is included in any feature.

3.2 Training data

To generate training data for the classifier, we first
extract reference reorderings from a word-aligned
parallel corpus. Given a parallel sentence, differ-
ent heuristics may be used to convert arbitrary word
alignments to a source permutation (Birch et al.,
2010; Feng et al., 2010; Visweswariah et al., 2011).
Similarly to this last work, we compute for each
source word fi the mean ai of the target positions
aligned to fi, then sort the source words according
to this value.3 As a difference, though, we do not
discard unaligned words but assign them the mean

3Using the mean of the aligned indices makes the gener-
ation of reference permutations more robust to alignment er-
rors. Admittedly, this heuristic does not handle well the case of
source words that are correctly aligned to non-consecutive tar-
get words. However, this phenomenon is also not captured by
standard PSMT models, who only learn continuous phrases.

i−2 i−1 i i+1 b j−1 j j+1
1 w w
2 w w w
3 w w w w
4 w w w w
5 w w w w
6 w w w
7 wall w w
8 p p
9 p p p

10 p p p p
11 p p p p
12 p p p p
13 p p p p p p
14 p p p
15 pall p p
16 w p
17 p w
18 c c
19 c c c c c c
20 h h
21 belong to same chunk(i, j)?

w: word identity, p: POS tag, c: chunk type, h: chunk head

Table 1: Feature templates used to learn whether a source
position j is to be translated right after i. Positions com-
prised between i and j are denoted by b and generate two
feature templates: one for each position (6 and 14) and
one for the concatentation of them all (7 and 15).

of their neighbouring words’ alignment means, so
that a complete permutation of the source sentence
(σ) is obtained. Table 2(a) illustrates this procedure.

Given the reference permutation, we then gener-
ate positive and negative training samples by simu-
lating the decoding process. We traverse the source
positions in the order defined by σ, keeping track of
the positions that have already been covered and, for
each t : 1 ≤ t ≤ J , generate:

• one positive sample (Rσt,σt+1=1) for the
source position that comes right after it,

• a negative sample (Rσt,u=0) for each source
position in {u : σt−δ+1 < u < σt+δ+1 ∧
u $= σt+1} that has not yet been translated.

Here, the sampling window δ serves to control the
size of the training data and the proportion between
positive and negative samples. Its value naturally
correlates with the DL used in decoding. The gener-
ation of training samples is illustrated by Table 2(b).

330



(a) Converting word alignments to a permutation:
source words are sorted by their target alignments
mean a. The unaligned word “D” is assigned the
mean of its neighbouring words’ a values (2 +
5)/2 = 3.5 :

(b) Generating binary samples by simulating the
decoding process: shaded rounds represent cov-
ered positions, while dashed arrows represent
negative samples:

Table 2: The classifier’s training data generation process.

3.3 Integration into phrase-based decoding
Rather than using the new reordering model for
data pre-processing as done by (Visweswariah et al.,
2011), we directly integrate it into the PSMT de-
coder Moses (Koehn et al., 2007).

Two main computation phases are required by the
WaW model: (i) at system initialization time, all fea-
ture weights are loaded into memory, and (ii) before
translating each new sentence, features are extracted
from it and model probabilities are pre-computed
for each pair of source positions (i, j) such that
|j − i − 1| ≤ DL. Note that this efficient solution
is possible because our model does not employ de-
coding history-based features, like the word that was
translated before the last one, or like the previous
jump legth. This is an important difference with re-
spect to the reordered source LM proposed by Feng
et al. (2010), which requires inclusion of the last n
translated words in the decoder state.

Fig. 1 illustrates the scoring process: when a par-
tial translation hypothesis H is expanded by cover-
ing a new source phrase f̃ , the model returns the
log-probability of translating the words of f̃ in that
particular order, just after the last translated word of

H. In details, this is done by converting the phrase-
internal word alignment4 to a source permutation, in
just the same way it was done to produce the model’s
training examples. Thus, the global score is inde-
pendent from phrase segmentation, and normalized
across outputs of different lengths: that is, the proba-
bility of any complete hypothesis decomposes into J
factors, where J is the length of the input sentence.

The WaW reordering model is fully compatible
with, and complementary to the lexicalized reorder-
ing (phrase orientation) models included in Moses.

Figure 1: Integrating the binary word reordering model
into a phrase-based decoder: when a new phrase is
covered (dashed boxes), the model returns the log-
probability of translating its words in the order defined
by the phrase-internal word alignment.

4 Early pruning of reordering steps

We now explain how the WaW reordering model can
be used to dynamically refine the input permutation
space. This method is not dependent on the particu-
lar classifier described in this paper, but can in prin-
ciple work with any device estimating the probabil-
ity of translating a given input word after another.

The method consists of querying the reordering
model at the time of hypothesis expansion, and fil-
tering out hypotheses solely based on their reorder-
ing score. The rationale is to avoid costly hypoth-
esis expansions for those source positions that the
reordering model considers very unlikely to be cov-
ered at a given point of decoding. In practice, this
works as follows:

• at each hypothesis expansion, we first enumer-
ate the set of uncovered input positions that
are reachable within a fixed DL, and query the
WaW reordering model for each of them5;

4Phrase-internal alignments are provided in the phrase table.
5The score used to prune a new word range f̃ is the log prob-

ability of translating the first aligned word of f̃ right after the
last translated word of the current hypothesis. See also Sect. 3.3.

331



• only based on the WaW score, we apply his-
togram and threshold pruning to this set and
proceed to expand the non-pruned positions.

Furthermore, it is possible to ensure that local re-
orderings are always allowed, by setting a so-called
non-prunable-zone of width ϑ around the last cov-
ered input position.6

According to how the DL, pruning parameters,
and ϑ are set, we can actually aim at different tar-
gets: with a low DL, loose pruning parameters, and
ϑ=0 we can try to speed up search without sacrific-
ing much translation quality. With a high DL, strict
pruning parameters, and a medium ϑ, we ensure that
the standard medium-range reordering space is ex-
plored, as well as those few long jumps that are
promising according to the reordering model. In our
experiments, we explore this second option with the
setting DL=18 and ϑ=5.

The underlying idea is similar to that of early
pruning proposed by Moore and Quirk (2007),
which consisted in discarding possible extensions of
a partial hypothesis based on their estimated score
before computing the exact language model score.
Our technique too has the effect of introducing ad-
ditional points at which the search space is pruned.
However, while theirs was mainly an optimization
technique meant to avoid useless LM queries, we in-
stead aim at refining the search space by exploiting
the fact that some SMT models are more important
than others at different stages of the translation pro-
cess. Our approach actually involves a continuous
alternation of two processes: during hypothesis ex-
pansion the reordering score is combined with all
other scores, while during early pruning some re-
ordering decisions are taken only based on the re-
ordering score. In this way, we try to combine the
benefits of fully integrated reordering models with
those of monolingual pre-ordering methods.

5 Evaluation

We test our approach on an Arabic-English news
translation task where sentences are typically long
and complex. In this language pair, long reorder-
ing errors mostly concern verbs, as all of Subject-
Verb-Object (SVO), VSO and, more rarerly, VOS

6See Bisazza (2013) for technical details on the integration
of word-level pruning with phrase-level hypothesis expansion.

constructions are attested in modern written Ara-
bic. This issue is well known in the SMT field and
was addressed by several recent works, with deep
or shallow parsing-based techniques (Green et al.,
2009; Carpuat et al., 2012; Andreas et al., 2011;
Bisazza et al., 2012). We question whether our ap-
proach – which is not conceived to solve this spe-
cific problem, nor requires manual rules to predict
verb reordering – will succeed in improving long re-
ordering in a fully data-driven way.

As SMT training data, we use all the in-domain
parallel data provided for the NIST-MT09 evalua-
tion for a total of 986K sentence pairs (31M English
words).7 The target LM used to run the main se-
ries of experiments is trained on the English side of
all available NIST-MT09 parallel data, UN included
(147M words). In the large-scale experiments, the
LM training data also include the sections of the En-
glish Gigaword that best fit to the development data
in terms of perplexity: namely, the Agence France-
Presse, Xinhua News Agency and Associated Press
Worldstream sections (2130M words in total).

For development and test, we use the newswire
sections of the NIST benchmarks: dev06-nw, eval08-
nw, eval09-nw consisting of 1033, 813, 586 sen-
tences respectively. Each set includes 4 reference
translations and the average sentence length is 33
words. To focus the evaluation on problematic re-
ordering, we also consider a subset of eval09-nw
containing only sentences where the Arabic main
verb is placed before the subject (vs-09: 299 sent.).8

As pre-processing, we apply standard tokeniza-
tion to the English data, while the Arabic data is
segmented with AMIRA (Diab et al., 2004) accord-
ing to the ATB scheme9. The same tool also pro-
duces POS tagging and shallow syntax annotation.

7The in-domain parallel data includes all the provided cor-
pora except the UN proceedings, and the non-newswire parts of
the small GALE-Y1-Q4 corpus (that is 9K sentences of audio
transcripts and web data). As reported by Green et al. (2010)
the removal of UN data does not affect baseline performances
on the news benchmarks.

8Automatically detected by means of shallow syntax rules.
9The Arabic Treebank tokenization scheme isolates con-

junctions w+ and f+, prepositions l+, k+, b+, future marker
s+, pronominal suffixes, but not the article Al+.

332



5.1 Reordering model intrinsic evaluation
Before proceeding to the SMT experiments, we
evaluate the performance of the WaW reorder-
ing model in isolation. All the tested configura-
tions are trained with the freely available MegaM
Toolkit10, implementing the conjugate gradient
method (Hestenes and Stiefel, 1952), in maximum
100 iterations. Training samples are generated
within a sampling window of width δ=10, from a
subset (30K sentences) of the parallel data described
above, resulting in 8M training word pairs11. Test
samples are generated from TIDES-MT04 (1324 sen-
tences, 370K samples with δ=10), one of the corpora
included in our SMT training data. Features with
less than 20 occurrences are ignored.

Classification accuracy. Table 3 presents preci-
sion, recall, and F-score achieved by different fea-
ture subsets, where W stands for word-based, P for
POS-based and C for chunk-based feature templates.
We can see that all feature types contribute to im-
prove the classifier’s performance. The word-based
model achieves the highest precision but a very low
recall, while the POS-based has much more bal-
anced scores. A better performance overall is ob-
tained by combining word-, POS- and mixed word-
POS-based features (62.6% F-score). Finally, the
addition of chunk-based features yields a further im-
provement of about 1 point, reaching 63.8% F-score.
Given these results, we decide to use the W,P,C
model for the rest of the evaluation.

Features (templates) P R F
W [1-7] 73.1 16.4 26.8
P [8-15] 69.5 54.8 61.3

W,P [1-17] 70.2 56.5 62.6
W,P,C [1-21] 70.6 58.1 63.8

Table 3: Classification accuracy of the WaW reordering
model on TIDES-MT04, using different feature subsets.
The template numbers refer to the rows of Table 1.

Ranking accuracy. A more important aspect to
evaluate for our application is how well our model’s
scores can rank a typical set of reordering options.
In fact, the WaW model is not meant to be used as

10http://www.cs.utah.edu/˜hal/megam/ (Daumé III, 2004).
11This is the maximum number of samples manageable by

MegaM. However, even scaling from 4M to 8M was only
slightly helpful in our experiments. In the future we plan to test
other learning approaches that scale better to large data sets.

a stand-alone classifier, but as one of several SMT
feature functions. Moreover, for early reordering
pruning to be effective, it is especially important that
the correct reordering option be ranked in the top n
among those available at the time of a given hypoth-
esis expansion. In order to measure this, we simulate
the decoding process by traversing the source words
in target order and, for each of them, we examine
the ranking of all words that may be translated next
(i. e. the uncovered positions within a given DL).
We check how often the correct jump was ranked
first (Top-1) or at most third (Top-3). We also com-
pute the latter score on long reorderings only (Top-
3-long): i. e. backward jumps with distortion D>7
and forward jumps with D>6. In Table 4, results
are compared with the ranking produced by standard
distortion, which always favors shorter jumps. Two
conditions are considered: DL=10 corresponding to
the sampling window δ used to produce the training
data, and DL=18 that is the maximum distortion of
jumps that will be considered in our early-pruning
SMT experiment.

Model DL DL-err Top-1 Top-3 Top-3-longback forw.

Distortion
10 2.4 61.8 79.6 50.7 66.0
18 0.8 62.0 80.0 18.9 52.3

WaW
10 2.4 71.2 91.2 76.4 69.3
18 0.8 71.2 91.8 68.0 51.8

Table 4: Word-to-word jump ranking accuracy (%) of
standard distortion and WaW reordering model, in dif-
ferent DL conditions. DL-err is the percentage of correct
jumps beyond DL. The test set consists of 40K reordering
decisions: one for each source word in TIDES-MT04.

We can see that, in terms of overall accuracies, the
WaW reordering model outperforms standard distor-
tion by a large margin (about 10% absolute). This
is an important result, considering that the jump
length, strongly correlating with the jump likeli-
hood, is not directly known to our model. As re-
gards the DL, the higher limit naturally results in a
lower DL-error rate (percentage of correct jumps be-
yond DL): namely 0.8% instead of 2.4%. However,
jump prediction becomes much harder: Top-3 accu-
racy of long jumps by distortion drops from 50.7%
to 18.9% (backward) and from 66.0% to 52.3% (for-
ward). Our model is remarkably robust to this effect
on backward jumps, where it achieves 68.0% accu-

333



racy. Due to the syntactic characteristics of Arabic
and English, the typical long reordering pattern con-
sists in (i) skipping a clause-initial Arabic verb, (ii)
covering a long subject, then finally (iii) jumping
back to translate the verb and (iv) jumping forward
to continue translating the rest of the sentence (see
Fig. 3 for an example).12 Deciding when to jump
back to cover the verb (iii) is the hardest part of
this process, and that is precisely where our model
seems more helpful, while distortion always prefers
to proceed monotonically achieving a very low ac-
curacy of 18.9%. In the case of long forward jumps
(iv), instead, distortion is advantaged as the correct
choice typically corresponds to translating the first
uncovered position, that is the shortest jump avail-
able from the last translated word. Even here, our
model achieves an accuracy of 51.8%, only slightly
lower than that of distortion (52.3%).

In summary, the WaW reordering model signifi-
cantly outperforms distortion in the ranking of long
jumps. In the large majority of cases, it is able to
rank a correct long jump in the top 3 reordering op-
tions, which suggests that it can be effectively used
for early reordering pruning.

5.2 SMT experimental setup
Our SMT systems are built with the Moses toolkit,
while word alignment is produced by the Berke-
ley Aligner (Liang et al., 2006). The baseline de-
coder includes a phrase translation model, a lexi-
calized reordering model, a 6-gram target language
model, distortion cost, word and phrase penalties.
More specifically, the baseline reordering model is a
hierarchical phrase orientation model (Tillmann,
2004; Koehn et al., 2005; Galley and Manning,
2008) trained on all the available parallel data. This
variant was shown to outperform the default word-
based on an Arabic-English task. To make our base-
line even more competitive, we apply early distor-
tion cost, as proposed by Moore and Quirk (2007).
This function has the same value as the standard one
over a complete translation hypothesis, but it antic-
ipates the gradual accumulation of the cost, mak-
ing hypotheses of the same length more compara-
ble to one another. Note that this option has no ef-

12Clearly, we would expect different figures from testing the
model on another language pair like German-English, where the
verb is often postponed in the source with respect to the target.

fect on the distortion limit, but only on the distor-
tion cost feature function. As proposed by Johnson
et al. (2007), statistically improbable phrase pairs
are removed from the translation model. The lan-
guage models are estimated by the IRSTLM toolkit
(Federico et al., 2008) with modified Kneser-Ney
smoothing (Chen and Goodman, 1999).

Feature weights are optimized by minimum
BLEU-error training (Och, 2003) on dev06-nw. To
reduce the effects of the optimizer instability, we
tune each configuration four times and use the av-
erage of the resulting weight vectors to translate the
test sets, as suggested by Cettolo et al. (2011).

Finally, eval08-nw is used to select the early prun-
ing parameters for the last experiment, while eval09-
nw is always reserved as blind test.

5.3 Evaluation metrics
We evaluate global translation quality with BLEU
(Papineni et al., 2002) and METEOR (Banerjee and
Lavie, 2005). These metrics, though, are only in-
directly sensitive to word order, and especially un-
likely to capture improvements at the level of long-
range reordering. For this reason, we also com-
pute the Kendall Reordering Score or KRS (Birch
et al., 2010) which is a positive score based on the
Kendall’s Tau distance between the source-output
permutation π and the source-reference permuta-
tions σ:

KRS(π,σ) = (1 −
√

K(π,σ)) · BP

K(π,σ) =

∑n
i=1

∑n
j=1 d(i, j)

1
2n(n − 1)

d(i, j) =

{
1 if πi < πj and σi > σj
0 otherwise

where BP is a sentence-level brevity penalty, similar
to that of BLEU. The KRS is robust to lexical choice
because it performs no comparison between output
and reference words, but only between the positions
of their translations. Besides, it was shown to corre-
late strongly with human judgements of fluency.

Our work specifically addresses long-range re-
ordering phenomena in language pairs where these
are quite rare, although crucial for preserving the
source text meaning. Hence, an improvement at this
level may not be detected by the general-purpose
metrics. We then develop a KRS variant that is only

334



sensitive to the positioning of specific input words.
Assuming that each input word fi is assigned a
weight λi, the formula above is modified as follows:

dλ(i, j) =

{
λi+λj if πi < πj and σi > σj
0 otherwise

A similar element-weighted version of Kendall Tau
was proposed by Kumar and Vassilvitskii (2010) to
evaluate document rankings in information retrieval.
Because long reordering errors in Arabic-English
mostly affect verbs, we set the weights to 1 for verbs
and 0 for all other words to only capture verb re-
ordering errors, and call the resulting metric KRS-V.

The source-reference word alignments needed to
compute the reordering scores are generated by the
Berkeley Aligner previously trained on the training
data. Source-output word alignments are instead ob-
tained from the decoder’s trace.

5.4 Results and discussion
To motivate the choice of our baseline setup (early
distortion cost and DL=8), we first compare the per-
formance of standard and early distortion costs un-
der various DL conditions.

!"#$%

!"#&'()%

!"#($%

!"#&%

!"#$%

!"#()%

!"#($%
!"#"$

!%#"$

!!#"$

!&#"$

!'#"$

&(#"$

&)#"$

&*#"$

&+#"$

,+#)$ ,+#%$ ,,#)$ ,,#%$ ,"#)$

*
+
,
%

-"./%

-./01$

23.45./5$

Figure 2: Standard vs early distortion cost results on
eval08-nw under different distortion limits (DL), using
the medium-size LM. Best scores are on top-right corner.

As shown in Fig. 2, most results are close to each
other in terms of BLEU and KRS, but early distor-
tion consistently outperforms the standard one (sta-
tistically significant). The most striking difference
appears at a very high distortion limit (18), where
standard distortion scores drop by more than 1 BLEU
point and almost 7 KRS points! Early distortion is
much more robust (only -1 KRS when going from
DL=8 to DL=18), which makes our baseline system
especially strong at the level of reordering.

Table 5 presents the results obtained by integrat-
ing the WaW reordering model as an additional
feature function, and by applying early reordering
pruning. The upper part of the table refers to the
medium-scale evaluation, while the lower part refers
to the large-scale evaluation. In each part, statis-
tical significance is computed against the baseline
[B] by approximate randomization as in (Riezler and
Maxwell, 2005). Run times are obtained by an Intel
Xeon X5650 processor on the first 500 sentences of
eval08-nw, and exclude loading time of all models.

Medium-scale evaluation. Integrating the WaW
model as an additional feature function results in
small but consistent improvements in all DL condi-
tions, which shows that this type of model conveys
information that is missing from the state-of-the-art
reordering models. As regards efficiency, the new
model makes decoding time increase by 8%.

Among the DL settings considered, DL=8 is con-
firmed as the optimal one – with or without WaW
model. Raising the DL to 18 with no special prun-
ing has a negative impact on both translation quality
and efficiency. The effect is especially visible on the
reordering scores: that is, from 84.7 to 83.9 KRS and
from 86.2 to 85.8 KRS-V on eval09-nw. Run times
are almost doubled: from 87 to 164 and from 94 to
178 ms/word, that is a 89% increase.

We then proceed to the last experiment where the
reordering space is dynamically pruned based on
the WaW model score. As explained in Sect. 4, a
non-prunable-zone of width ϑ=5 is set around the
last covered position. To set the early pruning pa-
rameters, we perform a grid search over the values
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5) for histogram and (0.5, 0.25, 0.1) for
relative threshold, and select the values that achieve
the best BLEU and KRS on eval08-nw, namely 3 (his-
togram) and 0.1 (threshold). The resulting configu-
ration is then re-optimized by MERT on dev06-nw.
This setting implies that, at a given point of decod-
ing where i is the last covered position, a new word
can be translated only if:

• it lies within a DL of 5 from i, or
• it lies within a DL of 18 from i and its WaW

reordering score is among the top 3 and at least
equal to 1/10 of the best score (in linear space).

As shown in Table 5, early pruning achieves the
best results overall: despite the high DL, we report

335



DL Reo.models eval08-nw eval09-nw vs-09 ms/
bleu met krs krs-V bleu met krs krs-V krs-V word

Using the medium-size LM (147M English tokens):

5
hier.lexreo, early disto 44.7 35.1! 83.0! 84.7! 50.3" 38.1 84.6 85.9 84.7 59
+ WaW model 44.8 35.1 83.7 85.4 51.0# 38.3# 85.1# 86.6$ 85.5# 64

8
hier.lexreo, early disto[B] 44.8 35.2 83.4 85.6 50.6 38.1 84.7 86.2 84.8 87
+ WaW model 45.0 35.2 83.7$ 85.9 51.1# 38.3# 85.1# 86.8# 85.8# 94

18
hier.lexreo, early disto 44.7 34.9! 82.4! 84.9! 50.3 38.0" 83.9! 85.8" 84.3" 164
+ WaW model 44.8 35.2 82.7! 85.5 51.0$ 38.3# 84.2" 86.2 85.2 178
+ early reo.pruning(ϑ=5) 45.0 35.3 83.7$ 86.3# 50.9 38.3# 84.9 87.0# 86.2# 68

Using the large interpolated LM (2130M English tokens) and double beam-size:
8 hier.lexreo, early disto[B] 46.3 35.0 83.2 85.0 51.6 38.3 84.5 85.8 84.5 2579

18
hier.lexreo, early disto 45.9" 34.9! 81.7! 84.1! 51.4 38.1! 83.0! 84.6! 83.1! 5462
+WaW+reo.pruning(ϑ=5) 46.3 35.2 83.4 85.7# 52.8# 38.6# 84.6 86.6# 85.5# 1588

Table 5: Effects of WaW reordering modeling and early reordering pruning on translation quality, measured with
% BLEU, METEOR, and Kendall Reordering Score: regular (KRS) and verb-specific (KRS-V). Statistically significant
differences with respect to the baseline [B] are marked with #! at the p ≤ .05 level and $" at the p ≤ .10 level.
Decoding time is measured in milliseconds per input word.

no loss in BLEU, METEOR and KRS, but we actually
see several improvements. In particular, the gains on
the blind test eval09-nw are +0.3 BLEU, +0.2 ME-
TEOR and +0.2 KRS (only METEOR is significant).
While these gains are admittedly small, we recall
that our techniques affect rare and isolated events
which can hardly emerge from the general-purpose
evaluation metrics. Moreover, to our knowledge,
this is the first time that a PSMT system is shown to
maintain a good performance on this language pair
while admitting very long-range reorderings.

Finally and more importantly, the reordering of
verbs improves significantly on both generic tests
and on the VS- sentence subset (vs-09): namely, in
the latter, we achieve a notable gain of 1.4 KRS-V.

Efficiency is also largely improved by our early
reordering pruning technique: decoding time is re-
duced to 68 ms/word, corresponding to a 22%
speed-up over the baseline.

Large-scale evaluation. We also investigate
whether our methods can be useful in a scenario
where efficiency is less important and more data
is available for training. To this end, we build a
very large LM by interpolating the main LM with
three other LMs trained on different Gigaword sec-
tions (see Sect. 5). Moreover, we relax the decoder’s
beam size from the default value of 200 to 400 hy-

potheses, to reduce the risk of search errors and ob-
tain the best possible baseline performance.

By comparing the large-scale with the medium-
scale baseline in Table 5, we note that the addition
of LM data is especially beneficial for BLEU (+1.5
on eval08-nw and +1.0 on eval09-nw), but not as
much for the other metrics, which challenges the
commonly held idea that more data always improves
translation quality.

Here too, relaxing the DL without special pruning
hurts not only efficiency but also translation qual-
ity: all the scores decrease considerably, showing
that even the stronger LM is not sufficient to guide
search through a very large reordering search space.

As for our enhanced system, it achieves simi-
lar gains as in the medium-scale scenario: that is,
BLEU and METEOR are preserved or slightly im-
proved despite the very high DL, while all the re-
ordering scores increase. In particular, we report sta-
tistically significant improvements in the reordering
of verbs, which is where the impact of our method is
expected to concentrate (+0.7, +0.8 and +1.0 KRS-V
on eval08-nw, eval09-nw and vs-09, respectively).

These results confirm the usefulness of our
method not only as an optimization technique, but
also as a way to improve translation quality on top
of a very strong baseline.

336



SRC

! ! ! " #$!%
&' ( )*

+, -. /0$%&' &-1! 2 +1 +03* +045(67!8 +9# +77! 5 :65 &-3*;24<5( &-73! 045( &-=>?@A ( 0B* +CD EF(23*
verb subj. obj. compl.

ywASl sfyr Almmlkp AlErbyp AlsEwdyp ldY lbnAn EbdAlEzyz xwjp tHrk -h fy AtjAh ...
continues ambassador Kingdom Arabian Saudi to Lebanon Abdulaziz Khawja move his in direction

REF The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia ’s ambassador to Lebanon Abdulaziz Khawja continues his moves towards ...
BASE continue to Saudi Arabian ambassador to Lebanon , Abdulaziz Khwja its move in the direction of ...
NEW The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia ’s ambassador to Lebanon , Abdulaziz Khwja continue its move in the direction of ...

SRC

;#7*$G'( H( +0&B5 ( )I( E4 J<K 65# +L M#NL &-O01 P5 )*QR#7*<5( S!
&7=@A ( TU*V3W XY. #8; #?7* +,

adv. verb obj. subj. compl.
fymA dEA -hm r}ys Almktb AlsyAsy l- Hrkp HmAs xAld m$El AlY AltzAm AlHyAd

meanwhile called them head bureau political of movement Hamas Khaled Mashal to necessity neutrality

REF Meanwhile, the Head of the Political Bureau of the Hamas movement, Khaled Mashal, called upon them to remain neutral
BASE The called them, head of Hamas’ political bureau, Khalid Mashal, to remain neutral
NEW The head of Hamas’ political bureau, Khalid Mashal, called on them to remain neutral

Figure 3: Long reordering examples showing improvements over the baseline system (BASE) when the DL is raised to
18 and early pruning based on WaW reordering scores is enabled (NEW).

Long jumps statistics and examples. To better
understand the behavior of the early-pruning system,
we extract phrase-to-phrase jump statistics from the
decoder log file. We find that 132 jumps beyond the
non-prunable zone (D>5) were performed to trans-
late the 586 sentences of eval09-nw; 38 out of these
were longer than 8 and mostly concentrated on the
VS- sentence subset (27 jumps D>8 performed in
vs-09).13 This and the higher reordering scores sug-
gest that long jumps are mainly carried out to cor-
rectly reorder clause-inital verbs over long subjects.

Fig. 3 shows two Arabic sentences taken from
eval09-nw, that were erroneuously reordered by the
baseline system. The system including the WaW
model and early reordering pruning, instead, pro-
duced the correct translation. The first sentence is
a typical example of VSO order with a long subject:
while the baseline system left the verb in its Ara-
bic position, producing an incomprehensible trans-
lation, the new system placed it rightly between the
English subject and object. This reordering involved
two long jumps: one with D=9 backward and one
with D=8 forward.

The second sentence displays another, less com-
mon, Arabic construction: namely VOS, with a per-
sonal pronoun object. In this case, a backward jump
with D=10 and a forward jump with D=8 were nec-
essary to achieve the correct reordering.

13Statistics computed on the medium-LM system.

6 Conclusions

We have trained a discriminative model to predict
likely reordering steps in a way that is complemen-
tary to state-of-the-art PSMT reordering models. We
have effectively integrated it into a PSMT decoder as
additional feature, ensuring that its total score over a
complete translation hypothesis is consistent across
different phrase segmentations. Lastly, we have pro-
posed early reordering pruning as a novel method
to dynamically shape the input reordering space and
capture long-range reordering phenomena that are
often critical when translating between languages
with different syntactic structures.

Evaluated on a popular Arabic-English news
translation task against a strong baseline, our ap-
proach leads to similar or even higher BLEU, ME-
TEOR and KRS scores at a very high distortion limit
(18), which is by itself an important achievement.
At the same time, the reordering of verbs, measured
with a novel version of the KRS, is consistently im-
proved, while decoding gets significantly faster. The
improvements are also confirmed when a very large
LM is used and the decoder’s beam size is dou-
bled, which shows that our method reduces not only
search errors but also model errors even when base-
line models are very strong.

Word reordering is probably the most difficult as-
pect of SMT and an important factor of both its qual-
ity and efficiency. Given its strong interaction with
the other aspects of SMT, it appears natural to solve

337



word reordering during decoding, rather than before
or after it. To date, however, this objective was only
partially achieved. We believe there is a promising
way to go between fully-integrated reordering mod-
els and monolingual pre-ordering methods. This
work has started to explore it.

Aknowledgments

This work was partially funded by the European
Union FP7 grant agreement 287658 (EU-BRIDGE).

References

Yaser Al-Onaizan and Kishore Papineni. 2006. Distor-
tion models for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
529–536, Sydney, Australia, July.

Jacob Andreas, Nizar Habash, and Owen Rambow. 2011.
Fuzzy syntactic reordering for phrase-based statistical
machine translation. In Proceedings of the Sixth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 227–
236, Edinburgh, Scotland, July.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evalu-
ation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Sum-
marization, pages 65–72, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June.

A. L. Berger, P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della
Pietra, J. R. Gillett, A. S. Kehler, and R. L. Mercer.
1996. Language translation apparatus and method of
using context-based translation models. United States
Patent, No. 5510981, Apr.

Alexandra Birch, Phil Blunsom, and Miles Osborne.
2009. A quantitative analysis of reordering phenom-
ena. In StatMT ’09: Proceedings of the Fourth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 197–
205, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Alexandra Birch, Miles Osborne, and Phil Blunsom.
2010. Metrics for MT evaluation: evaluating reorder-
ing. Machine Translation, 24(1):15–26.

Arianna Bisazza and Marcello Federico. 2012. Modi-
fied distortion matrices for phrase-based statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 478–487, Jeju Is-
land, Korea, July.

Arianna Bisazza, Daniele Pighin, and Marcello Fed-
erico. 2012. Chunk-lattices for verb reordering in

Arabic-English statistical machine translation. Ma-
chine Translation, Special Issue on MT for Arabic,
26(1-2):85–103.

Arianna Bisazza. 2013. Linguistically Motivated Re-
ordering Modeling for Phrase-Based Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Trento.
http://eprints-phd.biblio.unitn.it/1019/.

Marine Carpuat, Yuval Marton, and Nizar Habash. 2012.
Improved Arabic-to-English statistical machine trans-
lation by reordering post-verbal subjects for word
alignment. Machine Translation, Special Issue on MT
for Arabic, 26(1-2):105–120.

Mauro Cettolo, Nicola Bertoldi, and Marcello Federico.
2011. Methods for smoothing the optimizer instability
in SMT. In MT Summit XIII: the Thirteenth Machine
Translation Summit, pages 32–39, Xiamen, China.

Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1999. An empiri-
cal study of smoothing techniques for language model-
ing. Computer Speech and Language, 4(13):359–393.

Marta R. Costa-jussà and José A. R. Fonollosa. 2009.
State-of-the-art word reordering approaches in statisti-
cal machine translation: A survey. IEICE TRANSAC-
TIONS on Information and Systems, E92-D(11):2179–
2185.

Koby Crammer and Yoram Singer. 2003. Ultraconser-
vative online algorithms for multiclass problems. J.
Mach. Learn. Res., 3:951–991, March.

Hal Daumé III. 2004. Notes on CG and LM-BFGS op-
timization of logistic regression. Paper available at
http://pub.hal3.name, implementation avail-
able at http://hal3.name/megam.

Mona Diab, Kadri Hacioglu, and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004.
Automatic Tagging of Arabic Text: From Raw Text to
Base Phrase Chunks. In Daniel Marcu Susan Dumais
and Salim Roukos, editors, HLT-NAACL 2004: Short
Papers, pages 149–152, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, and Mauro Cettolo.
2008. IRSTLM: an Open Source Toolkit for Handling
Large Scale Language Models. In Proceedings of In-
terspeech, pages 1618–1621, Melbourne, Australia.

Minwei Feng, Arne Mauser, and Hermann Ney. 2010.
A source-side decoding sequence model for statisti-
cal machine translation. In Conference of the Associa-
tion for Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA),
Denver, Colorado, USA.

Michel Galley and Christopher D. Manning. 2008. A
simple and effective hierarchical phrase reordering
model. In EMNLP ’08: Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 848–856, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Spence Green, Conal Sathi, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2009. NP subject detection in verb-initial Ara-
bic clauses. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop

338



on Computational Approaches to Arabic Script-based
Languages (CAASL3), Ottawa, Canada.

Spence Green, Michel Galley, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2010. Improved models of distortion cost for
statistical machine translation. In Human Language
Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (NAACL), pages 867–875, Los
Angeles, California.

Magnus R. Hestenes and Eduard Stiefel. 1952. Meth-
ods of conjugate gradients for solving linear systems.
Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Stan-
dards, 49(6):409–436.

H. Johnson, J. Martin, G. Foster, and R. Kuhn. 2007. Im-
proving translation quality by discarding most of the
phrasetable. In In Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL 07,
pages 967–975.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceed-
ings of HLT-NAACL 2003, pages 127–133, Edmonton,
Canada.

Philipp Koehn, Amittai Axelrod, Alexandra Birch
Mayne, Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and
David Talbot. 2005. Edinburgh system description
for the 2005 IWSLT speech translation evaluation. In
Proc. of the International Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Translation, October.

P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin,
and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source Toolkit
for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics Companion Volume Proceed-
ings of the Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177–180,
Prague, Czech Republic.

Ravi Kumar and Sergei Vassilvitskii. 2010. General-
ized distances between rankings. In Proceedings of
the 19th international conference on World Wide Web,
pages 571–580, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Percy Liang, Ben Taskar, and Dan Klein. 2006. Align-
ment by agreement. In Proceedings of the Human
Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Main
Conference, pages 104–111, New York City, USA,
June.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajič. 2005. Non-projective dependency parsing
using spanning tree algorithms. In Proceedings of the
conference on Human Language Technology and Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, HLT
’05, pages 523–530, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Robert C. Moore and Chris Quirk. 2007. Faster beam-
search decoding for phrasal statistical machine transla-

tion. In In Proceedings of MT Summit XI, pages 321–
327, Copenhagen, Denmark.

F. Och and H. Ney. 2002. Discriminative training
and maximum entropy models for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), pages 295–302, Philadelhpia, PA.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training
in Statistical Machine Translation. In Erhard Hinrichs
and Dan Roth, editors, Proceedings of the 41st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 160–167.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association of Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL), pages 311–318, Philadel-
phia, PA.

Stefan Riezler and John T. Maxwell. 2005. On some
pitfalls in automatic evaluation and significance test-
ing for MT. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Ma-
chine Translation and/or Summarization, pages 57–
64, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June.

Christoph Tillmann. 2004. A Unigram Orientation
Model for Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Conference on Human Language
Technologies and the Annual Meeting of the North
American Chapter of the Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics (HLT-NAACL).

Karthik Visweswariah, Rajakrishnan Rajkumar, Ankur
Gandhe, Ananthakrishnan Ramanathan, and Jiri
Navratil. 2011. A word reordering model for im-
proved machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 486–496, Edinburgh,
Scotland, UK., July.

Dekai Wu. 1997. Stochastic inversion transduction
grammars and bilingual parsing of parallel corpora.
Computational Linguistics, 23(3):377–403.

Sirvan Yahyaei and Christof Monz. 2010. Dynamic dis-
tortion in a discriminative reordering model for sta-
tistical machine translation. In International Work-
shop on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT), Paris,
France.

Richard Zens and Hermann Ney. 2006. Discriminative
reordering models for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings on the Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 55–63, New York City, June.

R. Zens, F. J. Och, and H. Ney. 2002. Phrase-based sta-
tistical machine translation. In 25th German Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence (KI2002), pages 18–32,
Aachen, Germany. Springer Verlag.

339



340


