








































The Language Demographics of Amazon Mechanical Turk

Ellie Pavlick1 Matt Post2 Ann Irvine2 Dmitry Kachaev2 Chris Callison-Burch1,2
1Computer and Information Science Department, University of Pennsylvania

2Human Language Technology Center of Excellence, Johns Hopkins University

Abstract

We present a large scale study of the languages
spoken by bilingual workers on Mechanical
Turk (MTurk). We establish a methodology
for determining the language skills of anony-
mous crowd workers that is more robust than
simple surveying. We validate workers’ self-
reported language skill claims by measuring
their ability to correctly translate words, and
by geolocating workers to see if they reside in
countries where the languages are likely to be
spoken. Rather than posting a one-off survey,
we posted paid tasks consisting of 1,000 as-
signments to translate a total of 10,000 words
in each of 100 languages. Our study ran
for several months, and was highly visible on
the MTurk crowdsourcing platform, increas-
ing the chances that bilingual workers would
complete it. Our study was useful both to cre-
ate bilingual dictionaries and to act as cen-
sus of the bilingual speakers on MTurk. We
use this data to recommend languages with the
largest speaker populations as good candidates
for other researchers who want to develop
crowdsourced, multilingual technologies. To
further demonstrate the value of creating data
via crowdsourcing, we hire workers to create
bilingual parallel corpora in six Indian lan-
guages, and use them to train statistical ma-
chine translation systems.

1 Overview

Crowdsourcing is a promising new mechanism for
collecting data for natural language processing re-
search. Access to a fast, cheap, and flexible work-
force allows us to collect new types of data, poten-
tially enabling new language technologies. Because
crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical

Turk (MTurk) give researchers access to a world-
wide workforce, one obvious application of crowd-
sourcing is the creation of multilingual technologies.
With an increasing number of active crowd workers
located outside of the United States, there is even the
potential to reach fluent speakers of lower resource
languages. In this paper, we investigate the feasi-
bility of hiring language informants on MTurk by
conducting the first large-scale demographic study
of the languages spoken by workers on the platform.

There are several complicating factors when try-
ing to take a census of workers on MTurk. The
workers’ identities are anonymized, and Amazon
provides no information about their countries of ori-
gin or their language abilities. Posting a simple sur-
vey to have workers report this information may be
inadequate, since (a) many workers may never see
the survey, (b) many opt not to do one-off surveys
since potential payment is low, and (c) validating the
answers of respondents is not straightforward.

Our study establishes a methodology for deter-
mining the language demographics of anonymous
crowd workers that is more robust than simple sur-
veying. We ask workers what languages they speak
and what country they live in, and validate their
claims by measuring their ability to correctly trans-
late words and by recording their geolocation. To
increase the visibility and the desirability of our
tasks, we post 1,000 assignments in each of 100 lan-
guages. These tasks each consist of translating 10
foreign words into English. Two of the 10 words
have known translations, allowing us to validate that
the workers’ translations are accurate. We construct
bilingual dictionaries with up to 10,000 entries, with
the majority of entries being new.

Surveying thousands of workers allows us to ana-
lyze current speaker populations for 100 languages.

79

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2 (2014) 79–92. Action Editor: Mirella Lapata.
Submitted 12/2013; Published 2/2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics.



11/26/13 turkermap.html

file:///Users/ellie/Documents/Research/turker-demographics/code/src/20130905/paper-rewrite/turkermap.html 1/1

111 1,9981,9981,998
Figure 1: The number of workers per country. This map was generated based on geolocating the IP address
of 4,983 workers in our study. Omitted are 60 workers who were located in more than one country during
the study, and 238 workers who could not be geolocated. The size of the circles represents the number
of workers from each country. The two largest are India (1,998 workers) and the United States (866). To
calibrate the sizes: the Philippines has 142 workers, Egypt has 25, Russia has 10, and Sri Lanka has 4.

The data also allows us to answer questions like:
How quickly is work completed in a given language?
Are crowdsourced translations reliably good? How
often do workers misrepresent their language abili-
ties to obtain financial rewards?

2 Background and Related Work

Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) is an on-
line marketplace for work that gives employers
and researchers access to a large, low-cost work-
force. MTurk allows employers to provide micro-
payments in return for workers completing micro-
tasks. The basic units of work on MTurk are called
‘Human Intelligence Tasks’ (HITs). MTurk was de-
signed to accommodate tasks that are difficult for
computers, but simple for people. This facilitates
research into human computation, where people can
be treated as a function call (von Ahn, 2005; Little et
al., 2009; Quinn and Bederson, 2011). It has appli-
cation to research areas like human-computer inter-
action (Bigham et al., 2010; Bernstein et al., 2010),
computer vision (Sorokin and Forsyth, 2008; Deng
et al., 2010; Rashtchian et al., 2010), speech pro-
cessing (Marge et al., 2010; Lane et al., 2010; Parent
and Eskenazi, 2011; Eskenazi et al., 2013), and natu-
ral language processing (Snow et al., 2008; Callison-

Burch and Dredze, 2010; Laws et al., 2011).
On MTurk, researchers who need work completed

are called ‘Requesters’, and workers are often re-
ferred to as ‘Turkers’. MTurk is a true market, mean-
ing that Turkers are free to choose to complete the
HITs which interest them, and Requesters can price
their tasks competitively to try to attract workers and
have their tasks done quickly (Faridani et al., 2011;
Singer and Mittal, 2011). Turkers remain anony-
mous to Requesters, and all payment occurs through
Amazon. Requesters are able to accept submitted
work or reject work that does not meet their stan-
dards. Turkers are only paid if a Requester accepts
their work.

Several reports examine Mechanical Turk as an
economic market (Ipeirotis, 2010a; Lehdonvirta and
Ernkvist, 2011). When Amazon introduced MTurk,
it first offered payment only in Amazon credits, and
later offered direct payment in US dollars. More re-
cently, it has expanded to include one foreign cur-
rency, the Indian rupee. Despite its payments be-
ing limited to two currencies or Amazon credits,
MTurk claims over half a million workers from 190
countries (Amazon, 2013). This suggests that its
worker population should represent a diverse set of
languages.

80



A demographic study by Ipeirotis (2010b) fo-
cused on age, gender, martial status, income lev-
els, motivation for working on MTurk, and whether
workers used it as a primary or supplemental form
of income. The study contrasted Indian and US
workers. Ross et al. (2010) completed a longitudi-
nal follow-on study. A number of other studies have
informally investigated Turkers’ language abilities.
Munro and Tily (2011) compiled survey responses
of 2,000 Turkers, revealing that four of the six most
represented languages come from India (the top six
being Hindi, Malayalam, Tamil, Spanish, French,
and Telugu). Irvine and Klementiev (2010) had
Turkers evaluate the accuracy of translations that
had been automatically inducted from monolingual
texts. They examined translations of 100 words in
42 low-resource languages, and reported geolocated
countries for their workers (India, the US, Romania,
Pakistan, Macedonia, Latvia, Bangladesh and the
Philippines). Irvine and Klementiev discussed the
difficulty of quality control and assessing the plausi-
bility of workers’ language skills for rare languages,
which we address in this paper.

Several researchers have investigated using
MTurk to build bilingual parallel corpora for ma-
chine translation, a task which stands to benefit
low cost, high volume translation on demand (Ger-
mann, 2001). Ambati et al. (2010) conducted a pilot
study by posting 25 sentences to MTurk for Span-
ish, Chinese, Hindi, Telugu, Urdu, and Haitian Cre-
ole. In a study of 2000 Urdu sentences, Zaidan
and Callison-Burch (2011) presented methods for
achieving professional-level translation quality from
Turkers by soliciting multiple English translations
of each foreign sentence. Zbib et al. (2012) used
crowdsourcing to construct a 1.5 million word par-
allel corpus of dialect Arabic and English, train-
ing a statistical machine translation system that pro-
duced higher quality translations of dialect Arabic
than a system a trained on 100 times more Mod-
ern Standard Arabic-English parallel data. Zbib et
al. (2013) conducted a systematic study that showed
that training an MT system on crowdsourced trans-
lations resulted in the same performance as training
on professional translations, at 15 the cost. Hu et
al. (2010; Hu et al. (2011) performed crowdsourced
translation by having monolingual speakers collab-
orate and iteratively improve MT output.

English 689 Tamil 253 Malayalam 219
Hindi 149 Spanish 131 Telugu 87
Chinese 86 Romanian 85 Portuguese 82
Arabic 74 Kannada 72 German 66
French 63 Polish 61 Urdu 56
Tagalog 54 Marathi 48 Russian 44
Italian 43 Bengali 41 Gujarati 39
Hebrew 38 Dutch 37 Turkish 35
Vietnamese 34 Macedonian 31 Cebuano 29
Swedish 26 Bulgarian 25 Swahili 23
Hungarian 23 Catalan 22 Thai 22
Lithuanian 21 Punjabi 21 Others ≤ 20

Table 1: Self-reported native language of 3,216
bilingual Turkers. Not shown are 49 languages with
≤20 speakers. We omit 1,801 Turkers who did not
report their native language, 243 who reported 2 na-
tive languages, and 83 with ≥3 native languages.

Several researchers have examined cost optimiza-
tion using active learning techniques to select the
most useful sentences or fragments to translate (Am-
bati and Vogel, 2010; Bloodgood and Callison-
Burch, 2010; Ambati, 2012).

To contrast our research with previous work, the
main contributions of this paper are: (1) a robust
methodology for assessing the bilingual skills of
anonymous workers, (2) the largest-scale census to
date of language skills of workers on MTurk, and (3)
a detailed analysis of the data gathered in our study.

3 Experimental Design

The central task in this study was to investigate Me-
chanical Turk’s bilingual population. We accom-
plished this through self-reported surveys combined
with a HIT to translate individual words for 100
languages. We evaluate the accuracy of the work-
ers’ translations against known translations. In cases
where these were not exact matches, we used a sec-
ond pass monolingual HIT, which asked English
speakers to evaluate if a worker-provided translation
was a synonym of the known translation.

Demographic questionnaire At the start of each
HIT, Turkers were asked to complete a brief survey
about their language abilities. The survey asked the
following questions:

• Is [language] your native language?

• How many years have you spoken [language]?

81



• Is English your native language?

• How many years have you spoken English?

• What country do you live in?

We automatically collected each worker’s current lo-
cation by geolocating their IP address. A total of
5,281 unique workers completed our HITs. Of these,
3,625 provided answers to our survey questions, and
we were able to geolocate 5,043. Figure 1 plots
the location of workers across 106 countries. Table
1 gives the most common self-reported native lan-
guages.

Selection of languages We drew our data from the
different language versions of Wikipedia. We se-
lected the 100 languages with the largest number of
articles 1 (Table 2). For each language, we chose
the 1,000 most viewed articles over a 1 year period,2

and extracted the 10,000 most frequent words from
them. The resulting vocabularies served as the input
to our translation HIT.

Translation HIT For the translation task, we
asked Turkers to translate individual words. We
showed each word in the context of three sentences
that were drawn from Wikipedia. Turkers were al-
lowed to mark that they were unable to translate a
word. Each task contained 10 words, 8 of which
were words with unknown translations, and 2 of
which were quality control words with known trans-
lations. We gave special instruction for translat-
ing names of people and places, giving examples
of how to handle ‘Barack Obama’ and ‘Australia’
using their interlanguage links. For languages with
non-Latin alphabets, names were transliterated.

The task paid $0.15 for the translation of 10
words. Each set of 10 words was independently
translated by three separate workers. 5,281 workers
completed 256,604 translation assignments, totaling
more than 3 million words, over a period of three
and a half months.

Gold standard translations A set of gold stan-
dard translations were automatically harvested from

1http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/List_of_
Wikipedias

2http://dumps.wikimedia.org/other/
pagecounts-raw/

500K+ ARTICLES: German (de), English (en), Spanish (es), French
(fr), Italian (it), Japanese (ja), Dutch (nl), Polish (pl), Portuguese
(pt), Russian (ru)
100K-500K ARTICLES: Arabic (ar), Bulgarian (bg), Catalan (ca),
Czech (cs), Danish (da), Esperanto (eo), Basque (eu), Persian (fa),
Finnish (fi), Hebrew (he), Hindi (hi), Croatian (hr), Hungarian (hu),
Indonesian (id), Korean (ko), Lithuanian (lt), Malay (ms), Norwe-
gian (Bokmal) (no), Romanian (ro), Slovak (sk), Slovenian (sl), Ser-
bian (sr), Swedish (sv), Turkish (tr), UKrainian (UK), Vietnamese
(vi), Waray-Waray (war), Chinese (zh)
10K-100K ARTICLES: Afrikaans (af) Amharic (am) Asturian (ast)
Azerbaijani (az) Belarusian (be) Bengali (bn) Bishnupriya Manipuri
(bpy) Breton (br) Bosnian (bs) Cebuano (ceb) Welsh (cy) Zazaki
(diq) Greek (el) West Frisian (fy) Irish (ga) Galician (gl) Gujarati
(gu) Haitian (ht) Armenian (hy) Icelandic (is) Javanese (jv) Geor-
gian (ka) Kannada (kn) Kurdish (ku) Luxembourgish (lb) Latvian
(lv) Malagasy (mg) Macedonian (mk) Malayalam (ml) Marathi
(mr) Neapolitan (nap) Low Saxon (nds) Nepali (ne) Newar / Nepal
Bhasa (new) Norwegian (Nynorsk) (nn) Piedmontese (pms) Sicil-
ian (scn) Serbo-Croatian (sh) Albanian (sq) Sundanese (su) Swahili
(sw) Tamil (ta) Telugu (te) Thai (th) Tagalog (tl) Urdu (ur) Yoruba
(yo)
<10K ARTICLES: Central Bicolano (bcl) Tibetan (bo) Ilokano (ilo)
Punjabi (pa) Kapampangan (pam) Pashto (ps) Sindhi (sd) Somali
(so) Uzbek (uz) Wolof (wo)

Table 2: A list of the languages that were used in our
study, grouped by the number of Wikipedia articles
in the language. Each language’s code is given in
parentheses. These language codes are used in other
figures throughout this paper.

Wikipedia for every language to use as embedded
controls. We used Wikipedia’s inter-language links
to pair titles of English articles with their corre-
sponding foreign article’s title. To get a more trans-
latable set of pairs, we excluded any pairs where: (1)
the English word was not present in the WordNet
ontology (Miller, 1995), (2) either article title was
longer than a single word, (3) the English Wikipedia
page was a subcategory of person or place, or (4)
the English and the foreign titles were identical or a
substring of the other.

Manual evaluation of non-identical translations
We counted all translations that exactly matched
the gold standard translation as correct. For non-
exact matches we created a second-pass quality as-
surance HIT. Turkers were shown a pair of En-
glish words, one of which was a Turker’s transla-
tion of the foreign word used for quality control,
and the other of which was the gold-standard trans-
lation of the foreign word. Evaluators were asked
whether the two words had the same meaning, and
chose between three answers: ‘Yes’, ‘No’, or ‘Re-

82



Figure 2: Days to complete the translation HITs for
40 of the languages. Tick marks represent the com-
pletion of individual assignments.

lated but not synonymous.’ Examples of mean-
ing equivalent pairs include: <petroglyphs, rock
paintings>, <demo, show> and <loam, loam: soil
rich in decaying matter>. Non-meaning equiva-
lents included: <assorted, minutes>, and <major,
URL of image>. Related items were things like
<sky, clouds>. Misspellings like <lactation, lac-
tiation > were judged to have same meaning, and
were marked as misspelled. Three separate Turkers
judged each pair, allowing majority votes for diffi-
cult cases.

We checked Turkers who were working on this
task by embedding pairs of words which were ei-

पा क$ %तान ( भी + त$ कार %व.प २८ मई १९९८ 5 छह परमाण9 परी:ण कर डा<। 
In retribution pakistan also did six nuclear tests on 28 may 1998.
On 28 May Pakistan also conducted six nuclear tests as an act
of redressal.
Retaliating on this ’Pakistan’ conducted Six(6) Nuclear Tests
on 28 May, 1998.
pakistan also did 6 nuclear test in retribution on 28 may, 1998

Figure 3: An example of the Turkers’ translations of
a Hindi sentence. The translations are unedited and
contain fixable spelling, capitalization and grammat-
ical errors.

ther known to be synonyms (drawn from Word-
Net) or unrelated (randomly chosen from a corpus).
Automating approval/rejections for the second-pass
evaluation allowed the whole pipeline to be run au-
tomatically. Caching judgments meant that we ulti-
mately needed only 20,952 synonym tasks to judge
all of the submitted translations (a total of 74,572
non-matching word pairs). These were completed
by an additional 1,005 workers. Each of these as-
signments included 10 word pairs and paid $0.10.

Full sentence translations To demonstrate the
feasibility of using crowdsourcing to create multi-
lingual technologies, we hire Turkers to construct
bilingual parallel corpora from scratch for six In-
dian languages. Germann (2001) attempted to build
a Tamil-English translation system from scratch by
hiring professional translators, but found the cost
prohibitive. We created parallel corpora by trans-
lating the 100 most viewed Wikipedia pages in Ben-
gali, Malyalam, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, and Urdu into
English. We collected four translations from differ-
ent Turkers for each source sentence.

Workers were paid $0.70 per HIT to translate
10 sentences. We accepted or rejected translations
based on a manual review of each worker’s submis-
sions, which included a comparison of the transla-
tions to a monotonic gloss (produced with a dic-
tionary), and metadata such as the amount of time
the worker took to complete the HIT and their geo-
graphic location.

Figure 3 shows an example of the translations we
obtained. The lack of a professionally translated
reference sentences prevented us from doing a sys-
tematic comparison between the quality of profes-

83



p
t

b
s

sh t
l it sr ro e
s

m
s

d
e a
f

te h
r id d
a n
l

tr g
u sk f
i

h
e

m
l

fr ja p
a

b
g

m
k

n
o g
l

h
t

g
a sv cy l
v

h
u

kn a
z

b
e lt ko n
e

e
o a
r p
l

m
r

ca c
s

sw t
a h
i

b
n

n
n ka so zh jv e
l

ce
b v
i

b
cl is su u
z lb

b
p
y

sc
n

n
e
w u
r

sd b
r

p
s ru

a
m w
o

b
o0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Figure 4: Translation quality for languages with at least 50 Turkers. The dark blue bars indicate the pro-
portion of translations which exactly matched gold standard translations, and light blue indicate translations
which were judged to be correct synonyms. Error bars show the 95% confidence intervals for each language.

sion and non-professional translations as Zaidan and
Callison-Burch (2011) did. Instead we evaluate the
quality of the data by using it to train SMT systems.
We present results in section 5.

4 Measuring Translation Quality

For single word translations, we calculate the qual-
ity of translations on the level of individual assign-
ments and aggregated over workers and languages.
We define an assignment’s quality as the proportion
of controls that are correct in a given assignment,
where correct means exactly correct or judged to be
synonymous.

Quality(ai) =
1

ki

ki∑

j=1

δ(trij ∈ syns[gj]) (1)

where ai is the ith assignment, ki is the number of
controls in ai, trij is the Turker’s provided transla-
tion of control word j in assignment i, gj is the gold
standard translation of control word j, syns[gj] is
the set of words judged to be synonymous with gj
and includes gj , and δ(x) is Kronecker’s delta and
takes value 1 when x is true. Most assignments had
two known words embedded, so most assignments
had scores of either 0, 0.5, or 1.

Since computing overall quality for a language as
the average assignment quality score is biased to-
wards a small number of highly active Turkers, we
instead report language quality scores as the aver-
age per-Turker quality, where a Turker’s quality is
the average quality of all the assignments that she
completed:

Quality(ti) =

∑
aj∈assigns[i] Quality(aj)

| assigns[i] | (2)

where assigns[i] is the assignments completed
by Turker i, and Quality(a) is as above.

Quality for a language is then given by

Quality(li) =

∑
tj∈turkers[i] Quality(tj)

| turkers[i] | (3)

When a Turker completed assignments in more than
one language, their quality was computed separately
for each language. Figure 4 shows the transla-
tion quality for languages with contributions from
at least 50 workers.

Cheating using machine translation One obvi-
ous way for workers to cheat is to use available
online translation tools. Although we followed
best practices to deter copying-and-pasting into on-
line MT systems by rendering words and sentences

84



as images (Zaidan and Callison-Burch, 2011), this
strategy does not prevent workers from typing the
words into an MT system if they are able to type in
the language’s script.

To identify and remove workers who appeared to
be cheating by using Google Translate, we calcu-
lated each worker’s overlap with the Google transla-
tions. We used Google to translate all 10,000 words
for the 51 foreign languages that Google Trans-
late covered at the time of the study. We mea-
sured the percent of workers’ translations that ex-
actly matched the translation returned from Google.

Figure 5a shows overlap between Turkers’s trans-
lations and Google Translate. When overlap is high,
it seems likely that those Turkers are cheating. It is
also reasonable to assume that honest workers will
overlap with Google some amount of the time as
Google’s translations are usually accurate. We di-
vide the workers into three groups: those with very
high overlap with Google (likely cheating by using
Google to translate words), those with reasonable
overlap, and those with no overlap (likely cheating
by other means, for instance, by submitting random
text).

Our gold-standard controls are designed to iden-
tify workers that fall into the third group (those who
are spamming or providing useless translations), but
they will not effectively flag workers who are cheat-
ing with Google Translate. We therefore remove the
500 Turkers with the highest overlap with Google.
This equates to removing all workers with greater
than 70% overlap. Figure 5b shows that removing
workers at or above the 70% threshold retains 90%
of the collected translations and over 90% of the
workers.

Quality scores reported throughout the paper re-
flect only translations from Turkers whose overlap
with Google falls below this 70% threshold.

5 Data Analysis

We performed an analysis of our data to address the
following questions:

• Do workers accurately represent their language
abilities? Should we constrain tasks by region?

• How quickly can we expect work to be com-
pleted in a particular language?

(a) Individual workers’ overlap with Google Translate.
We removed the 500 workers with the highest overlap
(shaded region on the left) from our analyses, as it is rea-
sonable to assume these workers are cheating by submit-
ting translations from Google. Workers with no overlap
(shaded region on the right) are also likely to be cheating,
e.g. by submitting random text.

(b) Cumulative distribution of overlap with Google trans-
late for workers and translations. We see that eliminating
all workers with >70% overlap with google translate still
preserves 90% of translations and >90% of workers.

Figure 5

• Can Turkers’ translations be used to train MT
systems?

• Do our dictionaries improve MT quality?

Language skills and location We measured the
average quality of workers who were in countries
that plausibly speak a language, versus workers from
countries that did not have large speaker populations
of that language. We used the Ethnologue (Lewis

85



Avg. Turker quality (# Ts) Primary locations Primary locations
In region Out of region of Turkers in region of Turkers out of region

Hindi 0.63 (296) 0.69 (7) India (284) UAE (5) UK (3) Saudi Arabia (2) Russia (1) Oman (1)
Tamil 0.65 (273) ** 0.25 (2) India (266) US (3) Canada (2) Tunisia (1) Egypt (1)
Malayalam 0.76 (234) 0.83 (2) India (223) UAE (6) US (3) Saudi Arabia (1) Maldives (1)
Spanish 0.81 (191) 0.84 (18) US (122) Mexico (16) Spain (14) India (15) New Zealand (1) Brazil (1)
French 0.75 (170) 0.82 (11) India (62) US (45) France (23) Greece (2) Netherlands (1) Japan (1)
Chinese 0.60 (116) 0.55 (21) US (75) Singapore (13) China (9) Hong Kong (6) Australia (3) Germany (2)
German 0.82 (91) 0.77 (41) Germany (48) US (25) Austria (7) India (34) Netherlands (1) Greece (1)
Italian 0.86 (90) * 0.80 (42) Italy (42) US (29) Romania (7) India (33) Ireland (2) Spain (2)
Amharic 0.14 (16) ** 0.01 (99) US (14) Ethiopia (2) India (70) Georgia (9) Macedonia (5)
Kannada 0.70 (105) NA (0) India (105)
Arabic 0.74 (60) ** 0.60 (45) Egypt (19) Jordan (16) Morocco (9) US (19) India (11) Canada (3)
Sindhi 0.19 (96) 0.06 (9) India (58) Pakistan (37) US (1) Macedonia (4) Georgia (2) Indonesia (2)
Portuguese 0.87 (101) 0.96 (3) Brazil (44) Portugal (31) US (15) Romania (1) Japan (1) Israel (1)
Turkish 0.76 (76) 0.80 (27) Turkey (38) US (18) Macedonia (8) India (19) Pakistan (4) Taiwan (1)
Telugu 0.80 (102) 0.50 (1) India (98) US (3) UAE (1) Saudi Arabia (1)
Irish 0.74 (54) 0.71 (47) US (39) Ireland (13) UK (2) India (36) Romania (5) Macedonia (2)
Swedish 0.73 (54) 0.71 (45) US (25) Sweden (22) Finland (3) India (23) Macedonia (6) Croatia (2)
Czech 0.71 (45) * 0.61 (50) US (17) Czech Republic (14) Serbia (5) Macedonia (22) India (10) UK (5)
Russian 0.15 (67) * 0.12 (27) US (36) Moldova (7) Russia (6) India (14) Macedonia (4) UK (3)
Breton 0.17 (3) 0.18 (89) US (3) India (83) Macedonia (2) China (1)

Table 3: Translation quality when partitioning the translations into two groups, one containing translations
submitted by Turkers whose location is within regions that plausibly speak the foreign language, and the
other containing translations from Turkers outside those regions. In general, in-region Turkers provide
higher quality translations. (**) indicates differences significant at p=0.05, (*) at p=0.10.

et al., 2013) to compile the list of countries where
each language is spoken. Table 3 compares the av-
erage translation quality of assignments completed
within the region of each language, and compares it
to the quality of assignments completed outside that
region.

Our workers reported speaking 95 languages na-
tively. US workers alone reported 61 native lan-
guages. Overall, 4,297 workers were located in a
region likely to speak the language from which they
were translating, and 2,778 workers were located
in countries considered out of region (meaning that
about a third of our 5,281 Turkers completed HITs
in multiple languages).

Table 3 shows the differences in translation qual-
ity when computed using in-region versus out-of-
region Turkers, for the languages with the greatest
number of workers. Within region workers typi-
cally produced higher quality translations. Given the
number of Indian workers on Mechanical Turk, it
is unsurprising that they represent majority of out-
of-region workers. For the languages that had more
than 75 out of region workers (Malay, Amharic, Ice-
landic, Sicilian, Wolof, and Breton), Indian workers
represented at least 70% of the out of region workers

in each language.
A few languages stand out for having suspiciously

strong performance by out of region workers, no-
tably Irish and Swedish, for which out of region
workers account for a near equivalent volume and
quality of translations to the in region workers. This
is admittedly implausible, considering the relatively
small number of Irish speakers worldwide, and the
very low number living in the countries in which our
Turkers were based (primarily India). Such results
highlight the fact that cheating using online transla-
tion resources is a real problem, and despite our best
efforts to remove workers using Google Translate,
some cheating is still evident. Restricting to within
region workers is an effective way to reduce the
prevalence of cheating. We discuss the languages
which are best supported by true native speakers in
section 6.

Speed of translation Figure 2 gives the comple-
tion times for 40 languages. The 10 languages to
finish in the shortest amount of time were: Tamil,
Malayalam, Telugu, Hindi, Macedonian, Spanish,
Serbian, Romanian, Gujarati, and Marathi. Seven of
the ten fastest languages are from India, which is un-

86



320 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30

800,000

0

100,000

200,000

300,000

400,000

500,000

600,000

700,000

M
al
ay
al
am

Ta
m
il

Tel
ugu

Hindi

Urd
u

Ben
gali

Figure 6: The total volume of translations (measured
in English words) as a function of elapsed days.

sentence English + dictionary
language pairs foreign words entries
Bengali 22k 732k 22k
Hindi 40k 1,488k 22k
Malayalam 32k 863k 23k
Tamil 38k 916k 25k
Telugu 46k 1,097k 21k
Urdu 35k 1,356k 20k

Table 4: Size of parallel corpora and bilingual dic-
tionaries collected for each language.

surprising given the geographic distribution of work-
ers. Some languages follow the pattern of having a
smattering of assignments completed early, with the
rate picking up later.

Figure 6 gives the throughput of the full-sentence
translation task for the six Indian languages. The
fastest language was Malayalam, for which we col-
lected half a million words of translations in just un-
der a week. Table 4 gives the size of the data set that
we created for each of these languages.

Training SMT systems We trained statistical
translation models from the parallel corpora that we
created for the six Indian languages using the Joshua
machine translation system (Post et al., 2012). Table
5 shows the translation performance when trained
on the bitexts alone, and when incorporating the
bilingual dictionaries created in our earlier HIT. The
scores reflect the performance when tested on held
out sentences from the training data. Adding the dic-

trained on bitext + BLEU
language bitexts alone dictionaries ∆
Bengali 12.03 17.29 5.26
Hindi 16.19 18.10 1.91
Malayalam 6.65 9.72 3.07
Tamil 8.08 9.66 1.58
Telugu 11.94 13.70 1.76
Urdu 19.22 21.98 2.76

Table 5: BLEU scores for translating into English
using bilingual parallel corpora by themselves, and
with the addition of single-word dictionaries. Scores
are calculated using four reference translations and
represent the mean of three MERT runs.

tionaries to the training set produces consistent per-
formance gains, ranging from 1 to 5 BLEU points.
This represents a substantial improvement. It is
worth noting, however, that while the source doc-
uments for the full sentences used for testing were
kept disjoint from those used for training, there is
overlap between the source materials for the dictio-
naries and those from the test set, since both the dic-
tionaries and the bitext source sentences were drawn
from Wikipedia.

6 Discussion

Crowdsourcing platforms like Mechanical Turk give
researchers instant access to a diverse set of bilin-
gual workers. This opens up exciting new avenues
for researchers to develop new multilingual systems.
The demographics reported in this study are likely to
shift over time. Amazon may expand its payments to
new currencies. Posting long-running HITs in other
languages may recruit more speakers of those lan-
guages. New crowdsourcing platforms may emerge.
The data presented here provides a valuable snap-
shot of the current state of MTurk, and the methods
used can be applied generally in future research.

Based on our study, we can confidently recom-
mend 13 languages as good candidates for research
now: Dutch, French, German, Gujarati, Italian, Kan-
nada, Malayalam, Portuguese, Romanian, Serbian,
Spanish, Tagalog, and Telugu. These languages
have large Turker populations who complete tasks
quickly and accurately. Table 6 summarizes the
strengths and weaknesses of all 100 languages cov-
ered in our study. Several other languages are viable

87



workers quality speed
many high fast Dutch, French, German, Gu-

jarati, Italian, Kannada, Malay-
alam, Portuguese, Romanian,
Serbian, Spanish, Tagalog, Tel-
ugu

slow Arabic, Hebrew, Irish, Punjabi,
Swedish, Turkish

low fast Hindi, Marathi, Tamil, Urdu
or
medium

slow Bengali, Bishnupriya Ma-
nipuri, Cebuano, Chinese,
Nepali, Newar, Polish, Russian,
Sindhi, Tibetan

few high fast Bosnia, Croatian, Macedonian,
Malay, Serbo-Croatian

slow Afrikaans, Albanian,
Aragonese, Asturian, Basque,
Belarusian, Bulgarian, Central
Bicolano, Czech, Danish,
Finnish, Galacian, Greek,
Haitian, Hungarian, Icelandic,
Ilokano, Indonesian, Japanese,
Javanese, Kapampangan,
Kazakh, Korean, Lithuanian,
Low Saxon, Malagasy, Nor-
wegian (Bokmal), Sicilian,
Slovak, Slovenian, Thai, UKra-
nian, Uzbek, Waray-Waray,
West Frisian, Yoruba

low fast –
or
medium

slow Amharic, Armenian, Azer-
baijani, Breton, Catalan,
Georgian, Latvian, Luxembour-
gish, Neapolitian, Norwegian
(Nynorsk), Pashto, Pied-
montese, Somali, Sudanese,
Swahili, Tatar, Vietnamese,
Walloon, Welsh

none low or
medium

slow Esperanto, Ido, Kurdish, Per-
sian, Quechua, Wolof, Zazaki

Table 6: The green box shows the best languages to
target on MTurk. These languages have many work-
ers who generate high quality results quickly. We
defined many workers as 50 or more active in-region
workers, high quality as≥70% accuracy on the gold
standard controls, and fast if all of the 10,000 words
were completed within two weeks.

candidates provided adequate quality control mech-
anisms are used to select good workers.

Since Mechanical Turk provides financial incen-
tives for participation, many workers attempt to
complete tasks even if they do not have the lan-
guage skills necessary to do so. Since MTurk does
not provide any information about workers demo-
graphics, including their language competencies, it
can be hard to exclude such workers. As a result
naive data collection on MTurk may result in noisy
data. A variety of techniques should be incorporated
into crowdsourcing pipelines to ensure high quality
data. As a best practice, we suggest: (1) restricting
workers to countries that plausibly speak the foreign
language of interest, (2) embedding gold standard
controls or administering language pretests, rather
than relying solely on self-reported language skills,
and (3) excluding workers whose translations have
high overlap with online machine translation sys-
tems like Google translate. If cheating using exter-
nal resources is likely, then also consider (4) record-
ing information like time spent on a HIT (cumulative
and on individual items), patterns in keystroke logs,
tab/window focus, etc.

Although our study targeted bilingual workers on
Mechanical Turk, and neglected monolingual work-
ers, we believe our results reliably represent the cur-
rent speaker populations, since the vast majority of
the work available on the crowdsourced platform
is currently English-only. We therefore assume the
number of non-English speakers is small. In the fu-
ture, it may be desirable to recruit monolingual for-
eign workers. In such cases, we recommend other
tests to validate their language abilities in place of
our translation test. These could include perform-
ing narrative cloze, or listening to audio files con-
taining speech in different language and identifying
their language.

7 Data release

With the publication of this paper, we are releasing
all data and code used in this study. Our data release
includes the raw data, along with bilingual dictionar-
ies that are filtered to be high quality. It will include
256,604 translation assignments from 5,281 Turkers
and 20,952 synonym assignments from 1,005 Turk-
ers, along with meta information like geolocation

88



and time submitted, plus external dictionaries used
for validation. The dictionaries will contain 1.5M
total translated words in 100 languages, along with
code to filter the dictionaries based on different cri-
teria. The data also includes parallel corpora for six
Indian languages, ranging in size between 700,000
to 1.5 million words.

8 Acknowledgements

This material is based on research sponsored by
a DARPA Computer Science Study Panel phase 3
award entitled “Crowdsourcing Translation” (con-
tract D12PC00368). The views and conclusions
contained in this publication are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as representing offi-
cial policies or endorsements by DARPA or the U.S.
Government. This research was supported by the
Johns Hopkins University Human Language Tech-
nology Center of Excellence and through gifts from
Microsoft and Google.

The authors would like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for their thoughtful comments, which sub-
stantially improved this paper.

References

Amazon. 2013. Service summary tour for re-
questers on Amazon Mechanical Turk. https://
requester.mturk.com/tour.

Vamshi Ambati and Stephan Vogel. 2010. Can crowds
build parallel corpora for machine translation systems?
In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on
Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Vamshi Ambati, Stephan Vogel, and Jaime Carbonell.
2010. Active learning and crowd-sourcing for ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC).

Vamshi Ambati. 2012. Active Learning and Crowd-
sourcing for Machine Translation in Low Resource
Scenarios. Ph.D. thesis, Language Technologies In-
stitute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA.

Michael S. Bernstein, Greg Little, Robert C. Miller,
Bjrn Hartmann, Mark S. Ackerman, David R. Karger,
David Crowell, and Katrina Panovich. 2010. Soylent:
a word processor with a crowd inside. In Proceed-

ings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Soft-
ware and Technology (UIST).

Jeffrey P. Bigham, Chandrika Jayant, Hanjie Ji, Greg Lit-
tle, Andrew Miller, Robert C. Miller, Robin Miller,
Aubrey Tatarowicz, Brandyn White, Samual White,
and Tom Yeh. 2010. VizWiz: nearly real-time an-
swers to visual questions. In Proceedings of the ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technol-
ogy (UIST).

Michael Bloodgood and Chris Callison-Burch. 2010.
Large-scale cost-focused active learning for statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Chris Callison-Burch and Mark Dredze. 2010. Creating
speech and language data with Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Work-
shop on Creating Speech and Language Data with
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 1–12, Los Angeles,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jia Deng, Alexander Berg, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2010.
What does classifying more than 10,000 image cate-
gories tell us? In Proceedings of the 12th European
Conference of Computer Vision (ECCV, pages 71–84.

Maxine Eskenazi, Gina-Anne Levow, Helen Meng,
Gabriel Parent, and David Suendermann. 2013.
Crowdsourcing for Speech Processing, Applications to
Data Collection, Transcription and Assessment. Wi-
ley.

Siamak Faridani, Björn Hartmann, and Panagiotis G.
Ipeirotis. 2011. What’s the right price? pricing tasks
for finishing on time. In Third AAAI Human Compu-
tation Workshop (HCOMP’11).

Ulrich Germann. 2001. Building a statistical machine
translation system from scratch: How much bang for
the buck can we expect? In ACL 2001 Workshop on
Data-Driven Machine Translation, Toulouse, France.

Chang Hu, Benjamin B. Bederson, and Philip Resnik.
2010. Translation by iterative collaboration between
monolingual users. In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD
Workshop on Human Computation (HCOMP).

Chang Hu, Philip Resnik, Yakov Kronrod, Vladimir Ei-
delman, Olivia Buzek, and Benjamin B. Bederson.
2011. The value of monolingual crowdsourcing in
a real-world translation scenario: Simulation using
haitian creole emergency sms messages. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 399–404, Edinburgh, Scot-
land, July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. 2010a. Analyzing the mechani-
cal turk marketplace. In ACM XRDS, December.

Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. 2010b. Demographics of
Mechanical Turk. Technical Report Working paper

89



CeDER-10-01, New York University, Stern School of
Business.

Ann Irvine and Alexandre Klementiev. 2010. Using Me-
chanical Turk to annotate lexicons for less commonly
used languages. In Workshop on Creating Speech and
Language Data with MTurk.

Ian Lane, Matthias Eck, Kay Rottmann, and Alex
Waibel. 2010. Tools for collecting speech corpora
via mechanical-turk. In Proceedings of the NAACL
HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Lan-
guage Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, Los An-
geles.

Florian Laws, Christian Scheible, and Hinrich Schütze.
2011. Active learning with amazon mechanical turk.
In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Edinburgh,
Scotland.

Matthew Lease, Jessica Hullman, Jeffrey P. Bigham,
Juho Kim Michael S. Bernstein and, Walter Lasecki,
Saeideh Bakhshi, Tanushree Mitra, and Robert C.
Miller. 2013. Mechanical Turk is not anony-
mous. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.
2228728.

Vili Lehdonvirta and Mirko Ernkvist. 2011. Knowl-
edge map of the virtual economy: Converting
the virtual economy into development potential.
http://www.infodev.org/en/Document.
1056.pdf, April. An InfoDev Publication.

M. Paul Lewis, Gary F. Simons, and Charles D. Fennig
(eds.). 2013. Ethnologue: Languages of the world,
seventeenth edition. http://www.ethnologue.
com.

Greg Little, Lydia B. Chilton, Rob Miller, and Max Gold-
man. 2009. Turkit: Tools for iterative tasks on me-
chanical turk. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Human Computation at the International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-
HCOMP ’09), Paris.

Matthew Marge, Satanjeev Banerjee, and Alexander
Rudnicky. 2010. Using the Amazon Mechanical Turk
to transcribe and annotate meeting speech for extrac-
tive summarization. In Workshop on Creating Speech
and Language Data with MTurk.

George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: a lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–41.

Robert Munro and Hal Tily. 2011. The start of the
art: Introduction to the workshop on crowdsourcing
technologies for language and cognition studies. In
Crowdsourcing Technologies for Language and Cog-
nition Studies, Boulder.

Scott Novotney and Chris Callison-Burch. 2010. Cheap,
fast and good enough: Automatic speech recognition
with non-expert transcription. In Human Language

Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 207–215. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Gabriel Parent and Maxine Eskenazi. 2011. Speaking
to the crowd: looking at past achievements in using
crowdsourcing for speech and predicting future chal-
lenges. In Proceedings Interspeech 2011, Special Ses-
sion on Crowdsourcing.

Matt Post, Chris Callison-Burch, and Miles Osborne.
2012. Constructing parallel corpora for six indian
languages via crowdsourcing. In Proceedings of the
Seventh Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 401–409, Montréal, Canada, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Alexander J. Quinn and Benjamin B. Bederson. 2011.
Human computation: A survey and taxonomy of a
growing field. In Computer Human Interaction (CHI).

Cyrus Rashtchian, Peter Young, Micah Hodosh, and Ju-
lia Hockenmaier. 2010. Collecting image annotations
using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. In Workshop on
Creating Speech and Language Data with MTurk.

Joel Ross, Lilly Irani, M. Six Silberman, Andrew Zal-
divar, and Bill Tomlinson. 2010. Who are the crowd-
workers?: Shifting demographics in Amazon Mechan-
ical Turk. In alt.CHI session of CHI 2010 extended
abstracts on human factors in computing systems, At-
lanta, Georgia.

Yaron Singer and Manas Mittal. 2011. Pricing mecha-
nisms for online labor markets. In Third AAAI Human
Computation Workshop (HCOMP’11).

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast - but is it
good? Evaluating non-expert annotations for natural
language tasks. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Alexander Sorokin and David Forsyth. 2008. Utility
data annotation with amazon mechanical turk. In First
IEEE Workshop on Internet Vision at CVPR.

Luis von Ahn. 2005. Human Computation. Ph.D. thesis,
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity, Pittsburgh, PA.

Omar F. Zaidan and Chris Callison-Burch. 2011. Crowd-
sourcing translation: Professional quality from non-
professionals. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 1220–
1229. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rabih Zbib, Erika Malchiodi, Jacob Devlin, David
Stallard, Spyros Matsoukas, Richard Schwartz, John
Makhoul, Omar F. Zaidan, and Chris Callison-Burch.
2012. Machine translation of Arabic dialects. In The
2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

90



Rabih Zbib, Gretchen Markiewicz, Spyros Matsoukas,
Richard Schwartz, and John Makhoul. 2013. Sys-
tematic comparison of professional and crowdsourced
reference translations for machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Atlanta,
Georgia.

91



92


