








































Problems in Current Text Simplification Research:
New Data Can Help

Wei Xu1 and Chris Callison-Burch1 and Courtney Napoles2
1 Computer and Information Science Department

University of Pennsylvania
{xwe, ccb}@seas.upenn.edu

2 Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
courtneyn@jhu.edu

Abstract

Simple Wikipedia has dominated simplifica-
tion research in the past 5 years. In this
opinion paper, we argue that focusing on
Wikipedia limits simplification research. We
back up our arguments with corpus analy-
sis and by highlighting statements that other
researchers have made in the simplification
literature. We introduce a new simplifica-
tion dataset that is a significant improvement
over Simple Wikipedia, and present a novel
quantitative-comparative approach to study
the quality of simplification data resources.

1 Introduction

The goal of text simplification is to rewrite com-
plex text into simpler language that is easier to un-
derstand. Research into this topic has many poten-
tial practical applications. For instance, it can pro-
vide reading aids for people with disabilities (Carroll
et al., 1999; Canning et al., 2000; Inui et al., 2003),
low-literacy (Watanabe et al., 2009; De Belder and
Moens, 2010), non-native backgrounds (Petersen
and Ostendorf, 2007; Allen, 2009) or non-expert
knowledge (Elhadad and Sutaria, 2007; Siddharthan
and Katsos, 2010). Text simplification may also help
improve the performance of many natural language
processing (NLP) tasks, such as parsing (Chan-
drasekar et al., 1996), summarization (Siddharthan
et al., 2004; Klebanov et al., 2004; Vanderwende
et al., 2007; Xu and Grishman, 2009), semantic role
labeling (Vickrey and Koller, 2008), information ex-
traction (Miwa et al., 2010) and machine transla-
tion (Gerber and Hovy, 1998; Chen et al., 2012), by

transforming long, complex sentences into ones that
are more easily processed.

The Parallel Wikipedia Simplification (PWKP)
corpus prepared by Zhu et al. (2010), has become
the benchmark dataset for training and evaluating
automatic text simplification systems. An associated
test set of 100 sentences from Wikipedia has been
used for comparing the state-of-the-art approaches.
The collection of simple-complex parallel sentences
sparked a major advance for machine translation-
based approaches to simplification. However, we
will show that this dataset is deficient and should be
considered obsolete.

In this opinion paper, we argue that Wikipedia as a
simplification data resource is suboptimal for several
reasons: 1) It is prone to automatic sentence align-
ment errors; 2) It contains a large proportion of in-
adequate simplifications; 3) It generalizes poorly to
other text genres. These problems are largely due
to the fact that Simple Wikipedia is an encyclopedia
spontaneously and collaboratively created for “chil-
dren and adults who are learning English language”
without more specific guidelines. We quantitatively
illustrate the seriousness of these problems through
manual inspection and statistical analysis.

Our manual inspection reveals that about 50% of
the sentence pairs in the PWKP corpus are not sim-
plifications. We also introduce a new comparative
approach to simplification corpus analysis. In par-
ticular, we assemble a new simplification corpus of
news articles,1 re-written by professional editors to
meet the readability standards for children at multi-

1This Newsela corpus can be requested following the in-
structions at: https://newsela.com/data/

283

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 3, pp. 283–297, 2015. Action Editor: Rada Mihalcea.
Submission batch: 12/2014; Revision batch 4/2015; Published 5/2015.

c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics. Distributed under a CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.

https://newsela.com/data/


Not Aligned
(17%)

[NORM] The soprano ranges are also written from middle C to A an octave higher,
but sound one octave higher than written.
[SIMP] The xylophone is usually played so that the music sounds an octave higher
than written.

Not Simpler

[NORM] Chile is the longest north-south country in the world, and also claims of
Antarctica as part of its territory.
[SIMP] Chile, which claims a part of the Antarctic continent, is the longest country
on earth.

(33%) [NORM] Death On 1 October 1988, Strauss collapsed while hunting with the Prince
of Thurn and Taxis in the Thurn and Taxis forests, east of Regensburg.
[SIMP] Death On October 1, 1988, Strauß collapsed while hunting with the Prince
of Thurn and Taxis in the Thurn and Taxis forests, east of Regensburg.

Deletion
Only
(21%)

[NORM] This article is a list of the 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia
ordered by population density.
[SIMP] This is a list of the 50 U.S. states, ordered by population density.

Real
Simpli-
fication

Paraphrase
Only
(17%)

[NORM] In 2002, both Russia and China also had prison populations in excess of 1
million.
[SIMP] In 2002, both Russia and China also had over 1 million people in prison.

(50%) Deleltion
+ (12%)

Paraphrase

[NORM] All adult Muslims, with exceptions for the infirm, are required to offer
Salat prayers five times daily.
[SIMP] All adult Muslims should do Salat prayers five times a day.

Table 1: Example sentence pairs (NORM-SIMP) aligned between English Wikipedia and Simple English
Wikipedia. The breakdown in percentages is obtained through manual examination of 200 randomly sam-
pled sentence pairs in the Parallel Wikipedia Simplification (PWKP) corpus.

ple grade levels. This parallel corpus is higher qual-
ity and its size is comparable to the PWKP dataset.
It helps us to showcase the limitations of Wikipedia
data in comparison and it provides potential reme-
dies that may improve simplification research.

We are not the only researchers to notice prob-
lems with Simple Wikipedia. There are many hints
in past publications that reflect the inadequacy of
this resource, which we piece together in this pa-
per to support our arguments. Several different
simplification datasets have been proposed (Bach
et al., 2011; Woodsend and Lapata, 2011a; Coster
and Kauchak, 2011; Woodsend and Lapata, 2011b),
but most of these are derived from Wikipedia and
not thoroughly analyzed. Siddharthan (2014)’s ex-
cellent survey of text simplification research states
that one of the most important questions that needs
to be addressed is “how good is the quality of Simple
English Wikipedia”. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to systematically quantify the qual-
ity of Simple English Wikipedia and directly answer
this question.

We make our argument not as a criticism of others
or ourselves, but as an effort to refocus research di-
rections in the future (Eisenstein, 2013). We hope to

inspire the creation of higher quality simplification
datasets, and to encourage researchers to think crit-
ically about existing resources and evaluation meth-
ods. We believe this will lead to breakthroughs in
text simplification research.

2 Simple Wikipedia is not that simple

The Parallel Wikipedia Simplification (PWKP) cor-
pus (Zhu et al., 2010) contains approximately
108,000 automatically aligned sentence pairs from
cross-linked articles between Simple and Normal
English Wikipedia. It has become a benchmark
dataset for simplification largely because of its
size and availability, and because follow-up papers
(Woodsend and Lapata, 2011a; Coster and Kauchak,
2011; Wubben et al., 2012; Narayan and Gardent,
2014; Siddharthan and Angrosh, 2014; Angrosh
et al., 2014) often compare with Zhu et al.’s system
outputs to demonstrate further improvements.

The large quantity of parallel text from Wikipedia
made it possible to build simplification systems us-
ing statistical machine translation (SMT) technol-
ogy. But after the initial success of these first-
generation systems, we started to suffer from the

284



inadequacy of the parallel Wikipedia simplification
datasets. There is scattered evidence in the litera-
ture. Bach et al. (2011) mentioned they have at-
tempted to use parallel Wikipedia data, but opted to
construct their own corpus of 854 sentences (25%
from New York Times and 75% are from Wikipedia)
with one manual simplification per sentence. Wood-
send and Lapata (2011a) showed that rewriting
rules learned from Simple Wikipedia revision his-
tories produce better output compared to the “un-
avoidably noisy” aligned sentences from Simple-
Normal Wikipedia. The Woodsend and Lapata
(2011b) model, that used quasi-synchronous gram-
mars learned from Wikipedia revision history, left
22% sentences unchanged in the test set. Wubben
et al. (2012) found that a phrase-based machine
translation model trained on the PWKP dataset of-
ten left the input unchanged, since “much of train-
ing data consists of partially equal input and out-
put strings”. Coster and Kauchak (2011) constructed
another parallel Wikipedia dataset using a more so-
phisticated sentence alignment algorithm with an
additional step that first aligns paragraphs. They no-
ticed that 27% aligned sentences are identical be-
tween simple and normal, and retained them in the
dataset “since not all sentences need to be simplified
and it is important for any simplification algorithm
to be able to handle this case”. However, we will
show that many sentences that need to be simplified
are not simplified in the Simple Wikipedia.

We manually examined the Parallel Wikipedia
Simplification (PWKP) corpus and found that it is
noisy and half of its sentence pairs are not simplifi-
cations (Table 1). We randomly sampled 200 one-to-
one sentence pairs from the PWKP dataset (one-to-
many sentence splitting cases consist of only 6.1%
of the dataset), and classify each sentence pair into
one of the three categories:

Not Aligned (17%) -
Two sentences have different meanings, or only
have partial content overlap.

Not Simpler (33%)-
The SIMP sentence has the same meaning as
the NORM sentence, but is not simpler.

Real Simplification (50%)-
The SIMP sentence has the same meaning as
the NORM sentence, and is simpler. We fur-

ther breakdown into whether the simplification
is due to deletion or paraphrasing.

Table 1 shows a detailed breakdown and repre-
sentative examples for each category. Although Zhu
et al. (2010) and Coster and Kauchak (2011) have
provided a simple analysis on the accuracy of sen-
tence alignment, there are some important facts that
cannot be revealed without in-depth manual inspec-
tion. The “non-simplification” noise in the parallel
Simple-Normal Wikipedia data is a much more se-
rious problem than we all thought. The quality of
“real simplifications” also varies: some sentences
are simpler by only one word while the rest of sen-
tence is still complex.

The main causes of non-simplifications and
partial-simplifications in the parallel Wikipedia cor-
pus include: 1) The Simple Wikipedia was created
by volunteer contributors with no specific objective;
2) Very rarely are the simple articles complete
re-writes of the regular articles in Wikipedia (Coster
and Kauchak, 2011), which makes automatic
sentence alignment errors worse; 3) As an encyclo-
pedia, Wikipedia contains many difficult sentences
with complex terminology. The difficulty of sen-
tence alignment between Normal-Simple Wikipedia
is highlighted by a recent study by Hwang et al.
(2015) that achieves state-of-the-art performance
of 0.712 maximum F1 score (over the precision-
recall curve) by combining Wiktionary-based and
dependency-parse-based sentence similarities. And
in fact, even the simple side of the PWKP corpus
contains an extensive English vocabulary of 78,009
unique words. 6,669 of these words do not exist in
the normal side (Table 2). Below is a sentence from
an article entitled “Photolithography" in Simple
Wikipedia:

Microphototolithography is the use of pho-
tolithography to transfer geometric shapes on a
photomask to the surface of a semiconductor wafer
for making integrated circuits.

We should use the PWKP corpus with caution and
consider other alternative parallel simplification cor-
pora. Alternatives could come from Wikipedia (but
better aligned and selected) or from manual simpli-
fication of other domains, such as newswire. In the

285



PWKP Normal Simple
#words (avg. freq) 95,111 (23.91) 78,009 (23.88)
Normal 0 6,669(1.31)
Simple 23,771 (1.42) 0

Table 2: The vocabulary size of the Parallel
Wikipedia Simplification (PWKP) corpus and the
vocabulary difference between its normal and sim-
ple sides (as a 2×2 matrix). Only words consisting
of the 26 English letters are counted.

next section, we will present a corpus of news ar-
ticles simplified by professional editors, called the
Newsela corpus. We perform a comparative corpus
analysis of the Newsela corpus versus the PWKP
corpus to further illustrate concerns about PWKP’s
quality.

3 What the Newsela corpus teaches us

To study how professional editors conduct text sim-
plification, we have assembled a new simplification
dataset that consists of 1,130 news articles. Each ar-
ticle has been re-written 4 times for children at dif-
ferent grade levels by editors at Newsela2, a com-
pany that produces reading materials for pre-college
classroom use. We use Simp-4 to denote the most
simplified level and Simp-1 to denote the least sim-
plified level. This data forms a parallel corpus,
where we can align sentences at different reading
levels, as shown in Table 3.

Unlike Simple Wikipedia, which was created
without a well-defined objective, Newsela is meant
to help teachers prepare curricula that match the En-
glish language skills required at each grade level. It
is motivated by the Common Core Standards (Porter
et al., 2011) in the United States. All the Newsela ar-
ticles are grounded in the Lexile3 readability score,
which is widely used to measure text complexity and
assess students’ reading ability.

3.1 Manual examination of Newsela corpus
We conducted a manual examination of the Newsela
data similar to the one for Wikipedia data in Table 1.
The breakdown of aligned sentence pairs between
different versions in Newsela is shown in Figure 1.

2https://newsela.com/
3http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexile

Figure 1: Manual classification of aligned sentence
pairs from the Newsela corpus. We categorize ran-
domly sampled 50 sentence pairs drawn from the
Original-Simp2 and 50 sentences from the Original-
Simp4.

It is based on 50 randomly selected sentence pairs
and shows much more reliable simplification than
the Wikipedia data.

We designed a sentence alignment algorithm for
the Newsela corpus based on Jaccard similarity (Jac-
card, 1912). We first align each sentence in the sim-
pler version (e.g. s1 in Simp-3) to the sentence in the
immediate more complex version (e.g. s2 in Simp-
2) of the highest similarity score. We compute the
similarity based on overlapping word lemmas:4

Sim(s1, s2) =
|Lemmas(s1) ∩ Lemmas(s2)|
|Lemmas(s1) ∪ Lemmas(s2)|

(1)
We then align sentences into groups across all 5 ver-
sions for each article. For cases where no sentence
splitting is involved, we discard any sentence pairs
with a similarity smaller than 0.40. If splitting oc-
curs, we set the similarity threshold to 0.20 instead.

Newsela’s professional editors produce sim-
plifications with noticeably higher quality than
Wikipedia’s simplifications. Compared to sentence
alignment for Normal-Simple Wikipedia, automati-
cally aligning Newsela is more straightforward and
reliable. The better correspondence between the
simplified and complex articles and the availability
of multiple simplified versions in the Newsela data
also contribute to the accuracy of sentence align-
ment.

4We use the WordNet lemmatization in the NLTK package:
http://www.nltk.org/

286

https://newsela.com/
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexile
http://www.nltk.org/


Grade Level Lexile Score Text
12 1400L Slightly more fourth-graders nationwide are reading proficiently compared

with a decade ago, but only a third of them are now reading well, according to
a new report.

7 1070L Fourth-graders in most states are better readers than they were a decade
ago. But only a third of them actually are able to read well, according to a
new report.

6 930L Fourth-graders in most states are better readers than they were a decade ago.
But only a third of them actually are able to read well, according to a new
report.

4 720L Most fourth-graders are better readers than they were 10 years ago. But few of
them can actually read well.

3 510L Fourth-graders are better readers than 10 years ago. But few of them read well.

Table 3: Example of sentences written at multiple levels of text complexity from the Newsela data set. The
Lexile readability score and grade level apply to the whole article rather than individual sentences, so the
same sentences may receive different scores, e.g. the above sentences for the 6th and 7th grades. The bold
font highlights the parts of sentence that are different from the adjacent version(s).

Newsela PWKP
Original Simp-1 Simp-2 Simp-3 Simp-4 Normal Simple

Total #sents 56,037 57,940 63,419 64,035 64,162 108,016 114,924
Total #tokens 1,301,767 1,126,148 1,052,915 903,417 764,103 2,645,771 2,175,240
Avg #sents per doc 49.59 51.27 56.12 56.67 56.78 — —
Avg #words per doc 1,152.01 996.59 931.78 799.48 676.2 — —
Avg #words per sent 23.23 19.44 16.6 14.11 11.91 *24.49 *18.93
Avg #chars per word 4.32 4.28 4.21 4.11 4.02 5.06 4.89

Table 4: Basic statistics of the Newsela Simplification corpus vs. the Parallel Wikipedia Simplification
(PWKP) corpus. The Newsela corpus consists of 1130 articles with original and 4 simplified versions each.
Simp-1 is of the least simplified level, while Simp-4 is the most simplified. The numbers marked by * are
slightly different from previously reported, because of the use of different tokenizers.

Newsela Original Simp-1 Simp-2 Simp-3 Simp-4
#words (avg. freq) **39,046 (28.31) 33,272 (28.64) 29,569 (30.09) 24,468 (31.17) 20,432 (31.45)
Original 0 724 (1.19) 815 (1.25) 720 (1.32) *583 (1.33)
Simp-1 6,498 (1.38) 0 618 (1.08) 604 (1.15) 521 (1.21)
Simp-2 10,292 (1.67) 4,321 (1.32) 0 536 (1.13) 475 (1.16)
Simp-3 15,298 (2.14) 9,408 (1.79) 5,637 (1.46) 0 533 (1.14)
Simp-4 **19,197 (2.60) 13,361 (2.24) 9,612 (1.87) 4,569 (1.40) 0

Table 5: This table shows the vocabulary changes between different levels of simplification in the Newsela
corpus (as a 5×5 matrix). Each cell shows the number of unique word types that appear in the corpus listed
in the column but do not appear in the corpus listed in the row. We also list the average frequency of those
vocabulary items. For example, in the cell marked *, the Simp-4 version contains 583 unique words that
do not appear in the Original version. By comparing the cells marked **, we see about half of the words
(19,197 out of 39,046) in the Original version are not in the Simp-4 version. Most of the vocabulary that is
removed consists of low-frequency words (with an average frequency of 2.6 in the Original).

287



3.2 Vocabulary statistics

Table 4 shows the basic statistics of the Newsela cor-
pus and the PWKP corpus. They are clearly differ-
ent. Compared to the Newsela data, the Wikipedia
corpus contains remarkably longer (more complex)
words and the difference of sentence length before
and after simplification is much smaller. We use the
Penn Treebank tokenizer in the Moses package.5

Tables 2 and 5 show the vocabulary statistics
and the vocabulary difference matrix of the PWKP
and Newsela corpus. While the vocabulary size
of the PWKP corpus drops only 18% from 95,111
unique words to 78,009, the vocabulary size of the
Newsela corpus is reduced dramatically by 50.8%
from 39,046 to 19,197 words at its most simplified
level (Simp-4). Moreover, in the Newsela data, only
several hundred words that occur in the simpler ver-
sion do not occur in the more complex version. The
words introduced are often abbreviations (“National
Hurricane Center” → “NHC”), less formal words
(“unscrupulous”→ “crooked”) and shortened words
(“chimpanzee” → “chimp”). This implies a more
complete and precise degree of simplification in the
Newsela than the PWKP dataset.

3.3 Log-odds-ratio analysis of words

In this section, we visualize the differences in the
topics and degree of simplification between the Sim-
ple Wikipedia and the Newsela corpus. To do this,
we employ the log-odds-ratio informative Dirichlet
prior method of Monroe et al. (2008) to find words
and punctuation marks that are statistically overrep-
resented in the simplified text compared to the orig-
inal text. The method measures each token by the
z-score of its log-odds-ratio as:

δ
(i−j)
t√

σ2(δ
(i−j)
t )

(2)

It uses a background corpus when calculating the
log-odds-ratio δt for token t, and controls for its vari-
ance σ2. Therefore it is capable of detecting dif-
ferences even in very frequent tokens. Other meth-
ods used to discover word associations, such as mu-

5https://github.com/moses-smt/
mosesdecoder/blob/master/scripts/
tokenizer/tokenizer.perl

tual information, log likelihood ratio, t-test and chi-
square, often have problems with frequent words
(Jurafsky et al., 2014). We choose the Monroe et al.
(2008) method because many function words and
punctuations are very frequent and play important
roles in text simplification.

The log-odds-ratio δ(i−j)t for token t estimates the
difference of the frequency of token t between two
text sets i and j as:

δ
(i−j)
t = log(

yit + αt
ni + α0 − (yit + αt)

)

− log( y
j
t + αt

nj + α0 − (yjt + αt)
)

(3)

where ni is the size of corpus i, nj is the size of
corpus j, yit is the count of token t in corpus i, y

j
t is

the count of token t in corpus j, α0 is the size of the
background corpus, and αt is the count of token t in
the background corpus. We use the combination of
both simple and complex sides in the corpus as the
background.

And the variance of the log-odds-ratio is esti-
mated by:

σ2(δ
(i−j)
t ) ≈

1

yit + αt
+

1

yjt + αt
(4)

Table 6 lists the top 50 words and punctuation
marks that are the most strongly associated with
the complex text. Both corpora significantly reduce
function words and punctuation. The content words
show the differences of the topics and subject mat-
ters between the two corpora. Table 7 lists the top
50 words that are the most strongly associated with
the simplified text. The two corpora are more agree-
able on what the simple words are than what com-
plex words need to be simplified.

Table 8 shows the frequency and odds ratio of ex-
ample words from the top 50 complex words. The
odds ratio of token t between two texts sets i and j
is defined as:

r
(i−j)
t =

yit/y
j
t

ni/nj
(5)

It reflects the difference of topics and degree
of simplification between the Wikipedia and the
Newsela data. The high proportion of clause-related
function words, such as “which” and “where”,

288

https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/blob/master/scripts/tokenizer/tokenizer.perl
https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/blob/master/scripts/tokenizer/tokenizer.perl
https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/blob/master/scripts/tokenizer/tokenizer.perl


Linguistic class Newsela - Original Wikipedia (PWKP) - Normal
Punctuation , "– ; ’ ( ) , ; –
Determiner/Pronoun which we an such who i that a whose which whom
Contraction ’s
Conjunction and while although and although while
Prepositions of as including with according by

among in despite
as with following to of within upon
including

Adverb currently approximately initially
primarily subsequently typically thus
formerly

Noun percent director data research decades
industry policy development state
decade status university residents

film commune footballer
pays-de-la-loire walloon links
midfielder defender goalkeeper

Adjective federal potential recent executive
economic

northern northwestern southwestern
external due numerous undated various
prominent

Verb advocates based access referred derived established situated
considered consists regarded having

Table 6: Top 50 tokens associated with the complex text, computed using the Monroe et al. (2008) method.
Bold words are shared by the complex version of Newsela and the complex version of Wikipedia.

Linguistic class Newsela - Simp4 Wikipedia (PWKP) - Simple
Punctuation . .
Determiner/Pronoun they it he she them lot it he they lot this she
Conjunction because
Adverb also not there too about very now then

how
about very there

Noun people money scientists government
things countries rules problems group

movie people northwest north region
loire player websites southwest movies
football things

Adjective many important big new used big biggest famous different important
many

Verb is are can will make get were wants
was called help hurt be made like stop
want works do live

found is made called started pays said
was got are like get can means says has
went comes make put used

Table 7: Top 50 tokens associated with the simplified text.

Newsela PWKP
Original Simp-4 odds-ratio Normal Simple odds-ratio

which 2259 249 0.188 7261 4608 0.774
where 1472 546 0.632 1972 1470 0.909
advocates 136 0 0 6 3 0.610
approximately 21 0 0 480 140 0.356
thus 35 9 0.438 385 138 0.437

Table 8: Frequency of example words from Table 6. These complex words are reduced at a much greater
rate in the simplified Newsela than they are in the Simple English Wikipedia. A smaller odds ratio indicates
greater reduction.

289



Newsela - Original Wikipedia (PWKP) - Normal Newsela - Simp4 Wikipedia (PWKP) - Simple

PP(of)→ IN NP PP(as)→ IN NP 1 S(is)→ NP VP . NP(it)→ PRP
WHNP(which)→WDT PP(of)→ IN NP 2 NP(they)→ PRP S(is)→ NP VP .
SBAR(which)→WHNP S VP(born)→ VBN NP NP PP 3 S(are)→ NP VP . S(was)→ NP VP .
PP(to)→ TO NP WHNP(which)→WDT 4 S(was)→ NP VP . NP(he)→ PRP
NP(percent)→ CD NN PP(to)→ TO NP 5 NP(people)→ NNS NP(they)→ PRP
WHNP(that)→WDT NP(municipality)→ DT JJ NN 6 VP(is)→ VBZ NP NP(player)→ DT JJ JJ NN NN
SBAR(that)→WHNP S FRAG(-)→ ADJP : 7 NP(he)→ PRP S(are)→ NP VP .
PP(with)→ IN NP FRAG(-)→ FRAG : FRAG 8 S(were)→ NP VP . NP(movie)→ DT NN
PP(according)→ VBG PP NP())→ NNP NNP NNP 9 NP(it)→ PRP S(has)→ NP VP .
NP(percent)→ NP PP NP(film)→ DT NN 10 S(can)→ NP VP . VP(called)→ VBN NP
NP(we)→ PRP NP(footballer)→ DT JJ JJ NN 11 S(will)→ NP VP . VP(is)→ VBZ PP
PP(including)→ VBG NP NP(footballer)→ NP SBAR 12 ADVP(also)→ RB VP(made)→ VBN PP
SBAR(who)→WHNP S ADVP(currently)→ RB 13 S(have)→ NP VP . VP(said)→ VBD SBAR
SBAR(as)→ IN S VP(born)→ VBN NP NP 14 S(could)→ NP VP . VP(has)→ VBZ NP
WHNP(who)→WP ADVP(initially)→ RB 15 S(said)→ NP VP . VP(is)→ VBZ NP
NP(i)→ FW PP(with)→ IN NP 16 S(has)→ NP VP . NP(this)→ DT
PP(as)→ IN NP WHPP(of)→ IN WHNP 17 NP(people)→ JJ NNS VP(was)→ VBD NP
NP(director)→ NP PP SBAR(although)→ IN S 18 NP(money)→ NN NP(people)→ NNS
PP(by)→ IN NP ADVP(primarily)→ RB 19 NP(government)→ DT NN NP(lot)→ DT NN
S(has)→ VP S(links)→ NP VP . 20 S(do)→ NP VP . NP(season)→ NN CD
PP(in)→ IN NP VP(links)→ VBZ NP 21 NP(scientists)→ NNS S(can)→ NP VP .
SBAR(while)→ IN S PP(following)→ VBG NP 22 VP(called)→ VBN NP VP(is)→ VBZ VP
PP(as)→ JJ IN NP ADVP(subsequently)→ RB 23 S(had)→ NP VP . SBAR(because)→ IN S
PRN(–)→ : NP : SBAR(which)→WHNP S 24 S(says)→ NP VP . VP(are)→ VBP NP
S(’s)→ NP VP SBAR(while)→ IN S 25 S(would)→ NP VP . NP(player)→ DT JJ NN NN
S(said)→ ” S , ” NP VP . S(plays)→ ADVP VP 26 S(say)→ NP VP . NP(there)→ EX
PP(at)→ IN NP PP(within)→ IN NP 27 S(works)→ NP VP . NP(lot)→ NP PP
PP(among)→ IN NP PP(by)→ IN NP 28 S(may)→ NP VP . NP(websites)→ JJ NNS
SBAR(although)→ IN S SBAR(of)→WHNP S 29 S(did)→ NP VP . PP(like)→ IN NP
VP(said)→ VBD NP S(is)→ S : S . 30 S(think)→ NP VP . S(started)→ NP VP .

Table 9: Top 30 syntax patterns associated with the complex text (left) and simplified text (right). Bold
patterns are the top patterns shared by Newsela and Wikipedia.

that are retained in Simple Wikipedia indicates
the incompleteness of simplification in the Sim-
ple Wikipedia. The dramatic frequency decrease
of words like “which” and “advocates” in Newsela
shows the consistent quality from professional sim-
plifications. Wikipedia has good coverage on certain
words, such as “approximately”, because of its large
volume.

3.4 Log-odds-ratio analysis of syntax patterns

We can also reveal the syntax patterns that are most
strongly associated with simple text versus com-
plex text using the log-odds-ratio technique. Ta-
ble 9 shows syntax patterns that represent “parent
node (head word) → children node(s)" structures
from a constituency parse tree. To extract theses
patterns we parsed our corpus with the Stanford
Parser (Klein and Manning, 2002) and applied its
built-in head word identifier from Collins (2003).
Both the Newsela and Wikipedia corpora exhibit
syntactic differences that are intuitive and interest-
ing. However, as with word frequency (Table 8),

complex syntactic patterns are retained more often
in Wikipedia’s simplifications than in Newsela’s.

In order to show interesting syntax patterns
in the Wikipedia parallel data for Table 9, we
first had to discard 3613 sentences in PWKP that
contain both "is a commune" and "France". As the
word-level analysis in Tables 6 and 7 hints, there is
an exceeding number of sentences about communes
in France in the PWKP corpus, such as the sentence
pair below:

[NORM] La Couture is a commune
in the Pas-de-Calais department in the
Nord-Pas-de-Calais region of France .

[SIMP] La Couture, Pas-de-Calais is a commune.
It is found in the region Nord-Pas-de-Calais in the
Pas-de-Calais department in the north of France.

This is a template sentence from a stub geo-
graphic article and its deterministic simplification.
The influence of this template sentence is more over-

290



whelming in the syntax-level analysis than in the
word-level analysis —- about 1/3 of the top 30 syn-
tax patterns would be related to these sentence pairs
if they were not discarded.

3.5 Document-level compression

There are few publicly accessible document-level
parallel simplification corpora (Barzilay and Lap-
ata, 2008). The Newsela corpus will enable more
research on document-level simplification, such
as anaphora choice (Siddharthan and Copestake,
2002), content selection (Woodsend and Lapata,
2011b), and discourse relation preservation (Sid-
dharthan, 2003).

Simple Wikipedia is rarely used to study
document-level simplification. Woodsend and La-
pata (2011b) developed a model that simplifies
Wikipedia articles while selecting their most impor-
tant content. However, they could only use Simple
Wikipedia in very limited ways. They noted that
Simple Wikipedia is “less mature” with many arti-
cles that are just “stubs, comprising a single para-
graph of just one or two sentences”. We quantify
their observation in Figure 2, plotting the document-
level compression ratio of Simple vs. Normal
Wikipedia articles. The compression ratio is the
ratio of the number of characters between each
simple-complex article pair. In the plot, we use all
60 thousand article pairs from the Simple-Normal
Wikipedia collected by Kauchak (2013) in May
2011. The overall compression ratio is skewed to-
wards almost 0. For comparison, we also plot the
ratio between the simplest version (Simp-4) and the
original version (Original) of the news articles in the
Newsela corpus. The Newsela corpus has a much
more reasonable compression ratio and is therefore
likely to be more suitable for studying document-
level simplification.

3.6 Analysis of discourse connectives

Although discourse is known to affect readability,
the relation between discourse and text simplifica-
tion is still under-studied with the use of statistical
methods (Williams et al., 2003; Siddharthan, 2006;
Siddharthan and Katsos, 2010). Text simplification
often involves splitting one sentence into multiple
sentences, which is likely to require discourse-level
changes such as introducing explicit rhetorical rela-

tions. However, previous research that uses Simple-
Normal Wikipedia largely focuses on sentence-level
transformation, without taking large discourse struc-
ture into account.

Figure 3: A radar chart that visualizes the odds ra-
tio (radius axis) of discourse connectives in sim-
ple side vs. complex side. An odds ratio larger
than 1 indicates the word is more likely to occur
in the simplified text than in the complex text, and
vice versa. Simple cue words (in the shaded re-
gion), except “hence”, are more likely to be added
during Newsela’s simplification process than in
Wikipedia’s. Complex conjunction connectives (in
the unshaded region) are more likely to be retained
in Wikipedia’s simplifications than in Newsela’s.

To preserve the rhetorical structure, Siddharthan
(2003, 2006) proposed to introduce cue words when
simplifying various conjoined clauses. We perform
an analysis on discourse connectives that are rel-
evant to readability as suggested by Siddharthan
(2003). Figure 3 presents the odds ratios of sim-
ple cue words and complex conjunction connectives.
The odds radios are computed for Newsela between
the Original and Simp-4 versions, and for Wikipedia
between Normal and Simple documents collected
by Kauchak (2013). It suggests that Newsela ex-
hibits a more complete degree of simplification than
Wikipedia, and that it may be able to enable more
computational studies of the role of discourse in text
simplification in the future.

291



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4

0.
0

0.
5

1.
0

1.
5

Newsela

Compression Ratio

D
en

si
ty

0
1

2
3

4
5

Wikipedia

Compression Ratio

D
en

si
ty

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4

Figure 2: Distribution of document-level compression ratio, displayed as a histogram smoothed by kernel
density estimation. The Newsela corpus is more normally distributed, suggesting more consistent quality.

3.7 Newsela’s quality is better than Wikipedia

Overall, we have shown that the professional sim-
plification of Newsela is more rigorous and more
consistent than Simple English Wikipedia. The lan-
guage and content also differ between the encyclo-
pedia and news domains. They are not exchangeable
in developing nor in evaluating simplification sys-
tems. In the next section, we will review the evalua-
tion methodology used in recent research, discuss its
shortcomings and propose alternative evaluations.

4 Evaluation of simplification systems

With the popularity of parallel Wikipedia data
in simplification research, most state-of-the-art
systems evaluate on simplifying sentences from
Wikipedia. All simplification systems published in
the ACL, NAACL, EACL, COLING and EMNLP
main conferences since Zhu’s 2010 work compared
solely on the same test set that consists of only
100 sentences from Wikipedia, except one paper
that additionally experimented with 5 short news
summaries. The most widely practiced evaluation
methodology is to have human judges rate on gram-
maticality (or fluency), simplicity, and adequacy (or
meaning preservation) on a 5-point Likert scale.

Such evaluation is insufficient to measure 1) the
practical value of a system to a specific target reader
population and 2) the performance of individual
simplification components: sentence splitting, dele-

tion and paraphrasing. Although the inadequacy of
text simplification evaluations has been discussed
before (Siddharthan, 2014), we focus on these two
common deficiencies and suggest two future direc-
tions.

4.1 Targeting specific audiences
Simplification has many subtleties, since what con-
stitutes simplification for one type of user may not
be appropriate for another. Many researchers have
studied simplification in the context of different au-
diences. However, most recent automatic simplifica-
tion systems are developed and evaluated with little
consideration of target reader population. There is
one attempt by Angrosh et al. (2014) who evaluate
their system by asking non-native speakers compre-
hension questions. They conducted an English vo-
cabulary size test to categorize the users into differ-
ent levels of language skills.

The Newsela corpus allows us to target children at
different grade levels. From the application point of
view, making knowledge accessible to all children is
an important yet challenging part of education (Scar-
ton et al., 2010; Moraes et al., 2014). From the tech-
nical point of view, reading grade level is a clearly
defined objective for both simplification systems and
human annotators. Once there is a well-defined ob-
jective, with constraints such as vocabulary size and
sentence length, it is easier to fairly compare differ-
ent systems. Newsela provides human simplification

292



at different grade levels and reading comprehension
quizzes alongside each article.

In addition, readability is widely studied and can
be automatically estimated (Kincaid et al., 1975;
Pitler and Nenkova, 2008; Petersen and Ostendorf,
2009). Although existing readability metrics assume
text is well-formed, they can potentially be used in
combination with text quality metrics (Post, 2011;
Louis and Nenkova, 2013) to evaluate simplifica-
tions. They can also be used to aid humans in the
creation of reference simplifications.

4.2 Evaluating sub-tasks separately

It is widely accepted that sentence simplification in-
volves three different elements: splitting, deletion
and paraphrasing (Feng, 2008; Narayan and Gar-
dent, 2014). Splitting breaks a long sentence into
a few short sentences to achieve better readability.
Deletion reduces the complexity by removing unim-
portant parts of a sentence. Paraphrasing rewrites
text into a simpler version via reordering, substitu-
tion and occasionally expansion.

Most state-of-the-art systems consist of all or a
subset of these three components. However, the pop-
ular human evaluation criteria (grammaticality, sim-
plicity and adequacy) do not explain which compo-
nents in a system are good or bad. More importantly,
deletion may be unfairly penalized since shorter out-
put tends to result in lower adequacy judgements
(Napoles et al., 2011).

We therefore advocate for a more informative
evaluation that separates out each sub-task. We be-
lieve this will lead to more easily quantifiable met-
rics and possibly the development of automatic met-
rics. For example, early work shows potential use
of precision and recall to evaluate splitting (Sid-
dharthan, 2006; Gasperin et al., 2009) and deletion
(Riezler et al., 2003; Filippova and Strube, 2008).
Several studies also have investigated various met-
rics for evaluating sentence paraphrasing (Callison-
Burch et al., 2008; Chen and Dolan, 2011; Ganitke-
vitch et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2012, 2013; Weese et al.,
2014).

5 Summary and recommendations

In this paper, we presented the first systematic anal-
ysis of the quality of Simple Wikipedia as a simpli-

fication data resource. We conducted a qualitative
manual examination and several statistical analyses
(including vocabulary change matrices, compres-
sion ratio histograms, log-odds-ratio calculations,
etc.). We introduced a new, high-quality corpus of
professionally simplified news articles, Newsela, as
an alternative resource, that allowed us to demon-
strate Simple Wikipedia’s inadequacies in compar-
ison. We further discussed problems with current
simplification evaluation methodology and proposed
potential improvements.

Our goal for this opinion paper is to stimulate
progress in text simplification research. Simple En-
glish Wikipedia played a vital role in inspiring sim-
plification approaches based on statistical machine
translation. However, it has so many drawbacks
that we recommend the community to drop it as the
standard benchmark set for simplification. Other re-
sources like the Newsela corpus are superior, since
they provide a more consistent level of quality, tar-
get a particular audience, and approach the size of
parallel Simple-Normal English Wikipedia. We be-
lieve that simplification is an important area of re-
search that has the potential for broader impact be-
yond NLP research. But we must first adopt appro-
priate data sets and research methodologies.

Researchers can request the Newsela data fol-
lowing the instructions at: https://newsela.
com/data/

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Dan Cogan-Drew,
Jennifer Coogan, and Kieran Sobel from Newsela
for creating their data and generously sharing it with
us. We also thank action editor Rada Mihalcea
and three anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful
comments, and Ani Nenkova, Alan Ritter and Max-
ine Eskenazi for valuable discussions.

This material is based on research sponsored by
the NSF under grant IIS-1430651. The views and
conclusions contained in this publication are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as repre-
senting official policies or endorsements of the NSF
or the U.S. Government.

293

https://newsela.com/data/
https://newsela.com/data/


References

Allen, D. (2009). A study of the role of relative
clauses in the simplification of news texts for
learners of English. System, 37(4):585–599.

Angrosh, M., Nomoto, T., and Siddharthan, A.
(2014). Lexico-syntactic text simplification and
compression with typed dependencies. In Pro-
ceedings of the 14th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (EACL).

Bach, N., Gao, Q., Vogel, S., and Waibel, A. (2011).
Tris: A statistical sentence simplifier with log-
linear models and margin-based discriminative
training. In Proceedings of 5th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (IJCNLP).

Barzilay, R. and Lapata, M. (2008). Modeling local
coherence: An entity-based approach. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(1):1–34.

Callison-Burch, C., Cohn, T., and Lapata, M.
(2008). ParaMetric: An automatic evaluation
metric for paraphrasing. In Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING).

Canning, Y., Tait, J., Archibald, J., and Crawley,
R. (2000). Cohesive generation of syntactically
simplified newspaper text. In Proceedings of the
Third International Workshop on Text, Speech and
Dialogue (TSD).

Carroll, J., Minnen, G., Pearce, D., Canning, Y., De-
vlin, S., and Tait, J. (1999). Simplifying text for
language-impaired readers. In Proceedings of the
14th Conference of the 9th European Conference
for Computational Linguistics (EACL).

Chandrasekar, R., Doran, C., and Srinivas, B.
(1996). Motivations and methods for text simpli-
fication. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference
on Computational linguistics (COLING).

Chen, D. L. and Dolan, W. B. (2011). Collecting
highly parallel data for paraphrase evaluation. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Chen, H.-B., Huang, H.-H., Chen, H.-H., and
Tan, C.-T. (2012). A simplification-translation-
restoration framework for cross-domain smt ap-

plications. In Proceedings of the 24th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING).

Collins, M. (2003). Head-driven statistical models
for natural language parsing. Computational lin-
guistics, 29(4):589–637.

Coster, W. and Kauchak, D. (2011). Simple English
Wikipedia: A new text simplification task. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (ACL-HLT).

De Belder, J. and Moens, M.-F. (2010). Text simpli-
fication for children. In Prroceedings of the SIGIR
Workshop on Accessible Search Systems.

Eisenstein, J. (2013). What to do about bad language
on the Internet. In Proceedings of the 2013 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT).

Elhadad, N. and Sutaria, K. (2007). Mining a lex-
icon of technical terms and lay equivalents. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP 2007:
Biological, Translational, and Clinical Language
Processing.

Feng, L. (2008). Text simplification: A survey.
Technical report, The City University of New
York.

Filippova, K. and Strube, M. (2008). Dependency
tree based sentence compression. In Proceedings
of the 5th International Natural Language Gener-
ation Conference (INLG).

Ganitkevitch, J., Callison-Burch, C., Napoles, C.,
and Van Durme, B. (2011). Learning senten-
tial paraphrases from bilingual parallel corpora
for text-to-text generation. In Proceedings of the
2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP).

Gasperin, C., Maziero, E., Specia, L., Pardo, T., and
Aluisio, S. M. (2009). Natural language process-
ing for social inclusion: A text simplification ar-
chitecture for different literacy levels. In Proceed-
ings of SEMISH-XXXVI Seminário Integrado de
Software e Hardware.

Gerber, L. and Hovy, E. (1998). Improving transla-
tion quality by manipulating sentence length. In

294



Machine Translation and the Information Soup,
pages 448–460. Springer.

Hwang, W., Hajishirzi, H., Ostendorf, M., and Wu,
W. (2015). Aligning sentences from Standard
Wikipedia to Simple Wikipedia. In Proceed-
ings of the 2015 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (NAACL).

Inui, K., Fujita, A., Takahashi, T., Iida, R., and
Iwakura, T. (2003). Text simplification for read-
ing assistance: A project note. In Proceedings of
the 2nd International Workshop on Paraphrasing.

Jaccard, P. (1912). The distribution of the flora in
the alpine zone. New Phytologist, 11(2):37–50.

Jurafsky, D., Chahuneau, V., Routledge, B. R.,
and Smith, N. A. (2014). Narrative framing of
consumer sentiment in online restaurant reviews.
First Monday, 19(4).

Kauchak, D. (2013). Improving text simplification
language modeling using unsimplified text data.
In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Kincaid, J. P., Fishburne Jr, R. P., Rogers, R. L., and
Chissom, B. S. (1975). Derivation of new read-
ability formulas (automated readability index, fog
count and flesch reading ease formula) for navy
enlisted personnel. Technical report, DTIC Doc-
ument.

Klebanov, B. B., Knight, K., and Marcu, D. (2004).
Text simplification for information-seeking appli-
cations. In On the Move to Meaningful Inter-
net Systems 2004: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE,
pages 735–747. Springer.

Klein, D. and Manning, C. D. (2002). Fast exact
inference with a factored model for natural lan-
guage parsing. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems.

Louis, A. and Nenkova, A. (2013). What makes
writing great? First experiments on article qual-
ity prediction in the science journalism domain.
Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (TACL), 1:341–352.

Miwa, M., Saetre, R., Miyao, Y., and Tsujii, J.
(2010). Entity-focused sentence simplification for
relation extraction. In Proceedings of the 24th

International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING).

Monroe, B. L., Colaresi, M. P., and Quinn, K. M.
(2008). Fightin’words: Lexical feature selection
and evaluation for identifying the content of po-
litical conflict. Political Analysis, 16(4):372–403.

Moraes, P., McCoy, K., and Carberry, S. (2014).
Adapting graph summaries to the users’ read-
ing levels. In Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Natural Language Generation Conference
(INLG).

Napoles, C., Callison-Burch, C., and Van Durme,
B. (2011). Evaluating sentence compression: Pit-
falls and suggested remedies. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Gen-
eration.

Narayan, S. and Gardent, C. (2014). Hybrid simpli-
fication using deep semantics and machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL).

Petersen, S. and Ostendorf, M. (2007). Text simpli-
fication for language learners: A corpus analysis.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech and
Language Technology for Education.

Petersen, S. E. and Ostendorf, M. (2009). A ma-
chine learning approach to reading level assess-
ment. Computer Speech & Language, 23(1):89–
106.

Pitler, E. and Nenkova, A. (2008). Revisiting read-
ability: A unified framework for predicting text
quality. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP).

Porter, A., McMaken, J., Hwang, J., and Yang, R.
(2011). Common Core Standards the new US
intended curriculum. Educational Researcher,
40(3):103–116.

Post, M. (2011). Judging grammaticality with tree
substitution grammar derivations. In Proceedings
of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (ACL-HLT).

Riezler, S., King, T. H., Crouch, R., and Zaenen,
A. (2003). Statistical sentence condensation us-

295



ing ambiguity packing and stochastic disambigua-
tion methods for lexical-functional grammar. In
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technol-
ogy (NAACL-HLT).

Scarton, C., De Oliveira, M., Candido Jr, A.,
Gasperin, C., and Aluísio, S. M. (2010). Sim-
plifica: A tool for authoring simplified texts in
brazilian portuguese guided by readability assess-
ments. In Proceedings of the 2010 Annual Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT).

Siddharthan, A. (2003). Preserving discourse struc-
ture when simplifying text. In Proceedings of Eu-
ropean Workshop on Natural Language Genera-
tion (ENLG).

Siddharthan, A. (2006). Syntactic simplification and
text cohesion. Research on Language and Com-
putation, 4(1):77–109.

Siddharthan, A. (2014). A survey of research on
text simplification. Special issue of International
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 165(2).

Siddharthan, A. and Angrosh, M. (2014). Hybrid
text simplification using synchronous dependency
grammars with hand-written and automatically
harvested rules. In Proceedings of the 25th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING).

Siddharthan, A. and Copestake, A. (2002). Generat-
ing anaphora for simplifying text. In Proceedings
of the 4th Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor Res-
olution Colloquium (DAARC).

Siddharthan, A. and Katsos, N. (2010). Reformulat-
ing discourse connectives for non-expert readers.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (NAACL-HLT).

Siddharthan, A., Nenkova, A., and McKeown, K.
(2004). Syntactic simplification for improving
content selection in multi-document summariza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COL-
ING).

Vanderwende, L., Suzuki, H., Brockett, C., and
Nenkova, A. (2007). Beyond SumBasic: Task-
focused summarization with sentence simplifica-
tion and lexical expansion. Information Process-
ing & Management, 43(6):1606–1618.

Vickrey, D. and Koller, D. (2008). Sentence simpli-
fication for semantic role labeling. In Proceed-
ings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies (ACL-HLT).

Watanabe, W. M., Junior, A. C., Uzêda, V. R.,
Fortes, R. P. d. M., Pardo, T. A. S., and Aluísio,
S. M. (2009). Facilita: reading assistance for low-
literacy readers. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
International Conference on Design of Communi-
cation.

Weese, J., Ganitkevitch, J., and Callison-Burch,
C. (2014). PARADIGM: Paraphrase diagnos-
tics through grammar matching. In Proceedings
of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL).

Williams, S., Reiter, E., and Osman, L. (2003). Ex-
periments with discourse-level choices and read-
ability. In Proceedings of the European Natural
Language Generation Workshop (ENLG).

Woodsend, K. and Lapata, M. (2011a). Learning to
simplify sentences with quasi-synchronous gram-
mar and integer programming. In Proceedings
of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Woodsend, K. and Lapata, M. (2011b). WikiSimple:
Automatic simplification of Wikipedia articles. In
Proceedings of the 25th Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI).

Wubben, S., van den Bosch, A., and Krahmer, E.
(2012). Sentence simplification by monolingual
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 50th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).

Xu, W. and Grishman, R. (2009). A parse-and-trim
approach with information significance for chi-
nese sentence compression. In Proceedings of
the 2009 Workshop on Language Generation and
Summarisation.

296



Xu, W., Ritter, A., Dolan, B., Grishman, R., and
Cherry, C. (2012). Paraphrasing for style. In Pro-
ceedings of the 24th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING).

Xu, W., Ritter, A., and Grishman, R. (2013). Gather-
ing and generating paraphrases from twitter with
application to normalization. In Proceedings of
the Sixth Workshop on Building and Using Com-
parable Corpora (BUCC).

Zhu, Z., Bernhard, D., and Gurevych, I. (2010). A
monolingual tree-based translation model for sen-
tence simplification. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING).

297



298


