








































Discrete-State Variational Autoencoders
for Joint Discovery and Factorization of Relations

Diego Marcheggiani
ILLC

University of Amsterdam
marcheggiani@uva.nl

Ivan Titov
ILLC

University of Amsterdam
titov@uva.nl

Abstract

We present a method for unsupervised open-
domain relation discovery. In contrast to
previous (mostly generative and agglomera-
tive clustering) approaches, our model relies
on rich contextual features and makes mini-
mal independence assumptions. The model
is composed of two parts: a feature-rich re-
lation extractor, which predicts a semantic
relation between two entities, and a factor-
ization model, which reconstructs arguments
(i.e., the entities) relying on the predicted re-
lation. The two components are estimated
jointly so as to minimize errors in recovering
arguments. We study factorization models in-
spired by previous work in relation factoriza-
tion and selectional preference modeling. Our
models substantially outperform the genera-
tive and agglomerative-clustering counterparts
and achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1 Introduction

The task of Relation Extraction (RE) consists of de-
tecting and classifying the semantic relations present
in text. RE has been shown to benefit a wide range of
NLP tasks, such as information retrieval (Liu et al.,
2014), question answering (Ravichandran and Hovy,
2002) and textual entailment (Szpektor et al., 2004).

Supervised methods for RE have been success-
ful when small restricted sets of relations are con-
sidered. However, human annotation is expensive
and time-consuming, and consequently these ap-
proaches do not scale well to the open-domain set-
ting where a large number of relations need to be
detected in a heterogeneous text collection (e.g.,
the entire Web). Though weakly-supervised ap-
proaches, such as distantly supervised methods and

bootstrapping (Mintz et al., 2009; Agichtein and
Gravano, 2000), reduce the amount of necessary su-
pervision, they still require examples for every rela-
tion considered.

These limitations led to the emergence of unsu-
pervised approaches for RE. These methods extract
surface or syntactic patterns between two entities
and either directly use these patterns as substitutes
for semantic relations (Banko et al., 2007; Banko
and Etzioni, 2008) or cluster the patterns (sometimes
in context-sensitive way) to form relations (Lin and
Pantel, 2001; Yao et al., 2011; Nakashole et al.,
2012; Yao et al., 2012). The existing methods, given
their generative (or agglomerative clustering) nature,
rely on simpler features than their supervised coun-
terparts and also make strong modeling assumptions
(e.g., assuming that arguments are conditionally in-
dependent of each other given the relation). These
shortcomings are likely to harm their performance.

In this work, we tackle the aforementioned chal-
lenges and introduce a new model for unsupervised
relation extraction. We also describe an efficient es-
timation algorithm which lets us experiment with
large unannotated collections. Our model is com-
posed of two components:

• an encoding component: a feature-rich relation
extractor which predicts a semantic relation be-
tween two entities in a specific sentence given
contextual features;

• a reconstruction component: a factorization
model which reconstructs arguments (i.e., the
entities) relying on the predicted relation.

The two components are estimated jointly so as to
minimize errors in reconstructing arguments. While

231

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 4, pp. 231–244, 2016. Action Editor: Sebastian Riedel.
Submission batch: 10/2015; Revision batch: 2/2016; Published 6/2016.

c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license.



learning to predict left-out arguments, the inference
algorithm will search for latent relations that sim-
plify the argument prediction task as much as possi-
ble. Roughly, such an objective will favour inducing
relations that maximally constrain the set of admis-
sible argument pairs. Our hypothesis is that relations
induced in this way will be interpretable by humans
and useful in practical applications. Why is this hy-
pothesis plausible? Primarily because humans typi-
cally define relations as an abstraction capturing the
essence of the underlying situation. And the under-
lying situation (rather than surface linguistic details
like syntactic functions) is precisely what imposes
constraints on admissible argument pairs.

This framework allows us to both exploit rich fea-
tures (in the encoding component) and capture inter-
dependencies between arguments in a flexible way
(both in the reconstruction and encoding compo-
nents).

The use of a reconstruction-error objective, pre-
viously considered primarily in the context of train-
ing neural autoencoders (Hinton, 1989; Vincent et
al., 2008), gives us an opportunity to borrow ideas
from the well-established area of statistical rela-
tional learning (Getoor and Taskar, 2007), and, more
specifically, relation factorization. In this area,
tensor and matrix factorization methods have been
shown to be effective for inferring missing facts in
knowledge bases (Bordes et al., 2011; Riedel et
al., 2013; Chang et al., 2014; Bordes et al., 2014;
Sutskever et al., 2009). In our work, we also adopt a
fairly standard RESCAL factorization (Nickel et al.,
2011) and use it within our reconstruction compo-
nent.

Though there is a clear analogy between statisti-
cal relational learning and our setting, there is also
a very significant difference. In contrast to rela-
tional learning, rather than factorizing existing re-
lations (an existing ‘database’), our method simulta-
neously discovers the relational schema (i.e., an in-
ventory of relations) and a mapping from text to the
relations (i.e., a relation extractor), and it does it in
such a way as to maximize performance on recon-
struction (i.e., inference) tasks. This analogy also
highlights one important property of our framework:
unlike generative models, we explicitly force our se-
mantic representations to be useful for at least the
most basic form of semantic inference (i.e., infer-

ring an argument based on the relation and another
argument). It is important to note that the model is
completely agnostic about the real semantic relation
between two arguments, as the relational schema is
discovered during learning.

We consider both a factorization method inspired
by previous research in knowledge base modeling
(as discussed above) and another, even simpler one,
based on ideas from previous research on model-
ing selectional preferences (e.g., Resnik (1997); Ó
Séaghdha (2010); Van de Cruys (2010)), plus their
combination. Our models are applied to a version
of the New York Times corpus (Sandhaus, 2008).
In order to evaluate our approach, we follow Yao et
al. (2011) and align named entities in our collection
to Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008), a large collabo-
rative knowledge base. In this way we can evaluate
a subset of our induced relations against relations in
Freebase. Note that Freebase has not been used dur-
ing learning, making this a fair evaluation scenario
for an unsupervised relation induction method. We
also qualitatively evaluate our model by both con-
sidering several examples of induced relations (both
appearing and not appearing in Freebase) and vi-
sualizing embeddings of named entities induced by
our model. As expected, the choice of a factoriza-
tion model affects the model performance. Our best
models substantially outperform the state-of-the-art
generative Rel-LDA model of Yao et al. (2011):
35.8% F1 and 29.6% F1 for our best model and Rel-
LDA, respectively.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
In the following section, we formally describe the
problem. In Section 3, we motivate our approach.
In Section 4, we formally describe the method. In
Section 5 we describe our experimental setting and
discuss the results. We give more background on
RE, knowledge base completion and autoencoders
in Section 6.

2 Problem Definition

In the most standard form of RE considered in this
work, an extractor, given a sentence and a pair of
named entities e1 and e2, needs to predict the under-
lying semantic relation r between these entities. For
example, in the sentence

Roger Ebert wrote a review of The Fall

232



 

Feature representation of “Ebert is the first ….” (    )

Relation extractor
( = Encoding)

AWARDED(e1: Ebert,   e2:  Pulitzer prize)

Entity prediction
( = Reconstruction)

Hidden

 Log-linear feature-rich model

Factorization model

x

Pulitzer prize

Figure 1: Inducing relations with discrete-state autoencoders.

we have two entities e1 = Roger Ebert and
e2 = The Fall, and the extractor should predict
the semantic relation r = REVIEWED.1 The stan-
dard approach to this task is to either rely on hu-
man annotated data (i.e., supervised learning) or use
data generated automatically by aligning knowledge
bases (e.g., Freebase) with text (called distantly-
supervised methods). Both classes of approaches as-
sume a predefined inventory of relations and a man-
ually constructed resource.

In contrast, the focus of this paper is on open-
domain unsupervised RE (also known as relation
discovery) where no fixed inventory of relations is
provided to the learner. The methods induce rela-
tions from the data itself. Previous work on this
task (Banko et al., 2007), as well as on its general-
ization, called unsupervised semantic parsing (Poon
and Domingos, 2009; Titov and Klementiev, 2011),
groups patterns between entity pairs (e.g., wrote
a review, wrote a critique and reviewed) and uses
these clusters as relations. Other approaches (e.g.,
Shinyama and Sekine (2006); Yao et al. (2011); Yao
et al. (2012); de Lacalle and Lapata (2013)), in-
cluding the one introduced in this paper, perform
context-sensitive clustering, that is, they treat rela-
tions as latent variables and induce them for each
entity-pair occurrence individually. Rather than re-
lying solely on a pattern between entity pairs, the
latter class of methods can use additional context to
decide that Napoleon reviewed the Old Guard and
the above sentence about Roger Ebert should not be
labeled with the same relation.

1In some of our examples we will use relation names, al-
though our method, as virtually any other latent variable model,
will not induce names but only indices.

Unsupervised relation discovery is an important
task because existing knowledge bases (e.g., Free-
base, Yago (Suchanek et al., 2007), DBpedia (Auer
et al., 2007)) do not have perfect coverage even for
most standard domains (e.g., music or sports), and,
arguably more importantly, because there are many
domains not covered by these resources. Though
one option is to provide a list of relations with seed
examples for each of them and then use bootstrap-
ping (Agichtein and Gravano, 2000), it requires do-
main knowledge and may thus be problematic. In
these cases unsupervised relation discovery is the
only non-labour-intensive way to construct a rela-
tion extractor. Moreover, unsupervised methods can
also aid in building new knowledge bases by pro-
viding an initial set of relations which can then be
refined.

As is common, in this work we limit ourselves
to only considering binary relations between entities
occurring in the same sentence. We focus only on
extracting semantic relations, assuming that named
entities have already been recognized by an exter-
nal method (Finkel et al., 2005). As in previous
work (Yao et al., 2011), we are not trying to detect
if there is a relation between two entities or not; our
aim is to detect a relation between each pair of enti-
ties appearing in a sentence. In principle, heuristics
(i.e., based on the syntactic dependency paths con-
necting arguments) can be used to get rid of unlikely
pairs.

3 Our Approach

We approach the problem by introducing a latent
variable model which defines the interactions be-
tween a latent relation r and the observables: the

233



entity pair (e1, e2) and other features of the sentence
x. The idea which underlies much of latent vari-
able modeling is that a good latent representation is
the one that helps us to reconstruct the input (i.e.,
x, including (e1, e2)). In practice, we are not inter-
ested in predicting x, as x is observable, but rather
in inducing an appropriate latent representation (i.e.,
r). Thus, it is crucial to design the model in such a
way that a good r (the one predictive of x) indeed
encodes relations rather than some other form of ab-
straction.

In our approach, we encode this reconstruction
idea very explicitly. As a motivating example, con-
sider the following sentence:

Ebert is the first journalist to win the Pulitzer prize.

As shown in Figure 1, let us assume that we hide
one argument, chosen at random: for example, e2 =
Pulitzer prize. Now the purpose of the re-
construction component is to reconstruct (i.e., infer)
this argument relying on another argument (e1 =
Ebert), the latent relations r and nothing else. At
learning time, our inference algorithm will search
through the space of potential relation clusterings to
find the one that makes these reconstruction tasks as
simple as possible. For example, if the algorithm
clusters expressions is the first journalist to win to-
gether with was awarded, the prediction is likely to
be successful, assuming that the passage Ebert was
awarded the Pulitzer prize has been observed else-
where in the training data. On the contrary, if the
algorithm clustered is the first journalist to win with
presented, we are likely to make a wrong inference
(i.e., predict Golden Thumb award). Given that
we optimize the reconstruction objective, the former
clustering is much more likely than the latter. Re-
construction can be seen as a knowledge base fac-
torization approach similar to the ones of Bordes et
al. (2014). Notice that the model’s final goal is to
learn a good relation clustering, and that the recon-
struction objective is used as a means to reach this
goal. For reasons which will be clear in a moment,
we will refer to the model performing the prediction
of entities relying on other entities and relations as a
decoder (a.k.a. the reconstruction component).

Despite our description of the model as pattern-
clustering, it is important to stress that we are in-
ducing clusters in a context-sensitive way. In other

words, we are learning an encoder: a feature-rich
classifier, which predicts a relation for a specific sen-
tence and an entity pair in this sentence. Clearly, this
is a better approach because some of the patterns be-
tween entities are ambiguous and require extra fea-
tures to disambiguate them (recall the example from
the previous section), whereas other patterns may
not be frequent enough to induce reliable clustering
(e.g., is the first journalist to win). The encoding and
reconstruction components are learned jointly so as
to minimize the prediction error. In this way, the
encoder is specialized to the defined reconstruction
problem.

4 Reconstruction Error Minimization

In order to implement the desiderata sketched in
the previous section, we take inspiration from a
framework popular in the neural network commu-
nity, namely autoencoders (Hinton, 1989). Autoen-
coders are composed of two components: an en-
coder which predicts a latent representation y from
an input x, and a decoder which relies on the la-
tent representation y to recover the input (x̃). In the
learning phase, the parameters of both the encoding
and reconstruction part are chosen so as to minimize
a reconstruction error (e.g., the Euclidean distance
||x− x̃||2).

Although popular within the neural network com-
munity (where y is defined as a real-valued vec-
tor), autoencoders have recently been applied to the
discrete-state setting (where y is defined as a cat-
egorical random variable, a tuple of variables or a
graph). For example, such models have been used
in the context of dependency parsing (Daumé III,
2009), or in the context of POS tagging and word
alignment (Ammar et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2015a).
The most related previous work (Titov and Khod-
dam, 2015) considers induction of semantic roles
of verbal arguments (e.g., an agent, a performer of
an action vs. a patient, an affected entity), though
no grouping of predicates into relations was consid-
ered. We refer to such models as discrete-state au-
toencoders.

We use different model families for the decod-
ing and reconstruction components. The encoding
part is a log-linear feature-rich model, while the re-
construction part is a tensor (or matrix) factorization

234



model which seeks to reconstruct entities, relying on
the outcome of the encoding component.

4.1 Encoding component
The encoding component, that is, the actual relation
extractor that will be used to process new sentences,
is a feature-rich classifier that, given a set of fea-
tures extracted from the sentence, predicts the cor-
responding semantic relation r ∈ R. We use a log-
linear model (‘softmax regression’)

q(r|x,w) = exp(w
Tg(r, x)))∑

r′∈R exp(w
Tg(r′, x))

, (1)

where g(r, x) is a high-dimensional feature repre-
sentation and w is the corresponding vector of pa-
rameters. In principle, the encoding model can
be any model as long as the relation posteriors
q(r|x,w) and their gradients can be efficiently com-
puted or approximated. We discuss the features we
use in the experimental section (Section 5).

4.2 Reconstruction component
In the reconstruction component (i.e., decoder), we
seek to predict an entity ei ∈ E in a specific
position i ∈ {1, 2} given the relation r and an-
other entity e−i, where e−i denotes the complement
{e1, e2}\{ei}. Note that this model does not have
access to any features of the sentence; this is crucial
since in this way we ensure that all the essential in-
formation is encoded by the relation variable. This
bottleneck forces the learning algorithm to induce
informative relations rather than cluster relation oc-
currences in a random fashion or assign them all to
the same relation.

To simplify our notation, let us assume that we
predict e1; the model for e2 will be analogous. We
write the conditional probability models in the fol-
lowing form

p(e1|e2, r, θ) =
exp(ψ(e1, e2, r, θ))∑
e′∈E exp(ψ(e

′, e2, r, θ))
, (2)

where E is the set of all entities; ψ is a general scor-
ing function which, as we will show, can be instan-
tiated in several ways; θ represents its parameters.
The actual set of parameters represented by θ will
depend on the choice of scoring function. However,
in all the cases we consider in this paper, the param-
eters will include entity embeddings (ue ∈ Rd for

every e ∈ E). These embeddings will be learned
within our model.

In this work we explore three different factoriza-
tions ψ for the decoding component: a tensor fac-
torization model inspired by previous work on re-
lation factorization, a simple selectional-preference
model which scores each argument independently of
the other, and a third model which is a combination
of the first two.

4.2.1 ψRS: RESCAL
The first reconstruction model we consider is

RESCAL, a model very successful in the relational
modeling context (Nickel et al., 2011; Chang et
al., 2014). It is a restricted version of the classic
Tucker tensor decomposition (Tucker, 1966; Kolda
and Bader, 2009) and is defined as

ψRS(e1, e2, r, θ) = u
T
e1Crue2 , (3)

where ue1 ,ue2 ∈ Rd are the entity embeddings cor-
responding to the entities e1 and e2. Cr ∈ Rd×d is a
matrix associated with the latent semantic relation r;
it evaluates (i.e., scores) the compatibility between
the two arguments of the relation.

4.2.2 ψSP : Selectional preferences
The second factorization ψSP scores how well

each argument fits the selectional preferences of a
given relation r

ψSP (e1, e2, r, θ) =
2∑

i=1

uTeicir, (4)

where c1r and c2r ∈ Rd encode selectional prefer-
ences for the first and second argument of the rela-
tion r, respectively. This factorization is also known
as model E in Riedel et al. (2013). In contrast to the
previous model, it does not model the interaction be-
tween arguments: it is easy to see that p(e1|e2, r, θ)
for this model (expression (2)) does not depend on
e2 (i.e., on ue2 and c2r). Consequently, such a de-
coder would be more similar to generative models of
relations which typically assume that arguments are
conditionally independent (Yao et al., 2011). Note
however that our joint model can still capture ar-
gument interdependencies in the encoding compo-
nent. Still, this approach does not fully implement
the desiderata described in the previous section, so

235



we generally expect this model to be weaker on
reasonably-sized collections (this hypothesis will be
confirmed in our experimental evaluation).

4.2.3 ψHY : Hybrid model
The RESCAL model may be too expressive to

be accurately estimated for infrequent relations,
whereas the selectional preference model cannot, in
turn, capture interdependencies between arguments.
Thus it seems natural to hope that their combination
ψHY will be more accurate overall:

ψHY (e1, e2, r, θ) = u
T
e1Crue2 +

2∑

i=1

uTeicir. (5)

This model is very similar to the tensor factorization
approach proposed in Socher et al. (2013).

4.3 Learning

We first provide an intuition behind the objective we
optimize. We derive it more formally in the sub-
sequent section, where we show that it can be re-
garded as a variational lower bound on pseudolike-
lihood (Section 4.3.1). As the resulting objective is
still computationally expensive to optimize (due to a
summation over all potential entities), we introduce
further approximations in Section 4.3.2.

The parameters of the encoding and decoding
components (i.e., w and θ) are estimated jointly.
Our general idea is to optimize the quality of argu-
ment prediction while averaging over relations

2∑

i=1

∑

r∈R
q(r|x,w) log p(ei|e−i, r, θ). (6)

Though this objective seems natural, it has one seri-
ous drawback: the induced posteriors q(r|x,w) end
up being extremely sharp which, in turn, makes the
search algorithm more prone to getting stuck in local
minima. As we will see in the experimental results,
this version of the objective results in lower aver-
age performance. This behaviour can be explained
by drawing connections with variational inference.
Roughly speaking, direct optimization of the above
objective behaves very much like using hard EM for
generative latent-variable models. Intuitively, one
solution is, instead of optimizing expression (6), to

consider an entropy-regularized version that favours
more uniform posterior distributions q(r|x,w)
2∑

i=1

∑

r∈R
q(r|x,w)log p(ei|e−i,r,θ)+H(q(·|x,w)), (7)

where the last term H denotes the entropy over q.
The entropy term can be seen as posterior regu-
larization (Ganchev et al., 2010) which pushes the
posterior q(r|x,w) to be more uniform. As we
will see in a moment, this approach can be for-
mally justified by drawing connections to variational
inference (Jaakkola and Jordan, 1996) and, more
specifically, to variational autoencoders (Kingma
and Welling, 2014).

4.3.1 Variational inference
This subsection presents a justification for the ob-

jectives (6) and (7); however, a reader not interested
in this explanation can safely skip it and proceed di-
rectly to Section 4.3.2.

For the moment let us assume that we perform
generative modeling, and we consider optimization
of the following pseudo-likelihood (Besag, 1975)
objective

2∑

i=1

log
∑

r

p(ei|e−i, r, θ)pu(r), (8)

where pu(r) is the uniform distribution over rela-
tions. Note that currently the encoding model is not
part of this objective. The pseudo-likelihood (by
Jensen’s inequality) can be lower-bounded by the
following variational bound

2∑

i=1

∑

r∈R
qi(r) log p(ei|e−i, r, θ)pu(r) +H(qi), (9)

where qi is an arbitrary distribution over relations.
Note that pu(r) can be dropped from the expression
as it corresponds to a constant with respect to the
choice of both the variational distributions qi and the
(reconstruction) model parameters θ.

In variational inference, the maximization of the
original (pseudo-)likelihood objective (8) is replaced
with the maximization of expression (9) both with
respect to qi and θ. This is typically achieved with
an EM-like step-wise procedure: steps where qi is

236



selected for a given θ are alternated with steps where
the parameters θ are updated while keeping qi fixed.
One idea, introduced by Kingma and Welling (2014)
for the continuous case, is to replace the search for
an optimal qi with a predictor (a classifier in our
discrete case) trained within the same optimization
procedure. Our encoding model q(r|x,w) is ex-
actly such a predictor. With these two modifications
(dropping the nuisance term pu and replacing qi with
q(r|x,w)), we obtain the objective (7).
4.3.2 Approximation

The objective (7) cannot be efficiently optimized
in its exact form as the partition function of ex-
pression (2) requires the summation over the en-
tire set of possible entities E . In order to deal with
this challenge we rely on the negative sampling ap-
proach of Mikolov et al. (2013). Specifically we
avoid the softmax in expression (2) and substitute
log p(e1|e2, r, θ) in the objective (7) with the follow-
ing expression

log σ(ψ(e1, e2, r, θ))

+
∑

eneg1 ∈S
log σ(−ψ(eneg1 , e2, r, θ)),

where S is a random sample of n entities from the
distribution of entities in the collection and σ is
the sigmoid function. Intuitively, this expression
pushes up the scores of arguments seen in the text
and pushes down the scores of ‘negative’ arguments.
When there are multiple entities e1 which satisfy the
relation r with e2 (for example, Natasha Obama
and Malia Ann Obama, in relation CHILD OF
with Barack Obama) the scores for all such en-
tities will be pushed up. Assuming both daughters
are mentioned with a similar frequency, they will
get similar scores. Generally, arguments more fre-
quently mentioned in text will get higher scores.

In the end, instead of directly optimizing expres-
sion (7), we use the following objective

2∑

i=1

Eq(·|x,w)
[
log σ(ψ(ei, e−i, r, θ))

+
∑

enegi ∈S
log σ(−ψ(enegi , e−i, r, θ))

]

+ αH(q(·|x,w)), (10)

where Eq(·|x,w)
[
. . .
]

denotes an expectation com-
puted with respect to the encoder distribution
q(r|x,w). Note the non-negative parameter α: after
substituting the softmax with the negative sampling
term, the entropy parameter and the expectation are
not on the same scale anymore. Though we could
try estimating the scaling parameter α, we chose to
tune it on the validation set.

The gradients of the above objective can be cal-
culated using backpropagation. With the proposed
approximation, the computation of the gradients is
quite efficient since the reconstruction model has a
fairly simple form (e.g., bilinear) and learning the
encoder is no more expensive than learning a su-
pervised classifier. We used AdaGrad (Duchi et al.,
2011) as an optimization algorithm.

5 Experiments

In this section we evaluate how effective our model
is in discovering relations between pairs of entities
in a sentence. We consider the unsupervised setting,
so we use clustering measures for evaluation.

Since we want to directly compare to Rel-
LDA (Yao et al., 2011), we use the transductive
set-up: we train our model on the entire training
set (with labels removed) and we evaluate the es-
timated model on a subset of the training set. Given
that we train the relation classifier (i.e., the encod-
ing model), unlike some of the previous approaches,
there is nothing in our approach which prevents us
from applying it in an inductive scenario (i.e., to un-
seen data).

Towards the end of this section we also provide
qualitative evaluation of the induced relations and
entity embeddings.

5.1 Data and evaluation measures

We tested our model on the New York Times cor-
pus (Sandhaus, 2008) using articles from 2000 to
2007. We use the same filtering and preprocessing
steps (POS tagging, NER, and syntactic parsing) as
the ones described in Yao et al. (2011). In that way
we obtained about 2 million entity pairs (i.e., poten-
tial relation realizations).

In order to evaluate our models, we aligned each
entity pair with Freebase, and, as in Yao et al.
(2012), we discarded unaligned ones from the eval-

237



uation. We consider Freebase relations as gold-
standard clusterings and evaluated induced relations
against them. Note that we use the micro-reading
scenario (Nakashole and Mitchell, 2014), that is, we
predict a relation on the basis of a single occurrence
of an entity pair rather than aggregating informa-
tion across all the occurrences of the pair in the cor-
pus. Though it is likely to harm our performance
when evaluating against Freebase, this is a deliberate
choice as we believe extracting relations about less
frequent entities (where there is little redundancy
in a collection) and modelling content of specific
documents is a more challenging and important re-
search direction. Moreover, feature-rich models are
likely to be especially beneficial in these scenarios,
as for micro-reading the information extraction sys-
tems cannot fall back to easier non-ambiguous con-
texts.

We use the B3 metric (Bagga and Baldwin, 1998)
as the scoring function. B3 is a standard measure
for evaluating precision and recall of clustering tasks
(Yao et al., 2012). As the final evaluation score we
use F1, the harmonic mean of precision and recall.

5.2 Features
The crucial characteristic of the learning method we
propose is the ability to handle a rich (and overlap-
ping) set of features. With this in mind we adopted
the following set of features:

1. bag of words between e1 and e2;

2. the surface form of e1 and e2;

3. the lemma of the ‘trigger’2 (i.e., for the passage
Microsoft is based in Redmond, the trigger is
based and its lemma is base);

4. the part-of-speech sequence between e1 and e2;

5. the entity type of e1 and e2 (as a pair);

6. the entity type of e1;

7. the entity type of e2;

8. words on the syntactic dependency path be-
tween e1 and e2, i.e., the lexicalized path be-
tween the entities stripped of dependency labels
and their direction.

2We define triggers as in Yao et al. (2011), namely “all the
words on the dependency path except stop words”.

For example, from the sentence

Stephen Moore, director of fiscal policy studies
at the conservative Cato Institute,

we would extract the following features:

1. BOW:director, BOW:of, BOW:fiscal,
BOW:policy, BOW:studies, BOW:at,
BOW:the;

2. E1:Stephen Moore, E2:Cato Institute;

3. Trigger:director;

4. PoS:NN IN JJ NN NNS IN DT JJ;

5. PairType:PERSON ORGANIZATION;

6. E1Type:PERSON;

7. E2Type:ORGANIZATION;

8. Path:director at.

5.3 Parameters and baselines
All model parameters (w, θ) were initialized ran-
domly. The embedding dimensionality d was set
to 30. We induced 100 relations, the same as used
for Rel-LDA in Yao et al. (2011). We also set the
mini batch size to 100, the initial learning rate of
AdaGrad to 0.1 and the number of negative sam-
ples n to 20. The results reported in Table 1 are
average results of three runs obtained after 5 itera-
tions over the entire training set. For each model we
tuned the weight for the L2 regularization penalty
and chose 0.1 as it worked well across all the mod-
els. We tuned the α coefficient (i.e., the weight for
the entropy term) for each model: we chose 0.25 for
RESCAL, 0.01 for the selectional preferences, and
0.1 for the hybrid model. All model selection was
performed on a validation set: we selected a random
20% of the entire dataset, and considered all entity
pairs aligned to Freebase. The final evaluation was
done on the remaining 80%.

In order to compare our models with the state
of the art in unsupervised RE, we used as a base-
line the Rel-LDA model introduced in Yao et al.
(2011). Rel-LDA is an application of the LDA topic
model (Blei et al., 2003) to the relation discovery
task. In Rel-LDA topics correspond to latent rela-
tions, and, instead of relying on words as LDA does,

238



RESCAL Selectional Pref. Hybrid
Rel-LDA
(our feats)

Rel-LDA
(Yao et al., 2012) feats

HAC (DIRT)

34.5± 1.3 33.4± 1.1 35.8± 2.0 29.6± 0.9 26.3± 0.8 28.3

Table 1: Average F1 results (%), and the standard deviation, across 3 runs of different models on the test set.

Rel-LDA uses predefined features, including argu-
ment words. In a similar fashion to our selectional-
preference decoder, it assumes that arguments are
conditionally independent given the relation. As an-
other baseline, following Yao et al. (2012), we used
hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC). This
baseline is very similar to the standard unsupervised
relation extraction method DIRT (Lin and Pantel,
2001). The HAC cut-off parameter was set to 0.95
based on the development set performance. We used
the same feature representation for all the models,
including the baselines. We also report results of
Rel-LDA using the features from Yao et al. (2012).3

5.4 Results and discussion

The results we report in Table 1 are mean and stan-
dard deviations across 3 runs with different random
initialization of the parameters (except for the deter-
ministic HAC approach). First, we can observe that
using richer features is beneficial for the generative
baseline. It leads to a substantial improvement in F1
(from 26.3% to 29.6% F1). The HAC baseline is
outperformed by Rel-LDA (28.3% vs. 29.6% F1).
However, all our proposed models substantially out-
perform all 3 baselines: the best result is 35.8% F1.

The selectional preference model on average per-
forms better than the best baseline (33.4% vs. 29.6%
F1). As we predicted in Section 4, compared
with the RESCAL model, the selectional preference
model has slightly lower performance (34.5% vs.
33.4% F1). This is not surprising as the argument in-
dependence assumption is very strong, and the gen-
eral motivation we provided in Section 2 does not
really apply to the selectional preference model.

Combining RESCAL and selection preference
models, as we expected, gives some advantage in
terms of performance. The hybrid model is the best
performing model with 35.8% F1, and it is, on aver-
age, 6.2% more accurate than Rel-LDA.

The introduction of entropy in expression (7) does
3Yao et al. (2012) is a follow-up work for Yao et al. (2011).

0 0.01 0.1 1

alpha

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

40

F
1

Figure 2: Results of the hybrid model on the validation
set, with different α.

not only add an extra justification to the objective
we optimize, but also helps to improve the mod-
els’ performance. In fact, as shown in Figure 2 for
the Hybrid model, the difference between having or
not the entropy term makes a big difference, going
from 23.9% without regularization to 34.3% F1 with
regularization. Note that the method is quite sta-
ble within the range α ∈ [0.1, 1], and more fine-
grained tuning of α seems only mildly beneficial.
However the performance with small values of α
(0.01) is more problematic: Hybrid both does not
outperform Rel-LDA and has a large variance across
runs. Somewhat counter-intuitively, with α = 0 (no
entropy regularization) the variance is almost negli-
gible. However, given the low performance in this
regime, it probably just means that we get consis-
tently stuck in equally bad local minima.

Though it may seem that the need to tune the
entropy term weight is an unfortunate side effect
of using the non-probabilistic objective from Sec-
tion 4.3.2, the reality is more subtle. In fact,
even for fully probabilistic variational autoencoders
with real-valued states y, using the weight of 1,
as prescribed by their variational interpretation (see
Section 4.3.1), does not lead to stable perfor-
mance (Bowman et al., 2016). Instead, annealing
over α seems necessary. Though annealing is likely

239



Relation 66 Relation 62 Relation 19

president review professor
director review restaurant dean

chairman review production graduate
executive review book director

spokesman review performance specialist
manager column review attend
analyst review concert expert
owner review revival professor study

professor review rise chairman

Table 2: Relation clusters ordered from left to right by
their frequency.

to benefit our method as well, we leave it for future
work.

Since the proposed model is unsupervised, it is in-
teresting to inspect the relations induced by our best
model. In order to do so, we select the most likely
relation according to our relation extractor (i.e., en-
coding model) for every context in the validation set
and then, for every relation, we count occurrences
of every trigger. The most-frequent trigger for three
induced relations are presented in Table 2. Relation
62 encodes the relation REVIEWED (not present in
Freebase), as in

Anthony Tommasini reviews Metropolitan Opera’s
production of Cosi Fan Tutte.

Clusters 19 and 66 are examples of more coarse rela-
tions. Relation 19 represents a broader ACADEMIC
relation, as in the passage

Dr. Susan Merritt, dean of the School of Computer
Science and Information Systems.

or as in the passage

George Myers graduated from Yale University.

Cluster 66 instead groups together expressions such
as leads or president (of), so it can vaguely be de-
scribed as a LEADERSHIP relation, but it also con-
tains the relation triggered by the word professor
(in). In fact, this is the most frequent relation in-
duced by our model. We can check further by look-
ing at the learned embeddings of named entities vi-
sualized with the t-SNE algorithm (Van der Maaten
and Hinton, 2008). In Figure 3, we can see that en-
tities representing universities and non-academic or-

Semi-sup RESCAL 62.3
Semi-sup Selectional Pref. 58.1
Semi-sup Hybrid 61.5

Unsup Hybrid 34.3

Table 3: Average F1 results (%) for semi-supervised and
unsupervised models, across 3 runs of different models
tested on Te.

ganizations end up being very close in the embed-
ding space. This artefact is likely to be related to the
coarseness of Relations 66 and 19, though it does
not provide a good explanation for why this has hap-
pened, since the entity embeddings are also induced
within our model.

However, overlaps in embeddings do not seem to
be a general problem: the t-SNE visualization shows
that most entities are well clustered into fine-grained
types, for example, football teams, nations, and mu-
sic critics.

5.5 Decoder influence
In order to examine the influence of the decoder on
the model performance, we performed additional ex-
periments in a more controlled setting. We reduced
the dataset to entity pairs participating in Freebase
relations, ending up with a total of about 42,000 re-
lation realizations. We randomly split the dataset in
two. We used the first half as a test set Te, while we
used the second half as a training set Tr. We fur-
ther randomly split the training set Tr in two parts,
Tr1 and Tr2. We use Tr1 as a (distantly) labeled
dataset to learn only the decoding part for each pro-
posed model. To make it comparable to our unsuper-
vised models with 100 induced relations, we trained
the decoder on the 99 most frequent Freebase re-
lations plus a further OTHER relation, which is a
union of the remaining less frequent relations. This
approach is similar to the KB factorization adopted
in Bordes et al. (2011). With the decoder learned
and fixed, we trained the encoder part on unlabeled
examples in Tr2, while leveraging the previously
trained decoder. In other words, we optimize the
objective (10) on Tr2 but update only the encoder
parameters w.4 In this setting the decoder provides
a learning signal for the encoder. The better the gen-

4We also update embeddings of entities not appearing in
Tr1.

240



Political organizations

Universities

General 

Organizations

Figure 3: t-SNE visualization of entity embeddings learned during the training process.

eralization properties of the decoder are, the better
the resulting encoder should be. We expect more ex-
pressive decoders (i.e., RESCAL and Hybrid) to be
able to capture relations better than the selectional
preference model and, thus, yield better encoders. In
order to have a lower bound for the semi-supervised
models, we also trained our best model from the pre-
vious experiments (Hybrid) on Tr2 in a fully unsu-
pervised way. All models are tested on the test set
Te.

As expected, all models with a supervised de-
coder are much more accurate than the unsuper-
vised model (Table 3). The best results with a
supervised decoder are obtained by the RESCAL
model with 62.3% F1, while the result of the un-
supervised hybrid model is 34.3% F1. As expected
the RESCAL and Hybrid outperform the selectional
preference model in this setting (62.3% and 61.5%
vs. 58.1% F1 respectively). Somewhat surprisingly,
the RESCAL model is slightly more accurate (0.8%
F1) than the hybrid model. These experiments con-
firm that more accurate decoder models lead to bet-
ter performing encoders. The results also hint at a
potential extension of our approach to a more real-
istic semi-supervised setting, though we leave any
serious investigation of this set-up for future work.

6 Additional Related Work
In this section, we mainly consider lines of related
work not discussed in other sections of the paper,
and we emphasize their relationship to our approach.

Distant supervision. These methods can be re-
garded as a half-way point between unsupervised
and supervised methods. Distantly supervised mod-
els are trained on data generated automatically
by aligning knowledge bases (e.g., Freebase and
Wikipedia infoboxes) with text (Mintz et al., 2009;
Riedel et al., 2010; Surdeanu et al., 2012; Zeng et
al., 2015). Similarly to our method they can use
feature-rich models without the need for manually
annotated data. However, a relation extractor trained
in this way will only be able to predict relations al-
ready present in a knowledge base. These meth-
ods cannot be used to discover new relations. The
framework we propose is completely unsupervised
and does not have this shortcoming.

Bootstrapping. Bootstrapping methods for rela-
tion extraction (Agichtein and Gravano, 2000; Brin,
1998; Batista et al., 2015) iteratively label new ex-
amples by finding the ones which are the most sim-
ilar, according to some similarity function, to a seed
set of labeled examples. The process continues until
some convergence criteria is met. Even though this
approach is not very labor-intensive (i.e., it requires

241



only few manually labeled examples for the initial
seed set), it requires some domain knowledge from
the model designer. In contrast, unsupervised mod-
els are domain-agnostic and require only unlabeled
text.

Knowledge base factorization. Knowledge base
completion via matrix or tensor factorization has re-
ceived a lot of attention in the past few years (Bor-
des et al., 2011; Jenatton et al., 2012; Weston et
al., 2013; Bordes et al., 2013; Socher et al., 2013;
Garcı́a-Durán et al., 2014; Bordes et al., 2014; Lin
et al., 2015b; Chang et al., 2014; Nickel et al., 2011).
But in contrast to what we propose here, namely, in-
duction of new relations, these models factorize re-
lations already present in knowledge bases.

Universal schema methods (Riedel et al., 2013)
use factorization models to infer facts (e.g., predict
missing entities), but they do not attempt to induce
relations. In other words, they consider each given
context as a relation and induce an embedding for
each of them. They do not attempt to induce a clus-
tering over the contexts. Our work can be regarded
as an extension of these methods.

Autoencoders with discrete states. Aside from
the work cited above (Daumé III, 2009; Ammar
et al., 2014; Titov and Khoddam, 2015; Lin et al.,
2015a), we are not aware of previous work using
autoencoders with discrete states (i.e., a categori-
cal latent variable or a graph). The semisupervised
version of variational autoencoders (Kingma et al.,
2014) used a combination of a real-valued vector
and a categorical variable as its hidden representa-
tion and yielded impressive results on the MNIST
image classification task. However, their approach
cannot be directly applied to unsupervised classifi-
cation, as there is no reason to believe that latent
classes would be captured by the categorical vari-
able rather than in some way represented by the real-
valued vector.

The only other application of variational autoen-
coders to natural language is the very recent work of
Bowman et al. (2016). They study language mod-
eling with recurrent language models and consider
only real-valued vectors as states.

Generative models with rich features have also
been considered in the past (Berg-Kirkpatrick et al.,
2010). However, autoencoders are potentially more

flexible than generative models as they can use very
different encoding and decoding components and
can be faster to train.

7 Conclusions and Discussion
We presented a new method for unsupervised rela-
tion extraction.5 The model consists of a feature-
rich classifier that predicts relations, and a tensor
factorization component that relies on the predicted
relations to infer left-out arguments. These models
are jointly estimated by optimizing the argument re-
construction objective.

We studied three alternative factorization models
building on ideas from knowledge base factoriza-
tion and selectional preference modeling. We em-
pirically showed that our factorization models yield
relation extractors that are more accurate than state-
of-the-art generative and agglomerative clustering
baselines.

As the proposed modeling framework is quite
flexible, the model can be extended in many differ-
ent ways. Our approach can be regarded as learn-
ing semantic representations that are informative for
basic inference tasks (in our case, the inference task
was recovering individual arguments). More general
classes of inference tasks can be considered in future
work. Moreover, it would be interesting to evaluate
the proposed model on how accurately it infers these
facts (rather than only on the quality of the induced
latent representations). The work presented in this
paper can also be combined with the approach of
Titov and Khoddam (2015) to induce both relations
and semantic roles (i.e., essentially to induce seman-
tic frames (Fillmore, 1976)). Another potential di-
rection is the use of labeled data: our feature-rich
model (namely its discriminative encoding compo-
nent) is likely to have much better asymptotic per-
formance than its generative counterpart, and, con-
sequently, labeled data should be much more bene-
ficial.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by NWO Vidi Grant
016.153.327, Google Focused Award on Natural
Language Understanding and partially supported by
ISTI Grant for Young Mobility. The authors thank

5github.com/diegma/relation-autoencoder

242



the action editor and the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable suggestions and Limin Yao for an-
swering our questions about data and baselines.

References

Eugene Agichtein and Luis Gravano. 2000. Snowball:
Extracting relations from large plain-text collections.
In 5th ACM Conference on Digital Libraries.

Waleed Ammar, Chris Dyer, and Noah A. Smith. 2014.
Conditional random field autoencoders for unsuper-
vised structured prediction. In NIPS.

Sören Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens
Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary G. Ives.
2007. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. In
6th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC).

Amit Bagga and Breck Baldwin. 1998. Algorithms for
scoring coreference chains. In LREC.

Michele Banko and Oren Etzioni. 2008. The tradeoffs
between open and traditional relation extraction. In
ACL.

Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen Soderland,
Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007. Open
information extraction from the web. In IJCAI.

David S. Batista, Bruno Martins, and Mário J. Silva.
2015. Semi-supervised bootstrapping of relationship
extractors with distributional semantics. In EMNLP.

Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Alexandre Bouchard-Côté,
John DeNero, and Dan Klein. 2010. Painless unsu-
pervised learning with features. In HLT - NAACL.

Julian Besag. 1975. Statistical analysis of non-lattice
data. The statistician, pages 179–195.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3:993–1022.

Kurt D. Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim
Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: A collabo-
ratively created graph database for structuring human
knowledge. In SIGMOD.

Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston, Ronan Collobert, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2011. Learning structured embed-
dings of knowledge bases. In AAAI.

Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcı́a-Durán,
Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko. 2013. Irreflex-
ive and hierarchical relations as translations. In Struc-
tured Learning: Inferring Graphs from Structured and
Unstructured Inputs (SLG-ICML).

Antoine Bordes, Xavier Glorot, Jason Weston, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2014. A semantic matching energy
function for learning with multi-relational data. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning, 94(2):233–259.

Samuel R. Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, An-
drew M. Dai, Rafal Józefowicz, and Samy Bengio.
2016. Generating sentences from a continuous space.
In ICLR.

Sergey Brin. 1998. Extracting patterns and relations
from the world wide web. In The World Wide Web
and Databases Workshop (WebDB).

Kai-Wei Chang, Wen-tau Yih, Bishan Yang, and Christo-
pher Meek. 2014. Typed tensor decomposition of
knowledge bases for relation extraction. In EMNLP.

Hal Daumé III. 2009. Unsupervised search-based struc-
tured prediction. In ICML.

Oier Lopez de Lacalle and Mirella Lapata. 2013. Un-
supervised relation extraction with general domain
knowledge. In EMNLP.

John C. Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2011.
Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and
stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 12:2121–2159.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and the na-
ture of language. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 280(1):20–32.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by Gibbs sam-
pling. In ACL.

Kuzman Ganchev, Joao Graca, Jennifer Gillenwater, and
Ben Taskar. 2010. Posterior regularization for struc-
tured latent variable models. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 11:2001–2049.

Alberto Garcı́a-Durán, Antoine Bordes, and Nicolas
Usunier. 2014. Effective blending of two and three-
way interactions for modeling multi-relational data.
In European Conference on Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML-PKDD).

Lise Getoor and Ben Taskar. 2007. Introduction to sta-
tistical relational learning. MIT press.

Geoffrey E. Hinton. 1989. Connectionist learning proce-
dures. Artificial Intelligence, 40(1-3):185–234.

Tommi S. Jaakkola and Michael I. Jordan. 1996. Com-
puting upper and lower bounds on likelihoods in in-
tractable networks. In 12th Annual Conference on Un-
certainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI).

Rodolphe Jenatton, Nicolas Le Roux, Antoine Bordes,
and Guillaume Obozinski. 2012. A latent factor
model for highly multi-relational data. In NIPS.

Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. 2014. Auto-
encoding variational Bayes. In ICLR.

Diederik P. Kingma, Shakir Mohamed, Danilo Jimenez
Rezende, and Max Welling. 2014. Semi-supervised
learning with deep generative models. In NIPS.

Tamara G. Kolda and Brett W. Bader. 2009. Ten-
sor decompositions and applications. SIAM Review,
51(3):455–500.

243



Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. DIRT - discovery
of inference rules from text. In SIGKDD.

Chu-Cheng Lin, Waleed Ammar, Chris Dyer, and Lori S.
Levin. 2015a. Unsupervised POS induction with
word embeddings. In NAACL HLT.

Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Huan-Bo Luan, Maosong Sun,
Siwei Rao, and Song Liu. 2015b. Modeling relation
paths for representation learning of knowledge bases.
In EMNLP.

Xitong Liu, Fei Chen, Hui Fang, and Min Wang. 2014.
Exploiting entity relationship for query expansion in
enterprise search. Information Retrieval, 17(3):265–
294.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. In ICLR.

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky.
2009. Distant supervision for relation extraction with-
out labeled data. In ACL.

Ndapandula Nakashole and Tom M. Mitchell. 2014. Mi-
cro reading with priors: Towards second generation
machine readers. In AKBC at NIPS.

Ndapandula Nakashole, Gerhard Weikum, and Fabian M.
Suchanek. 2012. PATTY: A taxonomy of relational
patterns with semantic types. In EMNLP.

Maximilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, and Hans-Peter
Kriegel. 2011. A three-way model for collective
learning on multi-relational data. In ICML.

Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha. 2010. Latent variable models of
selectional preference. In ACL.

Hoifung Poon and Pedro M. Domingos. 2009. Unsuper-
vised semantic parsing. In EMNLP.

Deepak Ravichandran and Eduard H. Hovy. 2002.
Learning surface text patterns for a question answer-
ing system. In ACL.

Philip Resnik. 1997. Selectional preference and sense
disambiguation. In ACL SIGLEX Workshop on Tag-
ging Text with Lexical Semantics: Why, What, and
How.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Modeling relations and their mentions without
labeled text. In ECML-PKDD.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, Andrew McCallum, and
Benjamin M. Marlin. 2013. Relation extraction
with matrix factorization and universal schemas. In
NAACL.

Evan Sandhaus. 2008. The New York Times annotated
corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia,
6(12).

Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine. 2006. Preemp-
tive information extraction using unrestricted relation
discovery. In NAACL HLT.

Richard Socher, Danqi Chen, Christopher D. Manning,
and Andrew Y. Ng. 2013. Reasoning with neural ten-
sor networks for knowledge base completion. In NIPS.

Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: A core of semantic knowledge.
In WWW.

Mihai Surdeanu, Julie Tibshirani, Ramesh Nallapati, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2012. Multi-instance multi-
label learning for relation extraction. In EMNLP-
CoNLL.

Ilya Sutskever, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B.
Tenenbaum. 2009. Modelling relational data using
Bayesian clustered tensor factorization. In NIPS.

Idan Szpektor, Hristo Tanev, Ido Dagan, and Bonaven-
tura Coppola. 2004. Scaling web-based acquisition of
entailment relations. In EMNLP.

Ivan Titov and Ehsan Khoddam. 2015. Unsupervised in-
duction of semantic roles within a reconstruction-error
minimization framework. In NAACL.

Ivan Titov and Alexandre Klementiev. 2011. A Bayesian
model for unsupervised semantic parsing. In ACL.

Ledyard R. Tucker. 1966. Some mathematical
notes on three-mode factor analysis. Psychometrika,
31(3):279–311.

Tim Van de Cruys. 2010. A non-negative tensor fac-
torization model for selectional preference induction.
Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 16(4):417–
437.

Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008.
Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 9(2579-2605):85.

Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and
Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. 2008. Extracting and com-
posing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In
ICML.

Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Oksana Yakhnenko, and
Nicolas Usunier. 2013. Connecting language and
knowledge bases with embedding models for relation
extraction. In EMNLP.

Limin Yao, Aria Haghighi, Sebastian Riedel, and Andrew
McCallum. 2011. Structured relation discovery using
generative models. In EMNLP.

Limin Yao, Sebastian Riedel, and Andrew McCallum.
2012. Unsupervised relation discovery with sense dis-
ambiguation. In ACL.

Daojian Zeng, Kang Liu, Yubo Chen, and Jun Zhao.
2015. Distant supervision for relation extraction via
piecewise convolutional neural networks. In EMNLP.

244


