








































Visually Grounded and Textual Semantic Models Differentially Decode
Brain Activity Associated with Concrete and Abstract Nouns

Andrew J. Anderson
Brain & Cognitive Sciences

University of Rochester
aander41@ur.rochester.edu

Douwe Kiela
Computer Laboratory

University of Cambridge
dk427@cam.ac.uk

Stephen Clark
Computer Laboratory

University of Cambridge
sc609@cam.ac.uk

Massimo Poesio
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering

University of Essex
poesio@essex.ac.uk

Abstract

Important advances have recently been made
using computational semantic models to de-
code brain activity patterns associated with
concepts; however, this work has almost ex-
clusively focused on concrete nouns. How
well these models extend to decoding abstract
nouns is largely unknown. We address this
question by applying state-of-the-art compu-
tational models to decode functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) activity patterns,
elicited by participants reading and imagin-
ing a diverse set of both concrete and abstract
nouns. One of the models we use is linguistic,
exploiting the recent word2vec skipgram ap-
proach trained on Wikipedia. The second is
visually grounded, using deep convolutional
neural networks trained on Google Images.
Dual coding theory considers concrete con-
cepts to be encoded in the brain both linguisti-
cally and visually, and abstract concepts only
linguistically. Splitting the fMRI data accord-
ing to human concreteness ratings, we indeed
observe that both models significantly decode
the most concrete nouns; however, accuracy is
significantly greater using the text-based mod-
els for the most abstract nouns. More gener-
ally this confirms that current computational
models are sufficiently advanced to assist in
investigating the representational structure of
abstract concepts in the brain.

1 Introduction

Since the work of Mitchell et al. (2008), there has
been increasing interest in using computational se-
mantic models to interpret neural activity patterns

scanned as participants engage in conceptual tasks.
This research has almost exclusively focused on
brain activity elicited as participants comprehend
concrete nouns as experimental stimuli. Different
modelling approaches — predominantly distribu-
tional semantic models (Mitchell et al., 2008; De-
vereux et al., 2010; Murphy et al., 2012; Pereira et
al., 2013; Carlson et al., 2014) and semantic mod-
els based on human behavioural estimation of con-
ceptual features (Palatucci et al., 2009; Sudre et al.,
2012; Chang et al., 2010; Bruffaerts et al., 2013;
Fernandino et al., 2015) — have elucidated how dif-
ferent brain regions contribute to semantic represen-
tation of concrete nouns; however, how these results
extend to non-concrete nouns is unknown.

In computational modelling there has been in-
creasing importance attributed to grounding seman-
tic models in sensory modalities, e.g., Bruni et
al. (2014), Kiela and Bottou (2014). Andrews et
al. (2009) demonstrated that multi-modal models
formed by combining text-based distributional in-
formation with behaviourally generated conceptual
properties (as a surrogate for perceptual experience)
provide a better proxy for human-like intelligence.
However, both the text-based and behaviourally-
based components of their model were ultimately
derived from linguistic information. Since then, in
analyses of brain data, Anderson et al. (2013) have
applied multi-modal models incorporating features
that are truly grounded in natural image statistics to
further support this claim. In addition, Anderson et
al. (2015) have demonstrated that visually grounded
models describe brain activity associated with inter-
nally induced visual features of objects as the ob-

17

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 5, pp. 17–30, 2017. Action Editor: Daichi Mochihashi.
Submission batch: 2/2016; Revision batch: 7/2016; Published 1/2017.

c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license.



jects names are read and comprehended.
Having both image- and text-based models of se-

mantic representation, and neural activity patterns
associated with concrete and abstract nouns, enables
a natural test of Dual coding theory (Paivio, 1971).
Dual coding posits that concrete concepts are repre-
sented in the brain in terms of a visual and linguis-
tic code, whereas abstract concepts are only repre-
sented by a linguistic code. Whereas previous work
has demonstrated that image- and text-based seman-
tic models contribute to explaining neural activity
patterns associated with concrete nouns, it remains
unclear whether either text- or image-based seman-
tic models can decode neural activity patterns asso-
ciated with abstract words.

We extend previous work by applying image- and
text-based computational semantic models to de-
code an fMRI data set spanning a diverse set of
nouns of varying concreteness. The 70-word stim-
uli for the fMRI experiment (listed in Table 1) are
semantically structured according to taxonomic cat-
egories and domains embedded in WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998) and its extensions. Participants read
the noun and were instructed to imagine a situation
that they personally associate with the noun. In this
sense, the data solicited was targetting deep thought
patterns (deeper than might be anticipated for rapid
semantic processing required in conversations and
many real time interactions with the world). In the
analysis we split the fMRI data set into the most con-
crete and most abstract words based on behavioural
concreteness ratings. Our key contribution is in
demonstrating a decoding advantage for text-based
semantic models over the image-based models when
decoding the more abstract nouns. In line with the
previous results of Anderson et al. (2013) and An-
derson et al. (2015), both visual and textual models
decode the more concrete nouns.

The image- and text-based computational models
we use have recently been developed using neural
networks (Mikolov et al., 2013; Jia et al., 2014).
The image-based model is built using a deep con-
volutional neural network approach, similar in na-
ture to those recently used to study neural represen-
tations of visual stimuli (see Kriegeskorte (2015), al-
though note this is the first application to study word
elicited neural activation known to the authors). For
decoding we use a recently introduced algorithm

(Anderson et al., 2016) that abstracts the decoding
task to representational similarity space, and achieve
decoding accuracies on par with those convention-
ally achieved through discriminating concrete nouns
(and higher if we combine data to exploit group-
level regularities).

Because the fMRI experiments were performed in
Italian on native Italians, and because approximately
comparable text corpora in content were available in
English and Italian (English and Italian Wikipedia),
we were able to compare how well English and Ital-
ian text-based semantic models can decode neural
activity patterns. Whilst Italian Wikipedia could
reasonably be expected to be advantaged by sup-
porting culturally appropriate nuances of seman-
tic structure, it is disadvantaged by being consider-
ably smaller than English Wikipedia. Taking inspi-
ration from previous work exploiting cross-lingual
resources (Richman and Schone, 2008; Shi et al.,
2010; Darwish, 2013) we combined Italian and En-
glish text-based models in our decoding analyses in
an attempt to leverage the benefits of both.

Although combined language and English models
tended to yield marginally better decoding accura-
cies, there were no significant differences between
the different language models. Whilst we expect se-
mantic structure on a grand scale to broadly straddle
language boundaries for most concrete and abstract
concepts (albeit with cultural specificities), this is
proof of principle that cross linguistic commonali-
ties are reflected in neural activity patterns measur-
able with current technology.

2 Brain Data

We reanalyze the fMRI data originally collected by
Anderson et al. (2014), who investigated the rel-
evance of different taxonomic categories and do-
mains embedded in WordNet to the organization of
conceptual knowledge in the brain.

2.1 Word stimuli

Anderson et al. (2014) systematically selected a
list of 70 words intended to be representative of a
broad range of abstract and concrete nouns. These
were organised according to the domains of law and
music, cross-classified with seven taxonomic cate-
gories. They began by identifying low-concreteness

18



LAW MUSIC
Ur-abstracts giustizia justice musica music

liberta’ liberty blues blues
legge law jazz jazz
corruzione corruption canto singing
refurtiva loot punk punk

Attribute giurisdizione jurisdiction sonorita’ sonority
cittadinanza citizenship ritmo rhythm
impunita’ impunity melodia melody
legalita’ legality tonality’ tonality
illegalita illegality intonazione pitch

Communication divieto prohibition canzone song
verdetto verdict pentagramma stave
ordinanza decree ballata ballad
addebito accusation ritornello refrain
ingiunzione injunction sinfonia symphony

Event/action arresto arrest concerto concert
processo trial recital recital
reato crime assolo solo
furto theft festival festival
assoluzione acquital spettacolo show

Person/Social-role giudice judge musicista musician
ladro thief cantante singer
imputato defendant compositore composer
testimone witness chitarrista guitarist
avvocato lawyer tenore tenor

Location tribunale court/tribunal palco stage
carcere prison auditorium auditorium
questura police-station discoteca disco
penitenziario penitentiary conservatorio conservatory
patibolo gallows teatro theatre

Object/Tool manette handcuffs violino violin
toga robe tamburo drum
manganello truncheon tromba trumpet
cappio noose metronomo metronome
grimaldello skeleton-key radio radio

Table 1: Italian stimulus words and English translations, divided into law and music domains (columns), and taxo-
nomic categories (groups of 5 rows). The most concrete half of the words are indicated in bold font. Strike-throughs
indicate words for which we did not have semantic model coverage.

words in the norms of Barca et al. (2002). They then
linked these to WordNet to identify the taxonomic
category of the dominant sense of each word. Six
taxonomic categories that were heavily populated
with abstract words, as well as one unambiguously
concrete category, were chosen. All categories sup-
ported ample coverage of Law and Music domains
(determined according to WordNet Domains (Ben-
tivogli et al., 2004)). Five law words and five music
words were selected from each taxonomic category.
Taxonomic categories and example stimulus words
(translated into English) are as below:

Ur-abstract: Anderson et al.’s term for concepts
that are classified as abstract in WordNet but do not
belong to a clear subcategory, e.g., law or music. At-

tribute: A construct whereby objects or individuals
can be distinguished, e.g., legality, tonality. Com-
munication: Something that is communicated by,
to or between groups, e.g., accusation, symphony.
Event/action: Something that happens at a given
place and time, e.g., crime, festival. Person/Social-
role: Individual, someone, somebody, mortal, e.g.,
judge, musician. Location: Points or extents in
space, e.g., court, theatre. Object/Tool: A class of
unambiguously concrete nouns, e.g., handcuffs, vio-
lin.

The full list of stimuli is in Table 1. We split
the stimulus nouns into the 35 most concrete and
35 most abstract words according to the behavioural
concreteness ratings from Anderson et al. (2014).

19



2.2 fMRI Experiment

Participants Nine right-handed native Italian
speakers aged between 19 and 38 years (3 women)
were recruited to take part in the study. Two were
scanned after Anderson et al. (2014) to match the
number of participants analysed by Mitchell et al.
(2008). Scanning had previously been halted at 7 in-
stead of the planned 9 participants for a period due
to equipment failure. All had normal or corrected-
to-normal vision.

The 70 stimulus words were presented as written
words, in 5 runs (all runs were collected in one par-
ticipant visit), with the order of presentations ran-
domised across runs. In each run, a randomly se-
lected word was presented every 10 seconds, and re-
mained on screen for 3 seconds. On reading a stim-
ulus word, participants thought of a situation that
they individually associated with the noun. This pro-
cess is similar to previous concrete noun tasks, e.g.,
Mitchell et al. (2008), where participants were in-
structed to think of the properties of the noun. How-
ever, as people encounter difficulties eliciting prop-
erties of non-concrete concepts, compared to think-
ing of situations in which concepts played a role
(Wiemer-Hastings and Xu, 2005), the experimental
paradigm was adapted to imagining situations.

fMRI acquisition and preprocessing Anderson
et al. (2014) recorded fMRI images on a 4T Bruker
MedSpec MRI scanner. They used an Echo Planar
Imaging (EPI) pulse sequence with a 1000 msec rep-
etition time, an echo time of 33 msec, and a 26◦ flip
angle. A 64×64 acquisition matrix was used, and
17 slices were imaged with a between-slice gap of 1
mm. Voxels had dimensions of 3mm×3mm×5mm.
fMRI data were corrected for head motion, un-
warped, and spatially normalized to the Montreal
Neurological Institute and Hospital (MNI) template.
Only voxels estimated to be grey matter were in-
cluded in the subsequent analysis. For each partic-
ipant, for each scanning run (where a run is a com-
plete presentation of 70 words), voxel activity was
corrected by removing linear trend and transformed
to z scores (within each run). Each stimulus word
was represented as a single volume by taking the
voxel-wise mean of the 4 sec of data offset by 4
sec from the stimulus onset (to account for hemo-
dynamic response).

Voxel selection The 500 most stable grey mat-
ter voxels per participant were selected for analy-
sis. This was undertaken within the leave-2-word-
out decoding procedure detailed later in Section 4
using the same method as Mitchell et al. (2008):
Pearson’s correlation of each voxel’s activity be-
tween matched word lists in all scanning run pairs
(10 unique run pairs giving 10 correlation coeffi-
cients of 68/70 words, where the other 2 words were
test words to be decoded) was computed. The mean
coefficient was used as stability measure. Voxels as-
sociated with the 500 largest stability measures were
selected.

3 Semantic Models

3.1 Image-based semantic models

Following previous work in multi-modal semantics
(Bergsma and Van Durme, 2011; Kiela et al., 2014),
we obtain a total of 20 images for each of the stim-
ulus words from Google Images1. Images from
Google have been shown to yield representations
that are competitive in quality compared to alterna-
tive resources (Bergsma and Van Durme, 2011; Fer-
gus et al., 2005). Image representations are obtained
by extracting the pre-softmax layer from a forward
pass in a convolutional neural network (CNN) that
has been trained on the ImageNet classification task
using Caffe (Jia et al., 2014). This approach is simi-
lar to e.g., Kriegeskorte (2015), except that we only
use the pre-softmax layer, which has been found to
work particularly well in semantic tasks (Razavian
et al., 2014; Kiela and Bottou, 2014). Such CNN-
derived image representations have been found to be
of higher quality than traditional bag of visual words
models (Sivic and Zisserman, 2003) that were pre-
viously used in multi-modal semantics (Bruni et al.,
2014; Kiela and Bottou, 2014). We aggregate im-
ages associated with a stimulus word into an overall
visually grounded representation by taking the mean
of the individual image representations.

Image search for abstract nouns The validity
and success of the following analyses are depen-
dent on having built the image-based models from
a set of images that are indeed relevant to the ab-
stract words. The Google Image searches we used

1www.google.com/imghp

20



Figure 1: Representing brain and semantic model vectors
in similarity space.

to build the image-based models largely returned a
selection of images systematically associated with
our most abstract nouns. For instance, ‘corruption’
returns suited figures covertly exchanging money;
‘law’, ‘justice’, ‘music’, ‘tonality’ return pictures
of gavels, weighing scales, musical notes and cir-
cles of fifths, respectively. For ‘jurisdiction’, the
image search returns maps and law-related objects.
However, there were also misleading cases such as
‘pitch’ where the image search, whilst returning po-
tentially useful pictures of sinusoidal graphs, was
heavily contaminated by images of football pitches.
This problem is not exclusive to images, and the cur-
rent text-based models are also not immune to the
multiple senses of polysemous words.

3.2 Text-based semantic models

For linguistic input, we use the continuous vec-
tor representations from the skip-gram model of
Mikolov et al. (2013). Specifically, we obtained
300-dimensional word embeddings by training a
skip-gram model using negative sampling on recent
Italian and English Wikipedia dumps (using Gensim
with preprocessing from word2vec’s demo script).
For English, representations were built for the En-
glish translations of the 70 stimuli provided by An-
derson et al. (2014). The English model was trained
for 1 iteration, whereas the Italian was trained for 5,
since the Italian Wikipedia dump was smaller (5.2
vs 1.3 billion words respectively).

Following previous work exploiting cross-lingual
textual resources (Richman and Schone, 2008; Shi
et al., 2010; Darwish, 2013), we also applied Ital-
ian and English text-based models in combination.
Model combination was achieved at the analysis
stage, by fusing decoding outputs of Italian and En-
glish models as described in Section 4.1.

4 Representational similarity-based
decoding of brain activity

We decoded word-level fMRI representations using
the semantic models following the procedure intro-
duced by Anderson et al. (2016). The process of
matching models to words is abstracted to represen-
tational similarity space: For both models and brain
data, words are semantically re-represented by their
similarities to other words by correlating all word
pairs within the native model or brain space, using
Pearson’s correlation (see Figure 1). The result is
two square matrices of word pair correlations: one
for the fMRI data, another for the model. In the
similarity space, each word is a vector of correla-
tions with all other words, thereby allowing model
and brain words (similarity vectors) to be directly
matched to each other.

In decoding, models were matched to fMRI data
as follows (see Figure 2). Two test words were cho-
sen. The 500 voxels estimated to have the most
stable signal were selected using the strategy de-
scribed in Section 2.2. Voxel selection was based
on the fMRI data of the other 68/70 words. Se-
lection on 68/70 rather than all 70 words was to
allay any concern that voxel selection could have

21



systematically biased the fMRI correlation structure
(calculated next) to look like that of the semantic
model, and consequently biased decoding perfor-
mance. However, as similarity-based decoding does
not optimise a mapping between fMRI data and se-
mantic model, it is not prone to modelling and de-
coding fMRI noise as in classic cases of double dip-
ping (Kriegeskorte et al., 2009). Indeed, as we report
later in this section, there were no significant differ-
ences in decoding accuracy arising from tests using
voxel selection on 68/70 versus 70 words.

A single representation of each word was built by
taking the voxel-wise mean of all five presentations
of the word for the 500 selected voxels. An fMRI
similarity matrix for all 70 words was then calcu-
lated. Similarity vectors for the two test words were
drawn from both the model and fMRI similarity ma-
trices. Entries corresponding to the two test words
in both model and fMRI similarity vectors were re-
moved because these values could reveal the correct
answer to decoding. The two model similarity vec-
tors were then compared to the two fMRI similar-
ity vectors by correlation, resulting in four corre-
lation values. These correlation values were trans-
formed using Fisher’s r to z (arctanh). If the sum
of z-transformed correlations between the correctly
matched pair exceeded the sum of correlations for
the incongruent pair, decoding was scored a success,
otherwise a failure. This process was then repeated
for all word pairs, with the mean accuracy of all test
iterations giving a final measure of success.

Fisher’s r to z transform (arctanh) is typically used
to test for differences between correlation coeffi-
cients. It transforms the correlation coefficient r to
a value z, where z has amplified values at the tails
of the correlation coefficient (r otherwise ranges be-
tween -1 and 1). This is to make the sampling distri-
bution of z normally distributed, with approximately
constant variance values across the population corre-
lation coefficient. In the similarity-decoding method
used here, z is evaluated in decoding because it is a
more principled metric to compare and combine (as
later undertaken in Section 4.1)

However, under most circumstances r to z is not
critical to the procedure. z noticeably differs from r
only when correlations exceed .5, and r to z changes
decoding behaviour in select circumstances. Specif-
ically r to z can influence how word labels are as-

Figure 2: Similarity-decoding algorithm (adapted from
Anderson et al. 2016).

22



signed to similarity vectors by upweighting high
value correlation coefficients at the final stage of de-
coding.

A hypothetical scenario to illustrate the above
point is as follows. Let Pearson(X,Y) denote Pear-
son’s correlation of vectors X and Y, and brainA cor-
respond to a brain similarity vector “A” for an un-
known word label, and model1 to a semantic model
similarity vector for a known word label “1”. In the
final stage of analysis, there are two decoding alter-
natives given by (i) Pearson(brainA,model2)=.9 and
Pearson(brainB,model1)=.9, which when summed
gives 1.8; (ii) Pearson(brainA,model1)=.89, Pear-
son(brainB,model2)=.91. Here the sum is also 1.8
and therefore (i) and (ii) are identical. Applying
the r to z transform would result in selection of (ii)
because arctanh(.9)+arctanh(.9)=2.94, whereas arc-
tanh(.89)+arctanh(.91)=2.95.

Statistical significance of decoding accuracy was
determined by permutation testing. Decoding was
repeated multiple times using the following proce-
dure: creating a vector of word-label indices and
randomly shuffling these indices; applying the vec-
tor of shuffled indices to reorder both rows and
columns of only one of the similarity matrices
(whilst keeping the original correct row/column la-
bels so that word-labels now mismatch matrix con-
tents); and repeating the entire pair-matching decod-
ing procedure described above. If word labels are
randomly assigned to similarity vectors, we expect
a chance-level decoding accuracy of 50%. Repeti-
tion of this process (here 10,000 repeats) supplies a
null distribution of decoding accuracies achieved by
chance. The p-value of decoding accuracy is calcu-
lated as the proportion of chance accuracies that are
greater than or equal to the observed decoding accu-
racy.

For permutation testing only, voxel selection was
undertaken a single time, per participant, on all 70
words (rather than on 68/70 words in each leave-2-
out decoding iteration). This was to reduce com-
putation time that would otherwise have been pro-
hibitive. This is very unlikely to have yielded
any discernible difference in outcome. Unlike de-
coding strategies, that involve fitting a classifica-
tion/encoding model to fMRI data (and are prone
to fitting and subsequently decoding fMRI noise),
similarity-based decoding does not learn a mapping

between semantic-model and fMRI data and is ro-
bust to “double dipping” giving spurious decoding
accuracies (see Kriegeskorte et al. (2009) for prob-
lems associated with double dipping).

As an empirical demonstration, we reran all
of our 21 actual (non-permuted) model-based de-
coding analyses, that are reported later in Sec-
tion 5.2, whilst selecting voxels from all 70 words
(as opposed to leave-2-out voxel-selection on 68/70
words). Specifically, decoding analyses were re-
peated for all 7 model combinations, and tested first
on all words, then for the most concrete words only,
and finally the most abstract words only. Mean de-
coding accuracies for the 9 participants yielded with
and without leave-2-out voxel selection were com-
pared using paired t-tests. There were no significant
differences across all 21 tests. The most different
(non-significant) individual result was t=1.87, p=.09
(2-tailed), and in this case leave-2-out voxel selec-
tion gave the higher accuracy.

4.1 Model combination by ensemble averaging

To test whether the three different semantic mod-
els (image-based, Italian/English text-based) carried
complementary information, we combined the mod-
els in evaluation, thus allowing us to test whether
accuracies achieved using model combinations were
higher than those achieved with isolated models.

To combine the different models, we used an en-
semble averaging strategy and ran the similarity-
based decoding analyses as described above in par-
allel with each of the three semantic models. At
each leave-2-out test iteration, this gave three arc-
tanh transformed 2*2 correlation matrices (one for
each semantic model) that were used to evaluate de-
coding. Model combination was achieved by fusing
the respective arctanh transformed correlation ma-
trices by summing them together. Evaluation of the
resulting 2×2 summation matrix proceeded as previ-
ously by first summing the two congruent values on
the main-diagonal of the matrix, then summing the
two incongruent scores on the counter-diagonal. If
the congruent sum was greater than the incongruent
sum, decoding was a success, otherwise a failure.

23



5 Results

We split the stimulus nouns into the 35 most con-
crete and 35 most abstract words according to the
behavioural concreteness ratings from Anderson et
al. (2014), and ran analyses on all words combined
and these two subsets. Due to limitations in word
coverage of the semantic models, ‘melody’ was
missing from the abstract words, and ‘skeleton-key’
and ‘police-station’ were missing from the most
concrete words (hence 67/70 words were analysed).

5.1 Hypotheses

Dual coding theory (Paivio, 1971) leads to the fol-
lowing hypotheses: (1) The text-based models will
decode the more abstract nouns’ neural activity pat-
terns with higher accuracy than the image-based
model; (2) both image and text-based models will
decode the more concrete nouns’ neural activity.

We also compared the decoding accuracy for the
most concrete nouns achieved using the combined
image- and text-based models to the unimodal mod-
els in isolation. Whilst previous analyses have ob-
served advantages of multimodal models in describ-
ing concrete noun fMRI, it is not clear whether this
effect will carry over to our noun data set. One
reason is because many of the most concrete half
are “less concrete” than those of previous studies:
according to Brysbaert et al. (2014)’s concreteness
norms (where words were rated on a scale from 1 to
5), the mean ± SD rating of the 60 concrete nouns
analysed by Mitchell et al. (2008) (and subsequently
by Anderson et al. (2015)) is 4.87±.12, whereas
the mean ± SD of the “most concrete” nouns anal-
ysed in the current article, when tested with an inde-
pendent samples t-test, was significantly smaller at
4.42±.44 (t = 7.4, p < .0001, 2-tail). A second
reason is that the experimental task required par-
ticipants to imagine a situation associated with the
noun, rather than think of object properties. There-
fore this analysis was of a more exploratory nature.

5.2 Decoding Analysis

Decoding analyses were run using the image-based
model and Italian and English text-based models in
isolation, and also all combinations of these models
as described in Section 4. Results are in Figure 3.
In this section we use the abbreviations Img for the

image-based model and TXit and TXen, for the Ital-
ian and English text-based models, respectively.

In all tests, chance-level decoding accuracy (the
expected accuracy if word labelling is random) is
50%. Mean±SE accuracies across all participants
are displayed in the leftmost column of plots for
all 7 model combinations. Individual-level results
are displayed for only three model combinations to
avoid cluttering the graphs (Img only, the combined
TXit&TXen, and the combined Img&TXit&TXen).
To simplify the following discussion of results, we
mainly focus on these three models. The choice
to focus on TXit&TXen, rather than the Italian
model, was made following the rationale that the
language combination would leverage cultural nu-
ances of semantic structure found in the Italian text-
corpora jointly with the more extensive coverage of
the larger English Wikipedia. Although TXit&TXen
and TXen tended to produce higher decoding accu-
racies, there were no significant differences between
either TXit or TXen tested in isolation, or any model
combination incorporating them. Mean results are
displayed for all model combinations in Figure 3 and
key results are tabulated in Table 2.

5.3 An advantage for the textual model on
abstract nouns

With respect to hypothesis 1 (an advantage for the
text-based models decoding abstract neural activity
patterns), the key difference to observe in Figure 3
is the drop in relative decoding accuracy between
the image-based model and text-based models when
decoding the most abstract nouns. The nine partic-
ipant’s mean decoding accuracies for the most ab-
stract nouns were compared between the Img, TXit,
TXen and TXit&TXen models using Repeated Mea-
sures ANOVA. Combinations of image and text-
based models (e.g. Img&TXen) were not directly
relevant to this analysis (because they integrate vi-
sual and textual data) and consequently these mod-
els were excluded. Bartlett’s test was used to verify
that there was no evidence against homogeneity of
variances prior to analysis (χ2=1.77, p = .62). The
ANOVA indicated a statistically significant differ-
ence between models: F(3,24) = 5.06, p < .01. Post
hoc comparisons conducted using the Tukey Hon-
est Significant Difference (HSD) test revealed that
decoding accuracies achieved using TXen and the

24



40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Img

TXit & TXen

Img &TXit & TXen

p=.05

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Img

TXit & TXen

Img &TXit & TXen

p=.05

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Img

TXit & TXen

Img &TXit & TXen

p=.05

Figure 3: Results of the decoding analysis from Section 5.2. See also Table 2. p=.05 lines were empirically estimated
as described in Section 4 and apply to decoding an individual’s fMRI data (not multiple individuals).

25



All words combined Most concrete Most abstract
Img 67±3%, 7/9 (<.001) 70±3%, 7/9 (<.001) 58±4%, 2/9 (.07)

TXit&TXen 76±5%, 7/9 (<.001) 76±6%, 7/9 (<.001) 68±5%, 6/9 (<.001)
Img&TXit&TXen 77±5%, 8/9 (<.001) 77±5%, 8/9 (<.001) 68±5%, 5/9 (<.001)

Table 2: Key decoding accuracies from Section 5.2 (see also Figure 3). Each cell shows mean±SE decoding accuracy,
the number (n) of participants decoded at a level significantly above chance (p<.05), and in round brackets, the
cumulative binomial probability of achieving ≥ n significant results at p=.05.

TXit&TXen model were significantly different (and
larger than) Img (both p < .05). There were no other
significant differences (including between Img and
TXit). One possible reason for the weaker perfor-
mance of TXit than TXen is that Italian Wikipedia is
a less rich source of information due to being smaller
in size than English Wikipedia (despite it presum-
ably containing semantic information that is more
relevant to Italian culture).

5.4 Both image and text-based models decode
the more concrete nouns

That both image- and text-based models signifi-
cantly decoded the most concrete nouns is consis-
tent with hypothesis 2. To test for differences be-
tween image- and text-based models, mean decod-
ing accuracies for the nine participants on the most
concrete nouns were compared for the Img, TXit,
TXen and TXit&TXen models using Repeated Mea-
sures ANOVA. Combinations of image- and text-
based models (e.g. Img&TXen) were not directly
relevant to this analysis (because they integrate vi-
sual and textual data) and so these models were ex-
cluded. Bartlett’s test was used to verify homo-
geneity of variances prior to analysis (χ2 = 2.86,
p = .41). The ANOVA detected no statistically sig-
nificant differences between the models: F(3,24) =
1.56, p = .22. Therefore when decoding the most
concrete nouns there was no significant difference in
accuracy between image-based and any text-based
model.

5.5 No overall advantage for multimodal
models on the more concrete nouns

The third exploratory test compared the accuracy
of the multimodal combination of image- and text-
based models to the unimodal models when decod-
ing the more concrete neural activity patterns.

For the most concrete words, the highest scor-
ing combination across all models was Img&TXen
(mean±SE=77±4%). Whilst this proved to be sig-
nificantly greater than Img (t = 3.13, p <= .02,
df = 8, 2-tail), it was not significantly greater than
TXen (t = .81, p = .44, df = 8, 2-tail). Turning to
the analogous case for the Italian models, Img&TXit
(mean±SE=75±4%) was not significantly greater
than Img (t = 1.74, p = .12, df = 8, 2-tail),
or TXit (t = 1.09, p = 0.31, df = 8, 2-tail).
Therefore, although multimodal combinations re-
turned higher accuracies than either the image- and
text-based models in isolation (for concrete words),
decoding accuracy was not significantly higher than
either image- or text-based models.

Previous work decoding neural activity associated
with concrete nouns has found image-based mod-
els to supply complementary information to text-
based models (Anderson et al., 2015). We suggest
three reasons that image-based models may have
been disadvantaged in the current study compared
to these past analyses. Firstly, Anderson et al. fo-
cused on fMRI data elicited by unambiguously con-
crete nouns, whereas the experimental nouns anal-
ysed in the current article were mostly intended to
be ‘less than concrete’ (of the seven taxonomic cate-
gories investigated only ‘objects/tools’ was designed
to be unambiguously concrete). Secondly, Anderson
et al. used more images to build noun representa-
tions (on average 350 images per noun compared to
20 used here), and nouns in the ImageNet images
were segmented according to bounding boxes. Con-
sequently their input may have been less noisy than
Google Images (which we used because of its wider
coverage). Finally, the experimental task of the pre-
vious analyses required participants to actively think
about the properties of objects, whereas the current
data set was elicited as participants imagined situ-

26



ations associated with nouns (and hence may have
invoked neural representations with more contextual
elements).

The lack of a significant increase in decoding ac-
curacy achieved by pairing image- and text-based
models allows us to infer that the text-based model
contained many aspects of the visual semantic struc-
ture found in the image-based model. Of course we
expect modal structure in text-based models com-
mensurate with what people are inclined to report in
writing; e.g., it is easy to convey in text that both
bananas and lemons are yellow and curvy, and light-
bulbs and pears have similar shapes. Therefore we
would anticipate correspondences in semantic sim-
ilarities between image and text-based models and
for these correspondences to extend to match neural
similarities, e.g., as induced by participants viewing
pictures of objects (Carlson et al., 2014).

5.6 Group-level decoding analysis

The similarity-based decoding approach we have ap-
plied enables group-level neural representations to
be built simply by taking the mean similarity matrix
over participants. Values in the correlation matrix
were r to z (arctanh) transformed prior to averaging,
then the average values were back transformed to the
original range using tanh. This was because aver-
aging z-transformed values (and back transforming)
tends to yield less biased estimates of the population
value than averaging the raw coefficients (Silver and
Dunlap, 1987). However, in the current analysis re-
sults obtained with z-transformation versus without
it were virtually identical.

Building group-level representations by averag-
ing correlation matrices side-steps potential prob-
lems surrounding the obvious alternative method
of averaging data in fMRI space, where anatom-
ical/functional differences between different peo-
ples’ brains may result in relatively similar activity
patterns being spatially mismatched in the standard-
ised fMRI space. The motivation behind building
group-level neural representations is that we might
expect these to better match the computational se-
mantic models than individual-level data. This is
because the models are also built at group-level, cre-
ated from the photographs and text of many individ-
uals. However building group-level neural represen-
tations will only be beneficial if there exist group-

level commonalities in representational similarity
(when combining data will reduce noise) as opposed
to individual semantic representational schemes.

Accuracies achieved using models to decode the
group-level neural similarity matrices are displayed
in the final column of the bar charts at the right of
Figure 3. Specifically, decoding accuracies were:

For all words combined: Img=84.8%,
TXit&TXen=96.9% and Img&TXit&TXen=97.3%.

For the most concrete words: Img=87.5%,
TXit&TXen=95.8% and Img&TXit&TXen=95.8%.

For the most abstract words: Img=70.2%,
TXit&TXen=85.2% and Img&TXit&TXen=84.8%.

To statistically test whether group-level decod-
ing accuracies surpassed those of the individual-
level results, we compared the set of individual-
level mean accuracies to the corresponding group-
level mean accuracy using one sample t-tests. In
all tests (see Table 3) the individual-level accuracies
were significantly different (lower) than the group-
level accuracy (corrected for multiple comparisons
using false discovery rate (Benjamini and Hochberg,
1995)). This is indicative of group-level regularities
in semantic similarity for both concrete and abstract
nouns and also their combination.

A qualitative observation is that the differences
between group and individual-level accuracy appear
to be greater for concrete nouns. This could be con-
sistent with participants having a more subjective se-
mantic representation of abstract nouns; however we
did not attempt to statistically test this claim. This
is because a meaningful comparison would require
concrete and abstract words to be controlled by be-
ing at least equally discriminable at individual level
and this does not appear to be the case with this
dataset.

6 Conclusion

This article has demonstrated that neural activity
patterns elicited in mental situations of abstract
nouns can be decoded using text-based compu-
tational semantic models, thus demonstrating that
computational semantic models can make a con-
tribution to interpreting the semantic structure of
neural activity patterns associated with abstract
nouns. Furthermore, by comparing how well vi-
sually grounded and textual semantic models de-

27



All words combined Most concrete Most abstract
Img -5.6 (.004) -5.2 (.004) -3.0 (.02)

TXit&TXen -4.2 (.007) -3.6 (.010) -3.4 (.01)
Img&TXit&TXen -4.4 (.007) -3.9 (.008) -3.4 (.01)

Table 3: Results of one sample t-tests comparing the set of individual-level mean decoding accuracies to the group-
level accuracy (see Section 5.6). All tests were 2-tailed with df=8. The first number in each cell is the t-statistic, the
second number in round brackets is the p-value (corrected according to false discovery rate).

code brain activity associated with concrete or ab-
stract nouns, we have observed a selective advan-
tage for textual over visual models in decoding the
more abstract nouns. This has therefore provided
initial model-based brain decoding evidence that is
broadly in line with the predictions of dual coding
theory (Paivio, 1971). However, results should be
interpreted in light of the following two factors.

First, the dataset analysed was for a small sample
of 67 words, and it is reasonable to conjecture that
some of these words are also encoded in modalities
other than vision and language. For example, mu-
sical words may be encoded in acoustic and motor
features (see also Fernandino et al. (2015)). Future
work will be necessary to verify that the findings
generalise more broadly to words from domains be-
yond law and music. In work in progress the authors
are undertaking more focused analyses on the cur-
rent dataset, using textual, visual and newly devel-
oped audio semantic modes (Kiela and Clark, 2015)
to tease apart linguistic, visual and acoustic con-
tributions to semantic representation and how these
vary throughout different regions of the brain.

A second limitation of the current approach, as
pointed out by a reviewer, is that the Google im-
age search algorithm (the workings of which are un-
known to the authors) may not perform as well for
abstract words as it does for concrete words. Con-
sequently, the visual model may have been handi-
capped compared to the textual model when decod-
ing neural representations associated with more ab-
stract words. We have no current measure of the de-
gree of this effect, but it may be possible to alleviate
it in future work, by having participants manually
select images that they associate with abstract stim-
ulus words, and using computational representations
derived from these images in the analysis.

Secondary results are that we have exploited rep-

resentational similarity space to build group-level
neural representations which better match our inher-
ently group-level computational semantic models.
In so doing, this exposes group-level commonalities
in neural representation for both concrete and ab-
stract words. Such group-level representations may
prove both a useful test-bed for evaluating compu-
tational semantic models, as well as a potentially
useful information source to incorporate into com-
putational models (see Fyshe et al. (2014) for related
work).

Finally we have demonstrated that English and
Italian text-based models are roughly interchange-
able in our neural decoding task. That the En-
glish text-based model tended to return marginally
higher results on our Italian brain data than the Ital-
ian model provides a cautionary note for future stud-
ies wishing to use semantic models from different
languages to identify culturally specific aspects of
neural semantic representation e.g., as a follow up
to Zinszer et al. (2016). However we also note that
the English Wikipedia data was larger than the cor-
responding Italian corpus.

Acknowledgments

We thank three anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful comments and suggestions, Brian Murphy
for his involvement in the configuration, collection
and preprocessing of the original dataset, and Marco
Baroni and Elia Bruni for early conversations on
some of the ideas presented. Stephen Clark is sup-
ported by ERC Starting Grant DisCoTex (306920).

References

A. J. Anderson, E. Bruni, U. Bordignon, M. Poesio, and
M. Baroni. 2013. Of words, eyes and brains: Correlat-
ing image-based distributional semantic models with

28



neural representations of concepts. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 1960–1970, Seattle, WA.

A. J. Anderson, B. Murphy, and M. Poesio. 2014.
Discriminating taxonomic categories and domains in
mental simulations of concepts of varying concrete-
ness. J. Cognitive Neuroscience, 26(3):658–681.

A. J. Anderson, E. Bruni, A. Lopopolo, M. Poesio, and
M. Baroni. 2015. Reading visually embodied mean-
ing from the brain: Visually grounded computational
models decode visual-object mental imagery induced
by written text. NeuroImage, 120:309–322.

A. J. Anderson, B. D Zinszer, and R. D. S. Raizada.
2016. Representational similarity encoding for fMRI:
Pattern-based synthesis to predict brain activity using
stimulus-model-similarities. NeuroImage, 128:44–53.

M. Andrews, G. Vigliocco, and D. Vinson. 2009. In-
tegrating experiential and distributional data to learn
semantic representations. Psychological Review,
116(3):463–498.

L. Barca, C. Burani, and L. S. Arduino. 2002. Word
naming times and psycholinguistic norms for Italian
nouns. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 34:424–434.

Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg. 1995. Controlling the
false discovery rate: A practical and powerful ap-
proach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Sta-
tistical Society, Series B (Methodological), 57(1):289–
300.

L. Bentivogli, P. Forner, B. Magnini, and E. Pianta. 2004.
Revising the WordNet Domains Hierarchy: Seman-
tics, coverage, and balancing. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Multilingual Linguistic Resources, pages
101–108, Geneva, Switzerland.

S. Bergsma and B. Van Durme. 2011. Learning bilingual
lexicons using the visual similarity of labeled web im-
ages. In IJCAI, pages 1764–1769.

R. Bruffaerts, P. Dupont, R. Peeters, S. De Deyne,
G. Storms, and R. Vandenberghe. 2013. Similar-
ity of fMRI activity patterns in left perirhinal cortex
reflects similarity between words. J. Neuroscience,
33(47):18597–18607.

E. Bruni, N. K. Tran, and M. Baroni. 2014. Multimodal
distributional semantics. Journal of Artifical Intelli-
gence Research, 49:1–47.

M. Brysbaert, A. B. Warriner, and V. Kuperman. 2014.
Concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally known
English word lemmas. Behavior research methods,
46(3):904–911.

T. A. Carlson, R.A. Simmons, and N. Kriegeskorte.
2014. The emergence of semantic meaning in the
ventral temporal pathway. J. Cognitive Neuroscience,
26(1):120–131.

K. M. Chang, T. M. Mitchell, and M. A. Just. 2010.
Quantitative modeling of the neural representations of
objects: How semantic feature norms can account for
fMRI activation. NeuroImage: Special Issue on Mul-
tivariate Decoding and Brain Reading, 56:716–727.

K. Darwish. 2013. Named entity recognition using
cross-lingual resources: Arabic as an example. In
Proc. ACL, pages 1558–1567.

B. Devereux, C. Kelly, and A. Korhonen. 2010. Us-
ing fMRI activation to conceptual stimuli to evalu-
ate methods for extracting conceptual representations
from corpora. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT First
Workshop on Computational Neurolinguistics, pages
70–78, Los Angeles, USA.

C. Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

R. Fergus, L. Fei-Fei, P. Perona, and A. Zisserman.
2005. Learning object categories from Google’s im-
age search. In ICCV, pages 1816–1823.

L. Fernandino, C. J. Humphries, M. S. Seidenberg,
W. L. Gross, L. L. Conant, and J. R. Binder.
2015. Prediction of brain activation patterns as-
sociated with individual lexical concepts based on
five sensory-motor attributes. Neuropsycholigia.
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.04.009.

A. Fyshe, P. P. Talukdar, B. Murphy, and T. M. Mitchell.
2014. Interpretable semantic vectors from a joint
model of brain-and text-based meaning. In Proceed-
ings of ACL, pages 489–499, Baltimore, MD.

Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long,
R. B. Girshick, S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell. 2014.
Caffe: Convolutional architecture for fast feature em-
bedding. In ACM Multimedia, pages 675–678.

D. Kiela and L. Bottou. 2014. Learning image em-
beddings using convolutional neural networks for im-
proved multi-modal semantics. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 36–45, Doha, Qatar.

D. Kiela and S. Clark. 2015. Multi- and cross-modal
semantics beyond vision: Grounding in auditory per-
ception. In Proceedings of the Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing Conference (EMNLP
2015), pages 2461–2470, Lisbon, Portugal.

D. Kiela, F. Hill, A. Korhonen, and S. Clark. 2014. Im-
proving multi-modal representations using image dis-
persion: Why less is sometimes more. In Proceedings
of ACL 2014.

N. Kriegeskorte, W. K. Simmons, P. S. F. Bellgowan, and
C. I. Baker. 2009. Circular analysis in systems neuro-
science: The dangers of double dipping. Nature Neu-
roscience, 12:535–540.

N. Kriegeskorte. 2015. Deep neural networks: A new
framework for modeling biological vision and brain
information processing. Annual Review of Vision Sci-
ence, 1:417–446.

29



T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean. 2013.
Efficient estimation of word representations in vector
space. In Proceedings of ICLR, Scottsdale, Arizona,
USA.

T. M. Mitchell, S. V. Shinkareva, A. Carlson, K.-M.
Chang, V. L. Malave, R. A. Mason, and M. A. Just.
2008. Predicting human brain activity associated with
the meaning of nouns. Science, 320:1191–1195.

B. Murphy, P. Talukdar, and T. Mitchell. 2012. Selecting
corpus-semantic models for neurolinguistic decoding.
In Proceedings of the First Joint Conference on Lexi-
cal and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 114–
123, Montreal, Canada.

A Paivio, editor. 1971. Imagery and verbal processes.
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York.

M. Palatucci, D. Pomerleau, G. Hinton, and T. Mitchell.
2009. Zero-shot learning with semantic output codes.
Neural Information Processing Systems, 22:1410–
1418.

F. Pereira, M. Botvinick, and G. Detre. 2013. Using
Wikipedia to learn semantic feature representations of
concrete concepts in neuroimaging experiments. Artif.
Intell., 194:240–252.

A. S. Razavian, H. Azizpour, J. Sullivan, and S. Carls-
son. 2014. CNN features off-the-shelf: An astound-
ing baseline for recognition. In IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops
2014, pages 512–519.

A. E. Richman and P. Schone. 2008. Mining wiki re-
sources for multilingual named entity recognition. In
Proc. ACL.

L. Shi, R. Mihalcea, and M. Tian. 2010. Cross-
language text classification by model translation and
semi-supervised learning. In Proc. EMNLP.

N. C. Silver and W. P. Dunlap. 1987. Averaging correla-
tion coefficients: Should Fisher’s z transformation be
used? J. Applied Psychology, 72(1):146–148.

J. Sivic and A. Zisserman. 2003. Video google: A text
retrieval approach to object matching in videos. In
ICCV, pages 1470–1477.

G. Sudre, D. Pomerleau, M. Palatucci, L. Wehbe,
A. Fyshe, R. Salmelin, and T. Mitchell. 2012. Track-
ing neural coding of perceptual and semantic features
of concrete nouns. NeuroImage, 62:451–463.

K. Wiemer-Hastings and X. Xu. 2005. Content differ-
ences for abstract and concrete concepts. Cognitive
Science, 29:719–736.

B. D. Zinszer, A. J. Anderson, O. Kang, T. Wheatley, and
R. D. S. Raizada. 2016. Semantic structural align-
ment of neural representational spaces enables transla-
tion between English and Chinese words. J. Cognitive
Neuroscience, 28(11):1749–1759.

30


