








































Representation Learning for Grounded Spatial Reasoning

Michael Janner, Karthik Narasimhan, and Regina Barzilay
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{janner, karthikn, regina}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract

The interpretation of spatial references is
highly contextual, requiring joint inference
over both language and the environment. We
consider the task of spatial reasoning in a sim-
ulated environment, where an agent can act
and receive rewards. The proposed model
learns a representation of the world steered by
instruction text. This design allows for pre-
cise alignment of local neighborhoods with
corresponding verbalizations, while also han-
dling global references in the instructions. We
train our model with reinforcement learning
using a variant of generalized value itera-
tion. The model outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches on several metrics, yielding a 45%
reduction in goal localization error.1

1 Introduction

Understanding spatial references in natural language
is essential for successful human-robot communica-
tion and autonomous navigation. This problem is
challenging because interpretation of spatial refer-
ences is highly context-dependent. For instance, the
instruction “Reach the cell above the westernmost
rock” translates into different goal locations in the
two environments shown in Figure 1. Therefore,
to enable generalization to new, unseen worlds, the
model must jointly reason over the instruction text
and environment configuration. Moreover, the rich-
ness and flexibility in verbalizing spatial references
further complicates interpretation of such instruc-
tions.

1Code and dataset are available at https://github.
com/JannerM/spatial-reasoning

Reach the cell above the westernmost rock

Figure 1: Sample 2D worlds and an instruction de-
scribing a goal location. The optimal path from a
common start position, denoted by a white dashed
line, varies considerably with changes in the map
layout.

In this paper, we explore the problem of spa-
tial reasoning in the context of interactive worlds.
Specifically, we assume access to a simulated envi-
ronment, in which an agent can take actions to inter-
act with the world and is rewarded for reaching the
location specified by the language instruction. This
feedback is the only source of supervision the model
uses for interpreting spatial references.

The key modeling task here is to induce a repre-
sentation that closely ties environment observations
and linguistic expressions. In prior work, this issue
was addressed by learning representations for each
modality and then combining them, for instance,
with concatenation (Misra et al., 2017). While this
approach captures high-level correspondences be-
tween instructions and maps, it does not encode de-

49

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 6, pp. 49–61, 2018. Action Editor: Hal Daumé III.
Submission batch: 7/2017; Revision batch: 10/2017; Published 1/2018.

c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license.



tailed, lower-level mappings between specific posi-
tions on the map and their descriptions. As our ex-
periments demonstrate, combining the language and
environment representations in a spatially localized
manner yields significant performance gains on the
task.

To this end, our model uses the instruction text to
drive the learning of the environment representation.
We start by converting the instruction text into a real-
valued vector using a recurrent neural network with
LSTM cells (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997).
Using this vector as a kernel in a convolution opera-
tion, we obtain an instruction-conditioned represen-
tation of the state. This allows the model to reason
about immediate local neighborhoods in references
such as “two cells to the left of the triangle”. We
further augment this design to handle global refer-
ences that involve information concerning the entire
map (e.g. “the westernmost rock”). This is achieved
by predicting a global value map using an additional
component of the instruction representation. The en-
tire model is trained with reinforcement learning us-
ing the environmental reward signal as feedback.

We conducted our experiments using a 2D virtual
world as shown in Figure 1. Overall, we created
over 3,300 tasks across 200 maps, with instructions
sourced from Mechanical Turk. We compare our
model against two state-of-the-art systems adapted
for our task (Misra et al., 2017; Schaul et al., 2015).
The key findings of our experiments are threefold.
First, our model can more precisely interpret instruc-
tions than baseline models and find the goal location,
yielding a 45% reduction in Manhattan distance er-
ror over the closest competitor. Second, the model
can robustly generalize across new, unseen map lay-
outs. Finally, we demonstrate that factorizing the
instruction representation enables the model to sus-
tain high performance when handling both local and
global references.

2 Related Work

Spatial reasoning in text This topic has attracted
both theoretical and practical interest. From the lin-
guistic and cognitive perspectives, research has fo-
cused on the wide range of mechanisms that speak-
ers use to express spatial relations (Tenbrink, 2007;
Viethen and Dale, 2008; Byrne and Johnson-Laird,

1989; Li and Gleitman, 2002). The practical impli-
cations of this research are related to autonomous
navigation (Moratz and Tenbrink, 2006; Levit and
Roy, 2007; Tellex et al., 2011) and human-robot in-
teraction (Skubic et al., 2004).

Previous computational approaches include tech-
niques such as proximity fields (Kelleher et al.,
2006), spatial templates (Levit and Roy, 2007) and
geometrically defined mappings (Moratz and Ten-
brink, 2006; Kollar et al., 2010). More recent work
in robotics has integrated text containing position in-
formation with spatial models of the environment to
obtain accurate maps for navigation (Walter et al.,
2013; Hemachandra et al., 2014). Most of these ap-
proaches typically assume access to detailed geome-
try or other forms of domain knowledge. In contrast
to these knowledge-rich approaches, we are learn-
ing spatial reference via interaction with the envi-
ronment, acquiring knowledge of the environment
in the process.

Instruction following Spatial reasoning is a com-
mon element in many papers on instruction follow-
ing (MacMahon et al., 2006; Vogel and Jurafsky,
2010; Chen and Mooney, 2011; Artzi and Zettle-
moyer, 2013; Kim and Mooney, 2013; Andreas and
Klein, 2015). As a source of supervision, these
methods assume access to demonstrations, which
specify the path corresponding with provided in-
structions. In our setup, the agent is only driven
by the final rewards when the goal is achieved.
This weaker source of supervision motivates devel-
opment of new techniques not considered in prior
work.

More recently, Misra et al. (2017) proposed a
neural architecture for jointly mapping instructions
and visual observations (pixels) to actions in the
environment. Their model separately induces text
and environment representations, which are concate-
nated into a single vector that is used to output an
action policy. While this representation captures
coarse correspondences between the modalities, it
doesn’t encode mappings at the level of local neigh-
borhoods, negatively impacting performance on our
task.

Universal value functions The idea of general-
ized value functions has been explored before in
Schaul et al. (2015). The technique, termed UVFA,

50



presents a clever trick of factorizing the value func-
tion over states and goals using singular value de-
composition (SVD) and then learning a regression
model to predict the low-rank vectors. This results in
quick and effective generalization to all goals in the
same state space. However, their work stops short
of exploring generalization over map layouts, which
our model is designed to handle. Furthermore, our
setup also involves specifying goals using natural
language instructions, which is different from the
coordinate-style specification used in that work.

3 General Framework

Task setup We model our task as a Markov Deci-
sion Process (MDP), where an autonomous agent is
placed in an interactive environment with the capa-
bility to choose actions that can affect the world. A
goal is described in text, and rewards are available
to the agent correspondingly. The MDP can be rep-
resented by the tuple 〈S,A,X, T,R〉, where S is the
set of all possible state configurations,A is the set of
actions available to the agent, X is the set of all goal
specifications2 in natural language, T (s′|s, a, x) is
the transition distribution, and R(s, x) is the reward
function. A state s ∈ S includes information such
as the locations of different entities along with the
agent’s own position. In this work, T is determin-
istic in the environments considered; however, our
methods also apply in the stochastic case.

Text instructions Prior work has investigated hu-
man usage of different types of referring expres-
sions to describe spatial relations (Levinson, 2003;
Viethen and Dale, 2008). In order to build a ro-
bust instruction following system, we examine sev-
eral categories of spatial expressions that exhibit the
wide range of natural language goal descriptions.
Specifically, we consider instructions that utilize ob-
jects/entities present in the environment to describe
a goal location. These instructions can be catego-
rized into three groups:

(a) Text referring to a specific entity (e.g., “Go to
the circle”).

(b) Text specifying a location using a single refer-

2We will use the terms goal specifications and instructions
interchangeably.

ent entity (e.g., “Reach the cell above the west-
ernmost rock”).

(c) Text specifying a location using multiple refer-
ent entities (e.g., “Move to the goal two squares
to the left of the heart and top right of house”).

These three categories exemplify an increasing level
of complexity, with the last one having multiple lev-
els of indirection.

In each category, we have both local and global
references to objects. Local references require an
understanding of spatial prepositional phrases such
as ‘above’, ‘in between’ and ‘next to’ in order to de-
termine the precise goal location. This comprehen-
sion is invariant to the global position of the object
landmark(s) provided in the instruction. A global
reference, on the other hand, contains superlatives
such as ‘easternmost’ and ‘topmost’, which require
reasoning over the entire map. For example, in the
case of (a) above, a local reference would describe
a unique object3 (e.g., “Go to the circle”), whereas
a global reference might require comparing the po-
sitions of all objects of a specific type (e.g., “Go to
the northernmost tree”).

A point to note is that we do not assume any ac-
cess to mapping from instructions to objects or enti-
ties in the worlds or a knowledge of spatial ontology
– the system has to learn this entirely through feed-
back from the environment.

Generalized Value Iteration Learning to reach
the goal while maximizing cumulative reward can
be done by using a value function V (s) (Sutton and
Barto, 1998) which represents the agent’s notion of
expected future reward from state s. A popular al-
gorithm to learn an optimal value function is Value
Iteration (VI) (Bellman, 1957), which uses the tech-
nique of dynamic programming.

In the standard Bellman equation, the value func-
tion is dependent solely on state. Schaul et al. (2015)
proposed a value function V (s, g) describing the ex-
pected reward from being in state s given goal g,
capturing that state values are goal-dependent and
that a single environment can offer many such goals.
We also make use of such a generalized value func-
tion, although our goals are not observed directly as

3A local reference for a non-unique object would be am-
biguous, of course.

51



Figure 2: A schematic depiction of our model. Text instructions are represented as a vector h(t) and states
as embeddings φ(s). A portion of the text representation is used as a convolutional kernel on φ(s), giving a
text-conditioned local state representation z1. The remaining components are used as coefficients in a linear
combination of gradient functions to give a global map-level representation z2. z1 and z2 are concatenated
and input to a convolutional neural network to predict the final value map.

coordinate locations or states themselves but rather
described in natural language. With x denoting a
textual description of a goal, our VI update equa-
tions are:

Q(s, a, x) = R(s, x) + γ
∑

s′∈S
T (s′|s, a, x)V (s′, x)

(1)V (s, x) = max
a

Q(s, a, x)

where Q is the action-value function, tracking the
value of choosing action a in state s. Once an opti-
mal value function is learned, a straightforward ac-
tion policy is:

(2)π(s, x) = arg max
a

Q(s, a, x)

4 Model

Generalization over both environment configura-
tions and text instructions requires a model that
meets two desiderata. First, it must have a flexible
representation of goals, one which can encode both
the local structure and global spatial attributes inher-
ent to natural language instructions. Second, it must
be compositional; the representation of language
should be generalizable even though each unique in-
struction will only be observed with a single map
during training. Namely, the learned representation
for a given instruction should still be useful even if
the objects on a map are rearranged or the layout is
changed entirely.

To that end, our model combines the textual in-
structions with the map in a spatially localized man-
ner, as opposed to prior work which joins goal repre-
sentations and environment observations via simpler
functions like an inner product (Schaul et al., 2015).
While our approach can more effectively learn local
relations specified by language, it cannot naturally
capture descriptions at the global environment level.
To address this problem, we also use the language
representation to predict coefficients for a basis set
of gradient functions which can be combined to en-
code global spatial relations.

More formally, inputs to our model (see Figure 2)
consist of an environment observation s and textual
description of a goal x. For simplicity, we will as-
sume s to be a 2D matrix, although the model can
easily be extended to other input representations.
We first convert s to a 3D tensor by projecting each
cell to a low-dimensional embedding (φ) as a func-
tion of the objects contained in that cell. In parallel,
the text instruction x is passed through an LSTM
recurrent neural network (Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber, 1997) to obtain a continuous vector represen-
tation h(x). This vector is then split into local and
global components h(x) = [h1(x);h2(x)]. The lo-
cal component, h2(x), is reshaped into a kernel to
perform a convolution operation on the state embed-
ding φ(s) (similar to Chen et al. (2015)):

(3)z1 = ψ1(φ(s);h2(x))

Meanwhile, the three-element global component

52



Algorithm 1 Training Procedure
1: Initialize experience memory D
2: Initialize model parameters Θ
3: for epoch=1,M do
4: Sample instruction x∈X and associated environ-

ment E
5: Predict value map V̂ (s,x;Θ) for all s∈E
6: Choose start state s0 randomly
7: for t=1,N do
8: Select at=argmax

a

∑
s
T (s|st−1,a)V̂ (s,x;Θ)

9: Observe next state st and reward rt
10: Store trajectory (s=s0,s1,...,r=r0,r1,...) in D
11: for j=1,J do
12: Sample random trajectory (s,r) from D
13: Perform gradient descent step on loss L(θ)

h1(x) is used to form the coefficients for a vertical
and horizontal gradient along with a corresponding
bias term.4 The gradients, denoted G1 and G2 in
Figure 2, are matrices of the same dimensionality
as the state observation with values increasing down
the rows and along the columns, respectively. The
axis-aligned gradients are weighted by the elements
of h1(x) and summed to give a final global gradi-
ent spanning the entire 2D space, analogous to how
steerable filters can be constructed for any orienta-
tion using a small set of basis filters (Freeman and
Adelson, 1991):

(4)z2 = h1(x)[1] ·G1+h1(x)[2] ·G2+h1(x)[3] ·J

in which J is the all-ones matrix also of the same
dimensionality as the observed map.

Finally, the local and global information maps are
concatenated into a single tensor, which is then pro-
cessed by a convolutional neural network (CNN)
with parameters θ to approximate the generalized
value function:

(5)V̂ (s, x) = ψ2([z1; z2]; θ)

for every state s in the map.

Reinforcement Learning Given our model’s
V̂ (s, x) predictions, the resulting policy (Equa-
tion 2) can be enacted, giving a continuous trajectory
of states {st, st+1, . . .} on a single map and their
associated rewards {rt, rt+1, . . .} at each timestep

4Note that we are referring to gradient filters here, not the
gradient calculated during backpropagation in deep learning.

t. We stored entire trajectories (as opposed to state
transition pairs) in a replay memory D as described
in Mnih et al. (2015). The model is trained to pro-
duce an accurate value estimate by minimizing the
following objective:

(6)

L(Θ) = Es∼D
[
V̂ (s, x; Θ)−

(
R(s, x) +

γmax
a

∑

s′
T (s′|s, a)V̂ (s′, x; Θ−)

)]2

where s is a state sampled from D, γ is the discount
factor, Θ is the set of parameters of the entire model,
and Θ− is the set of parameters of a target network
copied periodically from our model. The complete
training procedure is shown in Algorithm 1.

5 Experimental Setup

Puddle world navigation data In order to study
generalization across a wide variety of environmen-
tal conditions and linguistic inputs, we develop an
extension of the puddle world reinforcement learn-
ing benchmark (Sutton, 1996; Mankowitz et al.,
2016). States in a 10×10 grid are first filled with ei-
ther grass or water cells, such that the grass forms
one connected component. We then populate the
grass region with six unique objects which appear
only once per map (triangle, star, diamond, circle,
heart, and spade) and four non-unique objects (rock,
tree, horse, and house) which can appear any num-
ber of times on a given map. See Figure 1 for an
example visualization.

Split Local Global

Train 1566 1071
Test 399 272

Table 1: Overall statistics of our dataset.

Goal positions are chosen uniformly at random
from the set of grass cells, encouraging the use
of spatial references to describe goal locations
which do not themselves contain a unique object.
We used the Mechanical Turk crowdsourcing plat-
form (Buhrmester et al., 2011) to collect natural lan-
guage descriptions of these goals. Human annota-
tors were asked to describe the positions of these

53



• Reach the horse below the rock and to the left of
the green diamond

• Move to the square two below and one left of the
star

• Go to the cell above the bottommost horse

Figure 3: Example goal annotations collected with
Mechanical Turk.

goals using surrounding objects. At the end of each
trial, we asked the same participants to provide goal
locations given their own text instructions. This
helped filter out a majority of instructions that were
ambiguous or ill-specified. Table 1 provides some
statistics on the data, and Figure 3 shows example
annotations. In total, we collected 3308 instructions,
ranging from 2 to 43 words in length, describing
over 200 maps. There are 361 unique words in the
annotated instructions. We do not perform any pre-
processing on the raw annotations.

It is plausible that a model designed to handle
only local references could not handle global ones
(consider our own model without the global gradi-
ent maps). For clearer interpretation of results, we
evaluate our model in two modes: trained and tested
on local and global data separately, or as a combined
dataset. While local instructions were obtained eas-
ily, the global instructions were collected by design-
ing a task in which only nonunique objects were pre-
sented to the annotators.5 This precluded simple in-
structions like “go left of the 〈object〉” because there
would always be more than one of each object type.
Therefore, we obtained text with global properties
(e.g. middle rock, leftmost tree) to sufficiently pin-
point an object. On average, we collected 31 unique
local instructions and 10 unique global instructions
per map.

To quantify the diversity of our dataset, we find
the five nearest instructions in the training set for
every instruction in the test set, as measured by edit
distance (using the word as a unit) normalized by
test instruction length. For each of these pairs, we
also measure the Manhattan distance between their
corresponding goal locations. Figure 4, which visu-

5The other objects were added back into the map after col-
lecting the instruction.

Figure 4: A heatmap showing the normalized in-
struction edit distance and goal Manhattan distance
corresponding to the most similar instructions be-
tween the train and test set. For each instruction in
the test set, we find the five most similar instructions
in the training set. Even for those instructions which
are similar, the goal locations they describe can be
far apart.

alizes this analysis, underscores the difficulty of this
task; even when two instructions are highly similar,
they might correspond to entirely different target lo-
cations. This is the case in the example in Figure 1,
which has a distance of four between the references
goals.

Baselines We compare our model to the following
baselines:

UVFA (text) is a variant of the model described
in (Schaul et al., 2015) adapted for our task. The
original model made use of two MLPs to learn low
dimensional embeddings of states and goals which
were then combined via dot product to give value
estimates. Goals were represented either as (x, y)
coordinates or as states themselves. As our goals
are not observed directly but described in text, we
replace the goal MLP with the same LSTM as in our
model. The state MLP has an identical architecture
to that of the UVFA: two hidden layers of dimension
128 and ReLU activations. For consistency with the
UVFA, we represent states as binary vectors denot-
ing the presence of each type of object at every po-
sition.

CNN + LSTM is a variant of the model described
in Misra et al. (2017), who developed it for a
language-grounded block manipulation task. It first
convolves the map layout to a low-dimensional rep-

54



Figure 5: Reward achieved by our model and the two baselines on the training environments during re-
inforcement learning on both local and global instructions. Each epoch corresponds to simulation on 500
goals, with a goal simulation terminating either when the agent reaches the goal state or has taken 75 actions.

resentation (as opposed to the MLP of the UVFA)
and concatenates this to the LSTM’s instruction em-
bedding (as opposed to a dot product). These con-
catenated representations are then input to a two-
layer MLP.

We also perform analysis to study the represen-
tational power of our model, introducing two more
comparison models:

UVFA (pos) is the original UVFA model from
(Schaul et al., 2015), which we evaluate on our mod-
ified puddle worlds to determine the difficulty of
environment generalization independently from in-
struction interpretation.

Our model (w/o gradient) is an ablation of our
model without the global gradient maps, which
allows us to determine the gradients’ role in
representation-building.

In additional to our reinforcement learning ex-
periments, we train these models in a supervised
setting to isolate the effects of architecture choices
from other concerns inherent to reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms. For this purpose, we constructed a
dataset of ground-truth value maps for all human-
annotated goals using value iteration. We use the
models to predict value maps for the entire grid and
minimize the mean squared error (MSE) compared
to the ground truth values:

(7)L′(Θ) =
∑

(s,x)

[V̂ (s, x; Θ)− V̄ (s, x)]2

5.1 Implementation details

Our model implementation uses an LSTM with a
learnable 15-dimensional embedding layer, 30 hid-
den units, 8-dimensional embeddings φ(s), and a
3x3 kernel applied to the embeddings, giving a di-
mension of 72 for h2(t). The final CNN has layers
of {3, 6, 12, 6, 3, 1} channels, all with 3x3 kernels
and padding of length 1 such that the output value
map prediction is equal in size to the input observa-
tion. For each map, a reward of 3 is given for reach-
ing the correct goal specified by human annotation
and a reward of −1 is given for falling in a puddle
cell. The only terminal state is when the agent is at
the goal. Rewards are discounted by a factor of 0.95.
We use Adam optimization (Kingma and Ba, 2015)
for training all models.

6 Results

We present empirical results on two different
datasets - our annotated puddle world and an exist-
ing block navigation task (Bisk et al., 2016).

6.1 Puddle world navigation

Comparison with the state-of-the-art We first
investigate the ability of our model to learn solely
from environment simulation. Figure 5 shows the
discounted reward achieved by our model as well
as the two baselines for both instruction types. In
both experiments, our model is the only one of the

55



Local Global Combined

Policy Quality Distance Policy Quality Distance Policy Quality Distance

UVFA (text) 0.56 4.71 0.62 6.28 0.61 5.06

CNN + LSTM 0.80 5.73 0.82 6.13 0.82 5.67

Our model 0.87 2.18 0.90 3.35 0.89 3.04

Table 2: Performance of models trained via reinforcement learning on a held-out set of environments and
instructions. Policy quality is the true expected normalized reward and distance denotes the Manhattan
distance from goal location prediction to true goal position. We show results from training on the local and
global instructions both separately and jointly.

Local Global

MSE Policy Quality Distance MSE Policy Quality Distance

UVFA (pos) 1.30 0.48 4.96 1.04 0.52 5.39

UVFA (text) 3.23 0.57 4.97 1.9 0.62 5.31

CNN + LSTM 0.42 0.86 4.08 0.43 0.83 4.18

Our model (w/o gradient) 0.25 0.94 2.39 0.61 0.87 5.15
Our model 0.25 0.94 2.34 0.41 0.89 3.81

Table 3: Performance on a test set of environments and instructions after supervised training. Lower is
better for MSE and Manhattan distance; higher is better for policy quality. The gradient basis significantly
improves the reconstruction error and goal localization of our model on global instructions, and expectedly
does not affect its performance on local instructions.

three to achieve an average nonnegative reward after
convergence (0.88 for local instructions and 0.49 for
global instructions), signifying that the baselines do
not fully learn how to navigate through these envi-
ronments.

Following Schaul et al. (2015), we also evaluated
our model using the metric of policy quality. This is
defined as the expected discounted reward achieved
by following a softmax policy of the value predic-
tions. Policy quality is normalized such that an op-
timal policy has a score of 1 and a uniform random
policy has a score of 0. Intuitively, policy quality
is the true normalized expectation of score over all
maps in the dataset, instructions per map, and start
states per map-instruction pair. Our model outper-
forms both baselines on this metric as well on the
test maps (Table 2). We also note that the perfor-

mance of the baselines flip with respect to each other
as compared to their performance on the training
maps (Figure 5). While the UVFA variant learned
a better policy on the train set, it did not generalize
to new environments as well as the CNN + LSTM.

Finally, given the nature of our environments, we
can use the predicted value maps to infer a goal lo-
cation by taking the position of the maximum value.
We use the Manhattan distance from this predicted
position to the actual goal location as a third met-
ric. The accuracy of our model’s goal predictions is
more than twice that of the baselines on local refer-
ences and roughly 45% better on global references.

Analysis of learned representations For the rep-
resentation analysis in a supervised setting, we com-
pared the predicted value maps of all models against

56



Figure 6: Value map predictions for two environments paired with two instructions each. Despite the dif-
ference in instructions, with one being global and the other local in nature and sharing no objects in their
descriptions, they refer to the same goal location in the environment in (a). However, in (b), the descriptions
correspond to different locations on the map. The vertical axis considers variance in goal location for the
same instruction, depending on the map configuration.

the unseen test split of maps. Table 3 shows the re-
sults of this study. As expected, our model with-
out the global gradient performs no differently from
the full model on local references, but has higher
MSE and average distances to true goal than the full
model on global references. We also note that UVFA
(pos) performs much worse than both CNN+LSTM
and our model, showing the difficulty of environ-
ment generalization even when the goals are ob-
served directly. (The original UVFA paper (Schaul
et al., 2015) demonstrated effective generalization
over goal states within a single environment.)

Surprisingly, our model trained via reinforcement
learning has more precise goal location predictions
(as measured via Manhattan distance) than when
trained on true state values in a supervised manner.
However, the MSE of the value predictions are much
higher in the RL setting (e.g., 0.80 vs 0.25 for super-
vised on local instructions). This shows that despite
the comparative stability of the supervised setting,
minimization of value prediction error does not nec-

essarily lend itself to the best policy or goal local-
ization. Conversely, having a higher MSE does not
always imply a worse policy, as seen also in the per-
formance of the two UVFA variants in Table 3.

Generalization One of the criteria laid out for our
model was its ability to construct language repre-
sentations and produce accurate value maps, inde-
pendent of layouts and linguistic variation. Figure 6
provides examples of two layouts, each with two dif-
ferent instructions. In the first map (top), we have
both instructions referring to the same location. Our
model is able to mimic the optimal value map accu-
rately, while the other baselines are not as precise,
either producing a large field of possible goal loca-
tions (CNN+LSTM) or completely missing the goal
(UVFA-text).

On the vertical axis, we observe generalization
across different maps with the same instructions.
Our model is able to precisely identify the goals in
each scenario in spite of significant variation in their

57



Figure 7: Examples of failure cases for our model.
Multiple levels of indirection in (a) and a long in-
struction filled with redundant information in (b)
make the instruction difficult to interpret. Intended
goal locations are outlined in red for clarity.

locations. This proves harder for the other represen-
tations.

Although our model is compositional in the sense
that it transfers knowledge of spatial references be-
tween different environments, some types of instruc-
tions do prove challenging. We identify two of the
poorest predictions in Figure 7. We see that multiple
levels of indirection (as in 7a, which references a lo-
cation relative to an object relative to another object)
or unnecessarily long instructions (as in 7b, which
uniquely identifies a position by the eighth token but
then proceeds with redundant information) are still
a challenge.

Learning curve Due to the manual effort that
comes with constructing a dataset of human anno-
tations, it is also important to consider the sample-
efficiency of a model. Figure 8 shows the quality
policy and prediction error on local instructions as a
function of training set size. Our model reaches 0.90
policy quality with only 400 samples, demonstrating
efficient generalization capability.

Figure 8: Effect of training set size on held-out pre-
dictions. The curves show the mean of ten training
runs and the shaded regions show standard devia-
tion. Our model’s policy quality is greater than 0.90
with as few as 400 training goal annotations.

Language Grounding Dataset

Policy Quality Distance

UVFA (text) 0.15 4.61

CNN + LSTM 0.17 4.11

Our model 0.74 3.94

Table 4: The performance of our model and two
baselines on the ISI Language Grounding dataset
(Bisk et al., 2016). Our model once again out-
performs the baselines, although all models have a
lower policy quality on this dataset than on our own.

6.2 ISI Grounding Dataset

We also evaluate our model on the ISI Language
Grounding dataset (Bisk et al., 2016), which con-
tains human-annotated instructions describing how
to arrange blocks identified by numbers and logos.
Although it does not contain variable environment
maps as in our dataset, it has a larger action space
and vocabulary. The caveat is that the task as posed
in the original dataset is not compatible with our
model. For a policy to be derived from a value map
with the same dimension as the state observation,
it is implicitly assumed that there is a single con-
trollable agent, whereas the ISI set allows multiple
blocks to be moved. We therefore modify the ISI
setup using an oracle to determine which block is
given agency during each step. This allows us to

58



Figure 9: (a-c) Visualizations of tasks from the ISI Language Grounding dataset (Bisk et al., 2016) and our
model’s value map predictions. The agentive block and goal location are outlined in red for visibility. (d)
The MSE of the value map prediction as a function of a subgoal’s ordering in an overall task. The model
performs better on subgoals later in a task despite the subgoals being treated completely independently
during both training and testing.

retain the linguistic variability of the dataset while
overcoming the mismatch in task setup. The states
are discretized to a 13× 13 map and the instructions
are lemmatized.

Performance on the modified ISI dataset is re-
ported in Table 4 and representative visualizations
are shown in Figure 9. Our model outperforms both
baselines by a greater margin in policy quality than
on our own dataset.

Misra et al. (2017) also use this dataset and report
results in part by determining the minimum distance
between an agent and a goal during an evaluation
lasting N steps. This evaluation metric is therefore
dependent on this timeout parameterN . Because we
discretized the state space so as to be able to repre-
sent it as a grid of embeddings, the notion of a single
step has been changed and direct comparison limited
to N steps is ill-defined.6 Hence, due to modifica-

6When a model is available and the states are not over-
whelmingly high-dimensional, policy quality is a useful metric
that is independent of this type of parameter. As such, it is our

tions in the task setup, we cannot compare directly
to the results in Misra et al. (2017).

Understanding grounding evaluation An inter-
esting finding in our analysis was that the difficulty
of the language interpretation task is a function of
the stage in task execution (Figure 9(d)). In the ISI
Language Grounding set (Bisk et al., 2016), each
individual instruction (describing where to move a
particular block) is a subgoal in a larger task (such
as constructing a circle with all of the blocks). The
value maps predicted for subgoals occurring later in
a task are more accurate than those occurring early
in the task. It is likely that the language plays a less
crucial role in specifying the subgoal position in the
final steps of a task. As shown in Figure 9(a), it may
be possible to narrow down candidate subgoal po-
sitions just by looking at a nearly-constructed high-

default metric here. However, estimating policy quality for en-
vironments substantially larger than those investigated here is a
challenge in itself.

59



level shape. In contrast, this would not be possible 
early in a task because most of the blocks will be 
randomly positioned. This finding is consistent with 
a result from Branavan et al. (2011), who reported 
that strategy game manuals were useful early in the 
game but became less essential further into play. It 
appears to be part of a larger trend that the marginal 
benefit of language in such grounding tasks can vary 
predictably between individual instructions.

7 Conclusions

We have described a novel approach for grounded 
spatial reasoning. Combining the language repre-
sentation in a spatially localized manner allows for 
increased precision of goal identification a nd im-
proved performance on unseen environment config-
urations. Alongside our models, we present Pud-
dle World Navigation, a new grounding dataset for 
testing the generalization capacity of instruction-
following algorithms in varied environments.

Acknowledgement

We thank the members of the MIT NLP group, the 
TACL reviewers and action editor for helpful 
feedback. We gratefully acknowledge support from 
the MIT Lincoln Laboratory and the MIT Super-
UROP program.

References

Jacob Andreas and Dan Klein. 2015. Alignment-based
compositional semantics for instruction following. In 
EMNLP.

Yoav Artzi and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2013. Weakly su-
pervised learning of semantic parsers for mapping in-
structions to actions. TACL, 1(1):49–62.

Richard Bellman. 1957. Dynamic Programming.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 1 edi-
tion.

Yonatan Bisk, Deniz Yuret, and Daniel Marcu. 2016.
Natural language communication with robots. In
NAACL HLT, pages 751–761.

S.R.K. Branavan, David Silver, and Regina Barzilay.
2011. Learning to win by reading manuals in a Monte-
Carlo framework. In ACL HLT, pages 268–277.

Michael Buhrmester, Tracy Kwang, and Samuel D.
Gosling. 2011. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Per-
spectives on Psychological Science, 6(1):3–5. PMID:
26162106.

Ruth M.J. Byrne and Philip N. Johnson-Laird. 1989.
Spatial reasoning. Journal of memory and language,
28(5):564–575.

David L. Chen and Raymond J. Mooney. 2011. Learn-
ing to interpret natural language navigation instruc-
tions fro mobservations. In Proceedings of the 25th
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-
2011), pages 859–865, San Francisco, CA, USA, Au-
gust.

Kan Chen, Jiang Wang, Liang-Chieh Chen, Haoyuan
Gao, Wei Xu, and Ram Nevatia. 2015. ABC-
CNN: An attention based convolutional neural net-
work for visual question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.05960.

William T. Freeman and Edward H. Adelson. 1991.
The design and use of steerable filters. IEEE TPAMI,
13(9):891–906.

Sachithra Hemachandra, Matthew R. Walter, Stefanie
Tellex, and Seth Teller. 2014. Learning spatial-
semantic representations from natural language de-
scriptions and scene classifications. In ICRA, pages
2623–2630. IEEE.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–
1780.

John D. Kelleher, Geert-Jan M. Kruijff, and Fintan J.
Costello. 2006. Proximity in context: an empirically
grounded computational model of proximity for pro-
cessing topological spatial expressions. In ACL, pages
745–752.

Joohyun Kim and Raymond J. Mooney. 2013. Adapting
discriminative reranking to grounded language learn-
ing. In ACL (1), pages 218–227.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR.

Thomas Kollar, Stefanie Tellex, Deb Roy, and Nicholas
Roy. 2010. Toward understanding natural language
directions. In Human-Robot Interaction, pages 259–
266. IEEE.

Stephen C Levinson. 2003. Space in language and cog-
nition: Explorations in cognitive diversity, volume 5.
Cambridge University Press.

Michael Levit and Deb Roy. 2007. Interpretation of spa-
tial language in a map navigation task. IEEE Transac-
tions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cy-
bernetics), 37(3):667–679.

Peggy Li and Lila Gleitman. 2002. Turning the ta-
bles: Language and spatial reasoning. Cognition,
83(3):265–294.

Matt MacMahon, Brian Stankiewicz, and Benjamin
Kuipers. 2006. Walk the talk: Connecting language,
knowledge, and action in route instructions. AAAI,
2(6):4.

60



Daniel J. Mankowitz, Timothy Arthur Mann, and Shie
Mannor. 2016. Iterative hierarchical optimiza-
tion for misspecified problems (IHOMP). CoRR,
abs/1602.03348.

Dipendra K. Misra, John Langford, and Yoav Artzi.
2017. Mapping instructions and visual observations
to actions with reinforcement learning. EMNLP.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver,
Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare,
Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidje-
land, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles Beat-
tie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King,
Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and
Demis Hassabis. 2015. Human-level control through
deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–
533, 02.

Reinhard Moratz and Thora Tenbrink. 2006. Spatial ref-
erence in linguistic human-robot interaction: Iterative,
empirically supported development of a model of pro-
jective relations. Spatial cognition and computation,
6(1):63–107.

Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David
Silver. 2015. Universal value function approximators.
In ICML, pages 1312–1320.

M. Skubic, D. Perzanowski, S. Blisard, A. Schultz,
W. Adams, M. Bugajska, and D. Brock. 2004. Spatial
language for human-robot dialogs. IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applica-
tions and Reviews), 34(2):154–167, May.

Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. 1998. Introduc-
tion to reinforcement learning. MIT Press.

Richard S. Sutton. 1996. Generalization in rein-
forcement learning: Successful examples using sparse
coarse coding. In NIPS.

Stefanie Tellex, Thomas Kollar, Steven Dickerson,
Matthew R. Walter, Ashis Gopal Banerjee, Seth J.
Teller, and Nicholas Roy. 2011. Understanding natu-
ral language commands for robotic navigation and mo-
bile manipulation. In AAAI.

Thora Tenbrink. 2007. Space, Time, and the Use of Lan-
guage: An Investigation of Relationships, volume 36.
Walter de Gruyter.

Jette Viethen and Robert Dale. 2008. The use of spatial
relations in referring expression generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Natural Language
Generation Conference, pages 59–67. ACL.

Adam Vogel and Dan Jurafsky. 2010. Learning to follow
navigational directions. In ACL, pages 806–814.

Matthew R. Walter, Sachithra Hemachandra, Bianca
Homberg, Stefanie Tellex, and Seth Teller. 2013.
Learning semantic maps from natural language de-
scriptions. Proceedings of the 2013 Robotics: Science
and Systems IX Conference.

61



62


