








































Scheduled Multi-Task Learning: From Syntax to Translation

Eliyahu Kiperwasser∗
Computer Science Department

Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

elikip@gmail.com

Miguel Ballesteros
IBM Research

1101 Kitchawan Road, Route 134
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598. U.S

miguel.ballesteros@ibm.com

Abstract

Neural encoder-decoder models of machine
translation have achieved impressive results,
while learning linguistic knowledge of both
the source and target languages in an implicit
end-to-end manner. We propose a framework
in which our model begins learning syntax and
translation interleaved, gradually putting more
focus on translation. Using this approach, we
achieve considerable improvements in terms
of BLEU score on relatively large parallel cor-
pus (WMT14 English to German) and a low-
resource (WIT German to English) setup.

1 Introduction

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Kalchbrenner
and Blunsom, 2013; Sutskever et al., 2014; Bah-
danau et al., 2014) has recently become the state-
of-the-art approach to machine translation (Bojar et
al., 2016). One of the main advantages of neural ap-
proaches is the impressive ability of RNNs to act as
feature extractors over the entire input (Kiperwasser
and Goldberg, 2016), rather than focusing on local
information. Neural architectures are able to extract
linguistic properties from the input sentence in the
form of morphology (Belinkov et al., 2017) or syn-
tax (Linzen et al., 2016).

Nonetheless, as shown in Dyer et al. (2016) and
Dyer (2017), systems that ignore explicit linguis-
tic structures are incorrectly biased and they tend to
make overly strong linguistic generalizations. Pro-
viding explicit linguistic information (Dyer et al.,

∗ Work carried out during summer internship at IBM Re-
search.

2016; Kuncoro et al., 2017; Niehues and Cho, 2017;
Sennrich and Haddow, 2016; Eriguchi et al., 2017;
Aharoni and Goldberg, 2017; Nadejde et al., 2017;
Bastings et al., 2017; Matthews et al., 2018) has
proven to be beneficial, achieving higher results in
language modeling and machine translation.

Multi-task learning (MTL) consists of being able
to solve synergistic tasks with a single model by
jointly training multiple tasks that look alike. The fi-
nal dense representations of the neural architectures
encode the different objectives, and they leverage
the information from each task to help the others.
For example, tasks like multiword expression de-
tection and part-of-speech tagging have been found
very useful for others like combinatory categorical
grammar (CCG) parsing, chunking and super-sense
tagging (Bingel and Søgaard, 2017).

In order to perform accurate translations, we pro-
ceed by analogy to humans. It is desirable to acquire
a deep understanding of the languages; and, once
this is acquired it is possible to learn how to translate
gradually and with experience (including revisiting
and re-learning some aspects of the languages). We
propose a similar strategy by introducing the con-
cept of Scheduled Multi-Task Learning (Section 4)
in which we propose to interleave the different tasks.

In this paper, we propose to learn the structure
of language (through syntactic parsing and part-of-
speech tagging) with a multi-task learning strategy
with the intentions of improving the performance of
tasks like machine translation that use that structure
and make generalizations. We achieve considerable
improvements in terms of BLEU score on a rela-
tively large parallel corpus (WMT14 English to Ger-

225

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 6, pp. 225–240, 2018. Action Editor: Philipp Koehn.
Submission batch: 10/2017; Revision batch: 2/2018; Published 4/2018.

c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license.



man) and a low-resource (WIT German to English)
setup. Our different scheduling strategies show in-
teresting differences in performance both in the low-
resource and standard setups.

2 Sequence to Sequence with Attention

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Sutskever et
al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2014) directly models
the conditional probability p(y|x) of the target se-
quence of words y =< y1, . . . , yT > given a source
sequence x =< x1, . . . , xS >. In this paper, we
base our neural architecture on the same sequence
to sequence with attention model; in the following
we explain the details and describe the nuances of
our architecture.

2.1 Encoder

We use bidirectional LSTMs to encode the source
sentences (Graves, 2012). Given a source sentence
x =< x1, . . . , xm >, we embed the words into vec-
tors through an embedding matrixWS , the vector of
the i-th word is WSxi. We get the representations
of the i-th word by summarizing the information of
neighboring words using bidirectional LSTMs (Bah-
danau et al., 2014),

hFi = LSTM
F (hFi−1, W

Sxi) (1)

hBi = LSTM
B(hBi+1, W

Sxi). (2)

The forward and backward representation are
concatenated to get the bi-directional encoder rep-
resentation of word i as hi = [hFi , h

B
i ].

2.2 Decoder

The decoder generates one target word per time-
step, hence, we can decompose the conditional prob-
ability as

log p(y|x) =
∑

j

p(yj |y<j , x). (3)

The decoding procedure consists of two main
processes: attention and LSTM based decoding.
The attention mechanism calculates the weights (αi)
for each source word based on the words trans-
lated/decoded so far. The model gives higher weight
to words that are more relevant to decode the next
word in the sequence. This is based on the words

decoded so far represented by the decoder state
(dj), and the encoder representation of the sentence
(hi). Concretely, we use dot attention (Luong et al.,
2015b) to calculate the attention weights. More for-
mally, αi is calculated as follows:

ei = d
>
j hi (4)

αi =
exp(ei)∑
k exp(ek)

. (5)

A vector representation (cj) capturing the infor-
mation relevant to this time-step is computed by a
weighted sum of the encoded source vector repre-
sentations using α values as weights.

cj =
∑

i

αi · hi. (6)

Given the sentence representation produced by
the attention mechanism (cj) and the decoder state
capturing the translated words so far (dj), the model
decodes the next word in the output sequence. The
decoding is done using a multi-layer perceptron
which receives cj and dj and outputs a score for each
word in the target vocabulary:

gj = tanh(W
1
Decdj +W

1
Attcj) (7)

uj = tanh(gj +W
2
Decdj +W

2
Attcj) (8)

p(yj |y<j , x) ≈ softmax(Woutuj + bout). (9)
3 Many Tasks One Sequence to Sequence

Sequence to sequence models have been used for
many tasks such as: machine translation (Sutskever
et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2014), summariza-
tion (Rush et al., 2015) and syntax (Vinyals et al.,
2015). Several recent works have shown that param-
eter sharing between multiple sequence to sequence
models that aim to solve different tasks may improve
the accuracy of the individual tasks (Kaiser et al.,
2017; Luong et al., 2015a; Zoph and Knight, 2016;
Niehues and Cho, 2017; Bingel and Søgaard, 2017,
inter-alia).

We apply a simple yet effective approach to learn
multiple tasks using a single sequence to sequence
model inspired by Ammar et al. (2016). All tasks
share a common output vocabulary and generate
terms according to (3). We learn multiple tasks si-
multaneously by prepending a special task embed-
ding vector to the target. The task vector symbol-
izes the task we are focusing on. The model can

226



The brown fox jumped over the fence
2 1 1 -4 -1 1 -2

det

nsubjamod

root

prep

pobj

det

Figure 1: Illustration of the encoding of an unlabeled
parsing tree into a sequence of distances. The first
row contains the sentence (source) and its parse tree,
and the second row contains the matching distances
sequence (target).

solve each of the tasks it was trained on by priming
the decoder with the token of each task. Johnson et
al. (2017) suggested to prepend a special embedding
vector according to the desired target language. In
contrast to our approach, they prepend the vector to
the encoder and not to the decoder.

We apply this methodology to jointly learn the
multiple tasks, however many of the tasks are not
of sequential nature (such as dependency parsing in
which the output should be a well-formed depen-
dency tree (Hudson, 1984; Melčuk, 1988)). We fit
those into our sequence to sequence model in or-
der to enrich the representation of other tasks, and
increase the potential information flow between the
tasks. In what follows, we show which tasks (and
how we linearize them) we solve jointly using our
model and how we apply sequence to sequence mod-
eling to those tasks.

Part-Of-Speech Tagging Given a sentence and its
part-of-speech annotation, we convert the task to
translating between the sentence (as the source se-
quence) and the given part-of-speech tags as the tar-
get. A similar approach was suggested by Niehues
and Cho (2017).

Unlabeled Dependency Parsing An unlabeled
dependency tree annotation can be viewed as a se-
quence of heads, where for every node there is a
unique incoming edge, that is, a single matching
head. We convert the tree by scanning the sentence
from left to right, and outputting the distance of each
word to its head. We then convert the task to translat-
ing between the original sentence and the resulting
sequence describing the unlabeled dependency tree

Figure 2: Illustration of Scheduled Multi-Task
Learning approach. This figure contains a flow chart
describing how the training examples from multi-
ple sources are gathered into a single training queue.
The chart starts from multiple queues, each contain-
ing training examples belonging to different tasks
(possibly from different datasets). Using a coin toss
we choose the next queue to take the following train-
ing example from. The probability of each of the
queues to be selected is determined by the scheduler.

(See Figure 1). Sequence of distances is an invert-
ible representation of the sequence of heads, which
is equivalent to an unlabeled tree. In contrast to a
sequence of heads, learning a sequence of distances
is able to generalize to sentences of arbitrary length
(including length which are not seen or rarely seen in
the training corpus). Distance to the syntactic heads
has also been shown to be an effective feature when
parsing sentences (McDonald et al., 2005).

Predicting Dependency Relations-Labeled De-
pendency Parsing Similarly to the conversion of
the unlabeled dependency tree to a sequence, we
scan all the words in the sentence from the begin-
ning to the end. For each word encountered, we
output the label of the dependency arc connecting
it with its matching head word. We, therefore, learn
to translate between the original sentence and the re-
sulting sequence of dependency labels.

Machine Translation Similarly to Sutskever et al.
(2014) and Bahdanau et al. (2014), we use sequence
to sequence to translate between a sentence written
in a source language and a sentence written in a tar-
get language.

4 Scheduled Multi-Task Learning

In order to produce accurate translations, neural ma-
chine translation systems have to learn syntax in

227



order to generate grammatically correct sentences.
Furthermore, translation systems have to disam-
biguate different parts-of-speech on the source side
sentence, since a different part-of-speech can result
in different translations. There are many sets of pa-
rameters able to capture the training data when em-
ploying LSTM (RNN) models. This applies to se-
quence to sequence models with attention. Each
set of parameters provides a different level of gen-
eralization (Reimers and Gurevych, 2017). As sug-
gested by Dyer (2017), representations learned by
the network do not capture the linguistic properties,
and they are biased to make overly strong linguistic
generalizations.

Providing “guidance” to the sequence to sequence
network at the beginning focusing it on a represen-
tation enriched with linguistic knowledge, such as
syntax or part-of-speech tagging, helps it obtain in-
formation necessary for converging to a more gen-
eral solution. We suggest interleaving the learning
of the syntax and translation tasks, and gradually de-
crease the weight of the syntactically oriented tasks
(auxiliary tasks). This enables the model to forget
about the syntax examples and to put more focus on
fitting the translation task as the training progresses.

Our approach, Scheduled Multi-Task Learning
(SMTL), is a semi-supervised learning approach
that generalizes the above scheme. Scheduled
Multi-Task Learning continuously interleaves be-
tween three well-known previous methods: Multi-
task learning, Pre-training, and Fine-tuning.

Multi-Task Learning (MTL) (Caruana, 1997)
solves synergistic tasks while maximizing the num-
ber of shared parameters. Sharing parameters for
multiple tasks may increase the accuracy in tests
for the individual tasks, thanks to representation
bias which captures a more regularized representa-
tion fitted to multiple tasks (Baxter, 2000) and us-
ing information from one task as hints to the other
tasks (Abu-Mostafa, 1990). In case of indepen-
dence between the features of the multiple tasks
learned, we assume that enforcing the representa-
tion to accommodate multiple tasks can result in a
drop in accuracy compared to the accuracy of each
task learned separately (Caruana, 1997; Bingel and
Søgaard, 2017).

Pre-Training (Collobert et al., 2011) is a widely
used approach (Goldberg, 2017) which initializes

the parameters with the parameters used to solve a
somewhat related task. Similarly, Fine-Tuning uses
a small annotated in-domain corpus and a large an-
notated out-of-domain corpus to estimate parame-
ters. We first learn using the large out-of-domain
corpus and once that is finished, we continue learn-
ing (fine-tuning) on the in-domain corpus. This is
a common approach for transfer learning (Yosinski
et al., 2014). A related approach is to start with a
pre-trained neural network model and fine-tune only
the final layers in order to keep the coarse features
detected for the previous task (Hinton and Salakhut-
dinov, 2006; Erhan et al., 2010). Both approaches,
facilitate encoding useful information from related
tasks (Pre-training) or data-sets (Fine-tuning) with-
out demanding that the representation accommo-
date both tasks, and can be viewed as regularization
(Caruana, 1997).

Our Scheduled Multi-Task Learning approach
unifies the above methods into a single framework.
This framework contains multiple queues, where
each queue contains the training examples belong-
ing to a specific pair of tasks and datasets. In or-
der to pick the next training example, we stochasti-
cally pick a queue (q) with time-dependent probabil-
ity (ptq) and then we get the next example from the
chosen queue (Figure 2).

The probabilities (ptq) change as the training pro-
gresses according to a Schedule. The Schedule
could, for example, give a high probability at the
beginning of the training process to some task (e.g.
part-of-speech tagging) and gradually decrease the
probability in favor of another task (e.g. transla-
tion). The latter schedule resembles the pre-training
approach at the beginning by, later in the process,
progressing to multi-task learning approach. Such a
schedule enables harnessing hints from related tasks
and also enforces a soft representation bias at the be-
ginning of the training. This contrasts with previous
schemes, which either they used solely pre-training
and therefore were not able to benefit from the repre-
sentation bias, or they used solely multi-task learn-
ing and were not able to tweak the representation
bias.

We aim to improve generalization over a specific
task and dataset (queue) using examples from re-
lated tasks and datasets. We suggest three sched-
ulers to do so: Constant Scheduler, Exponential

228



pconstq (t) = α

(a) Constant Schedule

pexpq (t) = 1− e−αt

(b) Exponential Schedule

psigq (t) =
1

1+e−αt

(c) Sigmoid Schedule

Figure 3: Illustration of different scheduling strategies determining the probability of the next training ex-
ample to be picked from each of the multiple tasks we learn. Each sub-plot in the figure matches a different
scheduling strategy (with α set to 0.5). The sub-plot describes the probability (p, y-axis) of the task we
wish to improve (q) using Scheduled Multi-Task Learning as a function of the number of epochs trained (t,
x-axis) so far. The remaining probability is uniformly distributed among the rest of the tasks.

Scheduler, and Sigmoid Scheduler (Figure 3). As
input, the schedulers receive the fraction of train-
ing epochs done so far (t = Sent/‖Corpus‖), and a
hyper-parameter (α) determining the slope of the
scheduler. Given slope parameter (α) and the epoch
number, the chosen scheduler depicts a multinomial
distribution for choosing each of the queues as the
source of the next training example.

Constant Scheduler We assign constant probabil-
ity to the queue we focus on and divide the rest of
the probability uniformly between remaining queues
(pq(t) = α). This is similar to previous Multi-Task
Learning approaches (Caruana, 1997).

Exponential Scheduler We assign exponentially
increasing probability to the queue we focus on and
divide the rest of the probability uniformly between
remaining queues (pq(t) = 1−e−αt). This approach
starts by only looking at the training from all the
tasks besides the task that we wish to focus on, and
it later tunes the parameters based solely on the main
task (resembling pre-training and fine-tuning).

Sigmoid Scheduler We assign probability to the
queue we focus on using a sigmoid and divide the
rest of the probability uniformly between remaining
queues (pq(t) = 11+e−αt ). This approach starts by
looking at all tasks (resembling MTL), and it later
tunes the parameters based solely on the main task
we wish to focus on.

5 Experimental Setup

We evaluate the effectiveness of our models for a
low-resource setting and a standard setting. Trans-
lation performances are reported in case-sensitive
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002). We report translation
quality using tokenized1 BLEU comparable with ex-
isting Neural Machine Translation papers.

Our experiments are centered around the transla-
tion task. We aim to determine whether other syn-
tactically oriented tasks can improve translation and
vice versa. Each task is presented in a sequence
to sequence manner (as described in Section 3). A
single sequence to sequence with attention model is
used to solve all tasks (all the parameters are shared
between the different tasks).

5.1 Data

We train the byte-pair encoding model (Sennrich et
al., 2016) for the translation parallel corpus and ap-
ply it to all the data (including non-translation data).

Syntax For English, we extract part-of-speech tag-
ging, dependency heads and labels from the Penn
tree-bank (Marcus et al., 1993) with Stanford De-
pendencies2. For German, we extract them from
TIGER tree-bank (Brants et al., 2002).3 Both tree-
banks are annotated by experts and contain the

1All texts are tokenized with tokenizer.perl and
BLEU scores are computed with multi-bleu.perl.

2Training: 02-21. Development: 22. Test: 23.
3German CoNLL 2009 dataset (Hajič et al., 2009).

229



gold annotations for dependency parsing and part-
of-speech tags.

Given the language, we extract three datasets
from the relevant tree-bank. We extract parallel cor-
pus of sentences and their gold part-of-speech anno-
tations. The same is done in order to extract a dataset
of the unlabeled distances and the dependency la-
bels.

Translation In order to simulate low-resource
translation tasks, we used 4M tokens of the WIT
corpus (Cettolo et al., 2012) for German to En-
glish as training data. We used tst2012 for valida-
tion and tst2013 for testing, provided by the Interna-
tional Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
(IWSLT). Byte-pair encoding is applied, resulting in
a vocabulary of 29937 tokens in the source side and
21938 tokens in the target side.

For standard translation setting, we use WMT par-
allel corpus (Buck et al., 2014) with 4.5M sentence
pairs (we translate from English to German). We use
newstest2013 (3000 sentences) as the development
set to select our hyper-parameters, and newstest2014
for testing. Note that we use the same (MT) develop-
ment sets to select the hyper-parameters of the syn-
tactically oriented tasks. After byte-pair encoding is
applied, it results in a vocabulary of 59937 tokens in
the source side and 63680 tokens in the target side.

We only used training examples shorter than 60
words per sentence. We also filter out pairs where
the target length is more than 1.5x times the source
length.

5.2 Training Details

We use mini-batching that limits the number of
words in the mini-batch instead of the number of
sentences (Morishita et al., 2017). We limit the
mini-batch size to 5000 words. Based on the sched-
uler we sample, the dataset to draw training exam-
ples from, and add it to the mini-batch until the word
limit is reached. In contrast to other approaches (Lu-
ong et al., 2015a; Zoph and Knight, 2016), our mini-
batch is not separated by tasks and often contains ex-
amples from multiple tasks. We shuffle each dataset
at the beginning of the training, and after the model
has been trained on all the source and target pairs
belonging to the dataset(s).

We use a two layer stacking BILSTM for the de-

coder, and a single layer BILSTM for the encoder.
For the low-resource setting, the number of dimen-
sions of the LSTM and the word embedding is set to
250. For the standard setting, the number of dimen-
sions is set to 500. The dimensionality in the stan-
dard setting is set to 500 (instead of 1000), in order
to enable quick convergence and thereby examine
our approach in many different combinations. The
weight updates were determined using the unbiased
Adam algorithm (Kingma and Ba, 2014).

We used 0.5 as the scheduler’s slope (α) (see
Section 4) for all our experiments. We use beam
search decoding (of size 5) when decoding the test
results. For all tasks (including dependency parsing
and part-of-speech tagging), we choose the model
that maximizes the BLEU score between the refer-
ence development corpus and the system prediction
on that corpus. For each scheduler and combination
of tasks, we report the test score of the model achiev-
ing the best development score of three single runs
(each with different random initialization).

Our code is implemented in C++, using the DyNet
framework (Neubig et al., 2017). When running on
a single GPU device Tesla K80, it takes 5-7 days to
completely train a model with 4.5 million sentence
pairs, and 12 hours for the low resource setup (4M
tokens).

6 Results

We show the base performance of each task using
our Many Tasks One Sequence to Sequence model
(subsection 6.1). We explore multiple combina-
tions of those concurrently learned using Scheduled
Multi-Task Learning (subsection 6.2). We explore
(subsection 6.3) different slope parameter (α) val-
ues (see Section 4) with the intention of optimiz-
ing machine translation by leveraging the additional
tasks. Finally, we compare our architecture with an
architecture that uses separate decoders for each task
(Section 6.4) with a focus on machine translation.

6.1 Auxiliary Tasks

We use dependency parsing and part-of-speech tag-
ging as auxiliary tasks. Our method utilizes BiL-
STM features for syntax as proposed by Kiper-
wasser and Goldberg (2016) and attention proposed
by Dozat and Manning (2016), however ours does

230



not impose any tree structure constraints since it is
the architecture for translation described in Section
2. The model does not even contain the length of the
sentence as a hard constraint, meaning that it can
arbitrarily output a shorter/longer sequence.4 Al-
though no structural constraints were imposed, our
sequence to sequence model is able to obtain a de-
cent parsing result.5 The model achieves 86.99 UAS
for English Penn tree-bank with Stanford Dependen-
cies,6 and 80.28 UAS for the German TIGER tree-
bank when the model is only trained to predict the
sequence of distances to head as described in Sec-
tion 3. This is below the best results achieved by
state-of-the-art parsers, that are already around 95
for English (Dozat and Manning, 2016; Kuncoro
et al., 2017), and around 90 for the same German
dataset (Andor et al., 2016; Kuncoro et al., 2016;
Bohnet and Nivre, 2012). As a side product of our
research, we show that dependency parsing can be
approached via a sequence to sequence with an at-
tention mode commonly used for neural machine
translation with linearized (using sequences of head
distances) dependency trees. Note that, in this case,
the models are solely trained on predicting the se-
quence of distances to the head and are not trained
to predict the sequence of dependency labels.

For part-of-speech tagging, we use the same se-
quence to sequence with attention architecture pre-
sented in Section 2. Our model uses BiLSTM en-
codings, in a similar way as proposed by Wang et
al. (2015) for part-of-speech tagging. Similarly as
in parsing (see above), we do not force one part-
of-speech per word and do not force the model
to scan the sentence linearly nor do we add any
hard constraints on the length. Even without these
constraints, the model achieves accuracy of 95.07
for English Penn tree-bank and 95.41 for German

4All evaluation metrics penalize sequences of the wrong
length.

5The parsing only model (without MTL) was trained solely
on the unlabeled dependency arcs. Full parsing model that was
used in conjunction with other tasks was trained as separate
tasks (in an MTL manner) on both unlabeled arcs and their la-
bels.

6By increasing the dimensionality of the network for the En-
glish parsing task, we achieve results around 90 UAS, but in Ta-
ble 4 we report results with 500 dimensions since it is the one
used in the multi-task learning scenario with the WMT data (see
Section 6.2).

TIGER treebank, which is lower than the best sys-
tems that achieve results above 97 (Andor et al.,
2016; Bohnet and Nivre, 2012) for both languages.
We use the same datasets as in the parsing task.

Note that both for part-of-speech tagging and de-
pendency parsing, our models are trained with byte-
pair encoding (BPE) in the input side (Sennrich et
al., 2015), meaning that there are usually more to-
kens in the input than in the output (which has ex-
actly one label or a token representing the distance to
head per word). For the single-task models we also
use 250 dimensions for our network (word embed-
dings, hidden dimensions and LSTM input dimen-
sions) for German and 500 dimensions for English.

6.2 Translation Task

We start from our baseline system which achieves
results which are comparable (see Tables 1 and 4)
to the ones reported by Bahdanau et al. (2014) on
the standard setting (WMT), and Niehues and Cho
(2017) on the low-resource setting (IWSLT). We ex-
amine the effect of Scheduled Multi-Task Learning
on the translation quality compared to the baseline
system with a constant value of the slope parameter
(α) set to 0.5.7 We also show that amount of repre-
sentation bias the models chose to obtain by testing
each model on each of the auxiliary tasks.

As in part-of-speech tagging and dependency
parsing (both predicting a sequence of heads and de-
pendency labels, as separate tasks. This is the reason
why we report LAS), we use BPE encoding both in
target and source. We use 250 dimensions for the
low-resource setting (IWSLT) and 500 dimensions
for the standard setting (WMT).

Low-Resource Setting In a low-resource setting,
we witness a significant increase in translation qual-
ity when doing basic multi-task learning (with the
constant scheduler) with syntactic auxiliary tasks
(Table 1). We attribute this to the additional lin-
guistic information which is difficult to learn from
a low-resource setting. The latter can be observed
in Table 1 which shows an increase of roughly 2.7
BLEU when adding part-of-speech information and
1.85 BLEU when adding dependency parsing.

7In Section 6.3 we explore different slope parameter (α) val-
ues for the same task.

231



The baseline (constant) multi-task learning sched-
uler reaches better translation quality than the sig-
moid and exponential scheduler. We hypothesize
that in a low-resource setting a strong representa-
tion bias incorporating linguistic knowledge helps
to build generalized representation which cannot be
obtained from a relatively small parallel corpus.

We evaluate the dependency parsing scores and
the part-of-speech tagging accuracy of the models
tuned to perform translation on the held-out devel-
opment set. The percentage of correctly predicted
unlabeled arcs by MTL is no more than 10 UAS
points worse compared to the models that are solely
train to parse or to tag, and they are very close for
the Constant Scheduler. Note that the models are
optimized to perform translation, however they are
still able to parse sentences with a reasonable accu-
racy. MTL models are also better at translation than
models trained on the vanilla translation data. This
means that the attentional model of translation is
benefiting from the syntactic information, and there-
fore chooses to learn parameters close to the syntac-
tically oriented tasks, even though there are no con-
straints forcing it to do so.

As mentioned above, the automatic scores show a
significant improvement over the NMT system that
only sees the parallel sentences. In Table 2, we show
some randomly picked examples from the IWSLT
development data in order to show how each of the
systems performed. We include Google web8 sys-
tem to see a comparison with a state-of-the-art sys-
tem that is probably trained with more data. Note
that in the low-resource data we only have 300k sen-
tence pairs. We selected the output of the systems
with highest score in each category (NMT Only,
NMT+POS with Constant Scheduler, NMT+Parsing
and NMT+POS+Parsing with Exponent Scheduler).

Given that the examples in Table 2 suggest that
the SMTL models may be doing a better job at
avoiding dropping words we complement our BLEU
scores with the METEOR evaluation metric (Lavie
and Agarwal, 2007) which is more sensitive to
recall. We report METEOR (and fragmentation
penalty that captures how well the system produces
the correct order of the words) for the models with
highest BLEU scores in each category (NMT Only,

8https://translate.google.com

NMT+POS with Constant Scheduler, NMT+Parsing
and NMT+POS+Parsing with Exponent Scheduler).
Table 3 shows the results. Models with the higher
BLEU scores also produce higher METEOR scores.
In addition it is interesting to see that the fragmenta-
tion penalty is higher for the NMT Only model; the
NMT Only model only produces 19,768 test words
(for the entire test set) while the rest produce longer
sentences with more than 20,400 test words. All of
this suggests that the additional tasks are helping to
avoid dropping parts of the sentence which leads to
more adequate outputs.

Standard Setting In the standard-resource setting
(Table 4), the exponent scheduler (when using part-
of-speech tagging as an auxiliary task) achieves sig-
nificantly better numbers than the other multi-task
learning strategies, and achieves a translation qual-
ity that surpasses the base neural translation system
(by 0.7 BLEU points). When applying the Constant
Scheduler (basic multi-task learning) we see a de-
duction of at least 1 BLEU point compared to the
score of the translation without multi-task learning.
We assume that additional out-of-domain linguistic
knowledge (such as syntax in the Penn tree-bank)
might confuse the linguistic properties that the trans-
lation model is inferring from the comparably large
machine translation data.

The sigmoid scheduler reaches better translation
quality than the constant scheduler by roughly 1
BLEU point (and improves over the base neural
translation system) and it improves over the Expo-
nent Scheduler for the tasks that include the pars-
ing objective. This suggests that putting more em-
phasis on syntax regularizes the model towards cap-
turing linguistic properties (as exponential scheduler
does), but that focusing on them as the training con-
tinues causes a representation bias which puts focus
on out-of-domain data, which, as a result, degrades
the translation quality.

Similarly to the low-resource setting, we evalu-
ate the dependency parsing scores and the part-of-
speech tagging accuracy of the models tuned to per-
form translation on the held-out development set.
The result for the standard setting shows a drop (of
12 UAS point at most) in the parsing accuracy when
trained in a multi-task manner. The accuracy of
the part-of-speech tagger improves when using con-

232



Scheduler Tasks BLEU POS UAS LAS

No MTL
NMT 27.70 – – –
POS – 95.41 – –

Parsing (Unlabeled) – – 80.28 –

Constant Scheduler
NMT + POS 30.4 93.51 – –

NMT + Parsing 28.73 – 79.78 74.25
NMT + POS + Parsing 29.08 94.80 79.38 74.13

Exponent Scheduler
NMT + POS 30.15 89.05 – –

NMT + Parsing 29.37 – 67.60 60.71
NMT + POS + Parsing 29.55 91.48 72.85 66.44

Sigmoid Scheduler
NMT + POS 30.2 90.74 – –

NMT + Parsing 28.78 – 69.26 62.43
NMT + POS + Parsing 28.93 89.11 65.92 58.46

Table 1: Scheduled Multi-Task learning results for IWSLT German to English translation.

System Example
Source Jeden Tag nahmen wir einen anderen Weg , sodass niemand erraten konnte , wohin wir gingen .
Google Every day we took a different route so no one could guess where we were going.
NMT Only We took another way for us to guess that no one could guess where we left.
NMT+POS Every day we took another way so no one could guess where we went.
NMT+Parsing Every day we took another way that no one could guess where we went.
NMT+POS+Parsing Every day we took another way that no one could guess where we were going.
Source Wissen Sie, wie viele Entscheidungen Sie an einem typischen Tag machen ?
Google Do you know how many decisions you make on a typical day?
NMT Only You know how many decisions you make on a typical day?
NMT+POS You know how many decisions you make on a typical day?
NMT+Parsing Do you know how many decisions you make on a typical day?
NMT+POS+Parsing Do you know how many decisions you make on a typical day?
Source Im Winter war es gemütlich, aber im Sommer war es unglaublich heiß.
Google in winter it was cozy, but in the summer it was incredibly hot.
NMT Only In winter, it was comfortable, but it was incredibly hot.
NMT+POS In winter, it was comfortable, but in summer it was incredibly hot.
NMT+Parsing In the winter, it was comfortable, but in the summer it was incredibly hot.
NMT+POS+Parsing In the winter, it was comfortable, but in summer it was incredibly hot.

Table 2: Examples from our low-resource IWSLT German to English translation.

System BLEU Fragmentation METEOR

NMT Only 27.7 50.36 30.91
NMT+POS 30.4 49.95 31.83
NMT+Parsing 29.37 50.14 31.43
NMT+POS+Parsing 29.55 50.02 31.56

Table 3: METEOR results for our best scoring sys-
tems in comparison with BLEU scores. Fragmenta-
tion refers to the fragmentation penalty.

stant and sigmoid schedulers. The part-of-speech
accuracy plunges significantly when using the expo-
nential scheduler; and in turn, the translation qual-
ity raises by 0.7 BLEU over the baseline model.
This suggests that softening the representation bias
(by allowing the model to gradually fine-tune on
translation) is necessary to improve the translation
task. When adding dependency parsing and part-of-
speech tagging, we do not see a significant drop in

those auxiliary tasks and also the results for transla-
tion does not improve. This might suggest that rep-
resentation bias is too strict in this case and does not
allow the representation to learn beyond the auxil-
iary tasks.

In order to complement our automatic scores, we
performed simple human evaluation, in which an in-
dependent German native speaker (who is also pro-
ficient in English) scored 50 sentences from 0 to 5
(being 0 exceptionally poor, and 5 excellent); the
sentences were randomly shuffled so there is no
bias towards the position in which they were pre-
sented. The NMT only system achieved a score of
2.54, the best system with part-of-speech tagging
only (which is the constant scheduler) achieved 2.68,
and both systems that incorporate dependency pars-
ing (NMT+Parsing and NMT+POS+Parsing with
the sigmoid scheduler) achieve 2.78 in average. An

233



Scheduler Tasks BLEU POS UAS LAS

No MTL
NMT 19.30 – – –
POS – 95.07 – –

Parsing (Unlabeled) – – 86.99 –

Constant Scheduler
NMT + POS 18.29 95.73 – –

NMT + Parsing 17.87 – 85.74 81.65
NMT + POS + Parsing 18.09 96.30 86.58 82.83

Exponent Scheduler
NMT + POS 20.02 89.89 – –

NMT + Parsing 18.85 – 80.40 74.70
NMT + POS + Parsing 18.04 94.68 82.54 77.57

Sigmoid Scheduler
NMT + POS 19.21 95.20 – –

NMT + Parsing 19.08 – 75.42 69.27
NMT + POS + Parsing 19.26 94.66 80.33 75.15

Table 4: Scheduled Multi-Task learning results for WMT14 English to German translation.

example output of the systems, also compared to
Google, is shown in Table 5; we observe how the
system that uses all auxiliary tasks manages to get
the gender agreement right for the words journalist
and Katie.

6.3 Scheduler Tuning

We study the impact of different slope parameter
(α) values on the translation BLEU score using the
low-resource IWSLT corpus. For each scheduler,
we train the model (pick the model performing best
on the development set) four times with multiple α
values and different auxiliary tasks, and average the
BLEU score of the decoded test set (Figure 4).

We compare the average result of the Constant
Scheduler (Figure 4) against the result of the best
performing model on the development set (Table
1). The average result when training with auxiliary
tasks (i.e. the Constant Scheduler where α is set to
zero) is significantly higher than the result of the best
model on the development set (0.7 BLEU points),
the matching scores are 28.5 and 27.7 BLEU points.
The average score when using the Constant Sched-
uler with α set to half is greater than the score of the
best performing model on the development set. The
average result of the constant scheduler setting sug-
gests that multi-task learning helps to mitigate over-
fitting.

The average results of a model with both parsing
and part-of-speech tagging peak when the slope pa-
rameter (α) is approximately 1 for both the exponen-
tial scheduler (29.43 BLEU) and the sigmoid sched-
uler (29.55 BLEU). For those schedulers, if the α
value is high, the probability of training on the aux-

iliary tasks decreases more rapidly. This suggests
that the model needs syntactically oriented synergis-
tic tasks to guide the initial steps to improve con-
vergence; after four epochs the probability of train-
ing on an auxiliary task is negligible. The constant
scheduler peaks when alpha is 0.2 (yielding an aver-
age score of 29.03 BLEU), suggesting that enriching
the representation with a small amount of syntacti-
cal information helps. This confirms our intuition
that syntax is helpful.

Looking at the constant scheduler, which per-
formed best for this dataset (Table 1), we see that the
best result is achieved by using parsing as the single
auxiliary task (without parts-of-speech). This hints
that parsing has potential to help machine transla-
tion, even more than part-of-speech tagging with
constant scheduler (Niehues and Cho, 2017).

6.4 Architecture Comparison

In order to further validate that the contribution of
Scheduled Multi-Task Learning is not limited to our
chosen sequence to sequence architecture, we study
the impact of our method with a single (and shared
across tasks) encoder and the architecture of sepa-
rate decoders which has already proven to be a very
effective multi-task learning scheme (Luong et al.,
2015a; Niehues and Cho, 2017). In the latter, each
of the decoders is responsible for a different task
(i.e. syntax, parts-of-speech, translation, etc.) us-
ing a single representation generated by the shared
encoder.

In Figure 5, we show the comparison between our
Many Tasks One Sequence to Sequence architecture
(Section 3) and the architecture of separate decoders

234



System Example
Source In an interview with US journalist Katie Couric , which is to be broadcast on Friday ( local time ) , Bloom said ,

” sometimes life does n’t go exactly as we plan or hope for ” .
Google In einem Interview mit der US-Journalistin Katie Couric, das am Freitag (Ortszeit) ausgestrahlt wird, sagte Bloom:

”Manchmal läuft das Leben nicht genau so, wie wir es planen oder erhoffen”.
NMT Only In einem Interview mit der US - Journalist Katie Couric, das am Freitag (Ortszeit) verbreitet werden soll, sagte Bloom,

”manchmal geht das Leben nicht genau wie wir planen oder Hoffnung für”.
NMT+POS In einem Interview mit den US - Journalisten Katie Couric, die am Freitag (Ortszeit) ausgestrahlt werden soll, sagte Bloom:

”Manchmal ist das Leben nicht genau so, wie wir es planen oder hoffen.”
NMT+Parsing In einem Interview mit dem US - Journalist Katie Couric, der am Freitag gesendet wird (Ortszeit) , sagte Bloom,

”manchmal wird das Leben nicht genau so aussehen, wie wir uns vorstellen oder hoffen”.
NMT+POS+Parsing In einem Interview mit US - Journalistin Katie Couric , das am Freitag ausgestrahlt wird (Ortszeit), sagte Bloom:

”Manchmal ist das Leben nicht genau so, wie wir planen oder hoffen”.

Table 5: Example from our standard English to German translation (WMT).

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

28

28.5

29

29.5

α

B
L

E
U

Sc
or

e

Constant Scheduler

0 1 2 3

28

28.5

29

29.5

α

Exponential Scheduler

0 1 2 3

28

28.5

29

29.5

α

Sigmoid Scheduler

Figure 4: A plot of the BLEU score for the three schedulers over different alpha values. The BLEU score is
the average test score of four independent experiments trained on IWSLT training set optimized for maximal
score on the IWSLT development set. We use 0 ≤ α < 1 for the constant scheduler, and 0 ≤ α ≤ 3 for
both the exponential and the sigmoid schedulers. The red line (squares) represents result with part-of-
speech tagging as auxiliary task; blue line (asterisks) represents result with parsing as auxiliary task; teal
line (circles) represents the results with both tasks as auxiliary tasks.

by using the IWSLT data set. We report BLEU
scores as the average test score of four independent
experiments for each scheduler and each value of
the slope parameter α. The plot shows the aver-
age for all schedulers. The best average score for
most of the alpha values is greater than the average
score without Scheduled Multi-Task Learning (28.5
BLEU). We conclude that scheduled multi-task with
syntactic auxiliary tasks is helpful not solely for
our architecture, but potentially for other systems as
well.

The architecture of separate decoders and a shared
encoder peaks at 29.68 BLEU which is higher than
the peak score of the shared decoder architecture
(29.55 BLEU) by 0.15 BLEU points. The best result
of the separate decoders significantly varies as alpha
is changed (σ = 0.38). The result of the shared de-
coder architecture also varies for different alpha, but
in a more subtle manner (σ = 0.21). This suggests

that the separate decoders architecture is more sen-
sitive to the scheduler used than the shared decoders
architecture.

7 Discussion

Scheduled Multi-Task Learning is complementary
to other transfer learning methods like pre-training
and fine-tuning. It is common to use pre-training in
the form of word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013;
Goldberg, 2017). One advantage of pre-trained
word embeddings is the representation of out-of-
vocabulary (OOV) words. Through pre-training,
OOV words are commonly trained using an early-
stopping methodology so their representation re-
mains close to words in the training corpus, thus en-
abling the model to generalize for unseen words and
achieve higher performance in the final task. This
constraint limits the flexibility of the optimizer to

235



0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5

28.5

29

29.5

α

B
L

E
U

Sc
or

e

Architectures Benchmark

Figure 5: A plot of the best BLEU score for each
alpha value using our approach (blue line with cir-
cle) and separate decoders (red line with asterisks).
The BLEU score is the average test score of four in-
dependent experiments for each scheduler and each
value of alpha trained on IWSLT training set opti-
mized for maximal score on the development set.

choose better word representation for words within
the training corpus. Scheduled multi-task learning
(and the exponential scheduler in particular) miti-
gates this problem by allowing the representation of
the final task and the auxiliary tasks to be tuned to
best fit each other.

The exponential scheduler starts by pre-training
the model on an auxiliary task (in our case, part-of-
speech tagging and dependency parsing) and grad-
ually puts more focus on our main task (NMT).
This enables the model to start with a representa-
tion which is able to solve structured prediction tasks
containing linguistic knowledge; as the training pro-
gresses and the focus is shifted by the scheduler to-
wards the main task, the OOV words representa-
tions continue to represent the syntax objective since
the auxiliary tasks are less visited but still in use
during training. Having embeddings that share the
same space enables the model to share information
between the tasks, and functions as regularization
(Caruana, 1997). The effectiveness of this sched-
uler is supported by the results (Table 1) showing
superior results (on average) on the WIT German to
English translation task.

Many approaches have been employing multi-
task learning in order to inject linguistic knowledge
with great success (Luong et al., 2015b; Niehues
and Cho, 2017; Martı́nez Alonso and Plank, 2017,

inter-alia). The final representation is then adapted
to solve multiple tasks, however continuing to fine-
tune on solely the main task might result in better
accuracy. The latter resembles the Sigmoid Sched-
uler which starts with multi-task learning and grad-
ually shifts to fine-tuning. The results (Table 4) sup-
port that this approach can further benefit multi-task
learning systems since it shows superior results (on
average) in the WMT14 English to German transla-
tion task, although it is still not more superior than
the baseline that does not use MTL.

8 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper presents an architecture to perform multi-
task learning focusing on the attentional model of
translation jointly with linearized dependency pars-
ing and part-of-speech tagging. We show how di-
verse scheduling strategies perform differently and
help to improve the scores in a low-resource set-
ting and a standard setting (bigger dataset). The ex-
ponent scheduler achieves the best results on aver-
age and the trained models still remember how to
perform the auxiliary tasks (part-of-speech tagging
and dependency parsing). This means that a key as-
pect of our models is that they are able to improve
the translation accuracy by incorporating syntacti-
cally based objectives into the model. Our mod-
els report modest dependency parsing and part-of-
speech tagging numbers but they clearly learn to per-
form the tasks; it is worth noting that there is a lack
of constraints related to sequence length and corre-
spondence between input tokens and tags/distances
which is needed to achieve good parsing scores
(Zhang et al., 2017).

We also want to explore another family of sched-
ulers which treats the layers of the neural network
differently. For instance, the scheduler can gradually
freeze the top LSTM layer of the decoder (by low-
ering the learning rate), allowing fine-tuning only
of the bottom LSTM layer when training for aux-
iliary tasks. Søgaard and Goldberg (2016) demon-
strated the potential of such an approach. Our ex-
periments show that scheduled multi-task learning
is very sensitive to the type of scheduler chosen, and
many types of schedulers can be explored. We plan
to carry out these experiments in the future.

236



Acknowledgments

Many thanks to Todd Ward, Wael Hamza, Yaser Al-
Onaizan, Yoav Goldberg, the three anonymous re-
viewers and the action editor for their useful com-
ments that improved the final version of this paper.

References

Yaser S. Abu-Mostafa. 1990. Learning from hints in
neural networks. J. Complexity, 6(2):192–198.

Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Towards string-
to-tree neural machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL 2017, Vancouver, Canada,
July 30 - August 4, Volume 2: Short Papers, pages
132–140.

Waleed Ammar, George Mulcaire, Miguel Ballesteros,
Chris Dyer, and Noah A. Smith. 2016. Many lan-
guages, one parser. TACL, 4:431–444.

Daniel Andor, Chris Alberti, David Weiss, Aliaksei
Severyn, Alessandro Presta, Kuzman Ganchev, Slav
Petrov, and Michael Collins. 2016. Globally nor-
malized transition-based neural networks. In Proceed-
ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 2442–2452, Berlin, Germany, August. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. CoRR, abs/1409.0473.

Joost Bastings, Ivan Titov, Wilker Aziz, Diego Marcheg-
giani, and Khalil Sima’an. 2017. Graph convolutional
encoders for syntax-aware neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
2017, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 9-11, 2017,
pages 1957–1967.

Jonathan Baxter. 2000. A model of inductive bias learn-
ing. JAIR, 12:149–198.

Yonatan Belinkov, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, Hassan
Sajjad, and James Glass. 2017. What do neural ma-
chine translation models learn about morphology? In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 861–872, Vancouver, Canada, July. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Joachim Bingel and Anders Søgaard. 2017. Identifying
beneficial task relations for multi-task learning in deep
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 15th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers,

pages 164–169, Valencia, Spain, April. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Bernd Bohnet and Joakim Nivre. 2012. A transition-
based system for joint part-of-speech tagging and la-
beled non-projective dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, pages 1455–1465,
Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Ondrej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck, Anto-
nio Jimeno-Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva,
Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Aurélie Névéol, Mari-
ana L. Neves, Martin Popel, Matt Post, Raphael Ru-
bino, Carolina Scarton, Lucia Specia, Marco Turchi,
Karin M. Verspoor, and Marcos Zampieri. 2016.
Findings of the 2016 conference on machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Ma-
chine Translation, WMT 2016, colocated with ACL
2016, August 11-12, Berlin, Germany, pages 131–198.

Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolfgang
Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The TIGER tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories, volume 168.

Christian Buck, Kenneth Heafield, and Bas Van Ooyen.
2014. N-gram counts and language models from the
common crawl. In LREC, volume 2, page 4.

Rich Caruana. 1997. Multitask learning. Machine
Learning, 28(1):41–75.

Mauro Cettolo, Christian Girardi, and Marcello Federico.
2012. Wit3: Web inventory of transcribed and trans-
lated talks. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference
of the European Association for Machine Translation
(EAMT), volume 261, page 268.

Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, Michael
Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Pavel P. Kuksa.
2011. Natural language processing (almost) from
scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12:2493–2537.

Timothy Dozat and Christopher D. Manning. 2016.
Deep biaffine attention for neural dependency parsing.
CoRR, abs/1611.01734.

Chris Dyer, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros, and
Noah A. Smith. 2016. Recurrent neural network
grammars. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 199–209, San Diego, California, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Chris Dyer. 2017. Should neural network architecture
reflect linguistic structure? In Proceedings of the
21st Conference on Computational Natural Language

237



Learning (CoNLL 2017), page 1, Vancouver, Canada,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Dumitru Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C. Courville,
Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, Pascal Vincent, and Samy
Bengio. 2010. Why does unsupervised pre-training
help deep learning? Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 11:625–660.

Akiko Eriguchi, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, and Kyunghyun
Cho. 2017. Learning to parse and translate improves
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 72–78,
Vancouver, Canada, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Neural network methods for natu-
ral language processing. Synthesis Lectures on Human
Language Technologies, 10(1):1–309.

Alex Graves. 2012. Supervised Sequence Labelling with
Recurrent Neural Networks, volume 385 of Studies in
Computational Intelligence. Springer.

Jan Hajič, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard Johans-
son, Daisuke Kawahara, Maria Antònia Martı́, Lluı́s
Màrquez, Adam Meyers, Joakim Nivre, Sebastian
Padó, Jan Štěpánek, Pavel Straňák, Mihai Surdeanu,
Nianwen Xue, and Yi Zhang. 2009. The CoNLL-
2009 shared task: Syntactic and semantic dependen-
cies in multiple languages. In Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL 2009): Shared Task, pages
1–18, Boulder, Colorado, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Geoffrey E. Hinton and Ruslan R. Salakhutdinov. 2006.
Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural net-
works. Science, 313(5786):504–507.

Richard A. Hudson. 1984. Word grammar. Blackwell
Oxford.

Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V. Le, Maxim
Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat,
Fernanda B. Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Cor-
rado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. 2017.
Google’s multilingual neural machine translation sys-
tem: Enabling zero-shot translation. TACL, 5:339–
351.

Lukasz Kaiser, Aidan N. Gomez, Noam Shazeer, Ashish
Vaswani, Niki Parmar, Llion Jones, and Jakob Uszko-
reit. 2017. One model to learn them all. CoRR,
abs/1706.05137.

Nal Kalchbrenner and Phil Blunsom. 2013. Recurrent
continuous translation models. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP 2013, 18-21 October
2013, Grand Hyatt Seattle, Seattle, Washington, USA,
A meeting of SIGDAT, a Special Interest Group of the
ACL, pages 1700–1709.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR,
abs/1412.6980.

Eliyahu Kiperwasser and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Simple
and accurate dependency parsing using bidirectional
LSTM feature representations. TACL, 4:313–327.

Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros, Lingpeng Kong,
Chris Dyer, and Noah A. Smith. 2016. Distilling an
ensemble of greedy dependency parsers into one mst
parser. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1744–1753, Austin, Texas, November. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros, Lingpeng Kong,
Chris Dyer, Graham Neubig, and Noah A. Smith.
2017. What do recurrent neural network grammars
learn about syntax? In Proceedings of the 15th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers,
pages 1249–1258, Valencia, Spain, April. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Alon Lavie and Abhaya Agarwal. 2007. Meteor: An
automatic metric for mt evaluation with high levels
of correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, StatMT ’07, pages 228–231, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg.
2016. Assessing the ability of LSTMs to learn syntax-
sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 4.

Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V. Le, Ilya Sutskever, Oriol
Vinyals, and Lukasz Kaiser. 2015a. Multi-task se-
quence to sequence learning. CoRR, abs/1511.06114.

Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Manning.
2015b. Effective approaches to attention-based neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2015 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP 2015, Lisbon, Portugal, Septem-
ber 17-21, 2015, pages 1412–1421.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Héctor Martı́nez Alonso and Barbara Plank. 2017. When
is multitask learning effective? Semantic sequence
prediction under varying data conditions. In Proceed-
ings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Vol-
ume 1, Long Papers, pages 44–53, Valencia, Spain,
April. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Austin Matthews, Graham Neubig, and Chris Dyer.
2018. Using morphological knowledge in open-
vocabulary neural language models. In Meeting of the

238



North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (NAACL), New Orleans, USA,
June.

Ryan T. McDonald, Koby Crammer, and Fernando C. N.
Pereira. 2005. Online large-margin training of de-
pendency parsers. In ACL 2005, 43rd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Pro-
ceedings of the Conference, 25-30 June 2005, Univer-
sity of Michigan, USA, pages 91–98.

Igor Aleksandrovič Melčuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax:
Theory and Practice. SUNY press.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S. Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositionality.
In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahra-
mani, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 26, pages 3111–
3119. Curran Associates, Inc.

Makoto Morishita, Yusuke Oda, Graham Neubig,
Koichiro Yoshino, Katsuhito Sudoh, and Satoshi
Nakamura. 2017. An empirical study of mini-
batch creation strategies for neural machine transla-
tion. CoRR, abs/1706.05765.

Maria Nadejde, Siva Reddy, Rico Sennrich, Tomasz
Dwojak, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Philipp Koehn,
and Alexandra Birch. 2017. Syntax-aware neural ma-
chine translation using CCG. CoRR, abs/1702.01147.

Graham Neubig, Chris Dyer, Yoav Goldberg, Austin
Matthews, Waleed Ammar, Antonios Anastasopou-
los, Miguel Ballesteros, David Chiang, Daniel Cloth-
iaux, Trevor Cohn, Kevin Duh, Manaal Faruqui,
Cynthia Gan, Dan Garrette, Yangfeng Ji, Lingpeng
Kong, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Gaurav Kumar, Chai-
tanya Malaviya, Paul Michel, Yusuke Oda, Matthew
Richardson, Naomi Saphra, Swabha Swayamdipta,
and Pengcheng Yin. 2017. DyNet: The dynamic neu-
ral network toolkit. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.03980.

Jan Niehues and Eunah Cho. 2017. Exploiting linguistic
resources for neural machine translation using multi-
task learning. In Proceedings of the Second Con-
ference on Machine Translation, WMT 2017, Copen-
hagen, Denmark, September 7-8, 2017, pages 80–89.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, July 6-12, 2002, Philadelphia, PA,
USA., pages 311–318.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2017. Reporting
score distributions makes a difference: Performance
study of LSTM-networks for sequence tagging. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP

2017, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 9-11, 2017,
pages 338–348.

Alexander M. Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston.
2015. A neural attention model for abstractive sen-
tence summarization. In Proceedings of the 2015 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP 2015, Lisbon, Portugal, Septem-
ber 17-21, 2015, pages 379–389.

Rico Sennrich and Barry Haddow. 2016. Linguistic input
features improve neural machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Machine Trans-
lation, WMT 2016, colocated with ACL 2016, August
11-12, Berlin, Germany, pages 83–91.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2015. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. CoRR, abs/1508.07909.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, ACL 2016, August 7-12, 2016, Berlin, Germany,
Volume 1: Long Papers.

Anders Søgaard and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Deep multi-
task learning with low level tasks supervised at lower
layers. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers), volume 2, pages 231–235.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014. Se-
quence to sequence learning with neural networks. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
27: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2014, December 8-13 2014, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, pages 3104–3112.

Oriol Vinyals, Lukasz Kaiser, Terry Koo, Slav Petrov,
Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2015. Gram-
mar as a foreign language. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 28: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2015, De-
cember 7-12, 2015, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, pages
2773–2781.

Peilu Wang, Yao Qian, Frank K. Soong, Lei He, and
Hai Zhao. 2015. Part-of-speech tagging with bidi-
rectional long short-term memory recurrent neural net-
work. CoRR, abs/1510.06168.

Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lip-
son. 2014. How transferable are features in deep neu-
ral networks? In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 27: Annual Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 2014, December 8-13
2014, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, pages 3320–3328.

Zhirui Zhang, Shujie Liu, Mu Li, Ming Zhou, and En-
hong Chen. 2017. Stack-based multi-layer attention
for transition-based dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods

239



in Natural Language Processing, pages 1678–1683,
Copenhagen, Denmark, September. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Barret Zoph and Kevin Knight. 2016. Multi-source neu-
ral translation. In NAACL HLT 2016, The 2016 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, San Diego California, USA, June 12-17,
2016, pages 30–34.

240


