



















































KUL: Recognition and Normalization of Temporal Expressions


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 325–328,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

KUL: Recognition and Normalization of Temporal Expressions 

 
 

Oleksandr Kolomiyets, Marie-Francine Moens 
Department of Computer Science 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven 

{oleksandr.kolomiyets, sien.moens}@cs.kuleuven.be 

 

 
  

 

Abstract 

 

In this paper we describe a system for the 
recognition and normalization of temporal 
expressions (Task 13: TempEval-2, Task 
A). The recognition task is approached as 
a classification problem of sentence con-
stituents and the normalization is imple-
mented in a rule-based manner. One of the 
system features is extending positive an-
notations in the corpus by semantically 
similar words automatically obtained from 
a large unannotated textual corpus. The 
best results obtained by the system are 
0.85 and 0.84 for precision and recall re-
spectively for recognition of temporal ex-
pressions; the accuracy values of 0.91 and 
0.55 were obtained for the feature values 
TYPE and VAL respectively. 

1 Introduction 

Recognition of temporal expressions1 is a task of 
proper identification of phrases with temporal 
semantics in running text. After several evalua-
tion campaigns targeted at temporal processing 
of text, such as MUC, ACE TERN and TempEv-
al-1 (Verhagen et al., 2007), the recognition and 
normalization task has been again newly reintro-
duced in TempEval-2 (Pustejovsky & Verhagen, 
2009). The task is defined as follows: determine 
the extent of the time expressions; in addition, 
determine the value of the features TYPE for the 
type of the temporal expression and its temporal 
value VAL. In this paper we describe the KUL 
system that has participated in this task.  

                                                 
1 Temporal expressions are sometimes referenced as time 
expressions and timexes.  

Architecturally, the system employs a pipe-
lined information processing chain and imple-
ments a number of machine learning classifiers 
for extracting the necessary information for the 
temporal value estimation. The normalization 
step employs a number of hand-crafted vocabula-
ries for tagging single elements of a temporal 
expression and a rule-based system for estimat-
ing the temporal value. The performance of the 
system obtained the values of 0.85 and 0.84 for 
precision and recall respectively for the recogni-
tion of temporal expressions. The accuracy for 
the type and value is 0.91 and 0.55 respectively. 

 The remainder of the paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 reports on the architecture of 
the system with single modules and describes 
theirs functions. Section 3 presents the results 
and error analysis; the conclusions are provided 
in Section 4. 

2 System Architecture 

The system is implemented in Java and follows a 
pipelined method for information processing. 
Regarding the problems it solves, it can be split 
in two sub-systems: recognition and normaliza-
tion.  

2.1 Recognition of Temporal Expressions  

This sub-system is employed for finding tempor-
al expressions in the text. It takes a sentence as 
input and looks for temporal expressions in it.   

Pre-processing: At this step the input text un-
dergoes syntactic analysis. Sentence detection, 
tokenization, part-of-speech tagging and parsing 
are applied2.  

Candidate selection: Since only certain lexi-
cal categories can be temporal expressions and 
they are defined in the TIDES standard (Ferro et 

                                                 
2  For preprocessing we use the OpenNLP package 
(http://opennlp.sourceforge.net).  

325



al., 2003), in our implementation we consider the 
following chunk-phrases as candidates for tem-
poral expressions: nouns (week, day), proper 
names (Tuesday, May), noun phrases (last Tues-
day), adjectives (current), adjective phrases (then 
current), adverbs (currently), adverbial phrases 
(a year ago), and numbers (2000). As input it 
takes the sentences with provided syntactic in-
formation and marks phrases in the parse tree 
belonging to the above types for temporal ex-
pressions.   

Annotation alignment: If the system is used 
for training classifiers, all the candidates in a 
sentence are examined against the available an-
notations. The candidates, whose parse and anno-
tation extents aligned, are taken as positive ex-
amples and the rest is considered as negative.  

Feature Design: To produce a feature-vector 
we use most valuable features extracted for 
phrase-candidate. After a number of experiments 
the following features were selected:  

• Last token in the phrase, most probable 
token to be a temporal trigger; 

• Lemma of the last phrasal token; 

• Part-of-speech of the last phrasal token; 

• Character pattern of the last phrasal to-
ken as introduced in (Ahn et al., 2007); 

• Neighbor POS’s. The concatenated part-
of-speech tags of the last phrasal token 
and its preceding token;  

• Character pattern of the entire phrase; 

• Phrase surface. A concatenated string of 
sub-parse  types for the phrase; 

• A Boolean feature indicating nested 
complex phrasal parses, such as noun 
verb, adverbial, adjective or preposition-
al phrase; 

• Depth of the phrase. The number of the 
nested sub-parses to the deepest pre-
terminal sub-parse.  

All the features are considered as Boolean. 

Classification: Once the classifiers are trained 
they can be used for recognition of temporal ex-
pressions on test sentences. A preprocessed sen-
tence is taken as input and starting from its 
parse-tree root the candidate-phrases are classi-
fied. The most probable class will be assigned to 
the candidate under consideration. Once the 
phrase is classified as temporal expression no 

further classification of nested phrases is per-
formed, since no embedded timexes are allowed 
in the corpus. After a series of experiments with 
different machine learning techniques on the 
training data the maximum entropy classifier was 
chosen. 

Extending positive instances: Sparseness of 
annotated corpora is the biggest challenge for 
any supervised machine learning technique. To 
overcome this problem we hypothesize that 
knowledge of semantic similar words could be 
found by associating words that do not occur in 
the training set to similar words that did occur in 
the training set. Furthermore, we would like to 
learn these similarities automatically in order to 
be as much as possible independent of know-
ledge sources that might not be available for all 
languages or domains. For example, there is in 
TimeBank a temporal expression “last summer“ 
with the temporal trigger summer, but there is no 
annotation of temporal expressions built around 
the temporal trigger winter, and this means that 
no temporal expression with the trigger winter 
can be recognized. Something similar usually 
happens to any annotated corpus and we want to 
find a way how to find other temporal expres-
sions outside the available data, which can be 
used for training. On the other hand, we want to 
avoid a naïve selection of words as, for example, 
from a gazetteer with temporal triggers, which 
may contradict with grammatical rules and the 
lexical context of a timex in text, e.g.: 

 
on Tuesday said.... 

 
But grammatically wrong by naïve replacement 
from a gazetteer:  

… on week said*… 
… on day said*… 

… on month said* … 
 
In order to find these words, which are legiti-

mate at a certain position in a certain context we 
use the latent word language model (LWLM) 
(Deschacht & Moens, 2009) with a Hidden Mar-
kov Model approach for estimating the latent 
word parameters.  

Complementary, we use WordNet (Miller, 
1995) as a source that can provide a most com-
plete set of words similar to the given one. One 
should note that the use of WordNet is not 
straight-forward. Due to the polysemy, the word 
sense disambiguation (WSD) problem has to be 
solved. Our system uses latent words obtained by 
the LWLM and chooses the synset with the high-

326



est overlap between WordNet synonyms and 
coordinate terms, and the latent words. The over-
lap value is calculated as the sum of LWLM 
probabilities for matching words. 

Having these two sets of synonyms and after a 
series of preliminary tests we found the setting, 
at which the system produces the highest results 
and submitted several runs with different strate-
gies:  

• Baseline (no expansion) (KUL Run 1) 

• 3 LWLM words with highest probabili-
ties (KUL Run 2) 

• 3 WordNet coordinate terms; WSD is 
solved by means of LWLM3 (KUL Run 
3)  

For each available annotation in the corpus a 
positive instance is generated. After that, the to-
ken at the most probable position for a temporal 
trigger is replaced by a synonym from the syn-
onym set found to the available token.  

2.2 Normalization of Temporal Expressions 

Normalization of temporal expressions is a 
process of estimating standardized temporal val-
ues and types. For example, the temporal expres-
sion “summer 1990” has to be resolved to its 
value of 1990-SU and the type of DATE. In 
contrast, for the expression “last year” the value 
cannot be estimated directly, rather it gets a mod-
ified value of another time expression.  

Due to a large variance of expressions denot-
ing the same date and vagueness in language, 
rule-based systems have been proven to perform 
better than machine-learning ones for the norma-
lization task. The current implementation follows 
a rule-based approach and takes a pre-processed 
document with recognized temporal expressions 
(as it is described in Section 2.1) and estimates a 
standardized ISO-based date/time value. In the 
following sections we provide implementation 
details of the system. 

Before the temporal value is estimated, we 
employ a classifier, which uses the same feature 
sets and classify the temporal expression among 
type classes DATE, TIME, DURATION and 
SET.  

Labeling: Labeling text is a process of provid-
ing tags to tokens of chunk-phrases from a de-

                                                 
3 Preliminary experiments, when the most common sense in 
WordNet is chosen for increasing the number of positive 
examples, showed a low performance level and thus has not 
been proposed for evaluations. 

fined set of tags. We carefully examined availa-
ble annotated temporal expressions and annota-
tion standards to determine categories of words 
participating in temporal expressions. The fol-
lowing set of categories with labels based on se-
mantics of temporally relevant information and 
simple syntax was defined: ordinal numbers 
(first, 30th etc.), cardinal numbers (one, two, 10 
etc.), month names (Jan., January etc.), week 
day names (Mo., Monday etc.), season names 
(summer, winter etc.), parts of day (morning, 
afternoon etc.), temporal directions (ago, later, 
earlier etc.), quantifiers (several, few etc.), mod-
ifiers (recent, last etc.), approximators (almost, 
nearly etc.), temporal co-references (time, period 
etc.), fixed single token timexes (tomorrow, to-
day etc.), holidays (Christmas, Easter etc.) and 
temporal units (days, months, years etc.). Also 
fine-grained categories are introduced: day num-
ber, month number and year number. For each 
category we manually construct a vocabulary, in 
which each entry specifies a value of a temporal 
field or a final date/time value, or a method with 
parameters to apply.  

As input, the normalization takes a recognized 
temporal expression and its properties, such as 
the temporal type and the discourse type4. During 
labeling each token in a temporal expression is 
tagged with one or multiple labels corresponding 
to the categories defined above. For each of the 
categories a custom detector is implemented. The 
detector declares the method to run and the ex-
pected type of the result. The rules that imple-
ment the logics for the detector are inherited 
from an abstract class for this specific detector, 
so that if a new rule needs to be implemented its 
realization is limited to the development of one 
class, all the rest the detector does automatically. 
Besides, the order, in which detectors have to be 
run, can be specified (as for example, in case of 
fine-grained detectors). As output, the module 
provides labels of the categories to the tokens in 
the temporal expression. If there is no entry in 
the vocabulary for a token, its part-of-speech tag 
is used as the label.  

 Value estimation: Value estimation is 
implemented in the way of aggregating the 
values defined for entries in the vocabulary 
and/or executing instructions or methods 
specified. Also a set of predefined resolution 

                                                 
4 Since in TempEval-2 the reference to the timex with re-
spect to which the value estimated is given, the normaliza-
tion module considers all timexes as deictic.   

327



rules is provided and can be extended with new 
implementations of resolution strategies.  

For resolution of complex relative temporal 
expressions, the value for which cannot be esti-
mated directly, we need to rely on additional in-
formation found at the recognition step. This in-
cludes the semantic type of the timex, discourse 
type and contextual temporal information 
(speech or document creation time, or previously 
mentioned timexes). Let’s consider the following 
temporal expression as an example: 10 days ago.  
In this example the temporal expression receives 
a modified value of another timex, namely the 
value of the document creation time. The tem-
poral expression is recognized and classified as a 
date (SEM TYPE: DATE), which refers to 
another timex (DISCOURSE TYPE: DEIC-
TIC). It takes the value of the referenced timex 
and modifies it with respect to the number (10), 
magnitude (days) and temporal direction (ago). 
Thus, the final value is calculated by subtracting 
a number of days for the value of the referenced 
timex.  

3 Results and Error Analysis  

In the Table 1 the results of the best-performing 
runs are presented.  

Table 1. Results of different runs of the system. 

As we can see the best results were obtained 
by extending available annotations with maxi-
mum 3 additional instances, which are extracted 
as coordinate terms in WordNet, whereas the 
WSD problem was solved as the greatest overlap 
between coordinate terms and latent words ob-
tained by the LWLM.  

Most of the errors at the recognition step were 
caused by misaligned parses and annotations.  

For normalization we acknowledge the signi-
ficance of estimating a proper temporal value 
with a correct link to the temporal expression 
with its value. In the TempEval-2 training data 
the links to the temporal expressions indicating 
how the value is calculated were not provided, 
and thus, the use of machine learning tools for 

training and automatic disambiguation was not 
possible. We choose a fixed strategy and all rela-
tive temporal expressions were resolved with 
respect to the document creation time, which 
caused errors with wrong temporal values and a 
low performance level.  

4 Conclusions 

For TempEval-2 we proposed a system for the 
recognition and normalization of temporal ex-
pressions. Multiple runs were submitted, among 
which the best results were obtained with auto-
matically expanded positive instances by words 
derived as coordinate terms from WordNet for 
which the proper sense was found as the greatest 
overlap between coordinate terms and latent 
words found by the LWLM.  

Acknowledgements 

This work has been funded by the Flemish gov-
ernment as a part of the project AMASS++ 
(Grant: IWT-60051) and by Space Applications 
Services NV as part of the ITEA2 project LIN-
DO (ITEA2-06011, IWT-70043). 

References  

Ahn, D., van Rantwijk, J., and de Rijke, M. 2007. A 
Cascaded Machine Learning Approach to Interpret-
ing Temporal Expressions. In Proceedings of 
NAACL-HLT 2007. 

Deschacht, K., and Moens M.-F. 2009. Using the La-
tent Words Language Model for Semi-Supervised 
Semantic Role Labeling. In Proceedings of the 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing.   

Ferro, L., Gerber, L., Mani, I., Sundheim, B., and 
Wilson, G. 2003. TIDES 2003 Standard for the 
Annotation of Temporal Expressions. 

Miller, G. A. 1995. WordNet: A Lexical Database for 
English. Communications of the ACM, 38(11): 39-
41. 

Pustejovsky, J. and Verhagen, M. 2009. SemEval-
2010 Task 13: Evaluating Events, Time Expres-
sions, and Temporal Relations (TempEval-2). In 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tions: Recent Achievements and Future Directions. 

Verhagen, M., Gaizauskas, R.,  Schilder, F., Hepple, 
M.,  and Pustejovsky, J. 2007. Semeval-2007 Task 
15: Tempeval Temporal Relation Identification. In 
SemEval-2007: 4th International Workshop on 
Semantic Evaluations. 

Run Recognition Normalization 

 P R F1 
TYPE 
Acc. 

VAL 
Acc. 

1 0.78 0.82 0.8 0.91 0.55 

2 0.75 0.85 0.797 0.91 0.51 

3 0.85 0.84 0.845 0.91 0.55 

328


