



















































UC3M System: Determining the Extent, Type and Value of Time Expressions in TempEval-2


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 329–332,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

UC3M system: Determining the Extent, Type and Value of Time 
Expressions in TempEval-2 

 
 

María Teresa Vicente-Díez, Julián Moreno Schneider, Paloma Martínez 
Department of Computer Science 
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 

Avda. Universidad, 30 
Leganés, 28911, Madrid, Spain. 

{tvicente, jmschnei, pmf}@inf.uc3m.es 

 
  

 

Abstract 

This paper describes the participation of 
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid in Task A of 
the TempEval-2 evaluation. The UC3M 
system was originally developed for the 
temporal expressions recognition and 
normalization (TERN task) in Spanish texts, 
according to the TIDES standard. Current 
version supposes an almost-total refactoring of 
the earliest system. Additionally, it has been 
adapted to the TimeML annotation schema 
and a considerable effort has been done with 
the aim of increasing its coverage. It takes a 
rule-based design both in the identification and 
the resolution phases. It adopts an inductive 
approach based on the empirical study of 
frequency of temporal expressions in Spanish 
corpora. Detecting the extent of the temporal 
expressions the system achieved a 
Precision/Recall of 0.90/0.87 whereas, in 
determining the TYPE and VALUE of those 
expressions, system results were 0.91 and 
0.83, respectively.  

1 Introduction 

The study of temporality in NLP is not a new 
task. However, in the last years it has witnessed a 
huge interest. Initiatives like TempEval task or 
the Automatic Context Extraction1 (ACE) TERN 
competitions have boosted research on the field 
and have promoted the development of new 
resources to the scientific community. 

There are two main advantages in 
participating in these evaluations. On the one 

                                                 
1 Automatic Content Extraction Evaluation. National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig//tests/ace/ 

hand it is possible to measure the systems’ 
performance under standardized metrics, sharing 
datasets and other resources. On the other hand, 
it is possible to make comparative evaluations 
among distinct participants looking forward the 
same objectives but using different approaches. 

Until recently, most of temporally annotated 
corpora, as well as temporal taggers, were 
available in English. Since languages as Spanish 
start to become prominent in the field it seems 
interesting the development of specific resources. 
Tempeval-2 has contributed to this target in a 
significant way thanks to the release of annotated 
corpora and the publication of specific guidelines 
(Sauri et al., 2009), (Saurí et al., 2010). 

This paper resumes the participation of the 
UC3M system in the task of determining the 
extent and resolving the value of time 
expressions in texts (Task A). This system was 
originally developed for the Spanish TERN task 
proposed in ACE 2007 evaluation (Vicente-Díez 
et al., 2007), achieving encouraging results 
although it was in a early stage of development. 

The system follows a ruled-based approach 
whose knowledge base has been inducted from 
the study of annotated temporal corpora 
(Vicente-Díez et al., 2008). A machine learning 
approach was initially discarded due to the 
limitation of annotated Spanish corpora. 

The aims of this work were to improve the 
coverage of the original system and test its 
performance against new available datasets with 
a view to its integration in future domains of 
application. Main challenges were to move to a 
new temporal model where interval is considered 
as the basic time unit as well as the isolation of 
the internal representation of temporal 
information from the annotation schema.  

329



This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
describes the system operation; Section 3 
presents experimentation and results; conclusions 
and future work are discussed in Section 4. 

2 System Description 

The UC3M system recognizes and annotates 
temporal expressions in texts based on a 
linguistic rules engine for Spanish language. 

Our system is divided into three different 
parts: recognition of temporal expressions, 
normalization of the detections, and annotation 
of the temporal expressions according to the 
TimeML schema.  

Following the definition of the Task A, the 
system is able to determine not only the extent of 
the temporal expressions but also the value of the 
features TYPE and VAL. It differentiates among 
the four TYPE values (dates, durations, sets and 
times) thanks to the classification of the 
recognition rules. The system straightforwardly 
provides a VAL attribute that accomplishes the 
format defined by TIMEX2 and TIMEX3 
standards through its internal model for 
representing time.  

2.1 Recognition 

The recognizer detects temporal expressions by 
means of a set of linguistic rules, focusing on 
those which are most frequent in Spanish.  

We adopted an empirical inductive approach 
through the analysis of the different types of 
temporal expressions in news corpora, and we 
could outline a typology of most common time 
expressions in the language. The typology 
together with the patterns that define these 
expressions form up the knowledge base for a 
successful automatic identification and resolution 
of temporal expressions. 

The rule engine allows managing different sets 
of rules independently of the target. In this case, 
the rules have been created attending to each 
pattern that is likely to match a temporal 
expression. Each rule determines the set of 
tokens that form an expression, the normalization 
type to be applied and the expression type. 

In Table 1 an example of a rule to identify 
dates is shown. The first line represents the name 
of the rule. The second line specifies the 
normalization method that will be used once the 
expression is recognized. The third line specifies 
the type of the temporal expression and the 
annotation pattern. Finally, the fourth line shows 
the tokens that trigger the rule.  

1. TEMPORAL_RULE(r1.3) 
2. TEMPORAL_ANALYSIS_NORMALIZATION_ 

TYPE=(abs_dia_mes_anio_3) 
3. TEMPORAL_ANALYSIS_TYPE= 

(date:init:YYYY-MM-DD) 
4. RULE= 

[[el/_] [DIC(DIASEMANA)/_] [dia/_] DIC(DIA) de 
DIC(MES) DIC(PREP) METHOD(year)] 

Table 1 Rule definition example 

The operation of the system is described as 
follows: first, the text is parsed token by token. 
Then, for each token, every rule is checked to 
find out if it triggers through a given token and 
the following ones. 

This operation implies that the higher the 
number of rules, the slower the text processing. 
The disadvantage of the processing speed has 
been accepted as a design criterion for the sake 
of the simplicity of creating new rules.  

2.2 Normalization 

The temporal expression normalization is done 
as an intermediate step between recognition and 
annotation, isolating the extraction of semantics 
from the annotation schema while trying to 
facilitate the second step. 

Normalization is important since recognized 
time expressions are managed and returned in a 
standard format that avoids semantic 
ambiguities.  

UC3M system applies an interval-based 
temporal normalization. It means that every 
temporal expression is represented as an interval 
with two boundaries: an initial and a final date 
(including time). This approach is motivated by 
the belief that the use of intervals as a basic time 
unit leads to a lower loss of semantics. For 
instance, when an expression like “en enero” (“in 
January”) is detected, current task proposes the 
annotation “2010-01”. However, we think that 
for many applications that are likely to use this 
system it would be more useful to have the 
complete interval that the expression refers 
(“2010-01-01 - 2010-01-31”). Through a set of 
procedures (as getting the length of a given 
month), our system tries to define the interval 
boundaries as much as possible. Every 
normalized expression is made up of two dates 
although it refers to a concrete date or time. 

In the internal representation model 
normalized dates and times adopts the ISO-8601 
form, durations are captured as a length related 
to the unit of measure, and sets are managed in a 
similar way to durations, adding quantity and 
frequency modifiers. 

330



The normalization process is dependent on the 
rule used to recognize each expression. For each 
new rule added to the engine a new 
normalization clause is needed. 

In Table 2 some temporal expression 
normalization examples are presented: 

Expression Init Date Final Date 
18 de abril de 2005 
18th of April of 2005 

20050418 20050418 

mayo de 1999 
May of 1999 

19990501 19990531 

en 1975 
in 1975 

19750101 19751231 

el próximo mes 
next month 

20100501 20100531 

Table 2 Interval-based normalization sample 

2.3 Annotation 

The annotation process starts from the 
normalized form of the temporal expression. The 
system implements a transformation procedure 
based on patterns. This transformation is 
dependent on the temporal expression type. 

Dates: when dealing with dates, the VAL 
value is extracted from the initial boundary of the 
interval in accordance with the annotation pattern 
defined in the corresponding rule (see Table 1). 
Some examples are shown in Table 3. 

Expression Norm. 
Init Date 

Pattern VAL 

mayo de 1999 
May of 1999 

19990501 YYYY-MM 1999-05 

la semana  
pasada 
last week 

20100405 YYYY-WXX 2010-W14 

los años 80 
the 80’s 

19800101 YYY 198 

Table 3 Annotation patterns for dates 

Durations: the model represents durations by 
capturing the length of action as a quantity. This 
quantity is stored in the position of the initial 
boundary whose granularity corresponds with the 
unit of measure. The annotation patterns indicate 
the granularity to be considered (Table 4). 

Expression 
Norm. 

Init Date 
Pattern VAL 

4 años 
4 años 

00040000 PXY P4Y 

4 meses, 3 
días y 2 
horas 
4 moths,3 
days and 2 
hours 

00040003- 
02:00:00 

COMBINED P4M3DT2H 

Table 4 Annotation patterns for durations 

Sets are managed similarly to durations. In this 
case also frequency and quantity modifiers are 

captured internally together with the interval 
representation, so that the transformation is 
immediate. 

Expression Norm. Init Date Pattern VAL FREQ QUANT 

cada 2 años 
each 2 
years 

00020000 
F1QEv 

PXY P2Y 1x EVERY 

2 veces al 
día 
twice a day 

00000001 
F2QEv 

PXD P1D 2x EVERY 

Table 5 Annotation patterns for sets 

Times: the representation model allows 
capturing hours, minutes, seconds and 
milliseconds if they are specified. Similarly to 
the annotation of dates, VAL value is obtained of 
the information in the initial boundary in the way 
the pattern determines (Table 6). 

Expression Norm. Init Date Pattern VAL 

a las 12:30 PM 
at 12:30 PM 

20100405 
12:30:00 

THXMX 
2010-04-

05T12H30M 
por la tarde 
in the evening 

20100405 
12:00:00 

TDP 2010-04-05TAF 

Table 6 Annotation patterns for times 

3 Experiments and Results 

Precision and recall and f-measure are used as 
evaluation metrics according to the evaluation 
methodology (Pustejovsky et al., 2009). To 
determine the quality of annotation, results are 
completed with figures concerning to the 
resolution of TYPE and VAL attributes. 

Before evaluation, the system was tested on 
the training corpus and, once the test datasets 
were released, it was tested on the corpus for 
relations detection (tasks C-F) since it contained 
both files "timex-extents.tab" and "timex-
attributes.tab". The results are shown in Table 7. 

Timex Extent Timex Attbs. 
Corpus 

P R F TYPE VAL 
Training 0.93 0.67 0.78 0.87 0.82 

Relation-Test 0.89 0.63 0.74 0.86 0.83 
Table 7 Results on training corpus 

In Table 8 results of final evaluation are 
presented and compared with the other 
participants’ figures for the same task and 
language. Since the test corpora were not 
aligned, further comparisons for different 
languages have not been proposed. 

Our system achieved a precision rate of 90% 
and a recall of 87%, being the f-measure of 88%. 
Thus, it supposes a significant improvement over 
our earlier work. In more, determining the value 
of TIMEX3 attributes the system raises good 

331



figures, obtaining the best VAL score, what 
means that normalization is working well. 

Timex Extent Timex Attrbs. 
Team 

P R F TYPE VAL 
UC3M 0.90 0.87 0.88 0.91 0.83 
TIPSem 0.95 0.87 0.91 0.91 0.78 

TIPSem-B 0.97 0.81 0.88 0.99 0.75 
Table 8 Results on test corpus 

Analyzing the experimental errors several 
facts can be highlighted: 

The percentage of expressions completely and 
correctly recognized and normalized is good but 
there are some missing expressions, mainly due 
to their complexity (or fuzziness) and to the 
absence of a rule to manage them, i.e.: “durante 
un largo periodo” (during a long period).  

Errors in determining the extent of the 
temporal expressions were mainly due to the 
inclusion of prepositions or articles that precede 
to the kernel of the expression, i.e.: “a corto 
plazo” vs. “corto plazo” (in short term). 

A number of false positives were due to some 
inconsistencies in the annotation of the corpus. 
An example has been observed in fuzzy time 
expressions that denotes a future reference: “el 
próximo técnico” (the next trainer) (not 
annotated) vs. “el próximo preparador” (the next 
coach) (FUTURE_REF)  

Although normalization figures are good, 
some annotations are incorrect if their resolution 
implies context-aware mechanisms. 

4 Conclusions and Future Work 

In this paper a rule based approach for 
automatically detecting and annotating temporal 
expressions according to TimeML TIMEX3 tag 
has been presented. It is based on an empirical 
study of temporal expressions frequencies in 
Spanish that provides the main recognition rules 
of the knowledge base. At the normalization 
stage, a representation model based on intervals 
has been adopted with the aim of capturing most 
semantics. The annotation process relies on 
patterns that distinguish among different types 
and granularities of the expressions to be tagged. 

Obtained results suppose a significant 
improvement over our previous work. Part of this 
success is due to the specific annotation 
guidelines for Spanish that have been released 
with occasion of the TempEval-2. It is a helpful 
tool to optimize the system performance, since 
each language has its own peculiarities that 
should be taken into account. The promotion of a 
common framework and the development of 

resources like specific corpora are also very 
interesting topics to boost research in the field, 
since both comparative and standardized 
evaluation of the systems are needed. 

Several aspects should be taken into account 
in future versions of the system. In order to 
improve the recall new knowledge must be 
incorporated to the rule engine. That supposes 
the addition of new rules and annotation patterns. 
This objective includes the implementation of 
dictionaries with a broader coverage of 
translatable temporal expressions, such as 
holidays, festivities, etc. 

We will also explore context extraction 
techniques that facilitate the resolution of 
context-aware temporal expressions. 

Another pending issue is the enlargement of 
the system to span the detection of events and the 
relations among events and time expressions. 

Finally, the system will be integrated into a 
NLP application that benefits from the temporal 
information management. We want to check the 
improvement that the extraction of temporal 
entities supposes on a traditional approach. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This work has been partially supported by the 
Research Network MAVIR (S-0505/TIC-0267), 
and project BRAVO (TIN2007-67407-C03-01). 

References  

James Pustejovsky, Marc Verhagen, Xue Nianwen, 
Robert Gaizauskas, Mark Hepple, Frank Schilder, 
Graham Katz, Roser Saurí, Estela Saquete, 
Tommaso Caselli, Nicoletta Calzolari, Kiyong Lee, 
and Seohyun Im. 2009. TempEval2: Evaluating 
Events, Time Expressions and Temporal Relations. 
SemEval Task Proposal. 

María Teresa Vicente-Díez, Doaa Samy and Paloma 
Martínez. 2008. An empirical approach to a 
preliminary successful identification and resolution 
of temporal expressions in Spanish news corpora. 
In Proceedings of the LREC'08. 

María Teresa Vicente-Díez, César de Pablo-Sánchez 
and Paloma Martínez. Evaluación de un Sistema de 
Reconocimiento y Normalización de Expresiones 
Temporales en Español. Procesamiento del 
lenguaje natural. N. 39 pp. 113-120, Sept. 2007. 

Roser Saurí, Estela Saquete and James Pustejovsky. 
2010. Annotating Time Expressions in Spanish. 
TimeML Annotation Guidelines. Version 
TempEval-2010.  

Roser Saurí, Olga Batiukova, James Pustejovsky. 
2009. Annotating Events in Spanish. TimeML 
Annotation Guidelines. Version TempEval-2010. 

332


