



















































HR-WSD: System Description for All-Words Word Sense Disambiguation on a Specific Domain at SemEval-2010


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 433–435,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

HR-WSD: System Description for All-words Word Sense Disambiguation
on a Specific Domain at SemEval-2010

Meng-Hsien Shih
National Taipei University of Technology

Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
simon.xian@gmail.com

Abstract

The document describes the knowledge-
based Domain-WSD system using heuris-
tic rules (knowledge-base). This HR-
WSD system delivered the best perfor-
mance (55.9%) among all Chinese sys-
tems in SemEval-2010 Task 17: All-words
WSD on a specific domain.

1 Introduction

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is essential
for language understanding systems such as in-
formation retrieval, summarization, and machine
translation systems (Dagan and Itai, 1994; Schutze
and Pedersen, 1995; Ng and Zelle, 1997). In par-
ticular due to the rapid development of other is-
sues in computational linguistics, WSD has been
considered the next important task to be solved.
Among various WSD tasks, the lexical sample
task can achieve a precision rate more than 70%
in Chinese, so can the all-words task in English,
but currently no Chinese all-words WSD system is
available. This study proposes an all-words WSD
system conducted on a specific domain which can
achieve a 55.9% precision rate.

This system makes use of certain characteristics
of WordNet. First, the sense inventory in Chinese
WordNet is ordered by the “prototypicality” of the
words. In other words, the first sense of a word
with multiple senses will be the prototype mean-
ing of that word. In addition to semantic relations
and sense definitions, Chinese WordNet also in-
cludes sense axes which indicate the relations be-
tween Chinese senses and corresponding English
senses.

2 Proposed Approach

Two heuristic rules are devised to characterize
domain texts: In a domain text, domain senses
are more likely to occur in words if they have one

(Heuristic Rule 1); on the other hand, for words
with no domain senses, the most generic usages
(prototype senses) are more likely to be adopted
(Heuristic Rule 2). Therefore, as proposed by
Li et al.(1995) for the WordNet-based domain-
independent texts WSD task, two heuristic rules
(HR) are taken into consideration in the domain
WSD test:

for all senses sk of w do
if w has domain sense

choose domain sense sk
else

choose prototype sense s1
end

Figure 1: Heuristic Rules based WSD

Besides, sense definitions from WordNet
were also tested with simplified Lesk algorithm
(Lesk, 1986; Kilgarriff and Rosenzweig, 2000)
in another experiment to examine the effect of
considering sense definitions in domain WSD:

for all senses sk of w do
if w has domain sense

choose domain sense sk
elseif Dk overlaps with C:

choose sense sk with Dk
that overlaps the most

else:
choose prototype sense s1

end

Figure 2: HR with simplified Lesk Algorithm.
Dk is the set of content words occurring in the dic-
tionary definition of sense sk. C is the set of con-
tent words in the context.

433



3 Procedures

Before the test only preprocessing including seg-
mentation and parts of speech tagging will be
applied to the target texts, in order to eliminate
those senses of the same word form in other parts
of speech; the background documents provided
by SemEval-2010 are not used for training since
this is not a supervised system. According to
Wang (2002), with preprocessing of PoS tagging
alone, 20% of word sense ambiguity can be distin-
guished.

Since the current number of semantic relations
in Chinese WordNet is still less than that in En-
glish WordNet (PWN), to detect domain senses,
the sense axes in Chinese WordNet are exploited.
By seeding with English words such as “environ-
ment” and “ecology,” all English words related to
these seed words can be captured with the help of
the semantic relations in Princeton WordNet. By
mapping these environment-related English words
to Chinese words with any kind of semantic rela-
tions in the sense axes, the corresponding Chinese
domain senses can be identified.

Therefore, the HR-WSD system will first con-
sider any domain senses for the words to be dis-
ambiguated; if there is no such sense, the proto-
type sense will be adopted. Another test where
sense definitions from WordNet are considered to
facilitate HR-based disambiguation was also con-
ducted.

4 Evaluation

The results were evaluated according to three man-
ually tagged documents in SemEval-2010 Task
17: All-words WSD on a Specific domain (Agirre
et al., 2010). The most frequent sense baseline
(MFS) refers to the first sense in WordNet lexical
markup framework (In Chinese WordNet senses
are ordered according to annotations in hand-
labelled corpora). In these tagged domain texts,
only nouns and verbs (two major types of content
words) as a single word are disambiguated. There-
fore, in this system only these two kinds of words
will be tagged with senses. Adjectives, adverbs, or
words in multiple forms (e.g., idioms and phrases)
are not considered, in order to simplify the test and
observe the results more clearly.

5 Results

By observing that the HR-WSD system* (Rank
1) outperformed other systems and was closest to

Rank Precision Recall
MFS 0.562 0.562
1* 0.559 0.559
2** 0.517 0.517
3 0.342 0.285
4 0.322 0.296
Random 0.32 0.32
5 0.310 0.258

Table 1: Results.

the MFS performance we can infer that Heuristic
Rule 2 works. However, since this system perfor-
mance is still worse than MFS, it may indicate that
Heuristic Rule 1 does not work well, or even de-
creases the system performance, so the mechanism
to detect domain senses needs to be refined. Be-
sides, the inclusion of simplified Lesk algorithm**
did not perform better than the original HR-WSD
system, further investigation such as more fine-
grained definition can be expected.

6 Discussion and Future Development

Although PoS tagging may help filter out senses
from other parts of speech of the same word form,
incorrect PoS tagging will lead to incorrect sense
tagging, which did happen in the HR-WSD sys-
tem, in particular when there is more than one pos-
sible PoS tag for the word. For instance, ’nuan-
hua’ in ’quan-qiu nuan-hua’ (global warming) is
manually tagged with a verbal sense in the answer
key from SemEval-2010, but tagged as a noun
in the pre-processing stage of the HR-WSD sys-
tem. The difference between manual tagged texts
and automatic tagged texts should be examined,
or consider allowing more than one PoS tag for a
word, or even no PoS pre-processing at all.

To disambiguate with the help of gloss defini-
tion, gloss words of the polysemous word must
have direct overlapping with that of its context
word, which does not always occur. To solve this
problem, we may expand gloss words to related
words such as hyponyms, hypernyms, meronyms,
or the gloss definition of the current gloss words.

Apart from nouns and verbs, if function words
and other kinds of content words such as adjec-
tives and adverbs are to be disambiguated, the per-
formance of the current WSD system needs to be
re-examined.

As mentioned in the beginning, WSD is an es-
sential part in language understanding systems.

434



With this Chinese WSD program, information
retrieval, summarization, or machine translation
tasks would be more plausible. The proposed
heuristic rules may also work for other languages
with similar WordNet resources. Besides, this sys-
tem was currently tested on three texts from the
environment domain only. It can be expected that
this Chinese WSD can work on texts of other do-
mains.

References
Adam Kilgarriff and Joseph Rosenzweig. 2000.

Framework and results for English SENSEVAL.
Computers and the Humanities,34:15–48.

Eneko Agirre, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, Christiane Fell-
baum, Shu-kai Hsieh, Maurizio Tesconi, Monica
Monachini, Piek Vossen and Roxanne Segers. 2010.
SemEval-2010 Task 17: All-words Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation on a Specific Domain. In Proceedings
of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Eval-
uations (SemEval-2010), Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Uppsala, Sweden..

Hinrich Schutze and Jan O. Pedersen. 1995. Informa-
tion Retrieval Based on Word Senses. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Informa-
tion Retrieval.

Hui Wang. 2002. A Study on Noun Sense Disam-
biguation Based on Syntagmatic Features. Inter-
national Journal of Computational Linguistics and
Chinese Language Processing,7(2):77–88.

Hwee Tou Ng and John Zelle. 1997. Corpus-Based
Approaches to Semantic Interpretation in Natural
Language Processing. AI magazine,18(4):45–64.

Ido Dagan and Alon Itai. 1994. Word-Sense Disam-
biguation Using a Second-Language Monolingual
Corpus. Computational Linguistics,20(4):563–596.

Michael Lesk. 1986. Automatic sense disambiguation
using machine readable dictionaries: How to tell a
pine from a ice cream cone. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Systems Documen-
tation, Toronto, CA, pp. 24–26..

Xiaobin Li, Stan Szpakowicz, and Stan Matwin. 1995.
A WordNet-based Algorithm for Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation. The 14th International Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence.

435


