



















































HITSZwidth.3emCITYU: Combine Collocation, Context Words and Neighboring Sentence Sentiment in Sentiment Adjectives Disambiguation


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 448–451,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

HITSZ_CITYU: Combine Collocation, Context Words and Neighbor-
ing Sentence Sentiment in Sentiment Adjectives Disambiguation 

 
 

Ruifeng Xu1,2, Jun Xu1 
1Harbin Institute of Technology, 

Shenzhen Campus, China 
xuruifeng@hitsz.edu.cn 
hit.xujun@gmail.com 

Chunyu Kit2 
2City University of Hong Kong, 

Hong Kong 
ctckit@cityu.edu.hk  

  
 

Abstract 

This paper presents the HIT_CITYU systems 
in Semeval-2 Task 18, namely, disambiguat-
ing sentiment ambiguous adjectives. The base-
line system (HITSZ_CITYU_3) incorporates 
bi-gram and n-gram collocations of sentiment 
adjectives, and other context words as features 
in a one-class Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
classifier. To enhance the baseline system, col-
location set expansion and characteristics 
learning based on word similarity and semi-
supervised learning are investigated, respec-
tively. The final system (HITSZ_CITYU_1/2) 
combines collocations, context words and 
neighboring sentence sentiment in a two-class 
SVM classifier to determine the polarity of 
sentiment adjectives. The final systems 
achieved 0.957 and 0.953 (ranked 1st and 2nd) 
macro accuracy, and 0.936 and 0.933 (ranked 
2nd and 3rd) micro accuracy, respectively.  

 

1 Introduction 
Sentiment analysis is always puzzled by the con-
text-dependent sentiment words that one word 
brings positive, neutral or negative meanings in 
different contexts. Hatzivassiloglou and 
Mckeown (1997) predicated the polarity of ad-
jectives by using the pairs of adjectives linked by 
consecutive or negation conjunctions. Turney 
and Littman (2003) determined the polarity of 
sentiment words by estimating the point-wise 
mutual information between sentiment words 
and a set of seed words with strong polarity. An-
dreevskaia and Bergler (2006) used a Sentiment 
Tag Extraction Program to extract sentiment-
bearing adjectives from WordNet. Esuli and Se-
basian (2006) studied the context-dependent sen-
timent words in WordNet but ignored the in-

stances in real context. Wu et al. (2008) applied 
collocation plus a SVM classifier in Chinese sen-
timent adjectives disambiguation. Xu et al. (2008) 
proposed a semi-supervised learning algorithm to 
learn new sentiment word and their context-
dependent characteristics.  

Semeval-2 Task 18 is designed to provide a 
common framework and dataset for evaluating 
the disambiguation techniques for Chinese sen-
timent adjectives. The HITSZ_CITYU group 
submitted three runs corresponding to one base-
line system and one improved systems (two runs). 
The baseline system (HITSZ_CITYU_3) is 
based on collocations between sentiment words 
and their targets as well as their context words. 
For the ambiguous adjectives, 412 positive and 
191 negative collocations are built from a 100-
million-word corpus as the seed collocation set. 
Using the context words of seed collocations as 
features, a one-class SVM classifier is trained in 
the baseline system. Using HowNet-based word 
similarity as clue, the seed collocations are ex-
panded to improve the coverage of collocation-
based technique. Furthermore, a semi-supervised 
learning algorithm is developed to learn new col-
locations between sentiment words and their tar-
gets from raw corpus. Finally, the inner sentence 
features, such as collocations and context words, 
and the inter sentence features, i.e. neighboring 
sentence sentiments, are incorporated to deter-
mine the polarity of ambiguous adjectives. The 
improved systems (HITSZ_CITYU_1/2) 
achieved 0.957 and 0.953 macro accuracy 
(ranked 1st and 2nd) and 0.936 and 0.933 micro 
accuracy (ranked 2nd and 3rd), respectively. This 
result shows that collocation, context-words and 
neighboring sentence sentiment are effective in 
sentiment adjectives disambiguation. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 presents the collocation extraction sub-
system based on lexical statistics. Section 3 

448



presents the baseline system and Section 4 
presents the improved systems. The experiment 
results are given in Section 5 and finally, Section 
6 concludes. 

2 Collocation Extraction 
A lexical statistics-based collocation extraction 
subsystem is developed to identify both the bi-
gram and n-gram collocations of sentiment ad-
jectives. This subsystem is based on our previous 
research on Chinese collocation extraction. It 
recognizes the co-occurring words of a headword 
as collocations which have co-occurrence fre-
quency significance among all co-occurring 
words and co-occurrence position significance 
among all co-occurring positions.  

For a sentiment adjective, noted as whead, any 
word within the [-5,+5] context window is a co-
word, denoted as wco-i for 1≤ i ≤ k, where k is the 
total number of different co-words of whead.  

BI-Strength(whead,wco-i) between a head word 
whead and a co-word w co-i (i=1, to k) is designed 
to measure the co-occurrence frequency signifi-
cance as follows:  

)()(
)()(5.0

)()(
)()(5.0

),(

minmaxminmax icoico

icoicohead

headhead

headicohead

icohead

wfwf
wfwwf

wfwf
wfwwf

wwStrengthBI

−−

−−−

−

−
−

⋅+
−
−

⋅

=−
(1) 

where, fmax(whead) , fmin(whead) and )( headwf are the 
highest, lowest and average co-occurrence fre-
quencies among all the co-words of whead,, re-
spectively; fmax(wco-i), fmin(wcoi) and )( icowf −  are 
respectively the highest, lowest and average co-
occurrence frequencies of the co-words for wco-i. 
The value of BI-Strength(whead wco-j) ranges from 
-1 to 1, and a larger value means a stronger asso-
ciation. Suppose f(whead,wco-i, m) is the frequency 
that wco-i co-occurs with whead at position m(–
5<=m<=5). The BI-Spread(whead,wco-i) is de-
signed to characterizes the significance that wco-i 
around whead at neighbouring places as follows: 

 
),,(

|),(),,(|
),( 5

5

5

5

∑

∑

−=
−

−=
−−

−

−
=−

m
icohead

m
icoheadicohead

icohead

mwwf

wwfmwwf
wwSpreadBI

(2) 

where, ),( icohead wwf − , fmax(whead,,wco-i), and fmin 
(whea,,dwco-i) are the average, highest, and lowest 
co-occurrence frequencies among all 10 posi-
tions, respectively. The value of BI-Spread(whead, 
wco-i) ranges from 0 to 1. A larger value means 
that whead and wco-i tend to co-occur in one or two 
positions.  

The word pairs satisfying, (1) BI-
Strength(whead wco-j)>K0 and (2) BI-Spread(whead, 

wco-i)>U0, are extracted as bi-gram collocations, 
where K0 and U0 are empirical threshold.  

Based on the extracted bi-gram collocations, 
the appearance of each co-word in each position 
around whead is analyzed. For each of the possible 
relative distances from whead, only words occupy-
ing the position with a probability greater than a 
given threshold T are kept. Finally, the adjacent 
words satisfying the threshold requirement are 
combined as n-gram collocations. 

3 The Baseline System 
The baseline system incorporates collocation and 
context words as features in a one-class SVM 
classifier. It consists of two steps: 
 STEP 1: To match a test instance containing 
seed collocation set. If the instance cannot be 
matched by any collocations, go to STEP 2. 

STEP 2: Use a trained classifier to indentify 
the sentiment of the word.  

The collocations of 14 testing sentiment adjec-
tives are extracted from a 100-million-word cor-
pus. Collocations with obvious and consistent 
sentiment are manually identified. 412 positive 
and 191 negative collocations are established as 
the seed collocation set.  

We think that the polarity of a word can be de-
termined by exploiting the association of its co-
occurring words in sentence. We assume that, the 
two instances of an ambiguous sentiment adjec-
tives that have similar neighboring nouns may 
have the same polarity. Gamon and Aue (2005) 
made an assumption to label sentiment terms. 

We extract 13,859 sentences containing collo-
cations between negative adjective and targets 
in seed collocation set or collocations between 
ambiguous adjective and negative modifier 
(such as 过于 too) as the training data. These 
sentences are assume negative. A single-class 
classifier is then trained to recognize negative 
sentences. Three types of features are used:  

(1) Context features include bag of words 
within context in window of [-5, +5] 

(2) Collocation features contain bi-grams in 
window [-5,+5] 

(3) Collocation features contain n-grams in 
window [-5,+5] 

In our research, SVM with linear kernel is 
employed and the open source SVM package – 
LIBSVM is selected for the implementation.  

4 The Improved System 
The preliminary experiment shows that the base-
line system is not satisfactory, especially the 

449



coverage is low. It is observed that the seed col-
location set covers 17.54% of sentences contain-
ing the ambiguous adjectives while the colloca-
tions between adjective and negative modifier 
covers only 11.28%. Therefore, we expand the 
sentiment adjective-target collocation set based 
on word similarity and a semi-supervised learn-
ing algorithm orderly. We then incorporate both 
inner-sentence features (collocations, context 
words, etc.) and inter-sentence features in the 
improved systems for sentiment adjectives dis-
ambiguation.  

4.1 Collocation Set Expansion based on 
Word Similarity 

First, we expand the seed collocation set on the 
target side. The words strongly similar to known 
targets are identified by using a word similarity 
calculation package, provided by HowNet (a 
Chinese thesaurus). Once these words co-occur 
with adjective within a context window more 
often than a threshold, they are appended to seed 
collocation set. For example, “低-技能(low ca-
pacity)”is expanded from a seed collocation “低
-能力 (low capacity)”. 

Second, we manually identify the words hav-
ing the same “trend” as the testing adjectives. 
For example, “上升 increase” is selected as a 
same-trend word of “高 high”. The collocations 
of “上升” are extracted from corpus. Its collo-
cated targets with confident and consistent sen-
timent are appended to the sentiment collocation 
set of “高” if they co-occurred with “高” more 
than a threshold. In this way, some low-
frequency sentiment collocation can be obtained. 

4.2 Semi-supervised Learning of Sentiment 
Collocations 

A semi-supervised learning algorithm is devel-
oped to further expand the collocation seed set, 
which is described as follows. (It is revised based 
on our previous research (Xu et al. 2008). The 
basic assumption here is that, the sentiment of a 
sentence having ambiguous adjectives can be 
estimated based on the sentiment of its neighbor-
ing sentences.  
 
Input: Raw training corpus, labeled as Su,  
Step 1. The sentences holding strong polarities 
are recognized from Su which satisfies any two of 
following requirements, (1) contains known con-
text-free sentiment word (CFSW); (2) contains 
more than three known context-dependent senti-
ment words (CDSW); (3) contains collocations 

between degree adverbs and known CDSWs; (4) 
contains collocations between degree adverbs 
and opinion operators (the verbs indicate a opi-
nion operation, such as 称赞 praise); (5) contains 
known opinion indicator and known CDSWs. 
Step 2. Identify the strong non-opinionated sen-
tences in Su. The sentences satisfying all of fol-
lowing four conditions are recognized as non-
opinionated ones, (1) have no known sentiment 
words; (2) have no known opinion operators; (3) 
have no known degree adverbs and (4) have no 
known opinion indicators.  
Step 3. Identify the opinion indicators in the rest 
sentences. Determine their polarities if possible 
and mark the conjunction (e.g.和 and) or nega-
tion relationship (e.g.但 but) in the sentences. 
Step 4. Match the CFSWs and known CDSWs in 
Su. The polarities of CFSWs are assigned based 
on sentiment lexicon.  
Step 5. If a CDSW occurs in a sentence with cer-
tain orientations which is determined by the opi-
nion indicators, its polarity is assigned as the 
value suggested. If a CDSW co-occur with a 
seed collocated target, it polarity is assigned ac-
cording to the seed sentiment collocation set. 
Otherwise, if a CDSW co-occur with a CFSW in 
the same sentence, or the neighboring continual 
or compound sentence, the polarity of CDSW is 
assigned as the same as CFSW, or the reversed 
polarity if a negation indicator is detected. 
Step 6. Update the polarity scores of CDSWs in 
the target set by using the cases where the polari-
ty is determined in Step 5. 
Step 7. Determine the polarities of CDSWs in 
the undetermined sentences. Suppose Si is a sen-
tence and the polarity scores of all its CFSWs 
and CDSWs are known, its polarity, labeled as 
Plo(Si), is estimated by using the polarity scores 
of all of the opinion words in this sentence, viz.: 
  

∑ −+
−

=
)(_)(_

)(_)(pos_
)(

CDSWnegPCDSWposP
CFSWnegPCFSWP

SiPlo (3) 

A large value (>0) of Plo(si) implies that si tends 
to be positive, and vice versa.  
Step 8. If the sentence polarity cannot be deter-
mined by its components, we use the polarity of 
its neighboring sentences sj-1 and sj+1, labeled as 
Plo(sj-1) and Plo(sj+1), respectively, to help de-
termine Plo(sj), viz.:  

)(5.0)(*)(5.0)( 11 +− ⋅++⋅= jjjj sPlosPlosPlosPlo (4) 
where, Plo*(sj) is the polarity score of Sj (Fol-
lowing Equation 3) but ignore the contribution of 
testing adjectives while 0.5 are empirical weights.  

450



Step 9. After all of the polarities of known 
CDSWs in the training data are determined, up-
date the collocation set by identifying co-
occurred pairs with consistent sentiment. 
Step 10. Repeat Step 5 to Step 9 to re-estimate 
the sentiment of CDSWs and expand the colloca-
tion set, until the collocation set converge. 
 

In this way, the seed collocation set is further 
expanded and their sentiment characteristics are 
obtained.  

4.3 Sentiment Adjectives Classifier 
We incorporate the following 8 groups of fea-
tures in a linear-kernel two-class SVM classifier 
to classify the sentences with sentiment adjec-
tives into positive or negative: 

(1) The presence of known positive/negative 
opinion indicator and opinion operator 

(2) The presence of known positive/negative 
CFSW 

(3) The presence of known positive/negative 
CDSW(exclude the testing adjectives) 

(4) The presence of known positive/negative 
adjective-target bi-gram collocations 

(5) The presence of known positive/negative 
adjective-target n-gram collocations 

(6) The coverage of context words surround-
ing the adjectives in the context words in 
training positive/negative sentences 

(7) The sentiment of -1 sentence 
(8) The sentiment of +1 sentence 
The classifier is trained by using the sentences 

with determined sentiment which is obtained in 
the semi-supervised learning stage. 

5 Evaluations and Conclusion 
The ACL-SEMEVAL task 18 testing dataset 
contains 14 ambiguous adjectives and 2,917 in-
stances. HITSZ_CITYU group submitted three 
runs. Run-1 and Run-2 are two runs correspond-
ing to the improved system and Run-3 is the 
baseline system. The achieved performances are 
listed in Table 1.  

 
Run ID Marco Accuracy Micro Accuracy
1 0.953 0.936 
2 0.957 0.933 
3(baseline) 0.629 0.665 

Table 1: Performance of HITSZ_CITYU Runs 
 

It is observed that the improved systems 
achieve promising results which is obviously 
higher than the baseline. They are ranked 1st and 
2nd in Macro Accuracy evaluation and 2nd and 3rd 

in Micro Accuracy evaluation among 16 submit-
ted runs, respectively. 

6 Conclusion 
In this paper, we proposed similarity-based and 
semi-supervised based methods to expand the 
adjective-target seed collocation set. Meanwhile, 
we incorporate both inner-sentence (collocations 
and context words) and inter-sentence features in 
a two-class SVM classifier for the disambigua-
tion of sentiment adjectives. The achieved prom-
ising results show the effectiveness of colloca-
tion features, context words features and senti-
ment of neighboring sentences. Furthermore, we 
found that the neighboring sentence sentiments 
are important features for the disambiguation of 
sentiment ambiguous adjectives, which is ob-
viously different from the traditional word sense 
disambiguation that emphasize the inner-
sentence features. 

References  
Andreevskaia, A. and Bergler, S. 2006. Mining 

WordNet for fuzzy sentiment: Sentiment tag ex-
traction from WordNet glosses. In Proceedings of 
EACL 2006, pp. 209-216 

Esuli, A. and Sebastian, F. 2006. SENTIWORDNET: 
A publicly available lexical resource for opinion 
mining. In Proceeding of LREC 2006, pp. 417-422. 

Hatzivassiloglou, V. and McKeown, K. R. 1997. Pre-
dicting the semantic orientation of adjectives. In 
Proceeding of ACL 1997, pp.174-181 

Michael Gamon and Anthony Aue. 2005. Automatic 
identification of sentiment vocabulary: Exploiting 
low association with known sentiment terms. In 
Proceedings of the ACL05 Workshop on Feature 
Engineering for Machine Learning in Natural 
Language Processing, pp.57-64 

Ruifeng Xu, Kam-Fai Wong et al. 2008. Learning 
Knowledge from Relevant Webpage for Opinion 
Analysis, in Proceedings of 2008 IEEE / WIC / 
ACM Int. Conf. Web Intelligence, pp. 307-313  

Turney, P. D. and Littman, M. L. 2003. Measuring 
praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orienta-
tion from association. ACM Transactions on In-
formation Systems, vol. 21, no. 4, pp.315-346 

Yunfang Wu, Miao Wang and Peng Jin. 2008. Dis-
ambiguating sentiment ambiguous adjectives, In 
Proceedings of Int. Conf. on Natural Language 
Processing and Knowledge Engineering 2008, pp. 
1-8 

451


