



















































TreeMatch: A Fully Unsupervised WSD System Using Dependency Knowledge on a Specific Domain


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 396–401,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

TreeMatch: A Fully Unsupervised WSD System Using Dependency 
Knowledge on a Specific Domain 

Andrew Tran          Chris Bowes         David Brown         Ping Chen 
University of Houston-Downtown 

Max Choly           Wei Ding 
University of Massachusetts-Boston 

Abstract 

Word sense disambiguation (WSD) is one of 
the main challenges in Computational 
Linguistics. TreeMatch is a WSD system 
originally developed using data from SemEval 
2007 Task 7 (Coarse-grained English All-
words Task) that has been adapted for use in 
SemEval 2010 Task 17 (All-words Word 
Sense Disambiguation on a Specific Domain). 
The system is based on a fully unsupervised 
method using dependency knowledge drawn 
from a domain specific knowledge base that 
was built for this task. When evaluated on the 
task, the system precision performs above the 
First Sense Baseline. 

1 Introduction 
There are many words within natural 

languages that can have multiple meanings or 
senses depending on its usage. These words are 
called homographs. Word sense disambiguation 
is the process of determining which sense of a 
homograph is correct in a given context. Most 
WSD systems use supervised methods to 
identify senses and tend to achieve the best 
results.  However, supervised systems rely on 
manually annotated training corpora. 
Availability of manually tagged corpora is 
limited and generating these corpora is costly 
and time consuming. With our TreeMatch 
system, we use a fully unsupervised domain-
independent method that only requires a 
dictionary (WordNet, Fallbaum, 1998.) and 
unannotated text as input (Chen et.al, 2009). 

WSD systems trained on general corpora tend 
to perform worse when disambiguating words 
from a document on a specific domain. The 
SemEval 2010 WSD-domain task (Agirre et. al., 
2010) addresses this issue by testing participant 
systems on documents from the environment 
domain. The environment domain specific 
corpus for this task  
was built from documents contributed by the 
European Centre for Nature Conservation  
 

 
(ECNC) and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF). 
We adapted our existing TreeMatch system from  
running on a general context knowledge base to 
one targeted at the environment domain. 

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
will detail the construction of the knowledge 
base. In Section 3 the WSD algorithm will be 
explained. The construction procedure and WSD 
algorithm described in these two sections are 
similar to the procedure presented in our 
NAACL 2009 paper (Chen et.al, 2009). In 
Section 4 we present our experiments and 
results, and Section 5 discusses related work on 
WSD. Section 6 finishes the paper with 
conclusions. 

2 Context Knowledge Acquisition and 
Representation 

Figure 1 shows an overview of our context 
knowledge acquisition process. The collected 
knowledge is saved in a local knowledge base. 
Here are some details about each step. 

 
Figure 1: Context Knowledge Acquisition and 

Representation Process 

2.1 Corpus Building Through Web Search 
The goal of this step is to collect as many 

valid sample sentences as possible that contain 
instances of the target word. Preferably these 
instances are also diverse enough to contain all 
the different glosses of a word. 

396



The World Wide Web is a boundless source 
of textual information that can be utilized for 
corpus building. This huge dynamic text 
collection represents a wide cross section of 
writing backgrounds that may not be represented 
in other corpora and may be able to better 
represent common human knowledge. 

However, because the content on the internet 
is not necessarily checked for grammatical or 
factual accuracy, concerns may arise about the 
use of a corpus built from it. The quality of 
context knowledge will be affected by sentences 
of poor linguistic and poor word usage but from 
our experience these kind of errors are negligible 
when weighted against the staggering volume of 
valid content also retrieved. 

To start the acquisition process, words that are 
candidates for disambiguation are compiled and 
saved in a text file as seeds for search queries. 
Each single word is submitted to a Web search 
engine as a query. Several search engines 
provide API’s for research communities to 
automatically retrieve large number of Web 
pages. In our experiments we used MSN Bing! 
API (Bing!, 2010) to retrieve up to 1,000 Web 
pages and PDF documents for each to-be-
disambiguated word. Collected Web pages are 
cleaned first, e.g., control characters and HTML 
tags are removed. Then sentences are segmented 
simply based on punctuation (e.g., ?, !, .). PDF 
files undergo a similar cleaning process, except 
that they are converted from PDF to HMTL 
beforehand. Sentences that contain the instances 
of a specific word are extracted and saved into a 
local repository. 

2.2 Parsing 
After the sentences have been cleaned and 

segmented they are sent to the dependency 
parser Minipar (Lin, 1998). After parsing, 
sentences are converted to parsing trees and 
saved into files. The files contain the weights of 
all connections between all words existing 
within the knowledge base. Parsing tends to take 
the most time in the entire WSD process. 
Depending on the initial size of the corpus, 
parsing can take weeks. The long parsing time 
can be attributed to Minipar’s execution through 
system calls and also to the lack of 
multithreading used. However, we only need to 
parse the corpus once to construct the knowledge 
base. Any further parsing is only done on the 
input sentences from the words to-be-
disambiguated, and the glosses of those words. 

2.3 Merging dependency relations 
After parsing, dependency relations from 

different sentences are merged and saved in a 
context knowledge base. The merging process is 
straightforward. A dependency relation includes 
one head word/node and one dependent 
word/node. Nodes from different dependency 
relations are merged into one as long as they 
represent the same word. An example is shown 
in Figure 2, which merges the following two 
sentences: 

“Computer programmers write software.” 
“Many companies hire computer 

programmers.” 
 

 
Figure 2: Merging two parsing trees. The number 
beside each edge is the number of occurrences of this 
dependency relation existing in the context 
knowledge base. 
 

In a dependency relation “word1 -> word2”, 
word1 is the head word, and word2 is the 
dependent word. After merging dependency 
relations, we will obtain a weighted directed 
graph with a word as a node, a dependency 
relation as an edge, and the number of 
occurrences of dependency relation as weight of 
an edge. This weight indicates the strength of 
semantic relevancy of head word and dependent 
word. This graph will be used in the following 
WSD process as our context knowledge base. As 
a fully automatic knowledge acquisition process, 
it is inevitable to include erroneous dependency 
relations in the knowledge base. However, since 
in a large text collection valid dependency 
relations tend to repeat far more times than 
invalid ones, these erroneous edges only have 
minimal impact on the disambiguation quality as 
shown in our evaluation results. 

397



3 WSD Algorithm 
Our WSD approach is based on the following 

insight: 
If a word is semantically coherent with its 

context, then at least one sense of this word is 
semantically coherent with its context. 

Assuming that the documents given are 
semantically coherent, if we replace a targeted 
to-be-disambiguated word with its glosses one 
by one, eventually one of the glosses will have 
semantic coherence within the context of its 
sentence. From that idea we can show the 
overview of our WSD procedure in Figure 3. For 
a given to-be-disambiguated word, its glosses 
from WordNet are parsed one by one along with 
the original sentence of the target word. The 
semantic coherency between the parse tree of 
each individual gloss and the parse tree of the 
original sentence are compared one by one to 
determine which sense is the most relevant.  

 
Figure 3: WSD Procedure 

To measure the semantic coherence we use 
the following hypotheses (assume word1 is the 
to-be-disambiguated word): 

• If in a sentence word1 is dependent on word2, 
and we denote the gloss of the correct sense 
of word1 as g1i, then g1i contains the most 
semantically coherent words that are 
dependent on word2; 

• If in a sentence a set of words DEP1 are 
dependent on word1, and we denote the gloss 
of the correct sense of word1 as g1i, then g1i 
contains the most semantically coherent 
words that DEP1 are dependent on. 

These hypotheses are used for the functions in 
Figure 4. The TreeMatching function uses what 
we call dependency matching to ascertain the 
correct sense of the to-be-disambiguated word. 
NodeMatching function is an extension from 
Lesk algorithm (Lesk, 1986). 

 

Input: Glosses from WordNet; 
S: the to-be-disambiguated sentence; 
G: the knowledge base generated in Section 2; 
1. Input a sentence S, W = {w| w’s part of speech 

is noun, verb, adjective, or adverb, w ∈ S}; 
2. Parse S with a dependency parser, generate 

parsing tree TS; 
3. For each w ∈W {  
4.  Input all w’s glosses from WordNet; 
5.  For each gloss wi {  
6.  Parse wi, get a parsing tree Twi; 
7.   scored = TreeMatching(TS, Twi); 

Scoren = NodeMatching(TS, Twi); 
} 

8. If the highest scored and Scoren indicate 
the sense, choose this sense; 

9. Otherwise, choose the first sense. 
10. } 
 
TreeMatching(TS, Twi) 
11. For each node nSi ∈TS { 
12. Assign weight wSi = 

1
𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙

 , lSi is the 
length between nSi and wi in TS; 

13. } 
14. For each node nwi ∈ Twi { 
15. Load its dependent words Dwi from G; 
16.  Assign weight wwi = 

1
𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙

, lwi is the 
level number of nwi in Twi; 

17.  For each nSj { 
18.   If nSj ∈ Dwi 
19.   calculate connection strength sji 

between nSj and nwi; 
20.   score = score + wSi × wwi × sji; 
21.  } 
      }  
22. Return score; 
 
NodeMatching (TS, Twi) 
23. For each node nSi ∈TS { 
24. Assign weight wwi = 

1
𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙

, lwi is the 
level number of nwi in Twi; 

25. For each nSj { 
28.  If nSi == wwi 
29.  score = score + wSi × wwi  

} 
      } 

Figure 4: WSD Algorithm 

4 Experiment 
The WSD-domain task for SemEval 2010 

focused on the environment domain. To prepare 
for the tests, we constructed a new domain 
specific knowledge base.  

 

398



Table 1: Fine-Grained SemEval 2010 Task 17 
Disambiguation Scores 

 
Since we knew the task’s domain specific 

corpus would be derived from ECNC and WWF 
materials, we produced our query list from the 
same source. A web crawl starting from both the 
ECNC and WWF main web pages was 
performed that retrieved 772 PDF documents. 
Any words that were in the PDFs and also had 
more than one gloss in WordNet were retained 
for Bing! search queries to start the acquisition 
process as described in section 2. 10779 unique 
words were obtained in this manner. 

Using the 10779 unique words for search 
queries, the web page and PDF retrieval step 
took 35 days, collecting over 3 TB of raw html 
and PDF files, and the cleaning and sentence 
extraction step took 2 days, reducing it down to 
3 GB of relevant sentences, while running on 5 
machines. Parsing took 26 days and merging 
took 6 days on 9 machines. From the parse trees 
we obtained 2202295 total nodes with an 
average of 87 connections and 13 dependents per 
node. 

Each machine was a 2.66 GHz dual core PC 
with 2 GB of memory with a total of 10 
machines used throughout the process. 

There were 3 test documents provided by the 
task organizers with about 6000 total words and 
1398 to-be-disambiguated words. 
Disambiguation of the target words took 1.5 
hours for each complete run. Each run used the 
same WSD procedure with different parameters. 

The overall disambiguation results are shown 
in Table 1. The precision of our best submission 
edged out the First Sense Baseline (1sense) 
baseline by .001 and is ahead of the Random 
selection baseline by .276. 

The recall of our submissions is lower than 
the precision because of our reliance on Minipar 
for the part of speech and lemma information of 
the target words. Sometimes Minipar would give 
an incorrect lemma which at times cannot be 
found in WordNet and thus our system would 
not attempt to disambiguate the words. Previous 
tasks provided the lemma and part of speech for 
target words so we were able to bypass that step. 

5 Related work 
Generally WSD techniques can be divided into 
four categories (Agirre, 2006), 
• Dictionary and knowledge based methods. 

These methods use lexical knowledge bases 
(LKB) such as dictionaries and thesauri, and 
extract knowledge from word definitions 
(Lesk, 1986) and relations among 
words/senses. Recently, several graph-based 
WSD methods were proposed. In these 
approaches, first a graph is built with senses 
as nodes and relations among words/senses 
(e.g., synonymy, antonymy) as edges, and 
the relations are usually acquired from a 
LKB (e.g., Wordnet). Then a ranking 
algorithm is conducted over the graph, and 
senses ranked the highest are assigned to the 
corresponding words. Different relations and 
ranking algorithms were experimented with 
these methods, such as TexRank algorithm 
(Mihalcea, 2005), personalized PageRank 
algorithm (Agirre, 2009), a two-stage 
searching algorithm (Navigli, 2007), 
Structural Semantic Interconnections 
algorithm (Navigli, 2005), centrality 
algorithms (Sinha, 2009). 

• Supervised methods. A supervised method 
includes a training phase and a testing phase. 
In the training phase, a sense-annotated 
training corpus is required, from which 
syntactic and semantic features are extracted 
to build a classifier using machine learning 
techniques, such as Support Vector Machine 
(Novisch, 2007). In the following testing 
phase, the classifier picks the best sense for a 
word based on its surrounding words 
(Mihalcea, 2002). Currently supervised 
methods achieved the best disambiguation 
quality (about 80% in precision and recall 
for coarse-grained WSD in the most recent 
WSD evaluation conference SemEval 2007 
(Novisch, 2007). Nevertheless, since training 
corpora are manually annotated and 
expensive, supervised methods are often 
brittle due to data scarcity, and it is 
impractical to manually annotate huge 
number of words existing in a natural 
language. 

• Semi-supervised methods. To overcome the 
knowledge acquisition bottleneck suffered in 
supervised methods, semi-supervised 
methods make use of a small annotated 
corpus as seed data in a bootstrapping 
process (Hearst, 1991) (Yarowsky, 1995). A 

System Precision Recall 
1sense 0.505 0.505 
TreeMatch-1 0.506 0.493 
TreeMatch-2 0.504 0.491 
TreeMatch-3 0.492 0.479 
Random 0.23 0.23 

399



word-aligned bilingual corpus can also serve 
as seed data (Zhong, 2009). 

• Unsupervised methods. These methods 
acquire knowledge from unannotated raw 
text, and induce senses using similarity 
measures (Lin, 1997). Unsupervised 
methods overcome the problem of 
knowledge acquisition bottleneck, but none 
of existing methods can outperform the most 
frequent sense baseline, which makes them 
not useful at all in practice. The best 
unsupervised systems only achieved about 
70% in precision and 50% in recall in the 
SemEval 2007 (Navigli, 2007). One recent 
study utilized automatically acquired 
dependency knowledge and achieved 73% in 
precision and recall (Chen, 2009), which is 
still below the most-frequent-sense baseline 
(78.89% in precision and recall in the 
SemEval 2007 Task 07). 

Additionally there exist some “meta-
disambiguation” methods that ensemble multiple 
disambiguation algorithms following the ideas of 
bagging or boosting in supervised learning 
(Brody, 2006). 

6 Conclusion 
This paper has described a WSD system 

which has been adapted for use in a specific 
domain for SemEval 2010 Task 17: All-Words 
Word Sense Disambiguation on a Specific 
Domain. Our system has shown that domain 
adaptation can be handled by unsupervised 
systems without the brittleness of supervised 
methods by utilizing readily available 
unannotated text from internet sources and still 
achieve viable results.  

Acknowledgments 
This work is partially funded by National 
Science Foundation grants CNS 0851984 and 
DHS #2009-ST-061-C10001. 

References  
E. Agirre, Philip Edmonds, editors. Word Sense     

Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications, 
Springer. 2006. 

E. Agirre, O. Lopez de Lacalle, C. Fellbaum, S. 
Hsieh, M. Tesconi, P. Vossen, and R. Segers. 
SemEval-2010 Task 17: All-words Word Sense 
Disambiguation on a Specific Domain. In 
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on 
Semantic Evaluations(SemEval-2010), 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Uppsala, Sweden. 2010. 

E. Agirre, A. Soroa. Personalizing pagerank for word 
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 12th 
conference of the European chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
(EACL-2009). 

Bing! API, available at msdn.microsoft.com 
A. Brody, R. Navigli, M. Lapata, Ensemble Methods 

For Unsupervised WSD, COLING-ACL, 2006 
P. Chen, W. Ding, C. Bowes, D. Brown. 2009. A 

Fully Unsupervised Word Sense Disambiguation 
Method and Its Evaluation on Coarse-grained All-
words Task, NAACL 2009. 

C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical 
Database, MIT press, 1998 

M. Hearst. Noun Homograph Disambiguation Using 
Local Context in Large Text Corpora. Proc. 7th 
Annual Conference of the Univ. of Waterloo 
Center for the New OED and Text Research, 
Oxford. 1991. 

M. Lesk. 1986. Automatic sense disambiguation 
using machine readable dictionaries: how to tell a 
pine cone from an ice cream cone. In Proceedings 
of the 5th Annual international Conference on 
Systems Documentation (Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada). V. DeBuys, Ed. SIGDOC ’86. 

D. Lin. Using syntactic dependency as local context 
to resolve word sense ambiguity. In Proceedings 
of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association For 
Computational Linguistics and Eighth Conference 
of the European Chapter of the Association For 
Computational Linguistics.  1997. 

D. Lin. 1998. Dependency-based evaluation of 
minipar. In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop 
on the Evaluation of Parsing Systems, pages 234–
241, Granada, Spain. 

R. Mihalcea. Unsupervised Large-Vocabulary Word 
Sense Disambiguation with Graph-based 
Algorithms for Sequence Data Labeling, in 
Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Human 
Language Technology Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP), 
Vancouver, October, 2005. 

R. Mihalcea. Instance based learning with automatic 
feature selection applied to word sense 
disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 19th 
International Conference on Computational 
linguistics. 2002. 

R. Navigli, Mirella Lapata. Graph Connectivity 
Measures for Unsupervised Word Sense 
Disambiguation. IJCAI 2007 

R. Navigli, Paola Velardi. Structural semantic 
interconnections: a knowledge-based approach to 
word sense disambiguation. IEEE Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 
(PAMI), 27(7):1063-1074. 2005. 

A. Novischi, Muirathnam Srikanth, and Andrew 
Bennett. Lcc-wsd: System description for English 

400



coarse grained all words task at semeval 2007. 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop 
on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 
223--226, Prague, Czech Republic. 2007. 

R. Sinha, Rada Mihalcea. Unsupervised Graph-based 
Word Sense Disambiguation, in “Current Issues in 
Linguistic Theory: Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing”, Editors Nicolas Nicolov 
and Ruslan Mitkov, John Benjamins, 2009. 

D. Yarowsky. Unsupervised word sense 
disambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting on 
Association For Computational Linguistics, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1995. 

Z. Zhong, Hwee Tou Ng. Word Sense 
Disambiguation for All Words without Hard 
Labor. In Proceeding of the Twenty-first 
International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence. 2009. 

401


