



















































DFKI KeyWE: Ranking Keyphrases Extracted from Scientific Articles


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 150–153,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

DFKI KeyWE: Ranking keyphrases extracted from scientific articles

Kathrin Eichler
DFKI - Language Technology

Berlin, Germany
kathrin.eichler@dfki.de

Günter Neumann
DFKI - Language Technology

Saarbrücken, Germany
neumann@dfki.de

Abstract

A central issue for making the content
of a scientific document quickly acces-
sible to a potential reader is the extrac-
tion of keyphrases, which capture the main
topic of the document. Keyphrases can
be extracted automatically by generating a
list of keyphrase candidates, ranking these
candidates, and selecting the top-ranked
candidates as keyphrases. We present the
KeyWE system, which uses an adapted
nominal group chunker for candidate ex-
traction and a supervised ranking algo-
rithm based on support vector machines
for ranking the extracted candidates. The
system was evaluated on data provided
for the SemEval 2010 Shared Task on
Keyphrase Extraction.

1 Introduction

Keyphrases capture the main topic of the docu-
ment in which they appear and can be useful for
making the content of a document quickly ac-
cessible to a potential reader. They can be pre-
sented to the reader directly, in order to provide
a short overview of the document, but can also
be processed further, e.g. for text summarization,
document clustering, question-answering or rela-
tion extraction. The task of extracting keyphrases
automatically can be performed by generating a
list of keyphrase candidates, ranking these can-
didates, and selecting the top-ranked candidates
as keyphrases. In the KeyWE system, candidates
are generated based on an adapted nominal group
chunker described in section 3 and ranked using
the SVMrank algorithm (Joachims, 2006), as de-
scribed in section 4. The used features are spec-
ified in section 5. In section 6, we present the
results achieved on the test data provided for the
SemEval 2010 Shared Task on Keyphrase Extrac-

tion1 by selecting as keyphrases the top 5, 10, and
15 top-ranked candidates, respectively.

2 Related work

The task of keyphrase extraction came up in the
1990s and was first treated as a supervised learn-
ing problem in the GenEx system (Turney, 1999).
Since then, the task has evolved and various new
approaches have been proposed. The task is usu-
ally performed in two steps: 1. candidate ex-
traction (or generation) and 2. keyphrase selec-
tion. The most common approach towards can-
didate extraction is to generate all n-grams up to
a particular length and filter them using stopword
lists. Lately, more sophisticated candidate extrac-
tion methods, usually based on additional linguis-
tic information (e.g. POS tags), have been pro-
posed and shown to produce better results (e.g.
Hulth (2004)). Liu et al. (2009) restrict their can-
didate list to verb, noun and adjective words. Kim
and Kan (2009) generate regular expression rules
to extract simplex nouns and nominal phrases. As
the majority of technical terms is in nominal group
positions2, we assume that the same holds true for
keyphrases and apply an adapted nominal group
chunker to extract keyphrase candidates.
The selection process is usually based on some
supervised learning algorithm, e.g. Naive Bayes
(Frank et al., 1999), genetic algorithms (Turney,
1999), neural networks (Wang et al., 2005) or de-
cision trees (Medelyan et al., 2009). Unsuper-
vised approaches have also been proposed, e.g. by
Mihalcea and Tarau (2004) and Liu et al. (2009).
However, as for the shared task, annotated train-
ing data was available, we opted for an approach
based on supervised learning.

1http://semeval2.fbk.eu/semeval2.php?location=tasks#T6
2Experiments on 100 manually annotated scientific ab-

stracts from the biology domain showed that 94% of technical
terms are in nominal group position (Eichler et al., 2009).

150



3 Candidate extraction

Rather than extracting candidates from the full text
of the article, we restrict our search for candidates
to the first 2000 characters starting with the ab-
stract3. We also extract title and general terms
for use in the feature construction process. From
the reduced input text, we extract keyphrase candi-
dates based on the output of a nominal group chun-
ker.
This approach is inspired by findings from cog-
nitive linguistics. Talmy (2000) divides the con-
cepts expressed in language into two subsystems:
the grammatical subsystem and the lexical sub-
system. Concepts associated with the grammati-
cal subsystem provide a structuring function and
are expressed using so-called closed-class forms
(function words, such as conjunctions, determin-
ers, pronouns, and prepositions, but also suf-
fixes such as plural markers and tense markers).
Closed-class elements (CCEs) provide a scaffold-
ing, across which concepts associated with the lex-
ical subsystem (i.e. nouns, verbs, adjectives and
adverbs) can be draped (Evans and Pourcel, 2009).
Spurk (2006) developed a nominal group (NG)
chunker that makes use of this grammatical sub-
system. Using a finite list of CCEs and learned
word class models for identifying verbs and ad-
verbs, a small set of linguistically motivated ex-
traction patterns is stated to extract NGs. The rules
are based on the following four types of occur-
rences of NGs in English: 1. at the sentence be-
ginning, 2. within a determiner phrase, 3. follow-
ing a preposition and 4. following a verb. Not
being trained on a particular corpus, the chunker
works in a domain-independent way. In addition,
it scales well to large amounts of textual data.
In order to use the chunker for keyphrase extrac-
tion, we manually analysed annotated keyphrases
in scientific texts, and, based on the outcome of the
evaluation, made some adaptations to the chun-
ker, which take care of the fact that the boundaries
of a keyphrase do not always coincide with the
boundaries of a NG. In particular, we remove de-
terminers, split NGs on conjunctions, and process
text within parentheses separately from the main
text. An evaluation on the provided training data
showed that the adapted chunker extracts 80% of
the reader-annotated keyphrases found in the text.

3This usually covers the introductory part of the article
and is assumed to contain most of the keyphrases. Partial
sentences at the end of this input are cut off.

4 Candidate ranking

The problem of ranking keyphrase candidates can
be formalized as follows: For a document d and
a collection of n keyword candidates C = c1...cn,
the goal is to compute a ranking r that orders
the candidates in C according to their degree of
keyphraseness in d.
The problem can be transformed into an ordinal
regression problem. In ordinal regression, the la-
bel assigned to an example indicates a rank (rather
than a nominal class, as in classification prob-
lems). The ranking algorithm we use is SVMrank,
developed by Joachims (2006). This algorithm
learns a linear ranking function and has shown to
outperform classification algorithms in keyphrase
extraction (Jiang et al., 2009).
The target (i.e. rank) value defines the order of
the examples (i.e. keyphrase candidates). Dur-
ing training, the target values are used to gener-
ate pairwise preference constraints. A preference
constraint is included for all pairs of examples in
the training file, for which the target value differs.
Two examples are considered for a pairwise pref-
erence constraint only if they appear within the
same document.
The model that is learned from the training data
is then used to make predictions on the test ex-
amples. For each line in the test data, the model
predicts a ranking score, from which the ranking
of the test examples can be recovered via sorting.
For ranking the candidates, they are transformed
into vectors based on the features described in sec-
tion 5.
During training, the set of candidates is made up
of the annotated reader and author keywords as
well as all NG chunks extracted from the text.
These candidates are mapped to three different
ranking values: All annotated keywords are given
a ranking value of 2; all extracted NG chunks
that were annotated somewhere else in the train-
ing data are given a ranking value of 1; all other
NG chunks are assigned a ranking value of 0.
Giving a special ranking value to chunks an-
notated somewhere else in the corpus is a way
of exploiting domain-specific information about
keyphrases. Even though not annotated in this par-
ticular document, a candidate that has been anno-
tated in some other document of the domain, is
more likely to be a keyphrase than a candidate that
has never been annotated before (cf. Frank et al.
(1999)).

151



5 Features

We used two types of features: term-specific
features and document-specific features. Term-
specific features cover properties of the candidate
term itself (e.g. term length). Document-specific
features relate properties of the candidate to the
text, in which it appears (e.g. frequency of the
term in the document). Our term-specific features
concern the following properties:

• Term length refers to the length of a can-
didate in number of tokens. We express
this property in terms of five boolean fea-
tures: has1token, has2tokens, has3tokens,
has4tokens, has5orMoreTokens. The advan-
tage over expressing term length as a nu-
meric value is that using binary features, we
allow the algorithm to learn that candidates
of medium lengths are more likely to be
keyphrases than very short or very long can-
didates.

• The MSN score of a candidate refers to the
number of results retrieved when querying
the candidate string using the MSN search
engine4. The usefulness of MSN scores for
technical term extraction has been shown by
Eichler et al. (2009). We normalize the MSN
scores based on the number of digits of the
score and store the normalized value in the
feature normalizedMsn. We also use a binary
feature isZeroMsn expressing whether query-
ing the candidate returns no results at all.

• Special characters can indicate whether a
candidate is (un)likely to be a keyphrase. We
use two features concerning special charac-
ters: containsDigit and containsHyphen.

• Wikipedia has shown to be a valuable source
for extracting keywords (Medelyan et al.,
2009). We use a feature isWikipediaTerm,
expressing whether the term candidate corre-
sponds to an entry in Wikipedia.

In addition, we use the following document-
specific features:

• TFIDF, a commonly used feature introduced
by Salton and McGill (1983), relates the fre-
quency of a candidate in a document to its
frequency in other documents of the corpus.

4http://de.msn.com/

• Term position relates the position of the first
appearance of the candidate in the document
to the length of the document. In addition,
our feature appearsInTitle covers the fact that
candidates appearing in the document title
are very likely to be keyphrases.

• Average token count measures the average
occurrence of the individual (lemmatized) to-
kens of the term in the document. Our
assumption is that candidates with a high
average token count are more likely to be
keyphrases.

• Point-wise mutual information (PMI,
Church and Hanks (1989)) is used to capture
the semantic relatedness of the candidate to
the topic of the document. A similar feature
is introduced by Turney (2003), who, in
a first pass, ranks the candidates based on
a base feature set, and then reranks them
by calculating the statistical association
between the given candidate and the top K
candidates from the first pass. To avoid the
two-pass method, rather than calculating
inter-candidate association, we calculate the
association of each candidate to the terms
specified in the General Terms section of
the paper. Like Turney, we calculate PMI
based on web search results (in our case,
using MSN). The feature maxPmi captures
the maximum PMI score achieved with the
lemmatized candidate and any of the general
terms.

6 Results and critical evaluation

Table 1 presents the results achieved by applying
the KeyWE system on the data set of scientific
articles provided by the organizers of the shared
task along with two sets of manually assigned
keyphrases for each article (reader-assigned and
author-assigned keyphrases). Our model was
trained on the trial and training data (144 articles)
and evaluated on the test data set (100 articles).
The evaluation is based on stemmed keyphrases,
where stemming is performed using the Porter
stemmer (Porter, 1980).
Since SVMrank learns a linear function, one can
analyze the individual features by studying the
learned weights. Roughly speaking, a high pos-
itive (negative) weight indicates that candidates
with this feature should be higher (lower) in the

152



Top Set P R F

5
reader 24.40% 10.13% 14.32%
combined 29.20% 9.96% 14.85%

10
reader 19.80% 16.45% 17.97%
combined 23.30% 15.89% 18.89%

15
reader 17.40% 21.68% 19.31%
combined 20.27% 20.74% 20.50%

Table 1: Results on the two keyword sets:
reader (reader-assigned keyphrases) and combined
(reader- and author-assigned keyphrases)

ranking. In our learned model, the four most im-
portant features (i.e. those with the highest ab-
solute weight) were containsDigit (-1.17), isZe-
roMsn (-1.12), normalizedMsn (-1.00), and avgTo-
kenCount (+0.97). This result confirms that web
frequencies can be used as a valuable source for
ranking keyphrases. It also validates our assump-
tion that a high average token count indicates a
good keyphrase candidate. The maxPMI feature
turned out to be of minor importance (-0.16). This
may be due to the fact that we used the terms from
the General Terms section of the paper to calculate
the association scores, which may be too general
for this purpose.

Acknowledgments

We thank Angela Schneider for her adaptations to
the chunker and helpful evaluations. The research
project DiLiA is co-funded by the European Re-
gional Development Fund (ERDF) in the context
of Investitionsbank Berlins ProFIT program under
grant number 10140159. We gratefully acknowl-
edge this support.

References
K. W. Church and P. Hanks. 1989. Word associa-

tion norms, mutual information and lexicography. In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the
Association of Computational Linguistics.

K. Eichler, H. Hemsen, and G. Neumann. 2009. Un-
supervised and domain-independent extraction of
technical terms from scientifc articles in digital li-
braries. In Proceedings of the LWA Information Re-
trieval Workshop, TU Darmstadt, Germany.

V. Evans and S. Pourcel. 2009. New Directions in Cog-
nitive Linguistics. John Benjamins Publishing Com-
pany.

E. Frank, G. W. Paynter, I. H. Witten, C. Gutwin,
and C. G. Nevill-Manning. 1999. Domain-specific

keyphrase extraction. In Proceedings of the 16th
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence.

A. Hulth. 2004. Combining Machine Learning and
Natural Language Processing for Automatic Key-
word Extraction. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Com-
puter and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University.

X. Jiang, Y. Hu, and H. Li. 2009. A ranking ap-
proach to keyphrase extraction. In Proceedings of
the 32nd Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval.

T. Joachims. 2006. Training linear svms in linear time.
In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining.

S. N. Kim and M. Y. Kan. 2009. Re-examining auto-
matic keyphrase extraction approaches in scientific
articles. In Proceedings of the ACL/IJCNLP Multi-
word Expressions Workshop.

F. Liu, D. Pennell, F. Liu, and Y. Liu. 2009. Unsu-
pervised approaches for automatic keyword extrac-
tion using meeting transcripts. In Proceedings of the
Conference of the NAACL, HLT.

O. Medelyan, E. Frank, and I.H. Witten. 2009.
Human-competitive tagging using automatic
keyphrase extraction. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference of Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP).

R. Mihalcea and P. Tarau. 2004. TextRank: Bringing
order into texts. In Proceedings of the EMNLP.

M. F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping.
Program, 14(3):130–137.

G. Salton and M. J. McGill. 1983. Introduction to
modern information retrieval. McGraw-Hill.

C. Spurk. 2006. Ein minimal überwachtes Verfahren
zur Erkennung generischer Eigennamen in freien
Texten. Diplomarbeit, Saarland University, Ger-
many.

L. Talmy. 2000. Towards a cognitive semantics. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

P. D. Turney. 1999. Learning to extract keyphrases
from text. Technical report, National Research
Council, Institute for Information Technology.

P. D. Turney. 2003. Coherent keyphrase extraction via
web mining. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

J.-B. Wang, H. Peng, and J.-S. Hu. 2005. Automatic
keyphrases extraction from document using back-
propagation. In Proceedings of 2005 international
conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics.

153


