



















































UCD-PN: Selecting General Paraphrases Using Conditional Probability


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 234–237,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

UCD-PN: Selecting General Paraphrases Using Conditional Probability

Paul Nulty
University College Dublin

Dublin, Ireland
paul.nulty@ucd.ie

Fintan Costello
University College Dublin

Dublin, Ireland
fintan.costello@ucd.ie

Abstract
We describe a system which ranks human-
provided paraphrases of noun compounds,
where the frequency with which a given
paraphrase was provided by human volun-
teers is the gold standard for ranking. Our
system assigns a score to a paraphrase of
a given compound according to the num-
ber of times it has co-occurred with other
paraphrases in the rest of the dataset. We
use these co-occurrence statistics to com-
pute conditional probabilities to estimate a
sub-typing or Is-A relation between para-
phrases. This method clusters together
paraphrases which have similar meanings
and also favours frequent, general para-
phrases rather than infrequent paraphrases
with more specific meanings.

1 Introduction

SemEval 2010 Task 9, “Noun Compound Inter-
pretation Using Paraphrasing Verbs”, requires sys-
tems to rank paraphrases of noun compounds
according to which paraphrases were most fre-
quently produced for each compound by human
annotators (Butnariu et al., 2010). This paper de-
scribes a system which ranks a paraphrase for a
given compound by computing the probability of
the paraphrase occurring given that we have previ-
ously observed that paraphrase co-occurring with
other paraphrases in the candidate paraphrase list.
These co-occurrence statistics can be built using
either the compounds from the test set or the train-
ing set, with no significant difference in results.

The model is informed by two observations:
people tend to use general, semantically light para-
phrases more often than detailed, semantically
heavy ones, and most paraphrases provided for a
specific compound indicate the same interpreta-
tion of that compound, varying mainly according
to level of semantic detail.

Given these two properties of the data, the ob-
jective of our system was to test the theory that
conditional probabilities can be used to estimate a
sub-typing or Is-A relation between paraphrases.
No information about the compounds was used,
nor were the frequencies provided in the training
set used.

2 Motivation

Most research on the disambiguation of noun com-
pounds involves automatically categorizing the
compound into one of a pre-defined list of seman-
tic relations. Paraphrasing compounds is an alter-
native approach to the disambiguation task which
has been explored by (Lauer, 1995) and (Nakov,
2008). Paraphrases of semantic relations may be
verbs, prepositions, or “prepositional verbs” like
found in and caused by. (Lauer, 1995) catego-
rized compounds using only prepositions. (Nakov,
2008) and the current task use only verbs and
prepositional verbs, however, many of the para-
phrases in the task data are effectively just prepo-
sitions with a copula, e.g. be in, be for, be of.

The paraphrasing approach may be easier to
integrate into applications such as translation,
query-expansion and question-answering — its
output is a set of natural language phrases rather
than an abstract relation category. Also, most
sets of pre-defined semantic relations have only
one or maybe two levels of granularity. This
can often lead to semantically converse relations
falling under the same abstract category, for ex-
ample a headache tablet is a tablet for prevent-
ing headaches, while headache weather is weather
that induces headaches — but both compounds
would be assigned the same relation (perhaps in-
strumental or causal) in many taxonomies of se-
mantic relations. Paraphrases of compounds using
verbs or verb-preposition combinations can pro-
vide as much or as little detail as is required to
adequately disambiguate the compound.

234



2.1 General paraphrases are frequent

The object of SemEval 2010 Task 9 is to rank para-
phrases for noun compounds given by 50-100 hu-
man annotators. When deciding on a model we
took into account several observations about the
data.

Firstly, the model does not need to produce
plausible paraphrases for noun compounds, it sim-
ply needs to rank paraphrases that have been pro-
vided. Given that all of the paraphrases in the
training and test sets have been produced by peo-
ple, we presume that all of them will have at
least some plausible interpretation, and most para-
phrases for a given compound will indicate gen-
erally the same interpretation of that compound.
This will not always be the case; some compounds
are genuinely ambiguous rather than vague. For
example a stone bowl could be a bowl for hold-
ing stones or a bowl made of stone. However, the
mere fact that a compound has occurred in text is
evidence that the speaker who produced the text
believed that the compound was unambiguous, at
least in the given context.

Given that most of the compounds in the dataset
have one clear plausible meaning to readers, when
asked to paraphrase a compound people tend to
observe the Grician maxim of brevity (Grice,
1975) by using simple, frequent terms rather than
detailed, semantically weighty paraphrases. For
the compound alligator leather in the training
data, the two most popular paraphrases were be
made from and come from. Also provided as
paraphrases for this compound were hide of and
be skinned from. These are more detailed, spe-
cific, and more useful than the most popular para-
phrases, but they were only produced once each,
while be made from and come from were pro-
vided by 28 and 20 annotators respectively. This
trend is noticeable in most of the compounds in
the training data - the most specific and detailed
paraphrases are not the most frequently produced.

According to the lesser-known of Zipf’s laws —
the law of meaning (Zipf, 1945) — words that are
more frequent overall in a language tend to have
more sub-senses. Frequent terms have a shorter
lexical access time (Broadbent, 1967), so to min-
imize the effort required to communicate mean-
ing of a compound, speakers should tend to use
the most common words - which tend to be se-
mantically general and have many possible sub-
senses. This seems to hold for paraphrasing verbs

and prepositions; terms that have a high overall
frequency in English such as be in, have and be of
are vague — there are many more specific para-
phrases which could be considered sub-senses of
these common terms.

2.2 Using conditional probability to detect
subtypes

Our model uses conditional probabilities to detect
this sub-typing structure based on the theory that
observing a specific, detailed paraphrase is good
evidence that a more general parent sense of that
paraphrase would be acceptable in the same con-
text. The reverse is not true - observing a fre-
quently occurring, semantically light paraphrase
is not strong evidence that any sub-sense of that
paraphrase would be acceptable in the same con-
text. For example, consider the spatial and tempo-
ral sub-senses of the paraphrase be in. A possible
spatial sub-sense of this paraphrase is be located
in, while a possible temporal sub-sense would be
occur during. The fact that occur during is pro-
vided as a paraphrase for a compound almost al-
ways means that be in is also a plausible para-
phrase. However, observing be in as a paraphrase
does not provide such strong evidence for occur
during also being plausible, as we do not know
which sub-sense of in is intended.

If this is correct, then we would expect that the
conditional probability of a paraphrase B occur-
ring given that we have observed another para-
phrase A in the same context is a measure of the
extent to which B is a more general type (parent
sense) of A.

3 System Description

The first step in our model is to generate a condi-
tional probability table by going over all the com-
pounds in the data and calculating the probabil-
ity of each paraphrase occurring given that we ob-
served another given paraphrase co-occurring for
the same compound. We compute the conditional
probability of every paraphrase with all other para-
phrases individually. We could use either the train-
ing or the test set to collect these co-occurrence
statistics, as the frequencies with which the para-
phrases are ranked are not used — we simply note
how many times each paraphrase co-occurred as a
possible paraphrase for the same compound with
each other paraphrase. For the submitted system
we used the test data, but subsequently we con-

235



firmed that using only the training data for this step
is not detrimental to the system’s performance.

For each paraphrase in the data, the conditional
probability of that paraphrase is computed with re-
spect to all other paraphrases in the data. For any
two paraphrases B and A:

P (B|A) = P (A ∧ B)
P (A)

As described in the previous section, we antic-
ipate that more general, less specific paraphrases
will be produced more often than their more de-
tailed sub-senses. Therefore, we score each para-
phrase by summing its conditional probability
with each other paraphrase provided for the same
compound.

For a list of paraphrases A provided for a given
compound, we score a paraphrase b in that list by
summing its conditional probability individually
with every other paraphrase in the list.

score(b) =
∑
a∈A

P (b|a)

This gives the more general, broad coverage,
paraphrases a higher score, and also has a cluster-
ing effect whereby paraphrases that have not co-
occurred with the other paraphrases in the list very
often for other compounds are given a lower score
— they are unusual in the context of this para-
phrase list.

4 Results and Analysis

4.1 Task results
Table 1 shows the results of the top 3 systems in
the task. Our system achieved the second high-
est correlation according to the official evaluation
measure, Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.
Results were also provided using Pearson’s corre-
lation coefficient and the cosine of the vector of
scores for the gold standard and submitted pre-
dictions. Our system performed best using the
cosine measure, which measures how closely the
predicted scores match the gold standard frequen-
cies, rather than the rank correlation. This could
be helpful as the scores provide a scale of accept-
ability.

As mentioned in the system description, we
collected the co-occurrence statistics for our sub-
mitted prediction from the test set of paraphrases
alone. Since our model does not use the frequen-
cies provided in the training set, we chose to use

System Spearman Pearson Cosine
UVT .450 .411 .635
UCD-PN .441 .361 .669
UCD-GOG .432 .395 .652
baseline .425 .344 .524

Table 1: Results for the top three systems.

the test set as it was larger and had more annota-
tors. This could be perceived as an unfair use of
the test data, as we are using all of the test com-
pounds and their paraphrases to calculate the po-
sition of a given paraphrase relative to other para-
phrases.

This is a kind of clustering which would not be
possible if only a few test cases were provided. To
check that our system did not need to collect co-
occurrence probabilities on exactly the same data
as it made predictions on, we submitted a second
set of predictions for the test based on the proba-
bilities from the training compounds alone. 1

These predictions actually achieved a slightly
better score for the official evaluation measure,
with a Spearman rho of 0.444, and a cosine of
0.631. This suggests that the model does not need
to collect co-occurrence statistics from the same
compounds as it makes predictions on, as long as
sufficient data is available.

4.2 Error Analysis

The most significant drawback of this system is
that it cannot generate paraphrases for noun com-
pounds - it is designed to rank paraphrases that
have already been provided.

Using the conditional probability to rank para-
phrases has two effects. Firstly there is a cluster-
ing effect which favours paraphrases that are more
similar to the other paraphrases in a list for a given
compound. Secondly, paraphrases which are more
frequent overall receive a higher score, as frequent
verbs and prepositions may co-occur with a wide
variety of more specific terms.

These effects lead to two possible drawbacks.
Firstly, the system would not perform well if de-
tailed, specific paraphrases of compounds were
needed. Although less frequent, more specific
paraphrases may be more useful for some appli-
cations, these are not the kind of paraphrases that
people seem to produce spontaneously.

1Thanks to Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha for pointing this out
and scoring the second set of predictions

236



Also, because of the clustering effect, this sys-
tem would not work well for compounds that are
genuinely ambiguous e.g. stone bowl (bowl made
of stone vs bowl contains stones). Most examples
are not this ambiguous, and therefore almost all
of the provided paraphrases for a given compound
are plausible, and indicate the same relation. They
vary mainly in how specific/detailed their explana-
tion of the relation is.

The three compounds which our system pro-
duced the worst rank correlation for were diesel
engine, midnight train, and bathing suit. With-
out access to the gold-standard scores for these
compounds it is difficult to explain the poor per-
formance, but examining the list of possible para-
phrases for the first two of these suggests that the
annotators identified two distinct senses for each:
diesel engine is paraphrased by verbs of contain-
ment (e.g. be in) and verbs of function (e.g. runs
on), while midnight train is paraphrased by verbs
of location (e.g. be found in, be located in) and
verbs of movement (e.g. run in, arrive at). Our
model works by separating paraphrases according
to granularity, and cannot disambiguate these dis-
tinct senses. The list of possible paraphrases for
bathing suit suggests that our model is not robust
if implausible paraphrases are in the candidate list
- the model ranked be in, be found in and emerge
from among the top 8 paraphrases for this com-
pound, even though they are barely comprehensi-
ble as plausible paraphrases. The difficulty here
is that even if only one annotator suggests a para-
phrase, it is deemed to have co-occurred with other
paraphrases in that list, since we do not use the fre-
quencies from the training set.

The compounds for which the highest correla-
tions were achieved were wilderness areas, conso-
nant systems and fiber optics. The candidate para-
phrases for the first two of these seem to be fairly
homogeneous in semantic intent. Fiber optics
is probably a lexicalised compound which hardly
needs paraphrasing. This would lead people to use
short and semantically general paraphrases.

5 Conclusion

We have described a system which uses a simple
statistical method, conditional probability, to es-
timate a sub-typing relationship between possible
paraphrases of noun compounds. From a list of
candidate paraphrases for each noun compound,
those which were judged by this method to be

good “parent senses” of other paraphrases in the
list were scored highly in the rankings.

The system does require a large dataset of com-
pounds with associated plausible paraphrases, but
it does not require a training set of human pro-
vided rankings and does not use any information
about the noun compound itself, aside from the list
of plausible paraphrases that were provided by the
human annotators.

Given the simplicity of our model and its per-
formance compared to other systems which used
more intensive approaches, we believe that our ini-
tial observations on the data are valid: people tend
to produce general, semantically light paraphrases
more often than specific or detailed paraphrases,
and most of the paraphrases provided for a given
compound indicate a similar interpretation, vary-
ing instead mainly in level of semantic weight or
detail.

We have also shown that conditional probabil-
ity is an effective way to compute the sub-typing
relation between paraphrases.

Acknowledgement

This research was supported by a grant under the
FP6 NEST Programme of the European Commis-
sion (ANALOGY: Humans the Analogy-Making
Species: STREP Contr. No 029088).

References
Donald E. Broadbent 1967. Word-frequency effect

and response bias.. Psychological Review, 74,

Cristina Butnariu and Su Nam Kim and Preslav Nakov
and Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha and Stan Szpakowicz and
Tony Veale. 2010. SemEval-2 Task 9: The In-
terpretation of Noun Compounds Using Paraphras-
ing Verbs and Prepositions, Proceedings of the 5th
SIGLEX Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, Upp-
sala, Sweden

Paul Grice. 1975. Studies in the Way of Words. Har-
vard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Mark Lauer 1995. Designing statistical language
learners: experiments on noun compound, PhD The-
sis Macquarie University, Australia

Preslav Nakov and Marti Hearst 2008. Solving Re-
lational Similarity Problems using the Web as a
Corpus. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL-08), Columbus, OH.

George Kingsley Zipf. 1945. The Meaning-Frequency
Relationship of Words. Journal of General Psychol-
ogy, 33,

237


