










































Non-atomic Classification to Improve a Semantic Role Labeler for a Low-resource Language


First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 95–99,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Non-atomic Classification to Improve a Semantic Role Labeler for a

Low-resource Language

Richard Johansson

Språkbanken, Department of Swedish, University of Gothenburg

Box 100, SE-40530 Gothenburg, Sweden

richard.johansson@gu.se

Abstract

Semantic role classification accuracy for most

languages other than English is constrained by

the small amount of annotated data. In this pa-

per, we demonstrate how the frame-to-frame

relations described in the FrameNet ontology

can be used to improve the performance of

a FrameNet-based semantic role classifier for

Swedish, a low-resource language. In order

to make use of the FrameNet relations, we

cast the semantic role classification task as

a non-atomic label prediction task. The ex-

periments show that the cross-frame general-

ization methods lead to a 27% reduction in

the number of errors made by the classifier.

For previously unseen frames, the reduction is

even more significant: 50%.

1 Introduction

The FrameNet lexical database and annotated cor-

pora, based on the theory of semantic frames (Fill-

more et al., 2003), have allowed the implementa-

tion of automatic systems to extract semantic roles

(Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002; Johansson and Nugues,

2007; Màrquez et al., 2008; Das et al., 2010).

Since the original FrameNet is developed for the

English language, most research on semantic role

extraction has focused exclusively on English. How-

ever, the English FrameNet has inspired similar ef-

forts for other languages. For instance, the ongo-

ing development of a Swedish FrameNet (Borin et

al., 2010) allows us to investigate the feasibility

of using this resource in constructing an automatic

role-semantic analyzer for Swedish. However, due

to the fact that the Swedish FrameNet annotation

process is in a fairly early stage, not much anno-

tated material is available, and this limits the perfor-

mance attainable by automatic classifiers trained on

these data. In particular, the scarce amount of data

makes it very hard for the machine learning meth-

ods to discern general linguistic facts concerning the

syntactic–semantic linking patterns, such as the rela-

tion between the voice of a verb, the syntactic func-

tions of its arguments, and the semantic roles of the

arguments (Dowty, 1991).

In this paper, we show that the inter-frame rela-

tions described in the FrameNet ontology allow us

to generalize across frames. This allows the clas-

sifier to learn general linguistic facts, and it also

leads to more efficient use of the annotated data.

To allow this kind of generalization, we formulate

the semantic role selection problem as a classifica-

tion task with non-atomic labels. This cross-frame

generalization method reduces the number of errors

made by the classifier by 27%, improving the accu-

racy from 54.4 to 66.5. When evaluating on frames

for which the classifier has not been trained, the ac-

curacy improves from 7.2 (random performance) to

53.4, a 50% error reduction.

2 The Swedish FrameNet

The Swedish FrameNet, SweFN, is a lexical re-

source under development (Friberg Heppin and

Toporowska Gronostaj, 2012), based on the English

version of FrameNet constructed by the Berkeley re-

search group (Baker et al., 1998). It is found on the

SweFN website1, and is available as a free resource.

The SweFN frames and frame names correspond

to the English ones, with some exceptions, as do

the selection of frame elements including defini-

tions and internal relations. The meta-information

about the frames, such as semantic relations be-

tween frames, is also transferred from the Berkley

FrameNet. Compared to the Berkeley FrameNet,

SweFN is expanded with information about the do-

main of the frames, at present: general language, the

medical and the art domain.

1
http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/swefn

95



At the time of writing this paper, SweFN cov-

ered 519 frames with around 18,000 lexical units.

The lexical units are gathered from SALDO, a free

Swedish electronic association lexicon (Borin and

Forsberg, 2009). A lexical unit from SALDO can-

not populate more than one frame. At present there

are 31 frames in SweFNwhich do not match a frame

in the Berkeley FrameNet. Of these, there are eight

completely new frames while the others have been

modified in some way.

Crucially for the work presented in this paper,

each frame is exemplified with at least one sentence.

The number of sentences is currently 2,974. The

most well-annotated frames are EXPERIENCER OBJ

with 38 sentences, CAUSE MOTION with 21, and

CAUSE HARM with 19. These sentences form the

training material used in the following sections.

3 System Implementation

In this section, we describe the implementation of

our semantic role labeling system. In order to be

useful on its own, such a system needs to solve sev-

eral tasks: (1) identification of predicate words; (2)

assignment of frames to predicate words; (3) iden-

tification of role fillers; (4) assignment of semantic

role labels to role fillers. In this paper, we focus ex-

clusively on the semantic role classification task.

3.1 Baseline: A Classifier for Swedish

Semantic Roles

Following most previous implementations, we used

a syntactic parse tree as the basis of the semantic

role extraction; we assumed that every semantic role

span coincides with the projection of a subtree in

the syntactic tree. The tasks of segmentation and

labeling then reduce to a classification problem on

syntactic tree nodes. Each sentence was parsed by

the LTH dependency parser (Johansson and Nugues,

2008a), which we trained on a Swedish treebank

(Nilsson et al., 2005). Figure 1 shows a sentence an-

notated with a dependency tree and semantic roles.

The semantic role labeling classifier was imple-

mented as a linear multiclass classifier with a flexi-

ble output space depending on the frame of the given

predicate; we trained this classifier using an online

learning algorithm (Crammer et al., 2006). In ad-

dition, we imposed a uniqueness constraint on the

labels output by the classifier, so that every role may

appear only once for a given predicate.

We considered a large number of features for the

classifier (Table 1). Most of these are commonly

used features taken from the standard literature on

semantic role labeling. We then applied a standard

greedy forward feature selection procedure to deter-

mine which of them to use. The features contain-

ing SALDO ID refer to the entry identifiers in the

SALDO lexicon. Note that the POS tags have coarse

and fine variants, such as VERB and VERB-FINITE-

PRESENT-ACTIVE respectively, and we used both of

them.

Semantic role classifiers rely heavily on lexical

features (Johansson and Nugues, 2008b), and this

may lead to brittleness; in order to increase robust-

ness, we added features based on hierarchical clus-

ters constructed using the Brown algorithm (Brown

et al., 1992). The Brown algorithm clusters word

into hierarchies represented as bit strings. Based on

tuning on a development set, we found that it was

best not to use the full bit string, but only a prefix if

the string was longer than 12 bits.

FRAME

DEPENDENCY RELATION PATH

FRAME ELEMENTS

POSITION

VOICE

ARGUMENT HEAD SALDO ID

ARGUMENT HEAD LEMMA

ARGUMENT HEAD POS (FINE)

PREDICATE POS (FINE)

ARGUMENT POS (COARSE)

ARGUMENT RIGHT CHILD POS (COARSE)

ARGUMENT WORD

PREDICATE WORD CLUSTER

ARGUMENT WORD CLUSTER

Table 1: List of classifier features.

3.2 A Classifier Using Non-atomic Semantic

Role Labels

The classifier described above is a quite typical ex-

ample of how semantic role classifiers are normally

implemented: each frame is independent of all other

frames. However, in our case, when the amount of

training data is quite small, the limitations of this

standard approach become apparent:

• Since there are many frames, the amount of
training data for each frame is very limited.

96



Vi promenerar söderut från Lindholmen längs Norra Älvstrandens brokiga kontur .

SS

RA

RA PA

RA

DT DT

AT

PA

IP

SELF MOVER DIRECTION

SOURCE

PATH

SELF MOTION

Figure 1: A sentence with dependency syntax (above) and semantic role structure (below).

• Basic linguistic facts, such as which roles are
likely to appear in subject position, have to be

relearned for each frame.

To remedy these problems, we developed a classi-

fier using non-atomic labels: instead of just a simple

label INGESTION:INGESTOR, the classifier can pre-

dict several labels, using some sort of decomposition

into meaningful parts. In §3.3, we will describe sev-
eral such decompositions.

As described above, our baseline classifier is a

standard linear classifier. Assume that the frame F

defines a set of semantic roles r1, . . . , rn, then the

classifier predicts a semantic role r∗ for a given ar-

gument a using this model:

r∗ = arg max
r∈F

w · Φ(a, r)

Here Φ is a feature function describing features of
the argument a taking the semantic role r, and w is a

weight vector produced by some training algorithm.

This classifier model can easily be generalized to

the non-atomic case. We then assume that each role

r can be decomposed using a decomposition func-

tion D, which returns a set of labels. We now apply

the feature function to each sub-label l instead of the

main label r.

r∗ = arg max
r∈F

∑

l∈D(r)

w · Φ(a, l)

Non-atomic classification has been described in a

number of publications. It is fairly common in text

categorization, where hierarchical classification is

probably the most common type. One of the most

similar to ours is the action classifier by Roth and

Tu (2009), which handled a large label set by de-

composing the labels into meaningful parts.

3.3 Generalization Methods

We investigated several ways of analyzing the labels,

and most of them were based on the properties of

the frames, defined in the FrameNet ontology. The

Swedish FrameNet currently does not define such

properties, but since the frames and frame elements

are for the most part based on their English coun-

terparts, we used the English ontology. In case of

mismatch, we just left the label in its original state.

The first method we tried was based on frame-to-

frame relations. We used the following relations:

INHERITANCE: specific to general, e.g. COMMU-

NICATION NOISE to COMMUNICATION.

SUBFRAME: from component to complex, e.g.

SETTING OUT to TRAVEL.

CAUSATIVE-OF: causative to inchoative,

e.g. CAUSE TEMPERATURE CHANGE to

INCH. CHANGE OF TEMP..

INCHOATIVE-OF: inchoative to stative, e.g.

INCH. CHANGE OF TEMP. to TEMPERATURE.

USING: child to parent, e.g. COMMUNICA-

TION NOISE to MAKE NOISE.

PERSPECTIVE-ON: perspectivized to neutral, e.g.

RIDE VEHICLE to USE VEHICLE.

To analyze a label in terms of frame-to-frame

relations, we applied the transitive closure of

each relation and returned the resulting set. For

instance, when applying the Inheritance rela-

tion to the INGESTION:INGESTOR label, we get

the following set: { INGESTION:INGESTOR,
INGEST SUBSTANCE:INGESTOR, MANIPU-

LATION:AGENT, INTENT. AFFECT:AGENT,

INTENT. ACT:AGENT, TRANS. ACTION:AGENT }.
The second method was based on the semantic

type of the semantic role. For instance, the INGES-

TION:INGESTOR role needs to be filled by an en-

tity of the semantic type SENTIENT. The decom-

position of this role then simply becomes { INGES-
TION:INGESTOR, SENTIENT }.
The third method was based on the simple no-

tion label generalization: if two semantic roles

97



in two different frames have the same name,

then we use the same label. For instance,

we change the INGESTION:INGESTOR and IN-

GEST SUBSTANCE:INGESTOR to INGESTOR. We

normalized the spelling, punctuation, and capitaliza-

tion of the labels before generalizing.

4 Experiments

We evaluated the classifier on the example sentences

in the Swedish FrameNet. The frame and the ar-

gument were given to the classifier, which then had

to predict the semantic role. We evaluated in two

different ways: In-frame evaluation, where a 5-fold

cross-validation was carried out over the set of sen-

tences, and Out-frame evaluation, where the cross-

validation was done over the set of frames. The out-

frame setting simulates the situation where a new

frame has been defined, but no training data have

been annotated. Without any sort of cross-frame

generalization, the classification in the out-frame

setting becomes a random baseline.

Table 2 shows the results of using the frame-to-

frame relations for analyzing the semantic role la-

bels. We see that decomposition based on Inheri-

tance is by far the most effective of these, although

the highest performance is obtained when combin-

ing all types of relation-based decompositions.

Classifier In-frame Out-frame

Baseline 54.4 7.2

Inheritance 58.7 28.1

Using 55.8 20.5

Subframe 54.8 11.5

Causative-of 54.5 9.7

Perspective-on 54.5 8.1

Inchoative-of 54.4 8.0

All except Inheritance 56.0 24.0

All relations 59.6 36.9

Table 2: Classification results with generalization based

on frame-to-frame relations.

The effect of analyzing labels in terms of semantic

type is similar. The in-frame performance is higher

than that of relation-based decomposition, while the

out-frame performance is a bit lower. The two gen-

eralization methods seem to complement each other,

since we get a higher performance by combining

them. Table 3 shows the results.

Classifier In-frame Out-frame

Semantic type 61.7 31.7

Semantic type + relations 63.5 42.6

Table 3: Adding semantic type generalization.

Finally, Table 4 shows the effect of using label

generalization. This is by far the most effective

method. However, we get even higher performance

by combining it with the other two methods.

Classifier In-frame Out-frame

Label generalization 65.9 51.5

LG + ST + relations 66.5 53.4

Table 4: Results with label generalization.

5 Discussion

When developing NLP systems for a low-resource

language, it is crucial to make effective use of the

available data. In the case of FrameNet semantic

role classification, one way to improve the use of the

data is to generalize the roles across the frames. This

also makes sense from a theoretical point of view,

since predicting multiple labels allows the machine

learner to learn general facts as well as specifics.

This work builds on previous work in multi-label

classification. For the task of FrameNet semantic

role classification, the work most closely related to

ours is that by Matsubayashi et al. (2009), which de-

fined a classifier making use of role groups; the ef-

fect of the role groups turns out to be similar to our

non-atomic classification approach.

Our experiments showed very significant error re-

ductions. This was especially notable in the case of

out-frame evaluation, which is to be expected since

the baseline in this case was a random selection. The

best classifier used all three types of label decom-

position, and achieved a 26% in-frame and a 50%

out-frame error reduction.

Acknowledgements

The research presented here was supported by the

Swedish Research Council (the project Swedish

Framenet++, VR dnr 2010-6013) and by the Uni-

versity of Gothenburg through its support of the

Centre for Language Technology and Språkbanken

(the Swedish Language Bank).

98



References

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.

1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proceed-

ings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association

for Computational Linguistics and 17th International

Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 86–

90, Montréal, Canada.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2009. All in the fam-

ily: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet. In Pro-

ceedings of the Nodalida 2009 Workshop on WordNets

and other Lexical Semantic Resources – between Lexi-

cal Semantics, Lexicography, Terminology and Formal

Ontologies, Odense, Denmark.

Lars Borin, Dana Dannélls, Markus Forsberg,

Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, and Dimitrios Kokki-

nakis. 2010. The past meets the present in the

Swedish FrameNet++. In Proceedings of EURALEX.

Peter F. Brown, Peter V. deSouza, Robert L. Mercer, Vin-

cent J. Della Pietra, and Jenifer C. Lai. 1992. Class-

based n-gram models of natural language. Computa-

tional Linguistics, 18(4):467–479.

Koby Crammer, Ofer Dekel, Joseph Keshet, Shai Shalev-

Schwartz, and Yoram Singer. 2006. Online passive-

aggressive algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning

Research, 2006(7):551–585.

Dipanjan Das, Nathan Schneider, Desai Chen, and

Noah A. Smith. 2010. Probabilistic frame-semantic

parsing. In Human Language Technologies: The 2010

Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of

the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages

948–956, Los Angeles, United States.

David R. Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argu-

ment selections. Language, 67(3):574–619.

Charles Fillmore, Christopher Johnson, and Miriam

Petruck. 2003. Background to FrameNet. Interna-

tional Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):235–250.

Karin Friberg Heppin and Maria Toporowska Gronostaj.

2012. The rocky road towards a Swedish FrameNet.

In Proceedings of LREC-2012 (to appear).

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic la-

beling of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,

28(3):245–288.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Semantic

structure extraction using nonprojective dependency

trees. In Proceedings of SemEval-2007, pages 227–

230, Prague, Czech Republic, June 23-24.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2008a.

Dependency-based syntactic–semantic analysis with

PropBank and NomBank. In Proceedings of the

CoNLL Shared Task, pages 183–187, Manchester,

United Kingdom.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2008b. The ef-

fect of syntactic representation on semantic role label-

ing. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Con-

ference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008),

pages 393–400, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Lluı́s Màrquez, Xavier Carreras, Ken Litkowski, and

Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. Semantic role labeling:

An introduction to the special issue. Computational

Linguistics, 34(2):145–159.

Yuichiroh Matsubayashi, Naoaki Okazaki, and Jun’ichi

Tsujii. 2009. A comparative study on generaliza-

tion of semantic roles in FrameNet. In Proceedings

of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting

of the ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference

on Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP, pages

19–27, Suntec, Singapore.

Jens Nilsson, Johan Hall, and Joakim Nivre. 2005.

MAMBA meets TIGER: Reconstructing a Swedish

treebank from antiquity. In Proceedings of NODAL-

IDA Special Session on Treebanks.

Dan Roth and Yuancheng Tu. 2009. Aspect guided text

categorization with unobserved labels. In Proceed-

ings of the IEEE Conference on Data Mining, Miami,

United States.

99


