










































Simple and Phrasal Implicatives


First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 124–131,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Simple and Phrasal Implicatives

Lauri Karttunen
Stanford University

CSLI, 210 Panama St.
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
laurik@stanford.edu

Abstract

This paper complements a series of works on
implicative verbs such as manage to and fail
to. It extends the description of simple im-
plicative verbs to phrasal implicatives as take
the time to and waste the chance to. It shows
that the implicative signatures of over 300
verb-noun collocations depend both on the se-
mantic type of the verb and the semantic type
of the noun in a systematic way.

1 Introduction

There is a substantial body of literature on the se-
mantics of English complement constructions start-
ing with (Kiparsky and Kiparsky, 1970) and (Kart-
tunen, 1971; Karttunen, 1973), including (Rudanko,
1989; Rudanko, 2002; Nairn et al., 2006; Egan,
2008). These studies have developed a semantic
classification of verbs and verb-noun collocations
that take sentential complements. They focus on
constructions that give rise to implied commitments
that the author cannot disavow without being inco-
herent or without contradicting herself. For exam-
ple, (1a) presupposes that Kim had not rescheduled
the meeting, (1b) entails that she didn’t and presup-
poses that she intended to reschedule it.

(1) a. Kim forgot that she had not rescheduled the
meeting.

b. Kim forgot to reschedule the meeting.

FACTIVE constructions like forget that X involve
presuppositions, IMPLICATIVE constructions like

forget to X give rise to entailments and may carry
presuppositions.

Presuppositions persist under negation, in ques-
tions and if-clauses, entailments do not. For ex-
ample, the negation of (1b), Kim did not forget
to reschedule the meeting, entails that Kim did
reschedule the meeting and presupposes, as (1b)
does, that it was her intention to do so.

Implicative constructions involve entailments.
The entailment may be positive or negative depend-
ing on the polarity of the containing clauses. Replac-
ing forget by didn’t forget in (1b) gives an entailment
of the opposite polarity. Questions and if-clauses do
not yield any entailments.

2 Simple implicatives

The constructions forget to X and remember to X are
two-way implicative constructions. They yield an
entailment about the truth or falsity of X both in af-
firmative and in negative sentences. We use the no-
tation + − | − + for the verb forget to to indicate that
forget to X yields a negative entailment for X in a posi-
tive context, +−, and a positive entailment in a negative
context, −+. The first sign stands for the polarity of the
embedding context, the second sign for the polarity of the
entailment. We code the verb remember to as + + | − −
because in a positive context remember to X yields a pos-
itive entailment about X, ++, and the opposite, −−, in a
negative context.

There are two major types of implicative construc-
tions. TWO-WAY IMPLICATIVES like forget to and re-
member to yield an entailment both in positive and neg-
ative contexts, ONE-WAY IMPLICATIVES yield an entail-
ment only under one polarity. Karttunen (1971; 1973)
and Nairn et al. (2006) list verbs of both types. Table 1
gives a few examples of two-way implicatives.

124



+ + | − − implicatives +− | −+ implicatives
turn out that
manage to fail to
succeed in neglect to

remember to forget to
deign to refrain from . . . ing

happen to avoid . . . ing

Table 1: Types of two-way implicative verbs

2.1 Two-way implicatives
The type of the complementizer that a verb takes may

change the semantic type of the construction. forget that
X is factive but forget to X is a +−|−+ implicative con-
struction. (1a) presupposes that Kim had not rescheduled
the meeting, (1b) entails that she didn’t.1 If we replace
forgot in (1) by didn’t forget, the presupposition of (1a)
remains intact but the entailment of (1b) reverses polar-
ity: Kim did reschedule the meeting.2 In contrast to for-
get, pretend that X and pretend to X are both counterfac-
tive. The sentences in (2) and their affirmative counter-
parts presuppose that Kim did not have everything figured
out.

(2) a. Kim didn’t pretend that she had everything fig-
ured out.

b. Kim didn’t pretend to have everything figured
out.

The polarity of a clause is determined from top down.
(3) entails that Kim ate breakfast because the two neg-
ative polarities of almost and fail cancel out and fail to
X and remember to X are both two-way implicative con-
structions.

(3) Kim almost failed to remember to eat breakfast.

The chain of inferences is sketched in (4) where [+]
marks the top-level expression as true. The subsequent
[+] and [−] signs indicate the entailed polarity of each
subordinate clause.

(4) [+] almost(fail-to(remember-to(X)))
[−] fail-to(remember-to(X))

1All the two-way implicatives in Table 1 also give rise to
a presupposition. (1b) and its negative counterpart presuppose
that Kim had intended to reschedule the meeting.

2It is possible to interpret the example differently by focus-
ing the negation on the word forget: Kim did not FORGET to
reschedule the meeting. She never intended to do that. See
(Karttunen and Peters, 1979), (Horn, 1985) for further discus-
sion of this type of “metalinguistic negation” that objects to the
use of a particular word or locution but not necessarily to what
the sentence entails.

[+] remember-to(X)
[+] X

In short, almost(X) and fail-to(X) switch the polarity of
the entailment, remember-to(X) preserves it. Omitting al-
most (or fail to) from (3) reverses the entailed polarity of
the eat-clause.

(5) Kim failed to remember to eat breakfast.

(6) [+] fail-to(remember-to(X))
[−] remember-to(X)
[−] X

2.2 One-way implicatives
Constructions such as manage to X and fail to X are per-
fectly symmetrical in that they yield an entailment both
in affirmative and negative contexts. As noted early on,
(Karttunen, 1971; Karttunen, 1973), there are four types
of verbs that yield an entailment about their complement
clause only under one or the other polarity.

++ implicatives +− implicatives
cause NP to refuse to
force NP to prevent NP from
make NP to keep NP from

−− implicatives −+ implicatives
can (= be able to) hesitate to

Table 2: Types of one-way implicative verbs

The ++ and some of the +− implicatives in Table 2
are causatives.3 (7a) entails that Mary left, (7b) entails
that she didn’t. (7c) and (7d) are consistent with Mary
leaving or not leaving.

(7) a. Kim forced Mary to leave. (*but she didn’t)

b. Kim prevented Mary from leaving.

c. Kim did not force Mary to leave.

d. Kim did not prevent Mary from leaving.

The +− implicatives switch the polarity of the en-
tailment from positive to negative. (8) does not tell us
whether Dave left or not because force to does not yield
any entailment under negative polarity about its comple-
ment.

3Rudanko (2002) points out that there is a causative con-
struction that is not associated with any particular verb: She
bullied him into marrying her entails that he married her. It ap-
pears that all constructions of the type TV NP into X are ++
implicatives.

125



(8) Kim prevented Mary from forcing Dave to leave.

(9) [+] prevent-to(X, force-to(Y, Z))
[−] force-to(Y, Z)
[ ] Z

The−− implicatives express a necessary condition for
the truth of the complement clause. If the host clause is
under negative polarity, the complement clause is false.
(10) entails that Kim did not finish her sentence.

(10) Kim could not finish her sentence.

It appears that hesitate to is the only −+ implicative
verb in English. (11) entails that Kim spoke her mind.

(11) Kim did not hesitate to speak her mind.

Omitting the negation in (11) makes it non-committal as
to whether Kim spoke her mind or not.4 There are other
verbs such as shy away from and shrink from that yield a
positive entailment under negation but they are two-way
implicatives like avoid to. The verb wait to has one in-
terpretation that has the same implicative signature as not
hesitate to but the construction not wait to is ambiguous.

2.3 Ambiguity of not wait to X
The construction not wait to X can be understood in two
ways. The example in (12a) could be continued either
with (12b) or (12c).

(12) a. Ed did not wait to call for help.

b. . . . Instead he left the scene in a hurry.

c. . . . But it was too late.

The continuation (12b) implies that Ed did not call for
help, (12c) implies that Ed called for help right away. The
word instead in (12b) and the anaphoric it in (12c) are
clues that indicate whether Ed made a call or not.

A Google search finds numerous examples of both
types. The sentences in (13) contain wait to X in the −−
sense, in the the examples in (14) it has the −+ interpre-
tation.

(13) a. Deena did not wait to talk to anyone. Instead,
she ran home.

b. He did not wait to hear Ms. Coulter’s response,
but immediately walked up the balcony stairs
and left.

4Although not hesitate to X seems to deny that there was
any hesitation to X, many examples from the web suggest oth-
erwise: When I got the paper back I almost hesitated to see the
grade, but when I saw the A on the title page, that hesitation
quickly turned into relief. Not hesitate to X is an idiom, it is not
compositional.

c. He was so excited to get his Thomas set that he
didn’t wait to take off his coat.

(14) a. It hurt like hell, but I’m glad she didn’t wait to
tell me.

b. Kalamazoo didn’t wait to strike back. The K-
Wings scored two goals in less than 90 seconds.

c. I didn’t wait to open the gift. Heck, I didn’t
even wait to wear them. They’re the softest most
comfy overalls I’ve ever owned.

The construction not wait to X is not vague about the
truth or falsity of the complement. Either it means that
X was not done at all or it means that X was done right
away without delay. In most contexts it is immediately
clear which interpretation the author has in mind. The
ambiguity mostly goes unnoticed.

The source of the ambiguity can be seen in examples
where wait to has two infinitival complements.

(15) a. “My biggest regret is that I didn’t wait [to get
married] [to have kids]” says Gerald, a father of
three. “If I had it to do over again, I’d wait until
I was married to become a father.”

b. Chances are, you probably didn’t wait [to get
permission from the scientific establishment] [to
start believing in the creative power of thought
and the underlying spirituality of the universe].

c. I raised my hand above my head, as if I were in
school or something, but didn’t wait [for anyone
to give me the “okay”] [to start talking].

The examples in (15) have the form not wait [to X] [to
Y]. They entail that X did not happen but Y is true. In
other words wait to is−− with respect to its first comple-
ment and −+ with respect to the second. In (15a) Gerald
did not get married but had kids. In (15b) the addressee
probably started believing without the permission of the
scientific establishment.

The implicit assumption in these cases is that one
might see X as a precondition for Y but the protagonist
skipped X and proceeded directly to Y. The ambiguity
arises from the fact that syntactically the two comple-
ments of wait to are both optional.

In the case of (15a), Gerald might have said My great-
est regret is that I didn’t wait to get married leaving out
the second complement, or he might have said My great-
est regret is that I didn’t wait to have kids leaving out the
first.

(13c) came with a picture of a boy with his blue coat
still on playing with his new Thomas train set. (14c) came
with a picture of a girl wearing her comfy birthday gift
overalls in advance of her birthday.

126



In the case of (12a) that is ambiguous without a con-
text, the reader has to guess whether it should be read
as Ed did not wait [to call for help][. . . ] or Ed did not
wait [. . . ] [to call for help]. The continuation (12b) is
consistent with the first option, (12c) with the second.

The fact that the ambiguity of (12a) is syntactic rather
than semantic explains why it is not possible to translate
this sentence to languages such as Finnish, German and
French in a way that preserves the ambiguity. The trans-
lator has to decide which of the two interpretations is the
right one because they translate differently. In this re-
spect (12a) is similar to well known examples such as
time flies like an arrow and I saw her duck that have no
ambiguity-preserving translations in other languages be-
cause the ambiguity comes from accidental lexical and
syntactic overlaps that are language-specific.

2.4 Invited inferences
Although one-way implicatives yield a definite entail-
ment only under one polarity, in many contexts they are
interpreted as if they were two-way implicatives. For ex-
ample, the complement of prevent from in negative sen-
tences such as (16) is likely to be understood to be true
and the author probably intended the sentence to be inter-
preted in that way.

(16) The language barrier did not prevent us from having
a few laughs together.

If something was not prevented or if someone could do it,
it may have happened. If someone was not forced to do
something or hesitated doing it, maybe she did not do it.
However, an explicit denial is possible as in (17) showing
that the inference about the veridicality of the comple-
ment is pragmatically based, not truth-conditional.

(17) a. Her mother did not prevent her from visiting her
father, but she never did.

b. He showed he could jab, but didn’t. He showed
he could work the body, but didn’t.

c. The school had not forced the students to leave,
but they left on their own.

d. She hesitated to ask, but had to: “Stateside?”

The promotion of can and be able to from a one-way
implicative to a two-way implicative is similar to the phe-
nomenon that (Geis and Zwicky, 1971) discuss under the
label of INVITED INFERENCE. What they observe is the
tendency to read conditionals as biconditionals. For ex-
ample, If you mow my lawn I will give you $5 is usually
interpreted as I will give you $5 if and only if you mow my
lawn. Invited inferences may be explicitly cancelled. as
in (17), and they do not even arise in contexts where they
would conflict with what is known: Firms were allowed
to earn more than they did earn. Obviously, firms did not

earn more than they earned. No invited inference in this
case.

The phenomenon of invited inferences is much more
prevalent than has been recognized and it has not been
systematically studied except for SCALAR IMPLICA-
TURES for which there is a vast literature.5

3 Phrasal implicatives
There is a large class of multiword constructions that are
semantically similar to the single verbs in Tables 1 and 2.
We call them PHRASAL IMPLICATIVES. They are com-
posed of a transitive verb such as have, make, take and
use, and a noun phrase headed by a noun such as attempt,
effort and opportunity that can take sentential comple-
ments. The “implicative signature” of such a phrase de-
pends both on the type of verb and the type of the noun.
We organize the presentation by the nouns.

3.1 attempt, effort, trouble, initiative
In the case of attempt the relation between a single verb
implicative and a phrasal one is obvious. For example,
attempt to X and make an attempt to X are virtually syn-
onymous.6

(18) a. Kim didn’t attempt to hide her feelings.

b. Kim didn’t make any attempt to hide her feel-
ings.

c. Kim made no effort to hide her feelings.

All the examples in (18) entail that Kim did not hide her
feelings. The affirmative versions of these sentences are
non-committal with respect to the complement clause.
Attempts and efforts can fail. Consequently, attempt to X,
make an attempt to X and make an effort to X are all −−
implicatives like allow NP to X in Table 2. The phrasal
version provides more ways to express negation than the
simple verb. It can be expressed by the determiner as in
(18c).

Another way to bring about a negative entailment in
this construction is to indicate by an adjective such as
futile that an attempt was made but it failed.

(19) Convair made a futile attempt to save their bomber
program.

5http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalar_
implicature

6We assume here that the infinitival clause is syntactically
a complement to the noun. In (18b), (18c) and in all the later
examples in this section there is an alternative syntactic anal-
ysis under which the to-complement expresses a purpose. In
that sense it does not modify the noun but the verb. The pur-
pose clause could be fronted separately, as in To hide her feel-
ings, Kim turned away. Purpose clauses are non-committal as
to whether the intended purpose was achieved.

127



Conversely, make a successful attempt to X entails that
X came about. Attempts can be described as bungled,
defeated, foiled, etc. that all yield a negative entailment
for the complement.

Complement taking nouns tend to occur with specific
verbs. Attempt can appear with have, make and take but
make is by far the most common collocate verb for this
noun. Semantically have/make/take an attempt to X are
all −− implicatives.

The choice of the collocate verb makes a difference
for many other nouns. In particular, make an effort to X
is a −− implicative but take an effort to X is a two-way
implicative. It has the signature + + | − − as illustrated
in (20).

(20) a. He took an effort to bring me to the butterfly
garden.

b. She took no effort to dress in style.

In these examples take an effort to X is an equi-
construction. They are in contrast with the take an effort
sentences in (21).

(21) a. Before people had computers, it took an effort
to infringe copyright.

b. It took no effort to unscrew the bolt.

c. Did it take an effort to be so clever?

The examples in (21) do not contain phrasal implicatives,
they have an extraposed complement clause. Extraposi-
tion is a factive construction. The extraposed infinitival
clauses in (21) are presupposed.

The nouns trouble and initiative are like effort in that
they form a + + | − − implicative phrase with take.

(22) a. She took the trouble to iron all the clothes.

b. Napoleon didn’t take the trouble to study the
country he was going to invade.

3.2 opportunity, chance, occasion
The phrase take the/an opportunity to X is a two-way ++
|−− implicative whereas have the/an opportunity to X is
only a −− implicative. (23a) entails that Kim expressed
her feelings, (23b) entails the opposite.

(23) a. Kim took the opportunity to express her feel-
ings.

b. Kim didn’t take the opportunity to express her
feelings.

Replacing took by have as in (24) takes away the pos-
itive entailment. (24a) is non-commital with respect to
the veridicality of the complement, (24b) has the same
negative entailment as (23b).

(24) a. Kim had the opportunity to express her feelings.

b. Kim didn’t have the opportunity to express her
feelings.

In (24) one could substitute get for have as getting some-
thing entails having it and not getting something entails
not having it. The substitution of lack or miss or lose for
have in (24) turns the−− implicative into a +− implica-
tive. In (25) we get a negative entailment in the affirma-
tive and no entailment under negation.

(25) a. The Belarusians lacked the opportunity to create
a distinctive national identity.

b. I didn’t lack the opportunity to engage in a rela-
tionship, I just felt no desire to.

There are several verbs that can substitute for take in (23)
without changing the entailments. They include more de-
scriptive synonyms for take such as seize, grab and snap.
There is also another family of verbs, use, utilize, exploit
and expend, that yield a two-way + + | − − implicative
phrase with the/an opportunity to X.

(26) a. Randy used the opportunity to toot his own
horn.

b. Randy didn’t use the opportunity to toot his own
horn.

Here use could be replaced by make use of, itself a + +
| − − implicative phrase.

Another class of verbs that yield implicative construc-
tions with the/a opportunity to X consists of lose, miss,
squander and waste that entail either not having or not
using an opportunity.

(27) a. Mr. Spitzer wasted the opportunity to drive a
harder bargain.

b. Galileo did not waste the opportunity to aim a
funny mock-syllogism at Grassi’s flying eggs.

Although WordNet classifies the verb waste as a hyponym
of the verb use, the two constructions, use the opportu-
nity to X and waste the opportunity to X, have opposite
entailment signatures. (27a) entails that Spitzer did not
drive a harder bargain. Replacing waste by did not use
in (27a) yields the same entailment as the original: he
didn’t. Similarly, (27b) entails that Galileo aimed a mock
syllogism at this opponent but replacing waste by use in
(27b) entails that he did not do that. In other words, use
the/an opportunity to X is a + + | − − implicative, but
waste the/an opportunity to X is a +− | −+ implicative
construction.

Table 3 below summarizes the observations in this sec-
tion. HAVE stands for have and get; LACK for lack, miss,
give up, throw away and discard; TAKE for take, seize,
grab and snap; USE for use, utilize, exploit and expend;

128



WASTE for waste, squander and drop; OPPORTUNITY for
opportunity, chance and occasion. Altogether Table 3
lists the signatures of 54 implicative constructions.

Construction Implicative
signature

HAVE OPPORTUNITY to X −−
LACK OPPORTUNITY to X +−

TAKE/USE OPPORTUNITY to X + + | − −
WASTE OPPORTUNITY to X +− | −+

Table 3: Phrasal implicatives with OPPORTUNITY nouns

3.3 asset, money, time
As the the contrast between examples in (27) and (28)
show, wasting money is different from wasting a chance.

(28) a. I wasted the money to buy a game that I cannot
play.

b. I wasted $10 to buy it.

c. I am thrilled I didn’t waste $10 to see it in the
theater.

d. I’m so glad I didn’t waste money to have some-
one else do it.

(28a) and (28b) entail that I bought the game, (28c) and
(28d) yield a negative entailment.

Constructions waste NP to X where NP is headed by a
noun that describes something of value like asset, money,
time. perks seem all to be + + | − − implicatives.

(29) a. I wasted the time to read through the whole
thing.

b. He didn’t waste time to stop and look for signs
of her trail.

c. I read that it did not work, so didn’t waste perks
to get it.

d. I’m glad I didn’t waste 90 minutes to see this
film.

e. I wasted an hour to play this game.

But waste time to X is a special case. It has an alterna-
tive idiomatic reading in negative sentences as illustrated
in (30).

(30) a. Dunning didn’t waste any time to begin writing
his second film.

b. Madonna didn’t waste time to move on to her
next single.

c. Secularists wasted no time to jump in flawed
study’s bandwagon.

Wasting no time to X in the sense of ‘quickly do X’ is an
idiomatic use of waste. The examples in (30) do not mean
the opposite if the negation is removed. To express the
idea opposite to (30b), for example, you have to resort to
another idiom, Madonna took her time to move on to her
next single, it is not correct to say that she wasted time.
Without the possessive, take the time to X is a straight-
forward ++ |−− implicative construction, have the time
to X is −−.

3.4 ability, power, means, oomph
Having the ability to do something is a precondition for
doing it. Lacking or losing the ability to X precludes do-
ing X. Both examples in (31) yield a negative entailment
for the complement clause.

(31) a. The defendant had no ability to pay a fine.

b. The crickets were there, but they had lost the
ability to sing.

The affirmative cases are less clear. (32a) does not entail
that Google has been tracking you, but an affirmative an-
swer to the on-line survey in (32b) would interpreted by
the author of the survey to mean that the Helpdesk actu-
ally solved your issues.

(32) a. Google has had the ability to track your online
behavior.

b. The Helpdesk had the ability to solve your is-
sues. Yes or No?

We classify have the ability to X as a −− implicative and
lose the ability to X as a +− implicative. But perhaps
ability and power should also be included in the next class
of nouns to accommodate the interpretation of (32b) and
similar cases.

3.5 courage, audacity, guts, gall, impudence,
chutzpah, gumption, good sense, foresight,
wisdom, nerve, stamina, endurance

This set of nouns describes character traits that “mani-
fest themselves” in acts that presuppose them. That is, if
someone had the courage to testify, she must have testi-
fied. If she didn’t testify, then she didn’t have the courage
to do so, or she lacked whatever other quality the act
would have required in her.

(33) a. Julie had the chutzpah to ask the meter maid for
a quarter.

b. I didn’t have the courage to tell her I love her.

have COURAGE to X is a + + | − − implicative con-
struction. It also carries the presupposition that the act
in question requires the character trait described by the
noun. Did you have the foresight to invest in Apple? asks

129



whether the addressee invested in Apple and presupposes
that it would have been a good idea. I managed to get the
courage to brave the hot tub has two presuppositions, one
coming from manage to, the other from get the courage
to.

3.6 hesitation, reluctance, qualms, scruples
Like the simple implicative hesitate to X, un-
der negative polarity have/show/display hesita-
tion/reluctance/qualms/scruples to X entail the
complement clause. They are −+ implicative con-
structions.

(34) a. She did not have any hesitation to don the role
of a seductress.

b. Fonseka displayed no reluctance to carry out his
orders.

c. Lauren showed no qualms to confess that she
fell for it.

3.7 obligation, responsibility, duty
Responsibilities and obligations to do something can be
accepted and taken on, or refused and declined. The ex-
amples in (35) are future-oriented statements. They do
not entail the truth or falsity of the complement clause
at the time referred to by the sentence even if there is an
invited inference about what might or might not be the
case.

(35) a. The Government accepted the obligation to see
that fair and reasonable wages were paid to rail-
waymen.

b. The bank who owns the foreclosed property has
refused the responsibility to maintain and clean
it up.

But statements about meeting or doing an obligation, re-
sponsibility or duty are + + | − − implicative construc-
tions.

(36) a. We clearly met the obligation to pass a bal-
anced, on-time budget.

b. Strausser hasn’t met his responsibility to make
improvements.

c. The cyclist met his duty to be seen, and the mo-
torist did not meet his corresponding duties to
keep a proper lookout and to exercise due care.

d. Gosling certainly did his duty to pitch the movie
to the masses.

4 Conclusion and future work

Table 4 summarizes the findings of the previous section
for some of the most common verbs that appear in phrasal
implicative constructions and the semantic types of nouns
they collocate with.

Verb Noun Implicative
family family signature
HAVE ABILITY −−
HAVE COURAGE + + | − −
HAVE OPPORTUNITY −−
LACK ABILITY +−
LACK COURAGE +−
LACK OPPORTUNITY +−
MAKE EFFORT −−
MEET OBLIGATION + + | − −
SHOW HESITATION −+
TAKE EFFORT + + | − −
TAKE ASSET + + | − −
TAKE OPPORTUNITY + + | − −
USE ASSET + + | − −
USE OPPORTUNITY + + | − −

WASTE ASSET + + | − −
WASTE OPPORTUNITY +− | −+

Table 4: Implicative signatures for verb-noun colloca-
tions

This table lists the implicative signatures of over three
hundred phrasal implicative verb-noun collocations. On
the level of surface strings the number of constructions is
of course much larger because of different tenses for the
verb and the many ways of fleshing a noun into a noun
phrase. For example, the verb waste expands to wasted,
has wasted, did not waste, etc. The noun chance expands
to a chanche, the chance, his chance, her last chance, etc.

The verb-noun collocations are publicly available.7 It
is a much larger class than the simple implicatives dis-
cussed in Section 2 but it is not complete. From a lin-
guistic point of view finding all the specimens is not im-
portant if the conceptual classification is done correctly.
For computational applications completeness does mat-
ter. We plan to continue to expand the list in the near
future.

The noun and verb classes discussed in Section 3 con-
tain items that are not together in any WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998) SYNSET class. For example, acquit, fulfill, meet,
and perform are interchangeable in sentences such as

7http://www.stanford.edu/group/csli_lnr/
Lexical_Resources/phrasal-implicatives/

130



(37) a. He conscientiously acquitted his duty to inform
and educate the Court.

b. He fulfilled his duty to cremate his dead
brother’s body.

c. The officer met his duty to investigate and had
probable cause to arrest Kim.

As far as WordNet is concerned, the verbs acquit, ful-
fill, meet, and perform are totally unrelated. Neverthe-
less they constitute an equivalence class for this particular
phrasal implicative collocation, the MEET OBLIGATION
to X construction.

The same holds for the noun classes in Section 3. The
class in 3.5 includes chutzpah and foresight. Substituting
foresight for chutzpah in (33a) would retain the entail-
ment, that Julie asked the meter maid for a quarter, but it
would bring in a different presupposition.

Some computational systems already take advantage
of the semantic classification of simple and phrasal im-
plicatives. PARC’s Bridge system (Nairn et al., 2006) im-
plements the simple implicatives discussed in Section 2.
A few of the phrasal implicatives discussed in Section 3
have also been implemented in Bridge (Pichotta, 2008).
The NatLog system (MacCartney, 2009) implements the
same simple implicatives as Bridge but in a different way.

But neither Bridge nor NatLog does anything with pre-
suppositions. NatLog takes (1b), Kim forgot to resched-
ule the meeting, as a paraphrase of what it entails, Kim
did not reschedule the meeting, Bridge doesn’t. But nei-
ther system recognizes the presupposition of intent that
comes with the construction forget to X.

One area that remains to be systematically explored is
the complements of adjectives. It is known that there are
factive adjectives such as strange, as in It is strange that
Federer has never suffered a major injury, and two-way
implicative adjectives such as lucky, as in He was lucky to
break even, and phrasal adjective ++ |−− constructions
such as see (it) fit to X, as in He saw fit to laugh and sneer
at us.

Another unexplored topic is phrasal factives such as
make pretense to X that is counterfactive, a paraphrase of
pretend to X.

We will address these issues in future work with the
Language and Natural Reasoning group at CSLI.8

Acknowledgments
Thanks to my fellow participants in the Linguistics and
Natural Reasoning group at CSLI (Cleo Condoravdi,
Stanley Peters, Tania Rojas-Esponda and Annie Zaenen)
for their help on the content and style of this article.
Thanks also to the four anonymous reviewers of this pa-
per for their comments and suggestions.

8http://www.stanford.edu/group/csli_lnr/

The author gratefully acknowledges the support of De-
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Ma-
chine Reading Program under Air Force Research Lab-
oratory (AFRL) prime contract no. FA8750-09-C-0181.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the view of DARPA, AFRL,
or the US government.

References
Thomas Egan. 2008. Non-finite complementation: A

usage-based study of infinitive and -ing clauses in En-
glish. Rodopi, Amserdam.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. Bradford Books.

Michael L. Geis and Arnold M. Zwicky. 1971. On
invited inferences. Linguistic Inquiry, 2(4):561–566.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/4177664.

Laurence Horn. 1985. Metalinguistic negation and prag-
matic ambiguity. Language, 61(1):121–174.

Lauri Karttunen and Stanley Peters. 1979. Conventional
implicature. In Choon-Kyu Oh and David A. Dinneen,
editors, Syntax and Semantics, Volume 11: Presuppo-
sition, pages 1–56. Academic Press, New York.

Lauri Karttunen. 1971. Implicative verbs. Language,
47:340–358.

Lauri Karttunen. 1973. La logique des constructions
anglaises à complément prédicatif. Langages, 8:56–
80. Published originally as “The Logic of English
Predicate Complement Constructions” by the Indiana
University Linguistics Club in 1971.

Paul Kiparsky and Carol Kiparsky. 1970. Fact. In
M. Bierwisch and K. E. Heidolph, editors, Progress
in Linguistics, pages 143–173. Mouton, Hague.

Bill MacCartney. 2009. Natural language inference.
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.

Rowan Nairn, Cleo Condoravdi, and Lauri Karttunen.
2006. Computing relative polarity for textual infer-
ence. In Proceedings of the Fifth International work-
shop on Inference in Computational Semantics (ICoS-
5), pages 67–76.

Karl Pichotta. 2008. Processing paraphrases and phrasal
implicatives in the Bridge question-answering system.
Undergraduate Honors Thesis, Symbolic Systems Pro-
gram, Stanford University.

Juhani Rudanko. 1989. Complementation and Case
Grammar. State University of New York Press, Al-
bany, New York.

Juhani Rudanko. 2002. Complements and Construc-
tions. Corpus-Based Studies on Sentential Comple-
ments in English in Recent Centuries. University of
Press of America, Lanham, Maryland.

131


