










































Sentence Clustering via Projection over Term Clusters


First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 38–43,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sentence Clustering via Projection over Term Clusters

Lili Kotlerman, Ido Dagan
Bar-Ilan University

Israel
Lili.Kotlerman@biu.ac.il

dagan@cs.biu.ac.il

Maya Gorodetsky, Ezra Daya
NICE Systems Ltd.

Israel
Maya.Gorodetsky@nice.com

Ezra.Daya@nice.com

Abstract

This paper presents a novel sentence cluster-
ing scheme based on projecting sentences over
term clusters. The scheme incorporates exter-
nal knowledge to overcome lexical variability
and small corpus size, and outperforms com-
mon sentence clustering methods on two real-
life industrial datasets.

1 Introduction

Clustering is a popular technique for unsupervised
text analysis, often used in industrial settings to ex-
plore the content of large amounts of sentences. Yet,
as may be seen from the results of our research,
widespread clustering techniques, which cluster sen-
tences directly, result in rather moderate perfor-
mance when applied to short sentences, which are
common in informal media.

In this paper we present and evaluate a novel
sentence clustering scheme based on projecting
sentences over term clusters. Section 2 briefly
overviews common sentence clustering approaches.
Our suggested clustering scheme is presented in
Section 3. Section 4 describes an implementation of
the scheme for a particular industrial task, followed
by evaluation results in Section 5. Section 6 lists
directions for future research.

2 Background

Sentence clustering aims at grouping sentences with
similar meanings into clusters. Commonly, vector
similarity measures, such as cosine, are used to de-
fine the level of similarity over bag-of-words encod-

ing of the sentences. Then, standard clustering algo-
rithms can be applied to group sentences into clus-
ters (see Steinbach et al. (2000) for an overview).

The most common practice is representing the
sentences as vectors in term space and applying the
K-means clustering algorithm (Shen et al. (2011);
Pasquier (2010); Wang et al. (2009); Nomoto and
Matsumoto (2001); Boros et al. (2001)). An alterna-
tive approach involves partitioning a sentence con-
nectivity graph by means of a graph clustering algo-
rithm (Erkan and Radev (2004); Zha (2002)).

The main challenge for any sentence clustering
approach is language variability, where the same
meaning can be phrased in various ways. The
shorter the sentences are, the less effective becomes
exact matching of their terms. Compare the fol-
lowing newspaper sentence ”The bank is phasing out
the EZ Checking package, with no monthly fee charged
for balances over $1,500, and is instead offering cus-
tomers its Basic Banking account, which carries a fee”
with two tweets regarding the same event: ”Whats
wrong.. charging $$ for checking a/c” and ”Now they
want a monthly fee!”. Though each of the tweets can
be found similar to the long sentence by exact term
matching, they do not share any single term. Yet,
knowing that the words fee and charge are semanti-
cally related would allow discovering the similarity
between the two tweets.

External resources can be utilized to provide such
kind of knowledge, by which sentence representa-
tion can be enriched. Traditionally, WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998) has been used for this purpose (She-
hata (2009); Chen et al. (2003); Hotho et al. (2003);
Hatzivassiloglou et al. (2001)). Yet, other resources

38



of semantically-related terms can be beneficial, such
as WordNet::Similarity (Pedersen et al., 2004), sta-
tistical resources like that of Lin (1998) or DIRECT
(Kotlerman et al., 2010), thesauri, Wikipedia (Hu et
al., 2009), ontologies (Suchanek et al., 2007) etc.

3 Sentence Clustering via Term Clusters

This section presents a generic sentence clustering
scheme, which involves two consecutive steps: (1)
generating relevant term clusters based on lexical se-
mantic relatedness and (2) projecting the sentence
set over these term clusters. Below we describe each
of the two steps.

3.1 Step 1: Obtaining Term Clusters

In order to obtain term clusters, a term connectivity
graph is constructed for the given sentence set and is
clustered as follows:

1. Create initially an undirected graph with
sentence-set terms as nodes and use lexical re-
sources to extract semantically-related terms
for each node.

2. Augment the graph nodes with the extracted
terms and connect semantically-related nodes
with edges. Then, partition the graph into term
clusters through a graph clustering algorithm.

Extracting and filtering related terms. In Sec-
tion 2 we listed a number of lexical resources pro-
viding pairs of semantically-related terms. Within
the suggested scheme, any combination of resources
may be utilized.

Often resources contain terms, which are
semantically-related only in certain contexts. E.g.,
the words visa and passport are semantically-related
when talking about tourism, but cannot be consid-
ered related in the banking domain, where visa usu-
ally occurs in its credit card sense. In order to dis-
card irrelevant terms, filtering procedures can be em-
ployed. E.g., a simple filtering applicable in most
cases of sentence clustering in a specific domain
would discard candidate related terms, which do not
occur sufficiently frequently in a target-domain cor-
pus. In the example above, this procedure would
allow avoiding the insertion of passport as related to
visa, when considering the banking domain.

Clustering the graph nodes. Once the term
graph is constructed, a graph clustering algorithm

is applied resulting in a partition of the graph nodes
(terms) into clusters. The choice of a particular al-
gorithm is a parameter of the scheme. Many clus-
tering algorithms consider the graph’s edge weights.
To address this trait, different edge weights can be
assigned, reflecting the level of confidence that the
two terms are indeed validly related and the reliabil-
ity of the resource, which suggested the correspond-
ing edge (e.g. WordNet synonyms are commonly
considered more reliable than statistical thesauri).

3.2 Step 2: Projecting Sentences to Term
Clusters

To obtain sentence clusters, the given sentence set
has to be projected in some manner over the term
clusters obtained in Step 1. Our projection pro-
cedure resembles unsupervised text categorization
(Gliozzo et al., 2005), with categories represented
by term clusters that are not predefined but rather
emerge from the analyzed data:

1. Represent term clusters and sentences as vec-
tors in term space and calculate the similarity
of each sentence with each of the term clusters.

2. Assign each sentence to the best-scoring term
cluster. (We focus on hard clustering, but the
procedure can be adapted for soft clustering).

Various metrics for feature weighting and vector
comparison may be chosen. The top terms of term-
cluster vectors can be regarded as labels for the cor-
responding sentence clusters.

Thus each sentence cluster corresponds to a sin-
gle coherent cluster of related terms. This is con-
trasted with common clustering methods, where if
sentence A shares a term with B, and B shares an-
other term with C, then A and C might appear in the
same cluster even if they have no related terms in
common. This behavior turns out harmful for short
sentences, where each incidental term is influential.
Our scheme ensures that each cluster contains only
sentences related to the underlying term cluster, re-
sulting in more coherent clusters.

4 Application: Clustering Customer
Interactions

In industry there’s a prominent need to obtain busi-
ness insights from customer interactions in a contact
center or social media. Though the number of key

39



sentences to analyze is often relatively small, such
as a couple hundred, manually analyzing just a hand-
ful of clusters is much preferable. This section de-
scribes our implementation of the scheme described
in Section 3 for the task of clustering customer in-
teractions, as well as the data used for evaluation.
Results and analysis are presented in Section 5.

4.1 Data
We apply our clustering approach over two real-life
datasets. The first one consists of 155 sentences
containing reasons of account cancelation, retrieved
from automatic transcripts of contact center interac-
tions of an Internet Service Provider (ISP). The sec-
ond one contains 194 sentences crawled from Twit-
ter, expressing reasons for customer dissatisfaction
with a certain banking company. The sentences in
both datasets were gathered automatically by a rule-
based extraction algorithm. Each dataset is accom-
panied by a small corpus of call transcripts or tweets
from the corresponding domain.1

The goal of clustering these sentences is to iden-
tify the prominent reasons of cancelation and dissat-
isfaction. To obtain the gold-standard (GS) anno-
tation, sentences were manually grouped to clusters
according to the reasons stated in them.

Table 1 presents examples of sentences from the
ISP dataset. The sentences are short, with only one
or two words expressing the actual reason stated in
them. We see that exact term matching is not suffi-
cient to group the related sentences. Moreover, tra-
ditional clustering algorithms are likely to mix re-
lated and unrelated sentences, due to matching non-
essential terms (e.g. husband or summer). We note
that such short and noisy sentences are common
in informal media, which became a most important
channel of information in industry.

4.2 Implementation of the Clustering Scheme
Our proposed sentence clustering scheme presented
in Section 3 includes a number of choices. Below
we describe the choices we made in our current im-
plementation.

Input sentences were tokenized, lemmatized and
cleaned from stopwords in order to extract content-
word terms. Candidate semantically-related terms

1The bank dataset with the output of the tested methods will
be made publicly available.

he hasn’t been using it all summer long
it’s been sitting idle for about it almost a year
I’m getting married my husband has a computer
yeah I bought a new laptop this summer so
when I said faces my husband got laid off from work
well I’m them going through financial difficulties

Table 1: Example sentences expressing 3 reasons for can-
celation: the customer (1) does not use the service, (2)
acquired a computer, (3) cannot afford the service.

were extracted for each of the terms, using Word-
Net synonyms and derivations, as well as DIRECT2,
a directional statistical resource learnt from a news
corpus. Candidate terms that did not appear in the
accompanying domain corpus were filtered out as
described in Section 3.1.

Edges in the term graph were weighted with the
number of resources supporting the corresponding
edge. To cluster the graph we used the Chinese
Whispers clustering tool3 (Biemann, 2006), whose
algorithm does not require to pre-set the desired
number of clusters and is reported to outperform
other algorithms for several NLP tasks.

To generate the projection, sentences were rep-
resented as vectors of terms weighted by their fre-
quency in each sentence. Terms of the term-cluster
vectors were weighted by the number of sentences
in which they occur. Similarity scores were calcu-
lated using the cosine measure. Clusters were la-
beled with the top terms appearing both in the un-
derlying term cluster and in the cluster’s sentences.

5 Results and Analysis

In this section we present the results of evaluating
our projection approach, compared to the common
K-means clustering method4 applied to:
(A) Standard bag-of-words representation of sen-

tences;
2Available for download at www.cs.biu.ac.il/

˜nlp/downloads/DIRECT.html. For each term we
extract from the resource the top-5 related terms.

3Available at http://wortschatz.informatik.
uni-leipzig.de/˜cbiemann/software/CW.html

4We use the Weka (Hall et al., 2009) implementation. Due
to space limitations and for more meaningful comparison we re-
port here one value of K, which is equal to the number of clus-
ters returned by projection (60 for the ISP and 65 for the bank
dataset). For K = 20, 40 and 70 the performance was similar.

40



(B) Bag-of-words representation, where sentence’s
words are augmented with semantically-related
terms (following the common scheme of prior
work, see Section 2). We use the same set of
related terms as is used by our method.

(C) Representation of sentences in term-cluster
space, using the term clusters generated by our
method as vector features. A feature is acti-
vated in a sentence vector if it contains a term
from the corresponding term cluster.

Table 2 shows the results in terms of Purity, Recall
(R), Precision (P) and F1 (see ”Evaluation of clus-
tering”, Manning et al. (2008)). Projection signifi-
cantly5 outperforms all baselines for both datasets.

Dataset Algorithm Purity R P F1

ISP

Projection .74 .40 .68 .50
K-means A .65 .18 .22 .20
K-means B .65 .13 .24 .17
K-means C .65 .18 .26 .22

Bank

Projection .79 .26 .53 .35
K-means A .61 .14 .14 .14
K-means B .64 .13 .19 .16
K-means C .67 .17 .21 .19

Table 2: Evaluation results.

For completeness we experimented with applying
Chinese Whispers clustering to sentence connectiv-
ity graphs, but the results were inferior to K-means.

Table 3 presents sample sentences from clusters
produced by projection and K-means for illustration.
Our initial analysis showed that our approach indeed
produces more homogenous clusters than the base-
line methods, as conjectured in Section 3.2. We con-
sider it advantageous, since it’s easier for a human to
merge clusters than to reveal sub-clusters. E.g., a GS
cluster of 20 sentences referring to fees and charges
is covered by three projection clusters labeled fee,
charge and interest rate, with 9, 8 and 2 sentences
correspondingly. On the other hand, K-means C
method places 11 out of the 20 sentences in a messy
cluster of 57 sentences (see Table 3), scattering the
remaining 9 sentences over 7 other clusters.

In our current implementation fee, charge and in-
terest rate were not detected by the lexical resources
we used as semantically similar and thus were not

5p=0.001 according to McNemar test (Dietterich, 1998).

grouped in one term cluster. However, adding more
resources may introduce additional noise. Such de-
pendency on coverage and accuracy of resources is
apparently a limitation of our approach. Yet, as
our experiments indicate, using only two generic re-
sources already yielded valuable results.

a. Projection
credit card, card, mastercard, visa (38 sentences)
XXX has the worst credit cards ever

XXX MasterCard is the worst credit card I’ve ever had

ntuc do not accept XXX visa now I have to redraw $150...

XXX card declined again , $40 dinner in SF...

b. K-means C
fee, charge (57 sentences)
XXX playing games wit my interest

arguing w incompetent pol at XXX damansara perdana

XXX’s upper management are a bunch of rude pricks

XXX are ninjas at catching fraudulent charges.

Table 3: Excerpt from resulting clusterings for the bank
dataset. Bank name is substituted with XXX. Cluster la-
bels are given in italics. Two most frequent terms are
assigned as cluster labels for K-means C.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

We presented a novel sentence clustering scheme
and evaluated its implementation, showing signifi-
cantly superior performance over common sentence
clustering techniques. We plan to further explore
the suggested scheme by utilizing additional lexical
resources and clustering algorithms. We also plan
to compare our approach with co-clustering meth-
ods used in document clustering (Xu et al. (2003),
Dhillon (2001), Slonim and Tishby (2000)).

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the MAGNE-
TON grant no. 43834 of the Israel Ministry of Indus-
try, Trade and Labor, the Israel Ministry of Science
and Technology, the Israel Science Foundation grant
1112/08, the PASCAL-2 Network of Excellence of
the European Community FP7-ICT-2007-1-216886
and the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agree-
ment no. 287923 (EXCITEMENT).

41



References
Chris Biemann. 2006. Chinese whispers - an efficient

graph clustering algorithm and its application to nat-
ural language processing problems. In Proceedings
of TextGraphs: the Second Workshop on Graph Based
Methods for Natural Language Processing, pages 73–
80, New York City, USA.

Endre Boros, Paul B. Kantor, and David J. Neu. 2001. A
clustering based approach to creating multi-document
summaries.

Hsin-Hsi Chen, June-Jei Kuo, and Tsei-Chun Su.
2003. Clustering and visualization in a multi-lingual
multi-document summarization system. In Proceed-
ings of the 25th European conference on IR re-
search, ECIR’03, pages 266–280, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.

Inderjit S. Dhillon. 2001. Co-clustering documents and
words using bipartite spectral graph partitioning. In
Proceedings of the seventh ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, KDD ’01, pages 269–274, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Thomas G. Dietterich. 1998. Approximate statistical
tests for comparing supervised classification learning
algorithms.

Günes Erkan and Dragomir R. Radev. 2004. Lexrank:
graph-based lexical centrality as salience in text sum-
marization. J. Artif. Int. Res., 22(1):457–479, Decem-
ber.

C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet – An Electronic Lexical
Database. MIT Press.

Alfio Massimiliano Gliozzo, Carlo Strapparava, and Ido
Dagan. 2005. Investigating unsupervised learning for
text categorization bootstrapping. In HLT/EMNLP.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11(1):10–18.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, Judith L. Klavans, Melissa L.
Holcombe, Regina Barzilay, Min yen Kan, and Kath-
leen R. McKeown. 2001. Simfinder: A flexible clus-
tering tool for summarization. In In Proceedings of the
NAACL Workshop on Automatic Summarization, pages
41–49.

A. Hotho, S. Staab, and G. Stumme. 2003. Word-
net improves text document clustering. In Ying
Ding, Keith van Rijsbergen, Iadh Ounis, and Joe-
mon Jose, editors, Proceedings of the Semantic Web
Workshop of the 26th Annual International ACM SI-
GIR Conference on Research and Development in In-
formaion Retrieval (SIGIR 2003), August 1, 2003,
Toronto Canada. Published Online at http://de.
scientificcommons.org/608322.

Xiaohua Hu, Xiaodan Zhang, Caimei Lu, E. K. Park, and
Xiaohua Zhou. 2009. Exploiting wikipedia as exter-
nal knowledge for document clustering. In Proceed-
ings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international confer-
ence on Knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD
’09, pages 389–396, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Lili Kotlerman, Ido Dagan, Idan Szpektor, and Maayan
Zhitomirsky-Geffet. 2010. Directional distributional
similarity for lexical inference. JNLE, 16:359–389.

Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering
of similar words. In Proceedings of the 17th interna-
tional conference on Computational linguistics - Vol-
ume 2, COLING ’98, pages 768–774, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hin-
rich Schütze. 2008. Introduction to Information Re-
trieval. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, Juli.

Tadashi Nomoto and Yuji Matsumoto. 2001. A new ap-
proach to unsupervised text summarization. In Pro-
ceedings of the 24th annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in informa-
tion retrieval, SIGIR ’01, pages 26–34, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Claude Pasquier. 2010. Task 5: Single document
keyphrase extraction using sentence clustering and la-
tent dirichlet allocation. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, Se-
mEval ’10, pages 154–157, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ted Pedersen, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Jason Miche-
lizzi. 2004. Wordnet::similarity: measuring the
relatedness of concepts. In Demonstration Papers
at HLT-NAACL 2004, HLT-NAACL–Demonstrations
’04, pages 38–41, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Shady Shehata. 2009. A wordnet-based semantic model
for enhancing text clustering. Data Mining Work-
shops, International Conference on, 0:477–482.

Chao Shen, Tao Li, and Chris H. Q. Ding. 2011. Integrat-
ing clustering and multi-document summarization by
bi-mixture probabilistic latent semantic analysis (plsa)
with sentence bases. In AAAI.

Noam Slonim and Naftali Tishby. 2000. Document clus-
tering using word clusters via the information bottle-
neck method. In Proceedings of the 23rd annual inter-
national ACM SIGIR conference on Research and de-
velopment in information retrieval, SIGIR ’00, pages
208–215, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

M. Steinbach, G. Karypis, and V. Kumar. 2000. A
comparison of document clustering techniques. KDD
Workshop on Text Mining.

Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: A large ontology from
wikipedia and wordnet.

42



Dingding Wang, Shenghuo Zhu, Tao Li, and Yihong
Gong. 2009. Multi-document summarization us-
ing sentence-based topic models. In Proceedings
of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers,
ACLShort ’09, pages 297–300, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Wei Xu, Xin Liu, and Yihong Gong. 2003. Document
clustering based on non-negative matrix factorization.
In Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in in-
formaion retrieval, SIGIR ’03, pages 267–273, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Hongyuan Zha. 2002. Generic summarization and
keyphrase extraction using mutual reinforcement prin-
ciple and sentence clustering. In SIGIR, pages 113–
120.

43


