










































DirRelCond3: Detecting Textual Entailment Across Languages With Conditions On Directional Text Relatedness Scores


First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 710–714,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

DirRelCond3: Detecting Textual Entailment Across Languages With
Conditions On Directional Text Relatedness Scores

Alpár Perini
‘Babeş-Bólyai’ University

Cluj-Napoca, Romania
palpar at gmail.com

Abstract

There are relatively few entailment heuristics
that exploit the directional nature of the entail-
ment relation. Cross-Lingual Text Entailment
(CLTE), besides introducing the extra dimen-
sion of cross-linguality, also requires to de-
termine the exact direction of the entailment
relation, to provide content synchronization
(Negri et al., 2012). Our system uses sim-
ple dictionary lookup combined with heuris-
tic conditions to determine the possible di-
rections of entailment between the two texts
written in different languages. The key mem-
bers of the conditions were derived from (Cor-
ley and Mihalcea, 2005) formula initially for
text similarity, while the entailment condition
used as a starting point was that from (Tatar
et al., 2009). We show the results obtained
by our implementation of this simple and fast
approach at the CLTE task from the SemEval-
2012 challenge.

1 Introduction

Recognizing textual entailment (TE) is a key task
for many natural language processing (NLP) prob-
lems. It consists in determining if an entailment re-
lation exists between two texts: the text (T) and the
hypothesis (H). The notation T → H says that the
meaning of H can be inferred from T, in order words,
H does not introduce any novel information with re-
spect to T.

Even though RTE challenges lead to many ap-
proaches for finding textual entailment, fewer au-
thors exploited the directional character of the en-
tailment relation. Due to the fact that the entailment

relation, unlike the equivalence relation, is not sym-
metric, if T → H , it is less likely that the reverse
H → T can also hold (Tatar et al., 2009).

The novel Cross-Lingual Text Entailment (CLTE)
approach increases the complexity of the traditional
TE task in two way, both of which have been only
partially researched and have promise for great po-
tential (Negri et al., 2012):

• the two texts are no longer written in the same
language (cross-linguality);

• the entailment needs to be queried in both di-
rections (content synchronization).

Mehdad et al. (2010) presented initial research di-
rections and experiments for the cross-lingual con-
text and explored possible application scenarios.

2 Theoretical Background

The semantic similarity formula from (Corley and
Mihalcea, 2005) defines the similarity of a pair of
documents differently depending on with respect to
which text it is computed. The formula involves only
the set of open-class words (nouns, verbs, adjectives
and adverbs) from each text.

Based on this text-to-text similarity metric, Tatar
et al. (2009) have derived a textual entailment recog-
nition system. The paper demonstrated that in the
case when T → H holds, the following relation will
take place:

sim(T,H)H > sim(T,H)T (1)

however, the opposite of this statement is not always
true, nevertheless it is likely. In (Tatar et al., 2007)

710



a simpler version for the calculus of sim(T,H)T is
used: namely the only case of similarity is the iden-
tity (a symmetric relation) and/or the occurrence of a
word from a text in the synset of a word in the other
text (not symmetric relation).

Perini and Tatar (2009) used the earlier seman-
tic similarity formula (Corley and Mihalcea, 2005)
to derive a formula for directional text relatedness
score as follows:

rel(T,H)T =∑
pos

∑
Ti∈WSTpos(maxRel(Ti)× idf(Ti))∑

pos

∑
Ti∈WSTpos idf(Ti)

(2)

A mathematically similar formula could be given
for rel(T,H)H (by swapping T for H in the RHS
of (2)) which would normally produce a different
score. In (2), maxRel(Ti) was defined as the high-
est relatedness between (in this order) word Ti and
words from H having the same part of speech as
Ti. The relatedness between a pair of words was
computed by taking the weight of the highest-ranked
WordNet relation that takes place between them. It
should be noted that the word order in the pair was
strict and that most of the WordNet relations in-
volved in the calculus were not symmetric.

After defining the relatedness of two texts, which
depends on the direction, Perini and Tatar (2009) in-
troduced a new directional entailment condition, de-
rived from the one in (Tatar et al., 2009):

rel(T,H)T +σ > rel(T,H)H > rel(T,H)T > θ .
(3)

3 The DirRelCond3 System

After having presented the necessary theoretical
background, in this section we give an overview of
our system for CLTE.

The application was implemented in the Java
programming language. XML input and output
was performed using the DocumentBuilder and the
DOM parser from Java.

The first step was to tag both the English and
the foreign language sentence using the TreeTagger
(Schmid, 1995), which had the advantage that it was
fast and it supported all the languages required by

this task by providing it with the necessary parame-
ter file, and also had a nice Java wrapper for it (an-
nolab, 2011). The output of the tagger was used to
obtain the necessary POS information needed to dis-
tinguish the set of open-class words for each sen-
tence. Because the tagset used for each language
was different, it was necessary to adapt all the differ-
ent variants to the four generic classes: noun, verb,
adjective and adverb.

The translation step followed for the foreign lan-
guage sentence, which took words only from these
classes and translated them using two dictionaries
in some cases. The base dictionary used for word
lookup was the FreeDict (FreeDictProject, 2012),
for which it was possible to download the language
files and use them locally with the help of a server
(ktulu, 2006) and a Java client (SourceForge, 2001).
The disadvantage of this dictionary was that it had
rather few headwords mainly for the Italian and
Spanish languages. A later improvement was to
use an additional online dictionary as a fall-back,
WordReference.com (WordReference.com, 2012),
which had a very good headword count for the Ital-
ian and French languages, it also provided a very
nice JSON API to access it and there was a ready-
to-use Java API (SourceForge, 2011) for it that sup-
ported caching the results. Although the number of
queries per hour was limited, it was very helpful that
they approved the caching of the results for the dura-
tion of the development. The dictionary lookup pro-
cess attached to each foreign word that was found
the set of English meanings, corresponding to each
sense that was found.

The penultimate step was to compute the text
relatedness scores with respect to each sentence,
rel(T,H)T and rel(T,H)H , by applying (2). The
only modification compared to the original formula
was that in the case of the translated word, all the
obtained meanings were used and the one producing
the maximum relatedness was kept. We have used
the following weights (assigned intuitively) for the
different WordNet relations in the final word relat-
edness score:

• equals: 1.0;

• same synset: 0.9;

• similar to: 0.85

711



• hypernyms: 0.8;

• hyponyms: 0.7;

• entailment: 0.7;

• meronyms: 0.5;

• holonyms: 0.5;

• not in WordNet or dictionaries: 0.01.

The final step was to devise a condition based on
these two text relatedness scores, similar to (3), but
one that would be able to report the entailment vote
for both directions:

noentail, if rel(T,H)T or rel(T,H)H < θ
bidir, if abs(rel(T,H)T , rel(T,H)H) < δ
forward, if rel(T,H)H > rel(T,H)T + σ
backwd, otherwise

(4)

4 Experimental Results

The CLTE task provided researchers with training
sets of 500 sentence pairs (one English, one foreign)
already annotated with the type of entailment that
exists between them (’Forward’, ’Backward’, ’Bidi-
rectional’, ’No entailment’). There was one train-
ing set for each French-English, German-English,
Italian-English, Spanish-English language combina-
tion (Negri et al., 2011). The test set consisted in a
similarly structured 500 pairs for each language pair
but without annotations. The mentioned entailment
judgment types were uniformly distributed, both in
the case of the development and the test dataset.

The DirRelCond3 system participated at the
CLTE task with four runs for each of the above lan-
guage combinations. Regarding the results, the ac-
curacies obtained are summarized in table 1 as per-
centages.

Figures 1, 2, 3, 4 show the precision, recall and F-
measure for the ‘Forward’, ‘Backward’, ‘No entail-
ment’ and ‘Bidirectional’ judgments for each of the
language pair combinations in the case of the best
run that the DirRelCond3 system has obtained:

The earlier figures pointed out that generally
the unidirectional ‘Forward’ and ‘Backward’ judge-
ments produced better results than the remaining

System Spa-En Ita-En Fra-En Deu-En
Run 1 30.0 28.0 36.2 33.6
Run 2 30.0 28.4 36.0 33.6
Run 3 30.0 33.8 38.4 36.4
Run 4 34.4 31.6 38.4 37.4

Table 1: DirRelCond3 accuracies obtained for CLTE
task. Best results are with italic.

Figure 1: DirRelCond3 German-English pair precision,
recall and F-measure values for the different judgments.

Figure 2: DirRelCond3 French-English pair precision,
recall and F-measure values for the different judgments.

ones that involved bi-directionality. This is some-
what expected because in this case it is more difficult
to correctly judge since there could more possibility
for error.

Regarding the individual runs, run 2 added
slightly improved dictionary search in addition to
run 1, by attempting to look for the lemma form of
the word as well, that was available thanks to the

712



Figure 3: DirRelCond3 Italian-English pair precision, re-
call and F-measure values for the different judgments.

Figure 4: DirRelCond3 Spanish-English pair precision,
recall and F-measure values of the different judgments.

TreeTagger tool (Schmid, 1995). In case the word
was still not found, but the language was French or
Italian and the word contained apostrophe, a lookup
was attempted for the part following it.

Run 3 added another slight improvement for Ger-
man, in case there was still no match for the word,
tried to see if the word was a composite containing
two parts found in the dictionary, and if so, used the
first one.

The first two runs were only using the FreeD-
ict (FreeDictProject, 2012) dictionary, while start-
ing with run 3, Italian and French language words,
in case not found, could also be searched in the Wor-
dReference (WordReference.com, 2012) online dic-
tionary.

The first three runs were using entailment condi-
tions common to all language combinations. The

values of the parameters were chosen based on the
CLTE development dataset (Negri et al., 2011) and
were as follows:
θ = 0.5, δ = 0.03, σ = 0.0.
The final run used empirically-tuned conditions for
each language pair in the dataset. The θ threshold
needed to be lowered for Spanish since many words
were not found in FreeDict, which was the only one
we had available for use, so the relatedness scores
were rather smaller. The values are summarized in
table 2 below:

Param Spa-En Ita-En Fra-En Deu-En
θ 0.25 0.55 0.5 0.45
δ 0.03 0.025 0.03 0.04
σ 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0

Table 2: DirRelCond3 – Run 4 condition parameters.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we have presented the DirRelCond3
systems that participated at the CLTE task (Negri et
al., 2012) from SemEval-2012. The system was a
good example of how an approach for mono-lingual
text entailment can be adapted to the new dimen-
sion of cross-linguality. It would have been possible
to use a MT tool and then do the entailment detec-
tion steps all in English as was the original approach,
however we expected that that would introduce more
possibility for error than translating and comparing
words with the same POS.

The overall best result for each language that we
have obtained was around the median of all the sys-
tem runs that were submitted to the CLTE task. The
best accuracy obtained by our system was for the
French-English pair with 38.4%, but well below the
accuracy of the best systems. Generally the results
involving German and French were somewhat better
than the other two languages. In the case of Span-
ish this could easily be caused by the significantly
smaller dictionary that was available, while for Ital-
ian, after relying also on WordReference.com this
was no longer the case. A possiblity is that some lan-
guage particularities were affecting the results (e.g.
high usage of apostrophe) but perhaps the entailment
heuristic thresholds were not the best either.

Finally, there are several possible improvements.

713



Firstly, in case the dictionary provides POS infor-
mation for the translation, that could be used to re-
tain only those senses that have the same POS as
the original word. For some languages, particularly
for Spanish, it would be helpful to rely on dictio-
naries with more headwords. Secondly, we can use
the inverse document frequency counts for words,
obtained either from the CLTE development cor-
pus or from web searches, because currently that
was simply one. Thirdly, both the empirically ob-
tained conditions can be further tuned, manually or
by means of learning, separately for each language
pair. Fourthly, when computing the word relatedness
scores, the weights of the WordNet relations could
be further adjusted for each language, empirically,
or again by learning.

References
annolab. 2011. tt4j – TreeTagger for Java. http://
code.google.com/p/tt4j/.

Courtney Corley and Rada Mihalcea. 2005. Measuring
the semantic similarity of texts. In Ann Arbor, editor,
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Empirical Mod-
eling of Semantic Equivalence and Entailment, pages
13–18.

FreeDictProject. 2012. FreeDict – free bilingual dictio-
naries. http://www.freedict.org/en/.

ktulu. 2006. JavaDICT – Java DICT Client.
http://ktulu.com.ar/blog/projects/
javadictd/.

Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2010. Towards cross-lingual textual entailment. In
Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 321–
324, Los Angeles, California, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Matteo Negri, Luisa Bentivogli, Yashar Mehdad, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Alessandro Marchetti. 2011. Di-
vide and conquer: Crowdsourcing the creation of
cross-lingual textual entailment corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 670–679, Edin-
burgh, Scotland, UK., July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

M. Negri, A. Marchetti, Y. Mehdad, L. Bentivogli, and
D. Giampiccolo. 2012. Semeval-2012 Task 8: Cross-
lingual Textual Entailment for Content Synchroniza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012).

Alpar Perini and Doina Tatar. 2009. Textual entailment
as a directional relation revisited. Knowledge Engi-
neering: Principles and Techniques, pages 69–72.

Helmut Schmid. 1995. TreeTagger – a lan-
guage independent part-of-speech tagger.
http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/.

SourceForge. 2001. JDictClient – JAVA dict
server client. http://sourceforge.net/
projects/jdictclient/.

SourceForge. 2011. WordReference Java API.
http://sourceforge.net/projects/
wordrefapi/.

Doina Tatar, Gabriela Serban, and M. Lupea. 2007.
Text entailment verification with text similarities. In
Babes-Bolyai University, editor, Knowledge Engineer-
ing: Principles and Techniques, pages 33–40. Cluj
University Press.

Doina Tatar, Gabriela Serban, A. Mihis, and Rada Mihal-
cea. 2009. Textual entailment as a directional relation.
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Tech-
nology, 41(1):17–28.

WordReference.com. 2012. WordReference.com –
Online Language Dictionaries. http://www.
wordreference.com/.

714


