










































Lexical semantic typologies from bilingual corpora  A framework


First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 90–94,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lexical semantic typologies from bilingual corpora — A framework

Steffen Eger
Department of Computer Science / Carnegie Mellon University

5404 Gates Hillman Complex / Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
seger@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We present a framework, based on Sejane and
Eger (2012), for inducing lexical semantic ty-
pologies for groups of languages. Our frame-
work rests on lexical semantic association net-
works derived from encoding, via bilingual
corpora, each language in a common reference
language, the tertium comparationis, so that
distances between languages can easily be de-
termined.

1 Introduction

Typologocial classifications have a long tradition in
linguistics. For example, typologies based on syn-
tactic categories have been proposed e.g. by Green-
berg (1961), leading a.o. to ‘word order’ catego-
rizations of natural languages as belonging to SVO,
VSO, etc. types. Relatedly, genealogical classifica-
tion systems based on phonological and morpholog-
ical similarities date back at least to the compara-
tists of the nineteenth centuries, among them Jacob
Grimm (1785-1863), Rasmus Rask (1787-1832),
and Karl Verner (1846-1896). Typological investi-
gations into (lexical) semantic relations across lan-
guages have, in contrast, attracted little attention.
Still, some results have been established such as
classifications based upon treatment of animal con-
cepts and corresponding meat concepts (see the ex-
cellent introduction to lexical typologies by Koch,
2001). As further exceptions, based on computa-
tional principles, may be considered Mehler et al.
(2011), who analyze conceptual networks derived
from the Wikipedia topic classification systems for

different languages; Gaume et al. (2008), who pro-
pose (but do not realize, to the best of our knowl-
edge) to compare distances between selected word
pairs such as meat/animal, child/fruit, door/mouth
across language-specific monolingual dictionaries in
order to categorize the associated languages and,
partly, Cooper (2008), who computes semantic dis-
tances between languages based on the curvature of
translation histograms in bilingual dictionaries.

Recently, Sejane and Eger (2012) have outlined a
novel approach to establishing semantic typologies
based upon the language-specific polysemy relation
of lexical units which entails language-dependent
‘lexical semantic association networks’. To illus-
trate, French bœuf has two meanings, which we may
gloss as ‘cow’ and ‘beef’ in English. Similarly,
French langue and Spanish lingua mean both ‘lan-
guage’ and ‘tongue’, whereas Chinese huà means
both ‘language’ and ‘picture’. Sejane and Eger’s
(2012) key idea is then that this language-specific
polysemy can be made observable via the trans-
lation relation implied e.g. by a bilingual dictio-
nary. For instance, using a Chinese-English dictio-
nary, one might be able to uncover the polysemy
of huà by assessing its two English translations, as
given above. More formally, one might create a link
(in a network) between two English words if they
have a common translation in Chinese (cf. Eger
and Sejane, 2010); doing the same with a Spanish-
English and French-English dictionary, one would
obtain three different lexical semantic association
networks, all encoded in the English language, the
tertium comparationis or reference language in this
case. In the English networks based upon Spanish

90



and French — Sejane and Eger (2012) call these net-
works the Spanish and French versions of English,
respectively — ‘language’ and ‘tongue’ would have
a link, whereas in the Chinese version of English,
‘language’ and ‘picture’ would have a link (see also
Figure 1 where we illustrate this idea for English and
Latin versions of German). Then, comparing these
networks across languages may allow establishing a
typology of lexical semantic associations.

In the current paper, we deliberate on Sejane and
Eger’s (2012) idea, suggesting ways to adequately
formalize their approach (Section 2) and propose
data sources suitable for their framework (Section
3). Moreover, in Section 4 we shortly discuss how
network versions of a given reference language can
be formally contrasted and suggest solutions for the
tertium comparationis problem. In Section 5, we
conclude.

2 Formal approach to lexical semantic
association networks

We propose the following mathematical framework
for representing lexical semantic association net-
works. Given n languages L1, . . . , Ln, n ≥
2, plus a selected reference language R distinct
from L1, . . . , Ln, and bilingual translation operators
T1, . . . , Tn, where Ti, i = 1, . . . , n, maps (or, trans-
lates) from language Li to the reference languageR,
create network graphs

Gi = (Vi, Ei)

with

Vi = W [R],

and

Ei = {(u, v) |u, v ∈ Vi, uTix, xTiv
for some x ∈W [Li]},

where by W [L] we denote the words of language L
and by aTib we denote that a translates into b under
Ti; moreover, we assume Ti to be symmetric such
that the Gi’s may be considered undirected graphs.

To generalize this a bit, we may consider weighted
graphs where for network i, i = 1, . . . , n, Vi is as
above, Ei = {(u, v) |u, v ∈ Vi}, and each edge
(u, v) ∈ Ei has weight (being a function of)

di(u, v) = |{x |uTix, xTiv}|. (1)

Then, if u and v have no common translation x,
di(u, v) = 0 and generally di(u, v) counts the num-
ber of common translations x between u and v, en-
tailing a generalization of the setting above, which
may allow for a more fine-grained analysis and may
be of importance for example for outlining seman-
tic many-to-one relationships between a languageLi
and the reference language R.

3 Possible data sources

Sejane and Eger (2012) conduct a preliminary study
of their approach on the open-source bilingual dic-
tionaries dicts.info (http://www.dicts.info/uddl.php).
The disadvantage with using bilingual dictionaries is
of course that they are scarcely available (and much
less freely available); moreover, for the above de-
scribed semantic association networks, it may be of
crucial importance to have comparable data sources;
e.g. using a general-purpose dictionary in one case
and a technical dictionary in the other, or using dic-
tionaries of vastly different sizes may severely affect
the quality of results.1

We more generally propose to use bilingual cor-
pora for the problem of inducing semantic asso-
ciation networks, where we particularly have e.g.
sentence-aligned corpora like the Europarl corpus
(Koehn, 2005) in mind (see also the study of Rama
and Borin (2011) on cognates, with Europarl as the
data basis). Then, translation relations Ti may be
induced from these corpora by applying a statisti-
cal machine translation approach such as the Moses
toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). The translation relations
may thus be probabilistic instead of binary, which
may either be resolved via thresholding or by modi-
fying Equation (1) as in

di(u, v) =
∑

x∈W [Li]

Pr[uTix] + Pr[xTiv]
2

or

di(u, v) =
∑

x∈W [Li]

Pr[uTix] · Pr[xTiv],

both of which have (1) as special cases.

1As another aspect, Sejane and Eger (2012) concluded that
the sizes and partly the qualities of their bilingual dictionaries
were, throughout, not fully adequate for their intentions.

91



Figure 1: Bilingual dictionaries German-English and German-Latin and induced lexical semantic association net-
works, English and Latin versions of German. Note the similarities and differences; Mann ‘man’ and Mensch ‘human’
have a link in both versions but there is a path between Mann and Frau ‘woman’ only in the English version of Ger-
man, whereas there exists e.g. a path between Mann and Held ‘hero’ only in the Latin version. Reprinted from Sejane
and Eger (2012).

Using the Europarl corpus would both address
the problem of size and comparability raised above;
moreover, corpora may better reflect actual language
use than dictionaries, which oftentimes document
idiosyncractic, normative or assumed language con-
ditions. A problem with the Europarl corpus is that it
covers just a very small (and selected) subset of the
world’s languages, whereas it might be of particu-
lar interest for (semantic) typology to contrast large,
heterogeneous classes of languages.

4 Network distance measures and the
problem of tertium comparationis

In order to be able to induce a semantic typology
from the above described lexical semantic associa-
tion networks, a distance metric δ on network graphs
is required,2 that is, a function δ that maps network
graphs Gi, Gj , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, to numbers

δij = δ(Gi, Gj) ∈ R.

Such distance measures may be derived from gen-
eral network statistics such as the number of
edges, the diameters of the networks, network den-
sity, graph entropy via information functionals (cf.
Dehmer, 2008) or clustering coefficients (cf. Watts
and Strogatz, 1998). We believe, however, that such
abstract measures can be useful only for a prelimi-
nary examination of the data. A more in-depth anal-
ysis should be based on comparing individual net-

2In this context, we identify languages with their lexical se-
mantic association networks.

work vertices in two versions of the reference lan-
guage. For example, we could ask about the lexi-
cal semantic difference between French and Chinese
with respect to the lexical unit ‘language’. One way
of realizing such an analysis would be by making
use of shortest distances between network vertices.
To be more precise, let Gi and Gj be two lexical se-
mantic network versions of a reference language R.
Assume thatGi andGj have the same number,N , of
vertices, with the same labels (i.e. names of vertices
such as ‘language’). Let uk, 1 ≤ k ≤ N , be the k-th
vertex in both graphs, with identical label across the
two graphs. Moreover, let si(uk) and sj(uk) be vec-
tors whose l-th component, 1 ≤ l ≤ N , is given as
the shortest distance between vertex uk and vertex
ul in graphs Gi and Gj , respectively,(

si(uk)
)
l

= shortest distance between

uk and ul in Gi,

and analogously for sj(uk). We could then define
the difference between network version Gi and Gj
with respect to vertex uk as e.g. the Euclidean dis-
tance between these two vectors,

‖si(uk)− sj(uk)‖ .

However, as useful as shortest distances may be,
they do not seem to fully capture the topological
structure of a network. For example, they do not
indicate whether there are many or few (short) paths
between two vertices, etc. (see also the discussion

92



in Gaume et al., 2008). Therefore, we propose a
Page-rank like (see Brin and Page, 1998; Gaume and
Mathieu, 2012) procedure to compare network ver-
tices of networks Gi and Gj . To this end, let pi(uk),
a vector of dimension N , denote the probability dis-
tribution that if, starting from vertex uk, one may
reach any of the other vertices of network Gi (and
analogously for network Gj), under the following
rules. In each step, starting at vertex uk, with prob-
ability α, a ‘random surfer’ on the network Gi may
pass from its current vertex v to any of v’s neighbors
with equal probability (if there are no neighbors, the
surfer passes to a random vertex), and with probabil-
ity (1 − α) the surfer ‘teleports’ to an arbitrary ver-
tex. The probability distribution pi(uk), for α close
to 1, may then neatly represent topological proper-
ties of network Gi, from the ‘perspective’ of vertex
uk. On this basis, we can, as above, determine the
difference between network versionsGi andGj with
respect to vertex uk as

δuk(Gi, Gj) = ‖pi(uk)− pj(uk)‖ . (2)

Finally, we define the (global) distance between Gi
andGj as the average over all such (local) distances,

δij =
1

N

N∑
k=1

δuk(Gi, Gj). (3)

If, as mentioned above, we have weighted graphs,
we slightly modify the random surfer’s behavior. In-
stead of passing with uniform probability from ver-
tex v to a neighbor vertex w of v, the surfer passes
to w with probability proportional to the weight be-
tween v and w; the larger the weight the higher is
the probability that the surfer ends up at w.

Then, once distance metric values δij are given,
an n × n distance matrix D may be defined whose
entry (i, j) is precisely δij ,

Dij = δij .

On D, standard e.g. hierarchical clustering algo-
rithms may be applied in order to deduce a lexical
semantic typology.

Finally, we address the tertium comparationis
problem: Given a set of languages, which one
should be chosen as reference language? It might be
tempting to believe that the choice of the reference

language should not matter much for the resulting
lexical semantic association networks, but the refer-
ence language may certainly have some impact. For
example, if English is the reference language, the
Chinese version of English might not only have a
link between ‘language’ and ‘picture’ but also be-
tween ‘language’ and ‘tongue’, because of the pol-
ysemy of ‘tongue’ in English. If, in contrast, Ger-
man was the reference language, the Chinese version
of German should not have a link between Zunge
‘tongue’ and Sprache ‘language’ because Zunge, in
German, does not mean ‘language’ (any more).

Thus, to avoid misspecifications based on a par-
ticular choice of reference language, we propose the
following. Let L1, . . . , Ln, Ln+1, n ≥ 2, be (n+ 1)
languages for which bilingual translation operators
TA,B exist for any two languages A, B from the
(n + 1) languages. Then let the distance between
languages i and j, 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n+ 1, be defined as

∆ij =
1

n− 1
∑

R∈L\{Li,Lj}

δ(GRi , G
R
j ),

where by GRi we denote the Li version of
R, and by L we denote the set of languages
{L1, . . . , Ln, Ln+1}; in other words, we specify the
distance between languages i and j as the aver-
age distance over all possible reference languages,
which excludes languages i and j themselves. As
above, ∆ij induces a distance matrix, with which
clustering can be performed.

5 Conclusion

We have presented a framework for inducing lexical
semantic typologies based on the idea of Sejane and
Eger (2012) to represent lexical semantic spaces of
different languages in a common reference language
in order to be able to contrast them. We have ex-
tended Sejane and Eger’s (2012) approach by giv-
ing it a solid mathematical foundation, by suggest-
ing more suitable data bases on which to implement
their study, and by outlining adequate network dis-
tance metrics on this data. Moreover, we have ad-
dressed the tertium comparationis problem of the
choice of the reference language. In follow-up work,
we intend to bring the idea to the data, from which
we expect very interesting cross-lingual lexical se-
mantic insights.

93



References

S. Brin, and L. Page. 1998. The Anatomy of a Large-
Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine. In Seventh
International World-Wide Web Conference (WWW
1998).

M.C. Cooper. 2008. Measuring the Semantic Distance
between Languages from a Statistical Analysis of
Bilingual Dictionaries. Journal of Quantitative Lin-
guistics, 15 (1): 1–33.

M. Dehmer. 2008. Information processing in complex
networks: Graph entropy and information functionals.
Applied Mathematics and Computation 201: 82–94.

S. Eger, and I. Sejane. 2010. Computing semantic sim-
ilarity from bilingual dictionaries. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on statistical analy-
sis of textual data (JADT 2010): 1217–1225.

B. Gaume, K. Duvignau, and M. Vanhove. 2008. Seman-
tic associations and confluences in paradigmatic net-
works. In From Polysemy to Semantic Change: To-
wards a typology of lexical semantic associations,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins: 233–267.

B. Gaume, and F. Mathieu. 2012. PageRank Induced
Topology for Real-World Networks. To appear.

J. H. Greenberg. 1961. Some universals of grammar with
particular reference to the order of meaningful ele-
ments. In Universals of language, Joseph H. Green-
berg (ed.), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 73–113.

P. Koch. 2001. Lexical typology from a cognitive and
linguistic point of view. In Language Typology and
Language Universals, Martin Haspelmath, Ekkehard
Knig, Wulf Oesterreicher, and Wolfgang Raible (eds.),
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter: 1142–1178.

P. Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In MT Summit 2005.

P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch, M.
Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen, C. Moran,
R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin, and E.
Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source Toolkit for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
demonstration session, Prague, Czech Republic, June
2007.

A. Mehler, O. Pustylnikov, and N. Diewald. 2011. Geog-
raphy of Social Ontologies: Testing a Variant of the
Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis in the Context of Wikipedia.
Computer Speech and Language, 25: 716–740.

T. Rama, and L. Borin. 2011. Estimating language rela-
tionships from a parallel corpus. A study of the Eu-
roparl corpus. In NEALT Proceedings Series (NODAL-
IDA 2011 Conference Proceedings): 161–167.

I. Sejane, and S. Eger. 2012. Semantic typologies from
bilingual dictionaries. To appear.

D.J. Watts, S. Strogatz. 1998. Collective dynamics of
‘small-world’ networks. Nature 393 (6684): 440–442.

94


