










































SemEval-2012 Task 5: Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing


First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 378–384,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

SemEval-2012 Task 5: Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing

Wanxiang Che†, Meishan Zhang†, Yanqiu Shao‡, Ting Liu†
†Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval

Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{car, mszhang, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn

‡Beijing City University, China
yqshao@bcu.edu.cn

Abstract
The paper presents the SemEval-2012 Shared
Task 5: Chinese Semantic Dependency Pars-
ing. The goal of this task is to identify the de-
pendency structure of Chinese sentences from
the semantic view. We firstly introduce the
motivation of providing Chinese semantic de-
pendency parsing task, and then describe the
task in detail including data preparation, data
format, task evaluation, and so on. Over ten
thousand sentences were labeled for partici-
pants to train and evaluate their systems. At
last, we briefly describe the submitted systems
and analyze these results.

1 Introduction

Semantic analysis is a long-term goal of Natural
Language Processing, and as such, has been re-
searched for several decades. A number of tasks
for encoding semantic information have been devel-
oped over the years, such as entity type recognition
and word sense disambiguation. Recently, sentence-
level semantics – in particular, semantic role label-
ing – has received increasing attention. However,
some problems concerning the semantic representa-
tion method used in semantic role labeling continue
to exist (Xue and Palmer, 2005).

1. Semantic role labeling only considers
predicate-argument relations and ignores
the semantic relations between a noun and its
modifier.

2. The meaning of semantic roles is related to spe-
cial predicates. Therefore, there are infinite se-
mantic roles to be learned, as the number of

predicates is not fixed. Although the Prop-
Bank (Xue and Palmer, 2003) normalizes these
semantic roles into certain symbols, such as
Arg0-Arg5, the same symbol can have different
semantic meanings when paired with different
predicates, and thus cannot be learned well.

Semantic dependency parsing is therefore pro-
posed to solve the two problems above for Chinese.
Firstly, the proposed method analyzes all the words’
semantic roles in a sentence and specifies the con-
crete semantic relation of each word pair. After-
ward, this work analyzes and summarizes all the
possible semantic roles, obtaining over 100 of them,
and then uses these semantic roles to specify the se-
mantic relation for each word pair.

Dependency parsing (Kübler et al., 2009) is based
on dependency grammar. It has several advantages,
such as concise formalization, easy comprehension,
high efficiency, and so on. Dependency parsing
has been studied intensively in recent decades, with
most related work focusing on syntactic structure.
Many research papers on Chinese linguistics demon-
strate the remarkable difference between semantics
and syntax (Jin, 2001; Zhou and Zhang, 2003).
Chinese is a meaning-combined language with very
flexible syntax, and semantics are more stable than
syntax. The word is the basic unit of semantics,
and the structure and meaning of a sentence consists
mainly of a series of semantic dependencies between
individual words (Li et al., 2003). Thus, a reason-
able endeavor is to exploit dependency parsing for
semantic analysis of Chinese languages. Figure 1
shows an example of Chinese semantic dependency
parsing.

378



国际
International

货币
Monetary

基金
Fund

组织
organization

调低
turn down

对
for

全球
global

经济
economy

增长
increasing

的
of

预测
prediction

d-genetive

d-restrictive d-restrictive agent prep-depend

d-genetive d-domain aux-depend

d-restrictive
content

root

Figure 1: An example of Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing.

Figure 1 shows that Chinese semantic dependency
parsing looks very similar to traditional syntax-
dominated dependency parsing. Below is a compar-
ison between the two tasks, dealing with three main
points:

1. Semantic relations are more fine-grained than
syntactic ones: the syntactic subject can either
be the agent or experiencer, and the syntactic
object can be the content, patient, possession,
and so on. On the whole, the number of seman-
tic relations is at least twice that of syntactic
relations.

2. Semantic dependency parsing builds the depen-
dency structure of a sentence in terms of se-
mantics, and the word pairs of a dependency
should have a direct semantic relation. This
criterion determines many sizeable differences
between semantics and syntax, especially in
phrases formed by “XP+DEG”, “XP+DEV”
and prepositional phrases. For example, in “美
丽 的 祖国” (beautiful country), the head of
“美丽” (beautiful) is “祖国” (country) in se-
mantic dependency parsing, whereas the head
is “的” (de) in syntax dependency parsing.

3. Semantic relations are independent of position.
For example, in “空气 被 污染” (the air is
contaminated) and “污染 了 空气” (contami-
nate the air), the patient “空气” (the air) can be
before or behind a predicate “污染” (contami-
nate).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 gives a short overview of data annotation.
Section 3 focuses on the task description. Section
4 describes the participant systems. Section 5 com-

pares and analyzes the results. Finally, Section 6
concludes the paper.

2 Data Annotation

2.1 Corpus Section

10,068 sentences were selected from the Penn Chi-
nese Treebank 6.01 (Xue et al., 2005) (1-121, 1001-
1078, 1100-1151) as the raw corpus from which to
create the Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing
corpus. These sentences were chosen for the anno-
tation for three reasons. First, gold syntactic depen-
dency structures can be of great help in semantic de-
pendency annotation, as syntactic dependency arcs
are often consistent with semantic ones. Second, the
semantic role labels in PropBank2 can be very use-
ful in the present annotation work. Third, the gold
word segmentation and Part-Of-Speech can be used
as the annotation input in this work.

2.2 Semantic Relations

The semantic relations in the prepared Chinese se-
mantic dependency parsing corpus came mostly
from HowNet3 (Dong and Dong, 2006), a fa-
mous Chinese semantic thesaurus. We also referred
to other sources. Aside from the relations from
HowNet, we defined two kinds of new relations: re-
verse relations and indirect relations. When a verb
modifies a noun, the relation between them is a re-
verse relation, and r-XXX is used to indicate this
kind of relation. For instance, in “打篮球的小男
孩” (the little boy who is playing basketball), the se-
mantic relation between the head word “男孩” (boy)

1http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/
catalogEntry.jsp?catalog\\Id=LDC2007T36

2http://verbs.colorado.edu/chinese/cpb/
3http://www.keenage.com/

379



and “打” (playing) is the r-agent. When a verbal
noun is the head word, the relation between it and
the modifier is the indirect relation j-XXX. For in-
stance, in “企业管理” (business management), the
head word is “管理” (management) and the modifier
is “企业” (business), their relation is j-patient.

Finally, we defined 84 single-level semantic re-
lations. The number of multi-level semantic rela-
tions that actually appear in the labeled corpus in
this work is 39.

Table 1 summarizes all of the semantic relations
used for annotation.

2.3 Annotation Flow

Our corpus annotation flow can be divided into the
following steps.

1. Conversion of the sentences’ constituent struc-
tures into dependency structures according to
a set of rules similar with those used by the
syntactic community to find the head of a
phrase (Collins, 1999).

2. Labeling of the semantic relations for each de-
pendency relation according to another set of
rules using the functional tags in the Penn Chi-
nese Treebank and the semantic roles in the
Chinese PropBank.

3. Six human annotators are asked to check and
adjust the structure and semantic relation errors
introduced in Step 2.

The first two steps were performed automatically
using rules. A high accuracy may be achieved with
dependency structures when semantic labels are not
considered. However, accuracy declines remarkably
when the semantic label is considered. Unlabeled
Attachment Score (UAS) and Labeled Attachment
Score (LAS) can be used to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the automatic conversion. Table 2 gives
the detailed results.

UAS LAS

Conversion Result 90.53 57.38

Table 2: Accuracy after conversion from gold ProbBank.

3 Task Description

3.1 Corpus Statistics
We annotated 10,068 sentences from the Penn Chi-
nese TreeBank for Semantic Dependency Parsing,
and these sentences were divided into training, de-
velopment, and test sections. Table 3 gives the de-
tailed statistical information of the three sections.

Data Set CTB files # sent. # words.
1-10; 36-65;81-121; 8301

Training 1001-1078; 250311
1100-1119;
1126-1140

Devel 66-80; 1120-1125 534 15329
Test 11-35; 1141-1151 1233 34311
Total 1-121; 1001-1078 10068 299951

1100-1151

Table 3: Statistics of training, development and test data.

3.2 Data Format
The data format is identical to that of a syntactic de-
pendency parsing shared task. All the sentences are
in one text file, with each sentence separated by a
blank line. Each sentence consists of one or more to-
kens, and each token is represented on one line con-
sisting of 10 fields. Buchholz and Marsi (2006) pro-
vide more detailed information on the format. Fields
are separated from each other by a tab. Only five of
the 10 fields are used: token id, form, pos tagger,
head, and deprel. Head denotes the semantic depen-
dency of each word, and deprel denotes the corre-
sponding semantic relations of the dependency. In
the data, the lemma column is filled with the form
and the cpostag column with the postag. Figure 2
shows an example.

3.3 Evaluation Method
LAS, which is a method widely used in syntactic
dependency parsing, is used to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the semantic dependency parsing system.
LAS is the proportion of “scoring” tokens assigned
to both the correct head and correct semantic depen-
dency relation. Punctuation is disregarded during
the evaluation process. UAS is another important
indicator, as it reflects the accuracy of the semantic
dependency structure.

380



Main Semantic Roles

Subject Roles agent, experiencer, causer, possessor, existent, whole, relevant

Object Roles isa, content, possession, patient, OfPart, beneficiary, contrast,
partner, basis, cause, cost, scope, concerning

Auxiliary Semantic Roles

Time Roles duration, TimeFin, TimeIni, time, TimeAdv

Location and State Roles LocationFin, LocationIni, LocationThru, StateFin, state,
StateIni, direction, distance, location

Others Verb Modifiers accompaniment, succeeding, frequency, instrument, material,
means, angle, times, sequence, sequence-p, negation, degree,
modal, emphasis, manner, aspect, comment

Attribute Roles

Direct modifiers d-genetive, d-category, d-member, d-domain, d-quantity-p, d-
quantity, d-deno-p, d-deno, d-host, d-TimePhrase, d-LocPhrase,
d-InstPhrase, d-attribute, d-restrictive, d-material, d-content, d-
sequence, d-sequence-p, qp-mod

Verb Phrase r-{Main Semantic Roles}, eg: r-agent, r-patient, r-possessor

Verb Ellipsis c-{Main Semantic Roles}, eg: c-agent, c-content, c-patient

Noun as Predication j-{Main Semantic Roles}, eg: j-agent, j-patient, j-target

Syntactic Roles and Others

Syntactic Roles s-cause, s-concession, s-condition, s-coordinate, s-or, s-
progression, s-besides, s-succession, s-purpose, s-measure, s-
abandonment, s-preference, s-summary, s-recount, s-concerning,
s-result

Others aux-depend, prep-depend, PU, ROOT

Table 1: Semantic Relations defined for Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing.

ID FORM LEMMA CPOS PPOS FEAT HEAD REL PHEAD PREL
1 钱其琛 钱其琛 NR NR 2 agent
2 谈 谈 VV VV 0 ROOT
3 香港 香港 NR NR 4 d-genetive
4 前景 前景 NN NN 7 s-coordinate
5 和 和 CC CC 7 aux-depend
6 台湾 台湾 NR NR 7 d-genetive
7 问题 问题 NN NN 2 content

Figure 2: Data format of the Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing corpus.

381



4 Participating Systems

Nine organizations were registered to participate in
the Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing task. Fi-
nally, nine systems were received from five different
participating teams. These systems are as follows:

1. Zhou Qiaoli-1, Zhou Qiaoli-2, Zhou Qiaoli-3
These three systems propose a divide-and-
conquer strategy for semantic dependency
parsing. The Semantic Role (SR) phrases are
identified (Cai et al., 2011) and then replaced
by their head or the SR of the head. The orig-
inal sentence is thus divided into two types of
parts that can be parsed separately. The first
type is SR phrase parsing, and the second in-
volves the replacement of SR phrases with ei-
ther their head or the SR of the head. Finally,
the paper takes a graph-based parser (Li et al.,
2011) as the semantic dependency parser for all
parts. These three systems differ in their phrase
identification strategies.

2. NJU-Parser-1, NJU-Parser-2
The NJU-Parser is based on the state-of-the-
art MSTParser (McDonald, 2006). NJU-Parser
applies three methods to enhance semantic de-
pendency parsing. First, sentences are split
into sub-sentences using commas and semi-
colons: (a) sentences are split using only com-
mas and semicolons, as in the primary sys-
tem, and (b) classifiers are used to determine
whether a comma or semicolon should be used
to split the sentence. Second, the last character
in a Chinese word is extracted as the lemma,
since it usually contains the main sense or se-
mantic class. Third, the multilevel-label is in-
troduced into the semantic relation, for exam-
ple, the r-{Main Semantic Roles}, with NJU-
Parser exploiting special strategies to handle it.
However, this third method does not show pos-
itive performance.

3. Zhijun Wu-1
This system extends the second-order of the
MSTParser by adding third-order features, and
then applying this model to Chinese semantic
dependency parsing. In contrast to Koo and
Collins (2010) this system does not implement

the third-order model using dynamic program-
ming, as it requires O(n4) time. It first first ob-
tained the K-best results of second-order mod-
els and then added the third-order features into
the results.

4. ICT-1
The ICT semantic dependency parser employs
a system-combining strategy to obtain the de-
pendency structure and then uses the classifier
from Le Zhang’s Maximum Entropy Model-
ing Toolkit4 to predict the semantic relation for
each dependency. The system-combining strat-
egy involves three steps:

• Parsing each sentence using Nivre’s arc
standard, Nivre’s arc eager (Nivre and
Nilsson, 2005; Nivre, 2008), and Liang’s
dynamic algorithm (Huang and Sagae,
2010);
• Combining parses given by the three

parsers into a weighted directed graph;
• Using the Chu-Liu-Edmonds algorithm to

search for the final parse for each sen-
tence.

5. Giuseppe Attardi-SVM-1-R, Giuseppe Attardi-
SVM-1-rev
We didn’t receive the system description of
these two systems.

5 Results & Analysis

LAS is the main evaluation metric in Chinese Se-
mantic Dependency Parsing, whereas UAS is the
secondary metric. Table 4 shows the results for these
two indicators in all participating systems.

As shown in Table 4, the Zhou Qiaoli-3 system
achieved the best results with LAS of 61.84. The
LAS values of top systems are very closely. We per-
formed significance tests5 for top six results. Table
5 shows the results , from which we can see that
the performances of top five results are comparative
(p > 0.1) and the rank sixth system is significantly
(p < 10−5) worse than top five results.

4http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/s0450736/
maxenttoolkit.html

5http://www.cis.upenn.edu/˜dbikel/
download/compare.pl

382



NJU-Parser-2 NJU-Parser-1 Zhijun Wu-1 Zhou Qiaoli-1 Zhou Qiaoli-2
Zhou Qiaoli-3 ∼ ∼ ∼ ∼ >
NJU-Parser-2 – ∼ ∼ ∼ >
NJU-Parser-1 – – ∼ ∼ >
Zhijun Wu-1 – – – ∼ >
Zhou Qiaoli-1 – – – – >

Table 5: Significance tests of the top five systems. ∼ denotes that the two systems are comparable (p > 0.1), and >
means the system of this row is significantly (p < 10−5) better than the system of this column.

System LAS UAS
Zhou Qiaoli-3 61.84 80.60
NJU-Parser-2 61.64 80.29
NJU-Parser-1 61.63 80.35
Zhijun Wu-1 61.58 80.64
Zhou Qiaoli-1 61.15 80.41
Zhou Qiaoli-2 57.55 78.55
ICT-1 56.31 73.20
Giuseppe Attardi-SVM-1-R 44.46 60.83
Giuseppe Attardi-SVM-1-rev 21.86 40.47
Average 54.22 72.82

Table 4: Results of the submitted systems.

The average LAS for all systems was 54.22.
Chinese Semantic Dependency Parsing performed
much more poorly than Chinese Syntactic Depen-
dency Parsing due to the increased complexity
brought about by the greater number of semantic re-
lations compared with syntactic relations, as well as
greater difficulty in classifying semantic relations.

In general, all the systems employed the tradi-
tional syntax-dominated dependency parsing frame-
works. Some new methods were proposed for
this task. Zhou Qiaoli’s systems first identified
the semantic role phrase in a sentence, and then
employed graph-based dependency parsing to ana-
lyze the semantic structure of the sentence. NJU-
Parser first split the sentence into sub-sentences,
then trained and parsed the sentence based on these
sub-sentences; this was shown to perform well. In
addition, ensemble models were also proposed to
solve the task using ICT systems.

6 Conclusion

We described the Chinese Semantic Dependency
Parsing task for SemEval-2012, which is designed to

parse the semantic structures of Chinese sentences.
Nine results were submitted by five organizations,

with the best result garnering an LAS score of 61.84,
which is far below the performance of Chinese Syn-
tax. This demonstrates that further research on the
structure of Chinese Semantics is needed.

In the future, we will check and improve the anno-
tation standards while building a large, high-quality
corpus for further Chinese semantic research.

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful comments. This work was supported by Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
via grant 61133012 and 61170144, and the Na-
tional “863” Leading Technology Research Project
via grant 2012AA011102.

References
Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. Conll-x shared

task on multilingual dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the Tenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning (CoNLL-X), pages 149–164,
New York City, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Dongfeng Cai, Ling Zhang, Qiaoli Zhou, and Yue Zhao.
2011. A collocation based approach for prepositional
phrase identification. IEEE NLPKE.

Michael Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Models
for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, Pennsyl-
vania University.

Zhendong Dong and Qiang Dong. 2006. Hownet And the
Computation of Meaning. World Scientific Publishing
Co., Inc., River Edge, NJ, USA.

Liang Huang and Kenji Sagae. 2010. Dynamic pro-
gramming for linear-time incremental parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 1077–1086,

383



Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Guangjin Jin. 2001. Theory of modern Chinese verb se-
mantic computation. Beijing University Press.

Terry Koo and Michael Collins. 2010. Efficient third-
order dependency parsers. In Proceedings of the 48th
Annual Meeting of the ACL, number July, pages 1–11.

Sandra Kübler, Ryan McDonald, and Joakim Nivre.
2009. Dependency Parsing. In Synthesis Lectures on
Human Language Technologies.

Mingqin Li, Juanzi Li, Zhendong Dong, Zuoying Wang,
and Dajin Lu. 2003. Building a large chinese corpus
annotated with semantic dependency. In Proceedings
of the second SIGHAN workshop on Chinese language
processing - Volume 17, SIGHAN ’03, pages 84–91,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Zhenghua Li, Min Zhang, Wanxiang Che, Ting Liu, Wen-
liang Chen, and Haizhou Li. 2011. Joint models for
chinese pos tagging and dependency parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1180–
1191, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK., July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ryan McDonald. 2006. Discriminative learning and
spanning tree algorithms for dependency parsing.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.

Joakim Nivre and Jens Nilsson. 2005. Pseudo-projective
dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL).

Joakim Nivre. 2008. Algorithms for deterministic incre-
mental dependency parsing. Computational Linguis-
tics, 34(4):513–553.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2003. Annotating
the propositions in the penn chinese treebank. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese
Language Processing.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2005. Automatic se-
mantic role labeling for chinese verbs. In Proceedings
of the 19th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.

Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha
Palmer. 2005. The penn chinese treebank: Phrase
structure annotation of a large corpus. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 11(2):207–238.

Guoguang Zhou and Linlin Zhang. 2003. The theory
and method of modern Chinese grammar. Guangdong
Higher Education Press.

384


