










































janardhan: Semantic Textual Similarity using Universal Networking Language graph matching


First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 662–666,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

janardhan: Semantic Textual Similarity using Universal Networking
Language graph matching

Janardhan Singh
IIT Bombay,

Mumbai, India
janardhan

@cse.iitb.ac.in

Arindam Bhattacharya
IIT Bombay,

Mumbai, India
arindamb

@cse.iitb.ac.in

Pushpak Bhattacharyya
IIT Bombay,

Mumbai, India
pb

@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

Sentences that are syntactically quite different
can often have similar or same meaning. The
SemEval 2012 task of Semantic Textual Sim-
ilarity aims at finding the semantic similarity
between two sentences. The semantic repre-
sentation of Universal Networking Language
(UNL), represents only the inherent meaning
in a sentence without any syntactic details.
Thus, comparing the UNL graphs of two sen-
tences can give an insight into how semanti-
cally similar the two sentences are. This paper
presents the UNL graph matching method for
the Semantic Textual Similarity(STS) task.

1 Introduction

Universal Networking language (UNL) gives the
semantic representation of sentences in a graphi-
cal form. By comparing the similarity of these
graphs, we inherently compare only the semantic
content of the two sentences, rather than compar-
ing the similarities in the syntax. Thus, the UNL
graph matching strategy is a natural choice for the
Semantic Textual Similarity(STS) task of SemEval
2012. UNL graphs are also used in textual en-
tailment and interlingua based machine translation
tasks. We use the UNL enconverter system at:
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in
/UNL enco
to generate the UNL graphs of the sentences. For the
two graphs, generated from the two sentences, we
give a similarity score by matching the two graphs.

In the following sections we describe UNL
matching strategy. section 2 describes the UNL sys-

Figure 1: UNL graph for “John eats rice”

tem and why this approach is useful, section 3 de-
scribes the matching algorithm, section 4 describes
the challenges faced in this approach, section 5 gives
the results and finally section 6 gives the conclusion
and the future scope.

2 Universal Networking Language

The Universal Networking Language gives a graph-
ical representation of the semantics of a text in the
form of hypergraphs. The representation is at the
semantic level which allows mapping of the simi-
lar meaning sentences having different syntax to the
same representation. To exemplify this point, con-
sider the UNL graphs generated for the following
sentences:

Sentence 1: John ate rice.

Sentence 2: Rice was eaten by John.

The UNL graph generated from the system are
given in figures 1 and 2 respectively.

The UNL graph consists of three components:

662



Figure 2: UNL graph for “Rice was eaten by John”

• Universal Words

• Relations

• Attributes

2.1 Universal Words
The Universal Words (UWs) form the vocabulary of
the Universal Networking Language. They form the
nodes of the UNL graph. The words are normalized
to their basic lemma, for example, eats becomes eat.
The Universal Word is, usually, followed by a dis-
ambiguating constraint list which is mainly used for
disambiguating the sense of the Universal Word. For
example, John (iof > person), here the word John is
disambiguated as an instance of (iof) a person and
rice is disambiguated to be in the class of (icl) proper
noun. The UNL generation system, uses a Universal
word dictionary created using the wordnet.

2.2 Relations
The UNL manual describes 46 binary semantic re-
lations among the Universal Words as given in UNL
manual. These form the labelled arcs of the UNL
graph. In the example of figures 1 and 2, the rela-
tions agent (agt) and object (obj) are shown. John is
the agent of the action eat and rice is the object of
the action eat. The UNL generation system gener-
ated these relations using complex rules based on the
dependency and constituency parser outputs, Word-
net features and Named Entity recognizer output.

2.3 Attributes
Attributes are attached to the Universal Words to
show the speakers perspective for some subjective
information in the text. For the given example, with
respect to the speaker of the text, the action of eat
happened in the past with respect to the speaker.

This is represented by the attribute @past.
The detailed description of the UNL standard can
be found in the UNL manual available online at
http://www.undl.org/unlsys/unl
/unl2005/.

The two sentences listed above, have the same
semantic content, although their syntax is different.
One sentence is in the active voice, while the other
sentence is in the passive. But if we compare the
UNL graphs of the two sentences, they are almost
identical, with an extra attribute @passive on the
main verb eat in the second graph. The graph match-
ing of the two sentences results in a high score near
to 5. Like voice, most of the syntactic variations are
dropped when we move from syntactic to semantic
representation. Thus, comparing the semantic rep-
resentation of the sentences, is useful, to identify
their semantic similarity. The UNL generation sys-
tem generates the attributes using similar features to
those for relation generation.

3 UNL matching

The UNL system available online at:
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in
/UNL enco
produces graphs for the sentences by listing the
binary relations present in the graph. An example
of such a listing is :

Sentence 3: A man is eating a banana by a tree.

[unl:1]
agt ( eat(icl>eat>do, agt>thing,
obj>thing):4.@present.@progress
.@entry,
man(icl>male>thing,
equ>adult_male):2.@indef )
ins ( eat(icl>eat>do, agt>thing,
obj>thing):4.@present.@progress
.@entry,
tree(icl>woody_plant>thing)
:9.@indef )
obj ( eat(icl>eat>do, agt>thing,
obj>thing):4.@present.@progress
.@entry,
banana(icl>herb>thing,
equ>banana_tree):6.@indef )
[\unl]

663



Sentence 4 : A man is eating a banana.

[unl:1]
agt ( eat(icl>eat>do, agt>thing,
obj>thing):4.@present.@progress
.@entry,
man(icl>male>thing,
equ>adult_male):2.@indef )
obj ( eat(icl>eat>do, agt>thing,
obj>thing):4.@present.@progress
.@entry,
banana(icl>herb>thing,
equ>banana_tree):6.@indef )
[\unl]

We treat the UNL graph of one sentence as goldunl
and the other as testunl. The matching score
between the two is found using the following
formulation (Mohanty, 2008):

score(testunl, goldunl)

= (2∗precision∗recall)(precision+recall) (1)

precision

=
∑

relation∈testunl relation score(relation)

(count(relations∈testunl)) (2)

recall

=
∑

relation∈testunl relation score(relation)

(count(relations∈goldunl)) (3)

relation score(relation)

= avg(rel match, uw1score, uw2score) (4)

rel match

=

{
1 if relation name matches
0 otherwise

(5)

uwscore

= avg(word score, attribute score) (6)

word score

=

{
1 if universal word matches
0 otherwise

(7)

attribute score

= F1score(testunl attr, goldunl attr) (8)

The matching scheme is based on the idea of the
F1 score. The two UNL graphs are a list of UNL
relations each. Considering, one as the gold UNL
graph and the other as the test UNL graph, we can
find the precision and recall of the total relations that
have matched. For the example given in section 2.4,
the sentence 3 has three relations while sentence 4
has two relations. A correspondence between the
relations agt of the two graphs and also the relation
obj of the two graphs can be established based on
the universal words that they connect. Each such re-
lation match is given a score, explained later, which
is used in the calculation of the precision and recall.
From the precision and recall the F1 score can be
easily calculated which becomes the total matching
score of the two graphs.

The relation score is obtained by averaging the
scores of relation match, and the score of the two
universal word matches. The universal word match
score has a component of the attributes that match
between the corresponding universal words. This
attribute matching is again the F1 score calculation
similar to relation matching. Matching the attributes
of the universal words, contributes to the score of the
matched universal word, which in turn contributes
to the score of the matched relation. Thus, matching
of the semantic relations has more weight than the
matching of the attributes.

The score obtained by this formulation is between
0 and 1. Another score between 0 and 1 is obtained
by flipping the goldunl graph to testunl and testunl
to goldunl. Average of these two scores is then mul-
tiplied by 5 to give the final score.

By this formulation, the score obtained by match-
ing graphs for sentences 3 and 4 is 4.0

4 Challenges in the approach

In the UNL graph matching startegy we faced the
following challenges:

4.1 Sentences with grammatical errors
Many of the sentences, especially, from the MSRpar
dataset, had minor grammatical errors. The UNL
generation requires grammatical correctness. Some
of the examples of such sentences are:

• The no-shows were Sens. John Kerry of Mas-
sachusetts and Bob Graham of Florida.

664



• She countersued for $125 million, saying G+J
broke its contract with her by cutting her out
of key editorial decisions and manipulated the
magazine’s financial figures.

• “She was crying and scared,’ said Isa Yasin, the
owner of the store.

Here, terms like G+J and punctuation errors as in
the third example lead to the generation of improper
UNL graphs. To handle such cases, the UNL gener-
ation needs to get robust.

4.2 Scoping errors

UNL graphs are hypergraphs, in which, a node can
in itself be a UNL graph. Scopes are given iden-
tity numbers like :01,:02 and so on. While matching
two different UNL graphs, this matching of scope
identity numbers cannot be directly achieved. Also,
one graph may have different number of scopes as
compared to the other. Hence, eventhough the UNL
graphs are generated correctly, due to scoping mis-
matches the matching score goes down. To tackle
this problem, the UNL graphs generated are con-
verted into scopeless form before the matching is
performed. Every UNL graph has an entry node,
which is the starting node of the graph. This is de-
noed by an @entry attribute on the node. Every
scope, too, has an entry node. The idea for convert-
ing the UNL graphs into scopeless form is to replace
the scope nodes by the graphs that these nodes repre-
sent, with the connection to the original scope node
going to the entry node of the replacing graph.

4.3 Incomplete or no graph generation

It was observed that for some of the sentences,
the UNL generation system did not produce UNL
graphs or the generation was incomplete. Some of
these sentences are:

• The Metropolitan Transportation Authority
was given two weeks to restore the $1.50 fare
and the old commuter railroad rates, York de-
clared.

• Long lines formed outside gas stations and peo-
ple rushed to get money from cash machines
Sunday as Israelis prepared to weather a strike
that threatened to paralyze the country.

These, are due to some internal system errors of
the UNL generation system. To improve on this, the
UNL generation system itself has to improve.

5 Results

By adopting the methodology described in section 3,
the following results were obtained on the different
datasets.

MSRpar 0.1936
MSRvid 0.5504
SMT-eur 0.3755
On-WN 0.2888

SMT-news 0.3387

As observed, the performance is good for the
MSRvid dataset. This dataset consists of small and
simple sentences which are grammatically correct.
The performance on this dataset should further im-
prove by capturing the synonyms of the Univer-
sal words while matching the UNL relations. The
performance for MSRpar dataset is low. The sen-
tences in this dataset are long and sometimes with
minor grammatical errors resulting in incomplete or
no UNL graphs. As the UNL generation system
becomes more robust, the performance is expected
to improve quickly. The overall result over all the
datasets is given in the following table.

ALL ALLnrm Mean
0.3431 0.6878 0.3481

6 Conclusion and Future Scope

The UNL graph matching approach works well with
grammatically correct sentences. The approach de-
pends on the accuracy of the UNL generation sys-
tem itself. With the increase in the robustness of the
UNL generation system, this approach seems natu-
ral. Since, the approach is unsupervised, it does not
require any training data. The matching algorithm
can be extended to include the synonyms of the Uni-
versal Words while matching relations.

References
Mohanty, R. and Limaye, S. and Prasad, M.K. and Bhat-

tacharyya, P. 2008. Semantic Graph from English
Sentences, Proceedings of ICON-2008: 6th Inter-
national Conference on Natural Language Processing
Macmillan Publishers, India

665



UNL Center of UNDL Foundation 2005 Uni-
versal Networking Language (UNL) Spec-
ifications Version 2005 Online URL:
http://www.undl.org/unlsys/unl
/unl2005/

UNL enconversion system. 2012. Online URL:
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/UNL enco

666


