










































Extracting a Semantic Lexicon of French Adjectives from a Large Lexicographic Dictionary


First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 161–169,
Montréal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c©2012 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extracting a Semantic Lexicon of French Adjectives from a Large
Lexicographic Dictionary

Selja Seppälä and Alexis Nasr
Laboratoire d’Informatique Fondamentale

Aix Marseille Université
163, avenue de Luminy

F-13288 Marseille Cedex 9
alexis.nasr@lif.univ-mrs.fr
selja.seppala@lif.univ-mrs.fr

Lucie Barque
Lexiques Dictionnaires Informatique

Université Paris 13
99, avenue Jean-Baptiste Clément

F-93430 Villetaneuse
lucie.barque@univ-paris13.fr

Abstract

We present a rule-based method to automati-
cally create a large-coverage semantic lexicon
of French adjectives by extracting paradig-
matic relations from lexicographic definitions.
Formalized adjectival resources are, indeed,
scarce for French and they mostly focus on
morphological and syntactic information. Our
objective is, therefore, to contribute enriching
the available set of resources by taking advan-
tage of reliable lexicographic data and formal-
izing it with the well-established lexical func-
tions formalism. The resulting semantic lexi-
con of French adjectives can be used in NLP
tasks such as word sense disambiguation or
machine translation. After presenting related
work, we describe the extraction method and
the formalization procedure of the data. Our
method is then quantitatively and qualitatively
evaluated. We discuss the results of the evalu-
ation and conclude on some perspectives.

1 Introduction

Formalized semantic resources are highly valuable
in areas such as NLP, linguistic analysis or lan-
guage acquisition. However, creating such resources
from scratch is time-consuming and generally yields
limited-size lexicons. Existing lexicographic dictio-
naries do have a large coverage and present a reli-
able content. They lack nevertheless the sufficient
formalization. In this paper, we present a rule-based
method to automatically create a large-coverage se-
mantic lexicon of French adjectives by extracting
paradigmatic relations from lexicographic defini-
tions using lexico-syntactic patterns. Formalized ad-

jectival resources are, indeed, scarce for French and
they mostly focus on morphological and syntactic
information. Our goal is, therefore, to contribute en-
riching the available set of resources by taking ad-
vantage of reliable lexicographic data and formal-
izing it with the well-established lexical functions
formalism of the Meaning-Text theory (Mel’čuk,
1996). The resulting semantic lexicon of French
adjectives can be used in NLP tasks such as word
sense disambiguation or machine translation1. In
section 2, we present related work. In section 3, we
expose the method used to build the lexicon, i.e. the
extraction method and the formalization procedure
of the data, and outline the main results. Finally, in
section 4, we present a quantitative evaluation of our
method and a qualitative evaluation of our data, and
discuss their results. We conclude on some perspec-
tives for future work.

2 Related Work

It is well established that there are different types
of adjectives distinguished by properties, such as
gradation and markedness, and by their seman-
tic and syntactic behaviors (antonymy, selectional
preferences) (Fellbaum et al., 1993; Raskin and
Nirenburg, 1996). WordNet, for example, distin-
guishes different types of adjectives according to
their semantic and syntactic behaviors: descriptive,
reference-modifying, color and relational adjectives
(Fellbaum et al., 1993). However, it mainly accounts
for the first and the last types of adjectives. Descrip-

1For other possible NLP applications of lexicons encoded
with the lexical function formalism, see Schwab and Lafour-
cade (2007).

161



tive adjectives are organized in adjectival synsets
that are mostly related through antonymy (heavy–
light); synsets of relational adjectives are linked to a
related noun by a pointer (fraternal–brother). Fell-
baum et al. (1993:36) acknowledge the existence of
more diverse relations to nominal synsets, but, to our
knowledge, these are not accounted for in WordNet.
This limitation is also present in the open access
French version of the Princeton WordNet, WOLF
(Sagot and Fišer, 2012). This limitation has led
projects extending WordNet to other languages, like
EuroWordNet, ItalWordNet or WordNet.PT, to add
a few more relations to account for this diversity
(Alonge et al., 2000; Marrafa and Mendes, 2006;
Vossen, 2002). The number of new relations is how-
ever limited. As can be seen, WordNet-type ap-
proaches focus on relating adjectival synsets using
a few semantic relations, mostly antonymy and plain
related to relations.

Our goal is to achieve a finer, and thus richer, se-
mantic characterization of the relations holding be-
tween French adjectives and other words from all
syntactic categories using the formalism of lexical
functions. We assume that the type of the adjective is
reflected in the structure of its lexicographic defini-
tion. Thus, to extract semantically relevant informa-
tion from adjectival definitions, we propose to create
different types of rules accounting for this diversity
of defining structures.

Formalized French lexicons contain rather limited
adjectival data. One can cite the morphological lex-
icon that links French denominal adjectives to the
nouns they are derived from (Strnadovà and Sagot,
2011) or the syntactic characterization of French ad-
jectives based on an automatic extraction of subcat-
egorization frames proposed in Kupść (2008). Our
method is meant to complete this set of resources
with an adjectival lexicon that is not limited to cer-
tain types of adjectives (like descriptive or denom-
inal) nor to morphologically related adjectives, and
which provides semantic information.

3 Method and Results

The method we use to extract formalized semantic
information from unformalized lexicographic defi-
nitions follows two steps : extracting relations be-
tween defined adjectives and elements of their def-

initions using lexico-syntactic rules (section 3.1)
and mapping these relations to regular relations that
can be expressed in terms of lexical functions (sec-
tion 3.2).

3.1 Extracting Paradigmatic Relations from
Lexicographic Definitions

The dictionary used in this project is the Trésor de la
langue française informatisé2 (TLFi). It is the elec-
tronic version of a 100,000 word lexicographic dic-
tionary of 19th and 20th century French, the Trésor
de la langue française (Dendien and Pierrel, 2003).

The TLFi contains a total of 13,513 adjectival
entries, among which 6,425 entries correspond to
mere adjectives and 7,088 to adjectives and other
parts of speech (generally nouns)3. Each of these
entries includes one or more definitions, which add
up to 44,410 definitions, among which 32,475 are
estimated to be adjectival. This approximation is
obtained after filtering out 11,935 non-adjectival
definitions from the mixed entries using a lexico-
syntactic definition parsing program aimed at detect-
ing nominal definitions. The remaining definitions
are mostly adjectival, with exceptions due to more
complex definition structures that are not accounted
for by the filtering method. Table 1 sums up the main
figures.

Adjectival entries 6,425
Not only adjectival entries 7,088
Estimated adjectival definitions 32,475

Table 1: Adjectives in the TLFi

To extract semantically relevant information from
adjectival definitions, we use a lexico-syntactic
adjectival definition parsing program which uses
lexico-syntactic rules that are linearly matched to
syntactically annotated adjectival definitions4. The
extraction method consists of the following steps:

1. First, tagging and lemmatizing the definition so
2TLFi, http://atilf.atilf.fr/tlf.htm.
3It is difficult to determine exactly how many adjectives are

defined in the TLFi since the dictionary often joins together
words that can be both used as a noun or an adjective (for ex-
ample JEUNE-young).

4The definitions are syntactically annotated with the Macaon
tool suite (Nasr et al., 2010) that was adapted to the special
sublanguage of lexicographic definitions.

162



that each word is related to a part of speech tag
(POS).

(1) RETENU = Qui fait preuve de modération.
(restrained = Who shows moderation.)
Qui/prorel fait/v preuve/nc de/prep
modération/nc ./poncts

2. Second, running the adjectival definition pars-
ing program to obtain a triplet composed of the
defined adjective (<adj>), a relation (<rel>)
and an argument (<arg>), i.e. a word or group
of words that is linked by the extracted relation
to the defined adjective.

(2) <adj>retenu</adj>
<rel>fait preuve de</rel>

<arg>modération</arg>

A lexico-syntactic rule extracts from a definition
the <rel> and <arg> elements. As can be seen
in figure 1, each lexico-syntactic rule is composed
of a left-hand side (LHS) containing either a lexi-
cal unit (lex), such as qui, or a POS tag (cat) like
v (verb), both of which can be optional (op="y"),
and a right-hand side (RHS) specifying which ele-
ments of the LHS are to be extracted as semanti-
cally relevant: a relation (REL) and/or an argument
(ARG)5.

In figure 1, the denominal rule 2.2 identifies
adjectival definitions corresponding to the lexico-
syntactic pattern stated by the LHS of the rule, such
as that of the adjective RETENU in example 2 above6.
The LHS contains nine elements, where the first two
correspond to lexical items and the remaining ones
to POS tags. Five elements are marked as optional,
since a definition may for example start by the for-
mula Qui est (Which/Who is) followed by some verb,
or it may directly begin with a verb. This verb has to
be followed by a noun (nc) and a preposition (prep),
which may be followed by a determinant and/or an
adjective, but which has to be followed by a noun,
etc. The RHS of the rule states that the relation to
be extracted corresponds to elements 3, 4 and 5 of

5For definitions by synonymy, only the argument is speci-
fied, the default semantic relation being synonymy.

6Note that the adjective RETENU (retained) is, morpholog-
ically speaking, not a denominal. However, the rule extracts
a noun to which this adjective is related in its definition, i.e.
MODÉRATION (moderation). It is, therefore, the rule that is con-
sidered denominal.

<regle num="2.2" rel="denominal">
<lhs>
<elt lex="qui" op="y" />
<elt lex="est" op="y" />
<elt cat="v" />
<elt cat="nc" />
<elt cat="prep" />
<elt cat="det" op="y" />
<elt cat="adj" op="y" />
<elt cat="nc" />
<elt cat="adj" op="y" />

</lhs>
<rhs>
<rel>

<elt num="3" />
<elt num="4" />
<elt num="5" />

</rel>
<arg>

<elt num="7" />
<elt num="8" />
<elt num="9" />

</arg>
</rhs>

</regle>

Figure 1: Example of Lexico-Syntactic Rule

the LHS, and that the argument is composed of ele-
ments 7, 8 and 97.

The relation extraction program reads the dictio-
nary definition from the beginning of the sentence
checking whether it contains the elements specified
in the LHS of the rule. In case the rule matches
the lexico-syntactic elements composing the defini-
tion, it outputs the lexical elements of the defini-
tion corresponding to the lexical or syntactic infor-
mation specified in the RHS of the rule in the form
REL(ARG)=ADJ, where ADJ stands for the adjec-
tive of the dictionary entry. For instance, applying
the rule from figure 1 to the definition of the adjec-
tive RETENU returns the relation fait preuve de and
the argument modération (example 2).

A total of 109 lexico-syntactic rules have been de-
signed. These rules cover 76.1 % of the adjectival
definitions (24,716/32,475 definitions). The rules
can broadly be grouped into four categories corre-
sponding to different adjectival definition structures.
This categorization is done according to the type of
defining information matched by the rules:

7In the RHS, the number assigned as a value to the num
attribute corresponds to the line number of the elt in the LHS.

163



1. The adjective is defined by one or more syn-
onyms.
→ REL = synonymy; ARG = adjective

(3) DIAGONAL = Transversal, oblique. (diago-
nal = Transversal, oblique.)
⇒ syn(transversal) = DIAGO-
NAL; syn(oblique) = DIAGONAL
(syn(transversal) = diagonal; syn(oblique)
= diagonal)

2. The adjective is defined by another adjective
modified by an adverb.
→ REL = adverb; ARG = adjective

(4) KILOMÉTRIQUE = Qui est très long, qui
n’en finit pas. (kilometric = Which is very
long, never-ending.)
⇒ très(long) = KILOMÉTRIQUE
(very(long) = kilometric)

3. The adjective is defined by a relation to a prop-
erty of the thing denoted by the modified noun.
The argument of this complex REL consists of
a noun phrase (NP), a verbal phrase (VP) or an
adjective (ADJ).
→ REL = relation + property; ARG =
NP/VP/ADJ

(5) AGRÉGATIF = Qui a la faculté d’agréger.
(aggregative = Which has the power to ag-
gregate.)
⇒ a la faculté de(agréger) = AGRÉGATIF
(has power to(aggregate) = aggregative)
VERSICOLORE = Dont la couleur est
changeante. (versicolor = Which color is
changing.)
⇒ dont la couleur est(changeante) = VER-
SICOLORE (which color is(changing) =
versicolor)

4. The adjective is defined by a relation having as
argument a noun phrase, a verbal phrase or an
adjective.
→ REL = relation; ARG = NP/VP/ADJ

(6) ACADÉMIQUE = Qui manque d’originalité,
de force; conventionnel. (academic =
Which lacks originality, strength; conven-
tional.)
⇒ manque de(originalité) =
ACADÉMIQUE (lacks(originality) =
academic)
INANALYSABLE = Qui ne peut être analysé,
qui ne peut être décomposé en ses éléments

distinctifs. (unanalyzable = Which cannot
be analyzed, which cannot be decompozed
in its distinctive elements.)
⇒ ne peut être(analysé) = IN-
ANALYSABLE (cannot be(analyzed) =
unanalyzable)

The rules extract a total of 5,284 different rela-
tion types in the form (REL, ARG), where REL is
a lexicalized expression and ARG a phrasal type, as
illustrated in example (7).

(7)

(capable de, VPinf) (capable of, VPinf )
(constitué de, NP) (constituted by, NP)
(couvert de, NP) (covered with, NP)
(fondé sur, NP) (founded on, NP)
(peu, ADJ) (not very, ADJ)
(propre à, NP) (particular to, NP)
(propre à, VPinf) (capable of, VPinf )
(relatif à, NP) (relating to, NP)

One can note that the lexicalized relation is some-
times followed by different phrasal types, as can be
seen for propre à in example (7). In those cases,
each (REL, ARG) pair is considered as a distinct re-
lation type.

3.2 Formalizing Paradigmatic Relations with
Lexical Functions

Lexical functions (LF) are a formal tool designed
to describe all types of genuine lexical relations
(paradigmatic and syntactic ones) between lexical
units of any language (Mel’čuk, 1996). Some of the
standard lexical functions that often return adjectival
values are briefly presented below:

• A0 – This paradigmatic lexical function returns the
adjective that semantically corresponds to the argu-
ment. E.g. A0(CHAT) = FÉLIN (A0(cat) = feline);
A0(CRIME) = CRIMINEL (A0(crime) = criminal)

• A1/A2 – These paradigmatic lexical functions re-
turn the adjectives that typically characterize, re-
spectively, the first and second argument of the
predicate given as argument to the functions. This
predicate can be nominal, adjectival or verbal.
For example, given that the nominal predicate
DÉCEPTION (disappointment) has two arguments,
the person that is disappointed and the reason of the
disappointment, function A1 applied to DÉCEPTION
returns the adjective DÉÇU (disappointed), while
function A2 returns DÉCEVANT (disappointing).
E.g. A1(DÉCEPTION) = DÉÇU (A2(disappointment)
= disappointed); A2(DÉCEPTION) = DÉCEVANT
(A2(disappointment) = disappointing)

164



• Able1/Able2 – Closely related to A1 and A2, these
functions return the adjective that means that the
first (Able1) or the second (Able2) argument of the
predicate P “might P or is likely to P” (whereas
A1 just means “arg1 that P” and A2 “arg2 that
is P-ed”). E.g. Able1(CRAINDRE) = PEUREUX
(Able1(to fear) = coward); Able2(CRAINDRE) =
EFFRAYANT (Able2(to fear) = frightening)

• Magn – This function returns an intensificator of
the predicate. This intensificator can modify the
argument, as in heavy rain (Magn expresses then
a syntagmatic relation), or can be another adjec-
tive that intensifies the meaning of the argument
(Magn expresses then a paradigmatic relation). E.g.
Magn(MAUVAIS) = AFFREUX (Magn(bad) = awful)

• Anti – This function returns the argument’s
antonym(s). E.g. Anti(ABSENT) = PRÉSENT
(Anti(absent) = present)

• AntiA1 – This complex lexical function returns
the adjective that means that the first argument of
the predicate P “is not P (anymore)”. E.g. An-
tiA1(FAIM) = REPU (AntiA1(hunger) = full)

We use this formalism to describe the paradig-
matic relations between adjectives and the argu-
ments extracted in the previous step. These rela-
tions are formulated in a non-systematic way in the
TLFi’s definitions. Definitions in traditional dictio-
naries are written in natural language and, thus, are
not formal enough to be used as such, for example,
in NLP tasks. In order to formalize the lexicon, a
mapping is done between lexical functions describ-
ing paradigmatic relations and the different ways of
expressing these relations in the TLFi’s definitions
(see relation types in example 7), as illustrated in ta-
ble 2.

This REL-LF mapping covers 67.3 % of the ex-
tracted relations (16,646/24,716 extracted relations).
Table 3 shows the complete list of lexical functions
used in our lexicon and their distribution: the three
lexical functions A0, A1 and QSyn represent around
90 % of the relations.

4 Evaluation

The method and the data have been evaluated in
two ways. The method has first been evaluated by
comparing our data to an external resource, the Dic-
tionnaire de combinatoire8 (DiCo), a French lex-

8The electronic version of the DiCo can be accessed here:
http://olst.ling.umontreal.ca/dicouebe/index.php.

A0 (qui) est relatif à, est propre à + N, se rapporte
à, . . . (who/that is related to, particular to . . . )

A1 (qui) a la forme de, est atteint de, . . .
(who/that has the shape of, suffers from . . . )

A2 (qui) produit, provoque, a reçu, . . .
(who/that causes, has obtained . . . )

Able1 qui peut, est propre à + V, susceptible de, . . .
(who/that can, is likely to . . . )

Able2 que l’on peut, . . .
(who/that can be . . . )

Anti qui n’est pas, qui s’oppose à, . . .
(that is not, that is opposed to . . . )

AntiA1 (qui) n’a pas de, est dépourvu de, manque de, . . .
(who/that has no, is un-sthg, lacks sthg . . . )

Table 2: LFs and Their Glosses in the TLFi Definitions

A0 A1 A2 Able1 Able2
28.8 % 27.71 % 4.38 % 6.65 % 0.37 %
Anti AntiA1 AntiA2 AntiAble1 AntiAble2

1.64 % 3.49 % 0.21 % 1.24 % 1.04 %
QSyn Magn Ver AntiMagn AntiVer

21.73 % 1.60 % 0.62 % 0.35 % 0.20 %

Table 3: LF’s Distribution in the French Adjectival Lexi-
con

icographic dictionary describing words with their
paradigmatic and syntagmatic relations expressed in
the LF formalism. In this first evaluation, we de-
termine the performance of the method by quan-
tifying the number of reference elements from the
DiCo that can be extracted from the TLFi with our
rules (section 4.1). Since relations involving adjec-
tives are scarce in the DiCo, our data has then been
qualitatively evaluated by an expert familiar with the
formalism of lexical functions9 (section 4.2). The
expert evaluates the relevance of the argument and
the adequacy of the proposed lexical function to de-
scribe the relation between the defined adjective and
the argument.

4.1 Comparison With the DiCo Data

The first evaluation procedure is meant to measure
the performance of the extraction program against
an existing resource. The reference is constituted
by selecting 240 triplets in the form LF(ARG)=ADJ
from the DiCo. An automatic evaluation script com-
pares these reference triplets with the hypothesized
triplets extracted from the TLFi. The system catego-

9The expert is not an author of this paper.

165



rizes the reference triplets in one of three large cat-
egories explained below: “Impossible”, “Yes” and
“No”, the latter ones indicating whether the method
allows to extract the reference triplets from the TLFi
or not. In the “No” cases, the evaluation system
subcategorizes the reference triplet according to a
possible explanation of the failure of the extraction
method.

1. IMPOSSIBLE (42.9 %, 103/240 triplets)
Cases where the reference triplets cannot be
used as an evaluation reference because either
the adjective of the reference is absent from
the TLFi dictionary (5 %, 12/240 triplets, ex-
ample 8) or the reference argument is absent
from the definition(s) of the corresponding ad-
jective in the TLFi (37.9 %, 91/240 triplets, ex-
ample 9).

(8) DiCo-reference
QSyn(humain) = philanthrope
(QSyn(human) = philanthropic)
TLFi-hypothesis
ø(ø) = ø
The adjective philanthrope (philanthropic)
does not have an entry in the TLFi.

(9) DiCo-reference
A1(richesse) = riche
(A1(wealth) = rich)
TLFi-hypothesis
A1Perf(fortune) = riche
(A1Perf(fortune) = rich)
In this example, the argument richesse
(wealth) does not exist in any of the 15 def-
initions of riche (rich) in the TLFi.

2. YES (20.4 %, 49/240 triplets)

(a) Total matches: these cases correspond to
the intersection of the two resources, i.e.
cases where the triplets are identical on
both sides (16.3 %, 39/240 triplets).

(10) DiCo-reference
A1(faute) = fautif
TLFi-hypothesis
A1(faute) = fautif
(A1(fault) = guilty)

(b) Partial matches: cases where the adjec-
tives and LFs are identical on both sides
and where the reference argument is in-
cluded in the hypothesis argument (4.2 %,
10/240 triplets).

(11) DiCo-reference
A1(défaite) = vaincu
(A1(defeat) = vanquished)
TLFi-hypothesis
A1(défaite militaire) = vaincu
(A1(military defeat) = vanquished)

3. NO (36.7 %, 88/240 triplets) Four types of
cases can be distinguished:

(a) Cases where the reference adjective is in
the TLFi but absent from the set of hy-
pothesis adjectives. These cases can be
explained by the fact that the extraction
rules did not match a definition in the
TLFi or by the fact that no LF has been
mapped to the lexical relation that was ex-
tracted from the TLFi definitions (13.8 %,
33/240 triplets).

(12) DiCo-reference
A0(lait) = lactique
(A0(milk) = lactic)
TLFi-hypothesis
ø(ø) = ø

(b) Cases where the adjective and the argu-
ment of the reference and of the hypoth-
esis are identical or where the arguments
match partially, but the LFs are differ-
ent (11.3 %, 27/240 triplets, example 13).
This divergence might indicate an erro-
neous mapping between the extracted lex-
icalized relation and the LF. It could also
be explained by the possibility of describ-
ing the same pair of ADJ-ARG with two
different LFs.

(13) DiCo-reference
Able1(haine) = haineux
TLFi-hypothesis
A1(haine) = haineux
(A1(hate) = hateful)

(c) Cases where the extraction rule outputs
an ill-formed hypothesis argument result-
ing from some problem in the extraction
rule (example 14), or where the hypoth-
esis triplet is not erroneous as such but
corresponds to a new triplet-variant for a
particular adjective (example 15) (11.7 %,
28/240 triplets).

(14) DiCo-reference A0(sucre) = sucrier
(A0(sugar) = sugar (nominal adjec-
tive))

166



TLFi-hypothesis
A0(production) = sucrier
(A0(production) = sugar)
TLFi-definition
SUCRIER = Qui est relatif à la
production, à la fabrication du sucre.
(sugar (adj.) = Related to the produc-
tion, the manufacture of sugar.)

In example 14, the TLFi definition for su-
crier contains the reference argument su-
cre, but the extraction rule did not match
the right string, resulting in an ill-formed
hypothesis argument.

(15) DiCo-reference A1(enthousiasme) =
enthousiaste
(A1(enthusiasm) = enthusiastic)
TLFi-hypothesis
A1(admiration passionnée) = enthou-
siaste
(A1(passionate admiration) = enthu-
siastic)

In example 15, the hypothesis argument
extracted by the rule is well-formed but
does not correspond to the reference argu-
ment. The hypothesis triplet can thus be
considered as a new variant for the adjec-
tive enthousiaste (enthusiastic).

The most significant results of the first evalua-
tion are synthesized in table 4. Note that the ref-
erence does not cover every relation type that has
been taken into account in our lexicon: among the
15 relation types listed in table 3 above, only ten are
present in the DiCo resource and six illustrated in
table 4.

Eval. % A1 A0 QSyn Able2 A2 Able1
Imp. 42.9 33 10 31 7 12 6
Yes 20.4 18 24 0 1 2 2
No 36.7 29 16 10 14 6 8
Total 100 80 50 41 22 20 16

Table 4: Results of the First Evaluation Against the DiCo

If the reference triplets marked “Impossible”
(Imp.) are excluded, this evaluation shows that the
simple rule-based system proposed to extract seman-
tically relevant information from lexicographic def-
initions of adjectives covers 35.8 % of the 137 ref-
erence triplets that can be used for the evaluation.

The analysis of the 88 “No” cases shows that most
of the problems are due to insufficient rule-coverage
and/or REL-LF mapping (37.5 %, 33/88). This fig-
ure could be reduced by further analyzing the def-
initions that are not accounted for by the rules in
order to add more rules, and by mapping more lex-
icalized relations to LFs. The latter solution might,
however, prove difficult due to the high frequency
of reduced- or single-occurrence relations extracted.
30.7 % (27/88) of the “No” cases correspond to a
difference in LFs and 31.8 % (28/88) to either ill-
formed arguments or to new variant-triplets. A man-
ual check of the 53 hypothesis triplets extracted for
the 28 adjectives of the latter types of cases shows
that in only 12 cases the hypothesis arguments are
ill-formed (corresponding to 6/28 reference triplets);
the rest corresponds to, a priori, acceptable argu-
ments, i.e. to new triplet variants (41/53 cases), al-
though a few of them are technically speaking ill-
formed. Therefore, most of the remaining 55.7 %
(49/88) “No” cases should be qualitatively evalu-
ated.

These mitigated quantitative results have to be put
in perspective. The first evaluation was meant to test
the performance of the extraction rules against data
from an existing resource, but, as the figures show,
the vast majority of the reference triplets cannot be
tested. This quantitative evaluation thus highlights
the difficulty of using existing resources for this
kind of task (particularly when such resources are
scarce). Moreover, it proves insufficient to measure
the actual performance of the rules. Two types of
cases are indeed unaccounted for: first, there might
be many correct hypothesis triplets that are not in
the reference, since there is a huge discrepancy in
the number of triplets between the reference and the
hypotheses; second, the hypothesis triplets that don’t
match to the reference might still be correct. There-
fore, other qualitative evaluation methods have to be
used.

4.2 Evaluation by an LF Expert

An expert of the LF formalism has evaluated
the quality of 150 triplets taken from the 16,646
LF(ARG)=ADJ triplets of the lexicon. First, he eval-
uated the argument (0 for a wrong argument, 1 for a
valid argument) and, when he judged that the argu-
ment was correct, he evaluated the LF: 2 for a good

167



LF, 1 for a partially satisfying LF and 0 for an in-
valid LF. To sum up, four configurations are possi-
ble:

• Case 1 – ARG:0
E.g. A2(converti-converted) = AGATISÉ-agatized

The expert considers that the argument is invalid.
Indeed, AGATISÉ means converted into an agate but
the program extracted converted as an argument in-
stead of agate.

• Case 2 – ARG:1 LF:0
E.g. Able1(admiration) = ADMIRABLE

The expert considers that the argument is valid but
the LF is not the right one: the adjective AD-
MIRABLE characterizes the second argument of ad-
miration and not the first one. The correct LF
should therefore be Able2.

• Case 3 – ARG:1 LF:1
A1(trouble-confusion) = AHURI-dazed

The expert considers that the argument is valid but
the LF is incomplete: it is true that the adjective
AHURI qualifies the first argument of confusion but,
more precisely, it conveys information on the man-
ifestation of the emotion. So a more precise LF
should be A1-Manif.

• Case 4 – ARG:1 LF:2
Magn(agité-upset) = AFFOLÉ-distraught

The expert considers that the argument and the LF
are valid since AFFOLÉ indeed means very upset.

Table 5 shows the results of the qualitative evalu-
ation of lexical functions. Cases 3 and 4 are consid-
ered to be accurate.

Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Total Accuracy
11 34 32 73 150 70.5 %

Table 5: Evaluation by the Expert

When confronted to cases 2 and 3, the expert was
invited to give the correct LF. This information will
be processed in order to improve the matching be-
tween relations extracted from the TLFi and appro-
priate lexical functions.

5 Conclusion

In this article, we presented a rule-based method
to automatically extract paradigmatic relations from
lexicographic definitions of adjectives using lexico-
syntactic patterns. This method was completed with

a manual mapping of the most frequently extracted
lexicalized relations (which are quite heterogenous)
to formal lexical functions. Our goal is to automati-
cally create a formalized semantic lexicon of French
adjectives that would be complementary to the few
existing adjectival resources that can be used, for
instance, in NLP tasks. The adjectival lexicon, in
which each adjective is related by a lexical func-
tion to an NP/VP/adjectival/adverbial argument, was
quantitatively and qualitatively evaluated.

The first evaluation, entirely automatic, was
aimed at testing the performance of the method. It
yielded rather inconclusive results mainly due to the
scarcity of the external data available for the task. A
thorough analysis of the different types of “errors”
showed that the number of “technical problems”
can be reduced by refining the extraction rules, by
adding more of them, and by completing the map-
ping of extracted relations to LFs. It also highlighted
the necessity to evaluate the method qualitatively.
The second evaluation was, thus, aimed at rating the
acceptability of the extracted relations. It was real-
ized by an expert of the lexical functions formalism
and gave good results, with a precision of around
70 %.

The automatically created adjectival lexicon pre-
sented in this paper can be easily extended by
a straightforward inversion of the LF(ARG)=ADJ
triplets. The resulting triplets would either complete
existing lexical entries if integrated into a similarly
encoded nominal and verbal lexicon, or constitute
new entries in the adjectival lexicon, thus extend-
ing the syntactic categories represented in the lexi-
con. The LF formalism could also be used to further
enrich adjectival entries by making automatic infer-
ences between adjective-argument pairs and their re-
spective synonyms. E.g. infer A0(kitty)=feline from
A0(cat)=feline and syn(cat)=kitty. Finally, mapping
LFs with the existing relations in WordNet could al-
low to integrate this adjectival lexicon to the French
WOLF.

Acknowledgements

This work has been funded by the French Agence
Nationale pour la Recherche, through the project
EDYLEX (ANR-08-CORD-009).

168



References
Alonge A., Bertagna F., Calzolari N., Roventini A., and

Zampolli A. 2000. Encoding information on adjec-
tives in a lexical-semantic net for computational ap-
plications. In Proceedings of the 1st North American
chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics conference, NAACL 2000, pages 42–49, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Dendien J. and Pierrel J.-M. 2003. Le Trésor
de la Langue Française informatisé : un exem-
ple d’informatisation d’un dictionnaire de langue de
référence. Traitement Automatique des Langues.
44(2):11-37.

Fellbaum C., Gross D. and Miller K. J. 1993. Adjec-
tives in WordNet. Technical report, Cognitive Science
Laboratory, Princeton University, 26–39.

Kupść A. 2008. Adjectives in TreeLex. In M. Klopotek,
A. Przepiórkowski, S. Wierzchoń et K. Trojanowski
(eds.), 16th International Conference Intelligent Infor-
mation Systems. Zakopane, Poland, 16-18 juin, Aca-
demic Publishing House EXIT, 287–296.

Marrafa, P. and Mendes, S. 2006. Modeling adjectives
in computational relational lexica. In Proceedings of
the COLING/ACL on Main conference poster sessions,
COLING-ACL ’06, pages 555–562, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mel’čuk I. 1996. Lexical Functions: A Tool for
the Description of Lexical Relations in the Lexicon.
In: L. Wanner (ed.). Lexical Functions in Lexicog-
raphy and Natural Language Processing. Amster-
dam/Philadelphia: Benjamins, 37-102.

Nasr A., Béchet F., Rey J.-F., Favre B. and Le Roux J.
2011. MACAON: An NLP tool suite for processing
word lattices. The 49th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Raskin V. and Nirenburg S. 1996. Adjectival Modifi-
cation in Text Meaning Represention. Proceedings of
COLING ’96.

Sagot B. and Fišer D. 2012. Automatic extension of
WOLF. 6th International Global Wordnet Conference
(GWC2012). Matsue, Japan.

Schwab D. and Lafourcade M. 2011. Modelling, Detec-
tion and Exploitation of Lexical Functions for Analy-
sis. ECTI Journal. Vol.2. 97-108.

Strnadová J. and Sagot B. 2011. Construction d’un lex-
ique des adjectifs dénominaux. Actes de TALN 2011.
Vol.2. 69-74. Montpellier, France.

Vossen, P. 2002. WordNet, EuroWordNet and Global
WordNet. Revue française de linguistique appliquée,
7(1):27–38.

169


