










































FBM: Combining lexicon-based ML and heuristics for Social Media Polarities


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 483–489, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

FBM: Combining lexicon-based ML and heuristics
for Social Media Polarities

Carlos Rodrı́guez-Penagos, Jordi Atserias, Joan Codina-Filbà,
David Garcı́a-Narbona, Jens Grivolla, Patrik Lambert, Roser Saurı́

Barcelona Media
Av. Diagonal 177, Barcelona 08018

Corresponding author: carlos.rodriguez@barcelonamedia.org

Abstract

This paper describes the system implemented
by Fundació Barcelona Media (FBM) for clas-
sifying the polarity of opinion expressions in
tweets and SMSs, and which is supported by
a UIMA pipeline for rich linguistic and sen-
timent annotations. FBM participated in the
SEMEVAL 2013 Task 2 on polarity classifi-
cation. It ranked 5th in Task A (constrained
track) using an ensemble system combining
ML algorithms with dictionary-based heuris-
tics, and 7th (Task B, constrained) using an
SVM classifier with features derived from the
linguistic annotations and some heuristics.

1 Introduction

We introduce the FBM system for classifying the
polarity of short user-generated text (tweets and
SMSs), which participated in the two subtasks of
SEMEVAL 2013 Task 2 on Sentiment Analysis in
Twitter. These are: Task A. Contextual Polarity Dis-
ambiguation, and Task B. Message Polarity Classifi-
cation. The former aimed at classifying the polarity
of already identified opinion expressions (or cues),
whereas the latter consisted in classifying the polar-
ity of the whole text (Wilson et al., 2013).

The literature agrees on two main approaches for
classifying opinion expressions: using supervised
learning methods and applying dictionary/rule-
based knowledge (see (Liu, 2012) for an overview).
Each of them on its own has been used in work-
able systems, and a principled combination of both
of them can yield good results on noisy data, since

generally one (dictionaries/rules) offers good preci-
sion while the other (ML) is able to discover unseen
examples and thus enhances recall.

FBM combined both approaches in order to bene-
fit from their respective strengths and compensating
as much as possible their weaknesses. For Task A
we used linguistic (lexical and syntactic) annotations
to implement both types of approaches. On the one
hand, we built machine learning classifiers based on
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) and Conditional
Random Fields (CRFs). On the other, we imple-
mented a basic classification system mainly based
on polarity dictionaries and negation information, as
well as simple decision tree-like heuristics extracted
from the training data. For task B we trained an
SVM classifier using some of the annotations from
Task A.

The paper first presents the process of data com-
pilation and preprocessing (section 2), and then de-
scribes the systems for Tasks A (section 3) and B
(section 4). Results and conclusions are discussed
in the last section.

2 Data Compilation and Processing

2.1 Making data available

The corpus of SMSs was provided to the partici-
pants by the organizers of the task. As for the corpus
of tweets, legal restrictions on twitter data distribu-
tion required the participants to download the tex-
tual contents of the corpus from a list of tweet ids.
We retrieved the tweet text using the official twit-
ter API instead of script provided by the organizers,
but not all the tweets were available for download

483



due to restrictions of different types (e.g. geograph-
ical), or because the twitter account was temporarily
suspended. In total, we managed to retrieve 10,764
tweets out of 11,777 ids provided by the organizers
(91.4%). It is worth pointing out that the restric-
tions on tweets distribution can become an issue for
future users of the dataset, as the amount of avail-
able tweets will diminish over time. By contrast, the
twitter test corpus was distributed with the full text
to avoid those problems.

2.2 Leveraging the data with rich linguistic
information

We applied the same linguistic processing to both
corpora (SMSs and tweets), even though the SMS
test data presents very different characteristics from
the twitter data, not only because of what can be ap-
preciated as genre differences, but also due to the
fact that is apparently written in Singaporean En-
glish, which differs significantly from American or
British English. No efforts were made to adapt
our linguistic processing modules and dictionaries
to this data.

Tweets and SMSs were processed with a UIMA1-
based pipeline consisting of a set of linguistic and
opinion-oriented modules, which includes:

Basic linguistic processing: Sentence segmen-
tation, tokenization, POS-tagging, lemmatiza-
tion.

Syntax: Dependency parsing.
Lexicon-based annotations:

• Basic polarity, distinguishing among: positive,
negative, and neutral, as encoded in Wilson et
al. (2010).

• Polarity strength, using the score for pos-
itive and negative polarity in SentiWordnet
3.0 (Baccianella et al., 2010). Each Sen-
tiWordNet synset has an associated triplet of
numerical scores (positive, negative,
and objective) expressing the intensity of
positive, negative and objective polarity of the
terms it contains. They range from 0.0 to 1.0,
and their sum is 1.0 for each synset (Esuli and
Sebastiani, 2007). We selected only the synset

1http://uima.apache.org/uima-specification.html

with positive or negative scores higher than 0.5,
containing a total of 16,791 words.

• Subjectiviy clues, from Wilson et al. (2010),
which are classified as weak or strong depend-
ing on their degree of subjectivity.

• Sentiment expressions, from the Linguistic In-
quiry and Word Count (LIWC) 2001 Dictio-
nary (Pennebaker et al., 2001).

• In-house compiled lexicons of negation mark-
ers (such as ’no’, ’never’, ’none’) and quanti-
fiers (’all’, ’many’, etc.), the latter further clas-
sified into low, medium and high according to
their quantification degree.

The different classifiers employed by FBM con-
structed their vectors from this output to learn global
and contextual polarities.

3 Task A: Ensemble System

Our system combined Machine Learning and rule-
based approaches. The aim was to combine the
strengths of each individual component while avoid-
ing as much as possible their weaknesses. In what
follows we describe each system component as well
as the way the ensemble system worked out the col-
lective decisions.

3.1 Conditional Random Fields

One of the classifiers uses the Conditional Random
Fields implementation of a biomedical Named En-
tity Recognition system (JNET from JulieLab) 2, ex-
ploiting the classification capabilities of the system
(rather than its span detection) by strongly associat-
ing already defined “marked instances” with a polar-
ity, and exploring a 5-word window. It uses depen-
dency labels, POS tags, polar words, sentiwordnet
and LWIC sentiment annotations, as well as indica-
tions for quantifiers and negation markers.

3.2 Support Vector Machines

This classifier was implemented using an SVM algo-
rithm with a linear kernel and the C parameter set to
0.2 (determined using a 5 fold cross-validation). The
features set includes those that we used in RepLab

2http://www.julielab.de

484



2012 (Chenlo et al., 2012) (including number of:
characters, words, links, hashtags, positive and neg-
ative emoticons, question-exclamation marks, ad-
jectives, nouns, verbs, adverbs, uppercased words,
words with duplicated vowels), plus a set of new
features at tweet level obtained from the linguistic
annotations: number of high/medium/low polarity
quantifiers, number of positive and negative polar
words, sentiwordnet applied to both the cue and the
whole tweet.

Moreover, the RepLab polarity calculation based
on different dictionaries was modified to take into
account negation (in a 3-word window) potentially
inverting the polarity (negPol). This polarity mea-
sure was applied to the cue and to the whole tweet,
thus generating two additional features.

3.3 Heuristic Approach

In task A, in parallel to the supervised learning sys-
tem, we developed a method (named Heur) based
on polarity dictionary lookup and simple heuristics
(see Figure 1) taking into account opinion words
as well as negation markers and quantifiers. These
heuristics were implemented so as to maximize the
number of correct positive and negative labels in the
training data. To this end, we calculated the aggre-
gate polarity of a cue segment as the sum of word
polarities found in the polarity lexicon. The aggre-
gate values in the training set ranged from -3 to +3,
taking respectively 1, 0 and -1 as the polarity of pos-
itive, neutral and negative words. The label distri-
bution of cue segments with an aggregate polarity
value of -1 is shown in Table 1.

Aggregate polarity -1
Negation no yes
negative 1,032 30

neutral 37 4
positive 178 71

Table 1: Cue segment polarity statistics in training data
for an aggregate polarity value of -1.

In this case, if no negation is present in the cue
segment, a majority (1,032) of examples had the
negative label. In case there was at least a negation, a
majority (71) of examples had a positive label. This
behaviour was observed with all negative aggregate

1: if has polar word(CUE) then
2: polarity= lex(P)-0.5*lex(QP)
3: -lex(N)+0.5*lex(QN)
4: if polarity>0 then
5: if has negation(CUE) then negative
6: else positive
7: end if
8: else if polarity<0 then
9: if has negation(CUE) then positive

10: else negative
11: end if
12: else
13: if has negation(CUE) then positive
14: else negative
15: end if
16: end if
17: else if has negation(CUE) then negative
18: else
19: polarity= tlex(P)-0.5*tlex(QP)
20: -tlex(N)+0.5*tlex(QN)
21: if polarity<0 then negative
22: else if tlex(NEU)>0 then neutral
23: else if polarity>0 then positive
24: else if has negemo(CUE) then negative
25: else if has posemo(CUE) then positive
26: else unknwn
27: end if
28: end if

Figure 1: Heuristics used by the lexicon-based system to
classify the polarity of a segment marked up as opinion
cue (Task A).

polarity values in training data, yielding the rule in
lines 8 to 11 of Figure 1. Similar rules were ex-
tracted for the other aggregate polarity values (lines
4 to 16 of Figure 1).

Figure 1 details the complete classification algo-
rithm. Note (lines 1 to 17) that we first rely on the
basic polarity lexicon annotations (described in sec-
tion 2). The final aggregate polarity formula (lines
2-3) was refined to distinguish sentiment words
which act as quantifiers, such as pretty in pretty mad.
The word pretty is both a positive polar word and a
quantifier. We want its polarity to be positive in case
it occurs in isolation, but less than one so that the
sum with a following negative polar word (such as
mad) be negative. We thus give this kind of words
a polarity of 0.5 by substracting 0.5 for each polar
word which is also a quantifier. In the polarity for-
mula of lines 2-3, lex(X) refers to the number of
words annotated as X, P and N refer respectively
to positive and negative polar words, and QP and

485



QN refer to positive and negative polar words which
are also quantifiers. Quantifiers which are not polar
words are not taken into account because they are
not likely to change the opinion polarity.

In case that no annotations from the basic polar-
ity, quantifiers, and negative markers lexicons are
found (lines 18 to 28), we look up in dictionaries
built from the training data (tlex in lines 19-20).
To build these dictionaries, we counted how many
times each word was labeled positive, negative and
neutral. We considered that a word has a given po-
larity if the number of times it was assigned to this
class is greater than the number of times it was as-
signed to any other class by a given threshold. We
calculated the polarity in the same way as before,
but now with the counts from the lexicon automati-
cally compiled from the training data. To improve
the recall of the dictionary lookup, we performed
some text normalization: lowercasing, deletion of
repeated characters (such as gooood) and deletion of
the hashtag “#” character. Finally, if no polar word
is found in the automatically compiled lexicon, we
look at the sentiment annotations (extracted from the
LIWC dictionary).

3.4 Ensemble Voting Algorithm
As already mentioned, we combined the results from
the described polarity methods to build a collective
decision. Table 2 shows the performance (in terms
of F1 measure) of the different single methods over
the tweet test data.

SVM Heur Heur+ CRF
Test 80.74 83.47 84.62 62.85

Table 2: Twitter Task A results for different methods

Although the heuristic method outperforms the
ML methods, they are not only different in nature
(ML vs. heuristic) but also use different information
(see Table 5). This suggests that the ensemble solu-
tion will be complementary and capable of obtaining
better results than any of the individual methods by
itself.

The development set was used to calculate the en-
semble response given the individual votes of the
different systems in a way similar to the behavior
knowledge space method (Huang and Suen, 1993).
Table 3 shows an example of how the assemble

voting is built. For each method vote combina-
tion (SVM-Heuristics-CRF) the number of positives
/ negatives / neutral is calculated in the development
data. The ensemble (EV) selects the vote that max-
imizes the number of correct votes in the develop-
ment data (in bold).

SVM Heur CRF EV # Instancespos neg neu
− + − − 0 6 0
− − + − 1 23 2
− − − − 3 125 2
− u + + 1 0 0
+ u n − 0 1 0
+ − + + 17 13 2
+ + + + 314 18 17
+ − n + 3 1 0

Table 3: Oracle building example (EV: Ensemble Vote,
+:positive, −:negative, n:neutral, u:unknown)

The test data contains some combination of votes
that were not seen in the development data. Thus,
in order to deal with these unseen combinations of
votes in the test set we use the following backup
heuristics based on the preformance figures of the
individual methods: Use the vote of the heuristic
method. If this method does not vote (u), then se-
lect the SVM vote.

Table 4 shows the results of the proposed ensem-
ble method, the well-known majority voting and the
upper bound of this ensemble method (calculated
with the same strategy over the test data), over the
development and test tweet data

Ensemble Majority Upper
Voting Voting Bound

Dev 85.48 81.31 85.48
Test 85.50 82.70 89.37

Table 4: Results for different ensemble strategies

In the development corpus, the upper bound and
ensemble results are the same, given that they ap-
ply the same knowledge. The difference is in the
test dataset, where the ensemble voting is calculated
based on the knowledge obtained from the develop-
ment corpus, while the upper bound uses the knowl-
edge that can be derived from the test corpus.

486



Table 5 illustrates the features used by each com-
ponent.

SVM SVM CRF Heur
(task A) (task B)

word • • •
lemma

pos • •
deps •
pol • • • •

polW •
sent • • •

sentiwn • • •
quant • • • •
neg • • • •

links •
hashTags •

Table 5: Information used (pos: part-of-speech; deps: de-
pendencies; pol: basic polarity classification; polW: basic
polarity word; sent: LIWC sentiments; sentwn: Senti-
Wordnet; quant/neg: quantifiers and negation markers.)

4 Task B: A Support Vector
Machine-based System

The system presented for task B is based on ML us-
ing a SVM model. The feature vector used as input
for the SVM component is composed of the annota-
tions provided by the linguistic annotation pipeline,
extended with a feature obtained by applying nega-
tion to the next polar words (window of size 3).

The features used do not include the words (or
their lemmas) because the number of tweets avail-
able for training is small (104) compared to the num-
ber of different words (4 · 104). A model based on
bag-of-words would suffer from overfitting and thus
be very domain and time-dependent. If the train and
test sets were randomly selected from a bigger set,
the use of words could increase the model’s accu-
racy, but the model would also be too narrowly ap-
plied to this specific dataset.

From the annotation pipeline we extracted as fea-
tures: the polar words (PolW) and their basic po-
larity (Pol); the sentiment annotations from LIWC
(Sent); the negation markers (Neg) and quantifiers
(Quant). The model was trained using Weka (Hall
et al., 2009).

The model used is SVM with the C parameter set
to 1.0 and applying a 10 fold cross-validation. The
option of doing first a model to discriminate polar
and neutral tweets was discarded because Weka al-
ready does that when training classifiers for more
than two training classes, and the combination of the
two classifiers (a first one between polar and opin-
ionated and a second one between positive and neg-
ative) would produce the same results.

5 Results and Discussion

The results of our system in each subcorpus and task
are presented in Table 5 (average of the F1-measure
over the classes positive and negative, constrained
track), with the ranking achieved in the competition
in parentheses.

Tweet Corpus SMS Corpus
Task A 0.86 (5th) 0.73 (11th)
Task B 0.61 (7th) 0.47 (28th)

Table 6: FBM system performance (F1 average over pos-
itive and negative classes, constrained track) and rankings

Given the differences in style and vocabularies be-
tween the SMS and tweet corpora, and the fact that
we made not effort whatsoever to adapt our system
or models to them, the drop in performance from
one to the other is considerable, but to be expected
since domain customization is an important aspect
of opinion mining.

Task A: The confusion matrix in Table 7 shows
an acceptable performance for the most frequent
classes in the corpus (with an error of 7.75% and
19.5% for postive and negative cues, respectively)
and a very poor job for neutral cues (98.1% of er-
ror), clearly a minority class in the training corpus
(5% of the data).

GOLD: Pos Neg Neu
SYSTEM: Pos 2,522 296 126

Neg 206 1,240 31
Neu 6 5 3

Table 7: Task A confusion matrix

Given the skewed distribution of polarity cate-
gories in the test corpus, however, neutral mistakes
amount to only 23% of our system error, and so we

487



focus our analysis on the problems in positive and
negative cues, respectively amounting to 31.7% and
44.8% of the total error. There are 2 main sources of
error:

• Limitations of the dictionaries employed,
which were short in covering somewhat fre-
quent slang words (e.g., wacky, baddest, shit-
loads), expressions (e.g., ouch, yukk, C’MON),
or phrases (e.g., over the top), some of which
express a particular polarity but contain a word
expressing just the opposite (have a blast, to
want something bad/ly).

• Problems in UGC processing, mainly related to
normalization (e.g., fooooool) and tokenization
(Perfect...not sure), which put at risk the cor-
rect identification of lexical elements that are
crucial for polarity classification.

Task B: The average F-score of positive and neg-
ative classes was 0.62 in the development set (that
was included in the training set) and the averaged F-
score for the test set was 0.61 (so they are very simi-
lar). If focusing on precision and recall, the positive
and negative classes have higher precision but lower
recall in the test set. We think that this low degrada-
tion of perfomance indicates the model’s potential
for generalization.

6 Conclusions

From our results, we can conclude that the use of
ensemble combination of orthogonal methods pro-
vides good performance for Task A. Similar results
could be expected for Task B (judging from mix-
ing dictionaries and ML in similar tasks at RepLab
2012 (Chenlo et al., 2012)). The ML methods that
we applied for Task B are essentially additive, and
hence have difficulties in applying features such as
polarity shifters. To overcome this, one of the fea-
tures includes negation of polar words when a polar-
ity shifter is near.

Overall, the SemEval Tasks have make evident the
usual challenges when mining opinions from Social
Media channels: noisy text, irregular grammar and
orthography, highly specific lingo, etc. Moreover,
temporal dependencies can affect the performance if
the training and test data have been gathered at dif-

ferent times, as is the case with text of such a volatile
nature as tweets and SMSs.

0.00%

5.00%

10.00%

15.00%

20.00%

25.00%

30.00%

35.00%

40.00%

45.00%

50.00%

train

dev

test

Figure 2: Distribution of tweets over time

The histogram in Figure 2 shows that this also ap-
plies to the Semeval tweets dataset. It illustrates the
distribution of tweets over time (extrapolated from
the sequential ids) in the 3 subcorpora (train, devel-
opment and test), showing some divergence between
the test corpus on the one hand, and the develop-
ment and training corpora on the other. Neverthe-
less, our system shows little performance degrada-
tion between development and testing results, as at-
tested in Table 4 (ensemble voting column).

Our work here and at other competitions already
cited validate a system that combines stochastic and
symbolic methodologies in a principled, data-driven
approach. Time and domain dependencies of Social
Media data make system and model generalization
highly desirable, and our system hybrid nature also
contribute to this objective.

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially funded by the Spanish
Government project Holopedia, TIN2010-21128-
C02-02, the CENIT program project Social Media,
CEN-20101037, and the Marie Curie Reintegration
Grant PIRG04-GA-2008-239414.

488



References
Baccianella, Stefano, Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebas-

tiani. 2010. SentiWordNet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In Proceedings of the 7th conference on International
Language Resources and Evaluation, Valletta, Malta.

Chenlo, Jose M., Jordi Atserias, Carlos Rodrı́guez-
Penagos and Roi Blanco. 2012. FBM-Yahoo!
at RepLab 2012. In: P. Forner, J. Karlgren,
C. Womser-Hacker (eds.) CLEF 2012 Evalua-
tion Labs and Workshop, Online Working Notes.
http://clef2012.org/index.php?page=Pages/procee-
dings.php.

Esuli, Andrea and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2007. SEN-
TIWORDNET: a high-coverage lexical resource for
opinion mining. Technical Report ISTI-PP-002/2007,
Institute of Information Science and Technologies
(ISTI) of the Italian National Research Council
(CNR).

Hall, Mark, Frank Eibe, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann and Ian H. Witten. 2009.
The WEKA data mining software: an update. In:
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 1: 10–18.

Huang, Y. S. and C. Y. Suen. 1993. Behavior-knowledge
space method for combination of multiple classifiers.
In Proceedings of IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 347–352.

Liu, Bing. 2012. Sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies,
(5-1), 1–167.

Pennebaker, James W., Martha E. Francis and Roger
J. Booth. 2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count:
LIWC 2001. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates.

Wilson, Theresa, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Sara
Rosenthal, Veselin Stoyanov and Alan. Ritter. 2013.
SemEval-2013 task 2: Sentiment analysis in twitter.
In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation, SemEval ’13.

Wilson, Theresa, Janyce Wiebe and Paul Hoffmann.
2010. Recognizing contextual polarity: An explo-
ration of features for phrase-level sentiment analysis.
Computational Linguistics, 35(3), 399–433.

489


