










































SSA-UO: Unsupervised Sentiment Analysis in Twitter


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 501–507, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

SSA-UO: Unsupervised Twitter Sentiment Analysis

Reynier Ortega, Adrian Fonseca
CERPAMID, University of Oriente

Ave Patricio Lumumba S/N
Santiago de Cuba, Cuba

Yoan Gutiérrez
DI, University of Matanzas

Autopista a Varadero Km 312
Matanzas, Cuba

Andrés Montoyo
DLSI, University of Alicante
Carretera de San Vicente S/N

Alicante,Spain

Abstract

This paper describes the specifications and re-
sults of SSA-UO, unsupervised system, pre-
sented in SemEval 2013 for Sentiment Analy-
sis in Twitter (Task 2) (Wilson et al., 2013).
The proposal system includes three phases:
data preprocessing, contextual word polarity
detection and message classification. The
preprocessing phase comprises treatment of
emoticon, slang terms, lemmatization and
POS-tagging. Word polarity detection is car-
ried out taking into account the sentiment as-
sociated with the context in which it appears.
For this, we use a new contextual sentiment
classification method based on coarse-grained
word sense disambiguation, using WordNet
(Miller, 1995) and a coarse-grained sense in-
ventory (sentiment inventory) built up from
SentiWordNet (Baccianella et al., 2010). Fi-
nally, the overall sentiment is determined us-
ing a rule-based classifier. As it may be ob-
served, the results obtained for Twitter and
SMS sentiment classification are good consid-
ering that our proposal is unsupervised.

1 Introduction

The explosion of Web 2.0 has marked a new age
for the human society. The huge use of Social Me-
dia such as Facebook1 , MySpace2 , LinkedIn3 and
Twitter4 , offers a place for people to share informa-
tion in real time. Twitter is one of the most popular

1https://www.facebook.com
2http://www.myspace.com/
3http://www.linkedin.com
4https://www.twitter.com/

social network websites and has been growing at a
very fast pace. The number of active users exceeds
500 million and the number of tweets posted by day
exceeds 500 million (as of May 2012)5. Through the
twitter applications, users shared opinions about per-
sonalities, politicians, products, companies, events,
etc. This has been attracting the attention of dif-
ferent research communities interested in analyz-
ing its content and motivated many natural language
tasks, such as sentiment analysis, emotions detec-
tion, opinions retrieval, product recommendation or
opinion summarization.

One of the most popular sentiment analysis tasks
is polarity classification. This task is a new field
that classifies opinion texts as positive, negative or
neutral (Pang et al., 2002; Turney, 2002; Esuli and
Sebastiani, 2006; Wilson et al., 2006; Wiegand et
al., 2010). Determining polarity might seem an easy
task, as many words have some polarity by them-
selves. However, words do not always express the
same sentiment, and in most cases the polarity of a
word depends on the context in which the word is
used. So, terms that clearly denote negative feel-
ings can be neutral, or even positive, depending
on their context. Hence, sentiment analysis sys-
tems should include semantic-level analysis in order
to solve word ambiguity and correctly capture the
meaning of each word according to its context. Also,
complex linguistic processing is needed to deal with
problems such as the effect of negations and infor-
mal language. Moreover, understanding the senti-
mental meaning of the different textual units is im-
portant to accurately determine the overall polarity

5http://www.statisticbrain.com/twitter-statistics/

501



of a text.
In this paper, we present a system that has as main

objective to analyze the sentiments of tweets and
classify these as positive, negative or neutral. The
proposal system includes three phases: data prepro-
cessing, contextual word polarity detection and mes-
sage classification. The preprocessing phase com-
prises treatment of emoticons, spell-errors, slang
terms, lemmatization and POS-tagging. Word po-
larity detection is carried out taking into account the
sentiment associated with the context within which
it appears. For this, we use a new contextual senti-
ment classification method based on coarse-grained
word sense disambiguation, using WordNet (Miller,
1995) and a coarse-grained sense inventory (senti-
ment inventory) built up from SentiWordNet (Bac-
cianella et al., 2010). Finally, the polarity is deter-
mined using a rule-based classifier. The paper is
organized as follows. Section 2 describes of SSA-
UO system. In Section 3 we evaluate our proposal
and discuss the results obtained in the SemEval 2013
Task No. 2. Finally, section 4 provides concluding
remarks.

2 SSA-UO System

We use an unsupervised strategy consisting in a
coarse-grained clustering-based word sense disam-
biguation (WSD) method that differentiates positive,
negative, highly positive, highly negative and objec-
tive uses of every word on context which it occurs.
The proposal method uses WordNet and a coarse-
grained sense inventory (sentiment inventory) built
up from SentiWordNet. The overall architecture of
our sentiment classifier is shown in Figure 1.

Firstly, data preprocessing is done to eliminate in-
complete, noisy or inconsistent information. A Sen-
timent Word Sense Disambiguation method (Section
2.3) is then applied to content words (nouns, adjec-
tives, verbs and adverbs). Once all content words
are disambiguated, we apply a rule-based classifier
(Section 2.4) to decide whether the tweet is positive,
negative or neutral.

Unsupervised word sense disambiguation method
proposed by (Anaya-Sánchez et al., 2006) was
adapted for sentiment word sense disambiguation.
Unlike the authors, who aim to obtain the correct
sense of a word, we use the method to determine

Figure 1: Overall architecture of Sentiment Classifier

when a word is used with highly positive (HP), posi-
tive (P), highly negative (HN), negative (N) or objec-
tive (O) meaning based on a sentiment sense inven-
tory. We make sentiment sense inventory based on
sense-level annotation in SentiWordNet. Finally, we
apply a rule-based classifier to determine the overall
sentiment in tweet.

2.1 Data Preprocessing

The tweets differ from the text in articles, books, or
even spoken language. It is limited to 140 charac-
ters, also includes many idiosyncratic uses, such as
emoticons, slang terms, misspellings, URLs, “RT”
for re-tweet, “@” for user mentions, “#” for hash-
tags, and character repetitions. Therefore it is nec-
essary to preprocess the text, in order to reduce the
noise information. The preprocessing step involve
the following task. The text is tokenized and URL,
re-tweets and author mentions are removed. Hash-
tag tokens frequently contain relevant information
related to the topic of the tweet, this is included as
part of the text but without the “#” character. We
replace emoticon tokens by emotion words using
an emoticons dictionary, obtained from Wikipedia

502



6. Each emoticon was manually annotated with an
emotion word and polarity value. Emoticons that
suggest positive emotions - “:-)”, “:)”, “X-D” - are
annotated with the emotion word “happy” and neg-
ative emoticons - “:-(”, “:-c”, “:,(” - are annotated
with the emotion word “sad”. The presence of ab-
breviations within a tweet is noted, therefore abbre-
viations are replaced by their meaning (e.g., LOL –
laughing out loud) using a dictionary7. Finally the
text is POS-tagged and lemmatized using TreeTag-
ger (Schmid, 1994) and stopwords are discarded.

2.2 Sentiment Sense Inventory

We considered SentiWordNet for building senti-
ment coarse-grained sense inventory. SentiWordNet
contain positive, negative and objective scores be-
tween 0 and 1 for all senses in WordNet. Based
on this sense level annotation, we define a new
rule (SentiS) for classifying senses in five sentiment
class. The senses are classified in the following man-
ner (Alexandra et al., 2009): senses whose positive
score is greater than or equal to 0.75 are consid-
ered to be highly positive (HP), senses with posi-
tive score greater than or equal to 0.5 and lower than
0.75 are considered positive (P), senses with nega-
tive score greater than or equal 0.75 are considered
highly negative (HN), whereas those whose negative
score is lower than 0.75 and greater than or equal to
0.5 are considered to be negative (N). In the remain-
ing cases, the senses are considered to be objective
(O) (see equation(1)).

sentiS(s)=



HP i f ScoreP(s)≥ 0.75
HN i f ScoreN(s)≥ 0.75
P i f ScoreP(s) < 0.75 and ScoreP(s)≥ 0.5
N i f ScoreN(s) < 0.75 and ScoreN(s)≥ 0.5
O in other case

(1)

Table 1 summarizes the distribution of the five
sentiment classes once classified all senses of Sen-
tiWordNet.

A notable unbalance can be observed between the
number of highly positive, highly negative, positive,
negative and objective senses.

6http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of emoticons
7http://www.noslang.com/dictionary/

Once all senses were classified in a five sentiment
sense class, we create a coarse sense inventory based
on this classification. This inventory is defined in the
following manner: For each word in SentiWordNet
we grouped its senses with the same sentiment class
in a single sense (coarse-sense), in case of objective
senses these are kept separated.

2.3 Contextual Word Polarity Detection
Much work on sentiment analysis have been di-
rected to determine the polarity of opinion using
anotated lexicons with prior polarity (Hatzivas-
siloglou and McKeown, 1997; Kamps and Marx,
2002; Turney, 2002). However a word can mod-
ify your prior polarity in relation to the context
within which it is invoked. For example the word
“earthquake” is used with negative meaning in the
sentence :

“Selling the company caused an earthquake amount
the employees”.

Whereas it is used in an neutral meaning in the
sentence:

“An earthquake is the result of a sudden release of
energy in the Earth’s crust that creates seismic waves”.

For this reason, our system uses a coarse-grained
WSD method for obtaining the contextual polarity
of all words in tweets. The selected disambigua-
tion method (Anaya-Sánchez et al., 2006) was de-
veloped for the traditional WSD task. In this WSD
method, the senses are represented as topic signa-
tures (Lin and Hovy, 2000) built from the repository
of concepts of WordNet. The disambiguation pro-
cess starts from a clustering distribution of all pos-
sible senses of the ambiguous words by applying
the Extended Star clustering algorithm (Gil-Garcı́a
et al., 2003). Such a clustering tries to identify co-
hesive groups of word senses, which are assumed
to represent different meanings for the set of words.

Resource HP HN P N O
SWN 310 938 2242 2899 109035

Table 1: Senses highly positive, highly negative, positive,
negative and objective distributions.

503



Then, clusters that match the best with the context
are selected. If the selected clusters disambiguate
all words, the process stops and the senses belong-
ing to the selected clusters are interpreted as the dis-
ambiguating ones. Otherwise, the clustering is per-
formed again (regarding the remaining senses) until
a complete disambiguation is achieved. It does not
distinguish between highly positive, positive, nega-
tive, highly negative or objective meaning of a word.
In this paper, we propose a strategy to built a coarse-
grained sense representation. Firstly, a topic signa-
tures for all senses into WordNet is built and the
topic signatures for coarse-grained senses is the sum
of the topic signatures of the corresponding fine-
grained senses that was grouped.

We explain coarse-grained sense representation
using the following example:

Let us consider the adjective “sad”. This adjec-
tive has three word senses into WordNet 2.0

sad#a#1 – experiencing or showing sorrow or unhappiness

sad#a#2 – of things that make you feel sad

sad#a#3 – bad; unfortunate

Firstly the topic signature are built for each word
sense:

vector1 = topicSignature(sad#a#1)
vector2 = topicSignature(sad#a#2)

vector3 = topicSignature(sad#a#3)

The senses are classified using equation (1)(in
Section 2.2), sense 1 and 3 were considered as
highly negative, whereas the sense 2 is objective.
The topic signature associated to highly negative
coarse-grained sense is computed as:

topicSignature(sad#a#HN) = sum(vector1+ vector3)

and objective coarse-grained sense is kept as
vector2

topicSignature(sad#a#O) = vector2

2.4 Rule-based Sentiment Classifier

We use a rule-based classifier to classify tweets into
positive, negative or neutral. A polarity value is as-

signed to each word, based on equation 2, after these
were disambiguated. It is necessary to clarify that
emotion words that replaced emoticons in the pre-
processing phase, are not disambiguated. Instead,
we give a prior polarity value equal to 4 if emotion
word is “happy” and -4 in case that emotion word is
“sad”. It is important to mention that the polarity of
a word is forced into the opposite class if it is pre-
ceded by a valence shifter (obtained from the Negate
category in GI (Stone et al., 1966)).

polarity(w) =



4
−4

2
−2

0

i f w is disambiguated as HP
i f w is disambiguated as HN
i f w is disambiguated as P
i f w is disambiguated as N
i f w is disambiguated as O

(2)

The polarity of the tweet is determined from the
scores of positive and negative words it contains. To
sum up, for each tweet the overall positive (PosS(t))
value and overall negative value (NegS(t)) , are com-
puted as:

PosS(t) = ∑
wi∈WP

polarity(wi) (3)

WP: Words disambiguated as highly positive or
positive in tweet t

NegS(t) = ∑
wi∈WN

polarity(wi) (4)

WN : Words disambiguated as highly negative or
negative in tweet t

If PosS(t) is greater than NegS(t) then the tweet
is considered as positive. On the contrary, if PosS(t)
is less than NegS(t) the tweet is negative. Finally, if
PosS(t) is equal to NegS(t) the tweet is considered
as neutral.

2.5 A Tweet Sentiment Classification Example

The general operation of the algorithm is illustrated
in the following example:

Let us consider the following tweet:

@JoeyMarchant: I really love Jennifer Aniston :-)
#loving, she is very cooooollll and sexy. I’m married to
her... LOL, http://t.co/2RShsRNSDW

504



After applying the preprocessing phase, we
obtain the following normalized text:

I really love Jennifer Aniston “happy” loving, she
is very cooll and sexy. I’m married to her... lots of laughs.

When the text is lemmatized and stopwords are
removed, we obtain the following bag of words (for
each word we show: lemma and part-of-speech n-
noun, v-verb, a-adjective, r-adverb and u-unknown):

really#r love#v jennifer#a aniston#n “happy”#a
loving#a cooll#a sexy#a marry#v lot#n laugh#n.

After contextual word polarity detection, we
obtain the following result (for each word we
shown lemma, part-of-speech and sentiment sense,
HP-highly positive, HN-highly negative, P-positive,
N-negative and O-objective).

really#r#P love#v#P jennifer#a#O aniston#n#O
“happy”#a loving#a#HP cooll#a#O sexy#a#P
marry#v#O lot#n#O laugh#n#P

Once that all words were disambiguated we
obtained their polarities using the equation 2 intro-
duced in section 2.4. We show the polarities values
assigned to each word, in Table 2.

Word POS Sentiment Polarity
really r P 2
love v P 2

jennifer a O 0
aniston n O 0
“happy” a - 4
loving a HP 4
cooll a O 0
sexy a P 2

marry a O 0
lot n O 0

laugh n P 2

Table 2: Polarity assigned to each word

Note that the word “happy” has not been dis-
ambiguated, its polarity is assigned according
to the emoticon associated in the original tweet.

Afterward we compute overall positive and negative
polarity value:

NegS(t) = 0

PosS(t) = 2+2+4+4+2+2 = 16

Therefore, the tweet t is classified as positive.

3 Results

This section presents the evaluation of our system in
the context of SemEval 2013 Task No.2 Subtask B
(Sentiment Analysis in Twitter). For evaluating the
participant’s systems two unlabeled datasets were
provided, one composed of Twitter messages and
another of SMS messages. For each dataset two
runs can be submitted, the first (constrained), the
system can only be used the provided training data
and other resources such as lexicons. In the second
(unconstrained), the system can use additional data
for training. Our runs are considered as constrained
because SSA-UO only use lexical resources for sen-
timent classification.

Runs Dataset F1 all runs Rank
twitter-1 Twitter 50.17 33(48)

sms-1 SMS 44.39 33 (42)

Table 3: SSA-UO results in polarity classification, all
runs summited

Runs Dataset F1 constrained runs Rank
twitter-1 Twitter 50.17 25 (35)

sms-1 SMS 44.39 22 (28)

Table 4: SSA-UO results in polarity classification, con-
strained runs summited

In Table 3 we summarize the results obtained by
SSA-UO system. As may be observed average F1
measure for Twitter dataset is the 50.17 and 44.39
for the SMS dataset. A total of 48 runs were sub-
mitted by all systems participant’s in Twitter and 42
for SMS dataset. Our runs were ranked 33th for both
datasets.

In Table 4 we compare our results with those runs
that can be considered as constrained. A total of 35
runs for Twitter and 28 for SMS were submitted ,

505



ours runs were ranked in 25th and 22th respectively.
It’s worth mentioning that, the results obtained can
be considered satisfactory, considering the complex-
ity of the task and that our system is unsupervised.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we have described the SSA-UO system
for Twitter Sentiment Analysis Task at SemEval-
2013. This knowledge driven system relies on unsu-
pervised coarse-grained WSD to obtain the contex-
tual word polarity. We used a rule-based classifier
for determining the polarity of a tweet. The experi-
mental results show that our proposal is accurate for
Twitter sentiment analysis considering that our sys-
tem does not use any corpus for training.

Acknowledgments

This research work has been partially funded by
the Spanish Government through the project TEXT-
MESS 2.0 (TIN2009-13391-C04), “Análisis de Ten-
dencias Mediante Técnicas de Opinión Semántica”
(TIN2012-38536-C03-03) and “Técnicas de Decon-
strucción en la Tecnologı́as del Lenguaje Humano”
(TIN2012-31224); and by the Valencian Govern-
ment through the project PROMETEO (PROME-
TEO/2009/199).

References

Balahur Alexandra, Steinberger Ralf, Goot Erik van der,
Pouliquen Bruno, and Kabadjov Mijail. 2009. Opin-
ion mining on newspaper quotations. In Proceed-
ings of the 2009 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint
Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent
Technology - Volume 03, WI-IAT ’09, pages 523–526,
Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer Society.

Henry Anaya-Sánchez, Aurora Pons-Porrata, and Rafael
Berlanga-Llavori. 2006. Word sense disambiguation
based on word sense clustering. In Proceedings of
the 2nd international joint conference, and Proceed-
ings of the 10th Ibero-American Conference on AI 18th
Brazilian conference on Advances in Artificial Intelli-
gence, IBERAMIA-SBIA’06, pages 472–481, Berlin,
Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexi-
cal resource for sentiment analysis and opinion min-
ing. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid
Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk,

Stelios Piperidis, Mike Rosner, and Daniel Tapias, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the Seventh International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
’10), Valletta, Malta, may. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiword-
net: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion
mining. In In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06, pages
417–422.

R. Gil-Garcı́a, J. M. Badı́a-Contelles, and A. Pons-
Porrata. 2003. Extended Star Clustering Algorithm.
In CIARP 2003, LNCS, vol. 2905, pages 480–487.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen R. McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In Proceedings of the eighth conference on Eu-
ropean chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, EACL ’97, pages 174–181, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jaap Kamps and Maarten Marx. 2002. Words with atti-
tude. In First International WordNet conference.

Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 2000. The automated
acquisition of topic signatures for text summarization.
In Proceedings of the 18th conference on Computa-
tional linguistics - Volume 1, COLING ’00, pages 495–
501, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM, 38:39–41.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? sentiment classification using ma-
chine learning techniques. In Proceeding of Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 79–
86.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tag-
ging using decision trees.

Philip J. Stone, Dexter C. Dunphy, Marshall S. Smith,
and Daniel M. Ogilvie. 1966. The General Inquirer:
A Computer Approach to Content Analysis. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Peter Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? se-
mantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifica-
tion of reviews. pages 417–424.

Michael Wiegand, Alexandra Balahur, Benjamin Roth,
Dietrich Klakow, and Andrés Montoyo. 2010. A sur-
vey on the role of negation in sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Spec-
ulation in Natural Language Processing, NeSp-NLP
’10, pages 60–68, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Rebecca Hwa. 2006.
Recognizing strong and weak opinion clauses. Com-
putational Intelligence, 22:73–99.

506



Theresa Wilson, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Sara
Rosenthal, Veselin Stoyanov, and Alan Ritter. 2013.
SemEval-2013 task 2: Sentiment analysis in twitter.
In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation, SemEval ’13, June.

507


