










































Serendio: Simple and Practical lexicon based approach to Sentiment Analysis


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 543–548, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Serendio: Simple and Practical lexicon based approach to Sentiment
Analysis

Prabu Palanisamy, Vineet Yadav and Harsha Elchuri
Serendio Software Pvt Ltd

Guindy, Chennai 600032, India
{prabu, vineet, harsha}@serendio.com

Abstract

This paper describes the system developed by
the Serendio team for the SemEval-2013 Task
2 competition (Task A). We use a lexicon
based approach for discovering sentiments.
Our lexicon is built from the Serendio tax-
onomy. The Serendio taxonomy consists of
positive, negative, negation, stop words and
phrases. A typical tweet contains word varia-
tions, emoticons, hashtags etc. We use prepro-
cessing steps such as stemming, emoticon de-
tection and normalization, exaggerated word
shortening and hashtag detection. After the
preprocessing, the lexicon-based system clas-
sifies the tweets as positive or negative based
on the contextual sentiment orientation of the
words. Our system yields an F-score of 0.8004
on the test dataset.

1 Introduction

Social media websites like Twitter, Facebook etc.
are a major hub for users to express their opinions
online. On these social media sites, users post com-
ments and opinions on various topics. Hence these
sites become rich sources of information to mine for
opinions and analyze user behavior and provide in-
sights for:

• User behavior

• Product feedback

• User intentions

• Lead generation

Businesses spend an enormous amount of time
and money to understand their customer opinions
about their products and services. Thus Sentiment
Analysis has become a hot research area since 2002.
Sentiment Analysis is used to determine sentiments,
emotions and attitudes of the user. The text used for
analysis can range from big document (e.g. Product
reviews from Amazon, blogs) to small status mes-
sage (e.g. Tweets, Facebook comments). In this pa-
per, we confine to Twitter data i.e classify a tweet to
have a positive, negative or neutral sentiment.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we study relevant previous work on Sen-
timent Analysis on Twitter data. In Section 3, we
describe each processing step of our approach in de-
tail. In Section 4, we experiment with the training
and the lexicon. In Section 5, we report and evaluate
the final result obtained from the test data published
by the SemEval team. In Section 6, we present our
conclusions and outline our future work.

2 Related Work

Sentiment Analysis on raw text is a well known
problem. The Liu (2012) book covers the entire
field of Sentiment Analysis. Sentiment Analysis can
be done using Machine learning or a Lexicon-based
approach. We use our lexicon based approach in our
study. The rest of the paper is confined to Lexicon
based approach

2.1 Lexicon based approach

The lexicon based approach is based on the assump-
tion that the contextual sentiment orientation is the

543



sum of the sentiment orientation of each word or
phrase. Turney (2002) identifies sentiments based
on the semantic orientation of reviews. (Taboada et
al., 2011; Melville et al., 2011; Ding et al., 2008)
use lexicon based approach to extract sentiments.

Sentiment Analysis on microblogs is more chal-
lenging compared to longer discourses like reviews.
Major challenges for microblog sentiment analysis
are short length status message, informal words,
word shortening, spelling variation and emoticons.
Sentiment Analysis on Twitter data have been re-
searched by (Bifet and Frank, 2010; Berming-
ham and Smeaton, 2010; Pak and Paroubek, 2010).
We use our lexicon based approach to extract sen-
timents. The open lexicon such as Sentiword-
net (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006; Baccianella et
al., 2010), Q-wordnet (Agerri and Garcı́a-Serrano,
2010), WordNet-Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti,
2004) are developed for supporting Sentiment Anal-
ysis. Studies have been made on preprocessing
tweets. Han and Baldwin (2011) used a classi-
fier to detect word variation and match the related
word. Kaufmann and Kalita (2010) gives the full
preprocessing approach to convert a tweet to normal
text. Sentiment Analysis on Twitter data is not con-
fined to raw text. Analyzing Emoticons have been
an interesting study. Go et al. (2009) used emoti-
cons to classify the tweets as positive or negative
and train standard classifiers such as Naive Bayes,
Maximum Entropy, and Support Vector Machines.
Hashtag may have some sentiment in it. Davidov
et al. (2010) used 50 hashtags and 15 emoticons as
sentiment labels for classification to allow diverse
sentiment types for the tweet. Negation and inten-
sifier play an important role in Sentiment Analysis.
Negation word can reverse the polarity, where as in-
tensifier increases sentiment strength. Taboada et
al. (2011) studied role of the intensifier and negation
in the lexicon based Sentiment Analysis. Wiegand
et al. (2010) survey the role of negation in Sentiment
Analysis.

3 Serendio Approach

Serendio sentiment engine extracts and analyzes
sentiments for a given product and feature set.
Serendio sentiment engine currently works for eight
different domains such as banking, tablets, smart-

phones, televisions, apparel, gaming, automobiles
and e-readers. In this section, we will introduce
Serendio’s Sentiment engine and the enhancements
that were made to handle the SemEval Task 2, Task
A - Contextual Polarity Disambiguation (Wilson et
al., 2013). The main steps of our approach are ex-
plained in detail in the subsections.

3.1 Creation of lexicon

The lexicon can be created either manually
(Taboada et al., 2011; Tong et al., 2001) or expand-
ing automatically from a seed of words (Kanayama
et al., 2006; Kaji and Kitsuregawa, 2007; Turney,
2002; Turney and Littman, 2003). In our study, the
lexicon is manually created. It is a one time process.
Two types of lexicons are created.

Common lexicon: This contains data that would
have the same semantic meaning or sense across dif-
ferent domains and categories.

• Common or default sentiment words. Posi-
tive and Negative sentiment words that have the
same sentiment value or sense across different
domains. For e.g. sentiment word “good” al-
ways represents a positive sentiment and it is
independent of any category. Positive or Nega-
tive sentiment words have a sentiment score of
+1 or -1 to indicate the respective polarity.

• Negation Words. Negation words are the
words which reverse the polarity of sentiment.
For example, “The battery life is not good” has
negative sentiment

• Blind Negation Words. In the sentence, “The
T.V needs a better remote”, “needs” is a blind
negation word. Blind negation words operate
at a sentence level and points out the absence
or presence of some sense that is not desired in
a product feature.

• Split words. Split words are the words used
for splitting sentences into clauses. The split
words list consists of conjunctions and punc-
tuation marks. For example the complex sen-
tence, “Camera is good but the battery is bad”
is split into two clauses “Camera is good” and
“Battery is bad”.

544



Category specific lexicon: Category specific lex-
icon contains the (1) Product Catalog which iden-
tifies all the products that we are interested in. (2)
Feature Catalog which is a list of attributes that the
product has. This enables the Serendio engine to do
analysis at the feature level. (3) Sentiment words
(positive and negative) that are specific to the cate-
gory. For example, for a category such as Televi-
sions, a product would be Samsung TV. The feature
would be LCD screen and the word “glare” would
be the category specific negative sentiment word.

The semeval task 2 contains Twitter data that can-
not be pinned to any specific category. So for this
task, only the common lexicon was used.

3.2 Preprocessing

A typical tweet contains word variations, emoticons,
hashtags etc. The objective of the preprocessing step
is to normalize the text into an appropriate form to
extract the sentiments. Below are the preprocessing
steps used.

• POS Tagging. POS Tagger gives part of
speech tag associated with words. POS tagging
is done using NLTK (Bird, 2006).

• Stemming. Stemmer gives the stem word.
Serendio lexicon contains stem words only. So
non stem words are stemmed and replaced with
stem words. For example, words like ‘loved‘,
‘loves‘, ‘loving‘, ‘love‘ are replaced with ‘lov‘.
This would aid the engine to do the word match
from the text to the lexicon. Stemming is done
using NLTK

• Exaggerated word shortening. Words which
have same letter more than two times and not
present in the lexicon are reduced to the word
with the repeating letter occurring just once
(Kouloumpis et al., 2011). For example, the
exaggerated word “NOOOOOO” is reduced to
“NO”.

• Emoticon detection. Emoticon has some sen-
timent associated with it. Twitter NLP (Ritter
et. al , 2011; Ritter et. al , 2012) is used to
extract emoticons along with the sentiments in
the Twitter data.

• Hashtag detection. The hashtag is a topic or
a keyword that is marked with a tweet. Hash-
tag is a phrase starting with # with no space
between them. Hashtags are identified and sen-
timents are extracted from them.

3.3 Sentiment calculation

Sentiment calculation is the aggregation of the sum
of the sentiment bearing entities of the tweet. Enti-
ties can be text, emoticons and hashtags. The sen-
timent calculation algorithm is shown in Algorithm
1. The sentiment calculation is based on a set of
heuristics built on the sentiment orientation of the
words. Blind negation words are extracted from the
sentence. The presence of the blind negation words
indicate negative sentiment. If the sentence contains
a blind negation word then other steps are skipped
and sentiment is blindly assigned as negative. Next,
sentiment words are extracted. The sentiment po-
larity of the word can be changed due to negation
words that occur in proximity (2 word distance).
If a sentiment word is not present, then the senti-
ment negation word becomes additive to the neg-
ative sentiment list. The sentence “I can not deal
it” has the negation word “not” and it does not con-
tain a sentiment word. So the negation word just
gets added to the negative sentiment word. Senti-
ments from emoticons are extracted with the help
of Twitter NLP. Sentiment words within the hash-
tag are extracted by python regex functions. For ex-
ample, from the hashtag “#ihateu”, the word “hate”
is extracted as a sentiment word. The sentiment of
the tweet is aggregated as the sum of the sentiments
from all the entities.

4 Experimental Data

The training data consist of real time tweets. 9451
subjective expressions are marked from all the
tweets and are labeled as positive or negative or neu-
tral. The average number of words of the marked
subjective expression is around 2 to 3 words. The
common dictionary that is constructed is shown in
Table 2. The Serendio sentiment engine is run on
the training data set. We identify the correct senti-
ment of the the phrases which are misclassified as
neutral, we include the phrases in our lexicon with
their appropriate sentiments.

545



Algorithm 1: Sentiment Calculation
Data: Preprocessed Twitter data
Result: Output: Positive, Negative, Neutral
Find the list of sentiment words SentiList, its
position in the sentence;
Find the list of sentiment negation words
SentiNegat, its position in the sentence;
Find the list of blind negation words
BlindNegat, its position in the sentence;
if BlindNegat then

return negativity;
else

if SentiList and SentiNegat then
foreach word in the SentiList do

if word is atmost the distance of 2
from SentiNegat then

Revert the polarity of the word;
end

end
else

if SentiNegat then
Add the SentiNegat to the
negative SentiList;

end
end

end
SentiSum=0;
foreach word in the SentiList do

SentiSum=SentiSum+sentiment of
word;

end
if Hashtag is present then

Find all the sentiment words in hash tag
using regex matching and add them to
SentiList

end
if Emoticon is present then

Find sentiment of the emoticon and add
emoticon,it’s sentiment to SentiList

end
SentiType=“neutral”;
if SentiSum > 0 then

SentiType=“positive”;
end
if SentiSum < 0 then

SentiType=“negative”;
end
return SentiType;

Table 1: Training Data

Sentiment type Expression count
Positive 5865
Negative 3120
Neutral 466

Table 2: Lexicon Details

Data type Count
Blind Negation word 7
Negation 13
Positive sentiment word 1260
Negative sentiment word 1703
Split word 16

5 Result and Discussion

Our sentiment engine performed reasonably well.
Please see Table 3 for Precision and Recall measure-
ments. The recall rates are lower because of our lexi-
cons lack of coverage of all the sentiment words. In-
formal language of tweets posed another challenge
for identifying negative sentiments. For example,
swear words such as “sh*t” and “f**k” are generally
considered as negative sentiment words. Phrases
such as “This sh*t is good” and “F**king awesome”
were identified as negative sentiments when in fact
they were expressing positive sentiments.

Table 3: Results

POSITIVE NEGATIVE
PRECISION 0.9361 0.8884
RECALL 0.7132 0.7912

The Serendio lexicon that we used has sentiment
words with a sentiment attached to it. By integrat-
ing with a lexical source such as Sentiwordnet, we
feel we could get a more nuanced word sense dis-
ambiguation. For example, the word “good” is con-
sidered to have positive polarity. According to Sen-
tiwordnet 3.0, good as an adjective has 21 different
senses with different sentiments. For example, the
sentiment word “good” in the phrase “A good mile
from here” gives an objective sense, not in a positive
sense.

546



6 Conclusion

In this paper we presented our system that we used
for the SemEval-2013 Task 2 for doing Sentiment
Analysis for Twitter data. We got an F-score of
0.8004 on the test data set.

We presented a lexicon based method for Senti-
ment Analysis with Twitter data. We provided prac-
tical approaches to identifying and extracting sen-
timents from emoticons and hashtags. We also pro-
vided a method to convert non-grammatical words to
grammatical words and normalize non-root to root
words to extract sentiments.

A lexicon based approach is a simple, viable and
practical approach to Sentiment Analysis of Twitter
data without a need for training. A Lexicon based
approach is as good as the lexicon it uses. To achieve
better results, word sense disambiguation should be
combined with the existing lexicon approach.

7 Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the organizers of SemEval
2013. We also would like to express our gratitude to
the various reviewers for their encouragement and
positive feedback.

References
Rodrigo Agerri and Ana Garcı́a-Serrano. 2010. Q-

WordNet: Extracting polarity from WordNet senses.
Seventh Conference on International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Malta.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexi-
cal resource for sentiment analysis and opinion min-
ing. Proceedings of the 7th conference on Interna-
tional Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC10),
Valletta, Malta, May.

Adam Bermingham and Alan F Smeaton. 2010. Clas-
sifying sentiment in microblogs: is brevity an advan-
tage? Proceedings of the 19th ACM international con-
ference on Information and knowledge management
1833–1836, ACM.

Albert Bifet and Eibe Frank. 2010. Sentiment knowl-
edge discovery in twitter streaming data. Discovery
Science 1–14, Springer.

Steven Bird. 2006. NLTK: the natural language toolkit.
Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on Interactive pre-
sentation sessions 69–72, Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence and David M Pennock.
2003. Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction
and semantic classification of product reviews. Pro-
ceedings of the 12th international conference on World
Wide Web 519–528, ACM.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using twitter hashtags
and smileys. Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics 241 –249,
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xiaowen Ding, Bing Liu and Philip S Yu. 2008. A
holistic lexicon-based approach to opinion mining.
Proceedings of the international conference on Web
search and web data mining 231–240, ACM.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiword-
net: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion
mining. Proceedings of LREC Volume 6, 417–422.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani and Lei Huang. 2009. Twit-
ter sentiment classification using distant supervision.
CS224N Project Report, Stanford 1–12.

Bo Han and Timothy Baldwin. 2011. Lexical normal-
isation of short text messages: Makn sens a# twitter.
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies Volume 1 , 368–378.

Nobuhiro Kaji and Masaru Kitsuregawa. 2007. Building
lexicon for sentiment analysis from massive collection
of HTML documents. Proceedings of the joint confer-
ence on empirical methods in natural language pro-
cessing and computational natural language learning
(EMNLP-CoNLL) 1075–1083, Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Hiroshi Kanayama and Tetsuya Nasukawa. 2006. Fully
automatic lexicon expansion for domain-oriented sen-
timent analysis. Proceedings of the 2006 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing 355–363,Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Max Kaufmann and Jugal Kalita. 2010. Syntactic nor-
malization of Twitter messages. International Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing Kharagpur,
India.

Efthymios Kouloumpis, Theresa Wilson and Johanna
Moore. 2011. Twitter sentiment analysis: The good
the bad and the omg. Proceedings of the Fifth Interna-
tional AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media
538–541.

Bing Liu. 2008 Sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies,
1–167,Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

Prem Melville, Wojciech Gryc and Richard D Lawrence.
2011. Sentiment analysis of blogs by combining lex-
ical knowledge with text classification. Proceedings

547



of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 1275–1284,
ACM.

Alexander Pak and Patrick Paroubek. 2010. Twitter as
a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
Proceedings of LREC, Volume 2010.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Foundations and trends in infor-
mation retrieval Volume 2 number 1-2, 1–135, Now
Publishers Inc.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: sentiment classification using ma-
chine learning techniques. Proceedings of the ACL-02
conference on Empirical methods in natural language
processing Volume 10, 79–86, Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe and Theresa Wilson. 2003.
Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern
bootstrapping. Proceedings of the seventh conference
on Natural language learning at HLT-NAACL 2003-
Volume 4 25–32, Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Alan Ritter, Sam Clark, Mausam and Oren Etzioni. 2011.
Named Entity Recognition in Tweets: An Experimen-
tal Study. EMNLP.

Alan Ritter, Mausam, Oren Etzioni, Sam Clark. 2012.
Open Domain Event Extraction from Twitter. KDD.

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004.
WordNet-Affect: an affective extension of WordNet.
Proceedings of LREC 1083–1086.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kimberly
Voll and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based meth-
ods for sentiment analysis. Computational linguistics,
volume 37, number2, 267–307, MIT Press.

Richard M Tong 2001. An operational system for detect-
ing and tracking opinions in on-line discussions. In
Working Notes of the ACM SIGIR 2001 Workshop on
Operational Text Classification 1–6,New York, NY.

Peter Turney and Michael Littman. 2003. Measuring
praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orientation
from association. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems 21(4):315–346.

Peter Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?: se-
mantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifica-
tion of reviews. Proceedings of the 40th annual meet-
ing on association for computational linguistics, 417–
424, Association for Computational Linguistics.

Michael Wiegand, Alexandra Balahur, Benjamin Roth,
Dietrich Klakow, Andrés Montoyo. 2010. A survey
on the role of negation in sentiment analysis. Pro-
ceedings of the workshop on negation and speculation
in natural language processing 60–68, Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Theresa Wilson, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Alan
Ritter, Sara Rosenthal and Veselin Stoyonov. 2013.
SemEval-2013 Task 2: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter.
Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation Association for Computation Lin-
guistics.

548


