










































Columbia NLP: Sentiment Detection of Subjective Phrases in Social Media


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 478–482, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Columbia NLP: Sentiment Detection of Subjective Phrases in Social Media

Sara Rosenthal
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027, USA
sara@cs.columbia.edu

Kathleen McKeown
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027, USA

kathy@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

We present a supervised sentiment detection
system that classifies the polarity of subjec-
tive phrases as positive, negative, or neutral. It
is tailored towards online genres, specifically
Twitter, through the inclusion of dictionaries
developed to capture vocabulary used in on-
line conversations (e.g., slang and emoticons)
as well as stylistic features common to social
media. We show how to incorporate these
new features within a state of the art system
and evaluate it on subtask A in SemEval-2013
Task 2: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter.

1 Introduction

People use social media to write openly about their
personal experiences, likes and dislikes. The follow-
ing sentence from Twitter is a typical example: “To-
morrow I’m coming back from Barcelona...I don’t
want! :(((”. The ability to detect the sentiment ex-
pressed in social media can be useful for understand-
ing what people think about the restaurants they
visit, the political viewpoints of the day, and the
products they buy. These sentiments can be used
to provided targeted advertising, automatically gen-
erate reviews, and make various predictions, such as
political outcomes.

In this paper we develop a sentiment detection al-
gorithm for social media that classifies the polarity
of sentence phrases as positive, negative, or neutral
and test its performance in Twitter through the par-
ticipation in the expression level task (subtask A)
of the SemEval-2013 Task 2: Sentiment Analysis
in Twitter (Wilson et al., 2013) which the authors

helped organize. To do so, we build on previous
work on sentiment detection algorithms for the more
formal news genre, notably the work of Agarwal et
al (2009), but adapt it for the language of social me-
dia, in particular Twitter. We show that exploiting
lexical-stylistic features and dictionaries geared to-
ward social media are useful in detecting sentiment.

In this rest of this paper, we discuss related work,
including the state of the art sentiment system (Agar-
wal et al., 2009) our method is based on, the lexicons
we used, our method, and experiments and results.

2 Related Work

Several recent papers have explored sentiment anal-
ysis in Twitter. Go et al (2009) and Pak and
Paroubek (2010) classify the sentiment of tweets
containing emoticons using n-grams and POS. Bar-
bosa and Feng (2010) detect sentiment using a po-
larity dictionary that includes web vocabulary and
tweet-specific social media features. Bermingham
and Smeaton (2010) compare polarity detection in
twitter to blogs and movie reviews using lexical fea-
tures. Agarwal et al (2011) perform polarity senti-
ment detection on the entire tweet using features that
are somewhat similar to ours: the DAL, lexical fea-
tures (e.g. POS and n-grams), social media features
(e.g. slang and hashtags) and tree kernel features. In
contrast to this related work, our approach is geared
towards predicting sentiment is at the phrase level as
opposed to the tweet level.

3 Lexicons

Several lexicons are used in our system. We use the
DAL and expand it with WordNet, as it was used in

478



Corpus DAL
NNP
(Post
DAL)

Word
Length-
ening

WordNet Wiktionary Emoticons Punctuation& Numbers
Not
Covered

Twitter - Train 42.9% 19.2% 1.4% 10.2% 12.7% 0.3% 1.5% 11.7%
Twitter - Dev 57.3% 13.8% 1.1% 7.1% 12.2% 0.4% 2.7% 5.4%
Twitter - Test 49.9% 15.6% 1.4% 9.6% 12.1% 0.5% 1.6% 9.3%
SMS - Test 60.1% 3.6% 0.6% 7.9% 14.7% 0.6% 1.9% 10.3%

Table 1: Coverage for each of the lexicons in the training and test corpora’s.

the original work (Agarwal et al., 2009), and expand
it further to use Wiktionary and an emoticon lexicon.
We consider proper nouns that are not in the DAL to
be objective. We also shorten words that are length-
ened to see if we can find the shortened version in
the lexicons (e.g. sweeeet→ sweet). The coverage
of the lexicons for each corpus is shown in Table 1.

3.1 DAL

The Dictionary of Affect and Language (DAL)
(Whissel, 1989) is an English language dictionary
of 8742 words built to measure the emotional mean-
ing of texts. In addition to using newswire, it was
also built from individual sources such as interviews
on abuse, students’ retelling of a story, and adoles-
cent’s descriptions of emotions. It therefore covers a
broad set of words. Each word is given three scores
(pleasantness - also called evaluation (ee), active-
ness (aa), and imagery (ii)) on a scale of 1 (low)
to 3 (high). We compute the polarity of a chunk in
the same manner as the original work (Agarwal et
al., 2009), using the sum of the AE Space Score’s
(|
√

ee2 + aa2|) of each word within the chunk.

3.2 WordNet

The DAL does cover a broad set of words, but we
will still often encounter words that are not included
in the dictionary. Any word that is not in the DAL
and is not a proper noun is accessed in WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998) 1 and, if it exists, the DAL scores
of the synonyms of its first sense are used in its
place. In addition to the original approach, if there
are no synonyms we look at the hypernym. We then
compute the average scores (ee, aa, and ii) of all the
words and use that as the score for the word.

1We cannot use SentiWordNet because we are interested in
the DAL scores

3.3 Wiktionary
We use Wiktionary, an online dictionary, to supple-
ment the common words that are not found in Word-
Net and the DAL. We first examine all “form of” re-
lationships for the word such as “doesnt” is a “mis-
spelling of” “doesn’t”, and ‘tonite” is an “alternate
form of” “tonight”. If no “form of” relationships ex-
ist, we take all the words in the definitions that have
their own Wiktionary page and look up the scores
for each word in the DAL. (e.g., the verb definition
for LOL (laugh out loud) in Wiktionary is “To laugh
out loud” with “laugh” having its own Wiktionary
definition; it is therefore looked up in the DAL and
the score for “laugh” is used for “LOL”.) We then
compute the average scores (ee, aa, and ii) of all the
words and use that as the score for the word.

3.4 Emoticon Dictionary
emoticon :) :D <3 :( ;)
definition happy laughter love sad wink

Table 2: Popular emoticons and their definitions

We created a simple lexicon to map common
emoticons to a definition in the DAL. We looked at
over 1000 emoticons gathered from several lists on
the internet2 and computed their frequencies within
a LiveJournal blog corpus. (In the future we would
like to use an external Twitter corpus). We kept
the 192 emoticons that appeared at least once and
mapped each emoticon to a single word definition.
The top 5 emoticons and their definitions are shown
in Table 2. When an emoticon is found in a tweet we
look up its definition in the DAL.

4 Methods

We run our data through several pre-processing steps
to preserve emoticons and expand contractions. We

2www.chatropolis.com, www.piology.org, en.wikipedia.org

479



General Social Media
Feature Example Feature Example
Capital Words Hello Emoticons :)
Out of Vocabulary duh Acronyms LOL
Punctuation . Repeated Questions ???
Repeated Punctuation #@. Exclamation Points !
Punctuation Count 5 Repeated Exclamations !!!!
Question Marks ? Word Lengthening sweeeet
Ellipses ... All Caps HAHA
Avg Word Length 5 Links/Images www.url.com

Table 3: List of lexical-stylistic features and examples.

then pre-process the sentences to add Part-of-Speech
tags (POS) and chunk the sentences using the CRF
tagger and chunker (Phan, 2006a; Phan, 2006b).
The chunker uses three labels, ‘B’ (beginning), ‘I’
(in), and ‘O’ (out). The ‘O’ label tends to be ap-
plied to punctuation which one typically wants to
ignore. However, in this context, punctation can be
very important (e.g. exclamation points, and emoti-
cons). Therefore, we append words/phrases tagged
as O to the prior B-I chunk.

We apply the dictionaries to the preprocessed sen-
tences to generate lexical, syntactic, and stylistic
features. All sets of features were reduced using chi-
square in Weka (Hall et al., 2009).

4.1 Lexical and Syntactic Features

We include POS tags and the top 500 n-gram fea-
tures(Agarwal et al., 2009). We experimented with
different amounts of n-grams and found that more
than 500 n-grams reduced performance.

The DAL and other dictionaries are used along
with a negation state machine(Agarwal et al., 2009)
to determine the polarity for each word in the sen-
tence. We include all the features described in the
original system (Agarwal et al., 2009).

4.2 Lexical-Stylistic Features

We include several lexical-stylistic features (see Ta-
ble 3) that can occur in all datasets. We divide these
features into two groups, general: ones that are
common across online and traditional genres, and
social media: one that are far more common in on-
line genres. Examples of general style features are
exclamation points and ellipses. Examples of social
media style features are emoticons and word length-
ening. Word lengthening is a common phenomenon

Figure 1: Percentage of lexical-stylistic features that are
negative (top), neutral (middle), and positive (bottom) in
the Twitter training corpus.

in social media where letters are repeated to indi-
cate emphasis (e.g. sweeeet). It is particularly com-
mon in opinionated words (Brody and Diakopoulos,
2011). The count values of each feature was normal-
ized by the number of words in the phrase.

The percentage of lexical-stylistic features that
are positive/negative/neutral is shown in Figure 1.
For example, emoticons tend to indicate a positive
phrase in Twitter. Each stylistic feature accounts for
less than 2% of the sentence but at least one of the
stylistic features exists in 61% of the Tweets.

We also computed the most frequent emoticons
(<3, :D), acronyms (lol), and punctuation symbols
(#) within a subset of the Twitter training set and
included those as additional features.

5 Experiments and Results

This task was evaluated on the Twitter dataset pro-
vided by Semeval-2013 Task 2, subtask A, which the
authors helped organize. Therefore, a large portion
of time was spent on creating the dataset.

480



Experiment Twitter SMS
Dev Test

Majority 36.3 38.1 31.5
Just DAL 70.1 72.3 67.1
WordNet 72.2 73.6 67.7
Wiktionary 72.8 73.7 68.7
Style 71.5 73.7 69.7
n-grams 75.2 75.7 72.5
WordNet+Style 73.2 74.6 70.1
Dictionaries+Style 74.0 75.0 70.2
Dictionaries+Style+n-grams 75.8 77.6 73.3

Table 4: Experiments using the Twitter corpus. Results
are shown using average F-measure of the positive and
negative class. All experiments include the DAL. The
dictionaries refer to WordNet, Wiktionary, and Emoticon.
Style refers to Lexical-Stylistic features. All results ex-
ceed the majority baseline significantly.

We ran all of our experiments in Weka (Hall et
al., 2009) using Logistic Regression. We also exper-
imented with other learning methods but found that
this worked best. All results are shown using the av-
erage F-measure of the positive and negative class.

We tuned our system for Semeval-2013 Task 2,
subtask A, using the provided development set and
ran it on the provided Twitter and SMS test data.
Our results are shown in Table 4 with all results
being statistically significant over a majority base-
line. We also use the DAL as a baseline to in-
dicate how useful lexical-stylistic features (specifi-
cally those geared towards social media) and the dic-
tionaries are in improving the performance of sen-
timent detection of phrases in online genres in con-
trast to using just the DAL. The results that are statis-
tically significant (computed using the Wilcoxon’s
test, p ≤ .02) shown in bold. Our best results for
each dataset include all features with an average F-
measure of 77.6% and 73.3% for the Twitter and
SMS test sets respectively resulting in a significant
improvement of more than 5% for each test set over
the DAL baseline.

At the time of submission, we had not experi-
mented with n-grams, and therefore chose the Dic-
tionaries+Style system as our final version for the
official run resulting in a rank of 12/22 (75% F-
measure) for Twitter and 13/19 (70.2% F-measure)
for SMS. Our rank with the best system, which in-
cludes n-grams, would remain the same for Twitter,
but bring our rank up to 10/19 for SMS.

We looked more closely at the impact of our new
features and as one would expect, feature selection
found the general and social media style features
(e.g. emoticons, :(, lol, word lengthening) to be use-
ful in Twitter and SMS data. Using additional online
dictionaries is useful in Twitter and SMS, which is
understandable because they both have poor cover-
age in the DAL and WordNet. In all cases using
n-grams was the most useful which indicates that
context is most important. Using Dictionaries and
Style in addition to n-grams did provide a signifi-
cant improvement in the Twitter test set, but not in
the Twitter Dev and SMS test set.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We have explored whether social media features,
Wiktionary, and emoticon dictionaries positively im-
pact the accuracy of polarity detection in Twitter and
other online genres. We found that social media re-
lated features can be used to predict sentiment in
Twitter and SMS. In addition, Wiktionary helps im-
prove the word coverage and though it does not pro-
vide a significant improvement over WordNet, it can
be used in place of WordNet. On the other hand, we
found that using the DAL and n-grams alone does al-
most as well as the best system. This is encouraging
as it indicates that content is important and domain
independent sentiment systems can do a good job of
predicting sentiment in social media.

The results of the SMS messages dataset indicate
that even though the online genres are different, the
training data in one online genre can indeed be used
to predict results with reasonable accuracy in the
other online genre. These results show promise for
further work on domain adaptation across different
kinds of social media.

7 Acknowledgements

This research was partially funded by (a) the ODNI,
IARPA, through the U.S. Army Research Lab and
(b) the DARPA DEFT Program. All statements of
fact, opinion or conclusions contained herein are
those of the authors and should not be construed as
representing the official views, policies, or positions
of IARPA, the ODNI, the Department of Defense, or
the U.S. Government.

481



References

Apoorv Agarwal, Fadi Biadsy, and Kathleen R. Mcke-
own. 2009. Contextual phrase-level polarity analysis
using lexical affect scoring and syntactic n-grams. In
Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, EACL ’09, pages 24–32, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Apoorv Agarwal, Boyi Xie, Ilia Vovsha, Owen Rambow,
and Rebecca Passonneau. 2011. Sentiment analy-
sis of twitter data. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Language in Social Media (LSM 2011), pages 30–
38, Portland, Oregon, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Luciano Barbosa and Junlan Feng. 2010. Robust senti-
ment detection on twitter from biased and noisy data.
In COLING (Posters), pages 36–44.

Adam Bermingham and Alan F. Smeaton. 2010. Clas-
sifying sentiment in microblogs: is brevity an advan-
tage? In Jimmy Huang, Nick Koudas, Gareth J. F.
Jones, Xindong Wu, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, and
Aijun An, editors, CIKM, pages 1833–1836. ACM.

Samuel Brody and Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2011.
Cooooooooooooooollllllllllllll!!!!!!!!!!!!!! using word
lengthening to detect sentiment in microblogs. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 562–570,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK., July. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA ; London, May.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and Lei Huang. 2009. Twit-
ter sentiment classification using distant supervision.
Processing, pages 1–6.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11(1):10–18, November.

Alexander Pak and Patrick Paroubek. 2010. Twit-
ter as a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair),
Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani,
Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Rosner, and Daniel
Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, may. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Xuan-Hieu Phan. 2006a. Crfchunker: Crf english phrase
chunker.

Xuan-Hieu Phan. 2006b. Crftagger: Crf english phrase
tagger.

C. M. Whissel. 1989. The dictionary of affect in lan-
guage. In R. Plutchik and H. Kellerman, editors, Emo-
tion: theory research and experience, volume 4, Lon-
don. Acad. Press.

Theresa Wilson, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Alan
Ritter, Sara Rosenthal, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2013.
Semeval-2013 task 2: Sentiment analysis in twitter.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

482


