










































UEM-UC3M: An Ontology-based named entity recognition system for biomedical texts.


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 622–627, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

UEM-UC3M: An Ontology-based named entity recognition system for 

biomedical texts. 

 

 
Daniel Sanchez-Cisneros Fernando Aparicio Gali 

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid Universidad Europea de Madrid 
Avda. de la Universidad, 30 C/ Tajo, s/n. Urb. El Bosque 

28911 Leganés - Madrid - Spain 28670-Villaviciosa de Odón- (Madrid) 
dscisner@inf.uc3m.es fernando.aparicio@uem.es 

  
  

 

 
 

Abstract 

Drug name entity recognition focuses on 

identifying concepts appearing in the text that 

correspond to a chemical substance used in 

pharmacology for treatment, cure, prevention 

or diagnosis of diseases. This paper describes 

a system based on ontologies for identifying 

the chemical substances in biomedical text. 

The system achieves an F-1 measure of 0.529 

in the task.  

1 Introduction 

Named entity recognition (NER) involves 

processing text and identifying certain occurrences 

of words belonging to particular categories of 

named entities. In recent years, much attention has 

been paid to the problem of recognizing gene and 

protein mentions in biomedical abstracts for 

different purposes such as information extraction, 

relation extraction or information retrieval. In this 

case we focus on the pharmacological domain. 

Furthermore, some initiatives have promoted the 

evaluation of different systems of named entity 

recognition and relation extraction in the 

pharmacological domain. This is the case of 

Semeval 2013: Recognition and classification of 

drug names task
1
 (Segura-Bedmar et al., 2013), 

where the system presented in this communication 

has been evaluated. 

                                                           
1 http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-

2013/task9/data/uploads/task-9.1-drug-ner.pdf 

  Following the annotation guidelines of the task, a 

drug is a substance that is used in the treatment, 

cure, prevention or diagnosis of disease. Moreover, 

each drug name entity can be classified in four 

different types: drug, brand, drug_n and group. 

Our system uses biomedical ontologies and 

external resources (containing biomedical 

information) as input to determine whether we are 

treating a drug name entity or not.  

  The resource integration seems to represent an 

improvement since the knowledge available for 

identifying entities is higher. Some biomedical 

resources such as Drugbank
2
, Kegg

3
, Pubchem

4
 or 

Drugs.com
5
 focus on providing a compound of 

information collected from different sources.  

  Section 2 exposes some related work in the field 

of NER. In section 3 we describe the system used 

for identifying drug name entities. Section 4 

presents the results obtained by the system and a 

little comparison with other approaches. In section 

5 we outline some conclusions obtained and ideas 

for future work.  

 

2 Related work 

The field of NER has been very studied in recent 

years, and has been faced in many approaches. 

Since text structures are frequently used to 

characterize documents in text mining algorithms, 

there only stand out those based in terms and 

                                                           
2 http://www.drugbank.ca/ 
3 http://www.genome.jp/kegg/ 
4 http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
5 http://www.drugs.com/ 

622



Figure 1: Architecture of the system. 

concepts. This is due to that concept-based systems 

represent the semantic content with a smaller 

number of characteristics, opposite to the term-

based systems based on characters or words. 

Concept-based and term-based representations 

mainly differ in the implicit or explicit appearance, 

respectively, of the words identified in the 

document. This fact implies that concept-based 

extraction techniques are more complex, requiring 

the use of more advanced computational linguistics 

techniques and a greater dependence on knowledge 

domain. 

  One reference system that focuses on concept 

recognition in the biomedical domain is MetaMap 

(Aronson, 2001). MetaMap is a program developed 

by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) that 

uses the UMLS Metathesaurus for annotating the 

concepts in a given text. The program is designed 

to obtain the concept that best fits a particular 

phrase, finding its origin in an attempt to improve 

the retrieval of biomedical literature indexed in 

MEDLINE/PubMed. MetaMap is a program with 

many strengths, such as the power of linguistic 

analysis, the high performance setting possibilities 

and the variety of processing algorithms included. 

On the other hand, MetaMap shows some 

weaknesses such as the algorithms developing 

focused on English grammar texts, or high 

processing time lapse due to the complexity of the 

algorithms (not suitable for real-time systems). 

Metamap analysis time periods goes from less than 

a minute for short simple text to long hours for 

complex sentences. 

  Gimli (Campos et al., 2013) is an open source and 

high-performance solution for biomedical named 

entity recognition on scientific documents, 

supporting the automatic recognition of gene, 

proteins, DNA, RNA, and cell domain names. This 

tool implements a machine learning approach 

based on conditional random fields (CRF).  

  On the other hand, there exists a more recent 

concept extraction techniques based on ontologies. 

Ontologies link concept labels to their 

interpretations, ie specifications of their meanings 

including concept definitions and relations to other 

concepts. Apart from relations such as isa and 

part-of, generally present in almost any domain, 

ontologies also model domain-specific relations, eg 

clinically-associated-with and has-manifestation 

are specific associations for the biomedical 

domain. Therefore, ontologies reflect the structure 

of the domain and constrain the potential 

interpretations of terms. Thus, ontologies can 

provide rich concept knowledge of domain specific 

name entities. This is the case of Open Biomedical 

Annotator (OBA) (Jonquet et al., 2009), an 

impressive annotation system using ontologies, 

which provides online access for users and for 

other systems as a Web service. There are other 

examples of utilities for extracting concepts using 

ontologies (e.g. Terminizer (Hancock et al., 2009), 

Whatizit (Rebholz-Schuhmann et al., 2008) or 

Reflect (Pafilis et al., 2009)). However, the 

magnitude of ontologies and resources integrated 

under the OBA Web service is difficult to reach by 

other systems (Whetzel et al., 2011): in three years 

623



(from 2008 to 2011), they have increased from 72 

to 260 biomedical ontologies. 

  The concept recognition tool used by the OBA 

system -in order to find ontology concepts 

matching the terms extracted from texts- is called 

Mgrep. Although Mgrep is not a free tool, some 

results are presented in (Jonquet et al., 2008). A 

comparison between Mgrep and MetaMap can also 

be found in (Shah et al., 2009), where they make 

an evaluation over a biological and disease terms 

dictionaries with precision (0.87 to 0.71 

respectively) and recall (1548 to 1730 recovered 

terms respectively) metrics. Thus, we decided to 

use Mgrep for identifying drug name entities in the 

system. 
 

3 Description of the system  

The system (see figure 1) is divided in two phases: 

(i) in one hand, the system must scan drug name 

entities without specifying any further information. 

This is the so-called entity identification process; 

(ii) on the other hand, the system classifies by 

using a rule-based process the type of the entities 

discovered previously. This is the so-called entity 

classification process. 

The corpus is processed sentence by sentence, 

using the identification tag provided for each 

sentence.  
 

 

 

 

3.1 Entity identification process  

In this phase we analyze each sentence of the 

corpus with Mgrep analyzer. This tool allows us to 

set the ontologies we want to use in the analysis. 

All additional ontologies used in the analysis 

increases the computational complexity required.  
 

The ontologies used in this first drug name 

identification phase belong to UMLS collection, 

and more specifically to the pharmacological 

domain: 

 Master Drug Data Base6 (MDDB): National 

Drug Data File ontology provides a codified 

drug dictionary, drug vocabulary, and drug 

pricing for prescription drugs and medication-

based over-the-counter products in the United 

States. It supports the ever-changing world of 

drug information in healthcare. 

 National Drug File7 (NDF): this ontology 
contains information about a comprehensive 

set of drug database elements and clinical 

information approved by the U.S. Food and 

Drug Administration (FDA), and dietary 

supplements information. 

 National Drug Data File (NDDF): this is an 
extension of the NDF ontology that includes 

chemical ingredients, clinical kinetics, 

diseases, dose forms, pharmaceutical 

preparations, physiological effects and 

                                                           
6 http://www.medispan.com/medi-span-electronic-drug-

file.aspx 
7 http://www.fdbhealth.com/fdb-medknowledge/ 

Figure 2a: Result of analysis with the Mgrep analyzer. 

Figure 2b: Example of multiword drug entity divided. 

624



therapeutic categories. 

 Ontology for Drug Discovery Investigations: 
this ontology contains information about 

description of drug discovery investigations 

from OBO
8
 relation ontology. 

 MESH Thesaurus9: this ontology contains sets 
of terms naming descriptors in a hierarchical 

structure. There exist 26,853 descriptors and 

over 213,000 entry terms in 2013 MeSH. 

 

For each drug name entity identified the Mgrep 

analyzer provides information about the ontology 

concept recognized, term information, snippet of 

original text (see figure 2a). After identifying drug 

name entities we noticed some errors in the 

recognized concepts, thus we held a post-

processing of the analysis results. Some entities are 

recognized by several ontologies at the same time, 

so it is necessary to filter repeated instances. 

Biomedical complex name entities are not 

identified. To solve this, we join compound name 

entities by following the charoffset of the sentence. 

The system only links two or more drug entities 

that were next to each other, without punctuation 

between them. For example, potassium chloride 

(see figure 2b) is recognized separately in 

potassium and chloride, so we group it as 

potassium chloride concept.  

As a result of this process we obtain a list of 

clear drug name entities that conforms our run 1 

approach in the task. However, we elaborate a 

second filter based in a gazetteer containing terms 

with no useful meaning for our drug name entity 

identification purpose. This gazetteer contains 

terms such as agent, compound and blocker. The 

results of this second filter conforms our run 2 

approach in the task. As a result of entity 

identification phase we obtain a list of drug name 

entities, but they are not identified as any type yet.  

3.2 Entity classification process  

In this phase we classify the list of pharmaceutical 

terms obtained from analysis phase. To do so, we 

elaborate a rule-based system following the 

annotation methods described in the task 

guidelines. This annotation method was based in 

biomedical resources, such as DrugBank, for 

determining aspects as if the drug entity is 
                                                           
8 http://www.obofoundry.org/ro/ 
9 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/mesh.html 

approved for human use, or if the drug entity is 

registered as a brand name. We can organize the 

general rules of the classification process by 

resources used: 

 DrugBank: These rules search the drug entity 
in DrugBank resource and obtain several 

information: 

o Drug information: information about 
approval state of the drug (approved, 

experimental, illicit). A rule classifies 

a drug entity as drug_n when 

experimental or illicit state is found in 

a drug, otherwise the drug entity is 

catalogued as drug type. 

o Synonym list: list of possible 
registered names of the entity. A 

recursive process searches each 

synonym in DrugBank (obviating the 

synonym list this time), and applies the 

rules as if original drug entity were 

treated. The result of the recursive 

process affect to the original drug 

entity. 

o Brand name list: list of registered 
commercial brand names of the entity. 

If a drug name entity is found in the 

brand name list, then it is catalogued 

as a brand type. 

o Categories: information about general 
category of drug. If the drug is found 

as a category, then it is classified as 

group type. 

 Pubchem: These rules search the drug entity 
and obtain information of drug identification 

and compound information and IUPAC name. 

 ATC Index10: These rules look for the drug 

entity in ATC Index resource and determine 

whether the entity is drug or group depending 

on the level of ATC code found.  

 Kegg: These rules search the drug entity in this 
resource and obtain information of drug 

categories. If the drug is found as a category, 

then it is classified as group type. 

 MeSH11:  These rules search information about 
MeSH tree categories classification of the drug 

entity. If the drug is found as a category, then 

it is classified as group type. Another rule 

makes a naïve processing of the MeSH 

                                                           
10 http://www.whocc.no/atc_ddd_index/ 
11 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/67055162 

625



description text to evaluate if the drug entity 

were used in humans. If this information is 

found in the text, then the drug entity is 

classified as a drug type. 
  

The described rules are representative examples 

of the complete rule-based system. There were 

assigned priorities to the rules, since some rules are 

more certain to describe a drug type than others. 

Thus, if a drug entity is found to be approved for 

using in humans after processing the MeSH text, 

but when looking the DrugBank state is found as 

illicit state, then the drug is classified as drug_n 

type since DrugBank offers a certain state of the 

drug, instead of a natural text description that may 

be classified as a false positive. Depending on the 

values collected on these biomedical resources the 

rule-based system determines whether the type of 

an entity is a drug, group, brand or drug_n. 
 

 

4 Results 

The best result in entity identification (exact 

matching) obtained by the system correspond to 

run 2, achieving a F1 measure of 0.609. On the 

other hand, the best results achieved in strict 

matching (boundary and type evaluation) 

correspond to run 2 again, with 0.529 F1 score. 
 

 
 

 

 

These results contrast with the result obtained by 

run 1, achieving a F1 measure of 0.528 and 0.458 

in entity identification and strict matching 

evaluation respectively. Thus we can quantify the 

advantage of using a filter based on gazetteer in an 

average increment of 0.079 F1 measure. 

We have noticed that the higher results are 

obtained in partial matching evaluation because of 

the relaxed conditions of the charoffset. This seems 

reasonable since complex multiword entity is hard 

to parse and define an exact charoffset. 

On the other hand, we also noticed that 

evaluating the classification of the type decrement 

the best results obtained by the system from 0.609 

to 0.529 of F1 score. This indicates that there is 

still a lot of improvement work in the rule-based 

system for type classification. A little error 

analysis was done in a set of 10 documents of the 

training dataset. The results show errors in 

conflictive entities that show multiples categories 

in DrugBank resource. Thus, for example cocaine 

drug entity contains tags of illicit and approved in 

DrugBank database, so the system classify this 

entity as drug_n instead of drug.  

 

5 Conclusions and future work 

In this paper we present a system for drug name 

entity recognition based on ontologies as 

participation for “Semeval 2013: Recognition and 

classification of drug names” task. The system is 

based on integration of biomedical resources for 

identification and classification of pharmacological 

entities. The best result of the system obtained an 

F1 measure of 0.529.  

The usage of ontologies in named entity 

recognition task seems to be a good choice since 

we can select specific ontologies. A possible future 

work includes an improvement of rule-based 

system, including a bigger collection of biomedical 

resources.  The entity classification could increase 

the results by creating an hybrid approach between 

rule-based methods and machine learning 

techniques. On the other hand, in the entities 

identification task, the system could include other 

biomedical text analyzers and establish a vote 

system. This would improve whether we consider 

an entity or not. Finally, in error analysis were 

noticed problems related to rule-based module. 

Therefore, an insightful improve could pass 

through making a context analysis in order to clear 

the ambiguity surrounding the drug entity.  
 

Acknowledgments 

This work has been funded by MA2VICMR 

project (S2009/TIC-1542) and MULTIMEDICA 

project
12

 (TIN 2010-20644-C03-01). 
 

References  

                                                           
12 http://labda.inf.uc3m.es/multimedica/ 

Table 1: Results obtained by the system. 

 

626



Aronson, A.R. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical 

text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap 

program.Proc AMIA Symp. 17–21.4.  

Campos, D., Matos, S., Oliveira J.L.. 2013. Gimli: open 

source and high-performance biomedical name 

recognition. BMC Bioinformatics 14:54.  

Hancock, D., Morrison N., Velarde G., Field D. 2009. 

Terminizer - Assisting Mark-Up of Text Using 

Ontological Terms. Nature Precedings.  

Jonquet C., Musen M.A., Shah N. 2008. A System for 

Ontology-Based Annotation of Biomedical Data. 

Data Integration in the Life Sciences, Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 144–152. 

Jonquet, C., Shah N.H., Musen M.A. 2009. The Open 

Biomedical Annotator, Summit on Translat 

Bioinforma. 56–60.  

Pafilis E., O’Donoghue S.I., Jensen L.J., Horn H., Kuhn 

M., Brown N.P., et al. 2009. Reflect: augmented 

browsing for the life scientist. Nature Biotechnology, 

27, 508–510.  

Rebholz-Schuhmann D., Arregui M., Gaudan S., Kirsch 

H., Jimeno A. 2008. Text processing through Web 

services: calling Whatizit. Bioinformatics. 24, 296–

298.  

Segura-Bedmar I., Martínez P., Herrero-Zazo M. 2013. 

SemEval-2013 Task 9 : Extraction of Drug-Drug 

Interactions from Biomedical Texts (DDIExtraction 

2013). Proceedings of Semeval 2013.  

Shah N.H., Bhatia N., Jonquet C., Rubin D., Chiang 

A.P., Musen M.A. 2009. Comparison of concept 

recognizers for building the Open Biomedical 

Annotator. BMC Bioinformatics.10, S14. 

 

 

Whetzel P.L., Noy N.F., Shah N.H., Alexander P.R., 

Nyulas C., Tudorache T., et al. 2011. BioPortal: 

enhanced functionality via new Web services from 

the National Center for Biomedical Ontology to 

access and use ontologies in software applications. 

Nucleic Acids Research. 39, W541–W545.  

 

627


