










































GETALP System : Propagation of a Lesk Measure through an Ant Colony Algorithm


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 232–240, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

GETALP: Propagation of a Lesk Measure through an Ant Colony Algorithm

Didier Schwab, Andon Tchechmedjiev, Jérôme Goulian,
Mohammad Nasiruddin, Gilles Sérasset, Hervé Blanchon

LIG-GETALP
Univ. Grenoble Alpes

http://getalp.imag.fr/WSD
firstname.lastname@imag.fr

Abstract

This article presents the GETALP system for
the participation to SemEval-2013 Task 12,
based on an adaptation of the Lesk measure
propagated through an Ant Colony Algorithm,
that yielded good results on the corpus of Se-
meval 2007 Task 7 (WordNet 2.1) as well as
the trial data for Task 12 SemEval 2013 (Ba-
belNet 1.0). We approach the parameter es-
timation to our algorithm from two perspec-
tives: edogenous estimation where we max-
imised the sum the local Lesk scores; exoge-
nous estimation where we maximised the F1
score on trial data. We proposed three runs
of out system, exogenous estimation with Ba-
belNet 1.1.1 synset id annotations, endoge-
nous estimation with BabelNet 1.1.1 synset id
annotations and endogenous estimation with
WordNet 3.1 sense keys. A bug in our imple-
mentation led to incorrect results and here, we
present an amended version thereof. Our sys-
tem arrived third on this task and a more fine
grained analysis of our results reveals that the
algorithms performs best on general domain
texts with as little named entities as possible.
The presence of many named entities leads the
performance of the system to plummet greatly.

1 Introduction

Out team is mainly interested in Word Sense Disam-
biguation (WSD) based on semantic similarity mea-
sures. This approach to WSD is based on a local
algorithm and a global algorithm. The local algo-
rithm corresponds to a semantic similarity measure
(for example (Wu and Palmer, 1994), (Resnik, 1995)

or (Lesk, 1986)), while the global algorithm propa-
gates the values resulting from these measures at the
level of a text, in order to disambiguate the words
that compose it. For two years, now, our team has
focussed on researching global algorithms. The lo-
cal algorithm we use, a variant of the Lesk algo-
rithm that we have evaluated with several global al-
gorithms (Simulated Annealing (SA), Genetic Al-
gorithms (GA) and Ant Colony Algorithms (ACA))
(Schwab et al., 2012; Schwab et al., 2013), has
shown its robustness with WordNet 3.0. For the
present campaign, we chose to work with an ant
colony based global algorithms that has proven its
efficiency (Schwab et al., 2012; Tchechmedjiev et
al., 2012).

Presently, for this SemEval 2013 Task 12 (Nav-
igli et al., 2013), the objective is to disambiguate a
set of target words (nouns) in a corpus of 13 texts
in 5 Languages (English, French, German, Italian,
Spanish) by providing, for each sense the appropri-
ate sense labels. The evaluation of the answers is
performed by comparing them to a gold standard
annotation of the corpus in all 5 languages using
three possible sense inventories and thus sense tags:
BabelNet 1.1.1 Synset ids (Navigli and Pozetto,
2012), Wikipedia page names and Wordnet sense
keys (Miller, 1995).

Our ant colony algorithm is a stochastic algorithm
that has several parameters that need to be selected
and tuned. Choosing the values of the parameters
based on linguistic criteria remains an open and dif-
ficult problem, which is why we wanted to autom-
atize the parameter search process. There are two
ways to go about this process: exogenous estima-

232



tion, when the parameter values are selected so as
to maximise the F-score on a small training anno-
tated corpus and then used to disambiguate another
corpus (weakly supervised); endogenous estimation,
when the parameters are chosen so as to maximise
the global similarity score on a text or corpus (unsu-
pervised). Our first experiment and system run con-
sists in tuning the parameters on the trial corpus of
the campaign and running the system with the Ba-
belNet sense inventory. Our second and third exper-
iments consist in endogenous parameter estimation,
the first using BabelNet as a sense inventory and the
second using WordNet. Unfortunately, the presence
of an implementation issue prevented us from ob-
taining scores up to par with the potential of our sys-
tem and thus we will present indicative results of the
performance of the system after the implementation
issue was fixed.

2 The GETALP System: Propagation of a
Lesk Measure through an Ant Colony
Algorithm

In this section we will first describe the local al-
gorithm we used, followed by a quick overview of
global algorithms and our own Ant Colony Algo-
rithm.

2.1 The Local Algorithm: a Lesk Measure

Our local algorithm is a variant of the Lesk Algo-
rithm (Lesk, 1986). Proposed more than 25 years
ago, it is simple, only requires a dictionary and no
training. The score given to a sense pair is the num-
ber of common words (space separated strings) in
the definition of the senses, without taking into ac-
count neither the word order in the definitions (bag-
of-words approach), nor any syntactic or morpho-
logical information. Variants of this algorithm are
still today among the best on English-language texts
(Ponzetto and Navigli, 2010).

Our local algorithm exploits the links provided by
WordNet: it considers not only the definition of a
sense but also the definitions of the linked senses
(using all the semantic relations for WordNet, most
of them for BabelNet) following (Banerjee and Ped-
ersen, 2002), henceforth referred asExtLesk1 Con-

1All dictionaries and Java implementations of all algorithms
of our team can be found on our WSD page

trarily to Banerjee, however, we do not consider
the sum of squared sub-string overlaps, but merely
a bag-of-words overlap that allows us to generate
a dictionary from WordNet, where each word con-
tained in any of the word sense definitions is indexed
by a unique integer and where each resulting defini-
tion is sorted. Thus we are able to lower the compu-
tational complexity fromO(mn) toO(m), wherem
and n are the respective length of two definitions and
m ≥ n. For example for the definition: "Some kind
of evergreen tree", if we say that Some is indexed by
123, kind by 14, evergreen by 34, and tree by 90,
then the indexed representation is {14, 34, 90, 123}.

2.2 Global Algorithm : Ant Colony Algorithm

We will first review the principles pertaining to
global algorithms and then a more detailed account
of our Ant Colony algorithm.

2.2.1 Global algorithms, Global scores and
Configurations

A global algorithm is a method that allows to
propagate a local measure to a whole text in or-
der to assign a sense label to each word. In the
similarity-based WSD perspective, the algorithms
require some fitness measure to evaluate how good
a configuration is. With this in mind, the score
of the selected sense of a word can be expressed
as the sum of the local scores between that sense
and the selected senses of all the other words of a
context. Hence, in order to obtain a fitness value
(global score) for the whole configuration, it is
possible to simply sum the scores for all selected
senses of the words of the context: Score(C) =∑m

i=1

∑m
j=iExtLesk(wi,C[i], wj,C[j]).

For a given text, the chosen configuration is
the one which maximizes the global score among
the evaluated ones. The simplest approach is the
exhaustive evaluation of sense combinations (BF),
used for example in (Banerjee and Pedersen, 2002),
that assigns a score to each word sense combination
in a given context (window or whole text) and se-
lects the one with the highest score. The main is-
sue with this approach is that it leads to a combi-

http://getalp.imag.fr/WSD and more specifically for
SemEval 2013 Task 12 on the following page
http://getalp.imag.fr/static/wsd/
GETALP-WSD-ACA/

233



natorial explosion in the length of the context win-
dow or text. The number of combinations is indeed∏|T |

i=1(|s(wi)|), where s(wi) is the set of possible
senses of word i of a text T . For this reason it is
very difficult to use the BF approach on an analy-
sis window larger than a few words. In our work,
we consider the whole text as context. In this per-
spective, we studied several methods to overcome
the combinatorial explosion problem.

2.2.2 Complete and Incomplete Approaches
Several approximation methods can be used in or-

der to overcome the combinatorial explosion issue.
On the one hand, complete approaches try to reduce
dimensionality using pruning techniques and sense
selection heuristics. Some examples include: (Hirst
and St-Onge, 1998), based on lexical chains that re-
strict the possible sense combinations by imposing
constraints on the succession of relations in a taxon-
omy (e.g. WordNet); or (Gelbukh et al., 2005) that
review general pruning techniques for Lesk-based
algorithms; or yet (Brody and Lapata, 2008) who
exploit distributional similarity measures extracted
from corpora (information content).

On the other hand, incomplete approaches gen-
erally use stochastic sampling techniques to reach a
local maximum by exploring as little as necessary
of the search space. Our present work focuses on
such approaches. Furthermore, we can distinguish
two possible variants:
• local neighbourhood-based approaches (new

configurations are created from existing con-
figurations) among which are some approaches
from artificial intelligence such as genetic al-
gorithms or optimization methods such as sim-
ulated annealing;
• constructive approaches (new configurations

are generated by iteratively adding new ele-
ments of solutions to the configuration under
construction), among which are for example
ant colony algorithms.

2.2.3 Principle of our Ant Colony Algorithm
In this section, we briefly describe out Ant Colony

Algorithm so as to give a general idea of how it op-
erates. However, readers are strongly encouraged
to read the detailed papers (Schwab et al., 2012;
Schwab et al., 2013) for a more detailed description

of the system, including examples of how the graph
is built, of how the algorithm operates step by step
as well all pseudo code listing.

Ant colony algorithms (ACA) are inspired from
nature through observations of ant social behavior.
Indeed, these insects have the ability to collectively
find the shortest path between their nest and a source
of food (energy). It has been demonstrated that
cooperation inside an ant colony is self-organised
and allows the colony to solve complex problems.
The environment is usually represented by a graph,
in which virtual ants exploit pheromone trails de-
posited by others, or pseudo-randomly explore the
graph. ACAs are a good alternative for the resolu-
tion of optimization problems that can be encoded
as graphs and allow for a fast and efficient explo-
ration on par with other search heuristics. The main
advantage of ACAs lies in their high adaptivity to
dynamically changing environments. Readers can
refer to (Dorigo and Stützle, 2004) or (Monmarché,
2010) for a state of the art.

In this article we use a simple hierarchical graph
(text, sentence, word) that matches the structure of
the text and that exploits no external linguistic infor-
mation. In this graph we distinguish two types of
nodes: nests and plain nodes. Following (Schwab et
al., 2012), each possible word sense is associated to
a nest. Nests produce ants that move in the graph in
order to find energy and bring it back to their mother
nest: the more energy is brought back by ants, the
more ants can be produced by the nest in turn. Ants
carry an odour (a vector) that contains the words of
the definition of the sense of its mother nest. From
the point of view of an ant, a node can be: (1) its
mother nest, where it was born; (2) an enemy nest
that corresponds to another sense of the same word;
(3) a potential friend nest: any other nest; (4) a plain
node: any node that is not a nest. Furthermore, to
each plain node is also associated an odour vector of
a fixed length that is initially empty.

Ant movement is function of the scores given by
the local algorithm, of the presence of energy, of the
passage of other ants (when passing on an edge ants
leave a pheromone trail that evaporates over time)
and of the nodes’ odour vectors (ants deposit a part
of their odour on the nodes they go through). When
an ant arrives onto the nest of another word (that cor-
responds to a sense thereof), it can either continue its

234



exploration or, depending on the score between this
nest and its mother nest, decide to build a bridge be-
tween them and to follow it home. Bridges behave
like normal edges except that if at any given time the
concentration of pheromone reaches 0, the bridge
collapses. Depending on the lexical information
present and the structure of the graph, ants will fa-
vor following bridges between more closely related
senses. Thus, the more closely related the senses of
the nests are, the more bridges between them will
contribute to their mutual reinforcement and to the
sharing of resources between them (thus forming
meta-nests); while the bridges between more dis-
tant senses will tend to fade away. We are thus able
to build interpretative paths (possible interpretations
of the text) through emergent behaviour and to sup-
press the need to use a complete graph that includes
all the links between the senses from the start (as is
usually the case with classical graph-based optimi-
sation approaches).

Through the emergence of interpretative paths,
sense pairs that are closer semantically benefit from
an increased ant traffic and thus tend to capture most
of the energy of the system at a faster pace, thus
favouring a faster convergence over an algorithm
that uses a local neighbourhood graph (nodes are
senses interconnected so as to represent all sense
combinations in a context window) without sacrific-
ing the quality of the results.

The selected answers correspond, for each word
to the nest node with the highest energy value. The
reason for this choice over using the pheromone con-
centration is that empirically, the energy level bet-
ter correlates with the actual F1 scores. In turn, the
global Lesk score of a selected sense combination
correlates even better with the F1 score, which is
why, we keep the sense combinations resulting from
each iteration of the algorithm (highest energy nests
at each iteration) and select the one with the highest
global Lesk score as the final solution.

2.3 Parameters
This version of our ant algorithm has seven param-
eters (ω, Ea, Emax, E0, δv, δ, LV ) which have an
influence on the emergent phenomena in the system:
• The maximum amount of energy an ant can

carry, Emax and Ea the amount of energy an
ant can take on a node, influences how much

an ant explores the environment. Ants cannot
go back through an edge they just crossed and
have to make circuits to come back to their nest
(if the ant does not die before that). The size
of the circuits depend on the moment the ants
switch to return mode, hence on Emax.
• The evaporation rate of the pheromone between

cycles (δ) is one of the memories of the sys-
tem. The higher the rate is, the least the trails
from previous ants are given importance and
the faster interpretative paths have to be con-
firmed (passed on) by new ants in order not to
be forgotten by the system.
• The initial amount of energy per node (E0)

and the ant life-span (ω) influence the number
of ants that can be produced and therefore the
probability of reinforcing less likely paths.
• The odour vector length (Lv) and the propor-

tion of odour components deposited by an ant
on a plain node (δV ) are two dependent param-
eters that influence the global system memory.
The higher the length of the vector, the longer
the memory of the passage of an ant is kept. On
the other hand, the proportion of odour compo-
nents deposited has the opposite effect.

Given the lack of an analytical way of determin-
ing the optimal parameters of the ant colony al-
gorithm, they have to be estimated experimentally,
which is detailed in the following section.

3 Acquisition of Parameter Values

The algorithms we are interested in have a certain
number of parameters that need tuning in order to
obtain the best possible score on the evaluation cor-
pus. There are three possible approaches:

• Make an educated guess about the value ranges
based on a priori knowledge about the dynam-
ics of the algorithm;
• Test manually (or semi-manually) several com-

binations of parameters that appear promising
and determine the influence of making small
adjustments to the values ;
• Use a learning algorithm to automate acquisi-

tion of parameters values. We present that ap-
proach in the following part.

235



3.1 Automated Parameter Estimation

Two methods can be used to automatically acquire
parameters. The first one consists in maximizing
the F-score on an sense-annotated corpus (weak ap-
proach) while the second one consist in maximizing
the global Lesk score (unsupervised approach).

3.1.1 Generalities
Both approaches are based on the same principle

(Tchechmedjiev et al., 2012). We use a simulated
annealing algorithm (Laarhoven and Aarts, 1987)
combined with a non-parametric statistical (Mann-
Whitney-U test (Mann and Whitney, 1947)) test with
a p-value adapted for multiple comparisons through
False Discovery Rate control (FDR) (Benjamini and
Hochberg, 1995). The estimation algorithm oper-
ates on all the parameters of the ant colony algo-
rithm described above and attempts to maximise the
objective function (Global score, F1). The reason
why we need to use a statistical test and FDR rather
than using the standard SA algorithm, is that the
Ant Colony Algorithm is stochastic in nature and
requires tuning to be performed over the distribu-
tion of possible answers for a given set of param-
eter values. Indeed, there is no guarantee that the
value resulting from one execution is representative
at all of the distribution. The exact nature of the dis-
tribution of answers is unknown and thus we take
a sampling of the distribution as precise as can be
afforded. Thus, we require the statistical test to as-
certain the significance between the scores for two
parameter configurations.

3.1.2 Exogenous parameter tuning
If we have a sense-annotated corpus at our dis-

posal, it is possible to directly use the F1 value ob-
tained by the system on this reference to tune the
parameters of the systems so as to maximise said F1
score. The main issues that arise from such meth-
ods are the fact that gold standards are expensive to
produce and that there is no guarantee on the gen-
erality of the contents of the gold standard. Thus,
in languages with little resources we may be un-
able to obtain a gold standard and in the case one
is available, there is a potentially strong risk of over
fitting. Furthermore due to the nature of the train-
ing, taking training samples in a random order for
cross-validation becomes tricky. This is why we also

want to test another method that can tune the pa-
rameters without using labelled examples. For the
evaluation, we estimated parameters on the F1 score
on the test corpus for English and French (the only
ones available). We used the parameters estimated
for English for our English results for our first sys-
tem run GETALP-BN1 and the French parameters
for the results on French, German, Italian, Spanish.

For English we found: ω = 26, Ea =
14, Emax = 3, E0 = 34, δv = 0.9775, δ =
0.3577, LV = 25.

For French: ω = 19, Ea = 9, Emax = 3, E0 =
32, δv = 0.9775, δ = 0.3577, LV = 25.

3.1.3 Endogenous parameter tuning
In the context of the evaluation campaign, the ab-

sence of an example gold standard on the same ver-
sion of the resource (synset id mismatch between
BabelNet 1.0 and 1.1.1 2) made dubious the prospect
of using parameters estimated from a gold standard.
Consequently, we set out to investigate the relation
between the F1 score of the gold standard and the
Global Lesk Score of successive solutions through-
out the execution of the algorithm.

We observed that the Lesk score is highly corre-
lated to the F1 score and can be used as an estimator
thereof. The main quality criterion being the dis-
criminativeness of the Lesk score compared to the
F1 score (average ratio between the number of pos-
sible F1 score values for a single Lesk score value),
for which the correlation is a possible indicator. We
make the hypothesis based on the correlation that for
a given specific local measure, the global score will
be an adequate estimator of the F1 score. Our sec-
ond system run GETALP-WSD-BN2 is based on the
endogenous parameter estimation. We will not list
all the parameters here, as there is a different set of
parameters for each text and each language.

3.2 Voting
In previous experiment, as can be expected, we have
observed a consistent rise the F1 score when apply-
ing a majority vote method on the output of several
executions (Schwab et al., 2012). Consequently we
followed the same process here, and for all the runs
of our system we performed 100 executions and ap-
plied a majority vote (For each word, our of all se-

2http://lcl.uniroma1.it/babelnet/

236



lected senses, take the one that has been selected the
most over all the executions) on all 100 answer files.
The result of this process is a single answer file and
comes with the advantage of greatly reducing the
variability of the answers. Say this voting process
is repeated over and over again 100 times, then the
standard deviation of F1 scores around the mean is
much smaller. Thus, we also have a good solutions
to the problem of selecting the answer that yields the
highest score, without actually having access to the
gold standard.

4 Runs for SemEval 2013 task 12

In this section we will describe the various runs we
performed in the context of Task 12. We will first
present our methodologies relating to the BabelNet
tagged gold standard followed by the methodologies
relating to the WordNet tagged gold standard.

4.1 BabelNet Gold Standard Evaluation

In the context of the BabelNet gold standard evalu-
ation, we need to tag the words of the corpus with
BabelNet synset ids. Due to the slow speed of re-
trieving Babel synsets and extracting glosses, espe-
cially in the context of our extended Lesk Approach,
we pre-generate a dictionary for each language that
contains entries for each word of the corpus and then
for each possible sense (as per BabelNet). In the
short time allotted for the competition, we restrict
ourselves to building dictionaries only for the words
of the corpus, but the process described can be ap-
plied to pre-generate a dictionary for the whole of
BabelNet.

Each BabelNet synset for a word is considered as
a possible sense in the dictionary. For each synset
we retrieve the Babel senses and retain the ones that
are in the appropriate language. Then, we retrieve
the Glosses corresponding to each selected sense
and combine them in as the definition correspond-
ing to that particular BabelNet synset. Furthermore,
we also retrieve certain of the related synsets and
repeat the same process so as to add the related def-
initions to the BabelNet synset being considered. In
our experiments on the test corpus, we determined
that what worked best (i.e. English and French)
was to use only relations coming from WordNet, all
the while excluding the r, gdis, gmono relation

added by BabelNet. We observed a similar increase
in disambiguation quality with the Degree (Navigli
and Lapata, 2010) algorithm implementation that
comes with BabelNet. The r relation correspond to
the relations in BabelNet extracted from Wikipedia,
whereas gdis and gmono corresponds to relation
created using a disambiguation algorithm (respec-
tively for monosemous and polysemous words).

4.2 WordNet Gold Standard Evaluation
In the context of the WordNet gold standard evalua-
tion, we initially thought the purpose would be to an-
notate the corpus in all five languages with WordNet
sense keys through alignments extracted from Ba-
belNet. As a consequence, we exploited BabelNet
as a resource, merely obtaining WordNet sense keys
through the main senses expressed in BabelNet, that
correspond to WordNet synsets. Although we were
able to produce annotations for all languages, as it
turns out, the WordNet evaluation was merely aimed
at evaluating monolingual systems that do not sup-
port BabelNet at all. For reference, we subsequently
generated a dictionary from WordNet only, to gauge
the performance of our system on the evaluation as
intended by the organisers.

5 Results

We will first present the general results pertaining
to Task 12, followed by a more detailed analysis on
a text by text basis, as well as the comparison with
results obtained on the Semeval 2007 WSD task in
terms of specific parts of speech.

5.1 General Results for Semeval-2013 Task 12
Important: implementation issue during the
evaluation period During the evaluation period,
we had an implementation issue, where a parameter
that limited the size of definition was not disabled
properly. As a consequence, when we experimented
to determine the appropriate relations to consider
for the context expansion of the glosses, we arrived
at the experimental conclusion that using all rela-
tions worked best. However, since it was already the
case with WordNet (Schwab et al., 2011), we read-
ily accepted that our experimental conclusion was
indeed correct. The issue was indirectly resolved
as an unforeseen side effect of another hot-fix ap-
plied shortly before the start of the evaluation period.

237



Given that we were not aware of the presence of a
limitation on the definition length before the hot-fix,
we performed all the experiments under an incorrect
hypothesis which led us to an incorrect conclusion,
that itself led to the results we obtained for the cam-
paign. Indeed, with no restrictions on the size of the
definition, our official results for this task were con-
sistently inferior to the random baseline across the
board. After a thorough analysis of our runs we ob-
served that the sum of local measures (global lesk
score) that correlated inversely with the gold stan-
dard F1 score, the opposite of what it should have
been. We immediately located and corrected this
bug when we realized what had caused these bad
results that did not correspond at all with what we
obtained on the test corpus. After the fix, we strictly
ran the same experiment without exploiting the gold
standard, so as to obtain the results we would have
obtained had the bug not been present in the first
place.

Run Lang. P R F1 MFS
BN1 EN 58.3 58.3 58.3 65.6

FR 48.3 48.2 48.3 50.1
DE 52.3 52.3 52.3 68.6
ES 57.6 57.6 57.6 64.4
IT 52.6 52.5 52.6 57.2

BN2 EN 56.8 56.8 56.8 65.6
FR 48.3 48.2 48.3 50.1
DE 51.9 51.9 51.9 68.6
ES 57.8 57.8 57.8 64.4
IT 52.8 52.8 52.8 57.2

WN1 EN 51.4 51.4 51.4 63.0

Table 1: Results after fixing the implementation is-
sue for all three of our runs, compared to the Most
Frequent Sense baseline (MFS).

We can see in Table 1, that after the removal of
the implementation issues, the scores become more
competitive and meaningful compared to the other
system, although we remain third of the evalua-
tion campaign. We can observe that there is no
large difference between the exogenous results (us-
ing a small annotated corpus) and endogenous re-
sults. Except for the English corpus where there is
a 2% increase. The endogenous estimation, since it

is performed on a text by text basis is much slower
and resource consuming. Given that the exogenous
estimation offers slightly better results and that it re-
quires very little annotated data, we can conclude
that in most cases the exogenous estimation will be
much faster to obtain.

5.2 A more detailed analysis

In this section we will first make a more detailed
analysis for each text on the English corpus, by look-
ing where our algorithm performed best. We restrict
ourselves on one language for this analysis for the
sake of brevity. As we can see in Table 2, the re-
sults can vary greatly depending on the text (within
a twofold range). The system consistently performs
better on texts from the general domain (T 4, 6, 10),
often beating the first sense baseline. For more spe-
cialized texts, however, (T 2, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13) the
algorithm performs notably lower than the baseline.
The one instance where the algorithm truly fails, is
when the text in question contains many ambigu-
ous entities. Indeed for text 7, which is about foot-
ball, many of the instance words to disambiguate are
the names of players and of clubs. Intuitively, this
behaviour is understandable and can be mainly at-
tributed to the local Lesk algorithm. Since we use
glosses from the resource, that mostly remain in the
general domain, a better performance in matching
texts is likely. As for named entities, the Lesk algo-
rithm is mainly meant to capture the similarity be-
tween concepts and it is much more difficult to dif-
ferentiate two football players from a definition over
concepts (often more general).

To further outline the strength of our approach, we
need to look back further at a setting with all parts
of speech being considered, namely Task 7 from Se-
mEval 2007. As can be seen in Table 3, even though
for adjectives and adverbs the system is slightly be-
low the MFS (respectively), it has a good perfor-
mance compared to graph based WSD approaches
that would be hindered by the lack of taxonomical
relations. For verbs the performance is lower as is
consistently observed with WSD algorithms due to
the high degree of polysemy of verbs. For example,
in the case of Degree (Navigli and Pozetto, 2012),
nouns are the part of speech for which the system
performs the best, while the scores for other parts of
speech are somewhat lower. Thus, we can hypoth-

238



Text Descr. Len. F1 MFS Diff.
1 Gen. Env. 228 61.4 68.9 -7.5
2 T. Polit. 84 51.2 66.7 -15.5
3 T. Econ. 84 52.4 56.0 - 3.6
4 News. Gen. 119 58.8 58.0 0.8
5 T. Econ. 74 39.2 36.5 2.7
6 Web Gen. 210 67.1 64.3 2.8
7 T. Sport. 190 34.2 60.5 -26.3
8 Sci. 153 63.4 67.3 -3.9
9 Geo. Econ. 190 63.2 74.2 -11
10 Gen. Law. 160 61.9 61.9 0
11 T. Sport. 125 56.8 64.0 -7.2
12 T. Polit. 185 64.3 73.0 -8.7
13 T. Econ. 130 68.5 72.6 -4.1

Table 2: Text by text F1 scores compared to the
MFS baseline for the English corpus (T.= Trans-
lated, Gen.= General, Env.= Environment, Polit.=
Politics, Econ.= Economics, Web= Internet, Sport.=
Sports, Geo.= Geopolitics, Sci.= Science).

A P.O.S. F1 MFS F1 Diff
1108 Noun 79.42 77.4 +1.99
591 Verb 74.78 75.3 -0.51
362 Adj. 82.66 84.3 -1.59
208 Adv. 86.95 87.5 -0.55

2269 All 79.42 78.9 +0.53

Table 3: Detailed breakdown of F1 score per part
of speech category for Semeval-2007 Task 7, over
results resulting from a vote over 100 executions

esise that using a different local measure depending
on the part of speech may constitute an interesting
development while allowing a return to a more gen-
eral all-words WSD task where all parts of speech
are considered, even when the resource does not of-
fer taxonomical relation for the said parts of speech.

6 Conclusions & Perspectives

In this paper, we present a method based on a
Lesk inspired local algorithm and a global algorithm
based on ant colony optimisation. An endogenous
version (parameter estimation based on the maximi-
sation of the F-score on an annotated corpus) and
an exogenous version (parameter estimation based
on the maximisation of the global Lesk score on

the corpus) of the latter algorithm do not exhibit a
significant difference in terms of the F-score of the
result. After a more detailed analysis on a text by
text basis, we found that the algorithm performs best
on general domain texts with as little named enti-
ties as possible (around or above the MFS baseline).
For texts of more specialized domain the algorithm
consistently performs below the MFS baseline, and
for texts with many named entities, the performance
plummets greatly slightly above the level of a ran-
dom selection. We also show that with our Lesk
measure the system is best suited for WSD in a more
general setting with all parts of speech, however in
the context of just nouns, it is not the most suitable
local measure. As we have seen from the other sys-
tems, graph based local measures may be the appro-
priate answer to reach the level of the best systems
on this task, however it is important not to dismiss
the potential of other approaches. The quality of the
results depend on the global algorithm, however they
are also strongly bounded by the local measure con-
sidered. Our team, is headed towards investigating
local semantic similarity measures and towards ex-
ploiting multilingual features so as to improve the
disambiguation quality.

7 Acknowledgements

The work presented in this paper was conducted in
the context of the Formicae project funded by the
University Grenoble 2 (Université Pierre Mendès
France) and the Videosense project, funded by the
French National Research Agency (ANR) under
its CONTINT 2009 programme (grant ANR-09-
CORD-026).

References
[Banerjee and Pedersen2002] Satanjee Banerjee and Ted

Pedersen. 2002. An adapted lesk algorithm for word
sense disambiguation using wordnet. In CICLing
2002, Mexico City, February.

[Benjamini and Hochberg1995] Yoav Benjamini and
Yosef Hochberg. 1995. Controlling the False Dis-
covery Rate: A Practical and Powerful Approach to
Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society. Series B (Methodological), 57(1):289–300.

[Brody and Lapata2008] Samuel Brody and Mirella La-
pata. 2008. Good neighbors make good senses:
Exploiting distributional similarity for unsupervised

239



WSD. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008),
pages 65–72, Manchester, UK.

[Dorigo and Stützle2004] Dorigo and Stützle. 2004. Ant
Colony Optimization. MIT-Press.

[Gelbukh et al.2005] Alexander Gelbukh, Grigori
Sidorov, and Sang-Yong Han. 2005. On some opti-
mization heuristics for Lesk-like WSD algorithms. In
International Conference on Applications of Natural
Language to Information Systems – NLDB’05, pages
402–405, Alicante, Spain.

[Hirst and St-Onge1998] G. Hirst and David D. St-Onge.
1998. Lexical chains as representations of context for
the detection and correction of malapropisms. Word-
Net: An electronic Lexical Database. C. Fellbaum. Ed.
MIT Press. Cambridge. MA, pages 305–332. Ed. MIT
Press.

[Laarhoven and Aarts1987] P.J.M. Laarhoven and E.H.L.
Aarts. 1987. Simulated annealing: theory and appli-
cations. Mathematics and its applications. D. Reidel.

[Lesk1986] Michael Lesk. 1986. Automatic sense dis-
ambiguation using mrd: how to tell a pine cone from
an ice cream cone. In Proceedings of SIGDOC ’86,
pages 24–26, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

[Mann and Whitney1947] H. B. Mann and D. R. Whitney.
1947. On a Test of Whether one of Two Random Vari-
ables is Stochastically Larger than the Other. The An-
nals of Mathematical Statistics, 18(1):50–60.

[Miller1995] George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical
database. ACM, Vol. 38(No. 11):p. 1–41.

[Monmarché2010] N. Monmarché. 2010. Artificial Ants.
Iste Series. John Wiley & Sons.

[Navigli and Lapata2010] Roberto Navigli and Mirella
Lapata. 2010. An experimental study of graph con-
nectivity for unsupervised word sense disambiguation.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 32:678–692,
April.

[Navigli and Pozetto2012] Roberto Navigli and Si-
mone Paolo Pozetto. 2012. Babelnet: The
automatic construction, evaluation and applica-
tion of a wide-coverage multilingual semantic
network. Artificial Intelligence, 193:217–250.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2012.07.004.

[Navigli et al.2013] Roberto Navigli, David Jurgens, and
Daniele Vannella. 2013. Semeval-2013 task 12: Mul-
tilingual word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings
of the 7th International Workshop on Semantic Eval-
uation (SemEval 2013), in conjunction with the Sec-
ond Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational
Semantics (*SEM 2013), Atlanta, Georgia, 14-15 June.

[Ponzetto and Navigli2010] Simone Paolo Ponzetto and
Roberto Navigli. 2010. Knowledge-rich word sense

disambiguation rivaling supervised systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 1522–1531.

[Resnik1995] Philip Resnik. 1995. Using information
content to evaluate semantic similarity in a taxonomy.
In Proceedings of the 14th international joint confer-
ence on Artificial intelligence - Volume 1, IJCAI’95,
pages 448–453, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

[Schwab et al.2011] Didier Schwab, Jérôme Goulian, and
Nathan Guillaume. 2011. Désambiguïsation lexicale
par propagation de mesures semantiques locales par al-
gorithmes a colonies de fourmis. In TALN, Montpel-
lier (France), Juillet.

[Schwab et al.2012] Didier Schwab, Jérôme Goulian, An-
don Tchechmedjiev, and Hervé Blanchon. 2012. Ant
colony algorithm for the unsupervised word sense dis-
ambiguation of texts: Comparison and evaluation. In
Proceedings of COLING’2012, Mumbai (India), De-
cember. To be published.

[Schwab et al.2013] Didier Schwab, Jerôme Goulian, and
Andon Tchechmedjiev. 2013. Theoretical and empir-
ical comparison of artificial intelligence methods for
unsupervised word sense disambiguation. Int. J. of
Web Engineering and Technology. In Press.

[Tchechmedjiev et al.2012] Andon Tchechmedjiev,
Jérôme Goulian, Didier Schwab, and Gilles Sérasset.
2012. Parameter estimation under uncertainty with
simulated annealing applied to an ant colony based
probabilistic wsd algorithm. In Proceedings of
the First International Workshop on Optimization
Techniques for Human Language Technology, pages
109–124, Mumbai, India, December. The COLING
2012 Organizing Committee.

[Wu and Palmer1994] Zhibiao Wu and Martha Palmer.
1994. Verbs semantics and lexical selection. In Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd annual meeting of Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’94, pages 133–138,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

240


