










































ClaC: Semantic Relatedness of Words and Phrases


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 108–113, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

ClaC: Semantic Relatedness of Words and Phrases

Reda Siblini
Concordia University

1400 de Maisonneuve Blvd. West
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3G 1M8
r_sibl@encs.concordia.ca

Leila Kosseim
Concordia University

1400 de Maisonneuve Blvd. West
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3G 1M8
kosseim@encs.concordia.ca

Abstract

The measurement of phrasal semantic relat-
edness is an important metric for many nat-
ural language processing applications. In this
paper, we present three approaches for mea-
suring phrasal semantics, one based on a se-
mantic network model, another on a distribu-
tional similarity model, and a hybrid between
the two. Our hybrid approach achieved an F-
measure of 77.4% on the task of evaluating
the semantic similarity of words and compo-
sitional phrases.

1 Introduction

Phrasal semantic relatedness is a measurement of
how multiword expressions are related in meaning.
Many natural language processing applications
such as textual entailment, question answering, or
information retrieval require a robust measurement
of phrasal semantic relatedness. Current approaches
to address this problem can be categorized into three
main categories: those that rely on a knowledge
base and its structure, those that use the distribu-
tional hypothesis on a large corpus, and hybrid
approaches. In this paper, we propose supervised
approaches for comparing phrasal semantics that are
based on a semantic network model, a distributional
similarity model, and a hybrid between the two.
Those approaches have been evaluated on the task
of semantic similarity of words and compositional
phrases and on the task of evaluating the composi-
tionality of phrases in context.

2 Semantic Similarity of Words and
Compositional Phrases

The semantic similarity of words and compositional
phrases is the task of evaluating the similarity of a
word and a short phrase of two or more words; for
example, the word Interview and the phrase Formal
Meeting. In the next section we present our seman-
tic network model for computing phrasal semantic
relatedness between a word and a phrase, followed
by a distributional similarity model, that we evalu-
ate on the task of semantic similarity of words and
compositional phrases.

2.1 Semantic Network Model
Knowledge-based approaches to semantic related-
ness use the features of the knowledge base to mea-
sure the relatedness. One of most frequently used
semantic network is the Princeton’s WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998) which groups words into synonyms
sets (called synsets) and includes 26 semantic rela-
tions between those synsets, including: hypernymy,
hyponymy, meronymy, entailment . . .
To measure relatedness, most of those approaches
rely on the structure of the semantic network, such
as the semantic link path, depth (Leacock and
Chodorow, 1998; Wu and Palmer, 1994), direction
(Hirst and St-Onge, 1998), or type (Tsatsaronis et
al., 2010). Our phrasal semantic relatedness ap-
proach is inspired from those methods. However,
our approach is based on the idea that the combi-
nation of the least costly types of relations that re-
late one concept to a set of concepts are a suitable
indicator of their semantic relatedness. The type
of relations considered includes not only the hy-

108



Figure 1: Example of the semantic network around the word car.

ponym/hypernym relations but also all 26 available
semantic relations found in WordNet in addition to
relations extracted from each of the eXtended Word-
Net (Harabagiu et al., 1999) synset’s logical form.

To implement our idea, we created a weighted and
directed semantic network based on the relations of
WordNet and eXtended WordNet. We used Word-
Net’s words and synsets as the nodes of the network.
Each word is connected by an edge to its synsets,
and each synset is in turn connected to other synsets
based on the semantic relations included in Word-
Net. In addition each synset is connected by a la-
beled edge to the predicate arguments that are ex-
tracted from the eXtended WordNet synset’s logical
form. Every synset in the eXtended WordNet is re-
lated to a logical form, which contains a set of pred-
icate relations that relates the synset to set of words.
Each predicate in this representation is added as an
edge to the graph connecting the synset to a word.
For example, Figure 1 shows part of the semantic
network created around the word car. In this graph,
single-line ovals represent words, while double-line
ovals represent synsets.

To compute the semantic relatedness between
nodes in the semantic network, it is necessary to take
into consideration the semantic relation involved be-
tween two nodes. Indeed, WordNet’s 26 semantic
relations are not equally distributed nor do they con-
tribute equally to the semantic relatedness between
concept. In order to indicate the contribution of each
relation, we have classified them into seven cate-
gories: Similar, Hypernym, Sense, Predicate, Part,
Instance, and Other. By classifying WordNet’s re-
lations into these classes, we are able to weight

the contribution of a relation based on the class it
belongs to, as opposed to assigning a contributory
weight to each relations. The weights were assigned
by manually comparing the semantic features of a
set of concepts that are related by a specific seman-
tic relations. Table 1 shows the seven semantic cat-
egories that we defined, their corresponding weight,
and the relations they include. For example the cat-
egory Similar includes WordNet’s relations of en-
tailment, cause, verb group, similar to, participle of
verb, antonym, and pertainym. This class of rela-
tions has the most common semantic features when
comparing two concepts related with any of those
relations and hence was assigned the lowest weight1

of 1. All the 26 relations in the table are the ones
found in WordNet, for the exception of the predicate
(and inverse predicate) relations which are the predi-
cate relations extracted from the eXtended WordNet.
This can be seen in Figure 1, for example, where the
word car is related to the word Engine with the Pred-
icate relation extracted from the eXtended WordNet
logical form and more specifically the predicate pro-
pel by.

The computation of semantic relatedness be-
tween a word and a compositional phrase is then
the combination of weights of the shortest weighted
path2 in the weighted semantic network between
that word and every word in that phrase, normalized
by the maximum path cost.

1The weight can be seen as the cost of traversing an edge;
hence a lower weight is assigned to a highly contributory rela-
tion.

2The shortest path is based on an implementation of Dijk-
stras graph search algorithm (Dijkstra, 1959)

109



Category Weight Semantic Relations in WordNet or xWordnet
Similar 1 similar to, pertainym, participle of verb, entailment, cause,

antonym, verb group
Hypernym 2 hypernym, instance hypernym, derivationally related
Sense 4 lemma-synset
Predicate 6 predicate (extracted from Extended WordNet)
Part 8 holonym (instance, member, substance), meronym (instance,

member, substance), inverse predicate (extracted from Extended
WordNet)

Instance 10 hyponym, instance hyponym
Other 12 attribute, also see, domain of synset (topic, region, usage), member

of this domain (topic, region, usage)

Table 1: Relations Categories and Corresponding Weights.

Figure 2 shows an extract of the network involv-
ing the words Interview and the phrase Formal Meet-
ing. For the shortest path from Interview to Formal,
the word Interview is connected with a Sense rela-
tion to the synset #107210735 [Interview]. As in-
dicated in Table 1, the weight of this relation is de-
fined as 4, This synset is connected to the synset Ex-
amination through a Hypernym relation type with a
weight of 2, which is connected to the word Formal
with a predicate (IS) relation of weight 6. Overall,
the sum of the shortest path from Interview to For-
mal Meeting is hence equal to the sum of the edges
shown in Figure 1 (4+2+6+4+6+4+6 = 32). By nor-
malizing the sum to the maximum, In our approach,
24 is maximum path cost after which we assume
that two words are not related (which we assume to
be traversing two times maximum weighted path, 2
* maximum path weight of 12) and 8 is the mini-
mum number of edges between 2 words (which is
equal to traversing from the word to itself, 2 * sense
weight of 4)). Taking into consideration the number
of words in the phrase, the semantic relatedness will
be (24*2 - (32-8*2))/24*2 = 66.7%. In the next sec-
tion, we will introduce our distributional similarity
model.

2.2 Distributional Similarity Model

Distributional similarity models rely on the distribu-
tional hypothesis (Harris, 1954) to represent a word
by its context in order to compare word semantics.
There are various approach for the selection, repre-

sentation, and comparison of contextual data. Most
use the vector space model to represent the context
as dimensions in a vector space, where the feature
are frequency of co-occurrence of the context words,
and the comparison is usually the cosine similar-
ity. To go beyond lexical semantics and to repre-
sent phrases, a compositional model is created, some
use the addition or multiplication of vectors such
as Mitchell and Lapata (2008), or the use of tensor
product to account for word order as in the work of
Widdows (2008), or a more complex model as the
work of Grefenstette and Sadrzadeh (2011). In our
model, we are inspired by those various work, and
more specifically by the work of Mitchell and Lapata
(2008). The compositional model is based on phrase
words vectors addition, where each vector is com-
posed of the collocation pointwise mutual informa-
tion of the word up to a window of 3 words left and
right of the main word. The corpus used to collect
the features and their frequencies is the Web 1TB
corpus (Brants and Franz, 2006). For the Interview
to Formal Meeting example, the vector of the word
interview is first created from the corpus of the top
1000 words collocating interview between the win-
dow of 1 to 3 words with their frequencies. A similar
vector is created for the word Formal and the word
Meeting, the vector representing Formal Meeting is
then the addition of vector Formal to vector Meet-
ing. The comparison of vector Interview to vector
Formal Meeting is then the cosine of both vectors.

110



2.3 Evaluation

We evaluated our approaches for word-phrase se-
mantic relatedness on the SemEval task of evalu-
ating phrasal semantics, and more specifically on
the sub-task of evaluating the semantic similarity
between words and phrases. The task provided an
English dataset of 15,628 word-phrases, 60% an-
notated for training and 40% for testing, with the
goal of classifying each word-phrase as either pos-
itive or negative. To transform the semantic relat-
edness measure to a semantic similarity classifica-
tion one, we first calculated the semantic relatedness
of each word-phrase in the training set, and used
JRip, WEKA’s (Witten et al., 1999) implementation
of Cohen’s RIPPER rule learning algorithm (Cohen
and Singer, 1999), in order to learn a set of rules that
can differentiate between a positive semantic simi-
larity and a negative one. The classifier resulted in
rules for the semantic network model based related-
ness that could be summarized as follows: If the se-
mantic relatedness of the word-phrase is over 61%
then the similarity is positive, otherwise it is nega-
tive. So for the example Interview - Formal meeting,
which resulted in a semantic relatedness of 66.7% in
the semantic network approach, it will be classified
positively by the generated rule. This method was
our first submitted test run to this task, which re-
sulted in a recall of 63.79%, a precision of 91.01%,
and an F-measure of 75.00% on the testing set.

For the second run, we trained the distributional
similarity model using the same classifier. This re-
sulted with the following rule that could be summa-
rized as follows: If the semantic relatedness of the
word-phrase is over 40% then the similarity is pos-
itive, otherwise it is negative. It was obvious from
the training set that the semantic network model
was more accurate than the distributional similarity
model, but the distributional model had more cover-
age. So for our second submitted test run, we used
the semantic network approach as the main result,
but used the distributional model as a backup ap-
proach if one of the words in the phrase was not
available in WordNet, thus combining the precision
and coverage of both approaches. This method re-
sulted in a recall of 69.48%, a precision of 86.70%,
and an F-measure of 77.14% on the testing set.

For the last run, we used the same classifier

but this time we training it using two features:
the semantic network model relatedness measure
(SN), and the distributional similarity model (DS).
This training resulted in a set of rules that could
be summarized as follows: if SN > 61% then the
similarity is positive, else if DS > 40% then the
similarity is also positive, and lastly if SN > 53%
and DS > 31% then also in this case the similarity
is positive, otherwise the similarity is negative. This
was our third submitted test run, which resulted a
recall of 70.66%, a precision of 85.55%, and an
F-measure of 77.39% on the testing set.

3 Semantic Compositionality in Context

The semantic compositional in context is the task of
evaluating if a phrase is used literally or figuratively
in context. For example, the phrase big picture is
used literally in the sentence Click here for a bigger
picture and figuratively in To solve this problem, you
have to look at the bigger picture.
Our approach for this task is a supervised ap-
proached based on two main components: first, the
availability of the phrases most frequent collocating
expressions in a large corpus, and more specifically
the top 1000 phrases by frequency in Web 1TB cor-
pus (Brants and Franz, 2006). For example, for the
phrase big picture, we collect the top 1000 phrases
that come before and after the phrase in a corpus,
those includes look at the, see the, understand the
..... If the context contain any of those phrase, then
this component returns 1, indicating that the phrase
is most probably used figuratively. The intuition is
that, the use of phrases figuratively is more frequent
than their use in a literal meaning, and hence the
most frequent use will be collocated with phrases
that indicate this use.
The second component, is the phrase compositional-
ity. We calculate the semantic relatedness using the
semantic network model relatedness measure, that
was explained in Section 2.1, between the phrase
and the first content word before it and after it. The
intuition here is that the semantic relatedness of the
figurative use of the phrase to its context should be
different than the relatedness to its literal use. So
for the example, the phrase old school in the con-
text he is one of the old school versus the hall of

111



Figure 2: Shortest Path Between the Word Interview and the Phrase Formal Meeting.

the old school, we can notice that hall will be more
related to old school than the word one. This compo-
nent will result in two features: the relatedness to the
word before the phrase (SRB) and the relatedness to
word after the phrase in context (SRA).

To combine both componenets, we evaluated our
approaches on the data set presented by the Se-
mEval task of evaluating phrasal semantics, and
more specifically on the sub task of evaluating se-
mantic compositionality in context. The data set
contains a total of 1114 training instances, and 518
test instances. We use the training data and com-
puted the three features (Frequent Collocation (FC),
Semantic Relatedness word Before (SRB), and Se-
mantic Relatedness word After (SRA), and used
JRip, WEKA’s (Witten et al., 1999) implementation
of Cohen’s RIPPER rule learning algorithm (Cohen
and Singer, 1999) to learn a set of rule that differen-
tiate between a figurative and literal phrase use. This
method resulted in a set of rules that can be summa-
rized as follows: if FC is equal to 0 and SRB < 75%
then it is used literally in this context, else if FC is
equal to 0 and SRA < 75% then it is is also used lit-
erally, otherwise it is used figuratively. This method
resulted in an accuracy of 55.01% on the testing set.

4 Conclusion

In this paper we have presented state of the art
word-phrase semantic relatedness approaches that
are based on a semantic network model, a distribu-
tional model, and a combination of the two. The

novelty of the semantic network model approach is
the use of the sum of the shortest path between a
word and a phrase from a weighted semantic net-
work to calculate word-phrase semantic relatedness.
We evaluated the approach on the SemEval task of
evaluating phrasal semantics, once in a supervised
standalone configuration, another with a backup dis-
tributional similarity model, and last in a hybrid con-
figuration with the distributional model. The hy-
brid model achieved the highest f-measure in those
three configuration of 77.4% on the task of evaluat-
ing the semantic similarity of words and composi-
tional phrases. We also evaluated this approach on
the subtask of evaluating the semantic composition-
ality in context with less success, and an accuracy of
of 55.01%.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the reviewers for their sug-
gestions and valuable comments.

References
Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1t 5-gram

version 1.
William W Cohen and Yoram Singer. 1999. A simple,

fast, and effective rule learner. In Proceedings of the
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
335–342. John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Edsger W Dijkstra. 1959. A note on two problems
in connexion with graphs. Numerische mathematik,
1(1):269–271.

112



Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press.

Edward Grefenstette and Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh. 2011.
Experimental support for a categorical compositional
distributional model of meaning. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1394–1404. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Sanda Harabagiu, George Miller, and Dan Moldovan.
1999. Wordnet 2- a morphologically and semantically
enhanced resource. In Proceedings of SIGLEX, vol-
ume 99, pages 1–8.

Zellig S Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word.
Graeme Hirst and David St-Onge. 1998. Lexical chains

as representations of context for the detection and cor-
rection of malapropisms. WordNet An electronic lexi-
cal database, pages 305–332, April.

Claudia Leacock and Martin Chodorow. 1998. Com-
bining local context and wordnet similarity for word
sense identification. WordNet: An electronic lexical
database, 49(2):265–283.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Vector-based
models of semantic composition. proceedings of ACL-
08: HLT, pages 236–244.

George Tsatsaronis, Iraklis Varlamis, and Michalis Vazir-
giannis. 2010. Text relatedness based on a word
thesaurus. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
37(1):1–40.

Dominic Widdows. 2008. Semantic vector products:
Some initial investigations. In To appear in Second
AAAI Symposium on Quantum Interaction, volume 26,
page 28th. Citeseer.

Ian H Witten, Eibe Frank, Leonard E Trigg, Mark A Hall,
Geoffrey Holmes, and Sally Jo Cunningham. 1999.
Weka: Practical machine learning tools and techniques
with java implementations.

Zhibiao Wu and Martha Palmer. 1994. Verbs seman-
tics and lexical selection. In Proceedings of the 32nd
annual meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 133–138, New Mexico, June.

113


