










































CodeX: Combining an SVM Classifier and Character N-gram Language Models for Sentiment Analysis on Twitter Text


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 520–524, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

CodeX: Combining an SVM Classifier and Character N-gram Language
Models for Sentiment Analysis on Twitter Text

Qi Han, Junfei Guo and Hinrich Schütze
Institute for Nature Language Processing

University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany

{hanqi, guojf}@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

This paper briefly reports our system for the
SemEval-2013 Task 2: sentiment analysis in
Twitter. We first used an SVM classifier with
a wide range of features, including bag of
word features (unigram, bigram), POS fea-
tures, stylistic features, readability scores and
other statistics of the tweet being analyzed,
domain names, abbreviations, emoticons in
the Twitter text. Then we investigated the ef-
fectiveness of these features. We also used
character n-gram language models to address
the problem of high lexical variation in Twit-
ter text and combined the two approaches to
obtain the final results. Our system is robust
and achieves good performance on the Twitter
test data as well as the SMS test data.

1 Introduction

The challenge of the SemEval-2013 Task 2 (Task
B) is the “Message Polarity Classification” (Wilson
et al., 2013). Specifically, the task was to classify
whether a given message has positive, negative or
neutral sentiment; for messages conveying both pos-
itive and negative sentiment, whichever is stronger
should be chosen.

In recent years, text messaging and microblog-
ging such as tweeting has gained its popularity.
Since these short messages are often used not only
to discuss facts but also to share opinions and sen-
timents, sentiment analysis on this type of data has
lately become interesting. However, some features
of this type of data make natural language process-
ing challenging. For example, the messages are usu-

ally short and the language used can be very in-
formal, with misspellings, creative spellings, slang,
URLs and special abbreviations. Some research has
already been done attempting to address these prob-
lems, to enable sentiment analysis on this type of
data, in particular on Twitter data, and even to use
the outcome of sentiment analysis to make predic-
tions (Jansen et al., 2009; Barbosa and Feng, 2010;
Bifet and Frank, 2010; Davidov et al., 2010; Jiang et
al., 2011; Pak and Paroubek, 2010; Saif et al., 2012;
Tumasjan et al., 2010).

As the research mentioned above, our system used
a machine learning based approach for sentiment
analysis. Our system combines results from an SVM
classifier using a wide range of features as well as
votes derived from character n-gram language mod-
els to do the final prediction.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes the features used for the SVM clas-
sifier. Section 3 describes how the votes from char-
acter n-gram language models were derived. Section
4 describes the details of our method. And finally
section 5 presents the results.

2 Features

We pre-processed the tweets as follows: i) tok-
enized the tweets using a tokenizer suitable for Twit-
ter data, which, for example, recognize emoticons
and hashtags; ii) replaced all URLs with the token
twitterurl; iii) replaced all Twitter usernames with
the token @twitterusername; iv) converted all to-
kens into lower case; v) replaced all sequences of
repeated characters by three characters, for example,
convert gooooood to goood, this way we recognize

520



the emphasized usage of the word; vi) expanded ab-
breviations with a dictionary,1 which we will refer
to as noslang dictionary; vii) appended neg to all
words from one position before a negation word to
the next punctuation mark.

We represented each given tweet using 6 feature
families:

• Lexical features (UG, BG): Number of times
each unigram appears in the tweet (UG); num-
ber of times each bigram appears in the tweet
(BG).

• POS features (POS U, POS B): Number of
times each POS appears in the tweet divided by
number of tokens of that tweet (POS U); num-
ber of times each POS bigram appears in the
tweet (POS B). To tag the tweet we used the
ark-twitter-nlp tagger.2

• Statistical features (STAT): Various readabil-
ity scores (ARI, Flesch Reading Ease, RIX,
LIX, Coleman Liau Index, SMOG Index, Gun-
ning Fog Index, Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level)
of the tweet; some simple statistics of the tweet
(average count of words per sentence, complex
word count, syllable count, sentence count,
word count, char count). We calculated the
statistics and scores after pre-processing step
vi). We then normalized these scores so that
they had mean 0 and standard deviation 1.

• Stylistic features (STY): Number of times
an emoticon appears in the tweet, number of
words which are written in all capital let-
ters, number of words containing characters
repeated consecutively more than three times,
number of words containing characters re-
peated consecutively more than four times. We
calculated these features after pre-processing
step i). We used the binarized and the logarith-
mically scaled version of these features.

• Abbreviation features (ABB): For every term
in the noslang dictionary, we checked whether
it was present in the tweet or not and used this
as a feature.

1http://www.noslang.com
2http://www.ark.cs.cmu.edu/TweetNLP/

• URL features (URL): We expanded the URLs
in the Twitter text and collected all the domain
names which the URLs in the training set point
to, and used them as binary features.

Feature sets UG, BG, POS U, POS B are com-
mon features for sentiment analysis (Pang et al.,
2002). Remus (2011) showed that incorporat-
ing readability measures as features can improve
sentence-level subjectivity classification. Stylistic
features have also been used in sentiment analysis on
Twitter data (Go et al., 2010). Some abbreviations
express sentiment which is not apparent from word
level. For example lolwtime, which means laugh-
ing out loud with tears in my eyes, expresses positive
sentiment overall, but this does not follow directly at
the sentiment of individual words, so the feature set
ABB might be helpful. Finally, we conjecture that a
tweet including an URL pointing to youtube.com
is more likely to be subjective than a tweet including
an URL pointing to a news website.

3 Integrating votes from language models
based on character n-grams

Language Models can be used for text classification
tasks. Since the goal of the SemEval-2013 Task 2
(Task B) is to classify each tweet into one of the
three classes: positive, negative or neutral, a lan-
guage model approach can be used.

Emoticon-smoothed language models have been
used to do Twitter sentiment analysis (Liu et al.,
2012). The language models used there were based
on words. However, there is evidence (Aisopos et
al., 2012; Raaijmakers and Kraaij, 2008) showing
that super-word character n-gram features can be
quite effective for sentiment analysis on short infor-
mal data. This is because noise and mis-spellings
tend to have smaller impact on substring patterns
than on word patterns. Our system used language
models based on character n-grams to improve the
performance of sentiment analysis on tweets.

For every tweet we constructed 3 sequences of
character-trigrams and 4 sequences of character-
four-grams. For instance, the tweet "Hello
World!" would have 7 corresponding substring
representations:
<s><s>H ell o W orl d!</s>,
<s>He llo Wo rld !</s></s>,

521



Hel lo Wor ld!,
<s><s><s>H ello Wor ld!</s>
<s><s>He llo Worl d!</s></s>,
<s>Hel lo W orld !</s></s></s>,
Hell o Wo rld!
where <s> means start of a sentence, </s> means
end of a sentence, means whitespace. Using the
corresponding sequences of character-trigrams from
all positive tweets in training set we trained a lan-
guage model LM+3 . To train the language model
we used Chen and Goodman’s modified Kneser-Ney
discounting for N-grams from the SRILM toolkit
(Stolcke, 2002). Given a new sequence of character-
trigrams derived from a positive tweet, it should
give a lower perplexity value than a language model
trained on sequences of character-trigrams from
negative tweets.

In this way we obtained 6 language models:
LM−3 from character-trigram sequences of neg-
ative tweets, LMN3 from character-trigram se-
quences of neutral tweets, LM+3 from character-
trigram sequences of positive tweets, LM−4 from
character-four-grams sequences of negative tweets,
LMN4 from character-four-gram sequences of neu-
tral tweets, LM+4 from character-four-gram se-
quences of positive tweets.

For every new tweet, we first obtain the 7 corre-
sponding substring representations. Then for each
substring representation, we calculate 3 votes from
the language models. For instance, for a sequence
of character-trigrams, we first calculate three per-
plexity valuesP−3 , P

N
3 , P

+
3 using language models

LM−3 , LM
N
3 , LM

+
3 then produce votes according

to the following discretization function:

vote(LMxn , LM
y
n) =

{
1 if P xn ≥ P

y
n ;

−1 else.

where n ∈ {3, 4} is the length of the character n-
gram, x, y ∈ {−, +, N} are class labels and P xn , P

y
n

are the corresponding perplexity values. In this way
we obtain 21 votes for every tweet. However, in the
final classification, every sentence got 42 votes, of
which 21 were derived from bigram language mod-
els of the substrings and 21 were from trigram lan-
guage models of these substrings.

Feature Sets Accuracy
UG,BG,POS U,POS B,STAT,STY,ABB,URL 0.692
BG,POS U,POS B,STAT,STY,ABB,URL 0.641
POS U,POS B,STAT,STY,ABB,URL 0.579
POS U,STAT,STY,ABB,URL 0.564
STAT,STY,ABB,URL 0.524
STY,ABB,URL 0.474
STY,URL 0.454
URL 0.441

Table 1: Cross validation average accuracy with differ-
ent feature sets. we started with all 8 feature sets and
removed feature sets one by one, where we always first
removed the feature set that resulted in the biggest drop
in accuracy.

4 Methods

In this section we describe the methods used by our
system.

Firstly, we did feature selection on all the features
described in Section 2. Using Mutual Information
(Shannon and Weaver, 1949) and 10-fold cross vali-
dation we chose the top 13,500 features. Using these
features we trained an SVM classifier with the train-
ing data. As the implementation of the SVM classi-
fier we used liblinear (Fan et al., 2008). The SVM
classifier was then used to produce initial predictions
for messages in the development set, the Twitter test
set and the SMS test set.

Then, we represented every message in the devel-
opment set, the Twitter test set and the SMS test
set using the 42 votes we described in Section 3
together with the predictions of the SVM classifier
we described above. Using the Bagging algorithm
from the WEKA machine learning toolkit (Hall et
al., 2009) and the development set data, we trained
a new classifier and used this classifier for the final
prediction on Twitter test data and SMS test data.

5 Results

5.1 Feature analysis

To study the effectiveness of different features, we
started with all 8 feature sets and removed feature
sets one by one, where we always first removed the
feature set that resulted in the biggest drop in accu-
racy. We did 10 fold cross validation on training set

522



Feature Sets Accuracy
POS U,POS B,STAT,STY,ABB,URL 0.579
POS B,STY,ABB,URL 0.571
POS U,STY,ABB,URL 0.557
STAT,STY,ABB,URL 0.524
STY,ABB,URL 0.474

Table 2: Cross validation average accuracy with further
combination of feature sets.

Accuracy F1 (pos, neg)
Majority Baseline 0.4123 0.2919
SVM Classifier 0.6612 0.5414

SVM + LM Votes 0.6457 0.5384

Table 3: Overall accuracy and average F1 score for posi-
tive and negative classes on Twitter test data.

and used average accuracy as a metric.
As we can see from Table 1, lexical features were

the most important features – they counted for more
than 0.11 loss of accuracy when removed from the
features. POS features and statistical features were
also important, POS bigrams more so than POS uni-
grams. Stylistic, abbreviation and URL features, on
the contrary, seem to be only of moderate useful-
ness.

To further investigate the relationship between the
feature sets POS U, POS B and STAT, we did addi-
tional experiments. From Table 2, we can see that
removing all three feature sets caused a decrease
in accuracy to 0.47, including just one feature set
POS B, POS U or STAT resulted in accuracy above
0.57, 0.55 and 0.52 respectively. This shows that
all three feature sets were quite effective and POS B
was most useful. However, adding all of the three
feature sets only caused an increase in accuracy to
0.579, which suggests that they were highly corre-
lated.

Accuracy F1 (pos, neg)
Majority Baseline 0.2350 0.1902
SVM Classifier 0.6504 0.5811

SVM + LM Votes 0.6418 0.5670

Table 4: Overall accuracy and average F1 score for posi-
tive and negative classes on SMS test data.

5.2 Effectiveness of language model features

To evaluate the effectiveness of features derived
from language models of character n-grams, we
compared the performance of our SVM classifier
and that of the classifier combining the SVM clas-
sifier results and language model features.3 We per-
formed our experiments on both of the Twitter test
data and the SMS test data. The results in Table 3
and Table 4 suggested that in our current setup, lan-
guage model features were not very helpful.

Table 3 and Table 4 also show that our system
improved the performance greatly compared to Ma-
jority baseline system,4. Compared with other par-
ticipants in the SemEval-2013 Task 2, our system
achieved average performance on Twitter test data.
However, it has been the ninth best out of all 48 sys-
tems for the performance on SMS test data. This
shows that our system can be easily adapted to dif-
ferent contexts without a big drop in performance.
One reason for that might be that we did not use any
sentiment lexicon developed specifically for Twitter
data and we used high level features like the statisti-
cal features and POS features for our classification.

6 Conclusion

This paper briefly reports our system designed for
the SemEval-2013 Task 2: sentiment analysis in
Twitter. We first used an SVM classifier with a wide
range of features. We found that simple statistics
of the tweets, for example word count or readabil-
ity scores, can help in sentiment analysis on Twitter
text.

We then used character n-gram language mod-
els to address the problem of high lexical variation
in Twitter text and combined the two approaches
to obtain the final results. Although in our current
setup, features derived from character n-gram lan-
guage models do not perform very well, they may
benefit from a larger training data set.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by DFG projects SFB 732.
We would like to thank our colleagues at IMS.

3We accidentally used feature set POS B two times in our
representation, but it didn’t change the results significantly.

4To be consistent with the evaluation metric, we chose the
majority class of positive and negative classes.

523



References
Fotis Aisopos, George Papadakis, Konstantinos Tserpes,

and Theodora Varvarigou. 2012. Content vs. context
for sentiment analysis: a comparative analysis over
microblogs. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM confer-
ence on Hypertext and social media, HT ’12, pages
187–96, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Luciano Barbosa and Junlan Feng. 2010. Robust senti-
ment detection on twitter from biased and noisy data.
In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics: Posters, COLING ’10,
pages 36–44, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Albert Bifet and Eibe Frank. 2010. Sentiment knowl-
edge discovery in twitter streaming data. In Proceed-
ings of the 13th international conference on Discov-
ery science, DS’10, pages 1–15, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using twitter hashtags
and smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Posters,
COLING ’10, pages 241–249, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-Rui
Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR: a li-
brary for large linear classification. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 9:1871–1874, June.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and L. Huang. 2010. Exploit-
ing the unique characteristics of tweets for sentiment
analysis. Technical report, Technical Report, Stanford
University.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11(1):10–18, November.

Bernard J. Jansen, Mimi Zhang, Kate Sobel, and Abdur
Chowdury. 2009. Twitter power: Tweets as elec-
tronic word of mouth. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol.,
60(11):2169–2188, November.

Long Jiang, Mo Yu, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu, and Tiejun
Zhao. 2011. Target-dependent twitter sentiment clas-
sification. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies - Volume 1, HLT ’11,
pages 151–160, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Kun-Lin Liu, Wu-Jun Li, and Minyi Guo. 2012. Emoti-
con smoothed language models for twitter sentiment
analysis. In Twenty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence.

A. Pak and P. Paroubek. 2010. Twitter as a corpus for
sentiment analysis and opinion mining. LREC.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? sentiment classification using ma-
chine learning techniques. In Proceedings of EMNLP,
pages 79–86.

Stephan Raaijmakers and Wessel Kraaij. 2008. A shal-
low approach to subjectivity classification. Proceed-
ings of ICWSM, pages 216–217.

Robert Remus. 2011. Improving sentence-level subjec-
tivity classification through readability measurement.
May. Proceedings of the 18th Nordic Conference of
Computational Linguistics NODALIDA 2011.

Hassan Saif, Yulan He, and Harith Alani. 2012. Seman-
tic sentiment analysis of twitter. In Philippe Cudr-
Mauroux, Jeff Heflin, Evren Sirin, Tania Tudorache,
Jrme Euzenat, Manfred Hauswirth, Josiane Xavier
Parreira, Jim Hendler, Guus Schreiber, Abraham Bern-
stein, and Eva Blomqvist, editors, The Semantic Web
ISWC 2012, number 7649 in Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 508–524. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg, January.

Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver. 1949. Mathe-
matical Theory of Communication. University of Illi-
nois Press.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILMAn extensible language
modeling toolkit. In In Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
national Conference on Spoken Language Processing
(ICSLP 2002, page 901904.

Andranik Tumasjan, Timm O. Sprenger, Philipp G. Sand-
ner, and Isabell M. Welpe. 2010. Predicting elections
with twitter: What 140 characters reveal about politi-
cal sentiment. Proceedings of the Fourth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

Theresa Wilson, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Sara
Rosenthal, Veselin Stoyanov, and Alan Ritter. 2013.
SemEval-2013 task 2: Sentiment analysis in twitter.
In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation, SemEval ’13, June.

524


