










































Choosing the Right Words: Characterizing and Reducing Error of the Word Count Approach


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 1: Proceedings of the Main Conference
and the Shared Task, pages 296–305, Atlanta, Georgia, June 13-14, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Choosing the Right Words:
Characterizing and Reducing Error of the Word Count Approach

H. Andrew Schwartz,1 Johannes Eichstaedt,1 Lukasz Dziurzynski,1 Eduardo Blanco,2
Margaret L. Kern,1 Stephanie Ramones,1 Martin Seligman,1 and Lyle Ungar1

1University of Pennsylvania
2Lymba Corporation

hansens@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

Social scientists are increasingly using the
vast amount of text available on social me-
dia to measure variation in happiness and
other psychological states. Such studies count
words deemed to be indicators of happiness
and track how the word frequencies change
across locations or time. This word count ap-
proach is simple and scalable, yet often picks
up false signals, as words can appear in differ-
ent contexts and take on different meanings.
We characterize the types of errors that occur
using the word count approach, and find lex-
ical ambiguity to be the most prevalent. We
then show that one can reduce error with a
simple refinement to such lexica by automat-
ically eliminating highly ambiguous words.
The resulting refined lexica improve precision
as measured by human judgments of word oc-
currences in Facebook posts.

1 Introduction

Massive social media corpora, such as blogs, tweets,
and Facebook statuses have recently peaked the in-
terest of social scientists. Compared to traditional
samples in tens or hundreds, social media sample
sizes are orders of magnitude larger, often contain-
ing millions or billions of posts or queries. Such text
provides potential for unobtrusive, inexpensive, and
real-time measurement of psychological states (such
as positive or negative affect) and aspects of sub-
jective well-being (such as happiness and engage-
ment). Social scientists have recently begun to use
social media text in a variety of studies (Cohn et

al., 2004; Kramer, 2010; Tausczik and Pennebaker,
2010; Kamvar and Harris, 2011; Dodds et al., 2011;
Golder and Macy, 2011).

One of the most popular approaches to estimate
psychological states is by using the word count
method (Pennebaker et al., 2007), where one tracks
the frequency of words that have been judged to be
associated with a given state. Greater use of such
words is taken to index the prevalence of the cor-
responding state. For example, the use of the word
‘happy’ is taken to index positive emotion, and ‘an-
gry’ to index negative emotion. The most widely
used tool to carry out such analysis, and the one we
investigate in this paper, is Pennebaker’s Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count, (LIWC) (Pennebaker et al.,
2001; Pennebaker et al., 2007). LIWC, originally de-
veloped to analyze writing samples for emotion and
control, has grown to include a variety of lexica for
linguistic and psychosocial topics including positive
and negative emotions, pronouns, money, work, and
religion. The word count approach has high appeal
to social scientists in need of a tool to approach so-
cial media, and although others have been used (see,
for example (Gottschalk and Bechtel, 1998; Bollen
et al., 2010), LIWC’s lexica are generally perceived
as a “tried-and-tested” list of words (Miller, 2011).

Unfortunately, the word count approach has some
drawbacks when used as indicators for psycholog-
ical states. Words are the unit of measurement, but
words can carry many different meanings depending
on context. Consider the Facebook posts below con-
taining instances of ‘play’, a word associated with
positive emotion in LIWC.

296



1. so everyone should come to the play tomor-
row...

2. Does anyone what type of file i need to convert
youtube videos to play on PS3???

3. Time to go play with Chalk from the Easter
Bunny!

Out of the three instances, only (3) seems to com-
municate positive emotion. In (1), ‘play’ is used as
a noun rather than the expected verb, while in (2),
‘play’ is a verb but it is used in a sense that is not
directly associated with positive emotion. (1) and
(2) demonstrate how lexical ambiguities (i.e. multi-
ple parts-of-speech or word senses) can affect accu-
racy of words in a lexicon. Additionally, even when
appearing as the expected part of speech and word
sense, signal from a word may change due to its con-
text, such as being within the scope of a negation as
in (4), or describing something desired as in (5).

4. ...all work no play :-(

5. i sure wish i had about 50 hours a day to play
cod

Our goal is to characterize the errors of the widely
used word count approach, and show that such lex-
ica can be significantly improved by employing an
ambiguity metric to refine such lexica. Rather than
work on a new method of measuring psychological
states, we work within the bounds of word count and
ask how accurate it is and whether we can improve
it without sacrificing its simplicity and scalability.

We attempt to reduce the erroneous signal of
the word count approach while maintaining legiti-
mate signal simply by refining the lexicon. In other
words, we would like to move closer to the goal in
Figure 1, by eliminating words that often carry er-
roneous signal such as ’play’, and keeping words
which often carry the sought-after signal, such as
’cheerful’. The difficulty in doing this is that we do
not have the data to tell us which words are most
likely to carry signal (even if we had such data we
would like to develop a method that could be applied
to any newly created lexica). Instead we leverage
part-of-speech and word sense data to help us deter-
mine which words are lexically ambiguous.

Figure 1: The relationship between text expressing posi-
tive emotion (POSEMO) and text containing LIWC terms
for POSEMO.

Our approach of eliminating ambiguous words
increases the precision at the expense of recall, a
reasonable trade-off in social media where we are
working with millions or even billions of word in-
stances. Additionally, it is minimally-supervised, in
that we do not require training data on human-state;
instead we use existing hand-labeled corpora, such
as SemCor (Miller et al., 1993), for word sense in-
formation. Not requiring training data also means
our refinement is flexible; it can be applied to mul-
tiple domains and lexica, it makes few assumptions
that might introduce problems of over-fitting, and it
is parsimonious in that it merely improves an estab-
lished approach.

This paper makes two primary contributions: (1)
an analysis of the types of errors common for the
word count approach (Section 3), and (2) a general
method for refining psychosocial lexica based on the
ambiguity of words (Section 4). Before describing
these contributions, we discuss related work, mak-
ing the case for using social media in social science
and surveying some work in computational linguis-
tics. We then evaluate both the original LIWC lex-
icon and our refinement of it against human judg-
ments of expression of positive and negative emo-
tions on hand-annotated Facebook posts, and show
the benefit of lexicon refinement for estimating well-
being over time for large aggregates of posts. Fi-
nally, we discuss the implications of our work and
possible future directions.

297



2 Background

Compared to traditional approaches in the social sci-
ences, large scale analysis of social media is cheap,
near real-time, unobtrusive, and gives high cover-
age. We outline these advantages below.

Inexpensive Extracting information from sources
such Facebook and Twitter is vastly cheaper than the
more conventional polling done by companies such
as Gallup – and by many social science researchers.
Social media data does not require phone calls to be
made or doors to be knocked on. For example, a rep-
resentative survey asking 1,000 people by a leading
polling company costs to the order of $10,0001. In
contrast, once the software exists, social media data
from tens of millions of users can be obtained and
analyzed at a fraction of the cost.

Temporal Resolution Much of the attraction of
social media stems from the fact that it captures
a written live stream of collective thought. When
Google relied on search queries to monitor health-
seeking behavior to predict influenza epidemics, the
reporting lag was a mere day, whereas traditional
CDC surveillance systems take 1-2 weeks to pub-
lish their data (Ginsberg et al., 2009). Infrastructure
based on social media and Internet use data allows
reporting and analysis systems with little to no re-
porting lag. Additionally, traditional survey designs
are typically only designed to assess psychological
states at a given point in time.

Unobtrusive Estimation Traditional self-report
survey approaches, even those implemented on the
web, suffer from social desirability, priming, and
other biases. For example, Kahneman et al. (Kah-
neman et al., 2006) found that the order in which
questions are asked on questionnaires can determine
how they are answered. By looking directly into the
social worlds, many of these self-report biases can
be avoided. The traces of human interactions in so-
cial media represent the goings-on in their original
ecologies of meaning and signification. This ap-
proach diminishes the inferential distance between
the context of the phenomena and the context of
measurement – and thus decreases the room for sys-
tematic distortion of signal.

1Gallup, Personal correspondence.

2.1 The Word Count Approach

As previously noted, the word count approach is
most often used by social scientists through the tool
known as Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count or
LIWC (Pennebaker et al., 2007). The LIWC2007
dictionary is composed of almost 4,500 words and
word stems organized across one or more word cat-
egories, including 406 positive emotion words and
499 negative emotion words. When long form texts
are analyzed with LIWC, the program simply re-
turns the percentages of words belonging to the dif-
ferent analytical categories – the simplicity of this
approach makes it popular with non-technical social
scientists.

LIWC’s positive and negative emotion lexica have
recently begun to be used on “short form” writing in
social media. For example, Golder and Macy (2011)
used LIWC to study diurnal and seasonal variation
in mood in a collection of 400 million Twitter mes-
sages. Kramer (2010) proposed the “Gross National
Happiness” index and Kivran-Swaine and Naaman
(2011) examined associations between user expres-
sions of positive and negative emotions and the size
and density of social networks. A comprehensive
review can be found in Tausczik and Pennebaker
(2010).

To our knowledge there is only one work which
has evaluated LIWC’s accuracy over social media.
Bantum and Owen (2009) evaluated LIWC on a set
of posts to an Internet-based breast cancer support
group. By annotating expression of emotion within
this text, they were able to produce accuracy figures
of sensitivity (much like recall) and predictive va-
lidity (precision). Sensitivity measured how often
a word (in context) expressing positive or negative
emotion was captured by LIWC. Predictive validity
measured how often a word (in context) captured
by LIWC as measuring positive or negative emotion
was indeed expressing positive or negative emotion.
While they found a recall of 0.88, the precision was
only 0.31 – that is, only 31% of instances contain-
ing words indexed by LIWC actually conveyed the
associated emotion. We contend that this is a major
drawback for applying LIWC to social media, be-
cause while it is not important to catch every expres-
sion of emotion out of a million Tweets, it is impor-
tant that when something is captured it is an accurate

298



estimate of the true state.

2.2 Related Work in Computational
Linguistics

Researchers have been exploring the use of lexica
that define the subjective orientation of words for
tasks such as sentiment or subjectivity analysis. A
common weakly-supervised approach starts with a
small set of sentiment knowledge (seed words as-
sociated with a given sentiment) and expands the
words into a large lexicon (Hatzivassiloglou and
McKeown, 1997; Kamps and Marx, 2002; Kim and
Hovy, 2004; Kanayama and Nasukawa, 2006; Bac-
cianella et al., 2010). We take a different approach.
Rather than expanding lexica, we start with a large
set of words and refine the set. The refinement in-
creases precision at the cost of recall, which is a
reasonable exchange when we are looking at mil-
lions or even billions of word instances. Standard
applications of sentiment analysis, such as annotat-
ing movie reviews, may not be as inclined to skip
instances, since they want to make predictions for
items which have very few reviews.

Another line of work in sentiment analysis has
created lexicons using supervised learning. One of
the first works to do so was by Pang and colleagues
(2002), who used data including author ratings of
reviews, such as IMDB movie reviews. The author
ratings become training data for sentiment classifi-
cation. Pang et al. showed that human-created lexi-
cons did not perform as well as lexicons based on
simple word statistics over the training data. In-
terestingly, they found that words like ‘still’ were
most predictive of positive movie reviews, and that
punctuation marks of ‘!’ and ‘?’ were strong signs
of negative movie reviews. Unfortunately, training
data for subjective well-being or happiness is not
yet available, preventing the use of such supervised
learning methods. Additionally, this work seeks to
experiment within the bounds of what social sci-
entists are in fact using (with publications in high-
impact venues such as Science). We thus take a dif-
ferent approach, and automatically improve human
created lexicons.

Wiebe and Cardie (2005) generalized the task of
sentiment analysis to that of discovering subjectiv-
ity such as “opinions, emotions, sentiments, specu-
lations, evaluations, etc.”. More recently, Wilson et

POSEMO NEGEMO
term frequency term frequency
like 774,663 hate 167,109
love 797,833 miss 158,274
good 571,687 bad 151,496

friend* 406,568 bore* 140,684
happy 384,797 shit* 114,923
LOL 370,613 hurt* 98,291
well* 284,002 craz* 94,518
great 263,113 lost 94,059
haha* 240,587 damn* 93,666
best 227,381 fuck 90,212

better 212,547 stupid* 85,587
fun 216,432 kill* 83,593

please* 174,597 hell 80,046
hope 170,998 fuckin* 79,959
thank 161,827 wrong* 70,714

Table 1: Most frequent POSEMO and NEGEMO terms in
LIWC in the 12.7 million Facebook posts. “*” indicates a
wildcard, so that “well*” matches “wellness”.

al. (2009) contended that the context may neutralize
or change the polarity of the subjective orientation
of a word. It is difficult to determine where concepts
of happiness such as quality of relationships or de-
gree of achievement in life fit in with subjectivity.
Thus, we do not claim to be measuring subjectivity
and instead we use the general term of ‘psychologi-
cal state’, referring to “the way something [a person]
is with respect to its main attributes” (Miller, 1993).

To the best of our knowledge, while part-of-
speech tagging and word sense disambiguation are
staple tasks in the computational linguistics commu-
nity, the utility of a lexical ambiguity metric has yet
to be explored.

3 Annotation and Analysis of Errors from
the Word Count Method

One objective of our work is to document and de-
scribe how often different types of errors occur when
using the word count approach on social media. To
do this, we first judged a sample of 1,000 instances
of LIWC terms occurring in Facebook posts to indi-
cate whether they contribute signal towards the as-
sociated LIWC category (i.e. positive emotion). We
then took instances that were deemed to carry erro-
neous signal and annotated them with a label for the

299



category agreement instances base rate
POSEMO 0.742 500 .654
NEGEMO 0.746 500 .697

TOTAL 0.744 1,000 .676
random 0.343 - -

Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement over 1,000 instances
of LIWC terms in Facebook posts. Base rate is the aver-
age of how often an annotator answered true.

type of signal error. This section describes the pro-
cess we used in generating these annotations and the
results we found.

3.1 Annotation Process

Annotating social media instances of lexica terms
provides insight into how well the word count ap-
proach works, and also yields a “ground truth” for
evaluating our lexicon refinement methods. We ran-
domly selected for labeling a sample of 1,000 sta-
tus updates containing words from a given lexicon
drawn from a collection of 12.7 million Facebook
status updates provided by the Cambridge myPer-
sonality project (Kosinski and Stillwell, 2012).

We used terms from the LIWC positive emotion
(POSEMO) and negative emotion (NEGEMO) lex-
ica, which are the same lexica used by the works of
Kramer (2010), Kivran-Swaine and Naaman (2011),
and Golder and Macy (2011). Table 1 lists the
most frequent POSEMO and NEGEMO terms in our
Facebook sample.

As mentioned above, we did two types of annota-
tions. First, we judged whether each given instance
of a word conveyed the correct associated type of
emotion. The second task took a sample of instances
judged to have incorrect signal and labeled them
with a reason for the error; We refer to this as signal
error type.

For the first task, we had three human judges inde-
pendently evaluate the 1,000 status update instances
as to whether they were indeed correct signal. The
question the judges were told to answer was “Does
the word contribute to the associated psychological-
state (POSEMO or NEGEMO) within the sentence
it appears?”. In other words, “would the sentence
convey less [positive emotion or negative emotion]
without this word?”. Subjective feedback from the
judges indicated that it was often difficult to make

a decision, so we used three judges per instance. In
the case of conflict between judges, the “correct” la-
bel for validation of the refined lexicon was defined
to be the majority vote. A sampling of Facebook sta-
tuses demonstrates a mixed picture of relevance for
the unrefined LIWC dictionaries:

1. has had a very good day (‘good’ - POSEMO)

2. is so very bored. (‘bore*’ - NEGEMO)

3. damn, that octopus is good, lol (‘damn’ -
NEGEMO)

4. thank you for his number (‘numb*’ -
NEGEMO)

5. I got pranked sooooo bad (‘bad’ - NEGEMO)

6. don’t be afraid to fail (‘afraid’ - NEGEMO)

7. I wish I could . . . and we could all just be happy
(‘happy’ - POSEMO)

Some posts clearly use positive or negative lexicon
words such as (1) and (2). Curse words can signify
negative emotion or emphasize the opposite state as
in (3), which is clearly emphasizing positive emo-
tion here. Example (5) demonstrates the word sense
issue we discussed previously. Words with wild-
cards that expand into other words with different
meanings can be particularly problematic, as the ex-
panded word can be far more frequent – and very
different in meaning – from the original word. For
example, ‘numb*’ matches ‘number’ in 4.

A different problem occurs when the context
of the word changes its implication for the emo-
tional state of the writer. This can either occur
through negation such as in (6) where ‘afraid’ sig-
nals NEGEMO, but is negated with ‘don’t’ or the
signal can be changed indirectly through a variety of
words indicating that the writer desires (and hence
lacks) the state, as in (7) where someone is wishing
to be ‘happy’.

Table 2 shows the agreement between an-
notators calculated as

∑
i agree(A

(i)
1 ,A

(i)
2 ,A

(i)
3 )

1,000
, where

agree(A1, A2, A3) was 1 when all three annota-
tions matched and 0 otherwise. Given the aver-
age positive base rate across annotators was 0.676
the chance that all three reviewers agree accord-
ing to chance (random agreement) is calculated as

300



category precision instances
POSEMO 67.9% 500
NEGEMO 72.8% 500

both 70.4% 1,000

Table 4: Accuracy of LIWC POSEMO and NEGEMO
lexica over Facebook posts.

0.6763+(1−0.676)3 = 0.343, the probability of all
three answering yes plus the probability of all three
answering no.

For the second task, we selected 100 instances
judged to be incorrect signal from the first task, and
labeled them according to the best reason for the
mistake. This task required more linguistic exper-
tise and was performed by a single annotator. La-
bels and descriptions are given in Table 3, which
breaks down the cases into lexical ambiguity, direct
or indirect negation, and other reasons such as the
stemming issue (stem plus wildcard expanding into
words indicating a different (or no) emotional state).

3.2 Analysis of Errors

Before discussing the types of errors we found when
using the word count approach, we examine LIWC’s
overall accuracy on our dataset. Table 4 shows the
precision broken down for both the positive emotion
(POSEMO) and the negative emotion (NEGEMO)
lexica. We see that the precision for NEGEMO is
slightly higher than POSEMO, indicating the terms
in that category may be more likely to indicate their
associated state.

Although the overall accuracy seems decent, one
should keep in mind our subjective judgement crite-
ria were quite tolerant, allowing any amount of con-
tribution of the corresponding signal to be consid-
ered accurate. For example, a salutation like “Happy
New Year” was judged to be a correct use of “happy”
to signal POSEMO, even though it clearly does not
have as strong a signal as someone saying “I feel
deliriously happy”.

Frequencies of signal errors are given in Table
5. The most common signal error was wrong word
sense, where the word did not signal emotional
state and some other sense or definition of the word
was intended (e.g. “u feel like ur living in a mu-
sic video”; corresponding to the sense “to inhabit”
rather than the intended sense, “to have life; be

category label frequency

Lexical Ambiguity
Wrong POS 15
Wrong WS 38

Signal Negation
Strict Negation 16

Desiring 6

Other
Stem Issue 5

Other 24

Table 5: Frequency of the signal error types.

alive” (Miller, 1993)). Other common signal errors
include strict negation where the word is canceled
out by a clear negative quantifier (e.g. “Don’t be
afraid to fail”) and wrong part of speech where the
word is signaling a different part of speech than the
emotion (e.g. “well, we cant afford to go to NYC”).
There were also various other signal error types that
include stem issues where the stem matched clearly
unintended words, desiring statuses where the status
is commenting on wanting the emotion instead of
experiencing it and other less prevalent issues such
as non-English language post, memes, or clear sar-
casm.

4 Method for Refining Lexica

The idea behind our refinement method is to remove
words that are likely to carry erroneous signal about
the underlying state or emotion of the person writ-
ing the tweet or Facebook post.2 We do so in an
indirect fashion, without actually using training data
of which posts are, in fact indicative of positive or
negative emotion. Instead, we focus on reducing er-
rors that are due to lexical ambiguity. By remov-
ing words that are often used with multiple parts of
speech or multiple senses, we can tilt the balance to-
ward precision at some cost in recall (losing some
signal from the ambiguous words). This makes the
word count approach more suitable for use in the
massive corpora afforded by social media.

4.1 Lexical Ambiguity

We address lexical ambiguity at the levels of both
part of speech (POS) and word sense. As a metric
of inverse-ambiguity, we determine the probability
that a random instance is the most frequent sense
(mfs) of the most frequent part of speech (mfp) of

2Refinement tool is available at wwbp.org.

301



category label description examples

Lexical Ambiguity
Wrong POS Not a valid signal because it is

the wrong POS
so everyone should come to the
play tomorrow...

Wrong WS Not a valid signal because it is
the wrong word sense (includes
metaphorical senses)

Does anyone what type of file i
need to convert youtube videos
to play on PS3???

Signal Negation
Strict Negation Within the scope of a negation,

where there is a clear negative
quantifier

...all work no play :-(

Desiring Within the scope of a desire /
wishing for something

i sure wish i had about 50 hours
a day to play cod

Other
Stem Issue Clearly not intended to be

matched with the given stem
numb* for NEGEMO match-
ing number

Other Any other issue or difficult to
classify

Table 3: Signal error types.

the word, denoted TSP (for top sense probability).
Given a wordw, we consider all parts of speech ofw
(POS(w)) and all senses for the most frequent part
of speech (senses(mfp(w))):

pmfp(w) =

max
[wpos∈POS(w)]

fp(wpos)∑
wpos∈POS(w)

fp(wpos)

pmfs(w) =

max
[wsense∈senses(mfp(w))]

fs(wsense)∑
wsense∈senses(mfp(w))

fs(wsense)

TSP (w) = (pmfp(w) ∗ pmfs(w))2 (1)

Here, fp and fs represent the frequencies of a cer-
tain part-of-speech and a certain sense of a word,
respectively. This is the squared-probability that an
instance of w is the top sense – the most-frequent
part-of-speech and the most-frequency sense of that
part-of-speech. The probability is squared because
both the word in the lexicon and the word occurring
in context should be the top sense (two independent
probabilities: given an instance of a word in a cor-
pus, and another instance of the word in the lexicon,
what is the probability that both are the top POS
and sense?). Frequency data is provided for parts-
of-speech from the Google N-Grams 2.0 (Lin et al.,
2010) and for word senses from SemCor (Miller et

al., 1993). This aspect of the refinement is inspired
by the most frequent sense heuristic for word sense
disambiguation (McCarthy et al., 2004; Yarowsky,
1993), in which the sense of a word is chosen with-
out regard to the context, but rather is simply based
on the frequencies of senses in corpora. In our case,
we restrict ourselves this way in order for the appli-
cation of the lexicon to remain unchanged.

For some words, we were unable to find sense fre-
quency data. We decided to keep such terms, on
the assumption that a lack in available frequency in-
formation implies that the word is not very ambigu-
ous. Many of these terms include Web speak such as
‘haha’ or ‘lol’, which we believe can carry a strong
signal for positive and negative emotion.

Lastly, since TSP is only a metric for the in-
verse ambiguity of a word, we must apply a thresh-
old to determine which words to keep. We denote
this threshold as θ, and the description of the refined
lexicon for a category, cat, is below.

lexθ(cat) = {w|w ∈ cat ∧ TSP (w) > θ}

4.2 Handling Stems
Some lexica, such as the LIWC dictionary, include
word stems that are intended to match multiple
forms of a word. Stems are marked by the suffix
‘*’. LIWC describes the application of stems as fol-
lows “the asterisk, then, denotes the acceptance of
all letters, hyphens, or numbers following its ap-

302



lex cat prec size

full
POSEMO 67.9% 500
NEGEMO 72.8% 500

both 70.4% 1,000

lex0.10
POSEMO 70.9% 392
NEGEMO 71.6% 423

both 71.3% 815

lex0.50
POSEMO 75.7% 239
NEGEMO 78.9% 232

both 77.3% 471

lex0.90
POSEMO 72.5% 109
NEGEMO 78.1% 128

both 75.5% 237

Table 6: Precision (prec) and instance subset size (size)
of refinements to the LIWC POSEMO and NEGEMO lex-
ica with various θ thresholds (0.10, 0.50, 0.90)

pearance.”3 This presents a problem because, while
the creators of such lexica obviously intended stems
to match multiple forms of a word, stems also often
match completely different words, such as ‘numb*’
matching ‘number’ or ‘won*’ matching ‘won’t’.

We identified how often unintended matches hap-
pen in Section 3. Finding that the stemming issues
were not the biggest problem, here, we just describe
how they fit into our lexical ambiguity metric, rather
than describe a technique to rid the lexicon of stem-
ming problems. One approach might be to deter-
mine how ambiguous a stem is – i.e. determine
how many words, parts-of-speech, and senses a stem
could be expanded into, but this ignores the fact that
the dictionary creators obviously intended the stem
to match multiple words. Instead, we expand stems
into all words that they match and replace them into
the lexica.

We base our expansion on the actual terms used
in social media. We find all words matching stems
among 1 million randomly selected Twitter mes-
sages posted over a 6-month period (August 2009
- February 2010), and restrict to those occurring at
least 20 times. Then, each word stem in the lexicon
is replaced with the expanded set of matching words.

Figure 2: The relationship between precision and size
when increasing the TSP threshold (θ).

5 Evaluation

We evaluate our refinement by comparing against
human judgements of the emotion conveyed by
words in individual posts. In the case of hu-
man judgements, we find that the subset of human-
annotated instances matching the refined lexica are
more accurate than the complete set.

In section 3 we discussed the method we used to
judge instances of LIWC POSEMO and NEGEMO
words as to whether they contributed the associated
affect. Each of the 1,000 instances in our evaluation
corpus were judged three times such that the major-
ity was taken as truth. In order to validate our refined
lexica, we find the accuracy (precision) of the subset
of instances which contain the refined lexica terms.

Table 6 shows the change in precision when us-
ing the refined lexica. size represents the number of
instances from the full evaluation corpus matching
words in the refined lexica. One can see that ini-
tially precision increase as the size becomes smaller.
This is more clearly seen in Figure 2. As discussed
in the method section, our goal with the refine-
ment is improving precision, making lexica more
suitable to applications over massive social media
where one can more readily afford to skip instances
(i.e. smaller size) in order to achieve more accu-
racy. Still, removing more ambiguous words does

3“How it works”: http://www.liwc.net/howliwcworks.php

303



not guarantee improved precision at capturing the
intended psychological state; it is possible that that
all senses of an ambiguous word do in fact carry in-
tended signal or that the intended sense a low ambi-
guity word is not the most frequent.

Our maximum precision occurs with a threshold
of 0.50, where things somewhat level-out. This rep-
resents approximately a 23% reduction in error, and
verifies that we can increase precision through the
automatic lexicon refinement based on lexical ambi-
guity.

6 Conclusions

Social scientists and other researchers are starting
to measure psychological states such as happiness
through text in Facebook and Twitter. We have
shown that the widely used word count method,
where one simply counts occurrences of positive or
negative words, can often produce noisy and inaccu-
rate estimates of expressions of psychological states.
We characterized and measured the frequency of
different types of errors that occur using this ap-
proach, and found that when counting words without
considering context, it is lexical ambiguities (unin-
tended parts-of-speech or word senses) which cause
the most errors. We proposed a method for refin-
ing lexica by removing those words most likely to
be ambiguous, and showed that we can significantly
reduce error as measured by human judgements.

Acknowledgments

Support for this research was provided by the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Pioneer Portfo-
lio, through a grant to Martin Seligman, “Exploring
Concepts of Positive Health”. We thank the review-
ers for their constructive and insightful comments.

References
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-

tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10),
Valletta, Malta, may. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Erin O.C. Bantum and J.E. Owen. 2009. Evaluating the
validity of computerized content analysis programs for

identification of emotional expression in cancer narra-
tives. Psychological assessment, 21(1):79.

Johan Bollen, Huina Mao, and Xiao-Jun Zeng. 2010.
Twitter mood predicts the stock market. Computer and
Information Science, 1010:1–8.

Michael A. Cohn, M.R. Mehl, and J.W. Pennebaker.
2004. Linguistic markers of psychological change sur-
rounding september 11, 2001. Psychological Science,
15(10):687.

Peter Sheridan Dodds, Kameron Decker Harris, Isabel M
Kloumann, Catherine A Bliss, and Christopher M
Danforth. 2011. Temporal patterns of happiness and
information in a global social network: Hedonomet-
rics and twitter. Diversity, page 26.

Jeremy Ginsberg, M.H. Mohebbi, R.S. Patel, L. Bram-
mer, M.S. Smolinski, L. Brilliant, et al. 2009. De-
tecting influenza epidemics using search engine query
data. Nature, 457(7232):1012–4.

Scott A. Golder and M.W. Macy. 2011. Diurnal and
seasonal mood vary with work, sleep, and daylength
across diverse cultures. Science, 333(6051):1878–
1881.

Louis A. Gottschalk and RJ Bechtel. 1998. Psychiatric
content analysis and diagnosis (pcad2000).

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen R. McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 174–181.

Daniel Kahneman, A.B. Krueger, D. Schkade,
N. Schwarz, and A.A. Stone. 2006. Would you
be happier if you were richer? a focusing illusion.
Science, 312(5782):1908.

Jaap Kamps and Maarten Marx. 2002. Words with atti-
tude. In 1st International WordNet Conference, pages
332–341, Mysore, India.

Sepandar D. Kamvar and J. Harris. 2011. We feel fine
and searching the emotional web. In Proceedings
of the fourth ACM international conference on Web
search and data mining, pages 117–126. ACM.

Hiroshi Kanayama and Tetsuya Nasukawa. 2006. Fully
automatic lexicon expansion for domain-oriented sen-
timent analysis. In Proceedings of the 2006 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, EMNLP ’06, pages 355–363, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2004. Determining the
sentiment of opinions. In Proceedings of the 20th in-
ternational conference on Computational Linguistics,
COLING ’04, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Funda Kivran-Swaine and M. Naaman. 2011. Network
properties and social sharing of emotions in social
awareness streams. In Proceedings of the ACM 2011

304



conference on Computer supported cooperative work,
pages 379–382. ACM.

Michal. Kosinski and David J. Stillwell. 2012.
mypersonality research wiki. mypersonality project.
http://www.mypersonality.org/wiki/.

Adam D.I. Kramer. 2010. An unobtrusive behavioral
model of gross national happiness. In Proceedings of
the 28th international conference on Human factors in
computing systems, pages 287–290. ACM.

Dekang Lin, Kenneth Church, Heng Ji, Satoshi Sekine,
David Yarowsky, Shane Bergsma, Kailash Patil, Emily
Pitler, Rachel Lathbury, Vikram Rao, Kapil Dalwani,
and Sushant Narsale. 2010. New tools for web-scale
n-grams. In Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, may. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Diana McCarthy, Rob Koeling, Julie Weeds, and John
Carroll. 2004. Finding predominant word senses
in untagged text. In Proceedings of the 42nd Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL’04), Main Volume, pages 279–286, Barcelona,
Spain, July.

George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee Tengi, and
Ross T Bunker. 1993. A semantic concordance. In
Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human Lan-
guage Technology, pages 303–308. Morgan Kaufman.

George A. Miller. 1993. Five papers on wordnet. Tech-
nical Report, Princeton University.

Greg Miller. 2011. Social scientists wade into the tweet
stream. Science, 333(6051):1814–1815.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 79–86.

James W Pennebaker, Martha E Francis, and Roger J
Booth. 2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count:
Liwc 2001. Word Journal Of The International Lin-
guistic Association.

James W. Pennebaker, C.K. Chung, M. Ireland, A. Gon-
zales, and R.J. Booth. 2007. The development and
psychometric properties of liwc2007. Austin, TX,
LIWC. Net.

Yla R. Tausczik and J.W. Pennebaker. 2010. The psy-
chological meaning of words: Liwc and computerized
text analysis methods. Journal of Language and So-
cial Psychology, 29(1):24.

Janyce Wiebe and Claire Cardie. 2005. Annotating ex-
pressions of opinions and emotions in language. lan-
guage resources and evaluation. In Language Re-
sources and Evaluation.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2009. Recognizing contextual polarity: An explo-
ration of features for phrase-level sentiment analysis.
Computational Linguistics, 35:399–433, September.

David Yarowsky. 1993. One sense per collocation. In
Proceedings of the workshop on Human Language
Technology, HLT ’93, pages 266–271, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

305


