










































MELODI: A Supervised Distributional Approach for Free Paraphrasing of Noun Compounds


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 144–147, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

MELODI: A Supervised Distributional Approach
for Free Paraphrasing of Noun Compounds

Tim Van de Cruys
IRIT, CNRS

tim.vandecruys@irit.fr

Stergos Afantenos
IRIT, Toulouse University

stergos.afantenos@irit.fr

Philippe Muller
IRIT, Toulouse University

philippe.muller@irit.fr

Abstract

This paper describes the system submitted
by the MELODI team for the SemEval-2013
Task 4: Free Paraphrases of Noun Compounds
(Hendrickx et al., 2013). Our approach com-
bines the strength of an unsupervised distri-
butional word space model with a supervised
maximum-entropy classification model; the
distributional model yields a feature represen-
tation for a particular compound noun, which
is subsequently used by the classifier to induce
a number of appropriate paraphrases.

1 Introduction

Interpretation of noun compounds is making explicit
the relation between the component nouns, for in-
stance that running shoes are shoes used in running
activities, while leather shoes are made from leather.
The relations can have very different meanings, and
existing work either postulates a fixed set of rela-
tions (Tratz and Hovy, 2010) or relies on appropri-
ate descriptions of the relations, through constrained
verbal paraphrases (Butnariu et al., 2010) or uncon-
strained paraphrases as in the present campaign. The
latter is much simpler for annotation purposes, but
raises difficult challenges involving not only com-
pound interpretation but also paraphrase evaluation
and ranking.

In terms of constrained verbal paraphrases
Wubben (2010), for example, uses a supervised
memory-based ranker using features from the
Google n-gram corpus as well as WordNet. Nulty
and Costello (2010) rank paraphrases of compounds
according to the number of times they co-occurred

with other paraphrases for other compounds. They
use these co-occurrences to compute conditional
probabilities estimating is-a relations between para-
phrases. Li et al. (2010) provide a hybrid sys-
tem which combines a Bayesian algorithm exploit-
ing Google n-grams, a score which captures human
preferences at the tail distribution of the training
data, as well as a metric that captures pairwise para-
phrase preferences.

Our methodology consists of two steps. First,
an unsupervised distributional word space model is
constructed, which yields a feature representation
for a particular compound. The feature representa-
tion is then used by a maximum entropy classifier to
induce a number of appropriate paraphrases.

2 Methodology

2.1 Distributional word space model

In order to induce appropriate feature representa-
tions for the various noun compounds, we start by
constructing a standard distributional word space
model for nouns. We construct a co-occurrence
matrix of the 5K most frequent nouns1 by the 2K
most frequent context words2, which occur in a win-
dow of 5 words to the left and right of the target
word. The bare frequencies of the word-context ma-
trix are weighted using pointwise mutual informa-
tion (Church and Hanks, 1990).

Next, we compute a joint, compositional repre-
sentation of the noun compound, combining the se-

1making sure all nouns that appear in the training and test
set are included

2excluding the 50 most frequent context words as stop words

144



mantics of the head noun with the modifier noun. To
do so, we make use of a simple vector-based multi-
plicative model of compositionality, as proposed by
Mitchell and Lapata (2008). In order to compute the
compositional representation of a compound noun,
this model takes the elementwise multiplication of
the vectors for the head noun and the modifier noun,
i.e.

pi = uivi

for each feature i. The resulting features are used as
input to our next classification step.

We compare the performance of the abovemen-
tioned compositional model with a simpler model
that only takes into account the semantics of the
head noun. This model only uses the context fea-
tures for the head noun as input to our second clas-
sification step. This means that the model only takes
into account the semantics of the head noun, and ig-
nores the semantics of the modifier noun.

2.2 Maximum entropy classification
The second step of our paraphrasing system consists
of a supervised maximum entropy classification ap-
proach. Training vectors for each noun compound
from the training set are constructed according to
the approach described in the previous section. The
(non-zero) context features yielded by the first step
are used as input for the maximum entropy classi-
fier, together with the appropriate paraphrase labels
and the label counts (used to weight the instances),
which are extracted from the training set.

We then deploy the model in order to induce a
probability distribution over the various paraphrase
labels. Every paraphrase label above a threshold φ is
considered an appropriate paraphrase. Using a por-
tion of held-out training data (20%), we set φ = 0.01
for our official submission. In this paper, we show a
number of results using different thresholds.

2.3 Set of paraphrases labels
For our classification approach to work, we need to
extract an appropriate set of paraphrase labels from
the training data. In order to create this set, we
substitute the nouns that appear in the training set’s
paraphrases by dummy variables. Table 1 gives an
example of three different paraphrases and the re-
sulting paraphrase labels after substitution. Note

that we did not apply any NLP techniques to prop-
erly deal with inflected words.

We apply a frequency threshold of 2 (counted over
all the instances), so we discard paraphrase labels
that appear only once in the training set. This gives
us a total of 285 possible paraphrase labels.

One possible disadvantage of this supervised ap-
proach is a loss of recall on unseen paraphrases. A
rough estimation shows that our set of training labels
accounts for only 25% of the similarly constructed
labels extracted from the test set. However, the most
frequently used paraphrase labels are present in both
training and test set, so this does not prevent our
system to come up with a number of suitable para-
phrases for the test set.

2.4 Implementational details

All frequency co-occurrence information has been
extracted from the ukWaC corpus (Baroni et al.,
2009). The corpus has been part of speech tagged
and lemmatized with Stanford Part-Of-Speech Tag-
ger (Toutanova and Manning, 2000; Toutanova et
al., 2003). Distributional word space algorithms
have been implemented in Python. The maximum
entropy classifier was implemented using the Maxi-
mum Entropy Modeling Toolkit for Python and C++
(Le, 2004).

3 Results

Table 2 shows the results of the different systems in
terms of the isomorphic and non-isomorphic evalu-
ation measures defined by the task organizers (Hen-
drickx et al., 2013). For comparison, we include a
number of baselines. The first baseline assigns the
two most frequent paraphrase labels (Y of X, Y for
X) to each test instance; the second baseline assigns
the four most frequent paraphrase labels (Y of X, Y
for X, Y on X, Y in X); and the third baseline assigns
all of the possible 285 paraphrase labels as correct
answer for each test instance.

For both our primary system (the multiplicative
model) and our contrastive system (the head noun
model), we vary the threshold used to select the final
set of paraphrases. A threshold φ = 0.01 results in
a smaller set of paraphrases, whereas a threshold of
φ = 0.001 results in a broad set of paraphrases. Our
official submission uses the former threshold.

145



compound paraphrase paraphrase label

textile company company that makes textiles Y that makes Xs
textile company company that produces textiles Y that produces Xs
textile company company in textile industry Y in X industry

Table 1: Example of induced paraphrase labels

model φ isomorphic non-isomorphic

baseline (2) – .058 .808
baseline (4) – .090 .633
baseline (all) – .332 .200

multiplicative .01 .130 .548
.001 .270 .259

head noun .01 .136 .536
.001 .277 .302

Table 2: Results

First of all, we note that the different baseline
models are able to obtain substantial scores for the
different evaluation measures. The first two base-
lines, which use a limited number of paraphrase
labels, perform very well in terms of the non-
isomorphic evaluation measure. The third baseline,
which uses a very large number of candidate para-
phrase labels, gets more balanced results in terms of
both the isomorphic and non-isomorphic measure.

Considering our different thresholds, the results
of our models are in line with the baseline re-
sults. A larger threshold, which results in a smaller
number of paraphrase labels, reaches a higher non-
isomorphic score. A smaller threshold, which re-
sults in a larger number of paraphrase labels, gives
more balanced results for the isomorphic and non-
isomorphic measure.

There does not seem to be a significant difference
between our primary system (multiplicative) and our
contrastive system (head noun). For φ = 0.01, the
results of both models are very similar; for φ =
0.001, the head noun model reaches slightly better
results, in particular for the non-isomorphic score.

Finally, we note that our models do not seem to
improve significantly on the baseline scores. For
φ = 0.001, the results of our models seem somewhat
more balanced compared to the all baseline, but the

differences are not very large. In general, our sys-
tems (in line with the other systems participating in
the task) seem to have a hard time beating a num-
ber of simple baselines, in terms of the evaluation
measures defined by the task.

4 Conclusion

We have presented a system for producing free para-
phrases of noun compounds. Our methodology con-
sists of two steps. First, an unsupervised distribu-
tional word space model is constructed, which is
used to compute a feature representation for a par-
ticular compound. The feature representation is then
used by a maximum entropy classifier to induce a
number of appropriate paraphrases.

Although our models do seem to yield slightly
more balanced scores than the baseline models, the
differences are not very large. Moreover, there is
no substantial difference between our primary mul-
tiplicative model, which takes into account the se-
mantics of both head and modifier noun, and our
contrastive model, which only uses the semantics of
the head noun.

References
Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi, and

Eros Zanchetta. 2009. The wacky wide web: A
collection of very large linguistically processed web-
crawled corpora. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, 43(3):209–226.

Cristina Butnariu, Su Nam Kim, Preslav Nakov, Diar-
muid Ó Séaghdha, Stan Szpakowicz, and Tony Veale.
2010. Semeval-2 task 9: The interpretation of noun
compounds using paraphrasing verbs and prepositions.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation, pages 39–44, Uppsala, Sweden,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kenneth W. Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word as-
sociation norms, mutual information & lexicography.
Computational Linguistics, 16(1):22–29.

146



Iris Hendrickx, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Diar-
muid Ó Séaghdha, Stan Szpakowicz, and Tony Veale.
2013. SemEval-2013 task 4: Free paraphrases of noun
compounds. In Proceedings of the International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval ’13, June.

Zhang Le. 2004. Maximum entropy modeling toolkit for
python and c++. http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.
uk/lzhang10/maxent_toolkit.html.

Guofu Li, Alejandra Lopez-Fernandez, and Tony Veale.
2010. Ucd-goggle: A hybrid system for noun com-
pound paraphrasing. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages
230–233, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Vector-based
models of semantic composition. proceedings of ACL-
08: HLT, pages 236–244.

Paul Nulty and Fintan Costello. 2010. Ucd-pn: Select-
ing general paraphrases using conditional probability.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation, pages 234–237, Uppsala, Swe-
den, July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kristina Toutanova and Christopher D. Manning. 2000.
Enriching the knowledge sources used in a maximum
entropy part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the
Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and Very Large Corpora
(EMNLP/VLC-2000), pages 63–70.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Manning,
and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech
tagging with a cyclic dependency network. In Pro-
ceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003, pages 252–259.

Stephen Tratz and Eduard Hovy. 2010. A taxonomy,
dataset, and classifier for automatic noun compound
interpretation. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 678–687, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Sander Wubben. 2010. Uvt: Memory-based pairwise
ranking of paraphrasing verbs. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation,
pages 260–263, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

147


