










































teragram: Rule-based detection of sentiment phrases using SAS Sentiment Analysis


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 513–519, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

teragram:
Rule-based detection of sentiment phrases using SAS Sentiment Analysis

Hilke Reckman, Cheyanne Baird, Jean Crawford, Richard Crowell,
Linnea Micciulla, Saratendu Sethi, and Fruzsina Veress

SAS Institute
10 Fawcett Street

Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
hilke.reckman@sas.com

Abstract

For SemEval-2013 Task 2, A and B (Sen-
timent Analysis in Twitter), we use a rule-
based pattern matching system that is based on
an existing ‘Domain Independent’ sentiment
taxonomy for English, essentially a highly
phrasal sentiment lexicon. We have made
some modifications to our set of rules, based
on what we found in the annotated training
data that was made available for the task. The
resulting system scores competitively, espe-
cially on task B.

1 Introduction

SAS taxonomies for sentiment analysis are primar-
ily topic-focused. They are designed to track sen-
timent around brands, entities, or other topics and
subtopics in a domain (Lange and Sethi, 2011;
Lakkaraju and Sethi, 2012; Albright and Lakkaraju,
2011). Domain-independent taxonomies have a
second function. In addition to performing topic-
focused tasks, they can be set up to perform senti-
ment analysis at the document level, classifying the
whole document as positive, negative, or neutral. In
this task all sentiment expressions are taken into ac-
count, rather than only those which are related to
the tracked topic. This second function is becom-
ing increasingly important. It allows for a broader
perspective that is complementary to topic-focused
opinion mining.

We participated in both subtask A and B of
SemEval-2013 Task 2: Sentiment Analysis in Twit-
ter (Wilson et al., 2013) with an adaptation of our
existing system. For task B, identifying the overall

sentiment of a tweet, our taxonomy mainly needed
some fine-tuning to specifically accommodate Twit-
ter data. (Normally tweets only make up a small
part of the data we work with.) We also made a
few adaptations to focus entirely on document level
sentiment, whereas originally the main focus of our
system was on tracking sentiment around products.
For task A, identifying the sentiment of ambiguous
phrases in a tweet, a few more modifications were
needed.

Our system is entirely rule-based, and the rules
are hand-written. In some cases, statistical text min-
ing approaches are used for the discovery of topics
and terms to facilitate rule writing. Our sentiment
analysis software does offer a statistical component,
but our experience is that purely rule-based models
work better for our typical sentiment analysis tasks.

Advantages of rules are that problems observed
in the output can be targeted directly, and the model
can become more and more refined over time. Also,
they allow for simple customization. In our brand-
centered work, we customize our taxonomies for
one or more brands that we want to track. When
we build a taxonomy for a new domain, we build
upon work we have done before in other domains.
The assignment of sentiment to certain phrases can
be sensitive to context where it needs to be. The
canceled task C, identifying sentiment related to a
topic, could have been approached successfully with
a rule-based approach, as our rules are specifically
designed to connect sentiment to targeted topics.

Section 2 describes the basic architecture of our
system, followed by a section on related work. Then
sections 4 and 5 describe the adaptations made for

513



each subtask and present the results. This is fol-
lowed by a more general discussion of our approach
in the light of these results in section 6, and the con-
clusion in section 7.

2 The base system

The datasets we normally use for the development
of our taxonomies include blogs, forums, news, and
Twitter. When developing a domain-specific taxon-
omy, we collect data for that particular domain, e.g.
Banking, Retail, Hospitality. We build the taxonomy
with the terms we encounter in those documents,
and test on a new set of documents. The Domain
Independent taxonomy started out as the common
base derived from several of these taxonomies, and
was then built out and tested using a wider range of
English-language documents. Since we used some
other tweets in the development of the original sys-
tem, our submission is considered unconstrained.

Our rules are patterns that match words or se-
quences of words, which makes our approach essen-
tially lexicon-based. Matching occurs left-to-right
and longer matches take precedence over shorter
ones. The top level rules in our sentiment taxonomy
are set up to recognize positive and negative word-
sequences. There is also a set of ‘neutral’ rules at
that level that block the assignment of positive or
negative sentiment in certain cases.

A positive or negative sequence can consist of a
single word from the positive or negative word-lists,
or a spelled out phrase from the positive or nega-
tive phrase-lists. Alternatively, it can be built up out
of multiple components, for example an emphatic
modifier and a sentiment term, or a negation and a
sentiment term. We call these sequences Positive
and Negative ‘Contexts’, since they are contexts for
the topic-terms that we normally track.

Documents are preprocessed by an in-house POS-
tagger. Rules can require a word to have a particular
part of speech.

The words in the word-list, or in any of the other
rules, can be marked with an ‘@’-sign to enable
morphological expansion, and in that case they will
match any of the forms in their paradigm. For ex-
ample ‘love@’ will match love, loves, loved, and
loving. This functionality is supported by a mor-
phological dictionary that links these forms to their

stem.
The rules are organized into lists that represent

useful concepts, which can be referred to in other
rules as a means of abstraction. For example the
rule:

def{Negation} def{PositiveAdjectives}

matches phrases that are composed of a negation (as
defined in the list named Negation) and a positive
adjective (as defined in the list named PositiveAd-
jectives). Negation includes rules like ‘hasn’t been’,
‘doesnt’[sic], ‘not exactly the most’, etc., and Posi-
tiveAdjectives contains a rule that matches words in
PositiveWords if they are also tagged as adjectives.
For efficiency reasons the dependencies cannot be
circular, hence not allowing for recursion.

Distance rules can be used to capture a longer
span, matching a specified pattern at the beginning
and at the end, including arbitrary intervening words
up to a specified number. They can also be used to
make matching a term dependent on specified terms
in the context. For example,

(SENT, (DIST 4, “ a{ def{HigherIsBetter}}”,
“ a{ def{Lowering}}”))

will capture phrases that say a company’s profit
(HigherIsBetter) went down (Lowering). The
SENT-operator prevents matching across sentence
boundaries.

(ORDDIST 7, “ def{PositiveContext}”,
“ a{ def{PositiveAmbig}}”)

will capture ambiguous positive expressions when
they follow an unambiguously positive sequence
within a distance of 7 words.

This ensemble of lists and rules has grown rela-
tively organically, and is motivated by the data we
encounter. We introduce new distinctions when we
feel it will make a difference in terms of results,
or sometimes for ease of development and mainte-
nance.

Usually each sentiment expression has the same
weight, and one positive and one negative expres-
sion cancel each other out. However at the top level
we can introduce weights, and we have done so in
this model. We have created lists of weak positive
and negative expressions, and we gave those very

514



Positive:
• (ORDDIST 2, “ a{exceed@}”, “ a{expectation@}”)
• :Pro could not be happier
• blown away by
• def{Negation} want@ it to end
• above and beyond
• break@ down barriers
• can’t go wrong with
• dying to def{Consume}
• save@ me def{Money}
• (ALIGNED, “ c{treat@}”, ”:N”)

Negative:
• def{Negation} find def{NounPhrases}

def{PositivePhrases}
• (SENT, (ORDDIST 7, “ a{disappointed that}”,

“ a{ def{PositivePhrases}}”))
• I would have loved
• def{Negation} accept@
• breach of def{PositiveWords}
• def{Money} magically disappears
• lack of training
• make@ no sense
• subject@ me to
• fun dealing with

Figure 1: Examples of rules for positive and negative
phrases and patterns.

low weights, so that they would only matter if there
were no regular-strength expressions present. We
limited some of those weak sentiment rules to sub-
task A only, but they clearly helped with recall there.

Negations in the default case turn positives into
negatives and negatives into neutrals. In addition to
negations we also have sentiment reversers, which
turn negatives into positives. Simple negations nor-
mally scope over a right-adjacent word or phrase, for
example a noun phrase or a verb. A special class of
clausal negations (I don’t think that) by approxima-
tion take scope over a clause.

This system contains roughly 2500 positive words
and 2000 positive phrases, and roughly 7500 neg-
ative words and 3000 negative phrases. Some ex-
amples are given in Figure 1. The neutral list also
contains about 2000 rules. Other helper lists such as

Negation, EmphaticModifiers, and Money typically
contain about a hundred rules each.

A system like this takes about six to eight weeks
to build for a new language. This requires a deve-
loper who is already familiar with the methodology,
and assumes existing support for the language, in-
cluding a morphological dictionary and a part-of-
speech tagger.

3 Related work

In tasks that are not topic-related, purely rule-based
models are rare, although the winning system of
SemEval-2010 Task 18 (Wu and Jin, 2010), some-
what similar to task A, was rule-based (Yang and
Liu, 2010). Liu (2010) suggests that more rule-
based work may be called for. However, there are
many other systems with a substantial rule-based
component (Nasukawa and Yi, 2003; Choi and
Cardie, 2008; Prabowo and Thelwall, 2009; Wilson
et al., 2005). Systems commonly have some rules
in place that account for the effect of negation (Wie-
gand et al., 2010) and modifiers. Sentiment lexicons
are widely used, but mainly contain single words
(Baccianella et al., 2010; Taboada et al., 2011). For
topic-related tasks, rule-based systems are a bit more
common (Ding et al., 2008).

4 Task A

Task A was to assign sentiment to a target in context.
The target in isolation would often be ambiguous. It
was a novel challenge to adapt our model for this
subtask.

Since we normally track sentiment around spe-
cific topics, we can usually afford to ignore highly
ambiguous phrases. Typical examples of this are
ambiguous emoticons and comments like no joke at
the end a sentence, or directly following it. When
these are used and could be disambiguated, usually
there is a less ambiguous term available that occurs
closer to the topic-term that we are interested in. (In
some cases we do use the topic as disambiguating
context.)

Also, we generally place slightly more empha-
sis on precision than on recall, assuming that with
enough data the important trends will emerge, even
if we ignore some of the unclear cases and outliers.
This makes the output cleaner and more pleasant to

515



work with for follow-up analysis.

4.1 Model adaptations and processing
We adapted our model to task A by introducing lists
of ambiguous positive and negative terms that were
then disambiguated in context, e.g. if there was an-
other sentiment term of a specified polarity nearby.
We also added some larger patterns that included an
ambiguous term, but as a whole had a much clearer
polarity. Below are some examples of rules for the
word like, which is highly ambiguous in English.

1. (ALIGNED, “ c{like@}”, “:V”) (pos)
2. likes (pos)

3. I like (pos)

4. like magic (pos)

5. give it a “like” (pos)

6. kinda like it (weakpos)

7. doesn’t seem like (hypothetical)

8. How can you like (neg)

9. don’t like (neg)

10. like to pretend (neg)

11. treated like a number (neg)

12. Is it like (neutral)

13. a bit like (neutral)

14. the likes of (neutral)

A seemingly obvious rule for like is (1), restrict-
ing it to usage as a verb. However, disambiguating
like is a difficult task for the tagger too, and the re-
sult is not always correct. Therefore this rule is a
fall-back case, when none of the longer rules apply.
Inflected forms such as (2) are pretty safe, with a
few exceptions, which can be caught by neutralizing
rules, such as (14). The hypothetical case, (7), is not
used in task A, but it is in task B.

A potential issue for our results on this task is that
our system only returns the longest match. So in a
sentence such as ‘I didn’t like it’, if you ask people
to annotate like, they may say it is positive, whereas
the longer phrase didn’t like is negative. In the out-
put of our system, like will only be part of a negative
sequence. The information that it was originally rec-
ognized as a positive word cannot be retrieved at the
output level.

We found that the annotators for task A were in
general much more liberal in assigning sentiment
than we normally are. We made major gains by re-
moving some of our neutralizing rules, for example

those that neutralize sentiment in hypothetical con-
texts, and by classifying negations that were not part
of a larger recognized phrase as weak negatives.

The annotations in the development data were
sometimes confusing (see also section 6). We had
some difficulty in figuring out when certain terms
such as hope or miss you should be considered
positive and when negative. The verb apologize
turned out to be annotated sometimes positive and
sometimes negative in near identical tweets.

The test items were processed as follows:

1. run the sentiment model on the text (tweet/SMS)

2. identify the target phrase as a character span

3. collect detected sentiment that overlaps with the tar-
get phrase

(a) if there is no overlapping sentiment expres-
sion, the sentiment is neutral

(b) if there is exactly one overlapping sentiment
expression, that expression determines the
sentiment

(c) if there is more than one sentiment expression
that overlaps with the target, compute which
sentiment has more weight (and in case of a
draw, assign neutral)

4.2 Results
We get a higher precision for positive and negative
sentiment on task A than any of the other teams,
but we generally under-predict sentiment. Precision
on neutral sentiment is very low. Detecting neutral
phrases did not seem to be a very important goal in
the final version of this task, though. The results of
our predictions on the Twitter portion of the data are
shown in Figure 2.

These results are slightly different from what we
submitted, as we did not realize at the time of sub-
mission that the encoding of the text was different
in the test data than it had been in the previously re-
leased data. The submitted results are included in
the summarizing Table 1 at the end of the discussion
section.

Some targets are easily missed. We do not have
a good coverage of hashtags yet, for example. We
incorporate frequent misspellings that are common
in Twitter and SMS. However, we have no general
strategy in place to systematically recognize uncon-
ventionally spelled words (Eisenstein, 2013). For

516



gs \ pred positive negative neutral
positive 1821 77 888 2734
negative 47 1091 403 1541
neutral 11 6 143 160

1879 990 1382 4435

class precision recall f-score
positive 0.9691 0.6661 0.7895
negative 0.9293 0.7080 0.8037
neutral 0.1035 0.8938 0.1855
average(pos and neg) 0.7966

Figure 2: Confusion table and scores on task A, tweets

a project that processes Twitter data it would also
make sense to periodically scan for new hashtags
and add them to the rules if they carry sentiment.
However, a sentiment lexicon is never quite com-
plete.

Therefore we experimented with a guessing com-
ponent. If we do not detect any sentiment in the tar-
get sequence, we let our model make a guess, based
on the overall sentiment it assigns to the document,
assuming that an ambiguous target overall is more
likely to be positive in a positive context and neg-
ative in a negative context. (Note that this is differ-
ent from our disambiguation rules, which only apply
to explicitly listed items.) This gives us substantial
gains on this subtask (Figure 3). However, this may
not hold up in a similar task where there are more
neutral instances than there were here, as we see a
decrease in precision on positive and negative.

gs \ pred positive negative neutral
positive 2147 230 357 2734
negative 137 1249 155 1541
neutral 50 33 77 160

2334 1512 589 4435

class precision recall f-score
positive 0.9199 0.7853 0.8473
negative 0.8261 0.8105 0.8182
neutral 0.1307 0.4813 0.2056
average(pos and neg) 0.8327

Figure 3: Confusion table and scores on task A, tweets,
with guessing

5 Task B

Task B was to predict the overall sentiment of a
tweet. This was much closer to the task our tax-
onomy is designed for, and yet it turned out to be
different in subtle ways.

5.1 Model adaptations and processing

We quickly found that running the model as we had
adapted it for subtask A over-predicted sentiment
on subtask B. We therefore put most of our neu-
tralizing rules back in place for this subtask, and
restricted a subset of the weak sentiment terms to
subtask A only. We disabled the mechanism that
helped us catch ambiguous terms in subtask A (see
section 4.1).

For processing we used our standard method,
comparing the added weights of the positive and of
the negative sequences found. The highest score
wins. In case of a draw, the document is classified as
neutral. ‘Unclassified’ (no sentiment terms found)
also maps to neutral for this task. A confidence score
is computed, but not used here.

5.2 Results

Our system compares positively to those of the other
teams. Originally we were in 3rd place as a team
on the Twitter data. After correcting for the encod-
ing problem we rise to second (assuming the other
teams did not have the same problem). Among un-
constrained systems only, we are first on tweets and
second on SMS. The results, after the correction, are
shown in Figure 4. As for task A, the original results
are included in the final summarizing Table 1.

gs \ pred positive negative neutral
positive 1188 88 296 1572
negative 66 373 162 601
neutral 408 202 1030 1640

1662 663 1488 3813

class precision recall f-score
positive 0.7148 0.7557 0.7347
negative 0.5626 0.6206 0.5902
neutral 0.6922 0.6280 0.6586
average(pos and neg) 0.6624

Figure 4: Confusion table and scores on task B, tweets

517



6 Discussion

We modified an existing rule-based system for Sem-
Eval Task 2. While the development of this exist-
ing system was a considerable time investment, the
modifications for the two SemEval subtasks took
no more than about 2 person-weeks in total. The
models used in task A and B have a large common
base, and our rule-based approach measures up well
against other systems. This shows that if the work is
done once, it can be re-used, modified, and refined.

As mentioned in section 4.1, the annotations did
not always seem consistent. The guidelines did not
ask the annotators to keep in mind a particular task
or purpose for their annotations. However, the cor-
rect annotation of a tweet or fragment can vary de-
pending on the purpose of the annotation. Non-
arbitrary choices have to be made as to what counts
as sentiment: Do you try to identify cases of im-
plicit sentiment? Do you count cases of quoted or
reported ‘3rd-party’-sentiment? . . . Ultimately it
depends on what you are interested in: Do you want
to: -track sentiment around certain topics? -know
how authors are feeling? -assess the general mood?
-track distressing versus optimistic messages in the
news? . . . While manual rule writing allows us to
choose a consistent strategy, it was not obvious what
the optimal strategy was in this SemEval task.

There were considerable differences in annotation
strategy between task A and task B, which shared the
same tweets. The threshold for detecting sentiment
appeared to be considerably lower in task A than in
task B. This suggests that different choices had been
made. These choices probably reflect how the anno-
tators perceived the tasks.

In our core business, we primarily track sentiment
around brands. One of the choices we made was
to also include good and bad news about the brand
(such as that the company’s stock went up or down)
where no explicit sentiment is expressed, because
the circulation of such messages reflects on the rep-
utation of the brand. (Liu (2010) points out that a
lot of sentiment is implicit.) In task B, we noticed
that ‘newsy’ tweets had a tendency to be annotated
as neutral. We did not have the time to thoroughly
adapt our model for that interpretation.

Both manually annotating training data for super-
vised machine learning and using training data for

manual rule writing require a lot of work. Both
can be crowd-sourced to a large extent if the pro-
cess is made simple enough, and the instructions
are clear enough. All methods that use lists of sen-
timent terms benefit from automatically extracting
such terms from a corpus (Qiu et al., 2009; Wiebe
and Riloff, 2005). As those methods become more
sophisticated, the work of rule writers becomes eas-
ier. Since the correct annotation depends on the task
at hand, and there are many different choices that
can be made, annotated data can be hard to reuse for
a slightly different task than the one for which it was
created. In rule-based models it is easier to leverage
earlier work and to slightly modify the model for a
new task. Both the rules and the model’s decision-
making process are human-interpretable.

Table 1 (next page) summarizes our results on the
various portions of the task, and under different con-
ditions. The results on SMS-data are consistently
lower than their counterparts on tweets, but they fol-
low the same pattern. We conclude that the model
generalizes to SMS, but not perfectly. This is not
surprising, since we have never looked at SMS-data
before, and the genre does appear to have some id-
iosyncrasies.

7 Conclusion

Our model is essentially a highly phrasal sentiment
lexicon. Ways of defining slightly more abstract pat-
terns keep the amount of work and the number of
rules manageable. The model is applied through pat-
tern matching on text, and returns a sentiment pre-
diction based on the number of positive and nega-
tive expressions found, based on the sum of their
weights. This is not mediated by any machine learn-
ing.

Slightly different versions of this system were em-
ployed in subtasks A and B. It turned out to be a
strong competitor in Task 2 of SemEval-2013, espe-
cially on subtask B, where it scored in the top three.

References

Russell Albright and Praveen Lakkaraju. 2011. Com-
bining knowledge and data mining to understand sen-
timent: A practical assessment of approaches. Techni-
cal report, SAS White Paper, January.

518



Task A Twitter Task A SMS Task B Twitter Task B SMS
F-score rank F-score rank F-score rank F-score rank

Submitted 0.7489 3of7 0.7283 4of7 0.6486 1of15 0.5910 2of15
13of23 11of19 3of34 5of29

After fixing encoding 0.7966 3of7 0.7454 3of7 0.6624 1of15 0.6014 1of15
11of23 8of19 2of34 4of29

With guessing 0.8327 (2of7) 0.7840 (2of7) NA NA
(8of23) (7of19)

Table 1: Summary of results. The first rank indication is relative to the other systems in the unconstrained category.
The second is relative to the total number of participating teams (by highest scoring system).

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In Proceedings of the 7th conference on International
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC10), Val-
letta, Malta, May.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2008. Learning with com-
positional semantics as structural inference for subsen-
tential sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 793–801. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Xiaowen Ding, Bing Liu, and Philip S Yu. 2008. A
holistic lexicon-based approach to opinion mining. In
Proceedings of the international conference on Web
search and web data mining, pages 231–240. ACM.

Jacob Eisenstein. 2013. What to do about bad language
on the internet. In Proc. of NAACL.

Praveen Lakkaraju and Saratendu Sethi. 2012. Corre-
lating the analysis of opinionated texts using sas text
analytics with application of sabermetrics to cricket
statistics. In Proceedings of SAS Global Forum 2012,
number 136.

Kathy Lange and Saratendu Sethi. 2011. What are peo-
ple saying about your company, your products, or your
brand? In Proceedings of SAS Global Forum 2011,
number 158.

Bing Liu. 2010. Sentiment analysis and subjectivity.
Handbook of natural language processing, 2:568.

Tetsuya Nasukawa and Jeonghee Yi. 2003. Senti-
ment analysis: Capturing favorability using natural
language processing. In Proceedings of the 2nd in-
ternational conference on Knowledge capture, pages
70–77. ACM.

Rudy Prabowo and Mike Thelwall. 2009. Sentiment
analysis: A combined approach. Journal of Informet-
rics, 3(2):143–157.

Guang Qiu, Bing Liu, Jiajun Bu, and Chun Chen. 2009.
Expanding domain sentiment lexicon through double
propagation. In Proceedings of the 21st international

jont conference on Artifical intelligence, pages 1199–
1204.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kimberly
Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based meth-
ods for sentiment analysis. Computational linguistics,
37(2):267–307.

Janyce Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. 2005. Creating subjec-
tive and objective sentence classifiers from unanno-
tated texts. In Computational Linguistics and Intel-
ligent Text Processing, pages 486–497. Springer.

Michael Wiegand, Alexandra Balahur, Benjamin Roth,
Dietrich Klakow, and Andrés Montoyo. 2010. A sur-
vey on the role of negation in sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of the workshop on negation and specu-
lation in natural language processing, pages 60–68.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Theresa Wilson, Paul Hoffmann, Swapna Somasun-
daran, Jason Kessler, Janyce Wiebe, Yejin Choi, Claire
Cardie, Ellen Riloff, and Siddharth Patwardhan. 2005.
Opinionfinder: A system for subjectivity analysis. In
Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP on Interactive Demon-
strations, pages 34–35. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Theresa Wilson, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Alan
Ritter, Sara Rosenthal, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2013.
SemEval-2013 task 2: Sentiment analysis in twitter.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Yunfang Wu and Peng Jin. 2010. Semeval-2010 task
18: Disambiguating sentiment ambiguous adjectives.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation, pages 81–85. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Shi-Cai Yang and Mei-Juan Liu. 2010. Ysc-dsaa: An
approach to disambiguate sentiment ambiguous adjec-
tives based on saaol. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages
440–443. Association for Computational Linguistics.

519


