










































CU : Computational Assessment of Short Free Text Answers - A Tool for Evaluating Students' Understanding


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 603–607, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

CU : Computational Assessment of Short Free Text Answers - A Tool for
Evaluating Students’ Understanding

Ifeyinwa Okoye
Institute of Cognitive Science
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309, USA
okoye@colorado.edu

Steven Bethard
Institute of Cognitive Science
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309, USA

bethard@colorado.edu

Tamara Sumner
Institute of Cognitive Science
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309, USA
sumner@colorado.edu

Abstract

Assessing student understanding by evaluat-
ing their free text answers to posed questions
is a very important task. However, manually,
it is time-consuming and computationally, it is
difficult. This paper details our shallow NLP
approach to computationally assessing student
free text answers when a reference answer is
provided. For four out of the five test sets, our
system achieved an overall accuracy above the
median and mean.

1 Introduction

Assessing student understanding is one of the holy
grails of education (Redecker et al., 2012). If we
(teachers, tutors, intelligent tutors, potential employ-
ers, parents and school administrators) know what
and how much a student knows, then we know what
the student still needs to learn. And then, can ef-
ficiently and effectively educate the student. How-
ever, the task of assessing what exactly a student un-
derstands about a particular topic can be expensive,
difficult and subjective.

Using multiple choice questionnaires is one of
the most prevalent forms of assessing student under-
standing because it is easy and fast, both manually
and computationally. However there has been a lot
of pushback from educators about the validity of re-
sults gotten from multiple choice questionnaires.

Assessing student understanding by evaluating
student free text answers either written or spoken is
one of the preferred alternatives to multiple choice
questionnaires. As an assessment tool, free text an-
swers can illuminate what and how much a student

knows since the student is forced to recall terms and
make connections between those terms rather than
just picking one out of several options. However,
assessing free text answers manually is tedious, ex-
pensive and time-consuming, hence the search for a
computational option.

There are three main issues that can limit the com-
putational approach and corresponding performance
when assessing free text answers: (1) the unit of
assessment, (2) the reference and (3) the level of
assessment. The unit of assessment can be words,
facets, phrases, sentences, short answers or essays.
The reference is the correct answer and what is
being compared to the student answer. Most re-
searchers generate the reference manually (Noorbe-
hbahani and Kardan, 2011; Graesser et al., 2004) but
some have focused on automatically generating the
reference (Ahmad, 2009). The level of assessment
can be coarse with 2 categories such as correct and
incorrect or more finer-grained with up to 19 cate-
gories as in (Ahmad, 2009). In general, the finer-
grained assessments are more difficult to assess.

2 The Student Response Analysis Task

The student response analysis task was posed as fol-
lows: Given a question, a known correct/reference
answer and a 1 or 2 sentence student answer, classify
the student answer into two, three or five categories.
The two categories were correct and incorrect; the
three categories were correct, contradictory and in-
correct; while the five categories were correct, par-
tially correct but incomplete, contradictory, irrele-
vant and not in the domain (Dzikovska et al., 2013).

We chose to work on the 2-way response task only

603



because for our application, we need to simply know
if a student answer is correct or incorrect. Our ap-
plication is an interactive essay-based personalized
learning environment (Bethard et al., 2012).

The overarching goal of our application is to cre-
ate a scalable online service that recommends re-
sources to users based on the their conceptual under-
standing expressed in an essay or short answer form.
Our application automatically constructs a domain
knowledge base from digital library resources and
identifies the core concepts in the domain knowl-
edge base.It detects flaws and gaps in users’ sci-
ence knowledge and recommends digital library re-
sources to address users’ misconceptions and knowl-
edge gaps. The gaps are detected by identifying the
core concepts which the user has not discussed. The
flaws (incorrect understanding/misconceptions) are
currently being identified by a process of (1) seg-
menting a student essay into sentences, (2) align-
ing the student sentence to a sentence in the domain
knowledge base and (3) using the system we devel-
oped for the student response analysis task to deter-
mine if the student sentence is correct or incorrect.

The development of our misconception detection
algorithm has been limited by the alignment task.
However, with the data set from the student response
analysis task containing correct alignments, we hope
to be able to use it to make improvements to our
misconception detection algorithm. We discuss our
current misconception detection system below.

3 System Description

Our system mainly exploits shallow NLP tech-
niques, in particular text overlap, to see how much
we can gain from using a simple system and how
much more some more semantic features could add
to the simple system. Although we have access to
the question which a 1-2 sentence student answer
corresponds to, we chose not to use that in our sys-
tem because in our application we do not have ac-
cess to that information. We were trying to build a
system that would work in our current essay-based
application.

Some of the student answers in the dataset have a
particular reference answer which they match. How-
ever, we do not make use of this information in our
system either. We assume that for a particular ques-

tion, all the corresponding reference answers can be
used to determine the correctness of any of the stu-
dent answers.

3.1 Features

The features we use are:

1. CosineSimilarity : This is the average cosine
similarity (Jurafsky and James, 2000) between
a student answer vector and all the correspond-
ing reference answer vectors. The vectors are
based on word counts. The words were low-
ercased and included stopwords and punctua-
tions.

2. CosineSimilarityNormalized : This is the av-
erage cosine similarity between a student an-
swer vector and all the corresponding reference
answer vectors, with the word counts within
the vectors divided by the word counts in Gi-
gaword, a background corpus. We divided
the raw counts by the counts in Gigaword to
ensure that punctuations, stopwords and other
non-discriminatory words do not artificially in-
crease the cosine similarity.

3. UnigramRefStudent : This is the average un-
igram coverage of the reference answers by a
student answer. To calculate this, the student
answer and all the corresponding reference an-
swers are tokenized into unigrams. Next, for
each reference answer, we count the number of
unigrams in the reference answer that are con-
tained in the student answer and divide it by the
number of unigrams in the reference answer.
The value we get for this feature, is the aver-
age over all the reference answers.

4. UnigramStudentRef : This is the average uni-
gram coverage of the student answer by the ref-
erence answers. To calculate this, the student
answer and all the corresponding reference an-
swers are tokenized into unigrams. Next, for
each reference answer, we count the number
of unigrams in the student answer that are con-
tained in the reference answer and divide it by
the number of unigrams in the student answer.
The value we get for this feature, is the average
over all the reference answers.

604



5. BigramRefStudent : This is similar to the Un-
igramRefStudent feature, but using bigrams.

6. BigramStudentRef : This is similar to the Un-
igramStudentRef feature, but using bigrams.

7. LemmaRefStudent : This is similar to the Un-
igramRefStudent feature, but in this case, the
lemmas are used in place of words.

8. LemmaStudentRef : This is similar to the Un-
igramStudentRef feature, but in this case, the
lemmas are used in place of words.

9. UnigramPosRefStudent : This is similar to
the UnigramRefStudent feature, but we use
part-of-speech unigrams for this feature in
place of word unigrams.

10. UnigramPosStudentRef : This is similar to
the UnigramStudentRef feature, but we use
part-of-speech unigrams for this feature in
place of word unigrams.

11. BigramPosRefStudent : This is similar to the
BigramRefStudent feature, but we use part-of-
speech bigrams for this feature in place of word
unigrams.

12. BigramPosStudentRef : This is similar to the
BigramStudentRef feature, but we use part-of-
speech bigrams for this feature in place of word
unigrams.

3.2 Implementation
We used the ClearTK (Ogren et al., 2008) toolkit
within Eclipse to extract features from the student
and reference sentences. We trained a LibSVM
(Chang and Lin, 2011) binary classifier to classify a
feature vector into two classes, correct or incorrect.
We used the default parameters for LibSVM except
for the cost parameter, for which we tried different
values. However, the default value of 1 gave us the
best result on the training set. Our two runs/systems
are essentially the same system but with a cost pa-
rameter of 1 and 10.

4 Results

The Student Response Analysis Task overall re-
sult can be found in the Task description paper

(Dzikovska et al., 2013). The CU system achieved
a ranking of above the mean and median for four
of the five different test sets. We perfomed below
the mean and median on the sciEntsBank unseen an-
swers. The accuracy result for the test data is shown
in Table 4. The results on our training data and
a breakdown of the contribution of each feature is
shown in Table 5. In Table 5 ALL refers to all the
features while ALL-CosineSimilarity is all the fea-
tures excluding the CosineSimilarity feature.

Sys
tem

beetle
un-
seen
an-
swers

beetle
un-
seen
ques-
tions

sciEnts
Bank
un-
seen
an-
swers

sciEnts
Bank
un-
seen
ques-
tions

sciEnts
Bank
un-
seen
do-
mains

CU
run
1

0.786 0.718 0.656 0.674 0.693

CU
run
2

0.784 0.717 0.654 0.671 0.691

Table 1: Overall Accuracy results for CU system on the
test Data

5 Discussion

As can be seen from Table 4 and further elaborated
on in (Dzikovska et al., 2013), there were two main
datasets, Beetle and SciEntsBank. The Beetle data
set has multiple reference answer per question while
the SciEntsBank has one reference answer per ques-
tion. Our system did better on the beetle data set
than the SciEntsBank data set, both during devel-
opment and on the final test sets. This leads us to
believe that our system will do well when there are
multiple reference answers rather than just one.

We analyzed the training data to understand
where our system was failing and what we could do
to make it better. We tried removing stopwords be-
fore constructing the feature vectors but that made
the results worse. Here are two examples where re-
moving the stopwords will make it impossible to as-
certain the validity of the student answer:

• It was connected. becomes connected

605



• It will work because that is closing the switch.
becomes work closing switch

Because the student answers are free text and use
pronouns in place of the nouns that were in the ques-
tion, the stop words are important to provide context.

Feature Type Beetle
& sci-
Ents
Bank

1 ALL 0.703
2 ALL - CosineSimilarity 0.702
3 ALL - CosineSimilari-

tyNormalized
0.700

4 ALL - UnigramRefStudent 0.702
5 ALL - UnigramStudentRef 0.701
6 ALL - BigramRefStudent 0.702
7 ALL - BigramStudentRef 0.699
8 ALL - LemmaRefStudent 0.701
9 ALL - LemmaStudentRef 0.700
10 ALL - UnigramPosRefStu-

dent
0.703

11 ALL - UnigramPosStuden-
tRef

0.703

12 ALL - BigramPosRefStu-
dent

0.702

13 ALL - BigramPosStuden-
tRef

0.702

Table 2: Accuracy results for 5X cross validation on the
training data

Currently, we are working on extracting and
adding several features that we did not use for the
task due to time constraints, to see if they improve
our result. Some of the things we are working on
are:

1. Resolving Coreference
We will use the current state-of-art coreference
system and assume that the question precedes
the student answer in a paragraph when resolv-
ing coreference.

2. Compare main predicates
The question is how to assign a value to the se-
mantic similarity between the main predicates.
If the predicates are separate and connect, then

there should be a way to indicate that the men-
tion of one of them in the reference, precludes
the validity of the student answer being correct
if it mentions the other. However, we also have
to take negation into account here. not sepa-
rated and connected should be marked as very
similar if not equal. We plan to include the al-
gorithm from the best system in the semantic
similarity task to our current system.

3. Compare main subject and object from a
syntactic parse or the numbered arguments
in semantic role label arguments
We have to resolve coreference for this to work
well. And again, we run into the problem of
how to assign a semantic similarity value to two
words that might not share the same synset in
ontologies such as Wordnet.

4. Optimize parameters and explore other clas-
sifiers Throughout developing and testing our
system, we used only the LibSVM classifier
and only optimized the cost parameter. How-
ever, there might be a different classifier or
set of options that can model the data better.
We hope to run through most of the classifiers
available and see if using a different one, with
different options improves our accuracy.

6 Conclusion

We have shown that there is value in using shallow
NLP features to judge the validity of free answer text
when the reference answers are given. However,
looking at the sentences that our system labeled as
correct and the gold standard incorrect or vice versa,
it is clear that we have to delve into more seman-
tic features if we want our system to be more accu-
rate. We hope to keep working on this task in sub-
sequent years to ensure continuous improvements in
systems that can assess student knowledge by eval-
uating free answer texts. Such systems will be able
to give students the formative feedback they need
to help them learn better. In addition, such systems
will provide teachers, intelligent tutors and adminis-
trators with feedback about student knowledge, so as
to help them adapt their curriculum, teaching and tu-
toring methods to better serve students’ knowledge
needs.

606



References
Faisal Ahmad. 2009. Generating conceptually personal-

ized interactions for educational digital libraries using
concept maps. Ph.D. thesis, University of Colorado at
Boulder.

Steven Bethard, Haojie Hang, Ifeyinwa Okoye, James H
Martin, Md Arafat Sultan, and Tamara Sumner. 2012.
Identifying science concepts and student misconcep-
tions in an interactive essay writing tutor. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Workshop on Building Educational
Applications Using NLP, pages 12–21. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. Libsvm:
a library for support vector machines. ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST),
2(3):27.

Myroslava O. Dzikovska, Rodney Nielsen, Chris Brew,
Claudia Leacock, Danilo Giampiccolo, Luisa Ben-
tivogli, Peter Clark, Ido Dagan, and Hoa Trang Dang.
2013. Semeval-2013 task 7: The joint student re-
sponse analysis and 8th recognizing textual entailment
challenge. In *SEM 2013: The First Joint Conference
on Lexical and Computational Semantics, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA, 13-14 June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Arthur Graesser, Shulan Lu, George Jackson, Heather
Mitchell, Mathew Ventura, Andrew Olney, and Max
Louwerse. 2004. AutoTutor: A tutor with dialogue
in natural language. Behavior Research Methods,
36:180–192.

Daniel Jurafsky and H James. 2000. Speech and lan-
guage processing an introduction to natural language
processing, computational linguistics, and speech.

F Noorbehbahani and AA Kardan. 2011. The automatic
assessment of free text answers using a modified bleu
algorithm. Computers & Education, 56(2):337–345.

Philip V Ogren, Philipp G Wetzler, and Steven J Bethard.
2008. Cleartk: A uima toolkit for statistical natu-
ral language processing. Towards Enhanced Inter-
operability for Large HLT Systems: UIMA for NLP,
page 32.

Christine Redecker, Yves Punie, and Anusca Ferrari.
2012. eassessment for 21st century learning and skills.
In 21st Century Learning for 21st Century Skills,
pages 292–305. Springer.

607


