










































UMCCDLSI: Textual Similarity based on Lexical-Semantic features


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 1: Proceedings of the Main Conference
and the Shared Task, pages 109–118, Atlanta, Georgia, June 13-14, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

UMCC_DLSI: Textual Similarity based on Lexical-Semantic features 

 

 

Alexander Chávez, Antonio Fernández Orquín, 

Héctor Dávila, Yoan Gutiérrez, Armando 

Collazo, José I. Abreu 

DI, University of Matanzas 

Autopista a Varadero km 3 ½  

Matanzas, Cuba.  
{alexander.chavez, tony, 

hector.davila, yoan.gutierrez, 

armando.collazo, jose.abreu}@umcc.cu 

Andrés Montoyo, Rafael Muñoz 

DLSI, University of Alicante Carretera de 

San Vicente S/N Alicante, Spain. 
{montoyo,rafael}@dlsi.ua.es 

 

Abstract 

This paper describes the specifications and 

results of UMCC_DLSI system, which 

participated in the Semantic Textual 

Similarity task (STS) of SemEval-2013. Our 

supervised system uses different types of 

lexical and semantic features to train a 

Bagging classifier used to decide the correct 

option. Related to the different features we 

can highlight the resource ISR-WN used to 

extract semantic relations among words and 

the use of different algorithms to establish 

semantic and lexical similarities. In order to 

establish which features are the most 

appropriate to improve STS results we 

participated with three runs using different 

set of features. Our best run reached the 

position 44 in the official ranking, obtaining 

a general correlation coefficient of 0.61. 

1 Introduction 

SemEval-2013 (Agirre et al., 2013) presents the 

task Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) again. In 

STS, the participating systems must examine the 

degree of semantic equivalence between two 

sentences. The goal of this task is to create a 

unified framework for the evaluation of semantic 

textual similarity modules and to characterize 

their impact on NLP applications. 

STS is related to Textual Entailment (TE) and 

Paraphrase tasks. The main difference is that 

STS assumes bidirectional graded equivalence 

between the pair of textual snippets. 

In case of TE, the equivalence is directional 

(e.g. a student is a person, but a person is not 

necessarily a student). In addition, STS differs 

from TE and Paraphrase in that, rather than 

being a binary yes/no decision, STS is a 

similarity-graded notion (e.g. a student is more 

similar to a person than a dog to a person).  

This graded bidirectional is useful for NLP 

tasks such as Machine Translation (MT), 

Information Extraction (IE), Question 

Answering (QA), and Summarization. Several 

semantic tasks could be added as modules in the 

STS framework, “such as Word Sense 

Disambiguation and Induction, Lexical 

Substitution, Semantic Role Labeling, Multiword 

Expression detection and handling, Anaphora 

and Co-reference resolution, Time and Date 

resolution and Named Entity, among others”1  

1.1 Description of 2013 pilot task 

This edition of SemEval-2013 remain with the 

same classification approaches that in their first 

version in 2012. The output of different systems 

was compared to the reference scores provided 

by SemEval-2013 gold standard file, which 

range from five to zero according to the next 

criterions2: (5) “The two sentences are 
equivalent, as they mean the same thing”. (4) 

“The two sentences are mostly equivalent, but 

some unimportant details differ”. (3) “The two 

sentences are roughly equivalent, but some 

important information differs/missing”. (2) “The 

two sentences are not equivalent, but share some 

details”. (1) “The two sentences are not 

                                                           
1 http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2012/task6/ 
2 http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-

2012/task6/data/uploads/datasets/train-readme.txt 

109



equivalent, but are on the same topic”. (0) “The 

two sentences are on different topics”. 

After this introduction, the rest of the paper is 

organized as follows. Section 3 shows the 

Related Works. Section 4 presents our system 

architecture and description of the different runs. 

In section 4 we describe the different features 

used in our system. Results and a discussion are 

provided in Section 5 and finally we conclude in 

Section 6. 

2 Related Works 

There are more extensive literature on measuring 

the similarity between documents than to 

between sentences. Perhaps the most recently 

scenario is constituted by the competition of 

SemEval-2012 task 6: A Pilot on Semantic 

Textual Similarity (Aguirre and Cerd, 2012). In 

SemEval-2012, there were used different tools 

and resources like stop word list, multilingual 

corpora, dictionaries, acronyms, and tables of 

paraphrases, “but WordNet was the most used 

resource, followed by monolingual corpora and 

Wikipedia” (Aguirre and Cerd, 2012). 

According to Aguirre, Generic NLP tools were 

widely used. Among those that stand out were 

tools for lemmatization and POS-tagging 

(Aguirre and Cerd, 2012). On a smaller scale 

word sense disambiguation, semantic role 

labeling and time and date resolution. In 

addition, Knowledge-based and distributional 

methods were highly used. Aguirre and Cerd 

remarked on (Aguirre and Cerd, 2012) that 

alignment and/or statistical machine translation 

software, lexical substitution, string similarity, 

textual entailment and machine translation 

evaluation software were used to a lesser extent. 

It can be noted that machine learning was widely 

used to combine and tune components. 

Most of the knowledge-based methods “obtain 

a measure of relatedness by utilizing lexical 

resources and ontologies such as WordNet 

(Miller et al., 1990b) to measure definitional 

overlap, term distance within a graphical 

taxonomy, or term depth in the taxonomy as a 

measure of specificity” (Banea et al., 2012). 

Some scholars as in (Corley and Mihalcea, 

June 2005) have argue “the fact that a 

comprehensive metric of text semantic similarity 

should take into account the relations between 

words, as well as the role played by the various 

entities involved in the interactions described by 

each of the two sentences”. This idea is resumed 

in the Principle of Compositionality, this 

principle posits that the meaning of a complex 

expression is determined by the meanings of its 

constituent expressions and the rules used to 

combine them (Werning et al., 2005). Corley 

and Mihalcea in this article combined metrics of 

word-to-word similarity, and language models 

into a formula and they pose that this is a 

potentially good indicator of the semantic 

similarity of the two input texts sentences. They 

modeled the semantic similarity of a sentence as 

a function of the semantic similarity of the 

component words (Corley and Mihalcea, June 

2005). 

One of the top scoring systems at SemEval-

2012 (Šarić et al., 2012) tended to use most of 

the aforementioned resources and tools. They 

predict the human ratings of sentence similarity 

using a support-vector regression model with 

multiple features measuring word-overlap 

similarity and syntax similarity. They also 

compute the similarity between sentences using 

the semantic alignment of lemmas. First, they 

compute the word similarity between all pairs of 

lemmas from first to second sentence, using 

either the knowledge-based or the corpus-based 

semantic similarity. They named this method 

Greedy Lemma Aligning Overlap. 

Daniel Bär presented the UKP system, which 

performed best in the Semantic Textual 

Similarity (STS) task at SemEval-2012 in two 

out of three metrics. It uses a simple log-linear 

regression model, trained on the training data, to 

combine multiple text similarity measures of 

varying complexity. 

3 System architecture and description 
of the runs 

As we can see in Figure 1, our three runs begin 

with the pre-processing of SemEval-2013’s 

training set. Every sentence pair is tokenized, 

lemmatized and POS-tagged using Freeling 2.2 

tool (Atserias et al., 2006). Afterwards, several 

methods and algorithms are applied in order to 

extract all features for our Machine Learning 

System (MLS). Each run uses a particular group 

of features. 

110



Figure 1. System Architecture. 

The Run 1 (named MultiSemLex) is our main 

run. This takes into account all extracted features 

and trains a model with a Bagging classifier 

(Breiman, 1996) (using REPTree). The training 

corpus has been provided by SemEval-2013 

competition, in concrete by the Semantic Textual 

Similarity task.  

The Run 2 (named MultiLex) and Run 3 

(named MultiSem) use the same classifier, but 

including different features. Run 2 uses (see 

Figure 1) features extracted from Lexical-

Semantic Metrics (LS-M) described in section 

4.1, and Lexical-Semantic Alignment (LS-A) 

described in section 4.2. 

On the other hand, Run 3 uses features 

extracted only from Semantic Alignment (SA) 

described in section 4.3. 

As a result, we obtain three trained models 

capable to estimate the similarity value between 

two phrases. 

Finally, we test our system with the SemEval-

2013 test set (see Table 14 with the results of our 

three runs). The following section describes the 

features extraction process. 

4 Description of the features used in the 
Machine Learning System 

Many times when two phrases are very similar, 

one sentence is in a high degree lexically 

overlapped by the other. Inspired in this fact we 

developed various algorithms, which measure 

the level of overlapping by computing a quantity 

of matching words in a pair of phrases. In our 

system, we used as features for a MLS lexical 

and semantic similarity measures. Other features 

were extracted from a lexical-semantic sentences 

alignment and a variant using only a semantic 

alignment. 

4.1 Similarity measures 

We have used well-known string based 

similarity measures like: Needleman-Wunch 

(sequence alignment), Smith-Waterman 

(sequence alignment), Smith-Waterman-Gotoh, 

Smith-Waterman-Gotoh-Windowed-Affine, 

Jaro, Jaro-Winkler, Chapman-Length-Deviation, 

Chapman-Mean-Length, QGram-Distance, 

Block-Distance, Cosine Similarity, Dice 

Similarity, Euclidean Distance, Jaccard 

Similarity, Matching Coefficient, Monge-Elkan 

and Overlap-Coefficient. These algorithms have 

been obtained from an API (Application 

Program Interface) SimMetrics library v1.5 for 

.NET 2.03. We obtained 17 features for our MLS 

from these similarity measures. 

Using Levenshtein’s edit distance (LED), we 

computed also two different algorithms in order 

to obtain the alignment of the phrases. In the first 

one, we considered a value of the alignment as 

the LED between two sentences. Contrary to 

(Tatu et al., 2006), we do not remove the 

punctuation or stop words from the sentences, 

                                                           
3 Copyright (c) 2006 by Chris Parkinson, available in 

http://sourceforge.net/projects/simmetrics/ 

Run1.Bagging Classifier 

Training set from 

SemEval 2013 

Pre-Processing (using Freeling) 

 

Run 3 Bagging  

classifier 
Run 2 Bagging 

classifier 

Similarity Scores 

Feature extraction 

Lexical-Semantic Metrics 

 

Lexical-semantic 

alignment 
Semantic 

alignment 

 

Jaro QGra

m 

Rel. 

Concept 

. . . 

Tokenizing Lemmatizing POS tagging 

SemEval 

2013 Test 

set 

     Training Process (using Weka) 

111



neither consider different cost for transformation 

operation, and we used all the operations 

(deletion, insertion and substitution).  

The second one is a variant that we named 

Double Levenshtein’s Edit Distance (DLED) 

(see Table 9 for detail). For this algorithm, we 

used LED to measure the distance between the 

phrases, but in order to compare the words, we 

used LED again (Fernández et al., 2012; 

Fernández Orquín et al., 2009). 

Another distance we used is an extension of 

LED named Extended Distance (in spanish 

distancia extendida (DEx)) (see (Fernández et 

al., 2012; Fernández Orquín et al., 2009) for 

details). This algorithm is an extension of the 

Levenshtein’s algorithm, with which penalties 

are applied by considering what kind of 

transformation (insertion, deletion, substitution, 

or non-operation) and the position it was carried 

out, along with the character involved in the 

operation. In addition to the cost matrixes used 

by Levenshtein’s algorithm, DEx also obtains 

the Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) 

(Hirschberg, 1977) and other helpful attributes 

for determining similarity between strings in a 

single iteration. It is worth noting that the 

inclusion of all these penalizations makes the 

DEx algorithm a good candidate for our 

approach.  

In our previous work (Fernández Orquín et al., 

2009), DEx demonstrated excellent results when 

it was compared with other distances as 

(Levenshtein, 1965), (Neeedleman and Wunsch, 

1970), (Winkler, 1999). We also used as a 

feature the Minimal Semantic Distances 

(Breadth First Search (BFS)) obtained between 

the most relevant concepts of both sentences. 

The relevant concepts pertain to semantic 

resources ISR-WN (Gutiérrez et al., 2011; 

2010a), as WordNet (Miller et al., 1990a), 

WordNet Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti, 

2004), SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2001) and 

Semantic Classes (Izquierdo et al., 2007). Those 

concepts were obtained after having applied the 

Association Ratio (AR) measure between 

concepts and words over each sentence. (We 

refer reader to (Gutiérrez et al., 2010b) for a 

further description). 

Another attribute obtained by the system was a 

value corresponding with the sum of the smaller 

distances (using QGram-Distance) between the 

words or the lemmas of the phrase one with each 

words of the phrase two. 

As part of the attributes extracted by the 

system, was also the value of the sum of the 

smaller distances (using Levenshtein) among 

stems, chunks and entities of both phrases. 

4.2 Lexical-Semantic alignment 

Another algorithm that we created is the Lexical-

Semantic Alignment. In this algorithm, we tried 

to align the phrases by its lemmas. If the lemmas 

coincide we look for coincidences among parts-

of-speech4 (POS), and then the phrase is 

realigned using both. If the words do not share 

the same POS, they will not be aligned. To this 

point, we only have taken into account a lexical 

alignment. From now on, we are going to apply 

a semantic variant. After all the process, the non-

aligned words will be analyzed taking into 

account its WordNet’s relations (synonymy, 

hyponymy, hyperonymy, derivationally-related-

form, similar-to, verbal group, entailment and 

cause-to relation); and a set of equivalences like 

abbreviations of months, countries, capitals, days 

and currency. In case of hyperonymy and 

hyponymy relation, words are going to be 

aligned if there is a word in the first sentence 

that is in the same relation (hyperonymy or 

hyponymy) with another one in the second 

sentence. For the relations “cause-to” and 

“implication” the words will be aligned if there 

is a word in the first sentence that causes or 

implicates another one in the second sentence. 

All the other types of relations will be carried 

out in bidirectional way, that is, there is an 

alignment if a word of the first sentence is a 

synonymous of another one belonging to the 

second one or vice versa. 

Finally, we obtain a value we called alignment 

relation. This value is calculated as 𝐹𝐴𝑉 =
 𝑁𝐴𝑊 / 𝑁𝑊𝑆𝑃. Where 𝐹𝐴𝑉 is the final 
alignment value, 𝑁𝐴𝑊 is the number of aligned 
words, and 𝑁𝑊𝑆𝑃 is the number of words of the 
shorter phrase. The  𝐹𝐴𝑉 value is also another 
feature for our system. Other extracted attributes 

they are the quantity of aligned words and the 

quantity of not aligned words. The core of the 

alignment is carried out in different ways, which 

                                                           
4 (noun, verb, adjective, adverbs, prepositions, 

conjunctions, pronouns, determinants, modifiers, etc.) 

112



are obtained from several attributes.  Each way 

can be compared by: 

 the part-of-speech. 

 the morphology and the part-of-speech. 

 the lemma and the part-of-speech. 

 the morphology, part-of-speech, and 
relationships of WordNet. 

 the lemma, part-of-speech, and 
relationships of WordNet. 

4.3 Semantic Alignment 

This alignment method depends on calculating 

the semantic similarity between sentences based 

on an analysis of the relations, in ISR-WN, of 

the words that fix them. 

First, the two sentences are pre-processed with 

Freeling and the words are classified according 

to their POS, creating different groups. 

The distance between two words will be the 

distance, based on WordNet, of the most 

probable sense of each word in the pair, on the 

contrary of our previously system in SemEval 

2012. In that version, we assumed the selected 

sense after apply a double Hungarian Algorithm 

(Kuhn, 1955), for more details  please refer to 

(Fernández et al., 2012). The distance is 

computed according to the equation (1): 

𝑑(𝑥, 𝑦) = ∑ 𝑤 ∗ 𝑟(𝐿[𝑖], 𝐿[𝑖 + 1])𝑖=𝑚𝑖=0 ; (1) 

Where 𝐿 is the collection of synsets 
corresponding to the minimum path between 

nodes 𝑥 and 𝑦, 𝑚 is the length of 𝐿 subtracting 
one, 𝑟 is a function that search the relation 
connecting 𝑥 and 𝑦 nodes, 𝑤 is a weight 
associated to the relation searched by 𝑟 (see 
Table 1). 

Relation Weight 

Hyponym, Hypernym 2 

Member_Holonym, Member_Meronym, 

Cause, Entailment 
5 

Similar_To 10 

Antonym 200 

Other relation different to Synonymy 60 

Table 1. Weights applied to WordNet relations. 

Table 1 shows the weights associated to 

WordNet relations between two synsets. 

Let us see the following example: 

 We could take the pair 99 of corpus 
MSRvid (from training set of SemEval-

2013) with a littler transformation in 

order to a better explanation of our 

method. 

Original pair 

A: A polar bear is running towards a group of 

walruses. 

B: A polar bear is chasing a group of walruses. 

Transformed pair: 

A1: A polar bear runs towards a group of cats. 

B1: A wale chases a group of dogs. 

Later on, using equation (1), a matrix with the 

distances between all groups of both phrases is 

created (see Table 2). 

GROUPS polar bear runs towards group cats 

wale Dist:=3 Dist:=2 Dist:=3 Dist:=5  Dist:=2 

chases Dist:=4 Dist:=3 Dist:=2 Dist:=4  Dist:=3 

group     Dist:=0  

dogs Dist:=3 Dist:=1 Dist:=4 Dist:=4  Dist:=1 

Table 2. Distances between groups. 

Using the Hungarian Algorithm (Kuhn, 1955) 

for Minimum Cost Assignment, each group of 

the first sentence is checked with each element 

of the second sentence, and the rest is marked as 

words that were not aligned. 

In the previous example the words “toward” 

and “polar” are the words that were not aligned, 

so the number of non-aligned words is two. 

There is only one perfect match: “group-group” 

(match with cost=0). The length of the shortest 

sentence is four. The Table 3 shows the results 

of this analysis. 

Number of exact 

coincidence 

Total Distances of 

optimal Matching 

Number of 

non-aligned 

Words 

1 5 2 

Table 3. Features from the analyzed sentences. 

This process has to be repeated for nouns (see 

Table 4), verbs, adjective, adverbs, prepositions, 

conjunctions, pronouns, determinants, modifiers, 

digits and date times. On the contrary, the tables 

have to be created only with the similar groups 

of the sentences. Table 4 shows features 

extracted from the analysis of nouns. 

GROUPS bear group cats 

wale Dist := 2  Dist := 2 

group  Dist := 0  

dogs Dist := 1  Dist := 1 

Table 4. Distances between groups of nouns. 

113



Number of 

exact 

coincidence 

Total Distances 

of optimal 

Matching 

Number of non-aligned 

Words 

1 3 0 

Table 5. Feature extracted from analysis of nouns. 

Several attributes are extracted from the pair of 

sentences (see Table 3 and Table 5). Three 

attributes considering only verbs, only nouns, 

only adjectives, only adverbs, only prepositions, 

only conjunctions, only pronouns, only 

determinants, only modifiers, only digits, and 

only date times. These attributes are:  

 Number of exact coincidences 

 Total distance of matching 

 Number of words that do not match 
Many groups have particular features 

according to their parts-of-speech. The group of 

the nouns has one more feature that indicates if 

the two phrases have the same number (plural or 

singular). For this feature, we take the average of 

the number of each noun in the phrase like a 

number of the phrase.  

For the group of adjectives we added a feature 

indicating the distance between the nouns that 

modify it from the aligned adjectives, 

respectively.  

For the verbs, we search the nouns that precede 

it, and the nouns that are next of the verb, and 

we define two groups. We calculated the 

distance to align each group with every pair of 

aligned verbs. The verbs have other feature that 

specifies if all verbs are in the same verbal time.  

With the adverbs, we search the verb that is 

modified by it, and we calculate their distance 

from all alignment pairs.  

With the determinants and the adverbs we 

detect if any of the alignment pairs are 

expressing negations (like don’t, or do not) in 

both cases or not. Finally, we determine if the 

two phrases have the same principal action. For 

all this new features, we aid with Freeling tool. 

As a result, we finally obtain 42 attributes from 

this alignment method. It is important to remark 

that this alignment process searches to solve, for 

each word from the rows (see Table 4) it has a 

respectively word from the columns. 

4.4 Description of the alignment feature 

From the alignment process, we extract different 

features that help us a better result of our MLS. 

Table 6 shows the group of features with lexical 

and semantic support, based on WordNet 

relation (named F1). Each of they were named 

with a prefix, a hyphen and a suffix. Table 7 

describes the meaning of every prefix, and Table 

8 shows the meaning of the suffixes. 

Features 

CPA_FCG, CPNA_FCG, SIM_FCG, CPA_LCG, 

CPNA_LCG, SIM_LCG, CPA_FCGR, 

CPNA_FCGR, SIM_FCGR, CPA_LCGR, 

CPNA_LCGR, SIM_LCGR 

Table 6. F1. Semantic feature group. 

Prefixes Descriptions 

CPA Number of aligned words. 

CPNA Number of non-aligned words. 

SIM Similarity 

Table 7. Meaning of each prefixes. 

Prefixes Compared words for… 

FCG Morphology and POS 

LCG Lemma and POS 

FCGR Morphology, POS and WordNet relation. 

LCGR Lemma, POS and WordNet relation. 

Table 8. Suffixes for describe each type of alignment. 

Features Descriptions 

LevForma Levenshtein Distance between two 

phrases comparing words by 

morphology 

LevLema The same as above, but now 

comparing by lemma. 

LevDoble Idem, but comparing again by 

Levenshtein and accepting words 

match if the distance is ≤ 2. 

DEx Extended Distance 

NormLevF, 

NormLevL 

Normalized forms of LevForma and 

LevLema. 

Table 9. F2. Lexical alignment measures. 

Features 

NWunch, SWaterman, SWGotoh, SWGAffine, Jaro, 

JaroW, CLDeviation, CMLength, QGramD, BlockD, 

CosineS, DiceS, EuclideanD, JaccardS, MaCoef, 

MongeElkan, OverlapCoef. 

Table 10. Lexical Measure from SimMetrics library. 

Features Descriptions 

AxAQGD_L All against all applying QGramD 

and comparing by lemmas of the 

words. 

AxAQGD_F Same as above, but applying 

QGramD and comparing by 

morphology. 

AxAQGD_LF Idem, not only comparing by lemma 

but also by morphology. 

AxALev_LF All against all applying Levenhstein 

114



comparing by morphology and 

lemmas. 

AxA_Stems Idem, but applying Levenhstein 

comparing by the stems of the 

words. 

Table 11. Aligning all against all. 

Other features we extracted were obtained 

from the following similarity measures (named 

F2) (see Table 9 for detail). 

We used another group named F3, with lexical 

measure extracted from SimMetric library (see 

Table 10 for detail). 

Finally we used a group of five feature (named 

F4), extracted from all against all alignment (see 

Table 11 for detail). 

4.5 Description of the training phase 

For the training process, we used a supervised 

learning framework, including all the training set 

as a training corpus. Using ten-fold cross 

validation with the classifier mentioned in 

section 3 (experimentally selected). 

As we can see in Table 12, the attributes 

corresponding with the Test 1 (only lexical 

attributes) obtain 0.7534 of correlation. On the 

other side, the attributes of the Test 2 (lexical 

features with semantic support) obtain 0.7549 of 

correlation, and all features obtain 0.7987. Being 

demonstrated the necessity to tackle the problem 

of the similarity from a multidimensional point 

of view (see Test 3 in the Table 12). 

Features 

Correlation on the training data of SemEval-

2013 

Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 

F1 
 0.7549 

0.7987 
F2 

F3 0.7534  

F4   

Table 12. Features influence. Gray cells mean 

features are not taking into account. 

5 Result and discussion 

Semantic Textual Similarity task of SemEval-

2013 offered two official measures to rank the 

systems5: Mean- the main evaluation value, 

Rank- gives the rank of the submission as 

ordered by the "mean" result. 

                                                           
5http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/sts/index.php?option=com_content&vi

ew=article&id=53&Itemid=61 

Test data for the core test datasets, coming 

from the following: 

Corpus Description 

Headlineas: news headlines mined from several news 

sources by European Media Monitor 

using the RSS feed. 

OnWN: mapping of lexical resources OnWN. The 

sentences are sense definitions from 

WordNet and OntoNotes. 

FNWN: the sentences are sense definitions from 

WordNet and FrameNet. 

SMT: SMT dataset comes from DARPA GALE 

HTER and HyTER. One sentence is a 

MT output and the other is a reference 

translation where a reference is generated 

based on human post editing. 

Table 13. Test Core Datasets. 

Using these measures, our second run (Run 2) 

obtained the best results (see Table 14). As we 

can see in Table 14, our lexical run has obtained 

our best result, given at the same time worth 

result in our other runs. This demonstrates that 

tackling this problem with combining multiple 

lexical similarity measure produce better results 

in concordance to this specific test corpora. 

To explain Table 14 we present following 

descriptions: caption in top row mean: 1- 

Headlines, 2- OnWN, 3- FNWN, 4- SMT and 5- 

mean. 

Run 1 R 2 R 3 R 4 R 5 R 

1 0.5841 60 0.4847 54 0.2917 52 0.2855 66 0.4352 58 

2 0.6168 55 0.5557 39 0.3045 50 0.3407 28 0.4833 44 

3 0.3846 85 0.1342 88 -0.0065 85 0.2736 72 0.2523 87 

Table 14. Official SemEval-2013 results over test 

datasets. Ranking (R). 

The Run 1 is our main run, which contains the 

junction of all attributes (lexical and semantic 

attributes).  Table 14 shows the results of all the 

runs for a different corpus from test phase. As 

we can see, Run 1 did not obtain the best results 

among our runs. 

Otherwise, Run 3 uses more semantic analysis 

than Run 2, from this; Run 3 should get better 

results than reached over the corpus of FNWN, 

because this corpus is extracted from FrameNet 

corpus (Baker et al., 1998) (a semantic network). 

FNWN provides examples with high semantic 

content than lexical. 

Run 3 obtained a correlation coefficient of 

0.8137 for all training corpus of SemEval 2013, 

115



while Run 2 and Run 1 obtained 0.7976 and 

0.8345 respectively with the same classifier 

(Bagging using REPTree, and cross validation 

with ten-folds). These results present a 

contradiction between test and train evaluation. 

We think it is consequence of some obstacles 

present in test corpora, for example:  

In headlines corpus there are great quantity of 

entities, acronyms and gentilics that we not take 

into account in our system. 

The corpus FNWN presents a non-balance 

according to the length of the phrases. 

In OnWN -test corpus-, we believe that some 

evaluations are not adequate in correspondence 

with the training corpus. For example, in line 7 

the goal proposed was 0.6, however both phrases 

are semantically similar. The phrases are: 

 the act of lifting something 

 the act of climbing something. 
We think that 0.6 are not a correct evaluation 

for this example. Our system result, for this 

particular case, was 4.794 for Run 3, and 3.814 

for Run 2, finally 3.695 for Run 1. 

6 Conclusion and future works 

This paper have introduced a new framework for 

recognizing Semantic Textual Similarity, which 

depends on the extraction of several features that 

can be inferred from a conventional 

interpretation of a text. 

As mentioned in section 3 we have conducted 

three different runs, these runs only differ in the 

type of attributes used. We can see in Table 14 

that all runs obtained encouraging results. Our 

best run was situated at 44th position of 90 runs 

of the ranking of SemEval-2013.  Table 12 and 

Table 14 show the reached positions for the three 

different runs and the ranking according to the 

rest of the teams.  

In our participation, we used a MLS that works 

with features extracted from five different 

strategies: String Based Similarity Measures, 

Semantic Similarity Measures, Lexical-Semantic 

Alignment and Semantic Alignment. 

We have conducted the semantic features 

extraction in a multidimensional context using 

the resource ISR-WN, the one that allowed us to 

navigate across several semantic resources 

(WordNet, WordNet Domains, WordNet Affect, 

SUMO, SentiWordNet and Semantic Classes). 

Finally, we can conclude that our system 

performs quite well. In our current work, we 

show that this approach can be used to correctly 

classify several examples from the STS task of 

SemEval-2013. Compared with the best run of 

the ranking (UMBC_EBIQUITY- ParingWords) 

(see Table 15) our main run has very close 

results in headlines (1), and SMT (4) core test 

datasets. 

Run 1 2 3 4 5 6 

(First) 0.7642 0.7529 0.5818 0.3804 0.6181 1 

(Our) 

RUN 2 
0.6168 0.5557 0.3045 0.3407 0.4833 44 

Table 15. Comparison with best run (SemEval 2013). 

As future work we are planning to enrich our 

semantic alignment method with Extended 

WordNet (Moldovan and Rus, 2001), we think 

that with this improvement we can increase the 

results obtained with texts like those in OnWN 

test set. 

6.1 Team Collaboration 

Is important to remark that our team has been 

working up in collaboration with INAOE 

(Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica y 

Electrónica) and LIPN (Laboratoire 

d'Informatique de Paris-Nord), Université Paris 

13 universities, in order to encourage the 

knowledge interchange and open shared 

technology. Supporting this collaboration, 

INAOE-UPV (Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, 

Óptica y Electrónica and Universitat Politècnica 

de València) team, in concrete in INAOE-UPV-

run 3 has used our semantic distances for nouns, 

adjectives, verbs and adverbs, as well as lexical 

attributes like LevDoble, NormLevF, NormLevL 

and Ext (see influence of these attributes in 

Table 12). 

Acknowledgments 

This research work has been partially funded by 

the Spanish Government through the project 

TEXT-MESS 2.0 (TIN2009-13391-C04), 

"Análisis de Tendencias Mediante Técnicas de 

Opinión Semántica" (TIN2012-38536-C03-03) 

and “Técnicas de Deconstrucción en la 

Tecnologías del Lenguaje Humano” (TIN2012-

31224); and by the Valencian Government 

through the project PROMETEO 

(PROMETEO/2009/199). 

116



Reference 

Agirre, E.; D. Cer; M. Diab and W. Guo. *SEM 2013 

Shared Task: Semantic Textual Similarity 

including a Pilot on Typed-Similarity. *SEM 

2013: The Second Joint Conference on Lexical and 

Computational Semantics, Association for 

Computational Linguistics, 2013.  

Aguirre, E. and D. Cerd. SemEval 2012 Task 6:A 

Pilot on Semantic Textual Similarity. First Join 

Conference on Lexical and Computational 

Semantic (*SEM), Montréal, Canada, Association 

for Computational Linguistics., 2012. 385-393 p.  

Atserias, J.; B. Casas; E. Comelles; M. González; L. 

Padró and M. Padró. FreeLing 1.3: Syntactic and 

semantic services in an opensource NLP library. 

Proceedings of LREC'06, Genoa, Italy, 2006. 

Baker, C. F.; C. J. Fillmore and J. B. Lowe. The 

berkeley framenet project. Proceedings of the 17th 

international conference on Computational 

linguistics-Volume 1, Association for 

Computational Linguistics, 1998. 86-90 p.  

Banea, C.; S. Hassan; M. Mohler and R. Mihalcea. 

UNT:A Supervised Synergistic Approach to 

SemanticText Similarity. First Joint Conference on 

Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), 

Montréal. Canada, Association for Computational 

Linguistics, 2012. 635–642 p.  

Breiman, L. Bagging predictors Machine learning, 

1996, 24(2): 123-140. 

Corley, C. and R. Mihalcea. Measuring the Semantic 

Similarity of Texts, Association for Computational 

Linguistic. Proceedings of the ACL Work shop on 

Empirical Modeling of Semantic Equivalence and 

Entailment, pages 13–18, June 2005. 

Fernández, A.; Y. Gutiérrez; H. Dávila; A. Chávez; 

A. González; R. Estrada; Y. Castañeda; S. 

Vázquez; A. Montoyo and R. Muñoz. 

UMCC_DLSI: Multidimensional Lexical-

Semantic Textual Similarity. {*SEM 2012}: The 

First Joint Conference on Lexical and 

Computational Semantics -- Volume 1: 

Proceedings of the main conference and the shared 

task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth 

International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation 

{(SemEval 2012)}, Montreal, Canada, Association 

for Computational Linguistics, 2012. 608--616 p.  

Fernández Orquín, A. C.; J. Díaz Blanco; A. Fundora 

Rolo and R. Muñoz Guillena. Un algoritmo para la 

extracción de características lexicográficas en la 

comparación de palabras. IV Convención 

Científica Internacional CIUM, Matanzas, Cuba, 

2009.  

Gutiérrez, Y.; A. Fernández; A. Montoyo and S. 

Vázquez. Integration of semantic resources based 

on WordNet. XXVI Congreso de la Sociedad 

Española para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje 

Natural, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, 

Valencia, SEPLN 2010, 2010a. 161-168 p. 1135-

5948. 

Gutiérrez, Y.; A. Fernández; A. Montoyo and S. 

Vázquez. UMCC-DLSI: Integrative resource for 

disambiguation task. Proceedings of the 5th 

International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, 

Uppsala, Sweden, Association for Computational 

Linguistics, 2010b. 427-432 p.  

Gutiérrez, Y.; A. Fernández; A. Montoyo and S. 

Vázquez Enriching the Integration of Semantic 

Resources based on WordNet Procesamiento del 

Lenguaje Natural, 2011, 47: 249-257. 

Hirschberg, D. S. Algorithms for the longest common 

subsequence problem J. ACM, 1977, 24: 664–675. 

Izquierdo, R.; A. Suárez and G. Rigau A Proposal of 

Automatic Selection of Coarse-grained Semantic 

Classes for WSD Procesamiento del Lenguaje 

Natural, 2007, 39: 189-196. 

Kuhn, H. W. The Hungarian Method for the 

assignment problem Naval Research Logistics 

Quarterly, 1955, 2: 83–97. 

Levenshtein, V. I. Binary codes capable of correcting 

spurious insertions and deletions of ones. Problems 

of information Transmission. 1965. pp. 8-17 p.  

Miller, G. A.; R. Beckwith; C. Fellbaum; D. Gross 

and K. Miller. Five papers on WordNet. 

Princenton University, Cognositive Science 

Laboratory, 1990a. 

Miller, G. A.; R. Beckwith; C. Fellbaum; D. Gross 

and K. Miller Introduction to WordNet: An On-

line Lexical Database International Journal of 

Lexicography, 3(4):235-244., 1990b. 

Moldovan, D. I. and V. Rus Explaining Answers with 

Extended WordNet ACL, 2001. 

Neeedleman, S. and C. Wunsch A general method 

applicable to the search for similarities in the 

amino acid sequence of two proteins Mol. Biol, 

1970, 48(443): 453. 

Niles, I. and A. Pease. Origins of the IEEE Standard 

Upper Ontology. Working Notes of the IJCAI-

2001 Workshop on the IEEE Standard Upper 

Ontology, Seattle, Washington, USA., 2001. 

117



Šarić, F.; G. Glavaš; Mladenkaran; J. Šnajder and B. 

D. Basić. TakeLab: Systems for Measuring 

Semantic Text Similarity.  Montréal, Canada, First 

Join Conference on Lexical and Computational 

Semantic (*SEM), pages 385-393. Association for 

Computational Linguistics., 2012.  

Strapparava, C. and A. Valitutti. WordNet-Affect: an 

affective extension of WordNet. Proceedings of 

the 4th International Conference on Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), Lisbon, 

2004. 1083-1086 p. 

Tatu, M.; B. Iles; J. Slavick; N. Adrian and D. 

Moldovan. COGEX at the Second Recognizing 

Textual Entailment Challenge. Proceedings of the 

Second PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment 

Challenge Workshop, Venice, Italy, 2006. 104-109 

p.  

Werning, M.; E. Machery and G. Schurz. The 

Compositionality of Meaning and Content, 

Volume 1: Foundational issues. ontos verlag 

[Distributed in] North and South America by 

Transaction Books, 2005. p. Linguistics & 

philosophy, Bd. 1. 3-937202-52-8. 

Winkler, W. The state of record linkage and current 

research problems. Technical Report, Statistical 

Research Division, U.S, Census Bureau, 1999. 

 
 

118


