










































[LVIC-LIMSI]: Using Syntactic Features and Multi-polarity Words for Sentiment Analysis in Twitter


Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 418–424, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

[LVIC-LIMSI]: Using Syntactic Features and Multi-polarity Words for
Sentiment Analysis in Twitter

Morgane Marchand1,2, Alexandru Lucian Ginsca1, Romaric Besançon1, Olivier Mesnard1
(1) CEA-LIST, DIASI, LVIC

CEA SACLAY - Nano-INNOV - Bt. 861 - Point courrier 173
91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France

(2) LIMSI-CNRS
Bat 508, BP133,91403 Orsay Cedex

morgane.marchand@cea.fr; alexandru.ginsca@cea.fr
romaric.besancon@cea.fr; olivier.mesnard@cea.fr

Abstract

This paper presents the contribution of our
team at task 2 of SemEval 2013: Sentiment
Analysis in Twitter. We submitted a con-
strained run for each of the two subtasks. In the
Contextual Polarity Disambiguation subtask,
we use a sentiment lexicon approach combined
with polarity shift detection and tree kernel
based classifiers. In the Message Polarity Clas-
sification subtask, we focus on the influence
of domain information on sentiment classifica-
tion.

1 Introduction

In the past decade, new forms of communication,
such as microblogging and text messaging have
emerged and became ubiquitous. These short mes-
sages are often used to share opinions and sentiments.
The Sentiment Analysis in Twitter task promotes re-
search that will lead to a better understanding of how
sentiment is conveyed in tweets and texts. In this
paper, we describe our contribution at task 2 of Se-
mEval 2013 (Wilson et al., 2013). For the Contextual
Polarity Disambiguation subtask, covered in section
2, we use a system that combines a lexicon based
approach to sentiment detection with two types of
supervised learning methods, one used for polarity
shift identification and one for tweet segment classi-
fication in the absence of lexicon words. The third
section presents the Message Polarity Classification
subtask. We focus here on the influence of domain
information on sentiment classification by detecting
words that change their polarity across domains.

2 Task A: Contextual Polarity
Disambiguation

In this section we present our approach for the con-
textual polarity disambiguation task in which, given
a message containing a marked instance of a word or
a phrase, the system has to determine whether that
instance is positive, negative or neutral in that con-
text. For this task, we submitted a single run using
only the tweets provided by the organizers.

2.1 System description

Based on the predominant strategy, sentiment anal-
ysis systems can be divided into those that focus on
sentiment lexicons together with a set of rules and
those that rely on machine learning techniques. For
this task, we use a mixed approach in which we first
filter the tweets based on the occurrences of words
from a sentiment lexicon and then apply different
supervised learning methods on the grounds of this
initial classification. In Figure 1 we detail the work-
flow of our system. We use the + , − and ∗ symbols
to denote a positive, negative and neutral tweet seg-
ment, respectively. Also, we use the a→ b notation
when referring to a polarity shift from a to b.

2.1.1 Data preprocessing
The language used in Twitter presents some partic-

ularities, such as the use of hashtags or user mentions.
In order to maximize the efficiency of language pro-
cessing methods, such as lemmatization and syntactic
parsing, we perform several normalization steps. We
remove the # symbol, all @ mentions and links and
perform lower case conversion. Also, if a vowel is
repeated more than 3 times in a word, we reduce it to

418



Figure 1: Contextual polarity disambiguation task system description

a single occurrence and we reduce multiple consecu-
tive punctuation marks to a single one. Finally, we
lemmatize the normalized text.

Emoticons have been successfully used as senti-
ment indicators in tweets (Davidov et al., 2010). In
our approach, we map a set of positive emoticons to
the word good and a set of negative emoticons to the
word bad. We use the following sets of emoticons:

• Positive emoticons: :) , :-) , :D , =) , :’) , :o) , :P
, >:) , :”>, >:|, <3 , ;>, ;) , ;-) , ;>, (: , (;

• Negative emoticons: :( , : ( , :-( , :’( , :/ , :<, ;(

Traits of informal language have been used as fea-
tures in Twitter sentiment classification tasks (Go
et al., 2009). In order to avoid the loss of possi-
ble useful information, we keep record of the per-
formed normalizations as binary features associated
to a tweet segment. We retain the following set of fea-
tures: hasPositiveEmoticon, hasNegativeEmoticon,
hasHashtag, hasAtSign, hasConsecutivePunctuation,
hasConsecutiveVowels, hasUpperCaseWords.

2.1.2 Classification methods
In a first step, we select tweet segments that con-

tain at least one word from a lexicon and assign to
it the polarity of that word. If there are more than
one sentiment words with different polarities in the
segment, we keep the most frequent polarity and in
the few cases where there is an equal number of posi-
tive and negative words, we take the polarity of the
last one. Next, we look for negation indicators (e.g.
not, ’t) using a set of words and rules and replace
them with the NEG token. We then identify instances

where there is a shift between the polarity predicted
from the lexicon and the one from the ground truth.
In order to account for the unbalanced datasets(e.g.
192 instances where there is a +→ − shift and 3188
where the positive instance was correctly identified
from the lexicon) we use cost sensitive classifiers. We
define a cost matrix in which the cost of the classifier
making a false positive error is three times higher
than a false negative error. Using this approach we
guide the classifier to provide less but more confident
predictions for the existence of a polarity shift while
allowing it to make more errors when predicting the
absence of a shift. For these classifiers, we use a Bag
of Words representation of the lemmatized segments.
When a word from the sentiment lexicon does not
appear in the tweet segment, we use a one vs. all
classification approach with a SVM classifier and
tree kernels. The tree kernel is a function between
two trees that computes a normalized similarity score
in the range [0,1] (Culotta and Sorensen, 2004). For
our task, we use an implementation of tree kernels
for syntactic parse trees (Moschitti, 2006) that is built
on top of the SVM-Light library (Joachims, 1999) in
a similar manner to that presented in (Ginsca, 2012).
We build the syntactic parse trees with the Stanford
CoreNLP library (Klein and Manning, 2003).

2.2 Evaluation and Results

For the experiments presented in this section, we
merge the training and development datasets and for
the polarity shift and sentiment classification experi-
ments we report the results using a 5-fold cross vali-
dation technique over the resulting dataset.

419



2.2.1 Lexicon choice influence
Considering that the selection of a lexicon plays

an important role on the performance of our system,
we tested 3 widely used sentiment lexicons: Sen-
tiWordNet 3 (Baccianella et al., 2010), Bing Liu’s
Opinion Lexicon (Hu and Liu, 2004) and MPQA
Subjectivity Lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005). Different
combinations of these lexicons were tried and in Ta-
ble 1 we present the top performing ones. Besides
the F-Measure for positive (Fp) and negative (Fn)
instances, we also list the percentage of instances in
which appears at least one word from the lexicon.
SentiWordnet appoints polarity weights to words,
ranging from 0 to 1. An important parameter is the
threshold over which a word is considered to have a
certain polarity. We tested several values (from 0.5 to
0.9 with a step of 0.05) and the best results in terms
of F-Measure were obtained for a threshold of 0.75.
Our finding is consistent with the value suggested in
(Chen et al., 2012).

Lexicon Found(%) Fp Fn
Liu 55.7 0.93 0.85
MPQA 61.4 0.89 0.76
SentWN 79.4 0.86 0.78
Liu+MPQA 67.1 0.89 0.78
Liu+SentWN 79.4 0.87 0.81
Liu+MPQA+SentWN 79.4 0.86 0.81

Table 1: Influence of lexicon on the F-Measure for positive
and negative segments

2.2.2 Polarity shift experiments
We tested several classifiers using the Weka toolkit

(Hall et al., 2009) and found that the best results
were obtained with the Sequential Minimal Optimiza-
tion (SMO) classifier. For instance, when classifying
+ → − shifts, SMO correctly identified 91 out of
192 polarity shifts in contrast with 68 and 41 detected
by a Random Forests and a Naive Bayes classifier,
respectively. For the +→ ∗ classification, the SMO
classifier finds 2 out of 34 shifts, for − → +, 15 out
of 238 and for − → ∗, 2 out of 32 shifts are found.
After changing the polarity of sentiment segments as
found by the 4 classifiers, we obtain an increase in
F-Measure from 0.930 to 0.947 for positive segments
and from 0.851 to 0.913 for negative segments. Our
choice of the Bag of Words model instead of a parse

tree representation for these classifiers is justified by
the poor performance of tree kernels when dealing
with unbalanced data.

2.2.3 Sentiment classification experiments

Model Class Avg. F-score

Basic Tree
positive 0.780
negative 0.645
neutral 0.227

Tree + Numeric
positive 0.768
negative 0.590
neutral 0.132

Tree + Context 2
positive 0.801
negative 0.676
neutral 0.231

Table 2: Comparison between different models used for
segment polarity classification

In a series of preliminary experiments, we tested
several classifiers trained on a Bag of Words model
and an SVM classifier with a tree kernel. We found
that the parse tree representation of a tweet segment
provided a higher accuracy. This shows that although
small, when a segment contains more than one word,
its syntactic structure becomes a relevant feature.
In Table 2 we compare the results of 3 tree based
models. In the Basic Tree model, we use only the
syntactic parse tree representation of a tweet seg-
ment. For the Tree + Numeric model, we use the
initial tree kernel together with a polynomial kernel
on the binary structure features presented in section
2.1.1. In the Tree + Context model, we include in the
parse tree, besides the given section, k tokens (words,
punctuation) from the whole tweet that surround the
selected segment. We performed tests with k from 1
to 5 and obtained the best results with a k value of 2.

2.2.4 Competition results
For the Twitter dataset, we ranked 4th out of

23 groups that submitted constrained runs. When
combining the results of the constrained and uncon-
strained submissions, our run was ranked 5th out of
a total of 29 submissions. For the SMS dataset, we
ranked 5th out of a total of 18 groups for the con-
strained setting and our submission was ranked 5th
out of 24 combined runs. In Table 3, we detail the
results we obtained on the competition test datasets.

420



Class P R F-score
Twitter positive 0.8623 0.9140 0.8874
Twitter negative 0.8453 0.8086 0.8265
Twitter neutral 0.4127 0.1625 0.2332
SMS positive 0.7107 0.8945 0.7921
SMS negative 0.8687 0.7609 0.8112
SMS neutral 0.3684 0.0440 0.0787

Table 3: Competition results overview on the Twitter and
SMS datasets

2.3 Discussion

The robustness of our approach is proved by the
low standard deviation of the F-Measure scores ob-
tained over each of the the 5 folds used for evaluation
(0.026) but also by the small difference between the
results we obtained during the development phase
and those reported on the competition test dataset.
The choice of lexicons results in a trade-off between
the percentage of instances classified with either the
lexicon and polarity shift or the supervised learning
method. Although the first one yields better results
and it is apparently desirable to have a better cover-
age of lexicon terms, this would reduce the number of
instances for training a classifier leading to a poorer
performance of this approach.

3 Task B: Message Polarity Classification

In this section, we present our approach for the mes-
sage polarity classification task in which, given a
message, the system has to determine whether it ex-
presses a positive, negative, or neutral sentiment. As
for Task A, we submitted a single constrained run.

3.1 Preprocessing of the corpora

We use as training corpora the training data, merged
with the development data. After the deletion of
tweets no longer available, our final training set con-
tains 10402 tweets: 3855 positive, 1633 negative and
4914 objective or neutral. In the preprocessing step,
we first remove the web addresses from the tweets to
reduce the noise. Then, we extract the emoticons and
create new features with the number of occurrences
of each type of emoticon. The different emoticons
types are presented in Table 4. Then, we lemmatize
the text using LIMA, a linguistic analyzer of CEA
LIST (Besançon et al., 2010).

:-) :) =) X) x) Smile
:-( :( =( Sadness

:-D :D =D X-D XD x-D xD :’) Laugh
;-) ;) Wink
< 3 Heart

:’-( :’( =’( Tear

Table 4: Common emoticon types

3.2 Boostexter baseline

To classify the tweets, we used the BoosTexter1 clas-
sifier (Schapire and Singer, 2000) in its discrete Ad-
aBoost.MH version, setting the number of iterations
to 1000. We used two types of features: a Bag of
Words of lemmatized uni-, bi- and tri-grams and the
number of occurrences of each emoticon type.

Bog of words features Emoticon type feature
wow lady gaga be great Smile 1

Table 5: Example of tweet representation

Boostexter is designed to maximize the accuracy,
not the F-score, which is the chosen evaluation metric
for this task. As the training data contain few negative
examples, the classifier tends to under-detect this
class. In order to favour the negative class detection,
we balance the training corpora. So our final system
is trained on 4899 tweets (1633 of each class, chosen
randomly). The accuracy results are not presented
here. However, the gain between our baseline and
our final system has the same order of magnitude.

3.3 Integration of domain information

Some words can change their polarity between two
different domains (Navigli, 2012; Yoshida et al.,
2011). For example, the word ”return” is positive
in ”I can’t wait to return to my book”. However, it is
often very negative when we are talking about some
electronics device, as in ”I had to return my phone
to the store”. This phenomenon happens even in
more closely related domains: ”I was laughing all the
time” is a good point for a comedy film but a bad one
for a horror film. We call such words or expressions
”multi-polarity words”. This phenomenon is different

1BoosTexter is a general purpose machine-learning program
based on boosting for building a classifier from text.

421



from polysemy, as a word can keep the same meaning
across domains while changing its polarity and it can
lead to classification error (Wilson et al., 2009). In
(Marchand, 2013), we have shown, on a corpus of re-
views, that a sensible amount of multi-polarity words
influences the results of common opinion classifiers.
Their deletion or their differentiation leads to better
classification results. Here, we test this approach on
a corpus of tweets.

3.3.1 Domain generation with LDA
In order to apply our method, we need to assign

domains to tweets. For that purpose, we use Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003). We
used the Mallet LDA implementation (McCallum,
2002). The framework uses Gibbs sampling to con-
stitute the sample distributions that are exploited for
the creation of the topic models. The models are built
using the lemmatized tweets from the training and
development data. We performed tests with a number
of domains ranging from 5 to 25, with a step of 5.
Each LDA representation of a tweet is encoded by
inferring a domain distribution. For example, if a
model with 5 domains is used, we generate a vector
of length 5, where each the i-th value is the propor-
tion of terms belonging to the i-th domain.

Domain 1 tonight, watch, time, today
Domain 2 win, vote, obama, black
Domain 3 game, play, win, team
Domain 4 apple, international, sun, anderson
Domain 5 ticket, show, open, live

Table 6: Most representative words of each domain (5
domains version)

In first experiments with crossvalidation on train-
ing data, the 5 domains version, presented in Table 6,
appears to be the most efficient. Therefore, in the rest
of the paper, results are shown only for this version.

3.3.2 Detection of multi-polarity words
For detecting the multi-polarity words, we use the

positive and negative labels of the training data. We
make the assumption that positive words will mostly
appear in positive tweets and negative words in neg-
ative tweets. Between two different corpora, we de-
termine words with different polarity across corpora
by using a χ2 test on their profile of occurrence in

positive and negative tweets in both corpora. The risk
of false positive is set to 0.05. The words are also
selected only if they occur more often than a given
threshold. For the SemEval task B, we apply this
detection for each domain. Each time, we detect the
words that change their polarity between a specific
domain and all the others. For example, the word
”black” is detected as positive in the second domain,
related to the election of Barack Obama, and neutral
in the rest of the tweets. At the end of this procedure,
we have 5 collections of words which change their
polarity (one different collection for each domain).
These collections are rather small: from 21 to 61
multi-polarity words are detected depending on the
domain and the parameters.

3.3.3 Differentiation of multi-polarity words
We tested different strategies in order to integrate

the domain information in the Sentiment Classifica-
tion in Twitter task.

• Domain-specific: 5 different classifiers are
trained on the domain specific subpart of the
tweets, without change on the data.

• Diff-topic: 5 different classifiers are trained on
the whole corpus, where the detected multi-
polarity words are differentiated into ”word-
domainX” and ”word-other”.

• Change-all: only 1 classifier is trained. Similar
to the previous one, except all the differentia-
tions are made at the same time.

• Keep-topic: 5 different classifiers are trained.
The detected multi-polarity words are kept in-
side their domain and deleted in the others.

• Remove-all: 5 different classifiers are trained.
The detected multi-polarity words are deleted
inside and outside their domain.

For the change-all version, we use only one classifier:
all test tweets are classified using the same classifier.
In the other versions, we obtain 5 classifiers. For
each test tweet, we determine its domain profile us-
ing topic models of LDA. Then we use a mix of all
the classifiers with weighting according to the LDA
mixture2. The domain-specific version gives worse

2The weight is the exponential of the LDA score.

422



results than the baseline trained on the whole original
corpus and is not represented on the figures.

Figure 2: Average F-measure results for the best set of
parameters for each method.

We tested all these versions with two training sets:
first, using all the training tweets to train the clas-
sifiers (Figure 2) and secondly, only the tweets for
which a domain can be confidently attributed (at least
a 75% score from the LDA model) (Figure 3). In this
case, the training set contains 2889 tweets. The run
submitted to SemEval corresponds to the change-all
version, trained with all the training tweets.

Figure 3: Average F-measure results for the best set of
parameters for each method.

Empirically, we set the threshold for the number
of occurrences to 10 in the first experiment and only
to 5 in the domain confident experiment, due to the
smallest size of the training corpora.

3.4 Analysis of the result and discussion
Using a boosting method with lemma trigrams and
emoticons features is a good fully automatic baseline.
We are in the mid range of results of all the partici-
pants (19th out of 48 submissions for the tweets and
26th out of 42 submissions for the SMS). We try to
include domain information to improve the opinion
classification. As we don’t have a reference domain
differentiation for the tweets, we separate them us-
ing the LDA method. The domain-specific version,
which does not take into account the multi-polarity
words, degrades the performances(-1.85% in the first

experiment, -2.8% in the second). On the contrary,
all our versions which use multi-polarity words, es-
pecially remove-all version, improve the F-measure.
The final improvement is small but it has to be re-
lated to the small number of multi-polarity words we
have detected (in average, 36 words per domain). We
think that the tweet collection is too small for the χ2
test to detect a lot of words with enough confidence.
For comparison, in our experiment on reviews, we
detected about 400 multi-polarity words per domain.
It is also worth noticing that for the domain confi-
dent experiment, the improvement is more sensible
(+1.46% versus +0.70%) even if the absolute value of
the score is not better, due to a much smaller training
data. It’s a good argument for our method. Another
question is about the method used to separate the
tweets into different domains. We plan to have more
control on the domains by using a more supervised
method based on the categories of Wikipedia.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented our contribution to Se-
mEval 2013 task 2: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter.
For the Contextual Polarity Disambiguation subtask,
we described a very efficient and robust method based
on a sentiment lexicon associated with a polarity shift
detector and a tree based classification. As for the
Message Polarity Classification, we focused on the
impact of domain information. With only 4899 train-
ing tweets, we achieve good performances and we
demonstrate that words with changing polarity can
influence the classification performance.
One of the challenges of this SemEval task was to
see how well sentiment analysis models trained us-
ing Twitter data would generalize to a SMS dataset.
Looking at our result but also at the submissions of
other participants, a drop of performance can be ob-
served between the results on the Twitter and SMS
test datasets. In (Hu et al., 2013), the authors per-
form a thorough study on the differences between the
language used on Twitter and that of SMS messages
and chat. They find that Twitter language is more
conservative and less informal than SMS and online
chat and that the language of Twitter can be seen as
a projection of a formal register in a restricted space.
This is a good indicator to the difficulty of using a
Twitter centered system on a SMS dataset.

423



Acknowledgments

This work was partly supported by the MUCKE
project (http://ifs.tuwien.ac.at/˜mucke/) through a
grant from the French National Research Agency
(ANR), FP7 CHIST-ERA Programme (ANR-12-
CHRI-0007-04).

References
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-

tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In
Proceedings of the 7th conference on International Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC10), Valletta,
Malta, May.

Romaric Besançon, Gaël de Chalendar, Olivier Ferret,
Faiza Gara, Olivier Mesnard, Meriama Lab, and Nasre-
dine Semmar. 2010. Lima : A multilingual framework
for linguistic analysis and linguistic resources develop-
ment and evaluation. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Confer-
ence Chair), Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Rosner,
and Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceedings of LREC’10,
Valletta, Malta, may. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003.
Latent dirichlet allocation. the Journal of machine
Learning research, 3:993–1022.

Lu Chen, Wenbo Wang, Meenakshi Nagarajan, Shaojun
Wang, and Amit P Sheth. 2012. Extracting diverse
sentiment expressions with target-dependent polarity
from twitter. Proceedings of ICWSM.

Aron Culotta and Jeffrey Sorensen. 2004. Dependency
tree kernels for relation extraction. In Proceedings of
the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, page 423. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using twitter hashtags and
smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics: Posters, pages
241–249. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Alexandru Lucian Ginsca. 2012. Fine-grained opin-
ion mining as a relation classification problem. In
2012 Imperial College Computing Student Workshop,
volume 28, pages 56–61. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-
Zentrum fuer Informatik.

Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and Lei Huang. 2009. Twit-
ter sentiment classification using distant supervision.
CS224N Project Report, Stanford, pages 1–12.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H Witten. 2009.

The weka data mining software: an update. ACM
SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 11(1):10–18.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the tenth
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, pages 168–177. ACM.

Yuheng Hu, Kartik Talamadupula, and Subbarao Kamb-
hampati. 2013. Dude, srsly?: The surprisingly formal
nature of twitters language. Proceedings of ICWSM.

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large scale svm learn-
ing practical.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 423–430. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Morgane Marchand. 2013. Fouille dopinion: ces mots qui
changent de polarité selon le domaine. In Proceedings
of the 8e Rencontres Jeunes Chercheurs en Recherche
dInformation (RJCRI).

Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. Mallet: A machine
learning for language toolkit.

Alessandro Moschitti. 2006. Making tree kernels prac-
tical for natural language learning. In Proceedings of
EACL, volume 6, pages 113–120.

R. Navigli. 2012. A quick tour of word sense disam-
biguation, induction and related approaches. SOFSEM
2012: Theory and Practice of Computer Science, pages
115–129.

Robert E Schapire and Yoram Singer. 2000. Boostex-
ter: A boosting-based system for text categorization.
Machine learning, 39(2-3):135–168.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. 2005.
Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level senti-
ment analysis. In Proceedings of the conference on
Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 347–354. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. 2009.
Recognizing contextual polarity: An exploration of
features for phrase-level sentiment analysis. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 35.

Theresa Wilson, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Alan
Ritter, Sara Rosenthal, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2013.
Semeval-2013 task 2: Sentiment analysis in twitter.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Yasuhisa Yoshida, Tsutomu Hirao, Tomoharu Iwata,
Masaaki Nagata, and Yuji Matsumoto. 2011. Transfer
learning for multiple-domain sentiment analysis - iden-
tifying domain dependent/independent word polaritys.
In AAAI.

424


