



















































Sensible: L2 Translation Assistance by Emulating the Manual Post-Editing Process


Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2014), pages 541–545,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-24, 2014.

Sensible: L2 Translation Assistance by Emulating the Manual
Post-Editing Process

Liling Tan, Anne-Kathrin Schumann, Jose M.M. Martinez and Francis Bond1
Universität des Saarland / Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany

Nanyang Technological University1 / 14 Nanyang Drive, Singapore
alvations@gmail.com, anne.schumann@mx.uni-saarland.de,

j.martinez@mx.uni-saarland.de, bond@ieee.org

Abstract

This paper describes the Post-Editor Z sys-
tem submitted to the L2 writing assis-
tant task in SemEval-2014. The aim of
task is to build a translation assistance
system to translate untranslated sentence
fragments. This is not unlike the task
of post-editing where human translators
improve machine-generated translations.
Post-Editor Z emulates the manual pro-
cess of post-editing by (i) crawling and ex-
tracting parallel sentences that contain the
untranslated fragments from a Web-based
translation memory, (ii) extracting the pos-
sible translations of the fragments indexed
by the translation memory and (iii) apply-
ing simple cosine-based sentence similar-
ity to rank possible translations for the un-
translated fragment.

1 Introduction

In this paper, we present a collaborative submis-
sion between Saarland University and Nanyang
Technological University to the L2 Translation As-
sistant task in SemEval-2014. Our team name
is Sensible and the participating system is Post-
Editor Z (PEZ).

The L2 Translation Assistant task concerns the
translation of an untranslated fragment from a par-
tially translated sentence. For instance, given a
sentence, “Ich konnte Bärbel noch on the border
in einen letzten S-Bahn-Zug nach Westberlin set-
zen.”, the aim is to provide an appropriate transla-
tion for the underline phrase, i.e. an der Grenze.

The aim of the task is not unlike the task of
post-editing where human translators correct er-
rors provided by machine-generated translations.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and pro-
ceedings footer are added by the organisers. Licence details:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

The main difference is that in the context of post-
editing the source text is provided. A transla-
tion workflow that incorporates post-editing be-
gins with a source sentence, e.g. “I could still
sit on the border in the very last tram to West
Berlin.” and the human translator is provided with
a machine-generated translation with untranslated
fragments such as the previous example and some-
times “fixing” the translation would simply re-
quire substituting the appropriate translation for
the untranslated fragment.

2 Related Tasks and Previous
Approaches

The L2 writing assistant task lies between the
lines of machine translation and crosslingual word
sense disambiguation (CLWSD) or crosslingual
lexical substitution (CLS) (Lefever and Hoste,
2013; Mihalcea et al. 2010).

While CLWSD systems resolve the correct
semantics of the translation by providing the
correct lemma in the target language, CLS at-
tempts to provide also the correct form of the
translation with the right morphology. Machine
translation tasks focus on producing translations
of whole sentences/documents while crosslingual
word sense disambiguation targets a single lexical
item.

Previously, CLWSD systems have tried distri-
butional semantics and string matching methods
(Tan and Bond, 2013), unsupervised clustering of
word alignment vectors (Apidianaki, 2013) and
supervised classification-based approaches trained
on local context features for a window of three
words containing the focus word (van Gompel,
2010; van Gompel and van den Bosch, 2013; Rud-
nick et al., 2013). Interestingly, Carpuat (2013)
approached the CLWSD task with a Statistical MT
system .

Short of concatenating outputs of CLWSD /
CLS outputs and dealing with a reordering issue

541



and responding to the task organizers’ call to avoid
implementing a full machine translation system
to tackle the task, we designed PEZ as an Auto-
matic Post-Editor (APE) that attempts to resolve
untranslated fragments.

3 Automatic Post-Editors

APEs target various types of MT errors from de-
terminer selection (Knight and Chander, 1994) to
grammatical agreement (Mareček et al., 2011).
Untranslated fragments from machine translations
are the result of out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words.

Previous approaches to the handling of un-
translated fragments include using a pivot lan-
guage to translate the OOV word(s) into a third
language and then back into to the source lan-
guage, thereby extracting paraphrases to OOV
(Callison-burch and Osborne, 2006), combining
sub-lexical/constituent translations of the OOV
word(s) to generate the translation (Huang et al.,
2011) or finding paraphrases of the OOV words
that have available translations (Marton et al.,
2009; Razmara et al., 2013). 1

However the simplest approach to handle un-
translated fragments is to increase the size of par-
allel data. The web is vast and infinite, a human
translator would consult the web when encounter-
ing a word that he/she cannot translate easily. The
most human-like approach to post-editing a for-
eign untranslated fragment is to do a search on
the web or a translation memory and choose the
most appropriate translation of the fragment from
the search result given the context of the machine
translated sentence.

4 Motivation

When post-editing an untranslated fragment, a hu-
man translator would (i) first query a translation
memory or parallel corpus for the untranslated
fragment in the source language, (ii) then attempt
to understand the various context that the fragment
can occur in and (iii) finally he/she would sur-
mise appropriate translations for the untranslated
fragment based on semantic and grammatical con-
straints of the chosen translations.

1in MT, evaluation is normally performed using automatic
metrics based on automatic evaluation metrics that compares
scores based on string/word similarity between the machine-
generated translation and a reference output, simply remov-
ing OOV would have improved the metric “scores” of the
system (Habash, 2008; Tan and Pal, 2014).

The PEZ system was designed to emulate the
manual post-editing process by (i) first crawling
a web-based translation memory, (ii) then extract-
ing parallel sentences that contain the untranslated
fragments and the corresponding translations of
the fragments indexed by the translation memory
and (iii) finally ranking them based on cosine sim-
ilarity of the context words.

5 System Description

The PEZ system consists of three components,
viz (i) a Web Translation Memory (WebTM)
crawler, (ii) the XLING reranker and (iii) a longest
ngram/string match module.

5.1 WebTM Crawler
Given the query fragment and the context sen-
tence, “Die Frau kehrte alone nach Lima zurück”,
the crawler queries www.bab.la and returns
sentences containing the untranslated fragment
with various possible tranlsations, e.g:

• isoliert : Darum sollten wir den Kaffee nicht
isoliert betrachten.

• alleine : Die Kommission kann nun aber für
ihr Verhalten nicht alleine die Folgen tragen.

• Allein : Allein in der Europischen Union
sind.

The retrieval mechanism is based on the
fact that the target translations of the queried
word/phrase are bolded on a web-based TM and
thus they can be easily extracted by manipulating
the text between <bold>...</bold> tags. Al-
though the indexed translations were easy to ex-
tract, there were few instances where the transla-
tions were embedded betweeen the bold tags on
the web-based TM.

5.2 XLING Reranker
XLING is a light-weight cosine-based sentence
similarity script used in the previous CLWSD
shared task in SemEval-2013 (Tan and Bond,
2013). Given the sentences from the WebTM
crawler, the reranker first removes all stopwords
from the sentences and then ranks the sentences
based on the number of overlapping stems.

In situations where there are no overlapping
content words from the sentences, XLING falls
back on the most common translation of the un-
translated fragment.

542



en-de en-es fr-en nl-en
acc wac rec acc wac rec acc wac rec acc wac rec

WebTM 0.160 0.184 0.647 0.145 0.175 0.470 0.055 0.067 0.210 0.092 0.099 0.214
XLING 0.152 0.178 0.647 0.141 0.171 0.470 0.055 0.067 0.210 0.088 0.095 0.214
PEZ 0.162 0.233 0.878 0.239 0.351 0.819 0.081 0.116 0.321 0.115 0.152 0.335

Table 1: Results for Best Evaluation of the System Runs.

5.3 Longest Ngram/String Matches

Due to the low coverage of the indexed trans-
lations on the web TM, it is necessary to ex-
tract more candidate translations. Assuming lit-
tle knowledge about the target language, human
translator would find parallel sentences containing
the untranslated fragment and resort to finding re-
peating phrases that occurs among the target lan-
guage sentences.

For instance, when we query the phrase history
book from the context “Von ihr habe ich mehr gel-
ernt als aus manchem history book.”, the longest
ngram/string matches module retrieves several tar-
get language sentences without any indexed trans-
lation:

• Ich weise darauf hin oder nehme an, dass
dies in den Geschichtsbüchern auch so
erwähnt wird.

• Wenn die Geschichtsbücher geschrieben wer-
den wird unser Zeitalter, denke ich, wegen
drei Dingen erinnert werden.

• Ich bin sicher, Präsident Mugabe hat sich
nun einen Platz in den Geschichtsbüchern
gesichert, wenn auch aus den falschen
Gründen.

• In den Geschichtsbüchern wird für jeden
einzelnen Tag der letzten mehr als 227 Jahre
an Gewalttaten oder Tragdien auf dem eu-
ropäischen Kontinent erinnert.

By simply spotting the repeating word/string
from the target language sentences it is pos-
sible to guess that the possible candidates
for “history book” are Geschichtsbücher or
Geschichtsbüchern. Computationally, this can
be achieved by looking for the longest matching
ngrams or the longest matching string across the
target language sentences fetched by the WebTM
crawler.

5.4 System Runs

We submitted three system runs to the L2 writing
assistant task in Semeval-2014.

1. WebTM: a baseline configuration which out-
puts the most frequent indexed translation of
the untranslated fragment from the Web TM.

2. XLING: reranks the WebTM outputs based
on cosine similarity.

3. PEZ: similar to the XLING but when the
WebTM fetches no output, the system looks
for longest common substring and reranks the
outputs based on cosine similarity.

6 Evaluation

The evaluation of the task is based on three met-
rics, viz. absolute accuracy (acc), word-based ac-
curacy (wac) and recall (rec).

Absolute accuracy measures the number of
fragments that match the gold translation of the
untranslated fragments. Word-based accuracy as-
signs a score according to the longest consecutive
matching substring between output fragment and
reference fragment; it is computed as such:

wac = |longestmatch(output,reference)|max(|output|,|reference|)
Recall accounts for the number of fragments for

which output was given (regardless of whether it
was correct).

7 Results

Table 1 presents the results for the best evalua-
tion scores of the PEZ system runs for the En-
glish to German (en-de), English to Spanish (en-
es), French to English (fr-en) and Dutch to English
(nl-en) evaluations. Figure 1 presents the word ac-
curacy of the system runs for both best and out-of-
five (oof) evaluation2.

The results show that using the longest
ngram/string improves the recall and subsequently
the accuracy and word accuracy of the system.
However, this is not true when guessing untrans-
lated fragments from L1 English to L2. This is
due to the low recall of the system when search-
ing for the untranslated fragment in French and

2Please refer to http://goo.gl/y9f5Na for results
of other competing systems

543



Figure 1: Word Accuracy of System Runs (best on
the left, oof on the right).

Dutch, where the English words/phases indexed in
the TM is much larger than other languages.

8 Error Analysis

We manually inspected the English-German out-
puts from the PEZ system and identified several
particularities of the outputs that account for the
low performance of the system for this language
pair.

8.1 Weird Expressions in the TM

When attempting to translate Nevertheless in the
context of “Nevertheless hat sich die neue Bun-
desrepublik Deutschland unter amerikanischem
Druck an der militrischen Einmischung auf dem
Balkan beteiligt.” where the gold translation is
Trotzdem or Nichtsdestotrotz. The PEZ system re-
trieves the following sentence pairs that contains a
rarely used expression nichtsdestoweniger from a
literally translated sentence pair in the TM:

• EN: But nevertheless it is a fact that nobody
can really recognize their views in the report.

• DE: Aber nichtsdestoweniger kann sich nie-
mand so recht in dem Bericht wiederfinden.

Another example of weird expression is when
translating “husband” in the context of “In der
Silvesternacht sind mein husband und ich auf die
Bahnhofstraße gegangen.”. PEZ provided a lesser
use yet valid translation Gemahl instead of the
gold translation Mann. In this case, it is also a
matter of register where in a more formal register
one will use Gemahl instead of Mann.

8.2 Missing / Additional Words from
Matches

When extracting candidate translations from the
TM index or longest ngram/string, there are sev-
eral matches where the PEZ system outputs a par-
tial phrase or phrases with additional tokens that
cause the disparity between the absolute accuracy
and word accuracy. An instance of missing words
is as follows:

• Input: Eine genetische Veranlagung
plays a decisive role.

• PEZ: Eine genetische Veranlagung
eine entscheidende rolle.

• Gold: Eine genetische Veranlagung
spielt (dabei) eine entscheidende rolle.

For the addition of superfluous words is as fol-
lows:

• Input: Geräte wie Handys sind
not permitted wenn sie nicht unterrichtlichen
Belangen dienen.

• PEZ: Geräte wie Handys sind es verboten,
wenn sie nicht unterrichtlichen Belangen
dienen.

• Gold: Geräte wie Handys sind verboten
wenn sie nicht unterrichtlichen Belangen di-
enen.

8.3 Case Sensitivity

For the English-German evaluation , there are sev-
eral instances where the PEZ system produces the
correct translation of the phrase but in lower cases
and this resulted in poorer accuracy. This is unique
to German target language and possibly contribut-
ing to the lower scores as compared to the English-
Spanish evaluation.

9 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented the PEZ automatic
post-editor system in the L2 writing assistant task
in SemEval-2014. The PEZ post-editing system is
a resource lean approach to provide translation for
untranslated fragments based on no prior training
data and simple string manipulations from a web-
based translation memory.

The PEZ system attempts to emulate the pro-
cess of a human translator post-editing out-
of-vocabulary words from a machine-generated

544



translation. The best configuration of the PEZ sys-
tem involves a simple string search for the longest
common ngram/string from the target language
sentences without having word/phrasal alignment
and also avoiding the need to handle word reorder-
ing for multi-token untranslated fragments.

Acknowledgements

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the People Programme (Marie Curie
Actions) of the European Union’s Seventh Frame-
work Programme FP7/2007-2013/ under REA
grant agreement n ◦ 317471.

References
Marianna Apidianaki. 2013. Limsi : Cross-lingual

word sense disambiguation using translation sense
clustering. In Second Joint Conference on Lexi-
cal and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume
2: Proceedings of the Seventh International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages
178–182, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June.

Chris Callison-burch and Miles Osborne. 2006. Im-
proved statistical machine translation using para-
phrases. In In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL-2006,
pages 17–24.

Marine Carpuat. 2013. Nrc: A machine translation ap-
proach to cross-lingual word sense disambiguation
(semeval-2013 task 10). In Second Joint Conference
on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM),
Volume 2: Proceedings of the Seventh International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013),
pages 188–192, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June.

Nizar Habash. 2008. Four techniques for online han-
dling of out-of-vocabulary words in arabic-english
statistical machine translation. In ACL, pages 57–
60.

Chung-Chi Huang, Ho-Ching Yen, Ping-Che Yang,
Shih-Ting Huang, and Jason S. Chang. 2011. Using
sublexical translations to handle the oov problem in
machine translation. ACM Trans. Asian Lang. Inf.
Process., 10(3):16.

Kevin Knight and Ishwar Chander. 1994. Automated
postediting of documents. In AAAI, pages 779–784.

David Mareček, Rudolf Rosa, Petra Galuščáková, and
Ondřej Bojar. 2011. Two-step translation with
grammatical post-processing. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
WMT ’11, pages 426–432, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Yuval Marton, Chris Callison-Burch, and Philip
Resnik. 2009. Improved statistical machine trans-
lation using monolingually-derived paraphrases. In
EMNLP, pages 381–390.

Majid Razmara, Maryam Siahbani, Reza Haffari, and
Anoop Sarkar. 2013. Graph propagation for para-
phrasing out-of-vocabulary words in statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 51st An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1105–
1115, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.

Alex Rudnick, Can Liu, and Michael Gasser. 2013.
Hltdi: Cl-wsd using markov random fields for
semeval-2013 task 10. In Second Joint Conference
on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM),
Volume 2: Proceedings of the Seventh International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013),
pages 171–177, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June.

Liling Tan and Francis Bond. 2013. Xling: Match-
ing query sentences to a parallel corpus using topic
models for wsd. In Second Joint Conference on Lex-
ical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume
2: Proceedings of the Seventh International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages
167–170, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June.

Liling Tan and Santanu Pal. 2014. Manawi: Using
multi-word expressions and named entities to im-
prove machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
Baltimore, USA, August.

Maarten van Gompel and Antal van den Bosch. 2013.
Wsd2: Parameter optimisation for memory-based
cross-lingual word-sense disambiguation. In Second
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Se-
mantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2013), pages 183–187, Atlanta, Geor-
gia, USA, June.

Maarten van Gompel. 2010. Uvt-wsd1: A cross-
lingual word sense disambiguation system. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation, SemEval ’10, pages 238–241,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

545


