



















































NILCUSP: Aspect Extraction using Semantic Labels


Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2014), pages 433–436,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-24, 2014.

NILC USP: Aspect Extraction using Semantic Labels

Pedro P. Balage Filho and Thiago A. S. Pardo
Interinstitutional Center for Computational Linguistics (NILC)

Institute of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, University of São Paulo
São Carlos - SP, Brazil

{balage, taspardo}@icmc.usp.br

Abstract

This paper details the system NILC USP
that participated in the Semeval 2014: As-
pect Based Sentiment Analysis task. This
system uses a Conditional Random Field
(CRF) algorithm for extracting the aspects
mentioned in the text. Our work added se-
mantic labels into a basic feature set for
measuring the efficiency of those for as-
pect extraction. We used the semantic
roles and the highest verb frame as fea-
tures for the machine learning. Overall,
our results demonstrated that the system
could not improve with the use of this se-
mantic information, but its precision was
increased.

1 Introduction

Sentiment analysis, or opinion mining, has gained
lots of attention lately. The importance of this
field of study is linked with the grown of informa-
tion in the internet and the commercial attention it
brought.

According to Liu et al. (2010), there are two
kinds of information available in the internet: facts
and opinions. Facts are objective statements about
entities and events in the world. Opinions are sub-
jective statements that reflect people’s sentiments
or perceptions about the entities and events. Ac-
cording to Liu, by that time, there was a lot of at-
tention on the processing of facts but little work
had been done on the processing of opinions.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and pro-
ceedings footer are added by the organisers. Licence details:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

Three levels of analysis for sentiment analysis
are known (Liu, 2012): document level, sentence
level and aspect level. The aspect-based sentiment
analysis is the name of the research topic that aims
to extract the sentiments about the aspects present
in the text.

This work presents a system evaluated in the
SemEval Task4: Aspect Based Sentiment Analy-
sis shared task (Pontiki et al., 2014). Our system
participated only in subtask 1: Aspect Term Ex-
traction. In this subtask, given a text, the system
should extract all aspects that are present. There
were two different domains for this task: restau-
rants and laptops.

The goal of our system was to verify how se-
mantic labels used in machine learning classifica-
tion would improve the aspect extraction task. For
this goal, we used two kinds of semantic labels:
the semantic roles (Palmer et al., 2010) and the se-
mantic frames (Baker et al., 1998).

Liu et al. (2012) categorizes the works for as-
pect extraction in four types, regarding the ap-
proach they follow, using: frequent terms, infre-
quent terms, machine learning, and topic model-
ing. This work uses a machine learning approach
that consists in training a sequential labeling algo-
rithm for aspect detection and extraction.

In what follows, we present some related work
in Section 2. Section 3 and 4 introduce our system
and report the achieved results. Some conclusions
are presented in Section 5.

2 Related work

Jin and Hovy (2009) reported one the first works
using sequential labeling for aspect extraction. In
this work, the authors used a Lexicalized Hidden
Markov Model to learn patterns to extract aspects
and opinions. Jakob and Gurevych (2010) trained

433



a Conditional Random Field for aspect extraction.
In this work, the authors report the results for a sin-
gle domain and a cross domain experiment. They
show that even in other domains the method could
be good.

Kim and Hovy (2006) explored the semantic
structure of a sentence, anchored to an opinion
bearing verb or adjective. Their method uses se-
mantic role labeling as an intermediate step to la-
bel an opinion holder and topic using data from
FrameNet.

Houen (2011) presented a system for opinion
mining with semantic analysis. The author ex-
plores the use of the semantic frame-based ana-
lyzer FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) for modeling
features in a machine learning approach. The au-
thor found that the FrameNet information was not
helpful in this classifier.

3 System Description

Our system uses a sequential labeling algorithm.
In our work, we use the Conditional Random Field
(Lafferty et al., 2001) algorithm provided by the
CRF++ tool1.

For training the sequential labeling algorithm,
we give as input features for each word in the cor-
pus. The algorithm will then learn how to classify
those words. In our approach, the possible classes
are: True, representing an aspect word; and False,
representing the remaining words.

The goal of our system was to evaluate the per-
formance of the semantic labels for the task. In
order to model our system, we built a feature set
consisting of 6 features.

1. the word

2. the part-of-speech

3. the chunk

4. the named-entity category

5. the semantic role label (SRL)

6. the most generic frame in FrameNet

The use of the first four features is consistent
with the best approaches in aspect-based senti-
ment analysis. The last two features are the ones
we are testing in our work.

In order to extract the features, we used two im-
portant tools: the Senna (Collobert et al., 2011), a

1Available at http://crfpp.googlecode.com/

semantic role labeling system, and the ARK SE-
MAFOR, a Semantic Analyzer of Frame Repre-
sentations (Das et al., 2010).

The Senna system uses a deep learning neural
network (Collobert, 2011) to provide several pre-
dictions for natural language processing. The sys-
tem output is represented in the CONLL format,
the same used in CRF++.

Our first 5 features were directly provided by
the Senna output. In these features, we decided to
keep the IOBE information since the initial exper-
iments showed the results were better with it than
without.

Our fifth feature, the semantic role label, was
retrieved from Senna as well. In the corresponding
paper, they reported Senna could achieve a F1 of
75% for the SRL task.

The example below shows how the features
were represented. In this example, we are only
showing four features: the word, the part-of-
speech, the chunk and the SRL. The classes are
in the last column.

WORD POS CHUNK SRL IS_ASPECT?
Great JJ B-NP B-A0 False
laptop NN E-NP E-A0 False
that WDT S-NP S-R-A0 False
offers VBZ S-VP S-V False
many JJ B-NP B-A1 False
great JJ I-NP I-A1 False
features NNS E-NP E-A1 True
! . O - False

The last feature was retrieved by ARK SE-
MAFOR tool. ARK SEMAFOR uses a probabilis-
tic frame-semantic parsing using the FrameNet re-
source. The ARK SEMAFOR output is the anal-
ysis of the frames present in the text for a given
verb. As our feature set has only word related fea-
tures, we decided to use the most upper level struc-
ture in the frame. In case of multiple verbs in the
sentence, we used the structure for the verb that is
closest to the word of interest.

The following example shows how the frames
were added into the training model. We limit to
show only the word, frame and the class. For train-
ing, we used the full training set with the six fea-
tures plus the class.

WORD FRAME IS_ASPECT?
I Shopping False
shopped Shopping False
around Relational_quantity False
before Relational_quantity False

434



buying Relational_quantity False
. O False

The organization from SemEval-2014 Task 4:
Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis provided two
domains for evaluation: restaurants and laptops.
For each domain, the organization provided three
datasets: a trainset, a devset and a testset.

We executed our algorithm with C pa-
rameter equal to 4.0. The experiment
code is fully available at the weblink
https://github.com/pedrobalage/

4 Results

Tables 1 and 2 show our system results for the
restaurants and laptops domains respectively. In
these tables, the results are discriminated by the
feature sets that were used. The reader may see
that a “+ Frame” system, for example, stands for
all the features discriminated above (Word, POS,
Chunk, NR, SRL) plus the Frame feature. The last
line shows the results scored by our system in the
SemEval shared task with all the features. We also
show the results for the baseline system provided
by the shared task (Pontiki et al., 2014).

Table 1: Results for restaurants domain
System Precision Recall F1-mesaure
Baseline 52.54 42.76 47.15
Word + POS 83.76 68.69 75.48
+ Chunk 83.38 68.16 75.01
+ NE 83.45 68.07 74.98
+ SRL 82.79 67.46 74.34
+ Frame 87.72 34.03 49.04

Table 2: Results for laptops domain
System Precision Recall F1-mesaure
Baseline 44.31 29.81 35.64
Word + POS 80.87 39.44 53.03
+ Chunk 78.83 39.29 52.44
+ NE 79.93 39.60 52.96
+ SRL 78.22 38.99 52.04
+ Frame 83.62 14.83 25.19

Comparing with the baseline, we may noticed
that our submitted system (+Frame) outperformed
the baseline for the restaurants domain but it did
not outperformed the baseline for the laptops do-
main (considering F1 mesaure).

When we look in detail for the inclusion of fea-
tures in our feature set, we may notice that, at ev-

ery new feature, the precision goes up, but the re-
call goes down. We believe this is due to the be-
haviour of the conditional random field algorithm
for compensating for a sparser feature set.

In general, the semantic labels (SRL and Frame)
could not improve the results. However, if we
are interested only on precision, these features are
helpful. This may be the case in scenarios where a
lot of information is available, as in the web, and
we want to be sure about the retrieved informa-
tion. Certainly, there is a conflict between preci-
sion and computational complexity, since the se-
mantic features are more expensive to be achieved
(in relation to the usual simpler features that may
be used).

Despite of that, we judge to be necessary to con-
duct more experiments in order to better evaluate
the impact of semantic labels in the aspect extrac-
tion task.

5 Conclusion

We presented an aspect extraction system built on
a conditional random field algorithm. We used
a rich feature set with the semantic roles and
the FrameNet upper frames for each word. We
have showed that the semantic labels may help to
achieve a more precise classifier, but it did not help
to improve the overall F-measure of the system.

Regarding the shared task, our system achieved
the second best precision value among the com-
peting systems, but the lowest recall value. Future
work should investigate ways of also improving
recall without penalty for the achieved precision.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the organizers for their
work constructing the dataset and overseeing the
task. We also would like to thank FAPESP for the
financial support.

References
Collin F Baker, Charles J Fillmore, and John B Lowe.

1998. The berkeley framenet project. In Proceed-
ings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and 17th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics-
Volume 1, pages 86–90. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, Michael
Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Pavel Kuksa.
2011. Natural language processing (almost) from

435



scratch. The Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 12:2493–2537.

Ronan Collobert. 2011. Deep learning for efficient
discriminative parsing. In Geoffrey J. Gordon and
David B. Dunson, editors, Proceedings of the Four-
teenth International Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence and Statistics (AISTATS-11), volume 15,
pages 224–232. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search - Workshop and Conference Proceedings.

Dipanjan Das, Nathan Schneider, Desai Chen, and
Noah A Smith. 2010. Semafor 1.0: A probabilistic
frame-semantic parser. Technical report, Language
Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University.

Søren Houen. 2011. Opinion Mining with Seman-
tic Analysis. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer
Science, University of Copenhagen.

Niklas Jakob and Iryna Gurevych. 2010. Extracting
opinion targets in a single-and cross-domain setting
with conditional random fields. In Proceedings of
the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 1035–1045.

Wei Jin and Hung Hay Ho. 2009. A Novel Lexicalized
HMM-based Learning Framework for Web Opinion
Mining. In Léon Bottou and Michael Littman, ed-
itors, Proceedings of International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML-2009), ICML ’09, pages
1–8. ACM, ACM Press.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2006. Extracting
opinions, opinion holders, and topics expressed in
online news media text. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text, SST ’06,
pages 1–8, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
’01, pages 282–289, San Francisco, CA, USA. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Bing Liu. 2010. Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity.
In N Indurkhya and F J Damerau, editors, Handbook
of Natural Language Processing, number 1, chap-
ter 28, pages 627–666. CRC Press, Taylor and Fran-
cis Group, Boca Raton.

Bing Liu. 2012. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-
ing. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
nologies, 5(1):1–167.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Nianwen Xue.
2010. Semantic role labeling. Synthesis Lectures
on Human Language Technologies, 3(1):1–103.

Maria Pontiki, Dimitrios Galanis, John Pavlopou-
los, Haris Papageorgiou, Ion Androutsopoulos, and
Suresh Manandhar. 2014. SemEval-2014 Task 4:

Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis. In Proceedings
of the 8th International Workshop on Semantic Eval-
uation, SemEval 2014, Dublin, Ireland.

436


