



















































SZTE-NLP: Clinical Text Analysis with Named Entity Recognition


Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2014), pages 615–618,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-24, 2014.

SZTE-NLP: Clinical Text Analysis with Named Entity Recognition

Melinda Katona and Richárd Farkas
Department of Informatics

University of Szeged
Árpád tér 2., Szeged, 6720, Hungary

{mkatona,rfarkas}@inf.u-szeged.hu

Abstract

This paper introduces our contribution to
the SemEval-2014 Task 7 on ”Analysis of
Clinical Text”. We implemented a sys-
tem which combines MetaMap taggings
and Illinois NER Tagger. MetaMap is de-
veloped to link the text of medical doc-
uments to the knowledge embedded in
UMLS Metathesaurus. The UMLS con-
tains a very rich lexicon while the promise
of a NER system is to carry out context-
sensitive tagging. Our system’s perfor-
mance was 0.345 F-measure in terms of
strict evaluation and 0.551 F-measure in
terms of relaxed evaluation.

1 Introduction

Clinical notes and discharge summaries from the
patient’s medical history contain a huge amount
of useful information for medical researchers and
also for hospitals. The automatic identification
of these unstructured information is an impor-
tant task for analysis of free-text electronic health
records. Natural Language Processing (NLP)
techniques provide a solution to process clinical
documents and to help patients understand the
contents of their clinical records (Tang et al., 2012;
Lee et al., 2004).

In this paper we introduce an approach which
discovers mentions of disorders in the free-text of
discharge summaries. The system participated in
the SemEval-2014 Task 7: Analysis of Clinical
Text, Task A.

Task A aims at the identifying of mention
concepts that belong to the UMLS (Boden-
reider, 2004) semantic group ”disorders” and
Task B is for mapping from each mention to

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and pro-
ceedings footer are added by the organisers. Licence details:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

a unique UMLS/SNOMED-CT CUI (Concept
Unique Identifiers). Here are a few examples from
the task description:

• The rhythm appears to be atrial fibrillation.
,,atrial fibrillation” is a mention of type disor-
ders with CUI C0004238

• The left atrium is moderately dilated.
,,left atrium [...] dilated” is a mention of type
disorders with CUI C0344720

• 53 year old man s/p fall from ladder.
,,fall from ladder” is a mention of type disor-
ders with CUI C0337212

Many approaches have been published to solve
these problems cf. (Skeppstedt et al., 2012; Pes-
tian et al., 2007).

2 Approach

After a text-normalization step we run a Named
Entity Recogniser (NER) on the documents. This
NER model was trained on the training set of the
shared task. It also employs a dictionary gathered
from UMLS through MetaMap tagging. Our ini-
tial experiments revealed that MetaMap (Aronson
and Lang, 2010) in its own gives a very poor pre-
cision hence we decided to investigate a NER ap-
proach which takes the context also into account.

2.1 Normalization
Clinical reports contain numerous special annota-
tions, such as anonymized data (for example pa-
tient name), etc. We made the following steps to
normalize texts:

• We removed the unnecessary characters, such
as . , ! ? # : ; — = + * ˆ

• Then replaced the [****] anonymized tags
with REPLACED ANONYMOUS DATA
notation.

615



2.2 UMLS Dictionary

Our NER system constructs features from dic-
tionaries as well. We created a dictionary from
UMLS with the help of MetaMap for incorporat-
ing external knowledge into the NER. The use of a
specialized dictionary is important because it con-
tains phrases that occur in clinical texts.

MetaMap (Aronson and Lang, 2010) is devel-
oped to link the text of medical documents to the
knowledge embedded in UMLS Metathesaurus.
MetaMap employs natural language processing
techniques working at the lexical/syntactic lev-
els, for example handling acronyms/abbrevations,
POS tagging, word sense disambiguation and so
on.

Both the test and training datasets were used
for creating our dictionary. We used MetaMap to
collect disorders from raw texts. After that, we
removed the redundant and most frequently used
common words, based on a list of the 5000 most
frequent English words according to the Google’s
n-gram corpus1.

2.3 Named Entity Recognition

In the task “Analysis of Clinical Text”, our task is
to recognize mentions of concepts that belong to
the UMLS semantic group “disorder”, which can
be viewed as a subclass of named entities, so NER
approach is effective for this assignment.

For training, we used the Illinois Named En-
tity Recognition (Ratinov and Roth, 2009) sys-
tem. By default, Illinois NER contains Wikipedia
gazetters and categories, but in this task, we need
one or more dictionary which contains disorders
and other clinical text terminology.

NER is typically viewed as a sequence label-
ing problem. The typical models include HMM
(Rabiner, 1989), CRF (Lafferty et al., 2001) and
sequential application of Perceptron or Winnow
(Collins, 2002). Illinois NER has several infer-
ence algorithms: Viterbi, beamsearch, greedy left-
to-right decoding. In our approach, we used beam-
search. The beamsize was 3. Initially, we used
bigger beamsize, but our empirical studies showed
that applying a small beamsize is more effective.

Beside the decoding algorithm, an important
question that has been studied extensively in the
context of shallow parsing which was somewhat
overlooked in the NER literature is the represen-

1http://storage.googleapis.com/books/ngrams/books/
datasetsv2.html

tation of text segments. Illinois NER contains
several representation schemes such as BIO and
BILOU - two of the most popular schemes. The
BIO scheme is employed to train classifiers that
identify Beginning, the Inside and the Outside of
the text segment. The BILOU scheme is employed
to train classifiers that identify the Beginning, the
Inside and the Last tokens of multi-token chunks
as well as Unit-length chunks. We used the
BILOU scheme.

The key intuition behind non-local features in
NER has been that identical tokens should have
identical label assignments. Ratinov and Roth
(2009) consider three approaches proposed in the
literature namely context aggregation, two-stage
prediction aggregation and extended prediction
history. The combination of these approaches is
more stable and better than any approach taken
alone.

In our experiments we used the combination
of context aggregation and two-stage prediction
aggregation. Context aggregation is the fol-
lowing approach in Illinois NER: for each to-
ken instance xi we used the tokens in the win-
dow of size two around it as features: ci =
xi−2, xi−1, xi, xi+1, xi+2. If the same token (t)
appears in several locations in the text for each in-
stance xij (xi1 , xi2 , . . ., xiN ). We also aggregated
the context across all instances within 200 tokens.

Context aggregation as done above can lead to
an excessive number of features. Some instances
of a token appear in easily-identifiable contexts.
The resulting predictions were used as features at
a second level of inference. This is a two-stage
prediction aggregation.

3 Experimental Results

Our system was developed and trained only on the
training set provided by the organizers and was
evaluated on the test set. The performance was
evaluated by Precision, Recall and F-measure in
both “strict” and “relaxed” modes. ”Strict“ means
that a concept is recognized correctly if the start-
ing and ending offsets are the same as in gold stan-
dard and “relaxed” means that a disorder mention
is correctly recognized as long as it overlaps with
the gold standard disorder mention.

3.1 Dataset

For training and testing, we used the datasets pro-
vided by the shared task organisers. The train-

616



Strict Relaxed
P R F P R F

original NER 0.508 0.225 0.312 0.874 0.378 0.528
NER with normalization 0.509 0.229 0.316 0.875 0.383 0.528
NER with normalization and full dictionary 0.512 0.226 0.313 0.878 0.378 0.533
NER with normalization and filtered dictionary 0.516 0.232 0.320 0.890 0.390 0.542

Table 1: Evaluation results of our system on the training set (P - Precision, R - Recall, F - F-score).

ing dataset contains of 398 notes from different
clinical documents including radiology reports,
discharge summaries, and ECG/ECHO reports.
For each note, disorder entities were annotated
based on a pre-defined guideline and then mapped
to SNOMED-CT concepts represented by UMLS
CUIs. The reference UMLS version was 2012AB.
If a disorder entity could not be found, it was
marked as CUI-less, otherwise marked with CUI
identifier.

The training set was used for system develop-
ment, and we evaluated the system on the test set
of 133 notes.

3.2 Results

We examined the contribution of our systems’
steps. Table 1 summarizes the results where the
first column contains result of named entity tag-
ger without any modification. Normalization gave
only a marginal improvement in accuracy. Next,
we employed all MetaMap matches as a feature
for the NER module. This decreased recall, be-
cause NER identified a lot of unnecessary expres-
sion. In our final and submitted system, we filtered
this dictionary as described in the previous section.

Lastly, Table 2 shows our official evaluation re-
sults.

Strict Relaxed
Precision 0.547 0.884
Recall 0.252 0.401
F-score 0.345 0.551

Table 2: Results of our submission on the test set.

4 Error Analysis

In both strict and relaxed evaluation modes, preci-
sion is high but recall is low. We have found three
important source of errors:

• multiple meaning words

• unknown disorders
• discontinuous phrases
A named entity tagger with context-aggregation

mode does not monitor multiple meanings, so if a
word has more occurrence, but in other meaning,
it will be a bad tagging. For example

”Seizure-like activity with clamped jaw and left
lip twitching was then noted after several days
of treatment. [...] Despite these therapies, she
failed to recover, and began to show further signs
of increasing intracranial pressure with increasing
seizure activity and posturing [...]”

Our sequence labeling approach cannot recog-
nize discontinuous phrases. Even when every to-
ken was marked, we took only continuous se-
quences as named entity mentions. For example
the sentence

”The left ventricular cavity is moderately di-
lated.”

yields three errors in the strict evaluation sce-
nario. We did not recognise the three token-long
phrase while predicted two false positive men-
tions. We also note that this shortcoming of our
approach is the reason for the huge difference be-
tween the achieved strict and relaxed scores.

The last error category is unrecognised disor-
ders. For instance,

”The PICC line was trimmed to the appropriate
length and advanced over the 0.018 wire with the
tip int the axillary vein”

Named entity tagger identified hepatitis B, but
hepatitis C not because dictionary does not contain
it. Expansion of dictionary increase accuracy.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we examined a machine learning
based disorder recognition system using MetaMap
and Illinois Named Entity Recognition. Illinois
NER uses different dictionaries for training. We
created a new filtered in-domain dictionary and we
showed that this dictionary is an important factor

617



for accuracy. The results achieved on the training
set and the test set show that the proposed clinical
dictionary creation procedure is efficient.

Acknowledgements

Melinda Katona is supported by the European
Union and co-funded by the European Social
Fund. Project title: ”Telemedicine-focused re-
search activities on the field of Matematics, In-
formatics and Medical sciences“ (project num-
ber: TÁMOP-4.2.2.A-11/1/KONV-2012-0073).
Richárd Farkas was partially funded by the ”Hun-
garian National Excellence Program“ (TÁMOP
4.2.4.A/2-11-1-2012-0001), co-financed by the
European Social Fund.

References
Alan R. Aronson and Franois-Michel Lang. 2010. An

Overview of MetaMap: Historical Perspective and
Recent Advances. JAMIA, 17:229–236.

Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Medical Lan-
guage System (UMLS): Integrating Biomedical Ter-
minology. Nucleic Acids Research, 32:267–270.

Michael Collins. 2002. Discriminative Training Meth-
ods for Hidden Markov Models: Theory and Exper-
iments with Perceptron Algorithms. In Proceedings
of the ACL-02 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing - Volume 10, pages 1
– 8.

John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional Random Fields:
Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling
Sequence Data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages
282 – 289.

Chih Lee, Wen-Juan Hou, and Hsin-Hsi Chen. 2004.
Annotating Multiple Types of Biomedical Entities:
A Single Word Classification Approach. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Joint Workshop on
Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine and
Its Applications, JNLPBA ’04, pages 80–83.

John P. Pestian, Christopher Brew, Pawel Matykiewicz,
D. J. Hovermale, Neil Johnson, K. Bretonnel Co-
hen, and Wlodzislaw Duch. 2007. A Shared Task
Involving Multi-label Classification of Clinical Free
Text. In Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP
2007: Biological, Translational, and Clinical Lan-
guage Processing, pages 97–104.

Lawrence Rabiner. 1989. A Tutorial on Hid-
den Markov Models and Selected Applications in
Speech recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE,
77:257–286.

L. Ratinov and D. Roth. 2009. Design Challenges and
Misconceptions in Named Entity Recognition. In
CoNLL, 6.

Maria Skeppstedt, Maria Kvist, and Hercules Dalianis.
2012. Rule-based Entity Recognition and Coverage
of SNOMED CT in Swedish Clinical Text. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eight International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12).

Buzhou Tang, Hongxin Cao, Yonghui Wu, Min Jiang,
and Hua Xu. 2012. Clinical Entity Recognition Us-
ing Structural Support Vector Machines with Rich
Features. In Proceedings of the ACM Sixth In-
ternational Workshop on Data and Text Mining in
Biomedical Informatics, DTMBIO ’12, pages 13–
20.

618


