



















































Semantic Roles in Grammar Engineering


Proceedings of the Third Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2014), pages 81–86,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-24 2014.

Semantic Roles in Grammar Engineering

Wojciech Jaworski Adam Przepiórkowski
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences

ul. Jana Kazimierza 5, 02-668 Warszawa
wjaworski@mimuw.edu.pl adamp@ipipan.waw.pl

Abstract

The aim of this paper is to discuss difficul-
ties involved in adopting an existing sys-
tem of semantic roles in a grammar engi-
neering task. Two typical repertoires of se-
mantic roles are considered, namely, Verb-
Net and Sowa’s system. We report on ex-
periments showing the low inter-annotator
agreement when using such systems and
suggest that, at least in case of languages
with rich morphosyntax, an approximation
of semantic roles derived from syntactic
(grammatical functions) and morphosyn-
tactic (grammatical cases) features of ar-
guments may actually be beneficial for ap-
plications such as textual entailment.

1 Introduction

The modern notion of semantic – or thematic –
roles stems from the lexical semantic work of
Gruber 1965 (his thematic relations) and Fillmore
1968 (so-called deep cases), and was popularised
by Jackendoff 1972, but traces of this concept may
already be found in the notion of kāraka in the
writings of the Sanskrit grammarian Pān. ini (4th
century BC); see, e.g., Dowty 1991 for a histori-
cal introduction. Fillmore’s deep cases are Agen-
tive, Dative, Instrumental, Factive, Locative, Ob-
jective, as well as Benefactive, Time and Comi-
tative, but many other sets of semantic roles may
be found in the literature; for example, Dalrym-
ple 2001, p. 206, cites – after Bresnan and Kan-
erva 1989 – the following ranked list of thematic
roles: Agent, Benefactive, Recipient/Experiencer,
Instrument, Theme/Patient, Locative.

In Natural Language Processing (NLP),
one of the most popular repertoires of se-
mantic roles is that of VerbNet (Kipper et al.
2000; http://verbs.colorado.edu/
~mpalmer/projects/verbnet.html),

a valence lexicon of English based on Levin’s
(1993) classification of verbs according to the
diathesis phenomena they exhibit. The VerbNet
webpage states that it contains 3769 lemmata
divided into 5257 senses. There are 30 semantic
roles used in VerbNet 3.2,1 including such stan-
dard roles as Agent, Beneficiary and Instrument,
but also more specialised roles such as Asset (for
quantities), Material (for stuff things are made
of) or Pivot (a theme more central to an event
than the theme expressed by another argument).
This resource is widely used in NLP, and it was
one of the main lexical resources behind the
Unified Lexicon of English (Crouch and King,
2005), a part of an LFG-based semantic parser
(Crouch and King, 2006) employed in tasks such
as question answering (Bobrow et al., 2007a) and
textual entailment (Bobrow et al., 2007b).

Another system of semantic roles considered
here is that developed by Sowa (2000; http:
//www.jfsowa.com/krbook/) for the pur-
pose of knowledge representation in artificial in-
telligence. There are 18 thematic roles proposed in
Sowa 2000, p. 508, including standard roles such
as Agent, Recipient and Instrument, but also 4
temporal and 4 spatial roles. Unlike in case of
VerbNet, there is no corpus or dictionary showing
numerous examples of the acutal use of such roles
– just a few examples are given (on pp. 506–510).
On the other hand, principles of assigning the-
matic roles to arguments may be formulated as a
decision tree, which should make the process of
semantic role labelling more efficient.

But why should we care about semantic roles at
all? From the NLP perspective, the main reason is
that they are useful in tasks approximating reason-
ing, such as textual entailment. Take the follow-

1Table 2 on the VerbNet webpage lists 21 roles, of which
Actor is not actually used; the 10 roles which are used but not
listed there are Goal, Initial_Location (apart from Location),
Pivot, Reflexive, Result, Trajectory and Value, as well as Co-
Agent, Co-Patient and Co-Theme.

81



ing two Polish sentences, with their naïve meaning
representations in (1a)–(2a):

(1) Anonim
anonymous

napisał
wrote

artykuł
paper

na
for

*SEM.
*SEM

‘An anonymous person wrote a paper for
*SEM.’
a. ∃a∃p article(a) ∧ person(p) ∧

anonymous(p) ∧ write(p, a, starsem)
b. ∃e∃a∃p article(a) ∧ person(p) ∧

anonymous(p) ∧ write(e) ∧
agent(e, p) ∧ patient(e, a) ∧
destination(e, starsem)

(2) Anonim
anonymous

napisał
wrote

artykuł.
paper

‘An anonymous person wrote a paper.’
a. ∃a∃p article(a) ∧ person(p) ∧

anonymous(p) ∧ write(p, a)
b. ∃e∃a∃p article(a) ∧ person(p) ∧

anonymous(p) ∧ write(e) ∧
agent(e, p) ∧ patient(e, a)

While it is clear that (2) follows from (1), this
inference is not obvious in (1a)–(2a); making such
an inference would require an additional mean-
ing postulate relating the two write predicates of
different arities. In contrast, when dependents
of the predicate are represented via separate se-
mantic roles, as in the neo-Davidsonian (1b)–(2b)
(cf. Parsons 1990), the inference from (1b) to (2b)
is straightforward and follows from general in-
ference rules of first-order logic; nothing special
needs to be said about the writing events.

Also, building on examples from Bobrow
et al. 2007b, p. 20, once we know that flies is a
possible hyponym of travels, we may infer Ed
travels to Boston from Ed flies to Boston. Given
representations employing semantic roles, e.g.,
∃efly(e)∧agent(e, ed)∧destination(e, boston)
and ∃e travel(e) ∧ agent(e, ed) ∧
destination(e, boston), all that is needed to
make this inference is a general inference schema
saying that, if P is a hypernym of Q, then
∀eQ(e) → P (e). A more complicated set of
inference schemata would be necessary if the
neo-Davidsonian approach involving semantic
roles were not adopted.

2 Problems with standard repertoires of
semantic roles

As noted by Bobrow et al. 2007b, p. 20, standard
VerbNet semantic roles may in some cases make

inference more difficult. For example, in Ed trav-
els to Boston, VerbNet identifies Ed as a Theme,
while in Ed flies to Boston – as an Agent. The so-
lution adopted there was to use “a backoff strategy
where fewer role names are used (by projecting
down role names to the smaller set)”.

In order to verify the usefulness of well-known
repertoires of semantic roles, we performed a us-
ability study of the two sets of semantic roles de-
scribed above. The aim of this study was to es-
timate how difficult it would be to create a cor-
pus of sentences with verbs’ arguments annotated
with such semantic roles. For this purpose, 37
verbs were selected more or less at random and
843 instances of arguments of these verbs (in 393
sentences, but only one verb was considered in
each sentence) were identified in a corpus. In two
experiments, the same 7 human annotators were
asked to label these arguments with VerbNet and
with Sowa’s semantic roles.

In both cases interannotator agreement (IAA)
was below our expectations, given the fact that
VerbNet comes with short descriptions of seman-
tic roles and a corpus of illustrative examples, and
that Sowa’s classification could be (and was for
this experiment) formalised as a decision tree. For
VerbNet roles, Fleiss’s κ (called Fleiss’s Multi-
π in Artstein and Poesio 2008, as it is actually
a generalisation of Scott’s π rather than Cohen’s
κ) is equal to 0.617, and for Sowa’s system it
is a little higher, 0.648. According to the com-
mon wisdom (reflected in Wikipedia’s entry for
“Fleiss’ kappa”), values between 0.41 and 0.60 re-
flect moderate agreement and between 0.61 and
0.80 – substantial agreement. Hence, the current
results could be interpreted as moderately sub-
stantial agreement. However, Artstein and Poesio
2008, p. 591, question this received wisdom and
state that “only values above 0.8 ensured an anno-
tation of reasonable quality”.

This opinion is confirmed by the more detailed
analysis of the distribution of (dis)agreement pro-
vided in Tab. 1. The top table gives the number
of arguments for which the most commonly as-
signed Sowa’s role was assigned by n annotators
(n ranges from 2 to 7; not from 1, as there were no
arguments that would be assigned 7 different roles
by the 7 annotators) and the most commonly as-
signed VerbNet role was assigned bym annotators
(m also ranges from 2 to 7). For example, the cell
in the row labelled 7 and in the column labelled

82



V e r b N e t
2 3 4 5 6 7

2 6 8 3 0 0 0 17
S 3 8 39 39 17 25 3 131
o 4 2 26 49 37 20 5 139
w 5 4 11 48 45 11 15 134
a 6 1 9 18 16 35 20 99

7 0 3 11 47 52 210 323
21 96 168 162 143 253 843

V e r b N e t
2 3 4 5 6 7

2 0.71% 0.95% 0.36% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 2.02%
S 3 0.95% 4.63% 4.63% 2.02% 2.97% 0.36% 15.54%
o 4 0.24% 3.08% 5.81% 4.39% 2.37% 0.59% 16.49%
w 5 0.47% 1.30% 5.69% 5.34% 1.30% 1.78% 15.90%
a 6 0.12% 1.07% 2.14% 1.90% 4.15% 2.37% 11.74%

7 0.00% 0.36% 1.30% 5.58% 6.17% 24.91% 38.32%
2.49% 11.39% 19.93% 19.22% 16.96% 30.01% 100.00%

Table 1: Interannotator agreement rate for VerbNet and Sowa role systems; the top table gives numbers
of arguments, the bottom table gives normalised percentages

6 contains the information that 52 arguments were
such that all annotators agreed on Sowa’s role and
6 agreed on a VerbNet role. The final row and
the final column contain the usual marginals; e.g.,
out of 843 arguments, in case of Sowa’s system
253 arguments were annotated unanimously, and
in case of VerbNet roles – 323 arguments. The
lower table gives the same information normalised
to percentages. Note that for a significant percent
of examples (almost 18% in case of Sowa’s sys-
tem and almost 14% in case of VerbNet) there is
no majority decision and that the concentration of
examples around the diagonal means that the lack
of consensus is largely independent of the choice
of the role system.

Some of the most difficult cases were discussed
with annotators and the conclusion reached was
that there are two main reasons for the low IAA:
numerous cases where more than one role seems
to be suitable for a given argument and cases
where there is no suitable role at all. (In fact, as
in case of LECZYĆ ‘treat, cure’ discussed below, it
is sometimes difficult to distinguish these two rea-
sons: more than one role seems suitable because
none is clearly right.)

The first situation is caused by the fact that a
distinction between the roles is often highly sub-
jective; for example, when a doctor is treating a

girl, is (s)he causing a structural change? The an-
swer to this question determines the distinction be-
tween Patient and Theme in Sowa’s system. It
could be “no” when the doctor only prescribes
some medicines, but it could be “yes” when (s)he
operates her. Furthermore, some emphasis is put
on volitionality in Sowa’s system: the initiatior of
an action can be either Agent or Effector, depend-
ing on whether (s)he causes the action voluntarily
or not – something that is often difficult to decide
even when a context of a sentence is given.

On the other hand, the Agent role is extended
in VerbNet to ‘internally controlled subjects such
as forces and machines’, but it is easy to confuse
this role with Theme. For example, in The horse
jumped over the fence, the horse is – somewhat
counterintuitively – marked as Theme, as it must
bear the same role as in Tom jumped the horse over
the fence, where the Agent role is already taken by
Tom. Other commonly confused pairs are Stim-
ulus and Theme, Topic and Theme, and Patient
and Theme. Moreover, there are cases where more
than one role genuinely (not as a result of con-
fusion) matches a given argument. For example,
in the Polish sentence Ona ładuje się w foremkę,
którą ktoś jej podsunął ‘She squeezes/loads her-
self into a/the mould that somebody offered her’,
the argument w foremkę ‘into mould’ can be rea-

83



sonably marked as both: a spatial Destination and
a functional Result.

The other common reason for interannotator
disagreement is the lack of a suitable role. For ex-
ample, returning to the sentence A doctor is treat-
ing a girl, it seems that neither of the two systems
has an obvious role for the person being cured
(hence the impression of potential suitability of a
number of roles). In Polish sentences involving the
verb LECZYĆ ‘treat, cure’, the object of treatment
was variously marked as Agent, Beneficiary, Pa-
tient or Source when using VerbNet roles, and as
Agent, Beneficiary, Experiencer, Patient, Recipi-
ent or Result when using Sowa’s system. Thus,
in Zwierzę jest leczone z tych chorób ‘An animal
is treated for these diseases’, in the VerbNet ex-
periment the animal was marked as Beneficiary
(by 3 annotators), as Patient (×3) and as Source
(×1), and in the Sowa experiment – as Benefi-
ciary (×2), as Patient (×2), as Recipient (×2) and
as Result (×1). Similarly, for Mąż leczył się na
serce, lit. ‘Husband treated himself for his heart’,
the husband was annotated as Agent (×2), Benefi-
ciary (×2), Patient (×2) and Source (×1) when us-
ing VerbNet roles and as Agent (×1), Beneficiary
(×2), Experiencer (×1), Patient (×2) and Recipi-
ent (×1) when using Sowa’s roles.

Another major problem with the attempt to use
these sets of semantic roles was a high percentage
of verb occurrences with multiple arguments as-
signed the same semantic role. In case of Sowa’s
system 4.36% of sentences had this problem on
the average (the raw numbers for the 7 annotators
are: 2, 5, 8, 9, 17, 31, 34 out of 347 sentences with
no coordination of unlikes in argument positions;2

note the surprisingly large deviation) and in case
of VerbNet – 2.47% sentences were so affected (7,
7, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12).

On the basis of these experiments, as well as
various remarks in the literature (see, e.g., the ref-
erence to Bobrow et al. 2007b at the beginning
of this section), we conclude that semantic role
systems such as VerbNet or Sowa’s are perhaps
not really well-suited for the grammar engineer-
ing task – and certainly not worth the time, effort

2In case of arguments realised as a coordination of un-
likes, e.g., a nominal phrase and a sentential clause, anno-
tators routinely assigned distinct semantic roles to different
conjuncts, so that one argument received a number of differ-
ent roles (from the same annotator) and, consequently, there
were many more duplicates in the remaining 393−347 = 46
sentences than in the 347 sentences free from coordination of
unlikes considered here.

and money needed to construct reasonably-sized
corpora annotated with them – and that other ap-
proaches must be explored.

3 Syntactic approximation of semantic
roles

In Jaworski and Przepiórkowski 2014 we propose
to define ‘semantic roles’ on the basis of mor-
phosyntactic information, including morpholog-
ical cases, following the Slavic linguistic tradi-
tion stemming from the work of Roman Jakob-
son (see, e.g., Jakobson 1971a,b). In particular,
since the broader context of the work reported here
is the development of a syntactico-semantic LFG
(Lexical-Functional Grammar; Bresnan 2001;
Dalrymple 2001) parser for Polish, we build on
the usual LFG approach of obtaining semantic
representations on the basis of f-structures, i.e.,
non-tree-configurational syntactic representations
(as opposed to more surfacy tree-configurational
c-structures) containing information about predi-
cates, grammatical functions and morphosyntac-
tic features; this so-called description-by-analysis
(DBA) approach has been adopted for German
(Frank and Erk, 2004; Frank and Semecký, 2004;
Frank, 2004), English (Crouch and King, 2006)
and Japanese (Umemoto, 2006).

In the usual DBA approach, semantic roles are
added to the resulting representations on the ba-
sis of semantic dictionaries external to LFG gram-
mars (Frank and Semecký, 2004; Frank, 2004;
Crouch and King, 2005, 2006). When such
FrameNet- or VerbNet-like dictionaries are not
available, grammatical function names (subject,
object, etc.) are used instead of semantic roles
(Umemoto, 2006). Unfortunately, this latter ap-
proach is detrimental for tasks such as textual en-
tailment, as LFG grammatical functions represent
the surface relations, so, e.g., a passivised (deep)
object bears the grammatical function of (surface)
subject. Other diathesis phenomena also result in
different grammatical functions assigned to argu-
ments standing in the same semantic relation to the
verb, e.g., the recipient of the verb GIVE will nor-
mally be assigned a different grammatical function
depending on whether it is realised as an NP (as in
John gave Mary a book) or as a PP (John gave a
book to Mary).

Although currently no reasonably-sized dictio-
naries of Polish containing semantic role informa-
tion are available, we do not resort to grammatical

84



functions as names of semantic roles, but rather
guess approximations of semantic roles on the ba-
sis of grammatical functions and morphosyntac-
tic features. For example, subjects of active verbs
are marked as R0 (the ‘semantic role’ approxi-
mating the Agent), but subjects of passsive verbs,
as well as objects of active verbs, are marked as
R1 (roughly, the Undergoer, i.e., Patient, Theme
or Product).3 Apart from grammatical functions
and the voice value of the verb, also morphosyn-
tactic features of arguments are taken into ac-
count, especially, for PP arguments, the preposi-
tion lemma and the grammatical case it governs.
So, for example, both the OBJ-TH (dative NP) ar-
guments and certain OBL (PP) arguments, e.g.,
those headed by the preposition DLA ‘for’, are
translated into the R2 ‘semantic role’, which ap-
proximates the Beneficiary and Recipient seman-
tic roles. This results in the same semantic repre-
sentations of Papkin upolował dla Klary krokodyla
‘Papkin.NOM hunted a crocodile.ACC for Klara’,
lit. ‘Papkin hunted for Klara crocodile’, and Pap-
kin upolował Klarze krokodyla, lit. ‘Papkin.NOM
hunted Klara.DAT crocodile.ACC’.

The advantage of this morphosyntax-based ap-
proach is that it is fully deterministic (only one
‘semantic role’ may be assigned to a given argu-
ment) and that it ensures high uniqueness of any
‘semantic role’ in the set of arguments of any verb
(only 6 of the 347 sentences considered above, i.e.,
1.73%, have the same ‘semantic role’ asigned to a
couple of arguments, compared with 2.47% and
4.36% in the experiments described in this paper;
see Jaworski and Przepiórkowski 2014 for addi-
tional data). The disadvantage is that sometimes
wrong decisions are made; for example, OBL ar-
guments of type Z[inst] ‘with’ may have one of
at least three meanings: Perlative (R7), Thematic
(R1) and Co-agentive (R0); in fact, the sentence
Zrób z nim porządek, lit. ‘do with him order’, is
ambiguous between the last two and may mean ei-
ther ‘Deal with him’ (R1) or ‘Clean up with him’
(R0). However, the procedure will always assign
only one of these ‘roles’ to such Z[inst] arguments
(currently R7).

3We use symbols such as R0 or R1 instead of more mean-
ingful names in order to constantly remind ourselves that we
are dealing with approximations of true semantic roles; this
also explains scare quotes in the term ‘semantic role’ when
used in this approximative sense.

4 Conclusions

When developing a semantic parser, it makes
sense to aim at neo-Davidsonian representations
with semantic roles relating arguments to events,
as such representations facilitate textual entail-
ment and similar tasks. In this paper we reported
on experiments which show that the practical us-
ability of two popular repertoires of semantic roles
in grammar engineering is limited: as the IAA
is low, systems trained on corpora annotated with
such semantic roles are bound to be inconsistent,
limiting the usefulness of resulting semantic rep-
resentations in such tasks. In case of a language
that does not have a resouce such as VerbNet, the
question arises then whether it makes sense to in-
vest considerable time and effort into creating it.

In this and the accompanying paper Jaworski
and Przepiórkowski 2014 we suggest an answer in
the negative and propose to approximate seman-
tic roles on the basis of syntactic and morphosyn-
tactic information. Admittedly, this proposal is
currently rather programmatic, as it is supported
only with anectodal evidence. It seems plausible
that the usefulness of resulting representations for
textual entailment should be comparable to – or
maybe even better than – that of semantic rep-
resentations produced by semantic role labellers
trained on rather inconsistently annotated data, but
this should be quantified by further experiments.4

If this hypothesis turns out to be true, however,
the method we propose has the clear advantage of
being overwhelmingly cheaper: instead of many
person-years of building a resource such as Verb-
Net (and then training a role labeller, etc.), a cou-
ple of days of a skilled researcher are required to
define and test reasonable translations from (mor-
pho)syntax to ‘semantic roles’.

References

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-
Coder Agreement for Computational Linguis-
tics. Computational Linguistics 34(4), 555–596.

Daniel G. Bobrow, Bob Cheslow, Cleo Condo-
ravdi, Lauri Karttunen, Tracy Holloway King,

4To the best of our knowledge, no testing data for such
tasks are available for Polish and Polish has never been in-
cluded in evaluation initiatives of this kind. The approach de-
scribed here is currently employed in a large-scale grammar
development effort carried out at the Institute of Computer
Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, in connection with the
CLARIN-PL Research Infrastructure, and we hope to further
report on its usefulness in the future.

85



Rowan Nairn, Valeria de Paiva, Charlotte Price,
and Annie Zaenen. 2007a. PARC’s Bridge and
Question Answering System. In Proceedings of
the GEAF07 Workshop, pages 26–45.

Daniel G. Bobrow, Cleo Condoravdi, Richard
Crouch, Valeria de Paiva, Lauri Karttunen,
Tracy Holloway King, Rowan Nairn, Charlotte
Price, and Annie Zaenen. 2007b. Precision-
focused textual inference. In Proceedings of the
ACL–PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment
and Paraphrasing at ACL 2007, pages 16–21.

Joan Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax.
Blackwell Textbooks in Linguistics, Malden,
MA: Blackwell.

Joan Bresnan and Jonni M. Kanerva. 1989. Loca-
tive inversion in Chicheŵa: A case study of fac-
torization in grammar. Linguistic Inquiry 20(1),
1–50.

Dick Crouch and Tracy Holloway King. 2005.
Unifying Lexical Resources. In Proceedings of
the Interdisciplinary Workshop on the Identifi-
cation and Representation of Verb Features and
Verb Classes.

Dick Crouch and Tracy Holloway King. 2006.
Semantics via f-structure rewriting. In Miriam
Butt and Tracy Holloway King (eds.), The Pro-
ceedings of the LFG’06 Conference, Universität
Konstanz, Germany: CSLI Publications.

Mary Dalrymple. 2001. Lexical Functional Gram-
mar. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic Proto-roles and Ar-
gument Selection. Language 67(3), 547–619.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. The Case for Case. In
Emmon Bach and Robert T. Harms (eds.), Uni-
versals in Linguistic Theory, pages 1–88, New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Anette Frank. 2004. Generalisations over Corpus-
induced Frame Assignment Rules. In Charles
Fillmore, Manfred Pinkal, Collin Baker and Ka-
trin Erk (eds.), Proceedings of the LREC 2004
Workshop on Building Lexical Resources from
Semantically Annotated Corpora, pages 31–38,
ELRA, Lisbon.

Anette Frank and Katrin Erk. 2004. Towards
an LFG Syntax-Semantics Interface for Frame
Semantics Annotation. In Alexander Gelbukh
(ed.), Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing (CICLing 2004), volume 2945
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–
12, Heidelberg: Springer.

Anette Frank and Jiří Semecký. 2004. Corpus-

based Induction of an LFG Syntax-Semantics
Interface for Frame Semantic Processing. In Sil-
via Hansen-Schirra, Stefan Oepen and Hans
Uszkoreit (eds.), Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Workshop on Linguistically Inter-
preted Corpora at COLING 2004, Geneva.

Jeffrey Gruber. 1965. Studies in Lexical Relations.
Ph. D.thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology.

Ray Jackendoff. 1972. Semantic Interpretation in
Generative Grammar. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.

Roman O. Jakobson. 1971a. Beitrag zur allge-
meinen Kasuslehre. Gesamtbedeutungen der
russischen Kasus. In Selected Writings II, pages
23–71, The Hague: Mouton.

Roman O. Jakobson. 1971b. Morfologičeskie
nabljudenija nad slavjanskim skloneniem. In
Selected Writings II, pages 154–183, The
Hague: Mouton.

Wojciech Jaworski and Adam Przepiórkowski.
2014. Syntactic Approximation of Semantic
Roles. In Adam Przepiórkowski and Maciej
Ogrodniczuk (eds.), Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing: Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Conference on NLP, PolTAL 2014,
Warsaw, Poland, September 17–19, 2014, vol-
ume 8686 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelli-
gence, Heidelberg: Springer.

Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang, William Schuler,
and Martha Palmer. 2000. Building a class-
based verb lexicon using TAGs. In Proceedings
of TAG+5 Fifth International Workshop on Tree
Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Terence Parsons. 1990. Events in the Semantics of
English: A Study in Subatomic Semantics. Cam-
bridge, MA: The MIT Press.

John F. Sowa. 2000. Knowledge Representa-
tion: Logical, Philosophical, and Computa-
tional Foundations. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks
Cole Publishing Co.

Hiroshi Umemoto. 2006. Implementing a
Japanese Semantic Parser Based on Glue
Approach. In Proceedings of the 20th Pacific
Asia Conference on Language, Information
and Computation, pages 418–425, Huazhong
Normal University, Wuhan, China: Tsinghua
University Press.

86


