



















































UOUA: Using Latent Semantic Analysis to Build a Domain-Dependent Sentiment Resource


Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2014), pages 773–778,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-24, 2014.

UO UA: Using Latent Semantic Analysis to Build a Domain-Dependent
Sentiment Resource

Reynier Ortega
Adrian Fonseca
Carlos Muñiz
CERPAMID

Ave Patricio Lumumba, S/N
Santigo de Cuba, Cuba

reynier.ortega@cerpamid.co.cu
adrian@cerpamid.co.cu

Yoan Gutiérrez
Andrés Montoyo

DLSI, University of Alicante
Carretera de San Vicente, S/N

Alicante, Spain
ygutierrez@dlsi.ua.es
montoyo@dlsi.ua.es

Abstract

In this paper we present our contribution to
SemEval-2014 Task 4: Aspect Based Sen-
timent Analysis (Pontiki et al., 2014), Sub-
task 2: Aspect Term Polarity for Laptop
domain. The most outstanding feature in
this contribution is the automatic building
of a domain-depended sentiment resource
using Latent Semantic Analysis. We in-
duce, for each term, two real scores that in-
dicate its use in positive and negative con-
texts in the domain of interest. The aspect
term polarity classification is carried out
in two phases: opinion words extraction
and polarity classification. The opinion
words related with an aspect are obtained
using dependency relations. These rela-
tions are provided by the Stanford Parser1.
Finally, the polarity of the feature, in a
given review, is determined from the pos-
itive and negative scores of each word re-
lated to it. The results obtained by our ap-
proach are encouraging if we consider that
the construction of the polarity lexicon is
performed fully automatically.

1 Introduction

Hundreds of millions of people and thousands
of companies around the world, actively use So-
cial Media2. Every day are more amazing web-
sites and applications (Facebook, Twitter, MyS-
pace, Amazon, etc.) that allow the easy sharing
of information in near real time. For this rea-
son, at present, the Web is flooded with subjec-
tive, personal and affective data. Mining this huge

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and pro-
ceedings footer are added by the organisers. Licence details:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

1http://nlp.stanford.edu:8080/parser/
2http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social media

volume of information offer both interesting chal-
lenges and useful intelligent applications such as
recommendation systems (Dong et al., 2013; Sun
et al., 2009) and customer’s reviews summariza-
tion (Bafna and Toshniwal, 2013; Balahur and
Montoyo, 2008).

Nowadays, companies have redirected their
marketing strategies toward the Web. Each one
of them advertises that their products are the best,
amazing, easy to use, long lasting and cheap. But
are these advertisements really true? Obviously,
not everything is true. The companies usually ex-
aggerate the product’s quality and in many cases
tend not to advertise the limitations of their prod-
ucts. Therefore, taking a rational decision about
which product is the best among the variety of ex-
isting options can be very stressful.

To avoid this situation, frequently we trust in
the experiences gained by others who have pur-
chased the product of our interest, or one similar.
The existence of websites like Ciao3, Epinions4

and Cnet5 make possible to the customers to inter-
change their experiences about a specific product,
and to future clients avoid products advertising

However, the existence of a large volume of re-
views entails that it is impossible to conduct an
effective exploration before making a final deci-
sion. The most important benefit of having that
amount of user-generated content on hand, specif-
ically product’s reviews, is that, these data can be
explored by a computer system to obtain informa-
tion about products and their features.

The task of aspect-based sentiment analysis
(Liu, 2012) is a fine-grained level of Sentiment
Analysis (Pang and Lee, 2008). This aim to iden-
tify the aspects (e.g., battery, screen, food, ser-
vice, size, weight, time-life) of given target entities

3www.ciao.com
4www.epinions.com
5www.cnet.com

773



(e.g., laptops, restaurants, camera) and the senti-
ment expressed towards each aspect (e.g., positive,
negative, neutral). This are composed by two ba-
sic phases: feature extraction and feature polarity
classification.

In this paper we present our contribution for
SemEval-2014 Task 4: Aspect Based Sentiment
Analysis (Pontiki et al., 2014), Subtask 2: Aspect
Term Polarity. In this approach we only focus on
the polarity classification problem. For this, we
induce a domain-dependent sentiment lexicon ap-
plying Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) on prod-
uct reviews corpus, gathered from Ciao. The clas-
sification phase is carried out as follow: the opin-
ion words related with the product aspect are draw
out using the dependency relations provided by
Stanford Parser, then the polarity of the extracted
words are combined to obtain overall aspect polar-
ity.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de-
scribes our approach. Further on, in Section 3, we
discuss the results obtained in the SemEval 2014
Task No. 4 subtask 2. Finally, section 4 provides
concluding remarks.

2 UO UA System

One of major challenge in sentiment analysis into
product reviews, is dealing with a quite domain de-
pendence. For instance, the word “unpredictable”
can be considered as positive in Movie domain,
however it is very negative in Airplane domain.
For this reason, we propose to create a specific
sentiment lexicon for addressing aspect based sen-
timent analysis in reviews.

Our proposal is divided in two main phases. The
first one aims to build a domain-dependent senti-
ment resource for Laptop domain applying LSA.
The second phase obtains the words related by
means of some dependency relation with the as-
pect, and later, the polarity of these words are
obtained from induced polarity lexicon and com-
bined for computing overall aspect polarity.

2.1 Domain-Dependent Polarity Lexicon

The use of sentiment resource has been proven
to be useful to build, train, and evaluate systems
for sentiment analysis (Gutiérrez et al., 2013; Bal-
ahur, 2011). In order to build sentiment resource,
several approach has been presented. In one of
the first works, presented by (Hatzivassiloglou and
McKeown, 1997), was proposed to take into ac-

count if adjectives are linked by adversative or
copulative conjunctions for detecting its polarity.
In (Turney and Littman, 2003) the authors exposed
a method for inferring the semantic orientation of
a word from its statistical association with a set
of positive and negative paradigm words, mea-
sured by point-wise mutual information (PMI). In
(2004), Hu and Liu suggested a technique to ex-
pand the lexicon using the relations of synonymy
and antonym provided by WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998). In (2009), Cruz et al., created a sentiment
resource based on a graph, constructed from con-
junctive expressions between pairs of adjectives,
observed in a review corpus. PageRank algorithm
(Page et al., 1999) was adapted to be used on
graphs with positive and negative edges, in order
to obtain the semantic orientation of words.

Despite the wide range of existing proposals
for resources construction, the results achieved
with them are far from expected. As we have
already seen, in aspect based sentiment analy-
sis, the polarity of a word is heavily dependent
on the domain; and general propose sentiment
resource such as General Inquirer (Stone et al.,
1966), WordNet-Affect(Strapparava and Valitutti,
2004), SentiWordNet(Baccianella et al., 2010) or
HowNet (Dong et al., 2010) do not capture this
dependency. On the other hand, the human anno-
tators can not create specific sentiment resources
for each new product launched to market. There-
fore, propose methods to create these resources is
a challenging task.

In this paper we address this task, presenting a
framework for building domain-dependent senti-
ment resource. Our proposal is compounded of
four phases. (See figure 1).

Firstly, review pages about the product of in-
terest can be retrieved from different websites, for
instance, Ciao, Epinions and Cnet (in this work
we only use reviews from Ciao). This reviews
are parsed and cleaned (this time we use Python
XML Parser6). For each page we extract: pros,
cons, title, full review and rating. In this work we
have only focus on the pros and cons attributes be-
cause they are usually very brief, consist of short
phrases or sentence segments and give a positive
and negative evaluation about the product aspects.
Each pros and cons in remainder paper will be
considered as positive and negative samples, re-
spectively.

6https://docs.python.org/2/library/xml.html

774



Figure 1: Building domain-dependent sentiment
resource.

Subsequently, the samples are preprocessed,
applying a POS-Tagging tool (Padró and
Stanilovsky, 2012) to convert all words in lem-
mas. After that, the stopwords are removed
from text. Afterward each sample is represented
using the classic vector space model (Salton et
al., 1975). Intending to measure the association
between term and class we add a special term to
the vectors. In positive samples the term tpos is
added whereas in the negative samples the term
tneg is aggregated.

Later, we apply a Latent Semantic Analysis
(this time we use, Gensim python package) to cal-
culate the strength of the semantic association be-
tween words and classes. LSA uses the Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD) to analyze the statis-
tical relationships among words in a corpus.

The first step is construct a matrix Mn×m, in
which the row vectors vi represent lemmas and the
column vectors si the positive and negative sample
(pros and cons). In each cell tij , we have the TF
score (Term Frequency) of the ith lemma in jth

sample. The next step is apply Singular Value De-
composition to matrix Mn×m to decompose it into
a product of three matrices UΣV T , then, we select
the k largest singular values, and their correspond-
ing singular vectors from U and V , obtained an
approximation M̂ = UkΣkV Tk of rank k to orig-
inal matrix Mn×m. After LSA is performed, we
use the new matrix M̂ to measure the association
between lemmas li and lj computing the cosine
measure between vectors vi and vj , with the equa-
tion 1.

LSAscore(li, lj) =
< vi, vj >

‖ vi ‖ · ‖ vj ‖ (1)

Finally, the polarity lexicon contains lemmas
li and its positive and negative scores. This val-
ues are computed using LSAscore(li, tpos) and
LSAscore(li, tneg) respectively. The table 1 show
some top positive and negative words computed
with this strategy.

Positive Score Negative Score
sturdy 0.8249 prone 0.8322
superb 0.7293 weak 0.8189
durable 0.7074 disaster 0.8120
sexy 0.6893 erm 0.8118
powerfull 0.6700 ill 0.8107
robust 0.6686 uncomfortable 0.8084
affordable 0.6630 noisy 0.7917
suuupeerrr 0.6550 overwhelm 0.7514
lighweight 0.6550 unsturdy 0.7491
unbreakable 0.6542 lousy 0.7143

Table 1: Examples of positive and negative words.

With aim to do our contribution to SemEval-
2014, Task 4: Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis
(Pontiki et al., 2014), Subtask 2: Aspect Term Po-
larity, we gathered 3010 Laptop Reviews, from
Ciao and create a corpus with 6020 samples, 3010
positives (Pros) and 3010 negatives (Cons). This
corpus was used as input in the developed frame-
work (See figure 1). In this time we utilize Freel-
ing7 as POS-Tagging tool and Gensim Python
Packages8 to perform LSA (only the most 100
most significant eigenvalue are used). After that,
a domain-dependent sentiment resource (DLSR)
with 4482 term was created for Laptop reviews.

2.2 Aspect Polarity Classification

In order to exploit our domain-dependent senti-
ment resource building for Laptop domain, we de-
velop an unsupervised method based on language
rule to classify the product aspect. The basic rules
are used to find dependency relation between as-
pect and their attributes. The figure 2 show the
architecture of our proposal.

The proposed method receive as input a tuple
(Pfeature, R), where Pfeature represent the aspect
to evaluate, and R is the context (review) in it ap-
pears.

7http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/
8https://pypi.python.org/pypi/gensim

775



Figure 2: Apect polarity classification.

The dependency parsed is applied to review R,
using Stanford Parser. Following that, we extract
a set of tuples W , each tuple is represented as a
pair (Att, Mod) where Att is a word related with
the aspect Pfeature through some dependency re-
lations shown in Table 2, and Mod is a integer
value indicating if Att is modified by a valence
shifter (Polanyi and Zaenen, 2004), (we only con-
sider negation words, e.g., never, no, not, don’t,
nothing, etc.) , and default value of 0 is assign, in
case that, the Att is modified by a valence shifter,
we assign value of -1.

Dependency relations
mod subj nsubj
amod csub csubpass
advmod obj dobj
vmod iobj pobj
rcmod npadvmod nn
subj xcomp advcl

Table 2: Stanford Parser dependency relations.

Once, the set of pairs W was obtained, the po-
larity of the feature Pfeature is determined from
the scores of the attributes (related words) that de-
scribe it. To sum up, for each pair (Att, Mod) ∈
W , the positive Pos((Att, Mod)) and negative
Neg((Att, Mod)) scores are calculated as:

Neg((Att, Mod)) =

{
−N(Att) if Mod < 0

N(Att) otherwise
(2)

Pos((Att, Mod)) =

{
−P (Att) if Mod < 0

P (Att) otherwise
(3)

Where P (Att) and N(Att) are the positive and
negative score for Att in domain-dependent senti-
ment resource DLSR.

Finally, the global positive and negative scores
(SOpos, SOneg) are calculated as:

SOpos(Pfeature) =
∑

w∈W
Pos(w) (4)

SOneg(Pfeature) =
∑

w∈W
Neg(w) (5)

If SOpos is greater than SOneg then the aspect is
considered as positive. On the contrary, if SOpos
is less than SOneg the aspect is negative. Finally,
if SOpos is equal to SOneg the aspect is considered
as neutral.

3 Results

In this section we present the evaluation of our
system in the context of SemEval-2014, Task 4:
Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis (Pontiki et al.,
2014), Subtask 2: Aspect Term Polarity. For
evaluating the participant’s system two unlabeled
domain-specific datasets for laptops and restau-
rants were distributed. For each dataset two runs
can be submitted, the first (constrained), the sys-
tem can only be used the provided training data
and other resources such as lexicons. In the sec-
ond (unconstrained), the system can use additional
data for training. We send one run for laptop
dataset and it only use external data retrieved from
Ciao website (the training data was not used) (un-
constrained).

The results achieve by our method are illustrate
in Table 3. As may be observed, the accuracy

Label Pr Rc F1
conflict 0.0 0.0 0.0
negative 0,5234 0,3764 0,4379
neutral 0,4556 0,4074 0,4302
positive 0,6364 0,7561 0,6911
Accuracy 0.55198777

Table 3: Results in aspect polarity classification
for laptop dataset.

achieve by UA OU was 0.55, and F1 measure for
negative, neutral and positive were 0,4379, 0,4302
and 0,6911 respectively. In case of conflict polar-
ity we reached a 0.0 F1 value because our system
not handle this situation. For this subtask (Laptop
domain) a total of 32 runs was submitted by all

776



systems participant’s and our run was ranked as
25th. The results despite not achieving expected,
are encouraging. These evidence the feasibility of
building resources from data available on the web,
for aspect-based sentiment analysis.

4 Conclusions

In this article, we presented and evaluated the
approach considered for our participation in
SemEval-2014 Task 4: Aspect Based Sentiment
Analysis (Pontiki et al., 2014), Subtask 2: Aspect
Term Polarity, specifically for Laptop Domain.
We present a framework for building domain-
dependent sentiment resources applying Latent
Semantic Analysis and build a special resource for
polarity classification in Laptop domain. This re-
source was combined into unsupervised method to
compute the polarity associated to different aspect
in reviews. The results obtained by our approach
are encouraging if we consider that the construc-
tion of the polarity lexicon is performed fully au-
tomatically.

Acknowledgements

This research work has been partially funded by
the University of Alicante, Generalitat Valenciana,
Spanish Government and the European Com-
mission through the projects, ”Tratamiento in-
teligente de la información para la ayuda a la toma
de decisiones” (GRE12-44), ATTOS (TIN2012-
38536-C03-03), LEGOLANG (TIN2012-31224),
SAM (FP7-611312), FIRST (FP7-287607) and
ACOMP/2013/067.

References
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Se-

bastiani. 2010. SentiWordnet 3.0: An enhanced
lexical resource for sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
LREC ’10, Valletta, Malta, May.

Kushal Bafna and Durga Toshniwal. 2013. Fea-
ture based summarization of customers’ reviews
of online products. Procedia Computer Science,
22(0):142 – 151. 17th International Conference in
Knowledge Based and Intelligent Information and
Engineering Systems - KES2013.

Alexandra Balahur and Andrés Montoyo. 2008. Mul-
tilingual feature-driven opinion extraction and sum-
marization from customer reviews. In Epaminon-
das Kapetanios, Vijayan Sugumaran, and Myra

Spiliopoulou, editors, Natural Language and Infor-
mation Systems, volume 5039 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 345–346. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.

Alexandra Balahur. 2011. Methods and Resources
for Sentiment Analysis in Multilingual Documents
of Different Text Types. Ph.D. thesis, Department
of Software and Computing Systems. Alcalant, Al-
calant University.

Fermı́n Cruz, José Antonio Troyano, Francisco Javier
Ortega, and Carlos Garcı́a Vallejo. 2009. In-
ducción de un lexicón de opinión orientado al do-
minio. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 43:5–
12.

Zhendong Dong, Qiang Dong, and Changling Hao.
2010. HowNet and its computation of meaning. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations, COL-
ING’10, pages 53–56, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Ruihai Dong, Markus Schaal, Michael P. O’Mahony,
Kevin McCarthy, and Barry Smyth. 2013. Opinion-
ated product recommendation. In Sarah Jane Delany
and Santiago Ontañón, editors, Case-Based Rea-
soning Research and Development, volume 7969 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 44–58.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.

Yoan Gutiérrez, Andy González, Roger Pérez, José
Abreu, Antonio Fernández Orquı́n, Alejandro Mos-
quera, Andrés Montoyo, Rafael Muñoz, and Franc
Camara. 2013. UMCC DLSI-(SA): Using a rank-
ing algorithm and informal features to solve senti-
ment analysis in Twitter. Atlanta, Georgia, USA,
page 443.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In Proceedings of the Joint ACL/EACL Con-
ference, pages 174–181.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining opinion fea-
tures in customer reviews. In Proceedings of AAAI,
pages 755–760.

Bing Liu. 2012. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-
ing. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
nologies, 5(1):1–167.

Lluı́s Padró and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. Freel-
ing 3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. Proceed-
ings of the Eight International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Istan-
bul, Turkey, May. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and
Terry Winograd. 1999. The PagerRank Citation
Ranking: Bringing Order to the Web.

777



Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion Mining and
Sentiment Analysis.

Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. 2004. Contextual
lexical valence shifters. In Yan Qu, James Shana-
han, and Janyce Wiebe, editors, Proceedings of the
AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude and
Affect in Text: Theories and Applications. AAAI
Press. AAAI technical report SS-04-07.

Maria Pontiki, Dimitrios Galanis, John Pavlopou-
los, Harris Papageorgiou, Ion Androutsopoulos, and
Suresh Manandhar. 2014. Semeval-2014 task 4:
Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis. In International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval), 2014.

Gerard Salton, Andrew Wong, and Chung Shu Yang.
1975. A vector space model for automatic indexing.
Communications of the ACM, 18(11):613–620.

Philip James Stone, Dexter Colboyd Dunphy, Marshall
Smith, and Daniel Ogilvie. 1966. The General In-
quirer: A Computer Approach to Content Analysis.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004.
WordNet-Affect: an affective extension of Word-
Net. In In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
LREC, pages 1083–1086, Lisbon, Portugal, May
26-28. European Language Resources Association.

Jianshu Sun, Chong Long, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Minlie
Huang. 2009. Mining reviews for product compar-
ison and recommendation. Polibits, pages 33 – 40,
06.

Peter Turney and Michael Lederman Littman. 2003.
Measuring praise and criticism: Inference of seman-
tic orientation from association. ACM Transactions
on Information Systems (TOIS), 21(4):315–346.

778


