








































Combining Mention Context and Hyperlinks from Wikipedia
for Named Entity Disambiguation

Ander Barrena
IXA NLP Group

UPV/EHU
Donostia, Basque Country

ander.barrena@ehu.eus

Aitor Soroa
IXA NLP Group

UPV/EHU
Donostia, Basque Country
a.soroa@ehu.eus

Eneko Agirre
IXA NLP Group

UPV/EHU
Donostia, Basque Country
e.agirre@ehu.eus

Abstract

Named entity disambiguation is the task of
linking entity mentions to their intended refer-
ent, as represented in a Knowledge Base, usu-
ally derived from Wikipedia. In this paper, we
combine local mention context and global hy-
perlink structure from Wikipedia in a proba-
bilistic framework. Our results show that the
two models of context, namely, words in the
context and hyperlink pathways to other en-
tities in the context, are complementary. We
test our method in eight datasets, improving
the state-of-the-art results in five, without any
tuning, showing that it is robust to out-of-
domain scenarios. When tuning combination
weights, we match the best reported results on
the widely-used AIDA-CoNLL test-b.

1 Introduction

Linking mentions occurring in documents to a
knowledge base is the main goal of Entity Link-
ing or Named Entity Disambiguation (NED). This
problem has attracted a great number of papers in
the NLP and IR communities, and a large number
of techniques, including local context and global in-
ference (Ratinov et al., 2011). We propose to use
a probabilistic framework that combines entity pop-
ularity, name popularity, local mention context and
global hyperlink structure, relying on information in
Wikipedia alone. Entity and name popularity are
useful disambiguation clues in the absence of any
context. The local mention context provides di-
rect clues (in the form of words in context) to dis-
ambiguate each mention separately. The hyperlink
structure of Wikipedia provides a global coherence
measure for all entities mentioned in the same con-
text.

The advantages of our method with respect to
other alternatives are as follows: (1) It does not in-
volve a large number of methods and classifier com-
bination. (2) The method learns the parameters di-
rectly from Wikipedia so no additional hand-labeled
data and training is needed. (3) We combine the
global hyperlink structure of Wikipedia with a lo-
cal bag-of-words probabilistic model in an intuitive
and complementary way. (4) The absence of training
allows for robust results in out-of-domain scenarios.

The evaluation of NED is fragmented, with sev-
eral popular shared tasks, such as TAC-KBP1, ERD2

or NEEL3. Other evaluation datasets include AIDA-
CoNLL and KORE504, which are very common in
NED evaluation. Note that each dataset poses differ-
ent problems. For instance AIDA-CoNLL is com-
posed of news, and systems need to disambiguate all
occurring mentions. TAC includes news and discus-
sion forums, and focuses on a large number of men-
tions for a handful of challenging strings. KORE50
includes short sentences with very ambiguous men-
tions. Unfortunately, there is no standard dataset,
and many contributions in this area report results in
just one or two datasets. We report our results on
eight datasets, improving the state-of-the-art results
on five.

1http://www.nist.gov/tac/2014/KBP/
2http://web-ngram.research.microsoft.

com/erd2014/
3http://www.scc.lancs.ac.uk/

microposts2015/challenge/index.html
4http://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/departments/

databases-and-information-systems/
research/yago-naga/aida/downloads/



2 Resources

The knowledge used by our Bayesian network
comes from Wikipedia. We extract three informa-
tion resources to perform the disambiguation: a dic-
tionary, textual contexts and a graph.

The dictionary is an association between strings
and Wikipedia articles. We construct the dictio-
nary using article titles, redirections, disambiguation
pages, and anchor text. If the mention links to a
disambiguation page, it is associated with all possi-
ble articles the disambiguation page points to. Each
association between a string and article is scored
with the prior probability, estimated as the number
of times that the mention occurs in the anchor text
of an article divided by the total number of occur-
rences of the mention. We choose candidate enti-
ties for disambiguation by just assigning all entities
linked to the mention in the dictionary.

In addition we build a graph using the Wikipedia
link structure, where entities are nodes and edges
are anchor links among entities from Wikipedia. We
used the third-party dictionary and graph described
in (Agirre et al., 2015), which is publicly available5.

Finally, we extract textual contexts for all the pos-
sible candidate entities from a Wikipedia dump. We
collect all the anchors including a link to each en-
tity in Wikipedia, and extract a context of 50 words
around the anchor link.

3 A Generative Bayesian Network

Given a mention s occurring in context c, our sys-
tem ranks each of the candidate entities e. Figure
1 shows the dependencies among the different vari-
ables. Note that context probability is given by two
different resources.

Candidate entities are ranked combining evi-
dences from 4 different probability distributions,
which we call entity knowledge P (e), name knowl-
edge P (s|e), context knowledge P (cbow|e) and
graph knowledge P (cgrf|e) respectively.

Entity knowledge P (e) represents the probability
of generating entity e, and is estimated as follows:

P (e) =
Count(e) + 1

|M |+N
5http://ixa2.si.ehu.eus/ukb/ukb-wiki.

tar.bz2

Figure 1: Dependencies among variables in a Bayesian
network. The network gives as a result this formula:
P (s, cbow, cgrf, e) = P (e)P (s|e)P (cbow|e)P (cgrf|e).

where Count(e) describes the entity popularity,
e.g., the number of times the entity e is refer-
enced within Wikipedia, |M | is the number of en-
tity mentions and N is the total number of entities
in Wikipedia. As can be seen, the estimation is
smoothed using the add-one method.

Name knowledge P (s|e) represents the probabil-
ity of generating a particular string s given the entity
e, and is estimated as follows:

P (s|e) = θCount(e, s)
Count(e)

+ (1− θ)Count(s)
|M |

whereCount(e, s) is the number of times mention s
is used to refer entity e and Count(s) is the number
of times mention s is used as an anchor. θ param-
eter is set to 0.9 according to development experi-
ments done in the AIDA-CoNLL development set
(also known as AIDA-CoNLL test-a, cf. Section 4).

The context knowledge is modeled in two differ-
ent ways. In the bag-of-words model, P (cbow|e)
represents the probability of generating context c =
{w1, w2, . . . , wn} given the entity e, and is esti-
mated as follows:

P (cbow|e) = Pe(w1)Pe(w2)...Pe(wn)
where Pe(w) is estimated as:

Pe(w) = λP
′
e(w) + (1− λ)Pw(w)

P ′e(w) is the maximum likelihood estimation of each
word w in the context of e entity. Context words are
smoothed by Pw(w) that is the likelihood of words
in the whole Wikipedia. λ parameter is set to 0.9 ac-
cording to development experiments done in AIDA-
CoNLL test-a.

The graph knowledge is estimated using person-
alized Pagerank. We used the probabilities returned



by UKB6 (Agirre et al., 2015). This software re-
turns P (e|cgrf)7 the probability of visiting a candi-
date entity when performing a random walk on the
Wikipedia graph starting in the entity mentions in
the context. In order to introduce it in the generative
model, we must first convert it to P (cgrf|e). We use
Bayes’ formula to estimate the probability:

P (cgrf|e) = P (e|cgrf)P (cgrf)/P (e)
Finally, the Full Model combines all evidences to

find the entity that maximizes the following formula:

e = argmax
e

P (s, cbow, cgrf, e) =

argmax
e

P (e)P (s|e)P (cbow|e)P (cgrf|e)

4 Experiments

We tested our algorithms on a wide range of
datasets: AIDA-CoNLL test-b (Hoffart et al., 2011),
KORE50 (Hoffart et al., 2012) and six TAC-KBP8

datasets corresponding to six years of the competi-
tion (Aida, Kore and Tac hereafter). No corpus was
used for training the parameters of the system, apart
from Wikipedia, as explained in the previous sec-
tions.

We used gold-standard mentions and we evalu-
ated only those mentions linked to a Wikipedia en-
tity (ignoring so-called NIL cases). Depending on
the dataset, we used the customary evaluation mea-
sure: micro-accuracy (Aida, Kore, Tac09 and Tac10)
or Bcubed+ (Tac11, Tac12, Tac13 and Tac14)9.

Each gold standard uses a different Wikipedia ver-
sion: 2010 for Aida and Kore, 2008 for Tac. We
use the Wikipedia dump from 25-5-2011 to build
our resources, as this is close to the versions used at
the time. We mapped gold-standard entities to 2011
Wikipedia automatically, using redirects in the 2011
Wikipedia. This mapping could cause a small degra-
dation of our results.

4.1 Results
The top 4 rows in table 1 show the performance
of the different combinations among probabilities.

6http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/ukb/
7Note that, contrary to us, the results in (Agirre et al., 2015)

multiply the Pagerank probability with the prior.
8http://www.nist.gov/tac/publications/

index.html
9Note that Tac14 results correspond to the so-called Diag-

nostic Entity Linking task.

The remaining row shows the best results reported
to date on those datasets (see caption for details).

The results suggest that each probability con-
tributes to the final score of the Full Model, shown
on row 4, showing that both context models are com-
plementary between each other10. The only excep-
tion is Tac13, where the bow model is best.

Our system obtains very good results in all
datasets, excelling in Tac09-10-11-12-13, where it
beats the state-of-the-art. The figures obtained by
the Full Model on Aida, Kore and Tac14 are close
to the best results. Note that the table shows the re-
sults of the system reporting the best values for each
dataset, that is, our system is compared not to one
single system but to all those systems. For exam-
ple, (Hoffart et al., 2012) reported lower figures for
Kore, 64.58. Regarding the results for TAC-KBP,
the full task includes linking to the Knowledge Base
and detecting and clustering NIL mentions. In or-
der to make results comparable to those for in Aida
and Kore, the table reports the results for mentions
which are linked to the Knowledge Base, that is, re-
sults where NIL mentions are discarded.

5 Adjusting the model to the data

We experimented with weighting the probabilities to
adapt the Full Model mentioned above to a specific
scenario. For the Weighted Full Model, we introduce
the α, β, γ and δ parameters11 as follows:

e = argmax
e

P (s, cbow, cgrf, e) =

argmax
e

P (e)αP (s|e)βP (cbow|e)γP (cgrf|e)δ

Weighting may change the optimal configuration
for θ and λ, we thus optimized all parameters on the
development set of Aida, yielding θ = 0.9, λ = 0.7,
α = 0.2, β = 0.1, γ = 0.6 and δ = 0.1 perform-
ing a exhaustive grid search. The step size used in
this experiment is 0.1. The parameters yielded high
results for development, up to 83.48.

Table 2 summarizes the results of the Weighted
Full Model for Aida, showing that model reaches
84.88 points, a la par to the best micro accuracy re-
ported by (Houlsby and Ciaramita, 2014) and above

10The results of our combination involving the UKB software
are not comparable to those reported by (Agirre et al., 2015),
due to the different formulation of the probability distribution
which involves the prior.

11α+ β + γ + δ = 1



Test Aida Kore Tac09 Tac10 Tac11 Tac12 Tac13 Tac14
P (e)P (s|e) 67.54 35.42 67.04 76.96 67.83 46.20 66.54 62.01
P (e)P (s|e)P (cbow|e) 75.05 60.42 77.19 85.20* 75.55 57.06 74.56* 71.21
P (e)P (s|e)P (cgrf|e) 76.83 54.86 79.40* 83.92* 79.75 70.13* 70.21 71.28
P (e)P (s|e)P (cbow|e)P (cgrf|e) 83.28 70.83 82.21* 85.98* 81.85* 71.65* 73.99* 76.48
Best (state-of-the-art) 84.89 71.50 79.00 80.60 80.10 68.50 71.80 79.60

Table 1: Bold marks the best value among probability combinations, and * those results that overcome the best value
reported in the state-of-the-art: (Houlsby and Ciaramita, 2014) for Aida, (Moro et al., 2014) for Kore, (Han and Sun,
2011) for Tac09 and see TAC-KBP proceedings for the rest8.

Test Aida
P (e)P (s|e)P (cbow|e)P (cgrf|e) 83.28
P (e)αP (s|e)βP (cbow|e)γP (cgrf|e)δ 84.88
(Moro et al., 2014) 82.10
(Hoffart et al., 2011) 82.54
(Houlsby and Ciaramita, 2014) 84.89

Table 2: Micro accuracy results for Aida introducing the
Weighted Full Model in row 2.

those reported by (Hoffart et al., 2011; Moro et al.,
2014) (respectively, 82.5412 and 82.10). Unfortu-
nately the parameter distribution seems to depend on
the test dataset, as the same parameters failed to im-
prove the results on the other datasets.

6 Related Work

The use of Wikipedia for named entity disambigua-
tion is a common approach in this area. In the re-
lated field of Wikification, (Ratinov et al., 2011) in-
troduced the supervised combination of a large num-
ber of global and local similarity measures. They
learn weights for each of those measures training a
supervised classifier on Wikipedia. Our approach is
different in that we just combine four intuitive meth-
ods, without having to learn weights for them. Un-
fortunately they don’t report results for NED.

(Moro et al., 2014) present a complex graph-
based approach for NED and Word Sense Disam-
biguation which works on BabelNet, a complex

12Note that values by (Hoffart et al., 2011) were reported on a
subset of Aida. The micro accuracy results reported in our table
correspond to the latest best model from the Aida web site:
http://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/departments/
databases-and-information-systems/
research/yago-naga/aida/.

combination of several resources including, among
others, Wikipedia, WordNet and Wiktionary. Our
results are stronger over Aida, but not on the smaller
Kore.

(Hoffart et al., 2011) presents a robust method
based on entity popularity and similarity measures,
which are used to build a mention/entity graph. They
include external knowledge from Yago, and train a
classifier on the train part of Aida, obtaining results
comparable to ours. Given that we do not train on
in-domain training corpora, we think our system is
more robust.

The use of probabilistic models using Wikipedia
for NED was introduced in (Han and Sun, 2011). In
this paper, we extend the model with a global model
which takes the hyperlink structure of Wikipedia
into account.

(Houlsby and Ciaramita, 2014) presents a prob-
abilistic method using topic models, where topics
are associated to Wikipedia articles. They present
strong results, but they need to initialize the sam-
pler on another NED system, Tagme (Ferragina and
Scaiella, 2012). In some sense they also combine
the knowledge in the graph with that of a local al-
gorithm (Tagme), so their work is complementary
to ours, but in their case the improvement obtained
when using the graph is negligible. They only pro-
vide results on Aida, and it is thus not possible to
compare their robustness with that of our algorithm.

7 Conclusions and future work

Bayesian networks provide a principled method to
combine knowledge sources. In this paper we com-
bine popularity, name knowledge and two methods
to model context: bag-of-words context, and hy-
perlink graph. The combination outperforms the



state-of-the-art in five out of eight datasets, show-
ing the robustness of the system in different do-
main and dataset types. Our results also show that
in all but one dataset the combination outperforms
individual models, indicating that bag-or-word con-
text and graph context are complementary. We
show that results can be further improved when tun-
ing the weights on in-domain development corpora,
matching the best results on the widely-used AIDA-
CoNLL test-b.

Given that Bayesian networks can be further ex-
tended, we are exploring to introduce additional
models of context into a Markov Random Field al-
gorithm. Our current model assumes that the two
models of context (bag or words and graph) are in-
dependent given e, and we would like to explore al-
ternatives to relax this assumption.

Acknowledgments

We thank the reviewers for their suggestions. This
work was partially funded by MINECO (CHIST-
ERA READERS project – PCIN-2013-002-C02-
01, and SKaTeR project – TIN2012-38584-C06-02),
and the European Commission (QTLEAP – FP7-
ICT-2013.4.1-610516). The IXA group is funded by
the Basque Government (A type Research Group).
Ander Barrena enjoys an PhD scholarship from the
Basque Government.

References
E. Agirre, A. Barrena, and A. Soroa. 2015. Studying

the Wikipedia Hyperlink Graph for Relatedness and
Disambiguation. ArXiv e-prints, March.

Paolo Ferragina and Ugo Scaiella. 2012. Fast and ac-
curate annotation of short texts with wikipedia pages.
IEEE Software, 29(1):70–75.

X. Han and L. Sun. 2011. A Generative Entity-mention
Model for Linking Entities with Knowledge Base. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, volume 1, pages 945–954.

J. Hoffart, M.A. Yosef, I. Bordino, H. Fürstenau,
M. Pinkal, M. Spaniol, B. Taneva, S. Thater, and
G. Weikum. 2011. Robust Disambiguation of Named
Entities in Text. In Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, Edinburgh, Scot-
land, United Kingdom 2011, pages 782–792.

Johannes Hoffart, Stephan Seufert, Dat Ba Nguyen, Mar-
tin Theobald, and Gerhard Weikum. 2012. Kore:

Keyphrase overlap relatedness for entity disambigua-
tion. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM international
conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment, page 545554.

Neil Houlsby and Massimiliano Ciaramita. 2014. A
scalable gibbs sampler for probabilistic entity linking.
In Maarten de Rijke, Tom Kenter, ArjenP. de Vries,
ChengXiang Zhai, Franciska de Jong, Kira Radinsky,
and Katja Hofmann, editors, Advances in Information
Retrieval, volume 8416 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 335–346. Springer International Pub-
lishing.

Andrea Moro, Alessandro Raganato, and Roberto Nav-
igli. 2014. Entity linking meets word sense dis-
ambiguation: a unied approach. Transactions of the
Association of Computational Linguistics, 2:231–244,
May.

L.A. Ratinov, D. Roth, D. Downey, and M. Anderson.
2011. Local and Global Algorithms for Disambigua-
tion to Wikipedia. In The 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Proceedings of the Con-
ference, 19-24 June, 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA,
pages 1375–1384. The Association for Computer Lin-
guistics.


