



















































IHS-RD-Belarus: Identification and Normalization of Disorder Concepts in Clinical Notes


Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015), pages 380–384,
Denver, Colorado, June 4-5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

IHS-RD-Belarus: Identification and Normalization of Disorder 

Concepts in Clinical Notes 

 

Maryna Chernyshevich Vadim Stankevitch 
IHS Inc. / IHS Global Belarus IHS Inc. / IHS Global Belarus 

131 Starovilenskaya St 131 Starovilenskaya St 

220123, Minsk, Belarus 220123, Minsk, Belarus 
{Marina.Chernyshevich}@ihs.com {Vadim.Stankevitch}@ihs.com 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper describes clinical disorder 

recognition and encoding system submit-

ted by IHS R&D Belarus team at the 

SemEval-2015 shared task related to 

analysis of clinical texts. Our system is 

based on IHS Goldfire Linguistic Proces-

sor and uses a rich set of lexical, syntac-

tic and semantic features. The proposed 

system consists of two components: a 

CRF-based approach to recognize disor-

der entities and empirical ranking to en-

code disorders to UMLS CUIs. Evalua-

tion on the test data set showed that our 

system achieved the F-measure of 0.898 

for entity recognition and the F-measure 

of 0.794 for UMLS CUI. The combined 

score for whole task is 0.690 (rank 17 out 

of 40 submissions). 

1 Introduction 

Named entity recognition (NER) is an infor-

mation extraction task where the aim is to identi-

fy mentions of specific types of entities in text. 

This task has been one of the main focuses in the 

biomedical text mining research field, especially 

when applied to the scientific literature. Such 

efforts have led to the development of various 

tools for the recognition of diverse entities, in-

cluding species names, genes and proteins, 

chemicals and drugs, anatomical concepts and 

diseases. These tools use methods based on dic-

tionaries, rules, and machine learning, or a com-

bination of those depending on the specificities 

and requirements of each concept type (Campos 

et al., 2013). After identifying entities occurring 

in texts, it is also relevant to disambiguate those 

entities and associate each occurrence with a 

specific concept, using a univocal identifier from 

a reference database such as Uniprot1 for pro-

teins, or OMIM2 for genetic disorders. This is 

usually performed by matching the identified 

entities  against a knowledge-base, possibly 

evaluating the textual context in which the entity 

occurred to identify the best matching concept. 

 In this paper, we describe a system 

(IHS_RD_Belarus in official results) developed 

to participate in the international shared task    

organized by the Conference on Semantic Evalu-

ation Exercises (SemEval-2015) and focused on 

the analysis of clinical notes. This task is  the 

repetition of task 7 at SemEval-2014 (Pradhan, et 

al., 2014) and aims at the recognition of entities 

belonging to the ‘disorders’ semantic group of 

the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) 

(Bodenreider, 2004) and normalization of these 

entities to a specific UMLS Concept Unique 

Identifier (CUI). Specifically, the task definition 

required that concepts should only be normalized 

to CUIs that could be mapped to the SNOMED 

CT3 terminology. 

2 System description 

2.1 Dataset 

The dataset for Tasks 1 consists of de-identified 

clinical notes of 4 different types (Discharge 

summary, ECG, Echo, Radiology) from MIMIC 

corpus (Lee et al., 2011). The organizer annotat-

ed 298 clinical notes with disorder entities on a 

predefined guideline and then mapped them to 

SNOMED-CT concepts represented by the 

UMLS CUIs. If a disorder entity cannot be found 

in SNOMED-CT, it was marked as “CUI-less”. 

These notes were used as training dataset. The 

unlabelled notes are provided for exploring semi-

supervised and unsupervised methods. 

380



Two types of disorder mentions are annotated: 

consecutive and discontiguous. The discontigu-

ous dirorder mentions consist of multiple tokens 

with some distance between each other, for ex-

ample, “The left atrium is moderately dilated”. 

Table 1 shows the counts of words, annotated 

disorders and unique CUIs in the training dataset. 

 

 Train data 

Documents 298 

Words count 162,511 

Disorder mentions 11,141 

                      consecutive 10,050 

                   discontiguous 1,091 

Unique UMLS CUI 1,355 

CUI-less entities 3,471 
Table 1. Distribution of the training data. 

2.2 Lexicon 

The disorder lexicon was created using the 

UMLS Metathesaurus, where each disorder con-

cept is represented by set of synonymous terms. 

 To satisfy the annotation guidelines, the con-

cept identifiers (CUIs) were restricted to the 11 

recommended disorder semantic types: 

 Congenital Abnormality 

 Acquired Abnormality 

 Injury or Poisoning 

 Pathologic Function 

 Disease or Syndrome 

 Mental or Behavioural Dysfunction 

 Cell or Molecular Dysfunction 

 Experimental Model of Disease 

 Anatomical Abnormality 

 Neoplastic Process 

 Signs and Symptoms 

The disorder lexicon was enriched using au-

tomatically generated lists of synonymous words. 

For this purpose we used 3 techniques: 

 lexical derivations, for example, “optical, 
optically”;  

 synonymous words based on the Leven-
stein distance within a set of synonymous 

terms representing one UMLS disorder 

concept, for example, “hyperchromasia, 

hyperchromatism, hyperchromia”; 

 similar noun phrases suggested by our in-
house autocorrection and autocompletion 

module that indexed UMLS terms, includ-

ing correction of typing errors (“carotic 

artery” = “carotid artery”) and similar 

terms (“tick disease” = “tick-borne dis-

ease”). 

2.3 Evaluation 

Evaluation was to be carried out according to the 

following F-scores: 

 Strict F-score: a predicted mention is con-
sidered a true positive if:  

1. its predicted span is exactly the same as 

for the gold-standard mention; 

2. the predicted CUI is correct. 

The predicted disorder is considered a false 

positive if the span is incorrect or the CUI is in-

correct. 

 Relaxed F-score: a predicted mention is a 
true positive if: 

1. there is any word overlap between the 
predicted mention span and the gold-

standard span (both in the case of con-

tiguous and discontinuous spans);  

2. the predicted CUI is correct. 

The predicted mention is a false positive if the 

span shares no words with the gold-standard 

span or the CUI is incorrect. 

2.4 Disorder identification 

We formulated disorder mention identification as 

a sequence labeling problem at token level and 

used Conditional Random Fields (CRF) (Laffer-

ty, 2001). CRFs have shown empirical successes 

recently in named entity recognition (McCallum 

and Li, 2003), opinion target extraction (Cher-

nyshevich, 2014), noun phrase segmentation 

(Sha and Pereira, 2003). 

To facilitate feature generation for supervised 

CRF learning, sentences were pre-processed with 

IHS Goldfire Linguistic Processor that performs 

the following operations: word splitting, part-of-

speech tagging, parsing, noun phrase extraction, 

semantic role labeling within expanded  Subject-

Action-Object (eSAO)  relations (Todhunter et 

al., 2010). We removed all footers and headers, 

which are associated with the whole document 

and are irrelevant for the task. The notes are de-

identified: the private data, e.g. names, data and 

places, are replaced by placeholders, for exam-

ple, “[**Location**]”. We replaced these 

placeholders with natural language expressions 

to assure correct POS-tagging and parsing.  

Two separate CRF models were trained to 

identify consecutive and discontiguous disorder 

mentions with the same tagging scheme and 

same set of features. 

381



2.4.1 CRF labels 

We conducted several experiments with dif-

ferent tagging conventions and decided to use the 

ILO (Inside-Last-Outside) tagging scheme, 

where tag I represents the beginning and the in-

side token of an entity, L represents the last word 

of entity and O not a member of a disorder struc-

ture. The following is an example of our tagging 

for consecutive and discontiguous disorder men-

tions: 

The/O rhythm/O appears/O to/O be/O atrial/I 

fibrillation/L 

The/O left/I atrium/I is/O moderately/O dilat-

ed/L 

The BIO (Begin-Inside-Outside) tagging 

scheme showed the classification accuracy lower 

by 5.5%. 

2.4.2 Features 

Given a sentence s and a token under considera-

tion wk, we define features over wk and window 

of 5 tokens: wk-2, wk-1, wk, wk+1, wk+2. 

Token: This feature represents the string of 

the token wk. 

Context features: This feature has been used 

with a window of five tokens (the 2 tokens be-

fore and the 2 tokens after the target token). The 

surrounding words usually convey useful infor-

mation about a token which help in predicting 

the correct tag for each token.  

Part of speech: This feature represents the 

POS tag of the token wk. It can provide some 

means of lexical disambiguation and help in de-

termining the boundaries of instances. 

Word letter case feature: This feature in-

cludes one of the three case tags for lowercase, 

uppercase and capitalized words corresponding-

ly. 

Letter n-grams:  3- and 4-letter n-grams start-

ing and ending the token wk. 

Word frequency in out-of-domain corpus: 

we used social media texts as an out-of-domain 

corpus. 

Part of a longer noun phrase:  whether the 

word belongs to the same noun group as the next 

word. 

Semantic category: This feature represents 

the semantic class to which the token wk belongs, 

for example, body part, process, units of meas-

ure, drug, and animal being. We used two 

sources of semantic information: WordNet and 

the UMLS. The UMLS provides a set of seman-

tic groups like anatomic terms, chemical sub-

stances and drugs, devices, disorders, etc. The 

WordNet was used to define semantic category 

of words not found in the UMLS. We selected 

the most representative nodes, for example, 

physical property, human, process etc. and all 

subordinate terms were assumed to belong to the 

appropriate category. 

Document section: This unigram feature as-

signs the id of the section in which the token wk 

belongs. Many clinical notes are divided into 

sections. These section headers provide very use-

ful information, for example, the section “Past 

Medical History” or “Diagnosis” contains a lot 

of disorder mentions, while “Medications” do 

not. We created list of section headers, mapped 

to about 80 different unified names. 

UMLS Features: We performed lookup in the 

disorder lexicon at two levels: word level and 

phrase level.  

 The word-level feature represents the proba-
bility of a separate word to occur in a disor-

der mention. For this purpose, we collected 

all words contained in the UMLS disorders 

and calculated their probabilities of being a 

part of a disorder mention using the TF-IDF 

weighting. The TF of each word in the train-

ing set is calculated as the number of times 

the corresponding token appears in the 

UMLS disorder terminology. The IDF for 

each word is calculated from the number of 

unlabelled notes, which contain the word. 

These weighted metrics show how important 

the word is for disorder identification and 

help to exclude a lot of common words like 

frequent adjectives or conjunctions that often 

appear both in disorder terms and other 

terms. 

 The phrase-level feature marks all phrases 
(with more than 2 words) that match a disor-

der term. 

2.5 Disorder normalization 

We propose a simple sieve-based algorithm that 

applies tiers of string matching for selecting the 

candidates with further candidates ranking.  

2.5.1 Candidates selection 

We applied following string matching rules to 

select candidate UMLS concepts for a disorder 

entity identified on the previous stage. Each rule 

assigns the score of confidence. 

 Exact match: disorder and UMLS con-
cept contain exactly the same extent text, 

excluding modifiers and determiners, with 

the same word order. 

382



 Relaxed match: all informative words 
(excluding preposition, conjunctions, stop 

words etc.) from disorder are included in 

the UMLS concept. 

 Partial match: at least one informative 
word from disorder is included in the 

UMLS concept. 

 Variants match: all possible variants are 
generated for the disorder entity using 

synonyms, corrections and suggestions 

from our in-house autocorrection and au-

tocompletion module and selected candi-

date UMLS concepts by relaxed matching 

rule. 

2.5.2 Candidates ranking 

All found candidate UMLS concepts were 

ranked on basis of a set of empirical parameters: 

 score of match confidence; 

 TF-IDF of the intersecting words; 

 total number of disorder variants in the 
UMLS presenting the same CUI; 

 number of times the UMLS concepts was 
already mentioned in this document; 

 number of occurrences of the UMLS con-
cept in the unlabelled corpus. 

The top ranked UMLS concepts were selected 

as the system’s output. If some concepts have the 

same ranking score, the first one by CUI number 

was selected. 

2.6 Results and error analysis 

The Table 2 summarizes the results separated by 

subtasks, disorder identification and disorder 

normalization, where the first column contains 

results obtained on development corpus and the 

second column shows the results on test corpus. 

 Dev corpus Test corpus 

Disorder identification 
    precision: 0.904 0.940 
    recall: 0.868 0.859 
    F1 measure: 0.886 0.898 
Disorder normalization: 
   accuracy: 0.794 0.794 

Table 2: Separated results of disorder identification 

and normalization. 

Our best performance on task 1 combining the 

disorder identification and normalization sub-

tasks is shown in Table 3. 

 

 Precision Recall F1 measure 

Strict 0.722 0.662 0.690 

Relaxed 0.746 0.684 0.714 

Table 3: Combined result of disorder identification 

and normalization. 

In this work we did not address the problem of 

discontiguous disorder mentions and correctly 

identified only about 10% of all discontiguous 

disorder mentions. Another source of errors are 

the one-, two-letters disorder acronyms, for ex-

ample, “N”, “V”, “BM”, etc. They remain un-

tagged as diseases, as they may also refer to   

other entities, for example, chemicals.  

As for disorder normalization task, the most 

challenging problem is the abbreviation disam-

biguation. The primary reason is a lack of abbre-

viations in UMLS terminology and their high 

ambiguity, for example, “AS” can refer to “An-

gelman Syndrome”, “Aortic Stenosis”, “Alz-

heimer Sclerosis” etc. 

3 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented a clinical analysis 

system designed for participation in Task 1a of 

the SemEval 2015 Task 14 challenge. Our sys-

tem performance was at 0.69 F-measure in the 

strict evaluation context and 0.714 F-measure in 

the relaxed evaluation context, obtaining a mid-

range position. Our disorder recognition system 

presents good precision but performs worse in 

terms of recall, especially in discontiguous men-

tions identification. In order to improve our dis-

order normalization we plan to develop context 

similarity measures and improve the abbreviation 

disambiguation.  

 

References 

Andrew McCallum, Wei Li. Early Results for Named 

Entity Recognition with Conditional Random 

Fields, Feature Induction and Web-Enhanced Lexi-

cons. In the Proceedings of the Seventh Confer-
ence on Natural Language Learning at HLT-

NAACL 2003. 

Campos G., Vazquez A. I., Fernando R. L., K. Y. C., 

and S. Daniel, 2013. Prediction of complex human 

traits using the genomic best linear unbiased pre-

dictor. PLoS Genet. 7. 

James Todhunter, Igor Sovpel and Dzianis Pastano-

hau. System and method for automatic semantic 

labeling of natural language texts. U.S. Patent 8 

583 422, November 12, 2013. 

383



John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pe-
reira. 2001. Conditional Random Fields: Probabil-

istic Models for Segmenting and Labeling Se-

quence Data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth In-

ternational Conference on Machine Learning, 

(ICML-2001). 

Joon Lee, Daniel J. Scott, Mauricio Villarroel, Gari D. 

Clifford, Mohammed Saeed and Roger G. Mark. 

Open-Access MIMIC-II Database for Intensive 

Care Research. In the Proceedings of the 33rd An-

nual International Conference of the IEEE EMBS, 

2011. 

F. Sha and F. Pereira. Shallow parsing with condi-

tional random fields. In the proceedings of Human 

Language Technology/North American chapter of 

the Association for Computational Linguistics an-

nual meeting (HLT/NAACL), 2003. 

Maryna Chernyshevich. IHS R&D Belarus: Cross-

domain extraction of product features using CRF. 

In the Proceedings of the International Workshop 

on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval), 2014. 

Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Medical Lan-

guage System (UMLS): Integrating Biomedical 

Terminology. Nucleic Acids Research, 32:267–

270. 

Sameer Pradhan, Noemie Elhadad, Wendy Chapman, 

Suresh Manandhar and Guergana Savova. 

SemEval-2014 Task 4: Aspect Based Sentiment 

Analysis. In Proceedings of the 8th International 

Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 

2014), Dublin, Ireland. 

384


