



















































Automatic Generation of a Lexical Resource to support Semantic Role Labeling in Portuguese


Proceedings of the Fourth Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2015), pages 216–221,
Denver, Colorado, June 4–5, 2015.

Automatic Generation of a Lexical Resource to support Semantic Role 

Labeling in Portuguese 

 

 

Magali Sanches Duran Sandra Aluísio 
Center for Computational Linguistics (NILC) 

São Paulo University (USP)  

São Carlos-SP, Brazil 

Center for Computational Linguistics (NILC) 

São Paulo University (USP) 

São Carlos-SP, Brazil 
magali.duran@uol.com.br  sandra@icmc.usp.br  

  

  

  

 

Abstract 

This paper reports an approach to automatical-

ly generate a lexical resource to support in-

cremental semantic role labeling annotation in 

Portuguese. The data come from the corpus 

Propbank-Br (Propbank of Brazilian Portu-

guese) and from the lexical resource of Eng-

lish Propbank, as both share the same 

structure.  In order to enable the strategy, we 

added extra annotation to Propbank-Br. This 

approach is part of a previous decision to in-

vert the process of implementing a Propbank 

project, by first annotating a core corpus and 

only then generating a lexical resource to ena-

ble further annotation tasks. The reasoning 

behind such inversion is to explore the task 

empirically before distributing the annotation 

task and to provide simultaneously: 1) a first 

training corpus for SRL in Brazilian Portu-

guese and 2) annotated examples to compose 

a lexical resource to support SRL. The main 

contribution of this paper is to point out to 

what extent linguistic effort may be reduced, 

thereby speeding up the construction of a lexi-

cal resource to support SRL for less resourced 

languages. The corpus Propbank-Br, with the 

extra annotation described herein, is publicly 

available.  

1 Introduction 

The task of semantic role labeling (SRL) consists 

of identifying a predicate (a verb or a predicate 

noun) and its arguments, assigning to each argu-

ment the semantic roles it play in the argumental 

structure (Palmer et al. 2010). For example, in the 

sentence “Parents complain to education depart-

ment about schools constantly switching uni-

forms”, there are two predicates: “complain” and 

“switching”. The argumental structure of “com-

plain” is: “Parents” (agent), “to the education de-

partment” (recipient), “about schools constantly 

switching uniforms” (theme). The argumental 

structure of “switching” is: “schools” (agent); 

“constantly” (time/frequency); “uniforms” (theme). 

There is no consensus regarding an ideal 

set of semantic role labels and, for this reason, the 

first difficult decision in a project of SRL is to 

choose which set to adopt. No matter which set is 

used, it is not always easy to decide which label to 

assign to each argument during the annotation task. 

In order to facilitate such decision, some projects 

of SRL developed lexical resources that predict the 

set of semantic roles required by each predicate. 

Some of such resources define semantic roles for 

verb classes, as Verbnet (Kipper et al. 2006); oth-

ers for semantic frames, as Framenet (Baker et al. 

1998); others define semantic roles for verb senses, 

as Propbank (Palmer et al. 2005) or for predicate 

nouns, as Nombank (Meyers et al, 2004). 

The more detailed and clear is the lexical re-

source, the easier the decision about which role 

label to assign during a manual annotation task. 

This is very important, because when we ease SRL 

annotation, we increase the likelihood of obtaining 

a high inter-annotator agreement and, consequent-

ly, the likelihood of obtaining a good precision for 

machine learning classifiers for the task.  

216



Among the lexical resources available for SRL 

in English, we consider that of Propbank1 the best 

one for supporting a distributed task of SRL anno-

tation. From hereafter, we will refer to such lexical 

resource simply as Propbank, regardless the fact 

that Propbank encompass both the lexical resource 

and the annotated corpus.  

Propbank does not require any linguistic exper-

tise from the annotators and, instead of using role 

labels as “agent” and “patient”, it uses a small set 

of numbered arguments, like Arg0 (for agents, 

causers or experiencers) and Arg1 (for patients and 

themes), which are described differently for each 

verb sense. For example, the verb sense “give.01” 

predicts an Arg0: “giver”, an Arg1: “thing given” 

and an Arg2: “entity given to”. This kind of de-

scription renders the roles very clear for annota-

tors, regardless their background on semantic role 

labels.  

Propbank has 56492 frame files, which are files 

containing (a) simple and complex predicates asso-

ciated to a given verb; (b) a coarse distinction of 

the verb senses; (c) the set of semantic roles of 

each sense of a verb (rolesets) and (d) several an-

notated examples to show how the semantic roles 

may occur in real texts.  

In practice, the annotator consults this kind of 

lexical resource while performing the annotation 

task. In the frame file of the verb being annotated, 

he looks for the sense that best suits the instance of 

annotation in question. Once identified the verb 

sense, the annotator needs to identify the constitu-

ents that play the semantic roles predicted for that 

verb sense, assigning them the respective role la-

bels.  

In short, the lexical resource of verbal frame 

files works as a repository of knowledge for SRL, 

accessible during the annotation task, that reduces 

the learning curve of SRL and facilitates the as-

signment of annotation tasks to several annotators. 

Provided that every instance receives a double-

blind annotation, the quality of the annotation may 

be controlled through inter-annotator agreement. 

Instances with disagreement may be discarded or 

receive linguists’ adjudication. This kind of lexical 

resource, therefore, is an essential part of the infra-

                                                           
1 http://verbs.colorado.edu/~mpalmer/projects/ace.html 
2 As informed in the site of the Verb-Index, updated on 

08/01/2013. 

structure to produce large training corpus for SRL 

classifiers.  

It is not a simple task to construct a lexical re-

source, equivalent to Propbank, to support SRL in 

another language. Everyone that consults regularly 

the Unified Verb-Index3, the system that gives ac-

cess to Propbank’s frame files, may observe that 

Propbank has been improved over the years, incor-

porating evidence provided by continuous annota-

tion experience. In a project with limited budget 

and time, it is natural to think about reusing exist-

ing resources in order to maximize the results. In 

this paper, we report the strategies used to build a 

lexical resource to support SRL in Portuguese 

(hereafter referred as Verbo-Brasil), profiting from 

the English resource developed within the Prop-

bank project and of annotated instances of the cor-

pus Propbank-Br (Duran and Aluísio, 2012). 

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-

lows. Section 2 explains the strategies used in min-

imizing the efforts towards the construction of 

frame files; Section 3 briefly addresses an extrinsic 

evaluation of Verbo-Brasil obtained from a par-

ticular SRL annotation task. Finally, in Section 4, 

we present our conclusions and future work. 

2 Methodology 

Initially, we intended to construct Verbo-Brasil by 

manually creating frame files for the 1000 most 

frequent verbs in Portuguese, using the editor of 

frame files Cornerstone (Choi et. al. 2010), devel-

oped within the Propbank project. We envisaged, 

from the beginning, the possibility of reusing anno-

tated instances of the corpus Propbank-Br, de-

scribed in the Subsection 2.1, as examples to 

illustrate verb senses. However, when we started 

the task, we realized it was possible to automatical-

ly construct frame files, reducing the effort re-

quired for the task. Automatization entailed the use 

of two strategies. The first strategy constituted the 

creation of frame files using the existing data from 

both the corpus of the earlier version of Propbank-

Br and the lexical repository of the English Prop-

bank plus some new data, which was incorporated 

for this purpose in an updated version of Propbank-

Br; this strategy is described in the Subsection 2.2.  

In the second strategy, described in Subsection 2.3, 

we duplicated the structure of the framefiles from 

                                                           
3 http://verbs.colorado.edu/verb-index/ 

217



the English Propbank to Propbank-Br for every 

verb which, in English, possessed a single sense. 

2.1 The corpus Propbank-Br 

The corpus Propbank-Br (Duran and Aluisio, 

2012) was annotated by a sole linguist, aiming to 

provide a training corpus for SRL. During this pro-

cess, we investigated to which extent the Propbank 

guidelines were reusable for undertaking an analo-

gous approach to SRL in Portuguese. We ascer-

tained the need of some adjustments in the 

guidelines in order to deal with differences be-

tween the Portuguese and English languages, as 

well as the differences between the parser outputs 

of the respective treebanks. As there was no lexical 

resource to support the annotation task, the sense 

distinction was made simultaneously to the annota-

tion task, taking as base the guidelines of Propbank 
4 5.  

The annotation was over the Brazilian portion of 

Bosque corpus (Afonso et. al. 2002), containing 

4213 sentences. Bosque corpus is a treebank anno-

tated by the parser Palavras (Bick, 2000) and re-

vised by linguists. The sentences produced 6142 

instances for annotation. Two SRL classifiers were 

trained on the resulting corpus. One of them (Alva-

Manchego and Rosa, 2012) adopted a semi-

supervised approach and obtained an F-Measure of 

82.3%; the other (Fonseca and Rosa, 2013) adopt-

ed a neural architecture to label semantic argu-
ments, disregarding the syntactic layer of 

annotation, and obtained an F-Measure of 62.82%.  

2.2 Reusing existing data from Propbank-Br 
and English Propbank 

To enable this strategy, it was necessary to add 

previously some extra data in the corpus Prop-

bank-Br, a manual task that was by far quicker 

than constructing the frame files from scratch. 

First, we defined which fields of the frame file 

could be filled in with information from English 

Propbank, which ones could be filled in with in-

formation from Propbank-Br and which fields 

would require new information, not available in 

any one of the existing resources. The idea was to 

                                                           
4http://verbs.colorado.edu/~mpalmer/projects/ace/PBguideline

s.pdf 
5 http://verbs.colorado.edu/~mpalmer/projects/ace/ Fram-

ingGuidelines.pdf 

add the extra information required to the corpus 

Propbank-Br. Aiming this, we created six “word 

tags” in corpus Propbank-Br, using the same anno-

tation tool used to annotate the original corpus 

(SALTO – Burchardt et al. 2006), as may be seen 

in Fig.1. 

 
Figure 1. Extra annotation inserted in Propbank-Br. 

 

The word tags are: 

(1) PB-roleset: an equivalent roleset-id in 

Propbank, was used as field key to bring, 

from Propbank, the semantic roles, the se-

mantic roles description, the related Verb-

net classes and the Verbnet roles to the 

framefiles (Fig. 2); 

(2) t-glosa: field that was filled in only in the 

first occurrence of a verb sense; it contains 

a brief description or a synonym of this 

sense of the verb to distinguish it from the 

other possible senses. 

(3) Nota (note): field used for observations re-

garding a roleset contained within a verb’s 

framefile when further clarification is 

thought to be helpful to the annotator; 

(4) Predicate_lemma: field, filled in only in 

the first occurrence of a verb sense, con-

taining the verb lemma or the name of a 

complex predicate (phrasal verb) when ap-

plicable; 

(5) Sentido (sense): field that indicates which 

verb sense is the one being used in the sen-

tence in question, also referred as roleset 

id, and is filled in for all instances. Once 

classified, the sentences can be subse-

quently added as examples of their respec-

218



tive verb sense within the appropriate 

frame file; 

(6) Nota_do_exemplo (example note): field 

used to convey information about a given 

example. 

 
Figure 2. Data brought from Propbank using the 

roleset id as field key. 

 

Once we had created the word tags in the cor-

pus, we undertook the annotation task to fill in 

them, as showed in the Fig.1. The greater the num-

ber of senses of a verb (polysemy), the greater was 

the difficulty to elect an English equivalent in Eng-

lish Propbank to fill in the word tag “PB_roleset”. 

We realized that highly polysemous verbs would 

demand special attention in the next phase of the 

process, that is, during the revision of frame files 

automatically generated.  

The annotation task provided the identification 

of 1453 verb senses in Portuguese for 1060 verb 

lemmas (an average of 1.37 senses per lemma). 

From the 1060 verb lemmas annotated in the cor-

pus, 80% present only one sense, 13% present two 

senses; 3% present three senses and 4% present 

four or more senses. Only 109 of the 1453 senses 

identified in Portuguese did not have an equivalent 

verb sense in English identified in Propbank. Con-

sequently, as the frame files of such 109 verbs 

could not obtain the fields brought from Propbank 

automatically, they required manual edition.  

Using the XML frame file structure of Prop-

bank, we defined the automatic generation of 

frame files, combining data from Propbank-Br and 

from Propbank, as shown in Fig.3. In the frame file 

structure, we used the field called “framnet” 

(aimed to store mappings to Framenet) for the in-

formation brought from the word tag “PB-roleset”, 

that is, the equivalent roleset id in the English 

Propbank. The Propbank roleset id was the field 

key to access and bring data from the respective 

English frame file.  

 
Figure 3. Frame file combining data from Propbank-Br 

and data brought from Propbank 

The strategy succeeded, and we achieved 1060 

frame files with 1453 verb senses and 6142 anno-

tated examples. After the generation, we began the 

revision of frame files with the most frequent 

verbs, translating the description of semantic roles, 

as may be seen in Fig.4. Currently, 541 frame files 

are fully revised.  
 

  
Figure 4. Frame file that combines information from 

corpus Propbank-Br and from Propbank’s equivalent 

roleset. 

2.3 Extension of the lexical resource using 
monosemous verbs  

During the task of filling in the word tags in the 

corpus Propbank-Br, we observed that verbs pre-

senting a unique sense (monosemous verbs) were 

219



the easiest to link to an English verb sense in Prop-

bank and almost always the equivalent verb sense 

was the unique sense of the respective frame file. 

This led us to hypothetize that monosemous verbs 

in Portuguese, would probably correspond to mon-

osemous verbs in English and vice-versa, whenev-

er an equivalent verb exists. 

On that basis, we decided to extend our resource 

taking as the start point the frame files that have a 

single verb sense in English Propbank. We identi-

fied 3737 English frame files that met such condi-

tion. We then translated only the verb lemmas of 

such frame files. Translation was executed auto-

matically using Google translator and revised 

manually. We chose Google translator because we 

needed to translate at once 3737 out-of-context 

verb lemmas in a quickly and uncomplicated man-

ner. It would be ideal if Google translator returned 

the word class of the results, thus allowing us to 

filter the verbs (we would only have obtained such 

result if we had translated the verbs one-by-one). 

For several verbs, the automatic translation pro-

vided no output. Among the output words in Por-

tuguese, there were several nouns, many of which 

do not correspond to any verb in Portuguese (eg. 

“to hangar”, “to shark”, “to tassle”). We then re-

vised the translation, providing better equivalents 

when necessary and marking an “N” for those 

translated lexical items that were not verbs in Por-

tuguese. After eliminating: (1) repetitions of trans-

lated verbs (two or more verbs translated into a 

same verb in Portuguese) and (2) verbs that we 

already had in our database, we obtained 1538 new 

verbs to extend our resource.  

The next step was to duplicate the respective 

English frame files, using the name of the verb in 

Portuguese to substitute the name of the English 

verb in the fields “roleset id” and “predicate lem-

ma”. Subsequently, we replaced the example sen-

tences in English by ones in Portuguese, extracted 

from corpus PLN-Br (Bruckschen et al., 2008). 

Lastly, to complete these new frame files, we are 

now annotating the examples with semantic role 

labels. Cornerstone frame files editor is being used 

for this task.  

3 Evaluation 

The two strategies we reported to automatically 

generate Portuguese frame files gave us 2598 

framefiles. The 541 frame files already revised 

correspond to the verbs with frequency above 1000 

in the corpus PLN-Br, which include the most pol-

ysemous verbs in Portuguese. Such verbs were 

target of a double-blind annotation task of 8345 

instances extracted from the same corpus. The an-

notation task has just been accomplished and will 

be fully reported in a later date; the Kappa inter 

annotator agreement (Carletta, 1996) for verb 

sense identification was 0.93.  

This annotation task gave us feedback to evalu-

ate and improve the respective frame files. Among 

the actions taken during the annotation task we can 

cite: adding new senses identified in the corpus; 

merging or splitting senses for verbs that presented 

low inter-annotator agreement; including new ex-

amples to better illustrate a verb sense.  

4 Concluding Remarks and Future work 

The approach we adopted to build a Propbank-like 

lexical resource to support SRL in Brazilian Portu-

guese may be of use for other researchers working 

on under-represented languages and with a limited 

budget.  

The 541 already revised frame files were used in 

a double-blind annotation SRL task that obtained a 

Kappa inter-annotator agreement for sense distinc-

tion of 0.93. 

In the future, we plan to use Verbnet classes, an 

information brought from the equivalent verb sense 

in Propbank, to find in Verbnet-Br (Scarton et al., 

2014) verb senses that are not in Verbo-Brasil. 

As soon as we accomplish the revision of the 

frame files, we will make Verbo-Brasil publicly 

available. The new version of the corpus Prop-

bank-Br, with the extra annotation described in this 

paper is now available for download at 

nilc.icmc.usp.br/portlex/index.php/en/downloadsin

gl. 

Acknowledgments 

Part of the results presented in this paper were ob-

tained through research activity in the project enti-

tled “Semantic Processing of Texts in Brazilian 

Portuguese”, sponsored by Samsung Eletrônica da 

Amazônia Ltda, under the terms of Brazilian fed-

eral law number 8.248/91. We also thank financial 

support from FAPESP and CAPES, process num-

ber 151/2013 (Portal de Min@s project).  

 

220



References  

Afonso S. ; Bick, E. ; Haber, E. ; Santos, D. (2002) Flo-

resta sintá(c)tica: a treebank for Portuguese. Procee-

dings of LREC 2002. 

Alva Manchego, F. E.; Rosa, J. L. G. (2012). Semantic 

Role Labeling for Brazilian Portuguese: A Bench-

mark. In IBERAMIA 2012, Lecture Notes in Artifici-

al Intelligence, v. 7637 p. 481–490. Springer.  

Baker, C.F.; Fillmore, C. J.; Lowe. J. B. (1998).The 

Berkeley FrameNet Project. Proceedings of Compu-

tational Linguistics 1998 Conference.  

Bick, E. (2000). The Parsing System Palavras Automat-

ic Grammatical Analysis of Portuguese in a Con-

straint Grammar Framework. Aarhus, Denmark, 

Aarhus University Press. 

Bruckschen, M., Muniz, F., Souza, J. G. C., Fuchs, J. T., 

Infante, K., Muniz, M., Gonçalves, P. N., Vieira, R.; 

Aluísio, S. M. (2008) “Anotação Linguística em 

XML do Corpus PLN-BR”. NILC-TR-09-08, 39 p. 

Burchardt, A.; Erk, K.; Frank, A.; Kowalski, A.; Pado, 

S. (2006) SALTO - A Versatile Multi-Level Annota-

tion Tool. Proceedings of LREC 2006.  

Carletta, Jean. (1996) Assessing agreement on classifi-

cation tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational Lin-

guistics, 22(2), pp. 249–254. 

Choi, J. D.; Bonial, C.; Palmer, M. (2010) Propbank 

Frameset Annotation Guidelines Using a Dedicated 

Editor, Cornerstone. Proceedings of LREC-2010.  

Duran, M. S.; Aluísio, S. M. (2012). Propbank-Br: a 

Brazilian Treebank annotated with semantic role la-

bels. Proceedings of LREC 2012, pp. 1862-1867. 

Fonseca, E. R.; Rosa, J. L. G. (2013) A Two-Step Con-

volutional Neural Network Approach for Semantic 

Role Labeling. Proceedings of IJCNN 2013 Interna-

tional Joint Conference on Neural Networks.  

Kipper,K.; Korhonen, Anna; Ryant, N.; Palmer, M. 

(2006). Extensive Classifications of English verbs. 

Proceedings of the 12th EURALEX International 

Congress. Turin, Italy.   

Meyers, A.; Reeves, R.; Macleod, C.; Szekely, R.; Ziel-

inska, V.; Young, B.; Grishman, R. (2004), The 

NomBank Project: An Interim Report. Proceedings. 

of HLT-EACL Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Anno-

tation. 

Palmer, M.; Gildea, D.; Kingsbury, P. (2005). The 

Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus of Semantic 

Roles. Computational Linguistics, 31:1, pp. 71-105. 

Palmer, M.; Gildea, D.; Xue, N. (2010). Semantic Role 

Labeling. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language 

Technology Series, ed. Graeme Hirst, Mogan & 

Claypoole.   

Scarton, C. ; Duran, M. S.; Aluísio, S. M. (2014) Using 

Cross-linguistic Knowledge to Build VerbNet-Style 

Lexicons: Results for a (Brazilian) Portuguese Verb-

Net. Proceedings of the International Conference on 

Computational Processing of Portuguese (PROPOR 

2014). Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 2014. v. 1. p. 

153-164. 

 

221


