



















































NTNU: An Unsupervised Knowledge Approach for Taxonomy Extraction


Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015), pages 938–943,
Denver, Colorado, June 4-5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

NTNU: An Unsupervised Knowledge Approach for Taxonomy Extrac-
tion 

Bamfa Ceesay 
Department of Computer Science and 

Information Engineering 
National Taiwan Normal University 
No. 88, Tingz Chou Road, Section 4, 

Taipei 116, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
bmfceesay@csie.ntnu.edu.tw 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Wen Juan Hou 
Department of Computer Science and 

Information Engineering 
National Taiwan Normal University 
No. 88, Tingz Chou Road, Section 4, 

Taipei 116, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
emilyhou@csie.ntnu.edu.tw 

 

Abstract 

Taxonomy structures are important tools in 
the science of classification of things or 
concepts, including the principles that un-
derlie such classification. This paper pre-
sents an approach to the problem of 
taxonomy construction from texts focusing 
on the hyponym-hypernym relation between 
two terms. Given a set of terms in a particu-
lar domain, the approach in this study uses 
Wikipedia and WordNet as knowledge 
sources and applies the information extrac-
tion methods to analyze and establish the 
hyponym-hypernym relationship between 
two terms.  Our system is ranked fourth 
among the participating systems in 
SemEval-2015 task 17. 

1 Introduction 

Taxonomies are essential tools for many Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) applications and the 
backbone of many structured knowledge re-
sources. Taxonomies specific to a domain are 
becoming indispensable to a growing number of 
applications (Velardi et al., 2013). Several state-
of-the-art approaches already exist to extract tax-
onomies to characterize the domains of interest 
from the corpus using the information extraction 
techniques. Recently, attention has been devoted 
to inducing the taxonomy from a set of keyword 
phrases instead of from a text corpus (Liu et al., 
2012). Such approaches enrich the set of key-

word phrases by aggregating search results for 
each keyword phrase into a text corpus to over-
come the lack of explicit relationships between 
keyword phrases from which the taxonomy can 
be induced. 

This approach faces a key challenge of ex-
tracting explicit relationships among keyword 
phrases. However, semantic relatedness between 
concepts in a domain is an important clue to ex-
tracting their taxonomy relationships. An im-
portant contribution in relation to this is reported 
by Gabrilovich et al. (2007) that present an ex-
plicit semantic analysis using the natural con-
cepts and propose a uniform method of 
computing relatedness of both individual concept 
and arbitrarily long text fragments. Lexical data-
bases such as WordNet (Miller, 1995) encode 
relations between words such as synonymy and 
hypernymy. Quite a few metrics have been de-
fined that compute relatedness using various 
properties of the underlying graph structures of 
these resources. The obvious drawback of this 
approach is that the creation of lexical resources 
requires the lexicographic expertise as well as a 
lot of time and effort, and consequently such re-
sources cover only a small fragment of the lan-
guage lexicon. Specifically, such the resources 
contain few proper names, neologisms, slang, 
and domain-specific technical terms. Further-
more, these resources have strong lexical orienta-
tion and mainly contain information about 
individual words but little world knowledge in 
general. 

938



With the advent of new information sources, 
many new methods and ideas are developed for 
the large scale information extraction taking ad-
vantages of huge amounts of unstructured availa-
ble resources. Barbu and Poesio (2009) propose a 
novel method for acquisition of knowledge for 
taxonomies of concepts from the raw Wikipedia 
text. Their approach uses the learning process to 
derive concept hierarchies from WordNet and 
maps them to Wikipedia pages for extraction of 
appropriate knowledge. Most state-of-the-art ap-
proaches for the domain-specific taxonomy in-
duction use the text corpus as its input and some 
information extraction methods to extract onto-
logical relationships from the text corpus, and 
finally apply the relationships to build the taxon-
omy. Other automatic approaches to taxonomy 
construction from texts include a statistical meth-
od to compare the syntactic context of terms for 
taxonomic relations identification (Tuan et al., 
2014). 

There have been a number of handcrafted, 
well-structured taxonomies publicly available 
online, including WordNet (Miller, 1995). How-
ever, such taxonomies are also not perfect since 
human experts are liable to miss some relevant 
terms. 

In this study, we consider the challenging 
problem of deriving taxonomies of a set of con-
cepts under a specific domain of interest. Consid-
er for illustration, the domain vehicle containing 
concepts such as car, bicycle, Toyota, automo-
bile, bus, Toyota_cambire, cruiser and Motorcy-
cle. Establishing hyponym-hypernym 
relationships among concepts is a difficult task if 
no other information is provided. We propose an 
approach to the taxonomy extraction task in 
SemEval-2015 (Bordea et al., 2015) with the fol-
lowing contributions: 

 
 To derive the statistical information 

about individual concepts in a given do-
main, the study uses WordNet and Wik-
ipedia to find the definition for the 
concept. 

 Using the definitions of concepts, the sta-
tistical information derived from these 
definitions is used to determine concept 
relationships and to represent the con-

cepts in a domain with a Bayesian Rose 
Tree (BRT). 

 The study finally extracts taxonomies for 
domain concepts using the BRT tree and 
WordNet type binary relations.  

 
Bayesian hierarchical clustering algorithm 

(BRT) is used to cluster concepts having hypo-
nym-hypernym relationships (Blundell et al., 
2012). Figure 1 presents our level approach to 
constructing the taxonomy for the domain con-
cepts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1. Approach to Taxonomy Extraction. 
 

In Figure 1, resources WordNet and Wikipe-
dia are first used to help the extraction of the def-
initions of the concepts. Then, information 
extracted from WordNet sense and Wikipedia 
categories are utilized to build the concept binary 
trees. With the concept binary trees, the system 
can construct the BRT tree and furthermore gen-
erate the relationships in the taxonomy for the 
concepts. Details in each step are described in the 
following sections. 

2 Concept Definition and Bayesian Ross 
Tree 

 
Definitions for describing concepts can be ex-
tracted from a variety of sources: dictionaries, 

WordNet Sense Wikipedia 
Categories 

Concept Binary 
Trees 

BRT Trees 
Rela-

tionship 

939



databases, corpora, web directories and others. 
Wikipedia and WordNet have drawn attentions 
on derivation of concepts for taxonomy construc-
tion (Barbu and Poesio, 2009; Song et al., 2011) 
and the syntactic conceptual taxonomy (Tuan et 
al. 2014). 

In this study, to generate definitions for con-
cepts and map concepts and keywords in defini-
tions to a BRT tree for taxonomy extraction, we 
follow the steps below: 

 First, given a concept, we use WordNet 
and Wikipedia to derive its definitions. In 
addition, the related WordNet synset and 
Wikipedia category are extracted for the 
taxonomy induction. 

 Using the Wikipedia categories that de-
scribe the corresponding concept article, 
the WordNet sense, and the WordNet 
hyponym tree from the first step, the 
study uses a binary tree to represent each 
concept in the given domain. The left 
node represents the set of terms consid-
ered to be hypernyms and the right node 
represents the set of terms considered to 
be hyponyms. 

Applying the above steps, the binary tree rep-
resentation of concepts in the given domain is 
used to construct the BRT tree for the taxonomy 
construction. One example of the BRT tree is 
shown in Figure 2 as below. 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 2. BRT Tree for a Term “Alienism,” in Sci-
ence Domain. 
 

Figure 2 illustrates the concept of BRT tree 
for a domain term, “alienism.” Each node repre-
sents a hypernym of the child node. For example, 
“psychiatry” is the hypernym of “alienism,” and 
“therapy” is the hypernym of “psychiatry” and 
“psychopathology” respectively. 

 

3 Concept Binary Tree Construction 

This study defines a set of concepts derived from 
the Wikipedia category structure, a set of terms 
in the WordNet hypernym sense, whyp, and a set 
of terms in the WordNet hyponym, whypo, for a 
given concept in the domain.1 For the set of terms 
in the Wikipedia category, a syntax-based meth-
od is employed by referencing the research of 
Tuan et al. (2014) to derive the taxonomy struc-
ture for the category terms. In our case of study, 
is_a relationship is an identification of the hyper-
nym and hyponym relationship between terms in 
the category set. That is, “X is_a Y” is translated 
as “X is a hyponym of Y.” However, this only 
shows a relationship among terms in the category 
set. To identify the hypernym-hyponym relation-
ship between the domain concept and the terms 
in the category, the study uses the semantic relat-
edness approach proposed in the research of Wu 
et al. (2009). Finally, set operations are used to 
collect hypernyms and hyponyms and we use 
these features to construct a binary tree with the 
domain concept as the root, if no category term is 
a hypernym of domain concept. If there exists a 
category term that is a hypernym of the domain 
concept, the term becomes the root. For a given 
concept in the domain, a set of hypernym, hyper, 
and a set of hyponym, hypo are defined. After 
deriving the category taxonomy, wt, for Wikipe-
dia categories, the following operations are de-
fined:  
 

hyper = whyper ∩ wt.hypernym (1) 
 

hypo = whypo ∩ wt.hyponym (2) 

                                                        
1Wikipedia can be downloaded at 
http://downlaod.wikimedia.org. This study uses the English 
Wikipedia database dump 

Psychopathology 
 

Alienism 
 

Alienism 
 

Psychological medicine 
 Alienism 

 

Prosthetics 
 

Medicine 
 

Psychiatry 

Therapy 
 

Medical specialty 

Alienism 

940



 
where wt.hypernym represents all hypernym 
terms connected to the category taxonomy wt and 
wt.hyponym represents all hyponym terms con-
nected to the category taxonomy wt. 

The multiple binary trees are used to construct 
BRT trees for the taxonomy extraction. However, 
it is worth to note that a cascading binary tree can 
be used instead of a BRT tree. For efficiency and 
computational purposes, a BRT tree is used, 
since a concept hypernym (parent node) can have 
more than two hyponyms (child node). The ob-
jective is to find relatedness between root con-
cepts and the assigned parent node to the root 
concept of the binary tree. Figure 3 shows an il-
lustration presenting concepts in our example 
domain in Section 3. 

 
Figure 3. An Illustration of Concept Representation. 

4 Extraction of Taxonomy Relationships 

To extract the hypernym-hyponym relation be-
tween concepts, our approach uses the taxonomy 
de-scribed in Section 3. The concepts from the 
given domain are replaced by their concept IDs 
to distinguish them from the rest of the concepts 
in the BRT tree. The root of the BRT tree is an 
empty node, label entity. We use the Breath First 
Traversal algorithm to extract concepts and their 
corresponding hyponyms from the BRT tree.2 

                                                        
2BFT is efficient in traversing a tree level by level and from 
left to right http://en.wikipedia.org/wikiTree_traversal  

For a given concept in the BRT tree, we con-
sider the concepts in the immediate child nodes, 
and extract the corresponding hypernyms and the 
hyponyms. Consequently, we can build the rela-
tionships of hypernyms and hyponyms for the 
concept. 

5 Evaluation Matrix and Result 

Our system is ranked fourth among the compara-
tive evaluation final ranking of the task partici-
pant.3 The table below shows the performance of 
participants’ system based on average precision 
(Avg. P), recall (Avg. R), and average F-score 
measure (Avg. F) for the taxonomy extraction.   
 

Participant Rank Avg. P Avg. R Avg. F 
INRIASAC 1 0.1721 0.4279 0.2427 
LT3 2 0.3612 0.6307 0.3886 
ntnu 4 0.1754 0.2756 0.2075 
QASSIT 5 0.1563 0.1588 0.1575 
TALNUPF 6 0.0720 0.1165 0.0798 
USAARWLV 3 0.2014 0.3139 0.2377 

 
Table 1. Comparative evaluation results for SemEval-
2015 Task 17, showing our system result in bold let-
ters.  
 

The evaluation tool measures a system-
generated taxonomy against the gold standard 
taxonomy by comparing the following items:4 

 
 The overall structure of the taxonomy 

against a gold standard, with an approach 
used for comparing hierarchical clusters. 

 Structural measures. 
 Manual quality assessment of novel edg-

es.  
In comparison against the gold standard data, 

the system’s average performance under certain 
domain terms (chemical (CH), equipment (EQ), 
food and science (SC) domains) with respect to 
vertices in common, edge coverage and ratio of 
novel edges are shown in the table below. 

                                                        
3 
http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2015/task17/index.php?id=evalua-
tion   
4 
http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2015/task17/index.php?id=evalua-
tion   

Entity

Automobile

Motocycle

Cruiser

Car

Toyota

Toyota_cambire

Bus Bicycle

941



 
Features CH EQ Food SC 

Vertices in 
coverage 

0.3149 0.3144 0.3165 0.4390 

Edge cover-
age 

0.2803 0.2331 0.2603 0.3287 

Ratio of 
Novel edges 

0.4198 1.3419 1.0264 0.8584 

 
Table 2. System’s comparison against gold standard 
data. 

In the table, the feature “vertices in coverage” 
represent the ratio of number of vertices in com-
mon with the gold standard taxonomy to the 
number of the gold standard vertices. The feature 
“edge coverage” is the fraction of number of 
edges in common with the gold standard over the 
number of edges in the gold standard. The ration 
of the product of the number of taxonomy edges 
and the number of edges in common with the 
gold standard to the number of gold standard 
edges is represented by “Ratio of Novel edges” in 
the result in Table 2. 

From Table 2, it can be observed that, the sys-
tem has the best and the worst performance in 
taxonomies for the science and equipment do-
mains respectively. The bases of these differ-
ences in the system’s performance are its 
precision for individual domain against its gold 
standard. For instance, from 452 vertices for the 
gold standard science domain from the taxonomy 
of fields and their subfields, the system was able 
to extract 338 vertices. Furthermore, the system’s 
cumulative measure of the similarity against the 
gold standard is affected by the precision rate. 
For instance, in the worst performance for the 
gold standard domain of material handling 
equipment combined with IS-A relations from 
WiBi (Flati et al., 2014), our system has a preci-
sion of 1.61% as shown in the evaluation result5 
while SC has good results in edge and vertex re-
trieval due to the good cumulative results. 

6 Conclusion 

 
In this paper, we present an approach for the un-
supervised knowledge extraction for taxonomies 

                                                        
5 http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2015/task17/index.php?id=evalu-
ation 

of concepts using WordNet and Wikipedia as the 
sources of information. We first induce the con-
struction of binary tree structures for each term in 
the domain using the extracted hypernym and 
hyponym. From the set of binary trees, we at-
tempt to construct a BRT tree for the taxonomy 
extraction.  

We regard this work as initial, as there is 
some improvement space to be made as well as 
many related areas to look into. First, in any fu-
ture work we will investigate what better evalua-
tion framework we can propose for the system. 
Second, we would like to give more attention to 
optimize the system result to a more formalized 
taxonomy. Third, we would like to include more 
concepts of relatedness extraction to obtain the 
stronger features. 

Acknowledgements. Research of this paper was 
partially supported by Ministry of Science and 
Technology, Taiwan, under the contract MOST 
103-2221-E-003-014. 

References 

Barbu, Eduard and Poesio, Massimo. (2009). 
Unsupervised Knowledge Extraction for 
Taxonomies of Concepts from Wikipedia. 
RANLP-2009, pp. 28-32. Borovets, Bulgaria. 

Blundell, Charles, Teh, Yee Whye, and Heller, 
Katherine A. (2012). Bayesian Rose Trees. 
DBLP, abs/1203.3468.  

Bordea, Georgeta, Buitelaar, Paul, Faralli, Stefano, 
and Navigli, Roberto. (2015). Semeval-2015 
task 17: Taxonomy Extraction Evaluation 
(TExEval). Proceedings of the 9th 
International Workshop on Semantic 
Evaluation.  

Flati, Tiziano, Vannella, Daniele, Pasini, Tommaso, 
and Navigli Roberto. (2014). Two Is Bigger 
(and Better) Than One: the Wikipedia Bitaxon-
omy Project. ACL 2014, Baltimore, Maryland, 
USA June 22-27, 2014. 

Gabrilovich, Evgeniy and Markovitch, Shaul. 
(2007). Computing Semantic Relatedness 
Using Wikipedia-based Explicit Semantic 
Analysis. IJCAI-07, pp. 1606-1611.  

Liu, Xueqing, Song, Yangqiu, Liu, Shixia, and 
Wang, Haixun. (2012). Automatic Taxonomy 
Construction from Keywords. ACM.  

Miller, George A. (1995). WordNet: A Lexical 
Database for English. Communications of the 
ACM, 38(11), 39-41.  

942



Song, Yangqiu, Wang, Haixun, Wang, Zhongyuan, 
Li, Hongsong, and Chen, Weizhu. (2011). 
Short Text Conceptualization Using a 
Probabilistic Knowledgebase. Proceedings of 
the Twenty-Second international joint 
conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 3, pp. 
2330-2336, AAAI Press 

Tuan, Luu Anh, Kim, Jung-jae, and Kiong, Ng See. 
(2014). Taxonomy Construction Using 
Syntactic Contextual Evidence. EMNLP-2104, 
pp. 810-819.  

Velardi, Paola, Faralli, Stefano, and Navigli 
Roberto. (2013). OntoLearn Reloaded: A 
Graph-Based Algorithm for Taxonomy 
Induction. Computational Linguistics, 39(3), 
665-707.  

Wu, Fang, Lu, Zhao, Yan, Yu, and Gu, Junzhong. 
(2009). Measuring Taxonomic Relationships in 
Ontologies Using Lexical Semantic 
Relatedness.  ICADIWT'09. Second 
International Conference on the. IEEE, 2009, 
pp. 784-789.  

943


