



















































TMUNSW: Identification of Disorders and Normalization to SNOMED-CT Terminology in Unstructured Clinical Notes


Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015), pages 394–398,
Denver, Colorado, June 4-5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

TMUNSW: Identification of disorders and normalization to 

SNOMED-CT terminology in unstructured clinical notes  

 

Jitendra Jonnagaddalaa,b,c     Siaw-Teng Liaw*,a     Pradeep Rayb    

Manish Kumarc   
School of Public Health and Community Medicine a, 

Asia-Pacific Ubiquitous Healthcare Research Centre b, 

Prince of Wales Clinical School c 

University of New South Wales 

Sydney 2031, Australia 
{Z3339253, siaw, p.ray, manish.kumar}@unsw.edu.au 

 

Hong-Jie Dai* 

Graduate Institute of Biomedical Informatics, College of Medical Science and 

Technology 

Taipei Medical University 

Taipei City 110, Taiwan 
hjdai@tmu.edu.tw 

 

Abstract 

Unstructured clinical notes are rich sources 

for valuable patient information. Information 

extraction techniques can be employed to 

extract this valuable information, which in 

turn can be used to discover new knowledge. 

Named entity recognition and normalization 

are the basic tasks involved in information 

extraction. In this paper, identification of 

disorder named entities and the mapping of 

identified disorder entities to SNOMED-CT 

terminology using UMLS Metathesaurus is 

presented. A supervised linear chain 

conditional random field model based on sets 

of features to predict disorder mentions is 

used in conjunction with MetaMap to 

identify and normalize disorders. Error 

analysis conclude that recall of the developed 

system can be significantly increased by 

adding more features during model 

development and also by using a frame based 

approach for handling disjoint entities. 

1 Introduction * 

Electronic health record (EHR) also referred to as 

electronic medical record (EMR), electronic 

patient record (EPR), or personal health record 

(PHR) store or capture patients’ medical history. 

                                                           
* Corresponding author  

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 

Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and 

proceedings footer are added by the organizers. License 

details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 

EHR data typically contains demographics, 

medications, administrative and billing data. The 

contents of EHR can be either in structured, semi-

structured or unstructured. Clinical notes 

contribute to majority of the unstructured data in 

EHR. 

    Clinical notes in EHR are often plain text 

records and valuable resources to obtain patient 

information (Denny, 2012). Clinical notes are rich 

in content and may include information on a 

patient’s demographics, medical history, family 

history, medications prescribed and lab test 

results. Information extraction tools can be used 

to extract the aforementioned unstructured data to 

discover new knowledge (Jensen, Jensen, & 

Brunak, 2012).   

     Named entity recognition (NER) is an 

important subtask of information extraction to 

identify the boundaries of named entities. Clinical 

notes often include a wide variety of entities like 

diseases, disorders, anatomical sites, symptoms 

and procedures. However, often these entities are 

expressed in various forms and formats. 

Normalization is another sub-task of information 

extraction where the entities identified during 

NER are accurately mapped to concepts of 

standard terminologies or ontologies.  Rich tools 

and resources are available to access various 

 

 

 

394



standard terminologies and ontologies. Unified 

Medical Language System (UMLS) 

Metathesaurus and National Center for 

Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) BioPortal are two 

resources that are very useful for normalization in 

the biomedicine domain. The UMLS 

Metathesaurus provides access to medical 

standard terminologies such as SNOMED-CT, 

ICD9, and RxNorm (Bodenreider, 2004). In this 

paper, the authors presented an information 

extraction system to i) identify the disorders in 

clinical notes using conditional random fields 

(CRFs) (Lafferty, McCallum, & Pereira, 2001), 

and ii) normalize the identified disorders to 

SNOMED-CT terminology concepts (Spackman, 

Campbell, & CÃ, 1997) using MetaMap (Aronson 

& Lang, 2010). 

2 Materials and Methods  

2.1 Dataset 

The authors used SemEval 2015 ShARe corpus to 

develop a CRF based information extraction 

system (Suominen et al., 2013). The ShARe 

corpus included training, development and test 

sets which were prepared using clinical notes 

from the MIMICII database (Saeed, Lieu, Raber, 

& Mark, 2002). The clinical notes were manually 

annotated by the annotators for disorder mentions 

and were normalized to SNOMED-CT concepts 

using UMLS concept unique identifiers (CUIs). 

Details on the corpus development are available 

                                                           
1http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2015/task14/data/uploads/share_a

nnotation_guidelines.pdf 

in the annotation guideline1. Table 1 summarizes 

the details of training, development and test sets. 
In this paper, disorder refers to SNOMED-CT 

concepts that belong to the eleven UMLS 

semantic types: Congenital Abnormality; 

Acquired Abnormality; Injury or Poisoning; 

Pathologic Function; Disease or Syndrome; 

Mental or Behavioral Dysfunction; Cell or 

Molecular Dysfunction; Experimental Model of 

Disease; Anatomical Abnormality; Neoplastic 

Process; and Signs and Symptoms. In other 

words, an entity which is not part of these eleven 

UMLS semantic types or is not possible to map to 

a SNOMED-CT is not a disorder. These kinds of 

disorders are annotated as CUI-less in the corpus.  
 

Type of clinical 

notes 

Trai-

ning 

Develo-

pment 

Test 

Discharge 136 133 100 

Electro 

Cardiogram 

54 0 0 

Echo Cardiogram 54 0 0 

Radiology 54 0 0 
Table 1: Summary of SemEval 2015 ShARe Corpus 

2.2 System Design 

The authors developed a CRF-based classifier to 

identify disorder concepts and normalize the 

identified concepts to UMLS CUIs using 

MetaMap (Aronson & Lang, 2010). The pre-

processing involves sentence detection, 

Figure 1: TMUNSW system design for SemEval-2014 Task 7 

 

395



tokenization, part of speech tagging and shallow 

parsing. For pre-processing, the authors used 

apache OpenNLP2 library which is a machine 

learning based toolkit. The output from 

preprocessing was used to extract several features 

which were used to train a Conditional Random 

Field based model. An overview of the developed 

system is schematized in figure 1. 

2.3 Disorder Identification 

The authors used discharge summaries from both 

training and development sets to develop the CRF 

model. Mallet implementation of CRF was used 

for disorder recognition using BIO tagging 

method (McCallum, 2002). The authors 

developed the CRF-model using BIO tagging 

method where each word token is assigned one of 

three tags "B","I","O". The “B” tag corresponds to 

beginning of a disorder entity, “I” tag corresponds 

to Inside disorder entity and “O” tag corresponds 

to outside (not a disorder entity). For example, let 

us consider this sentence - "The patient had 

headache with neck stiffness and was unable to 

walk for minutes." The classifier will produce the 

following token annotation “The/O patient/O 

had/O headache/B with/O neck/B stiffness/I 

and/O was/O unable/B to/I walk/I for/O 

minutes/O. /O”. The disorder identification CRF 

classifier uses word, syntactic features like POS 

tags and shallow parser tags. Authors also used 

previous word, its POS tags and next word and its 

POS tags as feature. Also, the authors developed 

a custom dictionary by extracting all disorder 

mentions in the training set, tokenized them and 

labelled each tokens as B-dict and I-dict. The 

developed custom dictionary was also used as 

features to build the classifier.  

2.4 Disorder Normalization 

Each disorder recognized by the CRF model was 

passed through MetaMap to find normalized 

concepts. For normalization of disorder concepts 

to UMLS SNOMED-CT CUIs, MetaMap 2013 

version with UMLS 2013AB as data source was 

used. MetaMap server (also known as mmserver) 

is configured to process the output from the CRF 

model using Java API. MetaMap was configured 

to normalize entities that can be mapped to 

SNOMED-CT terminology only. No additional 

rules or logic is used to handle one entity mapped 

to multiple UMLS CUIs from different UMLS 

semantic types. Entity with the highest MetaMap 

                                                           
2 https://opennlp.apache.org/ 

score is considered. In situations where MetaMap 

failed to assign a CUI, they are automatically 

annotated as CUI-less.   

2.5 Evaluation Metrics 

The system developed (disorder identification and 

normalization) was evaluated using the test set. 

The official evaluation script provided by the 

SemEval 2015 Task 14 organizers was used to 

evaluate performance of the developed system 

using precision (P), recall (R) and F score (F). 

Evaluation was carried using strict (St) and 

relaxed (Re) F-scores. In strict setting, the official 

evaluation script identified the predicted disorder 

mention as a true positive if the spans (start and 

end offsets) are exactly the same as in the gold 

standard and the predicted CUI is correct. The 

predicted disorder is evaluated as false positive if 

spans are incorrect or the identified CUI is 

incorrect. In relaxed setting, the official 

evaluation script identified the predicted disorder 

mention as a true positive if there is any overlap 

between the predicted  (start and end offsets) and 

gold standard spans. The predicted disorder is 

evaluated as false positive if spans are incorrect or 

identified CUI is incorrect. It is important to note 

that the evaluation metrics for both NER and 

normalization are calculated together.  

3 Results 

3.1 Individual Runs 

The performance of the developed system using 

different configurations is presented in table 2. 

Run1 (r1) is the output from the CRF model with 

markov order as 1, Run2 (r2) is the output from 

the CRF model with markov order 2 and custom 

dictionary for disjoint annotation, Run3 (r3) is the 

output from the CRF model with markov order as 

1 with custom dictionary for disjoint annotation. 

In terms of normalization, Run1 and Run2 had 

default MetaMap configuration and Run3 

included Word sense disambiguation (WSD). The 

results displayed for training set are based on 10 

fold cross validation.  
 

St 

Training Development 

P R F P R F 

r1 0.42 0.46 0.44 0.41 0.38 0.39 

r2 0.44 0.47 0.45 0.40 0.39 0.39 

r3 0.43 0.42 0.42 0.41 0.42 0.41 

396



Re Training Development 

P R F P R F 

r1 0.48 0.46 0.47 0.46 0.44 0.45 

r2 0.51 0.48 0.49 0.49 0.47 0.48 

r3 0.49 0.46 0.47 0.48 0.42 0.45 
Table 2: Performance of system with different 

configurations on training and development sets 

 

3.2 Official Evaluation 

Table 3 presents the official evaluation results of 

the three different runs on the test set. The official 

evaluation results are provided by the SemEval 

2015 shared task 14 organizers. Under both strict 

and relaxed setting, Run1 performed better than 

the other two runs. Run1 achieved an overall F-

measure of 0.338 under strict settings, while under 

relaxed settings it achieved an F-measure of 

0.408. Run2 and Run3 under both relaxed and 

strict settings had similar F-scores. The 

performance of the system on the test set is not so 

different from its performance on the training and 

the development sets. The gold set used to 

calculate the performance of the system by the 

organizers is not accessible to the authors.  

 

 

 

St Re 

r1 r2 r3 r1 r2 r3 

P 0.32 0.32 0.32 0.39 0.38 0.38 

R 0.34 0.34 0.34 0.42 0.41 0.41 

F 0.33 0.33 0.33 0.40 0.39 0.39 
Table 3: Official evaluation results on SemEval 2015 

ShARe corpus test set 

4 Discussion 

The authors developed the current system based 

on their previous work (Jonnagaddala, Kumar, 

Dai, Rachmani, & Hsu, 2014). A custom built 

dictionary to handle disjoint disorders is 

integrated into the current system. With this 

addition, the system was able to find most of the 

disjoint mentions in the development set. The 

official evaluation results of the performance of 

the developed system on NER and normalization 

was not reported independently. A thorough error 

analysis was performed on the output generated 

by the developed system. Unfortunately, it is 

found that the authors misinterpreted the UMLS 

semantic types covered in the training, 

development and test sets. The authors used the 

default disease disorder semantic group which 

consists of twelve semantic types including 

“Findings” type. However, in the ShARe corpus 

“Findings” semantic type was ignored. The 

concepts related to this type should have been 

normalized as CUI-less. This significantly made 

an impact on the overall system performance. 

Implementing additional rules to filter out CUIs 

belonging to “Findings” semantic type and 

labelling them as CUI-less have significantly 

improved the system performance. During CRF 

model development, the authors experimented 

with various n-grams on the training set and found 

that trigrams performed best, so trigram of word 

and trigram of word POS tags as a feature. The 

identification of disorder might have been 

improved further with post processing if custom 

dictionaries to handle abbreviations, acronyms 

and misspelled entities were employed 

(Jonnagaddala, Liaw, Ray, Kumar, & Dai, 2014).   

5 Conclusion 

In conclusion, the authors presented an 

information extraction system based on CRF and 

MetaMap to identify disorder mentions in clinical 

notes and normalize the identified entities to 

SNOMED CT terminology using UMLS CUIs. 

The performance of the developed system was not 

as expected mainly due to the fact that system 

included “findings” semantic type in the 

normalized entities, when they were supposed to 

be normalized as CUI-less. In future, the authors 

would like to improve the performance of the 

system by employing semi-supervised techniques 

and custom dictionaries for abbreviations, 

acronyms and misspellings.  

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank the organizers of 

2015 SemEval Task 14 shared task. This study 

was conducted as part of the electronic Practice 

Based Research Network (ePBRN) and 

Translational Cancer research network (TCRN) 

research programs. ePBRN was/is funded in part 

by the School of Public Health & Community 

Medicine, Ingham Institute for Applied Medical 

Research, UNSW Medicine and South West 

Sydney Local Health District. TCRN is funded by 

Cancer Institute of New South Wales and Prince 

of Wales Clinical School, UNSW Medicine. The 

content is solely the responsibility of the authors 

and does not necessarily reflect the official views 

of funding bodies.   

 

397



References  

Aronson, A. R., & Lang, F. M. (2010). An overview of 

MetaMap: historical perspective and recent 

advances. J Am Med Inform Assoc, 17(3), 

229-236. doi: 10.1136/jamia.2009.002733 

Bodenreider, O. (2004). The unified medical language 

system (UMLS): integrating biomedical 

terminology. Nucleic acids research, 

32(suppl 1), D267-D270.  

Denny, J. C. (2012). Mining electronic health records 

in the genomics era. PLoS computational 

biology, 8(12), e1002823.  

Jensen, P. B., Jensen, L. J., & Brunak, S. (2012). 

Mining electronic health records: towards 

better research applications and clinical care. 

Nat Rev Genet, 13(6), 395-405.  

Jonnagaddala, J., Kumar, M., Dai, H.-J., Rachmani, E., 

& Hsu, C.-Y. (2014). TMUNSW: Disorder 

Concept Recognition and Normalization in 

Clinical Notes for SemEval-2014 Task 7. 

Paper presented at the 8th International 

Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 

2014), Dublin, Ireland, August 23-24, 2014. 

Jonnagaddala, J., Liaw, S.-T., Ray, P., Kumar, M., & 

Dai, H.-J. (2014). HTNSystem: Hypertension 

Information Extraction System for 

Unstructured Clinical Notes. In S.-M. Cheng 

& M.-Y. Day (Eds.), Technologies and 

Applications of Artificial Intelligence (Vol. 

8916, pp. 219-227): Springer International 

Publishing. 

Lafferty, J. D., McCallum, A., & Pereira, F. C. N. 

(2001). Conditional Random Fields: 

Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and 

Labeling Sequence Data. Paper presented at 

the Proceedings of the Eighteenth 

International Conference on Machine 

Learning.  

McCallum, A. K. (2002). Mallet: A machine learning 

for language toolkit.  

Saeed, M., Lieu, C., Raber, G., & Mark, R. (2002). 

MIMIC II: a massive temporal ICU patient 

database to support research in intelligent 

patient monitoring. Paper presented at the 

Computers in Cardiology, 2002. 

Spackman, K. A., Campbell, K. E., & CÃ, R. (1997). 

SNOMED RT: a reference terminology for 

health care. Paper presented at the 

Proceedings of the AMIA annual fall 

symposium. 

Suominen, H., Salanterä, S., Velupillai, S., Chapman, 

W. W., Savova, G., Elhadad, N., . . . Jones, G. 

J. (2013). Overview of the ShARe/CLEF 

eHealth Evaluation Lab 2013 Information 

Access Evaluation. Multilinguality, 

Multimodality, and Visualization (pp. 212-

231): Springer. 

 

 

398


