



















































Al-Bayan: A Knowledge-based System for Arabic Answer Selection


Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015), pages 226–230,
Denver, Colorado, June 4-5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Al-Bayan: A Knowledge-based System for Arabic Answer Selection

Reham Mohamed Maha Ragab
reham.mohmd@alexu.edu.eg maha.ragab@alexu.edu.eg

Heba Abdelnasser Nagwa M. El-Makky
heba.abdelnasser@alexu.edu.eg nagwamakky@alexu.edu.eg

Marwan Torki
mtorki@alexu.edu.eg

Computer and Systems Engineering Department
Alexandria University, Egypt

Abstract

This paper describes Al-Bayan team participa-
tion in SemEval-2015 Task 3, Subtask A. Task
3 targets semantic solutions for answer selec-
tion in community question answering systems.
We propose a knowledge-based solution for
answer selection of Arabic questions, special-
ized for Islamic sciences. We build a Semantic
Interpreter to evaluate the semantic similarity
between Arabic question and answers using
our Quranic ontology of concepts. Using su-
pervised learning, we classify the candidate
answers according to their relevance to the
users questions. Results show that our system
achieves 74.53% accuracy which is compara-
ble to the other participating systems.

1 Introduction

With the increase of the popularity of community
question answering (CQA) systems, answer selection
became more challenging. CQA systems are often
open for public to answer any questions with no re-
striction or review from field experts. This highlights
the importance of developing systems that automati-
cally detects the most relevant answers from the irrel-
evant ones. These systems might be open-domain or
closed-domain, causing a tradeoff between accuracy
and generality.

SemEval-2015 task 3 targets semantically oriented
solutions for answer selection in community question
answering data. We focus on Subtask A for the Ara-
bic language which provides questions and several
community answers from the Fatwa website1. The

1Fatwa is a question about the Islamic religion.

goal is to classify each answer as: Direct, Related or
Irrelevant.

In this paper, we propose a knowledge-based an-
swer selection system for Arabic. We use our Quranic
ontology, enriched with Quran verses and Tafseer
books, to convert each question and its candidate an-
swers into weighted vectors of ontology concepts.
We use these vectors to compute a semantic similar-
ity score between the question and each candidate
answer. We also compute a keyword matching score
and feed the two scores into a decision tree classifier
which predicts how much the answer is related to the
question.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 shows some of the related work to the system.
Section 3 shows the details of the system architec-
ture. In Section 4, we show the results of the task
evaluation. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section
5.

2 Related Work

Our work is related to prior work in both Quranic
research and Question Answer Selection systems.

(a) Quranic Research: Several studies have been
made to understand the Quranic text and extract
knowledge from it using computational linguistics.
Saad et al. (2009) proposed a simple methodology for
automatic extraction of concepts based on the Quran
in order to build an ontology. In (Saad et al., 2010),
they developed a framework for automated gener-
ation of Islamic knowledge concrete concepts that
exist in the holy Quran. Qurany (Abbas, 2009) builds

226



a Quran corpus augmented with a conceptual ontol-
ogy, taken from a recognized expert source ’Mushaf
Al Tajweed’. Quranic Arabic Corpus (Atwell et
al., 2011) also builds a Quranic ontology of con-
cepts based on the knowledge contained in traditional
sources of Quranic analysis, including the sayings
of the prophet Muhammad (PBUH), and the Tafseer
books. Khan et al. (2013) developed a simple ontol-
ogy for the Quran based on living creatures including
animals and birds that are mentioned in the Quran in
order to provide Quranic semantic search. AlMaayah
et al. (2014) proposed to develop a WordNet for the
Quran by building semantic connections between
words in order to achieve a better understanding of
the meanings of the Quranic words using traditional
Arabic dictionaries and a Quran ontology.

Other attempts for text-mining the Quran were
proposed such as: QurAna (Sharaf and Atwell,
2012) which is a corpus of the Quran annotated
with pronominal anaphora and QurSim (Sharaf and
Atwell, 2012) which is another corpus for extracting
the relations between Quran verses.

b) Question Answer Selection Systems: Few at-
tempts have been proposed for Arabic Answer Se-
lection. In CLEF 2012, the Arabic language was
introduced for the first time for selecting answers to
questions from multiple answer choices of short Ara-
bic texts. Abouenour et al. (2012) proposed a system
based on distance density N-gram model and Arabic
WordNet expansion. Trigui et al. (2012) proposed
another system that used inference rules on the CLEF
background collection. However, those systems have
low accuracy, 0.21 and 0.19 respectively. In CLEF
2013, Al-QASIM system (Ezzeldin et al., 2013) was
proposed which focused on answer selection and val-
idation. This approach divided the task into 3 phases:
(i) Document analysis, (ii) locating questions and an-
swers and (iii) answer selection. The overall accuracy
of the system is 0.36.

3 System Architecture

3.1 System Overview

The system architecture is shown in Figure 1. The
dataset consists of Arabic questions and their candi-
date answers. The goal is to classify each candidate
answer into: (Direct, Related or Irrelevant).

Inverted 
index

Term 1

Term i

Term N

Semantic 
Relatedness 

Score

Quranic 
Ontology

C1 C j C N

 Question

Tafseer

Answer

qVect

aVect

Decision Tree 
Classifier

Keyword 
Matching

Score

Semantic Interpreter

Label
(Direct, Related,

 Irrelevant)

C1C1C1 C jC jC j C NC NC N

Preprocessing
MADA

Figure 1: System Architecture.

The question and the answers are preprocessed and
fed into the Semantic Interpreter. The Semantic Inter-
preter uses a Quranic ontology of concepts enriched
with Quran interpretation (Tafseer) books to build
an inverted index. The question is converted into a
weighted vector of concepts (qVect) and similarly the
candidate answer (aVect). A semantic relatedness
score and a keyword matching score are computed
and fed into a decision tree classifier which outputs
the label of the answer.

3.2 Preprocessing

First, we apply morphological analysis on the Ara-
bic text to identify its structure and remove the un-
wanted words (stopwords). For this purpose, we use
MADA (Morphological Analysis and Disambigua-
tion for Arabic) (Habash et al., 2009) which is one
of the most accurate Arabic preprocessing toolkits.
MADA can derive extensive morphological and con-
textual information from raw Arabic text, and then
use this information for high-accuracy part-of-speech
tagging, diacritization, lemmatization, disambigua-
tion, stemming, and glossing in one step.

Each term in the input text is represented by its
stem and POS tag using Buckwalter transliteration
(Buckwalter, 2002). We identify the stopwords ac-

227



cording to their POS tags. Pronouns, prepositions,
conjunctions and other POS types are all removed.

3.3 Building the Ontology
We integrated the Quranic Corpus Ontology (Atwell
et al., 2011) and the Qurany Ontology (Abbas, 2009),
to form our Quranic conceptual ontology proposed
in (Abdelnasser et al., 2014). The Quranic Corpus
Ontology uses knowledge representation to define
the key concepts in the Quran, and shows the relation-
ships between these concepts using predicate logic.
The Qurany Ontology is a tree of concepts that in-
cludes all the abstract concepts covered in the Quran.
It is imported from ’Mushaf Al Tajweed’ list of top-
ics. This integration was difficult since we had to
resolve the overlapping between the two ontologies.
There were also some mistakes in the Qurany Con-
cept Tree. So, we had to manually revise the 1200
concepts and their verses.

The Holy Quran consists of 6236 verses. Each
verse has to be under at least one concept in our
Quranic ontology. After the previous integration pro-
cess, there were 621 verses without concepts, so we
added them under their most suitable concepts to
complete the ontology using a similarity measure
module. This module measures the similarity be-
tween classified and unclassified verses to determine
the concepts of unclassified verses. Now, our final
ontology contains 1217 leaf concepts and all verses
of the Quran. Under each concept in our ontology,
we save the related verses with their Tafseer, that is
used to build the inverted index. We use two Tafseer2

books: (Ibn-Kathir, 1370) and (Al-Jaza’iri, 1986),
which are two of the most traditional books used by
Islamic scholars. It is possible to add other books to
enrich our corpus data.

3.4 Building the Semantic Interpreter
We use machine-learning techniques to build a Se-
mantic Interpreter using the Explicit Semantic Anal-
ysis (Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 2007) approach.
The Semantic Interpreter maps the input Arabic text
into a weighted vector of Quranic concepts.

For each leaf concept Ci, we construct a document
Di such that Di contains all the verses related to

2Tafseer is the interpretation of the Quran.

this concept and their Tafseer. We used Lucene In-
dexer3 to build an inverted index on the constructed
documents where each term Tj is represented as a
weighted vector of concepts. Entries of this vector
are assigned weights using the TFIDF scheme which
quantifies the strength of association between terms
and concepts.

Any input query to the system can be represented
as a weighted vector of concepts by calculating the
mean of concept vectors of the query terms.

3.5 Semantic Relatedness Score

In order to evaluate the semantic relatedness between
two Arabic texts, we enter each text into the Seman-
tic Interpreter as a query. The Semantic Interpreter
represents each text as a weighted vector of concepts.
We compute the Cosine similarity between the two
weighted vectors which represents the semantic relat-
edness score. Therefore, if two texts are semantically
related, they will have similar weights for the same
concepts and consequently a high Cosine similarity
score, and vice versa.

3.6 Keyword Matching Score

In this mechanism, the answers of a question are
weighted based on the matched words between the
answers and the question. For answer k and question
term j, Scorekj is the number of j repetitions in k
normalized by the maximum number of repetitions
of j in all answers. Scorek is the summation of
Scorekj , (j = 1, .., n) where n is the number of the
question terms. Finally, we normalize all answers by
the maximum Scorek.

3.7 Answer Classification

We compute the semantic relatedness score and the
keyword matching score for each combination of
question and answer in the training data. The two
scores are normalized for each question. Now to
classify the answers as (Direct, Related, Irrelevant),
we train a decision tree classifier using the two nor-
malized scores with the gold-standard labels supplied
with the training data. The normalized scores are also
computed for the test data and the classifier predicts
the label of each answers. Results are shown in the
next section.

3http://lucene.apache.org/

228



Class Direct Related Irrelevant Precision Recall F-measure
Direct 150 40 25 0.721 0.698 0.709
Related 43 94 85 0.519 0.423 0.467
Irrelevant 15 47 502 0.820 0.890 0.854
Macro - - - 0.687 0.6704 0.6765
Overall - - - 0.732 0.745 0.737

Table 1: The confusion matrix, and precision,recall and F-measure of the SemEval 2015 testset.

Training Testing
Questions 1300 200
Answers 6500 1001
Direct 1300 215
Related 1469 222
Irrelevant 3731 564

Table 2: Statistics of the training and testing data.

4 Evaluation

We evaluate our learning linguistic system by apply-
ing it on Fatwa questions/answers selection with a
supervised learning framework.

4.1 Dataset Description

We train our classifier on the provided benchmark
dataset in SemEval2015 (Màrquez et al., 2015). The
used data is from Fatwa website 4. Each question in
the dataset is provided with five different answers.
Each answer is labeled as Direct, Related, or Irrele-
vant. The distribution of the dataset we use is given
in Table 2.

4.2 Results

In this section, we provide the experimental results
of the training data and the SemEval 2015 test set.

Figure 2 shows the 10-folds cross validation results
of the system training data using the two scores (the
semantic relatedness and keyword matching scores).
From the figure, the Direct and Irrelevant classes
have better accuracies than the Related class. This is
intuitive as the Related class is more general than the
others (with few special marks), so it is more difficult
to be classified.

4http://fatwa.islamweb.net/

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

Recall Precision F-measure

Direct

Related

Irrelevant

Overall

Figure 2: The training data cross validation results.

Table 1 shows the confusion matrix of the SemEval
2015 test set results. The results also show that the
Related class has lower accuracy than the Direct and
Irrelevant. The overall system accuracy is 74.53%
and the system Macro-F1 is 67.65%

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed our system to automate
the process of Arabic answer selection in Community
Question Answering systems where candidate an-
swers are classified into answers that directly answer
the question vs. those that can be helpful vs. those
that are irrelevant. We constructed our knowledge-
based system using a Quranic semantic ontology and
the provided dataset in (Màrquez et al., 2015). The
system first applies some preprocessing tasks over
the question and answers, then a Semantic Interpreter
converts the preprocessed sentences into weighted
vectors of concepts. Using those vectors the system
calculates a semantic score for each answer, which is
fed, with an additional keyword matching score, into
a decision tree classifier. The system has an overall
accuracy of 74.53%.

229



References

Abdul-Baquee M. Sharaf and Eric Atwell. 2012. QurAna:
Corpus of the Quran annotated with Pronominal
Anaphora. LREC.

Abdul-Baquee M. Sharaf and Eric Atwell. 2012. QurSim:
A corpus for evaluation of relatedness in short texts.
LREC.

Abu Bakr Al-Jaza’iri. 1986. Aysar al-Tafasir li Kalaam il
’Aliyy il Kabir.

Ahmed Magdy Ezzeldin, Mohamed Hamed Kholief, and
Yasser El-Sonbaty. 2013. ALQASIM: Arabic language
question answer selection in machines. In Information
Access Evaluation. Multilinguality, Multimodality, and
Visualization, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg.

Eric Atwell, Claire Brierley, Kais Dukes, Majdi Sawalha
and Abdul-Baquee Sharaf. 2011. A An Artificial Intel-
ligence Approach to Arabic and Islamic Content on the
Internet. Proceedings of NITS 3rd National Informa-
tion Technology Symposium.

Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007. Com-
puting Semantic Relatedness Using Wikipedia-based
Explicit Semantic Analysis, volume 7. Proceedings
of the 20th international joint conference on artificial
intelligence.

Heba Abdelnasser, Reham Mohamed, Maha Ragab, Alaa
Mohamed, Bassant Farouk, Nagwa El-Makky, and Mar-
wan Torki. 2014. Al-Bayan: An Arabic Question An-
swering System for the Holy Quran. Proceedings of the
EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Language
Processing (ANLP).

Hikmat Ullah Khan and Syed Muhammad Saqlain and
Muhammad Shoaib and Muhammad Sher. 2013. On-
tology Based Semantic Search in Holy Quran., vol-
ume 2. International Journal of Future Computer and
Communication, 570-575.

Ismail Ibn-Kathir. 1370. Tafsir al-Qur’an al-Azim.
Lahsen Abouenour, Karim Bouzoubaa, and Paolo Rosso.

2012. IDRAAQ: New Arabic Question Answering Sys-
tem Based on Query Expansion and Passage Retrieval.
In CLEF.

Lluı̀s Màrquez and James Glass and Walid Magdy and
Alessandro Moschitti and Preslav Nakov and Bilal Ran-
deree. 2015. SemEval-2015 Task 3: Answer Selection
in Community Question Answering. Proceedings of the
9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation.

Manal AlMaayah, Majdi Sawalha, and Mohammad AM
Abushariah. 2014. A Proposed Model for Quranic
Arabic WordNet. LRE-REL2, 9.

Nizar Habash, Owen Rambow and Ryan Roth. 2009.
MADA+ TOKAN: A toolkit for Arabic tokenization, di-
acritization, morphological disambiguation, POS tag-
ging, stemming and lemmatization. Proceedings of

the 2nd International Conference on Arabic Language
Resources and Tools (MEDAR), Cairo, Egypt.

Noorhan Hassan Abbas. 2009. Quran’search for a Con-
cept’Tool and Website. M. Sc. thesis, University of
Leeds (School of Computing).

Omar Trigui, Lamia Hadrich Belguith, Paolo Rosso,
Hichem Ben Amor and Bilel Gafsaoui. 2012. Ara-
bic QA4MRE at CLEF 2012: Arabic Question Answer-
ing for Machine Reading Evaluation. CLEF (Online
Working Notes/Labs/Workshop).

Saidah Saad, Naomie Salim, and Hakim Zainal. 2009.
Pattern extraction for Islamic concept., volume 2. Pro-
ceedings of IEEE 2nd. International Conference on
Electrical Engineering & Informatics (ICEEI).

Saidah Saad, Naomie Salim, Hakim Zainal and S. Azman
M. Noah. 2010. A framework for Islamic knowledge
via ontology representation.. International Conference
on Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management
(CAMP).

Tim Buckwalter. 2002. Arabic transliteration. URL
http://www.qamus.org/transliteration.htm.

230


