



















































Mapping Different Rhetorical Relation Annotations: A Proposal


Proceedings of the Fourth Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2015), pages 147–152,
Denver, Colorado, June 4–5, 2015.

Mapping Different Rhetorical Relation Annotations: A Proposal

Farah Benamara Zitoune
IRIT, Toulouse University
Université Paul Sabatier

Toulouse, France
benamara@irit.fr

Maite Taboada
Department of Linguistics
Simon Fraser University

Vancouver, Canada
mtaboada@sfu.ca

Abstract

Annotation efforts have resulted in the avail-
ability of a number of corpora with rhetori-
cal relation information. The corpora, unfor-
tunately, are annotated under different theoret-
ical approaches and have different hierarchies
of relations. In addition, new sets of rhetor-
ical relations have been proposed to account
for language variation. The types of relations,
however, tend to overlap or be related in spe-
cific ways. We believe that differences across
approaches are minimal, and a unified set of
relations that works across languages is possi-
ble. This paper details a new taxonomy of re-
lations organized in four top level-classes with
a total of 26 relations. We propose a map-
ping between existing annotations and show
that our taxonomy is robust across theories,
and can be applied to multiple languages.

1 Motivation

The annotation of discourse relations in language
can be broadly characterized as falling under two
main approaches: the lexically grounded approach
and an approach that aims at complete discourse
coverage. Perhaps the best example of the first ap-
proach is the Penn Discourse Treebank (Prasad et
al., 2008). The annotation starts with specific lexical
items, most of them conjunctions, and includes two
arguments for each conjunction. This leads to par-
tial discourse coverage, as there is no guarantee that
the entire text is annotated, since parts of the text not
related through a conjunction are excluded. On the
positive side, such annotations tend to be reliable.
PDTB-style annotations have been carried out in a

variety of languages (Arabic, Chinese, Czech, Dan-
ish, Dutch, French, Hindi and Turkish), and in some
cases the taxonomy of relations had to be modified,
by adding or merging relations (Prasad et al., 2014).

Complete discourse coverage requires annotation
of the entire text, with most of the propositions in
the text integrated in a structure. It includes work
from two theoretical perspectives, either intention-
ally driven, such as RST (Mann and Thompson,
1988) or semantically driven, such as SDRT (Asher
and Lascarides, 2003). RST proposes a tree-based
representation, with relations between adjacent seg-
ments, and emphasizes a differential status for dis-
course components (the nucleus vs. satellite distinc-
tion). Annotated resources exist in Basque, Dutch,
German, English, Portuguese and Spanish. Cap-
tured in a graph-based representation, with long-
distance attachments, SDRT proposes relations be-
tween abstract objects using a relatively small set of
relations. Corpora following SDRT exist in Arabic,
French and English.

Manually annotated resources have contributed to
a number of applications, most notably discourse
segmentation into elementary discourse units, iden-
tification of explicit and implicit relations for the
purpose of discourse parsing, and development of
end-to-end discourse parsers (Hernault et al., 2010;
Feng and Hirst, 2014; Joty et al., 2015). These
parsers have been successfully deployed in NLP ap-
plications including machine translation, sentiment
analysis and automatic summarization (Thione et
al., 2004; Heerschop et al., 2011; Hardmeier, 2013).

Each approach has its own hierarchy of discourse
relations, but relations tend to overlap or be re-

147



lated in a few specific ways. We suggest there are
four general ways of mapping relations across ap-
proaches: (1) Specialization, where a relation R in
one approach can correspond to several relations in
another approach, (2) Generalization, in which sev-
eral relations in one approach correspond to one re-
lation in another approach, (3) Omission involves a
relation defined in one approach, but not taken into
account in another. Finally, in (4), Definition, rela-
tions have similar names, but different definitions.

We propose here a unified hierarchy of discourse
relations. Our proposal has several motivations.
First of all, with the wide availability of annotated
corpora, it would be beneficial to have a system for
mapping relations across approaches. In particular
for classification tasks such as discourse parsing, ac-
cess to larger amounts of data is likely to yield bet-
ter results. Secondly, and from a more theoretical
point of view, we would like to propose that differ-
ences across approaches are minimal, and a unified
set of relations is possible. This would facilitate the
work of discourse analysts and would also result in
better annotation efforts. Third, a unified set of dis-
course relations would allow us to compile a list of
discourse markers and other signals for those rela-
tions, which would also benefit discourse annota-
tion. Finally, this is a first step towards multilingual
discourse analysis. Many studies have compared the
use of discourse markers across languages, and how
they differ in translation (Degand, 2009; Zufferey
and Degand, 2014). We would like to contribute
to that area of study by unifying and integrating the
types of relations that markers can signal.

Merging different discourse relation taxonomies
involves, in our view, different steps, having to do
with: (1) segmentation, (2) unifying the set of re-
lations, (3) proposing possible signals, (4) unifying
discourse structures, and (5) providing a language
for merging annotations. We focus here on step (2).
For proposals for steps (4) and (5), see Venant et
al. (2013), and Chiarcos (2014), respectively.

2 Methodology

Our first focus are the two theories that we are most
familiar with, RST and SDRT. We next plan to find
correspondences between our unified RST-SDRT hi-
erarchy and the PDTB taxonomy.

The first step consists of grouping relations in top-
level classes. Our goal is to minimize the number of
top-level classes and, at the same time, reduce the
number at the fine-grained level, avoiding the prolif-
eration of relations seen in the RST Discourse Tree-
Bank (Carlson et al., 2003).

Two main criteria were used in creating the hi-
erarchy. First of all, the proposed hierarchy should
be stable enough for language variation. By this we
mean that the main classes at the top level should
remain constant. We believe that there is little cross-
linguistic variation when it comes to the higher-level
classification of discourse relations. The second, re-
lated criterion in our organization, is that the hierar-
chy has to be open to modification at the low level.
This is where previous research has observed varia-
tion due to language and genre.

Definitions of relations are based on three further
criteria. First of all, we do not define relations on the
basis of the status of their arguments. The nucleus-
satellite distinction in RST is not relevant for our ba-
sic definition of relations. Secondly, we focus on the
effect that a relation has on meaning, and not on how
it is lexically triggered by a discourse marker or lex-
ical device. Finally, we provide intentional effects
when needed. Our taxonomy is both intentionally
and semantically driven, motivated by our desire to
find a balance between RST and SDRT.

Our starting points are the set of RST defini-
tions from the RST website1 and the definitions pro-
vided within the RST-DT (Carlson et al., 2003). For
SDRT, we considered the relations defined in the
SDRT literature (Asher and Lascarides, 2003), plus
the adaptations created when annotating data in dif-
ferent projects: Discor (Reese et al., 2007), Annodis
(Afantenos et al., 2012), plus the classification pro-
posed for Arabic (Keskes et al., 2014).

3 Towards a unified hierarchy

We built a hierarchy with four top-level classes:
TEMPORAL, STRUCTURAL, THEMATIC and
CAUSAL-ARGUMENTATIVE, organized in three
levels with a total of 26 relations. We have taken
into account all SDRT, PDTB, RST-DT and RST
relations, with the exception of the following rela-
tions from the RST-DT: Topic Change (topic-shift,

1http://www.sfu.ca/rst/

148



topic-drift), Textual Organization and Topic-
Comment (problem-solution, question-answer,
statement-response, topic-comment, comment-
topic, rhetorical-question). We believe that some
of those relations structure topics, but are not
necessarily discourse relations. Table 1 summarizes
the inventory of the proposed relations at each level.

3.1 Temporal class
A class of relations indicating relations which set
events in terms of time or a similar frame is a com-
ponent of most hierarchies. In some classifications,
this group includes relations of background or fram-
ing, but we prefer an exclusively temporal class.

Arguments in the temporal class need to share
the same topic, and the relations always express
co-temporal constraints, i.e., temporal ordering be-
tween the main eventualities e1 and e2 introduced
respectively in their arguments. The class includes
three relations: SEQUENCE, INVERTED SEQUENCE
and SYNCHRONOUS.

3.2 Thematic class
Thematic is a broad class which includes relations
among the content of the propositions. They struc-
ture and organize information in the discourse, and
can be divided into three different subclasses:

(1) ELABORATION. A group of discourse rela-
tions that connect utterances describing the same
state of affairs. Further classified into: PARTI-
TIVE, GENERALITY, OBJECT, SUMMARY, RE-
STATEMENT, and MEANS. For most purposes, the
further specificity is not necessary, and in some
cases it may be difficult to distinguish among the
subclasses. We believe, however, that these more
specific relations may be useful when analyzing cer-
tain genres, or for particular applications.

(2) FRAMING. This class includes relations that
provide a framework for understanding the con-
tent of the situation described in the discourse seg-
ment. It includes two relations: FRAME and BACK-
GROUND. FRAME holds when a is a frame and b is
in the scope of that frame, generally when a is at the
beginning of a sentence. Several cases are possible:
temporal, spatial or domain frames. This relation
has no direct equivalence in RST. BACKGROUND
is equivalent to the RST relations Background and
Circumstance. It is used to capture a specific spatio-

temporal structure, to accommodate presuppositions
in discourse, or to set the stage of a story.

(3) ATTRIBUTION. Attribution relates a commu-
nicative agent in the first argument and the content
of a communicative act introduced in the second.
Both the RST-DT and SDRT take Attribution as a
discourse relation. PDTB, on the other hand, treats
it as orthogonal to discourse annotation. In our case,
we follow Asher et al.’s (2006) position on repor-
tative constructions in discourse, who consider that
the treatment of these verbs is necessary for a correct
analysis of the semantics and discourse structure of
stories in news corpora. We agree, however, with
the PDTB, that it is not a fully-fledged relation, with
the same intentional effects, but we do believe that it
should be annotated.

3.3 Structuring class

This class contains relations of textual organization
at a high level, which organize the structure of the
information in terms of themes or topics (but are
rhetorical, not relations of topic management). AL-
TERNATION holds when there is a disjunction be-
tween a and b. PARALLEL occurs when a and b have
similar semantic and syntactic structures, and it re-
quires a and b to share a common theme. It has the
same semantics as List in RST-DT. CONTINUATION
holds between two segments when they both elabo-
rate or provide background to the same segment. It
also occurs in cases where there is no clear rhetori-
cal relation between the segments. Equivalent to the
RST-DT relation Elaboration-additional and to Con-
tinuation in SDRT.

3.4 Causal-argumentative class

This class contains two broad classes, one causal and
one argumentative. We see them as related to each
other, as conjunctions and other discourse markers
can be present to indicate a causal relation or be
more abstract in an argumentative use (e.g., I’m only
saying this because I care.).

3.4.1 Causal
We distinguish between CAUSE/RESULT and

PURPOSE. Within the first sub-class, REASON holds
when the main eventuality of the second argument is
understood as the cause of the eventuality in the first
argument. RESULT relates a cause to its effect: the

149



TEMPORAL SEQUENCE, INVERTED SEQUENCE, SYNCHRONOUS

THEMATIC
ELABORATION → Partitive, Generality, Object, Summary, Restatement, Means
FRAMING → Frame, Background
ATTRIBUTION

STRUCTURING ALTERNATION, PARALLEL, CONTINUATION

CAUSAL-ARGUMENTATIVE

CAUSAL
Cause/Result → Reason, Result, General Condition
Purpose

ARGUMENTATIVE
Support → Motivation, Evidence/Justification, Evaluation/Interpretation
Opposition → Contrast, Concession, Antithesis

Table 1: Inventory of proposed relations in the unified hierarchy

main eventuality of a caused the eventuality given
by b. GENERAL CONDITION holds when the first
segment is a hypothesis and the second the conse-
quence. PURPOSE holds when the second segment
(b) describes the aim, the goal or the purpose of the
event described in the first segment (a). Most often,
it can be paraphrased as “a in order to b.”

3.4.2 Argumentative
This class includes the SUPPORT and OPPOSI-

TION sub-classes, which are used to advance an ar-
gument. SUPPORT mainly captures justification, ex-
planation (not causal), evaluation and evidence. OP-
POSITION groups relations where the segments have
similar semantic structures, but contrasting themes,
i.e., sentence topics, or when one constituent negates
a default consequence of the other.

4 Mapping RST and SDRT annotations

To test the stability of our proposed hierarchy across
both theoretical and language variations, we mapped
it to annotations in three corpora: the RST-DT En-
glish corpus (Carlson et al., 2003), the SDRT Ann-
odis French corpus (Afantenos et al., 2012), and the
RST Spanish Treebank (RST-ST) (da Cunha et al.,
2011). The taxonomies in these corpora respectively
contain 78, 17 and 28 relations. The total number of
annotated information in terms of frequency of rela-
tions is 18,255 for RST-DT, 3,345 for Annodis, and
3,115 for RST-ST. Tables 2, 3, 4, and 5 provide fre-
quency of our relations in each of the three corpora
above in the four main classes. The distribution of
our four classes across the corpora is respectively
3.61%, 25.55%, 47.80%, and 23.08%. The propor-
tions are quite similar to the original distribution in

each corpus, taking into account the slightly differ-
ent structures of each taxonomy.

RST-DT Annodis RST-ST
Seq. 224

350
74Sync. 160

Inv. Seq. 59 27
Total TEMPORAL: 894

Table 2: Temporal class mapping

RST-DT Annodis RST-ST Total
Alter. 21 18 9 48
Paral. 1,211 59 1,270
Conti. 4,144 682 171 4,997

Total STRUCTURING: 6,315

Table 3: Structuring class mapping

Most mappings were relatively straightforward,
except for some relations that can be either miss-
ing or too specific. The first case concerns the re-
lations FRAME, PARALLEL and ATTRIBUTION that
were not annotated in the RST-ST, as well as the re-
lation FRAME for RST-DT. The second case is the
most frequent and occurs when at least two rela-
tions having specific semantics or intentional effects
need to be merged to find their corresponding in-
stances in a given corpus. For example, the Tem-
poral relations SEQUENCE and SYNCHRONOUS in
Annodis were annotated using the same Narration
relation. The SDRT Elaboration captures most of
our ELABORATION relations (except for OBJECT).
On the other hand, the RST-ST corpus considers
only one Temporal relation, namely Sequence, and
RST-ST Elaboration includes OBJECT, PARTITIVE,

150



and GENERALITY. Another interesting case con-
cerns the Support relations MOTIVATION and EVI-
DENCE/JUSTIFICATION. SDRT does not distinguish
between the causal and the epistemic use of causal
relations and considers only two causal relations,
Explanation and Result. This is why we counted
SDRT causal relations only in the Causal/Result
sub-class (this is marked by (*) and (+) in Table 5).
Finally, the RST-DT multinuclear relations Cause-
result and Consequence are similar and can cor-
respond to either REASON or RESULT. We only
counted them in the total column (see † in Table 5).

RST-DT Annodis RST-ST Total
Obj. 2,698 525

1,444

6,995

Part. 176

614

Gen. 884
Sum. 83 8
Rest. 140 22
Means 226 175
Frame 225 225
Backg. 937 157 344 1,438
Attr. 3,070 74 3,144

Total THEMATIC: 11,802

Table 4: Thematic class mapping

RST-DT Annodis RST-ST Total
Reason 52 128 (+) 77

1245†
Result 159 162 (*) 193
Cond. 285

20
53

406
Excep. 43 5
Purp. 568 94 127 789
Motiv. 206 cf. (*) 28 234
Evid. 780 cf. (+) 98 878
Eval. 600 75 99 774
Cont. 352

143
58

1,378Conc. 293 50
Antith. 402 80

Total CAUS.ARG.: 5,704

Table 5: Causal-Argumentative class mapping

5 Discussion and conclusions

We have presented a unified taxonomy for discourse
relations which can be used to map existing annota-
tions, and to annotate new corpora. We believe our
taxonomy is robust across theoretical approaches,
and can be applied to multiple languages.

A number of issues are outstanding, the first with
regard to segmentation. Different corpora have fol-
lowed different segmentation methodologies, some-
times impacting the types of relations present in the
taxonomy, as is the case with the multiple subtypes
of Elaboration relations in the RST-DT corpus. Our
intention is to provide coarse and fine-grained seg-
mentation options, so that either can be adopted, de-
pending on the goals of the research.

More crucial to the task of unifying annotations
is the issue of the structure of the discourse. RST,
RST-DT and RST-ST all take trees as the funda-
mental structure. SDRT, however, postulates graphs
as the basic structure. On the other hand, map-
ping to a lexically-grounded approach, like that in
the PDTB, is certainly possible. We believe that
mapping and predicting relations can be a theory-
independent task, and that the rich annotations in
PDTB are useful for tasks such as discourse parsing.

Two further practical aspects remain unresolved.
First, relations with no correspondence across tax-
onomies need to be considered. One solution is to
ignore them and then predict a partial structure for
some texts. The second issue is the task of man-
ual annotation. As we have pointed out, in cases
where one original taxonomy is more detailed, map-
ping relations from that taxonomy onto an existing
corpus may require further annotation. If annotation
is undertaken, then that could solve our first practi-
cal problem, because then there is an opportunity to
annotate some of the relations with no mapping.

Finally, an excellent test of the usefulness of the
taxonomy would be to carry out experiments in dis-
course parsing. We would like to merge annotated
corpora, and test whether the larger size of the train-
ing data improves the results of a discourse parser.

Acknowledgments

We thank Nicholas Asher for his useful comments.
This work is conjointly supported by the Natu-
ral Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada and the ERC grant 269427 (STAC).

References

Stergos Afantenos, Nicholas Asher, Farah Benamara,
Myriam Bras, Cecile Fabre, Mai Ho-Dac, Anne

151



Le Draoulec, Philippe Muller, Marie-Paule Pery-
Woodley, Laurent Prevot, Josette Rebeyrolles, Lu-
dovic Tanguy, Marianne Vergez-Couret, and Laure
Vieu. 2012. An empirical resource for discover-
ing cognitive principles of discourse organisation: The
ANNODIS corpus. In Proceedings of the Eighth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2012).

Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics of
Conversation. Cambridge University Press.

Nicholas Asher, Julie Hunter, Pascal Denis, and Brian
Reese. 2006. Evidentiality and intensionality: Two
uses of reportative constructions in discourse. In
Workshop on Constraints in Discourse.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen Okurowski.
2003. Building a discourse-tagged corpus in the
framework of rhetorical structure theory. In Jan van
Kuppevelt and Ronnie Smith, editors, Current Di-
rections in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 85–112.
Kluwer.

Christian Chiarcos. 2014. Towards interoperable dis-
course annotation. discourse features in the ontologies
of linguistic annotation. In Proceedings of the Ninth
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’14).

Iria da Cunha, Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno, and Gerardo
Sierra. 2011. On the Development of the RST Spanish
Treebank. In Proceedings of the 5th Linguistic Anno-
tation Workshop, pages 1–10.

Liesbeth Degand. 2009. Describing polysemous dis-
course markers: What does translation add to the pic-
ture? In Stef Slembrouch, Miriam Taverniers, and
Mieke Van Herreweghe, editors, From will to well.
Studies in Linguistics offered to Anne-Marie Simon-
Vandenbergen. Academia Press, Gent.

Vanessa Wei Feng and Graeme Hirst. 2014. A linear-
time bottom-up discourse parser with constraints and
post-editing. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 511–521.

Christian Hardmeier. 2013. Discourse in statistical ma-
chine translation: A survey and a case study. Discours,
11.

Bas Heerschop, Frank Goossen, Alexander Hogen-
boom, Flavius Frasincar, Uzay Kaymak, and Franciska
de Jong. 2011. Polarity analysis of texts using dis-
course structure. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM in-
ternational conference on Information and knowledge
management, pages 1061–1070.

Hugo Hernault, Helmut Prendinger, David A. duVerle,
and Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2010. HILDA: A discourse
parser using Support Vector Machine classification.
Dialogue and Discourse, 1(3).

Shafiq Joty, Giuseppe Carenini, and Raymond Ng.
2015. CODRA: A novel discriminative framework for
rhetorical analysis. Computational Linguistics, page
in press.

Iskandar Keskes, Farah Benamara, and Lamia Bel-
guith Hadrich. 2014. Learning Explicit and Implicit
Arabic Discourse Relations. Journal of King Saud
University Computer and Information Sciences: Spe-
cial Issue on Arabic NLP: Current State and Future
Challenges.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0. In
6th International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC).

Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie Webber, and Aravind Joshi.
2014. Reflections on the penn discourse treebank,
comparable corpora, and complementary annotation.
Computational Linguistics, 40(4):921–950.

B. Reese, J. Hunter, P. Denis, N. Asher, and J. Baldridge.
2007. Reference manual for the analysis and annota-
tion of rhetorical structure. Technical report, Depart-
ment of Linguistics, The University of Texas, Austin.

Gian Lorenzo Thione, Martin Van den Berg, Livia
Polanyi, and Chris Culy. 2004. Hybrid text sum-
marization: Combining external relevance measures
with structural analysis. In Stan Szpakowicz Marie-
Francine Moens, editor, Text Summarization Branches
Out: Proceedings of the ACL-04 Workshop.

Antoine Venant, Nicholas Asher, Philippe Muller, Pas-
cal Denis, and Stergos Afantenos. 2013. Expressivity
and comparison of models of discourse structure. In
Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, Metz,
France, August.

Sandrine Zufferey and Liesbeth Degand. 2014. Anno-
tating the meaning of discourse connectives in mul-
tilingual corpora. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic
Theory, page in press.

152


