



















































Automatic Identification of Aspectual Classes across Verbal Readings


Proceedings of the Fifth Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2016), pages 12–22,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016.

Automatic Identification of Aspectual Classes across Verbal Readings

Ingrid Falk and Fabienne Martin
University of Stuttgart

firstname.lastname@ling.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

The automatic prediction of aspectual
classes is very challenging for verbs whose
aspectual value varies across readings,
which are the rule rather than the excep-
tion. This paper sheds a new perspective
on this problem by using a machine learn-
ing approach and a rich morpho-syntactic
and semantic valency lexicon. In con-
trast to previous work, where the aspec-
tual value of corpus clauses is determined
on the basis of features retrieved from the
corpus, we use features extracted from the
lexicon, and aim to predict the aspectual
value of verbal readings rather than verbs.
Studying the performance of the classifiers
on a set of manually annotated verbal read-
ings, we found that our lexicon provided
enough information to reliably predict the
aspectual value of verbs across their read-
ings. We additionally tested our predic-
tions for unseen predicates through a task
based evaluation, by using them in the
automatic detection of temporal relation
types in TempEval 2007 tasks for French.
These experiments also confirmed the re-
liability of our aspectual predictions, even
for unseen verbs.

1 Introduction

It is well known that the aspectual value of a sen-
tence plays an important role in various NLP tasks,
like for instance the assessment of event factual-
ity (Saurí and Pustejovsky, 2012), automatic sum-
marisation (Kazantseva and Szpakowicz, 2010),
the detection of temporal relations (Costa and
Branco, 2012) or machine translation (Meyer et
al., 2013). Since, however, the aspectual value of a
sentence results from a complex interplay between

lexical features of the predicate and its linguistic
context, the automatic detection of this aspectual
value is quite challenging.

Studies on the computational modelling of as-
pectual classes emerged about two decades ago
with the work of Passonneau (1988) and Klavans
and Chodorow (1992), among others. In proba-
bly the most extensive study on the field, Siegel
and McKeown (2000) extract clauses from a cor-
pus and classify them into states and events, sort-
ing the latter into culminated and non-culminated
events in a subsequent step. The classification is
based on features inspired by classic Vendlerian
aspectual diagnostics, themselves collected from
the corpus. Since, however, these features are
collected on a type level, this method does not
give satisfying results for verbs whose aspectual
value varies across readings (henceforth ‘aspectu-
ally polysemous verbs’), which are far from ex-
ceptional (see section 3)1.

This problem is directly addressed by Zarcone
and Lenci (2008). These authors classify cor-
pus clauses into the four Vendlerian aspectual cat-
egories (states, activities, accomplishments and
achievements), and like Siegel and McKeown,
base their classification on (classic aspectual) fea-
tures collected from the corpus. However, they ad-
ditionally employ some syntactic properties of the
predicate, a move that enables them to better ac-
count for the influence of the linguistic context on
the aspectual value of the verb across readings.

Friedrich and Palmer (2014), who extend Siegel
and McKeown’s (2000) model to distributional
features, also address the problem of aspectually
polysemous verbs, by making use of instance-
based syntactic and semantic features, obtained
from an automatic syntactic analysis of the clause.

1Type-based classification selects a dominant sense for
any given verb and then always assigns it for each reading
of this verb.

12



The approach we present here is designed to
tackle the issue of aspectual variability and is com-
plementary to the methods just described. As we
know from detailed work on verbal syntax and se-
mantics in the tradition of Dowty (1979), Levin
(1993), Rappaport and Levin (1998) and subse-
quent work, many morpho-syntactic and seman-
tic properties of the verb exert a strong influence
on its aspectual value in context. As far as we
know, no study on the computational modelling of
aspectual classes has tried to systematically take
advantage of these correlations between lexical
properties and lexical aspect. We aim to capi-
talise on these correlations with the help of a rich
French lexical resource, “Les Verbes Français”
(Dubois and Dubois-Charlier (1997; François et
al. (2007), henceforth LVF). The LVF is a valency
lexicon of French verbs providing a detailed mor-
pho-syntactic and semantic description for each
reading (use) of a verb.

Differently from previous work, the instances
we classify aspectually are verbal readings as de-
lineated in the LVF (rather than corpus phrases).
We therefore study lexical aspect on an interme-
diate level between the coarse-grained type (verb)
level and the fine-grained corpus utterance level.
Also, while in previous approaches, the features
are collected from corpora, those we make use of
are retrieved from the lexicon entries. The sub-
stantial advantage of this approach, that heavily
makes use of the colossal amount of information
manually coded in the LVF, is that it enables us to
fully investigate the aspectual flexibility of verbs
across readings and the factors that determine it.

For our automatic aspectual classification, we
firstly extracted verbal readings from the LVF
for a set of 167 frequent verbs chosen in such
a way that each of the four Vendlerian aspectual
classes are roughly equally represented. A se-
manticist manually annotated each of the corre-
sponding 1199 readings based on a refinement of
the classic Vendlerian 4-way aspectual categorisa-
tion. This refinement is motivated by recent stud-
ies in theoretical linguistics converging in the view
that the traditional quadripartite aspectual typol-
ogy has to be further refined (see (Hay et al., 1999;
Piñón, 2006; Mittwoch, 2013) among many oth-
ers). Such a refinement enables one to better ac-
count for the variable degree of aspectual flexibil-
ity among predicates, so as to e.g. delineate be-
tween ‘strictly stative’ predicates (e.g. know), and

those stative predicates that also naturally display
an activity reading (e.g. think). This annotation
provides the gold standard for our classification
experiments. For each annotated reading, we then
collected morpho-syntactic and semantic features
from the LVF, chosen for their relevance for the
aspectual value of the verb in context. Based on
these features, we trained classifiers to automati-
cally predict the aspectual class of the LVF read-
ings.

We assessed the accuracy of our automatic as-
pectual classification in a task based evaluation
as follows. Costa and Branco (2012) showed
that (type-based/verb-level) aspectual indicators
improve temporal relation classification in Tem-
pEval challenges (Verhagen et al., 2007), which
emerged in conjunction with TimeML and Time-
Banks (Pustejovsky and Mani, 2003). The tasks
involved in these challenges require temporal rea-
soning. Following Branco and Costa’s exam-
ple, we performed TempEval tasks on the French
TempEval data, using aspectual indicators derived
from the predictions generated by our classifier.
This way, we could show that our aspectual clas-
sification based on lexical features is reliable.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
presents the resource used. Section 3 explains on
which criteria verbal readings were manually an-
notated. Section 4 describes the features collected
from the LVF. Section 5 presents the automatic
aspectual classification based on these features.
Section 6 presents the aspectual indicators derived
from the classification. Section 7 describes how
our automatic classification was evaluated through
TempEval tasks.

2 The Resource – LVF

The LVF, which roughly covers 12 300 verbs (lem-
mas) for a total of 25 610 readings, is a detailed
and extensive lexical resource providing a sys-
tematic description of the morpho-syntactic and
syntactico-semantic properties of French verbs2.
The basic lexical units are readings of the verbs,
determined by their defining syntactic environ-
ment (argument structure, adjuncts) and a semi-
formal semantic decomposition (with a finite
repertoire of ‘opérateurs’). Once the idiosyn-

2The paper version is available online at http:
//talep.lif.univ-mrs.fr/FondamenTAL/. On-
line access and electronic versions in XML are avail-
able at http://rali.iro.umontreal.ca/rali/
?q=fr/lvf.

13



crasies are put aside, this decomposition very
roughly uses the same inventory of labels and
features as in the lexical templates found in e.g.
Pinker (1989) or Jackendoff (1983). In Table 1, we
give the sample entries for the verb élargir ‘widen’
to illustrate LVF’s basic layout.

Syntactic description (Table 1a). Each reading
of a verb is coupled with a representation of its
syntactic frames. In principle, a verbal reading
can be coupled with a transitive frame (labelled
‘T’), a reflexively marked frame (‘P’) and an in-
transitive frame (‘A’, ‘N’) unmarked by the reflex-
ive. The syntactic description additionally speci-
fies some semantic features of the main arguments
(e.g. whether the subject and direct object are ani-
mate and/or inanimate, whether the indirect object
refers to a location, etc). This information is of-
ten crucial for the aspectual value of the reading
(e.g. a ‘human-only’ intransitive frame strongly
indicates unergativity and henceforth atelicity).

Semantic description (Table 1b). Each entry in
the LVF is also characterised by a semi-formal se-
mantic decomposition providing a rough approx-
imation of the meaning of each verbal reading.
Each entry is therefore paired with a finite set of
primitive semantic features and labels on the ba-
sis of which verbal readings are sorted into 14 se-
mantic classes (eg. psych-verbs, verbs of physi-
cal state and behaviour, etc.). The semantic fea-
tures and labels used in the semantic decompo-
sition provide other cues about the type of verbs
(unergative/ unaccusative verbs, manner/ result
verbs, etc.) which is instantiated by each reading.
For instance, for the reading 01 of élargir ‘widen’
(‘élargir01’ for short) in Table 1b, ‘r/d +qt [p]’
roughly corresponds to BECOME(more(p)) (‘r/d’
stands for ‘(make) become’; ‘+qt’ stands for an
increase along a scale). From this, one can safely
infer that élargir01 is a ‘degree achievement’ verb.

Derivational properties. The LVF also indi-
cates when a verb is formed through a derivational
process, and in the positive case, provides infor-
mation about the category of the verbal root, thus
enabling one to identify deadjectival or denominal
verbs. Finally, for each entry is specified which
suffix is used for the available reading-preserving
deverbal nominalisations and adjectives (-ment, -
age, -ion, -eur, -oir, -ure or zero-derived nominal-
isations, and -able, -ant, -é adjectives).

3 The annotation

We retrieved 1199 entries (verbal readings) for the
selected 167 frequent verbs mentioned earlier. On
average, each verb has roughly 15 readings, while
50% have more than 133. These readings were
manually annotated according to a fine-grained as-
pectual classification on a ‘telicity scale’ of eight
values.

At the bottom of the scale are readings that are
unambiguously (‘strictly’) stative (i.e. for which
any other aspectual value is excluded), rated with
1 (S-STA). For instance, élargir02 (see Table 1a) is
rated with 1, given (a.o.) its incompatibility with
the progressive. Those are distinguished from sta-
tive verbs that also display a dynamic reading (e.g.
penser ‘think’), rated with 2 (STA-ACT). Readings
that are unambiguously dynamic and atelic (‘strict
activity’ readings) are rated with 3 (S-ACT).

At the top are found achievement readings for
which any other aspectual value is excluded, rated
with 8 (S-ACH). At the middle of the scale are
found ‘variable telicity’ readings, that have no
preference for the telic use in a neutral context and
are compatible both with for- and in- adverbials,
rated with 4 (ACT-ACC). For instance, élargir01
is rated with 4, because (a.o.) it is compatible
both with for- and in- adverbials and has no pref-
erence for the telic reading in a neutral context.
These variable telicity readings are distinguished
from ‘weak accomplishment’ readings, rated with
5 (W-ACC). Out of context, weak accomplishment
readings trigger an inference of completion and
have a preference for the telic use; however, they
are nevertheless acceptable with a for-adverbial
(on the relevant interpretation of this adverbial).
For instance, remplir01 ‘fill’ (Pierre a rempli le
seau d’eau ‘Peter filled the bucket with water’)
is rated with 5, because it by default triggers an
inference of completion, but is nevertheless still
acceptable with a for-adverbial under the ‘par-
titive’ reinterpretation of this adverbial. Under
this reinterpretation, described e.g. by Smollett
(2005) or Champollion (2013), the sentence trig-
gers an inference of non-completion (Bott (2010),
see e.g. Peter filled the bucket with water for 10
minutes). ‘Strong’ accomplishment readings —
like remplir09 (Cette nouvelle a rempli Pierre de

3Interestingly, the average number of 15 readings per verb
very closely matches the number of event categories per verb
obtained in the experiment reported by Marvel and Koenig
(2015), who propose a new method of automatically cate-
gorising event descriptions.

14



id frame encoded information
01 T1308 transitive, human subject, inanimate direct object, instrumental adjunct

P3008 reflexive, inanimate subject, instrumental adjunct
A30 intransitive with adjunct, inanimate subject

02 N1i intransitive, animate subject, prep. phrase headed by de (of )
A90 intransitive with adjunct, subject human or thing
T3900 transitive, inanimate subject, object human or thing

(a) Syntactic descriptions
id examplea semantic decomposition sem. primitive sem. class
01 On élargit une route/ La route (s’)élargit. r/d+qt large become Transformation
02 Cette veste élargit Paul aux épaules/ La robe élargit la taille. d large a.som become Transformation
03 On élargit ses connaissances. r/d large abs become Transformation
04 On élargit le débat à la politique étrangère. f.ire abs VRS directed move Enter/Exit

(b) The four readings illustrated by sample sentences and their semantic description

aLiteral translations – 01: One widens a road/the road is REFL widened/the road widens. 02: This jacket widens Paul ‘at
the’ shoulders/ The dress widens the waist. 03: One widens one’s knowledge. 04: One extends the debate to foreign policy.

Table 1: LVF entries for élargir

joie ‘This news filled Peter with joy’) — are in-
compatible with the partitive reinterpretation of
for-adverbials.4 Those are rated with 6 (S-ACC).
Finally, accomplishments that share a proper sub-
set of properties with achievements are rated with
7 (ACC-ACH).

The annotator evaluated each entry with a def-
inite or singular indefinite internal argument, in
order to abstract away from the role of the deter-
miner in the aspectual value of the VP (see e.g.
Verkuyl (1993)).

We also used a coarser grained aspectual scale
and group the verbal readings into the following
classes: ATElic (rating 1–3), with VARiable telic-
ity (rating 4), and TELic (5 or more). Table 2 gives
an overview of the distribution of the aspectual rat-
ings.

The first finding is that verbs display a consid-
erable aspectual variability across readings, which
confirms the need to go beyond the type level for
the computational modelling of aspectual classes.
The aspectual value of 2/3 of the 151 verbs with
more than one reading varies with the instantiated
reading (on the 8 value scale). With respect to the
coarser grained scale, roughly half of the verbs
(82, for a total of 793 readings) have readings in
more than one of the three overarching aspectual
classes.

4The for-adverbial is nevertheless compatible with rem-
plir09, but only under its (non-partitive) ‘result state-related
interpretation’, under which it scopes on the result state, cf.
Piñón (1999); see e.g. This news filled Peter with joy for ten
minutes.

4 The features

The LVF connects each verbal reading with spe-
cific morphological, syntactic and semantic fea-
tures. Among such features, those that influence
the lexical aspect of the verb in context are known
to be pervasive: Verbs encoding the BECOME op-
erator in their event structure generally have a telic
use; intransitive manner verbs are mostly activ-
ity verbs (see e.g. Rappaport Hovav and Levin
(1998) and subsequent work); ditransitive verbs
like give are mostly result verbs (see e.g. Pylkkä-
nen (2008)) and thus accomplishments.5. We took
advantage of many of these features for our classi-
fication. Also, some semantic classes give very
clear hints to the lexical aspect of its members.
For instance, readings instantiating the class of
‘enter/exit verbs’ are telic, those instantiating the
‘transformation’ class are never atelic only, etc.6

We also made use of features conveyed by the se-
mantic decomposition, in particular its main com-
ponent (BECOME, DO, ITER, STATE, etc.).

We also took advantage of the encoded infor-
mation on the suffixes used in reading-preserving
nominalisations. For instance, readings with an
intransitive but no transitive frame can in prin-

5Relevant features are sometimes coded in an indirect
way. For instance, the difference between verbs like donner
x à y ‘give x to y’, that subcategorise the indirect object, and
verbs like dire x à y ‘say x to y’, that do not, is retrievable
through the difference in the associated syntactic frames.

6On this respect, note that the semantic decomposition
of élargir02, which involves BECOME, shows the limits of
the analysis provided by the LVF: Under the ‘spatial’ use of
which élargir02 is an instance, degree achievements do not
describe events in which an individual undergoes change over
time (see Deo et al. (2013)).

15



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
S-STA ACT-STA S-ACT ACT-ACC W-ACC S-ACC ACC-ACH S-ACH

182 67 175 195 172 227 29 152

(a) 8 value scale

1-3 4 5-8
ATE VAR TEL
424 195 580

(b) 3 value scale

Table 2: Aspectual distribution of the 1199 manually annotated verbal readings

Features collected from corpus Related features
Example Clause in LVF

frequency –
not or never –
She can not explain why.
temporal adverb durative adverbial
I saw to it then. in semantic decomposition
implicit or no external argument canonical passive, refl.
He was admitted to the hospital. constr. w. instrumental adj.
past/pres participle –
. . . blood pressure going up.
in adverbial –
She built it in an hour.
4 tense related features –
manner adverb manner argument or adjunct
She studied diligently.
evaluative adverb +ql
They performed horribly. in semantic decomposition
for adverbial durative adverbial
I sang for ten minutes. in semantic decomposition
continuous adverb +re (iterative operator)
She will live indefinitely. in semantic decomposition

Table 3: Siegel and McKeown’s (2000) and LVF features.

ciple characterise unaccusative (telic) or unerga-
tive (atelic) verbs. But only the latter undergo -
eur nominalisation, as in English (see Keyser and
Roeper (1984)). The availability of the -eur nom-
inalisation is therefore a reliable aspectual feature
too.

Tables 3 and 4 compare features used in some
previous aspectual classifications and their equiv-
alents in the LVF. As one can check, the LVF fea-
tures cover most of the features used in Siegel and
McKeown (2000) and Zarcone and Lenci (2008)7.
For obvious reasons, features related to grammat-
ical aspect conveyed by tenses are not covered in
our valency lexicon. But overall, our set of fea-
tures roughly corresponds to those used in previ-
ous work, for a total of 38 features.

5 Classifying LVF entries

The items we classified are the 1199 readings for
the 167 verbs selected. Our classification task
consisted in predicting the right (coarse-grained)
aspectual class for these readings (ATE, VAR or
TEL). In this supervised learning setting, we ap-

7The features used by Friedrich and Palmer (2014) are
mainly derived from those of Siegel and McKeown (2000).

Features collected Related features
from corpus in LVF

temporal adverbs temporal arg. or adj.
intentional adverbs –
frequency adverbs +qt in sem. decomp.
iterative adverbs +re in sem. decomp.
tense –
only subject A* or N* frame
presence of direct obj T* frame
presence of indirect obj N* frame

presence of locative arg
encoded in frame
sem class = L

presence of sent. compl. encoded in frame
canonical passive T* and A* schema
subj & dobj, plural subj or obj
number, animacy, human/animal subj or obj
definiteness thing subj or obj

Table 4: Zarcone and Lenci’s (2008) and LVF features.

plied the classifiers shown in Table 5 with the
implementation provided by Weka (Hall et al.,
2009), mostly with their default settings8. We
measured the performance of the classifiers by as-
sessing the accuracy in 10-fold cross-validation,
and compared it to the accuracy of a baseline
classifier which always assigns the majority class
(TEL, rules.ZeroR). We also performed a linear
forward feature selection using the Naïve Bayes
algorithm9. This way, nine features were selected,
coding, among others:

• the presence of a temporal or manner argu-
ment/adjunct in the semantic decomposition;

• the main primitive in the semantic decompo-
sition;

• the use of the suffixes -ment and -ure in the
reading-preserving nominalisation;

• the relative polysemy of the lemma (indicated
by the number of its readings);

• a subject that must be inanimate;
• the presence of a reflexive reading.
8For libsvm (the SVM implementation), we used a linear

kernel and normalisation. We selected roughly one classifier
from each class.

9An exhaustive search with the 38 features in this group
was computationally too time-consuming.

16



Algorithm complete selected
trees.j48 61.80 63.00
rules.jrip 63.89 61.56
lazy.kstar 62.89 67.47
functions.libsvm 62.72 61.13
bayes.naivebayes 60.22 65.80
baseline 48.37 48.37

Table 5: Classification accuracy for LVF readings, with com-
plete feature set and selected in feature selection process.

The results in Table 5 show that the features re-
trieved from the LVF enable one to predict the as-
pectual class considerably better than the baseline:
The accuracy ranges from 12 points to almost 20
above the baseline accuracy of 48.37. The best
configuration, achieving an accuracy of 67.48%,
is the lazy.kstar classifier based on the feature
set reduced by feature selection. A comparison
with the results reported in previous work is dif-
ficult, due to the great discrepancies in the ex-
perimental settings (see the introduction). How-
ever, our results clearly show that the aspectual
class characterising verbal readings can be pre-
dicted with a reasonable precision on the basis of
lexical-related information only. They once again
empirically confirm the well-documented corre-
lations between lexical aspect and the morpho-
syntactic/semantic properties of the verb.

6 Aspectual indicators

In this section, we take a more qualitative look at
the results obtained in section 5. We assessed the
quality of the predictions of our model (henceforth
LVF-model) in two ways. Firstly, we derived as-
pectual indicators for the type level, describing the
general ‘aspectual profile’ of a verb across all its
readings. These are later used in the task based
evaluation described in section 710. Secondly, we
looked at the aspectual values assigned to the read-
ings of particular verbs (see indicators for the ver-
bal readings below).

Indicators for the type-level. The aspectual in-
dicators for the type-level are computed on the ba-
sis of the aspectual values predicted for each read-
ing of the verb. As shown in Table 6, they are de-
signed to reflect how aspectual values vary across
the readings of the verb. For example, the indica-

10Assigning a value to the type level was necessary to test
our predictions on the TempEval corpus, since aligning each
utterance of this corpus with a specific LVF-reading is not
feasible.

v. var > 1 telicity value for same lemma?
m. maj Telicity value of majority
t. tel Any telic reading?
a. ate Any atelic reading?

(a) Nominal and binary aspectual indicators
1. %tel Proportion of telic readings
2. %ate Proportion of atelic readings
3. %var Proportion of flexible readings
4. probest.max Max of probability estimates
5. probest.min Min of probability estimates
6. probest.avg Average of probability estimates

(b) Numeric aspectual indicators.

Table 6: Aspectual indicators

tor ‘v’ in Table 6a shows whether there is any vari-
ation at all, ‘t’ assesses the presence of at least one
telic reading, etc. Whereas the indicators in Ta-
ble 6a provide qualitative cues, those in Table 6b
convey quantitative information. The first three
give the proportion of readings of a particular as-
pectual class. The last three are computed from
the probability estimates generated by the libsvm
classifier.

In order to get an idea of the quality of our pre-
dictions, we computed from automatic predictions
the aspectual indicators for all annotated verbs.
We provide some of them in Table 7 for verbs
judged aspectually polysemous by the annotator.
These ‘automatic’ aspectual indicators are given
in normal font. For the same verbs, we also com-
puted the ‘manual’ aspectual indicators, i.e. those
computed on the basis of the manual annotations
(when possible)11. These are set in bold face. The
verbs in Table 7a are dominantly telic, those in 7b
dominantly atelic and those in 7c dominantly vari-
able. As one can check, the dominant aspectual
value is correctly assigned in most cases. Also,
in most cases, the proportion of uses of the non-
preferred readings closely matches the proportion
obtained manually. Unsurprisingly, the sample
of verbs predicted to be ‘mostly telic’ are mostly
(quasi-)achievement verbs or strong accomplish-
ments describing ‘non-gradual’ changes (verbs
lexicalising changes involving a two-point scale,
e.g. dead or not dead for kill, see e.g. Beavers
(2008)). Unsurprisingly again, many verbs pre-
dicted to be ‘mostly variable’ are degree achieve-
ment verbs. More remarkably, remplir ‘fill’ is

11Indicators derived from the probability estimates are not
computable from the manual annotations.

17



rightly predicted to be ‘mostly telic’, although it
is a verb of gradual change. The model there-
fore preserves here the crucial distinction between
degree achievements associated with a close scale
like remplir, tolerating atelic readings under some
uses although they conventionally encode a max-
imal point (see Kennedy and Levin (2008)), and
achievement verbs associated with an open scale
like élargir ‘widen’, that also accept both for- and
in- adverbials, but do not show a preference for the
telic reading in absence of any adverbial. These
observations suggest that even if predictions for
some readings are wrong, the aspectual indicators
might still rightly capture the general ‘aspectual
profile’ of verbs at the type level.

Indicators for the verbal readings. We also in-
spected the predicted values for some predicates
and compared them to the values assigned man-
ually. For predicates showing a high degree of
aspectual variability like élargir ‘widen’ (see Ta-
ble 7c), the results are very good: élargir01 (‘They
are widening the road’) is correctly analysed as
VAR and élargir04 (‘They are extending the major-
ity’) as TEL. Interestingly, élargir02 (‘This jacket
widens Pierre’s shoulders’) is correctly analysed
as ATE, despite of the fact that it is wrongly
analysed by the LVF as instantiating the class of
change of state verbs (see footnote 6). This sug-
gests that the computational model could leverage
the information provided by the syntactic frames
associated to élargir02 (see Table 1b) to outweigh
the wrongly assigned semantic class and produce
the correct aspectual prediction.

7 Task based evaluation

Reliable automatic aspectual classifications are
expected to enhance existing solutions to tempo-
ral relation classification. Thus, if our LVF-model
improves such a solution, we can conclude that our
learned aspectual values are reliable. We there-
fore evaluated the predictive power of the LVF-
model on unseen verbs through such tasks, fol-
lowing the method proposed in Costa and Branco
(2012). While Costa and Branco (2012) collected
their aspectual indicators from the web and im-
proved the temporal relation detection in the Por-
tuguese TimeBank (PTiB), we derive ours from
the predictions generated using the LVF-model, as
described in section 6 and use them in TempEval
tasks for the French TimeBank.
The data used in these experiments are the French

lemma m t a %tel %ate %var
casser TEL 1 0 95.00 0 0.05
‘break’ TEL 1 1 95.65 4.35 0
mourir TEL 1 1 75.00 25.00 0
‘die’ TEL 1 1 75.00 25.00 0
remplir TEL 1 1 70.00 30.00 0
‘fill’ TEL 1 1 80.00 20.00 0

(a) Mostly telic
lemma m t a %tel %ate %var
regarder ATE 0 1 0 91.67 8.33
‘look at’ ATE 1 1 16.67 83.33 0
chanter ATE 0 1 0 66.67 33.33
‘sing’ ATE 0 1 0 66.67 33.33
étudier ATE 1 1 30.00 60.00 10.00
‘study’ ATE 1 1 20.00 80.00 0

(b) Mostly atelic
lemma m t a %tel %ate %var
vieillir VAR 0 1 0 11.11 88.89
‘get older’ VAR 0 1 0 22.22 77.78
embellir VAR 0 1 0 33.33 66.67
‘beautify’ VAR 1 0 33.33 0 66.67
élargir VAR 1 1 25.00 25.00 50.00
‘widen’ VAR 1 1 25.00 25.00 50.00

(c) Mostly variable

Table 7: Aspectual indicators computed from predictions and
from manual annotations. Indicators in bold face are com-
puted based on manual annotations. The names of the indi-
cators refer to the labels used in Table 6.

TempEval data, a corpus for French annotated in
ISO-TimeML (FTiB in the following) described
in Bittar et al. (2011). This data contains about
15 000 tokens12 annotated with temporal relations.
Of these, roughly 2/3 are marked between 2 event
arguments and 1/3 between an event and a tem-
poral expression. The classification tasks we are
concerned with deal with the automatic detection
of the type of these temporal relations, namely
the tasks A, B and C in the TempEval 2007 chal-
lenge13. Table 8 gives an overview of the data for
each of the three classification tasks. We build our
experiments on top of a base system addressing
these challenges and show that the performance of
this base system can be improved using our aspec-

12This corresponds to 1/4 of the English TimeBank.
13Task A is about temporal relations between an event and

a time, task B focuses on relations between events and the
document’s creation time, and task C is concerned with rela-
tions between two events.

18



FTiB PTiB LVF
tlinks rel. types tlinks lemmas(seen) readings

A 302 10 1659 164(16) 1597
B 264 5 2887 149(14) 1329
C 1172 15 1993 427(40) 3827

Table 8: Event instances for TempEval tasks A, B and C
for French and Portuguese (left) and corresponding verbs and
readings in LVF (right).

Attribute A B C
event-aspect × X X
event-polarity × X X
event-pos × X X
event-class X X X
event-tense × × ×
event-mood∗ × X X
event-vform∗ × X X
order-adjacent × N/A N/A
order-event-first × N/A N/A
order-event-between X N/A N/A
order-timex-between × N/A N/A
timex-mod × × N/A
timex-type X × N/A
tlink-relType class

Table 9: Features used in the base system for TempEval tasks
A, B and C. Features checked (X) were selected in the feature
selection process.

tual indicators.
Like Costa and Branco (2012), we implemented

as base system the classifiers proposed for English
by Hepple et al. (2007), which only rely on rel-
atively simple annotation attributes. Table 9 lists
the features used in the context of our FTiB data,
basically the same as in Hepple et al. (2007) and
Costa and Branco (2012). As in their work, we
also determined the final set of features by per-
forming an exhaustive search on all possible fea-
ture combinations for each task, using again the
Naïve Bayes algorithm. The features marked ‘X’
are those finally selected this way. Using this set of
features, we trained the same classifiers and under
the same conditions described in section 5 on the
FTiB data. The accuracy of the resulting models
in 10-fold cross-validation on the three TempEval
tasks are shown in italics in Table 10.

Following again Costa and Branco (2012), we
then enhanced this basic set of features with each
of the aspectual indicators computed from the pre-
dictions generated by the LVF-model. The aspec-
tual indicators are listed in Table 6; we described
their computation in section 6. This way, we ob-
tained 10 enhanced feature sets, one for each as-

pectual indicator. Using these feature sets and the
same classifiers as before, we learned models on
the FTiB data and computed their accuracy in 10
fold cross-validation.

The improvements achieved this way are shown
in Table 10. Whenever an aspectual indicator im-
proves the results of the base system, we give its
accuracy (in bold face) below the accuracy of the
base system. The superscripts refer to the lines in
Table 6 and show which of the aspectual indicators
was used to enhance the base feature set to obtain
the reported improved accuracy14.

The results given in Table 10 show that the ac-
curacy of 8 out of the 15 tested classifiers could
be improved by 1-3 points by adding the aspec-
tual indicators. The indicator which produced the
most and largest improvements was the average
over the probability estimates, suggesting that this
value best reflects the dominant aspectual value
of the verb. Overall, the improvement obtained
through our classification is quantitatively compa-
rable to the enhancement realised by Costa and
Branco (2012): Their results show an improve-
ment similar in size to ours for 9 out of the same
15 classifiers. They evaluate on a test set, whereas
we compare accuracy in 10-fold cross-validation.
This was necessary since the French TimeBank
is considerably smaller (roughly 1/4 of Costa and
Branco’s data set for Portuguese, see PTiB col-
umn in Table 8). As mentioned earlier, a qual-
itative comparison is nevertheless difficult, given
the substantial differences between the data and
the methodology used here and there.

The results clearly show however that the LVF-
model trained on our annotated lexical entries per-
forms well on unseen predicates.

8 Conclusion and future work

This paper focuses on the issue of aspectual vari-
ability for the computational modelling of aspec-
tual classes, by using a machine learning approach
and a rich morpho-syntactic and semantic valency
lexicon. In contrast to previous work, where the
aspectual value of corpus clauses is determined at
the type (verb) level on the basis of features re-
trieved from the corpus, we make use of features
retrieved from the lexicon in order to predict an
aspectual value for each reading of a same verb
(as they are delineated in this lexicon). We firstly

14We only show improvements of at least 1%, and only
show the largest gains in performance.

19



Classifier A B C
trees.j48 0.71 0.81 0.40

0.731 0.823 0.41a
rules.jrip 0.71 0.83 0.36

0.736 0.846 0.37m
lazy.kstar 0.72 0.82 0.42

0.855
functions.libsvm 0.74 0.83 0.40

0.856
bayes.naivebayes 0.73 0.84 0.40
baseline 0.72 0.62 0.29

Table 10: Accuracy of classifiers obtained on FTiB with base
and enhanced feature sets. Values for the base classifiers are
in italics. In bold face improvements of an enhanced classi-
fier, no values represent no improvement. Superscripts give
the aspectual indicator used to enhance the base feature set
and obtain the improved result. They refer to rows in Table 6.

studied the performance of the classifier on a set
of manually annotated verb readings. Our results
experimentally confirm the theoretical assump-
tion that a sufficiently detailed lexicon provides
enough information to reliably predict the aspec-
tual value of verbs across their readings. Sec-
ondly, we tested the predictions for unseen predi-
cates through a task based evaluation: We used the
aspectual values predicted by the LVF-model to
improve the detection of temporal relation classes
in TempEval 2007 tasks for French. Our predic-
tions resulted in improvements quantitatively sim-
ilar to those achieved by Costa and Branco (2012)
for Portuguese and thus confirm the reliability of
our aspectual predictions for unseen verbs.

The investigation reported here can be further
pursued in many interesting ways. One possible
line of work consists in exploring the aspectual re-
alisation and distribution of the LVF readings in
corpus data. This would also provide means to re-
late our findings for verbal readings to corpus in-
stances.

Our study strongly relies on the LVF lexi-
cal database, a very extensive source of morpho-
syntactic and semantic information. For other lan-
guages, this kind of information, when it is avail-
able, is generally not contained in a single lexicon.
Therefore, a further interesting research direction
would be to evaluate the applicability of our tech-
nique to suitable information from distributed re-
sources. On this respect, recent efforts made
for linking linguistic and lexical data and making
these data accessible and interoperable would cer-
tainly be very helpful. For English in particular,
available suitable resources are already abundant.

One of these is the Pattern Dictionary of English
Verbs, see (Hanks, 2008). Other interesting data
bases are FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), VerbNet
(Levin, 1993; Kipper Schuler, 2006) and Prop-
Bank (Palmer et al., 2005), especially since these
different resources have been mapped together by
(Loper et al., 2007), thus giving access to both the
lexical and distributional properties defining each
entry.

Increasing the reliability of automatic identifi-
cation of aspectual classes also represents inter-
esting opportunities for several NLP applications.
A finer-grained and more reliable automatic as-
sessment of aspectual classes can among others be
quite useful for increasing the accuracy of textual
entailment recognition, and, particularly, the sen-
sitivity of systems to event factuality (Saurí and
Pustejovsky, 2009). For instance, for telic perfec-
tive sentences, while the inference of event com-
pletion amounts to an entailment with strong ac-
complishments and (quasi-)achievements (at least
in absence of an adverb signalling incompletion
like partly), the same inference is to some ex-
tent defeasible with weak accomplishments. In-
tegrating finer-grained distinctions among predi-
cates could also enable one to better disambiguate
verbal modifiers like durative adverbials. A for-
adverbial typically signals that the event is incom-
plete when it modifies a weak accomplishment;
e.g., Peter filled the truck for one hour suggests
that the filling event is not finished, see (Bott,
2010) a.o. However, the same adverbial does not
trigger this inference when it applies to a strong
accomplishment or a (quasi)-achievement. For in-
stance, They broke the law for five days does not
suggest that the breaking event is not finished. A
system that performs better in the identification
of fine grained aspectual classes would therefore
evaluate with more precision the probability that
the reported event is completed in the actual world.

Acknowledgments

This research was funded by the German Science
Foundation, SFB 732 Incremental specification
in context, Project B5 Polysemy in a Conceptual
System. For feedback and discussions, we thank
Achim Stein and the reviewers of *Sem 2016.

References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.

1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Pro-

20



ceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, volume 1, pages 86–90,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

John Beavers. 2008. Scalar complexity and the
structure of events. In John Dölling and Tatjana
Heyde-Zybatow, editors, Event Structures in Lin-
guistic Form and Interpretation. De Gruyter, Berlin.

André Bittar, Pascal Amsili, Pascal Denis, and Lau-
rence Danlos. 2011. French TimeBank: An ISO-
TimeML annotated reference corpus. pages 130–
134. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Oliver Bott. 2010. The Processing of Events. John
Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

Lucas Champollion. 2013. The scope and processing
of for-adverbials: A reply to Deo and Piñango. In
Todd Snider, editor, Proceedings of Semantics and
Linguistic Theory (SALT) 23, pages 432–452. CLC
publications, Cornell University, Ithaca:NY.

Francisco Costa and António Branco. 2012. Aspec-
tual type and temporal relation classification. pages
266–275. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Ashwini Deo, Itamar Francez, and Andrew Koontz-
Garboden. 2013. From change to value differ-
ence. In Todd Snider, editor, Semantics and Lin-
guistic Theory (SALT) 23, pages 97–115. CLC pub-
lications, Cornell University, Ithaca:NY.

David Dowty. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague
Grammar : The semantics of Verbs and Times in
Generative Semantics and in Montague’s PTQ. D.
Reidel Pub. Co., Dordrecht; Boston.

Jean Dubois and Françoise Dubois-Charlier. 1997. Les
Verbes français. Larousse.

Jacques François, Denis Le Pesant, and Danielle Lee-
man. 2007. Présentation de la classification
des Verbes Français de Jean Dubois et Françoise
Dubois-Charlier. Langue française, 153(1):3–19.

Annemarie Friedrich and Alexis Palmer. 2014. Auto-
matic prediction of aspectual class of verbs in con-
text. volume 2, pages 517–523. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining Software: An up-
date. SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11(1):10–18.

Patrick Hanks. 2008. Mapping Meaning onto Use: A
Pattern Dictionary of English Verbs. Utah. AACL.

Jennifer Hay, Christopher Kennedy, and Beth Levin.
1999. Scalar structure underlies telicity in
‘degree achievements’. In Devon Strolovitch
Tanya Matthews, editor, Semantics and Linguistic
Theory (SALT) 9, pages 127–144.

Mark Hepple, Andrea Setzer, and Robert Gaizauskas.
2007. USFD: Preliminary exploration of features
and classifiers for the TempEval-2007 Task. pages
438–441. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Ray Jackendoff. 1983. Semantics and Cognition. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Anna Kazantseva and Stan Szpakowicz. 2010. Sum-
marizing short stories. Computational Linguistics,
36(1):71–106.

Christopher Kennedy and Beth Levin. 2008. Mea-
sure of change: The adjectival core of verbs of vari-
able telicity. In Louise McNally and Christopher
Kennedy, editors, Adjectives and Adverbs: Syntax,
Semantics, and Discourse, pages 156–182. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Samuel Keyser and Thomas Roeper. 1984. On the
middle and ergative construction in English. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 15:381–416.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2006. VerbNet: A Broad-
Coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Pennsylvania.

Judith L. Klavans and Martin Chodorow. 1992. De-
grees of stativity: The lexical representation of verb
aspect. In COLING 1992 Volume 4: The 15th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Edward Loper, Szu ting Yi, and Martha Palmer. 2007.
Combining lexical resources: Mapping between
propbank and verbnet. In Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Workshop on Computational Linguistics.

Aron Marvel and Jean-Pierre Koenig. 2015. Event
categorization beyond verb senses. In Proceedings
of the 11th Workshop on Multiword Expressions,
NAACL 2015, pages 569–574.

Thomas Meyer, Cristina Grisot, and Andrei Popescu-
Belis. 2013. Detecting narrativity to improve En-
glish to French translation of simple past verbs. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse in Ma-
chine Translation, pages 33–42, Sofia, Bulgaria, Au-
gust. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Anita Mittwoch. 2013. On the criteria for distin-
guishing accomplishments from activities, and two
types of aspectual misfits. In Boban Arsenijevic,
Berit Gehrke, and Rafael Marín, editors, Studies in
the Composition and Decomposition of Event Pred-
icates, pages 27–48. Springer, Berlin.

Martha Palmer, Paul Kingsbury, and Daniel Gildea.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

21



Rebecca J. Passonneau. 1988. A computational model
of the semantics of tense and aspect. Computational
Linguistics, 14(2):44–60.

Christopher Piñón. 1999. Durative adverbials for re-
sult states. In Proceedings of the 18th West Coast
Conference in Formal Linguistics, pages 420–433.
Cascadilla Press, Somerville, MA.

Christopher Piñón. 2006. Weak and strong accom-
plishments. In Katalin Kiss, editor, Event Structure
and the Left Periphery. Studies on Hungarian, pages
91–106. Springer, Dordrecht.

Steven Pinker. 1989. Learnability and Cognition:
The Acquisition of Argument Structure. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.

James Pustejovsky and Inderjeet Mani. 2003. Annota-
tion of temporal and event expressions. In Compan-
ion Volume of the Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003
- Tutorial Abstracts.

Liina Pylkkänen. 2008. Introducing Arguments. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Malka Rappaport Hovav and Beth Levin. 1998. Build-
ing verb meanings. In Miriam Butt and Wilhelm
Geuder, editors, The Projection of Arguments: Lexi-
cal and Compositional Factors, pages 97–134. CSLI
Publications, Chicago.

Roser Saurí and James Pustejovsky. 2009. Fact-
Bank: A corpus annotated with event factuality.
43(3):227–268.

Roser Saurí and James Pustejovsky. 2012. Are you
sure that this happened? Assessing the factuality de-
gree of events in text. Computational Linguistics,
38(2):261–299.

Eric V. Siegel and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2000.
Learning methods to combine linguistic indica-
tors: Improving aspectual classification and reveal-
ing linguistic insights. Computational Linguistics,
26(4):595–628.

Rebecca Smollett. 2005. Quantized direct object
don’t delimit after all. In Henk Verkuyl, Henriëtte
de Swart, and Angeliek van Hout, editors, Perspec-
tives on Aspect, pages 41–59. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Amsterdam.

Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder,
Mark Hepple, Graham Katz, and James Pustejovsky.
2007. Semeval-2007 task 15: Tempeval tempo-
ral relation identification. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tions (SemEval-2007), pages 75–80, Prague, Czech
Republic. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Henk Verkuyl. 1993. A Theory of Aspectuality : The
Interaction between Temporal and Atemporal Struc-
ture. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; New
York.

Alessandra Zarcone and Alessandro Lenci. 2008.
Computational models for event type classification
in context. In Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’08), Marrakech, Morocco. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

22


