



















































IHS-RD-Belarus at SemEval-2016 Task 5: Detecting Sentiment Polarity Using the Heatmap of Sentence


Proceedings of SemEval-2016, pages 296–300,
San Diego, California, June 16-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 

IHS-RD-Belarus at SemEval-2016 Task 5:  

Detecting Sentiment Polarity Using the Heatmap of Sentence 

Maryna Chernyshevich 

IHS Inc. / IHS Global Belarus 

131 Starovilenskaya St 

220123, Minsk, Belarus 

{Marina.Chernyshevich}@ihs.com 

 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper describes the system submitted by 

IHS-RD-Belarus team for the sentiment detec-

tion polarity subtask on Aspect Based Senti-

ment Analysis task at the SemEval 2016 

workshop on semantic evaluation. We devel-

oped a system based on artificial neural net-

work to detect the sentiment polarity of opin-

ions. Evaluation on the test data set showed 

that our system achieved the F-score of 0.83 

for restaurants domain (rank 4 out of 28 sub-

missions) and F-score of 0.78 for laptops do-

main (rank 4 out of 21 submissions). 

1 Introduction 

Social media texts found in user review services 

have a great data-mining potential, as they offer 

real-time data that can be useful to monitor public 

opinion on brands, products, events, etc.  

Most of recent approaches to sentiment analysis 

task are based on bag-of-words features, syntactic 

dependency features, out-of-domain and domain-

specific sentiment lexicons, to train an supervised  

model that predicts the polarity of each given term 

or aspect category. This approach is very popular 

but it relies on heavy pre-processing of the data 

which involves careful choosing of the right fea-

tures, empirical thresholds and intuitive analysis of 

the training set (Brun et al., 2014, Saias, 2015). 

In this paper, we present an approach to the 

opinion polarity detection task based on an artifi-

cial neural network and sentiment orientation score 

of words. 

2 Task description 

The SemEval-2016 shared task on Aspect based 

Sentiment Analysis focuses on identifying the 

Opinion target expressions (OTE), the Aspect cat-

egories and the sentiment expressed towards each 

OTE or Aspect category. 

The main focus of this paper is polarity sub-

tasks, such as OTE polarity in restaurant subject 

domain and Aspect category polarity in laptop sub-

ject domain. 

In the OTE polarity subtask, the input consists 

of a review sentence and the set of terms or aspect 

categories. The expected output is a polarity label 

(positive, negative or neutral) for each of the asso-

ciated terms or aspect categories. 

For example, the system should determine the 

polarity of fajitas and salads in the following sen-

tence: I hated their fajitas, but their salads were 

great. 

As for the Aspect category polarity, the task is 

more complicated. In the following sentence, the 

system has to determine the polarity of display 

quality (DISPLAY#QUALITY) and display usa-

bility (DISPLAY#USABILITY): The display has a 

great resolution but has difficulty always seeing 

the small print. 

The task organizers provided a dataset of cus-

tomer reviews with manually annotated opinion 

targets: 2500 sentences for laptop domain and 

2000 sentences for restaurant domain. 

Evaluation was to be carried out according to 

Precision, Recall and F1 metrics. 

296



 
 
 

 

3 System description 

The central idea behind our system is the visualiza-

tion of sentiment orientation in a word sequence 

using heatmap, that highlights regions with higher 

or lower “temperature”.  The “temperature” of a 

word is its sentiment polarity, positive or negative, 

and the intensity is calculated based on sentiment 

orientation score of word. 

3.1 Sentiment orientation lexicon 

Sentiment orientation score indicates the strength 

of association of words (w) with positive (pr) and 

negative (nr) reviews. Following Turney and 

Littman (2003), we calculated SO as the difference 

using Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) 

measures: 

𝑆𝑂(𝑤) = 𝑃𝑀𝐼(𝑤, 𝑝𝑟) − 𝑃𝑀𝐼(𝑤, 𝑛𝑟) 

SO score is positive when the word or phrase 

tends to occur mostly in positive reviews and nega-

tive when the word occurs more often in negative 

reviews. The magnitude indicates the degree of as-

sociation. 

We followed the lexicon-generation approach 

proposed by Kiritchenko et al. (Kiritchenko et al., 

2014) and when generating the sentiment lexicons 

we distinguished the terms appearing in negated 

and affirmative contexts. Sentiment scores were 

then calculated separately for these two types of 

contexts. 

We created uni-, bi- and tri-gram lexicons based 

on Yelp restaurant reviews and Amazon reviews. 

3.2 Sentiment orientation score 

The final SO score of n-gram in a sentence can be 

affected by some neighbour terms, such as valence 

shifters and intensifiers (Kennedy and Inkpen, 

2006). We created short wordlists and tuned final 

SO score of n-gram if words from these lists were 

found in term context. 

3.2.1 Valence shifters 

Valence shifters are terms that can change the se-

mantic orientation of another term, for example, 

combining positively valenced words with a nega-

tion flips the positive orientation to a negative ori-

entation. The most important shifters are negations 

such as not, never, none, nobody, etc. (Polanyi and 

Zaenen, 2004). 

As it was mentioned above we included nega-

tions, such as not and never, as n-gram postfix into 

lexicons. If the n-gram in negative context is not 

found in lexicon or its raw frequency in review 

corpus is less than 5, the final SO score is calculat-

ed based on calculation rules showed in table 1. 

These negation rules are designed in order to 

improve the sentiment text analysis and are based 

on simple assumption: the negation flips positive 

the valence of a word to a negative with the same 

strength, but the negation doesn’t flip the valence 

of a negative word, it rather reduces its strength. 

 
SO of word calculation rule Example 

positive SO SO=pos_SO * -1 SO(love) = +2.6 

SO(not love) = -2.6 

negative SO SO=neg_SO * 0.5 SO(hate) = -2.2 

SO(not hate) = -1.1 

Table 1: SO calculation rules in negative context. 

3.2.2 Intensifiers 

Intensifiers are terms that change the degree of the 

expressed sentiment. For example, in the sentence 

“The waterfly cases are very good.”, the term very 

good is more positive together than just good 

alone. So to calculate the final SO score we multi-

ply sentiment score of n-gram by 3. 

On another side, in the sentence “The waterfly 

cases are barely good.”, the term barely makes 

this statement less positive. We created 4 lists of 

intensifiers of different intensity of affecting the 

final SO score of n-gram.  

3.2.3 Unreality and conditionality 

A sentence in reviews can express not only a real 

user experience, but also an unreal opinion, for ex-

ample a wish, “I should have bought something 

better.” or “The laptop may be better”. We col-

lected all surface patterns which can express unre-

ality or conditionality. The SO of all positive n-

grams in unreal context is flipped to negative with 

the same strength. The SO of negative n-grams is 

not changed. 

297



 
 
 

 

 
 

                                                         Fig. 1: System architecture 

 

3.3 Neural network architecture 

A fully connected multilayer neural network with 

back-propagation is applied. The network, illus-

trated in Fig. 1, contains 3 layers: 

 input with 81 nodes - one for each feature 
presenting “temperature” range; 

 hidden layer with 80 nodes - each node in 
the input layer is connected to each node 

of the hidden layer; 

 output layer with 3 nodes - one for each of 
3 classes. 

As the activation function the sigmoid function 

is used. We apply dropout to our hidden layers, as 

described in Srivastava et al. (Srivastava et al., 

2014), to prevent network overfitting. 

The network architecture is implemented on 

Keras
1
, which is an effective deep learning frame-

work implementation in python. 

                                                     
                                                       
1 http://keras.io/ 

 

 

 

At the first step, we detect the context of opinion 

target expressions or category. If the sentence has 

only one opinion target, the term context will in-

clude all words from the beginning to the end of 

the sentence. If the sentence has many targets, the 

context will include all words surrounding the term 

enclosed between two separators. As a separator 

we consider all punctuation marks, the next opin-

ion target, the end and the beginning of the sen-

tence. In the laptops subtask we had to detect po-

larity of the category that is not bounded to any 

word in the sentence. That is why we considered 

the whole sentence as context for every aspect cat-

egory.  

For training, each term context was represented 

as a vector of 81 features that resembles the scale 

of “temperature” from -40 (very negative) to 40 

(very positive). Each word according to its SO 

score was placed on this scale. The value of a fea-

ture means the number of words within this range 

of sentiment orientation. 

298



 
 
 

 

Table 2 illustrates a set of n-grams with their fi-

nal SO scores and “temperature” extracted from 

the sentence “Now the speed is disappointing”. 

 n-gram SO score °C 

Uni-grams disappointing -3.0 -30 

speed +1.0 +10 

Bi-grams is disappointing -2.7 -27 

disappointing . -1.7 -17 

now the -0.4 -4 

the speed +1.0 +10 

speed is +1.4 +14 

Tri-grams is disappointing . -3.5 -35 

the speed is -0.1 -1 

Table 2: SO scores of n-grams 

The number of training epochs is set to 2. More 

epochs would lead to overfitting because the train-

ing set that is relatively small. 

4 Results and further work 

The 3-fold cross-validation procedure was used to 

test the system performance. It uses 66% of the da-

ta to train and the remaining 33% to assess the ac-

curacy. This is repeated 3 times with a different 

33% left. Table 3 represents the results. 

 
 restaurants laptops 

total accuracy 0.82838934 0.8030438 

             F1 positive 0.882567 0.8479 

F1 negative 0.762167 0.796867 

          F1 neutral 0.0 0.0 

Table 3: 3-fold cross-validation results 

The results on the official test set are given in 

Table 4. They are similar to our best results at-

tained during the developments stage.  

 restaurants laptops 

total accuracy 0.8393481 0.7790262 

            F1 positive 0.9078 0.8308 

F1 negative 0.753 0.7588 

          F1 neutral 0.0 0.0 

Table 4: Official results 

On both sets our system did not recognize neu-

tral (mildly positive or mildly negative sentiment) 

sentiments, although we used 3 classes classifica-

tion. The reason is the low number of neutral sen-

timents in the annotated corpus. 

As a future work, we intend to develop more 

complex artificial neural network architecture and 

try to use review-long memory about the polarity 

of previous targets. Also we are going to investi-

gate the influence of words with extremely high or 

low sentiment orientation score on the SO scores 

of neighbouring words. 

5 Conclusion 

We have presented a simple neural network archi-

tecture that predicts polarity of word sequence 

based the heatmap of sentence that highlights re-

gions with higher or lower sentiment intensity. We 

submitted runs corresponding to the slot3 subtasks, 

obtaining competitive results. Our submission was 

ranked 4
th
 out of 28 submissions for restaurants 

domain and 4
th
 out of 21 submissions for laptops 

domain. 

References  

Alfred. V. Aho and Jeffrey D. Ullman. 1972. The Theory 

of Parsing, Translation and Compiling, volume 1. 

Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.  

Caroline Brun, Diana Nicoleta Popa, Claude Roux. 

2014. XRCE: Hybrid Classification for Aspect-based 

Sentiment Analysis. in Proceedings of the eight inter-

national workshop on Semantic Evaluation Exercises 

(SemEval-2014), August 2014, Dublin, Ireland. 

Kennedy, A. and D. Inkpen. 2006. Sentiment Classifica-

tion of Movie Reviews using Contextual Valence 

Shifters. Computational Intelligence, vol.22(2), 

pp.110-125, 2006. 

José Saias. 2015. Sentiue: Target and Aspect based Sen-

timent Analysis in SemEval-2015 Task 12. In Pro-

ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Se-

mantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015), Denver, Colora-

do.  

Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. Contextual valence 

shifters. In Proceedings of the AAAI Symposium on 

Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and 

Applications (published as AAAI technical report 

SS-04-07), 2004. 

Maria Pontiki, Dimitrios Galanis, Haris Papageorgiou, 

Ion Androutsopoulos, Suresh Manandhar, Moham-

mad AL-Smadi, Mahmoud Al-Ayyoub, Yanyan Zhao, 

Bing Qin, Orphée De Clercq, Véronique Hoste, Ma-

rianna Apidianaki, Xavier Tannier, Natalia Louka-

chevitch, Evgeny Kotelnikov, Nuria Bel, Salud María 

Jiménez Zafra, and Gülşen Eryiğit. 2016. SemEval-

2016 Task 5: Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis. In 

Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop on 

Semantic Evaluation, SemEval ’16, San Diego, Cali-

fornia, June 2016. Association for Computational 

Linguistics. 

Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu, Colin Cherry, and 

Saif M. Mohammad. 2014. NRC-Canada-2014: De-

299



 
 
 

 

tecting Aspects and Sentiment in Customer Reviews. 

in Proceedings of the eight international workshop on 

Semantic Evaluation Exercises (SemEval-2014), Au-

gust 2014, Dublin, Ireland.  

Srivastava. N, Hinton, G, Krizhevsky, A, Sutskever, I, 

Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent 

Neural Networks from Overfitting. Journal of Ma-

chine Learning Research 15, 2014 

 

 

300


