



















































JUNLP at SemEval-2016 Task 13: A Language Independent Approach for Hypernym Identification


Proceedings of SemEval-2016, pages 1310–1314,
San Diego, California, June 16-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

JUNLP at SemEval-2016 Task 13: A Language Independent Approach for
Hypernym Identification

Promita Maitra and Dipankar Das
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Jadavpur University

Kolkata, India
promita.maitra@gmail.com and dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper describes our approach to build
a language-independent hypernym extrac-
tion system, based on two modules for the
SemEval-2016 Task 13 on Taxonomy Extrac-
tion Evaluation (TExEval-2). This task fo-
cuses only on the hypernym-hyponym rela-
tion extraction from a list of terms collected
from various domains and languages. The first
module of our system is built on the state-
of-the-art system using BabelNet while the
second one deals with the parts found within
terms and which are useful to establish a hier-
archical relation among them. Our system per-
formed well in terms of recall in most of the
domains irrespective of the languages; how-
ever, the precision scores indicate a scope of
improvement. In case of overall ranking, our
present system stands fourth in monolingual
(i.e. English) evaluation and second in multi-
lingual (i.e. Dutch, Italian, French) setup.

1 Introduction

The rapid growth in terms of digitalized texts in the
recent years (specially, in the fields including scien-
tific, clinical, enterprise, legal, and personal infor-
mation management) has made the management of
textual information increasingly important. In order
to fulfill the need of having more structured data, on-
tologies, taxonomy or hierarchical relations between
ontological concepts are considered as useful tools
for content organization, navigation, and retrieval,
as well as to provide valuable input for semantically
intensive tasks such as question answering and tex-
tual entailment. This task specifically focuses on the

identification of hypernym-hyponym relation among
terms in four different languages (English, Dutch,
Italian and French) and different domains. Typically,
taxonomy construction has three basic steps: entity
or concept identification, discover different relations
among different entities and taxonomy construction.
The challenge organizers have made it easy by al-
ready providing us with a list of extracted entities
(also called concepts/terms) for each of the domains
in each of the languages. Our approach was to build
a system that fits a multilingual setup and signifi-
cantly reduces the computational time and complex-
ity by taking existing resources into consideration.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 describes the task at hand in brief along
with the main challenges. Section 3 gives a brief
overview of the work already done in this field. Sec-
tion 4 contains the details of the modules we have
used to address the problem. Section 5 presents the
analysis of results and finally, the conclusion and fu-
ture scopes are discussed in Section 6.

2 Problem Description

SemEval-2016 Task 13: Taxonomy Extraction Eval-
uation (TExEval-2) has its main focus on hypernym-
hyponym relation extraction from given lists of
terms collected from multiple domains like Food,
Environment and Science (Bordea et al., 2016).
This year, the task organizers have extended the
problem setup to address the multilingual structure.
Along with English, there were terms in French,
Dutch and Italian as well for all the domains. For
this particular task, we did not have to go through
the complexities of entity identification from a text

1310



as the lists of terms were already given.

• i. One of the main challenges was that we were
not provided with any annotated or plaintext
corpus that we can use as training. However,
the organizers suggested that it would be help-
ful if we explore the Wikipedia dump for the
same.

• ii. Second big challenge was to develop a sys-
tem that will work for languages we do not un-
derstand. Ontology development being such a
task where some basic domain knowledge is in-
evitable, this multilingual setup was indeed a
great concern for us.

• iii. We were specifically asked not to use the
resources we most frequently use in this kind
of tasks as they were used to construct the gold
standard. The list of the resources that were
prohibited is:

- hypernym-hyponym relations from the Word-
Net 1,

- skos:broader and skos:narrower relations
from EuroVoc 2,

- the Google product taxonomy 3,

- the Taxonomy of fields and their subfields
provided for the National Academies of Sci-
ences, Engineering, and Medicine 4.

However, in contrast, we were free to add more
terms if needed to the term lists that were provided
by the organizers.

3 Related Work

Hypernym detection from text is one of the most
popular hierarchical relation extraction tasks in on-
tology learning for which research work dates back
to at least 1984 (Calzolari, 1984). Hypernym can
be described as a linguistic term for a word whose
meaning includes the meanings of other words,
which are known as hyponyms. For instance, flower
is a hypernym of daisy and rose. On the other hand,

1https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
2http://eurovoc.europa.eu/
3https://www.google.com/basepages/producttype/taxonomy.en-

US.txt
4http://sites.nationalacademies.org/PGA/Resdoc/PGA 044522

daisy and rose are some of the hyponyms of flower.
In simple words, this relation deals with identify-
ing the concepts and finding the particular superclass
they fit in. Manually constructing these kind of re-
lations from text is a time-consuming and labour-
intensive procedure. Hence, the researchers felt the
need to make this process automatic. The meth-
ods proposed can broadly be categorized into two:
supervised and unsupervised. While the unsuper-
vised methods can identify and extract semantic re-
lations from plain text without the need of any pre-
annotated text corpora, the supervised methods often
find it difficult to find an annotated corpora in simi-
lar domain. A major part of the previous researches
on automatic semantic classification of words was
developed based on the method first proposed by
Hearst, that the presence of certain lexico-syntactic
patterns can indicate a particular semantic relation-
ship between two noun phrases (Hearst, 1992). This
paper introduced six basic lexical patterns. This
rule based approach was further extended in sub-
sequent works bringing out more valid patterns, ei-
ther handcrafted or learned from training corpus for
semantic relation extraction (Berland and Char-
niak, 1999) (Kozareva et al., 2008) (Widdows and
Dorow, 2002). Pattern based results are effective and
reliable, scores high on precision measure. How-
ever, these methods suffer in terms of recall. Later,
a few distributional approaches were proposed by
different authors making use of the large corpora
present in (Guido Boella, 2014) (Navigli and Ve-
lardi, 2010). Machine learning based methods make
use of features like term co-occurrence, seman-
tic similarity or other syntantic information from
text collection. Precision of these machine learn-
ing based approaches is lower compared to pattern
based approach. The simple morpho-syntactic ap-
proach also proved to yield a decent result (Lefever,
2015) (Sang et al., 2011). In recent years, several
researches are being carried out to extract semantic
relations from texts in other languages.

4 System Description

In the present challenge, we had to keep three main
points in mind. We wanted to make a single sys-
tem appropriate for a multilingual setup (Dutch,
French, Italian and English). However, it became

1311



more difficult as we were not allowed to use any of
the widely used resources like WordNet, EuroVoc,
Google Product Taxonomy etc. Building a taxon-
omy which would provide structured information
about semantic relations between words is an ex-
tremely slow and labor-intensive process. There-
fore, we kept our focus on building a system which
would be simple and significantly light in terms of
computation time.

Figure 1: Basic system diagram

Our system has two main modules, as shown in
Figure 1:

• i. Extracting semantic relations from BabelNet.

• ii. Analyzing the terms to find a subterm suit-
able to become a hypernym.

4.1 BabelNet Based Module

BabelNet5 is an open source resource containing
both multilingual dictionary with lexicographic and
encyclopedic coverage of terms, and a network of
concepts and named entities connected in a very
large network of semantic relations, called Babel
synsets (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012). Each of the
Babel synsets represents a given meaning and con-
tains all the synonyms which express that meaning
in a range of different languages. BabelNet 3.5 cov-
ers 272 languages, which also include our task re-
lated languages like English, French, Dutch and Ital-
ian.

5http://babelnet.org/

Finding out semantic relations from the entire
Wikipedia dump with a pattern based approach
proved to be quite a long process and computation-
ally expensive as there can be numerous types of
valid patterns that can hold a hypernym-hyponym
relation. On the other hand, it would take days to
initially start with a few patterns and then search
for more with a bootstrapping approach. On the
other hand, BabelNet already provides a variety of
semantic relations for a large number of concepts us-
ing knowledge from various resources available in-
cluding Wikipedia. So, our system execution time
gets significantly reduced if we just use the seman-
tic relation set available in BabelNet instead of ex-
tending the Wikipedia corpus and analyzing it for
the pattern search. Secondly, we wanted to have
a system that would fit into the multilingual setup
that the task intends to have this year. The facts
were that we do not have a satisfactory amount of
knowledge required for identifying the valid patterns
for hypernym-hyponym relations in languages other
than English, and we also do not have an annotated
training data to learn those patterns via a bootstrap-
ping method for those languages. Therefore, it was
essential for us to have a tool that could automati-
cally extract such knowledge from corpus.

For each term that appears in each domain, we
obtain a synset from the BabelNet for hypernym
relations found over the Wikipedia articles in dif-
ferent languages. As the task organizers specifi-
cally asked not to use resources like WordNet, only
the Wikipedia source is taken into account while
obtaining hypernym relations, skipping the others
like WordNet, VerbNet, Microsoft Terminology etc.
This is done to make the system computionally light
and reduce the huge time needed to process the
Wikipedia articles searching for patterns. We con-
sider the terms for their NOUN POS tag sense, with
the language mentioned in the query. We only con-
sidered the NOUN POS tags because it was seen
from our observation of term lists, that they contain
terms which are mostly nouns. We get the synset
for each term which contains a lot of noise such as
repetitive sense words, out-of-domain senses, senses
in different morphological form than the existing
terms, etc. We fed the raw synset output to a cleans-
ing module which would give us only the unique in-
domain terms in their correct morphological form as

1312



given in the term-list.
We further extended this module to find the

synsets of the terms present in the cleansed output
in order to obtain the entire hypernym tree for the
given term which helps to increase the recall of our
system.

4.2 Subordinate-word Module

This module deals with finding appropriate parts of
given terms that can possibly be the hypernym of the
original term. For example, Fruit Custard is a type
of Custard. Now these subordinate-words which
are potential hypernyms can be of the following two
types.

- The subordinate-word can itself be an indepen-
dent term present in the term-list given. For ex-
ample, if we have both the terms Biochemistry and
Chemistry in the term-list, we can just analyze the
term Biochemistry and identify Chemistry as its pos-
sible hypernym.

- There might be multiple terms for which no
common part is an independent term but significant
overlap exists among those, even more than once. In
such cases we have introduced that overlapped part
as our new term in the term-list. For example, we
have Chocolate Pudding and Vanilla Pudding as two
terms in our list but no entry for Pudding. Since we
get overlapping in previous two terms with Pudding,
we can consider Pudding as the possible hypernym
of Chocolate Pudding and Vanilla Pudding.

However, the problem is that we were getting
some noise in the input due to the stopwords present
in the list. For example, University of PlaceA
and University of PlaceB will have University and
of as the subordinate-word hypernyms. Of can-
not be a hypernym to some term. So we remove
those subordinate-words which has only stopwords
in them. Again, we had to deal with different
morphological forms of the same word as hyper-
nyms, for example science and sciences. For such
instances, we checked if any one form is the part of
our term list. If yes, we keep that form and remove
others or we keep the lemmatized form otherwise.

5 Analysis of Results

Just as construction of suitable ontology from text,
evaluation of an extracted ontology is not a simple

Language Precision Recall Fscore
English 0.15 0.30 0.20
Dutch 0.16 0.22 0.19
French 0.17 0.25 0.20
Italian 0.13 0.20 0.19

Table 1: Average Precision, Recall, Fscore for Gold standard
evaluation across all domains.

task either. For this particular task, structural evalu-
ation was done which includes the presence of cy-
cles, the number of intermediate nodes compared
to leaf nodes, and the number of over generic rela-
tions with the root node. The output relations were
also evaluated against collected gold standards col-
lected from WordNet and other well known, openly
available taxonomies using evaluation measures like
standard precision, recall and Fscore.

Table1 shows the average result of our system
with respect to the gold standard evaluation for each
language taking an average over all the domains.
We had our focus on generating a hypernym tree for
each term by providing the hypernyms of a term as
next input to the system. This resulted in better re-
call but the precision of our system showed a visible
decline compared to the baseline system for all the
languages.

Table 2 shows the structural evaluation of the out-
put produced by our system for different domains
in English and other languages. The structural mea-
sures used for the evaluation are as follows:

- V: number of distinct vertices;
- E: number of distinct edges;
- c.c.: number of connected components;
- i.i.: intermediate nodes = V - L where L is the

set of leaves
- cycles: YES = the taxonomy contains cycles,

NO = the taxonomy is a Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG)

- Cumulative Fowlkes and Mallows Measure
(FM): cumulative measure of the similarity of two
taxonomies.

As we can see, though we have cycles present in
relations of English language, all other language-
output is a DAG. We achieved better score in cat-
egorization due to high number of distinct vertices,
edges and intermediate nodes obtained by our sys-
tem.

1313



Measure English Multilingual
Cyclicity 3 0
Structure (FM) 0.1498 0.0155
Categorisation (i.i.) 377 178.22
Connectivity (c.c.) 53.17 34.89

Table 2: Structural Evaluation for English and other languages.

6 Conclusion and Future Scope

In this paper we have discussed in brief our approach
to address the Taxonomy Extraction and Evalua-
tion task of SemEval 2016. We have kept our fo-
cus mainly on keeping the computation time opti-
mal and building a system suitable for multilingual
setup. We took a completely unsupervised approach
without directly considering a text corpora. Both of
our modules need only the terms to be fed as input
and generates possible hypernym candidate for each
term in a short span of time compared to the huge
amount of time and knowledge needed to manually
craft the lexico-syntactic pattern/regular expressions
in each domain and then analyzing the large corpora
for possible matches. The results were good in terms
of recall, but the precision score suffered due to our
approach of generating as many possible in-domain
hypernyms of a term as we can.

We can try to improve our system’s perfor-
mance by making use of information available with
Wikipedia dump other than the article texts such as
infobox properties, redirect links, article titles, cat-
egories or other meta-information available. Also,
provided a training set, we believe a bag-of-word
model constructed within a specific context window
can yield better overall results.

References
Matthew Berland and Eugene Charniak. 1999. Find-

ing parts in very large corpora. In In Proceedings of
the 37th annual meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics on Computational Linguistics,
page 57. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Georgeta Bordea, Els Lefever, and Paul Buitelaar. 2016.
Semeval-2016 task 13: Taxonomy extraction evalua-
tion (texeval-2). In Proceedings of the 10th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Nicoletta Calzolari. 1984. Detecting patterns in a lexical
data base. In 10th International Conference on Com-

putational Linguistics and 22Nd Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, page 170.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Alice Ruggeri Livio Robaldo Guido Boella, Luigi
Di Caro. 2014. Learning from syntax generalizations
for automatic semantic annotation. Journal of Intelli-
gent Information Systems, page 1.

Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proc. of the Four-
teenth International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Nantes, France.

Zornitsa Kozareva, Ellen Riloff, and Eduard Hovy. 2008.
Semantic class learning from the web with hyponym
pattern linkage graphs. In In Proceedings of ACL-08,
volume 8, page 1048. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Els Lefever. 2015. Lt3: A multi-modular approach to au-
tomatic taxonomy construction. In In Proceedings of
the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2015), page 944. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2012. The
automatic construction, evaluation and application of
a wide-coverage multilingual semantic network. Else-
vier, page 217.

Roberto Navigli and Paola Velardi. 2010. Learning
word-class lattices for definition and hypernym extrac-
tion. In In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,ACL
10, page 1318. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Erik Tjong Kim Sang, Katja Hofmann, and Maarten
de Rijke. 2011. Extraction of Hypernymy Information
from Text.

Dominic Widdows and Beate Dorow. 2002. A graph
model for unsupervised lexical acquisition. In In Pro-
ceedings of the 19th international conference on Com-
putational linguistics, volume 1, page 1. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

1314


