



















































VENSESEVAL at Semeval-2016 Task 2 iSTS - with a full-fledged rule-based approach


Proceedings of SemEval-2016, pages 796–802,
San Diego, California, June 16-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

VENSESEVAL at Semeval-2016 Task 2: iSTS - with a full-fledged rule-
based approach 

Rodolfo Delmonte 

Department of Language Studies and Comparative Cultures & 
Department of Computer Science - Ca’ Foscari University of Venice 

Ca’ Bembo – Dorsoduro 1075 - 30123 VENEZIA 
Email:delmont@unive.it - Website: http//project.cgm.unive.it 

 

Abstract 

In our paper we present our rule-based system 
for semantic processing. In particular we 
show examples and solutions that may be 
challenge our approach. We then discuss 
problems and shortcomings of Task 2 – iSTS. 
We comment on the existence of a tension 
between the inherent need to on the one side, 
to make the task as much as possible 
“semantically feasible”. Whereas the detailed 
presentation and some notes in the guidelines 
refer to inferential processes, paraphrases and 
the use of commonsense knowledge of the 
world for the interpretation to work. We then 
present results and some conclusions.  

1 Introduction 

In this presentation we will focus on Task 2, 
Interpretable Semantic Textual Similarity. We will 
comment on the way in which the task has been 
defined and what is eventually made available to 
participants to the task. In the section below we 
will present our system created for RTE – 
Recognizing Textual Entailment - challenges, and 
how it has been reorganized to suit the new current 
task. We discuss examples that suit or challenge 
our approach. We then comment in detail problems 
and shortcoming related to issues related to the 
annotations and the choice of semantic relations. In 
a final section we will present our results and a 
discussion. 

2 The system VENSESEVAL 

The system is an adaptation of VENSES Venice 
team system used for RTE (Recognizing Text 
Entailment) challenges (see Delmonte et al. 2009). 

In fact Venses was only partially adaptable to the 
new task, and so we had to partly recast it. In 
particular, the semantic evaluation module which 
was used to issue a binary (or ternary) decision in 
RTE challenges, in iSTS scenario works in a 
totally different manner. RTE required a Text - 
which could be constituted by a single simple or 
complex sentence - to be compared to an 
Hypothesis, this usually a simple sentence. From a 
purely theoretic and abstract point of view, 
measuring semantic similarity between two 
sentences (snippets) resembles very closely RTE as 
indicated in the paper accompanying 2015 
challenge, (see Agirre et al. 2015). As the authors 
comment, iSTS can be defined as a graded 
similarity notion. In iSTS the comparison is 
between chunks which must be aligned first. 
   We find this approach certainly very useful and 
adequate for the task of semantic similarity 
checking. However, we had to reorganize and 
partly rewrite the modules for semantic matching. 
This has taken a lot of time and in fact the module 
hasn't been fully completed. So we assume that 
next year challenge will see a better – or at least 
complete - version of VENSESEVAL.  
   In the current challenge, we used only part of the 
original RTE system for various reasons. Venses 
was created to allow for semantic matching at 
different levels of complexity and representations. 
In particular, the task allowed semantic 
composition over different sentences, not 
necessarily adjacent to one another. It required 
anaphoric processes to be part of the semantic 
interpretation, again over a span of text made up of 
a number of different but referentially related 
sentences. For that reason, we used a complete 
system for semantic interpretation that not only 
had a level of anaphora and coreference resolution, 
it also ended up by creating a logical form 
representation which was then used for deep 

796



semantic matching1. 
   Venseseval has a different structure and less 
components. iSTS task seems much more a word 
or chunk level interpretation process. It does not 
require anaphora/coreference resolution because it 
is bound at sentence level. It does not require a 
logical form to be computed, or at least we haven't 
found a real motivation to do that. In fact, we then 
found good reasons for computing predicate-
argument structures, but only after the deadline 
expired – more on this below. Eventually we 
decided to limit ourselves to produce syntactic 
constituency structure which could then be used to 
produce non-embedded chunks. The pipeline we 
used is then fairly simple:  
- a tokenizer + a sentence splitter 
- a tagger + an augmented recursive transition 
network 
- a chunker extracting simple chunks - in the same 
fashion in which they have been characterized in 
the task - from sentence level constituency. 
   The system had to be reorganized around the 
gold chunk option which is what we wanted to 
experiment with. In order to allow chunk 
alignment to work correctly, sentences have been 
tokenized without introducing any further 
computation which could modify the order of the 
tokens. We just wanted to use tagged tokens with 
the gold chunks options, and chunked structures 
with the system option of the task.  
   In particular, in our original system, NP chunks 
were organized internally as a list to show the 
Head of the chunk in first position: all modifiers 
were moved to the right of the head. This was no 
longer possible, given the fact that we had to 
preserve the word order of the input sentence. No 
multiwords have been created, and this is 
something that may have contributed to decrease 
our tagger accuracy and as a consequence also 
chunks have a lower level of accuracy. The final 
system used the Named Entity Recognition module 
which however was only activated at chunk level, 
all other cases have been neglected. The reason for 
not producing multiwords was also related to the 
fact that we wanted to keep matching procedures 
as simple as possible. But we intend to reintroduce 
it in a future reimplementation of the system. 
   The first pass into the sentence pair is done with 

                                                
1 A version of the RTE system is still working on our website, 
http://project.cgm.unive.it/cgi-bin/venses/venses.pl 

the aim to produce a general similarity evaluation 
based on tagged words only. To do this, we use 
part of the matching procedures explained below 
which erase function or stop words, and evaluate 
identity and similarity between content words 
without however issuing any score. Then we pass 
to the chunk-based analysis which is similar to the 
algorithm proposed in the Annotation Guidelines 
that can be taken as a starting point also for our 
module. For instance, as specified in the Procedure 
at pag.11, 3.d where it says “proceed from 
strongest to weakest 1:1 alignments”. This is 
exactly what our system does, as specified in the 
algorithm below: 
 
− given one sentence pair, 

− select first chunk in sentence one 
− recursively try to match chunk 

one to each of the chunks in 
sentence two 
− start matching procedures 

from EQUIvalence/OPPOsite 
− succeed, move to second 

chunk in sentence one 
− repeat 
− fail 
− move to matching procedures 

for SPE1/SPE2  
− succeed, move to second 

chunk in sentence one 
− fail 
− move to matching procedures 

for SIMI, REL 
− succeed, move to second 

chunk in sentence one 
− fail 
− assign NOALI label to chunk 
− move to second chunk in 

sentence one 
− repeat until end of chunks 

in sentence one 
− end 

 
The main algorithm is a depth first attempt at 
finding the best match: we always select the first 
candidate available at each similarity level. We 
don’t try all possible matches, in a breadth-first 
approach where we should score them and then 
choose the best candidate. At the end of the main 
recursion, the algorithm looks for possible 
recovery actions, by collecting all NOALI marked 
chunks and searching for possible matches with the 
already matched chunks except for the ones 
computed as EQUI. This is done trying to match 

797



the head of the NOALI chunk with the head of the 
companion chunk. In case of match, it substitutes 
the other chunk with the current one and turns it 
into a NOALI.  
   In the Annotation Guidelines we find two 
secondary features - Polarity and Factuality, 
appearing as extensions to main features, which are 
scarcely commented. We didn't implement these 
extensions because there were no clear instructions 
to do so in the guidelines. In the case of POLarity 
we only found four cases so labeled in the training 
gold standard for headlines – none in the images 
gold standard. As to FACTuality extensions we 
only implemented NOALI_FACT for all those 
cases in which a communication verb was labeled. 
Also in this case, however, there was no clear 
definition of the task in the guidelines, but we 
found 29 labeled cases in the headlines gold 
standard, none in the images. 13 examples were 
cases of NOALI_FACT which gave us sufficient 
confidence in assigning the label. The remaining 
cases were split between EQUI and SIMI with two 
SPE1 cases, and it was fairly hard to establish a 
rule that could fit with them all. SPE cases are 
individuated by matching the head of the two 
chunks which must be equal in the sense provided 
by EQUIvalence algorithm.  
   SIMI on the contrary requires some inferential 
step – but see section below. In particular we used 
a specialized label SIMI-2 to classify all chunk-
pairs which involved differences in numbers, 
simple integers but also dates. Integers were then 
measured to check the distance in value and decide 
a score to associate to SIMI, which could vary 
from, 2 to 4. We used it also to indicate difference 
in country names, i.e. Locations recognized by the 
NER algorithm. 
   Problems arise for all those cases of paraphrases 
included in the corpus. There's a few examples in 
the training corpus of Headlines, in sentence 214, 
 
//Iran says it captures drone ; U.S. denies losing one. 
//Iran says it has seized U.S. drone ; U.S. says it 's not 
true  
8 <==> 10 12 13 14 // EQUI // 5 // denies <==> says 's 
not true 
 
Another such case is present in sentence 402,  
 
//Egypt 's main opposition rejects president 's call for 
dialogue. 
//Egypt opposition mulls response to Morsi dialogue 

call. 
5 <==> 3 4 // SPE1 // 3 // rejects <==> mulls response 
Finally, consider the example in sentence n.670 
again from Headlines, 
 
//No plan to shut petrol pumps at night Moily. 
//India govt rejects proposal to shut petrol pumps at 
night  
1 2 <==> 3 4 // SIMI // 4 // No plan <==> rejects 
proposal 
 
We set up a specialized algorithm for cases like the 
one in 214. But the other two cases we found are 
not computable: “no plan” can be paraphrased in 
an infinite number of different ways. The same 
applies to “mulls response”. 
   Coming now to the need to compute predicate-
argument structures, we have been convinced of its 
usefulness only after discovering poor performance 
of the system in total NOALI classification. In all 
those cases in which the sentence pair did not share 
any chunk, the system was still trying to relate far-
fetched similarities, despite the fact that the overall 
meaning was not compatible with that 
interpretation. Take for instance the pair from the 
test-set, sentence no.9: 
 
// Many dead as asylum boat sinks off Australia 
// Mandela spends third day in hospital 
 3 4 5 <==> 5 6 // SIMI // 2 // as asylum boat <==> in 
hospital  
 
Our system wrongly found some similarity 
between two chunks, where “asylum” and 
“hospital” share meaning components. However, 
the two sentences are clearly talking about totally 
different topics so the apparent meaning similarity 
should not apply. Preventing this from happening 
could only take place in case predicate argument 
structures were made available. Main predicates 
SINK and SPEND would then be judged not to 
share any meaning nor would the SUBJect 
“asylum” and “Mandela”. Argumenthood could 
then be used to prevent a SUBJect “asylum boat” 
from being made to share semantic similarity 
components with a locative adjunct “in hospital”, 
where the sinking event doesn’t find any 
correspondence. 

2.1 Matching procedures 

798



Matching is applied at different levels using 
different resources. We use WordNet2 for EQUI 
relations by searching non identical predicates in 
the same synset. Again WordNet is used for SIMI 
by searching up and down the path one level only, 
for all non identical predicates; we also use an 
extended version of VerbOcean3 for entailment 
relations between verbs, where we added some 250 
new relations. For more general REL relations we 
use Roget's Thesaurus4. And of course there's a 
great number of gazeteers and lexica for NER that 
is made available, in particular, the ones by JRC 
made available by Ralph Steinberg5. 
   For more complex semantic similarity relations, 
we have reconstructed our Finite State Automaton 
that we introduced in our last participation in RTE 
n.5. We report it here below. It requires tagged 
words and a number of linguistic rules to be 
implemented. The current version of the algorithm 
is made up of 86 different rules. 
   The procedure takes as input the tagged list of 
words making up the current chunk pairs and tries 
to match it, by the predicate 
match_template(Chunk1, Chunk2). If the match 
succeeds the semantic evaluation outputs a value 
that is indicative of the type of decision taken. This 
matching procedure is reached by the analysis only 
after EQUI have failed. Consider the example 
below where we highlight the portion of the chunk 
pair relevant for the semantic evaluation:  
 
T: Trains, trams, cars and buses ground to a halt on 
Monday after a shoot-out between 18:00 CET and 
19:00 CET in the historical city of Basel in 
Switzerland.  
H: Basel is a European city.  
 
In more detail, Augmented Finite State Automata 
mean that in addition to equality matching that is at 
the basis of the whole algorithm, the system looks 
for inferences and other lexical information to 
authorize the match. In fact, these procedures as a 
whole allow the matching to become more general 
though introducing some constraints. The  
instructions reported below are expressed in Prolog 

                                                
2 https://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/ 
download/current-version/ 
3 http://demo.patrickpantel.com/demos/ 
verbocean/ 
4 http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10681 
5 http://langtech.jrc.it/RS.html 

which treats capitalized words as variables. 
Constants on the contrary are written with lower 
case letter, as for instance the words “of” and “in” 
below.  
 
match_template([A,Is-_,T-_,F_,G|Hyp], 
[G,of-_,A,in-_,L-_|Text]) 
:-     
lightverbs(Is),     
high_rank(T,Lex),     
locwn(L),     
is_in(L,F1),     
(natl(F1,F,_);natl(F1,_,F)), !.  
 
where the procedure “lightverbs” looks for 
copulative verbs, i.e. the verb of the Chunk1 must 
be a copulative verb;  “high_rank” looks for high 
frequency words like articles; “locwn” verifies that 
the word present in the variable “L” is a location. 
Then there are two inferences: the first one is fired 
by the call “is_in” that recovers the name of the 
continent to which “L” belongs, thus implicitly 
requiring “L” to be the name of a nation. Then the 
second inference looks for the corresponding 
nationality adjective. Values for all above variables 
(L,A,F,F1,T,G,Is), are then as follows:  
 
L --> Switzerland, F1 --> Europe, F --> European 
A = Basel-np, Is = is, T = a, G = city-n  

3 Analysing iSTS Annotation Criteria 

As said above, measuring semantic similarity 
between two sentences (snippets) resembles very 
closely TE. However, differences are clearer seen 
that iSTS imposes an additional first step - chunk 
alignment - which is finding the chunk pair that is 
semantically closer and then assigning a type and a 
score. In this sense, it is intuitively limited to what 
pertains to semantics, while TE had no such 
limitation and the word Entailment was understood 
as possessing a much wider import than just 
semantics. In fact, if we read the annotation 
guidelines carefully, we discover at pag. 2 that the 
subdivision into chunks is defined as follows: 
"Chunks are aligned in context, taking into account 
the interpretation of the whole sentence, including 
common sense." Common sense has no reference 
whatsoever to SEMANTICS being rather based on 
knowledge of the world. The same we find at pag. 
3, "Note that the interpretation of the whole 
sentence, including common sense inference, has 

799



to be taken into account." Then in the annotation 
guidelines, we find other elements that indicate a 
need to go beyond semantics: "B. When aligning, 
take into account the deep meaning of the chunk in 
context, beyond the surface." 
   In fact, we expected task data to pertain to so-
called "literal" and direct meaning decomposition 
subset of sentences and not to contain any "non-
literal" or "indirect" interpretable data. We also 
didn't expect to find unexpressed or implicit 
meaning components that had to be reconstructed 
while interpreting chunks. As we will see, this is 
only partially confirmed. The task itself has been 
organized so as to favour semantic decomposition 
operations to be applicable to chunks which should 
be at first paired by the system and then interpreted 
and "semantically explained". Semantic 
explanation is to be carried out by choosing among 
a small number of semantic relational label, 
including: 
- EQUI(valent) SIMI(lar) OPPO(site) SPE(cific)1 
SPE(cific)2 REL(ation) NOALI(gnment) 
but also additional labels with further semantic 
content: 
-  EQUI_FACT EQUI_POL SIMI_FACT 
SPE1_FACT SPE2_FACT NOALI_FACT SIMI-2 
In particular label SIMI-2 is not explained in the 
guidelines. As to the other additional labels, FACT 
stands for factuality and POL for polarity, i.e. these 
two extensions should be used in case the sentence 
contains elements of one or the other phenomenon. 
The 2016 version of the task introduces then some 
further difficulty, when it allows chunks to match 
not just in a 1:1 but also 2:1. As to this procedure, 
in our system we check for a possible match 
already in the first recursive search and at the end 
of the recursive matching procedure. 
   We will now look into semantic relation labels 
first and see whether they are adequate and 
consistent. The first label, EQUIvalent covers all 
cases of full identity between wordforms in the two 
chunks. Equivalence without full orthographic 
identity is very frequent and includes all cases 
where the system matching algorithm has to put up 
with capitalized, or fully upper case words, and 
sometimes dashed version of the same unique 
word. But certainly the most frequent cases of 
equivalence-not-identity are where the two 
wordforms have different morphology and 
lemmata have to be matched. During EQUI 
matching procedures, we transform head words 

into their corresponding lemmata and try a match. 
   More difficult cases include named entity 
recognition processes, whenever an institution or a 
person is present with the abbreviated wordform in 
one chunk and the fully expressed name in the 
other; or when the name is used in one chunk and 
the other contains name and surname. Eventually, 
in some cases, the nationality has to match the 
word for the nation in the other chunk. 
Differentiating between SIMI and SPE is certainly 
hard6.  
   In all these definitions, we find the same words 
"similar meanings" except for REL where the word 
"relation" is used instead. Now differences 
between SPE and SIMI can only be found in the 
presence of "attributes" in the definition of SIMI, 
whereas in SPE we find reference to specificity, 
which we may assume can be related to the 
presence of  "attributes" but in different measure. It 
would seem then that SPE relations are more 
"similar" than SIMI relations, where semantic 
relations are less close. Let's now look at the 
examples presented in the guidelines. The second 
one poses already a problem: 
 
[Red double decker bus][driving][through the streets] 
[Double decker passenger bus][driving][with traffic] 
Alignment: 1<==>1(SPE1 4), 2<==>2(EQUI 5), 
3<==>3(REL 3) 
 
   The first two chunks have been interpreted as 
entertaining a SPE1 relation, which means that the 
first chunk "Red double decker bus" is more 
SPEcific than the second one. But the second one 
also contains a specification which is not present in 
the first chunk, "double decker passenger bus", 
constituted by the noun modifier "passenger". The 
choice of regarding chunk 1 more specific is driven 
by the fact that the colour specification adds a 
more relevant information to the common "double 
decker bus" than the noun  "passenger", which is 
regarded of no import to the identification of the 
semantic reference realized by the multiword head 
double_decker_bus. So it would seem that in order 
to decide whether to use SPE1 or SPE2 a system 
for semantic evaluation should be equipped with 
"commonsense" knowledge that would weigh the 
two attributes accordingly. However, it may be 

                                                
6 The guidelines defines it as follows (pag.3/4) very vaguely. 
 

800



disputable to define reference to "colour" as a less 
relevant attribute than reference to "passenger", for 
the simple reason that this decision eventually 
depends on the spatial location of the event. If it is 
England the location, then it is a commonplace 
notion that double decker buses are just red. But 
suppose the location was Lisbon, where double 
decker are sometimes red sometimes 
multicoloured, these latter being used by tourists to 
tour the city. In that case colour would have been 
more relevant than passenger. Even though 
“passenger” constitutes a more general attribute 
than “tourist” bus. So eventually, in order to use 
commonsense knowledge, at least time/place 
location must be made available. 
   Similar problems may be raised in another 
example (pag.6), where the semantic relation is  
expressed by predicates: 
 
[Hundreds]1[of Bangladesh clothes factory workers]2
[ill]3  
[Hundreds]1[fall]2[sick]3[in Bangladesh factory]4 
Alignment: 1<==>1 (EQUI 5), 2<==>4 (SPE1 3), 3
<==> 2,3 (EQUI 5) 
 
   Here the adjective "ill" is make to relate to "fall 
sick" by EQUI. However, (TO BE) "ill" where the 
verb to be is simply left implicit in the nominalized 
title, is interpretable as a STATE; whereas TO "fall 
sick" is clearly an EVENT. So maybe the two 
predicates are not EQUI but SIMI and in order to 
align FALL to the missing BE some inference is 
required. This goes against what is being affirmed 
under 2b, as to the fact that two events are 
(weakly) relatable but cannot be aligned because 
they "refer to different events". However the 
reference to different events is not clearly 
inferrable. 
 
[Saudis]1 [to permit]2 [women]3 [to compete]4 [in 
Olympics]5 
[Women]1 [are confronting]2 [a glass ceiling]3  
Alignment: 1<==>Ø(NOALI), 2<==>Ø(NOALI), 
3<==>1(SPE1 4), 4<==>Ø(NOALI), 5<==>Ø(NOALI), 
Ø<==>2(NOALI), Ø<==>3 (NOALI) 
 
   In one sentence we are told that women are in 
Saudi Arabia, but nothing is said in the second 
sentence, and since spatio-temporal locations can 
be left implicit we are unable to separate the two 
events and the two references to women. So we 
find it hard to consider the semantic relation 

intervening between the two chunks as SIMI. 

4 Results 

We report here below results for two of the three 
corpora only. As to the corpus for student-answer, 
it was filled with typos and spelling errors, and this 
was regarded part of the task. We were unable to 
compute any reasonable semantic similarity match 
for an extended number of sentences. So we 
decided to abandon it. As to the other two texts, 
results for test texts are very similar to those we 
already obtained for training ones, so we only 
show test results.  
 

 Ali Type Score TypSco 

Venseval 0.7428 0.4667 0.6949 0.4624 

Baseline 0.7100 0.4043 0.6251 0.4043 
Table 1: Results compared to Baseline for  

IMAGES SYS – Rank 12 over 13 
 

 Ali Type Score TypSco 

Venseval 0.8443 0.5789 0.8046 0.5735 

Baseline 0.8556 0.4799 0.7456 0.4799 
Table 2: Results compared to Baseline for  

IMAGES GS – Rank 10 over 20 
 
   As can be noticed by comparing results in SYS 
and GS tables, in the analysis of Images corpus the 
decrease of performance of the system is higher 
than the difference between baselines. Here below 
results for Headlines. 

 
 Ali Type Score TypSco 

Venseval 0.7081 0.4679 0.6493 0.4531 

Baseline 0.6486 0.4379 0.5912 0.4379 
Table 3: Results compared to Baseline for  

HEADLINES SYS – Rank 12 over 13 
 

 Ali Type Score TypSco 

Venseval 0.8731 0.5927 0.8099 0.5729 

Baseline 0.8462 0.5462 0.7610 0.5461 
Table 4: Results compared to Baseline for  

HEADLINES GS – Rank 13 over 20 
 
   In the Headlines corpus analysis differences in 
performance between SYS and GS are comparable. 
If we look closer at results in terms of number of 

801



teams we see that they are only 8, and our rank is 
now fifth, both in Images and Headlines results. In 
conclusion, we favoured a rule-based approach 
because we assume it can account for differences 
in text structures. However, rules require fine-
tuning which cannot be completed in a short time. 
This is clearly born out by differences in 
performance between the two corpora analysed, 
Images and Headlines, where the first one should 
have been much easier to process than the second. 

References 

Agirre, E.  and  Banea, C.  and  Cardie, C.  and  Cer, D.  
and  Diab, M.  and  Gonzalez-Agirre, A.  and  Guo, 
W.  and  Lopez-Gazpio, I. and Maritxalar, M. and 
Mihalcea, R.  and  Rigau, G.  and  Uria, L. and 
Wiebe, J. (2015). SemEval-2015 task 2: Semantic 
textual similarity, English, Spanish and pilot on 
interpretability. In Proceedings of the 9th 
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation 
(SemEval 2015), June. 

Chklovski, Timothy & Patrick Pantel. 2004. 
VERBOCEAN: Mining the Web for Fine-Grained 
Semantic Verb Relations. In Proceedings of 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing (EMNLP-04). Barcelona, 
Spain. 

Delmonte R., S.Tonelli, R. Tripodi, 2009. Semantic 
Processing for Text Entailment with VENSES, in 
Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference (TAC) 
2009 Workshop - Notebook Papers and Results, 
NIST, Gaithersburg MA, pp. 453-460. 

Fellbaum, Christiane (ed.), 1998. WordNet: An 
Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 

Levy, Omer, Torsten Zesch, Ido Dagan, and Iryna 
Gurevych. 2013. Recognizing Partial Textual 
Entailment. In ACL (2), pages 451–455.  

 
 

802


