



















































So-Called Non-Subsective Adjectives


Proceedings of the Fifth Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2016), pages 114–119,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016.

So-Called Non-Subsective Adjectives

Ellie Pavlick
University of Pennsylvania

epavlick@seas.upenn.edu

Chris Callison-Burch
University of Pennsylvania
ccb@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract

The interpretation of adjective-noun pairs
plays a crucial role in tasks such as rec-
ognizing textual entailment. Formal se-
mantics often places adjectives into a
taxonomy which should dictate adjec-
tives’ entailment behavior when placed in
adjective-noun compounds. However, we
show experimentally that the behavior of
subsective adjectives (e.g. red) versus
non-subsective adjectives (e.g. fake) is not
as cut and dry as often assumed. For ex-
ample, inferences are not always symmet-
ric: while ID is generally considered to be
mutually exclusive with fake ID, fake ID is
considered to entail ID. We discuss the im-
plications of these findings for automated
natural language understanding.

1 Introduction

Most adjectives are subsective, meaning that an in-
stance of an adjective-noun phrase is an instance
of the noun: a red car is a car and a successful
senator is a senator. In contrast, adjective-noun
phrases involving non-subsective adjectives, such
as imaginary and former (Table 1), denote a set
that is disjoint from the denotation of the nouns
they modify: an imaginary car is not a car and
a former senator is not a senator. Understanding
whether or not adjectives are subsective is critical
in any task involving natural language inference.
For example, consider the below sentence pair
from the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE)
task (Giampiccolo et al., 2007):

1. (a) U.S. District Judge Leonie Brinkema
accepted would-be hijacker Zacarias
Moussaoui’s guilty pleas . . .

(b) Moussaoui participated in the Sept. 11
attacks.

Privative Non-Subsective (AN ∩ N = ∅)
anti- artificial counterfeit deputy
erstwhile ex- fabricated fake
false fictional fictitious former
hypothetical imaginary mock mythical
onetime past phony pseudo-
simulated spurious virtual would-be

Plain Non-Subsective (AN 6⊂ N and AN ∩ N 6= ∅)
alleged apparent arguable assumed
believed debatable disputed doubtful
dubious erroneous expected faulty
future historic impossible improbable
likely mistaken ostensible plausible
possible potential predicted presumed
probable proposed putative questionable
seeming so-called supposed suspicious
theoretical uncertain unlikely unsuccessful

Table 1: 60 non-subsective adjectives from Nayak
et al. (2014). Noun phrases involving non-
subsective adjectives are assumed not to entail the
head noun. E.g. would-be hijacker 6⇒ hijacker.
(See Section 2 for definition of privative vs. plain).

In this example, recognizing that 1(a) does not en-
tail 1(b) hinges on understanding that a would-be
hijacker is not a hijacker.

The observation that adjective-nouns (ANs) in-
volving non-subsective adjectives do not entail the
underlying nouns (Ns) has led to the generaliza-
tion that the deletion of non-subsective adjectives
tends to result in contradictory utterances: Mous-
saoui is a would-be hijacker entails that it is not
the case that Moussaoui is a hijacker. This gen-
eralization has prompted normative rules for the
treatment of such adjectives in various NLP tasks.
In information extraction, it is assumed that sys-
tems cannot extract useful rules from sentences
containing non-subsective modifiers (Angeli et al.,
2015), and in RTE, it is assumed that systems
should uniformly penalize insertions and deletions
of non-subsective adjectives (Amoia and Gardent,
2006).

114



ANN

Privative 
(e.g. fake)

Plain Non-subsective 
(e.g. alleged)

ANN AN

Subsective 
(e.g. red)

Figure 1: Three main classes of adjectives. If their entailment behavior is consistent with their theoretical
definitions, we would expect our annotations (Section 3) to produce the insertion (blue) and deletion
(red) patterns shown by the bar graphs. Bars (left to right) represent CONTRADICTION, UNKNOWN, and
ENTAILMENT

While these generalizations are intuitive, there
is little experimental evidence to support them.
In this paper, we collect human judgements of
the validity of inferences following from the in-
sertion and deletion of various classes of adjec-
tives and analyze the results. Our findings suggest
that, in practice, most sentences involving non-
subsective ANs can be safely generalized to state-
ments about the N. That is, non-subsective adjec-
tives often behave like normal, subsective adjec-
tives. On further analysis, we reveal that, when
adjectives do behave non-subsectively, they often
exhibit asymmetric entailment behavior in which
insertion leads to contradictions (ID⇒ ¬ fake ID)
but deletion leads to entailments (fake ID ⇒ ID).
We present anecdotal evidence for how the en-
tailment associated with inserting/deleting a non-
subsective adjective depends on the salient prop-
erties of the noun phrase under discussion, rather
than on the adjective itself.

2 Background and Related Work

Classes of Adjectives. Adjectives are com-
monly classified taxonomically as either subsec-
tive or non-subsective (Kamp and Partee, 1995).
Subsective adjectives are adjectives which pick
out a subset of the set denoted by the unmodified
noun; that is, AN ⊂ N1. For non-subsective adjec-
tives, in contrast, the AN cannot be guaranteed to
be a subset of N. For example, clever is subsective,
and so a clever thief is always a thief. However,

1We use the notation N and AN to refer both the the nat-
ural language expression itself (e.g. red car) as well as its
denotation, e.g. {x|x is a red car}.

alleged is non-subsective, so there are many pos-
sible worlds in which an alleged thief is not in fact
a thief. Of course, there may also be many possi-
ble worlds in which the alleged thief is a thief, but
the word alleged, being non-subsective, does not
guarantee this to hold.

Non-subsective adjectives can be further di-
vided into two classes: privative and plain. Sets
denoted by privative ANs are completely disjoint
from the set denoted by the head N (AN ∩ N =
∅), and this mutual exclusivity is encoded in the
meaning of the A itself. For example, fake is con-
sidered to be a quintessential privative adjective
since, given the usual definition of fake, a fake ID
can not actually be an ID. For plain non-subsective
adjectives, there may be worlds in which the AN
is and N, and worlds in which the AN is not an N:
neither inference is guaranteed by the meaning of
the A. As mentioned above, alleged is quintessen-
tially plain non-subsective since, for example, an
alleged thief may or may not be an actual thief.
In short, we can summarize the classes of adjec-
tives in the following way: subsective adjectives
entail the nouns they modify, privative adjectives
contradict the nouns they modify, and plain non-
subsective adjectives are compatible with (but do
not entail) the nouns they modify. Figure 1 depicts
these distinctions.

While the hierarchical classification of adjec-
tives described above is widely accepted and often
applied in NLP tasks (Amoia and Gardent, 2006;
Amoia and Gardent, 2007; Boleda et al., 2012;
McCrae et al., 2014), it is not undisputed. Some
linguists take the position that in fact privative ad-

115



jectives are simply another type of subsective ad-
jective (Partee, 2003; McNally and Boleda, 2004;
Abdullah and Frost, 2005; Partee, 2007). Advo-
cates of this theory argue that the denotation of
the noun should be expanded to include both the
properties captured by the privative adjectives as
well as those captured by the subsective adjec-
tives. This expanded denotation can explain the
acceptability of the sentence Is that gun real or
fake?, which is difficult to analyze if gun entails
¬fake gun. More recent theoretical work argues
that common nouns have a “dual semantic struc-
ture” and that non-subsective adjectives modify
part of this meaning (e.g. the functional features
of the noun) without modifying the extension of
the noun (Del Pinal, 2015). Such an analysis can
explain how we can understand a fake gun as hav-
ing many, but not all, of the properties of a gun.

Several other studies abandon the attempt to or-
ganize adjectives taxonomically, and instead focus
on the properties of the modified noun. Nayak
et al. (2014) categorize non-subsective adjectives
in terms of the proportion of properties that are
shared between the N and the AN and Puste-
jovsky (2013) focus on syntactic cues about ex-
actly which properties are shared. Bakhshandh
and Allen (2015) analyze adjectives by observing
that, e.g., red modifies color while tall modifies
size. In Section 5, we discuss the potential ben-
efits of pursuing these property-based analyses in
relation to our experimental findings.

Recognizing Textual Entailment. We analyze
adjectives within the context of the task of Rec-
ognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) (Dagan et al.,
2006). The RTE task is defined as: given two nat-
ural language utterances, a premise p and a hy-
pothesis h, would a typical human reading p likely
conclude that h is true? We consider the RTE task
as a three-way classification: ENTAILMENT, CON-
TRADICTION, or UNKNOWN (meaning p neither
entails nor contradicts h).

3 Experimental Design

Our goal is to analyze how non-subsective adjec-
tives effect the inferences that can be made about
natural language. We begin with the set of 60 non-
subsective adjectives identified by Nayak et al.
(2014), which we split into plain non-subsective
and privative adjectives (Table 1).2 We search

2The division of these 60 adjectives into privative/plain
is based on our own understanding of the literature, not on

through the Annotated Gigaword corpus (Napoles
et al., 2012) for occurrences of each adjective in
the list, restricting to cases in which the adjective
appears as an adjective modifier of (is in an amod
dependency relation with) a common noun (NN).
For each adjective, we choose 10 sentences such
that the adjective modifies a different noun in each.
As a control, we take a small sample 100 ANs cho-
sen randomly from our corpus. We expect these to
contain almost entirely subsective adjectives.

For each selected sentence s, we generate s′ by
deleting the non-subsective adjective from s. We
then construct two RTE problems, one in which
p = s and h = s′ (the deletion direction), and one
in which p = s′ and h = s (the insertion direc-
tion). For each RTE problem, we ask annotators
to indicate on a 5-point scale how likely it is that
p entails h, where a score of -2 indicates definite
contradiction and a score of 2 indicates definite en-
tailment. We use Amazon Mechanical Turk, re-
quiring annotators to pass a qualification test of
simple RTE problems before participating. We so-
licit 5 annotators per p/h pair, taking the majority
answer as truth. Workers show moderate agree-
ment on the 5-way classification (κ = 0.44).

Disclaimer. This design does not directly test
the taxonomic properties of non-subsective ANs.
Rather than asking “Is this instance of AN an in-
stance of N?” we ask “Is this statement that is true
of AN also true of N?” While these are not the
same question, theories based on the former ques-
tion often lead to overly-cautious approaches to
answering the latter question. For example, in in-
formation extraction, the assumption is often made
that sentences with non-subsective modifiers can-
not be used to extract facts about the head N (An-
geli et al., 2015). We focus on the latter question,
which is arguably more practically relevant for
NLP, and accept that this prevents us from com-
menting on the underlying taxonomic relations be-
tween AN and N.

4 Results

Expectations. Based on the theoretical adjective
classes described in Section 2, we expect that both
the insertion and the deletion of privative adjec-
tives from a sentence should result in judgments
of CONTRADICTION: i.e. it should be the case
that fake ID ⇒ ¬ ID and ID ⇒ ¬ fake ID. Sim-
ilarly, we expect plain non-subsective adjectives
Nayak et al. (2014).

116



(a) Privative (b) Plain Non-Sub. (c) Subsective

Figure 2: Observed entailment judgements for insertion (blue) and deletion (red) of adjectives. Compare
to expected distributions in Figure 1.

to receive labels of UNKNOWN in both directions.
We expect the subsective adjectives to receive la-
bels of ENTAILMENT in the deletion direction (red
car ⇒ car) and labels of UNKNOWN in the inser-
tion direction (car 6⇒ red car). Figure 1 depicts
these expected distributions.

Observations. The observed entailment patterns
for insertion and deletion of non-subsective adjec-
tives are shown in Figure 2. Our control sample
of subsective adjectives (Figure 2c) largely pro-
duced the expected results, with 96% of deletions
producing ENTAILMENTs and 73% of insertions
producing UNKNOWNs.3 The entailment patterns
produced by the non-subsective adjectives, how-
ever, did not match our predictions. The plain non-
subsective adjectives (e.g. alleged) behave nearly
identically to how we expect regular, subsective
adjectives to behave (Figure 2b). That is, in 80%
of cases, deleting the plain non-subsective adjec-
tive was judged to produce ENTAILMENT, rather
than the expected UNKNOWN. The examples in
Table 2 shed some light onto why this is the case.
Often, the differences between N and AN are not
relevant to the main point of the utterance. For ex-
ample, while an expected surge in unemployment
is not a surge in unemployment, a policy that deals
with an expected surge deals with a surge.

The privative adjectives (e.g. fake) also fail
to match the predicted distribution. While in-
sertions often produce the expected CONTRADIC-
TIONs, deletions produce a surprising number of
ENTAILMENTs (Figure 2a). Such a pattern does
not fit into any of the adjective classes from Fig-
ure 1. While some ANs (e.g. counterfeit money)
behave in the prototypically privative way, others

3A full discussion of the 27% of insertions that deviated
from the expected behavior is given in Pavlick and Callison-
Burch (2016).

(1) Swiss officials on Friday said they’ve launched an
investigation into Urs Tinner’s alleged role.

(2) To deal with an expected surge in unemployment,
the plan includes a huge temporary jobs program.

(3) They kept it close for a half and had a theoretical
chance come the third quarter.

Table 2: Contrary to expectations, the deletion of
plain non-subsective adjectives often preserves the
(plausible) truth in a model. E.g. alleged role 6⇒
role, but investigation into alleged role⇒ investi-
gation into role.

(e.g. mythical beast) have the property in which
N⇒¬AN, but AN⇒N (Figure 3). Table 3 pro-
vides some telling examples of how this AN⇒N
inference, in the case of privative adjectives, often
depends less on the adjective itself, and more on
properties of the modified noun that are at issue in
the given context. For example, in Table 3 Exam-
ple 2(a), a mock debate probably contains enough
of the relevant properties (namely, arguments) that
it can entail debate, while in Example 2(b), a mock
execution lacks the single most important property
(the death of the executee) and so cannot entail ex-
ecution. (Note that, from Example 3(b), it appears
the jury is still out on whether leaps in artificial
intelligence entail leaps in intelligence...)

5 Discussion

The results presented suggest a few important pat-
terns for NLP systems. First, that while a non-
subsective AN might not be an instance of the N
(taxonomically speaking), statements that are true
of an AN are often true of the N as well. This is
relevant for IE and QA systems, and is likely to be-
come more important as NLP systems focus more
on “micro reading” tasks (Nakashole and Mitchell,
2014), where facts must be inferred from single
documents or sentences, rather than by exploiting

117



(1a) ENTAIL. Flawed counterfeit software can corrupt the information entrusted to it.
(1b) CONTRA. Pharmacists in Algodones denied selling counterfeit medicine in their stores.
(2a) ENTAIL. He also took part in a mock debate Sunday.
(2b) CONTRA. Investigation leader said the prisoner had been subjected to a mock execution.
(3a) ENTAIL. The plants were grown under artificial light and the whole operation was computerised.
(3b) UNKNOWN Thrun predicted that leaps in artificial intelligence would lead to driverless cars on the roads by 2030.

Table 3: Entailment judgements for the deletion of various privative adjectives from a sentence. Whether
or not deletion results in CONTRADICTION depends on which properties of the noun are most relevant.

Figure 3: Entailments scores for insertion (blue)
and deletion (red) for various ANs. E.g. the bot-
tom line says that status ⇒¬ mythical status (in-
sertion produces CONTRADICTION), but mythical
status⇒ status (deletion produces ENTAILMENT).

the massive redundancy of the web. Second, the
asymmetric entailments associated with privative
adjectives suggests that the contradictions gener-
ated by privative adjectives may not be due to a
strict denotational contradiction, but rather based
on implicature: i.e. if an ID is in fact fake, the
speaker is obligated to say so, and thus, when ID
appears unmodified, it is fair to assume it is not a
fake ID. Testing this hypothesis is left for future
research. Finally, the examples in Tables 2 and 3
seem to favor a properties-oriented analysis of ad-
jective semantics, rather than the taxonomic anal-
ysis often used. Nayak et al. (2014)’s attempt to
characterize adjectives in terms of the number of
properties the AN shares with N is a step in the
right direction, but it seems that what is relevant
is not how many properties are shared, but rather
which properties are shared, and which properties
are at issue in the given context.

6 Conclusion

We present experimental results on textual infer-
ences involving non-subsective adjectives. We
show that, contrary to expectations, the deletion
of non-subsective adjectives from a sentence does
not necessarily result in non-entailment. Thus,
in applications such as information extraction, it
is often possible to extract true facts about the
N from sentences involving a non-subsective AN.
Our data suggests that inferences involving non-
subsective adjectives require more than strict rea-
soning about denotations, and that a treatment of
non-subsective adjectives based on the properties
of the AN, rather than its taxonomic relation to the
N, is likely to yield useful insights.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by a Facebook Fel-
lowship, and by gifts from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, Google, and Facebook. This mate-
rial is based in part on research sponsored by the
NSF grant under IIS-1249516 and DARPA under
number FA8750-13-2-0017 (the DEFT program).
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce
and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes.
The views and conclusions contained in this pub-
lication are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing official policies or en-
dorsements of DARPA and the U.S. Government.

We would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers for their very thoughtful comments. We would
also like to thank the Mechanical Turk annotators
for their contributions.

References
Nabil Abdullah and Richard A Frost. 2005. Adjec-

tives: A uniform semantic approach. In Advances in
Artificial Intelligence, pages 330–341. Springer.

Marilisa Amoia and Claire Gardent. 2006. Adjec-
tive based inference. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop KRAQ’06 on Knowledge and Reasoning for

118



Language Processing, pages 20–27. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Marilisa Amoia and Claire Gardent. 2007. A first or-
der semantic approach to adjectival inference. In
Proceedings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Tex-
tual Entailment and Paraphrasing, pages 185–192,
Prague, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Gabor Angeli, Melvin Jose Johnson Premkumar, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2015. Leveraging linguis-
tic structure for open domain information extraction.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
344–354, Beijing, China, July. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Omid Bakhshandh and James Allen. 2015. From ad-
jective glosses to attribute concepts: Learning dif-
ferent aspects that an adjective can describe. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Computational Semantics, pages 23–33, London,
UK, April. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Gemma Boleda, Eva Maria Vecchi, Miquel Cornudella,
and Louise McNally. 2012. First order vs. higher
order modification in distributional semantics. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
1223–1233, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL recognizing textual entailment
challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges. Eval-
uating Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classi-
fication, and Recognising Tectual Entailment, pages
177–190. Springer.

Guillermo Del Pinal. 2015. Dual content semantics,
privative adjectives and dynamic compositionality.
Semantics and Pragmatics, 5.

Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan,
and Bill Dolan. 2007. The third PASCAL recogniz-
ing textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of
the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment
and Paraphrasing, pages 1–9, Prague, June. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Hans Kamp and Barbara Partee. 1995. Prototype
theory and compositionality. Cognition, 57(2):129–
191.

John P. McCrae, Francesca Quattri, Christina Unger,
and Philipp Cimiano. 2014. Modelling the seman-
tics of adjectives in the ontology-lexicon interface.
In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Cognitive
Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex), pages 198–209,
Dublin, Ireland, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and Dublin City University.

Louise McNally and Gemma Boleda. 2004. Relational
adjectives as properties of kinds. Empirical issues in
formal syntax and semantics, 8:179–196.

Ndapandula Nakashole and Tom M Mitchell. 2014.
Micro reading with priors: Towards second gener-
ation machine readers. In Proceedings of the 4th
Workshop on Automated Knowledge Base Construc-
tion (AKBC), at NIPS. Montreal, Canada.

Courtney Napoles, Matthew Gormley, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2012. Annotated gigaword. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Workshop on Automatic Knowl-
edge Base Construction and Web-scale Knowledge
Extraction, pages 95–100.

Neha Nayak, Mark Kowarsky, Gabor Angeli, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2014. A dictionary of
nonsubsective adjectives. Technical Report CSTR
2014-04, Department of Computer Science, Stan-
ford University, October.

Barbara H Partee. 2003. Are there privative adjectives.
In Conference on the Philosophy of Terry Parsons,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst.

Barbara Partee. 2007. Compositionality and coercion
in semantics: The dynamics of adjective meaning.
Cognitive foundations of interpretation, pages 145–
161.

Ellie Pavlick and Chris Callison-Burch. 2016. Most
baies are little and most problems are huge: Compo-
sitional entailment in adjective nouns. In Proceed-
ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2016), Berlin,
Germany. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

James Pustejovsky. 2013. Inference patterns with in-
tensional adjectives. In Proceedings of the 9th Joint
ISO - ACL SIGSEM Workshop on Interoperable Se-
mantic Annotation, pages 85–89, Potsdam, Ger-
many, March. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

119


