



















































Issues of Mass and Count: Dealing with `Dual-Life' Nouns


Proceedings of the 6th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2017), pages 189–198,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3-4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Issues of Mass and Count: Dealing with ‘Dual-Life’ Nouns

Tibor Kiss
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

44801 Bochum, Germany

tibor@linguistics.rub.de

Francis Jeffry Pelletier
University of Alberta

Edmonton, Canada

francisp@ualberta.ca

Halima Husić
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

44801 Bochum, Germany

husic@linguistics.rub.de

Johanna Poppek
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

44801 Bochum, Germany

poppek@linguistics.rub.de

Abstract
The topics of +MASS and +COUNT have been
studied for many decades in philosophy
(e.g., (Quine, 1960; Pelletier, 1975)), lin-
guistics (e.g., (McCawley, 1975; Allan,
1980; Krifka, 1991)) and psychology (e.g.,
(Middleton et al., 2004; Barner et al.,
2009). More recently, interest from within
computational linguistics has studied the
issues involved (e.g., (Pustejovsky, 1991;
Bond, 2005; Schmidtke and Kuperman,
2016)), to name just a few. As is pointed
out in these works, there are many difficult
conceptual issues involved in the study of
this contrast. In this article we study one
of these issues – the “Dual-Life” of be-
ing simultaneously +MASS and +COUNT – by
means of an unusual combination of hu-
man annotation, online lexical resources,
and online corpora.

1 Background

The standard story of +MASS and +COUNT usually
starts with some examples of nouns of both sorts.

• +COUNT: car, dog, idea, university, belief, . . .
• +MASS: water, garbage, advice, oil, admira-

tion, knowledge. . .

These examples are usually accompanied by some
syntactic tests for +MASS and +COUNT:

• Count terms can be pluralized, occur with in-
definite determiner, allow numeral modifiers,
occur with the quantifiers each, every, . . . .
Mass terms can’t do any of these.

• Always occurring in the singular, mass terms
occur with “measure” terms (e.g., much),
with the quantifiers most, all and the un-
stressed some, and bare in (e.g.) subject po-
sition with singular verb agreement. Singular
count terms can’t do any of these.

These lead to such comparisons as

(1) a. a car, four ideas, each university
b. *a water, *four garbage, *each admiration
c. all garbage, most water, advice is helpful
d. *all dog, *most university, *car is fast

It can be seen from this brief (and partial) de-
scription of the +MASS/+COUNT distinction that the
presumption is that the distinction applies to lexi-
cal nouns and that it is exhaustive and exclusive –
every such noun is either +COUNT or +MASS, and no
noun is both.

Our account will deny all these presumptions,
and in doing so will open what we find to be a
much more plausible account of various myste-
rious phenomena surrounding +MASS and +COUNT
(although in this study we just examine the “dual-
life” case).

2 Some Background Methodological
Issues

A fundamental feature of (and, we think, a prob-
lem with) with the “usual story” is that it presumes
that the locus or home of +MASS and +COUNT is the
lexical noun. This is a feature of modern analyses
as well as the older ones despite the fact that even
in the oldest of the works we find remarks cau-
tioning against this, such as (Quine, 1960)’s am-
biguous Mary put a little chicken into the salad
and cautionary remarks by others that such sen-
tences as We had crocodile for supper last night!
are completely normal. And to the claim that this
“changes the sense” of chicken from +COUNT to
+MASS, (Pelletier, 1975, p.456) remarked “Such
a claim makes clear that either (1) surface struc-
ture is not what the criteria are talking about or
(2) we need to distinguish not between mass and
count nouns but between mass and count senses of
nouns.” This sort of remark can be found through-
out the literature on +MASS/+COUNT; however, dic-

189



tionaries in fact do not usually make this distinc-
tion. The only relevant sense of crocodile in Word-
Net (Miller, 1995; Miller and Fellbaum, 2007) and
Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary is “large vo-
racious aquatic reptile having a long snout with
massive jaws and sharp teeth and a body covered
with bony plates; of sluggish tropical waters”. In
fact, with only a few exceptions, the relationship
between an animal and its flesh used as food (when
it is the same noun for each) does not generate new
senses in dictionaries (nor WordNet). Somehow,
both of the alleged meanings are contained in the
same sense.

One might postulate (and many theorists have,
e.g., (Bunt, 1985; Payne and Huddleston, 2002))
that there are some background “rules” that can
apply to a basic meaning of a noun and which will
generate the related sense that describes the oppo-
site value of the +MASS/+COUNT dimension. Sug-
gestions include rules for grinding (armadillo all
over the road), portioning (Order me a beer), sort-
ing (eight beers on tap), evaluating (too much car
for the average driver) and others. However, it
has seemed clear to most theorists that this sort of
strategy wouldn’t be able to account for all the var-
ied ways that +MASS and +COUNT senses of a given
noun might be related. Furthermore, for many so-
called abstract nouns, it is not even clear what it is
that makes a meaning be +MASS or +COUNT.

Another problem is that researchers looking
into the issues involved in +MASS/+COUNT tend to
use their own intuitions, based on a very limited
number of data points (that is, a very limited group
of words and their meanings). The use of large-
scale resources is relatively rare (although see
(Baldwin and Bond, 2003; Grimm, 2014; Katz and
Zamparelli, 2012; Kulkarni et al., 2013)). And the
use of dictionary resources is also rare, meaning
that researchers rely on their own “intuitions into
meaning” when it comes to issues of +COUNT and
+MASS. Although many researchers have pointed
to these sorts of limitations, none have actually
investigated the actual senses of nouns as they
appear in large resources (e.g., dictionaries), nor
have they investigated what it means for a specific
sense to be “dual-life” – i.e., to be both +MASS and
+COUNT.

For these sorts of reasons, we have decided to
investigate the possibility that the locus of +MASS
and +COUNT should be a given sense of a noun.
But a consequence of this will be that some senses

are both +COUNT and +MASS, as for instance, our
examples beer and crocodile. Even if we wish
to retain the “semantic conversion/coercion” rules
mentioned above and thus excuse these from be-
ing both +MASS and +COUNT, there are many others
(as we will show below) that do not lend them-
selves to such coercions. So one of our goals is
to display many individual senses of nouns (we
call these “noun-senses”) that are both +MASS and
+COUNT;. The usual name for a theory that allows
something to be both +MASS and +COUNT is “dual-
life” – “dual-life nouns” if the locus is the noun,
but “dual-life noun-senses” for our viewpoint.

3 What We Did

We used the American National Corpus (ANC:
(Ide and Suderman, 2004; Ide, 2008)), parsed
with the Stanford NLP Group (http://nlp.
stanford.edu) parser (Chen and Manning,
2014). We then intersected the ANC’s set of
nouns with those in WordNet to form a reposi-
tory of nouns for which there were definitions (in
WordNet).1 We employed four graduate linguis-
tics students to (independently) evaluate the ex-
tent to which each of the WordNet senses thus
chosen could be used in certain contexts (we call
these tests the ‘syntactic tests’) and whether, given
the answers to some of the syntactic tests, cer-
tain implications follow from their use (we call
these the ‘semantic tests’). There are six of these
tests in all, four syntactic and two semantic, cho-
sen for their relevance to various of the issues that
are salient in the studies of +MASS and +COUNT
terms. Table 1 gives the bare-bones outline of
the annotators’ tasks, which ask whether the an-
notators can construct sentences obeying the syn-
tactic patterns specified, while maintaining the
NOUN’s meaning to be the one under investiga-
tion. Table 2 shows some noun-senses and how
they fare with the tests. We discovered that there
was very significant inter-annotator agreement in
these answers. We have approximately 13,000
annotated and agreed-upon noun-senses. Inter-
annotator agreement, as measured by Krippen-
dorff’s α, = 0.755, which (Artstein and Poesio,
2008, pp. 576, 591) define as highly reliable.

1We employed the ANC as a natural corpus because we
also wished to investigate the actual senses in use. Our an-
notators characterized the MASS/COUNT feature of the various
senses, but we wished then to see which of these senses were
actually used in what contexts. That aspect of our research is
not reported in the present paper.

190



Syn 1: Can the noun-sense pair in its singular form appear together with more?
Sem 1: If Syn 1 = yes, is the comparison based on number of entities, or another mode of

measurement?
Syn 2: Can the noun-sense pair in its plural form appear together with more?
Sem 2: If Syn 2 = yes, is the sentence equivalent to a sentence with an explicit classifier?
Syn 3: Can the noun-sense pair in its singular form and combined with an indefinite determiner

be the syntactic subject of a definition or characterization?
Syn 4: Can the noun-sense pair in its singular form but without a determiner be the syntactic

subject of a definition or characterization?

Table 1: Four syntactic tests and two semantic tests annotators answered for each noun-sense

Noun WordNet description Syn 1 Sem 1 Syn 2 Sem 2 Syn 3 Syn 4
car#1 a motor vehicle with four no na yes ¬ equiv. yes no

wheels
fruitcake#1 a whimsically eccentric person no na yes ¬ equiv. yes no
fruitcake#2 a rich cake containing dried yes ¬ num. yes ¬ equiv. yes yes

fruit and nuts [. . . ]
lingerie#1 women’s underwear and yes num. na na no yes

nightclothes
whiskey#1 a liquor made from fermented yes ¬ num. yes equiv. no yes

mash of grain

Table 2: Examples of Test Outcomes.

Further details on the texts, the various senses
and the annotation process can be found in (Kiss
et al., 2014). Some other aspects of the general
research effort are in (Kiss et al., 2016).

Each noun-sense thus gets some unique pat-
tern of answers, which we can represent as an or-
dered six-tuple of answers (we use the ordering
given in Table 1). We extracted and processed the
annotators’ responses using R (https:\cran.
r-project.org), allowing us not only to pro-
cess the resulting answers given by our annotators,
but also to aid in the inner-annotator agreement
evaluation. A side effect of using R numerical
names to the groups of senses that have the same
six-tuple of answers. In this study we focus on one
of these groups (“Classes”); R gave it the name
“726”, which we have kept (even though “dual-
life” might have been a more informative choice
of name).

There are three possible answers for each of
the six Tests: yes, no, and not applicable (but
we sometimes use ‘num’ and ‘eq’, together with
negations), hence 729 possible classes. But the
questions are not independent of one another, and
in fact there are only 80 independently possible
classes. Our annotators found there to be 18 ac-

tual classes to be populated with noun-senses, out
of these 80 possible classes.

4 “Dual Life” senses

Remembering now that we are describing senses
of nouns, as identified by WordNet, what sort of
noun-senses manifest this duality of being both
+MASS and +COUNT? Or put more accurately, since
we test the senses by determining answers to ques-
tions that have that sense used in a full noun
phrase, what sort of noun-senses manifest the pos-
sibility of occurring in both +MASS NPs and also in
+COUNT NPs?

Our main group of such senses is called
Class 726 by R. This group has the profile
<yes,¬num,yes,¬equiv,yes,yes>. That is,

(2) a. This noun-sense can be used in the sin-
gular with more. <e.g., John has more X
than Mary>

b. This amount of X is not based on in-
stances of X.

c. It can be used in the plural <e.g., John
has more Xs than Mary>

d. The Xs are not equivalent to any clas-
sifier + X <e.g., not equivalent to more

191



cups (or kinds) of X>
e. It can be used with an indefinite singu-

lar determiner definition <e.g., An X is a
(some definition)>

f. It can be used in the singular without a
determiner definition <e.g., X is (some
definition)>

Class 726 contains 162 different senses of
nouns. There are two different broad categories
that we can distinguish within this group of dual-
life noun-senses. The two basic types are:

1. Senses of Nominally-Oriented nouns

2. Senses of Verbally-Oriented nouns

There are 57 senses of Type 1 and 96 senses of
Type 2. There are thus 8 other senses. 3 of which
seem to fit into both categories equally, and 5 that
do not seem to be of either Type.

4.1 Nominally-Oriented Noun Senses

We start with the Type 1 senses. Unlike the nouns
that give rise to the Type 2 senses, the nouns be-
hind these senses are not formed from other parts
of speech: they are either simple nouns on their
own or else nouns compounded from nouns and
possibly other (non-verb) parts of speech.

Some of the Nominally-Oriented Noun senses
are in groups that have been discussed in the liter-
ature before. One Nominally-Oriented noun type
that has long received play in the mass-count lit-
erature is that associated with food.2 For ani-
mal noun-senses other than pig, cow, e.g., alliga-
tor, the animal-designating “meaning” is +COUNT
while the flesh-designating “meaning” is +MASS. A
special version of this occurs when the particular
amount or type of the meat is typically cooked or
served as a unit, then such a unit gets called by a
special +COUNT term and that special term acquires
a +COUNT “meaning” for the meat that comprises it:
We had a steak for dinner/We had steak for dinner;
Mary cooked a ham for Easter/Mary served ham
for supper; George bought a large roast/George

2As remarked above, dictionaries and other lexical
sources (in particular, WordNet) take these differing ways to
interpret a word like alligator to be parts of one and the same
sense. Yet in writing about them, we wish to be able to dis-
cuss the differences that are internal to a sense. So, we have
decided to use the term “meaning” (with double quote marks)
when we wish to discuss the different interpretations that can
be given to a single sense (or alternatively put, the different
ways that a single sense can be used).

had leftover roast for a week. We give one exam-
ple of a noun-sense that is in this group, and then
list the nouns for the other 8 senses of the members
of this subgroup.

(3) a. fruitcake#2: a rich cake containing dried
fruit and nuts and citrus peel [. . . ]

b. cake#3, casserole#1, ham#1, marsh-
mallow#1, melon#2, pizza#1, salad#1,
steak#1

(Rothstein, 2010) brought attention to a class
of dual-life nouns that we may call the “fence-
nouns”. She was motivated by considerations like
this:

(4) a. Hans Müller’s ranch has more fence than
Alexis Sánchez’s granja.

b. A fence can be cut in half and part of it
moved, and then there are two fences.

As can be seen from (4-b), Rothstein’s dual-life
evidence is semantic in nature, as well as the syn-
tactic (4-a), although even in (4-b) we see the syn-
tactic point that ‘fence’ can be used with an indefi-
nite determiner. Rothstein makes a similar case for
other nouns, such as wire. And though she does
not remark on the fact that she is testing nouns,
as opposed to noun senses, one could plausibly ar-
gue that she in fact has kept the sense of ‘fence’
(and ‘wire’) constant in these examples, and that is
borne out by our annotators, who were just look-
ing at individual senses. Class 726 is the home of
a number of such noun senses.

(5) a. cable#2: a conductor for transmitting
electrical or optical signals or electric
power

b. cable#3, cord#1, ribbon#4, rope#1,
thread#1, wire#1

Another identifiable subgroup of Class 726 is
what we call the -sides dual life group. This group
does not seem to have been identified in the ear-
lier literature. Our annotators have determined that
some sentence such as (6-a) is grammatical (and
not due to counting the number of distinct seasides
in the two locations), and as well, it is obvious that
sentences like (6-b) are grammatical. And yet this
is the same sense of seaside.

(6) a. California has more seaside than Oregon.
b. We spent our vacation on a seaside in

southern England.

192



Our data included only 4 such senses:

(7) a. seaside#1: the shore of a sea or ocean
regarded as a resort

b. hillside#1, riverside#1, roadside#1

A final small group of the nominally-oriented
dual-life senses we call the -land senses:

(8) a. marshland#1: low-lying wet land with
grassy vegetation; usually is a transition
zone between land and water

b. forest#2, marsh#1, rainforest#1,
swamp#1, wetland#1

There are many other Nominally-Oriented dual-
life senses in Class 726 which do not manifest any
of the preceding four types of meaning. The most
common of the remaining ones are what we call
“Kind-Instance” (or “Type-Token”) in nature, usu-
ally where the kind-“meaning” is mass while the
instance-“meaning” is count. There are 31 such
senses, a few of which are:

(9) a. drought#1: A shortage of rain-
fall.“Farmers most affected by the
drought hope that there may yet be
sufficient rain early in the growing
season”3

b. mockery#3: humorous or satirical
mimicry.

c. brunch#1: combination breakfast and
lunch; usually served in late morning

d. anticoagulant#1: medicine that prevents
or retards the clotting of blood

In (9-a) we have a general term, ‘drought’,
which has many instances such as exemplified
in A drought has bedevilled California since
1999. So this seems a straightforward example
of our Nominally-Oriented Kind-Instance dual-
life senses. Things are maybe a little less obvious
with (9-b), but it seems plausible to claim that it
is designating a kind or sort of linguistic activity,
and each particular case of a humorous or satiri-
cal mimicry is a mockery. Here we are not saying
that the particular cases are the result of the activ-
ity, but rather that they exemplify the kind, mock-
ery. With (9-c) one might wonder why it was not
classified as an example of the Food subtype. In
our opinion this is because brunch is not the “con-

3The only other sense of drought in WordNet concerns
any prolonged shortage: “When England defeated Pakistan it
ended a ten-year drought”.

tainer” that has the mass-stuff as its makeup, in
the way that a chicken is a container for chicken(-
meat). Instead, brunch is the name for a kind of
activity, and each one of its manifestations is a
brunch.

As we noted above, most senses here make
the general “meaning” be mass, and the more
individual-denoting “meaning” be count. But
there are exceptions to this. Anticoagulant#1, for
example, seems to be a mass sense for the stuff
that is put into one’s body to retard blood clotting,
that is, this “meaning” picks out the physical man-
ifestation of the kind term (akin to the individual-
denoting “meaning” of the more usual terms). But
this makes this manifestation “meaning” be mass,
and the count sense seems to be a “sorting” mean-
ing, that is, the kind “meaning” is count. Thus, ‘an
anticoagulant’ names a kind or sort of stuff, rather
like ‘a beer’ can name a type/kind/sort of beer. So
‘anticoagulant’ without an indefinite article names
(something like) the stuff that is, in some particu-
lar case, doing the work of anti-coagulating.

4.2 Verbally-Oriented Noun Senses

There is a long-standing tradition claiming that
“event nouns”4 are ambiguous between a “mean-
ing” that describes an activity, action, event, or
process, on the one hand, and a “meaning” that de-
scribes the result of that activity, action, event, or
process, on the other hand. Some clear examples
of this in the literature are:

(10) a. collection: the activity of gathering to-
gether a group of items vs. the group
that is thus gathered.

b. invention: the process of generating
some new type of thing vs. the actual
kind of thing that has been generated.

Although some linguists would say that the fact
that one “meaning” is predictable from the other
“meaning”, and so they shouldn’t both be entered
in the lexicon (e.g., (Payne and Huddleston, 2002,
p. 337)), sometimes these two “meanings” are dis-
tinguished as separate senses in WordNet (and in
dictionaries more generally), but sometimes not.
For example, in WordNet we find

4We use ‘event’ to name this group, even though there
are nouns that don’t seem to be derived from event verbs nor
do they intuitively designate the occurrence of some event.
For example, some are actions, activities, achievements, pro-
cesses, etc..

193



(11) a. collection#1: several things grouped to-
gether or considered as a whole

b. collection#2: a publication containing a
variety of works

c. collection#3: a request for a sum of
money

d. collection#4: the act of gathering some-
thing together

Here we see the two “meanings” separated as dif-
ferent senses (senses #1 vs. #4). On the other hand,
sometimes the two “meanings” are merged into
the same sense. WordNet gives

(12) a. burglary#1: entering a building unlaw-
fully with intent to commit a felony or
to steal valuable property5

b. emission#1: the act of emitting; caus-
ing to flow forth6

c. amplification#1: addition of extra ma-
terial or illustration or clarifying detail7

Here we see that burglary#1 describes both the
activity of burgling and also the result of the ac-
tivity (a burglary). emission#1 describes both the
event of causing something to flow, and also the
result of that event (an emission). Similarly, am-
plification#1 describes both the activity of adding
extra material and the result of doing so. The for-
mer “meanings” are mass(-like) while the latter
are count(-like), as the examples in (13)–(15) sug-
gest.

(13) a. Burglary is not a difficult activity to
carry out.

b. The Müllers’ house suffered a burglary
last night.

(14) a. Methane emission in coal mines is a se-
rious health issue.

b. The cause of the miners’ deaths was de-
termined to be an emission of methane.

(15) a. The Opposition demanded amplifica-
tion of the Prime Minister’s remarks.

b. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs and of

5This is the only sense identified in WordNet.
6Other senses of emission focus on the kind of material

that is released by an emission; one sense even picks out a
specific subtype of that sort of emission, namely that of water
from a pipe.

7The other two senses of ‘amplification’ indicate rather
different features: amplification#2: ‘the amount of increase
in signal power or voltage or current expressed as the ratio
of output to input’; amplification#3: ‘(electronics) the act of
increasing voltage or power or current’.

Defense each provided an amplification
of the Prime Minister’s remarks.

There is another relation that is, in a way,
“between” these the categories of Nominally-
Oriented Kind-Instance and Verbally-Oriented
Event-Result. It happens when an event-noun (or
state- or process-noun) designates a general term
for a kind or type that has instances or tokens
called by the same name. Note that these are in-
stances or tokens of the kind, and not the result of
the event. In such cases, the event/state/process
“meaning” is usually or naturally seen as mass,
while the instance “meaning” seems usually or
naturally to be count. For example,

(16) a. fantasy#1: imagination unrestricted by
reality; “a schoolgirl fantasy”

b. litigation#1: a legal proceeding in a
court; a judicial contest to determine
and enforce legal rights

c. silence#1: the state of being silent (as
when no one is speaking); “there was
a shocked silence”; “he gestured for si-
lence”

These cases seem to suggest that we have a general
term (‘fantasy’, ‘litigation’, ‘silence’) denoting a
type or kind, which in turn has many instances.
The instances are thus not effects of these kinds.
For example, “a schoolgirl fantasy”, “a legal pro-
ceeding”, “a shocked silence” are all instances
of their respective kinds, but not effects of them.
Nonetheless, it seems clear that these all display
the fact that the ultimate source of these noun-
senses is a verb: fantasize, litigate, silence, whose
WordNet senses are: “to portray in the mind”, “to
engage in legal proceedings”, “to cause to be quiet
or not talk”. So such senses seem best classified
as Verbally-Oriented Kind-Instance senses, and as
we said, should be seen as forming a sort of mid-
dle ground between the Nominally-Oriented Kind-
Instance senses and the Verbally-Oriented Event-
Act senses. And so we call these senses Verbally-
Oriented Kind-Instance dual-life.

But in many cases it is difficult to determine
whether we have a case of the Verbally-Oriented
Act–Result relation or of the Verbally-Oriented
Kind–Instance relationship. For instance, with
each of the senses identified in (17), it seems that
there is no good reason to choose between viewing
the relationship as an Event-Result or as a Kind-

194



Instance:

(17) a. eccentricity#1: strange and unconven-
tional behavior

b. idealization#2: (psychiatry) a defence
mechanism that splits something you
are ambivalent about into two represen-
tations – one good and one bad

c. imperfection#1: the state or an in-
stance of being imperfect

Is eccentricity#1, for instance, the name for a pro-
cess, activity, or force, etc., that brings about an
eccentricity as a result? Or is it instead the name of
a kind or type of force (etc.) which has instances
that are called eccentricities? What about ideal-
ization#2? Or imperfection#1? In the latter case
it is explicitly defined as “either a state or an in-
stance” and so even the definition explicitly leaves
room for either interpretation. There seems to be
no good reason to view any of these (and others) in
one way or the other. About all that can be said is
that these are Verbally-Oriented, but we can’t fur-
ther determine which subtype they manifest. Or
maybe better put: they in fact do manifest both
types equally.

Examples such as these make one want to go
back to the earlier examples of Event-Result and
Kind-Instance and reanalyze them also, making it
become easier to see them too as perhaps exem-
plifying both ways in which a single sense can be
simultaneously mass and count. In fact, we are
tempted to say that there is some sort of “con-
tinuum” or continuity between the two ways – in
the same way that one can order wavelengths of
light so as to display a continuum between blue
and green.

The largest subgroup in the 726 Dual-Life Class
is the Verbally-Oriented Event-Result senses. (Al-
though keep in mind that many of these also man-
ifest at least a degree of Verbally-Oriented Kind-
Instance “meaning”.) There are 70 such senses in
this Class; 55 of them are senses of -tion nominal-
izations from activity verbs, 2 are -ment nominal-
ization, 3 are -ing nominalizations, and there are
15 others. A few examples of each of these types
senses are in (18-a)–(18-d) .

(18) a. acclimation#1: adaptation to a new
climate (a new temperature or altitude
or environment); deception#1: the act
of deceiving; insertion#2: the act of

putting one thing inside another; elim-
ination#4: the act of removing an un-
known mathematical quantity by com-
bining equations;

b. embellishment#1: elaboration of an in-
terpretation by the use of decorative
(sometimes fictitious) detail; infringe-
ment#1: an act that disregards an agree-
ment or a right.

c. borrowing#1: the appropriation (of
ideas or words etc) from another source;
ending#2: the act of ending something.

d. analysis#2: the abstract separation of
a whole into its constituent parts in or-
der to study the parts and their relations;
burglary#1: entering a building unlaw-
fully with intent to commit a felony or
to steal valuable property; dispersal#1:
the act of dispersing or diffusing some-
thing; influx#1; revival#1; war#1

A group that is somewhat smaller than the just-
mentioned Verbally-Oriented Event-Result senses
is that of Verbally-Oriented Kind-Instance senses,
with 18 members. Unlike the Verbally-Oriented
Event-Result senses where one “meaning” is a
name for the kind of activity and the other “mean-
ing” is a name for a result of that activity, here
we have a “meaning” as a name for the kind
of activity and the other “meaning” is a name
for tokens or instances of that activity, rather
than a result of that activity. But unlike the
Nominally-Oriented Kind-Instance noun-senses,
these Verbally-Oriented senses clearly rely on a
sense of a verb and not derived from a noun-sense.
10 of these noun-senses are -tion nominalizations,
one formation is from each of -ing, -ship, -ment,
while five are otherwise derived. A handful of the -
tion-formations are in (19-a), the -ing, -ship, -ment
formations are in (19-b), while the others are in
(19-c).

(19) a. elaboration#3: a discussion that pro-
vides additional information; intona-
tion#1: rise and fall of the voice pitch;
recrimination#1: mutual accusations;

b. looting#1: plundering during riots or
in wartime; displacement#4: (chem-
istry) a reaction in which an elemen-
tary substance displaces and sets free a
constituent element from a compound;
friendship#1: the state of being friends

195



(or friendly)
c. curvature#1: (medicine) a curving

or bending; often abnormal; fan-
tasy#1: imagination unrestricted by re-
ality; genocide#1: systematic killing of
a racial or cultural group; silence#1: the
state of being silent (as when no one is
speaking); tribute#1: something given
or done as an expression of esteem

Here that there is always a verb-oriented situation,
where the activity it describes gives rise to a mass
general name for that activity, and the results are
described by a count “meaning” of the same name.

4.3 Borderline Cases

Our rationales for the distinction between Kind-
Instance noun-senses and Event-Result noun-
senses (when they are both Verbally-Oriented) is
this:

(20) If the event’s happening suggests a
cause for the result, then it is a case of
Event-Result “meaning”.

(21) When the event seems not to play any
role in the formation, causation, occur-
rence, or existence of the object in ques-
tion, then it is a Kind-Instance “mean-
ing”.

We think that these two explanations can merge
into one another. E.g., in (22) it seems that the
event is causing an instance to occur, and so we
classify it in the Event-Result group, even though
one can also see that the so-called result maybe is
just an instance of the kind indicated by the event.

(22) a. insertion#2: the act of putting one thing
into another

b. encryption#1: the activity of convert-
ing data or information into code

c. re-creation#1: the act of creating
again.

d. amelioration#1: the act of relieving ills
and changing for the better

Although the examples in (22) are most naturally
seen as cases where an event causes some result,
they could also be seen the other way. So, it
seems natural to say that putting one thing into an-
other causes there to be some result – an insertion.
The activity of converting data to code (encryp-
tion) brings about an encryption of the data. But

on the other hand, one might say that the abstract
kind (or type), insertion, has various specific phys-
ical manifestations – various instances or tokens of
that type. As we said, we think the former is more
natural here and in the other members of (22), but
it also seems that the latter understanding is cer-
tainly possible.

But when there was no salient particular causa-
tion involved, and it was merely a matter of some
abstract kind (or concept) which is then said to be
instantiated in a particular situation, we labelled it
as Verbally-Oriented Kind-Instance, as in (23):

(23) a. elaboration#3: a discussion that pro-
vides additional information

b. fantasy#1: imagination unrestricted by
reality; “a schoolgirl fantasy”

c. retraction#1: a disavowal or taking
back of a previous assertion

d. genocide#1: systematic killing of a
racial or cultural group

Here it seems more natural to think that the noun
is describing some (abstract) kind or type, and the
count interpretation is a manifestation of that type.
In this way, ‘elaboration’ seems to us to describe
a type of speech act, and its manifestations or in-
stantiations will be this or that elaboration. (Of
course, one might also say that an act of elabora-
tion is an action which will result in some specific
elaboration, which makes the Event-Result read-
ing become more prominent.)

However, there seem to be various noun
senses in Class 726 that are Verbally-Oriented,
but for which we find it impossible to decide
whether they are more clearly Event-Result or
more clearly Kind-Instance. Probably the best
thing to say about them is that they are both
Verbally-Oriented Event-Result and Verbally-
Oriented Kind-Instance to the same extent. Here
are two representatives:

(24) a. defection#1: withdrawing support or
help despite allegiance or responsibility

b. eccentricity#1: strange and unconven-
tional behavior

Finally, we see a very few noun-senses that seem
to be equally Verbally- and Nominally-Oriented:

(25) a. curve#1: the trace of a point whose di-
rection of motion changes

b. poop#1: obscene terms for feces

196



c. regret#1: sadness associated with some
wrong done or some disappointment

5 Concluding Remarks

We have offered some theoretical considerations
for favouring an analysis of (dictionary-defined)
senses of nouns, rather than the nouns themselves,
as the locus for explaining why a NP is +MASS or
+COUNT. We have also offered empirical evidence
in the form of a large repository of carefully an-
notated noun-senses. These annotated senses can
be analyzed to determine which individual ones of
them can be used only in +COUNT NPs, or only in
+MASS NPs, or in both +COUNT and +MASS NPs, or
are not usable in either +MASS or +COUNT NPs. This
paper in particular discussed a class of senses of
the third of these varieties: “Dual-life” senses –
those individual meanings that can be used in both
+MASS and +COUNT NPs.

We view the current undertaking as a necessary
step in providing a complete semantic analysis of
+MASS and +COUNT NPs. Such an account requires
both the underlying meanings of the component
nouns, and also the semantic effect of the syntac-
tic method of forming the NP (that is, the giving
the meaning of the NP) from the noun’s meaning.
However, without a detailed account of the wide
range of senses of the component nouns, it will be
impossible to give the desired group of semantic
rules. And without that, there would be no hope
for a compositional account of these phenomena.

We encourage other researchers to investigate
the resources available with the Bochum En-
glish Countability Lexicon (BECL). The BECL
2.1 database is publicly available at http://
count-and-mass.org.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge the Alexander von
Humboldt Foundation for an Anneliese-Maier
prize and grant to Pelletier, and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (KI-759/5) grant to Kiss,
for their support of the work reported here and our
other reports.

References
Allan, K. (1980). Nouns and countability. Lan-

guage 56, 541–567.

Artstein, R. and M. Poesio (2008). Inter-coder agree-
ment for computational linguistics. Computational
Linguistics 34, 555–596. http://aclweb.
org/anthology/J08-4004.

Baldwin, T. and F. Bond (2003). Learning the count-
ability of English nouns from corpus data. In Proc.
of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. http://aclweb.
org/anthology/PS03-1059.

Barner, D., S. Inagaki, and P. Li (2009). Language,
thought, and real nouns. Cognition 11, 329–344.

Bond, F. (2005). Translating the Untranslatable: A
Solution to the Problem of Generating English De-
terminers. Stanford: CSLI Press.

Bunt, H. (1985). Mass Terms and Model Theoretic Se-
mantics. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.

Chen, D. and C. Manning (2014). A fast and accurate
dependency parser using neural networks. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP 2014. doi: 10.3115/v1/D14-
1082.

Grimm, S. (2014). Individuating the Abstract. In
U. Etxeberria, A. Fălăuş, A. Irurtzun, and B. Lefer-
man (Eds.), Proceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung 18,
Bayonne and Vitoria-Gasteiz, pp. 182–200.

Ide, N. (2008). The Amercian National Corpus: Then,
now, and tomorrow. In M. Haugh, K. Burridge,
J. Mulder, and P. Peters (Eds.), Selected Proceed-
ings of the 2008 HCSNet Workshop on Designing the
Australian National Corpus: Mustering Languages,
Summerville, MA. Cascadilla Proceedings Project.

Ide, N. and K. Suderman (2004). The Amercian Na-
tional Corpus first release. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference (LREC), Lisbon, pp. 1681–1684. http:
//aclweb.org/anthology/L04-1313.

Katz, G. and R. Zamparelli (2012). Quantifying
count/mass elasticity. In J. Choi (Ed.), Proceedings
of the 29th West Coast Conference on Formal Lin-
guistics, Somerville, MA, pp. 371–379. Cascadilla
Proceedings Project.

Kiss, T., F. J. Pelletier, H. Husić, and J. Poppek (2016).
A sense-based lexicon of count and mass expres-
sions: The Bochum English countability lexicon.
In Proceedings of LREC 2016, Portoroz, Slovenia.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/L16.

Kiss, T., F. J. Pelletier, and T. Stadtfeld (2014). Build-
ing a reference lexicon for countability in English.
In Proceedings of the Ninth LREC 2014, Reyk-
javik. http://aclweb.org/anthology/
L14-1312.

197



Krifka, M. (1991). Massennomina. In A. von Ste-
chow and D. Wunderlich (Eds.), Semantics: An In-
ternational Handbook of Contemporary Research,
pp. 399–417. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Kulkarni, R., S. Rothstein, and A. Treves (2013). A
statistical investigation into the cross-linguistic dis-
tribution of mass and count nouns: Morphosyntactic
and semantic perspectives. Biolinguistics 7, 132–
168.

McCawley, J. (1975). Lexicography and the count-
mass distinction. In Berkeley Linguistic Society, Vol.
1, pp. 314–321. Reprinted in J. McCawley (ed.) Ad-
verbs, Vowels, and Other Objects of Wonder, Univ.
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1979, pages 165–173.

Middleton, E., E. Wisniewski, K. Trindel, and M. Imai
(2004). Separating the chaff from the oats: Ev-
idence for a conceptual distinction between count
noun and mass noun aggregates. Journal of Mem-
ory and Language 50, 371–394.

Miller, G. (1995). WordNet: A lexical database for
English. Communications of the ACM 38, 39–41.

Miller, G. and C. Fellbaum (2007). WordNet then and
now. Language Resources and Evaluation 41, 209–
214. doi: 10.1007/s10579-007-9044-6.

Payne, J. and R. Huddleston (2002). Nouns and noun
phrases. In R. Huddleston and G. K. Pullum (Eds.),
The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language,
pp. 323–523. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UP.

Pelletier, F. J. (1975). Non-singular reference: Some
preliminaries. Philosophia 5, 451–465. Reprinted
in (Pelletier, 1979, pp. 1-14).

Pelletier, F. J. (Ed.) (1979). Mass Terms: Some Philo-
sophical Problems. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Pub.

Pustejovsky, J. (1991). The generative lexicon. Com-
putational Linguistics 17, 409–441. http://
aclweb.org/anthology/J91-4003.

Quine, W. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Rothstein, S. (2010). Counting and the mass-count dis-
tinction. Journal of Semantics 27, 343–397.

Schmidtke, D. and V. Kuperman (2016). Mass counts
in world Englishes: A corpus linguistic study of
noun countability in non-native varieties of english.
Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory 12. doi:
10.1515/clit-2015-0047.

198


