



















































COMMIT at SemEval-2017 Task 5: Ontology-based Method for Sentiment Analysis of Financial Headlines


Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2017), pages 883–887,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3 - 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

COMMIT at SemEval-2017 Task 5: Ontology-based Method for
Sentiment Analysis of Financial Headlines

Kim Schouten Flavius Frasincar
Erasmus University Rotterdam
P.O. Box 1738, NL-3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands

{schouten,frasincar}@ese.eur.nl
f.m.g.dejong@eshcc.eur.nl

Franciska de Jong

Abstract

This paper describes our submission to
Task 5 of SemEval 2017, Fine-Grained
Sentiment Analysis on Financial Mi-
croblogs and News, where we limit our-
selves to performing sentiment analysis on
news headlines only (track 2). The ap-
proach presented in this paper uses a Sup-
port Vector Machine to do the required
regression, and besides unigrams and a
sentiment tool, we use various ontology-
based features. To this end we created a
domain ontology that models various con-
cepts from the financial domain. This al-
lows us to model the sentiment of actions
depending on which entity they are affect-
ing (e.g., decreasing debt is positive, but
decreasing profit is negative). The pre-
sented approach yielded a cosine distance
of 0.6810 on the official test data, resulting
in the 12th position.

1 Introduction

Many companies in the financial sector are in the
business of gathering and selling information, in-
cluding news and sentiment analysis information,
because of the profound influence this has on in-
vestor behavior (Van de Kauter et al., 2015). The
relation between news and movements in the fi-
nancial market is intricate, with news influencing
the market (Schuster, 2003) as well as the mar-
ket being a source of news itself. Price fluctu-
ations of financial instruments can be linked to
supply and demand and thus to the desirability of
that financial product, which changes when new
facts related to this product are published. Sen-
timent analysis in the context of financial news
headlines aims to capture the change in desirabil-
ity of a given product. Assigning a negative senti-
ment score to a certain news headline for a given

product then represents a decrease in desirabil-
ity and thus a decrease in price for that product,
while assigning a positive sentiment has the oppo-
site meaning.

In track 2 of Task 5 at SemEval 2017 (Cortis
et al., 2017), each news headline contains one or
more company names, and for a given company
name, the sentiment, modeled as a real number
between -1 and 1, needs to be determined. When
multiple companies are mentioned, the same sen-
tence can appear multiple times in the data, each
time asking for the sentiment with respect to a dif-
ferent company. In financial headlines, there are
two reasons why the expressed sentiment can dif-
fer for the various companies that are mentioned.
The first is that expressed sentiment is often oppo-
site for competitors, while the second is that news
often reflects on the stock movements of the day
mentioning both the biggest winners and biggest
losers in the same headline.

Besides directly mentioning the stock move-
ments of a company, news headlines often report
on changes with respect to a certain aspect of a
company (e.g., its profit or debt) or on actions that
influence the company (e.g., opening stores or be-
ing sued). The expressed sentiment often depends
on what particular aspect is in scope. A decrease in
profit, for example, is considered negative, while a
decrease in debt is generally considered positive.

The issue of aspect-dependent sentiment is ad-
dressed in our approach by classifying aspects and
actions in such a way that an ontology reasoner,
with the help of a set of class axioms, can infer
which sentiment is expressed by a given pair of
aspect and (increase or decrease) action. Besides
aspect-dependent sentiment expressions, there are
also sentiment expressions that always convey a
positive (e.g., lift or good) or negative sentiment
(e.g., drown or bad), and those are also stored in
the ontology.

The ontology information is used a source of

883



features for the Support Vector Regression model
that is employed in our approach. Hence, we
present an approach that is a hybrid between
knowledge-based methods and machine learning
methods (Cambria, 2016).

This paper is structured as follows. In Sect. 2,
the method is presented, followed by an extensive
evaluation in Sect. 3. Conclusions and suggestions
for future work are given in Sect. 4.

2 Method

At the heart of the method is a Support Vector
Regression (SVR) model, for which we use the
Weka implementation (Frank et al., 2016; Shevade
et al., 2000). To provide features that describe the
news headline, all headlines are preprocessed us-
ing the Stanford CoreNLP library. This involves
tokenization, Part-of-Speech tagging, lemmatiza-
tion, dependency parsing, and sentiment annota-
tion. Furthermore, after tokenization, the head-
lines are scanned for company names that are in
the ontology, and all text is set to lowercase. The
company field in the annotations is also linked to
a URI in the ontology. The sentiment tool (Socher
et al., 2013) that is part of the CoreNLP package
assigns a sentiment score to various parts of the
text (using the parse tree), but for this research we
use only the sentiment assigned to the complete
headline. This is a number in the range of -2 to
2, but in practice, sentence sentiment tends to be
between -1 and 1. Besides the sentiment value,
which is a feature for the SVR, we also use the
presence or absence of unigrams as features (i.e.,
classical bag-of-words), denoting presence with 1
and absence with 0. This unigrams plus sentence
sentiment forms our baseline method.

2.1 Ontology Design

To the baseline method, we add various ontol-
ogy features. To that end, we first designed and
manually populated an ontology that models ex-
pressions in the financial domain (Schouten et al.,
2017). The ontology contains four main classes:
Sentiment, modeling mentions of a certain sen-
timent value, Entity, modeling nouns that rep-
resent entities like companies or aspects of entities
like profit and debt, Property, modeling adjec-
tives like lower, better, etc., and Action, repre-
senting verbs in the text. Hence, the ontology is a
model of mentions or expressions of the concepts
in the financial domain rather than a model of the

concepts themselves.
In accordance with the two main polar direc-

tions: up or increase, and down or decrease, all
subclasses of Entity are split into two groups
that correspond to these two directions. The first
group consist of positively oriented entities for
which an ‘up’ or ‘increase’ movement is positive
(e.g., profit). The second group is comprised of
negatively oriented entities for which a ‘down’ or
‘decrease’ movement is positive (e.g., debt).

Actions and properties are giving information
about some entity and these are divided into four
categories. The first two are aspect-dependent,
representing an Increase and Decrease ac-
tion, while the other two categories repre-
sent actions that are inherently Positive and
Negative. Actions in the Increase or
Decrease category can only be assigned a senti-
ment if they are linked with an entity from the on-
tology, while actions in the two sentiment classes
always denote that sentiment value regardless of
what entity they affect. A similar reasoning holds
for properties. An overview of the main ontology
classes is given in Figure 1.

2.2 Ontology Features

The presence or absence of subclasses of
Entity, Property, and Action, which are
the domain components of our ontology, are
recorded as additional features for the SVR. To
avoid fitting the model on certain companies
that occur in predominantly positive (or negative)
headlines in this particular set of news headlines,
we filter out company name URLs from the set of
features. Ontology concepts are linked to the text
by means of lexicalizations that have been added
to each non-abstract concept in the ontology. Once
a concept has been found, all its superclasses are
also added as features to the SVR model. Hence, if
we find the action Lift, we also add the concepts
Action, Positive, and Sentiment, since
the concept Lift always denotes a positive senti-
ment in our domain ontology.

On top of these ontology lookup features, we
define a set of class axioms that will allow the rea-
soner to infer the sentiment of a given combina-
tion of an Entity and either a Property or a
Action, where the action or property on its own
is not already a subclass of Sentiment. Us-
ing the two polar categories of entities (i.e., the
positively oriented group and the negatively ori-

884



Property

Entity Sentiment

Action

Positive NegativeDecreaseIncrease

Positive
Entity

Negative
Entity

Decreasing
Property

Positive
Property

Negative
Property

Increasing
Action

Decreasing
Action

Positive
Action

Negative
Action

Increasing
Property

Figure 1: The main classes of the used ontology

ented group) in conjunction with the Increase
and Decrease classes that contain actions and
properties, we can infer the sentiment of the four
different combinations that are possible. The class
axioms that describe this behavior are:

1. Increase u PosEntity v Positive
2. Increase u NegEntity v Negative
3. Decrease u PosEntity v Negative
4. Decrease u NegEntity v Positive
Besides these general class axioms, we also de-

fined a number of specific axioms that will allow
the reasoner to infer the sentiment for certain par-
ticular expressions. For example, closing a deal is
considered positive, while closing stores generally
is not. While we could get the right behavior by
classifying Store as a positively oriented entity,
and Deal as a negatively oriented entity, this did
not match with our intuition that a deal is some-
thing positive and more deals is not necessarily
bad, which is a conclusion that would follow from
classifying Deal as a negatively oriented entity.
Hence we have specific axioms that deal with this
scenario and the related Open action:

1. Close u Deal v Positive
2. Close u CompanyPart v Negative
3. Open u CompanyPart v Positive
In the above axioms, a CompanyPart is the

class that models all parts of a certain company,
including things like headquarters, stores, web-
shops, departments, etc. An example of the rea-
soner in action is visualized in Figure 2.

2.3 Company-specific Sentiment

The above model, with all the described ontology
features, would still result in a sentence-level sen-
timent algorithm that would not be able to give dif-

direct object

“ Kingfisher is set to open another 200 Screwfix stores ”

Open Store

Open Store

CompanyPart

Open and 

CompanyPart 

SubClassOf 

Positive

Positive

Figure 2: A schematic overview of the given rea-
soning example.

ferent sentiment scores for different companies in
the same sentence. Since this problem does ap-
pear, we add a company-specific sentiment feature
to the feature set. This feature denotes a positive
(1), neutral (0), or negative (-1) sentiment score
for the company that is mentioned in the com-
pany field of the annotation. Since we already an-
notated this field with a URL, we can locate the
company within the headline. After that, we use
the grammatical dependencies to find all words di-
rectly connected to the company. If these words
are either a property or an action, we can use those
to compute the company-specific sentiment as we
can safely assume that directly connected words in
the dependency graph pertain to that company.

Since a company is positively oriented en-
tity, all actions and properties with superclass
Decrease or Negative convey a negative sen-
timent towards the company, while Increase or
Positive communicate a positive sentiment. A
positive sentiment is quantified as +1, and a neg-
ative sentiment is represented by -1. Then, the
company-specific sentiment feature is computed
as the sum of all sentiment conveying words di-

885



rectly related in the dependency graph to the com-
pany mention in the headline.

3 Evaluation

In this section we evaluate our submission on the
training data and report the results obtained on the
official test data. The data consist of news head-
lines in the financial domain, and each headline
is annotated with the name of the target company.
For the training data the target sentiment score is
also provided. Note that the same headline can
appear multiple times in the data, each time with a
different target company. On the official test data,
a cosine distance of 0.6810 is achieved, resulting
in the 12th position. The feature set experiments
have been performed on the training data by run-
ning 5 times a 10-fold cross-validation setup, each
time with different random folds, to ensure robust
results.

To measure the effect of the various employed
ontology features, the method is run with different
subsets of all features. The results of this experi-
ment are reported in Table 1. In this way, we can
compare the benefit of adding entities, properties,
and actions from the ontology, separately. From
the reported results we can see that entities and
properties are not particularly useful for sentiment
analysis. For entities, this makes sense, as these
convey no sentiment information. For properties,
it is less intuitive, as adjectives, the word types that
usually correspond to a subclass of Property
from the ontology, are often strong indicators of
sentiment (e.g., good, bad, etc.).

On the other hand, matching verbs in the text
to subclasses of Action shows a large improve-
ment to sentiment analysis. We hypothesize that
the division into four categories (i.e., Positive,
Negative, Increase, and Decrease) is a
meaningful categorization in the domain of finan-
cial news. We observe that verbs are often the cen-
tral word in conveying information to the reader,
and hence, a lot of sentiment information is com-
municated using this type of concept.

Adding the class axioms to determine the
sentiment of combinations with subclasses of
Increase and Decrease is also useful, with
a 2% increase compared to not using it. Adding
the company specific sentiment, however, does not
seem to help much.

Table 1: The change in performance when using
different feature sets, reporting the average perfor-
mance on the training data, using 5 runs with 10-
fold cross-validation. Feature sets that are statisti-
cally indistinguishable from each other in terms of
performance are grouped together

avg. cosine
distance st.dev.

base (B) 0.6311 0.0482
B + entities (E) 0.6361 0.0455
B + properties (P) 0.6300 0.0478
B + actions (A) 0.6815 0.0498
B + E + P + A 0.6883 0.0502
B + E + P + A + 0.7041 0.0450

class axioms
B + E + P + A + 0.7050 0.0441

class axioms +
company-specific

sentiment

4 Conclusions

In this work we presented our submission to Task
5 of SemEval 2017: fine-grained sentiment anal-
ysis on financial news headlines (track 2). We
showed that by categorizing entities (nouns), prop-
erties (adjectives), and actions (verbs), and link-
ing them to concepts in an ontology, we can har-
ness the power of the ontology reasoner to in-
fer the sentiment of expressions that indicate a
typical up/increase or down/decrease movement.
This is achieved by defining class axioms within
the ontology. In terms of contribution to perfor-
mance, we can state that the categorization of ac-
tions into Positive, Negative, Increase,
and Decrease gave the highest increase in per-
formance, followed by adding class axioms for
sentiment inference.

For future work, we want to invest more in the
company-specific sentiment so we can assign dif-
ferent sentiment values to different companies in
the news headline. Given the fact that headlines
often contain companies with opposite sentiment,
this is a highly desirable feature to have. By using
a form of spreading activation, we could compute
the sentiment for the whole dependency graph, not
with respect to the root which would result in the
sentence sentiment, but with respect to the node
in the graph representing the company. Negators
and other valence shifters can be used to properly
spread the sentiment from one node to the next.

886



References
Erik Cambria. 2016. Affective Computing and Senti-

ment Analysis. IEEE Intelligent Systems 31(2):102–
107.

Keith Cortis, André Freitas, Tobias Dauert, Manuela
Huerlimann, Manel Zarrouk, Siegfried Handschuh,
and Brian Davis. 2017. SemEval-2017 Task
5: Fine-Grained Sentiment Analysis on Financial
Microblogs and News. In Proceedings of the
11th International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ation (SemEval-2017). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 510–526.

Eibe Frank, Mark A. Hall, and Ian H. Witten. 2016.
The WEKA Workbench. Online Appendix for ”Data
Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and
Techniques”, Fourth Edition. Morgan Kaufmann.

Kim Schouten, Flavius Frasincar, and Franciska
de Jong. 2017. COMMIT at SemEval-2017
Task 5: Ontology-based Method for Senti-
ment Analysis of Financial Headlines - On-
tology. http://www.kimschouten.com/
publications/#semeval2017.

Thomas Schuster. 2003. Meta-Communication
and Market Dynamics. Reflexive Interac-
tions of Financial Markets and the Mass
Media. Technical report, EconWPA.
http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:wpa:wuwpfi:
0307014.

S.K. Shevade, S.S. Keerthi, C. Bhattacharyya, and
K.R.K. Murthy. 2000. Improvements to the SMO
Algorithm for SVM Regression. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks 11(5):188 – 1993.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
and Christopher Potts Potts. 2013. Recursive Deep
Models for Semantic Compositionality Over a Sen-
timent Treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP 2013). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 1631–1642.

Marjan Van de Kauter, Diane Breesch, and Véronique
Hoste. 2015. Fine-grained Analysis of Explicit and
Implicit Sentiment in Financial News Articles. Ex-
pert Systems with Applications 42(11):4999–5010.

887


