



















































Generating Pattern-Based Entailment Graphs for Relation Extraction


Proceedings of the 6th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2017), pages 220–229,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3-4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Pattern-Based Entailment Graphs for Relation Extraction

Kathrin Eichler, Feiyu Xu, Hans Uszkoreit, Sebastian Krause
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)

Berlin, Germany
firstname.lastname@dfki.de

Abstract

Relation extraction is the task of recogniz-
ing and extracting relations between enti-
ties or concepts in texts. A common ap-
proach is to exploit existing knowledge
to learn linguistic patterns expressing the
target relation and use these patterns for
extracting new relation mentions. De-
riving relation patterns automatically usu-
ally results in large numbers of candi-
dates, which need to be filtered to de-
rive a subset of patterns that reliably ex-
tract correct relation mentions. We ad-
dress the pattern selection task by exploit-
ing the knowledge represented by entail-
ment graphs, which capture semantic rela-
tionships holding among the learned pat-
tern candidates. This is motivated by the
fact that a pattern may not express the
target relation explicitly, but still be use-
ful for extracting instances for which the
relation holds, because its meaning en-
tails the meaning of the target relation.
We evaluate the usage of both automati-
cally generated and gold-standard entail-
ment graphs in a relation extraction sce-
nario and present favorable experimental
results, exhibiting the benefits of structur-
ing and selecting patterns based on entail-
ment graphs.

1 Introduction

The task of relation extraction (RE) is to recog-
nize and extract relations among entities or con-
cepts mentioned in texts. One common approach
to RE is to learn and exploit extraction patterns
(e.g., based on syntactic dependency trees), which
express the targeted semantic relations. In order
to circumvent the manual creation of patterns, nu-

merous approaches have been investigated to de-
rive patterns automatically. Automatic methods
generally induce large numbers of unique candi-
date patterns, which only potentially express the
target relation and need to be filtered in order to
derive a subset of high-quality patterns for the re-
lation extraction task. The task of filtering or se-
lecting patterns can be tackled in various ways,
e.g., based on frequency information, or by apply-
ing syntactic or semantic criteria.

For many RE applications, such as knowledge
base population, patterns are not only relevant if
they express the target relation explicitly, but also
if they extract facts from which the target relation
can be inferred. For example, all patterns below
can be utilized for extracting pairs of people who
are or were involved in a marriage relation:

P1: PERSON1 <marry> PERSON21

P2: PERSON1 <be widow of> PERSON2

P3: PERSON1 <divorce from> PERSON2

However, only pattern P1 expresses the target
relation explicitly. Patterns P2 and P3 are seman-
tically different from P1, but express a fact that
entails the marriage relation2. As being aware of
these semantic relationships holding among pat-
terns can be of help in the pattern selection pro-
cess, we propose to capture and exploit these re-
lationships using pattern-based entailment graphs
and show how technology from the area of recog-
nizing textual entailment can be adapted to auto-
matically generate these graphs. Finally, we apply
the generated knowledge for relation extraction.

1PERSONx refers to a slot filler for a person recognized in
the input from which the pattern was extracted, <text> refers
to a normalized form of the text part of the extracted pattern.

2We ignore tense aspects for the time being, which is
also the approach taken in the RTE challenges (Dagan et al.,
2005).

220



2 Related Work

The task of estimating the quality of automatically
learned extraction patterns has been dealt with
in various ways, for example based on integrity
constraints (Agichtein, 2006), frequency heuris-
tics (Krause et al., 2012) or lexical semantic crite-
ria (Moro et al., 2013). Another line of research
in RE groups similar patterns, e.g., by merging
patterns based on syntactic criteria (Banko et al.,
2007; Shinyama and Sekine, 2006; Thomas et al.,
2011; Angeli et al., 2015), by clustering patterns
that are semantically related (Kok and Domingos,
2008; Yates and Etzioni, 2009; Yao et al., 2011),
or by identifying patterns associated to a given
seed relation (Bauer et al., 2014). Such approaches
help gain generalization; however, their ability to
express semantic relationships is limited, as they
cannot capture the asymmetric nature of these re-
lationships. For example, clustering can help us
identify pattern P4 below as being semantically re-
lated to patterns P1 to P3 in section 1.

P4: PERSON1 <love> PERSON2

However, it falls short of expressing that two en-
tities linked by patterns P1 to P3 are mentions of
the marriage relation, whereas this is not necessar-
ily true of entities linked by pattern P4. Similarly,
clustering can identify patterns P1 and P3 as se-
mantically related. However, it cannot express that
the relation expressed by pattern P3 entails the re-
lation expressed by pattern P1, but not vice versa.
These asymmetric relationships have been consid-
ered by Riedel et al. (2013), who learns latent fea-
ture vectors for patterns based on matrix factoriza-
tion, and have also been studied extensively in the
context of recognizing textual entailment (RTE).
RTE is the task of determining, for two textual ex-
pressions T (text) and H (hypothesis), whether the
meaning of H can be inferred from the meaning
of T (Dagan and Glickman, 2004). In RE, RTE
systems have been applied to validate a given re-
lation instance (Wang and Neumann, 2008) and
to extract instances entailing a given target rela-
tion (Romano et al., 2006; Bar-Haim et al., 2007;
Roth et al., 2009).

As illustrated above, RE can clearly benefit
from considering semantic relationships holding
among extraction patterns. However, previous
work in RE has either focussed on grouping re-
lated patterns without considering non-symmetric
relations, or, on computing entailment decisions

for individual T/H pairs. We propose to exploit en-
tailment relationships holding among RE patterns
by structuring the candidate set in an entailment
graph. Entailment graphs are hierarchical struc-
tures representing entailment relations among tex-
tual expressions and have previously been gener-
ated for various types of expressions (Berant et al.,
2010, 2012; Mehdad et al., 2013; Levy et al., 2014;
Kotlerman et al., 2015). Entailment graphs can
be constructed by determining entailment relation-
ships between pairs of expressions or, as proposed
by Kolesnyk et al. (2016), by generating entailed
sentences from source sentences. Our work of
building entailment graphs based on RE patterns
is related to the work by Nakashole et al. (2012),
who create a taxonomy of binary relation patterns.
For their syntactic patterns, they compute partial
orders of generalization and subsumption based on
the set of mentions extracted by each pattern. In
contrast to their work, we construct pattern-based
entailment graphs using RTE technology. This is
motivated by the fact that entailment is semantic
and not mention-based, i.e., one pattern can entail
another pattern even if they extract disjoint sets of
mentions in a given text corpus.

3 Entailment Graph Generation

3.1 Pattern-Based Entailment Graphs

A pattern-based entailment graph refers to a di-
rected graph, in which each node represents a
unique RE pattern, and each edge (→) denotes an
entailment relationship. Bidirectional edges (↔)
denote that the patterns represented by the two
nodes are considered semantically equivalent. A
sample subgraph for the marriage relation is given
in Figure 13, which shows all entailment relations
with respect to the pattern [PERSON1 <marry>
PERSON2]. Automatic entailment graph gener-
ation is usually performed in two steps: First,
entailment decisions for individual T/H pairs are
computed (using an RTE engine); second, an opti-
mization strategy is applied to derive a consistent,
transitive graph (Berant et al., 2010).

3.2 RTE Engine

For recognizing entailment relations between in-
dividual T/H pairs of patterns, we make use

3For reasons of simplicity, the figure shows the text repre-
sentation of the patterns, which are in fact represented as de-
pendency structures. Since entailment is transitive, all edges
are omitted that can be recovered in the transitive closure.

221



Figure 1: Subgraph showing entailment relations for the pattern [PERSON1 <marry> PERSON2]

of an RTE engine based on multi-level align-
ments. This RTE engine, referred to as Multi-
Align, is available through the RTE platform EX-
CITEMENT (Magnini et al., 2014) and achieved
state-of-the-art performance on several RTE cor-
pora (Noh et al., 2015). We opted for this RTE
system because it makes use of external knowl-
edge resources and, unlike more recent systems
based on neural networks (Rocktäschel et al.,
2015; Bowman et al., 2015), is able to cope with
the restricted amount of training data available
for the task. MultiAlign uses shallow parsing
for linguistic preprocessing and logistic regres-
sion for entailment classification. Features for
the classifier are generated on the basis of multi-
level alignments using four aligners: a lemma
aligner (aligning identical lemmas found in T and
H), an aligner based on the paraphrase tables
provided by the METEOR MT evaluation pack-
age (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014), and two lexi-
cal aligners based on Wordnet (Fellbaum, 1998)4

and VerbOcean (Chklovski and Pantel, 2004). As
output, it produces a binary decision (entailment,
non-entailment) along with a computed confi-
dence score.

As the RTE engine was originally designed for
sentences, rather than patterns, we converted each
pattern into its textual representation. The vari-
ables expressing type and semantic role of the enti-
ties linked by the pattern were excluded in this rep-

4Relations considered by the WordNet aligner: synonym,
derivationally related, (instance) hypernym, member / part
holonym, entailment, and substance meronym.

resentation, as the resulting variable alignments
would skew the RTE engine’s entailment deci-
sion. For our experiments, we used the original
MultiAlign implementation as well as an adapted
version, in which we made some changes to the
WordNet aligner. In particular, unlike in the orig-
inal implementation, which only considered the
first sense of each WordNet entry, we extended
this to cover all senses. This allowed us to re-
trieve additional relevant alignments such as wed
↔ marry. In addition, rather than retrieving rules
for all words in T, we only consider rules for full
verbs, nouns, and adjectives. This way, we par-
ticularly filter out rules for auxiliary verbs, which
tend to produce irrelevant alignments, especially
when considering all senses. A sample set of deci-
sions produced by our RTE engine among candi-
date patterns for the marriage relation is depicted
in Figure 2.

3.3 Graph Optimization

Automatically derived entailment decisions may
contradict each other. For example, as illus-
trated in Figure 2, our RTE engine correctly
decides that [PERSON1 <spouse of> PERSON2]
→ [PERSON1 <’s marriage to> PERSON2] and
that [PERSON1 <’s marriage to> PERSON2] →
[PERSON1 <marry> PERSON2]. However, it
misses the entailment relation between [PERSON1
<spouse of> PERSON2] and [PERSON1 <marry>
PERSON2], because the relationship between
spouse and marry is not covered by the seman-
tic resources underlying the system. This leads

222



Figure 2: Sample set of RTE decisions (YES: entailment, NO: no entailment) with associated confidence

Figure 3: Sample outputs using greedy (left) and global (right) graph optimizer

to a set of decisions that is invalid given the tran-
sitivity of the entailment relation. For deriving a
consistent graph, we applied two different strate-
gies: First, a simple greedy strategy that assumes
each computed positive entailment relation with a
confidence exceeding a pre-defined threshold to be
valid, and adds missing entailment edges to ensure
transitive closure. Second, the global graph opti-
mization algorithm by Berant et al. (2012), which
searches for the best graph under a global transitiv-
ity constraint, approaching the optimization prob-
lem by Integer Linear Programming. The selec-
tion of the optimization strategy is crucial, as il-
lustrated in Figure 3, which shows two sample out-
puts from each of the two strategies for the deci-
sions in Figure 2.

4 Applying Pattern-Based Entailment
Graphs for Relation Extraction

In order to exploit entailment graphs for relation
extraction, we propose the following approach,
which is depicted in Figure 4:

1. Create a set of candidate extraction patterns P
(applying any method of choice).

2. Generate an entailment graph EG expressing
entailment relations among the patterns in P .

3. Choose a base pattern5, expressing the target re-
lation explicitly and select all patterns entailing
the base pattern according to EG.

4. Apply the selected patterns to extract relation
mentions.

Given the sample graph in Figure 1 and the
base pattern H: [PERSON1 <marry> PERSON2],
our method would select all patterns entailing H ,
either directly or via transitivity, e.g., [PERSON1
<be ex-husband of> PERSON2], including pat-
terns considered semantically equivalent, such as
[PERSON1 <wed> PERSON2]. It would neither se-
lect [PERSON1 <love> PERSON2], as it has no en-
tailment relation to H , nor [PERSON1 <be in rela-
tionship with> PERSON2], as it is entailed by, but
not equivalent to H .

5Note that the selection of a base pattern can be done man-
ually, but can also be automated. For example, for the rela-
tions at hand, the most frequent pattern candidate learned for
a particular relation turned out to be an appropriate choice.

223



Figure 4: Procedure for relation extraction using pattern selection based on entailment graphs

5 Experiments

For evaluating our method on the relation extrac-
tion task, we conducted experiments on two freely
available datasets: TEG-REP (Eichler et al., 2016)
and FB15k-237 (Toutanova et al., 2015). On the
TEG-REG dataset, we carried out a detailed evalu-
ation of several pattern filtering strategies with re-
spect to two semantic relations. On the FB15k-237
corpus, we evaluate the scalability of our method
to other semantic relations.

5.1 TEG-REP
The TEG-REP corpus contains automatically de-
rived relation extraction patterns as well as gold-
standard entailment graphs created from these pat-
terns for three relations typically considered in RE
tasks: marriage, acquisition, and award honor.
The patterns underlying this corpus are a subset
of the patterns used by Moro et al. (2013) and
were acquired automatically using the pattern dis-
covery system by Krause et al. (2012). The sys-
tem derives candidate patterns from dependency-
parsed sentences extracted using distant super-
vision based on relation instances from the fact
knowledge base Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008).
The TEG-REP corpus is the only available cor-
pus of pattern-based entailment graphs and par-
ticularly suitable for our evaluation because it al-
lows for a comparison of patterns selected based
on both manually and automatically created entail-
ment graphs. For our experiments on this corpus,
we divided the full set of patterns in the corpus
(around 500 per relation) into two equally-sized

portions, one for creating training data for the RTE
engine, and one for evaluating pattern selection
methods. For creating an evaluation dataset, we
applied all patterns in the evaluation split to 14.5
million ClueWeb sentences (Lemur Project, 2009)
linked to Freebase entities (Gabrilovich et al.,
2013), and manually annotated around 3000 of the
extracted mentions.6 A mention was annotated
as being correct if we found evidence for the tar-
get relation between the entities in the mention to
hold. Evidence was drawn either from the source
sentence itself, or, in cases were the source sen-
tence did not express the relation explicitly, from
external resources such as Freebase or Wikipedia.

Our experiments on the TEG-REP dataset are
based on the relations marriage and acquisition7.
For our experiments, we split the evaluation set
into a development set for optimizing the graph
building parameters and a test set for the final
evaluation. In our experiments, we tested several
strategies for selecting patterns and measured per-
formance over the annotated relation mentions in
the evaluation dataset. For evaluating the graph-
based methods, we selected all patterns entailing
the base patterns [PERSON1 <marry> PERSON2]
(for marriage) and [ORGANIZATION1 <acquire>

6The annotation was done by three annotators. About
10% of the mentions were annotated by two annotators in
parallel, who achieved a very high interannotator agreement
(Cohens Kappa > 0.9). The remaining mentions were anno-
tated by a single person.

7We did not evaluate the award honor relation because
the vast majority (> 98%) of mentions extracted using these
patterns were correct, which would not have allowed for a
meaningful evaluation.

224



ORGANIZATION2] (for acquisition). In order to
investigate the benefits of the graph structure, we
compared the results to those achieved when com-
puting entailment relations at a pair-wise level,
i.e., using the base pattern of the relation as H
and all other candidate patterns for the relation as
T. We also applied the approach by Moro et al.
(2013), who identify relation-relevant word senses
based on lexical semantic subgraphs derived from
BabelNet and filter out patterns not containing any
relevant word sense. Based on a parameter k, they
consider a word sense to be relevant, if it is at most
k-step distant to the core word sense for the target
relation.

5.2 FB15k-237

As training the RTE models requires appropriate
training data, which may not be available, we ran
additional experiments to investigate if the mod-
els trained on T/H pairs for one relation are gen-
eral enough to be used for computing entailment
relations among pattern candidates for other se-
mantic relations. To this end, we used the FB15k-
237 corpus (Toutanova et al., 2015), which con-
tains knowledge-base relation triples and textual
mentions of Freebase entity pairs. For our ex-
periments on this corpus, we generated candidate
patterns by extracting the first 1000 tuples match-
ing a particular relation from the pattern files in
the corpus, and then extracting all patterns link-
ing any of the tuples in the textual triples used by
Toutanova and Chen (2015). This way, our candi-
date pattern set contains both patterns expressing
the target relation as well as patterns expressing
other relations. For creating the entailment graph,
we converted all patterns into a textual represen-
tation, removed patterns with no lexical item, and,
from the remaining patterns, built an entailment
graph applying the RTE engine described in 3.2
with the model trained on the marriage relation
and the best parameter setting derived based on
the TEG-REP corpus. For evaluating the result,
we selected 10 relations, defined a base pattern for
each of them, and checked, for each pattern in the
graph, whether it entailed the base pattern accord-
ing to the graph structure and whether the entail-
ment decision was correct based on the semantics
expressed by the pattern.

As in this setting, we evaluated the entailment
relations expressed by the pattern graph rather
than the usage of the patterns for relation extrac-

tion, the results are not directly comparable to the
figures obtained on the TEG-REP corpus, but still
allow for an assessment of the quality of the se-
lected patterns.

6 Results and Discussion

6.1 TEG-REP
Table 1 shows results on the TEG-REP corpus and
contains, for each of the following pattern selec-
tion methods, the computed precision, recall, and
F1 scores:

• All patterns All patterns from the test split
(baseline).

• Lexical semantic filter (Moro et al., 2013) Pat-
terns selected using the lexical semantic filter.

• Pair-wise entailment (MultiAlignAdapted) Pat-
terns selected based on pair-wise entailment de-
cisions using the model of MultiAlignAdapted.

• Entailment Graph (MultiAlignOriginal / Mul-
tiAlignAdapted) Patterns selected based on en-
tailment graphs generated with the original /
adapted MultiAlign implementation.

• Entailment Graph (TEG-REP gold standard)
Patterns selected based on gold-standard entail-
ment graphs from the TEG-REP corpus.

For the lexical semantic filter method, we ex-
perimented with different levels of k and noted
down the value achieving the best F1 score. The
results in the table were produced setting k to 1 for
the marriage relation and k to 5 for the acquisi-
tion relation. For the RTE-based methods, we ex-
perimented with the two different graph optimiza-
tion strategies and, for each of them, with different
confidence threshold values, and optimized these
parameters based on the development split. The
figures in the table show the results achieved on
the test split using the parameter setting optimized
on the development set: the greedy optimization
strategy with thresholds of 0.71 (MultiAlignOrig-
inal) and 0.77 (MultiAlignAdapted) for the mar-
riage relation and thresholds of 0.74 (MultiAlig-
nOriginal) and 0.75 (MultiAlignAdapted) for the
acquisition relation. On our data, the greedy edge
selection strategy produced better results than the
global graph optimizer for both relations. This was
because the global strategy, even with low con-
fidence thresholds, was more restrictive and re-
moved too many edges from the graph, thus yield-
ing lower recall figures.

225



Configuration Precision Recall F1
All patterns 0.15 1.00 0.27
Lexical semantic filter (Moro et al., 2013) 0.61 0.73 0.67
Pair-wise entailment (MultiAlignAdapted) 0.97 0.56 0.71
Entailment Graph (MultiAlignOriginal) 0.96 0.59 0.73
Entailment Graph (MultiAlignAdapted) 0.96 0.68 0.80
Entailment Graph (TEG-REP gold standard) 0.96 0.69 0.80

Table 1: Results for marriage relation (TEG-REP corpus)

Configuration Precision Recall F1
All patterns 0.30 1.00 0.46
Lexical semantic filter (Moro et al., 2013) 0.30 0.97 0.46
Pair-wise entailment (MultiAlignAdapted) 0.82 0.49 0.62
Entailment Graph (MultiAlignOriginal) 0.81 0.53 0.64
Entailment Graph (MultiAlignAdapted) 0.59 0.93 0.73
Entailment Graph (TEG-REP gold standard) 0.82 0.49 0.62

Table 2: Results for acquisition relation (TEG-REP corpus)

For both relations, the best overall results were
achieved using our proposed method based on en-
tailment graphs generated automatically applying
the adapted RTE engine. The results show that
entailment-based pattern selection is in fact more
powerful than the lexical semantic filter. It selects
patterns yielding a much higher precision because
it is able to successfully filter out non-entailing
patterns, such as [PERSON1 <be in relationship
with> PERSON2] for the marriage relation, which
are wrongly selected using the lexical semantic fil-
ter. For the marriage relation, the results not only
show that our RTE engine adaptations yielded a
much higher recall (with almost no loss in preci-
sion) than the original implementation (thanks to
an increased number of relevant alignments), but
also that pattern selection can in fact benefit from
the graph structure: Entailment graphs created us-
ing MultiAlignAdapted achieved much better per-
formance than a selection based on pair-wise en-
tailment computation using the same RTE model.
This was due to a higher recall achieved because
the graph structure allowed the algorithm to iden-
tify entailment relations that involved the combi-
nation of several inference steps and were missed
when applying RTE in a pair-wise manner. An ex-
ample is the relationship between wife and marry,
as shown below:

wife
hyper-
nym−−−→ spouse

member
holonym−−−−→ marriage

deri-
vation−−−→ marry

For the acquisition relation, we noticed that
the lexical semantic filter performed quite poorly
on our corpus. The relation requires a large k-
value, i.e., k >= 5, since there are many ways
in which an acquisition can be described. A
company can for instance devour, take-over or
purchase another company. Each increase of k
allows many additional content words, thus in-
creasing the danger of inappropriate ones. An
example is [ORGANIZATION1 <trademark of>
ORGANIZATION2]. Where it is plausible that in
the training set, an acquired company may persist
as a brand of its new owner, trademark does not
express a take-over. Although the semantic filter
by Moro et al. (2013) can provide useful hints and
can be applied without manually annotating train-
ing data, it is not powerful enough to discriminate
content words as to whether they provide strong
evidence for an acquisition or not.

Also patterns selected based on the entailment
graph gold-standard performed surprisingly
low on the acquisition relation. Here, recall
was affected negatively because some of the non-
entailing patterns that were filtered out were in fact
able to extract correct instances with good preci-
sion. In particular, patterns expressing a planned
acquisition, such as [ORGANIZATION1 <plan to
purchase> ORGANIZATION2], [ORGANIZATION1
<be to acquire> ORGANIZATION2], or
[ORGANIZATION1 <announce intention to
acquire> ORGANIZATION2] extracted many cor-

226



Relation Base pattern Precision Recall F1
award-award_honor-ceremony win at 0.58 (0.31) 0.73 (1.00) 0.65 (0.47)
base-locations-continents-countries_within country in 0.67 (0.57) 0.84 (1.00) 0.75 (0.59)
education-education-major_field_of_study degree in 1.00 (0.47) 0.49 (1.00) 0.65 (0.64)
film-...-film_regional_debut_venue premiere at 0.73 (0.13) 0.89 (1.00) 0.80 (0.23)
film-performance-film star in 0.97 (0.57) 0.53 (1.00) 0.69 (0.72)
organization-place_founded founded in 0.83 (0.16) 0.83 (1.00) 0.83 (0.27)
people-marriage-location_of_ceremony marry in 0.80 (0.07) 1.00 (1.00) 0.89 (0.12)
people-marriage-spouse marry 1.00 (0.15) 0.58 (1.00) 0.73 (0.26)
people-person-place_of_birth born in 1.00 (0.41) 0.84 (1.00) 0.91 (0.58)
people-place_of_burial buried at 1.00 (0.33) 0.71 (1.00) 0.83 (0.50)

Table 3: Entailment graph based pattern selection (vs. baseline) for FB15k-237 relations

rect mentions, as the acquisition in fact happened
at a later stage. Nevertheless, filtering out these
cases is correct from a semantic point of view,
even if many of the reported plans or attempts
concerning acquisitions later become a reality.

Precision on the acquisition gold-standard
was also lower than for the marriage re-
lation, due to patterns annotated as entail-
ing in the TEG-REP corpus, which extracted
comparably many incorrect instances. One
such pattern is [ORGANIZATION1 <takeover of>
ORGANIZATION2], which yields low precision
values because it often occurs in sentences ex-
pressing irrealis moods, such as the proposed Mi-
crosoft takeover of Yahoo or is a Pfizer takeover of
BMS realistic?, and because of its generality often
extracts non-company entities, e.g., Republican
takeover of Congress. Detecting the embedding
of correct patterns in irrealis contexts is a largely
unsolved problem and calls for the development
of general methods for recognizing nonfactual
modalities along the lines of the NegEx algorithm
for detecting negations in medical texts (Chapman
et al., 2001) and its later extensions.

6.2 FB15k-237

Our experiments on the FB15k-237 corpus are
presented in Table 3, showing the performance
of our pattern selection method based on entail-
ment graphs (with the adapted MultiAlign imple-
mentation) compared to a simple baseline (all pat-
terns). The results show that, even using an RTE
model trained on a completely different semantic
relation, our method achieves decent performance
on selecting meaningful patterns for a wide range
of relations. The figures in the table were pro-
duced with the simple graph optimization strat-
egy, but the global graph optimizer performed very
similar on this dataset, achieving the same results
for eight out of the ten relations. It performed

worse on the award-award_honor-ceremony rela-
tion (F1: 0.48), and better for the base-locations-
continents-countries_within relation (F1: 0.91).
Nevertheless, when dealing with larger numbers
of patterns, the global graph optimizer should be
the method of choice, as it is less prone to seman-
tic drift.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

We presented an approach for structuring relation
extraction patterns using entailment graphs and
evaluated the usefulness of these graphs for pattern
selection. For generating entailment graphs auto-
matically, we employed and adapted an alignment-
based entailment classifier, which makes use of
external knowledge resources, and experimented
with different graph optimization strategies. Our
classifier was trained on a manageable amount of
annotated patterns for a single semantic relation,
resulting in a generic model that was shown to pro-
duce valid entailment decisions for a wide range of
other semantic relations. Our experimental results
suggest that meaningful pattern-based entailment
graphs can be constructed automatically and that
the derived knowledge is in fact valuable for se-
lecting useful relation extraction patterns. In par-
ticular, entailment graph based filtering can help
achieve higher precision than methods which do
not take into account the asymmetric nature of se-
mantic relations.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the German Fed-
eral Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
through the projects ALL-SIDES (01IW14002)
and BBDC (01IS14013E) and by the German Fed-
eral Ministry of Economics and Energy (BMWi)
through the project SDW (01MD15010A).

227



References
Eugene Agichtein. 2006. Confidence estimation meth-

ods for partially supervised information extraction.
In Proceedings of the Sixth SIAM International Con-
ference on Data Mining. Bethesda, MD, USA, pages
539–543.

Gabor Angeli, Melvin Jose Johnson Premkumar, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2015. Leveraging linguis-
tic structure for open domain information extraction.
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Beijing, China, pages 344–354.

Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matt Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007.
Open Information Extraction from the Web. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference
on Artifical Intelligence. pages 2670–2676.

Roy Bar-Haim, Ido Dagan, Iddo Greental, and Eyal
Shnarch. 2007. Semantic Inference at the Lexical-
Syntactic Level. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
AAAI Press, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada,
pages 871–876.

Sandro Bauer, Stephen Clark, Laura Rimell, and Thore
Graepel. 2014. Learning a theory of marriage (and
other relations) from a web corpus. In Advances in
Information Retrieval, Springer International Pub-
lishing, pages 591–597.

Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, Meni Adler, and Jacob
Goldberger. 2012. Efficient tree-based approxima-
tion for entailment graph learning. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. Jeju Island, Korea,
pages 117–125.

Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, and Jacob Goldberger.
2010. Global learning of focused entailment graphs.
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. Uppsala,
Sweden, pages 1220–1229.

Kurt D. Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim
Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: a col-
laboratively created graph database for structuring
human knowledge. In Proceedings of the ACM SIG-
MOD international conference on Management of
data. pages 1247–1250.

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference
pages 632–642.

Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury,
Gregory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001.
A simple algorithm for identifying negated findings
and diseases in discharge summaries. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics 34(5):301 – 310.

Timothy Chklovski and Patrick Pantel. 2004. VerbO-
cean: Mining the Web for Fine-Grained Seman-
tic Verb Relations. In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Barcelona, Spain, pages 33–40.

Ido Dagan and Oren Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic
Textual Entailment: Generic Applied Modeling of
Language Variability. In Learning Methods for Text
Understanding and Mining.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The PASCAL Recognising Textual Entail-
ment Challenge. In Proceedings of the PASCAL
Challenges Workshop on Recognising Textual En-
tailment.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor
Universal: Language Specific Translation Evalua-
tion for Any Target Language. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.

Kathrin Eichler, Feiyu Xu, Hans Uszkoreit, Leonhard
Hennig, and Sebastian Krause. 2016. TEG-REP: A
corpus of textual entailment graphs based on relation
extraction patterns. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC).

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: an electronic
lexical database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA.

Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Michael Ringgaard, and Amar-
nag Subramanya. 2013. FACC1: Freebase annota-
tion of ClueWeb corpora, Version 1 (Release date
2013-06-26, Format version 1, Correction level 0).

Stanley Kok and Pedro Domingos. 2008. Extracting
semantic networks from text via relational cluster-
ing. In Proceedings of the European Conference
on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
Databases. pages 624–639.

Vladyslav Kolesnyk, Tim Rocktäschel, and Sebastian
Riedel. 2016. Generating natural language inference
chains. CoRR abs/1606.01404.

Lili Kotlerman, Ido Dagan, Bernardo Magnini, and
Luisa Bentivogli. 2015. Textual entailment graphs.
Natural Language Engineering 21:699–724.

Sebastian Krause, Hong Li, Hans Uszkoreit, and
Feiyu Xu. 2012. Large-scale learning of relation-
extraction rules with distant supervision from the
web. In Proceedings of the 11th International Se-
mantic Web Conference. Springer.

The Lemur Project. 2009. Clueweb09. http://
www.lemurproject.org.

Omer Levy, Ido Dagan, and Jacob Goldberger. 2014.
Focused Entailment Graphs for Open IE Proposi-
tions. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning. Ann
Arbor, Michigan, pages 87–97.

228



Bernardo Magnini, Roberto Zanoli, Ido Dagan, Kathrin
Eichler, Günter Neumann, Tae-Gil Noh, Sebastian
Padó, Asher Stern, and Omer Levy. 2014. The Ex-
citement Open Platform for Textual Inferences. In
Proceedings of the ACL 2014 System Demonstra-
tions. ACL.

Yashar Mehdad, Giuseppe Carenini, Raymond T. Ng,
and Shafiq R. Joty. 2013. Towards topic labeling
with phrase entailment and aggregation. In Proceed-
ings of the Human Language Technologies: Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion of Computational Linguistics. Atlanta, Georgia,
USA, pages 179–189.

Andrea Moro, Hong Li, Sebastian Krause, Feiyu Xu,
Roberto Navigli, and Hans Uszkoreit. 2013. Seman-
tic rule filtering for web-scale relation extraction. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Semantic Web
Conference. pages 347–362.

Ndapandula Nakashole, Gerhard Weikum, and
Fabian M. Suchanek. 2012. PATTY: A taxonomy
of relational patterns with semantic types. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning. Jeju
Island, Korea, pages 1135–1145.

Tae-Gil Noh, Sebastian Padó, Vered Shwartz, Ido Da-
gan, Vivi Nastase, Kathrin Eichler, Lili Kotlerman,
and Meni Adler. 2015. Multi-level alignments as an
extensible representation basis for textual entailment
algorithms. In Proceedings of *SEM 2015. ACL.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, Andrew McCallum, and
Benjamin M. Marlin. 2013. Relation Extraction
with Matrix Factorization and Universal Schemas.
In Proceedings of the Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. pages
74–84.

Tim Rocktäschel, Edward Grefenstette, Karl Moritz
Hermann, Tomás Kociský, and Phil Blunsom. 2015.
Reasoning about entailment with neural attention.
CoRR abs/1509.06664.

Lorenza Romano, Milen Kouylekov, Idan Szpektor,
Ido Dagan, and Alberto Lavelli. 2006. Investigat-
ing a generic paraphrase-based approach for relation
extraction. In Proceedings of the 11st Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. Trento, Italy.

Dan Roth, Mark Sammons, and V. G. Vinod Vydis-
waran. 2009. A framework for entailed relation
recognition. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 4th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing of the Asian Fed-
eration of Natural Language Processing. The Asso-
ciation for Computer Linguistics, Singapore, pages
57–60.

Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine. 2006. Preemp-
tive information extraction using unrestricted rela-
tion discovery. In Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the NAACL. New
York City, USA, pages 304–311.

Philippe Thomas, Stefan Pietschmann, Illés Solt,
Domonkos Tikk, and Ulf Leser. 2011. Not all links
are equal: Exploiting Dependency Types for the Ex-
traction of Protein-Protein Interactions from Text.
In Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop. pages 1–
9.

Kristina Toutanova and Danqi Chen. 2015. Observed
versus latent features for knowledge base and text in-
ference. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Contin-
uous Vector Space Models and Their Composition-
ality.

Kristina Toutanova, Danqi Chen, Patrick Pantel, Hoi-
fung Poon, Pallavi Choudhury, and Michael Gamon.
2015. Representing text for joint embedding of text
and knowledge bases.

Rui Wang and Günter Neumann. 2008. Relation vali-
dation via textual entailment. In Proceedings of the
1st International and KI-08 Workshop on Ontology-
based Information Extraction Systems. volume 400,
pages 26–37.

Limin Yao, Aria Haghighi, Sebastian Riedel, and An-
drew McCallum. 2011. Structured relation discov-
ery using generative models. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. Stroudsburg, PA, USA, pages
1456–1466.

Alexander Yates and Oren Etzioni. 2009. Unsuper-
vised methods for determining object and relation
synonyms on the web. Journal of Artificial Intelli-
gence Research 34:255–296.

229


