



















































LABDA at SemEval-2017 Task 10: Extracting Keyphrases from Scientific Publications by combining the BANNER tool and the UMLS Semantic Network


Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2017), pages 947–950,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3 - 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

LABDA at SemEval-2017 Task 10: Extracting Keyphrases from Scientific
Publications by combining the BANNER tool and the UMLS Semantic

Network

Isabel Segura-Bedmar, Cristóbal Colón-Ruiz, Paloma Martı́nez
Computer Science Department, Universidad Carlos III of Madrid

Avd. Universidad, 30, Leganés, 28911, Madrid, Spain
isegura,ccolon,pmf@inf.uc3m.es

Abstract

This paper describes the system presented
by the LABDA group at SemEval 2017
Task 10 ScienceIE, specifically for the
subtasks of identification and classifica-
tion of keyphrases from scientific articles.
For the task of identification, we use the
BANNER tool, a named entity recogni-
tion system, which is based on condi-
tional random fields (CRF) and has ob-
tained successful results in the biomedi-
cal domain. To classify keyphrases, we
study the UMLS semantic network and
propose a possible linking between the
keyphrase types and the UMLS semantic
groups. Based on this semantic linking,
we create a dictionary for each keyphrase
type. Then, a feature indicating if a to-
ken is found in one of these dictionaries
is incorporated to feature set used by the
BANNER tool. The final results on the test
dataset show that our system still needs
to be improved, but the conditional ran-
dom fields and, consequently, the BAN-
NER system can be used as a first approxi-
mation to identify and classify keyphrases.

1 Introduction

In the era of big data, as it could not be otherwise,
an enormous amount of scientific articles is avail-
able. Although during the last few years search en-
gines have provided significant improvements in
information access, researches still have to spend
much time exploring the huge number of articles
published in their research fields. This laborious
task could be reduced if search engines were able
to answer common questions such as: which stud-
ies have dealt with a specific TASK?, which stud-
ies have explored a PROCESS? or which studies

have employed such MATERIAL?. The automatic
detection and classification of keyphrases (which
describe tasks, processes and materials) as well as
the extraction of their relations between them from
scientific articles can support to find the answers
to the previous questions. This task is very impor-
tant, but has hardly been explored at the present
time (Augenstein and Sgaard, 2017).

The ScienceIE task at SemEval
2017 (Augenstein et al., 2017) aims the auto-
matic extraction of keyphrases and their relations
from scientific publications. The task consists of
three subtasks: (1) the subtask A is focused on the
identification of the keyphrases in a given article;
(2) the subtask B is focused on the classification
of keyphrases by one of the following types:
MATERIAL, TASK, and PROCESS; and (3)
the subtask C deals with the classification of the
relationships between keyphrases by one of the
following types: HYPONYM-OF, SYNONYM-
OF, and NONE. For the evaluation of the task, the
organizers have defined three different scenarios,
which the participating teams can choose to
submit their outputs. For example, in scenario
1, the test dataset consists of plain texts without
any annotation and participants can submit their
outputs for all subtasks; for the scenario 2, the
texts in the test dataset also include the annotation
of keyphrases with their offsets in texts, but
without providing their types. In this case, the
teams can only submit their outputs to the subtask
B and C. Finally, in scenario 3, which is only
valid for the subtask C, test documents contain the
keyphrases annotated with their offsets and their
types.

In this paper, we describe the participation
of the group LABDA in the subtasks A and
B. Our approach for identifying and classify-
ing keyphrases from scientific articles combines
the use of the BANNER tool (Leaman et al.,

947



2008) and the UMLS semantic network (McCray,
1989)1. The paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes our approach. Experiments, re-
sults, and discussion are described in Section 3.
Finally, the paper is concluded and future work is
proposed in Section 4.

2 Combining the BANNER tool and
UMLS to identify and classify
keyphrases

This section describes the system proposed by
the LABDA group for participation for subtask
A and B. BANNER is a named entity recog-
nition (NER) system, which is based on condi-
tional random fields (CRF). CRF is a class of sta-
tistical modelling method for sequence labelling
and makes use of a rich set of lexical and syn-
tactic features. Based on successful results pro-
vided by this approach for NER in the biomedical
domain (Krallinger et al., 2015; Wei et al., 2015;
Segura-Bedmar et al., 2015), in this paper, we ex-
plore the recognition of keyphrases as a sequence
labeling problem by using the BANNER tool.
This tool is designed to maximize domain inde-
pendence and allows to recognize named entities
from different domains.

BANNER has a 3-stage pipeline, whose input
is a sentence. The first process splits the sentence
into tokens. Then, each token is represented by
a set of features: lemma, prefixes and suffixes of
up to 2, 3 and 4 characters, bigrams and trigrams,
as well as a series of regular expressions to nor-
malize numeric values. Moreover, the word-class
feature also normalizes the possible forms of a to-
ken based on their letters by converting upper-case
letters to ’A’, lower-case ones to ’a’ and numbers
to ’0’.

We also incorporate a new feature that indi-
cates if the token is found in a given dictionary.
In particular, for each type of keyphrase (TASK,
MATERIAL, PROCESS), we define a dictionary
based on the semantic groups of UMLS. To cre-
ate these dictionaries, we studied in depth the
UMLS semantic network and proposed the links
between the keyphrase types and the UMLS se-
mantic groups shown in Table 1. Then, we tra-
verse the UMLS methatesaurus and their terms are
stored in their corresponding dictionary based on
the classification shown in Table 1. The UMLS se-
mantic groups as well as their semantic types can

1https://semanticnetwork.nlm.nih.gov/

be found at https://semanticnetwork.nlm.nih.gov/.
Thus, if a token is found in one of the three dictio-
naries, the feature is set to the name of the dictio-
nary.

To label tokens, we try with different IOB tag-
ging schemas (O=outside, B=beginning of an en-
tity, I=inside of an entity, E=end of an entity, W=a
single entity). Finally, a CRF model is trained us-
ing the features for each token from the training
data. We consider the three types of keyphrases
as the three possible types of entities to be recog-
nized by BANNER. Thus, our approach performs
both subtasks, identification and classification, as
one only process. We train a single model for the
three types.

3 Evaluation

As said before, we have only participated in the
subtasks A (identification) and B (classification).
That is, our experiments are performed on scenar-
ios 1 and 2. Our approach for identification is eval-
uated on the scenario 1, where the test documents
do not contain any annotation. Our approach for
classification is evaluated on the scenario 2, where
texts include the offsets of the keyphrases, but not
their types. Actually, as said above, we use the
same system to identify and classify keyphrases.

For evaluating the classification task on the sce-
nario 2, we take the list of keyphrase mentions
(without their types) provided as input of this
scenario and compare it with the output of the
BANNER tool, which was trained to classify the
three types of keyphrases: MATERIAL, TASK
and PROCESS. If the mention was classified as
a keyphrase by BANNER, we return the type pro-
vided by BANNER. If the mention was classified
with the tag O by BANNER (that is, outside to-
ken), our system was not be able to classify it.
However, if it is actually a keyphrase (because it is
in the input of the scenario 2), we decide to clas-
sify it with the most frequent type (PROCESS).
The keyphrases classified by BANNER, but not
found in the input of the scenario 2, are ignored.

Table 2 shows the results on the development
set for each keyphrase type: MATERIAL, TASK
and PROCESS. We tried with different variations
of the IOB schema and with different combina-
tions of the dictionaries defined from the UMLS
semantic network.

The best results are achieved for the type MA-
TERIAL with an F1 of 35.33%, followed by PRO-

948



Type UMLS groups
MATERIAL ANAT:Anatomy, CHEM:Chemicals and Drugs, GENE:Genes and Molecular sequences,

LIVB:Living beings, OBJC:Objects, CONC:Concepts and Ideas
PROCESS ACTI:Activities and Behaviors, DISO(T050:Experimental Model of Disease),

OCCU:Occupations, PROC:Procedures, CONC:Concepts and Ideas (T185:Classification,
T089:Regulation or Law, T170:Intellectual product, T171:Language, T080:Qualitative Concept,
T081:Quantitative Concept, T079:Temporal Concept)

TASK DISO:disorders(all concepts except those classified with the semantic type T050),
PHEN:phenomena, PHYS:physology

Table 1: Linking between keyphrase types and UMLS semantic groups.

Type IOB schema dictionaries Precision(%) Recall(%) F-Measure(%)

MATERIAL
IO NO 59.45 23.48 33.67
IO Material 59.74 25.08 35.33

IOB Material 61.29 23.66 34.14
IOBEW Material 62.73 23.66 34.36

TASK
IO NO 18.51 7.29 10.47
IO Task 16.12 7.29 10.05

IOB Task 17.02 5.83 8.69
IOBEW Task 19.51 5.83 8.98

PROCESS
IO NO 39.93 25.82 31.36
IO Process 40.00 25.60 31.22

IOB Process 41.76 24.06 30.53
IOBEW Process 40.87 22.73 29.21

Table 2: Results on the development set for each type of keyphrase (scenario 1).

CESS with a 31.36% of F1. The system achieves
the worst results for TASK (F1=10.47%). We
study the list of keyphrases in the training dataset
in order to know how many words form each
keyphrase type. We observe that 41% of MATE-
RIALS are formed by a single word, 32% of them
are formed by two words, and the rest of MA-
TERIALS (27%) are phrases with more than two
words. Therefore, we can claim that a high percent
of MATERIALS could be named entities. For the
type of PROCESS, more than half are formed by
one or two words (that is, they can be named en-
tities), while the rest (48%) are phrases with more
than two words. However, many of TASKS (74%)
have three or more words. Thus, while CRF mod-
els have succeeded in the task of NER from the
biomedical texts, the sequence labelling approach
may not be the most appropriate for identifying
keyphrases when they are formed by three or more
words. Another possible cause of low results for
TASK could be that the semantic linking between
TASK and the UMLS semantic groups, which we
defined for this work, is not suitable for the task.

Regarding the different settings, the IO schema
seems to achieve the best results for the three
keyphrase types. Only the use of the dictionary
for MATERIALS achieves a significant improve-
ment, while the rest of dictionaries do not seem to
improve the performance. We proposed the three

submitted runs based on the results on the devel-
opment set.

The final results of the task show that our sys-
tem achieved an F1 of 0.33 for the subtask A and
0.23 for the subtask B, when the system is evalu-
ated on the scenario 1 (without annotations). As
expected, our results are better for the subtask B
when it is classified on the scenario 2 (the off-
sets of the keyphrases are provided for the partici-
pants), achieving an F1 of 0.51.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we study if a sequence labelling ap-
proach is appropriate for the tasks of identification
and classification of keyphrases from scientific
publications. In particular, we use the BANNER
tool, based on a CRF model and a rich set of lexi-
cal features. To classify the keyphrases, we study
the UMLS semantic network and propose a link-
ing between the keyphrases types and the UMLS
semantic groups. Then, we extend the BANNER
tool by incorporating a new feature that indicates
if the token is found in one of the three dictionar-
ies built from UMLS. Results are modest yet sug-
gest promise for MATERIAL and PROCESS. As
a future work, we plan to explore other dictionar-
ies for the areas of computer science, physics and
material science. Moreover, we plan to study an
approach based on deep learning methods. Be-

949



cause keyphrases are usually longer phrases than
named entities, we would like to create a phrase
embedding model capable of measuring the sim-
ilarity between keyphrases. This approach could
be a solution to deal with nested keyphrases.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Research Program
of the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
- Government of Spain, (eGovernAbility-Access
project TIN2014-52665-C2-2-R).

References
Isabelle Augenstein, Mrinal Kanti Das, Sebastian

Riedel, Lakshmi Nair Vikraman, and Andrew Mc-
Callum. 2017. SemEval 2017 Task 10: ScienceIE -
Extracting Keyphrases and Relations from Scientific
Publications. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada.

Isabelle Augenstein and Anders Sgaard. 2017. Multi-
Task Learning of Keyphrase Boundary Classifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver,
Canada.

Martin Krallinger, Florian Leitner, Obdulia Rabal,
Miguel Vazquez, Julen Oyarzabal, and Alfonso Va-
lencia. 2015. Chemdner: The drugs and chemical
names extraction challenge. Journal of cheminfor-
matics 7(1):S1.

Robert Leaman, Graciela Gonzalez, et al. 2008. Ban-
ner: an executable survey of advances in biomedical
named entity recognition. In Pacific symposium on
biocomputing. volume 13, pages 652–663.

Alexa T McCray. 1989. The umls semantic network.
In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Com-
puter Application in Medical Care.. American Med-
ical Informatics Association, pages 503–507.

Isabel Segura-Bedmar, Vıctor Suárez-Paniagua, and
Paloma Martınez. 2015. Combining conditional
random fields and word embeddings for the
chemdner-patents task. In Proceedings of the fifth
BioCreative challenge evaluation workshop, Sevilla,
Spain. pages 90–93.

Chih-Hsuan Wei, Yifan Peng, Robert Leaman, Al-
lan Peter Davis, Carolyn J Mattingly, Jiao Li,
Thomas C Wiegers, and Zhiyong Lu. 2015.
Overview of the biocreative v chemical disease rela-
tion (cdr) task. In Proceedings of the fifth BioCre-
ative challenge evaluation workshop. pages 154–
166.

950


