



















































SemEval-2017 Task 8: RumourEval: Determining rumour veracity and support for rumours


Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2017), pages 69–76,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3 - 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

SemEval-2017 Task 8: RumourEval: Determining rumour veracity and
support for rumours

Leon Derczynski♥∗ and Kalina Bontcheva♥ and Maria Liakata♣
and Rob Procter♣ and Geraldine Wong Sak Hoi♦ and Arkaitz Zubiaga♣

♥: Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, S1 4DP, UK
♣: Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, CV4 7AL, UK

♦: swissinfo.ch, Bern, Switzerland
∗: leon.d@shef.ac.uk

Abstract

Media is full of false claims. Even Ox-
ford Dictionaries named “post-truth” as
the word of 2016. This makes it more
important than ever to build systems that
can identify the veracity of a story, and
the nature of the discourse around it. Ru-
mourEval is a SemEval shared task that
aims to identify and handle rumours and
reactions to them, in text. We present an
annotation scheme, a large dataset cov-
ering multiple topics – each having their
own families of claims and replies – and
use these to pose two concrete challenges
as well as the results achieved by partici-
pants on these challenges.

1 Introduction and Motivation

Rumours are rife on the web. False claims affect
people’s perceptions of events and their behaviour,
sometimes in harmful ways. With the increasing
reliance on the Web – social media, in particular –
as a source of information and news updates by in-
dividuals, news professionals, and automated sys-
tems, the potential disruptive impact of rumours is
further accentuated.

The task of analysing and determining veracity
of social media content has been of recent interest
to the field of natural language processing. After
initial work (Qazvinian et al., 2011), increasingly
advanced systems and annotation schemas have
been developed to support the analysis of rumour
and misinformation in text (Kumar and Geethaku-
mari, 2014; Zhang et al., 2015; Shao et al., 2016;
Zubiaga et al., 2016b). Veracity judgment can
be decomposed intuitively in terms of a compar-
ison between assertions made in – and entailments
from – a candidate text, and external world knowl-
edge. Intermediate linguistic cues have also been

shown to play a role. Critically, based on recent
work the task appears deeply nuanced and very
challenging, while having important applications
in, for example, journalism and disaster mitigation
(Hermida, 2012; Procter et al., 2013a; Veil et al.,
2011).

We propose a shared task where participants
analyse rumours in the form of claims made in
user-generated content, and where users respond
to one another within conversations attempting to
resolve the veracity of the rumour. We define a ru-
mour as a “circulating story of questionable verac-
ity, which is apparently credible but hard to verify,
and produces sufficient scepticism and/or anxiety
so as to motivate finding out the actual truth” (Zu-
biaga et al., 2015b). While breaking news unfold,
gathering opinions and evidence from as many
sources as possible as communities react becomes
crucial to determine the veracity of rumours and
consequently reduce the impact of the spread of
misinformation.

Within this scenario where one needs to listen
to, and assess the testimony of, different sources
to make a final decision with respect to a rumour’s
veracity, we ran a task in SemEval consisting of
two subtasks: (a) stance classification towards ru-
mours, and (b) veracity classification. Subtask A
corresponds to the core problem in crowd response
analysis when using discourse around claims to
verify or disprove them. Subtask B corresponds
to the AI-hard task of assessing directly whether
or not a claim is false.

1.1 Subtask A - SDQC Support/ Rumour
stance classification

Related to the objective of predicting a rumour’s
veracity, Subtask A deals with the complementary
objective of tracking how other sources orient to
the accuracy of the rumourous story. A key step
in the analysis of the surrounding discourse is to

69



SDQC support classification. Example 1:

u1: We understand there are two gunmen and up to a dozen hostages inside the cafe under siege at Sydney.. ISIS flags
remain on display #7News [support]

u2: @u1 not ISIS flags [deny]
u3: @u1 sorry - how do you know it’s an ISIS flag? Can you actually confirm that? [query]

u4: @u3 no she can’t cos it’s actually not [deny]
u5: @u1 More on situation at Martin Place in Sydney, AU –LINK– [comment]
u6: @u1 Have you actually confirmed its an ISIS flag or are you talking shit [query]

SDQC support classification. Example 2:

u1: These are not timid colours; soldiers back guarding Tomb of Unknown Soldier after today’s shooting #StandforCanada
–PICTURE– [support]

u2: @u1 Apparently a hoax. Best to take Tweet down. [deny]
u3: @u1 This photo was taken this morning, before the shooting. [deny]
u4: @u1 I don’t believe there are soldiers guarding this area right now. [deny]

u5: @u4 wondered as well. I’ve reached out to someone who would know just to confirm that. Hopefully get
response soon. [comment]

u4: @u5 ok, thanks. [comment]

Figure 1: Examples of tree-structured threads discussing the veracity of a rumour, where the label asso-
ciated with each tweet is the target of the SDQC support classification task.

determine how other users in social media regard
the rumour (Procter et al., 2013b). We propose
to tackle this analysis by looking at the conversa-
tion stemming from direct and nested replies to the
tweet originating the rumour (source tweet).

To this effect RumourEval provided partici-
pants with a tree-structured conversation formed
of tweets replying to the originating rumourous
tweet, directly or indirectly. Each tweet presents
its own type of support with respect to the rumour
(see Figure 1). We frame this in terms of support-
ing, denying, querying or commenting on (SDQC)
the original rumour (Zubiaga et al., 2016b). There-
fore, we introduce a subtask where the goal is to
label the type of interaction between a given state-
ment (rumourous tweet) and a reply tweet (the lat-
ter can be either direct or nested replies).

We note that superficially this subtask may bear
similarity to SemEval-2016 Task 6 on stance de-
tection from tweets (Mohammad et al., 2016),
where participants are asked to determine whether
a tweet is in favour, against or neither, of a given
target entity (e.g. Hillary Clinton) or topic (e.g.
climate change). Our SQDC subtask differs in two
aspects. Firstly, participants needed to determine
the objective support towards a rumour, an entire
statement, rather than individual target concepts.
Moreover, they are asked to determine additional
response types to the rumourous tweet that are rel-
evant to the discourse, such as a request for more
information (questioning, Q) and making a com-

ment (C), where the latter doesn’t directly address
support or denial towards the rumour, but pro-
vides an indication of the conversational context
surrounding rumours. For example, certain pat-
terns of comments and questions can be indicative
of false rumours and others indicative of rumours
that turn out to be true.

Secondly, participants need to determine the
type of response towards a rumourous tweet from
a tree-structured conversation, where each tweet is
not necessarily sufficiently descriptive on its own,
but needs to be viewed in the context of an aggre-
gate discussion consisting of tweets preceding it
in the thread. This is more closely aligned with
stance classification as defined in other domains,
such as public debates (Anand et al., 2011). The
latter also relates somewhat to the SemEval-2015
Task 3 on Answer Selection in Community Ques-
tion Answering (Moschitti et al., 2015), where the
task was to determine the quality of responses in
tree-structured threads in CQA platforms. Re-
sponses to questions are classified as ‘good’, ‘po-
tential’ or ‘bad’. Both tasks are related to tex-
tual entailment and textual similarity. However,
Semeval-2015 Task3 is clearly a question answer-
ing task, the platform itself supporting a QA for-
mat in contrast with the more free-form format of
conversations in Twitter. Moreover, as a question
answering task Semeval-2015 Task 3 is more con-
cerned with relevance and retrieval whereas the
task we propose here is about whether support or

70



denial can be inferred towards the original state-
ment (source tweet) from the reply tweets.

Each tweet in the tree-structured thread is cate-
gorised into one of the following four categories,
following Procter et al. (2013b):
• Support: the author of the response supports

the veracity of the rumour.
• Deny: the author of the response denies the

veracity of the rumour.
• Query: the author of the response asks for

additional evidence in relation to the veracity
of the rumour.
• Comment: the author of the response makes

their own comment without a clear contribu-
tion to assessing the veracity of the rumour.

Prior work in the area has found the task dif-
ficult, compounded by the variety present in lan-
guage use between different stories (Lukasik et al.,
2015; Zubiaga et al., 2017). This indicates it is
challenging enough to make for an interesting Se-
mEval shared task.

1.2 Subtask B - Veracity prediction

The goal of this subtask is to predict the verac-
ity of a given rumour. The rumour is presented
as a tweet, reporting an update associated with a
newsworthy event, but deemed unsubstantiated at
the time of release. Given such a tweet/claim, and
a set of other resources provided, systems should
return a label describing the anticipated veracity of
the rumour as true or false – see Figure 2.

The ground truth of this task has been manually
established by journalist members of the team who
identified official statements or other trustworthy
sources of evidence that resolved the veracity of
the given rumour. Examples of tweets annotated
for veracity are shown in Figure 2.

The participants in this subtask chose between
two variants. In the first case – the closed vari-
ant – the veracity of a rumour had to be predicted
solely from the tweet itself (for example (Liu et al.,
2015) rely only on the content of tweets to assess
the veracity of tweets in real time, while systems
such as Tweet-Cred (Gupta et al., 2014) follow a
tweet level analysis for a similar task where the
credibility of a tweet is predicted). In the second
case – the open variant – additional context was
provided as input to veracity prediction systems;
this context consists of a Wikipedia dump. Criti-
cally, no external resources could be used that con-
tained information from after the rumour’s resolu-

tion. To control this, we specified precise versions
of external information that participants could use.
This was important to make sure we introduced
time sensitivity into the task of veracity prediction.
In a practical system, the classified conversation
threads from Subtask A could be used as context.

We take a simple approach to this task, us-
ing only true/false labels for rumours. In prac-
tice, however, many claims are hard to verify;
for example, there were many rumours concern-
ing Vladimir Putin’s activities in early 2015, many
wholly unsubstantiable. Therefore, we also expect
systems to return a confidence value in the range
of 0-1 for each rumour; if the rumour is unverifi-
able, a confidence of 0 should be returned.

1.3 Impact

Identifying the veracity of claims made on the web
is an increasingly important task (Zubiaga et al.,
2015b). Decision support, digital journalism and
disaster response already rely on picking out such
claims (Procter et al., 2013b). Additionally, web
and social media are a more challenging environ-
ment than e.g. newswire, which has traditionally
provided the mainstay of similar tasks (such as
RTE (Bentivogli et al., 2011)). Last year we ran
a workshop at WWW 2015, Rumors and Decep-
tion in Social Media: Detection, Tracking, and
Visualization (RDSM 2015)1 which garnered in-
terest from researchers coming from a variety of
backgrounds, including natural language process-
ing, web science and computational journalism.

2 Data & Resources

To capture web claims and the community reac-
tion around them, we take data from the “model
organism” of social media, Twitter (Tufekci,
2014). Data for the task is available in the form
of online discussion threads, each pertaining to a
particular event and the rumours around it. These
threads form a tree, where each tweet has a par-
ent tweet it responds to. Together these form a
conversation, initiated by a source tweet (see Fig-
ure 1). The data has already been annotated for
veracity and SDQC following a published anno-
tation scheme (Zubiaga et al., 2016b), as part of
the PHEME project (Derczynski and Bontcheva,
2014), in which the task organisers are partners.

1http://www.pheme.eu/events/rdsm2015/

71



Veracity prediction examples:

u1: Hostage-taker in supermarket siege killed, reports say. #ParisAttacks –LINK– [true]

u1: OMG. #Prince rumoured to be performing in Toronto today. Exciting! [false]

Figure 2: Examples of source tweets with a veracity value, which has to be predicted in the veracity
prediction task.

Subtask A

S D Q C

Train 910 344 358 2,907
Test 94 71 106 778

Subtask B

T F U

Train 137 62 98
Test 8 12 8

Table 1: Label distribution of training and test
datasets.

2.1 Training Data

Our training dataset comprises 297 rumourous
threads collected for 8 events in total, which in-
clude 297 source and 4,222 reply tweets, amount-
ing to 4,519 tweets in total. These events include
well-known breaking news such as the Charlie
Hebdo shooting in Paris, the Ferguson unrest in
the US, and the Germanwings plane crash in the
French Alps. The size of the dataset means it can
be distributed without modifications, according to
Twitter’s current data usage policy, as JSON files.

This dataset is already publicly available (Zubi-
aga et al., 2016a) and constitutes the training and
development data.

2.2 Test Data

For the test data, we annotated 28 additional
threads. These include 20 threads extracted from
the same events as the training set, and 8 threads
from two newly collected events: (1) a rumour
that Hillary Clinton was diagnosed with pneumo-
nia during the 2016 US election campaign, and
(2) a rumour that Youtuber Marina Joyce had been
kidnapped.

The test dataset includes, in total, 1,080 tweets,
28 of which are source tweets and 1,052 replies.
The distribution of labels in the training and test
datasets is summarised in Table 1.

2.3 Context Data

Along with the tweet threads, we also provided ad-
ditional context that participants could make use
of. The context we provided was two-fold: (1)
Wikipedia articles associated with the event in
question. We provided the last revision of the ar-
ticle prior to the source tweet being posted, and
(2) content of linked URLs, using the Internet
Archive to retrieve the latest revision prior to the
link being tweeted, where available.

2.4 Data Annotation

The annotation of rumours and their subsequent
interactions was performed in two steps. In the
first step, we sampled a subset of likely rumourous
tweets from all the tweets associated with the
event in question, where we used the high num-
ber of retweets as an indication of a tweet be-
ing potentially rumourous. These sampled tweets
were fed to an annotation tool, by means of which
our expert journalist annotators members manu-
ally identified the ones that did indeed report un-
verified updates and were considered to be ru-
mours. Whenever possible, they also annotated
rumours that had ultimately been proven true or
the ones that had been debunked as false stories;
the rest were annotated as “unverified”. In the
second step, we collected conversations associ-
ated with those rumourous tweets, which included
all replies succeeding a rumourous source tweet.
The type of support (SDQC) expressed by each
participant in the conversation was then annotated
through crowdsourcing. The methodology for per-
forming this crowdsourced annotation process has
been previously assessed and validated (Zubiaga
et al., 2015a), and is further detailed in (Zubiaga
et al., 2016b). The overall inter-annotator agree-
ment rate of 63.7% showed the task to be chal-
lenging, and easier for source tweets (81.1%) than
for replying tweets (62.2%).

The evaluation data was not available to those
participating in any way in the task, and selec-

72



tion decisions were taken only by organisers not
connected with any submission, to retain fairness
across submissions.

Figure 1 shows an example of what a data in-
stance looks like, where the source tweet in the
tree presents a rumourous statement that is sup-
ported, denied, queried and commented on by oth-
ers. Note that replies are nested, where some
tweets reply directly to the source, while other
tweets reply to earlier replies, e.g., u4 and u5 en-
gage in a short conversation replying to each other
in the second example. The input to the verac-
ity prediction task is simpler than this; here par-
ticipants had to determine if a rumour was true or
false by only looking at the source tweet (see Fig-
ure 2), and optionally making use of the additional
context provided by the organisers.

To prepare the evaluation resources, we col-
lected and sampled the tweets around which there
is most interaction, placed these in an existing an-
notation tool to be annotated as rumour vs. non-
rumour, categorised them into rumour sub-stories,
and labelled them for veracity.

For Subtask A, the extra annotation for sup-
port / deny / question / comment at the tweet level
within the conversations were performed through
crowdsourcing – as performed to satisfactory qual-
ity already with the existing training data (Zubiaga
et al., 2015a).

3 Evaluation

The two subtasks were evaluated as follows.

SDQC stance classification: The evaluation of
the SDQC needed careful consideration, as the
distribution of the categories is clearly skewed to-
wards comments. Evaluation is through classifica-
tion accuracy.

Veracity prediction: The evaluation of the pre-
dicted veracity, which is either true or false for
each instance, was done using macroaveraged ac-
curacy, hence measuring the ratio of instances for
which a correct prediction was made. Addition-
ally, we calculated RMSE ρ for the difference be-
tween system and reference confidence in correct
examples and provided the mean of these scores.
Incorrect examples have an RMSE of 1. This
is normalised and combined with the macroaver-
aged accuracy to give a final score; e.g. acc =
(1− ρ)acc.

The baseline is the most common class. For

Team Score
DFKI DKT 0.635
ECNU 0.778
IITP 0.641
IKM 0.701
Mama Edha 0.749
NileTMRG 0.709
Turing 0.784
UWaterloo 0.780
Baseline (4-way) 0.741
Baseline (SDQ) 0.391

Table 2: Results for Task A: sup-
port/deny/query/comment classification.

Task A, we also introduce a baseline excluding the
common, low-impact “comment” class, consider-
ing accuracy over only support, deny and query.
This is included as the SDQ baseline.

4 Participant Systems and Results

We have had 13 system submissions at Ru-
mourEval, eight submissions for Subtask A
(Kochkina et al., 2017; Bahuleyan and Vech-
tomova, 2017; Srivastava et al., 2017; Wang
et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2017; Garcı́a Lozano et al., 2017; Enayet and El-
Beltagy, 2017), the identification of stance to-
wards rumours, and five submissions for Sub-
task B (Srivastava et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017;
Singh et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Enayet and
El-Beltagy, 2017), the rumour veracity classifi-
cation task, with participant teams coming from
four continents (Europe: Germany, Sweden, UK;
North America: Canada; Asia: China, India, Tai-
wan; Africa: Egypt), showing the global reach of
the issue of rumour veracity on social media.

Most participants tackled Subtask A, which in-
volves classifying a tweet in a conversation thread
as either supporting (S), denying (D), querying (Q)
or commenting on (C) a rumour. Results are given
in Table 2 The distribution of SDQC labels in the
training, development and test sets favours com-
ments (see Table 1. Including and recognising the
items that fit in this class is important for reduc-
ing noise in the other, information-bearing classi-
fications (support, deny and query). In actual fact,
comments are often express implicit support; the
absence of dispute is a soft signal of agreement.

Systems generally viewed this task as a four-
way single tweet classification task, with the ex-

73



ception of the best performing system (Turing),
which addressed it as a sequential classification
problem, where the SDQC label of each tweet
depends on the features and labels of the pre-
vious tweets, and the ECNU and IITP systems.
The IITP system takes as input pairs of source
and reply tweets whereas the ECNU system ad-
dressed class imbalance by decomposing the prob-
lem into a two step classification task (com-
ment vs. non-comment), and all non-comment
tweets classified as SDQ. Half of the systems em-
ployed ensemble classifiers, where classification
was obtained through majority voting (ECNU,
MamaEdha, UWaterloo, DFKI-DKT). In some
cases the ensembles were hybrid, consisting both
of machine learning classifiers and manually cre-
ated rules, with differential weighting of classi-
fiers for different class labels (ECNU, MamaEdha,
DFKI-DKT). Three systems used deep learning,
with team Turing employing LSTMs for sequen-
tial classification, team IKM using convolutional
neural networks (CNN) for obtaining the repre-
sentation of each tweet, assigned a probability for
a class by a softmax classifier and team Mama
Edha using CNN as one of the classifiers in their
hybrid conglomeration. The remaining two sys-
tems NileTMRG and IITP used support vector
machines with linear and polynomial kernel re-
spectively. Half of the systems invested in elabo-
rate feature engineering including cue words and
expressions denoting Belief, Knowledge, Doubt
and Denial (UWaterloo) as well as Tweet domain
features including meta-data about users, hash-
tags and event specific keywords (ECNU, UWa-
terloo, IITP, NileTMRG). The systems with the
least elaborate features were IKM and Mama Edha
for CNNs (word embeddings), DFKI-DKT (sparse
word vectors as input to logistic regression) and
Turing (average word vectors, punctuation, sim-
ilarity between word vectors in current tweet,
source tweet and previous tweet, presence of nega-
tion, picture, URL). Five out of the eight systems
used pre-trained word embeddings, mostly Google
News word2vec embeddings, while ECNU used
four different types of embeddings. Overall, elab-
orate feature engineering and a strategy for ad-
dressing class imbalance seemed to pay off, as can
be seen by the success of the high performance
of the UWaterloo and ECNU systems. The suc-
cess of the best performing system (Turing) can
be attributed both to the use of LSTM to address

Team Score Confidence RMSE
IITP 0.393 0.746

Table 3: Results for Task B: Rumour veracity -
open variant.

Team Score Confidence RMSE
DFKI DKT 0.393 0.845
ECNU 0.464 0.736
IITP 0.286 0.807
IKM 0.536 0.763
NileTMRG 0.536 0.672
Baseline 0.571 –

Table 4: Results for Task B: Rumour veracity -
closed variant.

the problem as a sequential task and the choice of
word embeddings.

Subtask B, veracity classification of a
source tweet, was viewed as either a three-
way (NileTMRG, ECNU, IITP) or two-way
(IKM, DFKI-DKT) single tweet classification
task. Results are given in Table 3 for the open
variant, where external resources may be used,2

and Table 4 for the closed variant – with no
external resource use permitted. The systems used
mostly similar features and classifiers to those in
Subtask A, though some added features more spe-
cific to the distribution of SDQC labels in replies
to the source tweet (e.g. the best performing
system in this task, NileTMRG, considered the
percentage of reply tweets classified as either S,
D or Q).

5 Conclusion

Detecting and verifying rumours is a critical task
and in the current media landscape, vital to pop-
ulations so they can make decisions based on the
truth. This shared task brought together many ap-
proaches to fixing veracity in real media, working
through community interactions and claims made
on the web. Many systems were able to achieve
good results on unravelling the argument around
various claims, finding out whether a discussion
supports, denies, questions or comments on ru-
mours.

The commentary around a story often helps de-
termine how true that story is, so this advance is
a great positive. However, finding out accurately

2Namely, the 20160901 English Wikipedia dump.

74



whether a story is false or true remains really
tough. Systems did not reach the most-common-
class baseline, despite the data not being excep-
tionally skewed. even the best systems could have
the wrong level of confidence in a true/false judg-
ment, weakly verifying stories that are true and so
on. This tells us that we are making progress, but
that the problem is so far very hard.

RumourEval leaves behind competitive results,
a large number of approaches to be dissected by
future researchers, and a benchmark dataset of
thousands of documents and novel news stories.
This sets a good baseline for the next steps in the
area of fake news detection, as well as the mate-
rial anyone needs to get started on the problem and
evaluate and improve their systems.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the European Com-
mission’s 7th Framework Programme for research,
under grant No. 611223 PHEME. This work is
also supported by the European Unions Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under
grant agreement No. 687847 COMRADES. We are
grateful to Swissinfo.ch for their extended support
in the form of journalistic advice, keeping the task
well-grounded, and annotation and task design ef-
forts. We also extend our thanks to the SemEval
organisers for their sustained hard work, and to
our participants for bearing with us during the first
shared task of this nature and all the joy and trou-
ble that comes with it.

References

Pranav Anand, Marilyn Walker, Rob Abbott, Jean
E. Fox Tree, Robeson Bowmani, and Michael
Minor. 2011. Cats rule and dogs drool!: Clas-
sifying stance in online debate. In Proceedings
of the 2Nd Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analy-
sis. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, WASSA ’11, pages 1–9.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2107653.2107654.

Hareesh Bahuleyan and Olga Vechtomova. 2017.
UWaterloo at SemEval-2017 Task 8: Detecting
Stance towards Rumours with Topic Independent
Features. In Proceedings of SemEval. ACL.

Luisa Bentivogli, Peter Clark, Ido Dagan, Hoa Dang,
and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2011. The seventh Pascal
Recognizing Textual Entailment challenge. In Pro-
ceedings of the Text Analysis Conference. NIST.

Yi-Chin Chen, Zhao-Yand Liu, and Hung-Yu Kao.
2017. IKM at SemEval-2017 Task 8: Convolutional
Neural Networks for Stance Detection and Rumor
Verification. In Proceedings of SemEval. ACL.

Leon Derczynski and Kalina Bontcheva. 2014. Pheme:
Veracity in digital social networks. In UMAP Work-
shops.

Omar Enayet and Samhaa R. El-Beltagy. 2017.
NileTMRG at SemEval-2017 Task 8: Determining
Rumour and Veracity Support for Rumours on Twit-
ter. In Proceedings of SemEval. ACL.

Marianela Garcı́a Lozano, Hanna Lilja, Edward
Tjörnhammar, and Maja Maja Karasalo. 2017.
Mama Edha at SemEval-2017 Task 8: Stance Clas-
sification with CNN and Rules. In Proceedings of
SemEval. ACL.

Aditi Gupta, Ponnurangam Kumaraguru, Carlos
Castillo, and Patrick Meier. 2014. Tweet-
cred: Real-time credibility assessment of con-
tent on twitter. In SocInfo. pages 228–243.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-13734-6 16.

Alfred Hermida. 2012. Tweets and truth: Journalism as
a discipline of collaborative verification. Journalism
Practice 6(5-6):659–668.

Elena Kochkina, Maria Liakata, and Isabelle Augen-
stein. 2017. Turing at SemEval-2017 Task 8: Se-
quential Approach to Rumour Stance Classification
with Branch-LSTM. In Proceedings of SemEval.
ACL.

KP Krishna Kumar and G Geethakumari. 2014. De-
tecting misinformation in online social networks us-
ing cognitive psychology. Human-centric Comput-
ing and Information Sciences 4(1):1–22.

Xiaomo Liu, Armineh Nourbakhsh, Quanzhi Li, Rui
Fang, and Sameena Shah. 2015. Real-time rumor
debunking on twitter. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM International on Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management. ACM, pages 1867–
1870.

Michal Lukasik, Trevor Cohn, and Kalina Bontcheva.
2015. Classifying tweet level judgements of ru-
mours in social media. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing. volume 2, pages 2590–2595.

Saif M Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Parinaz
Sobhani, Xiaodan Zhu, and Colin Cherry. 2016.
SemEval-2016 Task 6: Detecting Stance in Tweets.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ation.

Alessandro Moschitti, Preslav Nakov, Lluıs Marquez,
Walid Magdy, James Glass, and Bilal Randeree.
2015. Semeval-2015 task 3: Answer selection
in community question answering. SemEval-2015
page 269.

75



Rob Procter, Jeremy Crump, Susanne Karstedt, Alex
Voss, and Marta Cantijoch. 2013a. Reading the ri-
ots: What were the Police doing on Twitter? Polic-
ing and Society 23(4):413–436.

Rob Procter, Farida Vis, and Alex Voss. 2013b. Read-
ing the riots on twitter: methodological innovation
for the analysis of big data. International journal of
social research methodology 16(3):197–214.

Vahed Qazvinian, Emily Rosengren, Dragomir R
Radev, and Qiaozhu Mei. 2011. Rumor has it: Iden-
tifying misinformation in microblogs. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 1589–1599.

Chengcheng Shao, Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia,
Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer.
2016. Hoaxy: A platform for tracking online
misinformation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01511 .

Vikram Singh, Sunny Narayan, Md Shad Akhtar, Asif
Ekbal, and Pushpak Bhattacharya. 2017. IITP at
SemEval-2017 Task 8: A Supervised Approach for
Rumour Evaluation. In Proceedings of SemEval.
ACL.

Ankit Srivastava, Rehm Rehm, and Julian
Moreno Schneider. 2017. DFKI-DKT at SemEval-
2017 Task 8: Rumour Detection and Classification
using Cascading Heuristics. In Proceedings of
SemEval. ACL.

Zeynep Tufekci. 2014. Big questions for social me-
dia big data: Representativeness, validity and other
methodological pitfalls. In Proceedings of the AAAI
International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media.

Shari R Veil, Tara Buehner, and Michael J Palenchar.
2011. A work-in-process literature review: Incor-
porating social media in risk and crisis communica-
tion. Journal of contingencies and crisis manage-
ment 19(2):110–122.

Feixiang Wang, Man Lan, and Yuanbin Wu. 2017.
ECNU at SemEval-2017 Task 8: Rumour Evalua-
tion Using Effective Features and Supervised En-
semble Models. In Proceedings of SemEval. ACL.

Qiao Zhang, Shuiyuan Zhang, Jian Dong, Jinhua
Xiong, and Xueqi Cheng. 2015. Automatic de-
tection of rumor on social network. In Natu-
ral Language Processing and Chinese Computing,
Springer, pages 113–122.

Arkaitz Zubiaga, Ahmet Aker, Kalina Bontcheva,
Maria Liakata, and Rob Procter. 2017. Detection
and resolution of rumours in social media: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00656 .

Arkaitz Zubiaga, Maria Liakata, Rob Procter, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Peter Tolmie. 2015a. Crowdsourc-
ing the annotation of rumourous conversations in

social media. In Proceedings of the 24th Interna-
tional Conference on World Wide Web: Companion
volume. International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee, pages 347–353.

Arkaitz Zubiaga, Maria Liakata, Rob Procter, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Peter Tolmie. 2015b. Towards de-
tecting rumours in social media. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Workshop on AI for Cities.

Arkaitz Zubiaga, Maria Liakata, Rob Procter, Geral-
dine Wong Sak Hoi, and Peter Tolmie. 2016a.
PHEME rumour scheme dataset: Journalism use
case. doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.2068650.v1.

Arkaitz Zubiaga, Maria Liakata, Rob Procter, Geral-
dine Wong Sak Hoi, and Peter Tolmie. 2016b.
Analysing how people orient to and spread ru-
mours in social media by looking at con-
versational threads. PLoS ONE 11(3):1–29.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0150989.

76


