



















































Double Trouble: The Problem of Construal in Semantic Annotation of Adpositions


Proceedings of the 6th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2017), pages 178–188,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3-4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Double Trouble:
The Problem of Construal in Semantic Annotation of Adpositions

Jena D. Hwang and Archna Bhatia
IHMC

{jhwang,abhatia}@ihmc.us

Na-Rae Han
University of Pittsburgh
naraehan@pitt.edu

Tim O’Gorman
University of Colorado Boulder
timothy.ogorman@colorado.edu

Vivek Srikumar
University of Utah

svivek@cs.utah.edu

Nathan Schneider
Georgetown University

nathan.schneider@georgetown.edu

Abstract

We consider the semantics of preposi-
tions, revisiting a broad-coverage annota-
tion scheme used for annotating all 4,250
preposition tokens in a 55,000 word corpus
of English. Attempts to apply the scheme to
adpositions and case markers in other lan-
guages, as well as some problematic cases
in English, have led us to reconsider the
assumption that an adposition’s lexical con-
tribution is equivalent to the role/relation
that it mediates. Our proposal is to embrace
the potential for construal in adposition
use, expressing such phenomena directly
at the token level to manage complexity
and avoid sense proliferation. We suggest
a framework to represent both the scene
role and the adposition’s lexical function so
they can be annotated at scale—supporting
automatic, statistical processing of domain-
general language—and discuss how this
representation would allow for a simpler
inventory of labels.

1 Introduction

Prepositions and postpositions (collectively adpo-
sitions) are widespread in the world’s languages as
grammatical markers expressing spatial, temporal,
thematic,1 and other kinds of semantic relations.
Unfortunately for semantic processing, a handful
of high-frequency types carry an immense payload
by way of extreme polysemy. Thus, disambigua-
tion of adpositional meaning is crucial to piecing
together the interpretation of a sentence (§2).

A line of previous work (Srikumar and Roth,
2013a; Schneider et al., 2015, 2016, see §2) has
developed a scheme for broad-coverage annotation

1In the sense of thematic roles (agent, patient, etc.).

of adpositions with an eye toward building auto-
matic disambiguation systems. Their most recent
proposal consists of an inventory of 75 categorical
labels known as supersenses that characterize the
polysemy of English prepositions in a lexically-
neutral and coarse-grained fashion. They envision
disambiguation as assigning a single one of these
supersenses to each preposition token.

While formalizing disambiguation via single-
label classification works well for prototypical
members of the categories, on closer examination,
we argue that it is overly simplistic for many us-
ages. This became particularly evident when we
tried to adapt the English-centric supersense labels
to other languages.

Here we advance a more nuanced view that an
adposition can contribute a semantic perspective, or
construal, over and above the scenario relation that
its object participates in. We argue that it is essen-
tial to distinguish the contribution of the preposi-
tion itself, i.e., what the adposition codes for, from
the semantic role or relation that the adposition me-
diates and that a predicate or scene calls for; and as
a result, the label that would be most appropriate
is underdetermined for many tokens (§3). In our
view, the mismatch can be understood through the
lens of construal, and this should be made explicit
in corpora (§4).

To that end, we sketch an annotation approach
that disentangles the two elements of the meaning
while retaining the advantages of a broad-coverage
(rather than lexicographic-sense-based) scheme.
Preliminary analysis suggests that this scheme will
work well not only for English, but also for the
other languages examined. §5 surveys some of the
phenomena that our new analysis addresses with
examples from multiple languages; §6 suggests that
this added flexibility at the token level removes the
need for a great deal of complexity in the super-
sense inventory itself: i.e., we can get away with

178



StartState

Configuration

Circumstance
Temporal

Place

Whole Elements
Possessor

Species
Instance

Quantity

Superset

Causer
Agent

CreatorCo-Agent

Explanation Attribute

Manner

Reciprocation Purpose
Function

Age Time Frequency
Duration

RelativeTime

EndTimeStartTime ClockTimeCxn
DeicticTime

Path Locus
Value

Comparison/Contrast
Scalar/Rank

ValueComparison

Approximator
Contour

Direction

Extent
Location Source State

Goal
InitialLocation

Material
Donor/Speaker

Destination
Recipient

EndState

Via
Traversed

1DTrajectory
2DArea 3DMedium

Transit

Instrument

Patient

Co-Patient

Activity

Means

Course

Accompanier

Beneficiary

Theme
Co-Theme Topic

ProfessionalAspectUndergoer

Co-Participant

Affector

Participant

Experiencer Stimulus

Figure 1: Preposition supersense hierarchy (from Schneider et al., 2016). Top-level categories are circled and subcategories
radiate outward.

1/3 fewer semantic labels, reducing somewhat the
practical concern of sparse data. Here we also dis-
cuss challenges and tradeoffs inherent in the pro-
posed approach. We have begun testing the work-
ability of this proposal empirically by annotating
data in multiple languages, with disambiguation
experiments to follow.

2 Approaches to Prepositional Polysemy

The most frequent English prepositions are extraor-
dinarily polysemous. For example, the preposition
at expresses different information in each of the
following usages:

(1) a. It is at 123 Main St. (LOCATION)
b. We met him at 7pm. (TIME)
c. Everyone pointed at him. (GOAL)
d. She laughed at my acting. (STIMULUS)
e. He held her at gunpoint. (INSTRUMENT)

When confronted with a new instance of at, NLU
systems must determine whether it marks an entity
or scene’s location, time, goal, or something else.

As lexical classes go, prepositions are something
of a red-headed stepchild in the linguistics litera-
ture. Most of the semantics literature on prepo-
sitions has revolved around how they categorize
space and time (e.g., Herskovits, 1986; Verkuyl and
Zwarts, 1992; Bowerman and Choi, 2001). How-
ever, there have been a couple of lines of work
addressing preposition semantics broadly. In cogni-
tive linguistics, studies have examined abstract as
well as concrete uses of English prepositions (e.g.,
Dirven, 1993; Lindstromberg, 2010). Notably, the
polysemy of over and other prepositions has been
explained in terms of sense networks encompass-
ing core senses and motivated extensions (Brug-
man, 1981; Lakoff, 1987; Dewell, 1994; Tyler and
Evans, 2001, 2003). The Preposition Project (TPP;
Litkowski and Hargraves, 2005) broke ground in

stimulating computational work on fine-grained
word sense disambiguation of English prepositions
(Litkowski and Hargraves, 2005; Ye and Baldwin,
2007; Tratz and Hovy, 2009; Dahlmeier et al.,
2009). Typologists, meanwhile, have developed
semantic maps of functions, where the nearness
of two functions reflects their tendency to fall un-
der the same adposition or case marker in many
languages (Haspelmath, 2003; Wälchli, 2010).

Preposition supersenses. Following Srikumar
and Roth (2013b), Schneider et al. (2015) deve-
loped coarse-grained semantic categories of prepo-
sitions as a broader-coverage alternative to fine-
grained senses, using categories similar to those ap-
pearing in semantic maps (LOCATION, RECIPIENT,
etc.) rather than lexicalized senses. Schneider et al.
(2015) refined their inventory of categories through
extensive deliberation involving the use of dictio-
naries, corpora, and pilot annotation experiments.
They call the categories supersenses to emphasize
their similarity to coarse-grained classifications of
nouns and verbs that go by that name (Ciaramita
and Altun, 2006; Schneider et al., 2012).

The at examples in (1) are accompanied by
the appropriate supersenses from the supersense
scheme. Most supersenses resemble thematic roles
(cf. Fillmore (1968)); a few others are needed to
describe preposition-marked relations between en-
tities. There are multiple English prepositions per
supersense; e.g., “in the city” and “on the table”
would join “at 123 Main St.” in being labeled as
LOCATIONs. We understand the supersenses as
prototype-based categories, and in some cases use
heuristics like paraphrasability (“in order to” for
PURPOSE) and WH-question words (“Why?” for
PURPOSE and EXPLANATION) to help determine
which tokens are instances of the category.

The 75 supersenses are organized in a taxonomy
based on that of VerbNet (Bonial et al., 2011), with

179



PARTICIPANT, CIRCUMSTANCE, and CONFIGU-
RATION at the top level.2 The taxonomy uses multi-
ple inheritance to account for subcategories which
are considered to include properties of multiple
supercategories. The full hierarchy is in figure 1.

The approach to preposition annotation is com-
prehensive, i.e., every token of every preposition
type is given a supersense label. The supersenses
were applied to annotate a 55,000 word corpus of
online reviews in English, covering all 4,250 prepo-
sition tokens (Schneider et al., 2016). For each
token, annotators chose a single label from the in-
ventory. This is not an easy task, but with documen-
tation of many examples in a lexical resource, Prep-
Wiki,3 trained university students were able to
achieve reasonable levels of inter-annotator agree-
ment. Every token was initially labeled by at least
two independent annotators, and differences were
adjudicated by experts.

3 Problems with Preposition Supersenses

While the above approach works reasonably well
for most English tokens, difficulties in directly ap-
plying the scheme to adpositions and case markers
in other languages, as well as some of the persistent
issues arising in English, have led us to conclude
that perhaps the supersense hierarchy as it stands
is too simplistic to provide a faithful account of the
prepositions’ semantic behavior. This has caused
us to examine fundamental assumptions made by
previous work and reevaluate what it means to se-
mantically label an adposition.

3.1 Semantic Overlap in English
In the original English annotation (Schneider
et al., 2016), a few phenomena caused much hand-
wringing—not because there was no appropriate su-
persense, but because multiple supersenses seemed
to fit. For example, it was observed that TOPIC and
STIMULUS could compete for semantic territory.
(2) evinces related usages of about with different
governors:

2These loosely correspond to event arguments, adjuncts,
and adnominal complements, respectively. However, super-
sense organization does not make any claims with regard to
coreness or the argument/adjunct distinction, as there are many
phenomena that do not conform to either of the prototypes
for argument and adjunct (for a review of the literature on the
argument/adjunct distinction, see Hwang, 2011). We are also
not convinced that a firm distinction between lexical and non-
lexical/functional adpositions (Rauh, 1993) can be established,
though the relevance of this distinction in the context of the
construal approach merits further investigation.

3 http://tiny.cc/prepwiki

(2) a. I read [a book about the strategy].
b. I read about the strategy.
c. I knew about the strategy.
d. I cared about the strategy.

Usages (2a–2c) could reasonably be labeled as
TOPIC. This is because the about-PP indicates what
is communicated (2a, 2b) and known (2c). The
fourth example (2d), however, presents an over-
lap in its interpretation. On the one hand, tradi-
tional thematic role inventories include the category
STIMULUS for something that prompts a percep-
tual or emotional experience, as in (3).

(3) I was afraid of the strategy.

Surely, cared in (2d) describes an emotional
state, so about marks the STIMULUS. However,
much like examples (2a–2c), the semantics relating
to TOPIC is still very much present in the use of
about, drawing attention to the aspects of the car-
ing process involving thought or judgement. This
contrasts with the use of for in “I cared for my
grandmother,” where the prepositional choice calls
attention to the benefactive aspect of the caring act.

If we are constrained to one label per argument,
where should the line be drawn between STIMU-
LUS and TOPIC in cases of overlap? In other words,
should the semantic representation emphasize the
semantic commonality between all of the examples
in (2), or between (2d) and (3)?

Observing that annotators were inconsistent on
such tokens, Schneider et al. (2016) drew a bound-
ary between TOPIC and STIMULUS in an attempt
to force consistency, stating that “TOPIC should
be used if the governor is a predicate of commu-
nication or of ‘higher-level’ cognition—i.e., pri-
marily mental/intellectual rather than emotional/
perceptual/bodily in nature”.4 This criterion seems
artificial to us; at the very least, it splits hairs in a
way that would be difficult to explain to annotators.

Below, we instead argue that the idea of con-
strual/conceptualization offers a more principled
answer; in our new analysis, the TOPIC suggested
by about and the STIMULUS suggested by cared
can coexist.

3.2 Applying the Supersenses to Other
Languages

One of the premises of using unlexicalized super-
senses was that the scheme would port well to other

4 http://tiny.cc/prepwiki/index.php/Category:
SST-Topic

180



languages (as the WordNet noun and verb super-
senses have: Picca et al., 2008; Schneider et al.,
2012, inter alia). To test this, we have begun apply-
ing the existing supersenses to three new languages,
namely, Hebrew, Hindi, and Korean. Pilot annota-
tion in these languages has echoed the fundamental
problem discussed in the previous section.

Consider the Hindi examples below. In (4a), the
experiencer of an emotion is marked with a postpo-
sition kaa, the genitive case marker in Hindi.

(4) a. [Hindi]: EXPERIENCER vs. POSSESSOR
bipaashaa kaa gussaa
Bipasha GEN anger
“Bipasha’s anger”

b. [Hindi]: EXPERIENCER
bipaashaa bahut gussaa hui
Bipasha very angry became
“Bipasha got very angry.”

The use of kaa strongly suggests possession (in
(4), possession of an abstract quality). However,
the semantics of the phrase also includes EXPE-
RIENCER—thus, it seems inappropriate to force a
choice between EXPERIENCER and POSSESSOR
for this token. (The same problem is seen in a simi-
lar phrase “the anger of Bipasha” in English.) There
are other ways to attribute anger to Bipasha—e.g.,
see (4b). Here Bipasha is not construed as a posses-
sor when the postposition kaa is not used.

Our preliminary annotation of Hindi, Korean,
and Hebrew has suggested that instances of overlap
between multiple supersenses are fairly frequent.

4 The Construal Analysis

Why do “cared about the strategy” in (2d) and
“anger of Bipasha” (cf. (4a)) not lend themselves
to a single label? These seem to be symptoms of
the fact that no English preposition prototypically
marks EXPERIENCER or STIMULUS roles, though
from the perspective of the predicates, such roles
are thought to be important generalizations in char-
acterizing events of perception and emotion. In
essence, there is an apparent mismatch between
the roles that the verb care or the noun anger calls
for, and the functions that English prepositions pro-
totypically code for. While about prototypically
codes for TOPIC and of prototypically codes for
POSSESSOR, there is no preposition that “naturally”
codes for EXPERIENCER or STIMULUS in the same
way. Thus, if a predicate marks an EXPERIENCER
or STIMULUS with a preposition, the preposition

will contribute something new to the conceptual-
ization of the scene being described. With “cared
about the strategy,” it is TOPIC-ness that the prepo-
sition brings to the table; with “anger of Bipasha,”
it is the conceptualization of anger as an attribute
that somebody possesses.

Thus, we turn to theories in Cognitive Seman-
tics to define the phenomenon of construal as a
means of understanding the contributions that are
emerging from the adpositions with respect to the
expressed event or situation. Then, we propose a
method to handle the problem posed by construal
and to resolve the apparent semantic overlap which
is pervasive across languages.

4.1 Defining Construal
The world is not neatly organized into bits of in-
formation that map directly to linguistic symbols.
Rather, linguistic meaning reflects the priorities
and categorizations of particular expressions in
a language (Langacker, 1998; Jackendoff, 2002;
Croft and Cruse, 2004, ch. 3). Much like pictures
of a scene from different viewpoints will result in
different renderings, a real-world situation being
described will “look” different depending on the
linguistic choices made by a speaker. This includes
within-language choices: e.g., the choice of “John
sold Mary a book” vs. “John sold a book to Mary”
vs. “Mary bought a book from John.” In the pro-
cess called construal (a.k.a. conceptualization), a
speaker “packages” ideas for linguistic expression
in a way that foregrounds certain elements of a
situation while backgrounding others.

We propose to incorporate this notion of con-
strual in adposition supersense annotation. We use
the term scene to refer to events or situations in
which an adpositional phrase plays a role. (We do
not formalize the full scene, but assume its roles
can be characterized with supersense labels from
figure 1.) Contrast the use of the prepositions by
and of in (5):

(5) a. The festival features works by Puccini.
b. I’m an expert on the works of Puccini.

While both prepositional phrases indicate works
created by the operatic composer Puccini (i.e., CRE-
ATOR), the different choices of preposition reflect
different construals: by highlights the agency of
Puccini, whereas of construes Puccini as the source
of his composition. Thus, “works by Puccini” and
“works of Puccini” are paraphrases, but present sub-
tly different portrayals of the relationship between

181



Puccini and his works. In other words, these para-
phrases are not identical in meaning because the
preposition carries with it different nuances of con-
strual. In this paper, we focus on differences in con-
strual manifested in different adposition choices,
and the possibility that an adposition construal com-
plements the construal of a scene and its roles (as
evoked by the governing head or predicate).

For instances like “I read about the strategy” in
(2b) that were generally unproblematic for annota-
tion under the original preposition guidelines, the
semantics of the adposition and the semantic role
assigned by the predicate are congruent. However,
for examples like “cared about the strategy” in (2d)
and “anger of Bipasha” in (4a), we say that the
adposition construes the role as something other
than what the scene specifies. Competition between
different adposition construals accounts for many
of the alternations that are near-paraphrases, but
potentially involve slightly different nuances of
meaning (e.g., “talk to someone” vs. “talk with
someone”; “angry at someone” vs. “angry with
someone”).

Thus, the notion of construal challenges Schnei-
der et al.’s (2015; 2016) original conception that
each supersense reflects the semantic role assigned
by its governing predicate (i.e. verbal or event nomi-
nal predicate), and that a single supersense label
can be assigned to each adposition token. Rather
than trying to ignore these construals to favor a
single-label approach, or possibly create new labels
to capture the meaning distinctions that construals
impose on semantic roles, we adopt an approach
that gives us the flexibility to deal with both the
semantics coming from the scene and the construal
evoked by the adpositional choice.

4.2 Formulating a Construal Analysis
We address the issues of construal by decoupling
the semantics signaled by the adposition from the
role expected by the scene. Essentially, we bor-
row from Construction Grammar (Fillmore et al.,
1988; Kay and Fillmore, 1999; Goldberg, 2006) the
notion that semantic contributions can be made at
various levels of syntactic structure, beginning with
the semantics contributed by the lexical items.

Under the original single-label analysis, the full
weight of semantic assignment rested on the predi-
cate’s semantic role, with the indirect assumption
that the predicate selects for adpostions relevant to
the assignment. Under the construal analysis, we
assign semantics at both scene and adposition lev-

els of meaning: we capture what the scene calls
for, henceforth scene role and what the adposition
itself codes for, henceforth function. Both labels
are drawn from the supersense hierarchy (figure 1).
Allowing tokens to be annotated with both a role
and a function accounts for the non-congruent ad-
position construals, as in (6).

(6) a. The festival features works by Puccini.
scene role: CREATOR; function: AGENT

b. I’m an expert on the works of Puccini.
scene role: CREATOR; function: SOURCE

We recognize that both of these sentences carry the
meaning represented by the supersense CREATOR
at the scene level, but also recognize the construal
that arises from the chosen preposition: by is as-
signed the function of AGENT and of is assigned
the function of SOURCE.5

5 Applying the Construal Analysis

In this section, we discuss some of the more
productive examples of non-congruent constru-
als in English as well as in Hindi, Korean,
and Hebrew. Hereafter, we will use the notation
ROLE;FUNCTION to indicate such construals.
Adopting the “realization” metaphor of articulating
an idea linguistically, this can be read as “ROLE is
realized with an adposition that marks FUNCTION.”

5.1 Emotion and Perception Construals
Scenes of emotion and perception (Dirven, 1997;
Osmond, 1997; Radden, 1998) provide a com-
pelling case for the construal analysis. Consider
the sentences involving emotion in example (7):

(7) a. I was scared by the bear.
STIMULUS;CAUSER

b. I was scared about getting my ears pierced.
STIMULUS;TOPIC

Comparing examples (7a) and (7b), we notice
that there are two different types of stimuli repre-
sented in otherwise semantically parallel sentences.

5We also acknowledge that there is a level of construal
contributed by the verb. For example, Alex in Alex sent the
package to Pam can be AGENT or SOURCE depending whether
the interpretation is focused on the agency of the argument or
the spatial relation it has in reference to the action described by
the verb. These verb-triggered construals have been previously
explored, most notably by Jackendoff (1990). Perspective can
also be evident in the choice of syntactic constructions, e.g.,
active vs. passive voice (I made a mistake versus Mistakes
were made), which can be connected to sentiment (Greene
and Resnik, 2009). We specifically focus on the construal that
arises from the adposition in a given sentence.

182



The preposition by gives the impression that the
stimulus is responsible for triggering an instinctive
fear reflex (i.e., CAUSER), while about portrays the
thing feared as the content or TOPIC of thought.6

In some languages, the experiencer can be con-
ceptualized as a recipient of the emotion or feeling,
thus licensing dative marking.7 In the Hebrew ex-
ample (8a), the experiencer of bodily perception is
marked with the dative preposition l(e)- (Berman,
1982). Similarly, in Hindi, the dative postpostion
-ko marks an experiencer in (8b).

(8) a. [Heb.]: EXPERIENCER;RECIPIENT
Koev l-i ha-rosh
Hurts DAT-me the-head
“My head hurts.”

b. [Hindi]: EXPERIENCER;RECIPIENT
mujh-ko garmii lag rahii hai
I-DAT heat feel PROG PRES
“I’m feeling hot.”

Contrast this with examples where scene role
and adposition function are congruent:

(9) a. I ate dinner at 7:00. TIME;TIME
b. Let’s talk about our plan. TOPIC;TOPIC

In (9a) and (9b), the preposition is prototypical
for the given scene role and its function directly
identifies the scene role. Because the semantics of
the role and function are congruent, these cases do
not exhibit the extra layer of construal seen in (7)
and (8).8 In essence, our analysis helps capture the
construals that characterize the less prototypical
scene role and function pairings.

5.2 Professional Associate Construals
The online reviews corpus (Schneider et al., 2016)
shows that, at least in English, professional relation-

6Interestingly, “scared about” seems to require an ex-
plicit or metonymic event/situation as the complement. Thus,
“scared about the bear” would be felicitous to describe appre-
hension about some mischief that the bear might get up to.
It would be less than felicitous to describe a hiker’s reaction
upon being surprised by a bear.

7English displays this to a limited extent: “It feels/seems/
looks perfect to me.”

8One might object that most or all adpositions impose
a spatial construal—and thus, (9a) should be annotated as
TIME;LOCATION. We do not discount the possibility that
such a metaphor can be cognitively active in speakers using
temporal adpositions; in fact, there is considerable evidence
that time-as-space metaphors are cross-linguistically perva-
sive and productive (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980; Núñez and
Sweetser, 2006; Casasanto and Boroditsky, 2008). However,
we do not see much practical benefit to annotating temporal
at or topical about as spatial.

ships (especially employer–employee and business–
client ones) are fertile ground for alternating prepo-
sition construals. The following were among the
examples tagged as PROFESSIONALASPECT:

(10) a. My dad worked for a record label.
PROFESSIONALASPECT;BENEFICIARY

b. Dr. S— at CVTS is not a good doctor.
PROFESSIONALASPECT;LOCATION

c. Nigel from Nidd Design has always
been great!
PROFESSIONALASPECT;SOURCE

d. The owners and employees of this store ...
PROFESSIONALASPECT;POSSESSOR

All of these construals are motivated in that they
highlight an aspect of prototypical professional re-
lationships: e.g., an employee’s work prototypically
takes place at the business location (hence “work
at”), though this is not a strict condition for using
“work at”—the meaning of at has been extended
from the prototype. Likewise, the pattern “person
{at, from, of} organization” has been conventional-
ized to signify employment or similar institutional-
belonging relationships.

The construal analysis equips us with the abil-
ity to use the existing labels like BENEFICIARY
and LOCATION to deal with the overloading of the
PROFESSIONALASPECT label, instead of forcing
a difficult decision or creating several additional
categories. This analysis also accounts for simi-
lar construals presented by adpositions in other
languages. For example, the overlap of PROFES-
SIONALASPECT with SOURCE, as seen in English
example (10c), occurs in Hindi and Korean as well.

5.3 Static vs. Dynamic Construals
Another source of difficulty in the original anno-
tation came from caused-motion verbs like put,
which takes a PP indicating part of a path. Some-
times the preposition lexically marks a source
or goal, e.g., into, onto, or out of (11a). Often,
however, the preposition is prototypically locative,
e.g., in or on (11b), though the object of the prepo-
sition is interpreted as a destination, equivalent to
the use of into or onto, respectively. This locative-
as-destination construal is highly productive, so
analyzing on as polysemous between LOCATION
and DESTINATION does not capture the regular-
ity. The PP is sometimes analyzed as a resultative
phrase (Goldberg, 2006). In our terms, we simply
say that the scene calls for a DESTINATION, but the
preposition codes for a LOCATION:

183



(11) a. Cynthia put her things into a box.
DESTINATION;DESTINATION

b. Cynthia put her things on her bed.
DESTINATION;LOCATION

Thus, we avoid listing the preposition with multiple
lexical functions for this regular phenomenon.

The opposite problem occurs with fictive motion
(Talmy, 1996): a path PP, and sometimes a motion
verb, construe a static scene as dynamic as seen
in “A road runs through my property.” Rather than
forcing annotators to side with the dynamic con-
strual effected by the language, versus the static
nature of the actual scene, we represent both: the
scene role is LOCATION (static) and the prepo-
sition function is PATH (dynamic) (i.e., LOCA-
TION;PATH).

5.4 Metaphoric Scenes
Finally, our analysis gives us a way to handle
metaphoric scenes (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). In
(12), the locative-as-destination construal (§5.3) is
layered with the states-are-locations metaphor. We
annotate the scene in terms of the governing pred-
icate’s target domain (domain which we seek to
describe), and the adposition function in terms of
the source domain (domain from which we draw
metaphorical expressions to conceptualize the tar-
get domain):

(12) The election news put him in a very bad mood.
ENDSTATE;LOCATION

Our construal analysis can capture both source and
target domains by assigning the source domain
meaning to the function of the preposition and the
target domain meaning to the scene role.

6 Toward a Revised Hierarchy

The annotation of both scene and function levels
of semantics allows us to trade more complexity at
the token level for less complexity in the label set.
As discussed in §4, separating the scene role and
function levels of annotation will more adequately
capture construal phenomena without forcing an
arbitrary choice between two labels or introducing
further complexity into the hierarchy.

In fact, we intend to simplify the current super-
sense hierarchy, by collapsing some of the finer-
grained distinctions that can be accounted for with
the construal analysis instead. Candidates for re-
moval include the labels with multiple inheritance
such as CONTOUR (inheriting from PATH and

Circumstance

Temporal

Time

StartTime

EndTime

Frequency

Duration

Interval

Locus

Source

Goal

Path

Direction

Extent

Means

Manner

Explanation

Purpose

Participant

Causer

Agent

Co-Agent

Theme

Co-Theme

Topic

Stimulus

Experiencer

Originator

Recipient

Cost

Beneficiary

Instrument

Configuration

Identity

Species

Gestalt

Possessor

Whole

Characteristic

Possession

Part/Portion

Stuff

Accompanier

InsteadOf

ComparisonRef

RateUnit

Quantity

Approximator

SocialRel

OrgRole

• Items in the CIRCUMSTANCE subhierarchy are prototypically expressed as
adjuncts of time, place, manner, purpose, etc. elaborating an event or en-
tity.

• Items in the PARTICIPANT subhierarchy are prototypically entities func-
tioning as arguments to an event.

• Items in the CONFIGURATION subhierarchy are prototypically entities or
properties in a static relationship to some entity.

1.3 Limitations

This inventory is only designed to capture semantic relations with a figure–ground
asymmetry. This excludes:

• The semantics of coordination, where the two sides of the relation are on
equal footing, is not captured here. (Note that sometimes a morpheme
can have symmetric as well as asymmetric interpretations: e.g., Korean
-wa.)

• Aspects of meaning that pertain to information structure, discourse, or
pragmatics.

3

Figure 2: Preliminary revised hierarchy of 50 adposition su-
persenses.

MANNER; e.g., “The fly flew in zig-zags”) and
TRANSIT (inheriting from VIA and LOCATION;
e.g., “We traveled by bus”).

A preliminary proposal for a new hierarchy ap-
pears in figure 2.9 It weighs in at only 50 categories,
a third fewer than the original 75. A significantly
smaller inventory will both ease the cognitive bur-
den on annotators and reduce the sparsity of labels
in the data, which should facilitate better statistical
generalizations with limited data.

The added representational complexity of con-
struals seems justified to account for many of
the phenomena discussed above, especially as the
project grows to include more languages. But is the
complexity worth it on balance? We consider some
of the tradeoffs below.

6.1 Challenges in Function Assignment
We encountered several examples in which func-
tion labels are difficult to identify. Consider the
following paraphrases:

(13) a. [Korean]: LOCATION;LOCATION
Cheolsu-nun undongcang-eyse tallyessta.
Cheolsu-NOM schoolyard-at ran.
“Cheolsu ran in the schoolyard.”

b. [Korean]: LOCATION;?
Cheolsu-nun undongcang-ul tallyessta.
Cheolsu-NOM schoolyard-ACC ran.
“Cheolsu ran in the schoolyard.”

9Apart from changes enabled by the construal analy-
sis, a number of other simplifications and enhancements
are incorporated into the proposal, which space does
not allow us to enumerate here: for example, collaps-
ing LOCUS/LOCATION/STATE, SOURCE/INITIALLOCATION/
INITIALSATE, GOAL/DESTINATION/ENDSTATE, and TIME/
RELATIVETIME/CLOCKTIMECXN; and replacing PROFES-
SIONALASPECT with SOCIALREL and ORGROLE.

184



In (13a), “schoolyard” is accompanied by a post-
position -eyse (comparable to English at), which
marks it as the location of running. This is the
unmarked choice. On the other hand, in sentence
(13b), the noun is paired with the accusative marker
-ul, the marked choice. The use of -ul evokes a spe-
cial construal: it indicates that the schoolyard is
more than just a backdrop of the running act and
that it is a location that Cheolsu mindfully chose
as the place of action. Additionally, marking the
location with the accusative marker, pragmatically,
brings focus to the noun (i.e., he ran in a schoolyard
as opposed to anywhere else). Such construals are
not limited to locations, but may also include other
scene roles such as GOAL and ACCOMPANIER,
in alternation with postpositions that can express
those functions. Since accusative case markers gen-
erally serve syntactic functions over semantic ones,
it may be difficult to identify a semantic function
the accusative marker carries.

A similar phenomenon can be found in Hindi:

(14) a. [Hindi]: bare NP as DESTINATION
maiN library jaa rahii thii
I library go PROG PST
“I was going to the library.”

b. [Hindi]: DESTINATION;?
maiN library-ko jaa rahii thii
I library-ACC go PROG PST
“I was going to the LIBRARY.” [more
emphasis on the library]

This suggests that, apart from spatiotemporal re-
lations and semantic roles, adpositions can mark
information structural properties for which we
would need a separate inventory of labels.

In some idiomatic predicate–argument combina-
tions, the semantic motivation for the preposition
may not be clear (15).

(15) a. Listen to the violin! STIMULUS;?
b. What’s he proudest of? STIMULUS;?
c. Unhappy with my meal! STIMULUS;?
d. I’m interested in politics. TOPIC;?

While the scene role in (15a) and (15b) is clearly
STIMULUS, the function is less clear. Is the object
of attention construed (metaphorically) as a GOAL
in (15a), and the cause for pride as a SOURCE
in (15b)? Or are to and of semantically empty
argument-markers for these predicates (cf. the
“case prepositions” of Rauh, 1993)? We do not treat
either combination as an unanalyzable multiword

expression because the ordinary meaning of the
predicate is very much present. (15c) and (15d) are
similarly fraught. But as we look at more data, we
will entertain the possibility that the function can
be null to indicate a marker which contributes no
lexical semantics.

6.2 Challenges in Scene Role Assignment
There are complications which we are not yet pre-
pared to fully address. First, if the PP is not gov-
erned by a predicate which provides the roles—
such as a verb or eventive/relational noun—the
preposition may need to evoke a meaning more spe-
cific than our labels. E.g., for “children in pajamas”
and “woman in black,” in may be taken to evoke
the semantics of wearing clothing.10 The label set
we use for broad-coverage annotation is, of course,
vaguer, and would simply specify ATTRIBUTE for
the clothing sense of in. Copular constructions raise
similar issues. Consider “It is up to you to decide,”
meaning that deciding is the addressee’s responsi-
bility: this idiomatic sense of up to is closer to a
semantic predicate than to a semantic role or figure-
ground relation.

6.3 Multi-Construal Analysis?
In rare instances, we are tempted to annotate a
chain of extensions from a prototypical function of
a preposition, which we term multiple construal.
For instance:

(16) a. Bob’s boss yelled at him for his mistake.
RECIPIENT;BENEFICIARY;GOAL

b. Jane was angry at him for his mistake.
STIMULUS;BENEFICIARY;GOAL

c. I was involved in the project.
THEME;SUPERSET;LOCATION

“Yelled at” in (16a) is a communicative action
whose addressee (RECIPIENT) is also a target of the
negative emotion (BENEFICIARY;GOAL: com-
pare the use of at in “shoot at the target”). (16b)
is similar, except “angry” focuses on the emotion
itself, which Bob is understood to have evoked in
his boss.

With regard to (16c), the item “involved in” has
become fossilized, with in marking an underspec-
ified noncausal participant (hence, THEME as the
scene role). At the same time, one can understand

10Indeed, this is the position adopted by version 1.7
of FrameNet, where in is listed as a lexical unit of
the WEARING frame (https://framenet2.icsi.berkeley.
edu/fnReports/data/frame/Wearing.xml).

185



the in here as motivated by the member-of-set sense
(cf. “I am in the group”), which would be labeled
SUPERSET;LOCATION because it conceptualizes
membership in terms of containment. A similar
logic would apply to “people in the company”: PRO-
FESSIONALASPECT;SUPERSET;LOCATION. Ef-
fectively, the multiple construal analysis claims
that multiple steps of extending a preposition’s pro-
totypical meaning remain conceptually available
when understanding an instance of its use. That
said, we are not convinced that this logic could be
applied reliably by annotators, and thus may sim-
plify the usages in (16) to just the first and second
or the first and third labels.

6.4 The Annotation Process

Annotators are generally capable of interpreting
meaning in a given context. However, it might be
difficult to train annotators to develop intuitions
about adposition functions, which reflect prototyp-
ical meanings contributed by the lexical item that
may not be literally applicable. These distinctions
may be too subtle to annotate reliably. As we are
approaching this project with the goal of produc-
ing annotated datasets for training and evaluating
natural language understanding systems, it is an
important concern.

We are currently planning pilot annotation stud-
ies to ascertain (i) the prevalence of the role
vs. function mismatches, and (ii) annotator agree-
ment on such instances. Enshrining role–function
pairs in the lexicon may facilitate inter-annotator
consistency: our experience thus far is that anno-
tators benefit greatly from examples illustrating
the possible supersenses that can be assigned to a
preposition.

If initial pilots are successful, we would then
need to decide whether to annotate the role and
function together or in separate stages. Because
the function reflects one of the adposition’s proto-
typical senses, it may often be deterministic given
the adposition and scene role, in which case we
could focus annotators’ efforts on the scene roles.
Existing annotations for lexical resources such as
PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005), VerbNet (Palmer
et al., 2017; Kipper et al., 2008), and FrameNet
(Fillmore and Baker, 2009) might go a long way
toward disambiguating the scene role, limiting the
effort required from annotators.

6.5 Linguistic Utility of Annotated Data

Assuming the above theoretical and practical con-
cerns are surmountable, annotated corpora would
facilitate empirical studies of the nature and limits
of adposition/case construal within and across lan-
guages. For example: Is it the case that some of the
supersense labels can only serve as scene roles, or
only as functions? (A hypothesis is that PARTICI-
PANT subtypes tend to be limited to scene roles, but
this needs to be examined empirically.) Which role–
function pairs are attested in particular languages,
and are any universal? Thus far we have seen that
certain scene roles, such as EXPERIENCER, STIM-
ULUS, and PROFESSIONALASPECT, invite many
different adposition construals—is this universally
true? As adpositions are notoriously difficult for
second language learners, would it help to explain
which construals do and do not transfer from the
first language to the second language?

7 Conclusion

We have considered the semantics of adpositions
and case markers in English and a few other lan-
guages with the goal of revising a broad-coverage
annotation scheme used in previous work. We
pointed out situations where a single supersense did
not fully characterize the interaction between the
adposition and the scene elaborated by the PP. In
an attempt to tease apart the semantics contributed
specifically by the adposition from the semantics
coming from elsewhere, we proposed a construal
analysis. Though many details remain to be worked
out, we are optimistic that our analysis will ulti-
mately improve broad-coverage annotations as well
as constructional analyses of adposition behavior.

Acknowledgments

We thank the rest of our CARMLS team—Martha
Palmer, Ken Litkowski, Omri Abend, Katie Conger,
and Meredith Green—for participating in weekly
discussions of adposition semantics; Michael
Ellsworth for an insightful perspective on construal,
Paul Portner for a helpful clarification regarding
approaches to conceptualization in the literature,
and anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful com-
ments. We also thank the participants in the AAAI
Spring Symposium on Construction Grammar in
NLU, held earlier this year at Stanford, where an
early version of this work was presented.

186



References
Ruth A. Berman. 1982. Dative marking of the affectee role:

data from Modern Hebrew. Hebrew Annual Review 6:35–
59.

Claire Bonial, William Corvey, Martha Palmer, Volha V.
Petukhova, and Harry Bunt. 2011. A hierarchical unifi-
cation of LIRICS and VerbNet semantic roles. In Fifth
IEEE International Conference on Semantic Computing.
Palo Alto, CA, USA, pages 483–489.

Melissa Bowerman and Soonja Choi. 2001. Shaping mean-
ings for language: universal and language-specific in the
acquisition of spatial semantic categories. In Melissa Bow-
erman and Stephen Levinson, editors, Language Acquisi-
tion and Conceptual Development, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, pages 475–511.

Claudia Brugman. 1981. The story of ‘over’: polysemy, seman-
tics and the structure of the lexicon. MA thesis, University
of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA. Published New
York: Garland, 1981.

Daniel Casasanto and Lera Boroditsky. 2008. Time in
the mind: using space to think about time. Cognition
106(2):579–593.

Massimiliano Ciaramita and Yasemin Altun. 2006. Broad-
coverage sense disambiguation and information extraction
with a supersense sequence tagger. In Proc. of EMNLP.
Sydney, Australia, pages 594–602.

William Croft and D. Alan Cruse. 2004. Cognitive linguistics.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Daniel Dahlmeier, Hwee Tou Ng, and Tanja Schultz. 2009.
Joint learning of preposition senses and semantic roles of
prepositional phrases. In Proc. of EMNLP. Suntec, Singa-
pore, pages 450–458.

Robert B. Dewell. 1994. ‘Over’ again: Image-schema trans-
formations in semantic analysis. Cognitive Linguistics
5(4):351–380.

René Dirven. 1993. Dividing up physical and mental space
into conceptual categories by means of English preposi-
tions. In Cornelia Zelinsky-Wibbelt, editor, The seman-
tics of prepositions: From mental processing to natural
language processing, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pages
73–97.

René Dirven. 1997. Emotions as cause and the cause of
emotions. In Susanne Niemeier and René Dirven, editors,
The Language of Emotions: Conceptualization, expression,
and theoretical foundation, John Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pages 55–86.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. The case for case. In Emmon
Bach and Robert Thomas Harms, editors, Universals in
Linguistic Theory, Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York,
pages 1–88.

Charles J. Fillmore and Collin Baker. 2009. A frames ap-
proach to semantic analysis. In Bernd Heine and Heiko
Narrog, editors, The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Analy-
sis, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pages 791–816.

Charles J. Fillmore, Paul Kay, and Mary Catherine O’Connor.
1988. Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical construc-
tions: the case of let alone. Language 64(3):501–538.

Adele E. Goldberg. 2006. Constructions at work: the nature
of generalization in language. Oxford University Press.

Stephan Greene and Philip Resnik. 2009. More than words:
syntactic packaging and implicit sentiment. In Proc. of
NAACL-HLT . Boulder, Colorado, pages 503–511.

Martin Haspelmath. 2003. The geometry of grammatical
meaning: semantic maps and cross-linguistic comparison.
In Michael Tomasello, editor, The New Psychology of Lan-
guage: Cognitive and Function Approaches to Language
Structure, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ,
volume 2, pages 211–242.

Annette Herskovits. 1986. Language and spatial cognition:
an interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in English.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Jena D. Hwang. 2011. Making verb argument adjunct distinc-
tions in English. Synthesis paper, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado.

Ray Jackendoff. 1990. Semantic structures. MIT press.

Ray Jackendoff. 2002. Foundations of Language: Brain,
Meaning, Grammar, Evolution. Oxford.

Paul Kay and Charles J. Fillmore. 1999. Grammatical con-
structions and linguistic generalizations: the What’s X do-
ing Y? construction. Language 75(1):1–33.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and Martha
Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classification of English verbs.
Language Resources and Evaluation 42(1):21–40.

George Lakoff. 1987. Women, fire, and dangerous things:
what categories reveal about the mind. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live
By. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Ronald W. Langacker. 1998. Conceptualization, symboliza-
tion, and grammar. In Michael Tomasello, editor, The
New Psychology of Language: Cognitive and Functional
Approaches to Language Structure, Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates, Mahwah, NJ, pages 1–39.

Seth Lindstromberg. 2010. English Prepositions Explained.
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, revised edition.

Ken Litkowski and Orin Hargraves. 2005. The Preposition
Project. In Proc. of the Second ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on
the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and their Use in
Computational Linguistics Formalisms and Applications.
Colchester, Essex, UK, pages 171–179.

Rafael E. Núñez and Eve Sweetser. 2006. With the future
behind them: convergent evidence from Aymara language
and gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison of spatial
construals of time. Cognitive Science 30(3):401–450.

Meredith Osmond. 1997. The prepositions we use in the
construal of emotions: why do we say fed up with but
sick and tired of? In Susanne Niemeier and René Dirven,
editors, The Language of Emotions: Conceptualization,
expression, and theoretical foundation, John Benjamins,
Amsterdam, pages 111–133.

187



Martha Palmer, Claire Bonial, and Jena D. Hwang. 2017.
VerbNet: Capturing English verb behavior, meaning and
usage. In Susan E. F. Chipman, editor, The Oxford Hand-
book of Cognitive Science, Oxford University Press, pages
315–336.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 2005. The
Proposition Bank: an annotated corpus of semantic roles.
Computational Linguistics 31(1):71–106.

Davide Picca, Alfio Massimiliano Gliozzo, and Massimiliano
Ciaramita. 2008. Supersense Tagger for Italian. In Nico-
letta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Jan Odjik, Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel Tapias,
editors, Proc. of LREC. Marrakech, Morocco, pages 2386–
2390.

Günter Radden. 1998. The conceptualisation of emotional
causality by means of prepositional phrases. In Ange-
liki Athanasiadou, Elżbieta Tabakowska, René Dirven,
Ronald W. Langacker, and John R. Taylor, editors, Speak-
ing of emotions: conceptualisation and expression, Mouton
de Gruyter, pages 273–294.

Gisa Rauh. 1993. On the grammar of lexical and non-lexical
prepositions in English. In Cornelia Zelinsky-Wibbelt, edi-
tor, The Semantics of Prepositions: From Mental Process-
ing to Natural Language Processing, Mouton de Gruyter,
New York, pages 99–150.

Nathan Schneider, Jena D. Hwang, Vivek Srikumar, Meredith
Green, Abhijit Suresh, Kathryn Conger, Tim O’Gorman,
and Martha Palmer. 2016. A corpus of preposition super-
senses. In Proc. of LAW X – the 10th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop. Berlin, Germany, pages 99–109.

Nathan Schneider, Behrang Mohit, Kemal Oflazer, and
Noah A. Smith. 2012. Coarse lexical semantic annota-
tion with supersenses: an Arabic case study. In Proc. of
ACL. Jeju Island, Korea, pages 253–258.

Nathan Schneider, Vivek Srikumar, Jena D. Hwang, and
Martha Palmer. 2015. A hierarchy with, of, and for preposi-
tion supersenses. In Proc. of The 9th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop. Denver, Colorado, USA, pages 112–123.

Vivek Srikumar and Dan Roth. 2013a. An inventory of
preposition relations. Technical Report arXiv:1305.5785.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.5785.

Vivek Srikumar and Dan Roth. 2013b. Modeling semantic
relations expressed by prepositions. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics 1:231–242.

Leonard Talmy. 1996. Fictive motion in language and “cep-
tion”. In Paul Bloom, Mary A. Peterson, Nadel Lynn, and
Merrill F. Garrett, editors, Language and Space, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pages 211–276.

Stephen Tratz and Dirk Hovy. 2009. Disambiguation of prepo-
sition sense using linguistically motivated features. In Proc.
of NAACL-HLT Student Research Workshop and Doctoral
Consortium. Boulder, Colorado, pages 96–100.

Andrea Tyler and Vyvyan Evans. 2001. Reconsidering prepo-
sitional polysemy networks: the case of ‘over’. Language
77(4):724–765.

Andrea Tyler and Vyvyan Evans. 2003. The Semantics of
English Prepositions: Spatial Scenes, Embodied Meaning
and Cognition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.

Henk Verkuyl and Joost Zwarts. 1992. Time and space in
conceptual and logical semantics: the notion of Path. Lin-
guistics 30(3):483–512.

Bernhard Wälchli. 2010. Similarity semantics and building
probabilistic semantic maps from parallel texts. Linguistic
Discovery 8(1):331–371.

Patrick Ye and Timothy Baldwin. 2007. MELB-YB: Preposi-
tion sense disambiguation using rich semantic features. In
Proc. of SemEval. Prague, Czech Republic, pages 241–244.

188


