



















































MERALI at SemEval-2017 Task 2 Subtask 1: a Cognitively Inspired approach


Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2017), pages 245–249,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3 - 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

MERALI at SemEval-2017 Task 2 Subtask 1:
a Cognitively Inspired approach

Enrico Mensa
University of Turin, Italy

Dipartimento di Informatica
mensa@di.unito.it

Daniele P. Radicioni
University of Turin, Italy

Dipartimento di Informatica
radicion@di.unito.it

Antonio Lieto
University of Turin, Italy

ICAR-CNR, Palermo, Italy
lieto@di.unito.it

Abstract

In this paper we report on the participa-
tion of the MERALI system to the Se-
mEval Task 2 Subtask 1. The MER-
ALI system approaches conceptual sim-
ilarity through a simple, cognitively in-
spired, heuristics; it builds on a linguistic
resource, the TTCSE , that relies on Babel-
Net, NASARI and ConceptNet. The lin-
guistic resource in fact contains a novel
mixture of common-sense and encyclope-
dic knowledge. The obtained results point
out that there is ample room for improve-
ment, so that they are used to elaborate on
present limitations and on future steps.

1 Introduction

Defining conceptual representations along with
their associated reasoning procedures required and
still requires truly interdisciplinary efforts, in-
volving psychologists (Miller and Charles, 1991;
Barsalou, 1999; Malt et al., 2015), philoso-
phers (Machery, 2009; Gärdenfors, 2014), neu-
roscientists (Vigliocco et al., 2014), and com-
puter scientists (Resnik, 1998; Agirre et al., 2009;
Pilehvar and Navigli, 2015). Today, the ever-
growing number of applications of semantic tech-
nologies demand for further investigation on con-
cepts’ meaning: this fact explains the popularity of
issues rooted in and related to conceptual similar-
ity, and the success of the present Semantic Word
Similarity task (Camacho-Collados et al., 2017).

In this paper we present an approach to the
computation of conceptual similarity based on a
novel lexical resource, the TTCSE—so dubbed af-
ter Terms to Conceptual Spaces-Extended— that
has been acquired by integrating two different
sorts of linguistic resources, such as the ency-
clopedic knowledge available in BabelNet (Nav-

igli and Ponzetto, 2012) and NASARI (Camacho-
Collados et al., 2015), and the common-sense
grasped by ConceptNet (Speer and Havasi, 2012).
The resulting representation enjoys the interest-
ing property of being anchored to both resources,
thereby providing a uniform conceptual access
grounded on the sense identifiers provided by Ba-
belNet.

The TTCSE provides a conceptual representa-
tion inspired to Conceptual Spaces (CSs), a ge-
ometric representation framework where knowl-
edge is represented as a set of limited though cog-
nitively relevant quality dimensions (Gärdenfors,
2014). The CSs framework has been recently
used to extend and complement the representa-
tional and inferential power allowed by formal on-
tologies with special emphasis on dealing with the
corresponding typicality-based conceptual reason-
ing (Lieto et al., 2015, 2017); in this setting, the
TTCSE aims at providing a wide-coverage, cog-
nitively based linguistic resource for this sort of
knowledge, by extending previous work (Lieto
et al., 2016; Mensa et al., 2017).

2 Concept Representation in the TTCSE

Concepts representation in the TTCSE is consistent
with CSs: each concept c is provided with a vec-
tor representation ~c providing information on the
given concept along some semantic dimensions d.
All concepts included in such description are re-
ferred to through BabelNet synset IDs, and dimen-
sions themselves are a subset of the relationships
available in ConceptNet. Such relations report
common-sense information like, e.g., ISA, ATLO-
CATION, USEDFOR, PARTOF, MADEOF, HASA,
CAPABLEOF, etc.. For a full description of the
employed properties we refer the reader to (Mensa
et al., 2017).

Let D be the set of N dimensions. Each con-

245



AtLocation

IsA

UsedFor

Antonym

RelatedTo tool, food, table, cutlery, eating, knife, spoon, utensil

tool, cutlery, utensil

table, desk, plate

eating

knife, spoon

MadeOf metal

Figure 1: Example of representation for the con-
cept FORK (BN:00035902N). The representation
has been made human-readable by displaying con-
cept lexicalizations in place of their actual Babel
synset IDs.

cept ci in the linguistic resource is defined as a
vector ~ci = [si1, .., s

i
N ], where each s

i
h constitutes

the set of concepts filling the dimension dh ∈ D.
Each s can contain an arbitrary number of values,
or be empty. For example, the representation for
the concept FORK includes information about 6 di-
mensions that are filled with overall 18 concepts,
like illustrated in Figure 1.

The TTCSE resource contains 14, 677 concepts,
and it was built by starting from the 10K most fre-
quent nouns present in the Corpus of Contempo-
rary American English (COCA),1 browsing over
11M associations available in ConceptNet and the
2.8M NASARI vectors. Concepts in the TTCSE

are filled, on average, with 14.90 (concept) val-
ues.2

3 Conceptual similarity with the TTCSE

Our similarity metrics does not employ WordNet
taxonomy and distances between pairs of nodes,
such as in (Wu and Palmer, 1994; Leacock et al.,
1998), nor it depends on information content ac-
counts either, such as in (Resnik, 1998).

Conversely, given the aforementioned represen-
tation for concepts, one principal assumption un-
derlying our approach is that two concepts are

1http://corpus.byu.edu/full-text/.
2The final resource is available for download at the URL

http://ttcs.di.unito.it.

similar insofar as they share values on the same
dimension, such as when they are both used for
the same ends, they share the same components,
etc.. Given two concepts ~ci and ~cj , the conceptual
similarity along each dimension —filled in both
vectors— should be ideally computed as a func-
tion of the cardinality of the intersection between
overlapping dimensions

sim(~ci,~cj) =
N∑

k=1

|sik ∩ sjk|

where sik is the set of concepts filling the k-th
dimension in the vector ~ci representing the con-
cept ci. The rationale underlying this formula is
to grasp shared features, thereby allowing us to
provide an explanation based on common-sense
accounts. For example, rather than computing a
distance on WordNet or observing how frequently
they co-occur, to justify the similarity score for the
pair 〈bird, cock〉 we consider that each concept
ISA ‘animal’; and that both of them are RELAT-
EDTO ‘feather’, ‘chicken’, ‘roosting’ and ‘verte-
brate’.

However, our approach is presently limited by
the actual average filling factor, and by the noise
that can be possibly collected by an automatic
procedure built on top of the BabelNet and
ConceptNet resources. To handle the possibly
unbalanced number of concepts that charac-
terize the different dimensions and to prevent
the computation from being biased by more
richly defined concepts, we adopt the Symmet-
rical Tversky’s Ratio Model (Jimenez et al., 2013).

sim(~ci,~cj) =
1
N∗
·

N∗∑
k=1

|sik ∩ sjk|
β (αa+ (1− α) b) + |sik ∩ sjk|

where |sik ∩ sjk| counts the number of shared con-
cepts that are used as fillers for the dimension dk
in the concept ~ci and ~cj , respectively; and a and
b are computed as a = min(|sik − sjk|, |sjk − sik|),
b = max(|sik − sjk|, |sjk − sik|); and N∗ counts the
dimensions actually filled with at least one concept
in both vectors. The Symmetrical Tversky’s Ratio
Model allows us to tune the balance between car-
dinality differences (through the parameter α), and
between |sik ∩ sjk| and |sik− sjk|, |sjk− sik| (through
the parameter β). The parameters α and β were set
to .8 and .2 for the experimentation, based on a pa-
rameter tuning performed on the RG, MC and WS-
sim datasets (Rubenstein and Goodenough, 1965;

246



Dimension (h) Dim. score |sbirdh | |scockh | shared values

RELATEDTO 0.68 44 06
feather, chicken

roosting, vertebrate
ISA 0.58 07 04 animal

Table 1: Example of computation of the concep-
tual similarity for the pair ‘bird’ and ‘cock’, by in-
specting the actual content of the TTCSE resource.

Miller and Charles, 1991; Agirre et al., 2009).
For example, in order to compute the semantic

similarity between the concepts bird and cock the
TTCSE finds that the ISA and RELATEDTO dimen-
sions are filled in both~cbird and~ccock, thusN∗ = 2
in the present setting. Figures in column |sbirdh |
and |scockh | report about how many concepts were
retrieved that fill each dimension; elements in the
‘shared values’ column detail how many concepts
were found in common to be part of both concept
descriptions along the given dimension. The fi-
nal similarity score obtained by the TTCSE is 0.63,
against the 0.65 assigned in the gold standard.

4 Evaluation

The dataset proposed for the experimentation in-
cluded 500 word pairs; thanks to the mixture of
abstract/concrete concepts and named entities it
can be considered as a very complete and chal-
lenging test bed. Results have been computed
through Pearson and Spearman correlations (re-
spectively, r and ρ) and their harmonic mean; the
latter measure ranges between 0.789 (obtained by
the LUMINOSO team) and 0, as displayed in Fig-
ure 2. In particular, MERALI obtained 0.589 (r),
0.600 (ρ) and 0.594, respectively. We presently
focus on this run of the system and disregard the
other one that attained substantially similar results,
stemming from a slightly different parameters set-
ting.

We dissected the dataset, to identify our sys-
tem’s weaknesses, to the ends of improving both
the conceptual similarity computation procedures
and the lexical resource. We noticed that out of the
500 overall word pairs, 405 involve concept com-
parisons, while in the reminder pairs we have at
least one entity at stake (namely, 45 entity-entity
pairs and 50 entity-concept pairs).

Comparisons involving entities are somehow
different from those involving only concepts: for
example, the cases where the semantic similar-
ity is computed between a concept and an en-
tity (e.g., in ‘Darwin-evolution’, ‘Gauss-scientist’,

Figure 2: Results of the SemEval Task 2 Subtask 1
(English): harmonic mean between Spearman and
Pearson correlations for each team.

‘Siemens-electric train’) pose additional problems
with respect to cases in which two entities are
considered (such as for ‘Juventus-Bayern Mu-
nich’, ‘Plato-Aristotle’, and ‘Alexander Fleming-
Penicillin’). Under an ontological perspective,
individual entities act like instances, whilst con-
cepts can be considered as classes: one thus won-
ders what does comparing individuals and classes
mean. Moreover, according to the Conceptual
Spaces framework, individuals can be thought of
as points, while concepts are represented as re-
gions over the multidimensional conceptual space.
Comparisons between a class and an individual are
intuitively harder in that they require i) to find the
relations relating the individual and the class being
examined; and ii) in a CSs perspective, to com-
pare a point with a region. Furthermore, under a
cognitive perspective, it is difficult to follow the
strategy adopted by humans in providing a score
for pairs such as ‘Zara-leggings’ (gold standard
similarity judgement: 1.67): directly comparing
a manufacturer and a product is nearly unfeasible,
since their features can be hardly compared. Jus-
tifying the answer is perhaps helpful to give some
information on the argumentative paths that can be
followed to assess semantic similarity. One major
risk, in these respects, is that instead of similarity,
the scores provided by human annotators rather
refer to generic relatedness. For example, let us
consider the pair ‘tail-Boeing 747’ (gold standard
similarity judgement: 1.92): although each Boe-
ing 747 has a tail, the whole plane (holonym) can-
not be conceptually similar to its tail (meronym),
in the same way a door is not similar to its knob.

So we have re-run the statistical tests to com-
pute Spearman and Pearson correlations over
the three subsets (entity-entity, entity-concept,
concept-concept); the partial results are reported

247



# pairs r ρ harm.mean
entire data 500 0.59 0.60 0.59
entity-entity 45 0.69 0.70 0.69
entity-concept 50 0.72 0.66 0.69
concept-concept 405 0.56 0.57 0.56

Table 2: Spearman (ρ) and Pearson (r) correla-
tions (and their harmonic mean) obtained by the
MERALI system over the three subsets.

in Table 2.

It turned out that, against our intuition, the
MERALI system has better accuracy on word
pairs including an entity; so we further examined
the latter subset (concept-concept), where we ob-
tained poorer results. Here we notice that in many
cases (22, that is over 5% of this subset) overly
high scores were determined by the maximization
implemented in the word-similarity: in such cases,
in fact, semantic similarity is usually computed as
the similarity of the closest senses underlying the
given terms (Budanitsky and Hirst, 2006). An ex-
ample of this sort of errors is the pair ‘apocalypse-
fire’ (gold standard similarity judgement: 1.25),
where the MERALI system returned a value by
far higher than the expected value (namely, 3.85):
fires can legitimately be interpreted as apocalyp-
tic events, but only in a figurative way. Similar,
though distinct, differences in score are observed
when comparing two identical concepts: not al-
ways human beings provide the maximum (equal-
ity) score, sometimes in unexpected way like for,
e.g., ‘movie-film’ (gold standard similarity judge-
ment: 3.92), ‘multiple sclerosis-MS’ (gold stan-
dard similarity judgement: 3.92). Out of 24 such
cases, for 13 pairs (3% of this subset) we over-
estimated the semantic similarity. As regards as
fully different concept pairs (46, over 11%), in
half cases we have over-estimated the similarity,
perhaps due to a too permissive enriching routine
that sometimes accepts noisy concepts as dimen-
sion fillers.

However, the main issue of the first version of
the MERALI system is that the overall amount
of information available to the system is often
not enough to fully assess the semantic similar-
ity between concepts. Sometimes concepts them-
selves have been missing, and missing concepts
may be lacking in (at least one of) the resources
upon which the TTCSE is built. Also, difficul-
ties stemmed from insufficient information for the

concepts at stake: this phenomenon was observed,
e.g., when both concepts have been found, but no
common dimension has been filled. This sort of
difficulty shows that the coverage of the resource
still needs to be enhanced, especially by improv-
ing the extraction phase, so to add further concepts
per dimension, and to fill more dimensions.

5 Conclusions

We have illustrated the system MERALI, that re-
lies on a novel resource, the TTCSE . The under-
lying representation is compatible with the Con-
ceptual Spaces framework and aims at putting to-
gether encyclopedic and common-sense knowl-
edge. The results of the MERALI system have
been illustrated and discussed. The experimenta-
tion clearly showed that there is room for improv-
ing the system along two main axes: dimensions
must be filled with further information, and the
quality of the extracted information should be im-
proved. Also the computation of the similarity can
be refined by testing further heuristics, so to re-
duce the cases of over-estimation of semantic sim-
ilarity. All mentioned aspects will be addressed in
our future work.

References
Eneko Agirre, Enrique Alfonseca, Keith Hall, Jana

Kravalova, Marius Paşca, and Aitor Soroa. 2009. A
study on similarity and relatedness using distribu-
tional and wordnet-based approaches. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, NAACL ’09, pages 19–27.

Lawrence W Barsalou. 1999. Perceptions of per-
ceptual symbols. Behavioral and brain sciences
22(04):637–660.

Alexander Budanitsky and Graeme Hirst. 2006. Eval-
uating wordnet-based measures of lexical semantic
relatedness. Computational Linguists 32(1):13–47.

Jose Camacho-Collados, Mohammad Taher Pilehvar,
Nigel Collier, and Roberto Navigli. 2017. Semeval-
2017 task 2: Multilingual and cross-lingual semantic
word similarity. In Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
2017). Vancouver, Canada.

José Camacho-Collados, Mohammad Taher Pilehvar,
and Roberto Navigli. 2015. NASARI: a novel ap-
proach to a semantically-aware representation of
items. In Proceedings of NAACL. pages 567–577.

Peter Gärdenfors. 2014. The geometry of meaning: Se-
mantics based on conceptual spaces. MIT Press.

248



Sergio Jimenez, Claudia Becerra, Alexander Gelbukh,
Av Juan Dios Bátiz, and Av Mendizábal. 2013.
Softcardinality-core: Improving text overlap with
distributional measures for semantic textual similar-
ity. In Proceedings of *SEM 2013. volume 1, pages
194–201.

Claudia Leacock, George A Miller, and Martin
Chodorow. 1998. Using corpus statistics and word-
net relations for sense identification. Computational
Linguistics 24(1):147–165.

Antonio Lieto, Enrico Mensa, and Daniele P. Radi-
cioni. 2016. A Resource-Driven Approach for An-
choring Linguistic Resources to Conceptual Spaces.
In Procs of the XV International Conference of
the Italian Association for Artificial Intelligence.
Springer, volume 10037 of LNAI, pages 435–449.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-49130-1.

Antonio Lieto, Andrea Minieri, Alberto Piana, and
Daniele P. Radicioni. 2015. A knowledge-based
system for prototypical reasoning. Connection Sci-
ence 27(2):137–152.

Antonio Lieto, Daniele P. Radicioni, and Valentina
Rho. 2017. Dual PECCS: A Cognitive System
for Conceptual Representation and Catego-
rization. Journal of Experimental & Theo-
retical Artificial Intelligence 29(2):433–452.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2016.1198934.

Edouard Machery. 2009. Doing without concepts. Ox-
ford University Press.

Barbara C Malt, Silvia P Gennari, Mutsumi Imai, Eef
Ameel, Noburo Saji, and Asifa Majid. 2015. 11
where are the concepts? what words can and cant
reveal. The conceptual mind: New directions in the
study of concepts page 291.

Enrico Mensa, Daniele P. Radicioni, and Antonio Li-
eto. 2017. TTCSE : a Vectorial Resource for Comput-
ing Conceptual Similarity. In Proceedings of the 1st
Workshop on Sense, Concept and Entity Representa-
tions and their Applications. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Valencia, Spain, pages 96–
101. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-1912.

George A Miller and Walter G Charles. 1991. Contex-
tual correlates of semantic similarity. Language and
cognitive processes 6(1):1–28.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2012.
BabelNet: The automatic construction, evaluation
and application of a wide-coverage multilingual se-
mantic network. Artif. Intell. 193:217–250.

Mohammad Taher Pilehvar and Roberto Navigli. 2015.
From senses to texts: An all-in-one graph-based ap-
proach for measuring semantic similarity. Artif. In-
tell. 228:95–128.

Philip Resnik. 1998. Semantic similarity in a taxon-
omy: An information-based measure and its appli-
cation to problems of ambiguity in natural language.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 11(1).

Herbert Rubenstein and John B Goodenough. 1965.
Contextual correlates of synonymy. Communica-
tions of the ACM 8(10):627–633.

Robert Speer and Catherine Havasi. 2012. Represent-
ing General Relational Knowledge in ConceptNet 5.
In LREC. pages 3679–3686.

Gabriella Vigliocco, Stavroula-Thaleia Kousta,
Pasquale Anthony Della Rosa, David P Vinson,
Marco Tettamanti, Joseph T Devlin, and Stefano F
Cappa. 2014. The neural representation of abstract
words: the role of emotion. Cerebral Cortex
24(7):1767–1777.

Zhibiao Wu and Martha Palmer. 1994. Verbs semantics
and lexical selection. In Proceedings of the 32nd an-
nual meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. ACL, pages 133–138.

249


