



















































EmoIntens Tracker at SemEval-2018 Task 1: Emotional Intensity Levels in #Tweets


Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2018), pages 177–180
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 5–6, 2018. ©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

 

 

EmoIntens Tracker at SemEval-2018 Task 1: Emotional Intensity 

Levels in #Tweets 

 

 

Ramona-Andreea
 
Turcu

1
, Sandra Maria Amarandei

1
, 

 Iuliana-Alexandra Flescan-Lovin-Arseni
1
, Daniela Gifu

1,2
, Diana Trandabat

1 

 

1Faculty of Computer Science, “Alexandru Ioan Cuza” University of Iasi, 
2
Institute of Computer Science, Romanian Academy - Iasi Branch  

 

{ramona.turcu, daniela.gifu, dtrandabat}@info.uaic.ro 

{maria.amarandei, flescan.alexandra}@gmail.com 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 Introduction  

Emotion Analysis is still a challenging task in 

NLP (Natural Language Processing); the 

researchers try to recognize not only emotions 

“generally speaking” but also their intensity. 

Because the level of subjectivity is particularly 

high in this matter, prediction of emotions, 

mainly in text, demands for continuous research 

and improvement strategies. SemEval 

competition has already a tradition in 

developing tasks to address this subject. This 

year proposed an even more challenging task: 

emotion intensity prediction in tweets.  

Within this context, this present study aims 

to develop a system that can not only detect 

emotions but also their intensities, namely 

emotion intensity regression and emotion 

intensity ordinal classification tasks for fear, 

joy, sadness and anger. Better results are finally 

provided thanks to the combination between 

neural network and proper decision tree 

algorithms. 

From the four tasks, namely: EI-reg, EI-oc, 

VAD-reg, and VAD-oc, the system focuses on 

the first two of them, for both English and 

Spanish datasets, according to their relation 

with the emotion concept.  

While tweets annotation, emotion intensity 

regression and emotion intensity ordinal 

classification is an active field of emotion 

analysis, we believe that a supervised machine 

learning (Naive Bayes, KNN and SVM), deep 

learning approach (NN Tensor Flow model), and 

decision trees would increase the effectiveness 

of this system. 

2 State of the Art 

Some of the most used technologies which led 

to considerable results and step forwards in the 

domain of sentiment analysis are mainly 

represented by machine learning algorithms 

which already have led to impressive results can 

be thoroughly analyzed in several studies such 

as: the work of Bac Huy Nguyen (2015); latent 

semantic analysis (LSA) by Andrew et al. 
(2014), support vector machines in the work of 

Rohini S. Rahate and Emmanuel M, (2013), 

grammatical dependency relations, Support 

Vector Regression (SVR), and Neural Networks.  

Abstract 

 

The „Affect in Tweets” task is centered on 

emotions categorization and evaluation 

matrix using multi-language tweets 

(English and Spanish). In this research, 

SemEval Affect dataset was preprocessed, 

categorized, and evaluated accordingly 

(precision, recall, and accuracy). The 

system described in this paper is based on 

the implementation of supervised machine 

learning (Naive Bayes, KNN and SVM), 

deep learning (NN Tensor Flow model), 

and decision trees algorithms. 

177



 

 

An important work has been done by the 

tool IZU-NLP at EmoInt-2017 (Yuanye He et al., 

2017), meant to determine numerical values that 

would represent the emotion intensity in a 

tweet. There are researchers who prefer to 

combine several methods in order to achieve 

better results. For instance, in the paper of 

Sreekanth Maunendra and  Sankar Desarkar 

(2017) there were implemented three regression 

methods: (1) content-based features (ex. 
hashtags, emoticons); (2) training based on 

word and character n-grams; and finally (3) 

lexicons, word embeddings, word n-grams and 

character n-grams all together. 

Best–Worst Scaling (BWS) was highly 

valued in the work of Saif M. Mohammad and 

Felipe Bravo-Marquez (2017) when producing 

the first datasets of tweets annotated for 

sentiment intensities (anger, fear, joy, and 

sadness). 

Some existing tools and resources that 

enlarged the perspective and built the basis of 

sentiment analysis are: Emo-Int2017, NRC 

Emotion lexicon, Best-Worst Scaling resources; 

VADER-Sentiment-Analysis, SentiWordNet 

(Andrea Esuli et al., 2010), NLTK Sentiment 

Analyze, and Affective Tweets. All these works 

prove the interest of researchers on this subject 

and the fast evolution of this specific domain in 

time. 

In the context of the Semeval Competition, 

we developed a system for emotion intensity 

and ordinal classification of the subtasks 

already stated above. 

3 Dataset and method 

3.1 Data set 
 

The SemEval affect dataset used in this work 

contains an annotated set multi-language tweets 

(English and Spanish).  

For each emotion (anger, fear, sadness, joy) we 
had 3 sets of data (for train, developing and 

test).  

The English data set was revised by Hardik 

Meisheri Dec 5, 2017 consisting of ~100 

million English tweet ids and for Spanish the 

data set released on Dec 5, 2017 containing 

~1.2 million Spanish tweet ids. 
 

3.2 Method 
 

This research is oriented towards the first two 

tasks of SemEval so it will contain two 

components, one for Task EI-reg and the other 

one for Task EI-oc. The first step was to 

preprocess the development data set in multiple 

stages as follows: basic cleaning (Ids, useless 

stopwords, emoticons), tokenization and parsing 

to make data less repetitive. Then we apply the 

NN Tensor Flow model, the basic one, offered 

by Python with 600 neurons and with a layer of 

1 to 1000. 

The neural network was trained separately 
for each language using the same configuration. 

Once we obtained the results, we applied a 

Decision Tree Algorithm in order to refine them. 

For all subtasks we use Neural Network Tensor 

Flow (NNTF): Analyzing Tweet's Sentiment 

with Character-Level LSTMs NN Tensor Flow - 

python implemented neuronal network with the 

same parameters for the EI-oc subtask, we 

improved our results by implementing also the 

classifiers from pattern.vector. The algorithms 

are based on three big approaches - they 

implement the Naive Bayes, KNN and SVM 

classifiers respectively. Even though machine 

learning and neural networks gave decent result, 

the difficulty in controlling the actual reasoning 

implied the necessity of adding a refining 

algorithm that would improve final results. An 

algorithm that would meet this condition is the 

Decision Tree Classification, a Weka J48 

implementation that was improved by adding an 

algorithm used to generate same decision trees: 

check for base classification (this classification 

should be done by the first method described in 

this paper - NN Tensor Flow); for each 

score/class; find the normalized score;  

best_score will be the highest normalized score, 

this will be the root; create a decision node that 
splits on best_score; search on the sublists 

obtained by splitting on best_score; add those 

nodes as child of node. 

For development and training we used the 

results from the first method for both English 

and French. 

4 Results and Observations 

In both sets of results we will notice that the 
best results were obtained in the single positive 

feeling dataset - the one for joy. For EI-reg, the 

lowest result was registered for anger 

(accuracy), while the highest was the recall for 

joy. For EI-oc the best result is in the precision 

of joy, the lowest result being again in accuracy, 

but this time for sadness. 

178



 

 

The implementation of the Decision Tree 

Algorithm leads to growth and uniformization 

of the results in the EI-reg subtask, while it  

 

lowers those from EI-oc.  

This being said, it becomes clear that for 

ordinal classification (EI-oc) NNTF is 
preferred, while the additional Decision Tree  

 

Algorithm helps the improvement of intensity 

detection.  

5 Conclusions  

Within our project, we succeeded to obtain 

relevant results as participants in Semeval-Task 

1 Affect in Tweets, by implementing machine 

learning and decision tree algorithms. 

A constant concern relates to the modalities 

of sentiment summarization and visualization. 

When the results of sentiment analysis tasks 

need to be presented to an end user, a 

corresponding level of uncertainty should be 

taken into account (uncertain results shown as 

certain may lead to incorrect conclusions). Of 

course it is clear that we may increase it by 

identifying manually certain patterns and 

indices about intensity and/or their 

classification.  

 

It would have been rather interesting to  

have a balance between the negative and 

positive emotions (the Semeval Competition 
providing us with three negative and only one  

 

positive emotion.) Much and interesting work is 

to be done as we speak about such a subjective 

part and manifestation of human mind - 

emotions. 

Acknowledgments 

This survey was published with the support by 

two grants of the Romanian National Authority 

for Scientific Research and Innovation, 

UEFISCDI, project number PN-III-P2-2.1-BG-

2016-0390, contract 126BG/2016 and project 

number PN-III-P1-1.2-PCCDI-2017-0818, 

contract 73PCCDI/2018 within PNCDI III, and 

partially by the README project "Interactive 

and Innovative application for evaluating the 

readability of texts in Romanian Language and 

Table 1. NNTF and Classification Algoithm Results (a-accuracy, r-recall, p-precission) 

Table 2. Results obtained after implementing the Decission Tree Algorithm (a-accuracy, r-recall, p-precission) 

 

179



 

 

for improving users' writing styles", contract no. 

114/15.09.2017, MySMIS 2014 code 119286. 

 

References 
 Amir Zadeh, Rowan Zellers. 2016. Multimodal 

Sentiment Intensity Analysis in Videos: Facial 

Gestures and Verbal Messages, - Affective 

Computing and Sentiment Analysis. 

http://sentic.net/multimodal-sentiment-intensity-

analysis-in-videos.pdf  

Andrea Esuli, Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2010. 

SentiWordNet: A Publicly Available Lexical 

Resource for Opinion Mining. 

http://nmis.isti.cnr.it/sebastiani/Publications/LRE

C06.pdf  

Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, 

Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher 

Potts, Learning Word Vectors for Sentiment 

Analysis, Stanford, CA 94305. 

http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-1015  

Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Dan Roth, Richard Sproat, 

Emotions from text: machine learning for text-

based emotion prediction, 

https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/4db0/80cc272c68

fb45df65eccdde6317edc44c28.pdf  

Carlo Strapparava, Rada Mihalcea. 2007. SemEval-

2007 Task 14 Affective Tweets, 

https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/5b19/cdfecffbcd2

d82b57407863f95c42bb1f720.pdf  

Hutto, C.J. & Gilbert, E.E. 2014. VADER: A 

Parsimonious Rule-based Model for Sentiment 

Analysis of Social Media Text. Eighth 

International Conference on Weblogs and Social 

Media (ICWSM-14). Ann Arbor, MI. 

https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/a6e4/a253251036

9b8f55c68f049ff11a892fefeb.pdf  

Saif M. Mohammad and Felipe Bravo-Marquez, 

Emotion Intensities in Tweets, In Proceedings of 

the sixth joint conference on lexical and 

computational semantics (*Sem), Vancouver, 

Canada. 

Le B., Nguyen H. 2015. Twitter Sentiment Analysis 

Using Machine Learning Techniques. In: Le Thi 

H., Nguyen N., Do T. (eds) Advanced 

Computational Methods for Knowledge 

Engineering. Advances in Intelligent Systems and 

Computing, vol 358. Springer, Cham 

Saif M. Mohammad and Felipe Bravo-Marquez. 

2017. WASSA-2017 Shared Task on Emotion 

Intensity, In Proceedings of the EMNLP 2017 

Workshop on Computational Approaches to 

Subjectivity, Sentiment, and Social Media 

(WASSA), Copenhagen, Denmark. 

Saif M. Mohammad, Felipe Bravo-Marquez, 

Mohammad Salameh, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. 

2018. Semeval-2018 Task 1: Affect in tweets. In 

Proceedings of International Workshop on 

Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2018), New 

Orleans, LA, USA 

Sreekanth Maunendra, Sankar Desarkar. 2017. 

NSEmo at EmoInt-2017. An Ensemble to Predict 

Emotion Intensity in Tweets, 

http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-5230     

 

Vineet, John, Olga, Vechtomova. 2017. UWat-Emote 

at EmoInt-2017: Emotion Intensity Detection 

using Affect Clues, Sentiment Polarity and Word 

Embeddings.       

http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-5235  

Yuanye He, Liang-Chih Yu, K.Robert Lai, Weiyi Liu. 

2017.  Determinng Emotion Intensity Using a Bi-

directional LSTM-CNN Model. 

http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-5233  

Rohini S. Rahate, Emmanuel M. 2013.  Feature 

Selection for Sentiment Analysis by using SVM, 

International Journal of Computer Applications 

(0975–8887) Volume 84–No5, December  

 

180


