



















































Measuring Frame Instance Relatedness


Proceedings of the 7th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 245–254
New Orleans, June 5-6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Measuring Frame Instance Relatedness

Valerio Basile
University of Turin

Italy
basile@di.unito.it

Roque Lopez Condori
Université Côte d’Azur,

Inria, CNRS, I3S, France
roque.lopez-condori@inria.fr

Elena Cabrio
Université Côte d’Azur,

Inria, CNRS, I3S, France
elena.cabrio@unice.fr

Abstract

Frame semantics is a well-established
framework to represent the meaning of nat-
ural language in computational terms. In
this work, we aim to propose a quantita-
tive measure of relatedness between pairs
of frame instances. We test our method
on a dataset of sentence pairs, highlighting
the correlation between our metric and hu-
man judgments of semantic similarity. Fur-
thermore, we propose an application of our
measure for clustering frame instances to
extract prototypical knowledge from natu-
ral language.

1 Introduction

Frame Semantics has been a staple of artificial
intelligence and cognitive linguistics since its
first formulation in the ’70s (Fillmore, 1976).
In particular, frame semantics has been widely
adopted as a theoretical backbone for the inter-
pretation of natural language, in order to repre-
sent its meaning with formal structures suited
for computation. In a nutshell, according to
frame semantics, the meaning of a sentence can
be represented as a set of situations (frames)
and the entities involved in them (frame ele-
ments), each with their own role.

Several approaches have proposed in the
past years to automatically interpret natural
language in terms of frame semantics (Gildea
and Jurafsky, 2002; Thompson et al., 2003;
Erk and Padó, 2006, among others). How-
ever, the vast majority of these approaches fo-
cuses on the extraction of the structure of the
frames evoked in the natural language fragment
(frames and roles), while leaving the frame el-
ements either underspecified or simply repre-
senting them as spans of the original text. In
this work, we propose to fully represent the
meaning of a natural language sentence with

instantiated frames, where the frame elements
are nodes in a knowledge graph.

Moreover, while a great deal of effort has
been directed towards the extraction of frames
from natural language, not many systems pro-
cess frames further, to solve downstream tasks
in NLP and AI — an example is Sentilo (Recu-
pero et al., 2015), a sentiment analysis system
built on top of the frame-based machine read-
ing tool FRED by Presutti et al. (2012).

In this paper we define a quantitative mea-
sure to compute the semantic relatedness of a
pair of frame instances, and apply it to the task
of creating a commonsense knowledge base.

The main contributions of this paper are:

• A novel measure of relatedness between
frame instances (Section 3).

• A high-quality data set of natural lan-
guage sentences aligned to the frame in-
stances evoked by them (Sections 4 and
5).

• A pilot study on the extraction of pro-
totypical knowledge based on frame in-
stance clustering (Section 6).

Before introducing the novel contributions, we
describe related work (Section 2), while Sec-
tion 7 summarizes our conclusions.

2 Related Work

The most relevant to our research is the work
of Pennacchiotti and Wirth (2009), which in-
troduces the notion of “frame relatedness” and
proposes different types of measures to asses
it. These measures are grouped in three cate-
gories: i) based on the hypothesis that frames
are related if their lexical units are semanti-
cally related; ii) corpus-based measures, which
suggest that related frames tend to occur in

245



the same or similar contexts (e.g., measured
by pointwise mutual information or distribu-
tional semantic models); iii) hierarchy-based
measures, which leverage the FrameNet hier-
archy, assuming that frames are likely related
if they are close in the network structure of
FrameNet. The results of their experimental
tests show high correlation between some of
these measures and a dataset of human judg-
ments of semantic similarity.

Subsequent works have taken the measures
presented by Pennacchiotti and Wirth (2009)
as basis to implement more refined measures.
Kim et al. (2013) proposes SynRank, a func-
tion to calculate frame relatedness which uses
three measures: i) content similarity, based on
the overlapping of the terms that evoke the
frames, ii) context similarity, defined by neigh-
bor frames within a window in its document,
and iii) corpus-based word similarity, which
uses the corpus-specific information.

Virk et al. (2016) presented a supervised ap-
proach to enrich FrameNet’s relational struc-
ture with new frame-to-frame relations. To cre-
ate these new relations, the authors propose to
use features based on frame network structure
and frame elements (role names similarity by
overlap). In addition to these features, the over-
lap among content words (nouns, verbs, adjec-
tives and adverbs) occurring in verbal defini-
tions of each frame of FrameNet is also used.

More recently, Alam et al. (2017) proposed
three measures to compute the semantic relat-
edness between two frames using the hierar-
chical structure of the FrameNet graph. These
measures are i) path similarity, based on the
shortest path between two nodes in the tax-
onomy, ii) Leacock-Chodorow similarity (Lea-
cock and Chodorow, 1998), which considers
the shortest path between two nodes and the
depth of the taxonomy and iii) Wu-Palmer sim-
ilarity (Wu and Palmer, 1994), based on the
depths of two nodes in the taxonomy and their
least common subsumer. In (Shah et al.) a
word sense-based similarity metric is used as
a proxy to frame instance relatedness in order
to cluster frame instances.

Our method presupposes a formalization of
the frame element structure including the en-
tities that fill the semantic roles, akin to the
work of (Scheffczyk et al., 2006), which seeks

to give the slot fillers semantic type constraints
by linking them to a top-level ontology.

To our knowledge, our approach is the
first to address the relatedness of instantiated
frames that include disambiguated concepts in
their frame elements.

3 A Quantitative Measure of Frame
Instance Relatedness

In the theory of frame semantics, a frame is
a prototypical situation uniquely defined by a
name, e.g., Driving_vehicle, an event in-
volving a vehicle, someone who controls it,
the area where the motion takes place, and so
on. Frames have frame elements, identified
by the role they play in the frame. Following
the example above, Driver and Vehicle
are some of the frame elements expected to be
present in a Driving_vehicle situation.

Most NLP works on frame semantics are
based on FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), a lex-
ical semantic resource which contains descrip-
tions and annotations of frames. In FrameNet,
each frame type defines its own set of frame el-
ements and associated words (known as lexical
units) which can evoke the frame. FrameNet
also lists a set of frame-to-frame relations
(e.g. subframe_of, is_causative_of)
according to how they are organized with re-
spect to each other.

We propose a method to compute a nu-
meric score indicating the relatedness of a
pair of frame instances. Formally, we
define a frame instance fi as a tuple
(ft, {(r1, e1), ..., (rn, en)}), ft ∈ T , r ∈
R, e ∈ E, where T is the set of frame types, R
is the set of semantic roles, and E is the vocab-
ulary of entities that could fill any given role.

The relatedness between two frame in-
stances fi1 and fi2 is computed as a linear
combination of the relatedness between the two
frame types and the distance between the frame
elements contained in the frame instances:

firel(fi1, fi2) =

= αftrel(fi1, fi2)+(1−α)ferel(fi1, fi2)
(1)

The relatedness firel(fi1, fi2) is therefore de-
fined to be a number in the range [0, 1], while

246



the α parameter controls the extent to which
the relatedness is weighted towards the frame
types or the frame elements. The frame type
relatedness ftrel and the frame element relat-
edness ferel can be computed in several ways,
which we detail in the remainder of this sec-
tion.

3.1 Implementation Details

The method to compute the relatedness of
frame instances that we propose is independent
from the actual vocabulary of frames, roles and
concepts — although for some of the steps pre-
cise characteristics of the frame definition are
needed, e.g., a set of lexical units. In prac-
tice, we use the frame type and element inven-
tory of FrameNet 1.5, containing 1,230 frames,
11,829 lexical units and 173,018 example sen-
tences. As concept inventory, we select Ba-
belNet, a large scale multilingual dictionary
and semantic network (Navigli and Ponzetto,
2012). Words in BabelNet belong to one or
many BabelNet synsets, each synset defines a
sense, thus it represents a potential semantic
role filler in a frame element.

3.2 Frame Type Relatedness

Pennacchiotti and Wirth (2009) surveys a
number of methods to compute a relatedness
score between frames. We implemented the
best performing algorithm for frame related-
ness among those introduced in the aforemen-
tioned paper, namely the co-occurrence mea-
sure (ftrelocc). This algorithm is based on an
estimate of the point-wise mutual information
(pmi) between the two frames, computed on
the basis of their occurrence in an annotated
corpus.

Given two frame types ft1 and ft2, and a
corpus C, the measure is defined as:

ftrelocc(fi1, fi2) = log2
|Cft1,ft2 |
|Cf t1||Cf t2|

(2)

where Cft1 and Cft2 indicate the subsets of
contexts in which ft1 and ft2 occur respec-
tively, and Cft1,ft2 the subset of contexts
where both frame types occur.

Since a large corpus of frame-annotated nat-
ural language is hard to come by and very ex-
pensive to produce, the occurrence of a frame

type fti in a context c is defined as the occur-
rence of at least one of the lexical units lfti as-
sociated to that frame type in FrameNet in that
particular context:

Cfti = {c ∈ C : ∃lfti ∈ c}
Cft1,ft2 = {c ∈ C : ∃lft1 ∈ c ∧ ∃lft2 ∈ c}

While the original method only considers the
word part of the lexical units, we computed the
occurrence counts on SEMCOR (Landes et al.,
1998), a corpus of manually sense-labeled En-
glish text (words are annotated with part-of-
speech tags and senses from WordNet). By
using a disambiguated corpus, we are able to
match the lexical units from FrameNet to the
sense labels of SEMCOR, overcoming the am-
biguity of polysemous words.

We also implement an alternative measure
of frame type relatedness, based on distribu-
tional semantics (ftreldist inspired by another
of the measures in the same paper by Pennac-
chiotti and Wirth (2009)). We created vector
representations for each frame type by merg-
ing the representations of their lexical units in a
pre-trained word space model. For each frame
type, we compute the average of the vectors
in GloVe6B (Pennington et al., 2014), a large
word embedding model of English words, cor-
responding to each lexical unit in the frame.
The measure of distributional frame type relat-
edness between two frame types ft1 and ft2 is
then given by the cosine similarity between the
two respective frame vectors ~ft1 and ~ft2:

ftreldist(fi1, fi2) =
~ft1 · ~ft2

|| ~ft1|||| ~ft2||
(3)

3.3 Frame Elements Relatedness
The second half of equation 1 corresponds to
the relatedness measured between two sets of
frame elements, therefore an aggregation step
is needed. For each concept corresponding
to the frame elements fei ∈ fi1, we com-
pute all the similarity scores with respect to
the concepts corresponding to the frame ele-
ments fej ∈ fi2, and select the best match.
The aggregation by maximum is an approxi-
mation of the best match algorithm on bipartite
graphs, that is, the measure gives more weight
to the most similar pairs of frame elements

247



rather than averaging the similarities of all the
possible combinations. The resulting similari-
ties are averaged over all the frame elements.
Since this process is asymmetrical, we com-
pute it in both directions and take the average
of the results:

ferel(fi1, fi2) =

=
1

2

( 1
|fi1|

∑

fei∈fi1
max

fej∈fi2
csim(fei, fej) +

+
1

|fi2|
∑

fei∈fi2
max

fej∈fi1
csim(fei, fej)

)
(4)

The function csim(fei, fej) between con-
cepts is again computed as cosine simi-
larity between vector representations. In
this case we leverage the semantic resource
NASARI (Camacho-Collados et al., 2016), a
concept space model built on top of the Babel-
Net semantic network. Each vector in NASARI
represents a BabelNet synset in a dense 300-
dimensional space. The reason to use a differ-
ent vector space model than the one used for
ftreldist is that NASARI provides represen-
tations of disambiguated concepts, which we
have from KNEWS, while GloVe6B is a word-
based model and the lexical units are not dis-
ambiguated.

Note that in equation 4 the semantic roles of
the elements are ignored in the computation of
the relatedness between frame elements. We
therefore extend the definition of frame ele-
ment relatedness by adding the extra parame-
ter roles, acting as a filter: when activated, it
sets the relatedness score of a pair of frame ele-
ments to zero if they do not share the same role
in the frame instance.

4 Evaluation by Text Similarity

To our knowledge, there is no manually anno-
tated dataset of frame instances and their relat-
edness. In order to circumvent this shortcom-
ing, we propose an indirect methodology for
the evaluation of the frame instance relatedness
measures we introduced in Section 3. The key
idea of our evaluation approach is to measure
the relatedness of frame instances extracted
from pairs of short texts, for which a gold stan-
dard pairwise similarity score is given.

We parse the text with a knowledge extrac-
tion system to extract all the frame instances.
We then measure the semantic relatedness of
the extracted frame instances and compare the
outcome with a judgment of pairwise seman-
tic similarity given on the original sentences.
The aim of this experiment is to show that our
measure of frame instance relatedness corre-
lates with the semantic relatedness of the text
that evokes the frame. In other words, we use
textual similarity as a proxy for human judg-
ment of relatedness between frame instances.

4.1 Data

The dataset we selected to carry out this exper-
iment is provided by the shared task on Seman-
tic Text Similarity (STS) held at SemEval 2017
(task 1, track 5 English-English) (Cer et al.,
2017). The set is composed of 250 pairs of
short English sentences, manually annotated
with a numerical score from 1 to 5 indicating
their degree of semantic relatedness. Examples
of sentence pairs from the gold standard set,
along with their human judgments of semantic
similarity, are shown in Table 1.

Table 1: Examples of the sentence pairs in the Se-
mEval 2017 STS dataset, with numbers indicating
their semantic similarity on a scale from 1 to 5.

Sim. Sentence pair
4.0 There are dogs in the forest.

The dogs are alone in the forest.
3.4 The boy is raising his hand.

The man is raising his hand.
1.0 A woman supervisor is instructing

the male workers.
A woman is working as a nurse.

0.2 The woman is kneeling next to a cat.
A girl is standing next to a man.

4.2 Knowledge Extraction

To compute the relatedness score of pairs of
frame instances, we need to extract them from
the natural language text. For this purpose, we
use KNEWS (Knowledge Extraction With Se-
mantics), a fully automated pipeline of NLP
tools for machine reading (Basile et al., 2016).
The input of KNEWS is an arbitrary English
text, and its output is a set of RDF triples
encoding the frames extracted from the text

248



by Semafor (Das et al., 2014). KNEWS in-
tegrates the Word Sense Disambiguation tool
Babelfy (Moro et al., 2014) to extract con-
cept and entities from the input sentences, and
maps them to the frame roles provided by
Semafor, creating frame instances where the
frame types are from FrameNet 1.5 and the
frame roles are filled with concepts from Ba-
belNet. An example of the extraction of frame
instances from natural language performed by
KNEWS is shown in Figure 1. In the exam-
ple, three frame instances are extracted from
the sentence “two men sit on a bench”, with
frame types People, Cardinal_numbers
and Being_located. The frame elements
are completed with BabelNet synset identi-
fiers, e.g., the Theme of Being_located
is bn:00001533n (man, adult male, male:
An adult person who is male (as opposed to
a woman)1) and the Location of the same
frame instance is bn:00009850n (bench: A
long seat for more than one person2).

We ran KNEWS on the 500 sentences from
the STS dataset and extracted 1,650 frame in-
stances of 178 different frame types. Each
frame instance has on average 1.2 frame ele-
ments, for a total of 2,107 roles filled by 457
different types of concepts.

4.3 Frame-based Sentence Similarity
Our aim in this experiment is to assess the re-
latedness of sentences by measuring the relat-
edness of their corresponding frame instances.
Since we have defined (in Section 3) a method
to compute the relatedness of frame instances,
an extra step of aggregation is needed in order
to reconcile the measurement for the evalua-
tion. We define the similarity ssim(s1, s2) be-
tween two sentences s1 = {fi11, ..., fi1n} and
s2 = {fi21, ..., fi2m} as follows:

ssim(s1, s2) =

=
1

2

( 1
|s1|

∑

fi1i∈s1

max
fi2j∈s2

firel(fi1i , fi
2
j ) +

+
1

|s2|
∑

fi2i∈s2

max
fi1j∈s1

firel(fi1i , fi
2
j )
)

(5)

1http://babelnet.org/synset?word=
bn:00001533n

2http://babelnet.org/synset?word=
bn:00009850n

Table 2: Pearson correlation between sentence pair
similarity scores predicted by frame instance relat-
edness and the SemEval STS reference set.

without role filter with role filter
ftrel: occ dist occ dist
alpha

1.0 0.526 0.455 0.526 0.455
0.9 0.529 0.465 0.536 0.477
0.8 0.529 0.471 0.544 0.495
0.7 0.525 0.473 0.550 0.510
0.6 0.517 0.471 0.555 0.522
0.5 0.503 0.463 0.558 0.531
0.4 0.484 0.451 0.558 0.538
0.3 0.461 0.436 0.557 0.542
0.2 0.436 0.418 0.554 0.544
0.1 0.410 0.400 0.550 0.545
0.0 0.381 0.381 0.543 0.543

We tested the effect of the α parameter, the
frame type relatedness measures ftrelocc and
ftreldist, and the filter on semantic roles to in-
vestigate their impact on the quality of the re-
latedness measurement. The result is given in
Table 2 in terms of Pearson correlation between
the gold standard relatedness scores and the re-
latedness scores predicted by our method.

Overall, the occ measure of frame type re-
latedness produces better results than dist. We
find that both halves of equation 1 contribute
to the final result, with a sweet stop around
α = 0.4 that achieves the best performance
on this benchmark with ftrel = occ and the
filter on the semantic roles. Indeed, enforcing
the matching constraint on the semantic roles
proves to be a successful strategy. The differ-
ence in terms of adherence to the text similarity
scores with and without such constraint is sig-
nificant and consistent across every variation of
the other parameters.

4.4 Discussion

It must be stressed that the aim of the experi-
ment presented in this section is not to achieve
state of the art performance on the STS task,
for which better algorithms based on word sim-
ilarity and other techniques have been pro-
posed. In fact, many tasks that rely on sen-
tence level semantics can be solved without
the need of extracting frame instances. Rather,
we show that our method to compute a relat-
edness score between frame instances works

249



@prefix fbfi: <http://framebase.org/ns/fi->
@prefix fbframe: <http://framebase.org/ns/frame->
@prefix fbfe: <http://framebase.org/ns/fe->
@prefix rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns\#>
@prefix bn: <http://babelnet.org/rdf/>

fbfi:People_01b52400 rdfs:type fbframe:People.
fbfi:People_01b52400 fbfe:Person bn:00001533n.
fbfi:Cardinal_numbers_3faa6c9c rdfs:type fbframe:Cardinal_numbers.
fbfi:Cardinal_numbers_3faa6c9c fbfe:Entity bn:00001533n.
fbfi:Being_located_079aed4d rdfs:type fbframe:Being_located.
fbfi:Being_located_079aed4d fbfe:Theme bn:00001533n.
fbfi:Being_located_079aed4d fbfe:Location bn:00009850n.

Figure 1: Frame instances extracted by KNEWS from the sentence “two men sit on a bench”.

in practice, despite the inevitable shortcom-
ings of the frame extraction process, i.e., wrong
and/or missing classifications of frames, roles
and concepts. The STS dataset has a strong
bias towards people-centric frames. In fact,
the most frequent frame type in our collec-
tion is People (345 occurrences in 1,650 frame
instances), and the most frequent concept is
bn:00001533n (man, adult male, male, 226
occurrences in 2,107 frame elements).

5 Evaluation on Gold Standard
Frame Instances

The evaluation conducted in the first experi-
ment has the advantage of being fully auto-
mated. However, measuring frame instance re-
latedness indirectly through text similarity en-
tails that two distinct effects are measured at
once: 1) the relatedness of the frame instances
extracted from the text, and 2) the accuracy of
the frame instance extraction process. In this
section we propose a revised methodology for
the evaluation of the frame instance relatedness
measure that focuses only on measuring the ef-
fect (1), canceling the interference of (2). In
short, we manually correct the frame instances
extracted with KNEWS from the STS sentence
pairs and re-run the evaluation process as de-
scribed in Section 4. As by-products, we cre-
ate a gold standard dataset of frame instances
aligned with the text that evokes them3, and we
provide an evaluation of the performance of the
KNEWS knowledge extraction system.

3We will release the dataset after the review period.

5.1 Manual correction

We corrected each frame instance individually.
For the frame types, they were either confirmed
or marked as wrong. In the latter case, the
frame instance is discarded from the data set
without further process. This was also the pro-
cedure applied when an entity was not filling
any role for a particular frame instance, due
to a parsing mistake. If the frame type was
confirmed by the annotator, then the role and
sense labels were checked and possibly cor-
rected by replacing them with the correct ones
from FrameNet and BabelNet respectively.

We split the STS dataset (250 sentence pairs)
in three parts and assigned each of them to an
annotator. A subset of 37 frame instances ex-
tracted from 10 sentences was annotated by all
three annotators in order to compute a measure
of inter-coder reliability, resulting in a Fleiss’
Kappa of 0.81 on the annotation of frame types,
0.76 for roles, and 0.90 for concepts. Note
that the annotation of roles and concepts is only
considered when frame types are not discarded
by the annotators as wrong.

Once the annotation was finished, we com-
pared the obtained dataset with the one we
produced with KNEWS (Section 4.2). The
accuracy at the frame instance level (rate of
frame instances that were not corrected at all)
is 77.1%. More in detail, 79.5% of the frame
types were found correct. Among the frame in-
stances with correct frame types, 95.9% of the
roles and 82.5% of the concepts were correct.
During the manual inspection, we confirmed
that Semafor (like most semantic parsers) is

250



biased towards the most dominant frame for
ambiguous forms. The final gold standard
set comprises 1,261 frame instances and 1,579
frame elements.

5.2 Text Similarity Experiment with Gold
Standard Frame Instances

We repeated the experiment in 4.3, this time
computing the pair-wise frame relatedness on
the manually corrected frame instances. To
provide a fair comparison, we removed the
frame instances from the original set corre-
sponding to the frame instances removed dur-
ing the manual correction. We used the filter
on semantic roles described in 4.3 and ftrelocc
(the performance patterns we observed were
the same as in the original experiment). The
results of the experiment are shown in Fig-
ure 2. The overall performance is slightly
lower than the previous experiment. This can
be explained by observing that in this version
of the experiment we are using less data, al-
though of higher quality. Due to the struc-
ture of the correlation-based evaluation, incor-
rect frame instances extracted from a pair of
sentences contribute to their relatedness score
more than missing some frame instances. Also,
the dominance bias could play a role, in that
we mostly discarded low-frequency frames, for
which the relatedness metric we defined could
perform less than optimally. An in-depth anal-
ysis of this phenomenon (i.e., how does lexical
ambiguity interplay with the variance in relat-
edness scores?) is left for future work.

6 Clustering Frame Instances to
Extract Prototypical Knowledge

In the previous sections, we proved that our
method for computing a relatedness score be-
tween two frame instances correlates well with
human judgments of semantic similarity based
on the natural language expression of such in-
stances. What we presented is a kind of intrin-
sic evaluation, which, while helpful in assess-
ing the quality of the solution, does not pro-
vide an insight into the motivation to imple-
ment a measure of frame instance relatedness,
and what open problems could benefit from
our approach down the line. To fill this gap,
we propose a pilot study on the application of
the method introduced in this paper to a down-

● ●●
●●

● ●
●

●

●

●

0.400

0.425

0.450

0.475

0.500

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
alpha

Pe
ar

so
n

set

● corrected
original

Figure 2: Pearson correlation between sentence pair
similarity scores predicted by frame instance relat-
edness on corrected frame instances and the Se-
mEval STS reference set.

stream task, namely the extraction of common
sense knowledge from text, in line with the pro-
totypical knowledge building method in (Shah
et al.).

We start by observing that defining a quan-
titative distance metric between homogeneous
instances allows us to apply a clustering algo-
rithm. The result of such clustering is a par-
tition of the original set into subsets that can
be either overlapping (soft clustering) or non-
overlapping (hard clustering). Moreover, clus-
ters have a definite shape, with one of the el-
ements being the most central one (called the
clustroid), and the others being more or less
far from the center. We perform a hard clus-
tering of the frame instances collected from
the STS dataset and used for the experiment
in Section 4.3, and formulate three hypotheses:
i) elements close to the center of their respec-
tive clusters are the best candidates to repre-
sent prototypical frame instances; ii) elements
near the border of their respective clusters are
less likely to represent prototypical frame in-
stances, and therefore can be filtered out; iii)
the size of each cluster influences the prototyp-
icality degree of the elements in its central re-
gion, with larger clusters containing more pro-
totypical frame instances near its center.

To cluster the frame instances, we follow

251



Table 3: Random sample of frame instances extracted from the STS dataset.
Cluster size 5

Frame type Noise_makers (the Noise_maker is an artifact used to produce sound, especially formusical effect)
Role Noise_maker (this FE identifies the entity or substance that is designed to produce sound)
Concept Guitar (a stringed instrument usually having six strings; played by strumming or plucking)
Cluster size 40
Frame type Substance (this frame concerns internally undifferentiated Substances)
Role Substance (the undifferentiated entity which is presented as having a permanent existence)
Concept Sand (a loose material consisting of grains of rock or coral)
Cluster size 3

Frame type
Part_inner_outer (This frame concerns Parts of objects that are defined relative to the center
or edge of the object

Role Part
Concept Center (an area that is approximately central within some larger region)
Role Whole (an undivided entity having all its Parts)
Concept Pond (a small lake)

Table 4: Clustroids of randomly selected clusters from the STS dataset.
Cluster size 8

Frame type Vehicle (the frame concerns the vehicles that human beings use for the purpose of transportation)

Role Vehicle (is the transportation device that the human beings use to travel)
Concept Boat (a small vessel for travel on water)
Cluster size 5

Frame type Biological_area (this frame contains words that denote large ecological areas as well assmaller locations characterized by the type of life present)
Role Locale (this FE identifies a stable bounded area)
Concept Forest (the trees and other plants in a large densely wooded area)
Cluster size 35

Frame type Roadways (This frame involves stable Roadways which connect two stable Endpoints,the Source and the Goal)
Role Roadway (the Roadway is the roadway that connects locations)
Concept Road (a way or means to achieve something)

Table 5: Clustroids of the three largest clusters in the dataset.
Cluster size 418
Frame type People (this frame contains general words for Individuals, i.e. humans)
Role Person (the Person is the human being)
Concept Man (an adult person who is male -as opposed to a woman-)
Cluster size 51

Frame type Clothing (this frame refers to clothing and its characteristics, including anything that peopleconventionally wear)
Role Garment (this FE identifes the clothing worn)
Concept Shirt (a garment worn on the upper half of the body)
Cluster size 50
Frame type Kinship (this frame contains words that denote kinship relations)
Role Alter (the person who fills the role named by the Kinship term with respect to the Ego)
Concept Child (a young person of either sex)

the hierarchical clustering approach, because
the number of clusters is not necessary to be
known a priori. In particular, we used the ver-
sion implemented in the SciPy library4. We
tested different linkage methods for hierar-

4https://www.scipy.org/

chical clustering (single, complete, average,
weighted, centroid, median and ward), observ-
ing comparable results in terms of number of
clusters and their size distribution. We perform
the clustering with average linkage and the best
performing parameters of the frame relatedness

252



measure (the distance metric for the clustering)
according to the experiments in Section 4.

While giving an objective assessment about
the prototypicality of a frame instance is some-
what hard, we observe different behavior in
line with our hypothesis. The examples re-
ported in Table 3 include quite arbitrary, albeit
correct, frame instances. On the other hand, the
examples in Table 5 are indeed highly proto-
typical, e.g., a shirt is a prototypical piece of
clothing, while the examples in Table 4 can be
placed somewhere in the middle of the proto-
typicality scale.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented a novel method to compute
a quantitative relatedness measure between
frame instances, that takes into account the
type of the frames, the semantic role of the
frame elements, and the entities involved in the
frame instances. Based on a test conducted on
a gold standard set of sentence pairs, the mea-
sure we defined correlates positively with hu-
man judgments of semantic similarity. We fur-
ther apply the relatedness measure to the task
of extracting prototypical knowledge from nat-
ural language.

One clear bottleneck of our experimental
setup is given by the automatic parsing, that
does not always reach optimal performances.
We believe that a stable measure of relatedness
between frame instances will in fact boost the
performance of a disambiguation system, act-
ing as a coherence measure for an all-word dis-
ambiguation approach. We intend to test such
strategy in future work.

The experiment on frame instance cluster-
ing for prototypical knowledge extraction pre-
sented in Section 6 showed promising results.
In future work, we plan to conduct a large-scale
experiment following the same principles in-
cluding an extensive systematic evaluation of
the quality of the resulting dataset.

References

Mehwish Alam, Diego Reforgiato Recupero, Mis-
ael Mongiovì, Aldo Gangemi, and Petar Ris-
toski. 2017. Event-based Knowledge Reconcili-
ation using Frame Embeddings and Frame Simi-
larity. Knowledge-Based Systems, 135:192–203.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B.
Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and
17th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics - Volume 1, ACL ’98, pages 86–90,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Valerio Basile, Elena Cabrio, and Claudia Schon.
2016. KNEWS: Using Logical and Lexical Se-
mantics to Extract Knowledge from Natural Lan-
guage. In Proceedings of the European Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI) 2016.

José Camacho-Collados, Mohammad Taher Pile-
hvar, and Roberto Navigli. 2016. Nasari: Inte-
grating explicit knowledge and corpus statistics
for a multilingual representation of concepts and
entities. Artificial Intelligence, 240:36–64.

Daniel Cer, Mona Diab, Eneko Agirre, Inigo
Lopez-Gazpio, and Lucia Specia. 2017.
Semeval-2017 task 1: Semantic textual sim-
ilarity multilingual and crosslingual focused
evaluation. In Proceedings of the 11th Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval-2017), Vancouver, Canada.

Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, André F. T. Martins,
Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2014.
Frame-semantic parsing. Computational Lin-
guistics, 40:1:9–56.

Katrin Erk and Sebastian Padó. 2006. SHAL-
MANESER - A Toolchain For Shallow Semantic
Parsing. In Proceedings of LREC 2006.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and
the nature of language. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences: Conference on the Ori-
gin and Development of Language and Speech,
280(1):20–32.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Auto-
matic labeling of semantic roles. Comput. Lin-
guist., 28(3):245–288.

H. Kim, X. Ren, Y. Sun, C. Wang, and J. Han. 2013.
Semantic Frame-Based Document Representa-
tion for Comparable Corpora. In Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference on Data Min-
ing, pages 350–359.

Shari Landes, Claudia Leacock, and Randee I
Tengi. 1998. Building semantic concordances.
WordNet: An electronic lexical database,
199(216):199–216.

C. Leacock and M. Chodorow. 1998. Combining
local context and wordnet similarity for word
sense identification. In MIT Press, pages 265–
283, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

253



Andrea Moro, Alessandro Raganato, and Roberto
Navigli. 2014. Entity Linking meets Word Sense
Disambiguation: a Unified Approach. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (TACL), 2:231–244.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2012.
BabelNet: The automatic construction, evalua-
tion and application of a wide-coverage multi-
lingual semantic network. Artificial Intelligence,
193:217–250.

Marco Pennacchiotti and Michael Wirth. 2009.
Measuring Frame Relatedness. In Proceedings
of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, EACL ’09, pages 657–665, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vec-
tors for word representation. In Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 1532–1543.

Valentina Presutti, Francesco Draicchio, and Aldo
Gangemi. 2012. Knowledge extraction based
on discourse representation theory and linguistic
frames. In Knowledge Engineering and Knowl-
edge Management, pages 114–129, Berlin, Hei-
delberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Diego Reforgiato Recupero, Valentina Presutti, Ser-
gio Consoli, Aldo Gangemi, and Andrea Gio-
vanni Nuzzolese. 2015. Sentilo: Frame-based
sentiment analysis. Cognitive Computation,
7(2):211–225.

Jan Scheffczyk, Adam Pease, and Michael
Ellsworth. 2006. Linking framenet to the sug-
gested upper merged ontology. In Proceed-
ings of the 2006 Conference on Formal Ontol-
ogy in Information Systems: Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference (FOIS 2006),
pages 289–300, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
The Netherlands. IOS Press.

Avijit Shah, Valerio Basile, Elena Cabrio, and
Sowmya Kamath S. Frame instance extraction
and clustering for default knowledge building.
pages 1–10.

Cynthia A Thompson, Roger Levy, and Christo-
pher D Manning. 2003. A generative model for
semantic role labeling. In European Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 397–408. Springer.

Shafqat Mumtaz Virk, Philippe Muller, and Juli-
ette Conrath. 2016. A Supervised Approach for
Enriching the Relational Structure of Frame Se-
mantics in FrameNet. In Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics: Technical Papers, pages 3542–3552,
Osaka, Japan. The COLING 2016 Organizing
Committee.

Zhibiao Wu and Martha Palmer. 1994. Verbs
semantics and lexical selection. In Proceed-
ings of the 32Nd Annual Meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’94,
pages 133–138, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-

ation for Computational Linguistics.

254


