



















































UTFPR at SemEval-2019 Task 5: Hate Speech Identification with Recurrent Neural Networks


Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2019), pages 519–523
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 6–7, 2019. ©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

519

UTFPR at SemEval-2019 Task 5:
Hate Speech Identification with Recurrent Neural Networks

Gustavo Henrique Paetzold1, Shervin Malmasi2, Marcos Zampieri3
1Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, Toledo-PR, Brazil

2Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States
3University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, United Kingdom

ghpaetzold@utfpr.edu.br

Abstract

In this paper we revisit the problem of au-
tomatically identifying hate speech in posts
from social media. We approach the task us-
ing a system based on minimalistic compo-
sitional Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN).
We tested our approach on the SemEval-2019
Task 5: Multilingual Detection of Hate Speech
Against Immigrants and Women in Twitter
(HatEval) shared task dataset. The dataset
made available by the HatEval organizers con-
tained English and Spanish posts retrieved
from Twitter annotated with respect to the
presence of hateful content and its target. In
this paper we present the results obtained by
our system in comparison to the other entries
in the shared task. Our system achieved com-
petitive performance ranking 7th in sub-task A
out of 62 systems in the English track.

1 Introduction

Abusive and offensive content such as aggression,
cyberbulling, and hate speech have become per-
vasive in social media. The widespread of offen-
sive content in social media is a reason of concern
for governments worldwide and technology com-
panies, which have been heavily investing in ways
to cope with such content using human modera-
tion of posts, triage of content, deletion of offen-
sive posts, and banning abusive users.

One of the most common and effective strate-
gies to tackle the problem of offensive language
online is to train systems capable of recognizing
such content. Several studies have been published
in the last few years on identifying abusive lan-
guage (Nobata et al., 2016), cyber aggression (Ku-
mar et al., 2018), cyber bullying (Dadvar et al.,
2013), and hate speech (Burnap and Williams,
2015; Davidson et al., 2017). As evidenced in two
recent surveys (Schmidt and Wiegand, 2017; For-
tuna and Nunes, 2018) and in a number of other

studies (Malmasi and Zampieri, 2017; Gambäck
and Sikdar, 2017; ElSherief et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2018), the identification of hate speech is the
most popular of what Waseem et al. (2017) refers
to as “abusive language detection sub-tasks”.

This paper deals with the hate speech identi-
fication in English and Spanish posts from so-
cial media. We present our submissions to the
SemEval-2019 Task 5: Multilingual Detection of
Hate Speech Against Immigrants and Women in
Twitter (HatEval) shared task. We participated in
sub-task A which is a binary classification task in
which systems are trained to discriminate between
posts containing hate speech and posts which do
not contain any form of hate speech. Our ap-
proach, presented in detail in Section 4, com-
bines compositional Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) and transfer learning and achieved compet-
itive performance in the shared task.

2 Related Work

As evidenced in the introduction of this paper,
there have been a number of studies on automatic
hate speech identification published in the last few
years. One of the most influential recent papers
on hate speech identification is the one by David-
son et al. (2017). In this paper, the authors pre-
sented the Hate Speech Detection dataset which
contains posts retrieved from social media labeled
with three categories: OK (posts not containing
profanity or hate speech), Offensive (posts con-
taining swear words and general profanity), and
Hate (posts containing hate speech). It has been
noted in Davidson et al. (2017), and in other works
(Malmasi and Zampieri, 2018), that training mod-
els to discriminate between general profanity and
hate speech is far from trivial due to, for exam-
ple, the fact that a significant percentage of hate
speech posts contain swear words. It has been ar-



520

gued that annotating texts with respect to the pres-
ence of hate speech has an intrinsic degree of sub-
jectivity (Malmasi and Zampieri, 2018).

Along with the recent studies published, there
have been a few related shared tasks organized
on the topic. These include GermEval (Wiegand
et al., 2018) for German, TRAC (Kumar et al.,
2018) for English and Hindi, and OffensEval1

(Zampieri et al., 2019b) for English. The latter is
also organized within the scope of SemEval-2019.
OffensEval considers offensive language in gen-
eral whereas HatEval focuses on hate speech.

Waseem et al. (2017) proposes a typology of
abusive language detection sub-tasks taking two
factors into account: the target of the message and
whether the content is explicit or implicit. Con-
sidering that hate speech is commonly understood
as speech attacking a group based on ethnicity, re-
ligion, etc, and that cyber bulling, for example, is
understood as an attack towards an individual, the
target factor plays an important role in the iden-
tification and the definition of hate speech when
compared to other forms of abusive content.

The two SemEval-2019 shared tasks, HatEval
and OffensEval, both include a sub-task on tar-
get identification as discussed in Waseem et al.
(2017). HatEval includes the target annotation
in its sub-task B with two classes (individual or
group) whereas OffensEval includes it in its sub-
task C with three classes (individual, group or oth-
ers). Another important similarity between these
two tasks is that both include a more basic bi-
nary classification task in sub-task A. In HatEval,
posts are labeled as as to whether they contain hate
speech or not and in OffensEval, posts are labeled
as being offensive or not. As OffensEval consid-
ers multiple types of offensive contents, the hier-
archical annotation model used to annotate OLID
(Zampieri et al., 2019a), the dataset used in Offen-
sEval, includes an annotation level distinguishing
between the type of offensive content that posts
include with two classes: insults and threats, and
general profanity. This type annotation is used in
OffensEval’s sub-task B.

3 Task Description

HatEval (Basile et al., 2019) provides participants
with annotated datasets to create systems capable
of properly identifying hate speech in tweets writ-

1https://competitions.codalab.org/
competitions/20011

ten in both English and Spanish.
The training, development, trial, and test sets

provided for English are composed of 9,000,
1,000, 100 and 3,000 instances, respectively. The
training, development, trial and test sets provided
for Spanish are composed of 4,500, 500, 100 and
1,600 instances, respectively. Each instance is
composed of a tweet and three binary labels: One
that indicates whether or not hate speech is fea-
tured in the tweet, one indicating whether the hate
speech targets a group or an individual, and an-
other indicating whether or not the author of the
tweet is aggressive. HatEval has 2 sub-tasks:

• Sub-task A: Judging whether or not a tweet
is hateful.

• Sub-task B: Correctly predicting all three of
the aforementioned labels.

In this paper, we focus on Task A exclusively, for
both English and Spanish. We participated in the
competition using the team name UTFPR.

4 The UTFPR Models

The UTFPR models are minimalistic Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) that learn compositional
numerical representations of words based on the
sequence of characters that compose them, then
use them to learn a final representation for the sen-
tence being analyzed. These models, of which the
architecture is illustrated in Figure 1, are some-
what similar to those of Ling et al. (2015) and
Paetzold (2018), who use RNNs to create compo-
sitional neural models for different tasks.

As illustrated, the UTFPR models take as input
a sentence, split it into words, then split the words
into a sequence of characters in order to pass them
through a character embedding layer. The charac-
ter embeddings are passed onto a set of bidirec-
tional RNN layers that produces word representa-
tions, then a second set of layers produces a final
representation of the sentence. Finally, this repre-
sentation is passed through a softmax dense layer
that produces a final classification label.

For each language, we created two variants of
UTFPR: one trained exclusively over the training
data provided by the organizers (UTFPR/O), and
another that uses a pre-trained set of character-to-
word RNN layers extracted from the models intro-
duced by Paetzold (2018) (UTFPR/W). The pre-
trained model was trained for the English multi-
class classification Emotion Analysis shared task

https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/20011
https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/20011


521

Figure 1: Architecture of the UTFPR models.

of WASSA 2018, which featured a training set
of 153, 383 instances composed of a tweet and
an emotion label. This pre-trained model for En-
glish was used for the UTFPR/W variant of both
languages, since we wanted to test the hypothe-
sis that pre-training a character-to-word RNN on a
large dataset for English can improve the perfor-
mance of compositional models for both English
and Spanish.

We use 25 dimensions for the size of our char-
acter embeddings, and two layers of Gated Re-
current Units for our bidirectional RNNs with 60
hidden nodes each and 50% dropout. We saved
a model after each training iteration and picked
the one with the lowest error on the develop-
ment set. The UTFPR/W model went through the
same training process as UTFPR/O, with the pre-
trained character-to-word RNN layers being fine-
tuned for the task at hand.

Table 1 showcases the F-scores obtained by the
UTFPR systems on the trial set of Task A. Because
of its superior performance, we chose to submit
the UTFPR/W variants as our official entry.

F-scores
System English Spanish

UTFPR/O 0.509 0.601
UTFPR/W 0.570 0.665

Table 1: F-scores obtained for the trial set at HatEval
Task A for both languages.

5 Results and Discussion

5.1 Shared Task Performance

Tables 2 and 3 feature the F-scores obtained by the
UTFPR systems and the 3 best and worst perform-
ing systems at HatEval Task A for English and
Spanish, respectively. Ultimately, the UTFPR/W
systems submitted ranked 7th out of 62 valid sub-

missions for English, and 31st out of 35 valid sub-
missions for Spanish.

System F-scores
FERMI 0.650

Panaetius 0.570
YNU DYX 0.550
UTFPR/O 0.524
UTFPR/W 0.513
MELODI 0.350

INGEOTEC 0.350
INAOE-CIMAT 0.340

Table 2: F-scores obtained at HatEval Task A for the
English language. At the top and bottom of the table
are featured the top and bottom 3 systems submitted to
the shared task, respectively.

System F-scores
mineriaUNAM 0.730

Atalaya 0.730
MITRE 0.730

UTFPR/O 0.664
UTFPR/W 0.636
jhouston .630
LU team 0.620
TuEval 0.620

Table 3: F-scores obtained at HatEval Task A for the
Spanish language. At the top and bottom of the table
are featured the top and bottom 3 systems submitted to
the shared task, respectively.

One of the aspects we wanted to test with our
participation in this shared task was the extent to
which pre-training a character-to-word RNN over
a larger dataset for an analogous task helped the
models. Our results show that, even though using
a pre-trained RNN considerably improved the per-
formance of our models in the trial experiments,
it actually compromised their performance for the



522

Figure 2: F-scores of our robustness experiments for English. The horizontal axis represents the proportion of
noisy words in the input sentence, and the vertical axis the F-scores.

Figure 3: F-scores of our robustness experiments for Spanish. The horizontal axis represents the proportion of
noisy words in the input sentence, and the vertical axis the F-scores.

test set a little. We believe that this was caused
because the development set was more represen-
tative of the trial than the test set. Overall, sub-
mitting UTFPR/W instead of UTFPR/O cost us 2
ranks for English and 3 for Spanish.

5.2 Robustness Assessment
In order to test the robustness of the UTFPR sys-
tems, we had to generate different noisy versions
of the test set with increasing volumes of noise ar-
tificially added to them.

To do so, we introduced a modification to N%
of randomly selected words in each sentence in
the datasets. The modifications could be either
the deletion of a randomly selected character (50%
chance) or its duplication (50% chance). We used
0 ≤ N ≤ 100 in intervals of 10, resulting in a
total of 11 increasingly noisy versions. The next
step was to create “frozen” versions of the UTFPR
models that act as if any word out of the training
set’s vocabulary is unknown. If a word of the test
set is not present in the vocabulary of the training
set, it produces a numerical vector full of 1’s that
represents an out-of-vocabulary word.

Figures 2 and 3 show the results obtained for
English and Spanish, respectively. As it can be

noticed, our compositional models are much more
robust than the frozen alternatives, suffering very
faint losses in F-score even when 100% of the
words in the input sentence are noisy.

6 Conclusions

In this contribution, we presented the UTFPR sys-
tems submitted to the HatEval 2019 shared task.
The systems are based on compositional RNN
models trained exclusively over the training data
provided by the organizers. We introduced two
variants of our models: one trained entirely on
the shared task’s data (UTFPR/O), and another
with a set of pre-trained character-to-word RNN
layers fine-tuned to the task at hand (UTFPR/W).
Our results show that, despite its simplicity, the
UTFPR/O model attained competitive results for
English, placing it 7th out of 62 submissions. Fur-
thermore, the results of this shared task indicate
that our models are very robust, being able to han-
dle even substantially noisy inputs. In the future,
we intend to test more reliable ways of re-using
pre-trained compositional models.



523

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the organizers of the HatE-
val shared task for providing participants with this
dataset and for organizing this interesting shared
task. We gratefully acknowledge the support of
NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the Ti-
tan V GPU used for this research.

References
Valerio Basile, Cristina Bosco, Elisabetta Fersini, Deb-

ora Nozza, Viviana Patti, Francisco Rangel, Paolo
Rosso, and Manuela Sanguinetti. 2019. Semeval-
2019 task 5: Multilingual detection of hate speech
against immigrants and women in twitter. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation (SemEval-2019). Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Pete Burnap and Matthew L Williams. 2015. Cyber
hate speech on twitter: An application of machine
classification and statistical modeling for policy and
decision making. Policy & Internet, 7(2):223–242.

Maral Dadvar, Dolf Trieschnigg, Roeland Ordelman,
and Franciska de Jong. 2013. Improving cyberbul-
lying detection with user context. In Advances in
Information Retrieval, pages 693–696. Springer.

Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley, Michael Macy,
and Ingmar Weber. 2017. Automated Hate Speech
Detection and the Problem of Offensive Language.
In Proceedings of ICWSM.

Mai ElSherief, Vivek Kulkarni, Dana Nguyen,
William Yang Wang, and Elizabeth Belding. 2018.
Hate Lingo: A Target-based Linguistic Analysis
of Hate Speech in Social Media. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.04257.

Paula Fortuna and Sérgio Nunes. 2018. A Survey on
Automatic Detection of Hate Speech in Text. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(4):85.

Björn Gambäck and Utpal Kumar Sikdar. 2017. Using
Convolutional Neural Networks to Classify Hate-
speech. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Abusive Language Online, pages 85–90.

Ritesh Kumar, Atul Kr. Ojha, Shervin Malmasi, and
Marcos Zampieri. 2018. Benchmarking Aggression
Identification in Social Media. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Trolling, Aggression and Cyber-
bulling (TRAC), Santa Fe, USA.

Wang Ling, Chris Dyer, Alan W Black, Isabel Tran-
coso, Ramon Fermandez, Silvio Amir, Luis Marujo,
and Tiago Luis. 2015. Finding function in form:
Compositional character models for open vocabu-
lary word representation. In Proceedings of the 2015
EMNLP, pages 1520–1530. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Shervin Malmasi and Marcos Zampieri. 2017. Detect-
ing Hate Speech in Social Media. In Proceedings
of the International Conference Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing (RANLP), pages 467–
472.

Shervin Malmasi and Marcos Zampieri. 2018. Chal-
lenges in Discriminating Profanity from Hate
Speech. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Ar-
tificial Intelligence, 30:1–16.

Chikashi Nobata, Joel Tetreault, Achint Thomas,
Yashar Mehdad, and Yi Chang. 2016. Abusive
Language Detection in Online User Content. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference
on World Wide Web, pages 145–153. International
World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Gustavo Paetzold. 2018. Utfpr at iest 2018: Exploring
character-to-word composition for emotion analysis.
In Proceedings of the 9th EMNLP, pages 176–181.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Anna Schmidt and Michael Wiegand. 2017. A Sur-
vey on Hate Speech Detection Using Natural Lan-
guage Processing. In Proceedings of the Fifth Inter-
national Workshop on Natural Language Process-
ing for Social Media. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 1–10, Valencia, Spain.

Zeerak Waseem, Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley,
and Ingmar Weber. 2017. Understanding Abuse: A
Typology of Abusive Language Detection Subtasks.
In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Abusive
Langauge Online.

Michael Wiegand, Melanie Siegel, and Josef Rup-
penhofer. 2018. Overview of the GermEval 2018
Shared Task on the Identification of Offensive Lan-
guage. In Proceedings of GermEval.

Marcos Zampieri, Shervin Malmasi, Preslav Nakov,
Sara Rosenthal, Noura Farra, and Ritesh Kumar.
2019a. Predicting the Type and Target of Offensive
Posts in Social Media. In Proceedings of NAACL.

Marcos Zampieri, Shervin Malmasi, Preslav Nakov,
Sara Rosenthal, Noura Farra, and Ritesh Kumar.
2019b. SemEval-2019 Task 6: Identifying and Cat-
egorizing Offensive Language in Social Media (Of-
fensEval). In Proceedings of The 13th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval).

Ziqi Zhang, David Robinson, and Jonathan Tepper.
2018. Detecting Hate Speech on Twitter Using a
Convolution-GRU Based Deep Neural Network. In
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Ver-
lag.


