










































An Approach for Anonymous Spelling for Voter Write-Ins Using Speech Interaction


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 44–52,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Approach for Anonymous Spelling for Voter Write-Ins  
Using Speech Interaction 

 
 

Shaneé Dawkins Juan E. Gilbert 
Auburn University Clemson University 

3101 Shelby Center for Technology 100 McAdams Hall 
Auburn University, AL 36849, USA Clemson, SC 29634, USA 

stw0004@auburn.edu juan@clemson.edu 
 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

Today, the technology used for voting does 
not fully address the issues that disabled vot-
ers are confronted with during elections.  Vot-
ers, including those with most disabilities, 
should be able to vote and verify his or her 
ballot during elections without the assistance 
of others.  In order for this to happen, a uni-
versal design should be incorporated into the 
development of all voting systems.  The re-
search presented here embraces the needs of 
those who are disabled.  The primary objec-
tive of this research was to develop a system 
in which a person, can efficiently, anony-
mously, and independently write-in a candi-
date’s name during an election.  The method 
presented here uses speech interaction and 
name prediction to allow voters to privately 
spell the name of the candidate they intend to 
write-in.  A study was performed to determine 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the system.  
The results of the study showed that spelling a 
name using the predictive method developed 
is an effective and efficient solution to the 
aforementioned issues. 

1 Introduction* 

                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The 2000 United States Presidential Election will 
always be remembered for its voting irregularities.  
The issues with the ballot design during that elec-
tion led to skepticism of other voting systems and 
technologies.  Not only were there questions re-
garding the difficulty interpreting the voter's inten-
tion, the focus also shifted to the issues 
surrounding disabled voters.  The key issue was 
that disabled voters needed a way to vote inde-
pendently and anonymously, while still maintain-
ing system security and efficiency. All voters, 
including those with most disabilities, should be 
able to vote and verify his or her ballot during elec-
tions privately, without assistance.  Today, a prop-
erly designed interface is one of the key aspects to 
running a successful election. 

As technology for electronic voting systems 
continues to develop, there is an increased need for 
universal design in these systems (VVSG Chapter 
3, 2007).  A universal design ensures that systems 
are as usable as possible by as many people as pos-
sible regardless of age, ability or situation (Center 
for Universal Design, 2004).  By focusing on the 
voter and their needs, the design of electronic vot-
ing systems will far surpass the ballot designs of 
the 2000 election.   

With the security of voting systems constantly 
being a major concern, it is often difficult to im-
plement voting technology that incorporates a se-
cure universal design.  Some developers today 

                                                                                                
 
 
 
 

44



address this issue through the design of their elec-
tronic voting systems (Prime III, 2009); however, 
these electronic voting systems have yet to inte-
grate universal design into the writing-in of a can-
didate’s name. 

The objective of this research is to develop a 
system in which a person, including those with 
most disabilities, can efficiently, anonymously, and 
effectively spell a candidate’s name through 
speech interaction. The method presented in this 
paper is a predictive approach to spelling through 
speech interaction.  This allows voters to quickly 
and anonymously spell a candidate’s name for any 
position or office during the voting process.  The 
study performed intends to capture and analyze the 
effectiveness of writing in a candidate’s name 
anonymously through speech.   The results of this 
study could lead to the adaptation of this system in 
search functions for various other applications. 

2 Background  

2.1 Election Write-Ins 

The method of writing in a candidate’s name for a 
particular United States governing office dates 
back to the early 19th century (Official Election 
Site, 2007).  Prior to the 1800s, voters would sim-
ply call out their choices to a judge and election 
clerks tallying the votes (Jones, 2003).  After the 
12th amendment was passed in 1804, paper ballots 
became the standard method for voting.  Voters 
would bring their own slips of paper as the ballot, 
on which they wrote candidate’s names (History of 
the Paper Ballot, 2009).  Today, a write-in candi-
date is a candidate whose name does not appear on 
the ballot.  Voters can vote for a write-in candidate 
by marking the write-in indicator, and writing the 
candidate’s name in space provided on the ballot 
(Write-in Candidate Requirements, 2010).  

2.2 Prime III Electronic Voting System 

Prime III is a research prototype electronic voting 
system.  It is a secure, multimodal electronic vot-
ing system that delivers the necessary system secu-
rity, integrity and user satisfaction safeguards in a 
user-friendly interface that accommodates all peo-
ple regardless of ability (Prime III, 2009). With 
Prime III, voters are able to cast their votes through 
visual interaction and/or through speech interac-
tion. This multimodal approach to electronic vot-

ing enables Prime III to incorporate a universal 
design, which allows nearly all voters to cast their 
votes independently and privately.   

Due to the anonymous nature of voting systems, 
the candidates that the voter selects must be kept 
private.  Since Prime III integrates speech interac-
tion into the voting process, bystanders may be 
afforded the opportunity to compromise the pri-
vacy of the voter. Bystanders must not be able to 
hear whom a voter selects for any office, or a 
voter’s decision for any proposition in order to en-
sure voter – ballot anonymity.  Therefore, during 
the voting process, voters cannot simply say the 
name of the candidates for which s/he wishes to 
vote.  The speech interface of Prime III imple-
ments an interaction in which the voter does not 
need to explicitly verbalize for which candidate 
they intend to vote. 

The Prime III system uses speech to convey the 
information on the screen to the voter (e.g. candi-
dates listed for a particular office) through the use 
of a microphone headset. When an option is pre-
sented, the voter chooses the option by speaking, 
“Vote” into the microphone. If the voter does not 
wish to choose the current option, they do not say 
anything and the system moves on to the next 
prompt.  An example dialogue is as follows: 

Prime III: “To vote for the Democratic Party, say vote 
<beep>” 

Voter: <says nothing> 
Prime III: “To vote for the Republican Party, say vote 

<beep>” 
Voter: “Vote” 

In this example, the voter chose to vote for the 
Republican Party. Bystanders only hear the voter 
saying “Vote,” instead of a voter’s actual choice, 
which ensures the privacy of the voter and the 
anonymity of the voter’s ballot.   

The universal accessibility and anonymous na-
ture of electronic voting highlights the incomplete-
ness in the design of writing in a candidate’s name 
with Prime III. Currently, voters have the ability to 
write-in a candidate’s name in one way: using an 
onscreen keyboard (Figure 1).  When a voter 
chooses not to vote for a predetermined candidate 
and to write-in a candidate’s name, the keyboard is 
shown, and the user must use the touchscreen to 
type the candidate’s name. Since this portion of the 
system is not a multimodal design, the voter must 
be sighted to write-in a candidate’s name. 

45



 
Figure 1. Prime III On-screen Keyboard 

2.3 Universal Accessibility in Voting 

Help America Vote Act (HAVA) of 2002, was 
created to prevent the major issues faced in the 
2000 United States Presidential Election from hap-
pening in future elections (HAVA, 2002).  From 
HAVA, the United States Election Assistance 
Commission (EAC) was established.  One of the 
goals of the EAC was to adopt Voluntary Voting 
System Guidelines (VVSG), which expand access 
for individuals with disabilities to vote privately 
and independently (VVSG, 2007). The VVSG now 
addresses the advancement of technology and pro-
vides requirements for voting systems to be tested 
against to ensure functionality, security, and acces-
sibility (VVSG, 2005). Chapter 3 of the 2007 
VVSG proposes requirements for the usability and 
accessibility of electronic voting systems (VVSG 
Chapter 3, 2007). The VVSG states that all voters 
must have access to the voting process without 
discrimination, and that the voting process must be 
accessible to individuals with disabilities, includ-
ing non-visual accessibility (VVSG, 2007).  It also 
states that voting systems should be independently 
accessible to as many voters as possible, which 
further emphasizes the need for a universal design. 

3 Motivation 

Currently, there is no solution for writing in a can-
didate’s name that is universally accessible.  As 
stated previously, developing systems with a uni-
versal design ensures that the system can be used 
by anyone, regardless of abilities or disabilities.  
Prime III, like other electronic voting systems to-
day, simply cannot accommodate a range of voters 
due to its current write-in system through an on 
screen keyboard.  In order for voters with visual or 
motor impairments to vote, a voting official must 
enter the voting booth with him or her to write, or 
type, the candidate on the ballot for which the 

voter intends to vote. The lack of multimodality 
and accessibility in these write-in methods only 
accommodates sighted voters.  This violates the 
privacy of the voter and the anonymity of the 
voter’s ballot.  

The most fitting solution to this problem of 
voter privacy is to utilize a multimodal voting sys-
tem that incorporates speech interaction.  With the 
addition of speech, voters, regardless of most 
physical disabilities, have an option to vote inde-
pendently.  In order to write-in a candidate, a voter 
could simply speak aloud the name of the person 
who they intend to write-in.  The integration of the 
speech feature alone enables the system to have a 
universal design.  However, this system is not 
practical.  During election peak times, polling 
places may have a large voter turnout (Polling 
Place and Vote Center Management, 2009).  With 
the large number of voters at polling places at any 
given time, privacy is an enormous issue. In accor-
dance with the Election Assistance Commission 
(EAC), the voting process must preserve the se-
crecy of the ballot.  The voting process should pre-
clude anyone else from determining the content of 
a voter's ballot, without the voter's cooperation.  If 
such a determination is made against the wishes of 
the voter, then his or her privacy has been violated 
(VVSG Chapter 3, 2007).  If a voter is required to 
explicitly say the name of the candidate for which 
they intend to write-in, any bystanders within the 
polling place may be able to hear that name, and 
know for whom that person voted, thereby violat-
ing the voter’s privacy and ballot anonymity. 

In order to secure voter privacy through speech 
interaction, voters must communicate with the sys-
tem using the speech interaction method of Prime 
III.  As explained in section 2.2, this approach al-
lows a voter to make selections throughout the vot-
ing process by simply saying, “vote” in response to 
the system’s prompts.  Using this method for writ-
ing in a candidate’s name has its challenges.  The 
system cannot simply prompt names to the voter 
until the system gets to the name the voter intends 
to write-in.  There are an infinite number of names 
the voter would have to choose from.  For exam-
ple, it would not be viable for the dialogue to be as 
follows: 

Prime III: “To vote for the Bob Doe, say vote [beep]” 
Voter: <says nothing> 
Prime III: “To vote for the Bill Doe, say vote [beep]” 
Voter: <says nothing> 

46



Prime III: “To vote for the Billy Doe, say vote [beep]” 
Voter: <says nothing> 

… 

If the systems simply made uneducated guesses 
of the desired name, it would be impossible for the 
voter to write-in a candidate.   

A solution to this problem would be for the 
voter to spell, rather than say, the desired candi-
date’s name.  However, due to voter privacy, the 
voter cannot simply spell a name aloud.  Spelling a 
write-in candidate’s name can only be done pri-
vately if the Prime III method of getting input data 
from the voter, through speech, is applied to the 
design of the system.  Using this method, the sys-
tem would need to prompt the voter to determine 
the correct letters to spell the desired candidate’s 
name.  This would have to be done for the spelling 
of the entire name.  For example, to spell the name, 
“Bob,” the dialogue would be as follows: 

Prime III: “If the first letter of the candidate’s name is 
A, say vote <beep>” 

Voter: <says nothing> 
Prime III: “If the first letter of the candidate’s name is 

B, say vote <beep>” 
Voter: “Vote”  
Prime III: “If the second letter of the candidate’s name 

is A, say vote <beep>” 
Voter: <says nothing> 
Prime III: “If the second letter of the candidate’s name 

is B, say vote <beep>” 
Voter: <says nothing>  

… 

Prime III: “If the second letter of the candidate’s name 
is N, say vote <beep>” 

Voter: <says nothing> 
Prime III: “If the second letter of the candidate’s name 

is O, say vote <beep>” 
Voter: “Vote”  

… 

Prime III: “If the third letter of the candidate’s name is 
B, say vote <beep>” 

Voter: “Vote” 

Thus far, this is the best solution.  This approach 
to spelling a candidate’s name encompasses voter 
privacy, integrity, and universal accessibility.  
However, the above example implements a linear 
search to spell a write-in candidate’s name.  For 
each letter of the candidate’s full name, the voter 
may have to traverse each of the 26 letters of the 
alphabet.  Spelling using this method would take 
an extremely long time, especially if the letters of 
the candidate’s name were at the end of the alpha-
bet (i.e. “Robert Smith”), or if the candidate’s 

name has several letters (i.e. “Christopher Wash-
ington”).  Time is a vital factor in voting.  Voters 
want to make their selections and cast their ballots 
in a reasonable amount of time.  This straight lin-
ear approach to spell the name of a write-in candi-
date is long and undesirable, leading to the 
research presented in this paper.  The overall ob-
jective of this research is to propose a method to 
write-in a candidate’s name that addresses the is-
sues of time, privacy, and accessibility. 

Currently, there is no method to spell a name for 
writing in a candidate that incorporates a universal 
design and meets the requirements set forth by the 
EAC; no system allows an individual with visual 
or motor impairments to spell a candidate’s name 
privately and securely.  In order to solve these ma-
jor issues, a predictive spelling method was created 
using speech interaction.  The hypothesis is that 
the predictive spelling method through speech in-
teraction will take less time to spell a candidate’s 
name than the aforementioned linear approach. 

4 Design 

4.1 Design Overview 

The novel approach for writing in a candidate pre-
sented in this paper is implemented with a univer-
sal design, is private, and is time effective.  The 
proposed design solution utilizes alphabet cluster-
ing and implements name prediction as opposed to 
the linear search method discussed in the previous 
section.  This solution proves to be more time ef-
fective for letter selection, and for overall name 
selection. 

Rather than using linear search to traverse the 
alphabet, which may take an extensive duration of 
time to complete, this design breaks down the al-
phabet into clusters of letters, which are then are 
presented to the voter.  The voter then spells a can-
didate’s name by selecting from these letters and 
the system performs name prediction similar to the 
methods used in predictive text technology such as 
Nuance Communications’ XT9 (Nuance, 2009).  
Like in XT9, the voters spelling with our speech 
system have the option to select from the sugges-
tions made based on the letters spelled.  While 
XT9 utilizes a dictionary database to predict words 
that the user may intend to type, this system was 
developed using a database containing only first 
and last names that the user may intend to spell. 

47



For each letter of the candidate’s name, the clus-
ters are presented to the voter for selection using 
the method discussed in Chapter Three.  The voter 
begins by making the proper selections to spell the 
candidate’s last name.  The system first prompts 
the voter with the alphabet clusters.  Once the voter 
selects the desired cluster, the system then prompts 
the voter with the letters contained in that cluster.  
The voter then chooses a letter, and the system 
moves on to get the next letter of the desired can-
didate’s name.  Following every new letter selec-
tion, the first cluster presented for the next letter is 
a cluster of the three most common letters to fol-
low the letters already chosen. 

After the voter selects the first three letters of 
the candidate’s name, the system then suggests 
three names, one of which the voter may intend to 
write-in.  The names suggested are chosen because 
they have the highest probability to be written in.  
If the voter selects one of the names suggested, the 
process is repeated for the intended candidate’s 
first name, resulting in the chosen candidate’s full 
name being written in for the corresponding office 
on the ballot.  If the voter does not intend to write-
in one of the names suggested, s/he continues the 
process of selecting clusters, then letters, until the 
correct name is suggested, or the name has been 
spelled in full (see Table 2 for a full example). 

4.2 Cluster Selection 

The alphabet is broken down into four clusters of 
five letters, and one cluster of six letters (Table 1).  
For the first letter of each of the candidate’s names, 
given name and surname, the voter is prompted to 
choose from one of the five clusters.  For each let-
ter to be spelled after the first letter, there is an ad-
ditional cluster of three letters presented to the 
voter.  This cluster contains the most common next 
letters, given the letters the candidate has already 
chosen.  For every letter, with the exception of the 
first letter, the first cluster presented to the voter is 
the most common letter cluster.  This expedites the 
selection process since the voter is able to make his 
or her selection at this point, rather than making a 
selection from the five standard clusters. If the next 
letter of the name is not in the most common letter 
cluster, the voter is then prompted to select one of 
the five standard clusters (Table 1). 

 

Cluster Letters 
A, B, C, D, E 
F, G, H, I, J 

K, L, M, N, O 
P, Q, R, S, T 

U, V, W, X, Y, Z 
Table 1. Standard Letter Clusters 

The first of these clusters presented to the voter 
is chosen at random, with the prompts for the re-
maining clusters following in alphabetical order, in 
a round robin fashion. The purpose of this ran-
domization is to secure ballot anonymity by ensur-
ing that bystanders will not be able to piece 
together for whom the voter voted. 

4.3 Letter Selection 

Once the voter selects the correct cluster contain-
ing the next letter of the desired candidate’s name, 
s/he is prompted to choose amongst those letters.  
The letters presented by the system are dependent 
on the cluster the voter selected (see Table 2). If the 
voter selects the cluster of letters {A,B,C,D,E}, 
s/he is prompted to choose from those letters 
within that cluster.  If the voter selects the cluster 
of the most common letters, for example, {R, A, 
E}, s/he is prompted to choose a letter from that 
common letter cluster.  Once the desired letter is 
chosen, the system moves on to the set of prompts 
for the voter to select the next letter of the write-in 
candidate’s name (see Table 2). 

4.4 Name Database 

This prediction system for writing in a candidate’s 
name is made possible through the use of a local 
database of names. A local database is utilized due 
to the ban of wireless devices and Internet connec-
tions in voting and tabulating machines according 
to the Voter Confidence and Increased Accessibil-
ity Act of 2009 (Holt, 2009 and VCIAA, 2009). 

This database contains the most common names 
in the United States (Butler, 2005).  Taken from 
the United States census in 2000, each name was 
given a category and a rank.  The different catego-
ries of names are surnames, male given names, and 
female given names.  Within these categories, each 
name was given a rank based on popularity.  The 
names that were used most frequently are ranked at 
the top of the list, while the names infrequently 
used are at the bottom of the list.  The database 

48



used in this design contains a table of the top 1000 
ranked surnames from the 2000 US Census.  The 
database also has a table for given names; contain-
ing the top 1000 ranked male names, and the top 
1000 ranked female names.   

4.5 Name Prediction 

In order to effectively reduce the amount of time a 
voter spends to write-in a candidate’s name, this 
system utilizes a name prediction method built on 
the name database described in the previous sec-
tion.  Essentially, the predictions are suggestions to 
the voter of names that s/he may potentially spell.  
The names suggested are pulled from the name 
database depending on the letters already chosen 
by the voter.  If one of the predicted names is cor-
rect, the voter does not need to go through the en-
tire spelling process. 

The name suggestions are strictly based on the 
clusters and letters chosen by the voter.  When a 
voter selects a cluster, the system can suggest the 
most common (highest ranked) name that has a 
first initial as one of the letters in the cluster.  For 
example, if the voter is selecting the first letter of 
the candidate’s last name, and chooses the cluster 
“F, G, H, I, J,” the system can suggest “Johnson” 
to be the candidate’s last name.  Similarly, when a 
voter selects a letter, the system can suggest the 
most common name from the letters selected.  Fur-
thermore, if the voter is spelling the candidate’s 
last name, and has already selected the letters “J,” 
and “A,” the system can suggest “James” as the 
candidate’s last name. 

In a best-case scenario, the first name the system 
suggests would be the name the voter intended to 
write-in.  However, if that is not the case, each 
suggested name the voter rejects (says nothing) 
adds unnecessary interaction cycles to the spelling 
process.  For this reason, a different approach was 
taken to suggest names.  Because most names 
could be suggested correctly given the first three 
letters, the system waits to suggest names until the 
voter selects the first three letters.  Once the first 
three letters have been spelled, the system knows if 
there is a potential match in the database.  If there 
is no match, the system continues to let the voter 
spell the name intended.   

If there is a name in the database that starts with 
the letters that the voter already selected, that name 
is then suggested to the voter.  At this time, the 

system suggests up to three names for the voter to 
select from.  If after these initial three suggestions 
the system has not suggested the intended candi-
date’s name, the system prompts the voter to con-
tinue to spell the candidate’s name.  From this 
point on, the system suggests one name after the 
voter selects a cluster, and one name after the voter 
selects a letter.  If the voter rejects a name, it is 
never suggested again, so that the intended name 
has a chance at being suggested.  An example of 
the system dialogue is shown in Table 2.  

Interaction 
Mode Interaction 

Letters 
Already 
Selected 

System 
Say vote if the first letter of the 
candidate’s last name is A, B, C, D, 
or E 

-- 

Voter Vote -- 

System Say vote if the first letter of the candidate’s last name is A -- 

Voter <says nothing> -- 

System Say vote if the first letter of the candidate’s last name is B -- 

Voter <says nothing> -- 

System Say vote if the third letter of the candidate’s last name is C -- 

Voter Vote C 

System You have selected the letter C. Say vote to delete this letter. C 

Voter <says nothing> C 

System 
You have selected C as the candi-
date’s last name.  Say vote if you 
are finished spelling the last name. 

C 

Voter <says nothing> C 

System You will now select the second letter of the candidate’s last name. C 

System 

The next letters are the most com-
mon letters. Say vote if the second 
letter of the candidate’s last name 
is A, E, or O 

C 

Voter Vote C 

System Say vote if the second letter of the candidate’s last name is A C 

Voter Vote CA 
… 

System You have selected the letter R. Say vote to delete this letter. CAR 

Voter <says nothing> CAR 

System Say vote if the candidate’s last name is Carter CAR 

Voter <says nothing> CAR 

System Say vote if the candidate’s last name is Carroll CAR 

Voter <says nothing> CAR 

System Say vote if the candidate’s last name is Carpenter CAR 

Voter <says nothing> CAR 

System You will now select the fourth letter of the candidate’s last name CAR 

System 
The next letters are the most com-
mon letters.  Say vote if the third 
letter of the candidate’s last name 

CAR 

49



is L, P, or S 
Voter Vote CAR 

System Say vote if the candidate’s last name is Carlson CAR 

Voter <says nothing> CAR 

System Say vote if the third letter of the candidate’s last name is L CAR 

Voter Vote CARL 

System Say vote if the candidate’s last name is Carlisle CARL 

Voter Vote CARLISLE 
Table 2. Example Dialogue for Spelling Last Name, 

"Carlisle" 

5 Experiment and Evaluation 

The primary objective of this study was to observe 
and analyze how people interact with the predic-
tive write-in system through speech.  The goal of 
the study is to determine the time it takes a voter to 
use the write-in system developed. It is expected 
that the predictive system will perform signifi-
cantly faster when spelling a name than the linear 
system.  Additionally, it is expected that the par-
ticipants in the study will be able to use the system 
effectively, meaning they will be able to spell their 
intended names. 

5.1 Experimental Method 

The participants were directed to fill out a pre-
questionnaire to obtain their demographic informa-
tion and prior usage with computing.  Once the 
pre-questionnaire was completed, a scenario was 
given, introducing them to the write-in voting 
process, and to encourage them to treat the study as 
if it were an actual election.  The students then re-
corded in writing the name they intended to spell, 
which could be any first and last name of their 
choosing, with the exception of their own to keep 
the results anonymous. It was explained to the stu-
dent that the speech from the system would be 
coming from the speakers for observational pur-
poses, and that the headset was strictly for the use 
of the microphone. Data collected during the ex-
periment included the name each participant chose 
to write-in and the times taken to spell that name.  

5.2 Evaluation 

A total of 40 participants participated in this study, 
of which more than 80 percent were undergradu-
ates, Caucasians, and males.  Presented in this sec-
tion are calculated best-case comparisons between 
the predictive write-in method versus the linear 

search approach, as well as the experimental re-
sults from the study. 

Predictive Write-In Results: For the study, 
participants were required to provide a name to 
spell so that there was no bias amongst the names 
spelled.  The average length of the full names cho-
sen was 10.43 letters, with a standard deviation of 
2.22.  The shortest full name was 7 letters in 
length, and the longest full name was 16 letters in 
length.  Of the 80 first and last names chosen, 
71.3% of the names were in the database and sug-
gested to the user.  The average time it took for a 
participant to spell a candidate’s full name was 
9.52 minutes, with a standard deviation of 3.83.  
The median time was 8.42 minutes.  The average 
time, for the names given, per letter was 1.09 min-
utes, with a standard deviation of 45 seconds.   

Figure 2 shows a breakdown of times based on 
the number of letters in the full name spelled.  This 
figure shows the average times taken by partici-
pants to spell names of various lengths for the pre-
dictive method.  Removing the outliers of this 
chart, the average full name was between 8 and 16 
letters, and took an average of 9.23 minutes.  These 
results show that in practice, this system takes 
much longer than anticipated (see Comparison). 
Additional observations from the study showed 
that participant errors were the primary reason that 
the actual times were much different than what was 
calculated for the best-case times to spell the same 
names.   

 
Figure 2. Average Time to Spell Full Names 

Comparison: We calculated, at best case, 
how long it should take someone to spell the 
names from the study for both systems. In order to 
determine how long it would take to spell a name, 

50



each interaction cycle for the system was broken 
down and timed.  For each method, the sequence 
of prompts presented to the voter to spell a name is 
different.  The sequences were determined for each 
system, and compiled for each name spelled.  The 
sequences for the predictive write-in method was 
constructed under the assumption that the names to 
be spelled are in the system’s name database. 

Figure 3 shows the average times taken to spell 
names of various lengths for the predictive and 
linear methods.  The average time for the full 
names provided in the study for the calculated lin-
ear search method was 15.09 minutes, with a stan-
dard deviation of 3.86 (Table 3). The average time 
to spell the full names for the calculated predictive 
method was 4.33 minutes, with a standard devia-
tion of 0.17. The median times for the calculated 
predictive and linear methods were 4.34 and 14.73, 
respectively.  From these results, we can conclude 
that, on average, the predictive spelling approach is 
more than three times faster than the linear spelling 
approach.  The predictive spelling method was ef-
fective in that 100% of the participants were able 
to complete the spelling of the intended names. 

 
Figure 3. Best-Case Method Comparison of Times to 

Spell Full Names 

 
Time to spell full 
name - Predictive 
Method (minutes) 

Time to spell full 
name - Linear 
Method (minutes) 

Average 4.33 15.09 
Standard 
Deviation 0.17 3.86 

Median 4.34 14.73 
Table 3. Calculated Predictive and Linear  

Method Statistics 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 

The ultimate goal of electronic voting systems to-
day should be to allow anyone to vote privately 
and independently using a single design.  The EAC 

provides useful and necessary guidelines to ensure 
that all eligible citizens have the same access when 
voting, regardless of a person’s disabilities.  The 
primary objective of this research was to embrace 
these guidelines by developing a system in which a 
person, regardless of most disabilities, can effi-
ciently, anonymously, and independently write-in a 
candidate’s name during an election.  The method 
designed allows voters to spell a candidate’s name 
discretely through speech interaction, using a pre-
dictive approach for efficiency.   

The study performed was designed to test the 
hypothesis, which states that the method designed 
for predictive spelling through speech interaction 
will take much less time to spell a candidate’s 
name than the method of linear search. The results 
of the study suggest that the predictive approach to 
write-in a candidate’s name was more efficient 
than the linear spelling approach.  However, it was 
determined that, in practice, the participants took 
longer than calculated to spell a name using the 
prediction method.  

From observing the participants throughout the 
study, it was considered that the number of errors 
made during the spelling process might have been 
the primary reason for the time being so long.  Fu-
ture versions of this system will include increased 
efficiency for error correction. It may also be bene-
ficial for future studies to include participants of a 
more diverse demographic, and to collect other 
metrics for determining efficiency, such as, letters 
required to spell a name, and number of errors 
made while spelling and where said errors oc-
curred.  

As this method is further developed, it can be 
adapted by certain search functions.  Search appli-
cations that utilize a fixed directory will benefit 
greatly by using the prediction method discussed.  
This could be especially helpful for people directo-
ries, building directories, or telephony systems. 

Acknowledgments 
This material is based in part upon work supported 
by the National Science Foundation under Grant 
Numbers CNS- 0540492 and 0837675. Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the 
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the National Science Foundation. 

 

51



References  
2007 VVSG Chapter 3: Usability, Accessibility, and 

Privacy Requirements (2007) [online]. 
http://www.eac.gov/vvsg/part1/chapter03.php/. 

Butler, R., (2005). http://names.mongabay.com/. 
Center for Universal Design, N.C. State University 

(2004). Universal Design Education Online Web Site 
http://www.udeducation.org/learn/index.asp. 

Help America Vote Act. (2002). Public Law 107-252, 
107th Congress, United States [online]. 
http://www.fec.gov/hava/law_ext.txt. 

History of the Paper Ballot (2009) [online]. 
http://www.fairvote.org/righttovote/pballot.pdf. 

Jones, D., (2003). A Brief Illustrated History of Voting 
[online]. 
http://www.cs.uiowa.edu/~jones/voting/pictures/. 

Making Sure Votes Count and Are Counted (2009). 
http://holt.house.gov/voting.shtml. 

Nuance – XT9 Smart Input (2009). 
http://www.nuance.com/t9/xt9/. 

Official Election Site of San Mateo County (2007). 
http://www.shapethefuture.org/press/2007/090607.as
p. 

Polling Place and Vote Center Management (2009) [on-
line]. http://www.eac.gov/election/quick-start-
management-guides/docs/09-polling-place-and-vote-
center-management.pdf/attachment_download/file. 

Press Release: 2005 VVSG Adopted (2005). 
http://www.eac.gov/voting%20systems/docs/eac-
adopts-2005-voluntary-voting-system-
guidelines.pdf/attachment_download/file. 

Prime III: One Machine, One Vote for Everyone. (2009) 
http://primevotingsystem.org/. 

Voluntary Voting System Guidelines Recommendations 
to the Election Assistance Commission (2007) [on-
line]. http://www.eac.gov/files/vvsg/Final-TGDC-
VVSG-08312007.pdf. 

Voter Confidence and Increased Accessibility Act of 
2009 (2009). Public Law H.R. 2894. [online] 
http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-
bin/query/z?c111:H.R.2894:. 

Write-in Candidate Requirements. Maine 2010 June 
Primary and November General Election Candidates 
(2010). [online] 
http://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/elec/2010/writeincand
idateguide.doc. 

 
 
 

52


