










































Wishful Thinking - Finding suggestions and 'buy' wishes from product reviews


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text, pages 54–61,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Wishful Thinking 

Finding suggestions and ‘buy’ wishes from product reviews 

 

 

J. Ramanand Krishna Bhavsar Niranjan Pedanekar 
BFS Innovations  BFS Innovations  BFS Innovations  

Cognizant Technology Solutions Cognizant Technology Solutions Cognizant Technology Solutions 

Pune, India Pune, India Pune, India 
ramanand.janardhanan 

@cognizant.com 

krishna.bhavsar 

@cognizant.com 

niranjan.pedanekar 

@cognizant.com 

 

 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper describes methods aimed at solv-

ing the novel problem of automatically dis-

covering ‘wishes’ from (English) documents 

such as reviews or customer surveys. These 

wishes are sentences in which authors make 

suggestions (especially for improvements) 

about a product or service or show intentions 

to purchase a product or service. Such 

‘wishes’ are of great use to product managers 

and sales personnel, and supplement the area 

of sentiment analysis by providing insights 

into the minds of consumers. We describe 

rules that can help detect these ‘wishes’ from 

text. We evaluate these methods on texts from 

the electronic and banking industries. 

1 Introduction 

Various products and business services are used by 

millions of customers each day. For the makers of 

these products & services, studying these customer 

experiences is critical to understanding customer 

satisfaction and making decisions about possible 

improvements to the products. Thanks to the ad-

vent of weblogs, online consumer forums, and 

product comparison sites, consumers are actively 

expressing their opinions online. Most of these 

reviews are now available on the web, usually at 

little or no cost. Moreover, these are available for a 

variety of domains, such as financial services, tele-

com services, consumer goods etc. 

Automated analysis of opinions using such re-

views could provide a cheaper and faster means of 

obtaining a sense of such customer opinions, thus 

supplementing more traditional survey methods. In 

addition, automated analysis can significantly 

shorten the time taken to find insights into the cus-

tomer's mind and actions. 

Sentiment analysis of texts such as product re-

views, call center notes, and customer surveys 

aims to automatically infer opinions expressed by 

people with regards to various topics of interest. A 

sentiment analysis exercise classifies the overall 

opinion of a review document into positive, neu-

tral, or negative classes. It may also identify senti-

ments at a finer granularity, i.e. recognizing the 

mix of opinions about the topic(s) expressed in the 

text. However, industry analysts (Strickland, 2009) 

report some common problems with the results of 

these exercises: 

1. The results (usually numerical scores split 

across positive, negative, neutral classes) are hard 

to meaningfully interpret. 

2. These results are more useful to certain 

roles and domains. Brand, reputation, and service 

managers in media and retail industries find senti-

ment analysis more useful than product managers 

or sales teams in various industries. 

3. The results do not ‘indicate user action’ 

i.e. opinions do not help identify a future action of 

the author based on the comments. An example of 

this is: does the consumer indicate that he intends 

to stop using a service after a negative experience? 

4. The reader of the report often asks “what 

do I do next?” i.e. the results are not always ‘ac-

tionable’. There is a gap between understanding 

the results and taking an appropriate action. 

54



This has led to interest in identifying aspects in-

directly related to sentiment analysis, such as gaug-

ing possible loss of clientele or tapping into desires 

to purchase a product. Many of these methods at-

tempt to identify ‘user intent’.  

In this paper, we propose rule-based methods to 

identify two kinds of ‘wishes’ – one, the desire to 

see improvement in a product, and the other to 

purchase a product. These methods have been de-

signed & tested using a variety of corpora contain-

ing product reviews, customer surveys, and 

comments from consumer forums in domains such 

as electronics and retail banking. From our read-

ing, there has been only one published account of 

identifying ‘wishes’ (including suggestions) and no 

known work on identifying purchasing wishes. We 

hope to build approaches towards more compre-

hensive identification of such content.  

The paper is organized as follows. We begin by 

discussing some of the work related to this upcom-

ing area. Section 3 details our characterization of 

wishes. Section 4 describes the corpora used for 

these methods. We discuss our proposed algo-

rithms and rules in Sections 5 & 6, including a dis-

cussion of the results. Finally, we wrap up with our 

conclusions and directions for future work. 

2 Related Work  

The principal context of our work is in the area 

of sentiment analysis, which is now a widely re-

searched area because of the abundance of com-

mentaries from weblogs, review sites, and social 

networking sites. In particular, we are interested in 

the analysis of product reviews (Dave et al., 2003; 

Hu and Liu, 2004), as well as its application to 

more service-oriented industries such as banks. 

We have built a sentiment analyzer that can ana-

lyze product and service reviews from a variety of 

domains. This also accepts social networking 

commentaries, customer surveys and news articles. 

The implementation follows a lexicon-based ap-

proach, similar to the one described in Ding et al. 

(2008), using lexicons for product attributes and 

opinion words for basic sentiment analysis. 

Our work is not a sub-task of sentiment analysis, 

but supplements the area. A similar example of a 

classification task that works on the sentence level 

and is also related to sentiment analysis is Jindal 

and Liu (2006) which aims to identify comparisons 

between two entities in texts such as product re-

views. 

Goldberg et al. (2009) introduced the novel task 

of identifying wishes. This used a “WISH” corpus 

derived from a web site that collected New Year’s 

wishes. Goldberg et al. (2009) studied the corpus 

in detail, describing the nature, geography, and 

scope of topics found in them. The paper also 

looked at building ‘wish detectors’, which were 

applied on a corpus of political comments and 

product reviews. A mix of manual templates and 

SVM-based text classifiers were used. A method to 

identify more templates was also discussed. 

Our task, though similar to the above problem, 

has some novel features. In particular, there are 

two significant differences from Goldberg et al. 

(2009). We are interested in two specific kinds of 

wishes: sentences that make suggestions about ex-

isting products, and sentences that indicate the 

writer is interested in purchasing a product. (These 

are described in detail in Section 3.) Secondly, our 

interest is limited to product reviews, and not to 

social or political wishes. 

In Requirements Engineering, some methods of 

analyzing requirement documents have used lin-

guistic techniques to understand and correlate re-

quirements. These are somewhat related to our 

task, aiming to detect desired features in the pro-

ject to be executed. och Dag et al. (2005) has some 

useful discussions on this topic. 

Kröll and Strohmaier (2009) study the idea of 

Intent Analysis, noting a taxonomy of Human In-

tentions, which could be useful in future discus-

sions on the topic. 

3 What are Wishes 

3.1 Defining Wishes 

A dictionary definition (Goldberg et al. (2009)) of 

a “wish” is “a desire or hope for something to 

happen.” Goldberg et al. (2009) discuss different 

types of wishes, ranging from political to social to 

business. In our case, we limit our interest to 

comments about products and services. In particu-

lar, we are interested in two specific kinds of wish-

es. 

 
 

 

55



3.2 Suggestion Wishes 

These are sentences where the commenter wishes 

for a change in an existing product or service. 

These range from specific requests for new product 

features and changes in existing behaviour, or an 

indication that the user is unhappy with the current 

experience. Examples
1
: 

1. I'd love for the iPod shuffle to also mirror 
as a pedometer. 

2.  It would be much better if they had more 
ATMs in my area. 

 

We also include sentences that do not fully 

elaborate on the required change, but could serve 

as a pointer to a nearby region that may contain the 

required desire. Examples of these: 

1. I wish they’d do this. 
2. My wish list would be as follows: 
 

It is important to note the difference between 

our definition of wishes and that in Goldberg et al. 

(2009). That study seeks to discover any sentence 

expressing any desire. For instance, Goldberg et al. 

(2009) marks the following as wishes: 

1. I shouldn’t have been cheap, should have 
bought a Toshiba. 

2. hope to get my refund in a timely manner. 
In our approach, we do not treat these as wishes 

since they do not suggest any improvements. 

In some cases, improvements could be inferred 

from a negative opinion about the product. The 

implication is that the customer would be happier 

if the problem could be fixed. Examples:  

1. “My only gripe is the small size of the 
camera body” which implies “I wish the 

camera was bigger”. 

2. “The rubber flap that covers the usb port 
seems flimsy” which implies “I wish the 

rubber flap was more robust”. 

We do not address such implicit wishes. 

3.3 Purchasing Wishes 

These are sentences where the author explicitly 

expresses the desire to purchase a product. In some 

cases, a preferred price range is also indicated. 

 

Examples: 

                                                           
1 All sentences are taken from review sites such as epin-

ions.com 

1. I have a Canon digital rebel xt, I am look-
ing for a lens that will take sports actions foot-

ball shots at night. 

2. I want to purchase a cell phone range 12-
15000/-... please suggest me some good and 

stylish phones? 

3. We are also thinking of buying a condo in 
a few months… 

4 Corpora for Design and Evaluation  

4.1 Suggestion Wishes 

As part of building and testing our in-house senti-

ment analyzer, we collected a variety of texts from 

different sources such as popular consumer review 

sites (such as Epinions.com and MouthShut.com) 

and weblogs. These primarily belonged to the do-

mains of electronics and retail banking. Of these, 

we chose reviews about the Apple iPod and a col-

lection of banking reviews about five leading US 

banks. We also used customer surveys conducted 

for two products of a financial services company
2
. 

The sizes of the corpora are summarized in Table 

1. 

 

Some observations about these texts: 

1. The texts are in American or British English 

and are largely well-formed.  

2. They cover both reviews of products and de-

scriptions of customer service. 

3. The customer surveys consisted of sections 

for positives and negatives feedback, with an op-

tional ‘suggestions’ section. 

4. Wish sentences in the reviews were infre-

quent (on average, less than 1% of the total sen-

tences). The surveys had a much larger presence of 

wishes (about 5% on average).  
 

In addition, Goldberg et al. (2009) has made 

available a WISH corpus, which is a sample of 

7614 sentences consisting of sentences from politi-

cal discussions and product reviews. Since we are 

only interested in the latter, we evaluated our algo-

rithm only on the product review sentences (1235 

in number). 3% (41 sentences
3
) of these have been 

labeled as wishes. 

                                                           
2 Anonymous for confidentiality reasons 
3 In the WISH corpus, 149 (12%) are marked as wishes; how-

ever we only chose those wishes that suggest improvements. 

56



In a pre-processing step, individual sentences in 

the corpora were identified using GATE’s (Cun-

ningham, 2002) sentence splitter. 

4.2 Purchasing Wishes 

Similar to our collection of sentences for sugges-

tions, we collected texts from review sites and con-

sumer forums (such as Alibaba.com and Yahoo! 

Answers) that not only reviewed products and 

shared complaints but also allowed users to post 

requests for purchases. 

The corpus consisted of 1579 sentences about 

the following products: Apple iPhone, Cameras, 

Desktop PCs, and a mix of Credit Cards from four 

leading Indian and American banks. 

5 Finding Suggestions  

5.1 Approach 

The input to our system consists of the following: 

1. Datasets containing sentences. 

2. ATTRLEX
4
: A lexicon of product attributes 

for each of the domains. (e.g. the iPod attributes 

were words like ‘battery’, ‘interface’ etc.) 

3. POSLEX: A lexicon of positive opinions 

(words such as ‘good’, ‘better’, ‘fast’).  

4. NEGLEX: A lexicon of negation words (these 

are words that invert the opinion of a sentence. 

e.g: ‘not’, ‘wouldn’t’) 
 

We began by manually classifying sentences in 

samples from each of the corpora as ‘wishes’ or 

‘non-wishes’. We then looked for common phrases 

and words across all these wishes to derive patterns 

and rules.  

Initial analysis led to some proto-rules. These 

rules were then refined by using further analysis 

and in some cases, decision trees. The rules are 

grouped as follows. 

5.1.1 Rules based on modal verbs 

A majority of the wishes had pivotal phrases in-

volving modal verbs such as “would”, “could”, 

“should” etc. Examples: 

                                                           
4 These lexicons were built by semi-automated means using 

components built for our in-house sentiment analyzer which 

help detect opinions and attributes for a domain from related 

texts 

1. It would be a much more valuable service if they 

would fix this flaw. 

2.  It might be nice if one could drag-and-drop mu-

sic files and have the iPod reconstruct its index on-

the-fly. 

3.  I would prefer the unit to have a simple on off 

switch. 

 

This led to the following rules: 

 

a. modal verb + auxiliary verb + positive opinion 

word 

Match sentences which contain the pattern: 
<modal verb> <auxiliary verb> {window of size 3} 

<positive opinion word>  

 

Where 

Modal verb belongs to {may, might, could, 

would, will, should} 

Auxiliary verb belongs to {be, have been} 

Positive Opinion word belongs to 

POSLEX 

 

The positive word should appear to the right of the 

modal verb in a pre-defined window size (usually 3 

to 5). 

 

b. modal verb + preference verb 
Match sentences which contain the pattern: 
<modal verb> {window of size 3} <preference verb>  

 

Where 

Modal verb belongs to {may, might, would, 

will} 

Preference verb belongs to {love, like, pre-

fer, suggest} 

 

c. Other rules 

Match sentences containing: 

“should be able” or 

“should come with” or 
“could come with” 

5.1.2 The “needs to” rule 

Sentences containing the phrase “needs to” are 

candidate wishes, such as in the examples: 

1. Apple needs to step it up and get better longer 

lasting batteries. 

2. Their customer service representatives need to 

be educated in assisting customers. 

3. need to be able to configure the boxes. 

57



For this pattern, we created a decision tree model 

with the following features: 

1. Presence of negation word to the left of “needs 

to” 

2. Presence of a ‘product attribute’ word to the left 

3. Whether the sentence is interrogative 

4. Subject of the sentence from the list: {I, you, s/he, 
we, this, that, those, it, they, one, someone, somebody, 

something} 

 

Based on analysis and the combination suggested 

by the decision tree experiments, we formulated 

rules. Some of these rules are as follows: 

1. Interrogative sentences or those with a negation 

word to the left of “need to” are not wishes. 

2. If the product attribute is present (usually as the 

subject), the sentence is a wish. 

3. If the subject of the sentence is one of “this, that, 

these”, the sentence is likely to be a wish. When the 

subject is one of “I, you, one”, the sentence is not a 

wish. 

5.1.3 Other rules 

Sentences containing the patterns: 

1. “I wish”: along with filters such as the subject 

(“they, you, product”) etc. can be matched as 

wishes. 

2. “hopefully” or “I hope” 

3. “should be able to” or “should come with” 

 

These rules match very infrequently in the dataset. 

A summary of rule accuracy can be seen in Table 

3. 

5.2 Results 

5.2.1 Precision of Rules 

Type 

Total 

sen-

tences 

No. of 

predicted 

wishes 

No. of 

correct 

wishes 

Precision 

iPod 21147 90 53 58.89% 

Banking 15408 75 23 30.67% 

Product 1 4240 224 187 83.48% 

Product 2 6850 355 284 80.00% 

WISH 

corpus 
1236 28 16 57.14% 

Table 1 Precision of wish identification for various data 

sets 

5.2.2 Recall of Rules 

Recall was calculated on a 10% random sample 

from each data set, except in case of the WISH 

corpus, where all sentences were taken into ac-

count. 
 

Type 

No. of 

correctly 

predicted 

wishes in 

the sample 

No. of actual 

wishes in the 

sample 

Recall 

iPod 7 14 50.0% 

Banking 3 5 60.0% 

Product 1 24 45 53.3% 

Product 2 28 70 40.0% 

WISH corpus 16 41 39.0% 

Table 2 Recall of wish identification 

5.2.3 Rule Analysis 

This table analyses performance of the top 3 most fre-

quently matched rules. For each type of data, the first 

row shows the number of wishes predicted by each rule. 

The succeeding row shows the corresponding precision. 

 

Type/Rule 
Modal, aux, 

positive opinion 

Modal, 

preference 

“Needs 

to” 
Others 

iPod 24  8 7  14 

 57% 53% 43% 82% 

Banking 14  17 7  2 

 37% 85.0% 50% 28.5% 

Product 1 89 56 25 17 

 87%  83.6%  71%  85% 

Product 2 146  25 50 30 

 90% 71.4% 71% 90.9% 

WISH  

Corpus 
7 2 3 4 

 63.6% 50% 50% 57.1% 

Table 3 Rule Analysis 

5.3 Comments on Results 

Wishes occur very infrequently in reviews, where 

authors may or may not choose to talk about im-

provements. Surveys produced more wishes be-

cause of the design and objectives of the survey. 

Also, the language used in suggesting improve-

ments was more consistent across authors, making 

it easier to catch them. Wishes could be made 

about existing product attributes, but several wish-

58



wishes were about newer aspects. This could help 

product managers envisage features that their cus-

tomers are asking for. 

Experiments on the banking reviews showed the 

worst results. The dataset had very few wishes and 

the language used was usually part of a narrative, 

which threw up a lot of false positives. It could 

also be that the nature of the collected dataset was 

such that it did not contain sufficient number of 

wishes. 

Some of the false positives were difficult to 

avoid. Take an example such as: 
I wish it will be a better year. 

 

Though it is a ‘wish’ in general, this does not fit 

our definition of product suggestion though it fits a 

rule well. More semantic or contextual analysis 

may be required in this case. We do not filter out 

sentences that do not refer to already published 

product attributes since authors may be talking 

about adding completely new features, such as in 

the case: 
I wish it will be in magazine form next year. 
 

Of the rules, the first rule (modal + auxiliary + 

positive opinion word) had the highest contribution 

to make. The second rule was more consistent in 

detecting correct wishes. Incidentally, the “needs 

to” rule for banking reviews outperforms the re-

sults for iPod sentences – the only time this hap-

pens. 

Different patterns may be applicable for differ-

ent domains and types of texts. A possible ap-

proach to improving results would be to have a 

‘rule selection’ phase were rules that fall below a 

certain threshold are discarded. 

6 Finding Buy Wishes 

6.1 Approach 

Similar to finding suggestions, we assembled a 

corpus of sentences for various products and ser-

vices, this time from forums that also contain buy-

sell sections. These may contain comments like:  
1.  I am trying to find where I can purchase the com-

plete 1st season of Army Wives-can you help me? 

2.  I am seriously looking for a new bank... 

3.  I want to give a new year’s present to my 5 year old 

nephew. My budget is 1500 Rupees. 

We derived proto-rules and refined them by 

manual analysis and decision trees. The pattern of 

each rule is: 
 …<rule phrase> <common sub-rule>… 
If a sentence contains such a pattern, it is 

deemed to be a buy wish. 

 

To begin, we describe a common sub-rule that is 

used with all rules. 

6.1.1 Buy Identification common sub-rule 

This depends on the following three aspects: 

a. A ‘buy verb’ from among {find, buy, purchase, 

get, acquire} should be present 

b. Absence of a negation word (from NEGLEX) 

to the left of rule phrase 

c. Subjects: 

The subject should not be one of these: 

{you, one, they, someone, those} 

The subject could be one of these:  

{I, we, me} 

6.1.2 Rule phrases 

Rule phrases are one of the following 
1. “want to” 

2. “desire to” 

3. “would like to” 

4. “where can/do I” 

5. “place to” 

6. “going to” 

7. “looking to/for” 

8. “searching to/for” 

9. “interested in” 
 

Of these, in rules involving phrases 7, 8, and 9, we 

also check if there are any past tense verbs preced-

ing rule phrase. In such cases, we do not classify 

the sentence as a wish. For phrase 5, interrogative 

sentences are also ignored. 

6.2 Results 

6.2.1 Precision 

Type 

Total 

sen-

tences 

No. of 

predicted 

wishes 

No. of 

correct 

wishes 

Precision 

iPhone 193 43 41 95.34% 

iPod 176 48 37 79.54% 

Credit 

Cards 
865 6 4 66.67% 

59



Canon 

Cameras 
170 40 39 97.50% 

Desktop 

PCs 
175 36 34 94.44% 

Table 4 Precision of wish identification for various data 

sets 

6.2.2 Recall5 

Type 

No. of ex-

pected 

wishes 

No. of cor-

rectly pre-

dicted wishes 

Recall 

iPhone 80 41 51.25% 

iPod 54 37 68.51% 

Canon 

Camera 
65 39 60.00% 

Desktop 

PCs 
66 34 51.52% 

Table 5 Recall of wish identification 

6.2.3 Rule Analysis 

This table analyses the precision of the tope three rules 

that matched the most sentences. 

 

Rule 

Phrase 

No. of  

matched 

sentences 

No. of cor-

rect matches 
Precision 

Looking 

for 
98 85 86.73% 

Want to 24 22 91.67% 

Interested 

In 
6 6 100% 

Table 6 Rule Analysis 

6.3 Comments on Results 

Buy wishes tend to occur only in forums where 

buyers can advertise their search and hope to re-

ceive advice or meet prospective sellers. In addi-

tion to sites dedicated to specific products, social 

networks such as Twitter
6
 also provide such a plat-

form. This is in contrast to regular weblogs.  

The results for all the electronic products 

showed a precision of about 80% or more. As in 

the case of suggestion wishes, wishes were very 

rare in the credit cards postings.  

The recall in all cases was above 50%. Buy wish 

sentences matching The “looking for” and “want 

to buy/purchase” rules were common. An observa-

tion was that in some cases, people would simply 
                                                           
5 The credit cards set had very few actual wishes (less than 10) 

with which to carry out a meaningful recall exercise 
6 http://twitter.com 

list the expected attributes of the product they were 

looking for. Because of the nature of the forum, 

other users would interpret it as a buy/sell request. 

We could not separate these sentences from other 

kinds of sentences in the data set.  

In most cases, the sentences were terse and used 

phrases like “we need” and “seeking”. Further 

expanding the rule phrases & sub-phrases to in-

clude their synonyms is likely to improve recall. 

7 Conclusions and Future Work 

This paper described two novel problems in the 

world of opinion and intention mining, that of 

identifying ‘wishes’ relating to improvements in 

products and for purchasing them. These are likely 

to be directly useful to business users. We build 

approaches towards such detections, by the use of 

English-language patterns. To the best of our 

knowledge, this is the first attempt at solving such 

problems.  

The approach for identifying suggestions works 

best for texts that contain explicit wishes, espe-

cially customer surveys. They work reasonably 

well for (electronic) product reviews. In contrast, 

reviews about banking services tend to contain 

narratives and have more implicit opinions and 

wishes. Similarly, the algorithm to detect buy 

wishes works well for electronic product reviews 

in comparison to banking products. 

Wish statements appear very infrequently in re-

views. Existing sentiment analysis corpora may not 

be sufficient to use in creating wish detectors. 

Augmenting corpora such as the WISH dataset or 

creating even more robust and representative cor-

pora would be a must for such exercises. A possi-

ble source could be the “Make A Wish” 

foundation. 

One of the possible future directions could be to 

look at tense and mood analysis of sentences. Wish 

sentences come under the ‘optative’ mood. Tech-

niques that help identify such a mood could pro-

vide additional hints to the nature of the sentence. 

More features related to parts of speech and se-

mantic roles could be explored. 

We also plan to look at machine learning ap-

proaches, but the availability of good quality train-

ing data is a limiting factor.  

The emergence of social networking sites may 

provide more challenges for such detectors. Sites 

like Twitter are already being used to advertise 

60



intentions to buy or sell. However, the nature of 

discourse in these media is markedly different to 

regular reviews and forums due to size restrictions.  

Any system that helps business users to identify 

new customers or engage with existing ones would 

need to tap into all these emerging channels. The 

need for such detectors is likely to increase in the 

future, thus providing further motivation to study 

this nascent area. 

References  

Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina 

Bontcheva, and Tablan, Valentin. GATE: A frame-

work and graphical development environment for ro-

bust NLP tools and applications. 2002 

Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence, and David M. Pennock. 

Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction and 

semantic classification of product reviews. Proceed-

ings of the 12th international conference on World 

Wide Web. 2003. 

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. Mining and summarizing 

customer reviews. Proceedings of the tenth ACM 

SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge 

discovery and data mining. 2004. 

Andrew B. Goldberg, Nathanael Fillmore, David 

Andrzejewski, Zhiting Xu, Z, Bryan Gibson, and 

Xiaojin Zhu. May all your wishes come true: A study 

of wishes and how to recognize them. Proceedings of 

Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual 

Conference of the North American Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics. 2009. 

Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. Identifying comparative sen-

tences in text documents. Proceedings of the 29th an-

nual international ACM SIGIR conference on 

Research and development in information retrieval. 

2006. 

Mark Kröll and Markus Strohmaier, M. Analyzing hu-

man intentions in natural language text. Proceedings 

of the fifth international conference on Knowledge 

capture. 2009. 

Johan Natt och Dag, Vincenzo Gervasi, Sjaak Brink-

kemper, and Björn Regnell, B. A linguistic engineer-

ing approach to large-scale requirements 

management. Managing Natural Language Require-

ments in Large-Scale Software Development. Vol 

22-1. 2005. 

Marta Strickland. Five Reasons Sentiment Analysis 

Won’t Ever Be Enough. 

http://threeminds.organic.com/2009/09/five_reasons_

sentiment_analysi.html. 2009. 

Xiaowen Ding, Bing Liu, and Philip S.Yu. A holistic 

lexicon-based approach to opinion mining. Proceed-

ings of the international conference on Web search 

and web data mining. 2008. 

 

61


