










































Extracting Distinctive Features of Swine (H1N1) Flu through Data Mining Clinical Documents


Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL 2010, pages 130–131,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extracting Distinctive Features of Swine (H1N1) Flu through Data 

Mining Clinical Documents 

 

 

Heekyong Park 

Department of Biomedical Engineering, 

Seoul National University 

Seoul, South Korea. 

care01@snu.ac.kr 

Jinwook Choi, MD, PhD 

Department of Biomedical Engineering, 

Seoul National University 

Seoul, South Korea. 

jinchoi@snu.ac.kr 

 

 

Abstract 

Early recognition of distinguishing pat-

terns of a novel pandemic disease is im-

portant. We introduce a methodological 

approach based on popular data mining 

techniques to extract key features and 

temporal patterns of swine (h1n1) flu that 

is discriminated from swine flu like 

symptoms. 

1 Introduction 

Early recognition of a novel pandemic is desira-

ble to minimize its dissemination. However, it 

usually spends some time in developing a diag-

nostic test and people tend to omit the test for 

various reasons including cost, which leads to 

late recognition. Under these circumstances, 

symptoms and signs in clinical documents might 

be valuable indicators to have a population pers-

pective on pandemic severity.  

In this paper, we propose a methodological 

approach to extract features of swine(h1n1) flu 

distinctive to swine flu like patients’ one.  

2  Method 

2.1 Data 

 We randomly selected twenty clinical docu-

ments from first visit records of patients who had 

visited emergency room in Seoul National Uni-

versity Hospital (SNUH) with suspected case of 

swine flu. Ten of the documents are RT-PCR test 

positive cases, which mean that the patient is 

swine flu infected patient, while the ten remain-

ing documents are RT-PCR negative cases. Each 

document contains a patient’s symptoms, obser-

vations, recent clinical histories, clinical plans, 

and diagnoses in natural language. The symp-

toms are mostly about upper respiratory infection 

related ones but some of the sample documents 

describe about ones related to other diseases.   

2.2 Hypotheses 

We hypothesized two things as follows. 1) We 

will be able to extract distinctive symptom set 

between swine flu and swine-flu like patients by 

adopting apriori association rule mining method. 

2) Although the two target groups accompany 

similar symptoms, we will be able to make se-

lected symptoms more discriminative by devel-

oping impact score and considering temporal 

aspects, development rate. 

2.3  Distinguishing Symptoms Extraction 

We modeled each clinical document as one (tag, 

 item1, …, itemn) transaction of which tag and 

items indicate RT-PCR result and candidate fea-

tures, respectively. We set symptoms, signs, tra-

vel, and contact information as candidate fea-

tures. We divided target data into three groups 

(Table 1) and ran apriori association rule algo-

rithm to produce rules associated with RT-

PCR(+) or RT-PCR(-) cases. Then the items ap-

peared in association rules are collected. The 

items are grouped into four sets according to 

their original rules and training data (Table 2). 

The union of Ipos and Ipos_co was regarded as a 

distinguishing feature set, If. To enhance discrim-

ination ability, we used some weights to score 

them as shown in Table 2 and 3. 

Input data set Description  

Data 1 10 h1n1 positive transactions 

Data 2 10 h1n1 negative transactions 

Data 3 10 h1n1 positive transactions 

+ 10 h1n1 negative transactions 

 

Table 1. Input data 

130



 

2.4 Disease Development Pattern Analysis 

 We extracted temporal information of selected 

features in sample documents and modeled as 

interval constraints. We ran Floyd-Warshall’s 

all-pairs-shortest path algorithm to get hidden 

temporal relationships between two features. We 

traced start time gaps of the features to compare 

temporal patterns of the development rate of ex-

ternal indicators between two data sets, Data1 

and Data2. 

3 Result  

For input data, we produced transactions and ini-

tial temporal constraint network manually. We 

extracted distinctive feature set, applied our scor-

ing method, and compared temporal aspects. 

We limited support value threshold as 30% for 

Ipos and Ineg and 0% for Ipos_co and Ineg_co 

due to small data size. Eight signs and symptoms 

as well as travel information were extracted from 

47 items as distinguishing features of swine flu 

(Table 3). Besides sputum, pharynx injection, 

cvat, and travel information, five symptoms are 

the ones contained in the latest Centers for Dis-

ease Control (CDC) H1N1 influenza case report 

form. The others are strong indicators as well. 

The previous version of the CDC form contains 

sputum in the signs and symptoms section, and 

Himmerick (2009) described that pharyngeal 

injection is a clinical sign of uncomplicated 

swine-origin influenza A. Travel information is 

another important factor to diagnose an h1n1 

case in Korea and included in a special purpose 

h1n1 clinical document format in SNUH emer-

gency department. 

We compared start time of the features but 

could not find any differences. The symptoms 

had been developed so rapidly that temporal pat-

tern comparison between two groups was not 

meaningful. All the selected symptoms were de-

veloped within three days, and moreover, the 

symptoms in twelve documents were occurred in 

one day. As our data usually describes occur-

rence time in day granularity and the sample size 

is too small, we could not compare the features 

in finer granularity. 

4 Conclusion and Discussion 
In this paper, we tried to establish a methodolog-

ical approach to extract distinctive features of a 

novel pandemic on the early symptoms expe-

rienced by the patients. We applied popular data 

mining techniques to swine flu suspected cases. 

The results correspond to outputs of previous 

specialized medical domain research. We could 

get valuable information with extremely small 

amount of data. This methodological approach 

could be used usefully in novel infectious disease 

management and research to prevent spreading 

of the pandemic at the very beginning stage. 

Acknowledgement  
This work was supported by the Korea Science 

and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) grant 

funded by the Korea government(MEST) (No. 

2009-0090853). 

References  
Kristine A. Himmerick. H1N1 in perspective: The 

clinical impact of a novel influenza A virus. 
JAAPA CME articles. December 01, 2009 

Features Ipos Ipos_co Ineg Ineg_co score 

Dyspnea O O     9 
Pharyngeal 

injection 

O O     9 

Sore throat O O   O 7 
Travel O O   O 7 
Cough O O O O 6 

Fever O O O O 6 

Sputum O O O O 6 

Cvat (cos-

tovertebral 

angle ten-

derness) 

  O     5 

Rhinorrhea  O     5 

 

Table 3. Distinctive feature set(If) of h1n1 

cases accompanied with impact scores 
 

Input data Association rule descendant Unique item set in association rules Weight 

Data 1 H1n1 (+)  Ipos   4 

Data 3 H1n1 (+) Ipos_co  5 

Data 2 H1n1 (-) Ineg -1 

Data 3 H1n1 (-) Ineg_co -2 
* Subscript pos means the items are selected from h1n1(+) association rules (e.g., pos <- fever cough dyspnea) and neg 

means opposite cases (e.g., neg <- myalgia chilling fever). co indicates the items are selected from rules with h1n1(+) 

and h1n1(-) cases mixed training data (Data 3). 

 

Table 2. Feature sets and weights 

131


