










































Computational Linguistics for helping Requirements Elicitation: a dream about Automated Software Development


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 117–124, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Computational Linguistics for helping Requirements Elicitation: a 
dream about Automated Software Development

Carlos Mario Zapata J.
Leader of the Computational Language Research Group, School of Sys-

tems, Mines Faculty, Universidad Nacional de Colombia
Cra. 80 No. 65-223, of. M8A-310

Medellín, Colombia, South America
cmzapata@unal.edu.co

Abstract

Requirements elicitation is  one of the first 
processes of software development and it is 
intended to be hand-made by means of ana-
lyst-stakeholder  interviews.  As  a  natural-
language-based activity, requirements elici-
tation can take advantages of Computational 
Linguistics  techniques,  in order to achieve 
better results looking for automation in this 
field.  In this paper we survey some of the 
work  related  to  software  development  au-
tomation, guided by Computational Linguis-
tics techniques, and performed by the Com-
putational  Language Research Group from 
the Universidad Nacional de Colombia. We 
aim  the  definition  of  future  trans-national 
effort to be made in this research line.

1 Introduction

When stakeholders need to solve their information 
problems, they commonly search for the develop-
ment of software applications (Pressman, 2005). At 
the  beginning  of  this  process,  a  set  of  analyst-
stakeholder interviews take place, in order to cap-
ture the requirements belonging to the domain in 
which future software application must work. After 
that, in a hand-made process called “requirements 
elicitation”, the analyst transforms the captured in-
formation  into  formal  and  semi-formal  artifacts, 
mostly diagrams.  At this stage,  software applica-
tion is specified by means of such diagrams (Leite, 
1987).

Since  interviews  are  the  most  used techniques 
for collecting software requirements, they experi-
ment some of the most common problems of natu-

ral language (NL) communication: misunderstand-
ing,  ambiguity,  and  lack  of  clarity  (Christel  and 
Kang,  1992).  However,  as  an NL-based process, 
requirements elicitation can use some of the Com-
putational Linguistics (CL) and Natural Language 
Processing  (NLP)  techniques,  as  a  way to  solve 
such  problems.  The  main  goal  of  using  CL and 
NLP techniques in this particular problem is relat-
ed to the search for automation in the software de-
velopment process.

This is the strategy we (the Computational Lan-
guage Research Group—CLRG) choose to follow 
for clarifying requirements elicitation process and, 
therefore, for trying to automate the first phases of 
software  development  process.  In  this  paper,  we 
summarize  some of the CLRG effort  invested in 
helping requirements elicitation process with most-
ly  CL techniques,  but  searching  for  strong  NLP 
techniques, for instance, syntactical  and discourse 
parsers,  and  named  entity  recognition  systems, 
among others. We aim to show how we try to solve 
our  problems  in  this  field  (recognizing  the  exis-
tence of too much effort from other groups in the 
world, but focusing on our own work), as a way to 
motivate  the  definition  of  trans-national  projects 
searching for the same goals as us. Because our na-
tive language is Spanish, some of the examples we 
provide in this paper are encoded in this language.

The structure of this paper is the following: in 
section  2,  we  discuss  our  solutions  to  common 
problems  of  requirements  elicitation  process;  in 
section 3 we propose some possible joint projects 
in this field of knowledge; finally, in section 4 we 
present conclusions and future work.

117



2 Solutions  to  common  problems  of  re-
quirements elicitation process

Figure 1 gives us the overall software engineering 
process envisioned by this research. This is a kind 
of “big picture” about the way we are creating CL- 
and NLP-based tools  for  helping automated soft-
ware development  process.  In the following sub-
sections, we discuss a more detailed view of every 
tool.

2.1 Pre-conceptual schemas

The first gap we needed to bridge in this process 
was related to the knowledge representation of re-

quirements.  In  this  context,  the  UML  (Unified 
Modeling Language, OMG, 2010) is the  de-facto 
standard for representing requirements, but it is a 
language directed to technical readers, and stake-
holders are not usually technical people.  For this 
reason,  we  explored  the  possibilities  to  use  a 
graphical  language  closer  to  the  stakeholder  dis-
course, and we created the pre-conceptual schemas 
(Zapata,  2007)  by adapting  some previous  effort 
made by Sowa’s Conceptual Graphs (Sowa, 1984). 
Figure 2 shows an example of the pre-conceptual 
schemas, manually created by an analyst during the 
software elicitation process of one software appli-
cation.

Figure 1. Overall view of CL- and NLP-tools for automated software development.

Figure 2. An example of Pre-conceptual Schemas (Zapata, 2007).

118



Pre-conceptual  schemas  have  provided  a  new 
way to validate the stakeholder discourse, in order 
to clarify and understand what stakeholder has to 
say about  the  domain  information  related  to  the 
software application to-be-made.

2.2 UN-Lencep:  Specifying  pre-conceptual 
schemas

Pre-conceptual  schemas  gave  us  a  new  way  to 
communicate  with  stakeholders  in  the  require-
ments elicitation process, but their usage was limit-
ed to analysts. However, if we are interested in cre-
ating  a  pre-conceptual  schema,  we  need  the  in-
volvement of both kinds of actors in such action. In 
this case, we need to communicate each other in an 
NL-like way.

The solution to this problem came from two of 
the  several  techniques  from  Computational  Lin-
guistics:  Information  Extraction  (IE)  and  Con-
trolled Languages. In first  place, we use a set of 
templates,  in the same sense of IE templates,  for 
matching in a stakeholder discourse the same fea-
tures  of  a  pre-conceptual  schema.  Then,  we 
constrained the NL discourse, and we created UN-
Lencep  (Universidad  Nacional  de  Colombia—
Lenguaje  para  la  especificación  de  esquemas  
preconceptuales, Zapata et al., 2008).  By combin-
ing both techniques, we had the possibilities to cre-
ate a textual discourse in UN-Lencep. In the case 
of the pre-conceptual schema in figure 2, the UN-
Lencep discourse could be something like this:

A pet belongs to an owner.
The pet has identification, name, and medical  
history.
The medical history has a name and one detail.
The  detail  has  a  date,  a  diagnosis,  and  a  
medicine.
When the owner requests an appointment, the  
assistant assigns an appointment.
When  the  owner  accomplishes  the  appoint-
ment, the veterinarian auscultates the pet.
When the veterinarian auscultates the pet, the 
veterinarian registers the diagnosis.
When the veterinarian registers the diagnosis,  
the veterinarian prescribes the medicine.

Note that UN-Lencep phrases can be made by 
non-technical people, like stakeholders. The task of 
capturing requirements is now under the responsi-
bilities of the analyst-stakeholder team, instead of 

the analyst alone. Again, the UN-Lencep discourse 
is manually created by the analyst with the help of 
the stakeholder. We have developed a tool called 
UNC-Diagrammer, for helping the software elicita-
tion process in creating UN-Lencep discourses and 
pre-conceptual schemas. This tool has some mini-
mal NLP processing, because UN-Lencep is a tem-
plate-based controlled language.

2.3 Dialog model

UN-Lencep and pre-conceptual schemas provided 
the  partial  solution  to  our  requirements  capture 
problems. However, the fact that requirements elic-
itation was initiated by a set of stakeholder-analyst 
interviews reminded us the rest of the task. If we 
could discover a way to obtain the UN-Lencep dis-
course from something like an interview, we could 
link the beginning of the process to our partial so-
lution.

The answer, again, came from previous experi-
ences  in  Computational  Linguistics.  The  work 
made  on  dialog  models  provided  us  an  environ-
ment to prove our hypothesis about stakeholder-an-
alyst interviews. We found some previous work on 
dialog models related to train reservations, and we 
employed it to discover the structure of dialog, as 
sets of tagged utterances and turnovers. With these 
ideas in mind, we propose a structure for require-
ments  elicitation dialog (Zapata and Carmona, in 
press), as shown in figure 3. We are, also, explor-
ing the close relationship between dialog models 
for requirements elicitation and ontologies (Zapata 
et al., in press).

We are currently working on some projects for 
obtaining  UN-Lencep  discourses  from  a  dialog 
with the structure provided by figure 3. Also, we 
are working in proving the utilities of such conver-
sion in order to diminish software costs and devel-
opment time in  Latin-American software compa-
nies, and we select the COMPETISOFT model for 
promoting such improvement.

2.4 UNC-Corpus

Modeling is the center of requirements elicitation 
activities. We need models to understand the struc-
ture,  the behavior,  and the interaction among the 
concepts belonging to some domain. Traditionally, 
analysts make models by using their own knowl-
edge and understanding of the world domain, in a 
subjective way. But, is it possible to simulate such 

119



activity? How can we represent the knowledge ac-
quired  about  modeling  by an  analyst  in  creating 
models?  The work in Corpus Linguistics provided 
us some useful ideas about these questions. A cor-
pus is a collection of proved uses of a language. If 
we considered UML as a graphical modeling lan-
guage (but, finally,  a language), we could gather 

several “proved” uses of this language in the shape 
of  computationally  readable  files.  We  employed 
these  files  to  create  UNC-Corpus  (Zapata  et  al., 
2008),  a  UML-diagram  corpus.  Also,  we  used 
UNC-Corpus for  “completing”  diagrams, as  ana-
lysts  actually does,  by reviewing the  contents  of 
the corpus as shown in figure 4.

Figure 3. Requirements elicitation dialog model (Zapata and Carmona, in press).

2.5 AMV: a solution for conjugating and lem-
matizing Spanish verbs

Spanish is one of the most difficult languages for 
tasks  related  to  conjugate  and  lemmatize  verbs. 
Our  language  has  a  complex  structure  when  we 
need to use a verb.

CLRG have assumed these difficulties and, after 
exploring state  of  the art  in Spanish conjugators, 
decided to create  AMV (Analizador Morfológico 
de Verbos,  Zapata y Mesa,  2009),  an application 
that recognize the internal structure of the vast ma-
jority of Spanish verbs. AMV can be shown in fig-
ure 5.

2.6 Goals and problems

AMV gave us some insight about the structure of 
Spanish verbs, so we could discover some differ-
ences about these verbs. For example, we discov-
ered state verbs, action verbs, and goal verbs. Goal 
verbs are slightly different from the other kinds of 
verbs, because they express activities with no dura-
tion, generally associated to states to be reached. 

Three kinds  of  goal  verbs can be identified:  im-
provement,  maintenance,  and  achievement  verbs. 
Goal verbs are not recognized by most of the peo-
ple,  and  their  usage  tends  to  be  misunderstood 
along the software development process.

CLRG  devoted  some  effort  to  identify  goal 
verbs from NL discourses, and then represent them 
into pre-conceptual schemas (Zapata  et al., 2007). 
For completing this task, we used previous work of 
Antón  (1997)  for  gathering  some  verbs  in  the 
above  mentioned  categories,  and  then  we  em-
ployed a lexicon from Maryland University in or-
der  to  discover  the  internal  linguistic  features  of 
such verbs. With this information in hand, we in-
creased the number of available verbs for express-
ing goals. After that, we define a new set of sym-
bols to be used in pre-conceptual schemas for rep-
resenting goal verbs and then translating them into 
goal diagrams (Lezcano, 2007). Figure 6 shows an 
example of pre-conceptual schemas including goal 
verbs.
We are currently exploring the relationships among 
goals  and problems.  In  our  theory,  problems are 

120



seen either as negative goals or obstacles for a goal 
to be reached. So, we are trying to define a set of 
structures for representing goals and another set for 
representing problems. Also, we are defining some 
rules for obtaining goal expressions from problem 

sentences and viceversa. The first step of the pro-
cess was the state-of-the-art review of such struc-
tures (Zapata and Vargas, 2009), and we are deliv-
ering a Master’s Thesis with the structures and the 
heuristic rules for proving such relationship.

Figure 4. A snapshot of the use of UNC-Corpus (Zapata et al., 2008).

Figure 5. Snapshot of AMV (Zapata and Mesa, 2009).

121



Figure 6. An example of pre-conceptual schemas including goal verbs (Zapata et al., 2007)

2.7 Games for teaching

As a part of our research and teaching strategy, we 
use  games  to  show and reinforce  some concepts 
about  our  knowledge  area.  For  example,  we are 
currently  developing  an  on-line  game—called 
“Software  Boulevard”—for  understanding  how 
software industries make their intangible products. 
In this game, we intend to simulate the real behav-
ior of this kind of companies, but making the ac-
tors answer questions about software development 
process in several phases. Another example of our 
strategy is “Requirements elicitation dialog game” 
(Zapata and Giraldo, 2009), which is based on the 
importance of dialog inside the software develop-
ment process. This game is like a word puzzle in 
which players must fill in the blanks a set of words 
previously acquired by answering questions related 
to  software  development.  The blanks  are  located 
inside  a  simulated  analyst-stakeholder  interview 
and also as parts of a pre-conceptual schema. The 
main goal of the game is make conscious the play-
ers  about  the  importance of  good answers  in  re-
quirements  elicitation,  in  order  to  adequately 
“translate”  the  given  information  into  diagrams 
that consistently reflect such information.

2.8 State-of-the-art Reviews

The definition of several projects requires the ex-
tensive search for papers and journals related to the 

topics we need to incorporate in the process. In ad-
dition to the mentioned review on goals and prob-
lems  (Zapata  and  Vargas,  2009),  we  conducted 
some other  state-of-the-art  reviews on Controlled 
Languages  (Zapata  and  Rosero,  2008),  Dialog 
Models (Zapata and Mesa,  2009b),  and the Wiz-
ard-of-Oz  experiment  (Zapata  and  Carmona, 
2007).  Also,  we  made  a  review  on  Interlinguas 
(Zapata and Benítez, 2009), and we are preparing 
some other reviews on Computational Dialog and 
Code Generation.

3 Joint  projects  on requirements  elicita-
tion and computational linguistics

Our final goal—and probably “dream”—is the au-
tomation  of  software  development  process  from 
early  stages  related  to  speech  discourses.  We 
strongly believe this goal is so big enough to be 
reached by only one research group. We made now 
some part of the task, but we need help to complete 
it. For this reason, we want to create some trans-
national projects related to this field of knowledge 
to be executed by several research groups in Latin 
America,  for  example  the  Computation  Research 
Centre from the Instituto Politécnico Nacional  in 
Mexico, the Linguistic Engineering research group 
from the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Méx-
ico,  the  Working  Group  2.9  (Software  Require-
ments Engineering) from IFIP (International Fed-
eration  for  Information Processing),  and  the  Hu-

122



man-Computer  Interaction  Research  Group  from 
the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso. 
We have contacts inside these research groups and 
we are willing to initiate joint research projects re-
lated  to  Computational  Linguistics  and  Require-
ments Engineering.

The first project in which we are concerned is 
the  use  of  technical  documentation  for  require-
ments  elicitation. In almost every organization in 
the  world,  technical  documents  define  the  way 
such organization must behave. If we were capable 
to understand the surrounding information in these 
documents,  we could  elicit  many concepts  to  be 
validated  in  the  analyst-stakeholder  interviews, 
making too much work before the interviews take 
place. In this project, we need groups with exper-
tise in analyzing and processing some kind of tech-
nical  documents  (for  instance,  technical  reports, 
law sentences, instructions, and so on).

The second project we need to propose have nat-
ural  language  speeching  as  the  main  issue.  The 
way a stakeholder-analyst  interview is  conducted 
suggests that some expressions are repeated once 
and again in the context of the dialog. These ex-
pressions are guidelines to gather important infor-
mation  about  the  domain.  In  this  case,  we  need 
groups with larger experience in recording, retriev-
ing, and analyzing speech dialogs.

A computational  corpus  of  stakeholder-analyst 
interviews is the main product of the third project 
we want to execute.  Corpus  linguistics  can offer 
many techniques for analyzing such corpus, in or-
der to discover meta-information about the process 
of requirements elicitation by means of interviews. 
The common uses of expressions can lead to pre-
dictive information concerning one domain.  Con-
sequently, we need to gather as many recorded in-
terviews as we can, and research groups with this 
kind of information.

Finally, games are needed for understanding and 
simulating the entire process of requirements elici-
tation  as  a  result  from stakeholder-analyst  inter-
views, and this is the goal of the fourth project we 
need to propose. Our group has been using games 
in the shape of teaching strategies and we plan to 
keep using this strategy, because we think we are 
successful  on  it.  Here,  we  need  research  groups 
with the intention to co-create  and use games as 
teaching  strategies.  Also,  we  need  people  with 
some experience in evaluating the impact of games 
as teaching strategies.

The above mentioned  projects  have some CL- 
and  NLP-based  techniques  as  good  offerings  to 
find a solution. Also, for achieving the goals of ev-
ery  project,  we  need  to  interact  with  experts  in 
software  elicitation  process.  We hope  this  cross-
functional  and  trans-national  effort  will  give  the 
necessary tools to make true the dream about au-
tomation in software development process.

4 Conclusions and future work

The Computational Language Research Group has 
been developing some projects for helping require-
ments  elicitation  process  by means  of  Computa-
tional  Linguistics,  and  we  shown  some  of  this 
work in this paper. We tried to summarize the most 
important of our projects concerning this issue, be-
cause our aim is to propose and develop trans-na-
tional projects in searching for automated software 
development.

The  "big  picture"  of  this  work  exhibits  joint 
projects for making requirements elicitation closer 
to natural language dialog and speech. We look for 
a dream in which software development will be a 
simpler task, developed by common people by us-
ing natural language speeching interfaces.

Some work has still to be done:

• Eliciting  requirements  from  technical  docu-
ments belonging to an organization.

• Incorporating  speech  recognition  to  the  re-
quirements elicitation.

• Building  a  computational  corpus  of  analyst-
stakeholder interviews.

• Creating new games as teaching strategies for 
understanding  the  entire  requirements elicita-
tion process.

All of these projects are intended to be made by 
trans-national  groups  with  some  concern  about 
software development  process,  computational lin-
guistics, and natural language processing.

Acknowledgment
This  work is  founded by  the  Vicerrectoría  de 

Investigación  from  Universidad  Nacional  de  
Colombia, under the project: “Software Boulevard 
un juego de estrategia en Web para la enseñanza de 
competencias  de  gestión  en  Ingeniería  de 
Software”, Project number 9766.

123



References 
Annie Antón. 1997. Goal Identification and Refinement  

in  the  Specification  of  Software-Based Information  
Systems. PhD Thesis, Georgia Institute of Technolo-
gy, Atlanta, USA.

Michael  Christel  and Kyo  Kang.  1992.  Issues  in  Re-
quirement  elicitation. Technical  Report,  CMU/SEI-
92-TR-012,  ESC-TR-92-012.  Software  Engineering 
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburg.

Julio Cesar Leite. 1987. A survey on requirements anal-
ysis.  Department of Information and Computer Sci-
ence,  University  of  California,  Irvine,  Advanced 
Software Engineering Project Technical Report RT-
P071.

Luis  Lezcano.  2007.  Elaboración  semiautomática  del  
diagrama  de  objetivos.  M.Sc.  Thesis,  Universidad 
Nacional de Colombia, Sede Medellín.

Object Management Group (OMG). 2010. UML Super-
structure. Available at: http://www.omg.org/uml.

Roger Pressman. 2005. Software Engineering: a practi-
tioner's approach, 6th ed. McGraw Hill, New York.

John Sowa. 1984.  Conceptual  Structures:  Information 
Processing in Mind and Machine.  Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Co., Reading, MA.

Carlos  Zapata.  2007.  Definición  de  un  esquema 
preconceptual  para  la  obtención  automática  de  
esquemas  conceptuales  de  UML.  Ph.D.  Thesis, 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, sede Medellín.

Carlos  Zapata  and  Servio  Benítez.  2009.  Interlingua: 
Análisis crítico de la literatura.  Revista Facultad de 
Ingeniería Universidad de Antioquia, 47:117–128.

Carlos  Zapata  and  Nicolás  Carmona.  In  press.  Un 
modelo de diálogo para la Educción de Requisitos de 
Software. Dyna.

Carlos  Zapata  and  Nicolás  Carmona.  2007.  El 
experimento  Mago de  Oz  y  sus  aplicaciones:  Una 
mirada retrospectiva. Dyna, 74(151):125–135.

Carlos Zapata and Gloria Giraldo.  2009.  El  juego del 
diálogo  de  educción  de  requisitos  de  software. 
Avances en Sistemas e Informática, 6(1):105–114.

Carlos Zapata, Gloria Giraldo, and John Mesa. In press. 
Una propuesta de Metaontología para la Educción de 
Requisitos de Software. Ingeniare.

Carlos  Zapata,  Alexander  Gelbukh,  and  Fernando 
Arango. 2006. UN-Lencep: Obtención Automática de 
Diagramas UML a partir de un Lenguaje Controlado. 
Memorias  del  VII  Encuentro  Nacional  de  
Computación  ENC'06,  San  Luis  Potosí,  México, 
254–259.

Carlos  Zapata,  Juan  Hernández,  and  Raúl  Zuluaga. 
2008. UNC-Corpus: corpus de diagramas UML para 
la  solución  de  problemas  de  completitud  en 
ingeniería de software.  Revista EAFIT, 44(151):93–
106.

Carlos Zapata, Luis Lezcano, and Paula Tamayo. 2007. 
Validación del método para la obtención automática 
del  diagrama  de  objetivos  desde  esquemas 
preconceptuales.  Revista  Escuela  de  Ingeniería  de 
Antioquia, (8):21–35.

Carlos Zapata and John Mesa. 2009. Una propuesta para 
el análisis morfológico de verbos del español. Dyna, 
76(157):27–36.

Carlos Zapata and John Mesa. 2009b.  Los Modelos de 
Diálogo y sus Aplicaciones en Sistemas de Diálogo 
Hombre-Máquina:  Revisión  de  la  literatura.  Dyna, 
76(160):305–315.

Carlos  Zapata  and  Roberto  Rosero.  2008.  Revisión 
Crítica  de  la  Literatura  especializada  en  Lenguajes 
Controlados.  Avances  en  Sistemas  e  Informática, 
5(3):27–33.

Carlos Zapata and Fabio Vargas. 2009. Una revisión de 
la  literatura  en  consistencia  entre  problemas  y 
objetivos  en  Ingeniería  de  Software  y  Gerencia 
Organizacional.  Revista  Escuela  de  Ingeniería  de  
Antioquia, 11:117–129.

124


