










































Corpus Creation for New Genres: A Crowdsourced Approach to PP Attachment


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 13–20,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Corpus Creation for New Genres:
A Crowdsourced Approach to PP Attachment

Mukund Jha, Jacob Andreas, Kapil Thadani, Sara Rosenthal and Kathleen McKeown
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027, USA

{mj2472,jda2129}@columbia.edu, {kapil,sara,kathy}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

This paper explores the task of building an ac-
curate prepositional phrase attachment corpus
for new genres while avoiding a large invest-
ment in terms of time and money by crowd-
sourcing judgments. We develop and present
a system to extract prepositional phrases and
their potential attachments from ungrammati-
cal and informal sentences and pose the subse-
quent disambiguation tasks as multiple choice
questions to workers from Amazon’s Mechan-
ical Turk service. Our analysis shows that
this two-step approach is capable of producing
reliable annotations on informal and poten-
tially noisy blog text, and this semi-automated
strategy holds promise for similar annotation
projects in new genres.

1 Introduction

Recent decades have seen rapid development in nat-
ural language processing tools for parsing, semantic
role-labeling, machine translation, etc., and much of
this success can be attributed to the study of statisti-
cal techniques and the availability of large annotated
corpora for training. However, the performance of
these systems is heavily dependent on the domain
and genre of their training data, i.e. systems trained
on data from a particular domain tend to perform
poorly when applied to other domains and adap-
tation techniques are not always able to compen-
sate (Dredze et al., 2007). For this reason, achiev-
ing high performance on new domains and genres
frequently necessitates the collection of annotated
training data from those domains and genres, a time-
consuming and frequently expensive process.

This paper examines the problem of collecting
high-quality annotations for new genres with a focus
on time and cost efficiency. We explore the well-
studied but non-trivial task of prepositional phrase
(PP) attachment and describe a semi-automated sys-
tem for identifying accurate attachments in blog
data, which is frequently noisy and difficult to parse.
PP attachment disambiguation involves finding a
correct attachment for a prepositional phrase in a
sentence. For example, in the sentence “We went to
John’s house on Saturday”, the phrase “on Satur-
day” attaches to the verb “went”. In another exam-
ple, “We went to John’s house on 12th Street”, the
PP “on 12th street” attaches to the noun “John’s
house”. This sort of disambiguation requires se-
mantic knowledge about sentences that is difficult
to glean from their surface form, a problem which
is compounded by the informal nature and irregular
vocabulary of blog text.

In this work, we investigate whether crowd-
sourced human judgments are capable of distin-
guishing appropriate attachments. We present a sys-
tem that simplifies the attachment problem and rep-
resents it in a format that can be intuitively tackled
by humans.

Our approach to this task makes use of a heuristic-
based system built on a shallow parser that identi-
fies the likely words or phrases to which a PP can
attach. To subsequently select the correct attach-
ment, we leverage human judgments from multi-
ple untrained annotators (referred to here as work-
ers) through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk 1, an online
marketplace for work. This two-step approach of-

1http://www.mturk.amazon.com

13



fers distinct advantages: the automated system cuts
down the space of potential attachments effectively
with little error, and the disambiguation task can be
reduced to small multiple choice questions which
can be tackled quickly and aggregated reliably.

The remainder of this paper focuses on the PP at-
tachment task over blog text and our analysis of the
resulting aggregate annotations. We note, however,
that this type of semi-automated approach is poten-
tially applicable to any task which can be reliably
decomposed into independent judgments that un-
trained annotators can tackle (e.g., quantifier scop-
ing, conjunction scope). This work is intended as
an initial step towards the development of efficient
hybrid annotation tools that seamlessly incorporate
aggregate human wisdom alongside effective algo-
rithms.

2 Related Work

Identifying PP attachments is an essential task for
building syntactic parse trees. While this task has
been studied using fully-automated systems, many
of them rely on parse tree output for predicting po-
tential attachments (Ratnaparkhi et al., 1994; Yeh
and Vilain, 1998; Stetina and Nagao, 1997; Zavrel
et al., 1997). However, systems that rely on good
parses are unlikely to perform well on new genres
such as blogs and machine translated texts for which
parse tree training data is not readily available.

Furthermore, the predominant dataset for eval-
uating PP attachment is the RRR dataset (Ratna-
parkhi et al., 1994) which consists of PP attach-
ment cases from the Wall Street Journal portion of
the Penn Treebank. Instead of complete sentences,
this dataset consists of sets of the form {V,N1,P,N2}
where {P,N2} is the PP and {V,N1} are the poten-
tial attachments. This simplification of the PP at-
tachment task to a choice between two alternatives
is unrealistic when considering the potential long-
distance attachments encountered in real-world text.

While blogs and other web text, such as discus-
sion forums and emails, have been studied for a va-
riety of tasks such as information extraction (Hong
and Davison, 2009), social networking (Gruhl et
al., 2004), and sentiment analysis (Leshed and
Kaye, 2006), we are not aware of any previous ef-
forts to gather syntactic data (such as PP attach-

ments) in the genre. Syntactic methods such as
POS tagging, parsing and structural disambiguation
are commonly used when analyzing well-structured
text. Including the use of syntactic information
has yielded improvements in accuracy in speech
recognition (Chelba and Jelenik, 1998; Collins et
al., 2005) and machine translation (DeNeefe and
Knight, 2009; Carreras and Collins, 2009). We an-
ticipate that datasets such as ours could be useful for
such tasks as well.

Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) has become
very popular for manual annotation tasks and has
been shown to perform equally well over labeling
tasks such as affect recognition, word similarity, rec-
ognizing textual entailment, event temporal order-
ing and word sense disambiguation, when compared
to annotations from experts (Snow et al., 2008).
While these tasks were small in scale and intended to
demonstrate the viability of annotation via MTurk,
it has also proved effective in large-scale tasks in-
cluding the collection of accurate speech transcrip-
tions (Gruenstein et al., 2009). In this paper we ex-
plore a method for corpus building on a large scale
in order to extend annotation into new domains and
genres.

We previously evaluated crowdsourced PP attach-
ment annotation by using MTurk workers to repro-
duce PP attachments from the Wall Street Journal
corpus (Rosenthal et al., 2010). The results demon-
strated that MTurk workers are capable of identi-
fying PP attachments in newswire text, but the ap-
proach used to generate attachment options is de-
pendent on the existing gold-standard parse trees
and cannot be used on corpora where parse trees are
not available. In this paper, we build on the semi-
automated annotation principle while avoiding the
dependency on parsers, allowing us to apply this
technique to the noisy and informal text found in
blogs.

3 System Description

Our system must both identify PPs and generate a
list of potential attachments for each PP in this sec-
tion. Figure 1 illustrates the structure of the system.

First, the system extracts sentences from scraped
blog data. Text is preprocessed by stripping HTML
tags, advertisements, non-Latin and non-printable

14



PPs

PPs

Question 

 Builder

PP Identifier

Chunker
+

Preprocessor

sentences
Chunked 

Chunked 
sentences

point predictor
Attachment

attachments
Potential

Mechanical

     Turk

Questions
forNew domain

data (Blogs)

Figure 1: Overview of question generation system

characters. Emoticon symbols are removed using a
standard list. 2

The cleaned data is then partitioned into sentences
using the NLTK sentence splitter. 3 In order to
compensate for the common occurrence of informal
punctuation and web-specific symbols in blog text,
we replace all punctuation symbols between quo-
tation marks and parentheses with placeholder tags
(e.g. 〈QuestionMark〉) during the sentence splitting
process and do the same for website names, time
markers and referring phrases (e.g. @John). Ad-
ditionally, we attempt to re-split sentences at ellipsis
boundaries if they are longer than 80 words and dis-
card them if this fails.

As parsers trained on news corpora tend to per-
form poorly on unstructured texts like blogs, we
rely on a chunker to partition sentences into phrases.
Choosing a good chunker is essential to this ap-
proach: around 35% of the cases in which the cor-
rect attachment is not predicted by the system are
due to chunker error. We experimented with differ-
ent chunkers over a random sample of 50 sentences
before selecting a CRF-based chunker (Phan, 2006)
for its robust performance.

The chunker output is initially processed by fus-
ing together chunks in order to ensure that a single
chunk represents a complete attachment point. Two
consecutive NP chunks are fused if the first contains
an element with a possessive part of speech tag (e.g.
John’s book), while particle chunks (PRT) are fused
with the VP chunks that precede them (e.g. pack
up). These chunked sentences are then processed
to identify PPs and potential attachment points for
them, which can then be used to generate questions

2http://www.astro.umd.edu/˜marshall/
smileys.html

3http://www.nltk.org

for MTurk workers.

3.1 PP Extraction

PPs can be classified into two broad categories based
on the number of chunks they contain. A simple
PP consists of only two chunks: a preposition and
one noun phrase, while a compound PP has multi-
ple simple PPs attached to its primary noun phrase.
For example, in the sentence “I just made some last-
minute changes to the latest issue of our newsletter”,
the PP with preposition “to” can be considered to be
either the simple PP “to the latest issue” or the com-
pound PP “to the latest issue of our newsletter”.

We handle compound PPs by breaking them down
into multiple simple PPs; compound PPs can be re-
covered by identifying the attachments of their con-
stituent simple PPs. Our simple PP extraction al-
gorithm identifies PPs as a sequence of chunks that
consist of one or more prepositions terminating in a
noun phrase or gerund.

3.2 Attachment Point Prediction

A PP usually attaches to the noun or verb phrase pre-
ceding it or, in some cases, can modify a following
clause by attaching to the head verb. We build a set
of rules based on this intuition to pick out the poten-
tial attachments in the sentence; these rules are de-
scribed in Table 1. The rules are applied separately
for each PP in a sentence and in the same sequence
as mentioned in the table (except for rule 4, which
is applied while choosing a chunk using any of the
other rules).

15



Rule Example
1 Choose closest NP and VP preceding the PP. I made modifications to our newsletter.
2 Choose next closest VP preceding the PP if the VP selected in (1)

contains a VBG.
He snatched the disk flying away with one hand.

3 Choose first VP following the PP. On his desk he has a photograph.
4 All chunks inside parentheses are skipped, unless the PP falls within

parentheses.
Please refer to the new book (second edition) for
more notes.

5 Choose anything immediately preceding the PP that is not out of
chunk and has not already been picked.

She is full of excitement.

6 If a selected NP contains the word and, expand it into two options,
one with the full expression and one with only the terms following
and.

He is president and chairman of the board.

7 For PPs in chains of the form P-NP-P-NP (PP-PP), choose all the
NPs in the chain preceding the PP and apply all the above rules
considering the whole chain as a single PP.

They found my pictures of them from the concert.

8 If there are fewer than four options after applying the above rules,
also select the VP preceding the last VP selected, the NP preceding
the last NP selected, and the VP following the last VP picked.

Table 1: List of rules for attachment point predictor. In the examples, PPs are denoted by boldfaced text and potential
attachment options are underlined.

4 Experiments

An experimental study was undertaken to test our
hypothesis that we could obtain reliable annotations
on informal genres using MTurk workers. Here we
describe the dataset and our methods.

4.1 Dataset and Interface

We used a corpus of blog posts made on LiveJour-
nal 4 for system development and evaluation. Only
posts from English-speaking countries (i.e. USA,
Canada, UK, Australia and New Zealand) were con-
sidered for this study.

The interface provided to MTurk workers showed
the sentence on a plain background with the PP high-
lighted and a statement prompting them to pick the
phrase in the sentence that the given PP modified.
The question was followed by a list of options. In
addition, we provided MTurk workers the option to
indicate problems with the given PP or the listed op-
tions. Workers could write in the correct attachment
if they determined that it wasn’t present in the list of
options, or the correct PP if the one they were pre-
sented with was malformed. This allowed them to
correct errors made by the chunker and automated
attachment point predictor. In all cases, workers
were forced to pick the best answer among the op-
tions regardless of errors. We also supplied a num-

4http://www.livejournal.com

ber of examples covering both well-formed and er-
roneous cases to aid them in identifying appropriate
attachments.

4.2 Experimental Setup

For our experiment, we randomly selected 1000
questions from the output produced by the system
and provided each question to five different MTurk
workers, thereby obtaining five different judgments
for each PP attachment case. Workers were paid four
cents per question and the average completion time
per task was 48 seconds. In total $225 was spent
on the full study with $200 spent on the workers and
$25 on MTurk fees.The total time taken for the study
was approximately 16 hours.

A pilot study was carried out with 50 sentences
before the full study to test the annotation interface
and experiment with different ways of presenting the
PP and attachment options to workers. During this
study, we observed that while workers were will-
ing to suggest correct answers or PPs when faced
with erroneous questions, they often opted to not
pick any of the options provided unless the question
was well-formed. This was problematic because, in
many cases, expert annotators were able to identify
the most appropriate attachment option. Therefore,
in the final study we forced them to pick the most
suitable option from the given choices before indi-
cating errors and writing in alternatives.

16



Workers in agreement Number of questions Accuracy Coverage
5 (unanimity) 389 97.43% 41.33%
≥ 4 (majority) 689 94.63% 73.22%
≥ 3 (majority) 887 88.61% 94.26%
≥ 2 (plurality) 906 87.75% 96.28%
Total 941 84.48% 100%

Table 2: Accuracy and coverage over agreement thresholds

5 Evaluation corpus

In order to determine if the MTurk results were re-
liable, worker responses had to be validated by hav-
ing expert annotators perform the same task. For
this purpose, two of the authors annotated the 1000
questions used for the experiment independently and
compared their judgments. Disagreements were ob-
served in 127 cases; these were then resolved by a
pool of non-author annotators. If all three annota-
tors on a case disagreed with each other the question
was discarded; this situation occured 43 times. An
additional 16 questions were discarded because they
did not have a valid PP. For example, “I am painting
with my blanket on today”. Here “on today” is in-
correctly extracted as a PP because the particle “on”
is tagged as a preposition. The rest of the analysis
presented in this section was performed on the re-
maining 941 sentences.

The annotators’ judgments were compared to the
answers provided by the MTurk workers and, in
the case of disagreement between the experts and
the majority of workers, the sentences were man-
ually inspected to determine the reason. In five
cases, more than one valid attachment was possi-
ble; for example, in the sentence “The video below is
of my favourite song on the album - A Real Woman”,
the PP “of my favourite song” could attach to either
the noun phrase “the video” or the verb “is” and con-
veys the same meaning. In such cases, both the ex-
perts and the workers were considered to have cho-
sen the correct answer.

In 149 cases, the workers also augmented their
choices by providing corrections to incomplete an-
swers and badly constructed PPs. For example,
the PP “of the Rings and Mikey” in the sentence
“Samwise from Lord of the Rings and Mikey from
The Goonies are the same actor ?” was corrected to
“of the Rings”. In 34/39 of the cases where the cor-

rect answer was not present in the options provided,
at least one worker indicated correct attachment for
the PP.

5.1 Attachment Prediction Evaluation

We measure the recall for our attachment point pre-
dictor as the number of questions for which the cor-
rect attachment appeared among the generated op-
tions divided by the total number of questions. The
system achieves a recall of 95.85% (902/941 ques-
tions). We observed that in many cases where the
correct attachment point was not predicted, it was
due to a chunker error. For example, in the following
sentence, “Stop all the clocks , cut off the telephone
, Prevent the dog from barking with a juicy bone...”,
the PP “from barking” attaches to the verb “Pre-
vent”; however, due to an error in chunking “Pre-
vent” is tagged as a noun phrase and hence is not
picked by our system. The correct attachment was
also occasionally missed when the attachment point
was too far from the PP. For example, in the sentence
“Fitting as many people as possible on one sofa and
under many many covers and getting intimate”, the
correct attachment for the PP “under many many
covers” is the verb “Fitting” but it is not picked by
our system.

Even though the correct attachment was not al-
ways given, the workers could still provide their own
correct answer. In the first example above, 3/5 work-
ers indicated that the correct attachment was not in
the list of options and wrote it in.

6 Results

Table 2 summarizes the results of the experiment.
We assess both the coverage and reliability of
worker predictions at various levels of worker agree-
ment. This serves as an indicator of the effective-
ness of the MTurk results: the accuracy can be taken

17



Figure 2: The number of questions in which exactly x
workers provided the correct answer

as a general confidence measure for worker predic-
tions; when five workers agree we can be 97.43%
confident in the correctness of their prediction, when
at least four workers agree we can be 94.63% con-
fident, etc. Unanimity indicates that all workers
agreed on an answer, majority indicates that more
than half of workers agreed on an answer, and plu-
rality indicates that two workers agreed on a single
answer, while the remaining three workers each se-
lected different answers. We observe that at high
levels of worker agreement, we get extremely high
accuracy but limited coverage of the data set; as
we decrease our standard for agreement, coverage
increases rapidly while accuracy remains relatively
high.

Figure 2 shows the number of workers providing
the correct answer on a per-question basis. This
illustrates the distribution of worker agreements
across questions. Note that in the majority of cases
(69.2%), at least four workers provided the correct
answer; in only 3.6% of cases were no workers able
to select the correct attachment.

Figure 3 shows the distribution of worker agree-
ments. Unlike Table 2, these figures are not cumu-
lative and include non-plurality two-worker agree-
ments. Note that the number of agreements dis-
cussed in this figure is greater than the 941 evaluated
because in some cases there were multiple agree-
ments on a single question. As an example, three
workers may choose one answer while the remain-
ing two workers choose another; this question then
produces both a three-worker agreement as well as a
two-worker agreement.

Figure 3: The number of cases in which exactly x work-
ers agreed on an answer

No. of options No. of cases Accuracy
< 4 179 86.59%

4 718 84.26%
> 4 44 79.55%

Table 3: Variation in worker performance with the num-
ber of attachment options presented

All questions on which there is agreement also
produce a majority vote, with one exception: the
2/2/1 agreement. Although the correct answer was
selected by one set of two workers in every case of
2/2/1 agreement, this is not particularly useful for
corpus-building as we have no way to identify a pri-
ori which set is correct. Fortunately, 2/2/1 agree-
ments were also quite rare and occurred in only 3%
of cases.

Figure 3 appears to indicate that instances of
agreement between two workers are unlikely to pro-
duce good attachments; they have a an average ac-
curacy of 37.2%. However, this is due in large part
to cases of 3/2 agreement, in which the two workers
in the minority are usually wrong, as well as cases of
2/2/1 agreement which contain at least one incorrect
instance of two-worker agreement. However, if we
only consider cases in which the two-worker agree-
ment forms a plurality (i.e. all other workers dis-
agree amongst themselves), we observe an average
accuracy of 64.3% which is similar to that of cases
of three-worker agreement (67.7%).

We also attempted to study the variation in worker
performance based on the complexity of the task;
specifically looking at how response accuracy var-
ied depending on the number of options that workers
were presented with. Although our system aimed to

18



Figure 4: Variation in accuracy with sentence length.

generate four attachment options per case, fewer op-
tions were produced for small sentences and opening
PPs while additional options were generated in sen-
tences containing PP-NP chains (see Table 1 for the
complete list of rules). Table 3 shows the variation in
accuracy with the number of options provided to the
workers. We might expect that an increased number
of options may be correlated with decreased accu-
racy and the data does indeed seem to suggest this
trend; however, we do not have enough datapoints
for the cases with fewer or more than four options to
verify whether this effect is significant.

We also analyzed the relationship between the
length of the sentence (in terms of number of words)
and the accuracy. Figure 4 indicates that as the
length of the sentence increases, the average accu-
racy decreases. This is not entirely unexpected as
lengthy sentences tend to be more complicated and
therefore harder for human readers to parse.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

We have shown that by working in conjunction
with automated attachment point prediction sys-
tems, MTurk workers are capable of annotating PP
attachment problems with high accuracy, even when
working with unstructured and informal blog text.
This work provides an immediate framework for the
building of PP attachment corpora for new genres
without a dependency on full parsing.

More broadly, the semi-automated framework
outlined in this paper is not limited to the task of
annotating PP attachments; indeed, it is suitable for
almost any syntactic or semantic annotation task
where untrained human workers can be presented

with a limited number of options for selection. By
dividing the desired annotation task into smaller
sub-tasks that can be tackled independently or in a
pipelined manner, we anticipate that more syntac-
tic information can be extracted from unstructured
text in new domains and genres without the sizable
investment of time and money normally associated
with hiring trained linguists to build new corpora.
To this end, we intend to further leverage the advent
of crowdsourcing resources in order to tackle more
sophisticated annotation tasks.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Kevin Lerman for
his help in formulating the original ideas for this
work. This material is based on research supported
in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation
(NSF) under IIS-05-34871. Any opinions, findings
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not nec-
essarily reflect the views of the NSF.

References

Xavier Carreras and Michael Collins. 2009. Non-
projective parsing for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 200–209.

Ciprian Chelba and Frederick Jelenik. 1998. Structured
language modeling for speech recognition. In Pro-
ceedings of NLDB.

Michael Collins, Brian Roark, and Murat Saraclar.
2005. Discriminative syntactic language modeling for
speech recognition. In Proceedings of ACL, pages
507–514.

Steve DeNeefe and Kevin Knight. 2009. Synchronous
tree adjoining machine translation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 727–736.

Mark Dredze, John Blitzer, Partha Pratim Talukdar, Kuz-
man Ganchev, João Graca, and Fernando Pereira.
2007. Frustratingly hard domain adaptation for depen-
dency parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL Shared
Task Session of EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 1051–1055,
Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Alex Gruenstein, Ian McGraw, and Andrew Sutherland.
2009. A self-transcribing speech corpus: collecting
continuous speech with an online educational game.
In Proceedings of the Speech and Language Technol-
ogy in Education (SLaTE) Workshop.

19



Figure 5: HIT Interface for PP attachment task

Daniel Gruhl, R. Guha, David Liben-Nowell, and An-
drew Tomkins. 2004. Information diffusion through
blogspace. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 491–501.

Liangjie Hong and Brian D. Davison. 2009. A
classification-based approach to question answering in
discussion boards. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages
171–178.

Gilly Leshed and Joseph ’Jofish’ Kaye. 2006. Under-
standing how bloggers feel: recognizing affect in blog
posts. In CHI ’06 extended abstracts on Human fac-
tors in computing systems, pages 1019–1024.

Xuan-Hieu Phan. 2006. CRFChunker: CRF
English phrase chunker. http://crfchunker.
sourceforge.net.

Adwait Ratnaparkhi, Jeff Reynar, and Salim Roukos.
1994. A maximum entropy model for prepositional
phrase attachment. In Proceedings of HLT, pages 250–
255.

Sara Rosenthal, William J. Lipovsky, Kathleen McKe-
own, Kapil Thadani, and Jacob Andreas. 2010. Semi-
automated annotation for prepositional phrase attach-
ment. In Proceedings of LREC, Valletta, Malta.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and An-
drew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast—but is it good?:
evaluating non-expert annotations for natural language
tasks. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 254–263.

Jiri Stetina and Makoto Nagao. 1997. Corpus based PP
attachment ambiguity resolution with a semantic dic-
tionary. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large
Corpora, pages 66–80.

Alexander S. Yeh and Marc B. Vilain. 1998. Some prop-
erties of preposition and subordinate conjunction at-
tachments. In Proceedings of COLING, pages 1436–
1442.

Jakub Zavrel, Walter Daelemans, and Jorn Veenstra.
1997. Resolving PP attachment ambiguities with
memory-based learning. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Computational Language Learning (CoNLL),
pages 136–144.

Appendix A: Mechanical Turk Interface

Figure 5 shows a screenshot of the interface pro-
vided to the Mechanical Turk workers for the PP at-
tachment task. By default, examples and additional
options are hidden but can be viewed using the links
provided. The screenshot illustrates a case in which
a worker is confronted with an incorrect PP and uses
the additional options to correct it.

20


