



















































A Hybrid Approach for Functional Expression Identification in a Japanese Reading Assistant


Proceedings of the Multiword Expressions: From Theory to Applications (MWE 2010), pages 81–84,
Beijing, August 2010

A Hybrid Approach for Functional Expression Identification
in a Japanese Reading Assistant

Gregory Hazelbeck
Graduate School of

Science and Technology
Keio University

gregh@nak.ics.keio.ac.jp

Hiroaki Saito
Graduate School of

Science and Technology
Keio University

hxs@ics.keio.ac.jp

Abstract

In this paper we present a hybrid approach
for identifying Japanese functional ex-
pressions and its application in a Japanese
reading assistant. We combine the re-
sults of machine learning and pattern-
based methods to identify several types
of functional expressions. We show that
by using our approach we can double the
coverage of previous approaches and still
maintain the high level of performance
necessary for our application.

1 Introduction

Functional expressions are one of the most im-
portant elements of Japanese grammar that any-
one studying the language must learn. Despite the
importance of functional expressions, many tools
that assist learners of Japanese with reading texts
only provide dictionary look-up of simple words.
However, the ability to quickly obtain informa-
tion about such grammar could not only improve
the learner’s comprehension of the text, but also
facilitate their learning process of new elements
of Japanese grammar. Thus, we have decided to
develop a Japanese reading assistant that is ca-
pable of providing explanations of functional ex-
pressions in addition to vocabulary.

Functional expressions in Japanese are com-
pound expressions that contain content and func-
tion words, and can have both compositional and
non-compositional meanings. For example, in Ta-
ble 1, sentences 1 and 2 contain theにあたり (ni-
atari) compound expression. In sentence 1, this
expression has a functional, non-compositional
meaning of “when.” However, in sentence 2, the

same expression has a compositional meaning that
results simply from using the post-particleに (ni)
and verb あたり (a conjugated form of あたる
(ataru), meaning “to hit”) together. We refer to
this as the content usage of a functional expres-
sion. However, there are also functional expres-
sions where this type of content usage is very rare
(or even nonexistent). Sentence 3 shows an ex-
ample of theなければなりません (nakerebanari-
masen) functional expression which has a very
common functional meaning of “must or have to.”

Tsuchiya et al. (2006) have proposed a method
based on machine learning to identify functional
expressions. However, this method only covers
functional expressions which have balanced func-
tional vs. content usage ratios. In order to boost
coverage of current methods, we propose a hybrid
approach for functional expression identification
which uses a combination of the machine learning
method proposed by Tsuchiya et al. (2006) and
simple patterns. Coverage analysis and empirical
evaluations show that our method doubles the cov-
erage of previous approaches while still maintain-
ing a high level of performance.

2 Related Work

2.1 Functional Expressions

Research on Japanese functional expressions has
included work on identification methods as well
as resources that aid identification. Matsuyoshi
et al. (2006) developed a hierarchical dictionary
of functional expressions called Tsutsuji. The top
level of the dictionary’s nine level hierarchy con-
tains the lexical form of 341 expressions. The sec-
ond level categorizes these expressions by mean-
ing. The remaining seven levels contain various

81



にあたり (niatari)

1. Functional
アパートに入居するにあたり、隣近所に挨拶回りをするのは日本の習慣です。

It is a custom in Japan to greet your neighbors when you move into a new apartment.

2. Content
ボールが顔面にあたり、歯が折れた。

The ball hit me in the face and broke my tooth.
なければなりません (nakerebanarimasen)

3. Functional
明日は学校に行かなければなりません。

I have to go to school tomorrow.

Table 1. Examples of Japanese functional expressions.

surface forms for each expression where inser-
tion/deletion of particles and other conjugations
have been made. While this is the most compre-
hensive dictionary of Japanese functional expres-
sions, it can not be directly used for identifica-
tion because of the functional/content usage prob-
lem described in the previous section. Therefore,
identification methods like Tsuchiya et al. (2006)
which uses Support Vector Machines(SVM) have
been proposed to solve this problem. The data set
(Tsuchiya et al., 2005) used to train this method,
called MUST, contains annotated instances of 337
functional expressions. For each expression, a
maximum of 50 instances were collected from the
1995 Mainichi newspaper corpus.

Recent work by the same group of researchers
(Nagasaka et al., 2010) indicates that they have
continued to annotate additional functional ex-
pressions for the MUST data set. During this
process, they have observed that only around one
third of all functional expressions possess a suf-
ficient amount of functional and content usages
to be used with their machine learning method.
However, they have yet to propose any method
to cover the other two-thirds of functional expres-
sions. Our hybrid approach aims to improve cov-
erage by identifying functional expressions that
fall into this group.

3 Identification Method

Our hybrid approach combines the results from
two different methods of functional expression
identification. First, we will describe our imple-
mentation of a method that uses machine learning.
Then, we will describe our method of generating
patterns for functional expressions.

3.1 Machine Learning

Our implementation of the method proposed by
Tsuchiya et al. (2006) only deviates slightly from
its original form. We developed our own SVM-
based text chunking system in Python while the
original paper uses a text chunker called Yamcha1.
We also use the MeCab2 morphological analyzer
with a dictionary called UniDic while the original
paper used ChaSen with the default dictionary.

When training the SVMs, the original method
uses three sets of labels: functional, content, and
other. This allows both functional and content us-
ages to be explicitly identified. However, in our
application, we only need to identify functional
usages so that the expressions’ correct definitions
can be displayed. Therefore, in our implementa-
tion we only use two sets of labels (functional and
other) and label all content usages as other. We
also decided to build a separate model for each
functional expression because it enables us to add
new training data and functional expressions with-
out having to retrain everything. Although this
does increase time complexity in the worse case,
in practice it does not have a big affect on perfor-
mance because only a small fraction of the total
number of models are being used for a given text.
Identification of functional expressions in a new
text is performed in the following steps:

1. Morphologically analyze the text with
MeCab and extract candidate functional
expressions from the morpheme sequence.

2. Select the model corresponding to each can-
didate functional expression.

1http://chasen.org/~taku/software/yamcha/
2http://mecab.sourceforge.net/

82



GeneratePatterns(C: list of candidates from Tsutsuji)
01 P = {}
02 for each candidate c in C:
03 S = sentences that contain c in the BCCWJ
04 for each sentence s in S:
05 Ms = morpheme sequence of s
06 Mc = ExtractCandMorph(c, Ms)
07 if Mc ̸= null ∧ VerbChk(c, Mc, Ms, P):
08 Add Mc to P
09 break out of loop on line 4
10 end if
11 end for
12 end for
13 return P

Figure 1. The GeneratePatterns algorithm.

3. Use each model to conduct chunking. Label
any functional chunks as the model’s corre-
sponding functional expression.

4. Combine the results from each model. Re-
solve any overlapping chunks by the same
rules3 that Tsuchiya et al. (2006) use to re-
solve overlapping candidate functional ex-
pressions during feature generation.

3.2 Patterns
We generate simple patterns to identify functional
expressions with a high ratio of functional usage.
First, surveys are conducted of functional expres-
sions in Tsutsuji using the Balanced Corpus of
Contemporary Written Japanese (BCCWJ)4. As
of writing this paper, we have selected 36 func-
tional expressions from Tsutsuji’s top level as can-
didates for pattern generation. We also included
various surface forms of these expressions from
other levels of Tsutsuji resulting in a total of 1558
candidate functional expressions. The algorithm
used to generate patterns is shown in Figure 1.

The ExtractCandMorph function simply re-
turns the candidate c’s morpheme sequence. If
the candidate’s string does not match the bound-
aries of morphemes in Ms then null is returned.
The VerbChk function returns true if a candidate
is an auxiliary verb from Tsutsuji’s top level and
the morpheme immediately preceding it in Ms is a
verb. It returns true for lower level auxiliary verb

3Specifically, select the candidate that starts at the left-
most morpheme. If more than one candidate starts at the
same morpheme then select the longest candidate.

4Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese
Monitor Release Data (2009 Version).

candidates if the last morpheme in its morpheme
sequence is also in the morpheme sequence of its
top-level parent candidate from Tsutsuji. For any
candidate that is not an auxiliary verb, the func-
tion always returns true. We force candidates from
lower levels to satisfy an extra condition because
their lower frequency in the BCCWJ increases the
probability that a sentence with the wrong ex-
pression/usage will be selected. This algorithm
produces one pattern per functional expression.
Each pattern is composed of the expression’s mor-
pheme sequence. This is a list where each ele-
ment contains a morpheme’s surface form, part of
speech, and lexical form. Patterns for auxiliary
verbs also check if the previous morpheme is a
verb. Using this algorithm, we were able to gen-
erate 502 patterns with our 1558 candidate func-
tional expressions.

4 Coverage Analysis

To investigate the improvement in coverage
achieved by our hybrid approach, we compared
the coverage of our approach with the coverage
of just the MUST data set. We define coverage
as the ratio of functional expressions contained in
both the Tsutsuji dictionary and BCCWJ that are
supported.

We first collected all of the functional expres-
sion surface forms contained in Tsutsuji. We ex-
cluded all of the single character surface forms
which are mostly simple particles. Next, we
recorded the frequency of each surface form’s
string in the BCCWJ. Overlapping of strings is
allowed as long as a string covers at least one
character that no other string does. Finally, we
recorded which surface forms were supported by
our hybrid approach and the MUST data set. Ta-
ble 3 shows our final results.

Our results show that MUST is only cover-
ing around 12% of Tsutsuji’s functional expres-
sions in the BCCWJ. The additional functional
expressions supported by our hybrid approach
helps boost this coverage to 24%. Improvement
in coverage is observed at every frequency inter-
val. This is especially advantageous for our ap-
plication because it allows us to display informa-
tion about many different common and uncom-
mon functional expressions.

83



Corpus Usage Examples Total Examples Total MorphemesFunctional Content
Training (MUST) 1,767 1,463 3,230 114,699
Testing (1995 Mainichi Newspaper) 5,347 1,418 6,765 244,324

Table 2. Training and testing corpora details.

Frequency
Interval

Tsutsuji MUST Hybrid

>5,000 199 44 (22%) 70 (35%)
5,000-1,001 244 70 (29%) 111 (45%)
1,000-501 134 37 (28%) 54 (40%)
500-101 519 124 (24%) 191 (37%)
100-51 269 53 (20%) 90 (33%)
50-26 327 54 (17%) 97 (30%)
25-11 467 46 (10%) 113 (24%)
10-2 1,180 55 (5%) 188 (16%)
1 723 11 (2%) 82 (11%)
Total 4,062 494 (12%) 996 (24%)

Table 3. Functional expressions covered by each
resource. Percentage of Tsutsuji covered in each
frequency interval is given in parenthesis.

Software (kernel) Precision Recall Fβ = 1
Yamcha (polynomial) 0.928 0.936 0.932
Our chunker (linear) 0.931 0.935 0.933

Table 4. Experiment 1 results.

5 Evaluation

We evaluated the machine learning method on 54
of the most difficult to identify functional expres-
sions. These are the same expressions that were
used in Tsuchiya et al. (2006)’s evaluation. De-
tails of the training and testing data sets are shown
in Table 2. Results (Table 4) show that this method
performs well even on the most difficult functional
expressions. We also found that using a simple
linear kernel gave the best precision.

We evaluated the patterns generated from our
method by using them to identify functional ex-
pressions in randomly selected texts from the BC-
CWJ. After verifying 2000 instances of identified
functional expressions, we only found 6 instances
to be incorrect. However, since these 2000 in-
stances only cover 89 of the 502 expressions that
we support, we randomly selected two instances
of each remaining expression from the BCCWJ
and verified them. In the additional 750 instances
that were verified, only 10 instances were found
to be incorrect. Results of the second experi-

ment show that patterns generated for high fre-
quency functional expressions are providing espe-
cially good performance.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we presented a hybrid approach for
identifying Japanese functional expressions and
its application in a Japanese reading assistant. We
showed that a combination of machine learning
and simple patterns can improve coverage while
still maintaining the high level of performance
necessary for our application.

7 Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Takehito Utsuro for allow-
ing us to use his annotated functional expression
data to evaluate our approach. We would also like
to thank all of the other people involved in cre-
ating the MUST data set. Finally, we would like
to thank the anonymous reviewers for all of their
helpful comments.

References
Matsuyoshi, Suguru, Satoshi Sato, and Takehito Utsuro.

2006. Compilation of a Dictionary of Japanese Func-
tional Expressions with Hierarchical Organization. IC-
CPOL. pp. 395–402.

Nagasaka, Taiji, Takehito Utsuro, Suguru Matsuyoshi,
Masatoshi Tsuchiya. 2010. Analysis and Detection of
Japanese Functional Expressions based on a Hierarchical
Lexicon. Proceedings of the 16th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Natural Language Processing. pp. 970–
973. (in Japanese)

Tsuchiya, Masatoshi, Takao Shime, Toshihiro Takagi, Take-
hito Utsuro, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Suguru Matsuyoshi,
Satoshi Sato, and Seiichi Nakagawa. 2006. Chunking
Japanese Compound Functional Expressions by Machine
Learning. Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop
on Web as Corpus (EACL-2006). pp. 11–18.

Tsuchiya, Masatoshi, Takehito Utsuro, Suguru Matsuyoshi,
Satoshi Sato, and Seiichi Nakagawa. 2005. A Corpus
for Classifying Usages of Japanese Compound Functional
Expressions. PACLING. pp. 345–350.

84


