










































OTTO: A Transcription and Management Tool for Historical Texts


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 182–185,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

OTTO: A Transcription and Management Tool for Historical Texts

Stefanie Dipper, Lara Kresse, Martin Schnurrenberger & Seong-Eun Cho
Institute of Linguistics, Ruhr University Bochum

D – 44780 Bochum
dipper@linguistics.rub.de, lara.kresse@rub.de,

martin.schnurrenberger@rub.de, seong-eun.cho@rub.de

Abstract

This paper presents OTTO, a transcription
tool designed for diplomatic transcription
of historical language data. The tool sup-
ports easy and fast typing and instant ren-
dering of transcription in order to gain a
look as close to the original manuscript
as possible. In addition, the tool provides
support for the management of transcrip-
tion projects which involve distributed,
collaborative working of multiple parties
on collections of documents.

1 Corpora of Historical Languages1

The only way to study historical languages is, of
course, by looking at texts, or corpora from these
languages. Compared to texts from modern lan-
guages, early manuscripts or prints pose particular
challenges. Depending on physical condition of
the manuscripts, passages can be hard to decipher,
or pages can be damaged or missing completely.
Some texts contain words or passages that have
been added later, e.g., to clarify the meaning of a
text segment, or to correct (real or assumed) errors.

Moreover, historical texts exhibit a large
amount of character peculiarities (special letters,
punctuation marks, abbreviations, etc.), which are
not easily encoded by, e.g., the ASCII encoding
standard. For instance, medieval German texts of-
ten use superscribed letters to represent emerging
or remnant forms of diphthongs, e.g. ou. Some texts
distinguish two forms of the (modern) letter <s>,
the so-called short vs. long s: <s> vs. <ſ>. Con-
versely, some texts do not differentiate between
the (modern) letters <u> and <v>.

The existence of letter variants is often at-
tributed to aesthetic reasons or to save (expen-

1The research reported in this paper was financed by
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Grant DI 1558/1-1.
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments.

sive) space. Thus, when early manuscripts are
to be transcribed, it must first be decided whether
the differences between such variants are consid-
ered irrelevant and, hence, can be safely ignored,
or whether they constitute a (possibly) interesting
phenomenon and potential research issue.

This discussion relates to the level of tran-
scription, i.e. “how much of the information in
the original document is included (or otherwise
noted) by the transcriber in his or her transcrip-
tion” (Driscoll, 2006). Diplomatic transcription
aims at reproducing a large range of features of the
original manuscript or print, such as large initials
or variant letter forms.

Another important issue with historical corpora
is meta-information. A lot of research on histor-
ical texts focuses on the text proper and its con-
tent, rather than its language. For instance, re-
searchers are interested in the history of a text
(“who wrote this text and where?”), its relation-
ship to other texts (“did the writer know about or
copy another text?”), its provenance (“who were
the owners of this text?”), or its role in the cul-
tural context (“why did the author write about this
subject, and why in this way?”). To answer such
questions, information about past and current de-
positories of a manuscript, peculiarities of the ma-
terial that the text is written on, etc. are collected.
In addition, any indicator of the author (or writer)
of the text is noted down. Here, the text’s language
becomes relevant as a means to gather information
about the author. Linguistic features can be used to
determine the text’s date of origin and the author’s
social and regional affiliation. Usually, this kind
of information is encoded in the header (see, e.g.,
the TEI header (TEI Consortium (eds), 2007)).2

From the above, we derive the following re-
quirements:

Above all, use of Unicode is indispensable, to

2Text Encoding Initiative, www.tei-c.org

182



be able to encode and represent the numerous spe-
cial symbols and characters in a reliable and sus-
tainable way. Of course, not all characters that oc-
cur in historical texts are already covered by the
current version of Unicode. This is especially true
of character combinations, which are only sup-
ported partially (the main reason being that Uni-
code’s Combining Diacritical Marks focus on su-
perscribed diacritics rather than characters in gen-
eral). Therefore, Unicode’s Private Use Area has
to be used as well.

Similarly, there are characters without glyphs
defined and designed for them. Hence, an ideal
transcription tool should support the user in creat-
ing new glyphs whenever needed.

Since there are many more characters in histori-
cal texts than keys on a keyboard, the transcription
tool must provide some means to key in all char-
acters and combinations (similar issues arise from
logographic scripts, such as Chinese). In princi-
ple, there are two ways to do this:

(i) The transcriber uses a virtual keyboard,
which supports various character sets simultane-
ously and is operated by the mouse. Virtual key-
boards are “WYSIWYG” in that their keys are la-
beled by the special characters, which can then be
selected by the user by mouse clicks. As is well
known, virtual keyboards are often preferred by
casual users, beginners, or non-experts, since they
are straightforward to operate and do not require
any extra knowledge. However, the drawback is
that “typing” with a computer mouse is rather slow
and tedious and, hence, not a long-term solution.

(ii) Alternatively, special characters, such as
“$”, “@”, etc., are used as substitutes for historical
characters, commonly in combination with ordi-
nary characters, to yield a larger number of char-
acters that can be represented. Regular and ad-
vanced users usually prefer substitute characters
to virtual keyboards, because once the user knows
the substitutes, typing them becomes very natural
and fast. Of course, with this solution transcribers
have to learn and memorize the substitutes.

Some tools convert substitutes to the actual
characters immediately after typing (this is the
case, e.g., with shortcuts in Emacs), while others
require additional post-processing by interpreters
and viewers to display the intended glyphs (e.g.,
LaTeX encodings converted to postscript). Imme-
diate preview seems advantageous in that it pro-
vides immediate feedback to the user. On the other

hand, it might be easier to memorize substitutes if
the user can actually see them.

Which input method is to be preferred for his-
torical data? Transcription projects often involve
both beginners and advanced users: having people
(e.g. student assistants) join and leave the team is
rather often the case, because transcribing is a very
labor- and time-intensive task.

Our transcription tool OTTO faces this fact by
combining the advantages of the two methods.
The user types and views character substitutes but
simultaneously gets feedback in a separate win-
dow about whether the input is correct or not. This
lessens the uncertainty of new team members and
helps avoiding typing mistakes, thus increasing
the quality of transcription.

Another important requirement is the possibil-
ity to mark additions, deletions, uncertain read-
ings, etc. To encode such information, TEI also
provides a standardized representation format.

Finally, projects that involve multiple parties
distributed over different sites add a further re-
quirement. In such scenarios, tools are preferably
hosted by a server and operated via a web browser.
This way, there is no need of multiple installations
at different sites, and data on the server does not
need to be synchronized but is always up to date.

To our knowledge, there is no transcription tool
that (i) would support Unicode, (ii) allow for fast
typing, using character substitutes, and (iii) is
web-based. In MS Word, special characters are
usually inserted by means of virtual keyboards but
character substitutes can be defined via macros.
However, macros often pose problems when Word
is upgraded. Moreover, Word is not web-based.
LaTeX, which supports character substitutes, is of-
ten considered too complex for non-expert users,
does not offer instant preview, and is not web-
based.

2 The Transcription Tool OTTO3

OTTO is an online transcription tool for editing,
viewing and storing information of historical lan-
guage data. OTTO’s data model is a directed
graph. Nodes point to a (possibly empty) stretch
of primary data and are labeled.

The tool is written in PHP and also uses some
Java Script; data is stored in a mySQL database.

3A prior version of OTTO has been described in Dipper
and Schnurrenberger (2009).

183



Figure 1: Screenshot of the text editor

Any server which runs PHP >5.2 can be a host
for OTTO. Users can login to the tool from any-
where using a standard web browser. A live demo
of OTTO, with slightly restricted functionality,
can be tried out here: http://underberg.
linguistics.rub.de/ottolive.

2.1 Transcribing with OTTO
OTTO integrates a user-definable header editor, to
enter meta information about the manuscript, such
as its title, author, date of origin, etc. However, the
tool’s core feature is the text editor. The upper part
of the text editor in Fig. 1 displays the lines that
have been transcribed and saved already. Each line
is preceded by the bibliographic key, M117_sd2,
the folio and line numbers, which are automati-
cally generated.

The bottom part is dominated by two separate
frames. The frame on the left, called Transcrip-
tion, is the currently “active” field, where the user
enters the transcription (or edits an existing one).
The transcriber can use substitute characters to en-
code non-ASCII characters. In the figure, the dol-
lar sign ($) serves as a substitute for long s (<ſ>,
see the first word of the text, De$), and u\o stands
for ou (see Cu\onrat in the Transcription field at the
bottom).

The frame on the right, called Unicode, directly
transforms the user input to its diplomatic tran-

scription form, using a set of transcription rules.
The diplomatic Unicode view thus provides imme-
diate feedback to the transcriber whether the input
is correct or not.

Transcription rules have the form of “search-
and-replace” patterns. The first entity specifies the
character “to be searched” (e.g. $), the second en-
tity specifies the diplomatic Unicode character that
“replaces” the actual character. Transcription rules
are defined by the user, who can consult a database
such as the ENRICH Gaiji Bank4 to look up Uni-
code code points and standardized mappings for
them, or define new ones. OTTO uses the Juni-
code font, which supports many of MUFI’s me-
dieval characters, partly defined in Unicode’s Pri-
vate Use Area.5

Rules can be defined locally—i.e., applying to
the current transcription only—or globally, i.e.,
applying to all documents contained in OTTO’s
database.6 The rules are used to map the lines
entered in the Transcription frame to the lines in
diplomatic form in the Unicode frame.

OTTO allows for the use of comments, which
4http://beta.manuscriptorium.com/
5Junicode: http://junicode.sourceforge.

net/; MUFI (Medieval Unicode Font Initiative):
http://www.mufi.info/

6Global rules can be thought of as the application of a
project’s transcription criteria; local rules can be viewed as
handy abbreviations defined by individual users.

184



can be inserted at any point of the text. Since the
current version of OTTO does not provide special
means to take record of passages that have been
added, deleted, or modified otherwise, the com-
ment mechanism could be exploited for this pur-
pose.

The transcription, both in original (typed) and
in Unicode version, can be exported to a (cus-
tomized) TEI-conform XML format. Transcrip-
tion rules are optionally included in the header.

2.2 Transcription Projects

Projects that deal with the creation of historical
corpora often involve a cascade of successive pro-
cessing steps that a transcription has to undergo.
For instance, high-quality transcriptions are often
entered twice, by two transcribers independently
from each other, and their outcomes are compared
and adjusted. In the case of diplomatic transcrip-
tions, a further step called collating is necessary.
Collating means comparing the transcription and
the original manuscript in full detail. Often two
people are involved: One person reads out the
manuscript letter for letter, and also reports on any
superscript, white-space, etc. The other person
simultaneously tracks the transcription, letter for
letter. This way, high-quality diplomatic transcrip-
tion can be achieved.

To cope with the numerous processing steps,
transcription projects often involve a lot of people,
who work on different manuscripts (or different
pages of the same manuscript), in different pro-
cessing states.

OTTO supports such transcription projects in
several aspects: First, it allows for remote access
to the database, via standard web browsers. Sec-
ond, documents that are currently edited by some
user are locked, i.e., cannot be edited or modi-
fied otherwise by another user. Third, OTTO pro-
vides facilities to support and promote communi-
cation among project members. Finally, graphical
progress bars show the progress for each transcrip-
tion, measuring the ratio of the subtasks already
completed to all subtasks,

3 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper presented OTTO, an online transcrip-
tion tool for easy and fast typing, by the use of
user-defined special characters, and, simultane-
ously, providing a view on the manuscript that is as
close to the original as possible. OTTO also sup-

ports distributed, collaborative working of multi-
ple parties on collections of documents.

Future work includes adding further support for
transcribing special characters. First, we plan to
integrate a virtual keyboard for casual users. The
keyboard can also be used in the creation of tran-
scription rules, in order to specify the Unicode re-
placement characters, or if the user wants to look
up the substitute character defined for a specific
Unicode character in the set of transcription rules.

We plan to use the TEI gaiji module for the
representation of transcription rules and substitute
characters; similarly, elements from the TEI tran-
scr module could be used for the encoding of ad-
ditions, deletions, etc.7

For facilitating the collation process, we plan
to integrate transparent overlays. The user would
have to rescale an image of the original manuscript
and adjust it to the transcription, so that corre-
sponding characters would match.

OTTO is designed as to allow for adding cus-
tom functions, by being programmed according
to the paradigm of object-oriented programming.
Additional functionality can easily be integrated
(known as Plug-Ins). We currently work on in-
tegrating a normalizer into OTTO which maps
spelling and dialectal variants of word forms to a
standardized word form (Schnurrenberger, 2010).

OTTO will be made freely available to the re-
search community.

References
Stefanie Dipper and Martin Schnurrenberger. 2009.

OTTO: A tool for diplomatic transcription of histor-
ical texts. In Proceedings of 4th Language & Tech-
nology Conference, Poznan, Poland. To appear.

Matthew J. Driscoll. 2006. Levels of transcription.
In Lou Burnard, Katherine O’Brien O’Keeffe,
and John Unsworth, editors, Electronic Textual
Editing, pages 254–261. New York: Modern
Language Association of America. URL: http:
//www.tei-c.org/About/Archive_new/
ETE/Preview/driscoll.xml.

Martin Schnurrenberger. 2010. Methods for
graphemic normalization of unstandardized written
lang uage from Middle High German Corpora. Mas-
ter’s thesis, Ruhr University Bochum.

TEI Consortium (eds). 2007. TEI P5: Guidelines for
electronic text encoding and interchange. http:
//www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.

7http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/
tei-p5-doc/html/WD.html and PH.html

185


