










































Collaborating on Utterances with a Spoken Dialogue System Using an ISU-based Approach to Incremental Dialogue Management


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 233–236,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Collaborating on Utterances with a Spoken Dialogue System
Using an ISU-based Approach to Incremental Dialogue Management

Okko Buß, Timo Baumann, David Schlangen
Department of Linguistics

University of Potsdam, Germany
{okko|timo|das}@ling.uni-potsdam.de

Abstract
When dialogue systems, through the
use of incremental processing, are
not bounded anymore by strict, non-
overlapping turn-taking, a whole range of
additional interactional devices becomes
available. We explore the use of one such
device, trial intonation. We elaborate
our approach to dialogue management
in incremental systems, based on the
Information-State-Update approach, and
discuss an implementation in a micro-
domain that lends itself to the use of
immediate feedback, trial intonations and
expansions. In an overhearer evaluation,
the incremental system was judged as sig-
nificantly more human-like and reactive
than a non-incremental version.

1 Introduction
In human–human dialogue, most utterances have
only one speaker.1 However, the shape that an
utterance ultimately takes on is often determined
not just by the one speaker, but also by her ad-
dressees. A speaker intending to refer to some-
thing may start with a description, monitor while
they go on whether the description appears to be
understood sufficiently well, and if not, possibly
extend it, rather than finishing the utterance in the
form that was initially planned. This monitoring
within the utterance is sometimes even made very
explicit, as in the following example from (Clark,
1996):

(1) A: A man called Annegra? -
B: yeah, Allegra
A: Allegra, uh, replied and, uh, . . .

In this example, A makes use of what Sacks and
Schegloff (1979) called a try marker, a “question-
ing upward intonational contour, followed by a

1Though by far not all; see (Clark, 1996; Purver et al.,
2009; Poesio and Rieser, 2010).

brief pause”. As discussed by Clark (1996), this
device is an efficient solution to the problem posed
by uncertainty on the side of the speaker whether
a reference is going to be understood, as it checks
for understanding in situ, and lets the conversation
partners collaborate on the utterance that is in pro-
duction.

Spoken dialogue systems (SDS) typically can-
not achieve the close coupling between produc-
tion and interpretation that is needed for this to
work, as normally the smallest unit on which they
operate is the full utterance (or, more precisely,
the turn). (For a discussion see e.g. (Skantze and
Schlangen, 2009).) We present here an approach
to managing dialogue in an incremental SDS that
can handle this phenomenon, explaining how it is
implemented in system (Section 4) that works in
a micro-domain (which is described in Section 3).
As we will discuss in the next section, this goes be-
yond earlier work on incremental SDS, combining
the production of multimodal feedback (as in (Aist
et al., 2007)) with fast interaction in a semantically
more complex domain (compared to (Skantze and
Schlangen, 2009)).

2 Related Work
Collaboration on utterances has not often been
modelled in SDS, as it presupposes fully incre-
mental processing, which itself is still something
of a rarity in such systems. (There is work on
collaborative reference (DeVault et al., 2005; Hee-
man and Hirst, 1995), but that focuses on written
input, and on collaboration over several utterances
and not within utterances.) There are two systems
that are directly relevant here.

The system described in (Aist et al., 2007) is
able to produce some of the phenomena that we
are interested in here. The set-up is a simple
reference game (as we will see, the domain we
have chosen is very similar), where users can re-
fer to objects shown on the screen, and the SDS
gives continuous feedback about its understand-

233



ing by performing on-screen actions. While we
do produce similar non-linguistic behaviour in our
system, we also go beyond this by producing
verbal feedback that responds to the certainty of
the speaker (expressed by the use of trial intona-
tion). Unfortunately, very little technical details
are given in that paper, so that we cannot compare
the approaches more fully.

Even more closely related is some of our own
previous work, (Skantze and Schlangen, 2009),
where we modeled fast system reactions to deliv-
ery of information in installments in a number se-
quence dictation domain. In a small corpus study,
we found a very pronounced use of trial or in-
stallment intonations, with the first installments of
numbers being bounded by rising intonation, and
the final installment of a sequence by falling into-
nation. We made use of this fact by letting the sys-
tem distinguish these situations based on prosody,
and giving it different reaction possibilities (back-
channel feedback vs. explicit confirmation).

The work reported here is a direct scaling up of
that work. For number sequences, the notion of
utterance is somewhat vague, as there are no syn-
tactic constraints that help demarcate its bound-
aries. Moreover, there is no semantics (beyond
the individual number) that could pose problems
– the main problem for the speaker in that do-
main is ensuring that the signal is correctly identi-
fied (as in, the string could be written down), and
the trial intonation is meant to provide opportuni-
ties for grounding whether that is the fact. Here,
we want to go beyond that and look at utterances
where it is the intended meaning whose recogni-
tion the speaker is unsure about (grounding at level
3 rather than (just) at level 2 in terms of (Clark,
1996).) This difference leads to differences in the
follow up potential: where in the numbers domain,
typical repair follow-ups were repetitions, in se-
mantically more complex domains we can expect
expansions or reformulations.

3 The Puzzle Micro-Domain
To investigate these issues in a controlled set-
ting, we chose a domain that makes complex and
possibly underspecified references likely, and that
also allows a combination of linguistic and non-
linguistic feedback. In this domain, the user’s goal
is to instruct the system to pick up and manipu-
late Tetris-like puzzle pieces, which are shown on
the screen. We recorded human–human as well
as human–(simulated) machine interactions in this

domain, and indeed found frequent use of “pack-
aging” of instructions, and immediate feedback, as
in (2) (arrow indicating intonation).

(2) IG-1: The cross in the corner↗ ...
IF-2: erm

IG-3: the red one .. yeah

IF-4: [moves cursor]

IG-5: take that.

We chose these as our target phenomena for the
implementation: intra-utterance hesitations, possi-
bly with trial intonation (as in line 2);2 immediate
execution of actions (line 4), and their grounding
role as display of understanding (“yeah” in line 3).
The system controls the mouse cursor, e.g. moving
it over pieces once it has a good hypothesis about
a reference; other actions are visualised similarly.

4 Implementation
4.1 Overview

Our system is realised as a collection of incre-
mental processing modules in the InproToolKit
(Schlangen et al., 2010), a middle-ware pack-
age that implements some of the features of the
model of incremental processing of (Schlangen
and Skantze, 2009). The modules used in the im-
plementation will be described briefly below.

4.2 ASR, Prosody, Floor Tracker & NLU

For speech recognition, we use Sphinx-4 (Walker
et al., 2004), with our own extensions for incre-
mental speech recognition (Baumann et al., 2009),
and our own domain-specific acoustic model. For
the experiments described here, we used a recog-
nition grammar.

Another module performs online prosodic anal-
ysis, based on pitch change, which is measured in
semi-tone per second over the turn-final word, us-
ing a modified YIN (de Cheveigné and Kawahara,
2002). Based on the slope of the f0 curve, we clas-
sify pitch as rising or falling.

This information is used by the floor track-
ing module, which notifies the dialogue manager
(DM) about changes in floor status. These sta-
tus changes are classified by simple rules: silence
following rising pitch leads to a timeout signal

2Although we chose to label this “intra-utterance” here,
it doesn’t matter much for our approach whether one consid-
ers this example to consist of one or several utterances; what
matters is that differences in intonation and pragmatic com-
pleteness have an effect.

234



{< a ( 1 action=A=take; 2 prepare(A) ; 3 U),
( 4 tile=T ; 5 highlight(T) ; 6 U),
( 7 ; 8 execute(A,T) ; 9 U) >

< b (10 action=A=del ;11 prepare(A) ;12 U),
(13 tile=T ;14 highlight(T) ;15 U),
(16 ;17 execute(A,T) ;18 U) >}

Figure 1: Example iQUD

sent to the DM faster (200ms) than silence after
falling pitch (500ms). (Comparable to the rules in
(Skantze and Schlangen, 2009).)

Natural language understanding finally is per-
formed by a unification-based semantic composer,
which builds simple semantic representations out
of the lexical entries for the recognised words; and
a resolver, which matches these representations
against knowledge of the objects in the domain.

4.3 Dialogue Manager and Action Manager
The DM reacts to input from three sides: semantic
material coming from the NLU, floor state signals
from the floor tracker, and notifications about exe-
cution of actions from the action manager.

The central element of the information state
used in the dialogue manager is what we call the
iQUD (for incremental Question under Discus-
sion, as it’s a variant of the QUD of (Ginzburg,
1996)). Figure 1 gives an example. The iQUD
collects all relevant sub-questions into one struc-
ture, which also records what the relevant non-
linguistic actions are (RNLAs; more on this in a
second, but see also (Buß and Schlangen, 2010),
where we’ve sketched this approach before), and
what the grounding status is of that sub-question.

Let’s go through example (2). The iQUD in
Figure 1 represents the state after the system has
asked “what shall I do now?”. The system an-
ticipates two alternative replies, a take request, or
a delete request; this is what the specification of
the slot value in 1 and 10 in the iQUD indicates.
Now the user starts to speak and produces what is
shown in line 1 in the example. The floor tracker
reacts to the rising pitch and to the silence of ap-
propriate length, and notifies the dialogue man-
ager. In the meantime, the DM has received up-
dates from the NLU module, has checked for each
update whether it is relevant to a sub-question on
the iQUD, and if so, whether it resolves it. In this
situation, the material was relevant to both 4 and
13, but did not resolve it. This is a precondition for
the continuer-questioning rule, which is triggered
by the signal from the floor tracker. The system

then back-channels as in the example, indicating
acoustic understanding (Clark’s level 2), but fail-
ure to operate on the understanding (level 3). (As
an aside, we found that it is far from trivial to find
the right wording for this prompt. We settled on
an “erm” with level pitch.)

The user then indeed produces more material,
which together with the previously given informa-
tion resolves the question. This is where the RN-
LAs come in: when a sub-question is resolved, the
DM looks into the field for RNLAs, and if there
are any, puts them up for execution to the action
manager. In our case, slots 4 and 13 are both
applicable, but as they have compatible RNLAs,
this does not cause a conflict. When the action
has been performed, a new question is accommo-
dated (not shown here), which can be paraphrased
as “was the understanding displayed through this
action correct?”. This is what allows the user reply
in line 3 to be integrated, which otherwise would
need to be ignored, or even worse, would confuse
a dialogue system. A relevant continuation, on the
other hand, would also have resolved the question.
We consider this modelling of grounding effects
of actions an important feature of our approach.

Similar rules handle other floor tracker events;
not elaborated here for reasons of space. In
our current prototype the rules are hard-coded,
but we are preparing a version where rules and
information-states can be specified externally and
are read in by a rule-engine.

4.4 Overhearer Evaluation

Evaluating the contribution of one of the many
modules in an SDS is notoriously difficult (Walker
et al., 1998). To be able to focus on evaluation of
the incremental dialogue strategies and avoid in-
terference from ASR problems (and more techni-
cal problems; our system is still somewhat frag-
ile), we opted for an overhearer evaluation. (Such
a setting was also used for the test of the incremen-
tal system of (Aist et al., 2007).)

We implemented a non-incremental version of
the system that does not give non-linguistic feed-
back during user utterances and has only one,
fixed, timeout of 800ms (comparable to typical
settings in commercial dialogue systems). Two
of the authors then recorded 30 minutes of inter-
actions with the two versions of the system.We
then identified and discarded “outlier” interac-
tions, i.e. those with technical problems, or where

235



recognition problems were so severe that a non-
understanding state was entered repeatedly. These
criteria were meant to be fair to both versions
of the system, and indeed we excluded similar
numbers of failed interactions from both versions
(around 10 % of interactions in total).

We measured the length of interactions in the
two sets, and found that the interactions in the in-
cremental setting were significantly shorter (t-test,
p < 0.005). This was to be expected, of course,
as the incremental strategies allow faster reactions
(execution time can be folded into the user utter-
ance); other outcomes would have been possible,
though, if the incremental version had systemati-
cally more understanding problems.

We then had 8 subjects (university students,
not involved in the research) watch and directly
judge (questionnaire, Likert-scale replies to ques-
tions about human-likeness, helpfulness, and re-
activity) 34 randomly selected interactions from
either condition. Human-likeness and reactivity
were judged significantly higher for the incremen-
tal version (Wilcoxon rank-sum test; p < 0.05 and
p < 0.005, respectively), while there was no effect
for helpfulness (p = 0.06).

5 Conclusions

We described our incremental micro-domain dia-
logue system, which is capable of reacting to sub-
tle signals from the user about expected feedback,
and is able to produce overlapping non-linguistic
actions, modelling their effect as displays of un-
derstanding. Interactions with the system were
judged by overhearers to be more human-like and
reactive than with a non-incremental variant. We
are currently working on extending and generalis-
ing our approach to incremental dialogue manage-
ment, porting it to other domains.
Acknowledgments Funded by an ENP grant from DFG.

References
Gregory Aist, James Allen, Ellen Campana, Car-

los Gomez Gallo, Scott Stoness, Mary Swift, and
Michael K. Tanenhaus. 2007. Incremental under-
standing in human-computer dialogue and experi-
mental evidence for advantages over nonincremen-
tal methods. In Proceedings of Decalog (Semdial
2007), Trento, Italy.

Timo Baumann, Michaela Atterer, and David
Schlangen. 2009. Assessing and Improving the
Performance of Speech Recognition for Incremental
Systems. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2009,
Boulder, USA.

Okko Buß and David Schlangen. 2010. Modelling
sub-utterance phenomena in spoken dialogue sys-
tems. In Proceedings of Semdial 2010 (“Pozdial”),
pages 33–41, Poznan, Poland, June.

Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Alain de Cheveigné and Hideki Kawahara. 2002. YIN,
a fundamental frequency estimator for speech and
music. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
111(4):1917–1930.

David DeVault, Natalia Kariaeva, Anubha Kothari, Iris
Oved, and Matthew Stone. 2005. An information-
state approach to collaborative reference. In Short
Papers, ACL 2005, Michigan, USA, June.

Jonathan Ginzburg. 1996. Interrogatives: Ques-
tions, facts and dialogue. In Shalom Lappin, editor,
The Handbook of Contemporary Semantic Theory.
Blackwell, Oxford.

Peter A. Heeman and Graeme Hirst. 1995. Collabo-
rating on referring expressions. Computational Lin-
guistics, 21(3):351–382.

Massimo Poesio and Hannes Rieser. 2010. Comple-
tions, coordination, and alignment in dialogue. Dia-
logue and Discourse, 1(1):1–89.

Matthew Purver, Christine Howes, Eleni Gre-
goromichelaki, and Patrick Healey. 2009. Split
utterances in dialogue: a corpus study. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGDIAL 2009, pages 262–271, London,
UK, September.

Harvey Sacks and Emanuel A. Schegloff. 1979. Two
preferences in the organization of reference to per-
sons in conversation and their interaction. In George
Psathas, editor, Everyday Language: Studies in Eth-
nomethodology, pages 15–21. Irvington Publishers,
Inc., New York, NY, USA.

David Schlangen and Gabriel Skantze. 2009. A gen-
eral, abstract model of incremental dialogue pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of EACL 2009, pages 710–
718, Athens, Greece, March.

David Schlangen, Timo Baumann, Hendrik
Buschmeier, Okko Buß, Stefan Kopp, Gabriel
Skantze, and Ramin Yaghoubzadeh. 2010. Middle-
ware for incremental processing in conversational
agents. In Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010, Tokyo,
Japan.

Gabriel Skantze and David Schlangen. 2009. Incre-
mental dialogue processing in a micro-domain. In
Proceedings of EACL 2009, pages 745–753, Athens,
Greece, March.

Marilyn A. Walker, Diane J. Litman, Candace A.
Kamm, and Alicia Abella. 1998. Evaluating spoken
dialogue agents with PARADISE: Two case studies.
Computer Speech and Language, 12(3).

Willie Walker, Paul Lamere, Philip Kwok, Bhiksha
Raj, Rita Singh, Evandro Gouvea, Peter Wolf, and
Joe Woelfel. 2004. Sphinx-4: A flexible open
source framework for speech recognition. Techni-
cal report, Sun Microsystems Inc.

236


