










































Automatic Detection of Tags for Political Blogs


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 21–22,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Detection of Tags for Political Blogs 
 

 

Khairun-nisa Hassanali Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou 
Human Language Technology Institute Human Language Technology Institute 

The University of Texas at Dallas The University of Texas at Dallas 

Richardson, TX 75080, USA Richardson, TX 75080, USA 
nisa@hlt.utdallas.edu vh@hlt.utdallas.edu 

 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper describes a technique for automati-

cally tagging political blog posts using SVM’s 

and named entity recognition. We compare 

the quality of the tags detected by this ap-

proach to earlier approaches in other domains, 

observing effects from the political domain 

and benefits from NLP techniques comple-

mentary to the core SVM method. 

1 Introduction 

Political blogs are a particular type of communica-

tion platform that combines analyses provided by 

the blog owner or a team of regular contributors 

with shorter, but far more numerous, entries by 

visitors. Given the enthusiasm that activities for or 

against a particular politician or party can generate, 

political blogs are a vibrant part of the blogos-

phere: more than 38,500 blogs specifically dedi-

cated to politics exist in the US alone according to 

Technorati, and some of the more active ones at-

tract more than 30 million unique visitors each 

month (double that number just before major elec-

tions). 

Political blogs provide a wealth of factual in-

formation about political events and activities, but 

also by their nature are colored by strong opinions. 

They are therefore a particularly attractive target 

for semantic analysis methods using natural lan-

guage processing technology. In fact, the past two 

years have brought an increased number of colla-

borations between NLP researchers and political 

scientists using data from political sources, includ-

ing two special issues of leading political science 

journals on such topics (see (Cardie and Wilker-

son, 2008) for an overview). Our motivation for 

working with this kind of data is the construction 

of a system that collates information across blog 

posts, combines evidence to numerically rate atti-

tudes of blogs on different topics, and traces the 

evolution of these attitudes across time and in re-

sponse to events. To enable these tasks, we first 

identify the major topics that each blog post cov-

ers. In the present paper, we describe our recogniz-

er of blog post topics. We show that, perhaps 

because of the richness of political blogs in named 

entities, an SVM-based keyword learning approach 

can be complemented with named entity recogni-

tion and co-reference detection to achieve preci-

sion and recall scores higher than those reported by 

earlier topic recognition systems in other domains. 

2 Related Work  

In our approach, as in earlier published work, we 

take tags assigned by many blogs to individual 

blog posts as a reference list of the topics covered 

by that post. Tags are single words or short phras-

es, most often noun phrases, and are usually cho-

sen by each post’s authors without a controlled 

vocabulary; examples include “Michigan”, 

“George Bush”, “democracy”, and “health care”. 

Earlier work in predicting tags includes (Mishne, 

2006), who adopts a collaborative filtering ap-

proach; in contrast, we rely on training classifiers 

from earlier posts in each blog. Our approach is 

more similar to (Sood et al., 2007) and (Wang and 

Davison, 2008) who use different machine learning 

techniques applied to a training set. We differ from 

the last two approaches in our addition of proper 

noun and named entity recognition methods to our 

core SVM classifiers, in our exploration of specifi-

cally political data, and in our subsequent use of 

21



the predicted tags (for semantic analysis rather 

than tag set compression or query expansion). 

3 Data 

We collected data from two major political blogs, 

Daily Kos (www.dailykos.com) and Red State 

(www.redstate.com). Red State is a conserva-

tive political blog whereas Daily Kos is a liberal 

political blog. Both these blogs are widely read and 

tag each of their blog entries. We collected data 

from both these blogs over a period of two years 

(January 2008 – February 2010). We collected a 

total of 100,000 blog posts from Daily Kos and 

70,000 blog posts from Red State and a total of 

787,780 tags across both blogs (an average of 4.63 

tags per post). 

4 Methods 

We used SVM Light (Joachims, 2002) to predict 

the tags for a given blog post. We constructed one 

classifier for each of the tags present in the training 

set. The features used were counts of each word 

encountered in the title or the body of a post (two 

counts per word), further subdivided by whether 

the word appears in any tags in the training data or 

not, and whether it is a synonym of known tag 

words. We extract the top five proposed tags for 

each post, corresponding to the five highest scoring 

SVM classifiers. 

We also attempt to detect the main entities being 

talked about. We perform shallow parsing and ex-

tract noun phrases and then proper nouns. The 

most frequent proper NPs are probable tags. We 

also added named entity recognition and co-

reference resolution using the OpenNLP toolkit 

(maxent.sourceforge.net). We found that 

named entity recognition proposes additional use-

ful tags while the effect of co-reference resolution 

is marginal, mostly because of limited success in 

actually matching co-referent entities. 

5 Results and Evaluation 

For evaluating our methods, we used 2,681 posts 

from Daily Kos and 571 posts from Red State. We 

compared the tags assigned by our tagger to the 

original tags of the blog post, using an automated 

method (Figure 1). A tag was considered a match if 

it exactly matched the original tag or was a word 

super set – for example “health care system” is 

considered a match to “health care”. We also ma-

nually evaluated the relevance of the proposed tags 

on a small portion of our test set (100 posts). 

 
Method Precision Recall F-Score 

Single word SVM 27.3% 60.3% 37.6% 

+ Stemming 26.1% 59.5% 36.3% 

   + Proper Nouns 36.5% 56.8% 44.4% 

Named Entities 48.4% 49.1% 48.7% 

All Combined 21.1% 65.0% 31.9% 

Manual Scoring 67.0% 75.0% 70.8% 

    Single word SVM 19.0% 30.0% 23.3% 

+ Stemming 22.0% 30.2% 25.5% 

   + Proper Nouns 46.3% 54.0% 49.9% 

Named Entities 60.1% 41.5% 49.1% 

All Combined 20.3% 65.7% 31.0% 

Manual Scoring 47.0% 62.0% 53.5% 

Figure 1: Results on Daily Kos (top) and Red State 

(bottom) data. Best scores in bold. 

6 Conclusion  

We described and evaluated a tool for automatical-

ly tagging political blog posts. Political blogs differ 

from other blogs as they often involve named enti-

ties (politicians, organizations, and places). There-

fore, tagging of political blog posts benefits from 

using basic name entity recognition to improve the 

tagging. The recall in particular exceeds the score 

obtained by earlier techniques applied to other do-

mains (Sood et al. (2007) report precision of 13% 

and recall of 23%; Wang and Davison (2008) re-
port precision of 45% and recall of 23%).  

 

References  

Claire Cardie and John Wilkerson (editors). “Special 

Volume: Text Annotation for Political Science Re-

search”. Journal of Information Technology and 

Politics, 5(1):1-6, 2008. 

Thorsten Joachims. SVM-Light. 2002. http://www. 

svmlight.joachims.org. 

Gilad Mishne. “AutoTag: A Collaborative Approach to 

Automated Tag Assignment for Weblog Posts”. In 

Proceedings of WWW, 2006. 

Sanjay C. Sood, Sara H. Owsley, Kristian J. Hammond, 

and Larry Birnbaum. “TagAssist: Automatic Tag 

Suggestion for Blog Posts”. In Proceedings of 

ICWSM, 2007. 

Jian Wang and Brian D. Davison. “Explorations in Tag 

Suggestion and Query Expansion”. In Proceedings of 

SSM ’08, 2008. 

22


