










































Readability Assessment for Text Simplification


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Fifth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 1–9,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Readability Assessment for Text Simplification  

 
Sandra Aluisio

1
, Lucia Specia

2
, Caroline Gasperin

1
 and Carolina Scarton

1
 

1
Center of Computational Linguistics (NILC) 

2
Research Group in Computational Linguistics 

University of São Paulo University of Wolverhampton 

São Carlos - SP, Brazil Wolverhampton, UK 
{sandra,cgasperin}@icmc.usp.br, 

carol.scarton@gmail.com 

L.Specia@wlv.ac.uk 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

We describe a readability assessment ap-

proach to support the process of text simplifi-

cation for poor literacy readers. Given an in-

put text, the goal is to predict its readability 

level, which corresponds to the literacy level 

that is expected from the target reader: rudi-

mentary, basic or advanced. We complement 

features traditionally used for readability as-

sessment with a number of new features, and 

experiment with alternative ways to model 

this problem using machine learning methods, 

namely classification, regression and ranking. 

The best resulting model is embedded in an 

authoring tool for Text Simplification. 

1 Introduction 

In Brazil, the National Indicator of Functional Lite-

racy (INAF) index has been computed annually 

since 2001 to measure the levels of literacy of the 

Brazilian population. The 2009 report presented a 

worrying scenario: 7% of the individuals are illite-

rate; 21% are literate at the rudimentary level; 47% 

are literate at the basic level; only 25% are literate 

at the advanced level (INAF, 2009). These literacy 

levels are defined as:  

(1) Illiterate: individuals who cannot perform 

simple tasks such as reading words and phrases;  

(2) Rudimentary: individuals who can find ex-

plicit information in short and familiar texts (such 

as an advertisement or a short letter);  

(3) Basic: individuals who are functionally lite-

rate, i.e., they can read and understand texts of av-

erage length, and find information even when it is 

necessary to make some inference; and  

(4) Advanced: fully literate individuals, who can 

read longer texts, relating their parts, comparing 

and interpreting information, distinguish fact from 

opinion, make inferences and synthesize.   

In order to promote digital inclusion and acces-

sibility for people with low levels of literacy, par-

ticularly to documents available on the web, it is 

important to provide text in a simple and easy-to- 

read way. This is a requirement of the Web Con-

tent Accessibility Guidelines 2.0’s principle of 

comprehensibility and accessibility of Web con-

tent
1
. It states that for texts which demand reading 

skills more advanced than that of individuals with 

lower secondary education, one should offer an al-

ternative version of the same content suitable for 

those individuals. While readability formulas for 

English have a long history – 200 formulas have 

been reported from 1920 to 1980s (Dubay, 2004) – 

the only tool available for Portuguese is an adapta-

tion of the Flesch Reading Ease index.  It evaluates 

the complexity of texts in a 4-level scale corres-

ponding to grade levels (Martins et al., 1996).  

In the PorSimples project (Aluísio et al., 2008) 

we develop text adaptation methods (via text sim-

plification and elaboration approaches) to improve 

the comprehensibility of texts published on gov-

ernment websites or by renowned news agencies, 

which are expected to be relevant to a large au-

dience with various literacy levels. The project 

provides automatic simplification tools to aid (1) 

poorly literate readers to understand online content 

– a browser plug-in for automatically simplifying 

websites – and (2) authors producing texts for this 

audience – an authoring tool for guiding the crea-

tion of simplified versions of texts.  

This paper focuses on a readability assessment 

approach to assist the simplification process in the 

authoring tool, SIMPLIFICA. The current version 

of SIMPLIFICA offers simplification operations 

addressing a number of lexical and syntactic phe-

nomena to make the text more readable. The au-

                                                           
1 http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ 

1



thor has the freedom to choose when and whether 

to apply the available simplification operations, a 

decision based on the level of complexity of the 

current text and on the target reader.  

A method for automatically identifying such 

level of complexity is therefore of great value. 

With our readability assessment tool, the author is 

able to automatically check the complexi-

ty/readability level of the original text, as well as 

modified versions of such text produced as he/she 

applies simplification operations offered by 

SIMPLIFICA, until the text reaches the expected 

level, adequate for the target reader. 

In this paper we present such readability as-

sessment tool, developed as part of the PorSimples 

project, and discuss its application within the au-

thoring tool. Different from previous work, the tool 

does not model text difficulty according to linear 

grade levels (e.g., Heilman et al., 2008), but in-

stead maps the text into the three levels of literacy 

defined by INAF: rudimentary, basic or advanced. 

Moreover, it uses a more comprehensive set of fea-

tures, different learning techniques and targets a 

new language and application, as we discuss in 

Section 4. More specifically, we address the fol-

lowing research questions: 
 

1. Given some training material, is it possible to 

detect the complexity level of Portuguese texts, 

which corresponds to the different literacy levels 

defined by INAF? 

2. What is the best way to model this problem 

and which features are relevant? 
 

We experiment with nominal, ordinal and interval-

based modeling techniques and exploit a number 

of the cognitively motivated features proposed by 

Coh-Metrix 2.0 (Graesser et al., 2004) and adapted 

to Portuguese (called Coh-Metrix-PORT), along 

with a set of new features, including syntactic fea-

tures to capture simplification operations and n-

gram language model features.  

In the remainder of this paper, we first provide 

some background information on the need for a 

readability assessment tool within our text simpli-

fication system (Section 2) and discuss prior work 

on readability assessment (Section 3), to then 

present our features and modeling techniques (Sec-

tion 4) and the experiments performed to answer 

our research questions (Section 5). 

2. Text Simplification in PorSimples 

Text Simplification (TS) aims to maximize reading 

comprehension of written texts through their sim-

plification. Simplification usually involves substi-

tuting complex by simpler words and breaking 

down and changing the syntax of complex, long 

sentences (Max, 2006; Siddharthan, 2003).   

To meet the needs of people with different le-

vels of literacy, in the PorSimples project we pro-

pose two types of simplification: natural and 

strong. The first type results in texts adequate for 

people with a basic literacy level and the second, 

rudimentary level. The difference between these 

two is the degree of application of simplification 

operations to complex sentences. In strong simpli-

fication, operations are applied to all complex syn-

tactic phenomena present in the text in order to 

make it as simple as possible, while in natural sim-

plification these operations are applied selectively, 

only when the resulting text remains “natural”. 

One example of original text (a), along with its 

natural (b) and strong (c) manual simplifications, is 

given in Table 1. 
 

(a) The cinema theaters around the world were show-

ing a production by director Joe Dante in which a 

shoal of piranhas escaped from a military laborato-

ry and attacked participants of an aquatic show. 

(...) More than 20 people were bitten by palometas 

(Serrasalmus spilopleura, a species of piranhas) 

that live in the waters of the Sanchuri dam. 

(b) The cinema theaters around the world were show-

ing a production by director Joe Dante. In the pro-

duction a shoal of piranhas escaped from a military 

laboratory and attacked participants of an aquatic 

show. (…) More than 20 people were bitten by pa-

lometas that live in the waters of the Sanchuri dam. 

Palometas are Serrasalmus spilopleura, a species 

of piranhas. 

(c) The cinema theaters around the world were show-

ing a movie by director Joe Dante. In the movie a 

shoal of piranhas escaped from a military laborato-

ry. The shoal of piranhas attacked participants of 

an aquatic show. (...). Palometas have bitten more 

than 20 people. Palometas live in the waters of the 

Sanchuri dam. Palometas are Serrasalmus spilop-

leura, a species of piranhas. 

Table 1: Example of original and simplified texts 
 

The association between these two types of simpli-

fication and the literacy levels was identified by 

means of a corpus study. We have manually built a 

corpus of simplified texts at both natural and 

2



strong levels and analyzed their linguistic struc-

tures according to the description of the two litera-

cy levels. We verified that strong simplified sen-

tences are more adequate for rudimentary level 

readers, and natural ones for basic level readers. 

This claim is supported by several studies which 

relate capabilities and performance of the working 

memory with reading levels (Siddharthan, 2003; 

McNamara et al., 2002). 

2.1 The Rule-based Simplification System 

The association between simplification operations 

and the syntactic phenomena they address is im-

plemented within a rule-based syntactic simplifica-

tion system (Candido Jr. et al., 2009). This system 

is able to identify complex syntactic phenomena in 

a sentence and perform the appropriate operations 

to simplify each phenomenon.  

The simplification rules follow a manual for 

syntactic simplification in Portuguese also devel-

oped in PorSimples. They cover syntactic con-

structions such as apposition, relative clauses, 

coordination and subordination, which had already 

been addressed by previous work on text simplifi-

cation (Siddharthan, 2003). Additionally, they ad-

dress the transformation of sentences from passive 

into active voice, normalization of sentences into 

the Subject-Verb-Object order, and simplification 

of adverbial phrases. The simplification operations 

available are: sentence splitting, changing particu-

lar discourse markers by simpler ones, transform-

ing passive into active voice, inverting the order of 

clauses, converting to subject-verb-object order, 

relocating long adverbial phrases.  

2.2 The SIMPLIFICA Tool 

The rule-based simplification system is part of 

SIMPLIFICA, an authoring tool for writers to 

adapt original texts into simplified texts. Within 

SIMPLIFICA, the author plays an active role in 

generating natural or strong simplified texts by ac-

cepting or rejecting the simplifications offered by 

the system on a sentence basis and post-editing 

them if necessary. 

 Despite the ability to make such choices at the 

sentence level, it is not straightforward for the au-

thor to judge the complexity level of the text as 

whole in order to decide whether it is ready for a 

certain audience. This is the main motivation for 

the development of a readability assessment tool.  

The readability assessment tool automatically 

detects the level of complexity of a text at any 

moment of the authoring process, and therefore 

guides the author towards producing the adequate 

simplification level according to the type of reader. 

It classifies a text in one of three levels: rudimenta-

ry, basic or advanced.  

Figure 1 shows the interface of SIMPLIFICA, 

where the complexity level of the current text as 

given by the readability assessment tool is shown 

at the bottom, in red (in this case, “Nível Pleno”, 

which corresponds to advanced). To update the 

readability assessment of a text the author can 

choose “Nível de Inteligibilidade” (readability lev-

el) at any moment.  

The text shown in Figure 1 is composed of 13 

sentences, 218 words. The lexical simplification 

module (not shown in the Figure 1) finds 10 candi-

date words for simplification in this text, and the 

syntactic simplification module selects 10 sen-

tences to be simplified (highlighted in gray).  

When the author selects a highlighted sentence, 

he/she is presented with all possible simplifications 

proposed by the rule-based system for this sen-

tence. Figure 2 shows the options for the first sen-

tence in Figure 1. The first two options cover non-

finite clause and adverbial adjuncts, respectively, 

while the third option covers both phenomena in 

one single step. The original sentence is also given 

as an option.  

It is possible that certain suggestions of auto-

matic simplifications result in ungrammatical or 

inadequate sentences (mainly due to parsing er-

rors). The author can choose not to use such sug-

gestions as well as manually edit the original or 

automatically simplified versions. The impact of 

the author’s choice on the overall readability level 

of the text is not always clear to the author. The 

goal of the readability assessment function is to 

provide such information. 

Simplified texts are usually longer than the 

original ones, due to sentence  splittings and 

repetition of information to connect such 

sentences.  We  acknowledge  that  low literacy 

readers prefer short texts, but in this tool the 

shortening of the text is a responsibility of the 

author. Our focus is on the linguistic structure of 

the texts; the length of the text actually is a feature 

considered by our readability assessment system. 

3



Figure 1: SIMPLIFICA interface 

Figure 2. Simplification options available for the first sentence of the text presented in Figure 1

3. Readability Assessment 

Recent work on readability assessment for the 

English language focus on: (i) the feature set used 

to capture the various aspects of readability, to 

evaluate the contribution of lexical, syntactic, se-

mantic and discursive features; (ii) the audience of 

the texts the readability measurement is intended 

to; (iii) the genre effects on the calculation of text 

difficult; (iv) the type of learning technique 

which is more appropriate: those producing nomi-

nal, ordinal or interval scales of measurement, and 

(v) providing an application for the automatic as-

sessment of reading difficulty.  

Pitler and Nenkova (2008) propose a unified 

framework composed of vocabulary, syntactic, 

elements of lexical cohesion, entity coherence and 

discourse relations to measure text quality, which 

resembles the composition of rubrics in the area of 

essay scoring (Burstein et al., 2003).  

 The following studies address readability as-

sessment for specific audiences: learners of Eng-

lish as second language (Schwarm and Ostendorf, 

2005; Heilman et al., 2007), people with intellec-

tual disabilities (Feng et al., 2009), and people with 

cognitive impairment caused by Alzheimer (Roark 

at al, 2007). 

Sheehan et al. (2007) focus on models for 

literary and expository texts, given that traditional 

metrics like Flesch-Kincaid Level score tend to 

overpredict the difficulty of literary texts and 

underpredict the difficulty of expository texts.  

Heilman et al. (2008) investigate an appropriate 

scale of measurement for reading difficulty – 

nominal, ordinal, or interval – by comparing the 

effectiveness of statistical models for each type of 

data. Petersen and Ostendorf (2009) use 

classification and regression techniques to predict a 

readability score. 

Miltsakali and Troutt (2007; 2008) propose an 

automatic tool to evaluate reading difficulty of 

Web texts in real time, addressing teenagers and 

adults with low literacy levels. Using machine 

learning, Glöckner et al. (2006) present a tool for 

automatically rating the readability of German 

texts using several linguistic information sources 

and a global readability score similar to the Flesch 

Reading Ease.   

4



4. A Tool for Readability Assessment 

In this section we present our approach to readabil-

ity assessment.  It differs from previous work in 

the following aspects: (i) it uses a feature set with 

cognitively-motivated metrics and a number of ad-

ditional features to provide a better explanation of 

the complexity of a text; (ii) it targets a new audi-

ence: people with different literacy levels; (iii) it 

investigates different statistical models for non- 

linear data scales: the levels of literacy defined by 

INAF, (iv) it focus on a new application: the use of 

readability assessment for text simplification sys-

tems; and (v) it is aimed at Portuguese. 

4.1 Features for Assessing Readability 

Our feature set (Table 2) consists of 3 groups of 

features. The first group contains cognitively-

motivated features (features 1-42), derived from 

the Coh-Metrix-PORT tool (see Section 4.1.1). 

The second group contains features that reflect the 

incidence of particular syntactic constructions 

which we target in our text simplification system 

(features 43-49). The third group (the remaining 

features in Table 2) contains features derived from 

n-gram language models built considering uni-

grams, bigrams and trigrams probability and per-

plexity plus out-of-vocabulary rate scores. We later 

refer to a set of basic features, which consist of 

simple counts that do not require any linguistic tool 

or external resources to be computed. This set cor-

responds to features 1-3 and 9-11. 

4.1.1 Coh-Metrix-Port 

The Coh-Metrix tool was developed to compute 

features potentially relevant to the comprehension 

of English texts through a number of measures in-

formed by linguistics, psychology and cognitive 

studies. The main aspects covered by the measures 

are cohesion and coherence (Graesser et al., 2004). 

Coh-Metrix 2.0, the free version of the tool, con-

tains 60 readability metrics. The Coh-Metrix-

PORT tool (Scarton et al., 2009) computes similar 

metrics for texts in Brazilian Portuguese. The ma-

jor challenge to create such tool is the lack of some 

of the necessary linguistic resources. The follow-

ing metrics are currently available in the tool (we 

refer to Table 2 for details): 

1. Readability metric: feature 12. 
 

2. Words and textual information:  

 Basic counts: features 1 to 11. 

1 Number of words 

2 Number of sentences 

3 Number of paragraphs 

4 Number of verbs 

5 Number of nouns 

6 Number of adjectives 

7 Number of adverbs 

8 Number of pronouns 

9 Average number of words per sentence 

10 Average number of sentences per paragraph 

11 Average number of syllables per word 

12 Flesch index for Portuguese 

13 Incidence of content words 

14 Incidence of functional words  

15 Raw Frequency of content words  

16 Minimal frequency of content words  

17 Average number of verb hypernyms 

18 Incidence of NPs 

19 Number of NP modifiers 

20 Number of words before the main verb 

21 Number of high level constituents 

22 Number of personal pronouns 

23 Type-token ratio 

24 Pronoun-NP ratio 

25 Number of “e” (and) 

26 Number of “ou” (or)  

27 Number of “se” (if) 

28 Number of negations 

29 Number of logic operators 

30 Number of connectives  

31 Number of positive additive connectives 

32 Number of negative additive connectives 

33 Number of positive temporal connectives 

34 Number of negative temporal connectives 

35 Number of positive causal connectives 

36 Number of negative causal connectives 

37 Number of positive logic connectives 

38 Number of negative logic connectives 

39 Verb ambiguity ratio 

40 Noun ambiguity ratio 

41 Adverb ambiguity ratio 

42 Adjective ambiguity ratio 

43 Incidence of clauses 

44 Incidence of adverbial phrases 

45 Incidence of apposition 

46 Incidence of passive voice 

47 Incidence of relative clauses 

48 Incidence of coordination 

49 Incidence of subordination 

50 Out-of-vocabulary words  

51 LM probability of unigrams  

52 LM perplexity of unigrams  

53 LM perplexity of unigrams, without line break  

54 LM probability of bigrams  

55 LM perplexity of bigrams  

56 LM perplexity of bigrams, without line break  

57 LM probability of trigrams  

58 LM perplexity of trigrams  

59 LM perplexity of trigrams, without line break  

Table 2. Feature set 

5



 Frequencies: features 15 to 16. 

 Hypernymy: feature 17. 
 

3. Syntactic information:  

 Constituents: features 18 to 20. 

 Pronouns: feature 22 

 Types and Tokens: features 23 to 24. 

 Connectives: features 30 to 38. 
 

4. Logical operators: features 25 to 29. 
 

The following resources for Portuguese were used: 

the MXPOST POS tagger (Ratnaparkhi, 1996), a 

word frequency list compiled from a 700 million-

token corpus
2
, a tool to identify reduced noun 

phrases (Oliveira et al., 2006), a list of connectives 

classified as positives/negatives and according to 

cohesion type (causal, temporal, additive or logi-

cal), a list of logical operators and WordNet.Br 

(Dias-da-Silva et al., 2008).  

In this paper we include seven new metrics to 

Coh-Metrix-PORT: features 13, 14, 21, and 39 to 

42. We used TEP
3
 (Dias-da-Silva et al., 2003) to 

obtain the number of senses of words (and thus 

their ambiguity level), and the Palavras parser 

(Bick, 2000) to identify the higher level constitu-

ents. The remaining metrics were computed based 

on the POS tags. 

According to a report on the performance of 

each Coh-Metrix-PORT metric (Scarton et al., 

2009), no individual feature provides sufficient in-

dication to measure text complexity, and therefore 

the need to exploit their combination, and also to 

combine them with the other types of features de-

scribed in this section. 

4.1.2 Language-model Features 

Language model features were derived from a 

large corpus composed of a sample of the Brazilian 

newspaper Folha de São Paulo containing issues 

from 12 months taken at random from 1994 to 

2005. The corpus contains 96,868 texts and 

26,425,483 tokens. SRILM (Stolcke, 2002), a 

standard language modelling toolkit, was used to 

produce the language model features.  

4.2 Learning Techniques 

Given that the boundaries of literacy level classes 

are one of the subjects of our study, we exploit 

three different types of models in order to check 

                                                           
2 http://www2.lael.pucsp.br/corpora/bp/index.htm 
3 http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/tep2/index.htm 

which of them can better distinguish among the 

three literacy levels. We therefore experiment with 

three types of machine learning algorithms: a stan-

dard classifier, an ordinal (ranking) classifier and a 

regressor. Each algorithm assumes different rela-

tions among the groups: the classifier assumes no 

relation, the ordinal classifier assumes that the 

groups are ordered, and the regressor assumes that 

the groups are continuous.  

As classifier we use the Support Vector Ma-

chines (SVM) implementation in the Weka
4
 toolkit 

(SMO). As ordinal classifier we use a meta clas-

sifier in Weka which takes SMO as the base classi-

fication algorithm and performs pairwise classifi-

cations (OrdinalClassClassifier). For regression we 

use the SVM regression implementation in Weka 

(SMO-reg). We use the linear versions of the algo-

rithms for classification, ordinal classification and 

regression, and also experiment with a radial basis 

function (RBF) kernel for regression. 

5. Experiments 

5.1 Corpora 

In order to train (and test) the different machine 

learning algorithms to automatically identify the 

readability level of the texts we make use of ma-

nually simplified corpora created in the PorSimples 

project. Seven corpora covering our three literacy 

levels (advanced, basic and rudimentary) and two 

different genres were compiled. The first corpus is 

composed of general news articles from the Brazil-

ian newspaper Zero Hora (ZH original). These ar-

ticles were manually simplified by a linguist, ex-

pert in text simplification, according to the two 

levels of simplification: natural (ZH natural) and 

strong (ZH strong). The remaining corpora are 

composed of popular science articles from differ-

ent sources: (a) the Caderno Ciência section of the 

Brazilian newspaper Folha de São Paulo, a main-

stream newspaper in Brazil (CC original) and a 

manually simplified version of this corpus using 

the natural (CC natural) and strong (CC strong) 

levels; and (b) advanced level texts from a popular 

science magazine called Ciência Hoje (CH). Table 

3 shows a few statistics about these seven corpora. 

5.2 Feature Analysis 

As a simple way to check the contribution of dif-

ferent features to our three literacy levels, we com- 

                                                           
4 http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ 

6



  

Corpus Doc Sent Words Avg. words 

per text (std. 

deviation) 

Avg. 

words p. 

sentence 

ZH original 104 2184 46190 444.1 (133.7) 21.1 

ZH natural 104 3234 47296 454.7 (134.2) 14.6 

ZH strong 104 3668 47938 460.9 (137.5) 13.0 

CC original 50 882 20263 405.2 (175.6) 22.9 

CC natural 50 975 19603 392.0 (176.0) 20.1 

CC strong 50 1454 20518 410.3 (169.6) 14.1 

CH 130 3624 95866 737.4 (226.1) 26.4 

Table 3. Corpus statistics 
 

puted the (absolute) Pearson correlation between 

our features and the expected literacy level for the 

two sets of corpora that contain versions of the 

three classes of interest (original, natural and 

strong). Table 4 lists the most highly correlated 

features. 
 

 Feature Corr. 

1 Words per sentence 0.693 

2 Incidence of apposition 0.688 

3 Incidence of clauses 0.614 

4 Flesch index  0.580 

5 Words before main verb  0.516 

6 Sentences per paragraph  0.509 

7 Incidence of relative clauses  0.417 

8 Syllables per word 0.414 

9 Number of positive additive connectives  0.397 

10 Number of negative causal connectives 0.388 

Table 4: Correlation between features and literacy levels 
 

Among the top features are mostly basic and syn-

tactic features representing the number of apposi-

tive and relative clauses and clauses in general, and 

also features from Coh-Metrix-PORT. This shows 

that traditional cognitively-motivated features can 

be complemented with more superficial features 

for readability assessment. 

5.3 Predicting Complexity Levels 

As previously discussed, the goal is to predict the 

complexity level of a text as original, naturally or 

strongly simplified, which correspond to the three 

literacy levels of INAF: rudimentary, basic and ad-

vanced level.  

Tables 5-7 show the results of our experiments 

using 10-fold cross-validation and standard classi-

fication (Table 5), ordinal classification (Table 6) 

and regression (Table 7), in terms of F-measure 

(F), Pearson correlation with true score (Corr.) and 

mean absolute error (MAE). Results using our 

complete feature set (All) and different subsets of 

it are shown so that we can analyze the 

performance of each group of features. We also 

experiment with the Flesch index on its own as a 

feature. 

 

Features Class F Corr. MAE 

All original 0.913 0.84 0.276 

natural 0.483 

strong 0.732 

Language 

Model 

original 0.669 0.25 0.381 

natural 0.025 

strong 0.221 

Basic original 0.846 0.76 0.302 

natural 0.149 

strong 0.707 

Syntactic original 0.891 0.82 0.285 

natural 0.32 

strong 0.74 

Coh-

Metrix-

PORT 

original 0.873 0.79 0.290 

natural 0.381 

strong 0.712 

Flesch original 0.751 0.52 0.348 
natural 0.152 

strong 0.546 

Table 5: Standard Classification 
 

Features Class F Corr. MAE 

All original 0.904 0.83 0.163 

natural 0.484 

strong 0.731 

Language 

Model 

original 0.634 0.49 0.344 

natural 0.497 

strong 0.05 

Basic original 0.83 0.73 0.231 

natural 0.334 

strong 0.637 

Syntactic original 0.891 0.81 0.180 

natural 0.382 

strong 0.714 

Coh-

Metrix-

PORT 

original 0.878 0.8 0.183 

natural 0.432 

strong 0.709 

Flesch original 0.746 0.56 0.310 

natural 0.489 

strong 0 

Table 6: Ordinal classification 
 

The results of the standard and ordinal classifica-

tion are comparable in terms of F-measure and cor-

relation, but the mean absolute error is lower for 

the ordinal classification. This indicates that ordi-

nal classification is more adequate to handle our 

classes, similarly to the results found in (Heilman 

et al., 2008). Results also show that distinguishing 

between natural and strong simplifications is a 

harder problem than distinguishing between these 

and original texts. This was expected, since these 

two levels of simplification share many features. 

However, the average performance achieved is 

considered satisfactory. 

Concerning the regression model (Table 7), the 

RBF kernel reaches the best correlation scores 

7



among all models. However, its mean error rates 

are above the ones found for classification. A lin-

ear SVM (not shown here) achieves very poor re-

sults across all metrics. 
   

Features Corr. MAE 

All 0.8502 0.3478 

Language Model 0.6245 0.5448 
Basic 0.7266 0.4538 

Syntactic 0.8063 0.3878 
Coh-Metrix-PORT 0.8051 0.3895 
Flesch 0.5772 0.5492 

Table 7: Regression with RBF kernel 
 

With respect to the different feature sets, we can 

observe that the combination of all features consis-

tently yields better results according to all metrics 

across all our models. The performances obtained 

with the subsets of features vary considerably from 

model to model, which shows that the combination 

of features is more robust across different learning 

techniques. Considering each feature set independ-

ently, the syntactic features, followed by Coh-

Metrix-PORT, achieve the best correlation scores, 

while the language model features performed the 

poorest. 

These results show that it is possible to predict 

with satisfactory accuracy the readability level of 

texts according to our three classes of interest: 

original, naturally simplified and strongly simpli-

fied texts. Given such results we embedded the 

classification model (Table 5) as a tool for read-

ability assessment into our text simplification au-

thoring system. The linear classification is our 

simplest model, has achieved the highest F-

measure and its correlation scores are comparable 

to those of the other models.  

6. Conclusions 

We have experimented with different machine 

learning algorithms and features in order to verify 

whether it was possible to automatically distin-

guish among the three readability levels: original 

texts aimed at advanced readers, naturally simpli-

fied texts aimed at people with basic literacy level, 

and strongly simplified texts aimed at people with 

rudimentary literacy level. All algorithms achieved 

satisfactory performance with the combination of 

all features and we embedded the simplest model 

into our authoring tool. 

As future work, we plan to investigate the con-

tribution of deeper cognitive features to this prob-

lem, more specifically, semantic, co-reference and 

mental model dimensions metrics. Having this ca-

pacity for readability assessment is useful not only 

to inform authors preparing simplified material 

about the complexity of the current material, but 

also to guide automatic simplification systems to 

produce simplifications with the adequate level of 

complexity according to the target user.  

The authoring tool, as well as its text simplifica-

tion and readability assessment systems, can be 

used not only for improving text accessibility, but 

also for educational purposes: the author can pre-

pare texts that are adequate according to the level 

of the reader and it will also allow them to improve 

their reading skills. 

References  

Sandra M. Aluísio, Lucia Specia, Thiago A. S. Pardo, 

Erick G. Maziero, Renata P. M. Fortes (2008). To-

wards Brazilian Portuguese Automatic Text Simpli-

fication Systems. In the Proceedings of the 8th ACM 

Symposium on Document Engineering, pp. 240-248. 

Eckhard Bick (2000). The Parsing System "Palavras": 

Automatic Grammatical Analysis of Portuguese in a 

Constraint Grammar Framework. PhD Thesis. Uni-

versity of Århus, Denmark. 

Jill Burstein, Martin Chodorow and Claudia Leacock 

(2003). CriterionSM Online Essay Evaluation: An 

Application for Automated Evaluation of Student 

Essays. In the Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual 

Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial 

Intelligence, Acapulco, Mexico.  

Arnaldo Candido Jr., Erick Maziero, Caroline Gasperin, 

Thiago A. S. Pardo, Lucia Specia, and Sandra M. 

Aluisio (2009). Supporting the Adaptation of Texts 

for Poor Literacy Readers: a Text Simplification 

Editor for Brazilian Portuguese. In NAACL-HLT 

Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building 

Educational Applications, pages 34–42, Boulder’.  

Helena de M. Caseli, Tiago de F. Pereira, Lúcia Specia, 

Thiago A. S. Pardo, Caroline Gasperin and Sandra 

Maria Aluísio (2009). Building a Brazilian Portu-

guese Parallel Corpus of Original and Simplified 

Texts. In the Proceedings of CICLing. 

Max Coltheart (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic data-

base. In Quartely Jounal of Experimental Psycholo-

gy, 33A, pages 497-505. 

Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, George W. Furnas, 

Thomas K. Landauer e Richard Harshman (1990). 

Indexing By Latent Semantic Analysis. In Journal of 

the American Society For Information Science, V. 

41, pages 391-407. 

Bento C. Dias-da-Silva and Helio R. Moraes (2003). A 

construção de um thesaurus eletrônico para o portu-

guês do Brasil. In ALFA- Revista de Lingüística, V. 

8



47, N. 2, pages 101-115.    

Bento C Dias-da-Silva, Ariani Di Felippo and Maria das 

Graças V. Nunes (2008). The automatic mapping of 

Princeton WordNet lexical conceptual relations onto 

the Brazilian Portuguese WordNet database. In Pro-

ceedings of the 6th LREC, Marrakech, Morocco. 

William H. DuBay (2004). The principles of readability. 

Costa Mesa, CA: Impact Information: http://www.i 

mpact-information.com/impactinfo/readability02.pdf 

Christiane Fellbaum (1998). WordNet: An electronic 

lexical database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Lijun Feng, Noémie Elhadad and Matt Huenerfauth 

(2009). Cognitively Motivated Features for Reada-

bility Assessment. In the Proceedings of EACL 

2009, pages 229-237. 

Ingo Glöckner, Sven Hartrumpf, Hermann Helbig, Jo-

hannes Leveling and Rainer Osswald (2006b). An 

architecture for rating and controlling text readabili-

ty. In Proceedings of KONVENS 2006, pages 32-35. 

Konstanz, Germany.  

Arthur C. Graesser, Danielle S. McNamara, Max M. 

Louwerse and Zhiqiang Cai (2004). Coh-Metrix: 

Analysis of text on cohesion and language. In Beha-

vioral Research Methods, Instruments, and Comput-

ers, V. 36, pages 193-202. 

Ronald K. Hambleton, H. Swaminathan and H. Jane 

Rogers (1991). Fundamentals of item response 

theory. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Press. 

Michael Heilman, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Jamie 

Callan and Max Eskenazi (2007). Combining lexical 

and grammatical features to improve readability 

measures for first and second language texts. In the 

Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 460-467. 

Michael Heilman, Kevyn Collins-Thompson and Max-

ine Eskenazi (2008). An Analysis of Statistical 

Models and Features for Reading Difficulty Predic-

tion. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Innova-

tive Use of NLP for Building Educational Applica-

tions, pages 71-79. 

INAF (2009). Instituto P. Montenegro and Ação Educa-

tiva. INAF Brasil - Indicador de Alfabetismo Funcio-

nal - 2009. Available online at http://www. ibope. 

com.br/ipm/relatorios/relatorio_inaf_2009.pdf  

Teresa B. F. Martins, Claudete M. Ghiraldelo, Maria 

das Graças V. Nunes e Osvaldo N. de Oliveira Jr. 

(1996). Readability formulas applied to textbooks in 

brazilian portuguese. ICMC Technical Report, N. 

28, 11p.  

Aurélien Max (2006). Writing for Language-impaired 

Readers. In Proceedings of CICLing, pages 567-570. 

Danielle McNamara, Max Louwerse, and Art Graesser, 

2002. Coh-Metrix: Automated cohesion and coher-

ence scores to predict text readability and facilitate 

comprehension. Grant proposal. http://cohmetrix. 

memphis.edu/cohmetrixpr/publications.html 

Eleni Miltsakaki and Audrey Troutt (2007). Read-X: 

Automatic Evaluation of Reading Difficulty of Web 

Text. In the Proceedings of E-Learn 2007, Quebec, 

Canada. 

Eleni Miltsakaki and Audrey Troutt (2008). Real Time 

Web Text Classification and Analysis of Reading 

Difficulty. In the Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop 

on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational 

Applications, Columbus, OH. 

Cláudia Oliveira, Maria C. Freitas, Violeta Quental, Cí-

cero N. dos Santos, Renato P. L. and Lucas Souza 

(2006). A Set of NP-extraction rules for Portuguese: 

defining and learning. In 7th Workshop on Computa-

tional Processing of Written and Spoken Portuguese, 

Itatiaia, Brazil.  

Sarah E. Petersen and Mari Ostendorf (2009). A ma-

chine learning approach to reading level assess-

ment. Computer Speech and Language 23, 89-106. 

Emily Pitler and Ani Nenkova (2008). Revisiting reada-

bility: A unified framework for predicting text quali-

ty. In Proceedings of EMNLP, 2008. 

Adwait Ratnaparkhi (1996). A Maximum Entropy Part-

of-Speech Tagger. In Proceedings of the First Em-

pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 

Conference, pages133-142. 

Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell and Kristy Holling-

shead (2007). Syntactic complexity measures for de-

tecting mild cognitive impairment. In the Proceed-

ings of the Workshop on BioNLP 2007: Biological, 

Translational, and Clinical Language Processing, 

Prague, Czech Republic. 

Caroline E. Scarton, Daniel M. Almeida, Sandra M. A-

luísio (2009). Análise da Inteligibilidade de textos 

via ferramentas de Processamento de Língua Natu-

ral: adaptando as métricas do Coh-Metrix para o 

Português. In Proceedings of STIL-2009, São Carlos, 

Brazil.   

Sarah E. Schwarm and Mari Ostendorf (2005). Reading 

Level Assessment Using Support Vector Machines 

and Statistical Language Models. In the Proceedings 

of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp 523–530. 

Kathleen M. Sheehan, Irene Kostin and Yoko Futagi 

(2007). Reading Level Assessment for Literary and 

Expository Texts. In D. S. McNamara and J. G. 

Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cog-

nitive Science Society, page 1853. Austin, TX: Cog-

nitive Science Society. 

Advaith Siddharthan (2003). Syntactic Simplification 

and Text Cohesion. PhD Thesis. University of Cam-

bridge. 

Andreas Stolcke. SRILM -- an extensible language 

modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the International 

Conference on Spoken Language Processing, 2002. 

9


