










































Identifying Assertions in Text and Discourse: The Presentational Relative Clause Construction


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Extracting and Using Constructions in Computational Linguistics, pages 17–24,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

Identifying Assertions in Text and Discourse: 
The Presentational Relative Clause Construction 

 
Cecily Jill Duffield, Jena D. Hwang,  and Laura A. Michaelis    

Department of Linguistics, Institute of Cognitive Science  
University of Colorado at Boulder 

Boulder, CO 80309  USA 
{cecily.duffield, hwangd, laura.michaelis}@colorado.edu 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
Abstract 

In this paper we investigate the Presentational 
Relative Clause (PRC) construction. In both the 
linguistic and NLP literature, relative clauses 
have been considered to contain background 
information that is not directly relevant or highly 
useful in semantic analysis. In text 
summarization in particular, the information 
contained in the relative clauses is often 
removed, being viewed as non-central content to 
the topic or discourse. We discuss the 
importance of distinguishing the PRC 
construction from other relative clause types. 
We show that in the PRC, the relative clause, 
rather than the main clause, contains the 
assertion of the utterance. Based on linguistic 
analysis, we suggest informative features that 
may be used in automatic extraction of PRC 
constructions. We believe that identifying this 
construction will be useful in discriminating 
central information from peripheral. 

1 Introduction 

Identifying and extracting relevant information in a 
given text is an important task for human readers 
and natural language processing applications.  To 
do this, proper identification and treatment of 
complex sentences containing relative clauses and 
other embedded structures such as appositive 
clauses (e.g., My mother, a patient at the center, 
met him last year,) and participial clauses (e.g., 
Once he ate Werthers, including the wrapper,) is 
necessary.  

Thus, the tasks of text simplification and text 
summarization in NLP have focused their efforts 

on finding effective ways of simplifying long and 
complex sentences into shorter and simpler ones. 
This has in turn proven useful in machine 
translation (Chandrasekar et. al., 1996), parsing 
and information extraction (Chandrasekar and 
Srinivas, 1997), as well as document simplification 
designed to make texts accessible to wider 
audiences. Such audiences include readers at low 
literacy levels (Siddharthan, 2003), second 
language learners (Petersen and Ostendorf, 2007) 
and aphasic readers (Devilin and Unthank, 2006). 

The goal of text simplification and 
summarization is to reduce syntactic or structural 
complexities while preserving the central meaning 
or relevant information in the given text. 
Unfortunately, syntactic simplification algorithms 
often assume a uniform treatment of syntactic 
structures. This is especially true in the domain of 
relative clauses.  

Relative clauses are often considered to contain 
parenthetical information. That is, their putative 
role in the sentence is to provide background 
information about the mentioned entity or entities. 
Consider (1): 1 
 

(1) You [get] a guy down the street who comes 
up, uh, carrying a knife.2 

                                                
1 Relative clauses are shown in boldface and the referent noun 
phrase is underlined. The matrix verb, the verb of the sentence 
in which the relative clause is embedded, is in brackets. 
2 Unless otherwise noted, all examples in this paper are taken 
from the Switchboard Treebank corpus (Godfrey et al. 1992, 
Marcus et al. 1993), a syntactically parsed version of the 
Switchboard corpus of American English telephone 
conversations. 

17



 

 
According to the above definition of relative 
clauses, they key information in (1) is in the main 
clause You get a guy down the street. That is, (1) 
means something like: the entity you comes to 
possess a guy down the street. If we accordingly 
consider the relative clause as the background or 
incidental information and remove it from the 
semantic analysis, the assertion – the key piece of 
the information – would be lost.  

In this paper, we discuss the Presentational 
Relative Clause (PRC) construction, as seen in (1). 
In the PRC, the relative clause, rather than the 
main clause, contains the assertion of the utterance 
(Duffield & Michaelis, 2009).  Moreover, we 
analyze the construction in detail to assess its 
potential usefulness in NLP applications. Based on 
linguistic analysis, we suggest features that may be 
useful for implementation of automatic 
identification of PRC constructions. We believe 
that the identification of this construction will be 
useful in discriminating central information units 
from the peripheral ones.  

2 Relative Clauses 

Relative clauses are constructions in which a 
verbal clause modifies a nominal element, the 
“head,” as shown in (2) and (3):  

 
(2) I [like] cars that _____ are designed with human 

beings in mind.  
(3) I [like] those movies that you watch ____ time 

and time again.  
 
In (2), the relative clause that are designed with 
human beings in mind describes the head nominal 
cars, while in (3), the head nominal those movies is 
described by the relative clause that you watch 
time and time again. The gap in the relative clause 
indicating the position of the co-referential noun 
phrase is shown. 

Relative clauses are typically embedded in main 
clauses, with the result that the nominal element 
satisfies a semantic-role requirement of two 
different verbs. For example, consider sentence 
(2), where the head nominal cars serves as an 
argument of the verb like while a gap that shares its 
referent with the head nominal marks the argument 
of the passive verb designed. Likewise, in (3) the 
referent shared by the head nominal those movies 

in the main clause and the gap in the relative clause 
satisfies the requirements of two separate verbs, 
like and watch.  

2.1 Types of Relative Clauses  

In the linguistic tradition, relative clauses are 
typically classified into restrictive and non-
restrictive types, as seen in (4-5), respectively.  

 
(4) And, you know, I [want] a car that I can work on 

____, because I think it just costs too much even 
to get the oil changed anymore.  

(5) And once you’ve [reached] the river walk area, 
which ____ is the tourist area, it’s usually pretty 
safe during the day.  

 
In (4), the speaker has asserted that he would like a 
car; the restrictive relative clause specifies the type 
of car as one belonging to the set of cars that he 
could work on, as opposed to a type of car that he 
would be unable to repair. In (5), the relative 
clause does not identify the river walk area as one 
out of a set of areas, but simply provides additional 
information about it.  In neither case does the 
relative clause assert information in the discourse; 
rather, it expresses a presupposed proposition (e.g., 
‘I can work on x,’‘x is the tourist area’) that is 
assumed to be known by both the speaker and the 
addressee. 

Accordingly, relative clauses are assumed to 
provide background information concerning the 
entities they modify. This background material 
serves either to distinguish the referent from others 
of its kind, as in a restrictive relative clause, or 
provide additional material, as in a non-restrictive 
relative clause, rather than asserting something 
new about the referent.  

2.2 Relative Clauses in NLP 

In line with the linguistic consensus, work in NLP 
has also viewed relative clauses as expressing 
background information about a referent. In 
syntactic simplification, the structural complexity 
is resolved by splitting a sentence into multiple 
ones (Siddharthan, 2003; Chandrasekar, 1996). In 
effect, the relative clause is pulled out of the main 
clause into an independent sentence. For example, 
(5) would be simplified into (6). 

 

18



 

(6) And once you’ve reached the river walk area, it’s 
usually pretty safe during the day. The river 
walk area is the tourist area. 

 
In text summarization, where background 
information is considered parenthetical and 
identified with non-key content, relative clauses 
are simply disregarded (Siddharthan et al., 2004). 
That is, if we consider the relative clause to contain 
parenthetical information, it is reasonable to 
simply remove the non-key content from the text 
prior to any semantic analysis.  

3 Presentational Relative Clauses 

As the analysis of (1) above suggests, however, not 
all relative clauses contain parenthetical 
information. In fact, many linguistic studies have 
argued that subordinate clauses can make 
assertions (Goldberg, 2006; Menn, 1974; 
McCawley, 1981; Fox & Thompson, 1990), as a 
counterpoint to the studies that view them as 
expressing exclusively backgrounded information 
(Shibatani, 2009). 

Here, in line with Michaelis and Lambrecht 
(1996), Kay and Fillmore (1999) and other work in 
the Construction Grammar tradition, we analyze a 
particular construction, the Presentational Relative 
Clause construction (PRC), as a productive 
idiomatic pattern.  The PRC is a construction in 
which the material presented in the relative clause 
is not backgrounded, either in the sense of being 
unnecessary parenthetical material, or in the sense 
of being already known to both speaker and 
addressee (Duffield & Michaelis, 2009). In the 
PRC, information is asserted in the relative clause 
that modifies the nominal element, which is 
introduced by a semantically bleached main clause. 
Examples of the PRC include (1) and the 
following: 
 

(7) They [had] some guy that ___ was defending 
himself.  

(8) And I [know] people who ___have been drug 
tested and who have not, you know, been hired 
by a corporation. 

(9) And they've [got] a fifteen year old that ___'s 
their boss that ___ is carrying a gun 

 
Each of the examples above were examined in 
their original contexts to determining that an 
uninformative main clause introduces the head 

nominal, while an assertion is contained within the 
relative clause. In (7), the main clause that 
introduces the referent some guy is semantically 
uninformative. By this we mean that it does NOT 
assert that the entity they possessed some guy. 
Rather, the asserted proposition in the utterance is 
in the relative clause, and (7) can be paraphrased as 
A guy was defending himself.  In (8) the important 
information is not that the speaker knows a certain 
set of people. Instead, the key assertion here is: 
“Some people have been drug tested and have not 
been hired by a corporation.”  Likewise, (9), 
illustrating what might be described as a double-
PRC, could be rephrased as, “A fifteen-year-old is 
their boss and is carrying a gun.” 

3.1 Anatomy of the PRC construction 

The PRC construction is typically characterized by 
three main properties:  a semantically empty main 
clause, a head nominal in the object position of the 
main clause that is newly introduced into the 
discourse, and a subject-gap relative clause that 
modifies the head nominal.  
 
First property: The semantically bleached main 
clause serves to convey the restriction on the range 
of the existential quantifier rather than an assertion. 
In (7), for example, the main clause conveys the 
restriction ‘x is a guy’. Consequently, a PRC, 
unlike a restrictive relative, is not optional. It is a 
required part of the clause in which it appears, 
exemplified by the fact that (7) cannot reasonably 
be construed as asserting ‘They had some guy’.  

Being uninformative, the main verbs of PRC 
tend to have low semantic weight, as in (10-12). 

 
(10) I've [seen] some statistics that ___ say it's more 

expensive to kill somebody than to keep them 
in prison for life. 

(11) You [get] a guy down the street who ___ comes 
up, uh, carrying a knife. 

(12) When our kids were small we [had] a couple of, 
uh, good women who ___ would often come to 
the house.  

The bracketed main verbs in (10-12), which 
otherwise denote relations of perception, obtaining, 
and possession, respectively, here appear simply to 
‘set the stage’ for their object referents. In other 
words, (10) does not assert that the speaker sees 
something, (11) does not assert that the addressee 

19



 

obtains something and (12) does not assert that 
some people possessed someone. Rather than 
predicating a property or action of the main clause 
subject, the main clause predications in (10-12) 
provide an explicit or inferred center of perspective 
from which to view the entity denoted by the head 
nominal (Koenig and Lambrecht, 1999). 
 
Second property: The discourse-new head 
nominal is in the object position of the main 
clause.  Thus, the PRC enables the speaker to 
avoid violating a hearer-based information-
packaging constraint that Lambrecht (1994) refers 
to as the Principle of Separation of Reference and 
Role (PSRR): “Do not introduce a referent and talk 
about it in the same clause” (ibid). In other words, 
to aid the hearer in anchoring the new referent in 
discourse, the speaker introduces it in the object 
position of the main clause, and then predicates 
upon it in the relative clause, as in example (13): 
 

(13) Speaker A: We have more options now then 
(sic) we did when my kids were 
born, with being able to take off 
full-time longer, you can phase your 
schedule in so that it 's not full-time 
for up to six months. 

Speaker B: Oh boy, that's great. 
Speaker A: It 's really neat. I've [had] a couple 

of assistants that ___ came back 
just three days a week or they've, 
you know, whatever schedule they 
want from a pay standpoint. 

 
Consider Speaker A’s second turn, restructured as 
a declarative clause rather than as a PRC, and thus 
violating the PSRR. This time the assertion is 
conveyed in the main clause, but with the new 
entity in the in the subject position the result is 
pragmatically awkward: 

 
(14) Speaker A: It 's really neat. A couple of 

assistants came back just three days 
a week or they've, you know, 
whatever schedule they want from a 
pay standpoint. 

 
An additional example is provided in (15): 
 

(15) Speaker B: I’ve never liked D.C. a whole lot 
and a really hate the Redskins. And 
a lot of it's because, you know, I 

[got] a lot of people, you know, at 
work with and everything that __ 
are big Redskin fans. (??A lot of 
people I work with and everything 
are big Redskin fans.) 

 
Thus, a crucial identifying characteristic of the 
PRC is that it always modifies head nominals that 
are main-clause objects. 
 
Third property: Third identifying property of the 
PRC is the presence of a subject-gap relative 
clause.  That is, the relative clause modifying the 
head nominal contains a gap in the subject position 
of the relative clause that is co-referential with the 
head nominal, as in (7) repeated here as (16): 

 
(16) They [had] some guy that ___ was defending 

himself.  

There are, however, cases in which the head 
nominal is modified by an object-gap relative 
clause, which conveys an assertion, as in (17): 

 
(17) Everybody [gets] five pounds of garbage that 

they can throw away____ you know uh but 
more than that every week uh you’ve got to 
pay by the pound. 

In the example above, as with the more 
prototypical subject-gap PRC, the main clause 
does not make an assertion (in this case, the main 
clause does not assert that everybody receives five 
pounds of garbage).  Rather, the assertion in the 
relative clause is demonstrated by the appropriate 
paraphrase, “Everybody can throw away five 
pounds of garbage.” While speakers do produce 
object-gap sentences to convey assertions, subject-
gap PRC tokens account for the majority of 
assertoric relative clauses in spoken discourse 
(Duffield and Michaelis, 2009). This results in the 
subject-gap structure being a useful property for 
identifying prototypical instances of the PRC. 

4 Why identify the PRC construction? 

As argued above, identifying the PRC is important 
because, unlike restrictive and non-restrictive 
relative clauses, the PRC does not present 
backgrounded or parenthetical information. Rather, 
the loss of information asserted in a PRC results in 
the loss of inferences crucial for the discourse.   

20



 

4.1 “My son is an animal lover.” 

So far we have seen sentences or utterances that 
would inarguably be interpreted as sentences 
containing a PRC. However, there are PRCs, 
which, while equipped with every relevant PRC 
characteristic, initially appear to contain relative 
clauses expressing parenthetical information. 
Consider the following sentence: 
 

(18) I [had] a son, he’s now gone from the home,  
that ___ was an animal lover. 

In isolation, (18) could be interpreted as asserting 
that the speaker has a son, who now happens to 
have left home. The relative clause that was an 
animal lover would be treated as background 
information about the son.  Yet an examination of 
the context of the conversation reveals that the 
relative clause contains crucial information with 
regard to the discourse as a whole: 

 
(19) Speaker A: Do you want to hear about my 

other animals I've had? 
Speaker B: Sure, sure. 
Speaker A: I've had a skunk  
Speaker B: Yeah. 
Speaker A: I've had a Burmese python, 

I've had rats, I’ve had mice.  
Speaker B: Wow. 
Speaker A: Uh, let's see, I've had gerbils, I 

have, I [had] a son, he’s now 
gone from the home, that ___ 
was an animal lover.  

Speaker B: Uh-huh. 
Speaker A: So at one point I had a snake, 

skunk, dog and a cat running loose 
in the house. 

 
In this case, we see even a more compelling reason 
to identify this sentence as a PRC. Disregarding 
the relative clause in (18) and treating the main 
clause as containing an asserted proposition, 
results in a radically different reading: the 
speaker’s son is among the animals that the 
speaker claims to have owned (i.e. “I’ve had a 
skunk, I’ve had a Burmese python, I’ve had rats, 
I’ve had mice, I’ve had gerbils, I had a son…”). By 
classifying this sentence as a PRC, we reach the 
intended assertion, “My son was an animal lover,” 
which in turn explains why the speaker has been 
the proud owner of a menagerie of animals. 

4.2 Other examples 

Much like the example in (18), the discourse 
context of the other PRCs presented in this paper 
substantiates the claim that they present 
information central to the discourse.  The PRC in 
(7) “They [had] some guy that was defending 
himself,” used in a conversation describing a trial, 
signals that the situation departs from the 
prototypical courtroom schema in a crucial respect 
(the defendant is without a lawyer).  

Other instances of the PRC, such as (8) “And I 
[know] people who ___have been drug tested 
and who have not, you know, been hired by a 
corporation,” like (18), provide explanatory 
information: the reason for the speaker’s negative 
view of drug-testing. Finally, in (15) “I [got] a lot 
of people, you know, at work with and everything 
that ___ are big Redskin fans,” the PRC 
utterance explains why the speaker dislikes a 
particular football team. Treating these clauses as 
background information, restricting categories of 
entities, or removing them from semantic analysis 
results in the loss of information about causal 
connections in the text.    

5 Identifying the PRC construction 

Thus far we have presented the identifying 
linguistic properties of the PRC constructions. We 
will now demonstrate how these properties (see 
Section 3.1) lend themselves to features that could 
be useful for automatic identification and 
classification of PRCs. For the purposes of this 
section we make the assumption that we will only 
retain instances that can be parsed by an automatic 
parser (Collins 1999, Charniak, 1997).  The 
features we suggest are based on the results of a 
corpus study carried out by Duffield and Michaelis 
(in prep) examining the role of the PRC in the 
distribution of relative clause types in spoken 
discourse. 

5.1 The distribution of the PRC in discourse 

In the study by Duffield and Michaelis (2009, in 
prep), 1000 sentences (500 each of subject-gap and 
object-gap relative clauses) from the Switchboard 
Corpus (Godfrey, 1996) were manually examined 
for the first two of the identifying properties of 
PRC tokens as described in Section 3.1. In 
addition, each of the 1000 sentences was examined 

21



 

within a context of 50 lines of previous discourse 
to determine whether or not the relative clause 
conveyed an assertion.   

Their results showed that three properties, 
namely, a semantically bleached verb, discourse-
new head nominals, and an assertion in the relative 
clause, were found to significantly predict relative 
clauses of the subject-gap type, suggesting that 
PRCs account for the prevalence of subject-gap 
relative clauses in discourse. In fact, 22.4% of 
subject-gap relative clauses were PRCs, while only 
6.8% of object-gap relative clauses displayed 
features of the PRC.  The manner in which 
Duffield and Michaelis manually annotated their 
data, although based on linguistic analysis as 
discussed above, easily lends itself to a list of 
properties that could be automatically used to 
identify PRCs in larger corpora. 

5.2 Verb in the main clause 

Corresponding to the first property (Section 3.1) of 
a semantically empty main clause, Duffield & 
Michaelis have observed that PRC tokens have the 
tendency to co-occur with verbs of existence, 
perception and discovery. Table 1 lists these verbs. 
 

Be Get See Hear Tell 
Have Find Know Look Wonder 

Table 1: Main-clause verbs likely to appear in PRCs. 

This suggests that encoding the lemmatized verbs 
as features may help in automatic classification of 
PRCs.  

5.3 Position of head nominal 

The head nominal of the relative clause was found 
to occur in two positions relative to the main-
clause verb. It was either the second argument of 
the main-clause verb (20) or the complement in the 
prepositional phrase (21), which in turn was the 
second argument of the main-clause verb. 
 

(20) They [had] {some guy that ___ was defending 
himself.}-NP 

(21) I have a friend who was [telling] me {about her 
brother who ___ gets high all the time.}-PP 

Duffield and Michaelis also observed that there 
was a correlation between the main-clause verb 
and the position in which the head nominal was 

found. That is, the verbs such as look, tell, and 
wonder were regularly found when the head 
nominal was the complement in the PP, while 
other verbs in Table 1 more frequently occurred 
with the head nominal in the direct argument 
position of the main-clause verb. 
 Furthermore, Duffield and Michaelis found that 
in cases where the head nominal was the 
complement of the PP, the head of the PP was 
found to be either of or about. 
 This suggests that in conjunction with the 
features derived from the lemmatized verb, the 
position of the head nominal in relation to the 
main-clause verb could be encoded as a feature. 
That is, for each of the sentences examined, a 
feature can be coded for either a NP complement 
or PP complement, given which type of 
complement the relative clause sits in. 

In addition to the position of the head nominal, 
for those relative clauses that are found in the PP 
complement a feature can also be coded for the 
preposition heading the phrase.  

5.4 Head nominal: noun and modifiers 

Corresponding to the second property (Section 3.1) 
of PRCs, discourse-new status of modified head 
nominals, is indefinite form. Although Duffield & 
Michaelis recognize that the distinction between 
the ‘given’ and ‘new’ discourse statuses is not the 
same thing as definite versus indefinite form, 
discourse-active entities tend to be formally 
marked as definite, while discourse-new entities 
tend to be marked as indefinite (Prince 1992). 

Head nominals considered as indefinite include 
bare plural nouns (e.g., engineers), determinerless 
nominals modified by adjectives or cardinal 
numbers (e.g., about forty kindergarteners), bare 
mass nouns (e.g., material), nominals with weak 
quantifiers (e.g., some companies), indefinite 
pronouns (e.g., somebody, anybody) and nominals 
containing the indefinite article a (e.g., a fish).   

Definite head nominals include those containing 
the definite article the (e.g., the thing, the 
resources), demonstrative determiners (e.g., this 
recording, that attitude), possessive determiners 
(e.g., my bass), strong quantifiers (e.g., every story, 
all these people), demonstrative pronouns (e.g., 
that, those) and proper nouns (e.g., Rockport, 
Albany). Partitive nominal expressions with 

22



 

indefinite heads (e.g., one of those things, some of 
my friends) are also considered as indefinite. 

To turn the above into linguistic features that are 
characteristic of definite and indefinite head 
nominals, we suggest a number of possible features 
for classification. Several of these relating to the 
head noun phrase may contribute to the 
identification of PRCs: 
 
Head nominal features: 

- the phrasal categories of the sisters to the 
noun in the head noun phrase. These features 
will encode the presence of any adjectival or 
prepositional phrases within the head noun 
phrase. The inclusion of these features will 
account for the existence of any adjectival 
modification on the head noun phrase and/or 
partitive nominals. 

- the existence of named entities in the head 
noun phrase to ascertain the existence of any 
proper nouns in the head nominal. 

 
Head nominal features encoding:  

- whether or not the nominal is a pronoun. This 
will serve to introduce the indefinite and 
demonstrative pronouns into the classification 
of PRCs. 

- singularity/plurarity of the head nominal. 
 
Modifier features encoding: 

- articles and determiners, 
- quantifiers, and 
- possessive pronouns that modify the head 

noun or noun phrase.   

5.5 Gap in the relative clause 

The third and final property shared by PRCs 
concerns the gap in the relative clause. The gap 
occurs in subject position and is co-referential with 
the head nominal. This can be identified in the 
syntactic parses by the presence of a trace in the 
syntactic position co-indexed3 with the relative 
pronouns that, who, or which.  

                                                
3 Note that coindexation is distinct from coreference. In 
Treebank, coindexation involves the creation of a syntactic 
link between the trace and the constituent that was moved out 
of the position trace now occupies. Coreference is the 
relationship between the gap and the referent.  Most parsers, 
however, do not supply co-indexation. 

 The syntactic position of the gap can be coded 
as a feature. These would also include a feature for 
cases where the gap is entirely missing from the 
relative clause. This is to account for cases of 
relative clauses containing a pronoun in the 
position where the gap should be (e.g. The gap in 
this example is filled with the pronoun it: “Here[’s] 
a journal that I’m in the board of it.”). 

5.6 Subject position of matrix clause 

In addition to the above features, based on Duffield 
& Michaelis’ characterization of the PRC, there is 
one other syntactic characteristic worth 
investigating—the subject of the matrix clause. 
Consider the following PRCs: 

 
(22) They [had] some guy that ___ was defending 

himself. 
(23) There[’s] a lot of people that fall into that 

category  
(24) It [was] a moving man ____ pulled right up to 

her house, broke in and stole everything she 
owned4. 

General observation of PRCs is that they seem to 
display a tendency to have either a pronoun (22), 
or an expletive there (23) or it (24) in the subject 
position of the matrix clause. This suggests that the 
lexical content of the subject position may be a 
useful predictor for PRC classification. 

6 Discussion and Conclusion 

In this paper, we have presented identifying 
properties of the PRC construction.  We recognize 
that individual properties as presented here 
contribute to but do not determine the final 
meaning of the PRC construction as a whole, but in 
combination, they are likely predictors. Not all 
syntactic forms can be treated in the same way.  By 
not privileging the syntactic level, but rather 
treating lexical, morphological, and syntactic 
features equally, we are able to identify key 
indicators that could be used to identify the 
function of a relative clause in discourse as 
conveying an assertion as opposed to 
backgrounded information.   

                                                
4 Certain types of PRCs, such as in this example, are produced 
without the relative pronoun.  Such PRCs are referred to as 
amalgams (see Lambrecht, 1988 for discussion) 

23



 

For the purposes of NLP, we must work within 
the framework of phrasal structures, constrained by 
the resources currently available. Yet as we have 
suggested here, those resources, although not 
constructionally based, can be used to identify 
constructions for the purpose of extracting relevant 
information from naturally occurring data. We 
have further investigated the applicability of a 
construction-based approach to identifying relative 
clause types when the individual components, such 
as lexical items themselves are not themselves 
effective predictors.  This clause-level information 
allows for richer representations of textual 
meaning. 

Our future plans include experiments with 
implementing automatic classifiers of relative 
clause type based on these features. Such empirical 
study will give us a better understanding of the 
degree of usefulness of these features in 
identifying PRCs in text data. We anticipate that 
additional features will be discovered during the 
implementation process. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Martha Palmer, Jim 
Martin, Jinho Choi, Susan Brown, Les Sikos, and 
Steve Duman for valuable feedback. 
 
References 
  
Chandrasekar, Raman, and Bangalore Srinivas. 1997. 

Automatic Induction of Rules for Text 
Simplification. Knowledge-Based Systems, 10(3): 
183-190. 

Chandrasekar, Raman, Christine Doran, and Bangalore 
Srinivas. 1996. Motivations and Methods for Text 
Simplification. In Proceedings of the 16th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 1996), pages 1041-1044, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. 

Charniak, Eugene. 2000. A Maximum-Entropy-Inspired 
Parser. In Proceedings of NAACL00, pages 132-139, 
Seattle, WA, USA. 

Collins, Michael John. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical 
Models for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 

Devlin, Siobhan, and Gary Unthank. 2006. Helping 
Aphasic People Process Online Information. In 
Proceedings of the Eighth International ACM 
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and 
Accessibility, pages 225-226, Portland, OR, USA. 

Duffield, Cecily Jill and Laura A. Michaelis. 2009. Why 
Subject Relatives Prevail: Constraints versus 

Constructional Licensing. Presented at the 2009 
Annual Meeting of the Linguistics Society of 
America. San Francisco. CA, USA 

Duffield, Cecily Jill and Laura A. Michaelis. in prep. 
Why Subject Relatives Prevail: Constraints versus 
Constructional Licensing. 

Kay, Paul and Charles J. Fillmore. 1999. Grammatical 
Constructions and Linguistic Generalizations: the 
What's X doing Y? Construction. Language, 75(1):1-
33. 

Fox, Barbara, and Sandra Thompson. 1990. A 
Discourse Explanation of the Grammar of Relative 
Clauses in English Conversation. Language 66:51-64 

Goldberg, Adele E. 2006. Constructions at work. The 
nature of generalization in language. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 

Menn, Lise. 1974. Assertions not made by the main 
clause of a sentence. Studies in the Linguistic 
Sciences (University of Illinois) 4(1):132-143. 

Koenig, Jean-Pierre and Knud Lambrecht. 1999. French 
Relative Clauses as Secondary Predicates. In Francis 
Corbin, Carmen Dobrovie-Sorin, and Jean-Marie 
Marandin, editors, Empirical issues in Formal Syntax 
and Semantics 2. Thesus, pages 191-214, The Hague, 
The Netherlands. 

Lambrecht, Knud. 1994. Information structure and 
sentence form: Topic, focus, and the mental 
representation of discourse referents. In Cambridge 
Studies in Linguistics 71. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press. 

Lambrecht, Knud. 1988. There was a Farmer had a Dog: 
Syntactic Amalgams Revisited. In S. Axmaker, A. 
Jaisser and H. Singmaster, editors, The Proceedings 
of the Fourteenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley 
Linguistics Society. BLS, Inc., pages 319-339 
Berkeley, CA. 

McCawley, James D. 1981. The Syntax and Semantics 
of English Relative Clauses. Lingua, 53: 99-149. 

Michaelis, Laura A. and Knud Lambrecht. 1996. The 
Exclamative Sentence Type in English. In Adele 
Goldberg, editor, Conceptual Structure, Discourse 
and Language. Center for the Study of Language and 
Information, pages 375-389, Stanford, CA. 

Petersen, Sarah E. and Mari Ostendorf. 2007. Text 
simplification for language learners: a corpus 
analysis. In SLaTE-2007, pages 69-72, Farmington, 
PA. 

Siddharthan, Advaith. 2003. Syntactic simplification 
and Text Cohesion. Ph.D. thesis, University of 
Cambridge, UK. 

Siddharthan, Advaith, Ani Nenkova and Kathleen 
McKeown. 2004. Syntactic Simplification for 
Improving Content Selection in Multi-Document 
Summarization. In Proceedings of the 20th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 2004), Geneva, Switzerland. 

24


