










































Applying the TARSQI Toolkit to Augment Text Mining of EHRs


Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL 2010, pages 141–143,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Applying the TARSQI Toolkit to augment text mining of EHRs

Amber Stubbs
Department of Computer Science

Brandeis University MS 018
Waltham, Massachusetts, 02454 USA
astubbs@cs.brandeis.edu

Benjamin Harshfield
Channing Laboratory

Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts, 02115 USA

rebjh@channing.harvard.edu

Abstract

We present a preliminary attempt to ap-
ply the TARSQI Toolkit to the medi-
cal domain, specifically electronic health
records, for use in answering temporally
motivated questions.

1 Introduction

Electronic Health Records are often the most com-
plete records of a patient’s hospital stay, making
them invaluable for retrospective cohort studies.
However, the free text nature of these documents
makes it difficult to extract complex information
such as the relative timing of conditions or proce-
dures. While there have been recent successes in
this endeavor (Irvine et al., 2008; Mowery et al.,
2009; Zhou et al., 2007), there is still much to be
done. We present work done to adapt the TARSQI
Toolkit (TTK) to the medical domain. Though the
use of the TTK and a set of auxiliary Perl scripts,
we perform information extraction over a set of
354 discharge summaries used in the R3i REAL-
IST study to answer the following question:

Which patients can be positively identi-
fied as being on statins at the time they
were admitted to the hospital?

2 TARSQI Toolkit

The TARSQI Toolkit, developed as a part of the
AQUAINT workshops, is a “modular system for
automatic temporal and event annotation of nat-
ural language” in newswire texts (Verhagen and
Pustejovsky, 2008). The different modules prepro-
cess the data, label events and times, create links
between times and events (called “tlinks”), and
mark subordination relationships. Output from the
TTK consists documents annotated in TimeML,
an XML specification for event and time annota-
tion (Pustejovsky et al., 2005). Of particular inter-

est for this project are EVITA, the module respon-
sible for finding events in text, and Blinker, the
module used to create syntactic rule-based links
between events and timexes.

3 Structure of EHRs

The bodies of the Electronic Health Records
used were segmented, with each section having a
header indicating the topic of that section (“Med-
ical History”, “Course of Treatment”, “Discharge
Medications”, etc). Header names and sections are
not standardized across EHRs, but often give im-
portant temporal information about when events
described took place (Denny et al., 2008).

4 Statin Extraction Methodology

As the purpose of this task was to discover what
changes to the TTK would be necessary to make
the transition from newswire to medical texts, over
the course of two weeks we filled in the gaps in the
toolkit’s abilities with a few auxiliary Perl scripts.
Specifically, these scripts were used to clean up in-
put so that it conformed to TTK expectations, la-
bel the statins as events, locate section headers and
associate temporal information with the headers.

A list of statins was acquired from an MD, and
then supplemented with information from web-
sites in order to get all currently marketed versions
of the drugs. This list was then used in conjunc-
tion with a Perl script to find mentions of statins
in the discharge summaries and create TimeML
event tags for them.

In order to identify and categorize section head-
ers we developed a program to automatically col-
lect header names from a separate set of approxi-
mately 700 discharge summaries. Then we gath-
ered statistics on word frequency and created sim-
ple rules for characterizing headers based on key-
words. Headers were divided into four simple cat-
egories: Past, Present, After, and Not (for cate-

141



gories that did not contain specific or relevant tem-
poral information).

The Blinker component of the TTK was then
modified to take into account temporal informa-
tion stored in the header in addition to the syntac-
tic information present in each individual sentence
for the creation of tlinks.

5 Results

Output from the modified TTK was compared
to the judgment of human annotators on the
same dataset. Two annotators, employees of
BWH/Harvard Medical involved in data manage-
ment and review for clinical trials, were asked
to label each file as yes for those patients taking
statins at the time they were admitted to the hos-
pital, and no for those that werent. Files where
statins were mentioned without clear temporal an-
chorings were categorized as “unsure”.

Inter-annotator agreement was 85% (Cohen
kappa=.75), with 75% of the disagreements being
between “no” and “unsure”. The majority of these
ambiguous cases were discharge summaries where
a statin was listed under “discharge” but admission
medications were not listed, nor were the statins
mentioned as being started at the hospital. The
annotation guidelines have been updated to reflect
how to annotate these cases in the future. Over-
all, 139 patients were identified as being on statins,
174 were not on statins, and 41 were unclear.

As the question was which patients could be
positively identified as being on statins at the time
of admission, the files labeled as “unsure” were
considered to be “no” for the purposes of evalua-
tion against the TTK, making the totals 139 yeses
to 215 noes. The comparison between human and
computer annotation are shown below:

Yes No
Human 139 215
TTK 129 225

Table 1: Distribution of statin classifications.

The TTK system had an accuracy of 84% overall,
with an accuracy of 95% on the files that the hu-
man annotators found to be unambiguous.

6 Limitations

While we were pleased by these results, a num-
ber of factors worked in the favor or the automated

system. The task itself, while requiring a mixture
of lexical and temporal knowledge, was greatly
simplified by a finite list of medications and a bi-
nary outcome variable. Obscure abbreviations or
misspellings could have prevented identification
of statin mentions for both the computer and hu-
mans, making the overall accuracy questionable.
Additionally, in the majority of documents the
statins were mentioned in lists under temporally
anchored headings rather than free text, thereby
minimizing the impact of uncertain times as de-
scribed in Hripcsak et al (2009).

7 Future work

Our work so far shows promising results for being
able to modify the TARSQI Toolkit for use in the
medical domain. In the future, we would like to in-
tegrate the functionality of the Perl scripts used in
this project into the TTK, in particular expanding
the vocabulary of the EVITA module to the medi-
cal domain, section header labeling, and the use of
the headers in tlink creation.

New annotation schemas will need to be added
to the project in order to get a more complete and
accurate view of medical records. Under consider-
ation is the Clinical E-Science Framework (CLEF)
(Roberts et al., 2007) for annotating medical enti-
ties, actions (which would overlap with TimeML
events), drugs, etc. Modifications to Blinker will
be more fully integrated with the existing rule li-
braries. At this point it is unclear whether the TTK
will remain a single program, or if it will split into
domain-specific versions.

Furthermore, the number of files labeled “un-
sure” by human annotators highlights the need for
cross-document analysis abilities. Had previous
records for these patients been available, it seems
likely that there would have been fewer uncertain-
ties.

8 Conclusion

Modifying the TARSQI Toolkit, a newswire-
trained parser, for application in the medical do-
main provided accurate results for a very specific
time-sensitive query.

Acknowledgments

Partial support for the work described here was
provided by the Residual Risk Reduction Initiative
Foundation (r3i.org).

142



References
Joshua C Denny, Randolph A Miller, Kevin B John-

son, and Anderson Spickard. 2008. Development
and evaluation of a clinical note section header ter-
minology. AMIA Annual Symposium proceedings,
pages 156–60.

George Hripcsak, Noémie Elhadad, Yueh-Hsia Chen,
Li Zhou, and Frances P Morrison. 2009. Using em-
piric semantic correlation to interpret temporal as-
sertions in clinical texts. J Am Med Inform Assoc,
16(2):220–7.

Ann K Irvine, Stephanie W Haas, and Tessa Sullivan.
2008. Tn-ties: A system for extracting temporal in-
formation from emergency department triage notes.
AMIA Annual Symposium proceedings, pages 328–
32.

Danielle L. Mowery, Henk Harkema, John N. Dowling,
Jonathan L. Lustgarten, and Wendy W. Chapman.
2009. Distinguishing historical from current prob-
lems in clinical reports: which textual features help?
In BioNLP ’09: Proceedings of the Workshop on
BioNLP, pages 10–18, Morristown, NJ, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

James Pustejovsky, Bob Ingria, and Roser Sauri et al.,
2005. The Language of Time: A Reader, chapter
The Specification Language TimeML, pages 545–
558. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Angus Roberts, Robert Gaizauskas, and Mark et al
Hepple. 2007. The clef corpus: semantic annotation
of clinical text. AMIA Annual Symposium proceed-
ings, pages 625–9.

Marc Verhagen and James Pustejovsky. 2008. Tem-
poral processing with the tarsqi toolkit. In Coling
2008: Companion volume - Posters and Demonstra-
tions, pages 189–192, Manchester, UK.

Li Zhou, Simon Parsons, and George Hripcsak. 2007.
The evaluation of a temporal reasoning system in
processing clinical discharge summaries. J Am Med
Inform Assoc, 15(1):99–106.

143


