



















































Toward a Totally Unsupervised, Language-Independent Method for the Syllabification of Written Texts


Proceedings of the 11th Meeting of the ACL-SIGMORPHON, ACL 2010, pages 63–71,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Toward a Totally Unsupervised, Language-Independent Method for the
Syllabification of Written Texts

Thomas Mayer
Department of Linguistics

University of Konstanz, Germany
thomas.mayer@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract

Unsupervised algorithms for the induction
of linguistic knowledge should at best re-
quire as few basic assumptions as pos-
sible and at the same time in principle
yield good results for any language. How-
ever, most of the time such algorithms are
only tested on a few (closely related) lan-
guages. In this paper, an approach is pre-
sented that takes into account typological
knowledge in order to induce syllabic di-
visions in a fully automatic manner based
on reasonably-sized written texts. Our ap-
proach is able to account for syllable struc-
tures of languages where other approaches
would fail, thereby raising the question
whether computational methods can really
be claimed to be language-universal when
they are not tested on the variety of struc-
tures that are found in the languages of the
world.

1 Introduction

Many approaches developed in the field of com-
putational linguistics are only tested and optimized
for one language (mostly English) or a small set of
closely related languages, but at the same time are
often claimed to be applicable to any natural lan-
guage, cf. Bender (2009). Our aim is to stress the
importance of having a more varied sample of lan-
guages that include the different types that can be
found in the languages of the world in order to do
justice to the range of variation in linguistic struc-
tures across languages. Furthermore, we want to
point to the usefulness of using typological knowl-
edge for a language-universal approach.
In this paper, we present an unsupervised,

language-independent syllabification method
based on raw unannotated texts in a phonemic
transcription. The methods and procedures

presented in this work rest upon insights from
typological work and do not need any additional
language-dependent information. The main pur-
pose of this paper is not to present an improvement
on already established statistical approaches to
the problem of syllabification of an individual
language, but to introduce data from languages
that might constitute a problem for many syl-
labification methods that have been optimized
on languages like English and therefore make it
necessary to integrate an additional component
that is able to handle such cases.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-

lows. First, it is argued in Section 2 that ortho-
graphic texts (in any alphabetic script) can be used
for the induction of phonological patterns if the
spelling system is reasonably close to a phonemic
transcription. The syllabification process can be
divided into two steps. In Section 3, we present
and evaluate an algorithm for an unsupervised
classification of all symbols in the input texts into
vowels and consonants. Based on this classifica-
tion, a syllabification procedure is discussed that
makes use of distributional information of clus-
ters in order to break up vowel and consonant se-
quences into syllables (Section 4). Finally, we
conclude with a discussion of the advantages and
disadvantages of the present approach and its im-
plications for future research.

2 Learning phonological patterns on the
basis of written texts?

Most studies that are based on original texts are
concerned with research questions that do not
make use of phonological knowledge that has
been extracted from the texts. The reason for
this is obvious. The orthographies of many well-
studied modern languages contain many idiosyn-
cratic rules and exceptions that would make it dif-
ficult to use them for dealing with phonological
aspects of the languages under consideration. On

63



the other hand, in order to be able to use distribu-
tional information for phonological problems there
are not enough reasonably-sized phonetically tran-
scribed corpora, especially for a wider range of
languages.
However, many spelling systems do not suffer

from these shortcomings and thus can be used for
these purposes. When looking at languages whose
orthographies have been conceived or standard-
ized only recently it can be noted thatmany of them
are pretty close to a phonemic transcription. Pro-
vided the size of the corpus is big enough, smaller
inconsistencies in the spelling system can be con-
sidered to be noise in the data.
Phonemic orthographies as they are usually de-

vised for a new spelling system also show an ad-
vantage that phonetic transcriptions lack, namely
that they already group together those symbols
that represent the same phoneme in the language.1
Moreover, obligatory phonological processes such
as final devoicing are mostly not represented in the
written form (Turkish being a notable exception),
thereby providing a sort of underlying representa-
tion that is useful to induce which sequences can
be grouped together to morphemes.
For these reasons written texts can in our view

also be used for the induction of phonological
knowledge for languages with phonemic spelling
systems, even though their results have to be ana-
lyzed with great care.

3 Sukhotin’s algorithm

Sukhotin’s algorithm (Sukhotin, 1962, 1973) is a
totally unsupervised method to discriminate vow-
els from consonants on the basis of a phonemic
transcription. The approach relies on two fun-
damental assumptions that are grounded on typo-
logical insights. First, vowels and consonants in
words tend to alternate rather than being grouped
together. Second, the most frequent symbol in the
corpus is a vowel. The latter assumption is used
to initialize the classification step by claiming that
the most frequent symbol is the first member of
the vowel class, with the rest of the symbols ini-
tially all classified as consonants. With the help of
the first assumption the other vowels are then clas-
sified by iteratively checking which symbol is less

1In the remainder of this paper we will use the term ’sym-
bol’ as a more neutral expression for all letters in the written
texts in order not to be explicit whether the spelling system
really lives up to the goal of representing phonemes by let-
ters.

frequently adjacent to the already detected vowels.

3.1 Typological basis
It has been noticed in the typological literature at
least since Jakobson and Halle (1956) that there is
a tendency in the languages of the world for hav-
ing CV as the basic syllable structure. Of course,
languages differ as to the number and types of syl-
lables; there are languages that allow a huge vari-
ety of consonant (or vowel) clusters whereas others
are stricter in their phonotactic possibilities. How-
ever, all languages seem to obey the universal law
that CV is more basic than other syllable types and
that ”CV is the only universal model of the sylla-
ble.” Evidence for this comes from different ar-
eas of linguistics, including the observation that
no matter how small the number of syllable types
in a language is, it always includes CV. This is
also reflected in the Onset Maximization Princi-
ple (OMP), which states that an intervocalic con-
sonant is attributed to the following syllable and is
assumed to be a language-universal principle for
syllabification.
We are not aware of any cross-linguistic study

that investigated the token frequency of phonemes
in larger samples of texts. Hence, the second as-
sumption that the most frequent symbol in a text
is always a vowel cannot be backed up by typo-
logical knowledge. However, this claim can be
supported indirectly. In his study on consonant-
vowel ratios in 563 languages, Maddieson (2008)
states that the ratio ranges between 1.11 and 29.
The lowest value has been calculated for the isolate
language Andoke, which has 10 consonants and
9 vowels. The mean value is 4.25, though. Pro-
vided that it is always the case that languages have
more consonants than vowel types, it can be argued
that the fewer vowels have higher token frequen-
cies in order to be able to contribute their share to
the make-up of syllables.2 Yet this generalization
is untested and could be wrong for some languages
(or rather corpora of those languages). In our sam-
ple of texts in different languages, nevertheless the
most frequent symbol is always a vowel.

3.2 Description of the algorithm
Sukhotin’s algorithm is computationally simple
and can even be illustrated with a small toy cor-

2In the French corpus that Goldsmith and Xanthos (2009)
used in their studies, the most frequent phoneme turned out to
be a consonant. However, the rest of the classification was not
affected and all remaining phonemes were labelled correctly.

64



pus.3 Given a corpus with the inventory of n sym-
bols S := {s1, . . . , sn} we construct an n×nma-
trix M where the rows represent the first and the
columns the second symbol in a bigram sequence
and which indicates the number of times the se-
quences occur in the corpus.

M =

 m11 . . . m1n. . . . . . . . .
mn1 . . . mnn


The main diagonal, i.e., the self-succession of

symbols, is ignored by setting all its values to
zero. For instance, given a sample corpus C =
{saat, salat, tal, last, stall, lese, seele} we ob-
tain the following 5 × 5 matrix (for ease of un-
derstanding the symbols have been put in front of
the cells of the matrix and the row sums in the last
column):

M =



s a t l e Sum
s 0 3 2 0 3 8
a 3 0 3 4 0 10
t 2 3 0 0 2 7
l 0 4 0 0 3 7
e 3 0 2 3 0 8


Sukhotin’s algorithm initially considers all sym-

bols to be consonants before it enters an interative
phase. In each cycle of the phase, the symbol with
the highest row sum greater than zero is detected
and classified as a vowel. The row sum for any
symbol sa is calculated by adding up all occur-
rences of the symbol sa as a first or second mem-
ber in a sequence

∑n
i=1 mai. After a new vowel

has been detected, its row sum is set to zero and
all other row sums are updated by subtracting from
the sum of the row of each remaining symbol twice
the number of times it occurs next to the new-found
vowel. This process is repeated until nomore sym-
bols with positive row sums are left. In our exam-
ple, the vectors of row sums (RSum) for all sym-
bols in the individual steps of the iteration phase
look as follows:

RSum1 =
(

s a t l e
8 10 7 7 8

)

RSum2 =
(

s a t l e
2 0 1 −1 8

)
3More detailed descriptions can be found in Guy (1991)

and Goldsmith and Xanthos (2009).

RSum3 =
(

s a t l e
−4 0 −3 −7 0

)
The rationale behind this algorithm with respect

to its basic assumptions is as follows. The fact that
initially the symbol with the highest sum is consid-
ered to be a vowel reflects the idea that the most
frequent symbol in the corpus has to be a vowel.
What the row sums after each step actually con-
tain is the difference between the number of times
a symbol is found next to a consonant and the num-
ber of times it is found next to a vowel. When-
ever a new vowel has been detected all occurrences
of this vowel have to be subtracted from the other
symbols because this symbol is no longer consid-
ered to be a consonant.

3.3 Evaluation

To the best of our knowledge, the algorithm has
never been tested on a larger cross-linguistic sam-
ple. There are results for a number of languages
in Sukhotin’s original papers, in Sassoon (1992)
and in Goldsmith and Xanthos (2009), yet almost
all languages in those samples belong to the Indo-
European family (except for Georgian, Hungar-
ian and Finnish) or do not fulfill the criterion of
a phonemic transcription (Hebrew). It therefore
still needs to be tested on a more cross-linguistic
sample of languages. In particular, it is an inter-
esting question to see if the algorithm works even
for those languages that are notorious for having
many consonant clusters. On the basis of his sam-
ple of five languages, Sassoon (1992) comes to
the conclusion that it works very well on those
languages that have only few consonant clusters
but has problems when more complex clusters are
involved. However, he also notices that this ef-
fect disappears with larger text samples. Table 1
provides an evaluation of Sukhotin’s algorithm on
the basis of Bible texts (NT) in our sample of 39
languages. The size of the corpora in Sassoon’s
sample range from 1641 to 3781 characters while
the Bible texts contain more than 100,000 char-
acters (e.g., English has 716,301 characters). On
average, Sukhotin’s algorithm classifies 95.66%
of the symbols correctly. However, this percent-
age also includes those languages which do not
fulfill the criterion of having a suitable phonemic
writing system (e.g., Russian, English, German,
French). When looking only at those languages
whose spelling systems are close to a phonemic
transcription (or where the digraphs have been sub-

65



stituted by single symbols), the results are even
better.

Misclassified symbols are either very infrequent
and happen to occur next to symbols of the same
class or are part of one of the digraphs used in the
spelling system of the language. In the Maltese
case, the symbol î is classified as a consonant be-
cause it only occurs twice in the corpus in the word
eloî where it stands next to a symbol that is clearly
a vowel. For some languages, minor modifications
to the original texts have been made in order to re-
place the most frequent digraphs. In Swahili, for
instance, with the official orthography the symbol
c is classified as a vowel because it only occurs
in the digraph ch. After the digraph has been re-
placed by a single symbol, the classification is cor-
rect in all cases. Sometimes a symbol (e.g., h in
Warlpiri) is misclassified because it does not occur
in the writing system of the language but is part of
a digraph in foreign words (mostly proper names
of people or locations in the Bible texts). Another
problem of the approach is with orthographies that
use the same symbol for both vowels and conso-
nants. Since the classification is global, symbols
like English y, which is a consonant in yoghurt
and a vowel in lady, are always treated as either a
vowel or a consonant for the whole language inde-
pendent of the context where they occur. There-
fore symbols in the input text should always be
able to be classified to one or the other category.

As the discussion of misclassified symbols
shows, the main errors in the results are not due to
the algorithm itself, but a problem of the spelling
systems of the texts at hand. Our results confirm
the findings of Sassoon (1992) that the algorithm
is sensitive to the corpus size and the frequency of
occurrence of individual symbols. Larger corpora,
such as Bible texts, yield much better results for
these languages. Even those languages with many
and very complex consonant clusters (e.g., Geor-
gian, Croatian and Czech) get an almost perfect
classification. It is remarkable that the overall dis-
tribution of the symbols makes up for those cases
where consonants frequently occur in clusters. Ex-
periments with smaller corpus sizes also revealed
that one of the first symbols that get wrongly clas-
sified is the sibilant s. This might be another indi-
cator for the exceptional status of sibilants with re-
spect to syllabification and their occurrence in con-
sonant sequences where they can violate the sonor-
ity principle (e.g., in the sequence str in words like

string the consonant s is to the left of the consonant
t although higher in sonority).

4 Unsupervised syllabification

Based the classification of input symbols into vow-
els and consonants, the syllabification procedure
can then be applied. Knowledge of syllable struc-
ture is not only relevant for a better understand-
ing of the procedures and representations that are
involved in both computer and human language
learning but also interesting from an engineering
standpoint, e.g., for the correct pronunciation of
unknown words in text-to-speech systems or as an
intermediate step for morphology induction.
Several methods have been proposed in the lit-

erature for an unsupervised language-independent
syllabification (see Vogel, 1977 for an overview
and Goldsmith and Larson, 1990 for an imple-
mentation of a more recent approach based on
the sonority hierarchy). Some methods that have
been suggested in the literature (going back to
Herodotus, who observed this for Ancient Greek;
cf. Kuryłowicz, 1948) rely on the observation
that word-medial tautosyllabic consonant clusters
mostly constitute a subset of word-peripheral clus-
ters. Intervocalic consonant clusters can therefore
be divided up into a word-final and word-initial
cluster. Theoretically, two types of problems can
be encountered. First, those where more than one
division is possible and second, those in which no
division is possible.
Several approaches have been suggested to re-

solve the first problem, i.e., word-medial conso-
nant sequences where there are several possible di-
visions based on the occurrence of word-initial and
word-final clusters. O’Connor and Trim (1953)
and Arnold (1956) suggest that in cases of ambigu-
ous word-medial clusters the preference for one
syllable division over another can be determined
by the frequency of occurrence of different types of
word-initial and word-final clusters. For this pur-
pose, they determine the frequency of occurrence
of word-initial and word-final CV, VC, etc. sylla-
ble patterns. Based on these frequencies they cal-
culate the probabilities of dividing a word-medial
sequence by summing up the values established for
the different word-peripheral syllable types. The
candidate syllabification with the highest sum is
then chosen as the optimal division.
The approach taken here is a slight modification

of the proposal in O’Connor and Trim (1953) and

66



Language Vowels Consonants
Afrikaans a c* e i o u y á é ê í ò ó ô ú b d f g h j k l m n p q r s t v w x ä* ë* ï* ü*
Albanian a e g* h* i o u y ç* é ë b c d f j k l m n p q r s t v x z
Armenian (transl.) a e e’ y’ i o ch* o’ b g d z t’ jh l x c’ k h d’ gh tw m y n sh p j r’

s v t r c w p’ q f
Basque a e i o u v* á æ é í ó ö b c d f g h k l m n p q r s t x y z à* ä* ç è* ü*
Breton a c* e i o u ê b d f g h j k l m n p r s t v w y z ñ ù* ü*
Chamorro a e i o u á â é í ó ú b c d f g h j l m n p q r s t v x y ã* ñ ü*
Croatian a e i o u b c d f g h j k l m n p r s t v z ä* ð ó* ć č đ š ž
Czech a e i o u y á é í ó ú ý ě ů b c d f g h j k l m n p q r s t v x z č ď ň ř š ť ž
Danish a e i o u y å æ ø b c d f g h j k l m n p r s t v x z
Dutch a c* e i o u y b d f g h j k l m n p q r s t v w x z
English a e g* i o t* u b c d f h j k l m n p q r s v w x y z
Finnish a e i o u y ä ö b c d f g h j k l m n p q r s t v x z
French a e i o u à â è é ê î ô û b c d f g h j k l m n p q r s t v x y z ç ë* ï* ù*

ü* œ*
Georgian (transl.) a e i o u h* b g d v z t k’ l m n p’ zh r s t’ p k gh q sh ch ts

dz ts’ ch’ kh j
German a e h* i o p* u y ä ö ü b c d f g j k l m n q r s t v w x z ß
Gothic a e i o u v* x* û b d f g h j k l m n p q r s t w z ï* þ
Greek α ε η ι ο υ ω β γ δ ζ θ κ λ μ ν ξ π ρ ς σ τ φ χ ψ
Hungarian a c* e i o u y á é í ó õ ö ú û ü b d f g h j k l m n p r s t v x z
Icelandic a e i o u y á æ é í ó ö ú ý b d f g h j k l m n p r s t v x ð þ
Italian a e h* i o u à è ì ò ù b c d f g j k l m n p q r s t v z é*
Latin a e i o u y b c d f g h l m n p q r s t v x z
Maltese (rev.) a e g* i o u à â è ì í ò ù b d f h j k l m n p q r s t v w x z î* ċ ġ ħ ż
Mandarin (toneless) a e i o u ng zh ch b c d f g h j k l m n p q r s t w x y z sh
Maori (rev.) a e i o u g h k m n p r t ng w wh
Norwegian (Bokmål) a e i o u y å æ é ó ø b c d f g h j k l m n p r s t v z ë*
Potawatomi (rev.) a e i o u c d g k l m n p s t w sh y
Romanian a e i o u î ă b c d f g h j l m n p r s t v x z ş ţ
Russian а е и о у ы (ь*) э я б в г д ж з й к л м н п р с т ф х ц ч ш щ (ъ*)

(ю*)
Scots Gaelic a h* i o u b c d e* f g l m n p r s t
Spanish a e i o u á â é ê í î ó ô ù ú b c d f g h j l m n p q r s t v x y z ñ ü*
Swahili (rev.) a e i o u b d f g h j k l m n p r s t v w x y z
Swedish a e i o u y ä å é ö b c d f g h j k l m n p r s t v x
Tagalog (rev.) a e i o u ng b c d f g h j k l m n p q r s t v w x y z
Turkish a e i o u â å î ö û ü ı b c d f g h j k l m n p r s t v y z ç ğ ş
Ukrainian i а е и о у ь ю я є і ї c y б в г д ж з й к л м н п р с т ф х ц ч ш щ ґ
Uma a e g* i o u b c d f h j k l m n p r s t w y z ï*
Warlpiri (rev.) a e h* i o u c f j k l m n p q r s t v w x y z
Wolof a e i o u à é ë ó b c d f g j k l m n p q r s t w x y ñ ŋ
Xhosa a e g* i o t* u â b c d f h j k l m n p q r s v w x y z

Table 1: Results for Sukhotin’s algorithm on Bible texts in 39 languages. All symbols of the input
Bible texts for the respective languages are listed even if they are very infrequent. For those languages
marked as revised the most frequent digraphs have been replaced by a single symbol. Wrongly classified
symbols are marked with an asterisk. Languages with spelling systems which notoriously contain many
idiosyncratic rules are shaded. We decided to include them as a reference where the problems occur with
these systems.

67



Arnold (1956). Instead of counting the frequency
of occurrence of syllable types, the actual sylla-
bles are counted in order to determine the best split
of word-medial consonant sequences. An example
calculation for the German word fasten ’to abstain
from food’ is given in Table 2.

a) fa st142] en [fast.en] sum: 142
b) fa s528] [216t en [fas.ten] sum: 744
c) fa [176st en [fa.sten] sum: 176

Table 2: Example calculations for the word-medial
cluster in the German word fasten.

The example calculations in Table 2 show that
the candidate syllabification in b) yields the high-
est sum and is therefore chosen as the correct syl-
labification of the word. One of the advantages
of this approach (as well as the one proposed by
O’Connor and Trim and Arnold) is that OMP fol-
lows from the fact that word-initial CV sequences
are more frequent than word-final VC sequences
and does not have to be stipulated independently.
The claim that CV is the unmarked syllable

structure for all languages of the world (andOMP a
universal principle) has been challenged by some
Australian languages that seem to behave differ-
ently with respect to syllabification of VCV se-
quences (Breen and Pensalfini, 1999). In those
languages VCV sequences are syllabified as VC.V
instead of V.CV, as OMP would predict. The
authors provide evidence from a number of pro-
cesses in these languages (reduplication, language
games) as well as historical and comparative evi-
dence that support the analysis that VC seems to be
more accurate as the basic syllable type for those
languages.4

For cases where word-medial clusters cannot be
broken up by sequences that are found at word
edges (bad clusters), we decided to go back to the
original method used by O’Connor and Trim and
Arnold and calculate the frequency of occurrence
of syllable types. However, bad clusters are not
very frequent compared to the overall data in our
experiments.
One additional problem when working with

written texts5 rather than transcribed corpora is the
4Note that this does not invalidate one of the basic assump-

tions of Sukhotin’s algorithm, since C and V still alternate
even though in the reverse order.

5Some linguists also believe that stress can lead to a vio-
lation of OMP by attracting an intervocalic consonant to the
coda of the previous stressed syllable. Since stress is usually

Dutch aa (772), oo (510), ie (440), ui (301),
ou (155), eu (110), uu (27)

German ei (1373), au (641), eu (216)
English ea (336), ou (280), io (231), oo (79)
French ai (863), ou (686), eu (397), io

(339), ui (272), au (232), oi (232)
Greek ου (1687), ει (1684), ευ (650), οι

(616), αυ (287)
Wolof aa (1027), ee (821), oo (656), ée

(181), ii (158), óo (118)

Table 3: ”Diphthongs” for a subset of the lan-
guages in the sample (in brackets the frequency of
adjacent occurrence).

fact that diphthongs are not clearly distinguished
from sequences of monophthongs. Yet this is vi-
tal for a correct syllabification procedure since the
number of syllables of the word is different de-
pending on this choice. In order to retrieve the
diphthongs of the language from the distribution
of vowel sequences in the corpus the following ap-
proach has been used.6 For each bigram vowel se-
quence the number of times the first vowel v1 is
directly followed by the second vowel v2 is com-
pared with the number of times both vowels are
separated by one consonant. If the frequency of
direct adjacency is higher than the frequency of
v1cv2 the sequence is considered to be a ”diph-
thong”; if not, the sequence is considered to be a
case of hiatus and both vowels are attributed to dif-
ferent syllables. Similar to Sukhotin’s algorithm
the present syllabification algorithm is also global
in the sense that the diphthong/monophthong dis-
tinction is always used in the same way no matter
in which environment the sequence occurs.7 Ta-
ble 3 gives a list of the diphthongs extracted from
the corpus for a number of languages in our sample
based on this method.

4.1 The problem of evaluating syllabification
methods

There are several reasons why a gold standard
for syllabification, with which the syllabification
methods are compared, is difficult to establish.

not reflected in most orthographies, we do not consider this
option here.

6We thank Bernhard Wälchli (p.c.) for drawing our atten-
tion to this idea.

7In German, for instance, the vowel sequence eu can either
be tautosyllabic and in that case constitute a diphthong as in
heute ’today’; or it can be a case of hiatus and therefore be
broken up by a syllable boundary as in Museum ’museum’.

68



Duanmu (2009) states that even for well-described
languages like English linguists do not agree on the
correct syllabification of comparatively straight-
forward cases. For the English word happy, for in-
stance, four different analyses have been proposed:

[hæ.pi] Hayes (1995), Halle (1998), Guss-
mann (2002)

[hæp.i] Selkirk (1982), Hammond (1999)
[hæpi] Kahn (1976), Giegerich (1992),

Kreidler (2004)
[hæp.pi] Burzio (1994)

Table 4: Analyses of happy (cited from Duanmu,
2009). Underlined consonants are ambisyllabic.

The correct syllabification of a word can best
be established when there is some operation in the
language that takes recourse on the syllable struc-
ture of the word. In the case of the Australian
languages with no syllable onsets, Breen and Pen-
salfini (1999:6f) provide evidence from reduplica-
tion processes in Arrernte to support their analysis.
If the Arrernte syllable shape is VC(C), rather than
(C)CV, reduplication is most straightforwardly de-
scribed in terms of syllables. The attenuative pre-
fix is formed by /-elp/ preceded by the first syl-
lable of the base if VC(C) syllabification is as-
sumed. The attenuative form of the base empwaṛ
’to make’ is therefore empwelpempwaṛ.8 A simi-
lar argumentation can be put forward for languages
that show phonological operations that are based
on the structure of syllables, e.g., syllable-final de-
voicing. If a voiced obstruent is realized unvoiced,
the syllabification might suggest its position to be
in the coda.
Besides disagreement on the correct syllabifi-

cation of words, another crucial aspect of eval-
uating syllabification methods is the question of
whether the test set should consist of a random
sample of words of the language or whether there
should be any constraints on the composition of
the evaluation data. If the evaluation consists of
a huge number of monosyllabic words, the results
are much better than with polysyllabic words be-
cause no consonant clusters have to be broken up.

8As one reviewer remarked, reduplication patterns are
usually described in terms of a CV-template rather than sylla-
ble structures. However, in the case of Arrernte, a description
in terms of syllables rather than VC(C) shapes would be more
elegant and at the same time account for other operations as
well.

For the evaluation of their syllabification methods,
Goldwater and Johnson (2005) distinguish words
with any number of syllables from words with at
least two syllables. Depending on the method that
they test the differences in the percentage of cor-
rectly syllabified words range from a few to almost
30%. It is therefore easier to get better results when
applying the syllabification methods to languages
with a large number of monosyllabic words and
fewer consonant clusters, like Mandarin Chinese,
for instance.

4.2 Discussion and evaluation
One of the problems of a cross-linguistic inves-
tigation is the availability of gold standards for
evaluation. Thus, instead of providing a compara-
tive evaluation, we want to discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of the procedure with respect
to the more common sonority-based syllabifica-
tion method. We tested our method on a manually
created gold standard of 1,000 randomly selected
words in Latin. The precision is 92.50% and the re-
call 94.96% (F-Score 0.94) for each transition from
one symbol to another. Most misplaced syllable
boundaries are due to the vowel cluster io, which
has been treated as a diphthong by our method.
The most interesting aspect of our approach is

that it is able to account for those languages where
intervocalic consonants are better be analyzed as
belonging to the previous syllable, thereby violat-
ing OMP. Approaches relying on the Onset Max-
imization Principle would get all of these syllable
boundaries wrong. Breen and Pensalfini (1999)
note that Arrernte also has only VC in word-initial
position. Consequently, an approach that is based
on word-peripheral clusters can predict the lack of
word-medial onsets correctly. The importance of
word-peripheral clusters is also supported by find-
ings in Goldwater and Johnson (2005) where a bi-
gram model improves after training with Expec-
tation Maximization whereas a positional model
does not, which might be due to the fact that a bi-
gram model (unlike the positional model) can gen-
eralize whatever it learns about clusters no matter
if they occur at word edges or word-medially.
Moreover, the influence of word-peripheral

clusters on the syllabification of word-medial con-
sonant sequences is not restricted to syllable types
only, but sometimes also holds solely for individ-
ual consonants. In Chamorro, for instance, Top-
ping (1973) describes the syllabification of inter-
vocalic consonants as observing OMP. However,

69



this does not apply if the consonant is the glottal
stop /’/, in which case the syllable division occurs
after the consonant, leading to the syllabification
/na’.i/ ’to give’. The interesting observation in this
respect is that the glottal stop phonologically never
occurs at the beginning of a word in Chamorro
whereas all other consonants (with the exception
of /w/) do occur word-initially,9 which leads to the
correct syllabification results with our approach.
Another advantage of the present method is that

clusters with sibilant consonants that do not con-
form to the sonority principle (see the example of
str in Section 3.3) do not have to be treated dif-
ferently. They merely follow from the fact that
these clusters are particularly frequent in word-
peripheral position. The biggest disadvantage is
the fact that the method is sensitive to frequen-
cies of individual clusters and thereby sometimes
breaks up clusters that should be tautosyllabic
(one of the few examples in our Latin corpus was
teneb.rae).

5 Conclusions and future work

A complete model of syllabification involves more
than what has been presented in this paper. The
method proposed here is restricted to single words
and does not take into account resyllabification
across word boundaries as well as some other crite-
ria thatmight influence the actual syllable structure
of words such as stress and morphological bound-
aries. Nevertheless, the discussion of our approach
shows that expanding the range of languages to
other families and areas of the world can challenge
some of the well-established findings that are used
for inferring linguistic knowledge.
The results of Sukhotin’s algorithm show that

the distinction between vowels and consonants,
which is vital for any syllabification method, can
be induced from raw texts on the basis of the sim-
ple assumptions that vowels and consonants tend
to alternate and that a vowel is the most frequent
symbol in a corpus. In contrast to previous stud-
ies of the algorithm (Sassoon, 1992), our results
do not suffer from the fact that the input text is too
short and therefore yield better results.
Based on the classifications of symbols into

vowels and consonants with Sukhotin’s algorithm
our unsupervised syllabification method deter-

9Topping notes that phonetically there is a glottal stop pre-
ceding every word-initial vowel, yet this is totally predictable
in this position and therefore not phonemic.

mines syllable boundaries on distributional infor-
mation. In contrast to other unsupervised ap-
proaches to syllabification that are grounded on at-
tributing a sonority value to each consonant and
OMP, our procedure breaks up word-medial con-
sonant sequences by considering the frequencies
of all possible word-peripheral clusters in order to
get the most probable division. We did not pro-
vide a comparative evaluation of our procedure but
only discussed the problems that can be encoun-
tered when looking at a wider variety of languages
and how they can be solved by our approach. The
question that this paper wants to raise is therefore
if it is more important to optimize a procedure on
a single language (mostly English or related Euro-
pean languages) or whether it should be capable of
dealing with the variety of structures that can be
found in the languages of the world.
For future work we want to apply the present

methods on phonetically transcribed corpora in
order to be able to compare the results for the
well-studied European languages to other meth-
ods. There are still some challenges remaining for
a universal syllabification procedure, one of them
being the detection of syllabic consonants. Ulti-
mately, we also want to integrate a sonority hier-
archy of the input symbols to combine the advan-
tages of both approaches and to create a gradual
value for syllabification that is able to account for
the difference between clear-cut syllable bound-
aries and ambisyllabic consonants or other cases
where a syllable boundary is harder to establish.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded by the research ini-
tiative ”Computational Analysis of Linguistic De-
velopment” and the DFG Sonderforschungsbere-
ich 471 ”Variation und Entwicklung im Lexikon”
at the University of Konstanz. The author would
like to thank the Australian Institute of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS) for
the Warlpiri Bible sections as well as Miriam Butt,
Frans Plank, Bernhard Wälchli and three anony-
mous reviewers for valuable comments and sug-
gestions.

References

Gordon F. Arnold. 1955-1956. A phonological ap-
proach to vowel, consonant and syllable in modern
french. Lingua, V:251–287.

70



Emily Bender. 2009. Linguistically naive != language
independent: Why NLP needs linguistic typology.
In Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on the
Interaction between Linguistics and Computational
Linguistics, pages 26–32.

Gavan Breen and Rob Pensalfini. 1999. Arrernte: A
language with no syllable onsets. Linguistic Inquiry,
30(1):1–25.

Luigi Burzio. 1994. Principles of English Stress. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.

San Duanmu. 2009. Syllable Structure. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.

Heinz Giegerich. 1992. English Phonology. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.

John Goldsmith and Gary Larson. 1990. Local mod-
elling and syllabification. In Michael Ziolkowski,
Manuela Noske, and Karen Deaton, editors, The
Parasession on the Syllable in Phonetics & Phonol-
ogy, volume 2 of Papers from the 26th Regional
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic, pages 130–141.
Chicago Linguistic Society.

John Goldsmith and Aris Xanthos. 2009. Learning
phonological categories. Language, 85(1):4–38.

Sharon Goldwater and Mark Johnson. 2005. Rep-
resentational bias in unsupervised learning of syl-
lable structure. In Proceedings of the 9th Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CONLL), Ann Arbor.

Edmund Gussmann. 2002. Phonoloy: Analysis and
Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Jacques B. M. Guy. 1991. Vowel identification: an old
(but good) algorithm. Cryptologia, XV(3):258–262,
July.

Morris Halle. 1998. The stress of english words. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 29(4):539–568.

Michael Hammond. 1999. The Phonology of English:
A Prosodic Optimality Theoretic Approach. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Bruce Hayes. 1995. Metrical Stress Theory: Prin-
ciples and Case Studies. Chicage: University of
Chicage Press.

Roman Jakobson and Morris Halle. 1956. Fundamen-
tals of Language I. Phonology and Phonetics. ’s-
Gravenhage: Mouton.

Daniel Kahn. 1976. Syllable-based generalizations in
English phonology. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology.

Charles W. Kreidler. 2004. The Pronunciation of En-
glish: A Course Book. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Jerzy Kuryłowicz. 1948. Contribution à la théorie de
la syllabe. Bulletin de la Societe Polonaise de Lin-
guistique, 8:5–114.

Ian Maddieson. 2008. Consonant-vowel ratio. In
Martin Haspelmath, Matthew S. Dryer, David Gil,
and Bernard Comrie, editors, The World Atlas of
Language Structures Online, chapter 3. Munich:
Max Planck Digital Library. Available online at
http://wals.info/feature/3. Accessed on 2010-04-23.

J. D. O’Connor and J. L. M. Trim. 1953. Vowel, conso-
nant, and syllable - a phonological definition. Word,
9(2):103–122.

George T. Sassoon. 1992. The application of
Sukhotin’s algorithm to certain Non-English lan-
guages. Cryptologia, 16(2):165–173.

Elisabeth O. Selkirk. 1982. The syllable. In Harry
van der Hulst and Norval Smith, editors, The Struc-
ture of Phonological Representations, part II, pages
337–383. Dordrecht: Foris.

Boris V. Sukhotin. 1962. Eksperimental’noe vydelenie
klassov bukv s pomoşçju evm. Problemy strukturnoj
lingvistiki, 234:189–206.

Boris V. Sukhotin. 1973. Méthode de déchiffrage,
outil de recherche en linguistique. T.A. Informa-
tions, 2:1–43.

Donald M. Topping. 1980. Chamorro Reference
Grammar. The University Press of Hawaii, Hon-
olulu.

Irene Vogel. 1977. The Syllable in Phonological The-
ory with Special Reference to Italian. Ph.D. thesis,
Stanford University.

71


