










































PropBank Annotation of Multilingual Light Verb Constructions


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 82–90,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

PropBank Annotation of Multilingual Light Verb Constructions 

 

 

Jena D. Hwang
1
, Archna Bhatia

3
, Clare Bonial

1
, Aous Mansouri

1
,  

Ashwini Vaidya
1
, Nianwen Xue

2
, and Martha Palmer

1
 

1
Department of Linguistics, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder CO 80309 

2
Department of Computer Science, Brandeis University, Waltham MA 02453 

3
Department of Linguistics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana IL 61801 

{hwangd,claire.bonial,aous.mansouri,ashwini.vaidya,martha.palmer} 

@colorado.edu, bhatia@illinois.edu, xuen@brandeis.edu 

 

  

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we have addressed the task 

of PropBank annotation of light verb 

constructions, which like multi-word 

expressions pose special problems. To 

arrive at a solution, we have evaluated 3 

different possible methods of annotation. 

The final method involves three passes: 

(1) manual identification of a light verb 

construction, (2) annotation based on the 

light verb construction‟s Frame File, and 

(3) a deterministic merging of the first 

two passes. We also discuss how in 

various languages the light verb 

constructions are identified and can be 

distinguished from the non-light verb 

word groupings.  

1 Introduction  

One of the aims in natural language processing, 

specifically the task of semantic role labeling 

(SRL), is to correctly identify and extract the 

different semantic relationships between words 

in a given text. In such tasks, verbs are 

considered important, as they are responsible for 

assigning and controlling the semantic roles of 

the arguments and adjuncts around it. Thus, the 

goal of the SRL task is to identify the arguments 

of the predicate and label them according to their 

semantic relationship to the predicate (Gildea 

and Jurafsky, 2002; Pradhan et al., 2003).  

To this end, PropBank (Palmer et. al., 2005) 

has developed semantic role labels and labeled 

large corpora for training and testing of 

supervised systems. PropBank identifies and 

labels the semantic arguments of the verb on a 

verb-by-verb basis, creating a separate Frame 

File that includes verb specific semantic roles to 

account for each subcategorization frame of the 

verb. It has been shown that training supervised 

systems with PropBank‟s semantic roles for 

shallow semantic analysis yield good results (see 

CoNLL 2005 and 2008).  

However, semantic role labeling tasks are 

often complicated by multiword expressions 

(MWEs) such as idiomatic expressions (e.g., 

„Stop pulling my leg!‟), verb particle 

constructions (e.g., „You must get over your 

shyness.‟), light verb constructions (e.g., „take a 

walk‟, „give a lecture‟), and other complex 

predicates (e.g., V+V predicates such as Hindi‟s 

निकऱ गया nikal gayaa, lit. „exit went‟, means 
„left‟ or „departed‟). MWEs that involve verbs 

are especially challenging because the 

subcategorization frame of the predicate is no 

longer solely dependent on the verb alone. 

Rather, in many of these cases the argument 

structure is assigned by the union of two 

predicating elements. Thus, it is important that 

the manual annotation of semantic roles, which 

will be used by automatic SRL systems, define 

and label these MWEs in a consistent and 

effective manner. 

In this paper we focus on the PropBank 

annotation of light verb constructions (LVCs). 

We have developed a multilingual schema for 

annotating LVCs that takes into consideration the 

similarities and differences shared by the 

construction as it appears in English, Arabic, 

Chinese, and Hindi. We also discuss in some 

detail the practical challenges involved in the 

crosslinguistic analysis of LVCs, which we hope 

will bring us a step closer to a unified 

crosslinguistic analysis.    

Since NomBank, as a companion to 

PropBank, provides corresponding semantic role 

82



labels for noun predicates (Meyers et al., 2004), 

we would like to take advantage of NomBank‟s 

existing nominalization Frame Files and 

annotations as much as possible.  A question that 

we must therefore address is, “Are 

nominalization argument structures exactly the 

same whether or not they occur within an LVC?” 

as will be discussed in section 6.1. 

2 Identifying Light Verb Constructions 

Linguistically LVCs are considered a type of a 

complex predicate. Many studies from differing 

angles and frameworks have characterized 

complex predicates as a fusion of two or more 

predicative elements. For example, Rosen (1997) 

treats complex structures as complementation 

structures, where the argument structure of 

elements in a complex predicate are fused 

together.  Goldberg (1993) takes a constructional 

approach to complex predicates and arrives at an 

analysis that is comparable to viewing complex 

predicates as a single lexical item. Similarly, 

Mohanan (1997) assumes different levels of 

linguistic representation for complex predicates 

in which the elements, such as the noun and the 

light verb, functionally combine to give a single 

clausal nucleus. Alsina (1997) and Butt (1997) 

suggest that complex predicates may be formed 

by syntactically independent elements whose 

argument structures are brought together by a 

predicate composition mechanism.  

While there is no clear-cut definition of LVCs, 

let alone the whole range of complex predicates, 

for the purposes of this study, we have adapted 

our approach largely from Butt‟s (2004) criteria 

for defining LVCs. LVCs are characterized by a 

light verb and a predicating complement 

(henceforth, true predicate) that “combine to 

predicate as a single element.” (Ibid.) In LVC, 

the verb is considered semantically bleached in 

such a way that the verb does not hold its full 

predicating power. Thus, the light verb plus its 

true predicate can often be paraphrased by a 

verbal form of the true predicate without loss of 

the core meaning of the expression. For example, 

the light verb „gave‟ and the predicate „lecture‟ 

in „gave a lecture‟, together form a single 

predicating unit such that it can be paraphrased 

by „lectured‟. 

True predicates in LVCs can be a noun (the 

object of the verb or the object of the preposition 

in a prepositional phrase), an adjective, or a verb. 

One light verb plus true predicate combination 

found commonly across all our PropBank 

languages (i.e., English, Arabic, Chinese, and 

Hindi) is the noun as the object of the verb as in 

„Sara took [a stroll] along the beach‟. In Hindi, 

true predicates can be adjectives or verbs, in 

addition to the nouns. 

मुझ े तुम [अच्छे]  ऱगे         (Adjective) 
to-me  you [nice]  seem 

lit. „You seem nice to me‟ 
'You (are) liked to me (=I like you).' 

मैंिे  सब कुछ  [कर] लऱया   (Verb) 
I-ERG everything  [do] took 

lit. „I took do everything‟ 

'I have done everything.' 

As for Arabic, the LVCs come in verb+noun 

pairings. However, they surface in two syntactic 

forms. It can either be the object of the verb just 

like in English: 

 
عن لبنان [ محاضزة]جورج القى   

gave.he Georges [lecture] PREP Lebanon 

lit.'Georges gave a lecture about Lebanon' 

„Georges lectured about Lebanon‟ 

or the complement can be the object of a 

preposition: 

 
سيدنا إلياس[ بزيارة]سأقوم   

conduct.I [PREP-visit] our.saint Ilias 

lit. „I will conduct with visit Saint Ilias‟s‟ 

„I will visit Saint Ilias‟s‟ 

3 Standard PropBank  
Annotation Procedure 

The PropBank annotation process can be broken 

down into two major steps: creation of the Frame 

Files for verbs occurring in the data and 

annotation of the data using the Frame Files. 

During the creation of the Frame Files, the 

usages of the verbs in the data are examined by 

linguists (henceforth, “framers”). Based on these 

observations, the framers create a Frame File for 

each verb containing one or more framesets, 

which correspond to coarse-grained senses of the 

predicate lemma. Each frameset specifies the 

PropBank labels (i.e., ARG0, ARG1,…ARG5) 

corresponding to the argument structure of the 

verb. Additionally, illustrative examples are 

included for each frameset, which will later be 

referenced by the annotators. These examples 

also include the use of the ARGM labels. 

Thus, the framesets are based on the 

examination of the data, the framers‟ linguistic 

knowledge and native-speaker intuition. At 

83



times, we also make use of the syntactic and 

semantic behavior of the verb as described by 

certain lexical resources. These resources include 

VerbNet (Kipper et. al., 2006) and FrameNet 

(Baker et. al., 1998) for English, a number of 

monolingual and bilingual dictionaries for 

Arabic, and Hindi WordNet and DS Parses 

(Palmer et. al., 2009) for Hindi. Additionally, if 

available, we consult existing framesets of words 

with similar meanings across different languages. 

The data awaiting annotation are passed onto 

the annotators for a double-blind annotation 

process using the previously created framesets. 

The double annotated data is then adjudicated by 

a third annotator, during which time the 

differences of the two annotations are resolved to 

produce the Gold Standard. 

Two major guiding considerations during the 

framing and annotating process are data 

consistency and annotator productivity. During 

the frameset creation process, verbs that share 

similar semantic and syntactic characteristics are 

framed similarly. During the annotation process, 

the data is organized by verbs so that each verb is 

tackled all at once. In doing so, we firstly ensure 

that the framesets of similar verbs, and in turn, 

the annotation of the verbs, will both be 

consistent across the data. Secondly, by tackling 

annotation on verb-by-verb basis, the annotators 

are able to concentrate on a single verb at a time, 

making the process easier and faster for the 

annotators. 

4 Annotating LVC 

A similar process must be followed when 

annotating light verb constructions The first step 

is to create consistent Frame Files for light verbs. 

Then in order to make the annotation process 

produce consistent data at a reasonable speed, we 

have decided to carry out the light verb 

annotation in three passes (Table 1):  (1) annotate 

the light verb, (2) annotate the true predicate, and 

(3) merge the two annotations into one. 

The first pass involves the identification of the 

light verb. The most important parts of this step 

are to identify a verb as having bleached 

meaning, thereafter assign a generic light verb 

frameset and identify the true predicating 

expression of the sentence, which would be 

marked with ARG-PRX (i.e., ARGument-

PRedicating eXpression). For English, for 

example, annotators were instructed to use Butt‟s 

(2004) criteria as described in Section 2. These 

criteria required that annotators be able to 

recognize whether or not the complement of a 

potential light verb was itself a predicating 

element. To make this occasionally difficult 

judgment, annotators used a simple heuristic test 

of whether or not the complement was headed by 

an element that has a verbal counterpart.  If so, 

the light verb frameset was selected. 

The second pass involves the annotation of the 

sentence with the true predicate as the relation. 

During this pass, the true predicate is annotated 

with an appropriate frameset. In the third pass, 

the arguments and the modifiers of the two 

previous passes are reconciled and merged into a 

single annotation. In order to reduce the number 

of hand annotation, it is preferable for this last 

pass, the Pass 3, to be done automatically. 

Since the nature of the light verb is different 

from that of other verbs as described in Section 

2, the advantage of doing the annotation of the 

light verb and the true predicate on separate 

passes is that in the light verb pass the annotators 

will be able to quickly dispose of the verb as a 

light verb and in the second pass, they will be 

allowed to solely focus on the annotation of the 

light verb‟s true predicate. 

The descriptions of how the arguments and 

modifiers of the light verbs and their true 

predicates are annotated are mentioned in Table 

1, but notably, none of the examples in it 

currently include the annotation of arguments 

 Pass 1: Pass 2: Pass 3: 

 Light Verb Annotation True Predicate Annotation Merge of Pass1&2 Annotation 

Relation Light verb True predicate Light verb + true predicate 

Arguments 

and 

Modifiers 

- Predicating expression is 

annotated with ARG-PRX 

- Arguments and modifiers of 

the light verb are annotated 

- Arguments and modifiers of 

the true predicate are annotated 

- Arguments and modifiers 

found in the two passes are 

merged, preferably 

automatically. 

Frameset Light verb frameset True predicate‟s frameset LVC‟s frameset 

 

Example 
“John took a brisk walk through the park.” 

REL: took 

ARG-PRX: a brisk walk 

ARG-MNR: brisk  

REL: walk 

REL: took walk 

ARG-MNR: brisk 

Table 1. Preliminary Annotation Scheme 

84



and modifiers.  This is intentional, as coming to 

an agreement concerning the details of what 

exactly each of the three passes looks like while 

meeting the needs of the four PropBank 

languages is quite challenging. Thus, for the rest 

of the paper we will discuss the strengths and 

weaknesses of the two trial methods of 

annotation we have considered and discarded in 

Section 5, as well as the final annotation scheme 

we chose in Section 6. 

5 Trials 

5.1 Method 1 

As our first attempt, the annotation of argument 

and adjuncts was articulated in the following 

manner (Table 2). 

Pass 1: Pass 2: 

Light verb True predicate 

- Predicating expression 

is labeled ARG-PRX 

- Annotate the Subject 

argument of the light 

verb as the Arg0. 

- Annotate the rest of the 

arguments and modifiers 

of the light verb with 

ARGM labels. 

- Annotate arguments 

and modifiers of the 

true predicate within 

its domain of locality. 

Generic light verb Frame 

File 

True predicate‟s 

Frame File 

“John took a brisk walk through the park.” 
ARG0: John 

REL: took 

ARG-PRX: a brisk walk 

ARG-DIR: through the park 

ARG-MNR: brisk  

REL: walk 

Table 2. Method 1 for annotation for Passes 1 and 2. 

Revised information is in italics. 

In Pass 1, in addition to annotating the 

predicating expression of the light verb with 

ARG-PRX, the subject argument was marked 

with an ARG0. The choice of ARG0, which 

corresponds to a proto-typical agent, was guided 

by the observation that English LVCs tend to 

lend a component of agentivity to the subject 

even in cases where the true predicate would not 

necessarily assign an agent as its subject. The 

rest of the arguments and modifiers were labeled 

with corresponding ARGM (i.e., modifier) 

labels. The assumption here is that the arguments 

of the light verb will also be the arguments of the 

true predicate.   

In Pass 2, then, the annotation of the 

arguments of the true predicate was restricted to 

its domain of locality (i.e., the span of the ARG-

PRX as marked in Pass1). That is, in the example 

„John took a brisk walk through the park‟, the 

labeled spans for the true predicate would be 

limited to the NP „a brisk walk‟ and neither 

„John‟ nor through the park‟ would be annotated 

as the arguments of the true predicate „walk‟. 

Frame Files: This method would require three 

Frame Files: a generic light verb Frame File, a 

true predicate Frame File, and an LVC Frame 

File. The Frame File for the light verb would not 

be specific to the form of the light verb (e.g., 

same frame for take and make). Rather, it would 

indicate a skeletal argument structure in order to 

reduce the amount of Frame Files made, 

including only Arg0 as its argument
1
.  

5.2 Weakness of Method 1 

This method has one glaring problem: the 

assumption that the semantic roles of the 

arguments as assigned by the light verb 

uniformly coincide with those assigned by the 

true predicate does not always hold. Consider the 

following English sentence
2
. 

whether Wu Shu-Chen would make another 

[appearance] in court was subject to observation 

In this example, „Wu Shu-Chen‟ is the agent 

argument (Arg0) of the light verb „make‟ and is 

the theme or patient argument (Arg1) of a typical  

„appearance‟ event. Also consider the following 

example from Hindi.  

It is possible that in a light verb construction, 

the light verb actually modifies the standard 

underlying semantics of a nominalization like 

appearance.  In any event, we cannot assume that 

the expected argument labels for the light verb 

and for the standard interpretation of the 

nominalization will always coincide. Thus, we 

could say that Pass 2‟s true predicate annotation 

is only partial and is not representative of the 

complete argument structure. In particular, we 

are left with a very difficult merging problem, 

because the argument labels of the two separate 

passes conflict as seen in the above examples. 

5.3 Method 2 

In order to remedy the problem of conflicting 

argument labels, we revised Method 1‟s Pass 2 

annotation scheme. This is shown in Table 3. 

Pass 1 remains unchanged from Method 1. 

In this method, both the light verb and the true 

predicate of the sentence receive complete sets of 
                                                           
1 This is why the rest of the argument/modifiers would be 

annotated using ARGM modifier labels. 
2  The light verb is in boldface, the true predicate is in bold 

and square brackets, and the argument/adjunct under 

consideration is underlined. 

85



argument and modifier labels. In Pass 2, the 

limitation of annotating within the domain of 

locality is removed. That is, the arguments and 

modifiers inside and outside the true predicate‟s 

domain of control are annotated with respect to 

their semantic relationship to the true predicate 

(e.g., in the English example of Section 5.2, „Wu 

Shu-Chen‟ would be considered ARG1 of 

„appearance‟).  

Frame Files: This method would also require 

three Frame Files. The major difference is that 

with this method the Frame File for the true 

predicate includes arguments that are sisters to 

the light verb.  

5.4 Weaknesses of Method 2 

If in Method 1 we have committed the error of 

semantic unfaithfulness due to omission, in 

Method 2 we are faced with the problem of 

including too much. In the following sentence, 

consider the role of the underlined adjunct: 

A New York audience … gave it a big round 

of applause when the music started to play. 

By the annotation in Method 2, the underlined 

temporal adjunct „when the music started to 

play‟ is labeled as both the argument of „give‟ 

and of „applause‟. The question here is does the 

argument apply to both the giving and the 

applauding event? In other words, does the 

adjunct play an equal role in both passes?  

 Since it could be easily said that the temporal 

phrase applies to both the applauding and the 

giving of the applause events, this example may 

not be particularly compelling. However, what if 

a syntactic complement of the light verb is a 

semantic argument of the true predicate and the 

true predicate only? This is seen more frequently 

in the cases where the light verb is less bleached 

than in the case of „give‟ above. Consider the 

following Arabic example. 
 

تكبدهن خسائزفي تحضيزاتنا إهكان [ االعتبار]في أخذنا   

took.we PREP DEF-consideration PREP 

prepertations.our possibility sustain.their losses 

„We took into [consideration] during our prepa-

rations the possibility of them sustaining losses‟ 

 

Here, even though the constituent „of them 

sustaining losses‟ is the syntactic complement of 

the verb „to take;‟ semantically, it modifies only 

the nominal object of the PP „consideration.‟  

There are similar phenomena in Chinese light 

verb constructions. Syntactic modifiers of the 

light verb are semantic arguments of the true 

predicate, which is usually a nominalization that 

serves as its complement.  

 

我们 正  对    这 个 问题    [进行]    讨论 。 

we now regarding this CL issue [conduct] discussion. 

lit.“We are conducting a discussion on this issue.” 

 “We are discussing this issue.” 

 

The prepositional phrase 对这个问题 „regarding 

this issue‟ is a sister to the light verb but 

semantically it is an argument of the nominalized 

predicate 讨论 „discussion‟. 

The logical next question would be: does the 

annotation of the arguments, adjuncts and 

modifiers have to be all or nothing? It could 

conceivably be possible to assign a selected set 

of arguments at the light verb or true predicate 

level. For example, in the Chinese sentence, the 

modifier „regarding this CL issue‟, though a 

syntactic adjunct to the light verb, could be left 

out from the semantic annotation in Pass 1 and 

included only in the Pass 2. 

However, the objection to this treatment 

comes from a more practical need. As mentioned 

above, in order to keep the manual annotation to 

a minimum, it would be necessary to keep Pass 3 

completely deterministic. As is, with the 

unmodified Method 2, there would be the need to 

choose between Pass 1 or Pass 2 annotation to 

when doing the automatic Pass 3. If we modify 

Method 2 by annotating only a selected set of 

syntactic arguments for the light verb or the true 

predicate, then this issue is exacerbated. In such 

a case there we would have to develop with strict 

rules for which arguments of which pass should 

be included in Pass 3. Pass 3 would no longer be 

automatic, and should be done manually.  

Pass 2: 

True predicate 

- Annotate the Subject argument of the light verb 

with the appropriate role of the true predicate 

- Annotate arguments and modifiers of the true 

predicate without limitation as to the domain of 

locality. 

True predicate‟s Frame File 

“He made another appearance at the party” 

ARG1: He 

ARG-ADV: another 

REL: appearance 

ARG-DIR: at court 

Table 3. Method 2 for annotation for Pass 2. Pass 

1 as presented in Table 2 remains unchanged. 

Revised information for Pass 2 is in italics 

 

86



6 Final Annotation Scheme 

6.1 Semantic Fidelity 

Many of the objections so far to Methods 1 and 2 

have centered on the issue of semantic fidelity 

during the annotation of each of the two passes. 

The debate of whether both passes should be 

annotated and to what extent has practical 

implications for the third Pass, as described 

above. However, more importantly it comes 

down to whether or not the semantics of the final 

light verb plus true predicate combination is 

indeed distinct from the semantics of its parts 

(i.e. light verb and true predicate, separately). 

This may be a fascinating linguistic question, but 

it is not something our annotators can be 

debating for each and every instance.   

Instead, we argue that the semantic argument 

structure of the light verb plus true predicate 

combination can in practice be different from 

that of the expressions taken independently as 

has been proposed by various studies (Butt, 

2004; Rosen, 1997; Grimshaw & Mester, 1988). 

Thus, we resolve the cases in which the 

differences in argument roles as assigned by the 

light verb and the nominalization (Section 5.2) 

by handling the argument structure of the 

standard nominalization separately from that of 

the nominalization participating in the LVC. In 

the example „Chen made another appearance in 

court‟, we annotate „Chen‟ as the Agent (ARG0) 

of the full predicate „[make] [appearance]‟, 

which is different from the argument structure of 

the standard nominalization which would label 

„Chen‟ to be the Patient argument (ARG1). 

6.2 Method 3: Final Method 

Our final method of light verb annotation reflects 

the notion that the noun, verb, or adjective as a 

true predicate within an LVC can have a 

different argument structure from that of the 

word alone. Table 4 shows the final annotation 

scheme for light verb construction.  

During Pass 1, the LVCs and their predicating 

expressions are identified in the data. Instances 

identified as LVCs in Pass 1 are then manually 

annotated during Pass 2, annotating the 

arguments and adjuncts of the light verb and the 

true predicate with roles that reflect their 

semantic relationships to the light verb plus true 

predicate. In practice, Pass 1 becomes a way of 

simply manually identifying the light verb 

usages. It is in Pass 2 that we make the final 

choice of argument labels for all of the 

arguments. Thus in Pass 3, the light verb and the 

true predicate lemmas from Pass 1 and 2 are 

joined into a single unit (e.g., in the example 

found in Table 4, the light verb „took‟ would be 

joined with the true predicate „walk‟ into 

„took+walk’)
 3
. In this final method, Pass 3 can 

be achieved completely deterministically. 

The major difference in this annotation 

scheme from that of Methods 1 and 2 is that 

instead of annotating in terms of the semantics of 

the bare noun, adjective or verb, the argument 

structure is determined for the entire predicate or 

the full event: semantics of the light verb plus the 

true predicate. This means that for the sentences 

where the argument roles of the verb and the 

nominalization disagree like „Chen‟ in „Chen 

                                                           
3 The order of Pass 2 and Pass 3 as presented in Table 4 is 

arguably a product of how the annotation tools for 

PropBank are set up for Arabic, Chinese, and English. That 

is, the order of the Pass 2 and Pass 3 could potentially be 

flipped provided that the tools and procedures of annotation 

support it, as is the case for Hindi PropBank. After the LVC 

and ARG-PRX are identified in Pass 1, the light verb and 

the true predicate can be deterministically joined into a 

single relation in Pass 2, leaving the manual annotation of 

LVC for Pass 3.  The advantage of this alternative ordering 

is that because the annotation of LVC is done around light 

verb plus the true predicate as a single relation, rather than 

the true predicate alone as in Table 4, the argument 

annotation may in actuality be more intuitive for annotators 

even with less training. 

 Pass 1: Pass 2:  Pass 3: 

 Light Verb Identification LVC Annotation Deterministic relation merge 

Relation Light verb True predicate Light verb + true predicate 

Arguments 

& Modifiers 

- Predicating expression is 

annotated with ARG-PRX 

- Arguments and modifiers of 

the LVCs are annotated 

- Arguments and modifiers 

are taken from Pass 2 

Frame File <no Frame File needed> LVC‟s Frame File LVC‟s Frame File 

 

Example 
“John took a brisk walk through the park.” 

REL: took 

ARG-PRX: a brisk walk 

ARG0: John 

ARG-MNR: brisk  

REL: walk 

ARGM-DIR: through the park 

ARG0: John 

ARG-MNR: brisk  

REL: [took][walk] 

ARGM-DIR: through the park 

Table 4. Final Annotation Scheme 

87



made another
4
 appearance in court‟, we label the 

argument with the role that is consistent with the 

entire predicate (i.e. Agent, ARG0).  

Frame Files: The final advantage to this 

method is that only one Frame File is needed. 

Since Pass 1 is an identification round, no Frame 

File is required. A single Frame File for LVC 

that includes the argument structure with respect 

to the light verb plus true predicate combination 

will suffice for Pass 2 and Pass 3. 

7 Distinguishing LVCs from MWEs 

As we have discussed in Section 2, we adapted 

our approach from Butt‟s (2004) definition of 

LVCs. That is, an LVC is characterized by a 

semantically bleached light verb and a true 

predicate. These elements combine as a single 

predicating unit, in such a way that the light verb 

plus its true predicate can be paraphrased by a 

verbal form of the true predicate without loss of 

the core meaning of the expression (e.g. 

„lectured‟ for „gave a lecture‟). Also, as 

discussed in Section 6.1, our approach advocates 

the notion that the semantic argument structure 

of the light verb plus true predicate is different 

from that of the expressions taken independently 

(as also proposed by Butt, 2004; Rosen, 1997; 

Grimshaw & Mester, 1988 among others). 

While these definitions are appropriate for the 

PropBank annotation task as we have presented 

it, there are still cases that merit closer attention. 

Even English with a rather limited set of verbs 

that are commonly cited as LVCs, includes a 

problematic mixture of what could arguably be 

termed either LVCs or idiomatic expressions: 

„make exception‟, „take charge‟. This difficulty 

in part is the effect of frequency and 

entrenchment of particular constructions.  The 

light verbs themselves do not diminish in form 

over time in a manner similar to auxiliaries (Butt, 

2004), although the complements of common 

LVCs can change over time such that it is no 

longer clear that the complement is a predicating 

element.   

In the case of English, the expressions „take 

charge‟ may be more commonly found today as a 

LVC than independently in its verbal form.  As 

we discovered with our annotators, native 

English speakers are uncomfortable using the 

verb „charge‟ (i.e. to burden with a 

                                                           
4 The adjective „another‟ is annotated as the modifier of the 

full predicate „[make][appearance]‟ as it can be interpreted 

to mean that the make appearance event happened a 

previous appearance has been made. 

responsibility) as an independent matrix verb. A 

similar phenomenon can be seen in Arabic, 

where the predicate أطلق اسن lit. „release name‟ 

exemplifies a prototypical LVC that means „to 

name‟. However, in our data we see cases in 

which the complement is missing, while the 

semantics of the LVC remains intact: 

"القطاع العام"أو ها يطلق عليه   
CONJ REL be released.he PREP-him/it  

DEF-sector DEF-public 

lit „Or what is released to it “the public sector”‟ 

„Or what is called/named “the public sector.”‟ 

This raises the question of: when does a 

construction that may have once been an LVC 

become more properly defined as an idiomatic 

expression due to such entrenchment?  Idiomatic 

expressions can potentially be distinguished from 

LVCs through judgments of how fixed or 

syntactically variable a construction is, and on 

the basis of how semantically transparent or 

decomposable the construction is (Nunberg et. 

al., 1994). However, sometimes the dividing line 

is hard to draw.  

A similar problem arises in determining 

whether a construction is a case of an LVC or 

simply a usage with a distinct sense of the verb. 

Take, for example, the following Arabic 

sentence. 
 تناول الغذاء 

   take.he DEF-food 

lit. „(he) took food‟ 

„he ate‟ 

Here, the Arabic word غذاء „food‟ is the noun 

derivation of the root shared by the verb تغذى „to 

eat‟, in such a way that the sentence could be 

rephrased as تغذى „(he) ate‟. This example falls 

neatly into the LVC category. However, further 

examples suggest that the example is a case of a 

distinct sense of „to take orally‟ where the 

restrictions on the object are that the theme must 

be something that can be taken by mouth: 

 تناول الدواء

take.he DEF-medicine 

„he took medicine‟ 

 تناول الحساء

take.he DEF-soup 

„he took soup‟ 

Finally, determining the appropriate criteria to 

distinguish between a truly semantically 

bleached verb and verbs that seem to be 

participating in complex predication but 

contribute more to the semantics of the 

construction is a challenge for all languages. For 

example, in English data, there are potential 

LVCs with verbs that are not often thought of as 

light verbs, such as „produce an alteration‟ and 

88



„issue a complaint‟.  Although most English 

speakers would agree that the verbs in these 

constructions do not contribute to the semantics 

of the construction (e.g. „issue a complaint‟ can 

be paraphrased to „to complain‟), there are 

similar constructions such as „register a 

complaint,‟ wherein the verb cannot be 

considered light. For the purposes of annotation, 

where it is necessary for annotators to understand 

clear criteria for distinguishing light verbs, such 

cases are highly problematic because there is no 

deterministic way to measure the extent to which 

the verbal element contributes to the semantics 

of the construction.  In turn, there is not a good 

way to distinguish some of these borderline 

verbs from their normal, heavy usages.  

Such problems can be resolved by establishing 

language-specific semantic or syntactic tests that 

can be used for taking care of the borderline 

cases of LVCs. However, there is one other 

plausible manner we have identified that could 

help in detecting such atypical LVCs. This can 

be done by focusing on the argument structures 

of predicating complements rather than focusing 

on the verbs themselves.  Grimshaw & Mester 

(1988) suggest that the formation of LVCs 

involves argument transfer from the predicating 

complement to the verb, which is semantically 

bleached and thematically incomplete and 

assigns no thematic roles itself.  Similarly, 

Stevenson et al. (2004) suggest that the 

acceptability of a potential LVC depends on the 

semantic properties of the complement.  Thus, 

atypical LVCs, such as the English construction 

„issue a complaint,‟ can potentially be detected 

during the annotation of eventive nouns, planned 

for all PropBank languages.  

This process will make our treatment of LVCs 

more comprehensive. Used with our language-

specific semantic and syntactic criteria relating to 

both the verb and the predicating complement, it 

will help us to more effectively capture as many 

types of LVCs as possible, including those of the 

V+ADJ and V+V varieties. 

8 Usefulness of our Approach 

Two basic approaches have previously been 

taken to handle all types of MWEs, including 

LVCs in natural language processing 

applications. The first is to treat MWEs quite 

simply as fixed expressions or long strings of 

words with spaces in between; the second is to 

treat MWEs as purely compositional (Sag et al., 

2002). The words-with-spaces approach is 

adequate for handling fixed idiomatic 

expressions, but issues of lexical proliferation 

and flexibility quickly arise when this approach 

is applied to light verbs, which are syntactically 

flexible and can number in the tens of thousands 

for a given language (Stevenson et al., 2004; Sag 

et al., 2002).  Nonetheless, large-scale lexical 

resources such as FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) 

and WordNet (Fellbaum, 1999) continue to 

expand with entries that are MWEs.   

The purely compositional approach is also 

problematic for light verbs because it is 

notoriously difficult to predict which light verbs 

can grammatically combine with other 

predicating elements; thus, this approach leads to 

problems of overgeneration (Sag et al., 2002).  In 

order to overcome this problem, Stevenson et al. 

(2004) attempted to determine which 

nominalizations could form a valid complement 

to the English light verbs take, give and make, 

using Levin‟s (1993) verb classes to group 

similar nominalizations.  This approach was 

rather successful for take and give, but 

inconclusive for the verb make.  

Our approach can help to develop a resource 

that is useful whether one takes a words-with-

spaces approach or a compositional approach. 

Specifically, for those implementing a words-

with-spaces approach, the resulting PropBank 

annotation can serve as a lexical resource listing 

for LVCs. For those interested in implementing a 

compositional approach the PropBank annotation 

can serve to assist in predicting likely 

combinations. Moreover, information in the 

PropBank Frame Files can be used to generalize 

across classes of nouns that can occur with a 

given light verb with the help of lexical resources 

such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), FrameNet 

(Baker et. al., 1998), and VerbNet (Kipper-

Schuler, 2005) (in a manner similar to the 

approach of Stevenson et al. (2004)). 

Acknowledgements 

We also gratefully acknowledge the support of the 

National Science Foundation Grant CISE-CRI 

0709167, Collaborative: A Multi-Representational 

and Multi-Layered Treebank for Hindi/Urdu, and a 

grant from the Defense Advanced Research Projects 

Agency (DARPA/IPTO) under the GALE program, 

DARPA/CMO Contract No HR0011-06-C-0022, 

subcontract from BBN, Inc.  

Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or 

recommendations expressed in this material are those 

of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views 

of the National Science Foundation. 

89



Reference 

Alsina, A. 1997. Causatives in Bantu and Romance. 

In A. Alsina, J. Bresnan, and P. Sells eds. Complex 

Predicates. Stanford, California: CSLI 

Publications, p. 203-246. 

Baker, Collin F., Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. 

Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In 

Proceedings of the 17th International Conference 

on Computational Linguistics (COLING/ACL-98), 

pages 86–90, Montreal. ACL. 

Butt, M. 2004.  The Light Verb Jungle. In G. Aygen, 

C. Bowern & C. Quinn eds.  Papers from the 

GSAS/Dudley House Workshop on Light Verbs. 

Cambridge, Harvard Working Papers in 

Linguistics, p. 1-50.   

Butt, M. 1997. Complex Predicates in Urdu. In A. 

Alsina, J. Bresnan, and P. Sells eds. Complex 

Predicates. Stanford, California: CSLI 

Publications, p. 107-149. 

Fellbaum, Christine, ed.: 1998, WordNet: An 

Electronic Lexical Database, Cambridge, MA: 

MIT Press.  

Grimshaw, J., and A. Mester. 1988. Light verbs and 

θ-marking. Linguistic Inquiry 19(2):205–232. 

Gildea, Daniel and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic 

Labeling of Semantic Roles. Computational 

Linguistics 28:3, 245-288. 

Goldberg, Adele E. 2003.  “Words by Default: 

Inheritance and the Persian Complex Predicate 

Construction.” In E. Francis and L. Michaelis 

(eds). Mismatch: Form-Function Incongruity and 

the Architecture of Grammar. CSLI Publications.  

84-112. 

Kipper-Schuler, Karin. 2005. VerbNet: A broad 

coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. 

thesis, University of Pennsylvania. 

Levin, B. 1993. English Verb Classes and 

Alternations: A Preliminary Investigation. 

Chicago: Chicago Univ. Press.  

Meyers, A., R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekely, V. 

Zielinska, B. Young, and R. Grishman. 2004. The 

NomBank Project: An interim report. In 

Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: 

Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, pages 24- 31, 

Boston, MA. pages 430–437, Barcelona, Spain. 

Mohanan, T. 1997. Multidimensionality of 

Representation: NV Complex Predicates in Hindi. 

In A. Alsina, J. Bresnan, and P. Sells eds. Complex 

Predicates. Stanford, California: CSLI 

Publications, p. 431-471. 

Martha Palmer, Rajesh Bhatt, Bhuvana Narasimhan, 

Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma, Fei Xia, 

Hindi Syntax: Annotating Dependency, Lexical 

Predicate-Argument Structure, and Phrase 

Structure, In the Proceedings of the 7th 

International Conference on Natural Language 

Processing, ICON-2009, Hyderabad, India, Dec 

14-17, 2009 

Palmer, Martha, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 

2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus 

of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 

31(1):71–106. 

Pradhan, Sameer, Kadri Hacioglu, Valerie Krugler, 

Wayne Ward, James H. Martin, Daniel Jurafsky. 

2004. Shallow Semantic Parsing using Support 

Vector Machines. University of Colorado 

Technical Report: TR-CSLR 2003-03. 

Rosen, C. 1997. Auxiliation and Serialization: On 

Discerning the Difference. In A. Alsina, J. 

Bresnan, and P. Sells eds. Complex Predicates. 

Stanford, California: CSLI Publications, p. 175-

202. 

Sag, I., Baldwin, T. Bond, F., Copestake, A., 

Flickinger, D. 2002.  Multiword expressions: A 

pain in the neck for NLP.  In Proceedings of teh 

Third International Conference on Intelligent Text 

processing and Computatinal Linguistics 

(CICLING 2002), p. 1-15, Mexico City, Mexico. 

ACL. 

Stevenson, S., Fazly, A., and North, R. (2004). 

Statistical measures of the semi-productivity of 

light verb constructions. In Proceedings of the 

ACL-04 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: 

Integrating Processing, p. 1–8. 

 

90


