










































Supporting rule-based representations with corpus-derived lexical information.


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First International Workshop on Formalisms and Methodology for Learning by Reading, pages 114–121,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Supporting rule-based representations with corpus-derived lexical

information.

Annie Zaenen

Cleo Condoravdi

Daniel G. Bobrow

PARC

3333, Coyote Hill Road

Palo Alto, CA, 94304, USA

{zaenen,condorav,bobrow}@parc.com

Raphael Hoffmann

University of Washington

Box 352350

Seattle, WA, 98195, USA

raphaelh@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

The pervasive ambiguity of language al-
lows sentences that differ in just one lexi-
cal item to have rather different inference
patterns. This would be no problem if the
different lexical items fell into clearly de-
finable and easy to represent classes. But
this is not the case. To draw the correct
inferences we need to look how the refer-
ents of the lexical items in the sentence (or
broader context) interact in the described
situation. Given that the knowledge our
systems have of the represented situation
will typically be incomplete, the classifica-
tions we come up with can only be prob-
abilistic. We illustrate this problem with
an investigation of various inference pat-
terns associated with predications of the
form ‘Verb from X to Y’, especially ‘go
from X to Y’. We characterize the vari-
ous readings and make an initial proposal
about how to create the lexical classes that
will allow us to draw the correct inferences
in the different cases.

1 Introduction

Machine Reading requires a level of Natural
Language Processing that allows direct infer-
ences to be drawn from the processed texts.
Most heavy duty inferencing will be done by a
reasoning engine working on the output of the
linguistic analysis (with possible loops between
the two) but for this to be possible, the linguistic
analysis should deliver representations where a
certain level of disambiguation and content spec-
ification has been done. For instance, a human

will draw different conclusions from the follow-
ing two sentences about the position of the ref-
erent of the subject: ‘Eric went from Paris to
Lyon’ and ‘The road went from Paris to Lyon’.
The first sentence implies that a person named
Eric was in Paris at some time and in Lyon at
a later time, whereas the second sentence im-
plies that a part of the road was in Paris and a
part of it was in Lyon at the same time. For the
reasoner to draw such conclusions, the linguis-
tic analysis should assign appropriate roles to
the subject argument and the from-to adjunct
or argument phrases of the verbal predicate go
so as to convey that the first sentence involves
movement, while the second involves spatial ex-
tent.

In this paper we look at a range of such in-
ferences associated with from-to phrases. We
limit ourselves to rather simple cases of the
use of from-to phrases: those that describe no
change or gradual changes in the physical world.
We show that beyond inferences about time-
dependent locations and spatial extent of partic-
ular entities, from-to phrases give rise to infer-
ences about change of an entity in some dimen-
sion (e.g. temperature or width) either through
time or through space. We first discuss the in-
ferences we would like to be able to draw, and
describe features of a representation that cap-
tures enough distinctions to enable these infer-
ences to be drawn. This allows us to isolate the
factors leading to such inferences. Finally, we
give a preliminary sketch of a corpus analysis
that would help make the required distinctions

114



and characterize appropriate lexical classes.

2 Some simple inferences

Consider the following sentences:

1. Eric went from Paris to Lyon.

2. The road went from Paris to Lyon.

3. The meeting went from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m.

4. The temperature in the room went from 20
degrees to 30 degrees from 10 to 11 a.m.

5. The temperature went from 20 to 30 de-
grees from the front to the back of the room

6. The temperature went from 20 degrees to
30 degrees.

7. The room went from 20 to 30 degrees.

As indicated above, we would like the system to
be able to conclude from (1) that Eric was in
Paris before being in Lyon, and from (2) that
one part of the road is in Paris whereas another
part is in Lyon at the same time. From (3) the
system should infer that the mentioned event,
the meeting, started at 3 p.m. (or no later than
3 p.m.) and ended at 5 p.m. (or no earlier than
5 p.m.). From (4) the system should infer that
the value of the function temperature as it ap-
plies to the room increases over the given tem-
poral span. It is worth noting at this point that
the two sets of from-to phrases in (4) play differ-
ent roles. The temporal from-to phrases specify
the relevant domain of the temporal argument of
the function, while the measure from-to phrases
specify the range of the function on the given
domain. (5) has a similar implication to that
of (4), that the temperature changes, but this
time over a spatial dimension: the temperature
is implied to vary in different parts of the room,
being 20 degrees in the front of the room and 30
degrees in the back. Again the two sets of from-
to phrases in (5) play different roles. The spa-
tial from-to phrases specify the relevant domain
of the spatial argument of the function and the
measure from-to phrases specify the range of the
function on the given domain. (6) and (7) have
similar implications to those of (4) and, in the
right context, to those of (5) but they present
challenges of their own. In (6) the temporal (or
spatial) dimension is implicit and needs to be in-
ferred. (7) requires the inference that a change

of the values of the function temperature is in-
volved.1

These examples show that sentences that have
substantially the same syntax and even use the
same main verb can exhibit very different rela-
tions between their parts. The first question we
want to address is how to explicate these dif-
ferences and the second question is how to get
from the words used in these sentences to the
information needed about their type of referent
to ensure the right interpretation in each case.

The verb ‘to go’ is, of course, not the only
one that exhibits this behavior. The difference
in interpretation between examples (1) and (2)
can also be found with manner-of-motion verbs
such as ‘run’ and ‘zigzag’. Some verbs do lexi-
cally encode a particular functional dimension,
such as temperature or width. These are known
as degree achievements (Dowty, 1979; Abusch,
1986).2 Examples of degree achievements in-
clude ‘widen’, ‘lengthen’, ‘shorten’, ‘cool’, ‘age’.
They exhibit similar patterns of modification
with from-to phrases as we saw above:

8. The road widens from Palo Alto to Menlo
Park.

9. The road widens from 12 to 24 feet.

Here ‘widen’ is interpreted statively, like ‘go’ in
(2), and the two sentences imply spatial change
in width, over subparts of the road. The two
from-to phrases, however, have a different func-
tion giving rise to different implications. (8) im-
plies that the road is wider in Menlo Park than it
is in Palo Alto. (9) specifies the relation between
the measures of width at two different subparts
of the road. The from-to phrases in (8) specify

1It is not clear that the change has to be in one direc-
tional in all cases:

This summer, the temperature went from 20 de-
grees to 30 degrees.

In this example, it seems that the temperature varied
from 20 to 30 degrees, not necessarily that 20 degrees
was a starting point or 30 degrees an end point. See
section 4.1 for some further discussion.

2In English most degree achievements are derived
from gradable adjectives. When this is the case, the
meaning of degree achievements and underlying adjec-
tives is systematically related, as argued in (Hay et al.,
1999).

115



the domain of the spatial argument of the func-
tion width as it applies to the referent of ‘the
road’. Those in (9) specify the range of the val-
ues of the function width as it applies to different
parts of the referent of ‘the road’.

In what follows we will distinguish between
extent readings and change readings. Extent
readings specify, in full or in part, the tempo-
ral or spatial extent of a temporal or spatial en-
tity, as seen in (3) and (2). Change readings
specify the values of a function as applied to a
given entity through a temporal or spatial span.
The function is either determined directly by the
verb, as in (8) and (9), or by the verb in com-
bination with one of its arguments, as in (4) –
(6), or it has to be inferred, as in (1) and (7).

3 Representing the different readings

For the sake of concreteness, in this section we
show how the distinctions discussed above are
represented and implemented in AKR, an ab-
stract knowledge representation language into
which sentences are mapped after they are
parsed in the NL system developed at PARC
(Bobrow et al., 2007). The idea behind AKR is
to canonicalize many variations of an input text
with the same underlying meaning into a more
uniform representation. This ought to make the
task of interfacing with reasoners easier.

The AKR of a sentence consists of a list of
assertions. Terms are generated for each of the
content words of a sentence, such as verbs and
nouns, and are associated with assertions about
the types of events and objects their correspond-
ing words refer to. Predicates and their argu-
ments or modifiers are related via role relations.
The inventory of roles we use extends the set
of semantic or thematic roles often assumed in
linguistic analyses and found in resources such
VerbNet or FrameNet. It includes among other
things temporal or spatial relations of inclusion,
precedence, etc.

We assume that sentences with from-to
phrases imply the existence of a path and that
the further information about the path specified
is about the “location” of its initial and final
points. In representing such sentences a term is

created to represent a path and the path term
is linked by a role initial to the term for the
complement of from, and by a role final to the
term for the complement of to. On our analysis
then the from-to phrases are used to specify re-
strictions on the path term and do not translate
into thematic roles relating the verbal predicate
and the complement NP, such source or goal.
The path term is related to the verbal term via
different roles, depending on the type of inter-
pretation. Below is an example that shows the
role relations in AKR for sentence (1).

role(theme, go:13, Eric:7)

role(mpath, go:13, path:23)

role(initial,path:23,loc(-at-,Paris:4))

role(final,path:23,loc(-at-,Lyon:6))

role(dimension,path:23,loc)

3.1 Extent interpretations

In extent readings the subject argument denotes
an entity extended in space, as seen in (2), or a
non-punctual event, as seen in (3). The verb
itself does little work other than to signal that
the from-to phrases give information about the
spatial or temporal extent of its subject argu-
ment. The way they do that is by saying that
the given path is a spatial or temporal part of
the entity that is the referent of the subject ar-
gument. Let us start with the representation of
(3), as the representation of its meaning in our
terms is quite intuitive. Temporal paths, such
as from-to-span:11, correspond to time periods.

role(initial,time-span:11,timepoint(-at-,3pm))

role(final,time-span:11,timepoint(-at-,5pm))

role(temporalWithin,time-span:11,meeting:1)

It should now be clear that the representation
for the spatial extent reading would differ min-
imally from that of the temporal extent read-
ing: the relation between the path and the road
terms would be that of spatial inclusion and the
dimension of the path is locational.

role(initial,path:23,loc(-at-,Paris:4))

role(final,path:23,loc(-at-,Lyon:6))

role(spatialWithin,path:23,road:10)

116



3.2 Change interpretations

As discussed in section 2, change interpretations
establish a dependency between two paths which
should be represented explicitly. The paths
themselves may be specified overtly by from-to
phrases or they may be implicit. Functionally
relating two paths of this type was first dis-
cussed, to our knowledge, in (Jackendoff, 1996)
and further developed in (Gawron, 2005) and
(Gawron, 2009).

Let us consider first example (4), where the
two paths are given explicitly. (4) implies a
change in the temperature of the room over time
so the function temperature should be construed
as time-dependent. The temporal path speci-
fies the time period over which the given change
in temperature takes place; the scalar path par-
tially specifies the range of the function over the
given temporal domain. What we can conclude
for certain from (4) is that the temperature in
the room was 20 degrees at 10 a.m. and 30 de-
grees at 11 a.m. The sentence gives no specific
information about the temperature of the room
in between 10 and 11 a.m. though in this case,
given that change in temperature is continuous,
we can conclude that every degree between 20
and 30 was the temperature of the room at some
point within the relevant time period.

In order to represent the dependency between
the two paths we use a higher order predicate
path-map that specifies a function, that varies
over a range (in this case the scalar path from
20 degrees to 30 degrees) with a domain (in
this case the temporal path from 10 a.m. to 11
a.m.). More generally: the higher-order predi-
cate, path-map(F,D,R), relates a function F
and two posets D and R. The path-map relation
expresses that the image of D under F is equal
to R.3 For (4) we end up with the following rep-
resentation.

role(scale,go:5,path:4)

role(dimension, path:4,temperature)

role(initial,path:4,temperature(-at-,20 deg))

role(final,path:4,temperature(-at-,30 deg))

3Depending on what F, D and R are, this mapping
may also be order preserving, i.e. for all elements x, y in
D, if x precedes y then F(x) precedes F(y).

role(initial,time-span:11,timepoint(-at-,10am))

role(final,time-span:11,timepoint(-at-,11am))

path-map(function(temperature,room:2),
time-span:11,path:4)

The fact that path:4 is a scalar path is marked
by relating it to the verbal term via the role
scale.

The other examples discussed in section 2 re-
ceive representations based on this model. (5)
implies a change in the temperature of the room
over its spatial extent oriented from the front to
the back, so the function temperature should be
construed as location-dependent. Below we give
the assertions for the representation of (5) that
differ from those of (4). Note the additional
assertion relating the spatial path term to the
room term.

role(initial,path:11,loc(-at-,front:10))

role(final,path:11,loc(-at-,back:12))

role(spatialWithin,,path:11,room:2)

path-map(function(temperature,room:2),
path:11,path:4)

The representation of sentences with degree
achievements, such as The road widens from 12
to 24 feet from Palo Alto to Menlo Park, would
the same in all relevant respects except that the
dimension of the scalar path would be deter-
mined by the verb, in this case being width.

To derive full representations for (6) and (7)
we need to be able to infer the second and the
first argument of function, respectively. More-
over, we need to fix the dimension of the implicit
path. Generally, when only one path is specified
overtly, as in (6), (7) and (8) and (9) the exis-
tence of the other type of path is understood.
When only the range path is given, the under-
stood domain path can be either temporal or
locational.

We come now to the prototypical use of a
from-to phrase with verbs like ‘go’ to describe
movement whose origin is specified by the from
phrase and whose destination is specified by the
to phrase. We gave a preliminary representation
for (1) at the beginning of section 3. Missing
from that representation is the explicit link be-
tween the location of the theme argument during

117



the time of the movement. This link, of course,
can now be given in terms of the following path-
map assertion:

path-map(function(location,Eric:7),
time(go:13),path:23)

4 Which elements in the sentence

guide interpretation?

In our system roles and dimensions are intro-
duced by rules that take the output of the syn-
tactic parse of the sentence as input. The exact
form of these rules need not to concern us here.
But an important question for nlp is where the
information comes from that allows us to deter-
mine which role and dimension a path has. As
the examples show, the verb is not necessarily
the place to look: most of the examples use the
verb ‘to go’.

In fact, the information can come from various
places in the sentence (or the broader textual
context: ellipsis and anaphoric relations play
their usual roles here). Moreover in some cases
information about, say, the dimension can come
from the arguments of from and to whereas in
other cases this information can come from the
verb. ‘Widen’ for instance imposes the width-
dimension but if we use the verb ‘to go’ to de-
scribe a widening event, the information about
the dimension has to come from the arguments
of from and to and the subject.

Similar problems arise with respect to the de-
termination of the roles. Example 1 and 2 seem
to have straightforward interpretations where
the path role in the first case is clearly a move-
ment path whereas in the second case we have to
do with a stative interpretation. At first blush,
it seems that this information could be straight-
forwardly lexically encoded: people move and
roads don’t. But further reflection shows that
this will not do. Take the following example:

10. The train went from one end of the station
to the other.

In this case we can have two interpretations: ei-
ther the length of the train is such that it covers
that of the whole station or the train moved from
one end of the station to the other. What is im-
portant is not an intrinsic characteristic of the

lexical item but whether it is appropriate for the
extent (length) of its referent to be measured by
the from-to phrase.

Some more or less stable relations between
syntax and semantics can help us determine
which analysis to give. For instance, the starting
and end points of movement paths and stative
locational paths are referential (in contradistinc-
tion to those of scalar paths). As such, they tend
to be expressed by proper names or by a noun
phrase with a determiner.4

Manner of motion verbs are surprisingly un-
informative: many of them can have a moving
object or a stationary object or a function such
as the temperature as their subject. The combi-
nations summarized in the following are all pos-
sible:

11. Liz/the road/the temperature
went/crawled/moved/meandered
from X to Y.

With verbs of inherent directed motion, the verb
contributes a polarity for the direction but very
little else, as example 12 illustrates:

12. Liz/the road/the temperature
descended/climbed/ascended/fell/tumbled
from X to Y.

Again whatever information there is about the
type of path or the dimension it has to come
from the subject or from the from-to arguments.
From-to arguments can give the necessary infor-
mation about the dimension (locations, money,
time, degrees) but when they are scalar or tem-
poral, the measurement units will often be omit-
ted and the theme will indicate the dimension.

Degree achievements tend to be more special-
ized. They indicate the dimension (width, tem-
perature). Lexicons can contain many of the
function names but will not help with the cases
of metonymy (where an argument is given in-
stead of the name of the function itself).

4There are, however, exceptions:

He ran from where Bill was to where the field ends.

His tattoo goes from head to toe.

The path meanders from mountain to mountain.

118



4.1 Characterizing components of the
representations

In the previous subsection we have discussed dif-
ferent types of from-to phrases, and the roles
that link the elements of the representations of
these types. The question we address now is how
we can provide our system with the necessary in-
formation to make these distinctions. This is a
preliminary investigation as yet without imple-
mentation.

Ideally, we would have ontologies to give us
the right characteristics of the entities underly-
ing our lexical items and we would have ade-
quate mappings from the lexical items to these
ontologies. These ontologies and these mappings
are currently not available. Natural language
processing applications, however, have taught us
that even if humans can do surprising things and
language can express surprising thoughts, most
of the time, the reality that human language ex-
presses is rather predictable, so that the map-
ping to ontologies can up to a certain point be
mimicked by probabilistic feature assignments
to lexical items. For ‘Eric’ we can assume that
with a high probability it will be the theme of
a movement path and whereas for ‘the road’ a
high probability assigns it as the theme of a sta-
tive path. In other cases, however, we need con-
crete co-occurrence statistics to assign the right
representations. Next, we sketch a preliminary
investigation of some Wikipedia data that can
be brought to bear on this issue. We indicate
how the data might help and point out some of
the new problems it brings up.

A first question that arises is of how much
practical relevance the different types that we
have discussed are. We looked at the first 100
‘went from X to Y’ sentences pulled out of
Wikipedia parsed with the Stanford dependency
parser, that had the required syntactic pattern
and found that 61 fell into the categories de-
scribed in the previous sections (gradual change
or no change in the physical domain) whereas
about 39 are clearly transformational from-to’s
(for instance ‘The SU-152 went from design con-
cept to field trials in a record twenty-five days’).
Of these 61, 4 had temporal from-to modifiers,

19 had various scales or numeric from-to mod-
ifiers and 38 were locational. Of the locational
ones, 11 had a stationary reading and 17 had a
movement reading. So all the cases under dis-
cussion are well represented in naturally occur-
ring text.

A second question is how we can obtain
the relevant features from the data. We
see four potential methods: (1) the charac-
terization of words within existing ontologies
like WordNet (Miller, 1995), (2) the combina-
tion of stated facts through reasoning, (3) co-
occurrence statistics of words in text, and (4)
solicitation of novel features from human anno-
tators. We illustrate these methods based on
Wikipedia examples.

A first idea might be that there is at least a
straightforward ontological characterization for
difference between the movement and the sta-
tive reading: for the movement reading we re-
quire living beings and for the stative reading
we require long stationary entities. These im-
pressions are, of course, not completely wrong
but in the first case, we have to include in the
living beings not only groups such as brigades
but also ships (as in ‘She went from the Red Sea
to the Mediterranean to relieve USS Coral Sea
...’), flights (as in ‘This flight went from Spits-
bergen (Svalbard) to Alaska nonstop, so there
is little doubt that they went over the North
Pole.’) and messages (as in ‘The message went
from the Palace in Stockholm to the King at
Drottningholm.’). And in the second categories
we have not only roads and various transporta-
tion lines but also borders (as in ‘The bound-
ary of Manila province went from northeast to
southwest, ...’) and trade routes and things such
as (rifle) suppressors as in ‘The suppressor, 2
inches in diameter, went all the way from the
back of the barrel to well beyond the muzzle
...’). A quick inspection of WordNet shows that
there is no interesting ancestor node that covers
all the movement cases but it also suggests that
a great number of the cases can be covered with
‘conveyance, transport’ together with ‘motion,
movement, move’ as well as ‘organism, being’.
But ‘organism, being’ also covers ‘plants’ and
‘sitter’ and ‘stander’ and other subclasses that

119



don’t seem to be plausible candidates for the
movement analysis. There is no interesting hy-
pernym for both ‘road’ and ‘border’ before we
get to the useless level of ‘object, physical ob-
ject’ and no already existing ontology will help
with the suppressor case. Thus we might get
some data by using the first method but most
likely not everything we want.

As far as the arguments of the from-to phrases
themselves, locations can be indicated by place
names, institution names, nouns referring to lo-
cations, but also nouns referring to spatial lo-
cated entities that we do not think of as loca-
tions, such as parts of pieces of equipment. The
very limited inspection of data we have done up
to now does not lead us to expect that the na-
ture of the from-to arguments occurring with
movement readings is very different from that
found with stationary readings. In the current
state of affairs, many of the arguments of the
from-to phrases can be found either in gazetteers
or through the analysis of a reasonably well-
circumscribed spatial vocabulary.5

Some cases, however, fall outside of these re-
sources. The most interesting problem is pre-
sented by the reference to spatial entities that
are not clearly flagged as locations in ontologies,
such as those found in the suppressor-sentence
(‘The suppressor, 2 inches in diameter, went all
the way from the back of the barrel to well be-
yond the muzzle ...’) above. We admit that
his type of sentence seems to be rather rare
in the Wikipedia corpus but it is problematic
because detailed ontological representations of
even common objects are not readily available.
Wikipedia, however, has some information that
might help one to formulate reasonable hypothe-
ses about parts. For instance, the article that
contains the suppressor-sentence, also contains
a structured specification of the carbine under
description mentioning the barrel and the muz-
zle. Here we need to use the second method,
reasoning. The question then becomes whether
we can find reasoning patterns that are general
enough to give interesting results.

5Whereas it is possible to enumerate an extensive part
of the relevant vocabulary, there is no extensive descrip-
tion of meaning contribution of these elements.

The third method, already demonstrated in
the context of semantic parsing (Poon and
Domingos, 2009), seems also to be promising.
For instance, even staying within the class of
movement verbs, different verbs have different
signatures that might help us with the classifi-
cation of their subjects and their from-to argu-
ments. While ‘go’ has indeed the wide range of
meanings that we expected, ‘run’ is rather dif-
ferent: apart from three examples where ‘run’
refers to the movement of living beings and three
referring to vehicles moving, the other exam-
ples of the combination of ‘run’ with from-to fall
in two classes: indications of the spatial extent
of roads, railways and the like (27) and tempo-
ral extensions of shows, games or strips running
(16). The nature of the corpus has certainly an
influence here (Wikipedia does not contain nar-
rative texts) but this type of information might
be valuable to disambiguate parses: if we can
distinguish the cases where ‘run’ occurs with
spatial extent readings and the cases where it
occurs with temporal extent meanings, we can
harvest a set of possible subjects that are also
possible subjects for the spatial extent meaning
of ‘go’. The distinction between the two read-
ings of ‘run’ is not very difficult to make as most
of the temporal extent readings of ‘run’ have a
temporal from-to phrase.6

A different way in which the characteristics
of specific verbs or verb argument combinations
might at least probabilistically disambiguate
possible readings is illustrated with a difference
between ‘go’ and ‘range’ with scalars. In sec-
tion 3.2, we observed that scalar ‘go’ does not
always imply that there is a steady increase or
decrease over time or space. However in all the
numerical or scalar examples except for one in
our first sample, the interpretation implies such

6But those readings themselves bring up a new clas-
sificatory problem: most of the time the subject is an
event, a show, or a game. However, in most cases the
meaning is not that one performance of the show ran for
several months or year but that several successive perfor-
mances ran. Moreover, the construction cannot only be
used with event-referring expressions but also with enti-
ties such as ‘strips’. Here we get into problems of regular
polysemy. The treatment we have given above needs to
be complicated to take these into account.

120



a steady increase or decrease. We also exam-
ined the sentences with ‘price ranged’ and ‘price
went’ in the whole of Wikipedia. Unfortunately
there are very few examples but for these, the
difference in interpretation for ‘range’ and ‘go’
seems to hold up: all 4 examples with ‘go’ had
the interpretation of steady increase or decrease.
So ‘the price ranged ...’ and ‘the price went ...’
statistically might get a different interpretation
even if in some cases ‘go’ can be synonymous
with ‘range’.

Finally, there is a possibility that due to
sparseness some required features can neither be
derived from existing ontologies nor from natu-
ral language text itself. For example, in ‘The
2006 Trek the Trail event was organised on the
Railway Reserve Heritage Trail and went from
Mundaring to Darlington’ we assume an extent
interpretation, and may thus be inclined to clas-
sify all events that way. However, in ‘The case
Arklow vs MacLean went all the way from the
New Zealand High Court to the Privy Council
in London.’ we assume a change interpretation
(movement), although WordNet sees ‘event’ as
a hypernym of ‘case’. Interestingly, it is not the
arguments that determine the right interpreta-
tion here, but rather our distinction between dif-
ferent kinds of events: those for which spatial ex-
tent is important (street festivals) and those for
which not (lawsuits). More generally, in cases
where we are unable to make such fine distinc-
tions based on features derived from available
corpora, we can use our fourth method, solicit-
ing additional features from human annotators,
to group concepts in novel ways.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we first described the distinctions
that need to be made to allow a correct in-
terpretation of a subclass of from-to sentences.
We then looked at the resources that are avail-
able to help us guide to the correct interpreta-
tion. We distinguished four different ways to
obtain the information needed: features in an
existing ontology, features statistically derived
for the relations used with a concept, features
computed through reasoning and features ob-
tained through human annotation. We saw that

a small, very preliminary examination of the
data suggests that the three first methods will
allow us to make the right distinctions in an im-
portant number of cases but that there will be
cases in which the fourth method, human anno-
tation, will be necessary.

Acknowledgments

This material is based in part upon work sup-
ported by the Air Force Research Laboratory
(AFRL) under prime contract no. FA8750-09-
C-0181. Any opinions, findings, and conclusion
or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the author(s) and do not necessar-
ily reflect the view of the Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL).

References

Dorit Abusch. 1986. Verbs of Change, Causation,
and Time. Report CSLI, Stanford University.

Daniel Bobrow, Robert Cheslow, Cleo Condoravdi,
Lauri Karttunen, Tracy, Rowan Nairn, Valeria
de Paiva, Lotti Price, and Annie Zaenen. 2007.
PARC’s Bridge question answering system. In
Proceedings of the GEAF (Grammar Engineer-
ing Across Frameworks) 2007 Workshop. Stan-
ford, CA.

David Dowty. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague
Grammar: The Semantics of Verbs and Times in
Generative Semantics and in Montague’s PTQ.
Springer.

Jean Mark Gawron. 2005. Generalized Paths. SALT
17.

Jean Mark Gawron. 2009. The Lexical Semantics of
Extent Verbs.

Jennifer Hay, Christopher Kennedy, and Beth Levin.
1999. Scale structure underlies telicity in ‘degree
achievements’. pages 127–144.

Ray Jackendoff. 1996. The Proper Treatment of
Measuring Out, Telicity, and Perhaps Even Quan-
tification in English. Natural Language and Lin-
guistic Theory 14, pages 305–354.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical
database for english. Communications of the
ACM, 38(11):39–41.

Hoifung Poon and Pedro Domingos. 2009. Unsuper-
vised semantic parsing. In EMNLP.

121


