










































Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages (SPMRL) What, How and Whither


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First Workshop on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically-Rich Languages, pages 1–12,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages (SPMRL)
What, How and Whither

Reut Tsarfaty
Uppsala Universitet

Djamé Seddah
Alpage (Inria/Univ. Paris-Sorbonne)

Yoav Goldberg
Ben Gurion University

Sandra Kübler
Indiana University

Marie Candito
Alpage (Inria/Univ. Paris 7)

Jennifer Foster
NCLT, Dublin City University

Yannick Versley
Universität Tübingen

Ines Rehbein
Universität Saarbrücken

Lamia Tounsi
NCLT, Dublin City University

Abstract

The term Morphologically Rich Languages
(MRLs) refers to languages in which signif-
icant information concerning syntactic units
and relations is expressed at word-level. There
is ample evidence that the application of read-
ily available statistical parsing models to such
languages is susceptible to serious perfor-
mance degradation. The first workshop on sta-
tistical parsing of MRLs hosts a variety of con-
tributions which show that despite language-
specific idiosyncrasies, the problems associ-
ated with parsing MRLs cut across languages
and parsing frameworks. In this paper we re-
view the current state-of-affairs with respect
to parsing MRLs and point out central chal-
lenges. We synthesize the contributions of re-
searchers working on parsing Arabic, Basque,
French, German, Hebrew, Hindi and Korean
to point out shared solutions across languages.
The overarching analysis suggests itself as a
source of directions for future investigations.

1 Introduction

The availability of large syntactically annotated cor-
pora led to an explosion of interest in automati-
cally inducing models for syntactic analysis and dis-
ambiguation called statistical parsers. The devel-
opment of successful statistical parsing models for
English focused on the Wall Street Journal Penn
Treebank (PTB, (Marcus et al., 1993)) as the pri-
mary, and sometimes only, resource. Since the ini-
tial release of the Penn Treebank (PTB Marcus et

al. (1993)), many different constituent-based parsing
models have been developed in the context of pars-
ing English (e.g. (Magerman, 1995; Collins, 1997;
Charniak, 2000; Chiang, 2000; Bod, 2003; Char-
niak and Johnson, 2005; Petrov et al., 2006; Huang,
2008; Finkel et al., 2008; Carreras et al., 2008)).
At their time, each of these models improved the
state-of-the-art, bringing parsing performance on the
standard test set of the Wall-Street-Journal to a per-
formance ceiling of 92% F1-score using the PARS-
EVAL evaluation metrics (Black et al., 1991). Some
of these parsers have been adapted to other lan-
guage/treebank pairs, but many of these adaptations
have been shown to be considerably less successful.

Among the arguments that have been proposed
to explain this performance gap are the impact of
small data sets, differences in treebanks’ annotation
schemes, and inadequacy of the widely used PARS-
EVAL evaluation metrics. None of these aspects in
isolation can account for the systematic performance
deterioration, but observed from a wider, cross-
linguistic perspective, a picture begins to emerge –
that the morphologically rich nature of some of the
languages makes them inherently more susceptible
to such performance degradation. Linguistic factors
associated with MRLs, such as a large inventory of
word-forms, higher degrees of word order freedom,
and the use of morphological information in indi-
cating syntactic relations, makes them substantially
harder to parse with models and techniques that have
been developed with English data in mind.

1



In addition to these technical and linguistic fac-
tors, the prominence of English parsing in the litera-
ture reduces the visibility of research aiming to solve
problems particular to MRLs. The lack of stream-
lined communication among researchers working
on different MRLs often leads to a reinventing the
wheel syndrome. To circumvent this, the first work-
shop on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich
Languages (SPMRL 2010) offers a platform for
this growing community to share their views of the
different problems and oftentimes similar solutions.

We identify three main types of challenges, each
of which raises many questions. Many of the ques-
tions are yet to be conclusively answered. The first
type of challenges has to do with the architectural
setup of parsing MRLs: What is the nature of the in-
put? Can words be represented abstractly to reflect
shared morphological aspects? How can we cope
with morphological segmentation errors propagated
through the pipeline? The second type concerns the
representation of morphological information inside
the articulated syntactic model: Should morpholog-
ical information be encoded at the level of PoS tags?
On dependency relations? On top of non-terminals
symbols? How should the integrated representations
be learned and used? A final genuine challenge
has to do with sound estimation for lexical probabil-
ities: Given the finite, and often rather small, set of
data, and the large number of morphological analy-
ses licensed by rich inflectional systems, how can we
analyze words unseen in the training data?

Many of the challenges reported here are mostly
irrelevant when parsing Section 23 of the PTB but
they are of primordial importance in other tasks, in-
cluding out-of-domain parsing, statistical machine
translation, and parsing resource-poor languages.
By synthesizing the contributions to the workshop
and bringing it to the forefront, we hope to advance
the state of the art of statistical parsing in general.

In this paper we therefore take the opportunity
to analyze the knowledge that has been acquired in
the different investigations for the purpose of iden-
tifying main bottlenecks and pointing out promising
research directions. In section 2, we define MRLs
and identify syntactic characteristics associated with
them. We then discuss work on parsing MRLs in
both the dependency-based and constituency-based
setup. In section 3, we review the types of chal-

lenges associated with parsing MRLs across frame-
works. In section 4, we focus on the contributions to
the SPMRL workshop and identify recurring trends
in the empirical results and conceptual solutions. In
section 5, we analyze the emerging picture from a
bird’s eye view, and conclude that many challenges
could be more faithfully addressed in the context of
parsing morphologically ambiguous input.

2 Background

2.1 What are MRLs?

The term Morphologically Rich Languages (MRLs)
is used in the CL/NLP literature to refer to languages
in which substantial grammatical information, i.e.,
information concerning the arrangement of words
into syntactic units or cues to syntactic relations, is
expressed at word level.

The common linguistic and typological wisdom is
that “morphology competes with syntax” (Bresnan,
2001). In effect, this means that rich morphology
goes hand in hand with a host of nonconfigurational
syntactic phenomena of the kind discussed by Hale
(1983). Because information about the relations be-
tween syntactic elements is indicated in the form of
words, these words can freely change their positions
in the sentence. This is referred to as free word or-
der (Mithun, 1992). Information about the group-
ing of elements together can further be expressed by
reference to their morphological form. Such logical
groupings of disparate elements are often called dis-
continuous constituents. In dependency structures,
such discontinuities impose nonprojectivity. Finally,
rich morphological information is found in abun-
dance in conjunction with so-called pro-drop or zero
anaphora. In such cases, rich morphological infor-
mation in the head (or co-head) of the clause of-
ten makes it possible to omit an overt subject which
would be semantically impoverished.

English, the most heavily studied language within
the CL/NLP community, is not an MRL. Even
though a handful of syntactic features (such as per-
son and number) are reflected in the form of words,
morphological information is often secondary to
other syntactic factors, such as the position of words
and their arrangement into phrases. German, an
Indo-European language closely related to English,
already exhibits some of the properties that make

2



parsing MRLs problematic. The Semitic languages
Arabic and Hebrew show an even more extreme case
in terms of the richness of their morphological forms
and the flexibility in their syntactic ordering.

2.2 Parsing MRLs

Pushing the envelope of constituency parsing:
The Head-Driven models of the type proposed
by Collins (1997) have been ported to parsing
many MRLs, often via the implementation of Bikel
(2002). For Czech, the adaptation by Collins et al.
(1999) culminated in an 80 F1-score.

German has become almost an archetype of the
problems caused by MRLs; even though German
has a moderately rich morphology and a moder-
ately free word order, parsing results are far from
those for English (see (Kübler, 2008) and references
therein). Dubey (2005) showed that, for German
parsing, adding case and morphology information
together with smoothed markovization and an ade-
quate unknown-word model is more important than
lexicalization (Dubey and Keller, 2003).

For Modern Hebrew, Tsarfaty and Sima’an (2007)
show that a simple treebank PCFG augmented with
parent annotation and morphological information as
state-splits significantly outperforms Head-Driven
markovized models of the kind made popular by
Klein and Manning (2003). Results for parsing
Modern Standard Arabic using Bikel’s implemen-
tation on gold-standard tagging and segmentation
have not improved substantially since the initial re-
lease of the treebank (Maamouri et al., 2004; Kulick
et al., 2006; Maamouri et al., 2008).

For Italian, Corazza et al. (2004) used the Stan-
ford parser and Bikel’s parser emulation of Collins’
model 2 (Collins, 1997) on the ISST treebank, and
obtained significantly lower results compared to En-
glish. It is notable that these models were ap-
plied without adding morphological signatures, us-
ing gold lemmas instead. Corazza et al. (2004) fur-
ther tried different refinements including parent an-
notation and horizontal markovization, but none of
them obtained the desired improvement.

For French, Crabbé and Candito (2008) and Sed-
dah et al. (2010) show that, given a corpus compara-
ble in size and properties (i.e. the number of tokens
and grammar size), the performance level, both for
Charniak’s parser (Charniak, 2000) and the Berke-

ley parser (Petrov et al., 2006) was higher for pars-
ing the PTB than it was for French. The split-merge-
smooth implementation of (Petrov et al., 2006) con-
sistently outperform various lexicalized and unlexi-
calized models for French (Seddah et al., 2009) and
for many other languages (Petrov and Klein, 2007).
In this respect, (Petrov et al., 2006) is considered
MRL-friendly, due to its language agnostic design.

The rise of dependency parsing: It is commonly
assumed that dependency structures are better suited
for representing the syntactic structures of free word
order, morphologically rich, languages, because this
representation format does not rely crucially on the
position of words and the internal grouping of sur-
face chunks (Mel’čuk, 1988). It is an entirely differ-
ent question, however, whether dependency parsers
are in fact better suited for parsing such languages.

The CoNLL shared tasks on multilingual depen-
dency parsing in 2006 and 2007 (Buchholz and
Marsi, 2006; Nivre et al., 2007a) demonstrated that
dependency parsing for MRLs is quite challenging.
While dependency parsers are adaptable to many
languages, as reflected in the multiplicity of the lan-
guages covered,1 the analysis by Nivre et al. (2007b)
shows that the best result was obtained for English,
followed by Catalan, and that the most difficult lan-
guages to parse were Arabic, Basque, and Greek.
Nivre et al. (2007a) drew a somewhat typological
conclusion, that languages with rich morphology
and free word order are the hardest to parse. This
was shown to be the case for both MaltParser (Nivre
et al., 2007c) and MST (McDonald et al., 2005), two
of the best performing parsers on the whole.

Annotation and evaluation matter: An emerg-
ing question is therefore whether models that have
been so successful in parsing English are necessar-
ily appropriate for parsing MRLs – but associated
with this question are important questions concern-
ing the annotation scheme of the related treebanks.
Obviously, when annotating structures for languages
with characteristics different than English one has to
face different annotation decisions, and it comes as
no surprise that the annotated structures for MRLs
often differ from those employed in the PTB.

1The shared tasks involved 18 languages, including many
MRLs such as Arabic, Basque, Czech, Hungarian, and Turkish.

3



For Spanish and French, it was shown by Cowan
and Collins (2005) and in (Arun and Keller, 2005;
Schluter and van Genabith, 2007), that restructuring
the treebanks’ native annotation scheme to match
the PTB annotation style led to a significant gain in
parsing performance of Head-Driven models of the
kind proposed in (Collins, 1997). For German, a
language with four different treebanks and two sub-
stantially different annotation schemes, it has been
shown that a PCFG parser is sensitive to the kind of
representation employed in the treebank.

Dubey and Keller (2003), for example, showed
that a simple PCFG parser outperformed an emula-
tion of Collins’ model 1 on NEGRA. They showed
that using sister-head dependencies instead of head-
head dependencies improved parsing performance,
and hypothesized that it is due to the flatness of
phrasal annotation. Kübler et al. (2006) showed con-
siderably lower PARSEVAL scores on NEGRA (Skut
et al., 1998) relative to the more hierarchically struc-
tured TüBa-D/Z (Hinrichs et al., 2005), again, hy-
pothesizing that this is due to annotation differences.

Related to such comparisons is the question of the
relevance of the PARSEVAL metrics for evaluating
parsing results across languages and treebanks. Re-
hbein and van Genabith (2007) showed that PARS-
EVAL measures are sensitive to annotation scheme
particularities (e.g. the internal node ratio). It was
further shown that different metrics (i.e. the Leaf-
ancestor path (Sampson and Babarczy, 2003) and
dependency based ones in (Lin, 1995)) can lead to
different performance ranking. This was confirmed
also for French by Seddah et al. (2009).

The questions of how to annotate treebanks for
MRLs and how to evaluate the performance of the
different parsers on these different treebanks is cru-
cial. For the MRL parsing community to be able to
assess the difficulty of improving parsing results for
French, German, Arabic, Korean, Basque, Hindi or
Hebrew, we ought to first address fundamental ques-
tions including: Is the treebank sufficiently large
to allow for proper grammar induction? Does the
annotation scheme fit the language characteristics?
Does the use of PTB annotation variants for other
languages influence parsing results? Does the space-
delimited tokenization allow for phrase boundary
detection? Do the results for a specific approach
generalize to more than one language?

3 Primary Research Questions

It is firmly established in theoretical linguistics that
morphology and syntax closely interact through pat-
terns of case marking, agreement, clitics and various
types of compounds. Because of such close interac-
tions, we expect morphological cues to help parsing
performance. But in practice, when trying to incor-
porate morphological information into parsing mod-
els, three types of challenges present themselves:

Architecture and Setup: When attempting to
parse complex word-forms that encapsulate both
lexical and functional information, important archi-
tectural questions emerge, namely, what is the na-
ture of the input that is given to the parsing system?
Does the system attempt to parse sequences of words
or does it aim to assign structures to sequences of
morphological segments? If the former is the case,
how can we represent words abstractly so as to re-
flect shared morphological aspects between them?
If the latter is the case, how can we arrive at a good
enough morphological segmentation for the purpose
of statistical parsing, given raw input texts?

When working with morphologically rich lan-
guages such as Hebrew or Arabic, affixes may have
syntactically independent functions. Many parsing
models assume segmentation of the syntactically in-
dependent parts, such as prepositions or pronominal
clitics, prior to parsing. But morphological segmen-
tation requires disambiguation which is non-trivial,
due to case syncretism and high morphological am-
biguity exhibited by rich inflectional systems. The
question is then when should we disambiguate the
morphological analyses of input forms? Should we
do that prior to parsing or perhaps jointly with it?2

Representation and Modeling: Assuming that
the input to our system reflects morphological infor-
mation, one way or another, which types of morpho-

2Most studies on parsing MRLs nowadays assume the gold
standard segmentation and disambiguated morphological infor-
mation as input. This is the case, for instance, for the Arabic
parsing at CoNLL 2007 (Nivre et al., 2007a). This practice de-
ludes the community as to the validity of the parsing results
reported for MRLs in shared tasks. Goldberg et al. (2009), for
instance, show a gap of up to 6pt F1-score between performance
on gold standard segmentation vs. raw text. One way to over-
come this is to devise joint morphological and syntactic disam-
biguation frameworks (cf. (Goldberg and Tsarfaty, 2008)).

4



logical information should we include in the parsing
model? Inflectional and/or derivational? Case infor-
mation and/or agreement features? How can valency
requirements reflected in derivational morphology
affect the overall syntactic structure? In tandem with
the decision concerning the morphological informa-
tion to include, we face genuine challenges concern-
ing how to represent such information in the syntac-
tic model, be it constituency-based or dependency-
based. Should we encode morphological informa-
tion at the level of PoS tags and/or on top of syn-
tactic elements? Should we decorate non-terminals
nodes and/or dependency arcs or both?

Incorporating morphology in the statistical model
is often even more challenging than the sum of
these bare decisions, because of the nonconfigu-
rational structures (free word order, discontinuous
constituents) for rich markings are crucial (Hale,
1983). The parsing models designed for English of-
ten focus on learning rigid word order, and they do
not take morphological information into account (cf.
developing parsers for German (Dubey and Keller,
2003; Kübler et al., 2006)). The more complex ques-
tion is therefore: what type of parsing model should
we use for parsing MRLs? shall we use a general
purpose implementation and attempt to amend it?
how? or perhaps we should devise a new model from
first principles, to address nonconfigurational phe-
nomena effectively? using what form of representa-
tion? is it possible to find a single model that can
effectively cope with different kinds of languages?

Estimation and Smoothing: Compared to En-
glish, MRLs tend to have a greater number of word
forms and higher out-of-vocabulary (OOV) rates,
due to the many feature combinations licensed by
the inflectional system. A typical problem associ-
ated with parsing MRLs is substantial lexical data
sparseness due to high morphological variation in
surface forms. The question is therefore, given our
finite, and often fairly small, annotated sets of data,
how can we guess the morphological analyses, in-
cluding the PoS tag assignment and various features,
of an OOV word? How can we learn the probabil-
ities of such assignments? In a more general setup,
this problem is akin to handling out-of-vocabulary
or rare words for robust statistical parsing, and tech-
niques for domain adaptation via lexicon enhance-

Constituency-Based Dependency-Based

Arabic (Attia et al., 2010) (Marton et al., 2010)†
Basque - (Bengoetxea and Gojenola, 2010)
English (Attia et al., 2010) -
French (Attia et al., 2010)

(Seddah et al., 2010)
(Candito and Seddah, 2010)† -

German (Maier, 2010) -
Hebrew (Tsarfaty and Sima’an, 2010) (Goldberg and Elhadad, 2010)†

Hindi - (Ambati et al., 2010a)†
(Ambati et al., 2010b)

Korean (Chung et al., 2010) -

Table 1: An overview of SPMRL contributions. († report
results also for non-gold standard input)

ment (also explored for English and other morpho-
logically impoverished languages).

So, in fact, incorporating morphological informa-
tion inside the syntactic model for the purpose of
statistical parsing is anything but trivial. In the next
section we review the various approaches taken in
the individual contributions of the SPMRL work-
shop for addressing such challenges.

4 Parsing MRLs: Recurring Trends

The first workshop on parsing MRLs features 11
contributions for a variety of languages with a
range of different parsing frameworks. Table 1 lists
the individual contributions within a cross-language
cross-framework grid. In this section, we focus on
trends that occur among the different contributions.
This may be a biased view since some of the prob-
lems that exist for parsing MRLs may have not been
at all present, but it is a synopsis of where we stand
with respect to problems that are being addressed.

4.1 Architecture and Setup: Gold vs. Predicted
Morphological Information

While morphological information can be very infor-
mative for syntactic analysis, morphological anal-
ysis of surface forms is ambiguous in many ways.
In German, for instance, case syncretism (i.e. a sin-
gle surface form corresponding to different cases) is
pervasive, and in Hebrew and Arabic, the lack of vo-
calization patterns in written texts leads to multiple
morphological analyses for each space-delimited to-
ken. In real world situations, gold morphological in-
formation is not available prior to parsing. Can pars-
ing systems make effective use of morphology even
when gold morphological information is absent?

5



Several papers address this challenge by present-
ing results for both the gold and the automatically
predicted PoS and morphological information (Am-
bati et al., 2010a; Marton et al., 2010; Goldberg and
Elhadad, 2010; Seddah et al., 2010). Not very sur-
prisingly, all evaluated systems show a drop in pars-
ing accuracy in the non-gold settings.

An interesting trend is that in many cases, us-
ing noisy morphological information is worse than
not using any at all. For Arabic Dependency pars-
ing, using predicted CASE causes a substantial drop
in accuracy while it greatly improves performance
in the gold setting (Marton et al., 2010). For
Hindi Dependency Parsing, using chunk-internal
cues (i.e. marking non-recursive phrases) is benefi-
cial when gold chunk-boundaries are available, but
suboptimal when they are automatically predicted
(Ambati et al., 2010a). For Hebrew Dependency
Parsing with the MST parser, using gold morpholog-
ical features shows no benefit over not using them,
while using automatically predicted morphological
features causes a big drop in accuracy compared to
not using them (Goldberg and Elhadad, 2010). For
French Constituency Parsing, Seddah et al. (2010)
and Candito and Seddah (2010) show that while
gold information for the part-of-speech and lemma
of each word form results in a significant improve-
ment, the gain is low when switching to predicted
information. Reassuringly, Ambati et al. (2010a),
Marton et al. (2010), and Goldberg and Elhadad
(2010) demonstrate that some morphological infor-
mation can indeed be beneficial for parsing even in
the automatic setting. Ensuring that this is indeed
so, appears to be in turn linked to the question of
how morphology is represented and incorporated in
the parsing model.

The same effect in a different guise appears in
the contribution of Chung et al. (2010) concerning
parsing Korean. Chung et al. (2010) show a sig-
nificant improvement in parsing accuracy when in-
cluding traces of null anaphors (a.k.a. pro-drop) in
the input to the parser. Just like overt morphology,
traces and null elements encapsulate functional in-
formation about relational entities in the sentence
(the subject, the object, etc.), and including them at
the input level provides helpful disambiguating cues
for the overall structure that represents such rela-
tions. However, assuming that such traces are given

prior to parsing is, for all practical purposes, infeasi-
ble. This leads to an interesting question: will iden-
tifying such functional elements (marked as traces,
overt morphology, etc) during parsing, while com-
plicating that task itself, be on the whole justified?

Closely linked to the inclusion of morphological
information in the input is the choice of PoS tag set
to use. The generally accepted view is that fine-
grained PoS tags are morphologically more informa-
tive but may be harder to statistically learn and parse
with, in particular in the non-gold scenario. Mar-
ton et al. (2010) demonstrate that a fine-grained tag
set provides the best results for Arabic dependency
parsing when gold tags are known, while a much
smaller tag set is preferred in the automatic setting.

4.2 Representation and Modeling:
Incorporating Morphological Information

Many of the studies presented here explore the use
of feature representation of morphological informa-
tion for the purpose of syntactic parsing (Ambati et
al., 2010a; Ambati et al., 2010b; Bengoetxea and
Gojenola, 2010; Goldberg and Elhadad, 2010; Mar-
ton et al., 2010; Tsarfaty and Sima’an, 2010). Clear
trends among the contributions emerge concerning
the kind of morphological information that helps sta-
tistical parsing. Morphological CASE is shown to be
beneficial across the board. It is shown to help for
parsing Basque, Hebrew, Hindi and to some extent
Arabic.3 Morphological DEFINITENESS and STATE
are beneficial for Hebrew and Arabic when explic-
itly represented in the model. STATE, ASPECT and
MOOD are beneficial for Hindi, but only marginally
beneficial for Arabic. CASE and SUBORDINATION-
TYPE are the most beneficial features for Basque
transition-based dependency parsing.

A closer view into the results mentioned in the
previous paragraph suggests that, beyond the kind
of information that is being used, the way in which
morphological information is represented and used
by the model has substantial ramification as to
whether or not it leads to performance improve-
ments. The so-called “agreement features” GEN-
DER, NUMBER, PERSON, provide for an interesting
case study in this respect. When included directly as

3For Arabic, CASE is useful when gold morphology infor-
mation is available, but substantially hurt results when it is not.

6



machine learning features, agreement features ben-
efit dependency parsing for Arabic (Marton et al.,
2010), but not Hindi (dependency) (Ambati et al.,
2010a; Ambati et al., 2010b) or Hebrew (Goldberg
and Elhadad, 2010). When represented as simple
splits of non-terminal symbols, agreement informa-
tion does not help constituency-based parsing per-
formance for Hebrew (Tsarfaty and Sima’an, 2010).
However, when agreement patterns are directly rep-
resented on dependency arcs, they contribute an im-
provement for Hebrew dependency parsing (Gold-
berg and Elhadad, 2010). When agreement is en-
coded at the realization level inside a Relational-
Realizational model (Tsarfaty and Sima’an, 2008),
agreement features improve the state-of-the-art for
Hebrew parsing (Tsarfaty and Sima’an, 2010).

One of the advantages of the latter study is that
morphological information which is expressed at the
level of words gets interpreted elsewhere, on func-
tional elements higher up the constituency tree. In
dependency parsing, similar cases may arise, that
is, morphological information might not be as use-
ful on the form on which it is expressed, but would
be more useful at a different position where it could
influence the correct attachment of the main verb
to other elements. Interesting patterns of that sort
occur in Basque, where the SUBORDINATIONTYPE
morpheme attaches to the auxiliary verb, though it
mainly influences attachments to the main verb.

Bengoetxea and Gojenola (2010) attempted two
different ways to address this, one using a trans-
formation segmenting the relevant morpheme and
attaching it to the main verb instead, and another
by propagating the morpheme along arcs, through
a “stacking” process, to where it is relevant. Both
ways led to performance improvements. The idea of
a segmentation transformation imposes non-trivial
pre-processing, but it may be that automatically
learning the propagation of morphological features
is a promising direction for future investigation.

Another, albeit indirect, way to include morpho-
logical information in the parsing model is using
so-called latent information or some mechanism
of clustering. The general idea is the following:
when morphological information is added to stan-
dard terminal or non-terminal symbols, it imposes
restrictions on the distribution of these no-longer-
equivalent elements. Learning latent informa-

tion does not represent morphological information
directly, but presumably, the distributional restric-
tions can be automatically learned along with the
splits of labels symbols in models such as (Petrov
et al., 2006). For Korean (Chung et al., 2010),
latent information contributes significant improve-
ments. One can further do the opposite, namely,
merging terminals symbols for the purpose of ob-
taining an abstraction over morphological features.
When such clustering uses a morphological signa-
ture of some sort, it is shown to significantly im-
prove constituency-based parsing for French (Can-
dito and Seddah, 2010).

4.3 Representation and Modeling: Free Word
Order and Flexible Constituency Structure

Off-the-shelf parsing tools are found in abundance
for English. One problematic aspect of using them
to parse MRLs lies in the fact that these tools fo-
cus on the statistical modeling of configurational
information. These models often condition on the
position of words relative to one another (e.g. in
transition-based dependency parsing) or on the dis-
tance between words inside constituents (e.g. in
Head-Driven parsing). Many of the contributions to
the workshop show that working around existing im-
plementations may be insufficient, and we may have
to come up with more radical solutions.

Several studies present results that support the
conjecture that when free word-order is explicitly
taken into account, morphological information is
more likely to contribute to parsing accuracy. The
Relational-Realizational model used in (Tsarfaty
and Sima’an, 2010) allows for reordering of con-
stituents at a configuration layer, which is indepen-
dent of the realization patterns learned from the data
(vis-à-vis case marking and agreement). The easy-
first algorithm of (Goldberg and Elhadad, 2010)
which allows for significant flexibility in the order of
attachment, allows the model to benefit from agree-
ment patterns over dependency arcs that are easier
to detect and attach first. The use of larger subtrees
in (Chung et al., 2010) for parsing Korean, within a
Bayesian framework, allows the model to learn dis-
tributions that take more elements into account, and
thus learn the different distributions associated with
morphologically marked elements in constituency
structures, to improve performance.

7



In addition to free word order, MRLs show higher
degree of freedom in extraposition. Both of these
phenomena can result in discontinuous structures.
In constituency-based treebanks, this is either an-
notated as additional information which has to be
recovered somehow (traces in the case of the PTB,
complex edge labels in the German TüBa-D/Z), or
as discontinuous phrase structures, which cannot be
handled with current PCFG models. Maier (2010)
suggests the use of Linear Context-Free Rewriting
Systems (LCFRSs) in order to make discontinuous
structure transparent to the parsing process and yet
preserve familiar notions from constituency.

Dependency representation uses non-projective
dependencies to reflect discontinuities, which is
problematic to parse with models that assume pro-
jectivity. Different ways have been proposed to deal
with non-projectivity (Nivre and Nilsson, 2005; Mc-
Donald et al., 2005; McDonald and Pereira, 2006;
Nivre, 2009). Bengoetxea and Gojenola (2010)
discuss non-projective dependencies in Basque and
show that the pseudo-projective transformation of
(Nivre and Nilsson, 2005) improves accuracy for de-
pendency parsing of Basque. Moreover, they show
that in combination with other transformations, it
improves the utility of these other ones, too.

4.4 Estimation and Smoothing: Coping with
Lexical Sparsity

Morphological word form variation augments the
vocabulary size and thus worsens the problem of lex-
ical data sparseness. Words occurring with medium-
frequency receive less reliable estimates, and the
number of rare/unknown words is increased. One
way to cope with the one of both aspects of this
problem is through clustering, that is, providing an
abstract representation over word forms that reflects
their shared morphological and morphosyntactic as-
pects. This was done, for instance, in previous work
on parsing German. Versley and Rehbein (2009)
cluster words according to linear context features.
These clusters include valency information added to
verbs and morphological features such as case and
number added to pre-terminal nodes. The clusters
are then integrated as features in a discriminative
parsing model to cope with unknown words. Their
discriminative model thus obtains state-of-the-art re-
sults on parsing German.

Several contribution address similar challenges.
For constituency-based generative parsers, the sim-
ple technique of replacing word forms with more
abstract symbols is investigated by (Seddah et al.,
2010; Candito and Seddah, 2010). For French, re-
placing each word form by its predicted part-of-
speech and lemma pair results in a slight perfor-
mance improvement (Seddah et al., 2010). When
words are clustered, even according to a very local
linear-context similarity measure, measured over a
large raw corpus, and when word clusters are used in
place of word forms, the gain in performance is even
higher (Candito and Seddah, 2010). In both cases,
the technique provides more reliable estimates for
in-vocabulary words, since a given lemma or cluster
appear more frequently. It also increases the known
vocabulary. For instance, if a plural form is un-
seen in the training set but the corresponding singu-
lar form is known, then in a setting of using lemmas
in terminal symbols, both forms are known.

For dependency parsing, Marton et al. (2010) in-
vestigates the use of morphological features that in-
volve some semantic abstraction over Arabic forms.
The use of undiacritized lemmas is shown to im-
prove performance. Attia et al. (2010) specifically
address the handling of unknown words in the latent-
variable parsing model. Here again, the technique
that is investigated is to project unknown words to
more general symbols using morphological clues. A
study on three languages, English, French and Ara-
bic, shows that this method helps in all cases, but
that the greatest improvement is obtained for Arabic,
which has the richest morphology among three.

5 Where we’re at

It is clear from the present overview that we are
yet to obtain a complete understanding concerning
which models effectively parse MRLs, how to an-
notate treebanks for MRLs and, importantly, how
to evaluate parsing performance across types of lan-
guages and treebanks. These foundational issues are
crucial for deriving more conclusive recommenda-
tions as to the kind of models and morphological
features that can lead to advancing the state-of-the-
art for parsing MRLs. One way to target such an
understanding would be to encourage the investiga-
tion of particular tasks, individually or in the context

8



of shared tasks, that are tailored to treat those prob-
lematic aspects of MRLs that we surveyed here.

So far, constituency-based parsers have been as-
sessed based on their performance on the PTB (and
to some extent, across German treebanks (Kübler,
2008)) whereas comparison across languages was
rendered opaque due to data set differences and
representation idiosyncrasies. It would be interest-
ing to investigate such a cross-linguistic compari-
son of parsers in the context of a shared task on
constituency-based statistical parsing, in additional
to dependency-based ones as reported in (Nivre et
al., 2007a). Standardizing data sets for a large
number of languages with different characteristics,
would require us, as a community, to aim for
constituency-representation guidelines that can rep-
resent the shared aspects of structures in different
languages, while at the same time allowing differ-
ences between them to be reflected in the model.

Furthermore, it would be a good idea to intro-
duce parsing tasks, for either constituent-based or
dependency-based setups, which consider raw text
as input, rather than morphologically segmented
and analyzed text. Addressing the parsing prob-
lem while facing the morphological disambiguation
challenge in its full-blown complexity would be il-
luminating and educating for at least two reasons:
firstly, it would give us a better idea of what is the
state-of-the-art for parsing MRLs in realistic scenar-
ios. Secondly, it might lead to profound insights
about the potentially successful ways to use mor-
phology inside a parser, which may differ from the
insights concerning the use of morphology in the
less realistic parsing scenarios, where gold morpho-
logical information is given.

Finally, to be able to perceive where we stand
with respect to parsing MRLs and how models fare
against one another across languages, it would be
crucial to arrive at evaluation metrics that capture
information that is shared among the different repre-
sentations, for instance, functional information con-
cerning predicate-argument relations. Using the dif-
ferent kinds of measures in the context of cross-
framework tasks will help us understand the util-
ity of the different evaluation metrics that have been
proposed and to arrive at a clearer picture of what it
is that we wish to compare, and how we can faith-
fully do so across models, languages and treebanks.

6 Conclusion

This paper presents the synthesis of 11 contributions
to the first workshop on statistical parsing for mor-
phologically rich languages. We have shown that
architectural, representational, and estimation issues
associated with parsing MRLs are found to be chal-
lenging across languages and parsing frameworks.
The use of morphological information in the non
gold-tagged input scenario is found to cause sub-
stantial differences in parsing performance, and in
the kind of morphological features that lead to per-
formance improvements.

Whether or not morphological features help pars-
ing also depends on the kind of model in which
they are embedded, and the different ways they are
treated within. Furthermore, sound statistical esti-
mation methods for morphologically rich, complex
lexica, turn out to be crucial for obtaining good pars-
ing accuracy when using general-purpose models
and algorithms. In the future we hope to gain better
understanding of the common pitfalls in, and novel
solutions for, parsing morphologically ambiguous
input, and to arrive at principled guidelines for se-
lecting the model and features to include when pars-
ing different kinds of languages. Such insights may
be gained, among other things, in the context of
more morphologically-aware shared parsing tasks.

Acknowledgements

The program committee would like to thank
NAACL for hosting the workshop and SIGPARSE
for their sponsorship. We further thank INRIA Al-
page team for their generous sponsorship. We are
finally grateful to our reviewers and authors for their
dedicated work and individual contributions.

References

Bharat Ram Ambati, Samar Husain, Sambhav Jain,
Dipti Misra Sharma, and Rajeev Sangal. 2010a. Two
methods to incorporate local morphosyntactic features
in Hindi dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the
NAACL/HLT Workshop on Statistical Parsing of Mor-
phologically Rich Languages (SPMRL 2010), Los An-
geles, CA.

Bharat Ram Ambati, Samar Husain, Joakim Nivre, and
Rajeev Sangal. 2010b. On the role of morphosyntactic
features in Hindi dependency parsing. In Proceedings

9



of the NAACL/HLT Workshop on Statistical Parsing of
Morphologically Rich Languages (SPMRL 2010), Los
Angeles, CA.

Abhishek Arun and Frank Keller. 2005. Lexicalization
in crosslinguistic probabilistic parsing: The case of
French. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
306–313, Ann Arbor, MI.

Mohammed Attia, Jennifer Foster, Deirdre Hogan,
Joseph Le Roux, Lamia Tounsi, and Josef van Gen-
abith. 2010. Handling unknown words in statistical
latent-variable parsing models for Arabic, English and
French. In Proceedings of the NAACL/HLT Workshop
on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Lan-
guages (SPMRL 2010), Los Angeles, CA.

Kepa Bengoetxea and Koldo Gojenola. 2010. Applica-
tion of different techniques to dependency parsing of
Basque. In Proceedings of the NAACL/HLT Workshop
on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Lan-
guages (SPMRL 2010), Los Angeles, CA.

Daniel M. Bikel. 2002. Design of a multi-lingual,
parallel-processing statistical parsing engine. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second International Conference on
Human Language Technology Research, pages 178–
182. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. San Francisco,
CA, USA.

E. Black, S. Abney, D. Flickinger, C. Gdaniec, R. Gr-
ishman, P. Harrison, D. Hindle, R. Ingria, F. Jelinek,
J. Klavans, M. Liberman, M. Marcus, S. Roukos,
B. Santorini, and T. Strzalkowski. 1991. A procedure
for quantitatively comparing the syntactic coverage
of English grammars. In Proceedings of the DARPA
Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pages 306–
311, San Mateo (CA). Morgan Kaufman.

Rens Bod. 2003. An efficient implementation of a new
DOP model. In Proceedings of the tenth conference
on European chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 19–26, Budapest, Hungary.

Joan Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax. Black-
well, Oxford.

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. CoNLL-X
shared task on multilingual dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Computa-
tional Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 149–164,
New York, NY.

Marie Candito and Djamé Seddah. 2010. Parsing word
clusters. In Proceedings of the NAACL/HLT Workshop
on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Lan-
guages (SPMRL 2010), Los Angeles, CA.

Xavier Carreras, Michael Collins, and Terry Koo. 2008.
TAG, dynamic programming, and the perceptron for
efficient, feature-rich parsing. In Proceedings of the

Twelfth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL), pages 9–16, Manchester,
UK.

Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Course-to-
fine n-best-parsing and maxent discriminative rerank-
ing. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the
ACL, pages 173–180, Barcelona, Spain, June.

Eugene Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-inspired
parser. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual Meeting of the
North American Chapter of the ACL (NAACL), Seattle.

David Chiang. 2000. Statistical parsing with an
automatically-extracted Tree Adjoining Grammar. In
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting on Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 456–463,
Hong Kong. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics Morristown, NJ, USA.

Tagyoung Chung, Matt Post, and Daniel Gildea. 2010.
Factors affecting the accuracy of Korean parsing. In
Proceedings of the NAACL/HLT Workshop on Sta-
tistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages
(SPMRL 2010), Los Angeles, CA.

Michael Collins, Jan Hajič, Lance Ramshaw, and
Christoph Tillmann. 1999. A statistical parser for
Czech. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting
of the ACL, volume 37, pages 505–512, College Park,
MD.

Michael Collins. 1997. Three Generative, Lexicalized
Models for Statistical Parsing. In Proceedings of the
35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 16–23, Madrid, Spain.

Anna Corazza, Alberto Lavelli, Giogio Satta, and
Roberto Zanoli. 2004. Analyzing an Italian treebank
with state-of-the-art statistical parsers. In Proceedings
of the Third Third Workshop on Treebanks and Lin-
guistic Theories (TLT 2004), Tübingen, Germany.

Brooke Cowan and Michael Collins. 2005. Morphology
and reranking for the statistical parsing of Spanish. In
in Proceedins of EMNLP.

Benoit Crabbé and Marie Candito. 2008. Expériences
d’analyse syntaxique statistique du français. In Actes
de la 15ème Conférence sur le Traitement Automatique
des Langues Naturelles (TALN’08), pages 45–54, Avi-
gnon, France.

Amit Dubey and Frank Keller. 2003. Probabilistic pars-
ing for German using sister-head dependencies. In In
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 96–103,
Ann Arbor, MI.

Amit Dubey. 2005. What to do when lexicalization fails:
parsing German with suffix analysis and smoothing.
In 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

10



Jenny Rose Finkel, Alex Kleeman, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2008. Efficient, feature-based, conditional
random field parsing. In Proceedings of ACL.

Yoav Goldberg and Michael Elhadad. 2010. Easy-
first dependency parsing of Modern Hebrew. In Pro-
ceedings of the NAACL/HLT Workshop on Statistical
Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages (SPMRL
2010), Los Angeles, CA.

Yoav Goldberg and Reut Tsarfaty. 2008. A single frame-
work for joint morphological segmentation and syntac-
tic parsing. In Proceedings of the 46nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yoav Goldberg, Reut Tsarfaty, Meni Adler, and Michael
Elhadad. 2009. Enhancing unlexicalized parsing per-
formance using a wide coverage lexicon, fuzzy tag-set
mapping, and em-hmm-based lexical probabilities. In
Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 327–335.

Kenneth L. Hale. 1983. Warlpiri and the grammar of
non-configurational languages. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory, 1(1).

Erhard W. Hinrichs, Sandra Kübler, and Karin Naumann.
2005. A unified representation for morphological,
syntactic, semantic, and referential annotations. In
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Frontiers in Cor-
pus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky, pages 13–20, Ann
Arbor, MI.

Liang Huang. 2008. Forest reranking: Discriminative
parsing with non-local features. In Proceedings of
ACL.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of ACL, pages
423–430.

Sandra Kübler, Erhard W. Hinrichs, and Wolfgang Maier.
2006. Is it really that difficult to parse German?
In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 111–
119, Sydney, Australia, July. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Sandra Kübler. 2008. The PaGe 2008 shared task on
parsing German. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Parsing German, pages 55–63. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Seth Kulick, Ryan Gabbard, and Mitchell Marcus. 2006.
Parsing the Arabic treebank: Analysis and improve-
ments. In Proceedings of TLT.

Dekang Lin. 1995. A dependency-based method for
evaluating broad-coverage parsers. In International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
1420–1425, Montreal.

Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, Tim Buckwalter, and
Wigdan Mekki. 2004. The Penn Arabic treebank:

Building a large-scale annotated Arabic corpus. In
Proceedings of NEMLAR International Conference on
Arabic Language Resources and Tools.

Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, and Seth Kulick. 2008.
Enhanced annotation and parsing of the Arabic tree-
bank. In Proceedings of INFOS.

David M. Magerman. 1995. Statistical decision-tree
models for parsing. In Proceedings of the 33rd An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 276–283, Cambridge, MA.

Wolfgang Maier. 2010. Direct parsing of discontin-
uous constituents in german. In Proceedings of the
NAACL/HLT Workshop on Statistical Parsing of Mor-
phologically Rich Languages (SPMRL 2010), Los An-
geles, CA.

Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Yuval Marton, Nizar Habash, and Owen Rambow. 2010.
Improving Arabic dependency parsing with lexical and
inflectional morphological features. In Proceedings of
the NAACL/HLT Workshop on Statistical Parsing of
Morphologically Rich Languages (SPMRL 2010), Los
Angeles, CA.

Ryan T. McDonald and Fernando C. N. Pereira. 2006.
Online learning of approximate dependency parsing
algorithms. In Proc. of EACL’06.

Ryan T. McDonald, Koby Crammer, and Fernando C. N.
Pereira. 2005. Online large-margin training of depen-
dency parsers. In Proc. of ACL’05, Ann Arbor, USA.

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and
Practice. State University of New York Press.

Marianne Mithun. 1992. Is basic word order universal?
In Doris L. Payne, editor, Pragmatics of Word Order
Flexibility. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.

Joakim Nivre and Jens Nilsson. 2005. Pseudo-projective
dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), Ann Arbor, MI.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz
Yuret. 2007a. The CoNLL 2007 shared task on depen-
dency parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL Shared
Task Session of EMNLP-CoNLL 2007, pages 915–932,
Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan McDon-
ald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz Yuret.
2007b. The CoNLL 2007 shared task on dependency
parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL Shared Task
Session of EMNLP-CoNLL 2007, pages 915–932.

11



Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas Chanev,
Gülşen Eryiǧit, Sandra Kübler, Svetoslav Marinov,
and Erwin Marsi. 2007c. MaltParser: A language-
independent system for data-driven dependency pars-
ing. Natural Language Engineering, 13(2):95–135.

Joakim Nivre. 2009. Non-projective dependency parsing
in expected linear time. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and
the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing of the AFNLP.

Slav Petrov and Dan Klein. 2007. Improved inference
for unlexicalized parsing. In Human Language Tech-
nologies 2007: The Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics; Proceedings of the Main Conference.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and inter-
pretable tree annotation. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Sydney, Australia, July. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Ines Rehbein and Josef van Genabith. 2007. Treebank
annotation schemes and parser evaluation for German.
In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL), Prague, Czech Republic.

Geoffrey Sampson and Anna Babarczy. 2003. A test of
the leaf-ancestor metric for parse accuracy. Natural
Language Engineering, 9(04):365–380.

Natalie Schluter and Josef van Genabith. 2007. Prepar-
ing, restructuring, and augmenting a French Treebank:
Lexicalised parsers or coherent treebanks? In Proc. of
PACLING 07, Melbourne, Australia.

Djamé Seddah, Marie Candito, and Benoit Crabbé. 2009.
Cross parser evaluation and tagset variation: A French
Treebank study. In Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
tion Conference on Parsing Technologies (IWPT’09),
pages 150–161, Paris, France, October. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Djamé Seddah, Grzegorz Chrupała, Ozlem Cetinoglu,
Josef van Genabith, and Marie Candito. 2010.
Lemmatization and statistical lexicalized parsing of
morphologically-rich languages. In Proceedings of the
NAACL/HLT Workshop on Statistical Parsing of Mor-
phologically Rich Languages (SPMRL 2010), Los An-
geles, CA.

Wojciech Skut, Thorsten Brants, Brigitte Krenn, and
Hans Uszkoreit. 1998. A linguistically interpreted
corpus of German newspaper texts. In ESSLLI
Workshop on Recent Advances in Corpus Annotation,
Saarbrücken, Germany.

Reut Tsarfaty and Khalil Sima’an. 2007. Three-
dimensional parametrization for parsing morphologi-
cally rich languages. In Proceedings of the 10th Inter-
national Conference on Parsing Technologies (IWPT),
pages 156–167.

Reut Tsarfaty and Khalil Sima’an. 2008. Relational-
Realizational parsing. In Proceedings of the 22nd In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 889–896.

Reut Tsarfaty and Khalil Sima’an. 2010. Model-
ing morphosyntactic agreement in constituency-based
parsing of Modern Hebrew. In Proceedings of the
NAACL/HLT Workshop on Statistical Parsing of Mor-
phologically Rich Languages (SPMRL 2010), Los An-
geles, CA.

Yannick Versley and Ines Rehbein. 2009. Scalable dis-
criminative parsing for german. In Proceedings of the
11th International Conference on Parsing Technolo-
gies (IWPT’09), pages 134–137, Paris, France, Octo-
ber. Association for Computational Linguistics.

12


