



















































Constructing Large-Scale Person Ontology from Wikipedia


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on “Collaboratively Constructed Semantic Resources”, Coling 2010, pages 1–9,
Beijing, August 2010

Constructing Large-Scale Person Ontology from Wikipedia 

Yumi Shibaki 

Nagaoka University of 

Technology 

shibaki@jnlp.org 

Masaaki Nagata 

NTT Communication 

Science Laboratories 

nagata.masaaki@ 

labs.ntt.co.jp 

Kazuhide Yamamoto 

Nagaoka University of 

Technology 
yamamoto@jnlp.org 

Abstract 

This paper presents a method for con-

structing a large-scale Person Ontology 

with category hierarchy from Wikipe-

dia. We first extract Wikipedia category 

labels which represent person (hereafter, 

Wikipedia Person Category, WPC) by 

using a machine learning classifier. We 

then construct a WPC hierarchy by de-

tecting is-a relations in the Wikipedia 

category network. We then extract the 

titles of Wikipedia articles which 

represent person (hereafter, Wikipedia 
person instance, WPI). Experiments 

show that the accuracy of WPC extrac-

tion is 99.3% precision and 98.4% re-

call, while that of WPI extraction is 

98.2% and 98.6%, respectively. The ac-

curacies are significantly higher than 

the previous methods. 

1  Introduction 

In recent years, we have become increasingly 

aware of the need for, up-to-date knowledge 

bases offering broad coverage in order to im-

plement practical semantic inference engines 

for advanced applications such as question 

answering, summarization and textual entail-

ment recognition. General ontologies, such as 

WordNet (Fellbaum et al., 1998), and Nihongo 

Goi-Taikei (Ikehara et al., 1997), contain gen-

eral knowledge of wide range of fields. How-

ever, it is difficult to instantly add new know-
ledge, particularly proper nouns, to these gen-
eral ontologies. Therefore, Wikipedia has 
come to be used as a useful corpus for know-

ledge extraction because it is a free and large-

scale online encyclopedia that continues to be 

actively developed. For example, in DBpedia 
(Bizer et al. 2009), RDF triples are extracted 

from the Infobox templates within Wikipedia 

articles. In YAGO (Suchanek et al. 2007), an 

appropriate WordNet synset (most likely cate-

gory) is assigned to a Wikipedia category as a 

super-category, and Wikipedia articles are ex-

tracted as instances of the category.  

As a first step to make use of proper noun 

and related up-to-date information in Wikipedia, 

we focus on person names and the articles and 

categories related to them because it contains a 

large number of articles and categories that in-

dicate person, and because large-scale person 

ontology is useful for applications such as per-

son search and named entity recognition. Ex-

amples of a person article are personal name 

and occupational title such as “Ichiro” and “Fi-

nancial planner,” while an example of a person 

category is occupational title such as 

“Sportspeople.” 

The goal of this study is to construct a large-

scale and comprehensive person ontology by 

extracting person categories and is-a relations
1
 

among them. We first apply a classifier based 

on machine learning to all Wikipedia categories 

to extract categories that represent person. If 

both of the linked Wikipedia categories are per-

son categories, the category link is labeled as 

an is-a relation. We then use a heuristic-based 

rule to extract the title of articles that represent 

person as person instance from the person cate-

gories. 

In the following sections, we first describe 

the language resources and the previous works. 

We then introduce our method for constructing 

the person ontology and report our experimen-

tal results. 

                                                 
1 “is-a relation” is defined as a relation between A and B 

when “B is a (kind of) A.” 

1



2 Language Resources 

2.1  Japanese Wikipedia 

Wikipedia is a free, multilingual, on-line en-

cyclopedia that is being actively developed by a 

large number of volunteers. Wikipedia has ar-

ticles and categories. The data is open to the 

public as XML files
2
. Figure 1 shows an exam-

ple of an article. An article page has a title, 

body, and categories. In most articles, the first 

sentence of the body is the definition sentence 

of the title.  Although the Wikipedia category 
system is organized in a hierarchal manner, it is 

a thematic classification, not a taxonomy. The 

relation between category and subcategory and 

that between a category and articles listed on it 

are not necessarily an is-a relation. A category 
could have two or more super categories and 

the category network could have loops.  

 

ミシェル・ウィー（Michelle Wie, 1989年10月11日- ）
は、ゴルフ選手である。

Michelle Wie (Michelle Wie, born October 11, 

1989 ) is a golf player. 

Category : American golfers | 1989 births

Michelle Wie

category

title of article

definition sentence

 
Figure 1: Example of title, body (definition 

sentence), and categories for article page in 

Japanese Wikipedia (top) and its translation 

(bottom) 

2.2 Nihongo Goi-Taikei  

To construct the ontology, we first apply a ma-

chine learning based classifier to determine if a 

category label indicates a person or not. A Wi-

kipedia category label is often a common com-

pound noun or a noun phrase, and the head 

word of a Japanese compound noun and noun 

phrase is usually the last word. We assume the 

semantic category of the last word is an impor-

tant feature for classification.  

Nihongo Goi-Taikei (hereafter, Goi-Taikei) 

is one of the largest and best known Japanese 

thesauri. Goi-Taikei contains different semantic 

category hierarchies for common nouns, proper 

nouns, and verbs. In this work, we use only the 

                                                 
2http://download.wikimedia.org/jawiki 

common noun category (Figure 2). It consists 

of approximately 100,000 Japanese words (he-

reafter, instance) and the meanings of each 

word are described by using about 2,700 hie-

rarchical semantic categories. Words (In-

stances) with multiple meanings (ambiguous 

words) are assigned multiple categories in Goi-

Taikei. For example, the transliterated Japanese 

word (instance) raita (ライター ) has two 
meanings of “writer” and “lighter,” and so be-

longs to two categories, “353:author
3

”
 
and 

“915:household.”  

Japanese WordNet (approximately 90,000 

entries as of May 2010), which has recently 

been released to the public (Bonds et al., 2008), 
could be an alternative to Goi-Taikei as a large-

scale Japanese thesaurus. We used Goi-Taikei 

in this work because Japanese WordNet was 

translated from English WordNet and it is not 

known whether it covers the concepts unique to 

Japanese. 

3 Previous Works 

3.1 Ponzetto’s method and Sakurai’s me-
thod 

Ponzetto et al. (2007) presented a set of 

lightweight heuristics such as head matching 

and modifier matching for distinguishing is-a 

links from not-is-a links in the Wikipedia cate-

gory network. The main heuristic, “Syntax-

based methods” is based on head matching, in 

which a category link is labeled as is-a relation 

if the two categories share the same head lem-

ma, such as CAPITALS IN ASIA and CAPI-

TALS. Sakurai et al. (2008) presented a method 

equivalent to head matching for Japanese Wi-

kipedia. As Japanese is a head final language, 

they introduced the heuristic called suffix 

matching; it labels a category link as a is-a rela-

tion if one category is the suffix of the other 

category, such as 日本の空港(airports in Ja-

pan) and 空港(airports). In the proposed me-
thod herein, if a Wikipedia category and its 

parent category are both person categories, the 

category link is labeled as is-a relation. There-

fore, is-a relations, which cannot be extracted 

by Ponzetto’s or Sakurai’s method, can be ex-

tracted. 

                                                 
3
 The Goi-Taikei category is prefixed with ID number. 

2



246:personalities
and competitors

246:personalities
and competitors

5:humans 223:officials 219:semi-man

249:actor 251:competitor

453:shrine 221:spirit

4:people

151:ethnic group

152:ethnic group 153:race 55:boy 56:girl

1:common noun

2:concrete 1000:abstract

3:agents 388:places 533:objects

362:organizations 389:facilities 468:nature 534:animate

1235:events

1936:job

1937:business1939:occupation 

1065:title

1069:number1066:name

2483:nature 2507:state

385:nation383:assembly

Writer＿ライター

353:author 915:household appliance

lighter＿ライター

706:inanimate

Semantic category hierarchy for common nouns

1236:human
activities

1236:human
activities

1001:abstract
things

1001:abstract
things

2422:abstract
relationship

2422:abstract
relationship

About 2,700 categories

About 100,000 instances

 
Figure 2: Part of a category hierarchy for common nouns in Nihongo Goi-Taikei 

3.2 Kobayashi’s method 

Kobayashi et al. (2008) presented a tech-

nique to make a Japanese ontology equivalent 

to YAGO; it assigns Goi-Taikei categories to 
Japanese Wikipedia categories. These two me-

thods and our method are similar in that a Wi-

kipedia category and the title of an article are 

regarded as a category and an instance, respec-

tively. Kobayashi et al. automatically extract 

hypernyms from the definition sentence of each 

article in advance (referred to hereafter as “D-

hypernym.”) They apply language-dependent 

lexico-syntactic patterns to the definition sen-

tence to extract the D-hypernym. Here are some 

examples. 
 

は、[hypernym]の一つである <EOS> 
one of [hypernym] 

 

は、[hypernym]である<EOS> 
is a [hypernym] 

 

 [hypernym] <EOS> 

is a [hypernym] … 
 

where <EOS> refer to the beginning of a 

sentence 

For example, from the article in Figure 1, the 

words “ゴルフ選手 (golf player)” is extracted 

as the D-hypernym of the article “ミシェル・

ウィー (Michelle Wie).” 

Figure 3 outlines the Kobayashi’s method. 

First, for a Wikipedia category, if its last word 

matches an instance of Goi-Taikei category, all 

such Goi-Taikei categories are extracted as a 

candidate of the Wikipedia category’s super-

class. If the last word of the D-hypernym of the 

Wikipedia article listed on the Wikipedia cate-

gory matches an instance of the Goi-Taikei cat-

egory, the Goi-Taikei category is extracted as 

the super-class of the Wikipedia category and 

its instances (Wikipedia articles) (Figure 3). 

Although the Kobayashi’s method is a general 

one, it can be used to construct person ontology 

if the super-class candidates are restricted to 

those Goi-Taikei categories which represent 

person. 

Title            ミシェル・ウィー
Michelle Wie

Hypernym   ゴルフ選手
Golf player

アメリカ合衆国のゴルファー
American golfers

Wikipedia category

Match

last word

Person category

人_person
ゴルファー_golfer
選手_player
芸術家_artist

・
・
・

Goi-Taikei

Wikipedia article

Title            ALPGツアー
ALPG Tour

Hypernym   ゴルフツアー
Golf tour

Doesn’t 

match

Wikipedia article ×

 
Figure 3: The outline of Kobayashi’s method 

3.3 Yamashita’s method 

Yamashita made an open source software 

which extracts personal names from Japanese 

Wikipedia
4
. He extracted the titles of articles 

listed on the categories ○年生(○ births) (e.g., 
2000 births). As these categories are used to 

sort the names of people, horses, and dogs by 

born year, he used a simple pattern matching 

                                                 
4http://coderepos.org/share/browser/lang/perl/misc/wikipe

jago 

3



rules to exclude horses and dogs. In the expe-

riment in Section 5, we implemented his me-

thod by using not only “年生 (births)” but also 

“年没  (deaths)” and “世紀没  (th-century 

deaths),” “年代没  (s deaths),” “年代生  (s 

births),” and “世紀生  (th births)” to extract 
personal names. As far as we know, it is the 

only publicly available software to extract a 

large number of person names from the Japa-

nese Wikipedia. For the comparison with our 

method, it should be noted that his method 

cannot extract person categories. 

4 Ontology Building Method 

4.1 Construction of Wikipedia person cat-
egory hierarchy (WPC) 

We extract the WPC by using a machine learn-

ing classifier. If a Wikipedia category and its 

parent category are both person categories, the 

category link is labeled as an is-a relation. This 

means that all is-a relations in our person on-

tology are extracted from the original Wikipe-

dia category hierarchy using only a category 

classifier. This is because we investigated 

1,000 randomly sampled links between person 

categories and found 98.7% of them were is-a 

relations. Figure 4 shows an example of the 

Wikipedia category hierarchy and the con-

structed WPC hierarchy. 

 

Music Technology

Composers

Broadcasting

Wikipedia person

category (WPC)

Announcer productions

Announcers

is-a

is-a

is-a is-a

Category without

parent and child

Root category

Musicians

Conductors

Engineers

Announcers

Musicians

Conductors

Composers

Japanese conductors

Engineers

Japanese conductors

 
Figure 4: Example of Wikipedia category hie-

rarchy (top) and constructed Wikipedia person 

category hierarchy (bottom) 

We detect whether the Wikipedia category 

label represents a person by using Support Vec-

tor Machine (SVM). The semantic category of 

the words in the Wikipedia category label and 

those in the neighboring categories are used for 

the features. We use the following three aspects 

of the texts that exist around the target category 

for creating the features: 
 

1. Structural relation between the target cat-

egory and the text in Wikipedia.  (6 kinds) 
 

2.  Span of the text.  (2 kinds) 
 

3. Semantic category of the text derived 
from Goi-Taikei. (4 kinds) 

 

We examined 48 features by combining the 

above three aspects (6*2*4). 

   The following are the six structural relations 

in Wikipedia between the target category and 

the text information: 

 

Structural relation 

A. The target Wikipedia category label.  
 

B. All parent category labels of the target cat-

egory.  
 

C. All child category labels of the target   cat-

egory.  
 

D. All sibling category labels of the target 

category.  
 

E. All D-hypernym5 from each article listed on 

the target category.  
 

F.  All D-hypernyms extracted from the ar-
ticles with the same name as the target cate-

gory. 
 

As for F, for example, when the article ベー

シスト(bassist) is listed on the category: ベ

ー シ ス ト (bassist), we regard the D-
hypernym of the article as the hypernym of  

the category. 

 

As most category labels and D-hypernyms are 

common nouns, they are likely to match in-

stances in Goi-Taikei which lists possible se-

mantic categories of words.  

                                                 
5As for D-hypernym extraction patterns, we used almost 

the same patterns described in previous works on Japa-
nese sources such as (Kobayashi et al. 2008; Sumida et al., 

2008), which are basically equivalent to the works on 

English sources such as (Hearst, 1992). 

4



   After the texts located at various structural 

relations A-F are collected, they are matched to 

the instances of Goi-Taikei in two different 

spans: 
 

Span of the text 

Ⅰ. All character strings of the text 
 

Ⅱ. The last word of the text 
 

For the span Ⅱ, the text is segmented into 
words using a Japanese morphological analyzer. 

The last word is used because the last word 

usually represents the meaning of the entire 

noun phrase (semantic head word) in Japanese.  

In the proposed method, hierarchical seman-

tic categories of Goi-Taikei are divided into 

two categories; “Goi-Taikei person categories” 

and other categories. Goi-Taikei person catego-

ry is defined as those categories that represent 

person, that is, all categories under “5:humans” 

and “223:officials,” and “1939: occupation” 

and “1066:name” in Goi-Taikei hierarchy as 

shown in Figure 1.  

For each structural relation A-F  and span Ⅰ 

and Ⅱ, we calculate four relative frequencies 
a-d, which represents the manner in which the 

span of texts match the instance of Goi-Taikei 

person category. It basically indicates the de-

gree to which the span of text is likely to mean 

a person.  
 

Semantic type 

a. The span of text matches only instances of 

Goi-Taikei person categories. 
 

b. The span of text matches only instances of 

categories other than Goi-Taikei person cat-

egories. 
 

c. The span of text matches both instances of 

Goi-Taikei person categories and those of 

other categories. 
 

d. The span of text does not match any in-
stances of Goi-Taikei. 

 

For example, when the target category is “音楽

家” (musicians) in Figure 5 and the feature in 

question is B-Ⅱ (the last word of its parent 

categories), the word “家” (whose senses are 
family and house) falls into semantic type c, 

and the word “音楽” (music) falls into seman-
tic type b. Therefore, the frequency of semantic 

types a, b, c, d are 0, 1, 1, 0, respectively, in the 

features related to B-Ⅱ, and the relative fre-

quencies used for the feature value related B-Ⅱ 
are 0, 0.5, 0.5, 0, respectively. In this way, we 

use 48 relative frequencies calculated from the 

combinations of structural relation A-F, span 
Ⅰ and Ⅱ, and semantic type a-d, as the feature 
vector for the SVM.  

 

：Target category

：Similar category

：Last word

芸術家_Artists 音楽_Music

音楽家_Musicians

ジャズ作曲家_Jazz composers

作曲家_Composers

演奏家_Musicians by instrument

芸術 Art 職業別の人物_People by occupation

 
Figure 5: Example of Wikipedia category hie-

rarchy when the target category is “音楽家” 

4.2  Similar category 

In Wikipedia, there are categories that do not 
have articles and those with few neighboring 

categories. Here, we define the neighboring 

categories for a category as those categories 

that can be reached through a few links from 

the category. In these cases, there is a possibili-

ty that there is not enough text information 

from which features (mainly semantic category 

of words) can be extracted, which could de-

grade the accuracy. 

The proposed method overcomes this prob-

lem by detecting categories similar to the target 

category (the category in question) from its 

neighboring categories for extracting sufficient 

features to perform classification. Here, "simi-

lar category" is defined as parent, child, and 

sibling categories whose last word matches the 

last word of the target category. This is because 

there is a high possibility that the similar cate-

gories and the target category have similar 

meaning if they share the same last word in the 

category labels. If the parent (child) category is 

determined as a similar category, its parent 

(child) category is also determined as a similar 

category if the last word is the same. The pro-

cedure is repeated as long as they share the 

same last word.  

Figure 5 shows an example of similar cate-

gories when the target category is “Musicians.” 

In this case, features extracted from A-F of 

5



similar categories are added to features ex-

tracted using A-F of the target category, “Mu-

sicians.” For example, similar category “Art-

ists” has “Art” and “People by occupation” as 

B (parent categories of the target category) in 

Figure 5, therefore “Art” and “People by occu-

pation” are added to B of “Musicians.” 

4.3 Extracting Wikipedia person instance 
(WPI) 

The proposed method extracts, as WPIs the 

titles of articles listed as WPCs that meet the 

following four requirements.  
 

1. The last word of the D-hypernym of the 

title of the Wikipedia article matches an in-

stance of Goi-Taikei person category.  
 

2. The last word of the title of Wikipedia ar-

ticle matches an instance of Goi-Taike per-
son category. 

 

3. At least one of the Wikipedia categories as-

signed to the Wikipedia article matches the 

following patterns: 
 

(年没|世紀没|年代没|年生|世紀生|年代生)<EOS> 
( deaths | th-century deaths | ’s deaths | births | th-births | ’s 

births ) <EOS> 

 

These categories are used to sort a large 

number of person names by year.  
 
 

4. Wikipedia categories assigned to the Wiki-

pedia article satisfy the following condition: 
 

   5.0
categories  Wikipediaofnumber  All

4.1Section in   WPCsextracted ofNumber 
　　  

 

This condition is based on the observation 

that the more WPCs a Wikipedia article is 

assigned to, the more it is likely to be a WPI. 

We set the threshold 0.5 from the results of a 

preliminary experiment.  

5 Experiments  

5.1 Experimental setup 

We used the XML file of the Japanese Wiki-
pedia as of July 24, 2008. We removed irrele-

vant pages by using keywords (e.g., “image:,” 

“Help:”) in advance. This cleaning yielded 

477,094 Wikipedia articles and 39,782 Wiki-

pedia categories. We manually annotated each 

category to indicate whether it represents per-

son (positive) or not (negative). For ambiguous 

cases, we used the following criteria:  
 

＊Personal name by itself (e.g., Michael Jack-
son) is not regarded as WPC because usually 

it does not have instances. (Note: personal 

name as article title is regarded as WPI. )  
 

＊Occupational title (e.g., Lawyers) is regarded 
as WPC because it represents a person. 

 

＊Family (e.g., Brandenburg family) and Eth-
nic group (e.g., Sioux) are regarded as WPC. 

 

＊Group name (e.g., The Beatles) is not re-
garded as WPC. 

 

In order to develop a person category classifier, 

we randomly selected 2,000 Wikipedia catego-

ries (positive:435, negative:1,565) from all cat-

egories for training
6
. We used the remaining 

37,767 categories for evaluation. To evaluate 

WPI extraction accuracy, we used Wikipedia 

articles not listed on the Wikipedia categories 

used for training. 417,476 Wikipedia articles 
were used in the evaluation.  

To evaluate our method, we used TinySVM-

0.09
7
 with a linear kernel for classification, 

and the Japanese morphological analyzer JU-

MAN-6.0
8
 for word segmentation. The com-

parison methods are Kobayashi’s method and 

Yamashita’s method under the same conditions 

as our method. 

5.2 Experimental results  

Table 1 shows the WPCs extraction accuracy. 

Precision and recall of proposed method are 6.5 

points and 14.8 points better than those of Ko-

bayashi's method, respectively. 

 

Precision Recall F-measure

Kobayashi’s

method

92.8%
(6727/7247)

83.6%
(6727/8050)

88.0%

Proposed

method

99.3%
(7922/7979)

98.4%
(7922/8050)

98.8%
 

Table 1: The Wikipedia person categories 

(WPCs) extraction accuracy 

                                                 
6We confirmed that the accuracy will level off about 

2,000 training data by experiment. Details will be de-
scribed in Section 6. 
7http://chasen.org/~taku/software/TinySVM/ 
8http://www-lab25.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/nl-

resource/juman.html 

6



To confirm our assumption on the links be-

tween WPCs, we randomly selected 1,000 pairs 

of linked categories from extracted WPCs, and 

manually investigated whether both 

represented person and were linked by is-a re-

lation. We found that precision of these pairs 

was 98.3%. 

Errors occurred when the category link be-

tween  person categories in the Wikipedia cate-

gory network was not an is-a relation, such as 

千葉氏(Chiba clan) – 大須賀氏(Ohsuga clan). 
However, this case is infrequent, because 

98.7% of the links between person categories 

did exhibit an is-a relation (as described in Sec-

tion 4.1).  

Table 2 shows the WPIs extraction accuracy. 

We randomly selected 1,000 Wikipedia articles 

from all categories in Wikipedia, and manually 

created evaluation data (positive:281, nega-

tive:719). The recall of the proposed method 

was 98.6%, 21.0 points higher than that of Ya-

mashita’s method. Our method topped the F-

measure of Kobayashi’s method by 3.4 points. 

Among 118,552 extracted as WPIs by our me-

thod, 116,418 articles were expected be correct. 

In our method, errors occurred when WPI was 

not listed on any WPCs. However, this case is 

very rare. Person instances are almost always 

assigned to at least one WPC. Thus, we can 

achieve high coverage for WPIs even if we fo-

cus only on WPCs. We randomly selected 

1,000 articles from all articles and obtained 277 

person instances by a manual evaluation. Fur-

thermore, we investigated the 277 person in-

stances, and found that only two instances were 

not classified into any WPCs (0.7%). 

 

Precision Recall F-measure

Yamashita's

method

100.0%
(218/218)

77.6%
(218/281)

87.4%

Kobayashi's

method

96%
(264/275)

94.0%
(264/281)

95.0%

Proposed

method

98.2%
(277/282)

98.6%
(277/281)

98.4%

Table 2: The Wikipedia person instance 

(WPIs) extraction accuracy 

 

Table 3 shows the extracted WPC-WPI pairs 

(e.g., American golfers-Michelle Wie, Artists-

Meritorious Artist) extraction accuracy. We 

randomly selected 1,000 pairs of Wikipedia 

category and Wikipedia article from all such 

pairs in Wikipedia, and manually investigated 

whether both category and article represented a 

person and whether they were linked by an is-a 

relation (positive:296, negative:704). Precision 

and recall of proposed method are 2.1 points 

and 11.8 points higher than those of Kobaya-

shi's method, respectively. Among all 274,728 

extracted as WPC-WPI pairs by our method, 

269,233 was expected be correct. 

 

Precision Recall F-measure

Kobayashi’s

method

95.9%
(259/270)

87.5%
(259/296)

91.5%

Proposed

method

98.0%
(294/300)

99.3%
(294/296)

98.7%

Table 3: The extraction accuracy of the pairs 

of Wikipedia person category and person in-

stance (WPC-WPI) 

6 Discussions 

We constructed a WPC hierarchy using the 

8,357 categories created by combining ex-

tracted categories and training categories. The 

resulting WPC hierarchy has 224 root catego-

ries (Figure 4). Although the majority of the 

constructed ontology is interconnected, 194 

person categories had no parent or child (2.3 % 

of all person categories). In rare cases, the cat-

egory network has loops (e.g., “Historians” and 

“Scholars of history” are mutually interlinked).  

Shibaki et al. (2009) presented a method for 

building a Japanese ontology from Wikipedia 

using Goi-Taikei, as its upper ontology. This 

method can create a single connected taxono-

my with a single root category. We also hope 

to create a large-scale, single-root, and inter-

connected person ontology by using some up-

per ontology.   

Our method is able to extract WPCs that do 

not match any Goi-Taikei instance (e.g., Vi-

olinists and Animators). Furthermore, our me-

thod is able to detect many ambiguous Wikipe-

dia category labels correctly as person category. 

For example, “ファッションモデル (fashion 
model)” is ambiguous because the last word 

“モデル (model)” is ambiguous among three 
senses: person, artificial object, and abstract 

relation. Kobayashi’s method cannot extract a 

WPC if the last word of the category label does 

not match any instance in Goi-Taikei. Their 

method is error-prone if the last word has mul-

7



tiple senses in Goi-Taikei because it is based on 

simple pattern matching. Our method can han-

dle unknown and ambiguous category labels 

since it uses machine learning-based classifiers 

whose features are extracted from neighboring 

categories. 

Our method can extract is-a person category 

pairs that could not be extracted by Ponzetto et 

al. (2007) and Sakurai et al. (2008). Their me-

thods use head matching in which a category 

link is labeled as an is-a relation only if the 

head words of category labels are matched. 

However, our method can extract is-a relations 

without reference to surface character strings, 

such as “ジャーナリスト(Journalists)” and 

“スポーツライター(Sports writers).” Among 
all 14,408 Wikipedia category pairs extracted 

as is-a relations in our method, 5,558 (38.6%) 

did not match their head words.  

We investigated the learning curve of the 

machine learning-based classifier for extracting 

WPCs, in order to decide the appropriate 

amount of training data for future updates.  

As we have already manually tagged all 

39,767 Wikipedia categories, we randomly se-

lected 30,000 categories and investigated the 

performance of our method when the number 

of the training data was changed from 1,000 to 

30,000. The evaluation data was the remaining 

9,767 categories.  

 

precision
recall
f-value

100.0

99.0

98.0

97.0

Precision

Recall

F-measure

The number of training data

P
re

ci
si

o
n
 /

 R
ec

al
l 

/ 
F

-m
ea

su
re

 [
%

]

0 10k 20k 30k

 
Figure 6: The effect of training data size to 

WPC extraction accuracy 

 

Figure 6 shows the precision, recall, and F-

measure for different training data sizes. F-

measure differed only 0.4 points from 1,000 

samples (98.5%) to 30,000 samples (98.9%). 

Figure 6 shows that the proposed method of-
fers high accuracy in detecting WPCs with only 

a few thousand training examples.  

Our method uses similar categories for 

creating features as well as the target Wikipe-

dia category (Section 4.1). We compared the 

proposed method to a variant that does not use 

similar categories to confirm the effectiveness 

of this technique. Furthermore, our method 

uses the Japanese thesaurus, Goi-Taikei, to 

look up the semantic category of the words for 

creating the features for machine learning. We 

also compared the proposed method with the 

one that does not use semantic category (de-

rived from Goi-Taikei) but instead uses word 

surface form for creating features (This one 

uses similar categories).  

   Figure 7 shows the performance of the clas-

sifiers for each type of features. We can clearly 

observe that using similar categories results in 

higher F-measure, regardless of the training 

data size. We also observe that when there is 

little training data, the method using word sur-

face form as features results in drastically low-

er F-measures. In addition, its accuracy was 

consistently lower than the others even if the 

training data size was increased. Therefore, we 

can conclude that using similar category and 

Goi-Taikei are very important for creating good 

features for classification. 
 

本手法１

本手法２

本手法３

Proposed method

Without using similar category

Without using Goi-Taikei

F
-m

ea
su

re
 [

%
]

The number of training data

100.0

96.0

98.0

94.0

0

92.0

90.0
10k 20k 30k

 
Figure 7: The effects of using similar catego-

ries and Goi-Taikei 

 

In future, we will attempt to apply our method 

to other Wikipedia domains, such as organiza-

tions and products. We will also attempt to use 

other Japanese thesauri, such as Japanese 

WordNet. Furthermore, we hope to create a 

large-scale and single connected ontology. As a 

final note, we plan to open the person ontology 

constructed in this paper to the public on Web 

in the near future. 

 

8



 References 

Bizer, C., J. Lehmann, G. Kobilarov, S. Auer, C. 

Becker, R. Cyganiak, and S. Hellmann. 2009.  

“DBpedia - A crystallization point for the web of 

data,” Web Semantics: Science, Services and 

Agents on the World Wide Web, vol. 7, No.3,  

pages 154-165. 

Bond, Francis, Hitoshi Isahara, Kyoko Kanzaki, and 

Kiyotaka Uchimoto. 2008. Boot-strapping a 

wordnet using multiple existing wordnets. In 

Proceedings of the 6th International Conference 

on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), 

pages 28-30. 

Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An Electron-

ic Lexical Database, Language, Speech, and 

Communication Series. MIT Press. 

Hearst, Marti A. 1992. Automatic acquisition of 

hyponyms from large text corpora. In Proceed-

ings of the 14th Conference on Computational 

Linguistics (COLING), pages 539-545. 

Ikehara, Satoru, Masahiro Miyazaki, Satoshi Shi-

rai,Akio Yokoo, Hiromi Nakaiwa, Kentaro Ogu-

ra, Yoshifumi Ooyama, and Yoshihiko Hayashi, 

editors. 1997. Nihongo Goi-Taikei – a Japanese 

Lexicon. Iwanami Shoten. (in Japanese). 

Kobayashi, Akio, Shigeru Masuyama, and Satoshi 

Sekine. 2008. A method for automatic construc-

tion of general ontology merging goitaikei and 

Japanese Wikipedia. In Information Processing 

Society of Japan (IPSJ) SIG Technical Re-

port2008-NL-187 (in Japanese), pages 7-14. 

Ponzetto, S. P. and Michael Strube. 2007. Deriving 

a large scale taxonomy from Wikipedia. In Pro-

ceedings of the 22nd Conference on the Ad-

vancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pag-

es 1440–1445. 

Sakurai, Shinya, Takuya Tejima, Masayuki Ishika-

wa, Takeshi Morita, Noriaki Izumi, and Takahira 

Yamaguchi. 2008. Applying Japanese Wikipedia 

for building up a general ontology. In Japanese 

Society of Artificial Intelligence (JSAI) Technical 

Report SIG-SWO-A801-06 (in Japanese), pages 

1-8. 

 Shibaki, Yumi, Masaaki Nagata and Kazuhide Ya-

mamoto. 2009. Construction of General Ontolo-

gy from Wikipedia using a Large-Scale Japanese 

Thesaurus. In Information Processing Society of 

Japan (IPSJ) SIG Technical Report2009-NL-

194-4. (in Japanese). 

 

Suchanek, Fabian M., Gjergji Kasneci, and Ger-

hardWeikum. 2007. Yago: A core of semantic 

knowledge unifying wordnet and Wikipedia. In 

Proceedings of the 16th International Conference 

on World Wide Web (WWW), pages 697-706. 

Sumida, Asuka, Naoki Yoshinaga, and Kentaro To-

risawa. 2008. Boosting precision and recall of 

hyponymy relation acquisition from hierarchical 

layouts in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the Sixth 

Language Resources and Evaluation Confe-

rence(LREC), pages 28–30. 

9


