










































Using an Online Tool for the Documentation of Edo Language


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 109–112,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using an online tool for the documentation of È dó language 
Ota Ogie 

Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) 

ota.ogie@hf.ntnu.no 

 

Abstract 

 

Language documentation is important as a tool 

for preservation of endangered languages and 

making data available to speakers and 

researchers of a language. A data base such as 

TypeCraft is important for typology studies both 

for well documented languages as well as little 

documented languages and is a valid tool for 

comparison of languages.  This requires that 

linguistic elements must be coded in a manner 

that allows comparability across widely varying 

language data. In this paper, I discuss how I 

have used the coding system in TypeCraft for 

the documentation of data from È dó language, a 
language belonging to the Edoid group of the 

Benue-Congo subfamily of the Volta-Congo 

language family and spoken in Mid-Western 

Nigeria, West Africa. The study shows how 

syntactic, semantic and morphological 

properties of multi-verb constructions in È dó 
(Benue-Congo) can be represented in a 

relational database. 

1. Introduction 

 

In this paper
1
, I show some ways in which I am 

using a shared methodology in my research on 

multi-verb constructions. My research is 

centered around the language È dó, spoken in 
Mid-Western Nigeria, Ga and Akan (kwa), and 

the tool is the system TypeCraft, which has 

been developed in the ISK department, NTNU 

and first documented in Beermann and Prange 

(2006). 

Èdó language belongs to the Niger-
Congo, Atlantic-Congo, Volta-Congo, Benue-

Congo-Edoid language family.  The Ediod 

                                                           
1 I thank Professor Lars Hellan, NTNU Norway for his 

comments on earlier versions of this paper. 

language family consists of 33 languages and 

19 of these languages have either very little 

documentation or no documentation available.  

Multi-verb constructions are constructions 

in which the verbs in series must function as 

independent verbs in simple constructions, 

with at least one shared argument and no 

marking of syntactic dependency. 

The paper shows how syntactic, semantic 

and morphological properties of multi-verb 

constructions in Èdó (Benue-Congo) can be 
represented in a relational database and the 

development of annotation standards that 

contribute to contrastive and typological 

research. The analysis is extended to multi-

verb constructions in the following languages 

of the Niger-Congo: Ga and Akan (Kwa).  

 

2. TypeCraft 
 

TypeCraft is a tool for typological analysis that 

allows for annotation, classification and search 

of data along different morphological, 

syntactic, semantic and pragmatic criteria. In 

annotating it is important to have annotation 

schemes that allow for typological and 

contrastive studies.  

In this paper I use an annotation scheme 

for verbal constructions currently being 

developed at NTNU and documented in Hellan 

and Dakubu (2009). Syntactic and semantic 

information about construction types are 

provided by templates composed by labels. 

The basic structural parts of a template are 

referred to as slots that are separated by 

hyphens. A template with a verbal head can 

consist of maximal 7 slots; (1) POS of the 

head, and diathesis information; (2) valence 

specification; (3) dependent specification; (4) 

participant roles; (5) aspect and aktionsart; (6) 

109



situation type; (7) provides a linking type 

between slot 6 situation type and the 

specifications in slots 2-4. Slots 1 and 2 are 

obligatorily filled, the others not. (cf. Hellan 

and Dakubu, 2009). At present annotation of 

the construction labels is manual and not 

incorporated into the TypeCraft. However 

TypeCraft provides a construction tier where 

this information can be incorporated. 

 

3. Sentence level and word level 
annotation 

 
TypeCraft provides a set of glosses for 

syntactic and semantic coding and a set of 

parameters along which sentences may be 

classified that allow for standardized 

annotation and cross linguistic comparison as 

illustrated in figure1:   

 

 

figure1: Word and sentence level annotation

   

3.1 Word level 
 

Word level annotation allows for analysis of 

predicates in terms of syntactic and semantic 

properties including information about the 

subcategorization properties and argument 

structure of predicates.  

 

Figure2: Text editor in TypeCraft 

  showing word level annotation   

                        

Type craft features 7 tiers that provide 

information at the word level as shown in the 

Èdó example below.  

(1). Èdó 
Construction parameters: TransitiveVerb-

accomplishment-----declarative -positive 

Construction labels: v-tr-suAg_obThincrem-

COMPLETED_MONODEVMT  

-   

    “He/she wrote books”  

         èbé  

           èbé  

   3SG.SUBJ.NOM.AGT  write  PL.PST.H  book.DO.TH  

    PRON  V  CN  

Generated in TypeCraft 

The construction labels are explained as 

follows: v in Slot1 in the example above states 

that the head of the construction is a verb. tr in 

Slot2 states that the verb is transitive, 

suAg_obThincrem in Slot 4 states that the NP 

that is the subject of the construction bears an 

agent theta role and the object an incremental 

theme theta role. Lastly slot 5 gives the 

information that the aktionsart of the 

construction is completed monodevelopment.   

 

 

 

110



3.2 Sentence level 

TypeCraft provides a set of global tags at the 

sentence level that allows for classification in 

terms of syntactic and semantic automatically 

generated construction parameters such as 

constituent type, core constituent vs adjunct, 

transitivity, thematic roles, situation and aspect 

types, propositional types and polarity. Polarity 

is based on the assumption that States Of 

Affairs (SOA) comes in pairs: positive and 

negative. Figure 3 is used as illustration:  

 

 Figure3: Text editor in TypeCraft

 showing sentence level annotation   

 

(2). Èdó 
Construction parameters: multiple predicate 

kernel -SVC-achievement-----declarative -

positive 

Construction labels: svSuObIDALLsuAgobAff-

v1tr-v2tr-EVENTSEQ 

  

“Ozo cooked rice and sold”  

Òzó  lé      

òzó  lé      

Ozo.SUBJ.AGT  cook.PST.H  rice.AFF.DO  sell.PST.H  

PN  V  N  V  

Generated in TypeCraft.  

 

The construction parameter is 

explained as follows: the global tags multiple 

predicate kernel -SVC- provides information 

about constituent type, achievement provides 

information about situation and aspect types, 

declarative provides information about 

propositional types and positive about polarity. 

The construction labels have the 

following structure: Area1 (in italics for ease 

of exposition) gives the global labels, the 

number of verbs in series (ie sv, sv3, sv4 ) as 

well as argument sharing information (coded 

by the label IDALL) and information about 

thematic relations holding across the verb in 

series. Area 2 gives the valence information as 

well as information about grammatical 

function and thematic roles (underlined for 

ease of exposition). Information about the 

situation type of the construction is provided 

by Area 3 and is written in capital letters. 

 Information about tense, aspect, mood 

and negation is also provided by area 1 in the 

construction labels. Sharing of these features 

across verbs in series is represented as with 

sharing of arguments as in example (3) from 

Akan below.  

 

(3). Akan 

Construction parameters: multiple predicate 

kernel -SVC-achievement-----declarative -

positive 

Construction labels: 

svsuAspIDALLsuAgaspCompl-v1tr-v1obAff-

v2intr- CAUSERESULT 

Ama twe-e Kofi hwe-e fam  

“Ama pulled Kofi and fell (Ama fell) (covert reference subject 

sharing) ”  

Ama  twee  Kofi  hwee  fam  

ama  
twe

  
e  kofi  hwe  

 

e

  

 fam  

Ama.SUBJ.AG

T  

pull

  

COMP

L  

kofi.AFF.D

O  

fall.COMP

L  
  

under

  

PN  Vtr  PN  Vitr    

Generated in TypeCraft.  

With respect to the global labels in area 1, 

Hellan and Dakubu (2009) uses also the global 

label ev to represent Extended Verb 

Complexes and the label pv for preverbs in 

EVCs. In addition, to the labeling conventions 

used by Hellan and Dakubu (2009) for SVCs 

(sv) and EVCs (ev, pv), the following global 

labels are introduced to account for the range 

of multi-verb constructions in my data.  

 cc – covert co-ordination 

 mvc- multi-verb construction 

 mc- modifier construction 

111



4. Text , phrasal and construction 
search 

TypeCraft allows for search using different 

word level and sentence level parameters. This 

facilitates comparative analysis in multi-verb 

constructions. For example, argument sharing 

is a property that identifies types of multi-verb 

constructions. A search using the construction 

label svsuObIDALL is used as illustration. The 

result gives an output of serial verb 

constructions in Èdó and Ga consisting of two 
verbs in series with the subject and object 

arguments of the verbs in series sharing 

reference: 

 

 

Figure 4: Search for phrase using  

global tag svsuObIDALL  

The standardized annotation, search 

parameters and online nature of TypeCraft 

makes it advantageous compared to toolbox, a 

linguistic data management file based system 

used by many linguists in the documentation of 

African languages.  

                                               

5. Conclusion 

Standardized annotations and online databases 

such as TypeCraft aid linguists and speakers of 

a language in research, preservation of 

languages and in producing literacy materials 

that aid education and literacy. My research on 

multi-verb constructions in Èdó is the first in-
depth annotation for Èdó and will be easily 
available for language 

researchers/teachers/students all over the 

world. 

 

6. References 

Beermann, Dorothee and  Atle Prange. 2006. "Annotating 

and archiving Natural Language Paradigms online", 

presentation at the Texas Linguistic Society Annual 

Conference. Austin, Texas. 2006. 

Hellan, Lars  and Dakubu , Mary Esther Kropp. 2009. 

Identifying verb constructions cross-linguistically,Studies 

in the Languages of the Volta Basin 6. Part 3. Accra 

Ghana University Press 2009. 

Ogie, Ota  2009. Multi-verb constructions in Edo. PhD 

dissertation. Norwegian University of Science and 

Technology. Trondheim. Norway. Also to appear in 

VDM publishers. Germany. 

Ogie, Ota . 2009. In-depth annotation of multi-verb 

constructions in Èdó. http://www.typecraft.org.NTNU. 

Ogie, Ota . 2009. Multi-verb constructions in Edo. 

http://www.typecraft.org.NTNU. 

Ogie, Ota 2009.  An annotation tool for less-resourced 

languages. Presented at The Nordic African Days 2009. 

Africa- in search for alternatives. Trondheim 1-3 October 

2009. The Nordic African Institute.  

Ogie, Ota & Dorothee Beermann 2009.Typecraft 

Software for the documentation of minority languages. 

Presented at ISFITovation February 26th  2009. Slides 

29- 44. http://itovation.wordpress.com/2009/02/26/watch- 

isfitovation-live/. NTNU, Trondheim, Norway

 

112


