



















































Standardizing Complex Functional Expressions in Japanese Predicates: Applying Theoretically-Based Paraphrasing Rules


Proceedings of the Multiword Expressions: From Theory to Applications (MWE 2010), pages 64–72,
Beijing, August 2010

Standardizing Complex Functional Expressions in Japanese  
Predicates: Applying Theoretically-Based Paraphrasing Rules  

 
Tomoko Izumi†    Kenji Imamura†    Genichiro Kikui†    Satoshi Sato‡ 
†NTT Cyber Space Laboratories, 

NTT Corporation 
{izumi.tomoko, imamura.kenji, 
kikui.genichiro}@lab.ntt.co.jp

‡Graduate School of Engineering,  
Nagoya University 

ssato@nuee.nagoya-u.ac.jp 

 
 

 

Abstract 

In order to accomplish the deep semantic 
understanding of a language, it is essen-
tial to analyze the meaning of predicate 
phrases, a content word plus functional 
expressions. In agglutinating languages 
such as Japanese, however, sentential 
predicates are multi-morpheme expres-
sions and all the functional expressions 
including those unnecessary to the mean-
ing of the predicate are merged into one 
phrase. This triggers an increase in sur-
face forms, which is problematic for 
NLP systems. We solve this by introduc-
ing simplified surface forms of predi-
cates that retain only the crucial meaning 
of the functional expressions. We con-
struct paraphrasing rules based on syn-
tactic and semantic theories in linguistics. 
The results of experiments show that our 
system achieves the high accuracy of 
77% while reducing the differences in 
surface forms by 44%, which is quite 
close to the performance of manually 
simplified predicates. 

 
1 Introduction 
The growing need for text mining systems such 
as opinion mining and sentiment analysis re-
quires the deep semantic understanding of lan-
guages (Inui et al., 2008). In order to accomplish 
this, one needs to not only focus on the meaning 
of a single content word such as buy but also the 
meanings conveyed by function words or func-

tional expressions such as not and would like to. 
In other words, to extract and analyze a predi-
cate, it is critical to consider both the content 
word and the functional expressions (Nasukawa, 
2001). For example, the functional expressions 
would like to as in the predicate “would like to 
buy” and can’t as in “can’t install” are key ex-
pressions in detecting the customer’s needs and 
complaints, providing valuable information to 
marketing research applications, consumer opi-
nion analysis etc.  

Although these functional expressions are 
important, there have been very few studies that 
extensively deal with these functional expres-
sions for use in natural language processing 
(NLP) systems (e.g., Tanabe et al., 2001; Mat-
suyoshi and Sato, 2006, 2008). This is due to the 
fact that functional expressions are syntactically 
complicated and semantically abstract and so are 
poorly handled by NLP systems. 

In agglutinating languages such as Japanese, 
functional expressions appear in the form of 
suffixes or auxiliary verbs that follow the 
content word without any space. This sequence 
of a content word (c for short) plus several of 
functional expressions (f for short) forms a 
predicate in Japanese (COMP for completive 
aspect marker, NOM for nominalizer, COP for 
copular verb).   

(1) kat -chai -takat -ta -n -da 
buy -COMP -want -PAST -NOM -COP 

c -f1 -f2 -f3 -f4 -f5 
“(I) wanted to buy (it)” 

The meaning of “want to” is expressed by -tai 
(f2) and the past tense is expressed by -ta (f3). 

64



The other functional expressions, -chai(f1), -n(f4), 
and -da(f5), only slightly alter the predicative 
meaning of “wanted to buy,” as there is no direct 
English translation. Therefore, (1) expresses the 
same fact as (2). 

(2)  kai -takat -ta 
  buy -want -PAST 

“(I) wanted to buy (it).” 

As shown, in Japanese, once one extracts a 
predicate phrase, the number of differences in 
surface forms increases drastically regardless of 
their similarities in meaning. This is because 
sentential predicates are multi-word or multi-
morpheme expressions and there are two differ-
ent types of functional expressions, one which is 
crucial for the extraction of predicative meaning 
and the other, which is almost unnecessary for 
NLP applications. This increase in surface forms 
complicates NLP systems including text mining 
because they are unable to recognize that these 
seemingly different predicates actually express 
the same fact. 

In this study, we introduce paraphrasing rules 
to transform a predicate with complex functional 
expressions into a simple predicate. We use the 
term standardize to refer to this procedure. 
Based on syntactic and semantic theories in lin-
guistics, we construct a simple predicate struc-
ture and categorize functional expressions as 
either necessary or unnecessary. We then pa-
raphrase a predicate into one that only retains the 
crucial meaning of the functional expression by 
deleting unnecessary functional expressions 
while adding necessary ones. 
 The paper is organized as follows. In Section 
2, we provide related work on Japanese 
functional expressions in NLP systems as well as 
problems that need to be solved. Section 3 
introduces several linguistic theories and our 
standardizing rules that we constructed based on 
these theories. Section 4 describes the 
experiments conducted on our standardization 
system and the results. Section 5 discusses the 
results and concludes the paper. Throughout this 
paper, we use the term functional expressions to 
indicate not only a single function word but also 
compounds (e.g., would like to). 

 

2 Previous Studies and Problems  
Shudo et al. (2004) construct abstract semantic 
rules for functional expressions and use them in 
order to find whether two different predicates 
mean the same. Matsuyoshi and Sato (2006, 
2008) construct an exhaustive dictionary of 
functional expressions, which are hierarchically 
organized, and use it to produce different func-
tional expressions that are semantically equiva-
lent to the original one.  
 Although these studies provide useful in-
sights and resources for NLP systems, if the in-
tention is to extract the meaning of a predicate, 
we find there are still problems that need to be 
solved. There are two problems that we focus on. 
 The first problem is that many functional ex-
pressions are unnecessary, i.e., they do not ac-
tually alter the meaning of a predicate.   

(3) yabure -teshimat -ta -no -dearu 
 rip -COMP -PAST -NOM -COP 
 c -f1 -f2 -f3 -f4  
 “(something) ripped.” 

(3) can be simply paraphrased as (4) 

(4) yabure -ta 
 rip -PAST 
 c -f1  

In actual NLP applications such as text mining, 
it is essential that the system recognizes that (3) 
and (4) express the same event of something 
“ripped.” In order to achieve this, the system 
needs to recognize -teshimat, -no, and -dearu as 
unnecessary (f1, f3, f4 →Ø). Previous studies that 
focus on paraphrasing of one functional expres-
sion to another (f → f’) cannot solve this prob-
lem. 
 The second problem is that we sometimes 
need to add certain functional expressions in 
order to retain the meaning of a predicate (Ø →f). 

(5) (Hawai-ni) P1iki, P2nonbirishi -takat -ta 
 (Hawaii-to)  go relax -want -PAST 
   c1 c2 f1 f2 

“I wanted to go to Hawaii and relax.” 

(5) has a coordinate structure, and two verbal 
predicates, iki (P1) “go” and nonbirishi-takat-ta 
(P2) “wanted to relax”, are coordinated.  
 As the English translation indicates, the first 
predicate in fact means iki-takat-ta “wanted to 

65



go,” which implies that the speaker was not able 
to go to Hawaii. If the first predicate was ex-
tracted and analyzed as iku, the base (present) 
form of “go,” then this would result in a wrong 
extraction of predicate, indicating the erroneous 
fact of going to Hawaii in the future (Present 
tense in Japanese expresses a future event). In 
this case, we need to add the functional expres-
sions takat “want” and ta, the past tense marker, 
to the first verbal predicate.  

As shown, there are two problems that need 
to be solved in order for a system to extract the 
actual meaning of a predicate. 

i. Several functional expressions are neces-
sary for sustaining the meaning of the event 
expressed by a predicate while others barely 
alter the meaning (f →Ø). 

ii. Several predicates in coordinate sentences 
lack necessary functional expressions at the 
surface level (Ø →f) and this results in a 
wrong extraction of the predicate meaning. 

Based on syntactic and semantic theories in lin-
guistics, we construct paraphrasing rules and 
solve these problems by standardizing complex 
functional expressions. 
 
3 Construction of Paraphrasing Rules  
The overall flow of our standardizing system is 
depicted in Figure 1. The system works as fol-
lows. 

i. Given a parsed sentence as an input, it ex-
tracts a predicate(s) and assigns a semantic 
label to each functional expression based on 
Matsuyoshi and Sato (2006). 

ii. As for an intermediate predicate, necessary 
functional expressions are added if missing 
(Ø →f). 

iii. From each predicate, delete unnecessary 
functional expressions that do not alter the 
meaning of the predicate (f →Ø). 

iv. Conjugate each element and generate a 
simplified predicate.  

There are two fundamental questions that we 
need to answer to accomplish this system. 

A) What are UNNECCESARY functional ex-
pressions (at least for NLP applications), 
i.e., those that do not alter the meaning of 
the event expressed by a predicate? 

B) How do we know which functional expres-
sions are missing and so should be added? 

We answer these questions by combining what is 
needed in NLP applications and what is dis-
cussed in linguistic theories. We first answer 
Question A. 
 
3.1 Categorization of Functional Expressions 
As discussed in Section 1 and in Inui et al. 
(2008), what is crucial in the actual NLP appli-
cations is to be able to recognize whether two 
seemingly different predicates express the same 
fact.  

This perspective of factuality is similar to the 
truth-value approach of an event denoted by pre-
dicates as discussed in the field of formal seman-
tics (e.g., Chierchia and Mcconnel-Ginet, 2000; 
Portner, 2005). Although an extensive investiga-
tion of these theories is beyond the scope of this 
paper, one can see that expressions such as tense 
(aspect), negation as well as modality, are often 
discussed in relation to the meaning of an event 
(Partee et al., 1990; Portner, 2005). 

Tense (Aspect): Expresses the time in (at/for) 
which an event occurred. 

Negation: Reverses the truth-value of an event. 
Modality: Provides information such as possi-

bility, obligation, and the speaker’s eagerness 
with regard to an event and relate it to what is 
true in reality. 

The above three categories are indeed useful in 
explaining the examples discussed above. 

(6) kat -chai -takat -ta -n -da 
buy -COMP -want -PAST -NOM -COP 
 aspect modality tense(aspect) 

(7) kai -takat -ta 
 buy -want -PAST 
  modality tense(aspect) 
 “wanted to buy” 

The predicate “kat-chai-takat-ta-n-da” in (6) and 
“kai-takat-ta” in (7) express the same event be-
cause they share the same tense (past), negation 
(none), and modality (want). Although (6) has 
the completive aspect marker -chai while (7) 
does not, they still express the same fact. This is 
because the Japanese past tense marker -ta also 
has a function to express the completive aspect. 
The information expressed by -chai in (6) is re-

66



dundant and so unnecessary.  
On the other hand, the predicate “iku” in (5) 

and “iki-takat-ta,” which conveys the actual 
meaning of the predicate, express a different fact 
because they establish a different tense (present 
vs. past) and different modality (none vs. want).  

As shown, once we examine the abstract se-
mantic functions of functional expressions, we 
can see the factual information in a predicate is 
influenced by tense (aspect), negation, and mod-
ality. Therefore, the answer to Question A is that 
necessary functional expressions are those that 
belong to tense (aspect), negation, and modality. 
Furthermore, if there are several functional ex-
pressions that have the same semantic function, 
retaining one of them is sufficient. 

 
3.2  Adding Necessary Functional Expressions 
The next question that we need to answer is how 
we find which functional expressions are miss-
ing when standardizing an intermediate predicate 
in a coordinate structure (e.g., (5)). We solve this 
based on a detailed analysis of the syntactic 
structure of predicates. 

Coordinate structures are such that several 
equivalent phrases are coordinated by conjunc-
tions such as and, but, and or. If a predicate is 
coordinated with another predicate, these two 

predicates must share the same syntactic level. 
Therefore, the structure in (5) is indeed depicted 
as follows (What TP and ModP stand for will be 
discussed later). 

[TP[ModP[VP(Hawai-ni) iki][VPnonbirishi]takat]ta ] 
[TP[ModP[VP(Hawaii-to) go][VPrelax] want]PAST] 

This is the reason why the first predicate iki 
should be paraphrased as iki-takat-ta “wanted to 
go.” It needs to be tagged with the modality ex-
pression tai and the past tense marker ta, which 
seems to attach only to the last predicate.  
 This procedure of adding necessary function-
al expressions to the intermediate predicate is 
not as simple as it seems, however.   

(8) nemutai-mitai-de kaeri -tagatte -tei -ta 
sleepy-seems-COP gohome-want-CONT-PAST 

“He seemed sleepy and wanted to go home.” 

In (8), the first predicate nemutai-mitai-de “seem 
to be sleepy” should be paraphrased as nemutai-
mitai-dat-ta, “seemed to be sleepy,” in which 
only the functional expression indicating past is 
required. The other functional expressions such 
as tagatte “want,” and the aspect marker tei 
(CONTinuation) should not be added (nemutai-
mitai-de-tagat(want)-tei(CONT)-ta(PAST) is 
completely ungrammatical).  

Input  
A parsed Sentence 

Hontoo-wa Hawai-ni iki, nonbirishi takat ta n da kedo
Really-TOP Hawaii-to go relax want PAST NOM COP but 

“I wanted to go to Hawaii and relax if I could.” 

i. Predicate Extraction &
Labeling Semantic Classes 
to Functional Expressions 

ii. ADD necessary 
functional expressions 

(Ø → f) 

iii. DELETE unnecessary 
functional expressions 

(f → Ø) 

iv. Conjugate and  
Generate simple predicates 

Output  
Simplified Predicates 

iki 
go 
c 

[[[VP] Ø] Ø] 

iki tai ta
go want PAST
c [願望] [完了]

iki takat ta
go want PAST 

nonbirishi takat ta  
relax want PAST  

iki-takat-ta
“wanted to go” 

nonbirishi-takat-ta 
“wanted to relax” 

Figure 1. The flow of Standardization. 

iki tai ta
go want PAST 
c [願望] [完了] 

nonbirishi takat ta n da kedo 
relax want PAST NOM COP but 

c [願望] [完了] [判断] [判断] [逆接確定]

nonbirishi takat ta n da kedo 
relax  want PAST NOM COP but 

c [願望] [完了] [判断] [判断] [逆接確定] 
[[[VP]             ModP]    TP] 

67



 Furthermore, the intermediate predicate in the 
following example does not allow any functional 
expressions to be added. 

(9) (imawa) yasui-ga (mukashiwa) takakat-ta 
(today) inexpensive-but (in old days) expensive-
PAST 
“(They) are inexpensive (today), (but) used to 
be very expensive (in the old days.)” 

In (9), the first predicate yasui “inexpensive” 
should not be paraphrased as yasukat-ta “was 
inexpensive” since this would result in the un-
grammatical predicate of “*(they) were inexpen-
sive (today).”  
 In order to add necessary functional expres-
sions to an intermediate predicate, one needs to 
solve the following two problems. 

i. Find whether the target predicate indeed 
lacks necessary functional expressions.  

ii. If such a shortfall is detected, decide which 
functional expressions should be added to 
the predicate. 

We solve these problems by turning to the in-
completeness of the syntactic structure of a pre-
dicate. 

Studies such as Cinque (2006) and Rizzi 
(1999) propose detailed functional phrases such 
as TopP (Topic Phrase) in order to fully describe 
the syntactic structures of a language. We adopt 
this idea and construct a phrase structure of Jap-
anese predicates which borrows from the func-
tional phrases of TP, ModP, and FocP (Figure 2). 
 ModP stands for a modality phrase and this is 
where modality expressions can appear.1  FocP 
stands for a focus phrase. This is the phrase 
where the copula da appears. This phrase is 
needed because several modality expressions 
syntactically need the copula da in either the 
following or preceding position (Kato, 2007). 
The existence of FocP also indicates that the 
modality expressions within the phrase are com-
plete (no more modality phrase is attached). TP 
stands for a tense phrase and this is where the 
tense marker appears.  
 Note that this structure is constructed for the 
purpose of Standardization and other functional 

                                                 
1 The structure of Figure 2 is recursive. A modality expres-
sion can appear after a TP. Also, more than one ModP can 
appear although ModP and FocP are optional. 

projections such as NegP (negation phrase) will 
not be discussed although we assume there must 
be one. Based on the predicate structure in Fig-
ure 2, we solve the two problems as follows. 
 
The first problem: Detecting whether the target 
predicate lacks necessary functional expressions.  

 If the predicate has the past tense marker ta 
or if the coordinate conjunction following 
the predicate is for combining phrases with 
tense, then consider the predicate as com-
plete and do not add any functional expres-
sions. Otherwise, consider the predicate as 
incomplete and add the appropriate func-
tional expressions. 

The underlying principle of this rule is that if a 
predicate is tensed, then its syntactic structure is 
complete. As often described in syntactic theo-
ries (e.g., Adger, 2003), a sentence can be said to 
be a phrase with tense (i.e., TP). In other words, 
if a predicate is tensed, then it can stand alone as 
a sentence.  
 By adopting this idea, we judge the com-
pleteness of a predicate by the existence of tense. 
Because Japanese marks past tense by the past 
tense marker -ta, if a predicate has -ta, it is com-
plete and no functional expressions need be add-
ed.  
 However, Japanese does not hold an explicit 
present tense marker; the base form of a verb is 
also a present form. We solve this by looking at 
which conjunction follows the predicate. As dis-
cussed in Minami (1993), the finite state and the 
type of conjunction are related; some conjunc-
tions follow tensed phrases while others follow 
infinitival phrases. Following this, we categorize 
all the coordinate conjunctions based on whether 
they can combine with a tensed phrase. These 
conjunctions are listed as tensed in Table 1. If 

TP  
3 

(FocP) T:ta PAST [完了] 
3 

(ModP)*   Foc:da COP [判断] 
3 

VP   Mod: mitai “seems” [推量] 
4 
iku “go” 

Figure 2. Structure of a predicate. 

68



the target phrase is followed by one of those 
conjunctions, then we do not add any functional 
expressions to them because they are complete. 
 
The second problem: Finding the appropriate 
functional expressions for incomplete interme-
diate predicates. 

As discussed, we assume that predicates are 
coordinated at one of the functional phrase levels 
in Figure 2. Functional expressions that need to 
be added are, therefore, those of the outer phras-
es of the target phrase.  
 For example, if the target phrase has da, the 
head of FocP, then it only needs the past tense 
marker to be added, which is located above the 
FocP (i.e., TP). This explains the paraphrasing 
pattern of (8). Therefore, by looking at which 
functional expressions held by the target predi-
cate, one can see that functional expressions to 
be added are those that belong to phrases above 
the target phrase. 
 As shown, the answer to Question B is that 
we only add functional expressions to incom-
plete predicates, which are judged based on the 
existence/absence of tense. The appropriate 
functional expressions to be added are those of 
outer phrases of the target phrase. 
 
3.3  Implementing the Standardization 
In this final subsection, we describe how we ac-
tually implement our theoretical observations in 
our standardization system.  
 
CATEGORIZE functional expressions 
First, we selected functional expressions that 
belong to our syntactic and semantic categories 
from those listed in Matsuyoshi and Sato (2006), 
a total of about 17,000 functional expressions 
with 95 different semantic labels. We use ab-
stract semantic labels, such as “completion,” 
“guess,” and “desire” for the categorization 
(Table 2).  
 We divided those that did not belong to our 
syntactic and semantic categories into Deletables 
and Undeletables. Deletables are those that do 

not alter the meaning of an event and are, there-
fore, unnecessary. Undeletables are those that 
are a part of content words, and so cannot be 
deleted (e.g., kurai [程度] “about” as in 1-man-
en-kurai-da “is about one million yen”). Based 
on the categorization of semantic labels as well 
as surface forms of functional expressions, our 
system works as follows; 
 
ADD necessary functional expressions  
A-1: Examine whether the target predicate has 

the tense marker ta or it is followed by the 
conjunctions categorized as tensed. If not, 
then go to Step A-2. 

A-2: Based on the semantic label of the target 
predicate, decide which level of syntactic 
phrase the predicate projects. Add functional 
expressions from the last predicate that be-
longs to outer phrases. 

 
DELETE unnecessary functional expressions 
D-1: Delete all the functional expressions that 

are categorized as Deletables. 
D-2: Leave only one functional expression if 

there is more than one same semantic label. 
For those categorized as Negation, however, 
delete all if the number of negations is even. 
Otherwise, leave one. 

D-3: Delete those categorized as Focus if they 
do not follow or precede a functional expres-
sion categorized as Modality.  

 
GENERATE simple predicates 
Last, conjugate all the elements and generate 
simplified surface forms of predicates. 
 
4 Experiments and Evaluations 

4.1 Constructing Paraphrase Data 
We selected 2,000 sentences from newspaper 
and blog articles in which more than one predi-
cate were coordinated.2 We manually extracted 
predicates (c-f1-f2..fn). Half of them were those in 
which the last predicate had three or more func-
tional expressions (n ≥ 3). 

                                                 
2 We use Mainichi Newspapers from the year 2000. 

Table 1. Coordinate conjunctions. 

Not tensed Tensed 
gerundive 
form, te  

shi, dakedenaku, ueni, bakarika, 
hoka(ni)(wa), keredo, ga, nonitai-
shi(te),ippou(de),hanmen  

69



We then asked one annotator with a linguistic 
background to paraphrase each predicate into the 
simplest form possible while retaining the mean-
ing of the event.3 We asked another annotator, 
who also has a background in linguistics, to 
check whether the paraphrased predicates made 
by the first annotator followed our criterion, and 
if not, asked the first annotator to make at least 
one paraphrase. 424 out of 4,939 predicates 
(8.5%) were judged as not following the crite-
rion and were re-paraphrased. This means that 
the accuracy of 91.5% is the gold standard of our 
task. 

One of the authors manually assigned a cor-
rect semantic label to each functional expression. 
Procedure i in Figure 1 is, therefore, manually 
implemented in our current study. 

 
4.2 Experiments and Results 
Based on the standardization rules discussed in 
Section 3, our system automatically paraphrased 
functional expressions of test predicates into 
simple forms. We excluded instances that had 
segmentation errors and those that were judged 
as inappropriate as a predicate. 4  A total of 
1,501 intermediate predicates (287 for develop-
ment and 1,214 for test) and 1,958 last predi-
cates (391 for development and 1,567 for test) 
were transformed into simple predicates. 
 The accuracy was measured based on the ex-
act match in surface forms with the manually 
constructed paraphrases. For comparison, we 

                                                 
3 We asked to delete or add functional expressions from 
each predicate when paraphrasing. Only the surface forms 
(and not semantic labels) were used for annotation. 
4 In Japanese, a gerundive form of a verb is sometimes used 
as a postposition. The annotators excluded these examples 
as “not-paraphrasable.” 

used the following baseline methods. 

 No Add/Delete: Do not add/delete any 
functional expression.  

 Simp Add: Simply add all functional ex-
pressions that the intermediate phrase does 
not have from the last predicate. 

Table 3 indicates the results. Our standardizing 
system achieved high accuracy of around 77% 
and 83 % in open (against the test set) and 
closed tests (against the development set) com-
pared to the baseline methods (No Add/Delete 
(open), 55%; Simp Add (open), 33%). 

We also measured the reduced rate of differ-
ences in surface forms. We counted the number 
of types of functional expressions in the last pre-
dicates (a sequence of f1-f2-f3 is counted as one) 
before and after the standardization. 

For comparison, we also counted the number 
of functional expressions of the manually pa-
raphrased predicates. Table 4 lists the results. As 
shown, our standardizing system succeeded in 
reducing surface differences in predicates from 
the original ones at the rate of 44.0%, which is 
quite close to the rate achieved by the human 
annotators (52.0%). 
 
5 Discussion and Conclusion 
Our standardization system succeeded in gene-
rating simple predicates in which only functional 
expressions crucial for the factual meaning of 
the predicate were retained.  

The predicates produced by our system 
showed fewer variations in their surface forms 
while around 77% of them exactly matched the 
simplified predicates produced by human anno-
tators, which is quite high compared to the base-
line systems.  

Table 2. Syntactic and semantic categorization of semantic labels. 

Syntactic  Semantic  Semantic Labels
T if the 
surface is ta 

Tense 
(Aspect) 

完了(completion), 継起, 付帯, 回避, 経験, 事後, 習慣, 継続, 発継続, 着継続, 最中, 事
前, 放置, 傾向 

 Negation 否定(negation), 放置, 否定意志, 否定推量, 不可能, 不必要, 不許可, 不可避, 無意味
Mod Modality 推量(guess),  願望(desire), 疑問, 許可, 当為, 意志, 依頼, 勧め, 勧誘, 可能, 比況, 順接

必要, 不可能, 不必要, 不許可, 回想, 不可避, 無意味
Foc Focus 判断(affirmation), 名詞化, 同格
 Deletables 丁寧(politeness), 他-授与, 伝聞, 相応, 内-授与, 自然発生, 添加, 理由, 逆接確定, 感

嘆,不満, 順接確定, 順接仮定, 想外, 限定, 極端例
 Undele-

tables 
程度(about), 終点, 根拠, は観点, も観点, 割合, 基準, 起点, 場合, 状態, 想外無視, 相
関, 対象, 仲介, 定義, 範囲, 非限定, 不均衡, 立場, 同時性, 順接限定, 逆接仮定, 目的, 
反復, 因状況, 対比, 適当, 状況, 話題, 並立, 相手, 目標, 主体, 強調 

70



This was achieved because we constructed 
solid paraphrasing rules by applying linguistic 
theories in semantics and syntax. The quite low 
accuracy of the baseline method, especially 
SimpAdd, further supports our claim that im-
plementing linguistic theories in actual NLP ap-
plications can greatly improve system perfor-
mance. 

Unlike the study by Inui et al. (2008), we did 
not include the meaning of a content word for 
deciding the factuality of the event nor did we 
include it in the paraphrasing rules. This lowers 
the accuracy. Several functional expressions, 
especially those expressing aspect, can be de-
leted or added depending on the meaning of the 
content word. This is because content words in-
herently hold aspectual information, and one 
needs to compare it to the aspectual information 
expressed by functional expressions. Because we 
need a really complicated system to compute the 
abstract semantic relations between a content 
word and functional expressions, we leave this 
problem for future research.  

Regardless of this, our standardizing system 
is useful for a lot of NLP applications let alone 
text mining. As mentioned in Inui et al. (2008), 
bag-of-words-based feature extraction is insuffi-
cient for conducting statistically-based deep se-
mantic analysis, such as factual analysis. If stan-
dardized predicates were used instead of a single 
content word, we could expect an improvement 
in those statistically-based methods because each 
predicate holds important information about fact 
while differences in surface forms are quite li-
mited. 

In conclusion, we presented our system for 
standardizing complex functional expressions in 
Japanese predicates. Since our paraphrasing 

rules are based on linguistic theories, we suc-
ceeded in producing simple predicates that have 
only the functional expressions crucial to under-
standing of the meaning of an event. Our future 
research will investigate the relationship be-
tween the meaning of content words and those of 
functional expressions in order to achieve higher 
accuracy. We will also investigate the impact of 
our standardization system on NLP applications.  

 
References 

Adger, David (2003). Core Syntax: A minimalist ap-
proach. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Chierchia, Gennaro, & Sally McConnell-Ginet (2000). 
Meaning and grammar: An introduction to se-
mantics (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
press. 

Cinque, Guglielmo (2006). Restructuring and func-
tional heads: The cartography of syntactic struc-
tures, Vol. 4. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Haugh, Michael (2008). Utterance-final conjunctive 
particles and implicature in Japanese conversation. 
Pragmatics, 18 (3), 425-451. 

Inui, Kentaro, Shuya Abe, Kazuo Hara, Hiraku Mori-
ta, Chitose Sao, Megumi Eguchi, Asuka Sumida, 
Koji Murakami, & Suguru Matsuyoshi (2008). 
Experience mining: Building a large-scale data-
base of personal experiences and opinions from 
web documents. Proceedings of the 2008 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on 
Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technolo-
gy, Vol. 1., 314-321. 

Kato, Shigehiro (2007). Nihongo-no jutsubu-kouzou 
to kyoukaisei [Predicate complex structure and 
morphological boundaries in Japanese]. The an-
nual report on cultural science, Vol. 122(6) (pp. 
97-155). Sapporo, Japan: Hokkaido University, 
Graduate School of Letters. 

Matsuyoshi, Suguru, & Satoshi Sato (2006). Compi-
lation of a dictionary of Japanese functional ex-
pressions with hierarchical organization. Proceed-
ings of the 21st International Conference on 
Computer Processing of Oriental Languages 

 Normalization No Add/Delete Simp Add 
Open (Intermediate) 77.7%(943/1214) 57.8%(702/1214) 32.8%(398/1214) 
Closed (Intermediate) 82.9%(238/287) 62.0%%(178/287) 35.2%(101/287) 
Open (Last) 76.2%(1194/1567) 51.9% (203/391) n.a 
Closed (Last) 83.4%(326/391) 48.1%(188/391) n.a. 

Table 3. Results of our normalization system. 

Original 943 types Reduced Rate
Normalization 530 types 44.0% 
Human Annotation 448 types 52.0% 

Table 4. Reduced rate of surface forms. 

71



(ICCPOL), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Vol. 4285, 395-402.  

Matsuyoshi, Suguru, & Satoshi Sato (2008). Auto-
matic paraphrasing of Japanese functional expres-
sions using a hierarchically organized dictionary. 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Joint Confe-
rence on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP), 
Vol. 1, 691-696. 

Minami, Fujio (1993). Gendai nihongobunpou-no 
rinkaku [Introduction to modern Japanese gram-
mar]. Tokyo: Taishuukan. 

Nasukawa, Tetsuya (2001). Kooru sentaa-niokeru 
tekisuto mainingu [Text mining application for 
call centers]. Journal of Japanese society for Ar-
tificial Intelligence, 16(2), 219-225. 

Partee, Barbara H., Alice ter Meulen, & Robert E. 
Wall (1990). Mathematical methods in Linguistics. 
Dordrecht, The Netherland: Kluwer. 

Portner, Paul H. (2005). What is meaning?: Funda-
mentals of formal semantics. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. 

Rizzi, Luigi (1999). On the position “Int(errogative)” 
in the left periphery of the clause. Ms., Università 
di Siena. 

Shudo, Kosho, Toshifumi Tanabe, Masahito Takaha-
shi, & Kenji Yoshimura (2004). MWEs as non-
propositional content indicators. Proceedings of 
second Association for Computational Linguistics 
(ACL) Workshops on Multiword Expressions: In-
tegrating Processing, 32-39. 

Tanabe, Toshifumi, Kenji Yoshimura & Kosho Shu-
do (2001). Modality expressions in Japanese and 
their automatic paraphrasing. Proceedings of the 
6th Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim 
Symposium (NLPRS), 507-512. 

Tsujimura, Natsuko. (2007). An Introduction to Jap-
anese Linguistics (2nd Ed.). Malden, MA: Black-
well. 

72


