










































A Cross-Lingual Induction Technique for German Adverbial Participles


Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on NLP and Linguistics: Finding the Common Ground, ACL 2010, pages 34–42,
Uppsala, Sweden, 16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Cross-Lingual Induction Technique for German Adverbial Participles

Sina Zarrieß Aoife Cahill Jonas Kuhn Christian Rohrer
Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung (IMS)

University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany

{zarriesa,cahillae,jonas.kuhn,rohrer}@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

We provide a detailed comparison of
strategies for implementing medium-to-
low frequency phenomena such as Ger-
man adverbial participles in a broad-
coverage, rule-based parsing system. We
show that allowing for general adverb con-
version of participles in the German LFG
grammar seriously affects its overall per-
formance, due to increased spurious am-
biguity. As a solution, we present a
corpus-based cross-lingual induction tech-
nique that detects adverbially used par-
ticiples in parallel text. In a grammar-
based evaluation, we show that the auto-
matically induced resource appropriately
restricts the adverb conversion to a limited
class of participles, and improves parsing
quantitatively as well as qualitatively.

1 Introduction

In German, past perfect participles are ambigu-
ous with respect to their morphosyntactic cate-
gory. As in other languages, they can be used
as part of the verbal complex (example (1-a)) or
as adjectives (example (1-b)). Since German ad-
jectives can generally undergo conversion into ad-
verbs, participles can also be used adverbially (ex-
ample (1-c)). All three participle forms in (1) are
morphologically identical.

(1) a. Das Experiment hat ihn begeistert.
‘The experiment has enthused him.’

b. Er scheint von dem Experiment begeistert.
‘He seems enthusiastic about the experiment.’

c. Er hat begeistert experimentiert.
‘He has experimented in an enthusiastic way’ or:
‘He was enthusiastic when he experimented.’

This paper adresses the question of how to deal
with medium-to-low frequency phenomena such
as adverbial participles in a broad-coverage, rule-
based parsing system. In order to account for sen-

tences like (1-c), an intuitive approach would be to
generally allow for adverb conversion of partici-
ples in the grammar. However, on the basis of the
German LFG grammar (Rohrer and Forst, 2006),
we show that such a rule can have a strong negative
on the overall performance of the parsing system,
despite the fact that it produces the desired syntac-
tic and semantic analysis for specific sentences.

This trade-off between large-scale, statistical
and theoretically precise coverage is often en-
countered in engineering broad-coverage and, at
the same time, linguistically motivated parsing
systems: adding the analysis for a specific phe-
nomenon does not necessarily improve the overall
quality of the system since the rule might overgen-
erate and interact with completely different phe-
nomena in unpredicted ways.

In principle, there are two ways of dealing with
such an overgeneration problem in a grammar-
based framework: First, one could hand-craft
word lists or other linguistic constraints that re-
strict the adverb conversion to a certain set of par-
ticiples. Second, one could try to mine corpora for
this particular type of adverbs and integrate this
automatically induced knowledge into the gram-
mar (i.e. by means of pre-tagged input, word lists,
etc.). In the case of adverbial participles, both
ways are prone with difficulties. To our knowl-
edge, there has not been much theoretical work on
the linguistic properties of the participle adverb
conversion. Moreover, since the distinction be-
tween (predicative) adjectives and adverbs is the-
oretically hard to establish, the standard tag set
for German and, in consequence, annotated cor-
pora for German do not explicitly capture this phe-
nomenon. Thus, available statistical taggers and
parsers for German usually conflate the syntactic
structures underlying (1-b) and (1-c).

In this paper, we present a corpus-based ap-
proach to restricting the overgenerating adverb
conversion for participles in German, exploiting

34



parallel corpora and cross-lingual NLP induc-
tion techniques. Since adverbs are often overtly
marked in other languages (i.e. the ly-suffix in
English), adverbial participles can be straightfor-
wadly detected on word-aligned parallel text. We
describe the ingretation of the automatically in-
duced resource of adverbial participles into the
German LFG, and provide a detailed evaluation of
its effect on the grammar, see Section 5.

While the use of parallel resources is rather
familiar in a wide range of NLP domains, such
as statistical machine translation (Koehn, 2005)
or annotation projection (Yarowsky et al., 2001),
our work shows that they can be exploited for
very specific problems that arise in deep linguis-
tic analysis (see Section 4). In this way, high-
precision, data-oriented induction techniques can
clearly improve rule-based system development
through combining the benefits of high empirical
accuracy and little manual effort.

2 A Broad-Coverage LFG for German

Lexical Functional Grammar (LFG) (Bresnan,
2000) is a constraint-based theory of grammar. It
posits two levels of representation, c(onstituent)-
structure and f(unctional)- structure. C-structure
is represented by contextfree phrase-structure
trees, and captures surface grammatical configu-
rations. F-structures approximate basic predicate-
argument and adjunct structures.

The experiments reported in this paper use the
German LFG grammar constructed as part of the
ParGram project (Butt et al., 2002). The grammar
is implemented in the XLE, a grammar develop-
ment environment which includes a very efficient
LFG parser. Within the spectrum of appraoches
to natural language parsing, XLE can be consid-
ered a hybrid system combining a hand-crafted
grammar with a number of automatic ambiguity
management techniques: (i) c-structure pruning
where, based on information from statstically ob-
tained parses, some trees are ruled out before f-
structure unification (Cahill et al., 2007), (ii) an
Optimaly Theory-style constraint mechanism for
filtering and ranking competing analyses (Frank
et al., 2001), and (iii) a stochastic disambiguation
component which is based on a log-linear proba-
bility model (Riezler et al., 2002) and works on
the packed representations.

The German LFG grammar integrates a mor-
phological component which is a variant of

DMOR1 (Becker, 2001). This means that the (in-
ternal) lexicon does not comprise entries for sur-
face word forms, but entries for specific morpho-
logical tags, see (Dipper, 2003).

3 Participles in the German LFG

3.1 Analysis

The morphosyntactic ambiguity of German par-
ticiples presents a notorious difficulty for theoreti-
cal and computational analysis. The reason is that
adjectives (i.e. adjectival participles) do not only
occur as attributive modifiers (shown in (1-a)), but
can also be used as predicatives (see (2-b)). These
predicatives have exactly the same form as ver-
bal or adverbial participles (compare the three sen-
tences in (2)). Predicatives do appear either as ar-
guments of verbs like seem or as free adjuncts such
that they are not even syntactically distinguishable
from adverbs. The sentence in (2-c) is thus am-
biguous as to whether the participle is an adverb
modifying the main verb, or a predicative which
modifies the subject. Especially in the case of
modifiers refering to a psychological state, the two
underlying readings are hard to tell apart (Geuder,
2004). It is due to the lack of reliable semantic
tests that the standard German tag set (Schiller et
al., 1995) assigns the tag “ADJD” to predicative
adjectives as well as adverbs.

(2) a. Das Experiment hat ihn begeistert.
‘The experiment has enthused him.’

b. Er scheint von dem Experiment begeistert.
‘He seems enthusiastic about the experiment.’

c. Er hat begeistert experimentiert.
‘He has experimented in an enthusiastic way’ or:
‘He was enthusiastic when he experimented.’

For performance reasons, the German LFG does
not cover free predicatives at the moment. In the
context of our crosslingual induction approach,
the distinction between predicatives and adverbs
is rather straigtforward since we base our experi-
ments on languages that have morphologically dis-
tinct forms for these categories. In the follow-
ing, we will thus limit the discussion to adverbial
participles and ignore the complexities related to
predicative participles.

In the German LFG, the treatment of a given
participle form is closely tight to the morphologi-
cal analysis encoded in DMOR. In particular, ad-
verbial participles can have different degrees of
lexicalisation. For bestimmt (probably) in (3-a),
which is completely lexicalised, the morphology

35



proposes two analyses: (i) a participle tag of the
verbal lemma bestimmen (determine) and (ii) an
adverb tag for the lemma bestimmt. In this case,
the LFG parsing algorithm will figure out which
morphological analysis yields a syntactically well-
formed analysis. For gezielt (purposeful) in (3-b),
DMOR outputs, besides the participle analysis, an
adjective tag for the lemma. However, the gram-
mar can turn it into an adverb by a general ad-
verb conversion rule for adjectives. The difficult
case for the German LFG grammar is illustrated in
(3-c) by means of the adverbial participle wieder-
holt (repeatedly). This participle is neither lexi-
calised as an adverb nor as an adjective, but it still
can be used as an adverb.

(3) a. Bestimmt
Probably

ist
is

dieser
the

Mann
man

sehr
very

traurig.
sad.

b. Der
The

Mann
man

hat
has

gezielt
acted

gehandelt.
purposefully.

c. Der
The

Mann
man

hat
has

wiederholt
repeatedly

geweint.
cried.

To cover sentences like (3-c), the grammar
needs to include a rule that allows adverb conver-
sion for participles. Unfortunately, this rule is very
costly in terms of the overall performance of the
grammar, as is shown in the following section.

3.2 Assessing the Effect of Participle
Ambiguity on the German LFG

In this section, we want to illustrate the effect of
one specific grammar rule, i.e. the rule that gener-
ally allows for conversion of participles into ad-
verbs. We perform a contrastive evaluation of
two versions of the grammar: (i) the No-Part-Adv
version which does not allow for adverb conver-
sion (except for the lexicalised participles from
DMOR), (ii) the All-Part-Adv version which al-
lows every participle to be analysed as adverb.
Otherwise, the two versions of the grammar are
completely identical.

The comparison between the All-Part-Adv and
No-Part-Adv grammar version pursues two major
goals: On the one hand, we want to assess their
overall quantitative performance on representative
gold standard data, as it is common practice for
statistical parsing systems. On the other hand, we
are interested in getting a detailed picture of the
quality of the grammar for parsing adverbial par-
ticiples. These two goals do not necessarily go to-
gether since we know that the phenomenon is not
very frequent in the data which we use for evalu-
ation. Therefore, we do not only report accuracy

on gold standard data in the following, but also fo-
cus on error analysis and describe ways of qualti-
tatively assessing the grammar performance.

For evaluation, we use the TIGER treebank
(Brants et al., 2002). We report grammar per-
formance on the development set which consists
of the first 5000 TIGER sentences, and statistical
accuracy on the standard heldout set which com-
prises 371 sentences.

Quantitative Evaluation We first want to assess
the quantitative impact of the phenomenon of ad-
verbial participles in our evaluation data. We parse
the heldout set storing all possible analyses ob-
tained by both grammars, in order to compare the
upperbound score that the both versions can op-
timally achieve (i.e. independently of the disam-
biguation quality). Then, we run the XLE eval-
uation in the “oracle” mode which means that the
disambiguation compares all system analyses for a
given sentence to its gold analysis, and chooses the
best system analysis for computing accuracy. The
upperbound f-score for both grammar versions is
almost identical (at about 83.6%). This suggests
that the phenomenon of adverbial participles does
not occur in the heldout set.

If we run the grammar versions on a larger
set of sentences, the difference in coverage be-
comes more obvious. In Table 1, we report the
absolute number of parsed sentences, starred sen-
tences (only receiving a partial or fragment parse),
and the timeouts 1 on our standard TIGER devel-
opment set. Not very surprisingly, the coverage
of the All-Part-Adv version seems to be broader.
However, this does not necessarily mean that the
40 additionally covered sentences all exhibit ad-
verbial participles (see below). Moreover, Table 2
gives a first indication of the fact that the extended
coverage comes at a price: the All-Part-Adv ver-
sion massively increases the number of ambigui-
ties per sentence. Related to this, in the All-Part-
Adv version, the number of timeouts increases by
16% and parsing speed goes down by 6% com-
pared to the No-Part-Adv version.

To assess the effect of the massively increased
ambiguity rate and the bigger proportion of time-
outs in All-Part-Adv, we perform a statistical eval-
uation of the two versions of the grammar against
the heldout set, i.e. we compute f-score based

1Sentences whose parsing can not be finished in prede-
fined amount of time, the maximally allowed parse time is
set to 20 seconds.

36



Grammar Parsed
Sent.

Starred
Sent.

Time-
outs

Time
in sec

No-Part-Adv 4301 608 90 6853
All-Part-Adv 4339 555 105 7265

Table 1: Coverage-based evaluation on the TIGER
development set (sentences 1-5000), 4999 sen-
tences total

Sent. Av. ambiguities per sent. Av.
length No-Part-Adv All-Part-Adv Incr.
1-10 2.95 3.3 11%
11-20 24.99 36.09 44%
21-30 250.4 343.76 37%
31-40 1929.06 2972.847 54%
41-50 173970.0 663310.4 429%

Table 2: Average number of ambiguities per sen-
tence

on the parses that the XLE disambiguation selects
as the most probable parse. Both versions use
the same disambiguation model which results in
a slightly biased comparison but still reflects the
effect of increased ambiguity on the disambigua-
tion component. In Table 3, we can see that the
All-Part-Adv version performs significantly worse
than the grammar version which does not cap-
ture adverbial participles. The spurious ambigu-
ities and timeouts produced in All-Part-Adv have
such a strong negative impact on the disambigua-
tion component that it can not be outweighed by
the extended coverage of the grammar.

Qualitative Evaluation The fact that the All-
Part-Adv version generally increases parse ambi-
guity suggests that it produces a lot of undesired
analyses for constructions not related to adverbial
participles. To assess this assumption, we drew a
random sample of 20 sentences out of the addi-
tionally covered 41 sentences and checked manu-
ally whether these contained an adverbial partici-
ple: Only 40% of these sentences are actually cor-
rectly analysed. In all other cases, the grammar
lacks an analysis for a completely different phe-

Grammar Prec. Rec. F-Sc. Time
in sec

All-Part-Adv 83.80 76.71 80.1 666.55
No-Part-Adv 84.25 78.3 81.17 632.21

Table 3: Evaluation on the TIGER heldout set, 371
sentences total

nomenon (mostly related to coordination), but ob-
tains an (incorrect) analysis on the basis of the ad-
verb conversion rule.

As an example, Figure 1 presents two c-
structure analyses for the sentence in (4) in the
All-Part-Adv grammar. In the second c-structure
(CS2), the participle kritisiert (criticised) is anal-
ysed as adverb modifing the main verb haben
(have). This results in a very strange underlying f-
structure, meaning something like the Greens pos-
sess the SPD in a criticising manner.

(4) Die
The

Grünen
Greens

haben
have

die
the

SPD
SPD

kritisiert.
criticised.

“The Greens have criticised the SPD”

3.3 Interim Conclusion

This section has illustrated an exemplary dilemma
for parsing systems that aim broad-coverage and
linguisitically motivated analyses at the same time.
Since these systems need to explicitly address and
represent ambiguities that purely statistical sys-
tems are able to conflate or ignore, their perfor-
mance is not automatically improved by adding
a specific rule for a specific phenomenon. Inter-
estingly, the negative consequences affecting the
quantitative (statistical) as well as the qualitative
(linguistic) dimension of the grammar seem to be
closely related: The overgenerating adverb con-
version rule empirically leads to linguistically un-
motivated analyses which causes problems for the
disambiguation component. In the rest of the pa-
per, we show how the adverbial analysis of partici-
ples can be reasonably constrained on the basis of
a lexical resource induced from a parallel corpus.

4 Cross-Lingual Induction of Adverbial
Participles

The intuition of the cross-lingual induction ap-
proach is that adverbial participles can be easily
extracted from parallel corpora since in other lan-
guages (such as English or French) adverbs are
often morphologically marked and easily labelled
by statistical PoS taggers. As an example, con-
sider the sentence in (5), extracted from Europarl,
where the German participle verstärkt is translated
by unambiguous adverbs in English and French
(increasingly and davantage).

(5) a. Nach der Osterweiterung stehen die Zeichen
verstärkt auf Liberalisierung.

b. Following enlargement towards the east, the emphasis
is increasingly on liberalisation.

37



CS 1: ROOT:2543

CProot[std]:2536

DP[std]:984

DPx[std]:981

D[std]:616

die:34

NP:773

N[comm]:717

NAdj:714

Grünen:85

Cbar:2506

Vaux[haben,fin]:1054

haben:159

VP[v,part]:2080

DP[std]:1856

DPx[std]:2321

D[std]:1180

die:204

NP:1720

N[comm]:284

SPD:257

VC[v,part]:2009

V[v,part]:1593

Vx[v,part]:1590

kritisiert:348

PERIOD:418

.:410

CS 2: ROOT:2543

CProot[std]:2536

DP[std]:984

DPx[std]:981

D[std]:616

die:34

NP:773

N[comm]:717

NAdj:714

Grünen:85

Cbar:2506

V[v,fin]:2494

Vx[v,fin]:2491

haben:159

DP[std]:1856

DPx[std]:2321

D[std]:1180

die:204

NP:1720

N[comm]:284

SPD:257

ADVP[std]:1493

V[v,-infl]:1491

Vx[v,-infl]:1488

kritisiert:348

PERIOD:418

.:410

Figure 1: Two c-structures for sentence (4), obtained by the grammar All-Part-Adv - CS1 is correct, CS2
is semantically very strange

c. Après l’ élargissement à l’ Est, la tendance sera da-
vantage à la libéralisation.

In the following, we describe experiments on
Europarl where we automatically extract and fil-
ter adverbially translated German participles.

4.1 Data

We base our experiments on the German, En-
glish, French and Dutch part of the Europarl cor-
pus. We automatically word-aligned the German
part to each of the others with the GIZA++ tool
(Och and Ney, 2003). Note that, due to diver-
gences in sentence alignment and tokenisation,
the three word-alignments are not completely syn-
chronised. Moreover, each of the 4 languages has
been automatically PoS tagged using the TreeTag-
ger (Schmid, 1994). In addition, the German and
English parts have been parsed with MaltParser
(Nivre et al., 2006).

Since we want to limit our investigation to those
participles that are not already recorded as lexi-
calised adjective or adverb in the DMOR morphol-
ogy, we first have to generate the set of participle
candidates from the tagged Europarl data. We ex-
tract all distinct words (types) from the German
part that have been either tagged as ADJD (pred-
icative or adverbial modifier), 6089 types in total,
or as VVPP (past perfect participle), 5469 types
in total. We intersect this set of potential partici-
ples with the set of DMOR participles that only
have a verbal lemma. The resulting intersection
(5054 types in total) constitutes the set of all Ger-
man participles in Europarl that are not recorded
as lexicalised in the DMOR morphology .

Given the participle candidates, we now ex-
tract the set of sentences that exhibit a word

alignment between a German participle and an
English, French or Dutch adverb. The extrac-
tion yields 5191 German-English sentence pairs,
2570 German-French, and 4129 German-Dutch
sentence pairs. The German-English pairs com-
prise 1070 types of potentially adverbial partici-
ples. The types found in the German-French and
German-Dutch part form a proper subset of the
types extracted from the German-English pairs.
Thus, the additional languages will not increase
the recall of the induction. However, we will show
that they are extremely useful for filtering incor-
rect or uninteresting participle alignments.

For data exploration and evaluation, we anno-
tated 300 participle alignments out of the 5191
German-English sentences as to whether the En-
glish adverbial really points to an adverbial par-
ticiple on the German side (and/or the word-
alignment was correct). Throughout the entire set
of annotated sentences, this ratio between the par-
allel cases (where an English adverbial correctly
indicates a German adverbial) and all adverbially
translated participles is at about 30%. This means
that if we base the induction on word-alignments
alone, its precision would be relatively low.

The remaining 60% translation pairs do not only
reflect word alignment errors, but also cases where
we find a proper participle in the German sentence
that has a correct adverbial translation for other
reasons. A typical configuration is exemplified in
(6) where the German main verb vorlegen is trans-
lated as the verb-adverb combination put forward.

(6) a. Wir haben eine Reihe von Vorschlägen vorgelegt.
b. We have put forward a number of proposals.

These sentence pairs are cases of free or para-

38



Figure 2: Type/token ratio for adverbial participles

phrasing translations. Ideally, we want our induc-
tion method to filter such type of configurations.

The 300 annotated sentences comprise 121 to-
ken instances of German adverbially used partici-
ples that have an adverbial translation in English.
However, these 121 tokens reduce to 24 partici-
ple types. The graph in Figure 2 displays the
type/token-ratio for an increasing number of in-
stances in our gold standard. The curve exponen-
tially decays from about 10 tokens onward and
suggests that from about 30 tokens onward, the
number of unseen types is relatively low. This can
be interpreted as evidence in favour of the hypoth-
esis that the number of adverbially used participles
is actually fairly limited and can be integrated into
the grammar in terms of a hard-coded resource.

4.2 Filtering

The data analysis in the previous section has
shown that approximately one third of the English
adverb alignments actually point to an adverbial
participle on the German side. This means that we
have to rigorously filter the data that we extract on
the basis of word-alignments in order to obtain a
high quality resource for our grammar. In this sec-
tion, we will investigate several filtering methods
and evaluate them on our annotated sentence pairs.

Frequency-based filtering As a first attempt,
we filtered the non-parallel cases in our set of
participle-adverb translations by means of the rel-
ative frequency of the adverb translations. For

each participle candidate, we counted the number
of tokens that exhibit an adverbial alignment on
the English side, and divided this number by its
total number of occurrences in the German Eu-
roparl. The best f-score of the ADV-FREQ filter
(see Table 4) is achieved by the 0.05 threshold, but
generally, the precision of the frequency filters is
too low for high-quality resource induction. The
reason for the poor performance of the frequency-
based filters seems to be that some German verbs
are systematically translated as verb - adverb com-
binations as in (6). For these participles, the rel-
ative frequency of adverbial alignments is not a
good indicator for their adverbial use in German.

Multilingual Filtering Similar to filters used
in annotation projection where noisy word-
alignments are “cleaned” with the help of addi-
tional languages (Bouma et al., 2008), we have
implemented a filter that only selects those par-
ticiples as adverbials which also exhibit a certain
amount of adverbial translations in the French and
Dutch Europarl. We count the total number of
adverbial translations of a given participle on the
French side and divide it by the number of English
adverbial translations. For French, the best f-score
is achieved at a threshold of >0.1 (filter FR). For
Dutch, the best f-score is achieved at a threshold
of >0.05 (filter NL). The exact precision and re-
call values are given in Table 4.

Syntax-based Filtering The intuition behind
the filters presented in this section is that adver-
bial translations which are due to cross-lingual di-
vergences can be identified on the basis of their
syntactic contexts. Information about these con-
texts can be extracted from the dependency anal-
yses produced by MaltParser for the German and
English data. On the German side, we want to ex-
clude those participle instances for which the Ger-
man parser has found an auxiliary head, since this
configuration points to a normal partciple context
in German. The filter is called G-HEAD in Table
4. It filters all types which have an auxiliary head
in more than 40% of their adverbial translation
configurations. On the English side, we exclude
all translations where the adverb has a verbal head
which is also aligned to the German partciple. The
filter is called E-HEAD in Table 4. It excludes all
participle types which exhibit the E-HEAD con-
figuration in more than 50% of the cases.

39



filter prec. rec. f-sc.
ADV-FREQ 0.38 0.75 0.51
FR 0.48 0.76 0.58
NL 0.33 0.73 0.45
G-HEAD 0.65 0.8 0.71
E-HEAD 0.4 0.8 0.53
COMBINED-1 0.61 0.8 0.69
COMBINED-2 0.86 0.76 0.81

Table 4: Performance of filters on the set of gold
adverbial participle types

Combined Token-level Filtering So far, we
have shown that multilingual and syntactic in-
formation is useful to filter non-parallel partici-
ple translations. We have found that the pre-
cision of the syntactic filters can still be in-
creased by combining it with the multilingual fil-
ters. COMBINED-1 in Table 4 refers to the filter
which only includes those participle types which
have at least one adverbial translation on the En-
glish target side such that (i) the adverbial trans-
lation is paralleled on the French or Dutch target
side for the same German participle token and (ii)
the German participle token does not have an aux-
iliary head. If we combine this token-level filter-
ing with the syntactic type-level filtering G-HEAD
and E-HEAD (the filter called COMBINED-2 in
Table 4), the precision increases by about 25%
with little loss in recall.

4.3 Analysis

Based on the filtering techniques described in the
previous section, we can finally induce a list of 46
German adverbial participles from Europarl. The
fact that this participle class seems fairly delimited
in our data raises the theoretical question whether
the adverb conversion is licensed by any linguistic,
i.e. lexical-semantic, properties of these partici-
ples. However, we observe that the automatically
induced list comprises very diverse types of ad-
verbs, as well as very distinct types of underlying
verbs. Thus, besides adverbs that clearly modify
events (see sentence (5)), we also found adverbs
that are more likely to modify adjectives (sentence
(7-a)), or propositions (sentence (7-b)).

(7) a. Es ist eine verdammt gefährliche Situation.
‘It is a damned dangerous situation.’

b. Wir machen einen Bericht über den Bericht des Rech-
nungshofes , zugegeben.
‘We are drafting a report about the report of the Court
of Auditors , admittedly.’

A more fine-grained classification and analysis
of adverbial participles is left for future research.

5 Grammar-based Evaluation

The resource of participles licensing adverbial use,
whose induction was described in the previous
section, can be straightforwardly integrated into
the German LFG. By explicitly enumerating the
participles in the adverb lexicon, the grammar can
apply the standard adverb macros to them. To as-
sess the effect of the filtering, we built two new
versions of the grammar: (i) Euro-Part-Adv, its ad-
verb lexicon comprises all adverbially translated
participles found in Europarl (1091 types) and (ii)
Filt-Part-Adv, its adverb lexicon comprises only
the syntactically and multilingually filtered par-
ticiples found in Europarl (46 types).

Although we have seen in section 3.2 that adver-
bial participles do not seem to occur in the TIGER
heldout set, we also know that it is important to
assess the effect of ambiguity rate on the overall
grammar performance. Therefore, we computed
the accuracy of the most probable parses produced
by the Euro-Part-Adv and Filt-Part-Adv on the
heldout set. As is shown in Table 5, the Euro-Part-
Adv performs significantly worse than Filt-Part-
Adv. This suggests that the non-filtered participle
resource is not constrained enough and still pro-
duces a lot of spurious ambiguites that mislead the
disambiguation component. The coverage values
in Table 6 further corroborate the observation that
the unfiltered participle resource behaves similar
to the unrestricted adverb conversion in All-Part-
Adv (see Section 3.2). The coverage of the filtered
vs. the unfiltered version on the development set is
identical, however the timeouts in Euro-Part-Adv
increase by 17% and parsing time by 8%.

By contrast, there is no significant difference
in f-score between the No-Part-Adv version pre-
sented in Section 3.2 and the Filt-Part-Adv ver-
sion. Thus, we can, at least, assume that the fil-
tered participles resources has restricted the mas-
sive overgeneration caused by the general adverb
conversion rule such that the overall performance
of the original grammar is not negatively affected.

To evaluate the participle resource as to whether
it could have a positive qualtitative effect on pars-
ing TIGER at all, we built a specialised test-
suite which comprises only sentences containing
a non-lexicalised participle, which has an adver-
bial translation in Europarl and is tagged as ADJD

40



Grammar Prec. Rec. F-Sc. Time
in sec

Euro-Part-Adv 82.32 75.78 78.91 701
Filt-Part-Adv 84.12 78.2 81.05 665

Table 5: Evaluation on the TIGER heldout set, 371
sentences total

Grammar Parsed
Sent.

Starred
Sent.

Time-
outs

Time
in sec

Euro-Part-Adv 4304 588 107 7359
Filt-Part-Adv 4304 604 91 6791

Table 6: Performance on the TIGER development
set (sentences 1-5000), 4999 sentences total

in TIGER. The sentences were extracted from the
whole TIGER corpus yielding a set of 139 sen-
tences. In this quality-oriented evaluation, we
only contrast the No-Part-Adv version with the
filtered Filt-Part-Adv version since the unfiltered
version leads to worse overall performance. As
can be seen in Table 7, the No-Part-Adv can only
completely cover 36% of the specialised testsuite
which is much lower than its average complete
coverage on the development set (86%). This sug-
gests that a substantial number of the extracted
ADJD participles are actually used as adverbial in
the specialised testsuite.

Similar to the qualitative evaluation procedure
in 3.2, we manually evaluated a random sample of
20 sentences covered by Filt-Part-Adv and not by
No-Part-Adv as to whether they contain an adver-
bial participle that has been correctly recognised.
This was the case for 90% of the sentences, the
remaining 2 sentences were cases of secondary
predications. An example of a relatively simple
TIGER sentence that the grammar could not cover
in the No-Part-Adv version is given in (8).

(8) Die Anti-Baby-Pillen stehen im Verdacht , vermehrt
Thrombosen auszulösen.
“The birth control pill is suspected to increasingly cause
thromboses.”

We also manually checked a random sample of

Grammar Parsed
Sent.

Starred
Sent.

Time-
outs

Time
in sec

No-Part-Adv 50 77 12 427
Filt-Part-Adv 92 39 8 366

Table 7: Performance on the specialised TIGER
test set, 139 sentences total

20 sentences that the Filt-Part-Adv grammar could
not cover, in order to see whether the grammar sys-
tematically misses certain cases of adverbial par-
ticiples. In this second random sample, the per-
centage of sentences containing a true adverbial
participle was again 90%. The grammar could
not correctly analyse these because of their spe-
cial syntax that is not covered by the general ad-
verb macro (or, of course, because of difficult con-
structions not related to adverbial participles). An
example for such a case is given in (9).

(9) Transitreisen junger Männer vom Gaza-Streifen ins
Westjordanland und umgekehrt sind nicht gestattet.
“Transit travels from the Gaza Strip to the West Bank and
vice versa are not allowed for young men.”

The high proportion of true adverbial participle
instances in our specific testsuite suggests that the
data we induced from Europarl largely carries over
to TIGER (despite genre differences, for instance)
and constitutes a generally useful resource. Thus,
we can not only say that the filtered participle re-
source has no negative effect on the overall per-
formance of the German LFG, but also extends its
coverage for a less frequent phenomenon in a lin-
guistically precise way.

6 Conclusion

We have proposed an empirical account for detect-
ing adverbial participles in German. Since this
category is usually not annotated in German re-
sources and hard to describe in theory, we based
our method on multilingual parallel data. This
data suggests that only a fairly limited class of par-
ticiples actually undergo the conversion to adverbs
in free text. We have described a set of linguisti-
cally motivated filters which are necessary to in-
duce a high-precision resource for adverbial par-
ticiples from parallel data. This resource has been
integrated into the German LFG grammar. In con-
trast to the version of the grammar which does not
restrict the participle - adverb conversion, the re-
stricted version produces less spurious ambigui-
ties which leads to better f-score on gold standard
data. Moreover, by manually evaluating a spe-
cialised data set, we have established that the re-
stricted version also extends the coverage and pro-
duces the correct analyses which can be used for
further linguistic study.

41



References

Tanja Becker. 2001. DMOR: Handbuch. Technical
report, IMS, University of Stuttgart.

Gerlof Bouma, Jonas Kuhn, Bettina Schrader, and
Kathrin Spreyer. 2008. Parallel LFG Grammars
on Parallel Corpora: A Base for Practical Trian-
gulation. In Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway
King, editors, Proceedings of the LFG08 Confer-
ence, pages 169–189, Sydney, Australia. CSLI Pub-
lications, Stanford.

Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolf-
gang Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The tiger
treebank. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories.

Joan Bresnan. 2000. Lexical-Functional Syntax.
Blackwell, Oxford.

Miriam Butt, Helge Dyvik, Tracy Holloway King, Hi-
roshi Masuichi, and Christian Rohrer. 2002. The
Parallel Grammar Project.

Aoife Cahill, John T. Maxwell III, Paul Meurer, Chris-
tian Rohrer, and Victoria Rosén. 2007. Speeding
up LFG Parsing using C-Structure Pruning . In Col-
ing 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Grammar
Engineering Across Frameworks, pages 33 – 40.

Stefanie Dipper. 2003. Implementing and Document-
ing Large-Scale Grammars — German LFG. Ph.D.
thesis, Universität Stuttgart, IMS.

Anette Frank, Tracy Holloway King, Jonas Kuhn, and
John T. Maxwell. 2001. Optimality Theory Style
Constraint Ranking in Large-Scale LFG Grammars
. In Peter Sells, editor, Formal and Empirical Issues
in Optimality Theoretic Syntax, page 367–397. CSLI
Publications.

Wilhelm Geuder. 2004. Depictives and transparent ad-
verbs. In J. R. Austin, S. Engelbrecht, and G. Rauh,
editors, Adverbials. The Interplay of Meaning, Con-
text, and Syntactic Structure, pages 131–166. Ben-
jamins.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In MT Summit 2005.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, and Jens Nilsson. 2006.
Maltparser: A data driven parser-generator for de-
pendency parsing. In Proc. of LREC-2006.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Stefan Riezler, Tracy Holloway King, Ronald M. Ka-
plan, Richard Crouch, John T. Maxwell, and Mark
Johnson. 2002. Parsing the Wall Street Journal us-
ing a Lexical-Functional Grammar and Discrimina-
tive Estimation Techniques . In Proceedings of ACL
2002.

Christian Rohrer and Martin Forst. 2006. Improving
coverage and parsing quality of a large-scale LFG
for German. In Proceedings of LREC-2006.

Anne Schiller, Simone Teufel, and Christine Thielen.
1995. Guidelines fuer das Tagging deutscher Tex-
tkorpora mit STTS. Technical report, IMS, Univer-
sity of Stuttgart.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing.

David Yarowsky, Grace Ngai, and Richard Wicen-
towski. 2001. Inducing multilingual text analysis
tools via robust projection across aligned corpora. In
Proceedings of HLT 2001, First International Con-
ference on Human Language Technology Research.

42


