










































EmotiBlog: A Finer-Grained and More Precise Learning of Subjectivity Expression Models


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 1–10,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

EmotiBlog: a finer-grained and more precise learning of subjectivity 
expression models 

Ester Boldrini 
University of Alicante, Department of 

Software and Computing Systems 
eboldrini@dlsi.ua.es 

Alexandra Balahur 
University of Alicante, Department of 

Software and Computing Systems 
abalahur@dlsi.ua.es 

Patricio Martínez-Barco 
University of Alicante, Department of 

Software and Computing Systems 
patricio@dlsi.ua.es 

Andrés Montoyo 
University of Alicante, Department of 

Software and Computing Systems 
montoyo@dlsi.ua.es 

 

Abstract 

 

The exponential growth of the subjective in-
formation in the framework of the Web 2.0 
has led to the need to create Natural Language 
Processing tools able to analyse and process 
such data for multiple practical applications. 
They require training on specifically annotated 
corpora, whose level of detail must be fine 
enough to capture the phenomena involved. 
This paper presents EmotiBlog – a fine-
grained annotation scheme for subjectivity. 
We show the manner in which it is built and 
demonstrate the benefits it brings to the sys-
tems using it for training, through the experi-
ments we carried out on opinion mining and 
emotion detection. We employ corpora of dif-
ferent textual genres –a set of annotated re-
ported speech extracted from news articles, the 
set of news titles annotated with polarity and 
emotion from the SemEval 2007 (Task 14) 
and ISEAR, a corpus of real-life self-
expressed emotion. We also show how the 
model built from the EmotiBlog annotations 
can be enhanced with external resources. The 
results demonstrate that EmotiBlog, through its 
structure and annotation paradigm, offers high 
quality training data for systems dealing both 
with opinion mining, as well as emotion detec-
tion. 

1 Credits 

This paper has been supported by Ministe-
rio de Ciencia e Innovación- Spanish Gov-
ernment (grant no. TIN2009-13391-C04-
01), and Conselleria d'Educación-
Generalitat Valenciana (grant no. PRO-
METEO/2009/119 and A-
COMP/2010/288).  

2 Introduction 
The exponential growth of the subjective infor-
mation with Web 2.0 created the need to develop 
new Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools to 
automatically process and manage the content 
available on the Internet. Apart from the tradi-
tional textual genres, at present we have new 
ones such as blogs, forums and reviews. The 
main difference between them is that the latter 
are predominantly subjective, containing per-
sonal judgments. At the moment, NLP tools and 
methods for analyzing objective information 
have a better performance than the new ones the 
research community is creating for managing the 
subjective content. The survey called “The State 
of the Blogosphere 2009”, published by Tech-
norati 1 , demonstrates that users are blogging 
more than ever. Furthermore, in contrast to the 
general idea about bloggers, each day it is more 
and more the number of professionals who de-
cide to use this means of communication, contra-
dicting the common belief about the predomi-
nance of an informal editing (Balahur et al., 
2009). Due to the growing interest in this text 
type, the subjective data of the Web is increasing 
on a daily basis, becoming a reflection of peo-
ple’s opinion about a wide range of topics. (Cui, 
Mittal and Datar, 2006). Blogs represent an im-
portant source of real-time, unbiased informa-
tion, useful for the development of many applica-
tions for concrete purposes. Given the proved 
importance of automatically processing this data, 
a new task has appeared in NLP task, dealing 
with the treatment of subjective data: Sentiment 
Analysis (SA). The main objective of this paper 
is to present EmotiBlog (Boldrini et al., 2009), a 
fine-grained annotation scheme for labeling sub-
jectivity in the new textual genres. Subjectivity 

                                                
1 http://technorati.com/ 

1



can be reflected in text through expressions of 
emotions beliefs, views (a way of considering 
something) 2  and opinions, generally denomi-
nated “private states” (Uspensky, 1973), not 
open to verification (Wiebe, 1994). We per-
formed a series of experiments focused on dem-
onstrating that EmotiBlog represents a step for-
ward to previous research in this field; its use 
allows a finer-grained and more precise learning 
of subjectivity expression models. Starting form 
(Wiebe, Wilson and Cardie, 2005) we created an 
annotation schema able to capture a wide range 
and key elements, which give subjectivity, mov-
ing a step forward the mere polarity recognition. 
In particular, the experiments concern expres-
sions of emotion, as a finer-grained analysis of 
affect in text and a subsequent task to opinion 
mining (OM) and classification. To that aim, we 
employ corpora of different textual genres– a set 
of annotated reported speech extracted from 
news articles (denominated JRC quotes) (Bala-
hur et al., 2010) and the set of news titles anno-
tated with polarity and emotion from the SemE-
val 2007 Task No. 14 (Strapparava and Mihal-
cea, 2007), as well as a corpus of real-life self-
expressed emotion entitled ISEAR (Scherer and 
Walbott, 1999). We subsequently show, through 
the quality of the results obtained, that Emoti-
Blog, through its structure and annotation para-
digm, offers high quality training for systems 
dealing both with opinion mining, as well as 
emotion detection.  

3 Motivation and Contribution 

The main motivation of this research is the dem-
onstrated necessity to work towards the harmoni-
zation and interoperability of the increasingly 
large number of tools and frameworks that sup-
port the creation, instantiation, manipulation, 
querying, and exploitation of annotated resource. 
This necessity is stressed by the new tools and 
resources, which have been recently created for 
processing the subjectivity in the new-textual 
genres born with the Web 2.0. Such predomi-
nantly subjective data is increasing at an expo-
nential rate (about 75000 new blogs are reported 
to be created every day) and contains opinions on 
the most diverse set of topics. Given its world-
wide availability, the subjective data on the Web 
has become a primary source of information 
(Balahur et al., 2009). As a consequence, new 
mechanisms have to be implemented so that this 

                                                
2 http://dictionary.cambridge.org/ 

data is effectively analyzed and processed. The 
main challenge of the opinionated content is that, 
unlike the objective one, which presents facts, 
the subjective information is most of the times 
difficult and complex to extract and classify us-
ing in grammatically static and fixed rules. Ex-
pression of subjectivity is more spontaneous and 
even if the majority is quite formal, new means 
of expressivity can be encountered, such as the 
use of colloquialisms, sayings, collocations or 
anomalies in the use of punctuation; this is moti-
vated by the fact that subjectivity expression is 
part of our daily life. For example, at the time of 
taking a decision, people search for information 
and opinions expressed on the Web on their mat-
ter of interest and base their final decision on the 
information found. At the same time, when using 
a product, people often write reviews on it, so 
that others can have a better idea of the perform-
ance of that product before purchasing it. There-
fore, on the one hand, the growing volume of 
opinion information available on the Web allows 
for better and more informed decisions of the 
users. On the other hand, the amount of data to 
be analyzed requires the development of special-
ized NLP systems that automatically extract, 
classify and summarize the data available on the 
Web on different topics. (Esuli and Sebastiani, 
2006) define OM as a recent discipline at the 
crossroads of Information Retrieval and Compu-
tational Linguistics, which is concerned not with 
the topic a document is about, but with the opin-
ion it expresses. Research in this field has proven 
the task to be very difficult, due to the high se-
mantic variability of affective language. Differ-
ent authors have addressed the problem of ex-
tracting and classifying opinion from different 
perspectives and at different levels, depending on 
a series of factors which can be level of interest 
(overall/specific), querying formula (“Nokia 
E65”/”Why do people buy Nokia E65?”), type of 
text (review on forum/blog/dialogue/press arti-
cle), and manner of expression of opinion - di-
rectly (using opinion statements, e.g. “I think this 
product is wonderful!”/”This is a bright initia-
tive”), indirectly (using affect vocabulary, e.g. “I 
love the pictures this camera 
takes!”/”Personally, I am shocked one can pro-
pose such a law!”) or implicitly (using adjectives 
and evaluative expressions, e.g. “It’s light as a 
feather and fits right into my pocket!”). While 
determining the overall opinion on a movie is 
sufficient for taking the decision to watch it or 
not, when buying a product, people are interested 
in the individual opinions on the different prod-

2



uct characteristics. When discussing a person, 
one can judge and give opinion on the person’s 
actions. Moreover, the approaches taken can vary 
depending on the manner in which a user asks 
for the data (general formula such as “opinions 
on X” or a specific question “Why do people like 
X?” and the text source that needs to be queried). 
Retrieving opinion information in newspaper 
articles or blogs posts is more complex, because 
it involves the detection of different discussion 
topics, the subjective phrases present and subse-
quently their classification according to polarity. 
Especially in the blog area, determining points of 
view expressed in dialogues together with the 
mixture of quotes and pastes from newspapers on 
a topic can, additionally, involve determining the 
persons present and whether or not the opinion 
expressed is on the required topic or on a point 
previously made by another speaker. This diffi-
cult NLP problem requires the use of specialized 
data for system training and tuning, gathered, 
annotated and tested within the different text 
spheres. At the present moment, these 
specialized resources are scarce and when they 
exist, they are rather simplistically annotated or 
highly domain-dependent. Moreover, most of 
these resources created are for the English. The 
contribution we describe in this paper intends to 
propose solutions to the above-mentioned 
problems, and consists of the following points: 
first of all, we overcome the problem of corpora 
scarcity in other languages except English and 
also improve the English ones; we present the 
manner in which we compiled a multilingual 
corpus of blog posts on different topics of 
interest in three languages-Spanish, Italian and 
English. The second issue we tried to solve was 
the coarse-grained annotation schemas employed 
in other annotation schema. Thus, we describe 
the new annotation model, EmotiBlog built up in 
order to capture the different 
subjectivity/objectivity, emotion/opinion/attitude 
aspects we are interested in at a finer-grained 
level. We justify the need for a more detailed 
annotation model, the sources and the reasons 
taken into consideration when constructing the 
corpus and its annotation. Thirdly, we address an 
aspect strongly related to blogs annotation: due 
the presence of “copy and pastes” from news 
articles or other blogs, the frequent quotes, we 
include the annotation of both the directly 
indicated source, as well as the anaphoric 
references at cross-document level. We discuss 
on the problems encountered at different stages 
and comment upon some of the conclusions we 
have reached while performing this research. 

this research. Finally, we conclude on our ap-
proach and propose the lines for future work. 

4 Related Work 

In recent years, different researchers have ad-
dressed the needs and possible methodologies 
from the linguistic, theoretical and practical 
points of view. Thus, the first step involved re-
sided in building lexical resources of affect, such 
as WordNet Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti, 
2004), SentiWordNet (Esuli and Sebastiani, 
2006), Micro-WNOP (Cerini et. Al, 2007) or 
“emotion triggers” (Balahur and Montoyo, 
2009). All these lexicons contain single words, 
whose polarity and emotions are not necessarily 
the ones annotated within the resource in a larger 
context. We also employed the ISEAR corpus, 
consisting of phrases where people describe a 
situation when they felt a certain emotion. Our 
work, therefore, concentrates on annotating 
larger text spans, in order to consider the undeni-
able influence of the context. The starting point 
of research in emotion is represented by (Balahur 
and Montoyo, 2008), who centered the idea of 
subjectivity around that of private states, and set 
the benchmark for subjectivity analysis as the 
recognition of opinion-oriented language in order 
to distinguish it from objective language and giv-
ing a method to annotate a corpus depending on 
these two aspects – MPQA (Wiebe, Wilson and 
Cardie, 2005). Furthermore, authors show that 
this initial discrimination is crucial for the senti-
ment task, as part of Opinion Information Re-
trieval  (last three editions of the TREC Blog 
tracks 3  competitions, the TAC 2008 competi-
tion4), Information Extraction (Riloff and Wiebe, 
2003) and Question Answering (Stoyanov et al., 
2004) systems. Once this discrimination is done, 
or in the case of texts containing only or mostly 
subjective language (such as e-reviews), opinion 
mining becomes a polarity classification task. 
Our work takes into consideration this initial dis-
crimination, but we also add a deeper level of 
emotion annotation. Since expressions of emo-
tion are also highly related to opinions, related 
work also includes customer review classifica-
tion at a document level, sentiment classification 
using unsupervised methods (Turney, 2002), 
Machine Learning techniques (Pang and Lee, 
2002), scoring of features (Dave, Lawrence and 
Pennock, 2003), using PMI, syntactic relations 

                                                
3 http://trec.nist.gov/data/blog.html 
4 http://www.nist.gov/tac/ 

3



and other attributes with SVM (Mullena and Col-
lier, 2004), sentiment classification considering 
rating scales (Pang and Lee, 2002), supervised 
and unsupervised methods (Chaovalit and Zhou, 
2005) and semisupervised learning (Goldberg 
and Zhou, 2006). Research in classification at a 
document level included sentiment classification 
of reviews (Ng, Dasgupta and Arifin, 2006), sen-
timent classification on customer feedback data 
(Gamon, Aue, Corston-Oliver, Ringger, 2005), 
comparative experiments (Cui, Mittal and Datar, 
2006). Other research has been conducted in ana-
lysing sentiment at a sentence level using boot-
strapping techniques (Riloff, Wiebe, 2003), con-
sidering gradable adjectives (Hatzivassiloglou, 
Wiebe, 2000), semisupervised learning with the 
initial training some strong patterns and then ap-
plying NB or self-training (Wiebe and Riloff, 
2005) finding strength of opinions (Wolson, 
Wiebe, Hwa, 2004) sum up orientations of opin-
ion words in a sentence (or within some word 
window) (Kim and Hovy, 2004), (Wilson and 
Wiebe, 2004), determining the semantic orienta-
tion of words and phrases (Turney and Littman, 
2003), identifying opinion holders (Stoyanov and 
Cardie, 2006), comparative sentence and relation 
extraction and feature-based opinion mining and 
summarization (Turney, 2002). Finally, fine-
grained, feature-based opinion summarization is 
defined in (Hu and Liu, 2004) and researched in 
(Turney, 2002) or (Pang and Lee, 2002). All 
these approaches concentrate on finding and 
classifying the polarity of opinion words, which 
are mostly adjectives, without taking into ac-
count modifiers or the context in general. Our 
work, on the other hand, represents the first step 
towards achieving a contextual comprehension 
of the linguistic roots of emotion expression. 

5 Corpora 

It is well known that nowadays blogs are the 
second way of communication most used after 
the e-mail. They are extremely useful and a poll 
for discussing about any topic with the world. 
For this reason, the first corpus object of our 
study is a collection of blog posts extracted from 
the Web. The texts we selected have distinctive 
features, extremely different from traditional tex-
tual ones. In fact people writing a post can use an 
informal language colloquialism, emoticons, etc. 
to express their feelings and it is not rare to find 
a mix of sources in the same post; people usually 
mention some facts or discourses and then they 
give their opinion about them. As we can deduce, 

the source detection represents one of the most 
complex tasks. As we mentioned above, we car-
ried out a multilingual research, collecting texts 
in three languages: Spanish, Italian, and English 
about three subjects of interest. The first one 
contains blog posts commenting upon the signing 
of the Kyoto Protocol against global warming, 
the second collection consists of blog entries 
about the Mugabe government in Zimbabwe, and 
finally we selected a series of blog posts discuss-
ing the issues related to the 2008 USA presiden-
tial elections. For each of the abovementioned 
topics, we have gathered 100 texts, summing up 
a total of 30.000 words approximately for each 
language. However in this research we start with 
English but consider as future work labeling the 
other languages we have. The second corpus we 
employed for this research is a collection of 1592 
quotes extracted from the news in April 2008. As 
a consequence they are about many different top-
ics and in English (Balahur and Steinberg, 2009). 
Both of these corpora have been annotated with 
EmotiBlog that is presented in the next section. 

6 EmotiBlog Annotation Model 
Our annotation schema can be defined as a fine-
grained model for labelling subjectivity of the 
new-textual genres born with the Web 2.0. As 
mentioned above, it represents a step forward to 
previous research and it is focused on detecting 
the linguistic elements, which give subjectivity 
to the text. The EmotiBlog annotation is divided 
into different levels (Figure 1). 
 

 
Figure 1: General structure of EmotiBlog. 

 
As we can observe in Figure 1, the first distinc-
tion to be made is between objective and subjec-
tive speech. If we are labelling an objective sen-
tence, we insert the source element, while if we 
are annotating a subjective discourse, a list of 
elements with the corresponding attributes have 
to be added. We select among the list of subjec-
tive elements and specify the element’s attrib-

4



utes. Table 1 presents the annotation model in 
detail. 

 
Elem. Description 

Obj. speech Confidence, comment, source, target. 
Subj. speech Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 

phenomenon, polarity, source and target. 
Adjectives Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 

phenomenon, modifier/not, polarity, source 
and target. 

Adverbs Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 
phenomenon, modifier/not, polarity, source 
and target. 

Verbs Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 
phenomenon, polarity, mode, source and 
target. 

Anaphora Confidence, comment, type, source and 
target. 

Capital letter Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 
phenomenon, modifier/not, polarity, source 
and target. 

Punctuation Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 
phenomenon, modifier/not, polarity, source 
and target. 

Names Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 
phenomenon, modifier/not, polarity, and 
source. 

Phenomenon Confidence, comment, type: collocation, 
saying, slang, title, and rhetoric. 

Reader Inter-
pretation 

Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 
phenomenon, polarity, source and target. 

Author Inter-
pretation 

Confidence, comment, level, emotion, 
phenomenon, polarity, source and target. 

Emotions Confidence, comment, accept, anger, 
anticipation, anxiety, appreciation, bad, 
bewilderment, comfort, … 

Table 1: EmotiBlog structure 
 

Each element of the discourse has its own attrib-
utes with a series of features, which have to be 
annotated. Due to space reasons it is impossible 
to detail each one of them, however we would 
like to underline the most innovative and rel-
evant. For each element we are labelling the an-
notator has to insert his level of confidence. In 
this way we will assign each label a weight that 
will be computed for future evaluations. More-
over, the annotator has to insert the polarity, 
which can be positive or negative, the level 
(high, medium, low) and also the sentiment this 
element is expressing. Table 2 presents a com-
plete list of the emotions we selected to be part 
of EmotiBlog. We grouped all sentiments into 
subgroups in order to help the evaluation pro-
cess. In fact emotions of the same subgroup will 
have less impact when calculating the inter-
annotation agreement. In order to make this sub-
division proper and effective division, we were 
inspired by (Scherer, 2005) who created an alter-
native dimensional structure of the semantic 
space for emotions. The graph below represents 
the mapping of the term Russell (1983) uses for 
his claim of an emotion circumflex in two-

dimensional valence by activity/arousal space 
(upper-case terms). As we can appreciate, the 
circle is divided by 4 axes. Moreover, Scherer 
distinguishes between positive and negative sen-
timents and after that between active and passive. 
Furthermore emotions are grouped between ob-
structive and conductive, and finally between 
high power and low power control. We started 
form this classification, grouping sentiments into 
positive and negative, but we divided them as 
high/low power control, obstructive/conductive 
and active/passive. Further on, we distributed the 
sentiments within our list into the Scherer slots 
creating other smaller categories included in the 
abovementioned general ones. The result of this 
division is shown in Table 2: 

Table 2: Alternative dimensional structures of the 
semantic space for emotions 

 
Following with the description of the model, we 
said that the first distinction to be made is be-
tween objective and subjective speech. Analys-
ing the texts we collected, we realised that even 
if the writer uses an objective speech, sometimes 
it is just apparently objective and for this reason 
we added two elements: reader and author inter-
pretation. The first one is the impres-
sion/feeling/reaction the reader has reading the 
intervention and what s/he can deduce from the 
piece of text and the author interpretation is what 
we can understand from the author (politic orien-
tation, preferences). All this information can be 
deduced form some linguistic elements that ap-
parently are not so objective as they may appear. 
Another innovative element we inserted in the 
model is the coreference but just at a cross-post 
level. It is necessary because blogs are composed 
by posts linked between them and thus cross-

Group Emotions 
Criticism Sarcasm, irony, incorrect, criticism, 

objection, opposition, scepticism. 
Happiness Joy, joke. 
Support Accept, correct, good, hope, support, 

trust, rapture, respect, patience, 
appreciation, excuse. 

Importance Important, interesting, will, justice, 
longing, anticipation, revenge. 

Gratitude Thank. 
Guilt Guilt, vexation. 
Fear Fear, fright, troubledness, anxiety. 
Surprise Surprise, bewilderment, disappoint-

ment, consternation. 
Anger Rage, hatred, enmity, wrath, force, 

anger, revendication. 
Envy Envy, rivalry, jealousy. 
Indifference Unimportant, yield, sluggishness. 
Pity Compassion, shame, grief. 
Pain Sadness, lament, remorse, mourning, 

depression, despondency. 
Shyness Timidity. 
Bad Bad, malice, disgust, greed. 

5



document coreference can help the reader to fol-
low the conversations. We also label the unusual 
usage of capital letters and repeated punctuation. 
In fact, it is very common in blogs to find words 
written in capital letter or with no conventional 
usage of punctuation; these features usually 
mean shouts or a particular mood of the writer. 
Using EmotiBlog, we annotate the single ele-
ments, but we also mark sayings or collocations, 
representative of each language. A saying is a 
well-known and wise statement, which often has 
a meaning, different from the simple meanings of 
the words it contains5; while a collocation is a 
word or phrase, which is frequently used with 
another word or phrase, in a way that sounds cor-
rect to native speakers, but might not be expected 
from the individual words’ meanings6. Finally 
we insert for each element the source and topic. 
An example of annotation can be:  <phenomenon 
target="Kyoto Protocol" category="phrase" degree="medium" 
source="w" polarity="positive" emotion="good">The Onion has a 
<adjective target="Kyoto Protocol" phenomenon="phrase" de-
gree="medium" polarity="positive" emotion="good" source="w" 
ismodifier="yes">great</adjective> story today titled “Bush Told 
to Sign Birthday Treaty for Someone Named Kyoto." 
</phenomenon> 

7 Experiments and Evaluation 

In order to evaluate the appropriateness of the 
EmotiBlog annotation scheme and to prove that 
the fine-grained level it aims at has a positive 
impact on the performance of the systems em-
ploying it as training, we performed several ex-
periments. Given that a) EmotiBlog contains an-
notations for individual words, as well as for 
multi-word expressions and at a sentence level, 
and b) they are labeled with polarity, but also 
emotion, our experiments show how the anno-
tated elements can be used as training for the 
opinion mining and polarity classification task, 
as well as for emotion detection. Moreover, tak-
ing into consideration the fact that EmotiBlog 
labels the intensity level of the annotated ele-
ments, we performed a brief experiment on de-
termining the sentiment intensity, measured on a 
three-level scale: low, medium and high. In order 
to perform these three different evaluations, we 
chose three different corpora. The first one is a 
collection of quotes (reported speech) from 
newspaper articles presented in (Balahur et al., 
2010), enriched with the manual fine-grained 

                                                
5  Definition according to the Cambridge Advanced Learner’s 
Dictionary 
6   Definition according to the Cambridge Advanced Learner’s 
Dictionary 

annotation of EmotiBlog7; the second one is the 
collection of newspaper titles in the test set of the 
SemEval 2007 task number 14 – Affective Text. 
Finally, the third one is a corpus of self-reported 
emotional response – ISEAR (Scherer and Wal-
bott, 1999). The intensity classification task is 
evaluated only on the second corpus, given that it 
is the only one in which scores between -100 and 
0 and 0 and 100, respectively, are given for the 
polarity of the titles. 

 
6.1 Creation of training models 

For the OM and polarity classification task, we 
first extracted the Named Entities contained in 
the annotations using Lingpipe and united 
through a “_” all the tokens pertaining to the NE. 
All the annotations of punctuation signs that had 
a specific meaning together were also united un-
der a single punctuation sign. Subsequently, we 
processed the annotated data, using Minipar. We 
compute, for each word in a sentence, a series of 
features (some of these features are used in (Choi 
et al., 2005): 
• the part of speech (POS)  
• capitalization (if all letters are in capitals, if 

only the first letter is in capitals, and if it is a 
NE or not) 

• opinionatedness/intensity/emotion - if the 
word is annotated as opinion word, its polar-
ity, i.e. 1 and -1 if the word is positive or 
negative, respectively and 0 if it is not an 
opinion word, its intensity (1.2 or 3) and 0 if 
it is not a subjective word, its emotion (if it 
has, none otherwise) 

• syntactic relatedness with other opinion 
word – if it is directly dependent of an opin-
ion word or modifier (0 or 1), plus the polar-
ity/intensity and emotion of this word (0 for 
all the components otherwise) 

•  role in 2-word, 3-word and 4-word annota-
tions: opinionatedness, intensity and emo-
tion of the other words contained in the an-
notation, direct dependency relations with 
them if they exist and 0 otherwise.  

We compute the length of the longest sentence in 
EmotiBlog. The feature vector for each of the 
sentences contains the feature vectors of each of 
its words and 0s for the corresponding feature 
vectors of the words, which the current sentence 
has less than the longest annotated sentence. Fi-
nally, we add for each sentence as feature binary 
features for subjectivity and polarity, the value 
corresponding to the intensity of opinion and the 
                                                
7 Freely available on request to the authors. 

6



general emotion. These feature vectors are fed 
into the Weka8 SVM SMO ML algorithm and a 
model is created (EmotiBlog I). A second model 
(EmotiBlog II) is created by adding to the collec-
tion of single opinion and emotion words anno-
tated in EmotiBlog, the Opinion Finder lexicon 
and the opinion words found in MicroWordNet, 
the General Inquirer resource and WordNet Af-
fect.  

 
6.2 Evaluation of models on test sets 
 

In order to evaluate the performance of the mod-
els extracted from the features of the annotations 
in EmotiBlog, we performed different tests. The 
first one regarded the evaluation of the polarity 
and intensity classification task using the Emoit-
blog I and II constructed models on two test sets 
– the JRC quotes collection and the SemEval 
2007 Task Number 14 test set. Since the quotes 
often contain more than a sentence, we consider 
the polarity and intensity of the entire quote as 
the most frequent result in each class, corre-
sponding to its constituent sentences. Also, given 
the fact that the SemEval Affective Text head-
lines were given intensity values between -100 
and 100, we mapped the values contained in the 
Gold Standard of the task into three categories: [-
100, -67] is high (value 3 in intensity) and nega-
tive (value -1 in polarity), [-66, 34] medium 
negative and [33, 1] is low negative. The values 
between [1 and 100] are mapped in the same 
manner to the positive category. 0 was consid-
ered objective, so containing the value 0 for in-
tensity. The results are presented in Table 3 (the 
values I and II correspond to the models Emoti-
Blog I and EmotiBlog II):  
 
Test  
Corpus 

Evaluation 
type 

Precision Recall 

Polarity 32.13 54.09 JRC quotes I 
Intensity 36.00 53.2 
Polarity 36.4 51.00 JRC quotes 

II Intensity 38.7 57.81 
Polarity 38.57 51.3 SemEval I 
Intensity 37.39 50.9 
Polarity 35.8 58.68 SemEval II 
Intensity 32.3 50.4 

Table 3. Results for polarity and intensity classifi-
cation using the models built from the EmotiBlog 

annotations 
The results shown in Table 2 show a signifi-
cantly high improvement over the results ob-
tained in the SemEval task in 2007. This is ex-
plainable, on the one hand, by the fact that sys-

                                                
8 http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ 

tems performing the opinion task did not have at 
their disposal the lexical resources for opinion 
employed in the EmotiBlog II model, but also 
because of the fact that they did not use machine 
learning on a corpus comparable to EmotiBlog 
(as seen from the results obtained when using 
solely the EmotiBlog I corpus). Compared to the 
NTCIR 8 Multilingual Analysis Task this year, 
we obtained significant improvements in preci-
sion, with a recall that is comparable to most of 
the participating systems. In the second experi-
ment, we tested the performance of emotion clas-
sification using the two models built using Emo-
tiBlog on the three corpora – JRC quotes, SemE-
val 2007 Task No.14 test set and the ISEAR cor-
pus. The JRC quotes are labeled using Emoti-
Blog; however, the other two are labeled with a 
small set of emotions – 6 in the case of the Se-
mEval data (joy, surprise, anger, fear, sadness, 
disgust) and 7 in ISEAR (joy, sadness, anger, 
fear, guilt, shame, disgust). Moreover, the Se-
mEval data contains more than one emotion per 
title in the Gold Standard, therefore we consider 
as correct any of the classifications containing 
one of them. In order to unify the results and ob-
tain comparable evaluations, we assessed the 
performance of the system using the alternative 
dimensional structures defined in Table 1. The 
ones not overlapping with the category of any of 
the 8 different emotions in SemEval and ISEAR 
are considered as “Other” and are not included 
either in the training, nor test set. The results of 
the evaluation are presented in Table 4. Again, 
the values I and II correspond to the models 
EmotiBlog I and II. The “Emotions” category 
contains the following emotions: joy, sadness, 
anger, fear, guilt, shame, disgust, surprise. 
 
Test  
corpus 

Evaluation  
type 

Precision Recall 

JRC 
quotes I 

Emotions  
 

24.7 15.08 

JRC 
quotes II 

Emotions 
 

33.65 18.98 

SemEval I Emotions 29.03 18.89 
SemEval II Emotions 32.98 18.45 
ISEAR I Emotions 22.31 15.01 
ISEAR II Emotions 25.62 17.83 
Table 4. Results for emotion classification using the 

models built from the EmotiBlog annotations. 
The best results for emotion detection were ob-
tained for the “anger” category, where the preci-
sion was around 35 percent, for a recall of 19 
percent. The worst results obtained were for the 
ISEAR category of “shame”, where precision 
was around 12 percent, with a recall of 15 per-

7



cent. We believe this is due to the fact that the 
latter emotion is a combination of more complex 
affective states and it can be easily misclassified 
to other categories of emotion. Moreover, from 
the analysis performed on the errors, we realized 
that many of the affective phenomena presented 
were more explicit in the case of texts expressing 
strong emotions such as “joy” and “anger”, and 
were mostly related to common-sense interpreta-
tion of the facts presented in the weaker ones. As 
it can be seen in Table 3, results for the texts per-
taining to the news category obtain better results, 
most of all news titles. This is due to the fact that 
such texts, although they contain a few words, 
have a more direct and stronger emotional charge 
than direct speech (which may be biased by the 
need to be diplomatic, find the best suited words 
etc.). Finally, the error analysis showed that emo-
tion that is directly reported by the persons expe-
riencing is more “hidden”, in the use of words 
carrying special signification or related to gen-
eral human experience. This fact makes emotion 
detection in such texts a harder task. Neverthe-
less, the results in all corpora are comparable, 
showing that the approach is robust enough to 
handle different text types. All in all, the results 
obtained using the fine and coarse-grained anno-
tations in EmotiBlog increased the performance 
of emotion detection as compared to the systems 
in the SemEval competition.  
 

6.3 Discussion on the overall results 
 

From the results obtained, we can see that this 
approach combining the features extracted from 
the EmotiBlog fine and coarse-grained annota-
tions helps to balance between the results ob-
tained for precision and recall. The impact of 
using additional resources that contain opinion 
words is that of increasing the recall of the sys-
tem, at the cost of a slight drop in precision, 
which proves that the approach is robust enough 
so that additional knowledge sources can be 
added. Although the corpus is small, the results 
obtained show that the phenomena it captures is 
relevant in the OM task, not only for the blog 
sphere, but also for other types of text (newspa-
per articles, self-reported affect). 

8 Conclusions and future work 

Due to the exponential increase of the subjective 
information result of the high-level usage of the 
Internet and the Web 2.0, NLP able to process 
this data are required. In this paper we presented 

the procedure by which we compiled a multilin-
gual corpus of blog posts on different topics of 
interest in three languages: Spanish, Italian and 
English. Further on, we explained the need to 
create a finer-grained annotation schema that can 
be used to improve the performance of subjectiv-
ity mining systems. Thus, we presented the new 
annotation model, EmotiBlog and justified the 
benefits of this detailed annotation schema, pre-
senting the sources and the reasons taken into 
consideration when building up the corpus and 
its labeling. Furthermore, we addressed the pres-
ence of “copy and pastes” from news articles or 
other blogs, the frequent quotes. For solving this 
possible ambiguity we included the annotation of 
both the directly indicated source, as well as the 
anaphoric references at cross-document level. 
We performed several experiments on three dif-
ferent corpora, aimed at finding and classifying 
both the opinion, as well as the expressions of 
emotion they contained; we showed that the fine 
and coarse-grained levels of annotation that 
EmotiBlog contains offers important information 
on the structure of affective texts, leading to an 
improvement of the performance of systems 
trained on it. Although the EmotiBlog corpus is 
small, the results obtained are promising and 
show that the phenomena it captures are relevant 
in the OM task, not only for the blog sphere, but 
also for other textual-genres. It is well known 
that OM is an extremely challenging task and a 
young discipline, thus there is room for im-
provement above all to solve linguistic phenom-
ena such as the correference resolution at a cross 
document level, temporal expression recognition. 
In addition to this, more experiments would need 
to be done in order to verify the complete ro-
bustness of EmotiBlog. Last but not least, our 
idea is to include the existing tools for a more 
effective semi-supervised annotation. After the 
training of the ML system we obtain automati-
cally some markables which have to be validated 
or not by the annotator and the ideal option 
would be to connect these terms the system de-
tects automatically with tools, such as the map-
ping with an opinion lexicon based on WordNet 
(SentiWordNet, WordNet Affect, MicroWord-
Net), in order to automatically annotate all the 
synonyms and antonyms with the same or the 
opposite polarity respectively and assigning them 
some other elements contemplated into the Emo-
tiBlog annotation schema. This would mean an 
important step forward for saving time during the 
annotation process and it will also assure a high 
quality annotation due to the human supervision. 

8



References 
Balahur A., Steinberger R., Kabadjov M., Zavarella 

V., van der Goot E., Halkia M., Pouliquen B., and 
Belyaeva J. 2010. Sentiment Analysis in the News.  
In Proceedings of LREC 2010. 

Balahur A., Boldrini E., Montoyo A., Martínez-Barco 
P. 2009. A Comparative Study of Open Domain 
and Opinion Question Answering Systems for Fac-
tual and Opinionated Queries. In Proceedings of 
the Recent Advances in Natural Language Proc-
essing. 

Balahur A., Montoyo A. 2008. Applying a Culture 
Dependent Emotion Triggers Database for Text 
Valence and Emotion Classification. In Proceed-
ings of the AISB 2008 Symposium on Affective 
Language in Human and Machine, Aberdeen, Scot-
land. 

Balahur A., Steinberger R., Rethinking Sentiment 
Analysis in the News: from Theory to Practice and 
back. In Proceeding of WOMSA 2009. Seville. 

Balahur A., Boldrini E., Montoyo A., Martínez-Barco 
P. 2009. Summarizing Threads in Blogs Using 
Opinion Polarity. In Proceedings of ETTS work-
shop. RANLP. 2009. 

Boldrini E., Balahur A., Martínez-Barco P., Montoyo 
A. 2009. EmotiBlog: a fine-grained model for 
emotion detection in non-traditional textual gen-
res. In Proceedings of WOMSA. Seville, Spain. 

Boldrini E., Fernández J., Gómez J.M., Martínez-
Barco P. 2009. Machine Learning Techniques for 
Automatic Opinion Detection in Non-Traditional 
Textual Genres. In Proceedings of WOMSA 2009. 
Seville, Spain. 

Chaovalit P, Zhou L. 2005. Movie Review Mining: a 
Comparison between Supervised and Unsupervised 
Classification Approaches. In Proceedings of 
HICSS-05. 

Carletta J. 1996. Assessing agreement on 
classification task: the kappa statistic. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 22(2): 249–254. 

Cui H., Mittal V., Datar M. 2006. Comparative Ex-
periments on Sentiment Classification for Online 
Product Reviews. In Proceedings of the 21st Na-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence AAAI. 

Cerini S., Compagnoni V., Demontis A., Formentelli 
M., and Gandini G. 2007. Language resources and 
linguistic theory: Typology, second language ac-
quisition. English linguistics (Forthcoming), chap-
ter Micro-WNOp: A gold standard for the evalua-
tion of automatically compiled lexical resources for 
opinion mining. Franco Angeli Editore, Milano, IT. 

Choi Y., Cardie C., Rilloff E., Padwardhan S. 2005. 
Identifying Sources of Opinions with Conditional 
Random  Fields and Extraction Patterns.  In Pro-
ceedings of the HLT/EMNLP.  

Dave K., Lawrence S., Pennock, D. “Mining the Pea-
nut Gallery: Opinion Extraction and Semantic 
Classification of Product Reviews”. In Proceedings 
of WWW-03. 2003. 

Esuli A., Sebastiani F. 2006. SentiWordNet: A Pub-
licly Available Resource for Opinion Mining. In 
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2006, 
Genoa, Italy.  

Gamon M., Aue S., Corston-Oliver S., Ringger E. 
2005. Mining Customer Opinions from Free Text. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 

Goldberg A.B., Zhu J. 2006. Seeing stars when there 
aren’t many stars: Graph-based semi-supervised 
learning for sentiment categorization. In HLT-
NAACL 2006 Workshop on Textgraphs: Graph-
based Algorithms for Natural Language Process-
ing. 

Hu M., Liu B. 2004. Mining Opinion Features in Cus-
tomer Reviews. In Proceedings of Nineteenth Na-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence AAAI. 

Hatzivassiloglou V., Wiebe J. 2000. Effects of adjec-
tive orientation and gradability on sentence subjec-
tivity. In Proceedings of COLING.  

Kim S.M., Hovy E. 2004. Determining the Sentiment 
of Opinions. In Proceedings of COLING. 

Mullen T., Collier N. 2006. Sentiment Analysis Using 
Support Vector Machines with Diverse Information 
Sources. In Proceedings of EMNLP. 2004. Lin, 
W.H., Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., Hauptman, A. “Which 
Side are You On? Identifying Perspectives at the 
Document and Sentence Levels”. In Proceedings of 
the Tenth Conference on Natural Language Learn-
ing CoNLL.2006.  

Ng V., Dasgupta S. and Arifin S. M. 2006. Examining 
the Role of Linguistics Knowledge Sources in the 
Automatic Identification and Classification of Re-
views. In the proceedings of the ACL, Sydney. 

Pang B., Lee L., Vaithyanathan S. 2002. Thumbs up? 
Sentiment classification using machine learning 
techniques. In Proceedings of EMNLP-02, the 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. 

Riloff E., Wiebe J. 2003. Learning Extraction Pat-
terns for Subjective Expressions. In Proceedings of 
the 2003 Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing.  

Strapparava C. Valitutti A. 2004. WordNet-Affect: an 
affective extension of WordNet. In Proceedings 
ofthe 4th International  Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, LREC. 

Russell J.A. 1983. Pancultural aspects of the human 
conceptual organization of emotions. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 45: 1281–8. 

Scherer K. R. 2005. What are emotions? And how can 
they be measured? Social Science Information, 
44(4), 693–727. 

Stoyanov V. and Cardie C. 2006. Toward Opinion 
Summarization: Linking the Sources. COLING-
ACL. Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in 
Text. 

Stoyanov V., Cardie C., Litman D., and Wiebe J. 
2004. Evaluating an Opinion Annotation Scheme 
Using a New Multi-Perspective Question and An-

9



swer Corpus. AAAI Spring Symposium on Explor-
ing Attitude and Affect in Text.  

Strapparava and Mihalcea, 2007 - SemEval 2007 
Task 14: Affective Text. In  Proceedings of the 
ACL.   

Turney P. 2002. Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down? Se-
mantic Orientation Applied to Unsupervised Clas-
sification of Reviews. ACL 2002: 417-424. 

Turney P., Littman M. 2003. Measuring praise and 
criticism: Inference of semantic orientation from 
association. ACM Transactions on Information 
Systems 21. 

Uspensky B. 1973. A Poetics of Composition. Univer-
sity of California Press, Berkeley, California. 

Wiebe J. M. 1994. Tracking point of view in narra-
tive. Computational Linguistics, vol. 20, pp. 233–
287. 

Wiebe J., Wilson T. and Cardie C. 2005. Annotating 
expressions of opinions and emotions in language. 
Language Resources and Evaluation. 

Wilson T., Wiebe J., Hwa R. 2004. Just how mad are 
you? Finding strong and weak opinion clauses. In: 
Proceedings of AAAI. 

Wiebe J., Wilson T. and Cardie C. 2005. “Annotation 
Expressions of Opinions and Emotions in Lan-
guage. Language Resources and Evaluation.  

Wiebe J., Riloff E. 2005. Creating Subjective and 
Objective Sentence Classifiers from Unannotated 
Texts. In Proceedings of the 6th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics and Intelli-
gent Text Processing (CICLing).  

 
 
 

 

10


