










































Modeling Message Roles and Influence in QA Forums


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 11–12,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modeling Message Roles and Influence in Q&A Forums 
 

Jeonhyung Kang and Jihie Kim 
University of Southern California  

Information Sciences Institute 
4676 Admiralty Was, Marina del Rey, CA, U.S.A 

{jeonhyuk, jihie}@isi.edu 
 

Abstract 

We are modeling roles of individual messages 
and participants in Q&A discussion forums. In 
this paper, we present a mixed network model 
that represents message exchanges and message 
influences within a discussion thread.  We first 
model individual message roles and thread-level 
user roles using discussion content features. We 
then combine the resulting message roles and the 
user roles to generate the overall influence net-
work. Message influences and their aggregation 
over the network are analyzed using B-centrality 
measures.  We use the results in identifying the 
most influential message in answering the initial 
question of the thread.  

1 Introduction 

Online discussion boards play an important role in 
various fields, including science, politics, and edu-
cation. Understanding patterns of group interac-
tions can be important in many applications. For 
example, in Q&A forums, some messages contain 
more useful or influential answers than others. 
Identifying useful content can help future discus-
sions with similar issues. That is, useful informa-
tion on a topic can be sent to related discussions 
(Kim et al., 2009). 

There has been some work on analyzing dia-
logue patterns in online discussion boards (Feng et 
al, 2006). Some of these model message roles us-
ing dialogue acts such as question act or answer 
act. Most of these focus on modeling individual 
messages, often using surface forms.  There has 
been limited study on thread-level modeling of the 
true roles of the messages, whether they provide 
information (source) or seek information (sink), or 
which message in the thread is most useful or in-
fluential as the source. 

In this paper, we present a novel model of mes-
sage influence within a discussion thread.  In mod-

eling the thread-level influence of the messages, 
besides the sink/source role of the individual mes-
sages, we take into account the roles of the mes-
sage posters within the thread.  In Q&A discussion 
threads, since the roles of the posters as an infor-
mation provider or an information seeker often do 
not change within the same thread, such informa-
tion can help us identify the true roles or influence 
of the messages. 

 We combine the message roles and the user 
roles with a network model. Message influences 
and their aggregation over the network are ana-
lyzed using B-centrality measures.  We use the 
resulting influence scores in identifying the most 
influential message in answering the initial ques-
tion of the thread. 

2 Modeling Message Influence  

We use discussion data from an Operating Systems 
course in the Computer Science department at the 
University of Southern California. Students use a 
discussion board, most commonly, to seek help on 
the project assignments. For this study, we use data 
from the Fall 2007 semester, with 177 discussion 
threads (randomly choose 133 for training and 44 
for test) with 580 messages (randomly choose 451 
for training and 129 for test). 

2.1 Sink and source roles of a message 

For each pair of messages where one is a reply to 
the other, we model the roles of the latter, as a sink 
or a source with respect to the former message or 
the message author. Some messages, especially 
long ones, can have both roles. Figure 1 shows an 
influence model of sink and source. A node repre-
sents either a user or a message. An edge is either a 
reply-to relation between two messages or an own-
ership of a message by a user. The direction of 
each edge indicates the direction of influence. A 
source is a message that provides information and 
it generates influence. In the top graph, B responds 

11



to A’s message as an information source. A sink 
message requests information from others so the 
edge direction goes towards it.  Note that sinks and 
sources are different from questions and answers 
since some of sources can take a form of a question 
(e.g. have you checked the manual?). 
 

 
 
 
 

 

Figure 1: Sink and source role of a message 

2.2 Information seeker and information pro-
vider: Thread level roles 

Figure 2 shows an influence model of an informa-
tion seeker and an information provider when they 
exchange messages. The information flows from 
the information provider to the information seeker, 
as indicated by the direction of the edges. In gen-
eral, the initial poster seeks information and his or 
her role does not usually change within the thread. 
Without loss of generality, we assume that within a 
discussion thread, a user’s role doesn’t change for 
a certain amount of time, although he or she can 
post both Sink and Source messages, as shown in 
Figure 2.  Using this model, we can capture the 
intention of the message based on who posted the 
message. 
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
 

 
Figure 2: Thread-level user intention and message roles 

2.3 Message and Participant Role Classifiers  

Individual messages were annotated with sink and 
source information. The same message can have 
both sink and source roles with respect to the prior 
message or its poster.  

The features used include cue phases (n-
grams) and their positions, message position in the 
thread, author change information, the relative po-
sition of the message in the thread, a user’s partici-
pation frequency (normalized), n-gram of previous 
messages with their positions and the message 
length. The details of these features are described 
in Kim et al (2009).  

We used a Support Vector Machine (Chang 
and Lin 2001) to create two binary classifiers 
(since one message can have both roles) that iden-
tify message roles: source and sink, and one binary 
classifier for user roles: information seeker and 
information provider. The precisions/recalls range 
from 0.89 to 0.96. F-scores are within 0.92-0.93. 

3 Profiling Influence of Message with Cen-
trality Measures  

We generate a message-role graph and a user-role 
graph using the above model, and generate influ-
ence network combining user and message roles. 
Message influences and their aggregation over the 
network are analyzed using B-centrality measures. 
To evaluate our source score accuracy (Ghosh and 
Lerman 2009), we annotated the most influential 
source message for the initial question (sink) in 
each thread. We use Mean Reciprocal Rank Score 
(MRR) to evaluate our results. The combined 
model provides better results with an MRR score 
of 0.90. 

Ranking strategy Information used MRR 

Influence Network 
Model score 

User role + msg 
role 

0.90 

Earlier source msg  msg role + msg 
location 

0.74 

Earlier msg from info 
providers  

User role + msg 
location 

0.68 

Table 2: MRR scores for different strategies 

Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by National Science 
Foundation, CCLI Phase II (#0618859).  

References  
Feng, D. Shaw, E. Kim, J. and Hovy, E. An Intelligent 

Discussion-Bot for Answering Student Queries in 
Threaded Discussions, Proc. of IUI-2006. 

Ghosh, R. and Lerman, K. The structure of heterogeneous 
networks. Proc. of IEEE Social Comp. Conf, 2009. 

Kim, J., Li, J., and Kim, T. Identifying student online dis-
cussions with unanswered questions,Proc. K-CAP 2009.  

12


