










































Opinion Mining of Spanish Customer Comments with Non-Expert Annotations on Mechanical Turk


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 114–121,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Opinion Mining of Spanish Customer Comments with Non-Expert
Annotations on Mechanical Turk

Bart Mellebeek, Francesc Benavent, Jens Grivolla,
Joan Codina, Marta R. Costa-jussà and Rafael Banchs

Barcelona Media Innovation Center
Av. Diagonal, 177, planta 9

08018 Barcelona, Spain
{bart.mellebeek|francesc.benavent|jens.grivolla|joan.codina|

marta.ruiz|rafael.banchs}@barcelonamedia.org

Abstract

One of the major bottlenecks in the develop-
ment of data-driven AI Systems is the cost of
reliable human annotations. The recent ad-
vent of several crowdsourcing platforms such
as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, allowing re-
questers the access to affordable and rapid re-
sults of a global workforce, greatly facilitates
the creation of massive training data. Most
of the available studies on the effectiveness of
crowdsourcing report on English data. We use
Mechanical Turk annotations to train an Opin-
ion Mining System to classify Spanish con-
sumer comments. We design three different
Human Intelligence Task (HIT) strategies and
report high inter-annotator agreement between
non-experts and expert annotators. We evalu-
ate the advantages/drawbacks of each HIT de-
sign and show that, in our case, the use of
non-expert annotations is a viable and cost-
effective alternative to expert annotations.

1 Introduction

Obtaining reliable human annotations to train data-
driven AI systems is often an arduous and expensive
process. For this reason, crowdsourcing platforms
such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk1, Crowdflower2

and others have recently attracted a lot of attention
from both companies and academia. Crowdsourc-
ing enables requesters to tap from a global pool of
non-experts to obtain rapid and affordable answers
to simple Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs), which

1https://www.mturk.com
2http://crowdflower.com/

can be subsequently used to train data-driven appli-
cations.

A number of recent papers on this subject point
out that non-expert annotations, if produced in a suf-
ficient quantity, can rival and even surpass the qual-
ity of expert annotations, often at a much lower cost
(Snow et al., 2008), (Su et al., 2007). However, this
possible increase in quality depends on the task at
hand and on an adequate HIT design (Kittur et al.,
2008).

In this paper, we evaluate the usefulness of MTurk
annotations to train an Opinion Mining System to
detect opinionated contents (Polarity Detection) in
Spanish customer comments on car brands. Cur-
rently, a large majority of MTurk tasks is designed
for English speakers. One of our reasons for partic-
ipating in this shared task was to find out how easy
it is to obtain annotated data for Spanish. In addi-
tion, we want to find out how useful these data are
by comparing them to expert annotations and using
them as training data of an Opinion Mining System
for polarity detection.

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 con-
tains an explanation of the task outline and our goals.
Section 3 contains a description of three different
HIT designs that we used in this task. In Section
4, we provide a detailed analysis of the retrieved
HITs and focus on geographical information of the
workers, the correlation between the different HIT
designs, the quality of the retrieved answers and on
the cost-effectiveness of the experiment. In Section
5, we evaluate the incidence of MTurk-generated an-
notations on a polarity classification task using two
different experimental settings. Finally, we conclude

114



in Section 6.

2 Task Outline and Goals

We compare different HIT design strategies by eval-
uating the usefulness of resulting Mechanical Turk
(MTurk) annotations to train an Opinion Mining
System on Spanish consumer data. More specifi-
cally, we address the following research questions:

(i) Annotation quality: how do the different
MTurk annotations compare to expert annotations?

(ii) Annotation applicability: how does the per-
formance of an Opinion Mining classifier vary after
training on different (sub)sets of MTurk and expert
annotations?

(iii) Return on Investment: how does the use of
MTurk annotations compare economically against
the use of expert annotations?

(iv) Language barriers: currently, most MTurk
tasks are designed for English speakers. How easy
is it to obtain reliable MTurk results for Spanish?

3 HIT Design

We selected a dataset of 1000 sentences contain-
ing user opinions on cars from the automotive sec-
tion of www.ciao.es (Spanish). This website was
chosen because it contains a large and varied pool
of Spanish customer comments suitable to train an
Opinion Mining System and because opinions in-
clude simultaneously global numeric and specific
ratings over particular attributes of the subject mat-
ter. Section 5.1 contains more detailed information
about the selection of the dataset. An example of a
sentence from the data set can be found in (1):

(1) ‘No te lo pienses más, cómpratelo!’
(= ‘Don’t think twice, buy it!’)

The sentences in the dataset were presented to
the MTurk workers in three different HIT designs.
Each HIT design contains a single sentence to be
evaluated. HIT1 is a simple categorization scheme
in which workers are asked to classify the sentence
as being either positive, negative or neutral, as is
shown in Figure 1b. HIT2 is a graded categorization
template in which workers had to assign a score be-
tween -5 (negative) and +5 (positive) to the example
sentence, as is shown in Figure 1c. Finally, HIT3 is
a continuous triangular scoring template that allows

Figure 1: An example sentence (a) and the three HIT
designs used in the experiments: (b) HIT1: a simple
categorization scheme, (c) HIT2: a graded categoriza-
tion scheme, and (d) HIT3: a continuous triangular scor-
ing scheme containing both a horizontal positive-negative
axis and a vertical subjective-objective axis.

workers to use both a horizontal positive-negative
axis and a vertical subjective-objective axis by plac-
ing the example sentence anywhere inside the trian-
gle. The subjective-objective axis expresses the de-
gree to which the sentence contains opinionated con-
tent and was earlier used by (Esuli and Sebastiani,
2006). For example, the sentence ‘I think this is a
wonderful car’ clearly marks an opinion and should
be positioned towards the subjective end, while the
sentence ‘The car has six cilinders’ should be lo-
cated towards the objective end. Figure 1d contains
an example of HIT3. In order not to burden the
workers with overly complex instructions, we did
not mention this subjective-objective axis but asked
them instead to place ambiguous sentences towards
the center of the horizontal positive-negative axis
and more objective, non-opinionated sentences to-
wards the lower neutral tip of the triangle.

115



For each of the three HIT designs, we speci-
fied the requirement of three different unique as-
signments per HIT, which led to a total amount of
3 × 3 × 1000 = 9000 HIT assignments being up-
loaded on MTurk. Mind that setting the requirement
of unique assigments ensures a number of unique
workers per individual HIT, but does not ensure a
consistency of workers over a single batch of 1000
HITs. This is in the line with the philosophy of
crowdsourcing, which allows many different people
to participate in the same task.

4 Annotation Task Results and Analysis

After designing the HITs, we uploaded 30 random
samples for testing purposes. These HITs were com-
pleted in a matter of seconds, mostly by workers in
India. After a brief inspection of the results, it was
obvious that most answers corresponded to random
clicks. Therefore, we decided to include a small
competence test to ensure that future workers would
possess the necessary linguistic skills to perform the
task. The test consists of six simple categorisation
questions of the type of HIT1 that a skilled worker
would be able to perform in under a minute. In order
to discourage the use of automatic translation tools,
a time limit of two minutes was imposed and most
test sentences contain idiomatic constructions that
are known to pose problems to Machine Translation
Systems.

4.1 HIT Statistics

Table 1 contains statistics on the workers who com-
pleted our HITs. A total of 19 workers passed the
competence test and submitted at least one HIT. Of
those, four workers completed HITs belonging to
two different designs and six submitted HITs in all
three designs. Twelve workers are located in the US
(64%), three in Spain (16%), one in Mexico (5%),
Equador (5%), The Netherlands (5%) and an un-
known location (5%).

As to a comparison of completion times, it took
a worker on average 11 seconds to complete an in-
stance of HIT1, and 9 seconds to complete an in-
stance of HIT2 and HIT3. At first sight, this result
might seem surprising, since conceptually there is an
increase in complexity when moving from HIT1 to
HIT2 and from HIT2 to HIT3. These results might

Overall HIT1 HIT2 HIT3
ID C % # sec. # sec. # sec.
1 mx 29.9 794 11.0 967 8.6 930 11.6
2 us 27.6 980 8.3 507 7.8 994 7.4
3 nl 11.0 85 8.3 573 10.9 333 11.4
4 us 9.5 853 16.8 - - - -
5 es 9.4 - - 579 9.1 265 8.0
6 ec 4.1 151 9.4 14 16.7 200 13.0
7 us 3.6 3 15.7 139 8.5 133 11.6
8 us 2.2 77 8.2 106 7.3 11 10.5
9 us 0.6 - - - - 50 11.2
10 us 0.5 43 5.3 1 5 - -
11 us 0.4 - - 38 25.2 - -
12 us 0.4 - - 10 9.5 27 10.8
13 es 0.4 - - - - 35 15.1
14 es 0.3 - - 30 13.5 - -
15 us 0.3 8 24.7 18 21.5 - -
16 us 0.2 - - - - 22 8.9
17 us 0.2 - - 17 16.5 - -
18 ? 0.1 6 20 - - - -
19 us 0.1 - - 1 33 - -

Table 1: Statistics on MTurk workers for all three HIT
designs: (fictional) worker ID, country code, % of total
number of HITs completed, number of HITs completed
per design and average completion time.

suggest that users find it easier to classify items
on a graded or continuous scale such as HIT2 and
HIT3, which allows for a certain degree of flexibil-
ity, than on a stricter categorical template such as
HIT1, where there is no room for error.

4.2 Annotation Distributions

In order to get an overview of distribution of the re-
sults of each HIT, a histogram was plotted for each
different task. Figure 2a shows a uniform distribu-
tion of the three categories used in the simple cat-
egorization scheme of HIT1, as could be expected
from a balanced dataset.

Figure 2b shows the distribution of the graded cat-
egorization template of HIT2. Compared to the dis-
tribution in 2a, two observations can be made: (i)
the proportion of the zero values is almost identical
to the proportion of the neutral category in Figure
2a, and (ii) the proportion of the sum of the positive
values [+1,+5] and the proportion of the sum of the
negative values [-5,-1] are equally similar to the pro-
portion of the positive and negative categories in 2a.
This suggests that in order to map the graded annota-
tions of HIT2 to the categories of HIT1, an intuitive
partitioning of the graded scale into three equal parts
should be avoided. Instead, a more adequate alterna-
tive would consist of mapping [-5,-1] to negative, 0

116



Figure 2: Overview of HIT results: a) distribution of the three categories used in HIT1, b) distribution of results in the
scaled format of HIT2, c) heat map of the distribution of results in the HIT3 triangle, d) distribution of projection of
triangle data points onto the X-axis (positive/negative).

to neutral and [+1,+5] to positive. This means that
even slightly positive/negative grades correspond to
positive/negative categories.

Figure 2c shows a heat map that plots the distri-
bution of the annotations in the triangle of HIT3. It
appears that worker annotations show a spontaneous
tendency of clustering, despite the continuous nature
of the design. This suggests that this HIT design,
originally conceived as continuous, was transformed
by the workers as a simpler categorization task using
five labels: negative, ambiguous and positive at the
top, neutral at the bottom, and other in the center.

Figure 2d shows the distribution of all data-
points in the triangle of Figure 2c, projected onto
the X-axis (positive/negative). Although similar to
the graded scale in HIT2, the distribution shows a
slightly higher polarization.

These results suggest that, out of all three HIT de-
signs, HIT2 is the one that contains the best balance
between the amount of information that can be ob-
tained and the simplicity of a one-dimensional an-
notation.

4.3 Annotation Quality

The annotation quality of MTurk workers can be
measured by comparing them to expert annotations.

This is usually done by calculating inter-annotator
agreement (ITA) scores. Note that, since a single
HIT can contain more than one assignment and each
assignment is typically performed by more than one
annotator, we can only calculate ITA scores between
batches of assignments, rather than between individ-
ual workers. Therefore, we describe the ITA scores
in terms of batches. In Table 4.4, we present a com-
parison of standard kappa3 calculations (Eugenio
and Glass, 2004) between batches of assignments in
HIT1 and expert annotations.

We found an inter-batch ITA score of 0.598,
which indicates a moderate agreement due to fairly
consistent annotations between workers. When
comparing individual batches with expert annota-
tions, we found similar ITA scores, in the range be-
tween 0.628 and 0.649. This increase with respect
to the inter-batch score suggests a higher variability
among MTurk workers than between workers and
experts. In order to filter out noise in worker annota-
tions, we applied a simple majority voting procedure
in which we selected, for each sentence in HIT1, the
most voted category. This results in an additional

3In reality, we found that fixed and free margin Kappa values
were almost identical, which reflects the balanced distribution
of the dataset.

117



batch of annotations. This batch, refered in Table
4.4 as Majority, produced a considerably higher ITA
score of 0.716, which confirms the validity of the
majority voting scheme to obtain better annotations.

In addition, we calculated ITA scores between
three expert annotators on a separate, 500-sentence
dataset, randomly selected from the same corpus as
described at the start of Section 3. This collection
was later used as test set in the experiments de-
scribed in Section 5. The inter-expert ITA scores
on this separate dataset contains values of 0.725 for
κ1 and 0.729 for κ2, only marginally higher than the
Majority ITA scores. Although we are comparing
results on different data sets, these results seem to
indicate that multiple MTurk annotations are able to
produce a similar quality to expert annotations. This
might suggest that a further increase in the number
of HIT assignments would outperform expert ITA
scores, as was previously reported in (Snow et al.,
2008).

4.4 Annotation Costs

As explained in Section 3, a total amount of 9000
assignments were uploaded on MTurk. At a reward
of .02$ per assignment, a total sum of 225$ (180$
+ 45$ Amazon fees) was spent on the task. Work-
ers perceived an average hourly rate of 6.5$/hour for
HIT1 and 8$/hour for HIT2 and HIT3. These fig-
ures suggest that, at least for assignments of type
HIT2 and HIT3, a lower reward/assignment might
have been considered. This would also be consis-
tent with the recommendations of (Mason and Watts,
2009), who claim that lower rewards might have an
effect on the speed at which the task will be com-
pleted - more workers will be competing for the task
at any given moment - but not on the quality. Since
we were not certain whether a large enough crowd
existed with the necessary skills to perform our task,
we explicitly decided not to try to offer the lowest
possible price.

An in-house expert annotator (working at approx-
imately 70$/hour, including overhead) finished a
batch of 1000 HIT assignments in approximately
three hours, which leads to a total expert annotator
cost of 210$. By comparing this figure to the cost
of uploading 3 × 1000 HIT assignments (75$), we
saved 210 − 75 = 135$, which constitutes almost
65% of the cost of an expert annotator. These figures

do not take into account the costs of preparing the
data and HIT templates, but it can be assumed that
these costs will be marginal when large data sets are
used. Moreover, most of this effort is equally needed
for preparing data for in-house annotation.

κ1 κ2
Inter-batch 0.598 0.598
Batch 1 vs. Expert 0.628 0.628
Batch 2 vs. Expert 0.649 0.649
Batch 3 vs. Expert 0.626 0.626
Majority vs. Expert 0.716 0.716
Experts4 0.725 0.729

Table 2: Interannotation Agreement as a measure of qual-
ity of the annotations in HIT1. κ1 = Fixed Margin
Kappa. κ2 = Free Margin Kappa.

5 Incidence of annotations on supervised
polarity classification

This section intends to evaluate the incidence of
MTurk-generated annotations on a polarity classifi-
cation task. We present two different evaluations.
In section 5.2, we compare the results of training
a polarity classification system with noisy available
metadata and with MTurk generated annotations of
HIT1. In section 5.3, we compare the results of
training several polarity classifiers using different
training sets, comparing expert annotations to those
obtained with MTurk.

5.1 Description of datasets

As was mentioned in Section 3, all sentences were
extracted from a corpus of user opinions on cars
from the automotive section of www.ciao.es
(Spanish). For conducting the experimental evalu-
ation, the following datasets were used:

1. Baseline: constitutes the dataset used for train-
ing the baseline or reference classifiers in Ex-
periment 1. Automatic annotation for this
dataset was obtained by using the following
naive approach: those sentences extracted from
comments with ratings5 equal to 5 were as-
signed to category ‘positive’, those extracted

5The corpus at www.ciao.es contains consumer opinions
marked with a score between 1 (negative) and 5 (positive).

118



from comments with ratings equal to 3 were
assigned to ‘neutral’, and those extracted from
comments with ratings equal to 1 were assigned
to ‘negative’. This dataset contains a total of
5570 sentences, with a vocabulary coverage of
11797 words.

2. MTurk Annotated: constitutes the dataset that
was manually annotated by MTurk workers in
HIT1. This dataset is used for training the con-
trastive classifiers which are to be compared
with the baseline system in Experiment 1. It
is also used in various ways in Experiment 2.
The three independent annotations generated
by MTurk workers for each sentence within this
dataset were consolidated into one unique an-
notation by majority voting: if the three pro-
vided annotations happened to be different6,
the sentence was assigned to category ‘neutral’;
otherwise, the sentence was assigned to the cat-
egory with at least two annotation agreements.
This dataset contains a total of 1000 sentences,
with a vocabulary coverage of 3022 words.

3. Expert Annotated: this dataset contains the
same sentences as the MTurk Annotated one,
but with annotations produced internally by
known reliable annotators7. Each sentence re-
ceived one annotation, while the dataset was
split between a total of five annotators.

4. Evaluation: constitutes the gold standard used
for evaluating the performance of classifiers.
This dataset was manually annotated by three
experts in an independent manner. The gold
standard annotation was consolidated by using
the same criterion used in the case of the pre-
vious dataset8. This dataset contains a total of
500 sentences, with a vocabulary coverage of
2004 words.

6This kind of total disagreement among annotators occurred
only in 13 sentences out of 1000.

7While annotations of this kind are necessarily somewhat
subjective, these annotations are guaranteed to have been pro-
duced in good faith by competent annotators with an excellent
understanding of the Spanish language (native or near-native
speakers)

8In this case, annotator inter-agreement was above 80%, and
total disagreement among annotators occurred only in 1 sen-
tence out of 500

Baseline Annotated Evaluation
Positive 1882 341 200
Negative 1876 323 137
Neutral 1812 336 161
Totals 5570 1000 500

Table 3: Sentence-per-category distributions for baseline,
annotated and evaluation datasets.

These three datasets were constructed by ran-
domly extracting sample sentences from an origi-
nal corpus of over 25000 user comments contain-
ing more than 1000000 sentences in total. The sam-
pling was conducted with the following constraints
in mind: (i) the three resulting datasets should not
overlap, (ii) only sentences containing more than
3 tokens are considered, and (iii) each resulting
dataset must be balanced, as much as possible, in
terms of the amount of sentences per category. Table
3 presents the distribution of sentences per category
for each of the three considered datasets.

5.2 Experiment one: MTurk annotations vs.
original Ciao annotations

A simple SVM-based supervised classification ap-
proach was considered for the polarity detection task
under consideration. According to this, two dif-
ferent groups of classifiers were used: a baseline
or reference group, and a contrastive group. Clas-
sifiers within these two groups were trained with
data samples extracted from the baseline and anno-
tated datasets, respectively. Within each group of
classifiers, three different binary classification sub-
tasks were considered: positive/not positive, nega-
tive/not negative and neutral/not neutral. All trained
binary classifiers were evaluated by computing pre-
cision and recall for each considered category, as
well as overall classification accuracy, over the eval-
uation dataset.

A feature space model representation of the data
was constructed by considering the standard bag-of-
words approach. In this way, a sparse vector was ob-
tained for each sentence in the datasets. Stop-word
removal was not conducted before computing vec-
tor models, and standard normalization and TF-IDF
weighting schemes were used.

Multiple-fold cross-validation was used in all
conducted experiments to tackle with statistical vari-

119



classifier baseline annotated
positive/not positive 59.63 (3.04) 69.53 (1.70)
negative/not negative 60.09 (2.90) 63.73 (1.60)
neutral/not neutral 51.27 (2.49) 62.57 (2.08)

Table 4: Mean accuracy over 20 independent simula-
tions (with standard deviations provided in parenthesis)
for each classification subtasks trained with either the
baseline or the annotated dataset.

ability of the data. In this sense, twenty independent
realizations were actually conducted for each exper-
iment presented and, instead of individual output re-
sults, mean values and standard deviations of evalu-
ation metrics are reported.

Each binary classifier realization was trained with
a random subsample set of 600 sentences extracted
from the training dataset corresponding to the clas-
sifier group, i.e. baseline dataset for reference sys-
tems, and annotated dataset for contrastive systems.
Training subsample sets were always balanced with
respect to the original three categories: ‘positive’,
‘negative’ and ‘neutral’.

Table 4 presents the resulting mean values of
accuracy for each considered subtask in classifiers
trained with either the baseline or the annotated
dataset. As observed in the table, all subtasks ben-
efit from using the annotated dataset for training
the classifiers; however, it is important to mention
that while similar absolute gains are observed for
the ‘positive/not positive’ and ‘neutral/not neutral’
subtasks, this is not the case for the subtask ‘neg-
ative/not negative’, which actually gains much less
than the other two subtasks.

After considering all evaluation metrics, the bene-
fit provided by human-annotated data availability for
categories ‘neutral’ and ‘positive’ is evident. How-
ever, in the case of category ‘negative’, although
some gain is also observed, the benefit of human-
annotated data does not seem to be as much as for
the two other categories. This, along with the fact
that the ‘negative/not negative’ subtask is actually
the best performing one (in terms of accuracy) when
baseline training data is used, might suggest that
low rating comments contains a better representa-
tion of sentences belonging to category ‘negative’
than medium and high rating comments do with re-
spect to classes ‘neutral’ and ‘positive’.

In any case, this experimental work only verifies
the feasibility of constructing training datasets for
opinionated content analysis, as well as it provides
an approximated idea of costs involved in the gener-
ation of this type of resources, by using MTurk.

5.3 Experiment two: MTurk annotations vs.
expert annotations

In this section, we compare the results of training
several polarity classifiers on six different training
sets, each of them generated from the MTurk anno-
tations of HIT1. The different training sets are: (i)
the original dataset of 1000 sentences annotated by
experts (Experts), (ii) the first set of 1000 MTurk re-
sults (Batch1), (iii) the second set of 1000 MTurk
results (Batch2), (iv) the third set of 1000 MTurk
results (Batch3), (v) the batch obtained by major-
ity voting between Batch1, Batch2 and Batch3 (Ma-
jority), and (vi) a batch of 3000 training instances
obtained by aggregating Batch1, Batch2 and Batch3
(All). We used classifiers as implemented in Mal-
let (McCallum, 2002) and Weka (Hall et al., 2009),
based on a simple bag-of-words representation of
the sentences. As the objective was not to obtain
optimum performance but only to evaluate the dif-
ferences between different sets of annotations, all
classifiers were used with their default settings.

Table 5 contains results of four different clas-
sifiers (Maxent, C45, Winnow and SVM), trained
on these six different datasets and evaluated on the
same 500-sentence test set as explained in Section
5.1. Classification using expert annotations usu-
ally outperforms classification using a single batch
(one annotation per sentence) of annotations pro-
duced using MTurk. Using the tree annotations per
sentence available from MTurk, all classifiers reach
similar or better performance compared to the sin-
gle set of expert annotations, at a much lower cost
(as explained in section 4.4).

It is interesting to note that most classifiers bene-
fit from using the full 3000 training examples (1000
sentences with 3 annotations each), which intu-
itively makes sense as the unanimously labeled ex-
amples will have more weight in defining the model
of the corresponding class, whereas ambiguous or
unclear cases will have their impact reduced as their
characteristics are attributed to various classes.

On the contrary, Support Vector Machines show

120



System

E
xp

er
ts

B
at

ch
1

B
at

ch
2

B
at

ch
3

M
aj

or
ity

A
ll

Winnow 44.2 43.6 40.4 47.6 46.2 50.6
SVM 57.6 53.0 55.4 54.0 57.2 52.8
C45 42.2 33.6 42.0 41.2 41.6 45.0
Maxent 59.2 55.8 57.6 54.0 57.6 58.6

Table 5: Accuracy figures of four different classifiers
(Winnow, SVM, C45 and Maxent) trained on six different
datasets (see text for details).

an important drop in performance when using mul-
tiple annotations, but perform well when using the
majority vote. As a first intuition, this may be due to
the fact that SVMs focus on detecting class bound-
aries (and optimizing the margin between classes)
rather than developing a model of each class. As
such, having the same data point appear several
times with the same label will not aid in finding ap-
propriate support vectors, whereas having the same
data point with conflicting labels may have a nega-
tive impact on the margin maximization.

Having only evaluated each classifier (and train-
ing set) once on a static test set it is unfortunately not
possible to reliably infer the significance of the per-
formance differences (or determine confidence in-
tervals, etc.). For a more in-depth analysis it might
be interesting to use bootstrapping or similar tech-
niques to evaluate the robustness of the results.

6 Conclusions

In this paper we have examined the usefulness of
non-expert annotations on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk to annotate the polarity of Spanish consumer
comments. We discussed the advantages/drawbacks
of three different HIT designs, ranging from a sim-
ple categorization scheme to a continous scoring
template. We report high inter-annotator agree-
ment scores between non-experts and expert anno-
tators and show that training an Opinion Mining
System with non-expert MTurk annotations outper-
forms original noisy annotations and obtains com-
petitive results when compared to expert annotations
using a variety of classifiers. In conclusion, we
found that, in our case, the use of non-expert anno-

tations through crowdsourcing is a viable and cost-
effective alternative to the use of expert annotations.

In the classification experiments reported in this
paper, we have relied exclusively on MTurk anno-
tations from HIT1. Further work is needed to fully
analyze the impact of each of the HIT designs for
Opinion Mining tasks. We hope that the added rich-
ness of annotation of HIT2 and HIT3 will enable us
to use more sophisticated classification methods.

References
A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani. 2006. SentiWordNet: a pub-

licly available lexical resource for opinion mining. In
Proceedings of LREC, volume 6.

B. D Eugenio and M. Glass. 2004. The kappa statistic: A
second look. Computational linguistics, 30(1):95101.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11(1):10–18.

A. Kittur, E. H Chi, and B. Suh. 2008. Crowdsourcing
user studies with mechanical turk.

W. Mason and D. J Watts. 2009. Financial incentives
and the performance of crowds. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Human Computation,
pages 77–85.

A. K. McCallum. 2002. Mallet: A machine learning for
language toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.

R. Snow, B. O’Connor, D. Jurafsky, and A. Y Ng. 2008.
Cheap and fastbut is it good?: evaluating non-expert
annotations for natural language tasks. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 254–263.

Q. Su, D. Pavlov, J. H Chow, and W. C Baker. 2007.
Internet-scale collection of human-reviewed data. In
Proceedings of the 16th international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 231–240.

121


