










































Cancer Stage Prediction Based on Patient Online Discourse


Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL 2010, pages 64–71,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cancer Stage Prediction Based on Patient Online Discourse

Mukund Jha
Computer Science

Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

mj2472@columbia.edu

Noémie Elhadad
Biomedical Informatics

Columbia University
New York, NY 10032

noemie@dbmi.columbia.edu

Abstract

Forums and mailing lists dedicated to par-
ticular diseases are increasingly popular
online. Automatically inferring the health
status of a patient can be useful for both
forum users and health researchers who
study patients’ online behaviors. In this
paper, we focus on breast cancer forums
and present a method to predict the stage
of patients’ cancers from their online dis-
course. We show that what the patients
talk about (content-based features) and
whom they interact with (social network-
based features) provide complementary
cues to predicting cancer stage and can be
leveraged for better prediction. Our meth-
ods are extendable and can be applied to
other tasks of acquiring contextual infor-
mation about online health forum partici-
pants.

1 Introduction

In this paper we investigate an automated method
of inferring the stage of a patient’s breast cancer
from discourse in an online forum. Such informa-
tion can prove invaluable both for forum members,
by enriching their use of this rapidly developing
and increasingly popular medium, and for health
researchers, by providing them with tools to quan-
tify and better understand patient populations and
how they behave online.

Patients with chronic diseases like diabetes or
life-threatening conditions like breast cancer get
a wealth of information from medical profession-
als about their diagnoses, test results, and treat-
ment options, but such information is not always
satisfactory or sufficient for patients. Much of
that is essential to their everyday lives and the
management of their condition escapes the clin-
ical realm. Furthermore, patients feel informed

and empowered by exchanging experiences and
emotional support with others in the same circum-
stances. Thus, it is not surprising that patient com-
munities have flourished on the Web over the past
decade, through active disease-specific discussion
forums and mailing lists.

For health professionals, this new medium
presents exciting research avenues related to the-
ories of psycho-social support and how patients
manage their conditions. Qualitative analyses of
forums and mailing list posts show that breast
cancer patients and survivors provide and seek
support to and from their peers and that support,
while also emotional, is largely informational in
nature (Civan and Pratt, 2007; Meier et al., 2007).
Emotional support may include words of encour-
agement and prayers. Examples of informational
support are providing personal experiences with a
treatment, discussing new research, explaining a
pathology report to a peer, as well as exchanging
information pertinent to patients’ daily lives, such
as whether to shave one’s head once chemotherapy
starts.

Given the kinds of benefits that patients and sur-
vivors seek and provide in online forums, it seems
likely that they would be inclined to gravitate to-
ward others whose circumstances most closely re-
semble their own, beyond sharing the general di-
agnosis of breast cancer. In fact, focus groups
and surveys conducted with breast cancer patients
identified and emphasized the need for online can-
cer forum participants to identify other patients of
a particular age, stage of illness, or having opted
for similar treatment (Rozmovits and Ziebland,
2004; van Uden-Kraan et al., 2008).

The stage of a patient’s cancer, in particular, can
be a crucial proxy for finding those whose experi-
ences are likely similar and relevant to one’s own.
For breast cancer, there are five high-level stan-
dard stages (0 to IV). While they do not give the
whole picture about a particular cancer (the stages

64



themselves can be described with finer granular-
ity and they do no not encompass additional in-
formation like hormonal sensitivity), physicians
have traditionally relied on them for prognosis and
determining treatment options. For patients and
survivors, they are a useful way to communicate
to their peers their health status, as evidenced by
the members’ signatures on forums and mailing
lists (Meier et al., 2007).

Although many forums provide pre-set profile
fields for users to populate with important back-
ground information, such as the stage of their can-
cer (e.g., the popular forum on breastcancer.
org), in practice, only a fraction of members have
a complete profile. Thus, an automated way of in-
ferring member profile information via the social
network created by a forum’s users would help fill
in the blanks.

Beyond identifying other patients in a forum in
similar circumstances, such a tool can have nu-
merous practical benefits for both forum users and
health researchers who study patients’ online be-
havior. When a patient searches for a particu-
lar piece of information in a forum, incorporat-
ing contextual information about the user into the
search mechanism can improve search results. For
example, a search tool can rank higher the posts
that were authored by patients with the same stage.
For health researchers, questions which bring a
better understanding of forum usage (i.e., “are pa-
tients with stage IV cancer more or less active in a
forum than patients with early stage cancer”) can
be answered accurately only if all members of the
forums are taken into account, not just the ones
who filled out their member profiles. Furthermore,
in the context of health communication, the more
information is available about an individual, the
more effective the message can be, from generic
to personalized to targetted to tailored (Kreuter et
al., 2000). Our research contributes an automated
method to acquiring contextual information about
forum participants. We focus on cancer stage as
an exmple of context information.

Our research question is whether it is possible
to predict the stage of individuals’ cancer based on
their online discourse. By discourse we mean both
the information she conveys and whom she talks
to in a forum. Following ethical guidelines in pro-
cessing of patient data online, we focus on a pop-
ular breast cancer forum with a large number of
participants (Eysenbach and Till, 2001). We show

that the content of members’ posts and the stage
of their interlocutors can provide complementary
clues to identifying cancer stages.

2 Related Work

Researchers have begun to explore the possibility
of diagnosing patients based on their speech pro-
ductions. Content analysis methods, which rely on
patient speech transcripts or texts authored by pa-
tients, have been leveraged for understanding can-
cer coping mechanisms (Graves et al., 2005; Ban-
tum and Owen, 2009), psychiatric diagnoses (Ox-
man et al., 1988; Elvevaag et al., 2010), and the
analysis of suicide notes (Pestian et al., 2008).
In all cases, results, while not fully accurate, are
promising and show that patient-generated con-
tent is a valuable clue to diagnosis in an automated
framework.

Our work departs from these experiments in that
we do not attempt to predict the psychological
state of a patient, but rather the status of a clinical
condition. Staging breast cancer provides a way to
summarize the status of the cancer based on clin-
ical characteristics (the size of the tumor, whether
the cancer is invasive or not, whether cancer cells
are present in the lymph nodes, and whether the
cancer has spread beyond the breast). There are
five high-level stages for breast cancer. Stage 0
describes a non-invasive cancer. Stage I represents
early stage of an invasive cancer, where the tumor
size is less than 2 centimeters and no lymph nodes
are involved (that is, the cancer has not spread out-
side of the breast). Stages II and III describe a can-
cer with larger tumor size and/or the cancer has
spread outside of the breast. Stage IV describes
a cancer that have metastasized to distant parts of
the body, such as lungs and bones.

In our work, we analyze naturally occurring
content, generated by patients talking to each other
online. As such, our sample population is much
larger than in earlier works (typically less than 100
subjects). Like the researchers who focus on con-
tent analysis, we rely on the content generated by
patients, but we also hypothesize that whom the
patients interact with can help the prediction of
cancer stage.

In particular, we build a social network based
on patients’ interactions to boost text-based pre-
dictions. Graph-based methods are becoming
increasingly popular in the NLP community,
and similar approaches have been employed and

65



shown to perform well in other areas like ques-
tion answering (Jurczyk, 2007) (Harabagiu et al.,
2006), word-sense disambiguation (Niu et al.,
2005), and textual entailment (Haghighi, 2005).

3 Methods

Our methods to predict cancer stage operate in a
supervised framework. We cast the task of stage
prediction as a 4-way classification (Stage I to IV).
We hypothesize that the discourse of patients on-
line, as defined by the content of their posts in a
forum, can be leveraged to predict cancer stage.
Furthermore, we hypothesize that the social net-
work derived by whom patients interact with can
provide an additional clue for stage detection.

We experimented with three methods of predict-
ing cancer stage:

Text-based stage prediction A classifier is
trained given the post history of a patient.

Network-based stage prediction A social net-
work representing the interactions among fo-
rum members is built, and a label propagation
algorithm is applied to infer the stage of indi-
vidual patients.

Combined prediction A classifier which com-
bines text-based and network-based features.

Next we describe each method in detail, along
with our dataset and our experimental setup.

3.1 Data Collection and Preprocessing
We collected posts from the publicly available dis-
cussion board from breastcancer.org. It is
a popular forum, with more than 60,000 regis-
tered members, and more than 50,000 threads dis-
cussed in 60 subforums. To collect our dataset,
we crawled the content of the most popular subfo-
rums.1

Collected posts were translated from HTML
into an XML format, keeping track of author id,

1There were 17 such subforums: “Just Diagnosed,” “Help
Me Get Through Treatment,” “Surgery - Before, During, and
After,” “Chemotherapy - Before, During and After,” “Ra-
diation Therapy - Before, During and After,” “Hormonal
Therapy - Before, During and After,” “Alternative, Com-
plementary and Holistic Treatment,” “Stage I and II Breast
Cancer,” “Just Diagnosed with a Recurrence or Metastasis,”
“Stage III Breast Cancer,” “Stage IV Breast Cancer Sur-
vivors,” “HER2/neu Positive Breast Cancer,” “Deperession,
Anxiety and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder,” “Fitness and
Getting Back in Shape,” “Healthy Recipes for Everyday Liv-
ing,” “Recommend Your Resources,” “Clinical Trials, Re-
search, News, and Study Results.”

Nb. of threads 26,160
Nb. of posts 524,247
Nb. of threads with < 20 posts 22,334
Nb. of users with profile Stage I 2,226
Nb. of users with profile Stage II 2,406
Nb. of users with profile Stage III 1,031
Nb. of users with profile Stage IV 749
Total Nb. of users with profile 6,412
Nb. of active users profiled Stage I 1,317
Nb. of active users profiled Stage II 1,400
Nb. of active users profiled Stage III 580
Nb. of active users profiled Stage IV 448
Total Nb. of active users with profile 3,745

Table 1: General statistics of the dataset.

thread id, position of the post in the thread, body of
the post, and signature of the author (which is kept
separated from the body of the post). The con-
tent of the posts was tokenized, lower-cased and
stemmed. Images, URLs, and stop words were re-
moved.

To post in breastcancer.org, users must
register. They have the option to enter a profile
with pre-set fields related to their breast cancer di-
agnosis; in particular cancer stage between stage
I and IV. We collected the list of members who
entered their stage information, thereby providing
us with an annotated set of patients with their cor-
responding cancer stage. Table 1 shows various
statistics for our dataset. Active users are defined
as members who have posted more than 50 words
overall in the forums. Note the low number of
user with profile information (approximately 10%
of the overall number of registered participants in
the forum).

3.2 Text-Based Stage Prediction
We trained a text-based classifier relying on the
full post history of each patient. The full post
history was concatenated. Signature information,
which is derived automatically from the patient’s
profile (and thus contains stage information) was
removed from the posts. The classifier relied on
unigrams and bigrams only. Table 2 shows statis-
tics about post history length, measured as number
of words authored by a forum member.

3.3 Network-Based Stage Prediction
We hypothesize that patients tend to interact in a
forum with patients with similar stage. To test this

66



Stages Min Max Average Median
I 4 609,608 8,429 3,123
II 2 353,731 8,142 3,112
III 8 211,655 9,297 3,189
IV 10 893,326 17,083 326

Table 2: Statistics about number of words in post
history.

?
2

12

2
1

5
IV

III

I

IV

3

Figure 1: Nodes in the social network of forum
member interaction.

hypothesis, we represent the interactions of the pa-
tients as a social network. The nodes in the net-
work represent patients, and an edge is present be-
tween two nodes if the patients interact with each
other, that is they are part of the same threads of-
ten. Weights on edges represent the degree of in-
teraction. Higher weight on an edge between two
forum members indicates they interact more often.
More precisely, we build an undirected, weighted
network, where the nodes representing training in-
stances are labeled with their provided stage infor-
mation and their labels are fixed. Figure 1 shows
an example of node and its immediate neighbors
in the network. Of his five neighbors, four repre-
sent training instances and have a fixed stage, and
one represents a user with an unknown stage.

A label propagation algorithm is applied to the
network, so that every node in the network is as-
signed a stage between I and IV (Raghavan et al.,
2007). Given a node and its immediate neighbors,
it looks for the most frequent labels, taking into ac-
count the edge weights. In our example, the prop-
agated label for the central node will be stage IV.
This label, in turn, will be used to assign a label to
the other nodes. When building the social network
of interactions, we experimented with the follow-
ing parameters.

Nodes in the network. We experimented with
including all the forum members who participated
in a conversation thread. Thus, it includes all the
members, even the ones without a known cancer
stage. This resulted in a network of 15,035 forum
participants. This way, the network covers more
interactions among more users, but is very sparse
in its initial labeling (only the training instances
in the dataset of active members with a known la-
bel are labeled). The label propagation algorithm
assigns labels to all the nodes, but we test its ac-
curacy only on the test instances. We also ex-
perimented with including only the patients in the
training and testing sets, thereby reducing the size
of the network but also decreasing the sparsity of
the labeling. This resulted in a network of 3,305
nodes.2

Drawing edges in the network. An edge be-
tween two users indicate they are frequently in-
teracting. One crude way is to draw an edge be-
tween every user participating in the same thread,
this however does not provide an accurate picture
and hence does not yield good results. In our ap-
proach we draw an edge in two steps. First, since
threads are often long and can span over multiple
topics, we only draw an edge if the two individ-
uals’ posts are within five posts of each other in
the thread. Second, we then look for any direct
references made by a user to another user in their
post. In forum threads, users usually make a di-
rect reference by either by explicitly referring to
each other using their real name or internet aliases
or by quoting each other, i.e., repeating or stating
what the other user has mentioned in her post. For
example in “Hey Dana, I went through the same
thing the first time I went to my doctor...”, the au-
thor of the post is referring to another user with
name ’Dana’. We rely on such explicit references
to build accurate graph.3 To find direct explicit ref-
erences, we search in every post of a thread for any
mention of names (real or aliases) of users partic-
ipating in the thread and if one is found we draw
an edge between them.

We observed that users refer to each other very

2This number of nodes is less than the numbers of over-
all active members in our gold standard because some active
members have either posted in threads with only one post or
with more than 20 posts.

3An alternative approach is to identify quotes in posts. In
our particular dataset, quotes did not occur often, and thus
were ignored when assessing the degree of interaction be-
tween two forum members.

67



frequently using their real names instead of inter-
net names (which are long and often arbitrary).
These are often hard to detect because no data is
present which link users’ forum aliases to their
real name. We use following approach to extract
real names of the users.

Extracting real names. For every user, we ex-
tract the last ten words (signature) from every post
posted by the user and concatenate them after re-
moving all stop words and other common signa-
ture terms (like thanks, all the best, love, good luck
etc.) using a pre-compiled list. We then mine for
the most frequent name occurring in the concate-
nated text using standard list of names and extract-
ing capitalized words. We also experimented with
using Named Entity Recognizers, but our simple
rule based name extractor gave us better results
with higher precision. Finally, we map the ex-
tracted real name with the user’s alias and utilize
them to find direct references between posts.

Weights Computation. The weight of an edge
between two nodes represents the degree of inter-
action between two corresponding users (the more
often they communicate, the higher the weight).
Since the label propagation algorithm takes into
account the weighted frequency of neighboring
nodes, these weights are crucial. We compute
the weights in following manner: for each pair of
users with an existing edge (as determined above),
we iterate through their posts in common threads,
and add the cosine similarity score between the
two posts to the weight of the edge. For edges
made through direct references we add the high-
est cosine similarity score between any two pair of
posts in that particular thread. This way we weigh
higher the edges made through direct reference as
we are more confident about them.

The full network of all users (15,035 nodes)
had 480,051 edges, and the restricted network of
dataset users (3,305 nodes) had 28,152 edges.

3.4 Combining Text-Based and
Network-Based Predictions

To test the hypothesis that text-based and network-
based predictions model different aspects of pa-
tients and thus provide complementary cues to
stage prediction, we trained a classifier which in-
corporates text-based and network-based features.

The combined classifier contained the following
features: text-based predicted label, confidence
score of the text-based prediction, network-based

predicted label, percentage of immediate neigh-
bors in the network with a stage I label, stage II,
III and IV labels (neighbors in the network with
no labels do not contribute to the counts). For in-
stance, the central node in Figure 1 is assigned the
feature values 1/4, 0, 1/4 and 1/2 for the ratio of
stage I, II, III and IV neighbors.

3.5 Experimental Setup

Our dataset for the three models consisted of the
3,745 active members. For all the models, we fol-
low a five-fold stratified cross validation scheme.
The text-based classification was carried out with
BoosTexter (Schapire and Singer, 2000), trained
with 800 rounds of boosting. The label propaga-
tion on the social network was carried out in R.4

The final decision-tree classification was carried
out in Weka, relying on an SVM classifier with
default parameters (Hall et al., 2009).

4 Results

Table 3 shows the results of the text-based predic-
tion, the network-based prediction and the com-
bined prediction for each stage measured by Pre-
cision, Recall and F-measure. For comparison, we
report on the results of a baseline text-based pre-
diction. The baseline prediction assigns a stage
based on the explicit mention of stage in the post
history of a patient. In practice, it is a rule-
based prediction with matching against the pattern
“stage [IV|four|4]” for stage IV prediction,
and similarly for other stages. The text-based pre-
diction yields better results than the baseline, with
a marked improvement for each stage.

The network-based prediction performs only
slightly worse than the text-based predictions. The
hypothesis that whom the patient interacts with in
the forums helps predict stage holds. To verify this
point further, we computed for each stage the av-
erage ratio of neighbors per stage based on the so-
cial network of interactions, as shown in Figure 2.
For instance, stage IV patients interact mostly with
their peers (49% of their posts are shared with
other stage IV users), and to some extent with
other patients (18% of their posts with stage I pa-
tients, 20% with stage II patients, and 13% with
stage III patients). Except for stage III patients, all
other patients are mostly interacting with similarly
staged patients.

4www.r-project.org

68



Baseline Text Based
Stage Precision Recall F Stage Precision Recall F
I 76.2 26.4 39.3 I 54.9 63.9 59.1
II 79.4 18.7 30.3 II 51.6 55.0 53.2
III 76.6 35.0 48.0 III 52.7 30.3 38.5
IV 76.4 50.7 60.9 IV 82.5 71.2 76.4

Network Based Combined
Stage Precision Recall F Stage Precision Recall F
I 50.4 56.7 53.4 I 57.1 65.4 61.0
II 49.6 49.1 49.3 II 56.6 53.5 55.0
III 65.7 27.7 39.0 III 56.1 48.3 51.9
IV 59.3 83.7 69.4 IV 84.7 81.3 83.0

Table 3: Stage prediction results (Precision, Recall, and F-measure).

When combining the text-based and the
network-based predictions in an overall classifier
the prediction yields the best results. These results
confirm the potential in combining the two facets
of patient discourse, content and social interaction.

The results presented in the table correspond to
a network built with the full set of users, including
those without any profile information. When re-
stricting the network on the patients with stage la-
bels only, we obtained similar results (F-measures
of 56% for stage I, 52% for stage II, 43% for stage
III, and 79% for stage IV). This shows that it is
worth modeling the full set of interactions and the
full network structure, even when a large number
of nodes have missing labels.

Finally, we also experimented with building
networks with no weights or with weights with-
out the 5-post-apart restriction. In both cases, the
results of the network-based and combined predic-
tions are lower than those presented in Table 3. We
interpret this fact as a confirmation that our edge
weighting strategy models to a promising extent
the degree of interaction among patients.

5 Discussion

Text-based prediction. Results confirm that
cancer stage can be predicted by a patient’s on-
line discourse. When examining the unigrams and
bigrams picked up by the classifier as predictive
of stage, we can get a sense of the frequent top-
ics of discussion of patients. For instance, the
phrases “tumor mm” (referring to tumor size in
millimeters) and “breast radiation” were highly
predictive of stage I patients. The words “hat” and
“hair” were highly predictive of stages II and III,

Figure 2: Distribution of stage-wise interactions.

while stage IV patients were predicted by the pres-
ence of the phrases “bone met.” (which stands for
bone metastasis), “met lung” “liver,” and “lym-
phedema” (which is a side effect of cancer treat-
ment linked to the removal of lymph nodes and
tumor).

Figure 3 shows the overall accuracy of the text-
based classifier, when tested against the amount of
text available for the classification. As expected,
the longer the post history, the more accurate the
classification.

Representing degree of interaction among pa-
tients. In our experiments, we observed that the
weigthing scheme of edges had a strong impact
on the overall accuracy of stage prediction. The
more interaction was modeled (through distance
in thread and identification of explicit references),
the better the results. This confirms the hypothesis
that dialogue is helpful in predicting cancer stage,
and emphasizes the need for accurate techniques

69



Figure 3: Overall text-based prediction accuracy
against post history length.

to model interaction among forum participants in
a social network.

Discourse of Stage IV patients. Both the text-
based and the network-based predictions provide
higher precision and recall for the stage IV pa-
tients. This is emphasized by Figure 2, where
we see that, in our dataset, stage IV patients talk
mostly to each other. These results suggest that
stage IV patients have particular discourse, which
separates them from other patients. This presents
interesting avenues for future investigation.

6 Future Work and Conclusion

In this paper, we investigated breast cancer stage
prediction based on the online discourse of pa-
tients participating in a breast cancer-specific fo-
rum. We show that relying on lexical features de-
rived from the content of the posts of a patient
provides promising classification results. Further-
more, even a simple social network representing
patient interactions on a forum, yields predictions
with comparable results. Combining the two ap-
proaches boosts results, as content and interaction
seem to model complementary aspects of patient
discourse.

Our experiments show that stage IV patients ap-
pear to exhibit specific textual and social patterns
in forums. This point can prove useful to health re-
searchers who want to quantify patient behaviors
online.

The strategy of combining two facets of dis-
course (content and interactions) introduces sev-

eral interesting research questions. In the future,
we plan to investigate some of them. In a first step,
we plan to better model the interactions of patients
online. For instance, we would like to analyze the
content of the posts to determine further if two pa-
tients are in direct communication, and the domain
of their exchange (e.g., clinical vs. day-to-day vs.
emotional). As we have observed that the way
edges in the network are weighted has an impact
on overall performance, we could then investigate
whether the domain(s) of interaction among users
(clinical matters vs. emotional and instrumental
matters for instance) has an impact on predicting
cancer stage by taking the different domains of in-
teraction in account in the weight computation.

Finally, this work relies on a single, yet highly
active and popular, forum. We would like to
test our results on different breast cancer forums,
but also on other disease-specific forums, where
patients can be separated in clinically relevant
groups.

Acknowledgments

We thank Phani Nivarthi for his help on data col-
lection. This work is supported in part by a Google
Research Award. Any opinions, findings, or con-
clusions are those of the authors, and do not neces-
sarily reflect the views of the funding organization.

References
Erin Bantum and Jason Owen. 2009. Evaluating the

validity of computerized content analysis programs
for identification of emotional expression in cancer
narratives. Psychological Assessment, 21(1):79–88.

Andrea Civan and Wanda Pratt. 2007. Threading to-
gether patient expertise. In Proceedings of the AMIA
Annual Symposium, pages 140–144.

Brita Elvevaag, Peter Foltz, Mark Rosenstein, and
Lynn DeLisi. 2010. An automated method to ana-
lyze language use in patients with schizophrenia and
their first degree-relatives. Journal of Neurolinguis-
tics, 23:270–284.

Gunther Eysenbach and James Till. 2001. Ethical is-
sues in qualitative research on internet communities.
BMJ, 323:1103–1105.

Kristi Graves, John Schmidt, Julie Bollmer, Michele
Fejfar, Shelby Langer, Lee Blonder, and Michael
Andrykowski. 2005. Emotional expression and
emotional recognition in breast cancer survivors:
A controlled comparison. Psychology and Health,
20(5):579–595.

70



Aria Haghighi. 2005. Robust textual inference via
graph matching. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP’05, pages 387–394.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: An up-
date. SIGKDD Explorations, 11(1).

Sanda Harabagiu, Finley Lacatusu, and Andrew Hickl.
2006. Answering complex questions with random
walk models. In Proceedings of SIGIR Conference
(SIGIR’06), pages 220–227.

Pawel Jurczyk. 2007. Discovering authorities in ques-
tion answer communities using link analysis. In
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management (CIKM’07).

Matthew Kreuter, David Farrell, Laura Olevitch, and
Laura Brennan. 2000. Tailoring health messages:
customizing communication using computer tech-
nology. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Andrea Meier, Elizabeth Lyons, Gilles Frydman,
Michael Forlenza, and Barbara Rimer. 2007. How
cancer survivors provide support on cancer-related
internet mailing lists. Journal of Medical Internet
Research, 9(2):e12.

Zheng-Yu Niu, Dong-Hong Ji, and Chew Lim Tan.
2005. Word sense disambiguation using label prop-
agation based semi-supervised learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Conference (ACL’05), pages
395–402.

Thomas Oxman, Stanley Rosenberg, Paula Schnurr,
and Gary Tucker. 1988. Diagnostic classification
through content analysis of patient speech. Ameri-
can Joural of Psychatry, 145:464–468.

John Pestian, Pawel Matykiewicz, Jacqueline Grupp-
Phelan, Sarah Arszman Lavanier, Jennifer Combs,
and Robert Kowatch. 2008. Using natural language
processing to classify suicide notes. In Proceedings
of BioNLP’08, pages 96–97.

Usha Raghavan, Reka Albert, and Soundar Kumara.
2007. Near linear time algorithm to detect commu-
nity structures in large-scale networks. Physics Re-
view, page E 76 036106.

Linda Rozmovits and Sue Ziebland. 2004. What do
patients with prostate or breast cancer want from
an Internet site? a qualitative study of information
needs. Patient Education and Counseling, 53:57–
64.

Robert Schapire and Yoram Singer. 2000. BoosTex-
ter: A boosting-based system for text categorization.
Machine Learning, 39(2/3):135–168.

Cornelia van Uden-Kraan, Constance Drossaert, Erik
Tall, Bret Shaw, Erwin Seydel, and Mart van de
Laar. 2008. Empowering processes and outcomes

of participation in online support groups for patients
with breast cancer, arthritis, or fibromyalgia. Quali-
tative Health Research, 18(3):405–417.

71


