



















































A Baseline Approach for Detecting Sentences Containing Uncertainty


Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning: Shared Task, pages 148–150,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Baseline Approach for Detecting Sentences Containing Uncertainty

Erik Tjong Kim Sang
University of Groningen
erikt@xs4all.nl

Abstract

We apply a baseline approach to the
CoNLL-2010 shared task data sets on
hedge detection. Weights have been as-
signed to cue words marked in the train-
ing data based on their occurrences in
certain and uncertain sentences. New
sentences received scores that correspond
with those of their best scoring cue word,
if present. The best acceptance scores for
uncertain sentences were determined us-
ing 10-fold cross validation on the training
data. This approach performed reasonably
on the shared task’s biological (F=82.0)
and Wikipedia (F=62.8) data sets.

1 Introduction

CoNLL-2010 offered two shared tasks which in-
volve finding text parts which express uncertainty
or unreliability (Farkas et al., 2010). We focus
on Task 1, identifying sentences which contain
statements which can be considered uncertain or
unreliable. We train a basic statistical model on
the training data supplied for the task, apply the
trained model to the test data and discuss the re-
sults. The next section describes the format of
the data and introduces the model that was used.
Section three discusses the experiments with the
model and their results. Section four concludes
the paper.

2 Data and model

The CoNLL-2010 shared task training data sets
contain sentences which are classified as either
certain or uncertain. Sentences of the uncertain
class contain one or more words which have been
marked as indicator of uncertainty, the so-called
hedge cues. Here is an example of such a sentence
with the hedge cues written in bold font:

These results indicate that in mono-
cytic cell lineage, HIV-1 could mimic
some differentiation/activation stimuli
allowing nuclear NF-KB expression.

CoNLL-2010 offers two shared tasks: classify-
ing sentences in running text as either certain or
uncertain (Task 1) and finding hedge cues in sen-
tences classified as uncertain together with their
scopes (Task 2). We have only participated in
Task 1.

We built a basic model for the training data, tak-
ing advantage of the fact that the hedge cues were
marked explicitly. We estimated the probability of
each training data word appearing in a hedge cue
with unigram statistics:

P (w in cue) =
f(w in cue)

f(w)

where P (w in cue) is the probability that word w
appears in a hedge cue, f(w) is frequency of the
word w in the data and f(w in c) is the frequency
of the word inside hedge cues. We performed only
little text preprocessing, converting all words to
lower case and separating six common punctua-
tion signs from the words.

In the classification stage, we assigned to each
word the estimated hedge cue probability accord-
ing to the training data. Next, we assigned a score
to each sentence that was equal to one minus the
highest individual score of its words:

P (s is certain) = 1− argmax
w in s

P (w in cue)

P (s is certain) is the estimated probability that
the sentence s is certain, and it is equal to one mi-
nus the highest probability of any of its words be-
ing part of a hedge cue. So a sentence contain-
ing only words that never appeared as a hedge cue
would receive score 1.0. Meanwhile a sentence

148



with a single word that had appeared in a hedge
cue in the training data would receive one minus
the probability associated with that word. This
model ignores any relations between the words
of the sentence. We experimented with combin-
ing the scores of the different words but found the
minimum word score to perform best.

3 Experiments

Apart from the word probabilities, we needed to
obtain a good threshold score for deciding whether
to classify a sentence as certain or uncertain.
For this purpose, we performed a 10-fold cross-
validation experiment on each of the two training
data files (biological and Wikipedia) and measured
the effect of different threshold values. The results
can be found in Figure 1.

The model performed well on the biological
training data, with F scores above 80 for a large
range of threshold values (0.15–0.85). It per-
formed less well on the Wikipedia training data,
with a maximum F score of less than 60 and 50+
scores being limited to the threshold range 0.45–
0.85. The maximum F scores were reached for
threshold values 0.55 and 0.65 for biological data
(F=88.8) and Wikipedia data (F=59.4), respec-
tively. We selected the threshold value 0.55 for
our further work because the associated precision
and recall values were closer to each other than for
value 0.65.

We build domain-specific models with the bio-
logical data (14,541 sentences) and the Wikipedia
data (11,111 sentences) and applied the models to
the related training data. We obtained an F score
of 80.2 on the biological data (13th of 20 partici-
pants) and a score of 54.4 on the Wikipedia data
(9th of 15 participants). The balance between pre-
cision and recall scores that we strived for when
processing the training data, was not visible in the
test results. On the biological test data the sys-
tem’s recall score was 13 points higher than the
precision score while on the Wikipedia test data
precision outperformed recall by 31 points (see
Table 1).

Next, we tested the effect of increasing the data
sets with data from another domain. We repeated
the cross-validation experiments with the training
data, this time adding the available data of the
other domain to each of the sets of nine folds used
as training data. Unfortunately, this did not re-
sult in a performance improvement. The best per-

train-test thre. Precis. Recall Fβ=1
bio-bio .55 74.3% 87.1% 80.2±1.0
wik-wik .55 74.0% 43.0% 54.4±0.9
all-bio .55 69.3% 74.6% 71.8±1.2
all-wik .55 69.0% 44.6% 54.2±1.0

Table 1: Performances of the models for different
combinations of training and test data sets with the
associated acceptance threshold values. Training
and testing with data from the same domain pro-
duces the best scores. Higher recall scores were
obtained for biological data than for Wikipedia
data. Standard deviations for F scores were esti-
mated with bootstrap resampling (Yeh, 2000).

formance for the biological data dropped to F =
84.2 (threshold 0.60) while the top score for the
Wikipedia data dropped to F = 56.5 (0.70).

We kept the threshold value of 0.55, built a
model from all available training data and tested
its performance on the two test sets. In both cases
the performances were lower than the ones ob-
tained with domain dependent training data: F =
71.8 for biological data and F = 54.2 for Wikipedia
data (see Table 1).

As post-deadline work, we added statistics for
word bigrams to the model, following up work
by Medlock (2008), who showed that considering
word bigrams had a positive effect on hedge detec-
tion. We changed the probability estimation score
of words appearing in a hedge cue to

P (wi−1wi in cue) =
f(wi−1wi in cue)

f(wi−1wi)

where wi−1wi is a bigram of successive words in a
sentence. Bigrams were considered to be part of a
hedge cue when either or both words were inside
the hedge cue. Unigram probabilities were used
as backoff for known words that appeared outside
known bigrams while unknown words received the
most common score for known words (0). Sen-
tences received a score which is equal to one mi-
nus the highest score of their word bigrams:

P (s is certain) = 1− argmax
wi−1wi in s

P (wi−1wi in cue)

We repeated the threshold estimation experiments
and found that new bigram scores enabled the
models to perform slightly better on the training

149



Figure 1: Precision-recall plot (left) and F plot (right) for different values of the certainty acceptance
thresholds measured by 10-fold cross-validation experiments on the two shared task training data sets
(biological and Wikipedia). The best attained F scores were 88.8 for biological data (threshold 0.55) and
59.4 for Wikipedia data (0.65).

data. The maximum F score for biological training
data improved from 88.8 to 90.1 (threshold value
0.35) while the best F score for the Wikipedia
training data moved up slightly to 59.8 (0.65).

We applied the bigram models with the two op-
timal threshold values for the training data to the
test data sets. For the biological data, we obtained
an F score of 82.0, a borderline significant im-
provement over the unigram model score. The
performance on the Wikipedia data improved sig-
nificantly, by eight points, to F = 62.8 (see Table
2). This is also an improvement of the official
best score for this data set (60.2). We believe that
the improvement originates from using the bigram
model as well as applying a threshold value that
is better suitable for the Wikipedia data set (note
that in our unigram experiments we used the same
threshold value for all data sets).

4 Concluding remarks

We applied a baseline model to the sentence clas-
sification part of the CoNLL-2010 shared task on
hedge detection. The model performed reason-
ably on biological data (F=82.0) but less well on
Wikipedia data (F=62.8). The model performed
best when trained and tested on data of the same
domain. Including additional training data from
another domain had a negative effect. Adding bi-
gram statistics to the model, improved its perfor-
mance on Wikipedia data, especially for recall.

Although the model presented in this paper per-
forms reasonably on the hedge detection tasks, it
is probably too simple to outperform more com-
plex models. However, we hope to have shown its

train-test thre. Precis. Recall Fβ=1
bio-bio .35 79.8% 84.4% 82.0±1.1
wik-wik .65 62.2% 63.5% 62.8±0.8
all-bio .50 73.2% 77.7% 75.4±1.2
all-wik .60 63.5% 57.9% 60.6±0.9

Table 2: Performances of bigram models for dif-
ferent combinations of training and test data sets.
The bigram models performed better than the uni-
gram models (compare with Table 1).

usefulness as baseline and as possible feature for
more advanced models. We were surprised about
the large difference in performance of the model
on the two data sets. However, similar perfor-
mance differences were reported by other partic-
ipants in the shared task, so they seem data-related
rather than being an effect of the chosen model.
Finding the origin of the performance differences
would be an interesting goal for future work.

References
Richárd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, György Móra, János

Csirik, and György Szarvas. 2010. The CoNLL-
2010 Shared Task: Learning to Detect Hedges and
their Scope in Natural Language Text. In Proc.
of the Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL-2010): Shared Task, pages 1–12.

Ben Medlock. 2008. Exploring hedge identification in
biomedical literature. Journal of Biomedical Infor-
matics, 41:636–654.

Alexander Yeh. 2000. More accurate tests for the sta-
tistical significance of result differences. In Pro-
ceedings of the 18th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 947–953.

150


