










































Same and Elaboration Relations in the Discourse Graphbank


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 63–66,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Same and Elaboration Relations in the Discourse Graphbank

Irina Borisova
 University of Groningen, 

Groningen, The Netherlands
Saarland University, 

Saarbrücken, Germany
borisova.ira@gmail.com

Gisela Redeker
University of Groningen, 

Groningen, The Netherlands
g.redeker@rug.nl

Abstract

This  study investigates  the  use of  Same  – a 
relation  that  connects  the  parts  of  a 
discontinuous  discourse  segment  –  in  the 
Discourse Graphbank (Wolf et al., 2004). Our 
analysis  reveals  systematic  deviations  from 
the  definition  of  the  Same relation  and  a 
substantial  number  of  confusions  between 
Same and  Elaboration relations.  We discuss 
some  methodological  and  theoretical 
implications of these findings.

1 Introduction

Coherence  relations  and  their  composition 
(usually assumed to be strictly hierarchical, i.e., 
treelike) form the core of most corpus-linguistic 
and  computational  work  on  discourse  structure 
(see Taboada & Mann 2006 for an overview). The 
assumption  that  discourse  structure  can  be 
modeled as a tree has recently come under attack 
e.g.  in Wolf & Gibson (2003, 2006;  henceforth 
WG). Based on the  Discourse Graphbank (Wolf 
et al 2004; henceforth DG), a manually annotated 
corpus  of  135  newspaper  and  newswire  texts, 
WG claim that less constrained graph structures 
are  needed that  allow for  crossed  dependencies 
(i.e.  structures  in  which  discourse  units  ABCD 
(not necessarily adjacent) have relations AC and 
BD) and multiple-parent structures (where a unit 
enters  more  than  one  coherence relation  and  is 
thus dominated by more than one node).1 

Among the 11 types of relations distinguished 
in  DG,  the  Elaboration relation,  where  two 
asymmetrically  related  discourse  units  are 
“centered around a common event of entity”(Wolf 
1 The validity of this claim is contested in Egg & Redeker 
(2010).

et  al  2003:  12),  stands  out  by  its  heavy 
involvement in these violations of tree structure 
constraints. Elaboration relations are involved in 
50.52% of all crossed dependency structures and 
in 45.83% of  multiple-parent  structures.  These 
high  percentages  are  in  part  due  to  the  high 
overall  frequency  of  Elaboration relations 
(37.97% of all relations), but clearly exceed that 
base rate. Elsewhere, Elaboration relations, esp. 
those where the elaborandum is an entity and not 
a  whole  proposition,  have  been  criticized  as 
belonging more to referential coherence than to 
relational coherence (Knott el at  2001). In this 
study,  we  show  that  WG’s  (somewhat 
idiosyncratic)  definition  of  the Elaboration 
relation  seems  to  lead  to  confusion  with  the 
'pseudo-relation' Same.

The  ‘pseudo-relation’  Same-Unit was 
introduced by Marcu (Carlson & Marcu 2001) to 
deal  with  discontinuous  discourse  units  in  the 
RST  Discourse  Treebank  (Carlson,  Marcu  & 
Okurowski  2002).  Same-Unit (re)connects  the 
parts  of  a  discourse  unit  that  is  disrupted  by 
embedded  material.  In  the  tree  representation, 
the intervening material is attached to one of the 
constituent  units  of  the  Same-Unit relation 
(Carlson  &  Marcu  2001:23-26).  In  DG,  this 
relation is called Same and accounts for 17.21% 
of all relations; only Elaboration and Similarity 
are  more  frequent.2 As  DG  allows  multiple 
attachments,  Same should  be  expected  to  be 
regularly  associated  with  multiple-parent 
structures,  and  it  is:  the  percentage  of  Same 
relations is higher in multiple-parent structures 
than  overall,  and  the  reduction  of  multiple-
2 Note that a Same-Unit relation is not needed in ‘classic’ 
RST, where parenthetical segments are extracted and 
placed after the segment within which they occur (Redeker 
& Egg 2006).

63



parent  structures  when  Same relations  are 
removed  from  the  DG  is  second  only  to 
Elaboration (Wolf & Gibson 2003:280-282).

Our  explorations  of  Same relations  in  DG 
revealed a substantial number of cases that do not 
seem to fit WG’s definition of this relation, most 
notably confusions with Elaboration relations and 
a  surprising number  of  cases  where  there  is  no 
intervening segment to be bridged by the  Same 
relation.  In  this  paper,  we  will  present  these 
findings  and  discuss  some  consequences  for 
discourse  segmentation  and  the  annotation  of 
coherence relations.

2 Same relations in DG

The  DG  coding  manual  (Wolf  et  al  2003:15) 
stipulates  as  the  only  condition  for  a  Same 
relation  that  a  discourse  segment  must  have 
“intervening  material”.  The  example  in  the 
manual  tacitly  fits  the  much  more  restrictive 
definition  given  in  (Wolf  &  Gibson  2003:255) 
and in (Wolf & Gibson 2006:28):

 “A same relation  holds  if  a  subject  NP is 
separated from its predicate by an intervening 
discourse segment”. 

Among  the  534  Same  relations  in  DG,3 we 
have  identified  128  cases  (23.98%)  where  this 
definition does not seem to apply. Sixty-four of 
these  cases  also  do  not  satisfy  the  broader 
definition in the coding manual (see 2.3).

2.1 Same or Elaboration?

In  35  cases,  the  Same relation  is  applied  to 
constructions  that  are  elsewhere  labeled 
Elaborations. Consider the parallel examples (1) 
and (2): 

(1) [42]–[44] elab-loc 
[42] There, [43] she said,
[44] robots perform specific 
tasks in “islands of 
automation,” (Text 1) 

(2)[32]–[34] same 
[32] In the factory of the 
future, [33] according to the 
university's model, [34] 
human chatter will be 
replaced by the click-clack 
of machines. (Text 1) 

3We have arbitrarily chosen to use the data for annotator 1. 
The two annotators agreed on segmentation and annotation 
in 98% of the cases.

In these examples, [42] and [32] each specify 
a location for the state of affairs expressed in the 
second constituent of the relation, [44] and [34] 
respectively. Note that [32] is not a subject NP 
and  example  (2)  thus  violates  the  restricted 
variant  of  the  Same  relation  definition. 
Interestingly,  examples  (1)  and  (2)  differ  with 
respect  to  the  involvement  in  crossed 
dependencies and multiple-parent structures. As 
expected from an elaborating segment, [42] does 
not participate in any other relations;  the three 
other relations [44] participates in do not include 
[42].  By  contrast,  [32]  is  attached  to  the 
intervening segment and in eight other relations 
in  which  not  [34]  by  itself,  but  the  combined 
segment [32]–[34] participates. 

In  other  examples,  a  general  difference 
between these Same and  Elaboration examples 
lies  in  the  attachment  of  the  intervening 
segment:  in  the  Same cases,  the  intervening 
segment  might  be  attached  to  the  preceding 
discourse segment, and in the Elaboration cases 
to the following segment.

The confusion between the symmetric  Same 
relation (both segments have in principle equal 
status) and the asymmetric Elaboration relation 
(combining an elaborandum with a less central 
elaborating segment) might have been caused by 
WG’s  definition,  which  stipulates  that  the 
segments be “centered around a common event 
or entity”  (Wolf et  al 2003: 12)  and thus does 
not  reflect  the  asymmetry  of  the  Elaboration 
relation.

2.2 Violations of definitional constraints

There are other cases, besides those discussed in 
2.1,  where  the  formal  requirement  of  the 
restrictive definition is not met. In 20 cases, the 
Same relations joins coordinated or disjoint NP's 
as in example (3):

(3)[13]–[16] same
[13] Mrs. Price's husband, 
[14] Everett Price, [15] 63, 
[16] and their daughters, 
(Text 2)

In 12 cases, Same is used to relate a discourse 
connective to its host clause as in (4):

(4)[4]–[6] same
[4] However, [5] after two 
meetings with the Soviets, 
[6] a State Department 
spokesman said that (Text 8)

64



Presumably the annotators were using the less 
restrictive definition in the coding manual.  This 
explanation cannot account for the last category 
of problematic cases we now turn to.

2.3 Spurious Same relations

We found 64 cases in DG where Same is assigned 
to two adjacent discourse segments, thus violating 
the essential  criterion of “intervening material”. 
Such ‘spurious’ Same relations occur with various 
constructions including the following: 

• Complement clauses

(5)[61] The administration 
should now state [62] that 
(Text 123, wsj_0655)

• Infinitive clauses

(6)[79] Banco Exterior was 
one of the last banks [80] to 
create a brokerage house 
(Text 122, wsj_0616)

• Conditional clauses

(7) [35] And important U.S. 
lawmakers must decide at the 
end of November [36] if the 
Contras are to receive the 
rest of the $49 million in 
so-called humanitarian 
assistance under a bipartisan 
agreement (Text 123, 
wsj_0655).

• Gerund postmodifier phrases

(8) [2] Lawmakers haven’t 
publicly raised the 
possibility [3] of renewing 
military aid to the Contras, 
(Text 123, wsj_0655).

• Temporal “as”-clauses

(9) [31] it came [32] as 
Nicaragua is under special 
international scrutiny in 
anticipation of its planned 
February elections. (Text 
123, wsj_0655)

The  64  spurious  Same relations  are 
concentrated in only 20 of the 135 texts. Fifty-one 
of those cases occur in ten texts that  were also 
used in the RST Discourse Treebank. This gives 

us  the  interesting  opportunity  to  compare  the 
DG  and  RST Treebank  analyses  for  these  51 
cases. As Table 1 shows, only two of them are 
labeled  Same-Unit in the RST Treebank, while 
26 (51%) are Elaboration relations.

Relations Frequencies Percent

Elaboration 26 51.0 %

Attribution 13 25.5 %

Same-Unit 2 3.9 %

Other 10 19.6 %

Total 51 100 %
Table 1: Spurious Same relations in DG and relations 
assigned in the RST Treebank

It  is  instructive  to  look  at  the  subtype  of 
Elaboration assigned to these cases, which most 
commonly  is  the  relation  Elaboration-object-
attribute-e.  It  applies  to  clausal  modifiers, 
usually  postmodifiers  of  a  noun  phrase,  that 
express an intrinsic quality of an object. Carlson 
& Marcu (2001:55) illustrate this relation with 
the following example: 

(10) [Allied Capital is a 
closed-end management 
investment company][that 
will operate as a business 
development concern.] 
(wsj_0607)

The  constructions  with  spurious  Same 
relations  in  DG  thus  often  involve  restrictive 
modification, implying a very close tie between 
the segments  involved,  possibly prompting  the 
annotators to as it were undo the segmentation.

3 Segmentation rules

Any annotation  of  discourse  relations  requires 
rules  for  segmenting  the  text  into  elementary 
discourse  units.  DG follows Carlson  & Marcu 
(2003)  in  assuming  clauses,  modifiers  and 
attributions  as  discourse  segments  (DSs),  but 
adds  some “refinements”  (Wolf  et  al.,  2003:8) 
that  may  be  responsible  for  some  of  the 
problematic  cases  discussed  in  section  2.4 In 
particular, two of the additional stipulations refer 
to “elaborations”:

4 A different account of the segmentation is given in (Wolf 
& Gibson 2006), but the annotation in DG is presumably 
based on the 2003 manual.

65



“Elaborations [..] are separate DSs: [ Mr. 
Jones, ][ spokesman for IBM, ] [ said… ]” 
(Wolf et al., 2003:8)
“Time-, space-, personal- or detail-
elaborations are treated as DSs” (Wolf et al., 
2003:9). 

This  might  simply  be  an  unfortunate 
equivocation,  but  still  is  likely  to  confuse 
annotators by confounding the segmentation and 
relation annotation tasks. 

4  Conclusions

Our  analysis  of  the  Same  relation  in  DG  has 
shown systematic deviations from the definition 
of this (pseudo-)relation and a substantial number 
of  confusions  between  Same and  Elaboration, 
both in cases where  Same  cannot apply, as there 
is  no  intervening  segment,  and  in  cases  where 
both might apply, but parsimony would demand 
to  treat  parallel  cases  equally. Some  of  the 
problematic cases may have been caused by the 
use  of  relational  terminology  (“elaboration”)  in 
two of the segmentation rules. The problems are 
not  just  methodological,  though,  but  may  raise 
questions  about  the  conceptual  status  of 
Elaboration relations. 

The  confusion  of  a  bone  fide  coherence 
relation with a purely technical construction that 
serves  to  recombine the  parts  of  an  interrupted 
segment  must  be  worrisome.  More  specifically, 
the  comparison with the annotation in the RST 
Discourse  Treebank  reveals  that  many  of  the 
‘spurious’ Same relations in DG are analyzed as 
Elaboration-object-attribute-e relations  in  the 
RST Treebank. This is exactly the subcategory of 
Elaboration relations that most clearly operate on 
the level of entities instead of propositions, and 
thus  arguably  might  not  be  proper  discourse 
relations (Knott et al. 2001). This holds a fortiori 
as  Carlson  &  Marcu’s  (2001)  definition  of  the 
Elaboration-object-attribute-e relation requires a 
restrictive  modifier  construction.  The increasing 
availability  of  corpora  annotated  for  discourse 
structure will facilitate the further investigation of 
these questions.

 Acknowledgements

This research was partially supported by a travel 
grant  from  the  Erasmus  Mundus  Masters 
Programme  in  Language  and  Communication 
Technologies to Borisova and by grant 360-70-
282  of  the  Netherlands  Organization  for 
Scientific  Research  (NWO)  to  Redeker.  We 
would  like  to  thank  Robin  Cooper  and  three 
anonymous  reviewers  for  their  very  useful 
comments.

References
Lynn  Carlson  and  Daniel  Marcu. 2001. Discourse 

Tagging Reference Manual.

Lynn  Carlson,  Daniel  Marcu,  and  Mary  Ellen 
Okurowski.  2002.  RST  Discourse  Treebank. 
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia.

Markus Egg and Gisela Redeker. 2010. How complex 
is discourse? Proceedings of LREC 2010.

Alistair  Knott,  Jon Oberlander,  Michael  O’Donnell, 
and Chris Mellish. 2001. Beyond Elaboration: The 
interaction of relations and focus in coherent text. 
In  J.  Schilperoord T.  Sanders  and  W.  Spooren, 
editors, Text  Representation:  Linguistic  and 
Psycholinguistic Aspects, pp 181–196. Benjamins. 

Gisela Redeker and Markus Egg. 2006. Says who? 
On  the  treatment  of  speech  attributions  in 
discourse  structure.  In  C.  Sidner,  J.  Harpur,  A. 
Benz, and P. Kühnlein (eds),  Proceedings of the 
Workshop  Constraints  in  Discourse  2006.  
Maynooth:  National  University  of  Ireland,  pp. 
140–146.

Maite  Taboada  and  William  C.  Mann.  2006. 
Rhetorical  Structure  Theory:  Looking  back  and 
moving ahead. Discourse Studies, 8 (3), 423–459.

Florian Wolf, Edward Gibson, Amy Fisher, Meredith 
Knight. 2003.  A  Procedure  for Collecting  a 
Database  of  Texts  Annotated  with  Coherence 
Relations. Database documentation. 

Florian Wolf and Edward Gibson. 2003. Representing 
discourse  coherence:  A corpus-based  study. 
Computational Linguistics, 31(2):249–287. 

Florian  Wolf,  Edward  Gibson,  Amy  Fisher,  and 
Meredith  Knight. 2004.  Discourse Graphbank. 
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia. 

Florian Wolf and Edward Gibson. 2006.  Coherence  
in Natural Language. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

66


