










































Characteristics of High Agreement Affect Annotation in Text


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 118–122,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Characteristics of high agreement affect annotation in text

Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm
Cornell University, USA

cissioalm@gmail.com

Abstract
The purpose of this paper is to present an
unusual English dataset for affect explo-
ration in text. It describes a corpus of fairy
tales from three sources that have been
annotated for affect at the sentence level.
Special attention is given to data marked
by high annotator agreement. A quali-
tative analysis of characteristics of high
agreement sentences from H. C. Ander-
sen reveals several interesting trends, illus-
trated by examples.

1 Introduction

Meaning is essential to language. The impor-
tance of expressive, attitudinal/emotive, or so-
cial/interpersonal meaning has been noted by
prominent linguists (Bühler, 1934; Lyons, 1977;
Jakobson, 1996; Halliday, 1996). However, affect
is still an understudied phenomenon in linguistics,
although many affective computing applications
actually apply to language (Picard, 1997).

The motivation behind this discussion is to
bring a special and rather unique dataset to the
attention of reseachers in the field of natural lan-
guage processing, affective computing, and re-
lated areas. This paper discusses affect represen-
tation, presents an affect dataset, and then focuses
on clear-cut cases of affective meaning and expres-
sion in text with a summary of an analysis of data
for which human annotators highly agreed on the
assignment of affect labels. For dataset results in
supervised classification (including experimenta-
tion on high agreement data), cf. Alm (2009).1

2 Affect representation

Affect can be modeled, e.g. as categories (Ek-
man, 1994), dimensions (Osgood, 1969), by fo-

1For details on this dataset and experimentation con-
ducted with it, readers should consult my book (Alm, 2009),
which exceeds this paper in scope and depth.

cus on appraisal (Ortony et al, 1988), or on ex-
perience of physical and bodily responses (Cor-
nelius, 2000). There is a lack of consensus on a
model of affect (Picard, 1997; Scherer, 2003) and
controversy surrounds such modeling. Pragmati-
cally, different views of affect complement each
other and jointly create a basis for understanding
affective language phenomena. Affect modeling
decisions are arguably application dependent. For
a detailed literature review on previous work on
how to characterize affect, affect in text-based lin-
guistics and in subjective NLP or speech technol-
ogy, and tales and oral narratives, see Alm (2009).
Also see http://emotion-research.net/.

Resulting originally from an interest in text
analysis for child-directed expressive text-to-
speech synthesis, this dataset relies on a categor-
ical annotation scheme of basic emotions; a model
supported by the compelling observation that emo-
tive facial expressions were cross-culturally rec-
ognized well above chance (Ekman and Friesen,
1998). In vision and speech research “the Big
Six” (Cornelius, 2000) (i.e. happiness, fear, anger,
surprise, disgust, and sadness) appear quite often.
Nevertheless, the Ekmanian view remains contro-
versial. For instance, Russel and Fernández-Dols
(1998) have critiqued the relevance, methods, and
rigor of the “Facial Expression Program” for emo-
tion. One alternative is free labeling (i.e. anno-
tators may come up with their own labels), but
that may result in impractical, large label sets. A
study grouping items from open-ended responses
to a perception test on characterizing certain fairy
tale sentences noted that although other cases oc-
curred, Big Six emotions were frequent in answers
(Bralè et al, 2005).

As regards the dataset’s use of affect cate-
gories, several empirical studies have shown above
chance performance for recognition of categorical
emotions in classification tasks involving prosody.
Categorical labels may be more straightforward

118



for annotators to conceptualize compared to di-
mensional scales, as participants pointed out in a
study (Francisco and Gervas, 2006). Also, cate-
gories are arguably suitable for pedagogy, and they
naturally fit computational classification. A basic
affect category is also broad enough to span re-
lated affect states, e.g. the emotion family (Ek-
man, 1994) of angry could also cover concepts
such as irritated, annoyed and enraged.2 Finally,
the foundational nature of basic, categorical af-
fects intuitively seems to fit a child-directed con-
text and fairy tales contents, which may include
certain canonical topics and behaviors, compared
to more spontaneous discourse.3

3 Corpus data overview

The affect dataset consists of 176 stories (more
than 15,000 sentences) by Beatrix Potter, the
Brothers Grimm and H. C. Andersen, manually
annotated at the sentence level by pairs of annota-
tors.4 For the annotation process, annotators read
tales and had to make a choice from a set of affect
categories for sentences. Each sentence was given
four affect labels since each of two annotators as-
signed both a primary emotion (guided by the pre-
cence of a feeler, mostly a character or character
type in the text) and a background mood to a sen-
tence. The four labels were then combined into a
sentence’s affect labels. For more details on the
annotation process, cf. (Alm, 2009). The label set
consisted of a set of categorical affect labels. Prior
to the analysis below, ANGRY and DISGUSTED
were merged (motivated by data sparsity and re-
lated semantics) into one category, as were POSI-
TIVELY and NEGATIVELY SURPRISED, yielding a
merged set of affect labels: ANGRY-DISGUSTED,
FEARFUL, HAPPY, NEUTRAL, SAD, SURPRISED.

Interannotator agreement can be an artifact of
annotation scheme and procedure. For exam-
ple, pairs might be trained to annotate similarly,
across-the-board rules (e.g. questions are nega-
tive) might ignore subtle decisions, or problem-
atic items might be removed. Such approaches
may yield higher agreement, cleaner data, and
perhaps better performance and more consistent

2Categories do not exclude adding intensity for approxi-
mating an arousal dimension, arguably relevant for speech.

3Naturally, tales also encompass narrative complexity.
4The annotated data are available at the author’s website

(both the full dataset and the high agreement subsets). For in-
stance, for the high agree affect data, a storyname is followed
by its corresponding high agree affective sentences in the fol-
lowing format: sentence-id-in-story@label-code@sentence.

Figure 1: (Dis)agreement: merged labels

trained applications. But, the relevance of that
for study of linguistic behavior is less clear. Za-
enen (2006) noted that “[f]or interannotator agree-
ment, it suffices that all annotators do the same
thing. But even with full annotator agreement it
is not sure that the task captures what was origi-
nally intended” (577); this should not be confused
with understanding a linguistic issue. Fig. 1 re-
ports on a diagnostic alternative with the ratios of
(dis)agreement types. This avoids the concept of
ground truth, which may not hold for all language
phenomena. Affect, which is highly subjective, is
arguably better captured by flexible acceptability.5

Fig. 1 shows that sentences only labeled NEU-
TRAL were frequent, as were disagreements,
which were more common for sentences marked
both with NEUTRAL and one or more affect
classes. This parallels findings for polarity expres-
sions in subjective texts (Wilson et al, 2005), and
shows that the border between affective and neu-
tral is fuzzy. (Affect perception lacks clear defini-
tions and is subjective, and neutrality suffers from
the same dilemma.) A sentence with high agree-
ment affect was defined as all four primary emo-
tion and mood labels having the same affective la-
bel (given the merged label set). These were more
common than mixed affective labels.

4 High agreement in H. C. Andersen

This section examines the subset of high agree-
ment sentences in the H. C. Andersen data from
a qualitative-interpretive perspective. The anal-
ysis is not intended as rigid categorization, but
rather to get an overall idea of why high agreement
might occur on affect labels across annotators.
Isolated sentences were extracted and mostly ex-
amined that way, rarely considering context. This

5Regular agreement scores for the corpus would be low.

119



Figure 2: Distribution of 460 H. C. Andersen high
agreement affective sentences across affect labels

focused the analytical scope.6 Five annotators en-
gaged with the overall H. C. Andersen subcor-
pus of 77 tales. 460 sentences were marked by
affective high agreement, given the five affective
classes. The distribution of affective classes for
this subset is in Fig. 2, with HAPPY and SAD being
most frequent.

4.1 Characteristics: high agreement affect

The below overview lists characteristics observed
in an analysis on the H. C. Andersen high agree-
ment data. It briefly describes each characteristic
and lets an example illustrate it. For more discus-
sion, examples, word lists etc., see Alm (2009).
The characteristics occur in some and not all sen-
tences; some frequently, others more rarely. Often,
several jointly characterize a sentence.

The illustrative sentence examples in this sec-
tion use the following format: Affect labels
are in small caps and sentences are in italics.
Also, phrases in bold-face illustrate the discussed
characteristic, whereas phrases that annotators
noted are underlined (single underscore for non-
overlapping vs. double underscore for overlap-
ping mark-up), and their feeler/s for the primary
emotion annotation is/are included (with annotator
subscripts to show if they had indicated the same
or not) in parenthesis in small caps.

4.1.1 Affect words
Content words that directly name an affective
state (e.g. reflecting a particular intensity) are
common in high agreement sentences, cf.:

6Annotators’ noted feeler and emotional/connotative
phrases for the sentences were inspected.

ANGRY-DISGUSTED: They buzzed round
the prince and stung his face and hands;
angrily he drew his sword and brandished it, but
he only touched the air and did not hit the gnats.
(VILLAIN1,2)

That narration can directly announce affective
states is an indication of the important narrative
role affect can play in stories. Also, Wilson and
Wiebe (2003) interestingly noted that annotators
agreed more strongly with strong subjective ex-
pressions, which affect words are examples of.
Some illustrative affect words from the examined
data are (for SURPRISED): alarmed, astonished,
astonishment, shocked, shocking, startled, sur-
prised. Special cases include negation (e.g. not
happy for SAD); figurative/idiomatic phrases (e.g.
one of his heartstrings had broken for SAD); or ap-
pearance with more than one affect (e.g. anguish
for SAD or FEARFUL).

4.1.2 Words for related/contrastive affect
states

Expressions in the sentential context naming re-
lated or contrastive affective states not in the label
set (e.g. dull, pride, relief, or shame) may also help
evoke a particular affect, as in:
HAPPY: They looked at Little Claus ploughing
with his five horses, and he was so proud that he
smacked his whip, and said, “Gee-up, my five
horses.” (HERO1,2)

4.1.3 Affect related words or expressions
Lexical items or phrases which describe actions,
properties, behaviors, cognitive states, or objects
associated with particular affects occur frequently
in the examined high agreement subset, e.g. as in:
HAPPY: They laughed and they wept; and Peter
embraced the old Fire-drum. (HERO1, (TRUE)
MOTHER2, (TRUE) FATHER2)

Some more prominent affect related lexical
items include weep, kiss, laugh, cry (= weep), and
forms of pleasure, tears, and smile. Expressions
of weeping or tears often appear with sadness, but
may also depict happiness. Negations may occur.

4.1.4 Polarity words and expressions
Words or expressions of positive or negative po-
larity can help to set the scene with a particular af-
fective mode, in particular with relation to context
and acquired knowledge. Expressions of opposing
polarity may be used as a contrast, as in:
HAPPY: It became a splendid flower-garden

120



to the sick boy, and his little treasure upon earth.
(SICK BOY1,2)

Modifiers can intensify the affective load. Lex-
ical words and phrases may have permanent vs.
occasional attitudinal meaning (Hedquist, 1978).

4.1.5 Knowledge and human experience
Readers may from experience associate aquired
knowledge about situations, visualizations, and
behaviors with particular affects. For example, it
is common knowledge that starving is traumatic:
SAD: He was hungry and thirsty, yet no one gave
him anything; and when it became dark, and they
were about to close the gardens, the porter turned
him out. (HERO1,2).

Story worlds tend to involve canonical represen-
tations of characters, actions, functions, situations
and objects. Surrounding context can be impor-
tant for affective interpretations. Scenarios may
include, e.g. an inspiration from weather, flow-
ers, nature, or God; singing (or dancing, jump-
ing); physical lack and need; sleep deprivation
or allowance; addiction; incapability; unexpected
observation; appearance/posture (or intonation);
contextual guidance; or relate to marriage (see
(Alm, 2009) for examples). In fact, arguably most
discussed characteristics can be traced to acquired
knowledge, experience, associations, or context.

4.1.6 Speech acts
Speech acts reflect a certain kind of communica-
tive knowledge that can have affective meaning
(such as cursing, insulting, commanding), e.g.:
ANGRY-DISGUSTED:
Let her be expelled from the congregation and the
Church. (VILLAIN1,2)

4.1.7 Types of direct speech
Direct speech may be used by characters in tales to
express affect. This might include speaking excit-
edly, (WH)-exclamations or (WH)-questions, short
utterances, interjections (and sound effects), such
as ah, alas, hurrah, o God, sorry, thump, ugh. Di-
rect speech can be introduced by words of speak-
ing, as in:
FEARFUL: “Mercy!” cried Karen. (HEROINE1,2)

4.1.8 Mixed emotions
Affective high agreement sentences also include
cases of mixed emotions, e.g. affect or affect-
related words referring to more than one affect.
The ‘winning’ affect may be inferred. Contrast

might make it more prominent, as in:
HAPPY (mixed SAD): He now felt glad at
having suffered sorrow and trouble, because
it enabled him to enjoy so much better all the
pleasure and happiness around him; for the

great swans swam round the new-comer, and
stroked his neck with their beaks, as a welcome.
(MAIN CHARACTER/HERO1,2)

4.2 Tendencies of particular affect categories
Lastly, there may be trends for particular charac-
teristics associating more or less with a particular
affect. For example, in this subset, FEARFUL sen-
tences seem often to contain affect or affect related
words, whereas SURPRISED sentences may quite
often be characterized by various types of direct
speech or involve unexpected observations.

5 Conclusion

This paper brought attention to an affect dataset,
and discussed (mostly surface) characteristics in
its H. C. Andersen high agreement subset, il-
lustrating the complexity of affect cues, without
claiming an exhaustive analysis. It also tentatively
hypothesized that some characteristics may show
particular affinity with certain affects.

The high agreement sentence data may be par-
ticularly interesting for affect research, while other
parts of the annotated, larger corpus may reveal
insights on affect variation in text and perception
thereof (bearing in mind that the dataset is not
necessarily representative across domains and text
types, nor of contemporary texts).

Lastly, as noted above, developed knowledge,
experience, associations, and context appear very
important for affect understanding. This is also
a substantial part of what makes the problem of
automatically predicting affect from text so chal-
lenging; it involves levels of deep cognitive under-
standing rather than just extractable surface fea-
tures. Whereas the discussed characteristics nat-
urally do not consistute the answer to affect un-
derstanding, they may inform future search for it.
Deep understanding and continuous, as opposed
to static, computational development of affective
understanding remain crucial areas of future work
for expressive NLP applications.

Acknowledgments

Thanks to R. Sproat, R. Proaño, and reviewers.
Project funded by NSF (award ITR-#0205731).

121



References
Alm, Cecilia Ovesdotter. 2009. Affect in Text and

Speech. VDM Verlag: Saarbrcken.

Bralè, Véronique, Valérie Maffiolo, Ioannis Kanellos,
and Thierry Moudenc. 2005. Towards an expres-
sive typology in storytelling: A perceptive approach.
In Jianhua Tao, Tieniu Tan, and Rosalind W. Picard
(Eds.), Affective Computing and Intelligent Inter-
action, First International Conference, ACII 2005,
Beijing, China, October 22-24, 2005, Proceedings,
858-865.

Bühler, Karl. 1934. Sprachtheorie: Die Darstellungs-
funktion der Sprache. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Ver-
lag.

Cahn, Janet E. 1990. The generation of affect in syn-
thesized speech. Journal of the American Voice I/O
Society 8, 1-19.

Cornelius, Randolph R. 2000. Theoretical approaches
to emotion. In Proceedings of the ISCA Workshop on
Speech and Emotion, 3-10.

Ekman, Paul. 1994. All emotions are basic. In P. Ek-
man and R. J. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature of Emo-
tion: Fundamental Questions. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 15-19.

Ekman, Paul and Wallace V. Friesen. 1998 [1971]
Constants across culture in the face and emo-
tion. Jenkins, Jennifer M and Oatley, Keith and
Stein, Nancy L. (eds). Human Emotions: A Reader.
Malden, Massachussetts: Blackwell, 63-72.

Francisco, Virginia and Pablo Gervás 2006. Explor-
ing the compositionality of emotions in text: Word
emotions, sentence emotions and automated tag-
ging. In AAAI-06 Workshop on Computational Aes-
thetics: Artificial Intelligence Approaches to Beauty
and Happiness.

Halliday, Michael A. K. 1996. Linguistic function
and literary style: An inquiry into the language
of William Golding’s The Inheritors. Weber, Jean
Jacques (ed). The Stylistics Reader: From Roman
Jakobson to the Present. London: Arnold, 56-86.

Hedquist, Rolf. 1978. Emotivt spåk: En studie i
dagstidningarnas ledare. Ph.D. Thesis. Umeå.

Jakobson, Roman. 1996. Closing statement: Lin-
guistics and poetics. Weber, Jean Jacques (ed). The
Stylistics Reader: From Roman Jakobson to the
Present. London: Arnold, 10-35.

Lyons, John. 1977. Semantics volumes 1, 2. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ortony, Andrew, Gerlad L. Clore, and Allan Collins.
1988. The Cognitive Structure of Emotions. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.

Osgood, Charles E. 1969. On the whys and wherefores
of E, P, and A. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 12 (3), 194-199.

Picard, Rosalind W. 1997. Affective computing. Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Russell, James A. and José M. Fernández-Dols 1998
[1997]. What does a facial expression mean? Jenk-
ins, Jennifer M and Oatley, Keith and Stein, Nancy
L. (eds). Human Emotions: A Reader. Malden,
Massachussetts: Blackwell, 63-72.

Scherer, Klaus R. 2003. Vocal communication of emo-
tion: A review of research paradigms. Speech Com-
munication 40 (1-2), 227256.

Wilson, Theresa, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoff-
man. 2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in
phrase-level sentiment analysis. Proceedings of
HLT/EMNLP, 347-354.

Wilson, Theresa and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Annotating
opinions in the world press. 4th SigDial workshop
on Discourse and Dialogue.

Zaenen, Annie. 2006. Mark-up barking up the wrong
tree. Journal of Computational Linguistics 32 (4),
577-580.

122


