










































Representing Story Plans in SUMO


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 40–48,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Representing Story Plans in SUMORepresenting Story Plans in SUMORepresenting Story Plans in SUMORepresenting Story Plans in SUMO            
Jeffrey Cua  Jeffrey Cua  Jeffrey Cua  Jeffrey Cua   

Center for Human Language Technologies 

De La Salle University, Manila, Philippines 
  cuajeffreyleonardcompro1@yahoo.com 

Ethel OngEthel OngEthel OngEthel Ong  
College of Computer Studies 

De La Salle University, Manila, Philippines 
ethel.ong@delasalle.ph     

Ruli Ruli Ruli Ruli ManurungManurungManurungManurung    
Faculty of Computer Science 

University of Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia 
maruli@cs.ui.ac.id 

    

    
Adam PeaseAdam PeaseAdam PeaseAdam Pease    

Articulate Software 

Angwin, California, USA 
apease@articulatesoftware.com    

 

 

Abstract 

Automatic story generation systems require a 

body of commonsense knowledge about the 

basic relationships between concepts we find 

everyday in our world in order to produce in-

teresting narratives that describe human ac-

tions and world events. This paper presents an 

ongoing work that investigates the use of 

Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) 

to represent storytelling knowledge and its in-

ference engine Sigma to query actions and 

events that may take place in the story to be 

generated. The resulting story plan (fabula) is 

also represented in SUMO, allowing for a sin-

gle story representation to be realized in vari-

ous human languages. 

1 Introduction 

People combine words and events from their 

knowledge source of words, their meanings and 

their relationships in order to tell stories about their 

lives, their communities, and their daily expe-

riences. In order for computers to achieve the same 

level of expressiveness to provide a more fluent 

man-machine interaction, they must be provided 

with the same collection of knowledge about the 

basic relationships between things and events. 

Picture Books (Solis et al, 2009), an automatic 

story generator that generates story text for child-

ren from a given input set of picture elements 

(backgrounds, characters and objects), utilized a 

semantic ontology whose design has been adapted 

from ConceptNet (Liu and Singh, 2004). The 

background serves as the setting of the story and is 

also used to determine the theme. Semantic con-

cepts needed by the story planner, specifically ob-

jects, story events, and character actions are 

classified according to the semantic categories of 

ConceptNet, namely things, spatial, events, ac-

tions, and functions. This mapping approach con-

strained the flexibility of the system, as new 

themes would entail repopulating the sequences of 

possible events manually into the knowledge base. 

Events and actions are selected according to their 

associated themes, and not marked with precondi-

tions that specify constraints under which certain 

actions can be performed and the corresponding 

consequential events that may arise. 

Swartjes (2006) developed a story world ontolo-

gy containing two layers, the upper story world 

ontology and the domain-specific world ontology. 

The upper story world ontology is independent of 

any story structures or story domains and models a 

vast amount of possible actions and events. It is 

also limited to high-level concepts that are meta, 

generic or abstract to address a broad range of do-

main areas. A domain-specific story world ontolo-

gy, on the other hand, applies the upper story 

world ontology to a certain story domain. 

Kooijman (2004) suggests the use of the Sug-

gested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) as an 

upper ontology to capture the semantics of world 

knowledge. SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2001) is an 

40



open source formal and public ontology. It is a col-

lection of well-defined and well-documented con-

cepts, interconnected into a logical theory. It 

numbers some 20,000 terms and 70,000 axioms. 

Axioms are in first-order logic form (with some 

higher order extensions) and reflect commonsense 

notions that are generally recognized among the 

concepts. They place a constraint on the interpreta-

tion of concepts and provide guidelines for auto-

mated reasoning systems such as Sigma (Pease, 

2003). Formal terms in SUMO are mapped to syn-

sets in WordNet (Pease, 2006). 

There are other noteworthy ontologies that can 

be considered. Like SUMO, Cyc (Lenat, 1995) is a 

large-scale, language-independent and extensible 

knowledge base and commonsense reasoning en-

gine, but it is proprietary and its open-source ver-

sion, OpenCyc
1
, has no inference rules. DOLCE 

(Gangemi, 2003) is a small-scale descriptive on-

tology with a cognitive orientation. BFO (Smith, 

1998) is another small-scale upper ontology sup-

porting domain ontologies developed for scientific 

research domain, such as biomedicine. Thus, no 

ontology other than SUMO had the characteristics 

of being comprehensive enough to include forma-

lizations that represent detailed elements of every-

day life (e.g., furniture, breaking an object, 

emotion), being open-source, having expressive-

ness of at least first order predicate calculus so that 

arbitrary rules about actions and consequences can 

be represented, having an associated open-source 

first-order inference engine, and a language gener-

ation capability so that stories can be automatically 

presented in multiple human languages 

This paper presents SUMOs (SUMO Stories), 

an automatic story generator that uses first-order 

logic to declaratively describe models of the world, 

specifically those aspects of the world that 

represent storytelling knowledge for children’s 

stories of the fable form. The story planner then 

utilizes an open source browsing and inference 

engine Sigma to infer this knowledge to generate a 

story plan (fabula) also in first-order logic form.  

Using first-order logic enables a less restricted 

semantics compared to description logic, which is 

commonly used for knowledge representation of 

large ontologies. Though having lesser constraints 

will have an impact on the speed of inference, it is 

overcome by the advantage of having greater re-

                                                           
1 OpenCyc web site, http://www.opencyc.org/ 

presentational capability. In particular, the axi-

omatic nature of actions and their consequences, so 

essential for reasoning about narrative structures, is 

not supported by description logics, which focus 

on category and instance membership reasoning. 

Section 2 provides a background on the know-

ledge required by story generation and how these 

were represented in Picture Books, which is used 

as the basis for the storytelling knowledge. Section 

3 discusses the representation of the storytelling 

knowledge to SUMO. The SUMOs architecture 

depicting the interaction between the story planner 

and Sigma to derive the story plan is then pre-

sented in Section 4. The paper concludes with a 

summary of what we have accomplished so far, 

and presents further work that can be done. 

2 Storytelling Knowledge  

Theune and her colleagues (2006) presented five 

levels of the different aspects of a story that must 

be represented in the semantic network. These are 

the story world knowledge, character representa-

tions, a causal and temporal network to represent 

plot structures, representational model of narrato-

logical concepts, and the representation of the sto-

ry’s potential effects on the user. Only the first four 

levels are included in this study. 

According to Swartjes (2006), a story is com-

posed of a story world where the story takes place, 

the characters that interact in the story world, and 

the associated objects. Consider the story generat-

ed by Picture Books in Table 1 about Rizzy the 
rabbit who learns to be honest (Hong et al, 2008). 

The afternoon was windy. Rizzy the rabbit was in the 

dining room. She played near a lamp. Rizzy broke the 

lamp. She was scared. Mommy Francine saw that the 

lamp was broken. Rizzy told Mommy Francine that Da-

niel broke the lamp. Daniel the dog told her that he did 

not break the lamp. Daniel was upset. He got punished. 

Mommy Francine told Daniel that he was grounded. He 

cried. Rizzy felt guilty. She told Mommy Francine that 

she broke the lamp. Mommy Francine told Rizzy that 

she should have been honest. Rizzy apologized to 

Mommy Francine. Mommy Francine forgave Rizzy. 

Rizzy apologized to Daniel. He forgave her. Mommy 

Francine told Rizzy to be honest. She told her that being 

honest is good. From that day onwards, Rizzy always 

was honest. 

Table 1. Sample story generated by Picture Books 

(Hong et al, 2008) 

41



The story elements in Table 1 were determined 

from the background (i.e., dining room), the cha-

racters (i.e., Rizzy and her mommy Francine) and 

object (i.e., lamp) that the child user places into 

his/her picture using the Picture Editor of the sys-

tem in Figure 1. 

The background serves as the main setting of the 

story, and combined with the selected objects, is 

used to determine the theme. Consider the bed-

room setting. If the associated object is a lamp, 

then the theme is about bravery (i.e., do not be 

afraid of the dark). If the object is a set of toy 

blocks, the theme can be about being neat. In Pic-

ture Books, such associations are manually deter-

mined and entered into the database. In SUMOs, 

these associations should be inferred automatically 

through axioms that should be commonsense, and 

not be explicit encoding of narrative knowledge.  

 

Figure 2. Picture Editor (Hong et al, 2008) 

 

Stories generated by Picture Books follow a ba-

sic plot dictated by Machado (2003) that flows 

from negative to positive and comprises four sub-

plots, namely the problem, rising action, solution 

and climax. The theme is subdivided into these 

four subplots, each representing a major event in 

the story. 

Each subplot contains at least two author goals 

representing the goal of the scene and the corres-

ponding consequence of the goal. An author goal is 

translated into one or more character goals, each 

representing an action performed by the character 

(main, secondary, or adult character) in order to 

achieve the author goal. A character goal translates 

directly to one declarative sentence in the generat-

ed story. Table 2 shows the author goals and the 

character goals for some of the sentences in the 

story in Table 1. 

The design of the character goal is based from 

the action operators of Uijlings (2006) which is 

easily transformed to a declarative sentence in ac-

tive voice using the surface realizer simpleNLG 

(Venour and Reiter, 2008). In the case of Picture 

Books, however, the approach resulted in a story 

where every sentence describes an action or a feel-

ing (i.e., scared, guilty, upset) that is performed by 

the character, as seen in Table 1. 

Subplot #1 

Author goal 1.1: 

Goal of the scene Child is doing an activity 

Character goal <character> plays <object> 

Resulting text 
Rizzy the rabbit played near a 

lamp. 

Author goal 1.2: 

Goal consequence Child caused a problem 

Character goal <character> destroys <object> 

Resulting text Rizzy broke the lamp. 

Subplot #2 

Author goal 2.1: 

Goal of the scene Child lied 

Character goal 

<main character> told <adult 

character> that <secondary 

character> <did the action> 

Resulting text 
Rizzy told Mommy Francine that 

Daniel the dog broke the lamp. 

Author goal 2.2: 

Goal consequence Another child gets punished 

Character goal #1 
<secondary character> receives 

<punishment> 

Resulting text #1 Daniel the dog got punished. 

Character goal #2 

<adult character> issues <pu-

nishment> to <secondary cha-

racter> 

Resulting text #2 
Mommy Francine told Daniel 

that he was grounded. 

Table 2. Sample author goals and character goals asso-

ciated with the theme Being Honest (Hong et al, 2008) 

 

The story planner of Picture Books utilizes two 

types of knowledge, the operational knowledge 

and the domain knowledge. The operational know-

ledge contains a static description of the different 

backgrounds and their associated themes and ob-

jects, the child characters and their corresponding 

parent characters, as well as the occupation of the 

42



parents. For each theme, the set of character goals 

needed to instantiate the major events in the theme 

are also specified.  

The domain knowledge, on the other hand, con-

tains a semantic description of objects and events 

that can occur, as well as actions that can be per-

formed. For example, breaking an object results to 

getting punished, and grounded is a form of pu-

nishment. 

Character goals are instantiated by accessing the 

semantic ontology to search for concepts that are 

directly related to the input concept. There are two 

search methods. The first method searches for 

another concept that has a relationship with the 

given concept while satisfying the semantic cate-

gory. For example, ontoSpatial(“play”) triggers a 

search for all concepts connected to play within the 

spatial semantic category, such as the semantic 

relationship locationOf(“play”, “park”). The second 

method searches for a path that semantically re-

lates the two given concepts. For example, ontoAc-

tion(“vase”, “method of destruction”) triggers a 

search for a path to relate how a vase can be de-

stroyed, and yields the following relationships: 

CapableOf(“break”, “vase”) 

Isa(“method of destruction”, “break”)  

3 Representing Storytelling Knowledge in 
SUMO 

A crucial part of the work involved in the devel-

opment of SUMOs is the representation of the sto-

rytelling knowledge and the evolving story plan in 

SUMO and the use of the Sigma reasoning engine 

to infer story facts and events. 

The storytelling knowledge represented in 

SUMO includes the semantic description about 

concepts, objects and their relationships. From a 

given input set of story elements comprising the 

selected background, characters, and objects, a 

query is sent to Sigma to determine a possible 

starting action that can be performed by the main 

character in the story. The story then progresses 

based on the relationships of character actions and 

reactions, which are the stored facts in SUMO. 

Similar to Picture Books, the resulting story plan 

is created based on a pre-authored plot of problem, 

rising action, resolution and climax. But instead of 

attaching the next set of actions and emotions of 

characters to author goals, in SUMOs, the set of 

actions that a character can do – reaction to events 

and objects, experience emotions such as joy and 

sadness, and subsequent actions based on their 

emotions – are represented in SUMO logic. 

The storytelling knowledge was formulated us-

ing a set of predicates that can be classified into 

four main types. Factual predicates specify proper-

ties of characters, objects, and locations. Semantic 

predicates define the semantic relationships be-

tween concepts. Actions and events predicates de-

fine the causal relationships between actions and 

events. Thematic predicates represent a new set of 

predicates to relate story themes to actions. 

3.1 Conceptualizing Story Characters, Ob-
jects, and Backgrounds 

Factual predicates represent the characters, their 

roles, the locations, and the objects that may com-

prise a story. The class and subclass axioms of 

SUMO
2
 are used to define the set of characters, 

objects and locations.  

Children’s stories of the fable form are por-

trayed by animals that can capture the  imagina-

tion and attention of the readers. Animal characters 

are given names, such as Ellen the elephant, Rizzy 

the rabbit, and Leo the lion, to give the impression 

that the characters are friends that the children are 

getting to know better through reading the story 

(Solis et al, 2009). Representing this in SUMO 

entails the use of the subclass axiom to represent 

class inheritance as shown below: 

(subclass RabbitCharacter StoryCharacter) 

Class definitions include slots that describe the 

attributes of instances of the class and their rela-

tions to other instances (Noy, 2001). A character in 

SUMOs has the attributes type (whether adult or 

child), gender, and name. An example axiom to 

represent a female child RabbitCharacter whose 

name will be “Rizzy” is shown below. Similar 

axioms are defined for all the other characters. 

(=> 

  (and 

    (instance ?RABBIT RabbitCharacter) 

    (attribute ?RABBIT Female) 

    (attribute ?RABBIT Child)) 

  (name ?RABBIT "Rizzy")) 

Backgrounds and objects are also defined using 

the subclass axiom and inherit from existing 

classes in SUMO, for example, 

                                                           
2 SUMO Ontology Portal, http://www.ontologyportal.org/ 

43



(subclass LivingRoom Room) 

(subclass Lamp LightFixture) 

(subclass Lamp ElectricDevice) 

(attribute Lamp Fragile) 

Further definitions can be provided for living 

room to differentiate it from other rooms, such as 

being disjoint from bathroom, and has a primary 

purpose of supporting social interaction, as shown 

below. Similarly, the definition for lamp can also 

be extended to distinguish it from other electric 

light fixtures, e.g., a lamp is moveable unlike a 

chandelier, but is plugged in when operating unlike 

a flashlight. 

(=> 

 (instance ?R LivingRoom) 

     (hasPurpose ?R 

          (exists (?S) 

              (and 

              (instance ?S SocialInteraction) 

              (located ?S ?R))))) 

(disjoint  LivingRoom Bathroom) 

3.2 Representing Semantic Concepts 

Aside from the properties of objects that are mod-

eled using the attribute axiom, semantic relation-

ships that may hold between two concepts 

involving types of activities or actions, character 

emotions, locations of objects, and abilities of cha-

racters or objects must also be modeled. Table 3 

shows sample semantic relationships for these con-

cepts as represented in Picture Books, following 

the semantic categories of ConceptNet (Liu and 
Singh, 2004). 

Objects IsA (doll, toys) 

Activities IsA (play games, activity) 

Concepts 

IsA (grounded, punishment) 

IsA (disorder, problem) 

IsA (no appetite, problem) 

IsA (dizzy, discomfort) 

IsA (itchy, discomfort) 

Emotions 
IsA (happy, emotion) 

IsA (scared, emotion) 

Reaction to 

Events 

EffectOf (break object, scared) 

EffectOf (meet new friends, smile) 

Location LocationOf (toys, toy store) 

Capability 

CapableOf (lamp, break) 

CapableOf (glass of water, break) 

CanBe (toys, scattered) 

Table 3. Semantic relationships in Picture Books based 

on ConceptNet (Hong et al, 2008) 

In SUMOs, all isA(entity1, entity2) relations 

were replaced with the axiom (subclass entity1 

entity2). To specify that an entity is in a location, 

i.e., locationOf(toys, toy store), first, we create an 

instance of a toystore and then specify that a cer-

tain toy instance is in that toystore, as follows:  

(=> 

    (instance ?TOYSTORE ToyStore) 

    (exists (?TOY) 

        (and 

            (instance ?TOY Toy) 

            (located ?TOY ?TOYSTORE)))) 

The capability axiom is used to conceptualize 

the capability relation (capability ?process ?role 

?obj). It specifies that ?obj has the specified ?role 

in the ?process. For example, a lamp or a glass is 

the patient (receiver) of the process breaking, 

while a toy is the patient for the process scattering. 

(capability Breaking experiencer Lamp) 

(capability Breaking experiencer Glass) 

(capability Scattering experiencer Toy) 

Reaction to events is expressed using the if-else 

axiom of SUMO, for example, if a child character 

causes an accident (a damage), then he/she will 

feel anxiety. Emotions are represented using the 

attribute relation. 

 (=> 

    (and 

      (instance ?ACCIDENT Damaging) 

      (instance ?CHARACTER StoryCharacter) 

      (attribute ?CHARACTER Child) 

      (agent ?ACCIDENT ?CHARACTER)) 

    ((attribute ?CHARACTER Anxiety))) 

3.3 Conceptualizing Actions and Events 

Swartjes (2006) noted that organizing actions and 

events, and causally relating them, is an essential 

step in story generation. Independent of the story 

plot, the causes and effects of character actions can 

be used to describe the events that form the story.  

Actions define activities that can be performed 

by a character in the story, such as play, tell a lie, 

or cry. Events, on the other hand, occur in the story 

as a result of performing some actions, such as a 

lamp breaking as a result of a character or an ob-

ject hitting it. Swartjes (2006) further notes that 

events are not executed by a character. 

Action predicates are used to define the actions 

that may take place given a set of world state. Con-

sider the axiom below which provides a set of four 

44



possible actions – RecreationOrExercise, Looking, 

Maintaining, and Poking – that can be performed 

(as an agent) or experienced by a child character 

who is situated near a lamp object in the story 

world. These four actions are subclasses of the In-

tentionalProcess of SUMO. 

 (=> 

  (and 

    (orientation ?CHARACTER ?OBJECT Near) 

    (instance ?CHARACTER StoryCharacter) 

    (attribute ?CHARACTER Child) 

    (instance ?OBJECT Lamp)) 

  (and 

    (capability RecreationOrExercise  

experiencer ?CHARACTER) 

    (capability Looking experiencer ?CHARACTER) 

    (capability Maintaining experiencer ?CHARACTER) 

    (capability Poking experiencer ?CHARACTER))) 

Again, the capability relation is used but in this 

instance, to specify that the character has the role 

of experiencing the specified process. While both 

the agent and the experiencer roles represent the 

doer of a process, an experiencer does not entail a 

causal relation between its arguments. 

Event predicates are used to model explicit 

events that may take place as a result of some cha-

racter actions. Consider again the exists axiom be-

low which states that an instance of an event (in 

this case damaging) can occur when there is a 

child character (the agent) playing near a fragile 

object. The subprocess axiom is used to represent a 

temporally distinguished part of a process and also 

expresses a chain of cause and effect subprocesses 

for playing and damaging. The recipient (patient) 

of the event is the object. 

(=> 

 (and 

   (agent ?X ?CHARACTER) 

   (instance ?CHARACTER StoryCharacter) 

   (attribute ?CHARACTER Child) 

   (instance ?OBJECT Object) 

   (attribute ?OBJECT Fragile) 

   (instance ?X RecreationOrExercise) 

   (orientation ?CHARACTER ?OBJECT Near) 

 (exists (?DAMAGE) 

   (and 

     (instance ?DAMAGE Damaging) 

     (subProcess ?DAMAGE ?X) 

     (agent ?DAMAGE ?CHARACTER) 

     (patient ?DAMAGE ?OBJECT)))) 

Although suitable for inference, the given axiom 

does not fully capture the desired truth as the no-

tion of time is not represented. The axiom says “if 

a child plays at any point in time, and is near an 

object at any point in time (not necessarily while 

playing), then the object gets damaged during 

playing”.  The more accurate axiom below uses 

holdsDuring to show that the time frames of the 

actual playing and being near the object are the 

same, thus increasing the likelihood of the charac-

ter who is playing to cause the damage. 

(=> 

 (and 

   (instance ?X RecreationOrExercise) 

   (agent ?X ?CHARACTER) 

   (instance ?CHARACTER StoryCharacter) 

   (attribute ?CHARACTER Child) 

   (instance ?OBJECT Object) 

   (attribute ?OBJECT Fragile) 

   (holdsDuring (WhenFn ?X) 

       (orientation ?CHARACTER ?OBJECT Near)) 

(exists (?DAMAGE) 

   (and 

     (instance ?DAMAGE Damaging) 

     (subProcess ?DAMAGE ?X) 

     (agent ?DAMAGE ?CHARACTER) 

     (patient ?DAMAGE ?OBJECT)))) 

As the representation shows, SUMO is quite ca-

pable of encoding temporal properties of events 

with its temporal qualification. However, inferenc-

ing with rules involving time relations between 

events is currently not supported by Sigma (Corda 

et al, 2008). Nevertheless, efforts are underway to 

perform true higher-order logical inference (Sut-

cliffe et al, 2009). 

The next step involves deriving axioms to 

represent the different ways in which an object can 

be damaged depending on its attribute, for exam-

ple, fragile objects can break while paper-based 

objects such as books and paintings can be torn. 

Consideration must also be made to determine if a 

damage is an accident or intentional. 

3.4 Conceptualizing Story Themes 

Themes can also be mapped to SUMO as thematic 

predicates, and the story planner can identify a 

theme either based on the first action that was per-

formed, or based on user selection. In the latter 

case, when Sigma returns all possible actions, the 

planner can choose one based on the theme. 

45



4 System Architecture 

The architecture of SUMOs, shown in Figure 2, 

has two main modules, the Story Editor and the 

Story Planner, both of which interact with Sigma
3
 

to retrieve story facts from the SUMO ontology as 

well as to assert new axioms representing the de-
veloping story plan back to SUMO. 

 
Figure 2. Architecture of SUMOs 

 

The Story Editor handles the generation of as-

sertions corresponding to the input picture ele-

ments specified by the user.  

The Story Planner is responsible for planning 

the flow of events in the story. It uses a meta-

knowledge about children’s story comprising of 

five phases – introduction, problem, rising action, 

solution, and climax. The planner determines and 

phrases the queries that are sent to Sigma and ge-

nerates additional axioms based on the query re-

sults in order to expand the story plan. The 

generated axioms are asserted back to Sigma for 

inclusion in the SUMO ontology to be used again 

for further inferencing.  

Queries sent to Sigma can be classified into 

three categories. Concept-based queries concern 

classes and instances, and are used to determine 

direct and indirect subclass and class-instance rela-

tionships while relation-based queries infer know-

ledge by considering transitivity, symmetry and 

inversion of relations (Corda et al, 2008). Action-

based queries identify a set of actions based on the 

                                                           
3 Sigma Knowledge Engineering Environment,  

http://sigmakee.sourceforge.net  

current world state to drive the story. A fourth cat-

egory, time-event queries, currently not supported 

by Sigma, should reason about temporal and event-

based specifications. 

The interaction between the Story Planner and 

Sigma in Figure 2 raises an issue of search control. 

In Picture Books and SUMOs, information that 

guides the story planning can be bottom-up, i.e. the 

actions and events are determined based on what is 

possible within the story ontology, e.g. through the 

various capability axioms, or top-down, i.e. actions 

are selected based on Machado's narrative subplot 

knowledge. Currently, the Story Planner is respon-

sible for managing the process. However, if both 

these sources of knowledge and constraints can be 

represented in first-order logic, the search control 

of the story planning process can be recast as a 

theorem proving task, i.e. one that searches for a 

proof that satisfies all constraints. This is a future 

research direction. 

The following section presents a more detailed 

trace of system operation and the contents of a sto-

ry plan in first-order logic. 

4.1 Generating Story Plans 

The first part of the story plan contains assertions 

to represent the initial elements of the story. Using 

the story in Table 1 as an example, lines 1 to 6 be-

low assert the main child character and her parent, 

while lines 7 to 8 assert the background and the 

object, respectively.  

1>   (instance Rabbit1 RabbitCharacter) 
2>  (attribute Rabbit1 Child) 
3>  (attribute Rabbit1 Female) 
4>  (instance Rabbit2 RabbitCharacter) 
5>  (attribute Rabbit2 Adult) 
6>  (attribute Rabbit2 Female) 
7>  (instance LivingRoom1 LivingRoom) 
8>  (instance Lamp1 Lamp) 

The next step involves initializing the locations 

of these story elements. Currently, it is setup that 

all objects would be situated in the background and 

the first child character would always be near the 

first object, as shown in the assertions below.  

9>  (located Rabbit1 LivingRoom1) 
10>  (located Lamp1 LivingRoom1) 
11>  (orientation Rabbit1 Lamp1 Near) 

This, however, creates the assumption that the 

child character is already in the location near ob-

jects which he will interact with, which may not 

return 

results 

abstract 

story plan 

assertions 

assertions 

obtain 

results 

Story 

Editor 
SUMO 

Ontology 

(Story 

Ontology) 

SIGMA  

(Inference 

Engine) 

Story 

Planner 

Story plan  

(SUMO) 

query 

46



necessarily be true and reduces the flexibility of 

the system. In order to create more varied stories, 

the initial location can be identified based on the 

theme and the first event that the user would want 

to likely happen in the story. 

From the initial set of assertions, the story plan-

ner issues its first concept-based query to Sigma 

with “(name Rabbit1 ?X)” to determine a name for 

the main character, Rabbit1, and receives “Rizzy” 

as a result. This is asserted to the story plan as: 

12>  (name Rabbit1 “Rizzy”) 

The next query is the first action-based query 

used to determine the first action to start the story 

flow. Given “(capability ?X experiencer Rabbit1)”, 

which is intended for identifying the set of possible 

starting actions that the main character, Rabbit1, 

can perform with the object in the background, 

Sigma returns the following list (assuming the sto-

ry facts given in the previous section):  

X = [RecreationOrExercise, Looking, 

Maintaining, Poking]  

Assuming the planner selects RecreationOrEx-

ercise, the following assertions are then added to 

the story plan: 

13>  (instance RecOrEx1 RecreationOrExercise)  
14>  (agent RecOrEx1 Rabbit1) 

At this point, the introduction phase of the story 

plan has been completed. The problem phase be-

gins with a query to identify any instances of prob-

lems that can occur, i.e. “(instance ?X Damaging)”. 

Damaging the object lamp causes its attribute to be 

changed, and again we query Sigma for this 

change of state with “(attribute Lamp1 ?X)” yielding 

the result broken, and the corresponding emotional 

state of the character “(attribute Rabbit1 ?X)”. The 

following assertions were added to the plan: 

15>  (instance (sk0 Rabbit1 Lamp1   
                   RecOrEx1) Damaging) 

16>  (attribute Lamp1 Broken) 
17>  (attribute Rabbit1 Anxiety) 

While a full explanation of skolemization is not 

possible here for space reasons, we note that the 

second argument of assertion #15 (derived from 

Sigma’s answer to the query) stands for the exis-

tence of an unnamed term, in this case, that there is 

an instance of a Damaging process. The agent 

(Rabbit1), patient (Lamp1), and the action (RecO-

rEx1) that caused the problem were all provided in 

the query result. 

4.2 Generating Surface Text 

SUMO-based story plans provide a form of inter-

lingua where story details are represented in logi-

cal form. The logical representation allows 

generation of the same story in different languages 

(that are connected to WordNet). Sigma already 

has a language generator, with templates for Eng-

lish, and an initial set for Tagalog (Borra et al, 

2010).  Work is currently underway to enhance the 

existing language generator in Sigma and make the 

generated text more natural. Sigma can then be 

used to generate stories automatically from the 

knowledge asserted in the story generation process. 

5 Conclusions and Further Work 

The paper presented a preliminary work aimed at 

representing storytelling knowledge in SUMO and 

using Sigma as inference engine to assist the plan-

ner in generating story plans. Further work focuses 

on modeling the emotional state of the character as 

a result of some event (e.g., feeling worried, guilty 

or scared due to causing some problems in the 

world state), changes in character traits as the story 

progresses (e.g., from negative trait to positive trait 

as the story flows from rule violation to value ac-

quisition), and enhancing the representation for 

story themes. Once a set of knowledge has been 

developed, these should be evaluated systematical-

ly through validation of the rules for logical consis-

tency with the theorem prover. A future goal is to 

apply the metrics proposed by Callaway & Lester 

(2002) in StoryBook to evaluate with actual users 

if the generated stories are better and more varied 

as compared to that of Picture Books. 

Although SUMO is quite capable of 

representing time and sequences, reasoning with 

temporally qualified expression is challenging for 

any theorem prover. The works of (Sutcliffe et al, 

2009) to extend the inference engine to handle rea-

soning over temporal relations should be explored 

further to allow SUMOs to generate story plans 

that consider temporal relations between actions 

and events. 

Finally, story generators will benefit its readers 

if the generated stories are narrated orally. SUMOs 

can be explored further to model various emotions 

to provide annotations in the surface story text 

which will then be fed to a text to speech tool for 

speech generation. 

47



References 

Borra, A., Pease, A., Roxas, R. and Dita, S. 2010. Intro-

ducing Filipino WordNet. In: Principles, Construc-

tion and Application of Multilingual Wordnets: 

Proceedings of the 5th Global WordNet Conference, 

Mumbai, India. 

Callaway, C. B., and Lester, J. C. 2002. Narrative Prose 

Generation. Artificial Intelligence, 139(2):213-252, 

Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd., Essex, UK.  

Corda, I., Bennett, B., and Dimitrova, V. 2008. Interact-

ing with an Ontology to Explore Historical Domains. 

Proceedings of the 2008 First International Work-

shop on Ontologies in Interactive Systems, 65-74, 

IEEE Computer Society. 

Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Masolo, C., and Oltramari, 

A. 2003. AI Magazine, 24(3):13-24, Association for 

the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. 

Kooijman, R. 2004. De virtuele verhalenverteller: 

voorstel voor het gebruik van een upper-ontology en 

een nieuwe architectuur. Technical  Report. Universi-

ty of Twente, Department of Electrical Engineering, 

Mathematics and Computer Science. 

Hong, A., Solis, C., Siy, J.T., and Tabirao, E. 2008. Pic-

ture Books: Automated Story Generator. Undergra-

duate Thesis, De La Salle University, Manila, 

Philippines. 

Lenat, D.B. 1995. Cyc: A Large-Scale Investment in 

Knowledge Infrastructure, Communications of the 

ACM, 38(11).  

Liu, H. and Singh, P. 2004. Commonsense Reasoning in 

and over Natural Language. Proceedings of the 8th 

International Conference on Knowledge-Based Intel-

ligent Information and Engineering Systems, 293-

306, Wellington, New Zealand, Springer Berlin. 

Machado, J. 2003. Storytelling. In Early Childhood 

Experiences in Language Arts: Emerging Literacy, 

304-319. Clifton Park, N.Y., Thomson/Delmar 

Learning. 

Niles, I. and Pease, A. 2001. Towards A Standard Upper 

Ontology.   Proceedings of Formal Ontology in 

Information Systems (FOIS 2001), 2-9, October 17-

19, Ogunquit, Maine, USA. 

Noy, N. and McGuinness, D. 2001. Ontology Develop-

ment 101: A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology. 

Stanford Knowledge Systems Laboratory Technical 

Report KSL-01-05 and Stanford Medical Informatics 

Technical Report SMI-2001-0880, March 2001. 

Ong, E. 2009. Prospects in Creative Natural Language 

Processing. Proceedings of the 6th National Natural 

Language Processing Research Symposium, De La 

Salle University, Manila, Philippines. 

 

 

 

 

 

Pease, A. 2006. Formal Representation of Concepts: 

The Suggested Upper Merged Ontology and Its Use 

in Linguistics. Ontolinguistics. How Ontological Sta-

tus Shapes the Linguistic Coding of Concepts. Schal-

ley, A.C. and Zaefferer, D. (ed.), Vorbereitung 

Berlin, New York. 

Pease, A. 2003. The Sigma Ontology Development En-

vironment. Working Notes of the IJCAI-2003 Work-

shop on Ontology and Distributed Systems, vol. 71 of 

CEUR Workshop Proceeding series. 

Riedl, M. and Young, R.M. 2004. An Intent-Driven 

Planner for Multi-Agent Story Generation. Proceed-

ings of the Third International Joint Conference on 

Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 186-

193, Washington DC, USA, IEEE Computer Society. 

Smith, B. 1998. The Basic Tools of Formal Ontology. 

Formal Ontology in Information Systems, Nicola Gu-

arino (ed),  IOS Press, Washington. Frontiers in Ar-

tificial Intelligence and Applications, 19-28. 

Solis, C., Siy, J.T., Tabirao, E., and Ong, E. 2009. Plan-

ning Author and Character Goals for Story Genera-

tion. Proceedings of the NAACL Human Language 

Technology 2009 Workshop on Computational Ap-

proaches to Linguistic Creativity, 63-70, Boulder, 

Colorado, USA. 

Sutcliffe, G., Benzmüller, C., Brown, C.E., and Theiss, 

F. 2009. Progress in the Development of Automated 

Theorem Proving for Higher-order Logic. Automated 

Deduction, 22
nd

 International Conference on Auto-

mated Deduction, Montreal, Canada, August 2-7, 

2009. Proceedings of the Lecture Notes in AI, vol. 

5663, 116-130, 2009, Springer. 

Swartjes, I. 2006. The Plot Thickens: Bringing Structure 

and Meaning into Automated Story Generation. Mas-

ter's Thesis, University of Twente, The Netherlands. 

Theune, M., Nijholt, A., Oinonen, K., and Uijlings J. 

2006. Designing a Story Database for Use in Auto-

matic Story Generation.  Proceedings 5th Interna-

tional Conference Entertainment Computing, 

Cambridge, UK. Lecturer Notes in Computer 

Science, 4161:298-301, Heidelberg, Springer Berlin. 

Uijlings, J.R.R. 2006. Designing a Virtual Environment 

for Story Generation. MS Thesis, University of Ams-

terdam, The Netherlands. 

Venour, C. and Reiter, E. 2008. A Tutorial for Sim-

plenlg. http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/~ereiter/simplenlg 

WordNet. 2006. WordNet: A Lexical Database for the 

English Language. Princeton University, New Jersey. 

48


