










































Characteristics and Analysis of Finnish and Swedish Clinical Intensive Care Nursing Narratives


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 53–60,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Characteristics and Analysis of Finnish and Swedish  
Clinical Intensive Care Nursing Narratives 

 
 

Helen Allvinf, Elin Carlssonf, Hercules Dalianisf, Riitta Danielsson-Ojalaa, 
Vidas Daudaravičiusb, Martin Hasself, Dimitrios Kokkinakisc, Heljä Lund-

gren-Lainea, Gunnar Nilssonf, Øystein Nytrød, Sanna Salanteräa, Maria 
Skeppstedtf, Hanna Suominene, Sumithra Velupillaif 

aDepartment of Nursing Science, University of Turku, VSSHP, Turku, Finland, 
bVytautas Magnus University, Lithuania, 

cDepartment of Swedish, University of Gothenburg, Sweden, 
dIDI, The Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway, 

eNICTA Canberra Research Laboratory and Australian National University, Australia 
fDepartment of Computer and Systems Sciences/Stockholm University 

Forum 100 
SE-164 40 Kista, Sweden 

http://www.dsv.su.se/hexanord 

Abstract 

We present a comparative study of Finnish 
and Swedish free-text nursing narratives from 
intensive care. Although the two languages 
are linguistically very dissimilar, our hypothe-
sis is that there are similarities that are impor-
tant and interesting from a language 
technology point of view. This may have im-
plications when building tools to support pro-
ducing and using health care documentation. 
We perform a comparative qualitative analysis 
based on structure and content, as well as a 
comparative quantitative analysis on Finnish 
and Swedish Intensive Care Unit (ICU) nurs-
ing narratives. Our findings are that ICU nurs-
ing narratives in Finland and Sweden have 
many properties in common, but that many of 
these are challenging when it comes to devel-
oping language technology tools. 

1 Introduction 

The purpose of this study1 is to do content and 
lexical analysis of nursing narratives written in an 

                                                             
1 Our research on the Stockholm EPR Corpus (Dalianis et al., 
2009) has been approved by Etikprövningsnämnden i Stock-
holm, (the Regional Vetting Board), reference number 

Intensive Care Unit (ICU). The ultimate goal of 
our research is to define linguistic similarities and 
language-specific aspects that differentiate clinical 
narratives in Finnish and Swedish in order to lay 
groundwork for developing internationally appli-
cable language technology solutions and create a 
framework for characterising and comparing clini-
cal narratives. Free text is handy for information 
entry but a challenge for information extraction, 
care handover and other uses of gathered informa-
tion. Language technology can alleviate some of 
these problems in retrospective analysis by offer-
ing a more semantically informed interpretation 
and abstraction. However, the most promising po-
tential of language technology is to interactively 
improve, interpret and code during text entry so 
that the resulting structured, coded, free text can be 
validated immediately. The critical bottleneck to-
day is namely information handover and reuse, and 
extensive text is simply not used nor is useful. In-
teractively validated, semantically processed text 
could be more usable and support abstraction, 
visualization and query tools for the benefit of cli-
nicians, patients, researchers and quality adminis-
trators.  

                                                                                                
2009/1742-31/5. Our research on the Finnish Corpus (Salan-
terä et al., 2009) has been approved by the Ethical committee 
of the Hospital District of South West Finland, reference 
number 2/2009, §66. 

53



In this paper, we analyze Finnish and Swedish 
ICU nursing narratives from both qualitative and 
quantitative perspectives. Our data includes textual 
nursing documentation of adult patients with a 
protracted inpatient period. We have chosen ICUs 
because of their international similarity in decision 
making (Lauri & Salanterä 2002) and nursing 
documentation because it covers the entire inpa-
tient period. 

2 Background 

2.1 Clinical text 

Clinical text covers the text documents produced 
for clinical work by clinicians and occurs in clini-
cal information systems. It is written by clinicians, 
that is, professionals (physicians, nurses, therapists 
and other specialist) responsible for patient care. 
Its primary purpose is to serve patient care as a 
summary or hand-over note. However, clinical text 
is also written for legal requirements, care continu-
ity and purposes of reimbursement, management 
and research. Clinical text covers every care phase 
and, depending on the purpose, documents differ. 
Documents that describe the patient’s state, current 
health problems and socio-medical history are very 
different from those describing a care plan, its ac-
tualization and evaluation of care outcomes. Again, 
these differ from diagnostic notes, lab results, ra-
diography readings, pathology reports and dis-
charge documents that plan further care at 
discharge.  Finally, clinical text may have been 
entered in “real time”, in retrospect, or as a sum-
mary, by the bedside or elsewhere. The enterer can 
be a clinician, secretary who transcribes a dictate, 
speech recognition software or another system that 
generates or synthesizes text, (McDonald 1997, 
Thoroddsen et al., 2009.).  

2.2 Legal requirements for clinical documen-
tation in different countries 

In several countries clinical documentation is 
based on law. In Finland, the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Health (Statutes of Finland, 298/2009) 
defines that to ensure good care, all necessary and 
wide-ranging information has to be registered in 
patient records. In Sweden, the National Board of 
Health and Welfare has a similar approach (Pa-
tientdatalagen 2008:355). Clinical text should be 

explicit and intelligible, and only generally well-
known, accepted concepts and abbreviations are 
allowed to be used. It should detail adequately the 
patient’s conditions, care and recovery.  

2.3 Special features of ICU and nursing 

An ICU is an essential component of most large 
hospitals with high quality care.  ICUs provide 
care for critically ill patients and focus on condi-
tions that are life-threatening and require compre-
hensive care and constant monitoring (Webster's 
2010). This task is fairly similar universally. It is 
based on optional, international guidelines focus-
ing on triage, admission, discharge and education. 
This international similarity was evident when 
nurses’ decision making was studied in Canada, 
Finland, Northern Ireland, Switzerland, Norway 
and the USA (Lauri & Salanterä 2002); the study 
showed that decision making of ICU nurses was 
the most uniform in different countries when com-
pared with nurses working in public health care, 
psychiatric care, and short and long term care. 

Clinical text written by nurses, that is, nursing 
narratives, both in Finland and in Sweden is based 
on the care process which stands for gathering in-
formation from the patient, setting goals for care, 
implementing nursing interventions, and evaluat-
ing the results of given care. In Finland, the na-
tional standardized documentation model has been 
implemented with the Finnish care classification 
(assessment, interventions and outcomes of care) 
(Tanttu & Ikonen 2007). The Swedish VIPS model 
provides a structure for the documentation process 
with key words that reflect the nursing process 
(Ehrenberg et al., 1996).  

ICU nursing narratives can be lengthy, espe-
cially when the patient stay in the ICU is pro-
longed. As much as 60 A4 pages equivalents of 
written text may be gathered during one period of 
care. However, clinicians have somewhat different 
opinion on how to organize the information they 
write. For example, headings are often inconsistent 
and text under headings can cover a lot of other 
issues than those directly concerning the given 
heading. (Suominen et al., 2009.)  

2.4 Related studies 

Since most of the available clinical documents are 
in free-text form, a number of stylistically oriented 
efforts to characterize the data from various angles 

54



have taken place. This may include various topics, 
from viewing detailed information about specific 
items (e.g. readability, Kim et al., 2007) to identi-
fying patterns and structures in order to provide 
better technology to automatically process the 
sublanguage (Pakhomov et al., 2006). The majority 
of such efforts investigate different aspects of lin-
guistic features at a monolingual level, for in-
stance, Hahn & Wermter (2004); Tomanek et al., 
(2007); Chung (2009); Harkema et al., (2009); 
while for a thorough review of various related is-
sues see Meystre et al., (2008). In the Nordic con-
text, Josefsson (1999) discusses Swedish clinical 
language and shows examples on how verb con-
structions in a clinical setting differ from a non 
clinical setting.  One claim is that the physician 
unmarks the verb forms for agentivity when writ-
ing about the patient and what actions she takes, 
for example, Patienten hallucinerar [The patient 
hallucinates] instead of the normal form  Patienten 
får hallucinationer [The patient experiences hallu-
cinations].   

Hellesø (2005) describes nurses' general use of 
the language function in the nursing discharge 
notes. She finds that the text in the nursing dis-
charge notes is information-dense and character-
ized by technical terms, and that the use of 
standardised templates helped nurses improve the 
completeness, structure and content of the informa-
tion. Comparisons at a monolingual level between 
written clinical text and lay text has been carried 
out by Dalianis et al., (2009). A contrastive com-
putational linguistics study was carried out be-
tween the Stockholm EPR Corpus (SEPR) and a 
general language corpus, both written Swedish 
text. The findings showed that SEPR contained 
longer words and that the vocabulary was highly 
domain-specific. Other work is described in 
Ownby, (2005). Comparing clinical text at a 
crosslingual level has, to our knowledge, only been 
done by Borin et al., (2007).  

3 Analysis of Finnish and Swedish ICU 
nursing narratives  

The analyzed nursing narratives origin from one 
ICU in a university-affiliated hospital both in Fin-
land and Sweden. Our inclusion criterion was an 
ICU inpatient period of at least 5 days and patient's 
age of at least 16 years. The Finnish data includes 
nursing narratives from 514 patient records (496 

unique patients, 18 rebounds, a patient record is 
defined as each inpatient period of at least 5 days 
per patient) between January 2005 and August 
2006. The Swedish data includes nursing narra-
tives from 379 patient records (333 unique pa-
tients, 46 rebounds) between January 2006 and 
May 2008. Since we did not have complete admis-
sion and discharge documents from both countries, 
our analysis is performed on daily nursing narra-
tives. These documents are written by ICU nurses 
during the actual inpatient period from the patient 
admission to the discharge.    

3.1 Qualitative analysis 

A manual content analysis was performed by four 
health care professionals (i.e., three native Finnish 
speakers knowing Swedish, one Swedish native 
speaker) and one native Swedish speaking lan-
guage consultant. Three average-sized patient re-
cords each from Finland and Sweden were chosen 
for our analysis (average size 2,389 words for Fin-
land and 5,169 words for Sweden). In the analysis, 
we considered special features (Table 1) of daily 
notes both from the structural and content related 
points of view.  

The style and context of both Finnish and Swed-
ish text is very similar. For health care profession-
als, and especially with an ICU background, all the 
texts are intelligible and the meaning of a writer 
becomes evident from the context even in the pres-
ence of numerous linguistic and grammatical mis-
takes; almost all the sentences are lacking both 
grammatical subjects and objects. It is evident that 
in both countries, the narratives are written from a 
professional to a professional in order to support 
information transfer, remind about important facts, 
and supplement numerical data.  

A feature common for all the six records is that 
they rarely contain any subjects or objects when 
nurses are writing about patients. However, in the 
Swedish nursing narratives the word patient is 
used as a subject or object much more often than in 
the Finnish narratives. The abbreviation pat. is 
mostly used for this reference and she/he is never 
used for this purpose. In the whole data, pat. is 40 
percent more common than she/he, which is the 
most common personal pronoun. It seems that the 
word patient or pat. is used more when the profes-
sionals are writing about relatives. In general, pro-
nouns are used infrequently in the narratives, and  

55



  
Table 1. Special structural and contextual features of Finnish and Swedish daily ICU nursing narratives. The original 

examples are added in (). 
 

I very rarely. If the reader is not a health care pro-
fessional, a risk for confusing the subject (i.e., the 
patient or nurse) arises. However, the context 
makes it almost always clear who is referred to.  
Approximately half of the narratives do not contain 
any verb. The most common tense is perfect, but 

without the auxiliary has. When the meaning does 
not contain a subject it becomes “unnatural” to use 
has. Instead, the supine form is used, for example 
slept, lain, and eaten. Both present and past parti- 
ciples without be-verb are common, for example, 
Breathing: Ventilator parameters unchanged. 

Special features of Finnish narratives  
 

Special features of Swedish narratives  
 

Structure Examples Structure Examples 

Headings are used in 2 out of 3 
patient records. Headings are typi-
cally used as subjects or subjects 

are partially used.  

Diuresis: occasionally profuse. 
(Diureesi: ajoittain runsasta.) 

 

Pupils move under eyelids but 
does not open eyes. 

(Pupillit liikkuvat luomien alla, 
mutta ei avaa silmiään.)  

Headings are used in all daily narra-
tives. In Swedish daily narratives, the 

structure of headings seems to be 
obligatory. The headings are used 

typically as subjects.  

Circulation: Stable with ino-
trop. 

(Cirkulation: Stabil med ino-
tropi.) 

 

Reacts only for pain stimula-
tion during the suction of intu-

bation tube. 
(Reagerar enbart vid smärt-
stimuli vid sugning i tuben.) 

Present and past participles are 
typical but verbs of be, is and are 

are not used.  

Consciousness remained un-
changed. 

(Tajunta pysynyt ennallaan.) 
 

Blood pressure low. 
(Verenpaine matala.) 

Present and past participles are typical 
but verbs of be, is and are are not 

used.  

Breathing: Ventilator parame-
ters unchanged. 

(Andning: Ventilator paramet-
rarna oförändrade.) 

Complete sentences are rarely 
used.  

No spontaneous movements, 
rigidifies. 

(Ei spontaania liikettä, jäykiste-
lee.) 

 

Husband and daughter have 
been staying a long time beside 

the patient. 
(Mies ja tytär olleet pitkään 

potilaan vierellä.) 

Complete sentences are rarely used.  

Light sedation, looks up now 
and then. 

(Lätt sederad, tittar upp ibl-
and.) 

 

She took the wedding ring and 
the watch home. 

(Hon tog med sig vigselring 
och klocka hem.) 

Misspellings are found but the 
content or meaning is still clear.  

Hemodynamic – hemodynamic 
(Hemodynamiikka – henody-

namiikka) 

Misspellings are found but the content 
or meaning is still clear.  

The motther is informed. 
(Mammman är informered.) 

 
Magnesium is addded. 

(Magnesium har tilllsatts.) 

Content Examples Content  Examples 

The word patient as a subject or 
object is infrequently mentioned. If 

this word is mentioned it is not 
abbreviated.  

Oxidates well or ventilates well. 
(Happeutuu hyvin tai ventiloituu 

hyvin.)  

The word patient is used more often 
than in Finnish narratives as a subject 

or object. It is also replaced with 
abbreviations of Pat or Pt.  

Patient got a percutanous 
tracheostomy today. 

(Patienten har fått en perkutan 
trakeostomi idag.) 

 

Very worried about patient’s 
condition. 

(Mycket oroliga över patien-
tens tillstånd.) 

 

Pt. wakes up for talking and 
appears to be adequate. 

(Pt. vakner på tilltal och up-
plevs som adekvat.) 

Signs are typically used: e.g., >, <, 
-->, +, -.  

The height for the drain raised 
from 10 --> 20 mmHg. 

(Dreneerausrajaa nostettu 10 
 --> 20 mmHg.) 

 

Got medicine --> good response. 
(Sai lääkettä -->hyvä vaste.) 

Many different abbreviations are 
used. The origin of entire word is 

Swedish, English, Latin, professional 
or ICU typical.  

em. [eftermiddag, afternoon], 
HR [heart rate], VF [Ven-

tricula/Fibrillation, Ventricular 
Fibrillation]  

56



The use of headings is frequent and good – most of 
the time the content matches the headings (Tables 
1 and 3). In addition, headings are used similarly in 
the Swedish and Finnish documents. Most of the 
time the headings are considered as subjects of the 
sentence, for example, Consciousness: Unchanged. 
Liquor brighter than yesterday. 

However, in the use of headings there are two 
interesting findings: If the headings are to be cho-
sen freely, as in the Finnish narratives, nurses tend 
to use their own headings and hence many syno-
nyms or closely related concepts are used; for ex-
ample, hemodynamics versus blood pressure and 
pulse or breathing versus oxidation. If the headings 
are obligatory, as in the Swedish narratives, nurses 
tend to write their observations under the heading 
which is somehow closest to the subject; for exam-
ple, body temperature under circulation or level of 
sedation under sleep. 

For both languages the use of different abbrevia-
tions is very common. Almost every daily nursing 
narrative included several abbreviations. Most of 
the abbreviations are typical for an ICU domain: 
CVP [central venous pressure], PEEP [Positive 
End-Expiratory Pressure], EN [Enteral Nutrition], 
TPN [Total Parenteral Nutrition], pO2 [partial 
pressure of oxygen], pCO2 [partial pressure of 
carbon dioxide], MV [Minute Ventilation] and 
MAP [Mean Arterial Pressure]. From a language 
technology point of view this means that ICU nurs-
ing narratives contain language-independent vo-
cabulary. However, nurses in both countries also 
use many language dependent abbreviations. 

3.2 Quantitative analysis 

The Finnish data set (n=514) was quantitatively 
analyzed using the morphological analyser FinT-
WOL and the disambiguator FinCG, (Lingsoft 
2010), and the Swedish data set (n=379) using the 
GTA, Granska Text Analyzer (Knutsson et al., 
2003). Both data sets are rich in terms of amount 
of text and vocabulary (Table 2). It is also clear 
that the amount of text written per day and patient 
varies a lot in both data sets. More complex words 
were spelled in numerous ways. For example, the 
pharmacological substance Noradrenalin had ap-
proximately 350 and 60 different spellings in the 
Finnish and Swedish data sets, respectively. This 
problem is part of a more general issue of refer-

ence resolution e.g. when mapping different lexical 
terms referring to the same concept. 

In our quantitative analysis, we have included 
punctuation characters. In the Swedish data there 
was a large amount of html-tags and other format-
ting characters, which has a high impact on the 
total number of tokens (see Table 2). Moreover, as 
Finnish is highly inflective, FinCG produces alter-
native lemmas, hence it is possible to reduce the 
sparseness of the data by processing the output by 
choosing only one alternative lemma (see total 
number of types in Table 2).  

To further illustrate the richness of ICU nursing 
language, the number of unique bigrams (e.g., “is 
not”, “oxidate well” and “night time” (note: a mis-
spelled compound) are the most common ones for 
Finnish) and trigrams (e.g., “oxygeneated and ven-
tilated”, “and ventilate well” are among the most 
common ones for Finnish) were 368,166 (275,205 
after FinCG) and 745,407 (356,307 after FinCG) 
for Finnish patient records. For the Swedish data, 
the number of unique bigrams was 469,455 
(344,127 after GTA) and 1,064,944 (905,539 after 
GTA). Examples of common Swedish ICU bi-
grams and trigrams include “circulation stabile”, 
“during night”, “in connection with”, and “with 
good effect”. Of the content of Finnish nursing 
narratives, 11% are verbs, 7% nouns and less than 
1% pronouns. For Swedish nursing narratives, the 
respective percentages are 11%, 27% and 2%. One 
reason for the high numbers for nouns in the Swed-
ish data might be due to the large amount of 
(obligatory) headings relative to the Finnish data 
(see Table 3).  

To support fluent information flow, language 
technology is needed to strengthen referential con-
gruence. Much of this richness of vocabulary is 
explained by abbreviations and personal differ-
ences in professional jargon. In particular, abbre-
viations were common. Based on the analysis of 
the most common words, abbreviations were rela-
tively established in Swedish data. For the Finnish 
data, abbreviations were less standard but RR, SR, 
CVP, h, ad, ml, ok, vas. [vasen, left] and oik. 
[oikea, right] were extremely common. Thus, ref-
erential congruence can be strengthened by spell-
ing out the most common abbreviations 
automatically. 

Adding topical content headings is another way 
to support information flow. Topical content head-
ings were mandatory for Swedish data, but no de-

57



fault headings for Finnish existed. However, the 
headings for Finnish were established in terms of 
content. In Table 3, we see that the headings for 
both languages cover similar topics, which indi-
cates that the clinical information need is similar 
for professionals in both countries (and languages). 
Thus, we recommend forming a standardized set of 
headings from which the user can voluntarily se-
lect the ones to be used. This does not exclude add-
ing other headings. Another alternative is to 
develop language technology for topic segmenta-
tion and labeling. We have promising results from 
this approach (see, e.g., Suominen 2009).  

Temporal expressions (e.g., time, evening, night) 
were often used in both data sets. This poses the 
question of tense analysis of verbs being unneces-
sary and the time-related words being enough to 
imply the needed temporal information. It is also 
interesting to note that the negations inte [not, 
Swe], ingen [none, Swe], ej [not, Swe] and ei 
[no/not, Fin] are all among the most common 
types, which is an important property to take into 
account in information extraction applications. 
Furthermore, words regarding the oral cavity, such 
as breathing and mucus, as well as relations, such 
as daughter, son, wife, and husband are very com-
mon in both data sets.  

Inspired by the tf×idf-measure from information 
retrieval, we also analyzed the most common 
words in terms of a) the number of patients in 
whose documents the word was used and b) the 
number of daily nursing narratives in which the 
word was used. Here, we found, in both data sets, 
that those words that were used for all patients as 
well as all daily narratives, were very similar in 
both data sets, and were related to the most com-
mon headings, temporal expressions, negations and 
monitoring (e.g., increase, continue, begin).  

The amount of Protected Health Information 
(PHI) in form of person names was equal in both 
of the data sets: 1.5 person names per thousand 
tokens. This is notable, since this has implications 
when it comes to integrity issues and reuse of data 
for research purposes. 

FinCG did not recognize 36% of the content of 
Finnish nursing narratives. However, words 
marked as unrecognized by FinCG also included 
punctuation marks. In our previous study (see 
Suominen 2009 and references therein), we tai-
lored FinCG by extending approximately 35,000 
clinical terms. The extension not only substantially 

improved the applicability of FinCG to the health 
domain but also initiated piloting of our language 
technology components in an authentic healthcare 
environment in the fall 2008. This lead to the re-
lease of commercial language technology for Fin-
nish health records (Lingsoft 2010).  

 

Data Finnish  Swedish  
Total number of patients  514  379  

Total number of  
tokens,  

types (unique tokens) and 
types after processing 

 
1,227,909 

63,328 
38,649 

 
1,959,271 

- 
41,883 

Number of tokens per patient: 
Minimum 
Maximum 
Average 

Standard deviation 

 
540 

14,118 
2,389 
1,635   

 
92 

36,830 
5,169 
5,271 

Total number of  
daily documents and 

shifts 

 
5,915 

17,103 

 
4,700 

– 

Number of tokens per daily 
document: 
Minimum 
Maximum 
Average 

Standard deviation 

 
 

0 
915 
208 

87 

 
 

5 
9,389 

417 
239 

 
Table 2. Comparison of Finnish and Swedish ICU data 
sets: total amount of text per patient. A daily document, 
i.e. nursing narrative, contains all text written about a 

given patient during a calendar day. 
 

Finnish n ≈ Swedish  n = 
Hemodynamics  7,800  Respiratory  11,301  

Consciousness  6,900  Circulation 10,630  

Relatives  5,700  Elimination  10,041  

Diuresis  5,400  Nutrition  8,258  

Breathing  4,500  Communication  5,880  

Oxygenation  3,600  Event Time  5,681  

Other  3,200  Pain  4,732  

Excretion  590  Psychosocial  4,682  

Hemodialysis  370  Sleep  4,438  

Pulse  160  Skin  4,402  

Skin  160  Activity  3,794  

 
Table 3. Comparison of Finnish and Swedish ICU data 
sets: the most common headings. For the Finnish data, 

where default headings were not given, we approxi-
mated the amount of heading by using an automated 

heuristics followed by manual combination of headings 
with the same meaning. 

58



For Swedish, GTA handles unknown words dif-
ferently than FinCG. However, by comparing the 
ICU words with a Swedish general language cor-
pus (PAROLE, Gellerstam et al. (2000)), we found 
that 69% of the types are not included in PAROLE, 
which indicates a need for tailoring GTA (or simi-
lar tools for Swedish) with domain-specific ICU 
terms.  

4 Conclusions 

The purpose of this study was to do content and 
lexical analysis of nursing narratives written in an 
ICU. Our findings are that, even though the Fin-
nish and Swedish languages are not linguistically 
closely related, the way of writing clinical nursing 
ICU narratives in both countries is very similar. 
Moreover, the written context made sentences 
clear for content experts, even though the texts 
were full of specialized jargon, misspellings, ab-
breviations, and missing subjects and objects. 
However, these characteristics make clinical text 
challenging for language technology. For example 
coreference resolution as in the case of noradrena-
lin. 

We have also shown that the content characteris-
tics of Finnish and Swedish ICU nursing narratives 
are very similar. This implies that developing tools 
for documentation support in ICUs is not country 
or language dependant in that respect. Developing 
such tools may improve possibilities for informa-
tion extraction and text mining, enabling the possi-
bilities to reuse the vast amounts of important 
practice-based information and evidence captured 
in clinical narratives. The framework we have in-
troduced here could easily be employed in other 
studies of clinical texts. 

6 Future work 

In the future, we will use the results of this study in 
developing language technology for Finnish, Swe-
dish and other Nordic ICU narratives. We will 
study how to identify abbreviations, misspellings 
and normalize and correct them, by using various 
distance measures and concept management tech-
niques. We will also study how to automatically 
identify important parts of text and highlight them. 
Furthermore, we are interested in studying text 
provenance and pragmatics in this particular set-
ting. In addition, we will evaluate the influence of 

these technology components in clinical practice. 
We will also address similarities and differences in 
clinical text written by various professional groups 
or at other hospital wards and health care units. 
Finally, we are eager to seek possibilities to incor-
porate laymen's information needs and their inter-
action with health care providers into our study. 

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Nordforsk and the Nordic 
Council of Ministers for the funding of our research 
network HEXAnord – HEalth teXt Analysis network in 
the Nordic and Baltic countries and NICTA, funded by 
the Australian Government as represented by the De-
partment of Broadband, Communications and the Digi-
tal Economy and the Australian Research Council 
through the ICT Centre of Excellence program. We 
would also like to thank the Department of Information 
Technology and TUCS, University of Turku, Finland. 

References 
Lars Borin, Natalia Grabar, Catalina Hallett, Davis 

Hardcastle, Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, Dimitrios 
Kokkinakis, Sandra Williams and Alistair Willis. 
2007. Empowering the patient with language tech-
nology. SemanticMining NoE 507505: Deliverable 
D27.2. <http://gup.ub.gu.se/gup/record/index.xsql?pu
bid=53590>  

Grace Yuet-Chee Chung. 2009. Towards identifying 
intervention arms in randomized controlled trials: ex-
tracting coordinating constructions.  Journal of Bio-
medical Informatics. 42(5):790–800  

Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hassel and Sumithra Velupil-
lai. 2009. The Stockholm EPR Corpus - Characteris-
tics and Some Initial Findings. Proceedings of 
ISHIMR 2009, Evaluation and implementation of e-
health and health information initiatives: interna-
tional perspectives. 14th International Symposium 
for Health Information Management Research, Kal-
mar, Sweden, 14-16 October, 2009, pp 243-249, pdf. 
Awarded best paper.  

Anna Ehrenberg, Margareta Ehnfors and Ingrid Thorell-
Ekstrand. 1996. Nursing documentation in patient re-
cords: experience of the use of the VIPS model. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing 24, 853–867.  

Martin Gellerstam, Yvonne Cederholm, and Torgny 
Rasmark. The bank of Swedish. In: Proceedings of 
LREC 2000 -- The 2nd International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 329–333, 
Athens, Greece.  

Udo Hahn and Joachim Wermter. 2004. High-
performance tagging on medical texts. Proceedings 
of the 20th international conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics. Geneva, Switzerland.  

59



Henk Harkema, Dowling JN, Thornblade T, Chapman 
WW. 2009. ConText: an algorithm for determining 
negation, experiencer, and temporal status from clin-
ical reports. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 
2009;42(5):839–51.  

Ragnhild Hellesø. 2005. Information handling in the 
nursing discharge notes, Journal of Clinical Nursing, 
Volume 15 Issue 1, 11 - 21. Blackwell publishing  

Gunlög Josefsson. 1999. Få feber eller tempa? Några 
tankar om agentivitet i medicinskt fackspråk, Alla 
tiders språk: en vänskrift till Gertrud Pettersson. 
Pages 127. Institutionen för nordiska språk. Lund. (In 
Swedish)  

Hyeoneui Kim, Sergey Goryachev, Craciela Rosemblat, 
Allen Browne, Alla Keselman and Qing Zeng-
Treitler. 2007. Beyond surface characteristics: a new 
health text-specific readability measurement. AMIA 
Annual Symp. 11:418-22.  

Ola Knutsson, Johnny Bigert, and Vigg Kann. 2003. A 
robust shallow parser for Swedish. In Proceedings 
14th Nordic Conf. on Comp. Ling. NODALIDA. 

Sirkka Lauri and Sanna Salanterä;. 2002. Developing an 
instrument to measure and describe clinical decision 
making in different nursing fields. Journal of Profes-
sional Nursing. Mar-Apr;18(2), 93-100.  

Lingsoft. 2010, Lingsoft Oy, http://www.lingsoft.fi/  
Clement J. McDonald. 1997. The Barriers to Electronic 

Medical Record Systems and How to Overcome 
Them. JAMIA. 1997;4:213–221.   

Stéphane M. Meystre, Guergana K. Savova, Karin C. 
Kipper-Schuler and John E. Hurdle. 2008. Extracting 
Information from Textual Documents in the Elec-
tronic Health Record: a Review of Recent Research. 
Yearbook Med Inform. 2008:128-44.  

Raymond L. Ownby 2005. Influence of Vocabulary and 
Sentence Complexity and Passive Voice on the 
Readability of Consumer-Oriented Mental Health In-
formation on the Internet. AMIA Annual Symposium 
Proceedings. 2005: 585–588. 

Serguei V. S. Pakhomov, Anni Coden and Christopher 
G. Chute. 2006. Developing a corpus of clinical notes 
manually annotated for part-of-speech. International 
Journal of Medical Informatics. 2006 Jun;75(6):418-
29. Epub 2005 Sep 19. 

Patientdatalagen (2008:355) Svensk författnings-
samling, Socialdepartementet, 2008, Stockholm. (In 
Swedish)  

Hanna Suominen. 2009. Machine Learning and Clinical 
Text: Supporting Health Information Flow. TUCS 
Dissertations No 125, Turku Centre for Computer 
Science, 2009, Turku, Finland.  

Hanna Suominen, Heljä Lundgrén-Laine, Sanna Salan-
terä, Helena Karsten, and Tapio Salakoski. 2009. In-
formation flow in intensive care narratives. In Chen 
J, Chen C, Ely J, Hakkani-Tr D, He J, Hsu H.-H, 
Liao L, Liu C, Pop  M, Ranganathan S, Reddy C.K, 

Ruan J, Song Y, Tseng V.S, Ungar L, Wu D, Wu Z, 
Xu K, Yu H, Zelikovsky A, editors. Proceedings 
IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics 
and Biomedicine Workshops, BIBM 2009, pages 
325–330. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-
neers, Los Alamitos, California, USA.  

Kaarina Tanttu and Helena Ikonen. 2007. Nationally 
standardized electronic nursing documentation in 
Finland by the year 2007. Stud Health Technol In-
form.122:540-1.  

Asta Thoroddsen, Kaija Saranto, Anna Ehrenberg, Wal-
ter Sermeus. 2009. Models, standards and structures 
of nursing documentation in European countries. 
Stud Health Technol Inform.146:327-31.  

Katrin Tomanek, Joachim Wermter and Udo Hahn. 
2007. A Reappraisal of sentence and token splitting 
for life sciences documents. Stud Health Technol In-
form. 129 (Pt 1):524-8. 

Webster’s 2010. Webster’s New World Medical Dic-
tionary. 
http://www.medterms.com/script/main/hp.asp,last 
visited February 2, 2010. 

60


