










































Social Links from Latent Topics in Microblogs


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 19–20,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Social Links from Latent Topics in Microblogs∗

Kriti Puniyani and Jacob Eisenstein and Shay Cohen and Eric P. Xing
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

{kpuniyan,jacobeis,scohen,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu

1 Introduction

Language use is overlaid on a network of social con-
nections, which exerts an influence on both the topics
of discussion and the ways that these topics can be ex-
pressed (Halliday, 1978). In the past, efforts to under-
stand this relationship were stymied by a lack of data, but
social media offers exciting new opportunities. By com-
bining large linguistic corpora with explicit representa-
tions of social network structures, social media provides
a new window into the interaction between language and
society. Our long term goal is to develop joint sociolin-
guistic models that explain the social basis of linguistic
variation.

In this paper we focus on microblogs: internet jour-
nals in which each entry is constrained to a few words
in length. While this platform receives high-profile at-
tention when used in connection with major news events
such as natural disasters or political turmoil, less is
known about the themes that characterize microblogging
on a day-to-day basis. We perform an exploratory anal-
ysis of the content of a well-known microblogging plat-
form (Twitter), using topic models to uncover latent se-
mantic themes (Blei et al., 2003). We then show that these
latent topics are predictive of the network structure; with-
out any supervision, they predict which other microblogs
a user is likely to follow, and to whom microbloggers will
address messages. Indeed, our topical link predictor out-
performs a competitive supervised alternative from tra-
ditional social network analysis. Finally, we explore the
application of supervision to our topical link predictor,
using regression to learn weights that emphasize topics
of particular relevance to the social network structure.

2 Data

We acquired data from Twitter’s streaming “Gardenhose”
API, which returned roughly 15% of all messages sent
over a period of two weeks in January 2010. This com-

∗We thank the reviews for their helpful suggestions and Brendan
O’Connor for making the Twitter data available.

prised 15GB of compressed data; we aimed to extract a
representative subset by first sampling 500 people who
posted at least sixteen messages over this period, and
then “crawled” at most 500 randomly-selected followers
of each of these original authors. The resulting data in-
cludes 21,306 users, 837,879 messages, and 10,578,934
word tokens.

Text Twitter contains highly non-standard orthography
that poses challenges for early-stage text processing.1 We
took a conservative approach to tokenization, splitting
only on whitespaces and apostrophes, and eliminating
only token-initial and token-final punctuation characters.
Two markers are used to indicate special tokens: #, indi-
cating a topic (e.g. #curling); and @, indicating that the
message is addressed to another user. Topic tokens were
included after stripping the leading #, but address tokens
were removed. All terms occurring less than 50 times
were removed, yielding a vocabulary of 11,425 terms.
Out-of-vocabulary items were classified as either words,
URLs, or numbers. To ensure a fair evaluation, we re-
moved “retweets” – when a user reposts verbatim the
message of another user – if the original message author
is also part of the dataset.

Links We experiment with two social graphs extracted
from the data: a follower graph and a communication
graph. The follower graph places directed edges between
users who have chosen to follow each other’s updates;
the message graph places a directed edge between users
who have addressed messages to each other (using the @
symbol). Huberman et al. (2009) argue that the commu-
nication graph captures direct interactions and is thus a
more accurate representation of the true underlying social
structure, while the follower graph contains more con-
nections than could possibly be maintained in a realistic
social network.

1For example, some tweets use punctuation for tokenization (You
look like a retired pornstar!lmao) while others
use punctuation inside the token (lOv!n d!s th!ng call3d
l!f3).

19



Figure 1: Mean rank of test links (lower is better), reported over 4-fold cross-validation. Common-neighbors is a network-based
method that ignores text; the LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allocation) methods are grouped by number of latent topics.

3 Method
We constructed a topic model over twitter messages,
identifying the latent themes that characterize the cor-
pus. In standard topic modeling methodology, topics de-
fine distributions over vocabulary items, and each docu-
ment contains a set of latent topic proportions (Blei et al.,
2003). However, the average message on Twitter is only
sixteen word tokens, which is too sparse for traditional
topic modeling; instead, we gathered together all of the
messages from a given user into a single document. Thus
our model learns the latent topics that characterize au-
thors, rather than messages.

Authors with similar topic proportions are likely to
share interests or dialect, suggesting potential social con-
nections. Author similarity can be quantified without
supervision by taking the dot product of the topic pro-
portions. If labeled data is available (a partially ob-
served network), then regression can be applied to learn
weights for each topic. Chang and Blei (2009) describe
such a regression-based predictor, which takes the form
exp

(
−ηT (z̄i − z̄j) ◦ (z̄i − z̄j)− ν

)
, denoting the pre-

dicted strength of connection between authors i and j.
Here z̄i (z̄j) refers to the expected topic proportions for
user i (j), η is a vector of learned regression weights, and
ν is an intercept term which is only necessary if a the link
prediction function must return a probability. We used
the updates from Chang and Blei to learn η in a post hoc
fashion, after training the topic model.

4 Results
We constructed topic models using an implemen-
tation of variational inference2 for Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA). The results of the run with
the best variational bound on 50 topics can be
found at http://sailing.cs.cmu.edu/
socialmedia/naacl10ws/. While many of
the topics focus on content (for example, electronics
and sports), others capture distinct languages and even
dialect variation. Such dialects are particularly evident in

2http://www.cs.princeton.edu/˜blei/lda-c

stopwords (you versus u). Structured topic models that
explicitly handle these two orthogonal axes of linguistic
variation are an intriguing possibility for future work.

We evaluate our topic-based approach for link predic-
tion on both the message and follower graphs, compar-
ing against an approach that only considers the network
structure. Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg (2003) perform
a quantitative comparison of such approaches, finding
that the relatively simple technique of counting the num-
ber of shared neighbors between two nodes is a surpris-
ingly competitive predictor of whether they are linked;
we call this approach common-neighbors. We evaluate
this method and our own supervised LDA+regression ap-
proach by hiding half of the edges in the graph, and pre-
dicting them from the other half.

For each author in the dataset, we apply each method
to rank all possible links; the evaluation computes the av-
erage rank of the true links that were held out (for our
data, a random baseline would score 10653 – half the
number of authors in the network). As shown in Figure
1, topic-based link prediction outperforms the alternative
that considers only the graph structure. Interestingly, post
hoc regression on the topic proportions did not consis-
tently improve performance, though joint learning may
do better (e.g., Chang and Blei, 2009). The text-based ap-
proach is especially strong on the message graph, while
the link-based approach is more competitive on the fol-
lowers graph; a model that captures both features seems
a useful direction for future work.

References
D. Blei, A. Ng, and M. Jordan. 2003. Latent Dirichlet alloca-

tion. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:993–1022.
J. Chang and D. Blei. 2009. Hierarchical relational models for

document networks. Annals of Applied Statistics.
M.A.K. Halliday. 1978. Language as social semiotic: The

social interpretation of language and meaning. University
Park Press.

Bernardo Huberman, Daniel M. Romero, and Fang Wu. 2009.
Social networks that matter: Twitter under the microscope.
First Monday, 14(1–5), January.

D. Liben-Nowell and J. Kleinberg. 2003. The link prediction
problem for social networks. In Proc. of CIKM.

20


