










































Depends on What the French Say - Spoken Corpus Annotation with and beyond Syntactic Functions


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 274–281,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

 

Depends on What the French Say 
Spoken Corpus Annotation With and Beyond Syntactic Functions  

José Deulofeu 
DELIC, Université de Provence 

Aix, France. 
jose.deulofeu@up.univ-

mrs.fr 

Lucie Duffort, Kim Gerdes 
LPP, Sorbonne Nouvelle 

Paris, France 
lucieduffort@hotmail.com 

kim@gerdes.fr 

 
Sylvain Kahane 

Modyco, Université Paris Ouest 
Nanterre, France 

sylvain@kahane.fr 

Paola Pietrandrea 
Université Roma TRE / Lattice, ENS 

Rome, Italy and Paris, France 
pietrand@uniroma3.it 

 

Abstract 

We present a syntactic annotation scheme for 
spoken French that is currently used in the 
Rhapsodie project. This annotation is depend-
ency-based and includes coordination and dis-
fluency as analogously encoded types of para-
digmatic phenomena. Furthermore, we attempt 
a thorough definition of the discourse units re-
quired by the systematic annotation of other 
phenomena beyond usual sentence boundaries, 
which are typical for spoken language. This 
includes so called “macrosyntactic” phenom-
ena such as dislocation, parataxis, insertions, 
grafts, and epexegesis. 

1 Introduction 

This communication presents the syntactic anno-
tation scheme currently being developed for 
Rhapsodie a project funded by the French Na-
tional Research Agency (ANR) which aims to 
study the syntax-prosody interface in spoken 
French. Rhapsodie aims to elaborate a freely dis-
tributed corpus, classified into different discourse 
genres, and doted with prosodic and syntactic 
annotations elaborated for the study of the rela-
tionship of prosody, syntax, and information 
structure in discourse. 

Contrary to what is available in the anglo-
saxon world, there is no freely distributed and 
syntactically annotated corpus of spoken French 
today. This is what our project aims to provide. 

The only tree-bank for French, that we know 
of, is the Paris 7 Corpus (Abeillé et al. 2003). 
This is a corpus of newspaper texts, annotated 
mainly in Penn Tree Bank style and partially 
with dependency annotations, which is distrib-
uted only under highly restrictive conditions. 

Some annotated corpora of spoken French 
nevertheless exist: The CID (Corpus of Interac-
tional Data) (Bertrand et al. 2009) uses an anno-
tation with typed chunks, and the VALIBEL cor-
pus (Dister et al. 2008 ; Degand et Simon 2009) 
consists of delimiting maximal syntactic units. 
This notion, allowing segmentation of the text, is 
essential for any syntactic annotation, a concept 
we will come back to in section 2. Neither of 
these corpora is distributed freely and none 
comes close to the precision and variety of spo-
ken language corpora existing for other lan-
guages like English or Dutch. 

There is, however, an important tradition of 
description of the spoken French language, nota-
bly at the University of Provence in Aix, where a 
team led by Claire Blanche-Benveniste coined 
the two level distinction of “micro-syntax” and 
“macro-syntax” and proposed a parallel analysis 
of paradigmatic phenomena ranging from coor-
dinations to disfluencies (Blanche-Benveniste 
1990, Berrendonner 1990, Bilger et al. 1997, 
Guénot 2006, Gerdes & Kahane 2009). 

Rhapsodie’s innovation stems from a formal-
ization and generalization of this tradition. The 
parallel annotation of prosody and syntax natu-
rally leads to a syntactic analysis of the text as a 
whole, including hesitations and disfluencies, 
whereas other approaches tend to erase these 
phenomena in order to obtain standard sentences 
similar to written language where syntactic anno-
tation is well-established. Examples of this latter 
approach include main reference corpora, for 
example the English Switchboard corpus 
(http://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/switchboard), or the 
CGN (Dutch Spoken Corpus, 
http://lands.let.ru.nl/cgn). These types of annota-
tion also commonly exclude phenomena such as 
colon effects, grafts, and associated illocutionary 

274



 

 

units, because of their limited conception of sen-
tence boundaries and a focus on written phenom-
ena. The Rhapsodie syntactic analysis scheme 
tends to include all words of the corpus and finds 
it necessary to take account of all the above phe-
nomena because they are, we believe, intrinsi-
cally syntactic. 

The original English examples in this paper 
stem from the Micase corpus (Simpson-Vlach & 
Leicher 2006), in particular from the segment 
Honors Advising (http://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/ 
micase) and from interviews that we collected 
ourselves (ELUI; English Language Use Inter-
views, Duffort in preparation). Some phenomena 
are specific to French and we use original exam-
ples from the Rhapsodie corpus; some other ex-
amples, designated as "constructed examples", 
are simplified constructions of phenomena we 
only encountered in more complex combinations. 

2 Annotation 

In the analysis of written text, the units of anno-
tation are usually taken to be “graphical” sen-
tences, i.e. the words between two periods, a nei-
ther explicit nor homogenous notion that has lit-
tle or no linguistic relevance. Spoken corpus an-
notation, on the contrary, has to simultaneously 
define dependency units and the dependency an-
notation that we impose on these units. These 
two questions are not independent: The more 
phenomena we include in the syntactic analysis, 
the longer the units will become. 

Our first choice concerns syntactic annotation: 
Functional dependency annotation has proven to 
be a more challenging task than phrase structure 
annotation but seems to be more versatile for 
various languages and more promising as an in-
termediate syntactic structure between the or-
dered words and semantics. All dependency 
based corpora have to choose a set of functions 
to be used in annotation. This choice is often 
guided by practical considerations (existing 
phrase structure annotation, parsers, semantic 
needs, etc.) but even though few have tried to 
give a formal and general definition of syntactic 
functions (Mel'cuk & Pertsov 1987), each choice 
of a set of functions presumes that two elements 
(subtrees) that share the same function have 
something in common: Usually this is thought to 
be 

- the exchangeability of the two elements 
(at a certain degree of abstraction, exclud-
ing, for example, agreement features) 

- the coordinability of the two elements 

For example, to decide whether gone and the 
bike have the same function in he has gone and 
he has a bike, it is not sufficient that the two 
elements can be interchanged; we also need co-
ordinability which in this case is ungrammatical. 
We will therefore stipulate the existence of two 
different functions.1 

(1) *He has gone and a bike. 

In other words, a coordination is an orthogonal 
construction to a head-daughter relation. This 
also shows in the difficulty in dependency as 
well as phrase structure approaches to account 
for coordination. The near-symmetry of coordi-
nations violates basic assumptions of X-bar the-
ory and head-daughter relationships. Contrary to 
other dependency analyses like the Prague De-
pendency Treebank (ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt) or the 
Alpino Dependency Treebank (www.let.rug.nl/ 
vannoord/trees), our approach does not include 
coordinations in our syntactic functions, but 
these, as well as other paradigmatic phenomena, 
are encoded in what we call “piles”2 (see section 
2.3). 

2.1 Dependency Units and Illocutionary 
Units  

We don’t consider that syntax can be reduced to 
dependency, and we have to define the delimita-
tion of functional relations as well as the delimi-
tation of so called “macro-syntactic” phenomena 
such as dislocation and colon effect that go be-
yond dependency. Our complete annotation 
therefore includes units joined by dependency, 
paradigmatic sub-units, and higher-level rela-
tions that are still syntactic and not purely discur-
sive. We propose a well defined distinction be-
tween syntax based segmentation, called “de-
pendency units” (DU), and pragmatically based 
segmentation, called “illocutionary units” (IU). 

Applying a bottom-up approach, we first look 
for rectional (head-daughter) relations, which 
gives us the DUs: Each DU is a unit, constructed 
around a syntactic head that itself has no gover-
nor. We define a rectional relation using the 
                                                 
1 Note that this choice is less clear in many cases, 
such as for example for the distinction between pas-
sives and predicative functions, or between full and 
light verbs. 
2 Of course this can be represented formally equiva-
lently as a specific type of dependency, but we believe 
that the distinction is linguistically important and lim-
iting the notion of dependency to true head-daughter 
relations makes the notion of dependency more con-
sistent. 

275



 

 

common criteria: i.e. constraints in terms of cat-
egory, morphological features, and restructura-
tion possibilities (commutation with a pronoun, 
diatheses, clefting). 

In addition to these syntactic units, we define 
the IUs as unities that demonstrate a discursive 
autonomy, in other words, that have their own 
illocutionary force. These terms may seem sur-
prising in formal syntax, but we believe that they 
are unavoidable for our task. This definition as-
sents to traditional grammarians’ intuition of sen-
tences holding a “complete meaning” and Creis-
sels’ definition of “sentence” (2004) as a pro-
positional content realizing an enunciation. 

Both units, DUs and IUs are relatively inde-
pendent and complementary and they have their 
own well-formedness conditions. In general, an 
IU is a combination of several DUs, but we will 
show examples ranging from simple interjections 
to complex embedded DUs. In some cases a rec-
tional relation, and thus a DU can go beyond the 
limits of an IU. 

This opposition of DU and IU reflects 
Blanche-Benveniste’s opposition between micro-
syntax and macrosyntax (1990): A DU is the 
maximal microsyntactic unit; an IU constitutes 
the maximal unit of macrosyntax.   

2.2 Microsyntax and Dependency Units  

In this paper, we will not elaborate further on the 
dependency annotation itself. We have followed 
approaches taken by numerous other corpora 
such as the Prague Dependency Treebank or the 
Alpino Dependency Treebank (www.let.rug.nl/ 
vannoord/trees/). 

Let us consider the following utterance, typi-
cal for spoken French: 

(2) moi ma mère le salon c’est de la moquette 
me my mother the living room it's carpet 
'My mother's living room is carpeted' 

In (2), three elements—moi, literally 'me', ma 
mère 'my mother', le salon 'the living room'—are 
paratactically juxtaposed to a predicative unit, 
c'est de la moquette 'it is carpet'. These elements 
are not syntactically dependent on any element in 
the predicative unit. We treat them as separate 
DUs. We will illustrate in 2.4 the treatment we 
propose for the relation holding between these 
DUs.  

2.3 Piles  

Beside dependency, we acknowledge the exis-
tence of a separate mechanism of syntactic cohe-
sion within DUs: Following Gerdes & Kahane 

(2009), we call the syntactic relation between 
units occupying the same structural position 
within a DU, or, in other words, holding the 
same position in a dependency tree, a “pile”. Co-
ordination is a typical case of piling: 

(3) our two languages are {English | ^and 
French} (ELUI) 

We consider that we also have a pile of elements 
occupying the same structural position in refor-
mulations (4), disfluencies (5) or corrections (6): 

(4)  did a humanoid species { spring up | or ex-
ist } in various places {in the world | {not 
just in Africa | ^but also in Asia | ^and 
maybe also in southern Europe }} // (Mi-
case) 

(5)  { I~ | in~ | including } kind of a general idea 
of these "uh" (ELUI) 

(6)  {I | I} have lots of other interests {like "um" | 
that are a little bit more like} {paleontology 
| ^or astronomy | ^or international religion | 
^or "uh" not religion | international relations 
| ^so those things {I wanna & | I think I’m 
gonna concentrate more on} // (Micase) 

Our desire to treat coordinations, reformulations 
and disfluencies as phenomena showing syntac-
tic similarity resides in the fact that, as shown by 
Blanche-Benveniste (1990) among others, it is 
not always easy to distinguish between disflu-
ency, reformulation and coordination: As an ex-
ample, consider (7a), more or less interpreted in 
the same way as examples (7b,c) which are, re-
spectively, a reformulation and a coordination: 

(7) a. she is { a linguist | maybe a technician } 
b. she is { a linguist | "um" a technician } 
c. she is { a linguist | ^or a technician }  
(constructed example) 

In all cases of piles, we use the same notation: 
the segments that occupy the same syntactic po-
sition are put between curly brackets { } and they 
are separated by vertical pipes |. Pipes therefore 
separate what we call pile layers. These layers 
may be introduced by pile markers, usually a 
conjunction. If a pile marker does not play a syn-
tactic role, it is preceded by a caret ^. 

Dependencies and piles allow for a complete 
description of the syntactic cohesion of a DU. In 
(7), for example, the first layer realizes the posi-
tion of attribute within the dependency structure. 
The syntagmatic relation between the two layers 
entails a paradigmatic relation between linguist 
and computational scientist. The second layer 
inherits the structural (attribute) position from 

276



 

 

the paradigmatic relation within the dependency 
structure. It should also be noticed that, with the 
exception of abandoned layers (noted &), layers 
can be seen as alternatives. It is possible to walk 
these structures by choosing one layer of each 
pile, extracting as many utterances as there are 
paths. Each of these utterances has a complete 
dependency structure merely containing govern-
ment and modification relations, for example, 
(7a) can be reduced to the two DUs in (8), which 
will constitute the input for the parsing process: 

(8)  a. she is a linguist 
  b. she is maybe a computational linguist  

Note that maybe, though it acts as a pile marker, 
also plays a syntactic role in the context of the 
pile, contrarily to a conjunction (*she is or a 
computational scientist), the latter being marked 
with the caret to make this distinction. 

2.4 Macrosyntax and Illocutionary Units  

An Illocutionary Unit (IU) is any portion of 
discourse encoding a unique illocutionary act: 
assertions, questions, and commands (see Ben-
veniste 1966, Searle 1976). An IU expresses a 
speech act that can be made explicit by introduc-
ing an implicit performative act such as "I say", 
"I ask", "I order". A test for detecting the Illocu-
tionary Units that make up a discourse consists 
of the introduction of such performative seg-
ments (see below). A segmentation in IUs is par-
ticularly important for the study of the connec-
tion of prosody and syntax, which is the goal of 
Rhapsodie, because these units are prosodically 
marked (Blanche-Benveniste 1997, Cresti 2000). 
We use the symbol // to segment the text in IUs 
(but see also the symbols //+ in section 3). 

It should be noted that there exist IUs that are 
not made up of Verbal Dependency Units. See 
examples (9a,b): 

(9) a. SPK1: we've heard all of the "you know" 
big "uh" meteors coming from outer space 
//     SPK2: right // (Micase) 

      b. ^and then < boom //  
      (constructed example) 

We extend the notion of IU to a unit whose status 
in terms of illocutionary acts, let alone in terms 
of propositional structures, may be unclear, but 
which can form a "complete message": interjec-
tions, phatics, feed back particles like voilà 
‘that’s it’, quoi ‘what’, hélas!, ‘alas’, tant pis! 
‘oh well’. See for instance in the famous critical 
punt against French writer Corneille (10a) that 
could be annotated as in (10b). 

(10) a. Après l'Agésilas, hélas ! Après l'Attila, 
holà ! (Nicolas Boileau 1828) 
'After Agésilas, alas! After Attila, no 
more!' 

 b. après l'Agésilas < hélas // après l'Attila < 
holà // 

In a context such as (11), a single IU is made up 
of two verbal DUs: I got up in the morning and I 
was with clients. 

(11) I got up in the morning < I was with clients 
// I ate at noon < I was with clients // I went 
to bed at night < I was with clients //  
(translation, Rhapsodie) 

The relation between the two verbal DUs in (11) 
cannot be described in terms of microsyntactic 
dependency. Indeed, I got up in the morning is 
not dependent on the verbal construction of the 
following DU. Nevertheless, the existence of a 
macrosyntactic relation can be acknowledged. 
The first DU in (11), I got up in the morning, is 
not as autonomous from an illocutionary point of 
view: it cannot constitute a self standing mes-
sage. In (11) it is not asserted that "I got up in the 
morning". And (11) can be paraphrased by (12a) 
but not by (12b): 

(12) a. it is said that I got up in the morning I was 
with the clients 

    b. # it is said that I got up in the morning 
and that I was with the clients. 

The illocutionary force of (11) is encoded by the 
DU I was with clients, which can be interpreted 
as an assertion even if uttered in isolation. Whe-
reas the unit I got up in the morning does not 
have in this context any illocutionary interpreta-
tion. The subsegment of an IU supporting the 
illocutionary force of the IU is called the nu-
cleus. It can be autonomized. The nucleus and 
the others segments forming the IU are called the 
Illocutionary Components (ICs). The ICs are al-
ways microsyntactic units and are generally 
DUs. The nucleus is the unit that is affected by a 
negation or an interrogation having scope on the 
IU. See for example the tests in (13) and (14): 

(13) A: I got up in the morning I was with clients 
B: this is not true (≈ It is not true that you 
were with clients, # It is not true that you 
got up in the morning) 

(14) A: I got up in the morning I was with clients 
B: Is that true? (≈ Is that true that you were 
with clients) 
(# Is that true that you got up in the morn-
ing) 

277



 

 

ICs preceding and following the nucleus are 
called pre-nuclear units (Pre-N) and post-nuclear 
units (Post-N). We use the symbol < to mark the 
Pre-N and the > to mark the post-N. These tags 
can be considered as explicit counterparts of 
commas in writing. 

(15) il y a plein de trucs < tu les vois après > en 
fait > les défauts (Rhapsodie)  

there are plenty of things < you see them 
later > actually > the faults  

It is possible that, due to a particular communica-
tive structure, the illocutionary force is carried 
only by a part of a DU and that the nucleus forms 
a DU with another IC: 

(16) to my mother <+ I don't speak anymore 
(constructed example) 

(17) two euros >+ it costs  
(translation, Blanche-Benveniste 1990) 

The addition of the symbol + indicates that the 
IC on one and the other side are parts of the same 
UR. 

3 More cases of irregularity in the inter-
face between microsyntactic and mac-

rosyntactic units 

We will now present a number of structures that 
were particularly problematic for the syntactic 
annotation of the Rhapsodie corpus and that il-
lustrate the mismatch between DU and IU 
boundaries well. 

3.1 DU beyond the IU 

Up to now, we have seen a few examples of 
segmentation of an IU into DUs. We will now 
show that there are cases, traditionally named 
epexegesis, where we can consider that it is in 
fact the DU which is segmented into multiple IU. 
Let us consider these two examples: 

(18)  SPK1: he has arrived 
    SPK2: last night (constructed example) 

(19) She speaks French. And very well!  
(constructed example) 

In these two examples, there are two illocu-
tionary acts: in (18) this is evident as there are 
two speakers uttering two different assertions. In 
(19), there are two assertions. In both cases, the 
second illocutionary act is not (micro) syntacti-
cally autonomous. The second IU directly fol-
lows the first IU and integrates and completes its 
syntactic structure, being in a dependency rela-
tion with the head of the first IU (the verb ar-

rived in (18), the verb speaks in (19)). We can 
therefore paraphrase the preceding examples 
thusly: 

(20)  SPK1: he has arrived 
    SPK2: he has arrived last night 

(21) She speaks French and (what is more) she 
speaks French very well. 

Rather than postulating an ellipsis in the second 
segment (as suggested by Culicover & Jackend-
off 2005, among others) we analyze the two IUs 
as belonging to the same DU. This choice natu-
rally descends from the modular approach we 
adopted, which distinguishes between illocution-
ary and syntactic relations. As in the case of a 
dependency relation crossing the IC border, we 
add a + symbol to indicate that the illocutionary 
frontier is not a limit to the DU. 

In addition to dependency, piling can also 
cross IU frontiers, as in (22):  

(22)   SPK1: How often do you go {there |} //+ 
     SPK2: {| to the States} // (ELUI) 

In (22) the argument position of the verb go is 
realized twice: through the segment there uttered 
by the first speaker and through the segment to 
the states uttered as a separate IU by the second 
speaker. We use the notation {X|}…{|Y} when 
the pile between X and Y is interrupted by a syn-
tactic frontier, in this case an IU frontier, or a 
discontinuity. 

It should be noted that the piling in (22) does 
not only cross an IU frontier but it crosses a 
speech turn frontier as well, as it is realized by 
two different speakers. We do not consider the 
speech turn as a limit for the extension of syntac-
tic phenomena, rather we assume that there can 
be co-construction of semantic content and syn-
tactic structures in dialogues 

3.2 Inserted IUs 

An IU can be inserted into another IU. This is 
what happens for example in the case of inser-
tions.  

(23) a. I woke up (you're going to laugh //) in the 
morning at five o'clock // (constructed ex-
ample) 
b. { I studied | (sorry//) I studied in college | 
I studied } international relations // (ELUI) 

We propose two equivalent ways to note this, 
either by placing the inserted utterance between 
parentheses as in (23) or by using the symbol # 
to indicate that the utterance is continued later at 
the following occurrence of #: 

278



 

 

(24) a. I woke up #// you're going to laugh //# in 
the morning at five o'clock //  
(constructed example) 

These two notations are strict equivalents __"(" = 
"#//" and ")" = "//#"__, but the symbol # also al-
lows the encoding of more complex cases such 
as the following example, where SPK1 is inter-
rupted three times by SPK2. This does not keep 
SPK1 from pursuing a relatively complex utter-
ance, all the while interacting with SPK2 through 
yeahs which punctuate SPK2's interventions. The 
sequence of //#+ tags indicates that the IU is 
completed (//), but that the DU continues later on 
(#+): 

(25) SPK1: but but otherwise uh well & // in any 
case the fundamental research it it remains 
free //#+ 
SPK2: yeah yeah // 
SPK1: #luckily //#+ 
SPK2 so yeah // in 2009 // 
SPK1: yeah // 
SPK2 : we'll have to see later // 
SPK1: yeah // # the applied research < less 
// ^but the fundamental research < yeah // 
(translation, Rhapsodie) 

3.3 Embedded IUs 

Direct discourse presents a particular difficulty 
due to the embedding of illocutionary acts. Con-
sider the following example: 

(26)  he said [ go away > poor fool // ] //  
(translation, radio) 

The reported speech in (26), annotated with the 
symbols [ ], has its own illocutionary force, it 
can be regarded therefore as an autonomous IU. 
Regardless, the preceding segment (he said) does 
not form an autonomous illocutionary act or a 
complete DU. We treat such a structure as an 
embedded IU. The reported speech is an IU em-
bedded in the IU made up of the whole utterance 
he said go away poor fool. 

Another phenomenon that we treat as the em-
bedding of IUs is the graft. We define a graft as 
the filling of a syntactic position with a segment 
belonging to an unexpected category (Deulofeu, 
1999). 
(27) a. you don't have an agenda with [one day I 

do this // one day I do that //] (translation, 
Deulofeu 1999) 

b. you follow the tram line which passes 
towards the [I think it's an old firehouse //] 
// (translation, Rhapsodie) 

c. I could like take and see {if I & | if it was 
worth it that I should go into "you know" 
more depth | ^or if that was just sort of like 
[ okay {I l- | I like it} // ^but I don't wanna 
like study that // ^so I don't know //] } // 
(Micase) 

d. we had criticized the newspaper [I think it 
was the Provencal #] we had criticized it 
in relation to (# or the Meridional //) in re-
lation to the death of [what was his name // 
not Coluche // the other guy //] //  

  (translation, Blanche-Benveniste 1990) 

This phenomenon can be regarded as a rupture of 
sub-categorization. The grafted segment usually 
has its own illocutionary force, being in most 
cases a unit commenting on the lexical choice 
that should have been done to respect the sub-
categorization. In a graft, as well as in reported 
speech, an IU occupies a governed position in-
side a DU. 

3.4 Associated IUs 

A number of  discourse particles (such as "right", 
"of course" in English, "quoi", "bon" in French) 
and parentheticals units (such as "I think", "I 
guess", "you know" in English, "je crois", "tu 
vois" in French) are endowed with an illocution-
ary force. However, these elements do not serve 
the purpose of modifying the common ground 
between speakers. They merely have a function 
of modal modification or interactional regulation. 
We call these units "associated units", we treat 
them as non autonomous illocutionary compo-
nents and we annotate them between quotation 
marks " ". 

(28) it's a really "you know" open field "you 
know" like all that stuff // (Micase) 

(29) he is coming "I guess" // (constructed) 
(30) "I mean" English wasn't that helpful itself // 

(ELUI) 

4  Levels of annotation 

Our annotation strategy rests on the fact that 
relatively good tools for automatic analysis of 
French written texts are currently in existence 
(Bourigault et al. 2005, De la Clergerie 2005, 
Boulier & Sagot 2005). Adapting these tools to 
spoken French would constitute a project in and 
of itself, one much more ambitious than our an-
notation project (even though we believe that 
Rhapsodie is an essential step towards the devel-
opment of parsers for spoken language, and that 
one of the final uses of Rhapsodie will be as a 

279



 

 

contribution to the training and development of 
these parsers). In other words, we want to use 
these tools developed for written text without 
modifying them substantially. In order to do this, 
we realize a pre-treatment of transcribed text "by 
hand": We manually annotate every phenomenon 
typical of the syntax of speech. The result is a 
pre-treated text that parsers can analyze as writ-
ten text with minimal error. The segmentation 
into IUs and DUs described in the previous sec-
tions aims at providing such a pre-treatment. As 
we hope we have shown, our pre-treatment has a 
theoretical and practical value, and could consti-
tute a satisfying analysis of speech on its own. 
Regardless, we would like to present all levels of 
our treatment, as this will allow a greater under-
standing of the choices that have been made (for 
example the analysis of piles during pre-
treatment). 

Our annotation procedure is organized into 
several steps which alternate regularly between 
automatic and manual treatment. 
Level 1: Raw transcription (i.e. without syntactic 
enrichment) - This consists of orthographic tran-
scription which includes speech overlap, trun-
cated morphemes, etc. 
Level 2: Simple automatic pre-treatment - Anno-
tation of trivial "disfluencies" (such as word re-
petition) and identification of potential associ-
ated IUs (um, uh... but also like, you know...). 
This automatic step is very rough and is to be 
corrected at level 3. 
Level 3: Manual syntactic segmentation - This is 
the annotation presented in the previous sections 
of this paper, indicating DUs, IUs, ICs, piles, etc. 
This level is obtained manually starting at level 
2. The general idea is that it simultaneously con-
stitutes: 

- A coding of everything that we know we 
are not able to automatically calculate, 
and which would cause problems for 
parsers (originally programmed for writ-
ten text), 

- A coding which is satisfactory in itself 
and permits a preliminary study of the 
syntax-prosody interface. 

A tool has been developed for checking the well-
formedness of this level of annotation.  
Level 4: Parser entry - Existing parsers for 
French have not been programmed to process 
simple transcriptions of speech, nor have they 
been tuned to treat the markup that we have in-
troduced at level 3. However, these tags allow us 
to automatically segment the text and furnish the 

parser with sections it is capable of analyzing. 
The following example will illustrate this point. 

(31)  are you thinking {of other communicat~ | 
"uh" of other functions}  

  (constructed example) 

would give us to two segments: 

(32) a. are you thinking of other communicat~ 
        b. are you thinking of other functions. 

Certain fragments of text are therefore duplicated 
and analyzed multiple times. These analyses, if 
identical, are automatically fused in the ulterior 
levels. If they differ, a manual treatment is nec-
essary. Another strategy consists of not unpiling 
but rather perceiving an utterance including a 
pile as a Directed Acrylic Graph (DAG), that is 
to say a graph in which the arcs are labeled by 
words of the text, and which integrate all possi-
ble paths in a pile structure. A parser like SxLFG 
(Boulier and Sagot 2005) can manage a DAG 
entry, but for the moment it is parameterized to 
choose the best path in the DAG and not to ana-
lyze the entire DAG. 
Level 5: Parser output - Parsers provide us with a 
syntactic analysis in the form of a dependency 
tree. We now have two things left to do: 1) au-
tomatically translate these analyses so that they 
correspond exactly to the desired labels (this is 
mainly a renaming process of functional labels); 
2) apply syntactic annotations computed for the 
unfolded segments to the original texts (those 
from level 3), while fusing duplicated syntactic 
annotations. 
Level 6: Dependency analysis - This consists of 
level 5 after automatic reinsertion of analyzed 
sections and manual correction. The last level is 
a manual correction of level 5, this is absolutely 
necessary as the parsers still make many mis-
takes (we estimate that about 30% of dependen-
cies will have to be corrected) and do not use our 
same labels. The encoding of level 6 is therefore 
a complete syntactic analysis of text, which in-
cludes microsyntax (functional dependencies) as 
well as macrosyntax. 

Conclusion 

The ongoing process of annotating transcriptions 
of spoken French with syntactic functions has 
revealed the necessity of a well-defined text seg-
mentation separated into illocutionary and de-
pendency units. This process is an interesting 
challenge in its own right as it allows, for the 
time being, only very limited automated steps, 

280



 

 

and can be seen as a necessary pre-treatment be-
fore the parsing process, relying mainly on tools 
tuned to work on written data. Linguistically, 
contrary to the conventional ad-hoc punctuation 
of written text, our segmentation can be seen as a 
systematic punctuation process relying on repro-
ducible criteria allowing for a distribution of this 
process to trained annotators. Moreover, the no-
tion of paradigmatic piles naturally completes the 
short-comings of head-descriptions in coordina-
tions and other paradigmatic phenomena. 

If we want to share tools and resources across 
languages and theoretical models, it is necessary 
that annotation norms develop in the field of syn-
tactic annotation of spoken texts, in other words, 
we need some kind of language-independent 
punctuation scheme reflecting syntactic and 
pragmatic segmentation of the text. This is a 
process that is well on its way for written text. 
Our work on French and English shows that our 
annotation scheme proposes criteria that can be 
applied to different languages while yielding in-
teresting results. We hope this to be a contribu-
tion to the development of unified annotation 
methods in dependency annotation of spoken text 
and thus to a deeper understanding of functional 
syntax as a whole. 

References 

Abeillé, A., L. Clément, F. Toussenel. 2003. Building 
a Treebank for French. A. Abeillé (ed) Treebanks. 
Kluwer, Dordrecht. 

Benveniste, E. 1966. Problèmes de linguistique géné-
rale, Gallimard, Paris  

Berrendonner, A. 1990. “Pour une macro-syntaxe”. 
Travaux de linguistique 21: 25-31. 

Bertrand, R., P. Blache, R. Espesser, G. Ferré, C. 
Meunier, B. Priego-Valverde, S. Rauzy. 2009. Le 
CID - Corpus of Interactional Data - Annotation et 
exploitation multimodale de parole conversation-
nelle. Traitement Automatique des Langues, 49(3): 
1-30. 

Bilger M., Blasco, M., Cappeau, P., Sabio, F. & Sa-
velli, M.-J. 1997. Transcription de 
 l'oral et interprétation: illustration de quelques dif-
ficultés. Recherches sur le français parlé 14: 55-
85. 

Blanche-Benveniste, C., M. Bilger, C. Rouget, K. van 
den Eynde. 1990. Le Français parlé. Études gram-
maticales. Paris, CNRS Éditions. 

Blanche-Benveniste, C. 1997. Approches de la langue 
parlée en français, Ophrys, Paris. 

Boullier, P. et B. Sagot. 2005. Analyse syntaxique 
profonde à grande échelle: SxLfg. Traitement Au-
tomatique des Langues, 46(2):65-89. 

Bourigault D., Fabre C., Frérot C., Jacques M.-P. & 
Ozdowska S. 2005. Syntex, analyseur syntaxique 
de corpus, in Actes des 12èmes journées sur le 
Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles, 
Dourdan, France  

Creissels D. 2004. Cours de syntaxe générale. Chapi-
tre 1, http://lesla.univ-lyon2.fr/sites/lesla/IMG/pdf/ 
doc-346.pdf 

Culicover P., R. Jackendoff 2005. Simpler Syntax. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press  

Cresti, E. 2000. Corpus di italiano parlato. Accade-
mia della Crusca, Florence. 

De la Clergerie, E. 2005. DyALog: a tabular logic 
programming based environment for NLP. Pro-
ceedings of 2nd International Workshop on Con-

straint Solving and Language Processing, Barce-
lona, Spain. 

Degand, L., Simon, A. C. 2009. On identifying basic 
discourse units in speech: theoretical and empirical 
issues. Discours 4 (http://discours.revues.org/in-
dex.html) 

Deulofeu, J. 1999. Recherches sur les formes de la 
prédication dans les énoncés assertifs en français 

contemporain (le cas des énoncés introduits par le 

morphème que). Thèse d’état, Université Paris 3.  

Dister, A., Degand, L., Simon, A. C. 2008. Approches 
syntaxiques en français parlé: vers la structuration 
en unités minimales du discours. Proceedings of 
the 27th Conference on Lexis and Grammar, 
L’Aquila, 10-13 September 2008, 27-34.  

Gerdes, K., Kahane, S. 2009. Speaking in Piles. Para-
digmatic Annotation of a Spoken French Corpus. 
Proceedings of the fifth Corpus Linguistics Confer-

ence, Liverpool.  

Guénot M.-L. 2006. La coordination considérée 
comme un entassement paradigmatique: descrip-
tion, formalisation et intégration, Proceedings of 
TALN, Leuven, Belgique, 178-187. 

Mel'cuk, I., Pertsov, N. 1987. Surface Syntax of Eng-
lish. A Formal Model within the Meaning-Text 

Framework, Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

Searle, J. R. 1976. A classification of illocutionary 
acts. Language in Society 5:1, 1-23. 

Simpson-Vlach, R., & Leicher, S. 2006. The MICASE 
handbook, The University of Michigan Press, Ann 
Arbor. 

281


