










































Network Analysis of Korean Word Associations


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First Workshop on Computational Neurolinguistics, pages 27–35,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Network Analysis of Korean Word Associations 

Jaeyoung Jung Li Na Hiroyuki Akama
Tokyo Institute of Technology Tokyo Institute of Technology Tokyo Institute of Technology 

2-12-1, O-okayama, Meguro-ku 2-12-1, O-okayama, Meguro-ku 2-12-1, O-okayama, Meguro-ku

Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan 

jung.j.aa@m.titech.ac.jp li.n.ad@m.titech.ac.jp akama.h.aa@m.titech.ac.jp 

 
 

Abstract

Korean Word Associations (KorWA) were 

collected to build a semantic network for the 

Korean language. A graphic representation 

approach of applying coefficients to complex 

networks allows us to discern the semantic 

structures within words. A semantic network 

of the KorWA was found to exhibit the scale-

free property in its degree distribution. The 

growth of the network around hub words was 

also confirmed through two experimental 

phases. As an issue for further research, we 

suggest that the present results may yield in-

sights for computational neurolinguistics, as a 

semantic network of word association norms 

can bridge the gap between information about 

lexical co-occurrences derived from a corpora 

and anatomical networks as a basis for map-

ping out neural activations. 

1 Introduction 

Language is an intricate cognitive system. The 

mental system, called a grammar by linguists, al-

lows human beings to form and interpret the 

sounds, words, and sentences of their language. 

The system is often broken down into several 

components, such as phonetics, phonology, mor-

phology, syntax, and semantics (O'Grady et al. 

2005). Depending on one’s concerns, the basic 

elements of each level (i.e. phones, syllables, mor-

phemes, words, or sentences) become the constitu-

ents of linguistic networks of sound patterns, 

morphological structures, or syntactic organiza-

tions. Parse trees, for instance, which are often 

used in analyzing the syntactic structures of sen-

tences, employ links to represent the syntagmatic 

relationships between words. However, focusing 

on the processes of conceptualizing feelings, ex-

periences, and perceptions and of encoding them in 

words (namely, lexicalization), linguists have fre-

quently drawn another kind of linguistic network 

substantiated as a map of words projecting seman-

tic structures and relations onto an Euclidian space 

from a paradigmatic perspective. In that sense, 

word association data is attractive in terms of ease 

of data manipulation, especially when making a 

graph from a list of word pairs. Moreover, the tools 

for analyzing complex networks have been often 

applied to analyzing the structural features within 

large-scale word association data and to mining 

lexical knowledge from them. 

Since Galton (1880), word association has been 

used as an empirical method for observing thought 

processes, memory, and mental states within clini-

cal and cognitive psychology (Deese, 1965). From 

a linguistic perspective, word associations are un-

doubtedly valuable language resources because 

they are rich sources of linguistic knowledge and 

lexical information. The data has some unique 

characteristics that are very interesting and useful 

for cultural studies, reflecting the life styles, social, 

cultural and linguistic backgrounds of the native 

speakers who contributed to the data collections.  

Such information could be particularly useful for 

further applications not only within semantic stud-

ies but also for intelligent information retrieval, 

brain research, and language learning. 

In short, so-called word association norms are 

crucial as large-scale paradigmatic corpora. They 

consist of word pair data based on psychological 

experiments where the participants are typically 

asked to provide a semantically-related response 

word that comes to mind upon presentation of a 

stimulus word. Two well-known word association 

data for English are the University of South Florida 

word association, rhyme and word fragment norms 

27



(Nelson et al., 1998) and the Edinburgh Word As-

sociation Thesaurus of English (EAT; Kiss et al., 

1973). For Japanese there are Ishizaki's Associa-

tive Concept Dictionary (IACD) (Okamoto and 

Ishizaki, 2001) and the Japanese Word Association 

Database (JWAD) (Joyce, 2005, 2006, 2007). Util-

izing computational linguistic techniques that aim 

to mathematically analyze their structures, raw as-

sociation data is often transformed into some form 

of graph or complex network representation, where 

the vertices stand for words and the edges indicate 

an associative relationship (Miyake et al., 2007). 

Such techniques of graph representation and their 

analysis allow us to discern the patterns of connec-

tivity within large-scale resources of linguistic 

knowledge and to perceive the inherent relation-

ships between words and word groups. 

However, despite a long history of word associa-

tion studies and the valuable contributions of such 

data to cognitive science, comprehensive, large-

scale databases of Korean word association norms 

have been seriously inadequate. In one study, Lee 

(1970) surveyed word associations based on 30 

adjectives and 29 words representing colors, tar-

geting 40 university students and analyzed the re-

sponse words for associative tendencies in terms of 

gender and grammatical word classes. More re-

cently, Shin (1998) attempted to categorize words 

by conceptual systems in order to construct a lexi-

cal dictionary supporting foreign language learners. 

Although her data differs from word association 

norms and is not available as an accessible digital 

database for academic purpose, the semantic clas-

sification of the words can be exploited in com-

plementing the analysis of Korean semantic 

networks.  

A collection of Korean word associations (for 

short, KorWA) was planned and conducted with 

the strong motivation of constructing a worthwhile 

database of Korean word associations as a kind of 

resource that has multiple applications in a number 

of areas such as lexicography, language education, 

artificial intelligent, natural language processing, 

and cultural study.  Moreover, we intend to share 

the database on the web to foster these various po-

tential utilities. 

  In this paper, KorWA is represented into se-

mantic networks and examined by some combina-

torial methods in linguistics. The details are 

presented from the whole process of collecting the 

data to the results of the analysis based on the the-

ory of complex networks. Furthermore, this paper 

briefly discusses another important characteristic, 

dynamics in scale-free networks, which has re-

cently attracted much attention in this research 

field. Finally we will mention the applicability of 

the graph-based analysis developed here to the fu-

ture potential researches of the computational neu-

rolinguistics. 

2 Korean word associations 

2.1 Design of Experiment 

Preparation of an association experiment begins 

with the selection of a stimulus word set that is to 

be presented to the respondent in order to initiate 

their association process.  Determining the stimu-

lus word set is a crucial part in designing the ex-

periment, as associative responses are greatly 

influenced by the characteristics of the presented 

words, in particular, the stimulus word familiarity 

influences response heterogeneity, variability, rela-

tional categories, and reaction times (Deese 1965). 

For the experiment of Korean word associations, 

we referred to a list of 5,000 Korean basic words 

(Seo et al. 1998), which was derived from the 

Yonsei Corpora consisting of 42,644,891 words as 

of 1998 [ILIS].  From the list, we compiled a list of 

3,951 words, consisting of 2,628 nouns, 1,006 

verbs, and 317 adjectives. 

One hundred and thirty-two native Korean stu-

dents (71 males and 61 females) at Daejon Univer-

sity, South Korea voluntarily participated in the 

experiment.  The students were mainly from the 

departments of Korean language and literature 

(54%), physical therapy (30%), and philosophy 

(11%).  More than 70% of the students had educa-

tional background in the humanities.  Most of the 

students (93%) were in their 20s; 82% between 20 

and 25 years old and 11% between 26 and 30 years 

old.  14% of students answered that on average 

they read more than five books in a month. The 

task was conducted on the campus of Daejeon 

University from September 2007 to February 2008. 

It was a traditional pen-and-paper based task. Un-

der the control of an instructor, each session of the 

task lasted for 30 minutes. 

In the task, participants were instructed to write 

down the response words that came to mind when 

they looked at the presented words. We asked the 

subjects to write down all the words that they 

28



could think of from the presented words. This pro-

cedure is called the continuous free association 

task, differing from the discrete association task 

where the subject is asked to only write down their 

first response (Cramer 1968). 

As a means of naturally displaying continuous 

associations, the respondents were asked to map 

out their responses. That is, they drew a kind of 

associative map for a given word, by adding a line 

when they made an association and numbering the 

responses according to the order in which they 

came to mind from the stimulus word. In the ex-

periment, an A5 size booklet was distributed to the 

participants. The booklet had 66 pages printed on 

one-side, including 2 front-back cover pages.  

 

 
Figure 1. Instructions about the task and example 

 

The first 4 pages contained instructional informa-

tion; (1) a brief description of the experiment’s 

purpose and its method, (2) a short survey for basic 

respondent information (gender, age, major, and 

number of books read in a month), (3) an example 

illustrating what to do in the task (shown in Figure 

1), and (4) one practice before the task. Then, the 

remaining 60 pages were for the word association 

task, printed with one word per page. Thus, each 

participant was asked to provide word association 

responses for 60 words. 

In total, 132 booklets were prepared for the task. 

A list of 60 words for each booklet was randomly 

extracted from the 3,951 stimulus set. Apart from 

six of the 132 sets, the lists included 40 nouns, 15 

verbs, and 5 adjectives. The others had slightly 

different numbers of the syntactic categories. 

However, eventually each stimulus word was 

planned to be presented to up to two subjects. 

As the result of approximately 6-month period 

of data collection, we obtained 28,755 responses in 

total for the 3,942 stimulus words (from the origi-

nal stimulus set, nine words failed to elicit any 

word associations). The 28,755 responses (tokens) 

consisted of 11,275 distinct words (types). Each 

item was presented to two respondents. 

The KorWA database (Figure 2) was con-

structed from the collected word association re-

sponses. The data is arranged into six fields; (1) the 

part of speech of the stimulus word, (2) the stimu-

lus word, (3) the part of speech of the response, (4) 

response order, (5) raw form of the response, and 

(6) response word in standard form. 
 

 
Figure 2. Contents of the KorWA database 

2.2 Basic Analysis 

The Korean word association data collected is 

briefly summarized here in terms of the relations 

between the stimulus words and the responses to-

gether with some basic statistics. The participants 

produced on average 218 responses (standard de-

viation = 63.8, ranging from 98 to 482) for the 

complete set of 60 words in the free association 

task, which corresponds to 3.6 responses per 

stimulus word. Because each stimulus item was 

presented to two respondents, each stimulus has on 

average 7.3 association responses. 

29



As already mentioned, our task was the continu-

ous free association task where the respondent was 

allowed to provide more than one response, so 

there is the possibility of chaining responses where 

some association responses are elicited by prior 

responses. The response set of 28,755 tokens in-

cludes all such responses. Furthermore, it is possi-

ble to extract the primary responses that were 

given as the first response produced for each 

stimulus word. In doing that, it is possible to con-

vert the continuous free association task condition 

to the discrete association task employed in other 

existing data. The primary associates for the 3,942 

stimulus are 7,550 word tokens (4,197 types). The 

associations seem to be related to the grammatical 

classes of the stimulus.  Ervin (1961) reports that 

many associations tend to have the same gram-

matical class as the stimulus word. Similarly, Jen-

kins (1954) and Saporta (1955) provide an 

interesting way of classifying association struc-

tures into two modes, i.e. paradigmatic associa-

tions and syntagmatic ones. In the former mode, 

the stimulus and response fit a common grammati-

cal paradigm. For example, the word ACTION 

yields the associates of WORDS, LIFE, 

MOVEMENT, MOTION, GAME, and so on, 

which are not likely to occur as sequences in eve-

ryday English. In the latter case, the stimulus and 

response are generally contiguous, occupying dif-

ferent positions within phrases or sentences. 

Namely, they often form sequences, as in the rela-

tions between the stimulus word of 

ADMINISTRATIVE and its common associates of 

DUTY, JOB, CONTROL, DISCIPLINE, POWER, 

BUREAUCRATS, POSITION, AGENCY, 

ENTITY, SCHOOL, BOSS, GOVERNMENT, 

RULE, etc. (Deese 1965). Deese (1962) clarified 

the relative frequencies of paradigmatic and syn-

tagmatic associations among the grammatical 

classes of English, especially with nouns, verbs, 

adjectives, and adverbs in his study. He observed 

that the tendency towards paradigmatic or syntag-

matic association varied with word class; nouns are 

dominantly paradigmatic, while adjectives and 

verbs tend to be both paradigmatic and syntag-

matic. In the case of adjectives, it is a particularly 

interesting tendency for the association types to 

have a strong correlation with frequency of usage. 

That is to say, for common adjectives, associations 

are more likely to be paradigmatic (e.g. for HOT, 

associates such as COLD, WARM, and COOL 

more frequently occur than WOMEN, WEATHER, 

and the like), while uncommon adjectives are more 

syntagmatic (e.g. for ADMINISTRATIVE, associ-

ates such as DUTY, GOVERNMENT, and RULE 

are more often produced than SUPERVISORY, 

EXECUTIVE, and so on). What is more, most 

paradigmatic associates to adjectives are either 

synonymous with the stimulus (COLD COOL) or 

the opposite of the stimulus (COLD HOT). Com-

mon adjectives overwhelmingly have more anto-

nyms as their response, but relatively low-frequent 

adjectives have more synonym associations. 

A similar tendency is observed in our data, 

which included three types of grammatical class 

among the stimulus items, with nouns, verbs, and 

adjectives, covering 66.5%, 25.5%, and 8% of the 

stimulus set respectively. The different proportions 

of the word classes reflects their frequencies within 

the Yonsei corpora, i.e. among the 5,000 most fre-

quent words, there is a much larger number of 

nouns, compared to verbs and adjectives. By tag-

ging the responses with parts of speech data during 

the course of constructing the database, we can 

analyze the distributions of grammatical categories 

among the responses. The responses were over-

whelmingly nouns (78%), followed by adjectives 

(7%), proper nouns (4.5%) and verbs (4.4%) in 

descending order. Within the primary response list, 

the distributions of word class are not greatly dif-

ferent, with 79% nouns, 6.7% adjectives, 4.8% 

verbs, 3.9% proper nouns, and around 6% others. 

Corresponding to the grammatical class of the 

stimulus specifically, nouns are also the dominant 

responses. When considering just the primary re-

sponses, noun stimulus elicited mostly noun re-

sponses (80%), followed by adjectives (6%), 

proper nouns (5%), and verbs (3%); verb stimulus 

produced around 80% noun associates, 10% verbs 

and 4% adjectives; while for adjective stimulus, 

there were 70% noun responses, 19% adjectives, 

and 2% verbs. In short, we found a majority of 

noun noun, verb noun, and adjective noun com-

binations within the stimulus response relations. 

This demonstrates the association tendency for 

nouns to strongly elicit paradigmatic associations, 

as seen from the principal noun noun relations, 

while verbs and adjectives tend to yield more syn-

tagmatic associations, as seen from the major rela-

tions of verb noun and adjective noun. 

2.3 Network Analysis (1) 

30



Degrees:  Recently, a number of studies have ap-

plied graph theory approaches in investigating lin-

guistic knowledge resources. For instance, instead 

of word frequency based computations, Dorow, et 

al (2005) utilize graph clustering techniques as 

methods of detecting lexical ambiguity and of ac-

quiring semantic classes. Steyvers and Tenenbaum 

(2005) conducted a noteworthy study that exam-

ined the structural features of three semantic net-

works (free association norms of Nelson et al., 

Roget's thesaurus, and WordNet). By calculating a 

range of statistical features, including the average 

shortest paths, diameters, clustering coefficients, 

and degree distributions, they observed interesting 

similarities between three networks in terms of 

their scale-free patterns of connectivity and small-

world structures. Following their basic approach, 

we analyze the characteristics of the semantic net-

work representation of KorWA by calculating the 

statistical features of the graph coefficients, such as 

degree and degree distribution. 

The semantic network representation of the 

word association network is constructed by repre-

senting the words as nodes and associative pairing 

information for words as edges. The degree (D) of 

a node denotes the number of edges that a node has. 

An undirected graph is structured by the edges, 

while a directed graph is structured by arcs that 

include the associative direction. The numbers of 

incoming and outgoing arcs from a node are re-

ferred to as the in-degree and out-degree of a node, 

respectively. The sum of the in-degree and out-

degree values of a node is equal to its total degree. 

This concept of graph analysis allows us to 

categorize the total words in the data into three 

types; one being words only found in the stimulus 

set (S-type), one being words occurred as both 

stimulus and responses (SR-type), and the last be-

ing words only observed among the response set 

(R-type). The proportion of S-type, SR-type, and 

R-type words in the total word set corresponds to 

12.2% (1,568 words), 18.5% (2,374 words), and 

69.3% (8,901 words) respectively. Here, it is worth 

focusing on the SR-type of words. These are words 

selected as the most frequent ones through a large-

scale corpus covering various fields. At the same 

time, they also are produced by people in the free 

association task. This may indicate, in some sense, 

the high usability or commonness of those words. 

Indeed, the most frequent words in this data all 

belong to the SR-type. 

2.4 Network Analysis (2) 

Scale-free: The most frequent words belonging to 

the SR-type play the role of hubs in semantic net-

works made from word association data. These 

hubs can be represented as nodes that have not 

only outgoing links but also possess ingoing links, 

which leads us think of a scale-free graph, such as 

that incorporated within the Barabási-Albert (BA) 

model. It is widely known that Barabási and Albert 

(1999) have suggested that the degree distributions 

of scale-free network structures correspond to a 

power law, expressed as 
rddxP  !! )(  (where d 

stands for degree and is a small integer, such as 

2 or 3). This type of distribution is also known as 

Zipf's law, which describes the typical frequency 

distributions of words in a document and plots on a 

log scale as a falling diagonal stroke. The degree 

distribution of nodes in the KorWA network also 

exhibits this scale-free property, which has also 

been observed in word association data for differ-

ent languages. 

 

 
Figure 3. Degree distribution on log-log scales for the 

KorWA semantic network. P(k) is the probability that a 

node has k degrees in the network. 

   

However, we should stress the importance of 

network dynamics and of microscopically examin-

ing the ongoing process of data accumulation to 

determine whether the scale-freeness observed for 

word association data is derived from the same 

mechanism as the BA model. Rather than being 

static, networks are recognized as evolving over 

time, with the adding or pruning of nodes and 

edges (Barabási and Albert, 1999; Watts, 1999). 

Indeed, we can easily identify such networks in a 

number of areas, from the World Wide Web to the 

internet connections on a physical level, co-

authorships, friendships, and business transactions. 

31



According to the BA model, the probability that 

a node receives an additional link is proportional to 

its degree. The probability that a new vertex will 

be connected to a vertex (node) i  depends on the 
connectivity of that vertex. Barabási and Albert 

(1999) explain with this idea of preferential at-

tachment in terms of the scale-free property and 

the presence of hubs within the network. Networks 

as dynamical systems which grow over time and 

have topological properties produce dynamical 

behaviors as well. In particular with research on 

the diffusion of a new trend or technology or the 

spread of a disease and virus, the structural proper-

ties of the network have presented a new approach 

to understanding epidemical behaviors over a net-

work, including issues about why contagion occurs 

in certain cases, how it spreads, and what is the 

most efficient and effective way to prevent it. 

Many researchers have tried to address and analyze 

such behaviors with small-world models (Ball et 

al., 1997; Watts and Strogatz, 1998) and scale-free 

models (Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani, 2001). 

The semantic networks that we have examined 

to date have similar structural properties to many 

other networks. So, it is also possible to explain the 

scale-free feature of semantic networks in terms of 

preferential attachment? How can such dynamic 

behavior be interpreted for semantic networks? In 

the next section, we would like to briefly discuss 

those questions a little further. 

2.5 Network Analysis (3) 

Network Dynamics: It is a matter of fact that lan-

guage evolves; especially from a lexical perspec-

tive, where new vocabularies are generated and old 

senses sometimes disappear over time. However, 

tracing and observing such changes is rather diffi-

cult because such natural language evolution oc-

curs over long periods of time. When considering 

the evolution of semantic networks, therefore, we 

assume that the growth of a semantic network may 

correspond to the increases in the numbers of 

words (nodes) and semantic relations (edges) in as 

more data is added in the construction of the net-

work. Particularly, for our semantic networks 

which are built from word association data, the 

networks grow as more word association data is 

added. 

In this sense, we can attempt to observe the 

growth process for semantic networks here. To that 

aim, the KorWA network is particularly suitable, 

as it is constructed from KorWA data collected 

from two sessions that used exactly the same task. 

We may see how the network evolves by taking 

the sessions as two separate points in time. 

From the beginning, the KorWA network starts 

with the 3,951 nodes that correspond to the set of 

stimulus words. It cannot be called a network at 

this stage because there are no links between these 

nodes. Then, as the word associations are collected, 

a network starts to appear by adding edges between 

the initial nodes and new nodes corresponding to 

the association responses. When the first session of 

data collection was complete, we found that the 

initially disconnected 3,951 nodes forming a large, 

well-connected network, as presented in Table 1. 

 
Table 1. Growth of the KorWA semantic network. 

 
 

The number of nodes had increased to 9,054, 

and 13,669 edges were generated between them. 

8,641 nodes corresponding to 95% of the total 

nodes are connected to each other, being the larg-

est component in the network, but, at the same 

time, there were also 126 small partitions with 2 to 

3 nodes connected to each. The pseudo diameter, 

the longest distance, of the largest component is 18, 

which indicates that the nodes within it are well 

connected to each other. In this network, a node 

has three links on average and the distribution of 

degrees in the network shows a power law distribu-

tion (P(k)~K-  with a degree exponent !=2.42), as 

in Figure 3 above. 

Then, additional word associations were col-

lected for the same set of stimulus words in the 

same manner as in the first session. When the new 

data was added to the first network, we obtained a 

larger network, as described in Table 1. The net-

work grew by 12,844 nodes and 26,931 edges. 

Through this process, more than 99.7% of nodes 

(12,807) became interconnected, leaving on 37 

words as elements disconnected from the whole 

graph. Moreover, the pseudo diameter of the larg-

32



est component became smaller despite the increase 

in its size. The discrepancy in the degrees of words 

became larger than before, with a degree range 

from 1 to 198. 

 
Table 2.  Top 20 words with the highest degrees be-

fore and after growth of the KorWA network. 

    Before growth After growth 

(‘money’)/ 87 

(‘love’)/ 79 

(‘friend’)/ 56 

(‘human’)/ 48 

(‘water’)/ 48 

(‘dream’)/45 

(‘army’)/ 45 

(‘mind’)/ 44 

(‘house’)/ 43 

(‘tear’)/ 43 

(‘movie’)/39 

(‘study’)/39 

(‘eye/snow’)/ 36 

(‘book’)/ 35 

(‘alcohol’)/ 34 

(‘woman’)/ 34 

(‘myself’)/ 33 

(‘thing’)/ 32 

(‘car’)/ 32 

(‘family’)/ 32 

(‘money’)/198 

(‘love’)/ 146 

(‘friend’)/ 114 

(‘human’)/ 106 

(‘mind’)/ 85 

(‘woman’)/80 

(‘water’)/ 80 

(‘study’)/ 74 

(‘tear’)/ 73 

(‘myself’)/ 73 

(‘dream’)/ 70 

(‘army’)/ 69 

(‘house’)/ 69 

(‘alcohol’)/ 69 

(‘book’)/ 68 

(‘eye/snow’)/ 65 

(‘fight’)/64 

(‘war’)/ 64 

(‘movie’)/ 63 

(‘school’)/ 63 

Note. The number after the slash indicates the degree for 

the word. 

 

Over time (as reflected in the first and second 

sessions of data collection), 3,790 nodes and 

13,262 edges newly appeared in the KorWA net-

work. Through this growth, the network became 

much more interconnected, as clearly evidenced by 

the size of the largest component and the pseudo 

diameter. What is particularly salient is the number 

of links that a word has through the growth process. 

Interestingly, regardless of the double increase in 

the connections within the network, around 60% of 

the total nodes were still poorly connected, having 

a degree of only 1 or 2. On the other hand, some of 

nodes that already had plenty of links became 

much richer, becoming linked to even more other 

nodes; with the average degree for 1% of the total 

nodes being over 60. Table 2 lists the top 20 words 

in terms of highest degree values before and after 

growth. The first four words do not change in order, 

while the shifts for the other top items are not so 

significant. However, for most of these items, the 

degree value roughly doubled. 

From these observations, we can assume that 

there are some words that attract more links from 

other nodes, while most of these other words have 

just a few connections. This phenomenon appears 

even more conspicuously through the growth proc-

ess. The scale-free nature of semantic networks 

also seems to reflect a kind of preferential attach-

ment. What kinds of words always attract links 

from new nodes? As suggested already, these seem 

to be basic concept words, closely related to daily 

life and culture, and these hubs form a kind of 

bridge between several different conceptual do-

mains. 

Such words contributing to the connectivity of 

the network are central to the dynamic behavior of 

across the networks, and are likely to be key con-

cept words for understanding a culture and for 

learning language within the contexts of semantic 

networks. Further study and exploration in the 

structural and dynamic characteristics within se-

mantic networks may open up a new approach to 

semantics, cultural studies, and language learning 

from a cognitive perspective. 

   

3 Conclusion and Further study 

This paper has described our dataset to represent 

human language in the form of a network. With 

much interest in language as a communication and 

thinking tool, we have sought to build a semantic 

network representing lexical knowledge and the 

conceptual relations between words. To that aim, 

word association data is particularly suitable in 

terms of its data format and its abundant and useful 

content. We presented a project to collect Korean 

word association norms given the high utility and 

urgent need of data of this kind. We have detailed 

the project from the design of free association ex-

periment to the basic analysis of the data collected. 

The application of the word association data to 

computational neurolinguistics is an issue for our 

future work. We believe that our study could po-

tentially represent a breakthrough for this research 

field. The methods of Mitchell et al. (2008), for 

example, suggest to us strong connections between 

neural activation data and lexical co-occurrence 

information, obtained from text corpora which 

plays a role of intermediating within linguistics 

33



embodiment theory with a sensory-motor basis and 

amodal theory with computational models. Ac-

cording to Mitchell et al., the techniques of natural 

language processing combined with neural linguis-

tics can enable us to predict the patterns of neural 

activation for word stimuli for which fMRI data 

are not yet available. In short, the neural associa-

tions within firing patterns turn out to be correlated 

with word associations within co-occurrence pat-

terns. 

However, the similarity coefficient or the dis-

tance between any two words might be computed 

not only from a set of documents but also from 

graphic representations of associative concepts, 

such as the one presented in this paper. If it is true 

that a word can be represented not only by a three-

dimensional array of cerebral activation, but also in 

terms of the lexical relatedness that is incorporated 

as a linear combination of these patterns, it may 

not be an overstatement to say that there might be a 

structural homology between natural neural net-

works in the brain and semantic networks built 

from word association norms. This kind of meta-

network perspective within cognitive science has 

become all the more important because attempts to 

fill the gaps in the modeling of neural pathways are 

increasingly attracting wide interest. Sporns et al. 

(2004), for instance, have tried to apply the con-

ceptual methods of complex networks, such as 

small word-scale free, to cortical networks and to 

the more dynamic, functional and effective con-

nectivity patterns that underlie human cognition. 

Similarly, Stam and Reijneveld (2007) have intro-

duced a graph analysis applied to multi-channel 

recordings of brain activity, by setting up vertices 

at the anatomical loci within a neural circuit and 

linking some that elicit high correlation patterns to 

the same stimulus. Also within the experiment 

paradigms used by Mitchell et al, some techniques 

for constructing a network model could be effec-

tive for the distributional representation of cortical 

responses handled at the same level as meaning 

proximity, even though Mitchell et al. treated each 

voxel (volumetric pixel value in a 3-dimensional 

regular grid) independently. If such models of net-

work settings could be applied to images of neural 

activation across all the voxels for a set of stimulus 

nouns, it is possible to assume, by a reverse proc-

ess of parameter estimation, the existence of hid-

den semantic layers composed of unknown 

semantic features. These intermediate factors could 

be compared with real vocabulary data, such as 

basic verbs (as in the experiment conducted by 

Mitchell et al.) taking the stimulus nouns as sub-

jects or targets. 

Moreover, the merits of introducing graph 

analysis techniques to computational neurolinguis-

tics could possibly be found in the evolutionary 

dynamics of networks, to the extent that the degree 

of word nodes (or, more simply, their frequencies) 

could be weighted for the neural connectivity de-

duced from fMRI responses. The data formats of 

neural activation patterns could then assimilate 

diachronic data to represent how a network grows 

over time around the key concepts or hub words, in 

accordance with the learning processes of particu-

lar individuals. Future research from this perspec-

tive could also support the high accuracy of similar 

experiments regardless of distributional bias in 

word frequencies. Briefly, semantic networks con-

structed from word association data could convey 

the lexical co-occurrence of words within docu-

ments to a visual map of the human brain reacting 

to those words. 

34



References  

D. Mollison, F. Ball, and G. Scalia-Tomba. 1997. Epi-
demics with two levels of mixing, Annals of Applied 

Probability 7, pp. 46-89. 

A.-L. Barabási, and R. Albert. October 15, 1999. Emer-

gence of scaling in random networks. Science, 
286:509-512. 

P. Cramer. 1968. Word association. New York and 
London: Academic Press. 

J. Deese. 1962. "Form class and the determinants of 
association", Journal of verbal learning and verbal 

behavior, vol. 1, pp. 79-84. 

B. Dorow, D. Sergi, D. Widdows, E. Moses, K. Ling, 

and J. Eckmann. 2005. "Using Curvature and 
Markov Clustering in Graphs for Lexical Acquisition 

and Word Sense Discrimination", in MEANING-
2005, 2nd Workshop organized by the MEANING 

Project. 

F. Galton. 1880. "Psychometric experiments", Brain 2, 

pp. 149-162. 

S. Saporta, 1955. Linguistic structure as a factor and as 

a measure in word association, in J. J. Jenkins (Ed.), 
Associative process in verbal behavior: A Report of 

Minnesota Conference, Minneapolis: University of 

Minnesota. 

T. Joyce. 2005. Lexical association network maps for 
basic Japanese vocabulary, in Words in Asia cultural 

contexts, V. B. Y. Ooi, A. Pakir, I. Talib, L. Tan, P. 

K. W. Tan, and Y. Y. Tan (Eds.). Singapore: Na-

tional University of Singapore, pp. 114-120. 

G. R. Kiss. 1968. Words associations and networks, 

Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 

vol.7, pp. 707-13. 

Y. J. Lee. 1970. Comparative studies on word associa-
tions by male and female university students: based 

on adjectives and color-referring words (translated 

from     :     

  ),    

9 .  344. 

C. L. McEvoy and D. L. Nelson. 1982. Category name 

and instance norms for 106 categories of various 
sizes, American Journal of Psychology 95, pp. 581-

634. 

H. Akama, J. Jung, M. Miyake, and T. Joyce. 2007.  

Hierarchical Structure in Semantic Networks of 
Japanese Word Associations, PACLIC21 (Pacific 

Asia Conference on Language, Information, and 

Computation-2007), pp.321-328. 

A. Carlson, K. Chang, M. Just, R. Mason, S. Shinkareva, 

T. Mitchell, and V. Malave. 2008. Predicting human 

brain activity associated with the meanings of nouns. 
Science, 320:1191–1195. 

C. L. McEvoy and D. L. Nelson. 2005. Implicitly acti-
vated memories: The missing links of remembering, 

In  Human learning and memory: Advances in theory 
and application, C. Izawa and N. Ohta (Eds.). Mah-

wah, NJ and London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, , 

pp 177-198. 

J. Archibald, J. Rees-Miller, M. Aronoff, and W. 

O'Grady. 2005. Contemporary Linguistics: An intro-

duction, 5th ed. Boston & New York: Bedford/St. 
Martin's. 

J. Okamoto and S. Ishizaki. 2001. "Construction of 
associative concept dictionary with distance 

information, and comparison with electronic concept 

dictionary (translated from 

)", , vol. 8, 

pp. 37-54. 

A. Vespignani, and R. Pastor-Satorras. 2001. Epidemic 

spreading in scale-free networks, Physical Review 
Letter. 86. pp. 3200-3203. 

H. S. Shin. 1998. "Korean vocabulary teaching and 

semantic dictionary (translated from  

 )", vol. 9, no.2, 

pp. 85-104. 

G. H. Jin, N. J. Nam, and S. G. Seo. 1998. "Determina-

tion of basic vocabulary for Korean language educa-
tion as a foreign language (translated from 

     

)", 1st year of annual report (December 14, 

1998), Internationalization of Korean language pro-

motion committee, Ministry of Culture, Sports, and 

Tourism. 

C. C. Hilgetag, D. R. Chialvo, M. Kaiser, and O. Sporns. 

9 September 2004. "Organization, development and 
function of complex brain networks", TRENDS in 

Cognitive Sciences Vol.8 No. 

C. J. Stam, J. C. Reijneveld. 2007. "Graph theoretical 

analysis of complex networks in the brain". Non-
linear Biomedical Physics. 

J. B. Tenenbaum and M. Steyvers. 2005. “The large-
scale Structure of Semantic Networks: Statistical 

Analysis and a Model of Semantic Growth”, Cogni-
tive Science 29, pp.41-78. 

D. J. Watts and S. Strogatz. June 1998. "Collective dy-
namics of 'small-world' networks". Nature 393, 

pp.440–442. 

35


