










































Towards Improving the Naturalness of Social Conversations with Dialogue Systems


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 91–94,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Improving the Naturalness of
Social Conversations with Dialogue Systems

Matthew Marge, João Miranda, Alan W Black, Alexander I. Rudnicky
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{mrmarge,jmiranda,awb,air}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We describe an approach to improving
the naturalness of a social dialogue sys-
tem, Talkie, by adding disfluencies and
other content-independent enhancements
to synthesized conversations. We investi-
gated whether listeners perceive conversa-
tions with these improvements as natural
(i.e., human-like) as human-human con-
versations. We also assessed their ability
to correctly identify these conversations as
between humans or computers. We find
that these enhancements can improve the
perceived naturalness of conversations for
observers “overhearing” the dialogues.

1 Introduction

An enduring problem in spoken dialogue systems
research is how to make conversations between
humans and computers approach the naturalness
of human-human conversations. Although this
has been addressed in several goal-oriented dia-
logue systems (e.g., for tutoring, question answer-
ing, etc.), social dialogue systems (i.e., non-task-
oriented) have not significantly advanced beyond
so-called “chatbots”. Proper social dialogue sys-
tems (Bickmore and Cassell, 2004; Higuchi et
al., 2002) would be able to conduct open con-
versations, without being restricted to particular
domains. Such systems would find use in many
environments (e.g., human-robot interaction, en-
tertainment technology).

This paper presents an approach to improving a
social dialogue system capable of chatting about
the news by adding content-independent enhance-
ments to speech. We hypothesize that enhance-
ments such as explicit acknowledgments (e.g.,
right, so, well) and disfluencies can make human-
computer conversations sound indistinguishable
from those between two humans.

Enhancements to synthesized speech have been
found to influence perception of a synthetic
voice’s hesitation (Carlson et al., 2006) and per-
sonality (Nass and Lee, 2001). Andersson et
al. (2010) used machine learning techniques to
determine where to include conversational phe-
nomena to improve synthesized speech. Adell et
al. (2007) developed methods for inserting filled
pauses into synthesized speech that listeners found
more natural. In these studies, human judges com-
pared utterances in isolation with and without im-
provements. In our study, we focus on a holistic
evaluation of naturalness in dialogues and ask ob-
servers to directly assess the naturalness of con-
versations that they “overhear”.

2 The Talkie System

Talkie is a spoken dialogue system capable of hav-
ing open conversations about recent topics in the
news. This system was developed for a dialogue
systems course (Lim et al., 2009). Interaction
is intended to be unstructured and free-flowing,
much like social conversations. Talkie initiates a
conversation by mentioning a recent news head-
line and invites the user to comment on it.

The system uses a database of news topics and
human-written comments from the “most blogged
about articles” of the New York Times (NYT)1.
Comments are divided into single sentences to ap-
proximate the length of a spoken response. Given
a user’s utterance (e.g., keywords related to the
topic), Talkie responds with the comment that
most closely resembles that utterance. Talkie may
access any comment related to the topic under dis-
cussion (without repetition). The user may choose
to switch to a different topic at any time (at which
point Talkie will propose a different topic from its
set).

1http://www.nytimes.com/gst/mostblogged.html
Follow links to each article’s comment section.

91



3 Study

We performed a study to determine if the per-
ceived naturalness of conversations could be im-
proved by using heuristic enhancements to speech
output. Participants “overheard” conversations
(similar to Walker et al. (2004)). Originally typed
interactions, the conversations were later synthe-
sized into speech using the Flite speech synthesis
engine (Black and Lenzo, 2001). For distinctive-
ness, conversations were between one male voice
(rms) and one female voice (slt). The voices were
generated using the CLUSTERGEN statistical para-
metric synthesizer (Black, 2006). All conversa-
tions began with the female voice.

3.1 Dialogue Content
We considered four different conversation types:
(1 & 2) between a human and Talkie (human-
computer and computer-human depending on the
first speaker), (3) between two humans on a
topic in Talkie’s database (human-human), and
(4) between two instances of Talkie (computer-
computer). The human-computer and computer-
human conditions differed from each other by
one utterance; that is, one was a shifted version
of the other by one dialogue turn. The human-
computer conversations were collected from two
people (one native English speaker, one native
Portuguese speaker) interacting with Talkie on
separate occasions. For human-human conversa-
tions, Talkie proposed a topic for discussion. Each
conversation contained ten turns of dialogue. To
remove any potential effects from the start and end
content of the conversations, we selected the mid-
dle three turns for synthesis. Each conversation
type had five conversations, each about one of five
recent headlines (as of May 2010).

3.2 Heuristic Enhancements
We defined a set of rules that added phenomena
observed in human-human spoken conversations.
These included filled pauses, word repetitions, si-
lences, and explicit acknowledgments. Conversa-
tions in this study were enhanced manually by fol-
lowing the set of rules described in Figure 1; an
example is shown in Figure 2.

3.3 Participants and Task
Eighty participants were recruited from Ama-
zon’s Mechanical Turk2 (MTurk) for this between-

2http://www.mturk.com

Category I - Explicit Acknolwedgements

• inserted sparingly at the beginning of sentences
when grammatical (e.g., well, so, you know,
right).

Category II - Filled pauses / repetitions

• no more than three per dialogue
• no more than two in any one sentence
• placed repetitions in places where speaker may

have hesitation (e.g., after ”I think...”)
• utterances may have a filled pause or a repetition

followed by a filled pause.

Category III - Silences

• added sparingly after filled pauses.

Figure 1: Heuristics used for adding enhance-
ments to synthesized dialogue.

subjects study. Only workers with a 95% HIT (hu-
man intelligence task) approval rating could par-
ticipate. There were three experimental dimen-
sions that we counterbalanced across participants:
the four conversation “types” described in Section
3.1, the order of the five topics, and the presence
or absence of heuristic enhancements to the syn-
thesized speech that participants heard. Each par-
ticipant listened to every topic such that exactly
five participants heard each condition.

Participants made two judgments per conversa-
tion: rating the “naturalness” of a conversation
based on a four-point Likert scale and ranking
the conversant identities (i.e., as two humans, two
computers, or a computer and a human) from most
to least confident. We used the non-parametric
Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance to
determine statistically significant differences in
naturalness responses across groups (naturalness
being the dependent measure).

4 Results

We analyzed two measures: (1) naturalness rat-
ings of conversations, and (2) frequencies from
highest-rank to lowest-rank of who the participant
believed to be the speakers in each conversation.
We found no statistically significant ordering ef-
fects or biases due to the topic of conversation.

4.1 Speaker Type Condition Results

Results for naturalness scores are summarized in
Figure 3. As expected, mean naturalness was
highest for the human-human condition and lowest
for the computer-computer condition. We found

92



Human-computer conversation (original, enhancements)

h: Well, that sounds ridiculous, you get taxed proportionally to your paycheck.
c: So, let them retire on social security payments, then you will see changes with <uh> with an overabundance of funds.
h: I don’t see how this would be possible.
c: You know, you don’t have the money yet, and you have just increased your debt by 2.5 trillion dollars.
h: Exactly why should we be raising taxes on the rich?
c: With our current politics of division, I <umm> worry we have the will or determination to address these issues.

Figure 2: Example conversation with heuristic enhancements marked in bold.

1.9

2.5

2.3

2.7

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

1.9

2.5

2.3

2.7

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

cc ch hc hh

Figure 3: Naturalness across the speaker type con-
dition.

no statistically significant difference in naturalness
ratings for the computer-human condition com-
pared to the human-computer condition (H(1) =
2.94; p = 0.09). Also, the computer-computer
condition was significantly different from all other
conditions, suggesting that conversation flow is an
important factor in determining the naturalness of
a conversation (H(3) = 42.49, p < 0.05).

People rated conversations involving a com-
puter and a human similarly to human-human con-
versations (without enhancements). There were
no statistically significant differences between the
three conditions cc, ch, and hc (H(2) = 5.36, p =
0.06). However, a trend indicated that hc natural-
ness ratings differed from those of the ch and hh
conditions. Conversations from the hc condition
had much lower (18%) mean naturalness ratings
compared to their ch counterparts, even though
they were nearly equivalent in content.

4.2 Heuristic Enhancements Results

There were significant differences in naturalness
ratings when heuristic enhancements were present
(H(1) = 17.49, p < 0.05). Figure 4 shows that
the perceived naturalness was on average higher
with heuristic enhancements. Overall, mean natu-
ralness improved by 20%. This result agrees with

findings from Andersson et al. (2010).
Computer-computer conversations had the

highest relative improvement (42%) in mean nat-
uralness. Naturalness ratings were significantly
different when comparing these conversations
with and without enhancements (H(1) = 11.77, p
< 0.05). Content-free conversational phenomena
appear to compensate for the lack of logical flow
in these conversations. According to Figure 5,
after enhancements people are no better than
chance at correctly determining the speakers in
a computer-computer conversation. Thus the
heuristic enhancements clearly affect naturalness
judgments.

Even the naturalness of conversations with good
logical flow can improve with heuristic adjust-
ments; there was a 26% relative improvement in
the mean naturalness of human-human conver-
sations. Participant ratings of naturalness were
again significantly different (H(1) = 12.45, p <
0.05). Note that these conversations were origi-
nally typed dialogue. As such, they did not capture
turn-taking properties present in conversational
speech. When enhanced with conversational phe-
nomena, they more closely resembled natural spo-
ken conversations. As shown in Figure 5, people
are more likely than chance to correctly identify
two humans as being the participants in the di-
alogue after these enhancements were applied to
speech.

Conversations with one computer and one hu-
man also benefited from heuristic enhancements.
Improvements in naturalness were marginal, how-
ever. Naturalness scores in the hc condition im-
proved by 16%, but this improvement was only
a trend (H(1) = 3.66, p = 0.06). Improvement
was negligible in the ch condition. Participants
selected the correct speakers in human-computer
dialogues no better than random. We note that
participants tended to avoid ranking conversations
as “human & computer” with confidence (i.e., the
highest rank). A significant majority (267 out of
400) of second-rank selections were “human &
computer.” Participants tended to order conditions

93



1.5

2.5

2.1

2.4

2.2

2.5
2.4

3.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

1.5

2.5

2.1

2.4

2.2

2.5
2.4

3.0

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

cc ch hc hh

no_enhance all_enhance

Figure 4: Mean naturalness across enhancement
conditions.

66.0%

34.0%

16.0%

30.0%30.0%

16.0%

44.0%

56.0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70% 66.0%

34.0%

16.0%

30.0%30.0%

16.0%

44.0%

56.0%

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

cc ch hc hh

no_enhance all_enhance

Figure 5: Percentage of participants’ selections of
members of the conversation that were correct.

from all human to all computer or vice-versa.

5 Conclusions

We have shown that content-independent heuris-
tics can be used to improve the perceived natural-
ness of conversations. Our conversations sampled
a variety of interactions using Talkie, a social di-
alogue system that converses about recent news
headlines. An experiment examined the factors
that could influence how external judges rate the
naturalness of these conversations.

We found that without enhancements, people
rated conversations involving a human and a com-
puter similarly to conversations involving two hu-
mans. Adding heuristic enhancements produced
different results, depending on the conversation
type: computer-computer and human-human con-
versations had the best gain in naturalness scores.
Though it remains to be seen if people are always
influenced by such enhancements, they are clearly
useful for improving the naturalness of human-

computer dialogues.
Future work will involve developing methods to

automatically inject enhancements into the synthe-
sized speech output produced by Talkie, as well
as determining whether other types of systems can
benefit from these techniques.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Aasish Pappu, Jose-Pablo
Gonzales Brenes, Long Qin, and Daniel Lim for
developing the Talkie dialogue system.

References
J. Adell, A. Bonafonte, and D. Escudero. Filled pauses

in speech synthesis: Towards conversational speech.
In TSD’07, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 2007.

S. Andersson, K. Georgila, D. Traum, M. Aylett, and
R.A.J. Clark. Prediction and realisation of con-
versational characteristics by utilising spontaneous
speech for unit selection. In the 5th International
Conference on Speech Prosody, Chicago, Illinois,
USA, 2010.

T. Bickmore and J. Cassell. Social Dialogue with Em-
bodied Conversational Agents. J. van Kuppevelt, L.
Dybkjaer, and N. Bernsen (eds.), Natural, Intelligent
and Effective Interaction with Multimodal Dialogue
Systems. New York: Kluwer Academic.

A. Black. CLUSTERGEN: A Statistical Parametric
Synthesizer using Trajectory Modeling. In Inter-
speech’06 - ICSLP, Pittsburgh, PA, 2006.

A. Black and K. Lenzo. Flite: a small fast run-time
synthesis engine. In ISCA 4th Speech Synthesis
Workshop, Scotland, 2001.

R. Carlson and K. Gustafson and E. Strangert. Cues for
Hesitation in Speech Synthesis. In Interspeech’06 -
ICSLP, Pittsburgh, PA, 2006.

S. Higuchi, R. Rzepka, and K. Araki. A casual conver-
sation system using modality and word associations
retrieved from the web. In EMNLP’08. Honolulu,
Hawaii, 2008.

D. Lim, A. Pappu, J. Gonzales-Brenes, and L. Qin.
The Talkie Spoken Dialogue System. Unpublished
manuscript, Carnegie Mellon Univeristy, 2009.

C. Nass and K. M. Lee. Does computer-synthesized
speech manifest personality? Experimental tests of
recognition, similarity-attraction, and consistency-
attraction. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied 7 (2001) 171-181.

M. A. Walker, S. J. Whittaker, A. Stent, P. Maloor, J.
Moore, M. Johnston, G. Vasireddy. Generation and
evaluation of user tailored responses in multimodal
dialogue. Cognitive Sci. 28 (2004) 811-840.

94


