










































Discourse Relation Configurations in Turkish and an Annotation Environment


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 202–206,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Discourse Relation Configurations in Turkish
and an Annotation Environment

Berfin Aktaş∗ and Cem Bozsahin∗ † and Deniz Zeyrek∗ ‡
∗ Informatics Institute, † Computer Eng. and ‡ Foreign Language Education Dept.

Middle East Technical University, Ankara Turkey 06531
berfinaktas@gmail.com {bozsahin,dezeyrek}@metu.edu.tr

Abstract
In this paper, we describe an annotation
environment developed for the marking of
discourse structures in Turkish, and the
kinds of discourse relation configurations
that led to its design.

1 Introduction

The property that distinguishes a discourse from a
set of arbitrary sentences is defined as coherence
(Halliday and Hasan, 1976). Coherence is estab-
lished by the relations between the units of dis-
course.

Systematic analysis of coherence requires an
annotated corpus in which coherence relations are
encoded. Turkish Discourse Bank Project (TDB)
aims to produce a large-scale discourse level an-
notation resource for Turkish (Zeyrek and Weber,
2008). The TDB follows the annotation scheme of
the PDTB (Miltsakaki et al, 2004). The lexicalized
approach adopted in the TDB assumes that dis-
course relations are set up by lexical items called
discourse connectives. Connectives are consid-
ered as discourse level predicates which take ex-
actly two arguments. The arguments are ab-
stract objects like propositions, facts, events, etc.
(Asher, 1993). They can be linked either by ex-
plicitly realized connectives or by implicit ones
recognized by an inferential process. We anno-
tate explicit connectives; implicit connectives are
future work. We use the naming convention of the
PDTB. Conn stands for the connective, Arg1 and
Arg2 for the first and the second argument, respec-
tively. Conn, Arg1 and Arg2 are assumed to be
required components of discourse relations. Sup-
plementary materials which are relevant to but not
necessary for the interpretation are also annotated.

Our main data is METU Turkish Corpus(MTC)
(Say et al, 2002). MTC is a written source of Turk-
ish with approximately 2 million words. The orig-
inal MTC files include informative tags, such as

the author of the text, the paragraph boundaries in
the text, etc. We removed these tags to obtain raw
text files and set the character encoding of the files
to “UTF-8”. These conversions are useful for pro-
gramming purposes such as visualizing the data in
different platforms and the use of third-party li-
braries.

We developed an annotation environment to
mark up the discourse relations, which we call
DATT (Discourse Annotation Tool for Turkish).
DATT produces XML files as annotation data
which are generated by the implementation of a
stand-off annotation methodology. We present in
§2 the data from Turkish discourse, which forced
us to use stand-off annotation instead of in-line
markup. The key aspect is potential crossing of
the markup links. However, stand-off annotation
is also advantageous for separate licensing. We
present the design of data structure and the func-
tionality of the tool in §3. We report some prelim-
inary results in the conclusion.

2 Dependency analysis of discourse
relations

The TDB has no a priori assumption on how the
predicates and arguments are placed. We need to
take into account potential cases to be able to han-
dle overlappings and crossings among relations.
We use the terminology proposed by Lee et al
(2006), and follow their convention for naming the
variations of structures we came across.

We looked at the connective tokens placed close
to each other, and made an initial investigation to
reveal how these predicates and their arguments
are located in the text. Preliminary analysis of the
data indicates that the components of two relations
are placed in 7 different ways, two of which are
special to Turkish (§2.5; §2.6). This section is de-
voted to the descriptions of observed patterns with

202



representative examples.1

In the examples the connective (Conn) is
underlined, Arg1 is in italics and Arg2 is in bold-
face. A connective’s relative order with respect
to its own arguments is not shown in the graphi-
cal templates. It is made explicit in the subsequent
examples.

2.1 Independent relations
The predicate-argument structure of the connec-
tives are independent from each other (i.e., there
is no overlap between the arguments of different
connectives.) The template is (1). An example is
provided in (2).

(1)

(2) Akıntıya kapılıp umulmadık bir geceyi
bölüştü benimle ve bu kadarla kalsın
istedi belki. Eda açısından olayın yorumu
bu kadar yalın olmalı. Ama eğer böyleyse
benim için yorumlanması olanaksız bir
düşten başka kalan yok geriye şimdi.
She was drifted with a current and shared an
unexpected night with me and perhaps she
wanted to keep it this much only. From
the perspective of Eda, the interpretation of
the incident should be that simple. But, if this
is the case, now there is nothing left be-
hind for me but a dream impossible to in-
terpret.

In (2), the relation set up by Ama is fully preceded
by the relation set up by ve. There is no overlap
between the argument spans of the connectives ve
and Ama.

2.2 Full embedding
The text span of a relation constitutes an argument
of another connective (3). An example is provided
in (4).

(3)

(4)a. [..] madem yanlış bir yerde olduğumuzu
düşünüyoruz da doğru denen yere asla
varamayacağımızı biliyoruz , senin gibi
biri nasıl böyle bir soru sorar ,[..]

1All data in this paper are taken from MTC, unless stated
otherwise. More examples can be found in Aktaş (2008).

b. [..] madem yanlış bir yerde olduğumuzu
düşünüyoruz da doğru denen yere asla
varamayacağımızı biliyoruz , senin gibi biri
nasıl böyle bir soru sorar,[..]

[..] if we think that we are in a wrong place,
and we know that we will never never reach
the right place; how come a person like you
ask such a question? [..]

In (4), the span of the relation headed by da con-
stitutes the Arg2 of the connective madem.

2.3 Shared argument
Two different connectives can share the same ar-
gument (5).

(5)

In some situations, different connectives can share
both of their arguments as in the case of (6):

(6) Dedektif romanı içinden çıkılmaz gibi görü-
nen esrarlı bir cinayetin çözümünü sunduğu
için, her şeyden önce mantığa güveni ve
inancı dile getiren bir anlatı türüdür ve
bundan ötürü de burjuva rasyonelliğinin
edebiyattaki özü haline gelmiştir.

Unraveling the solution to a seemingly intri-
cate murder mystery, the detective novel is a
narrative genre which primarily gives voice
to the faith and trust in reason and being so,
it has become the epitome of bourgeois ra-
tionality in the literature.

2.4 Properly contained argument
The argument span of one connective encapsu-
lates the argument of another connective plus more
text (7).

(7)

An example is provided in (8), where Arg2 of ve
properly contains Arg1 of Tersine.

(8)a. Kapıdan girdi ve söyler misin, hiç etkilen-
medin mi yazdıklarından?, dedi. Tersine,
çok etkilendim.

b. Kapıdan girdi ve söyler misin, hiç etkilen-
medin mi yazdıklarından?, dedi. Tersine,
çok etkilendim.

203



S/he entered through the door and said “Tell
me, are you not touched at all by what s/he
wrote?”. On the contrary, I am very much
affected.

2.5 Properly contained relation

The argument span of one connective covers the
predicate-argument structure of another connec-
tive and more text (9), as exemplified in (10).

(9)

(10)a. Burada bizce bir ifade bozukluğu veya çe-
viri yanlışı bahis konusu olabilir, çünkü el-
biseler sanki giyildiği sürece ve yıpran-
mamışken yıkanamaz, fakat daha sonra
yıkanabilirmiş gibi bir anlam taşımak-
tadır.

b. Burada bizce bir ifade bozukluğu veya çe-
viri yanlışı bahis konusu olabilir, çünkü
elbiseler sanki giyildiği sürece ve yıpran-
mamışken yıkanamaz, fakat daha sonra
yıkanabilirmiş gibi bir anlam taşımaktadır.

Here a mistake of expression or mistransla-
tion might be the case, because the meaning
is as if the clothes cannot be washed as long
as they are used and not worn out, but can
be washed later.

In (10), the second argument of çünkü covers the
whole relation headed by fakat and the text “gibi
bir anlam taşımaktadır”, which is not part of it.

2.6 Nested relations

A relation is nested inside the span of another re-
lation (11).

(11)

In (12), the relation headed by da is properly
nested between the connective ve and its first ar-
gument.

(12) Büyük bir masada günlerce, gecelerce otu-
rup konuşacağız - konuşmayı unuttum diy-
orum da gülüyorlar bana - ve biriniz
kalkıp şiir okuyacak.

We will sit and talk around a big table for
days and nights - I say I have forgotten how
to speak and they laugh at me - and one of
you will stand up and recite poetry.

2.7 Pure crossing
The dependency structure of a relation interleaves
with the arguments, or the connective of another
relation (13), as exemplified in (14).

(13)

(14)a. (Constructed) Kitabı okumaya başladım :
Okullar çoktan açılmıştı. Ardından kapının
çaldığını duydum ama yerimden kalk-
madan okumaya devam ettim: Ama bu
okula henüz öğretmen atanmamıştı.

b. Kitabı okumaya başladım Okullar çoktan
açılmıştı. Ardından kapının çaldığını duy-
dum ama yerimden kalkmadan okumaya de-
vam ettim: Ama bu okula henüz öğretmen
atanmamıştı.

I started to read the book. The schools had
long been opened. Then, I heard the door
bell ring but I continued reading without
getting up: But a teacher had not been ap-
pointed to this school yet.

3 The tool

DATT is an XML-based infrastructure for text an-
notation. It aims to produce searchable and track-
able data. An initial investigation of connective
and argument locations revealed that there is ar-
gument sharing of various sorts, and nested and
crossing relations in Turkish discourse. The ex-
istence of such constructions lead us to use a
stand-off annotation rather than an in-line method.
These dependencies are violations of tree struc-
ture required by XML. Using the OCCURS fea-
ture of SGML for this purpose would lead to a less
portable markup tool.

3.1 Data representation
In stand-off markup, annotations are stored sepa-
rate from data. Since the base file is not modified
during annotation, it is guaranteed that all the an-
notators are dealing with the same version of the
data. The text spans of dependency constructions
are represented in terms of character offsets from

204



the beginning of the text file. This is a highly error-
prone way of storing annotation data. If there is a
shift in the character indexes in the original text
file, previously annotated data will be meaning-
less. To compensate for this, we keep the text
spans of annotations for recovery purposes.

Annotation files are well-formed XML files.
One can easily add new features to the annota-
tions. XML facilities available as online sources
such as the libraries for search and post-processing
reduce the implementation effort of adding new
features.

3.2 Search functionality

In the TDB, the annotation process is organized
according to connective types and their tokens.
The connective to be annotated is identified, and
all the relations which are set up by the instances
of that connective are marked. Therefore it is im-
portant to be able to find all the instances of a spe-
cific connective in the entire data source. DATT
has a search functionality which walks through all
resource files and shows the annotator which files
have the token. We used “Apache Lucene Search
Library” for this functionality.

Two distinguishing characteristics of Turkish,
the vowel harmony and voicing, motivated us to
enhance the search facilities by adding support for
allomorphy. In Turkish, suffixes may have many
different forms. The ability to search on these
forms is crucial if connectives are attached to the
inflected forms of words, which is very frequently
the case. For instance, the “-dık”(the factive nom-
inal) suffix has eight allomorphs (i.e. -dık, -dik,
-duk, -dük, -tık, -tik, -tuk, -tük) depending on the
phonological environment.

In Turkish discourse, the meaning of a connec-
tive may change according to the inflectional cate-
gory of the word that precedes it. For example, the
word just before the connective“için” can be in-
flected with “-dık” and “-mak”(the infinitive) suf-
fixes. With “-dık” the connective bears the mean-
ing of causal “since”, while in the other case, the
connective has the meaning of “so as to”(Zeyrek,
Webber, 2008). Because of this semantic differ-
ence, it will be important for the annotator to clus-
ter the instances of a connective token preceded by
all the forms of a certain inflectional suffix in one
search. DATT provides this opportunity with the
allomorph search support.

In Turkish, connectives can be inflected. For ex-

ample, the connective “dolayısıyla” (due to that)
is the inflected form of “dolayı”(due to). The sup-
port for regular expression search is also added to
DATT to retrieve the inflected forms of the same
connective.

3.3 The user interface
The user interface of DATT is expected to allow
the marking of dependency hierarchies mentioned
in Section 2 in a user-friendly way. the TDB an-
notation requires at least three components, which
are Arg1, Conn and Arg2. In DATT, in order to
guide the annotator, we enforce the labeling of
these mandatory components, while marking of
the supplementary material is optional.

Another feature of DATT is the ability to mark
discontiguous text spans as a unique relation,
which is attested in Turkish discourse (15). Its
connective-argument structure is shown below.
The Arg1 of the connective -erek is interleaved
with the second argument Arg2.

(15) Yürü lan, dedi Katana, Ramiz’i kolundan
çekerek, Miskoye korkuyo!
“Hey you, move” said Katana, while drag-
ging Ramiz by the arm, “Miskoye is freaked
out.”

Conn Arg1 Arg2
-erek Yürü ... Kat$ 5, Mis$ korkuyo Ram$ ... çekerek

4 Conclusion

We adopt a lexical approach to discourse annota-
tion. Connectives are words, and they take two
text spans as arguments. An exploration of these
structures shows that there is argument-sharing
and overlap among relations. We are considering
automatic detection of relation types for an ap-
praisal of discourse relation distribution. For the
time being, DATT has search support for allomor-
phy and regular expressions as an aid to finding
the connectives.

Approximately 60 connective types and 100 to-
kens have been determined so far in the annotation
process, using 3 annotators. 7,000 relation tokens
headed by the connectives have been annotated us-
ing DATT, spanning approximately 300,000-word
text. Work for agreement statistics is under way.
We hope that machine learning techniques can dis-
cover more structure in the data once we have rea-
sonable confidence with annotation.

5We use the notation “abc$” to refer to the word that be-
gins with the string “abc”.

205



References
Berfin Aktaş. 2008. Computational Aspects of Dis-

course Annotation. Informatics Institute, METU.
Unpublished master thesis.

Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

M. A. K. Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohe-
sion in English. London: Longman.

Alan Lee and Rashmi Prasad and Aravind Joshi and
Nikhil Dinesh and Bonnie Webber. 2006. Com-
plexity of dependencies in discourse. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories.

Eleni Miltsakaki and Rashmi Prasad and Aravind Joshi
and Bonnie Webber. 2004. The Penn Discourse
TreeBank. LREC, Lisbon, Portugal.

Bilge Say and Deniz Zeyrek and Kemal Oflazer and
Umut Ozge. 2002. Development of a Corpus and
a Treebank for Present-day Written Turkish. 11th
International Conference on Turkish Linguistics.

Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A Discourse
Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse Con-
nectives in the METU Corpus. In Proceedings of
IJCNLP.

206


