










































The vocal intensity of turn-initial cue phrases in dialogue


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 225–228,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

The vocal intensity of turn-initial cue phrases in dialogue 
 

 
Anna Hjalmarsson 

Department of Speech Music and Hearing, KTH 
Stockholm, Sweden 

annah@speech.kth.se 

 
  

 

Abstract 

The present study explores the vocal intensity 
of turn-initial cue phrases in a corpus of dia-
logues in Swedish. Cue phrases convey rela-
tively little propositional content, but have 
several important pragmatic functions. The 
majority of these entities are frequently occur-
ring monosyllabic words such as “eh”, “mm”, 
“ja”. Prosodic analysis shows that these words 
are produced with higher intensity than other 
turn-initial words are. In light of these results, 
it is suggested that speakers produce these ex-
pressions with high intensity in order to claim 
the floor. It is further shown that the difference 
in intensity can be measured as a dynamic in-
ter-speaker relation over the course of a dia-
logue using the end of the interlocutor’s previ-
ous turn as a reference point. 

1 Introduction 
In dialogue, interlocutors produce speech incre-
mentally and on-line as the dialogue progresses. 
Articulation can be initiated before the speaker 
has a complete plan of what to say (Pechmann, 
1989). When speaking, processes at all levels 
(e.g. semantic, syntactic, phonologic and articu-
latory) work in parallel to render the utterance. 
This processing strategy is efficient, since the 
speaker may employ the time devoted to articu-
lating an early part of an utterance to plan the 
rest. 

Speakers often initiate new turns with cue 
phrases – standardized lexical or non-lexical ex-
pressions such as “ehm” “okay”, “yeah”, and 
“but” (c.f. Gravano, 2009). Cue phrases (or dis-
course markers) are linguistic devices used to 
signal relations between different segments of 
speech (for an overview see Fraser, 1996). These 
devices convey relatively little propositional con-
tent, but have several important pragmatic func-
tions. For example, these words provide feed-

back and signal how the upcoming utterance re-
lates to previous context. Another important 
function is to claim the conversational floor (c.f. 
Levinson, 1983). 

With these fundamental properties of language 
production in mind, it is proposed that turn-initial 
cue phrases can be used in spoken dialogue sys-
tems to initiate new turns, allowing the system 
additional time to generate a complete response. 
This approach was recently explored in a user 
study with a dialogue system that generates turn-
initial cue phrases incrementally (Skantze & 
Hjalmarsson, in press). Results from this experi-
ment show that an incremental version that used 
turn-initial cue phrases had shorter response 
times and was rated as more efficient, more po-
lite and better at indicating when to speak than a 
non-incremental implementation of the same sys-
tem. The present study carries on this research, 
investigating acoustic parameters of turn-initial 
cue phrases in order to build a dialogue system 
that sounds convincing intonation wise. 

Another aim of this study was to explore if the 
vocal intensity of the other speaker’s immedi-
ately preceding speech can be used as a reference 
point in order to measure intensity as an inter-
speaker relation over the course of a dialogue. 
Thus, in addition to measuring overall differ-
ences in intensity, the relative difference between 
the first token of a new turn and the last token of 
the immediately preceding turn was measured. 
This dynamic approach, if proven feasible, al-
lows spoken dialogue system designers to adjust 
the system’s vocal intensity on-line in order to 
accommodate variations in the surrounding 
acoustic environment.  

2 Related work 
There are a few examples of research that have 
manipulated intensity to signal pragmatic func-
tions. For example, Ström & Seneff (2000) in-
creases intensity in order to signal that user 

225



barge-ins are disallowed in particular dialogue 
states. Theoretical support for such manipula-
tions is provided by an early line of research on 
interruptions in dialogue (Meltzer et al., 1971). 
Meltzer et al. (1971) propose that the outcome of 
speech overlaps is affected by prosodic charac-
teristics and show that the greater the increase in 
amplitude, the greater the likelihood of “interrup-
tion success”. Moreover, it is show that the suc-
cess of interruptions, that is who retains the floor, 
is based on how much higher the intensity of the 
interruption is compared to the previous 
speaker’s intensity or compared  to the speaker’s 
own intensity at the end of that speaker’s previ-
ous speaker turn.  

Measuring inter-speaker relative intensity is 
further motivated by research that suggests that 
speakers adjust their vocal intensity online over 
the course of a dialogue in order to accommodate 
the surrounding acoustic context. For example, 
speakers tend to raise their voice unintentionally 
when background noise increases to enhance 
their audibility; this is the so-called Lombard 
effect (Pick et al., 1989). Moreover, speakers 
adjust intensity based on their conversational 
partners (Natale, 1975) and the distance to their 
listeners (Healey et al., 1997).  

3 Method 

3.1 Data: The DEAL corpus 
DEAL is a dialogue system that is currently be-
ing developed at the department of Speech, Mu-
sic and Hearing, KTH (Wik & Hjalmarsson, 
2009). The aim of the DEAL dialogue system is 
to provide conversation training for second lan-
guage learners of Swedish. The scene of DEAL 
is set at a flea market where a talking animated 
persona is the owner of a shop selling used 
goods. 

The dialogue data used as a basis for the data 
analyzes presented in this paper were human-
human dialogues, collected in a recording envi-
ronment set up to mimic the interaction in the 
DEAL domain. The dialogue collected were in-
formal, human-human, face-to-face conversation 
in Swedish. The recordings were made with 
close talk microphones with six subjects (four 
male and two female). In total, eight dialogues 
were collected. Each dialogue was about 15 min-
utes, making for about two hours of speech in 
total in the corpus. The dialogues were tran-
scribed orthographically and annotated for enti-
ties such as laughter, lip-smacks, breathing and 
hemming. The transcripts from the dialogues 

were time-aligned with the speech signal. This 
was done using forced alignment with subse-
quent manual verification of the timings. The 
dialogues were also segmented into speaker 
turns. A speaker turn here is a segment of speech 
of arbitrary length surrounded by another 
speaker’s vocalization. All together, the dia-
logues contained 2036 speaker turns. 

The corpus was also annotated for cue phrases 
using 11 functional categories. The definition of 
cue phrases used for annotation of the DEAL 
corpus was broad and all types of vocalizations 
that the speakers use to hold the dialogue to-
gether at different communicative levels were 
included. Cue phrase annotation was designed as 
a two-fold task: (i) to decide if a word was a cue 
phrase or not – a binary task, and (ii) to select its 
functional class according to the annotation 
scheme. The annotators could see the transcrip-
tions and listen to the recordings while labelling. 
The kappa coefficient for task (i) was 0.87 
(p<.05). The kappa coefficient for (ii) was 0.82 
(p<.05). For a detailed description of the cue 
phrase categories and their annotation, see 
(Hjalmarsson, 2008).  

3.2 Data analysis 
The first word in each turn was extracted and 
analyzed. Here, a word is all annotated tokens in 
the corpus except breathing, lip-smacks, and 
laughter, which are all relevant, but outside the 
scope of this study. 1137 (57%) words were an-
notated as some type of cue phrase, and 903 (43 
%) were other words. The turn-initial cue phrases 
were annotated with different cue phrase catego-
ries. 587 (28%) turn-initial words were annotated 
as either RESPONSIVE, RESPONSIVE DISPREFER-
ENCE or RESPONSIVE NEW INFORMATION. The 
annotation of these was based on the interpreta-
tion of the speakers’ attitudes, expressing either 
neutral feedback (RESPONSIVE), non-agreement 
(RESPONSIVE DISPREFERENCE) or surprise (RE-
SPONSIVE NEW INFORMATION). The RESPON-
SIVES were most frequently realized as either 
“ja”, “a”, and “mm” (Eng: “yeah”, “mm”).  

Furthermore, 189 (9%) of all turn-initial words 
were annotated as CONNECTIVES. The connective 
cue phrase categories indicate how the new ut-
terance relates to previous context. For example, 
these signal whether the upcoming speaker turn 
is additive, contrastive or alternative to previous 
context. Examples of these categories are “och” 
(Eng: “and”), “men” (Eng: “but”) and “eller” 
(Eng: “or”), respectively. 

226



A third category of cue phrases in a turn-initial 
position was filled pauses (57, 3%). Whereas 
filled pause may not typically be considered as 
cue phrases, these elements have similar charac-
teristics. For example, fillers provide important 
pragmatic information that listeners attend and 
adjust their behaviour according to. For example, 
a corpus study of Dutch fillers showed that these 
tokens highlight discourse structure (Swertz, 
1998). Frequently occurring filler words in the 
corpus were “eh” and “ehm”. 

The majority of the turn-initial cue phrases 
were high frequency monosyllabic words, which 
are typically not associated with stress, although 
on listening, they give the impression of being 
louder than other turn-initial vocalizations. To 
verify this observation, the intensity in decibel of 
the first word of each turn was extracted using 
Snack (www.speech.kth.se/snack). In order to 
explore the vocal intensity as an inter-speaker 
relation over the course of the dialogue, the aver-
age intensity of the last word of all turns was 
extracted. The motivation of this approach is to 
use the previous speaker’s voice intensity as a 
reference point. Thus, in order to avoid the need 
for global analysis over speakers and dialogues, 
only the (un-normalized) difference in intensity 
between the last word of the immediately preced-
ing turn and the first word of a new turn was cal-
culated.  

All turns following a one word only turn from 
the other speaker were excluded as an approxi-
mation to avoid speech following backchannel 
responses. 300 (33%) of the speaker changes 
contained overlapping speech. These overlaps  
were excluded from the data analysis since the 
recordings were not completely channel-
separated and crosstalk could conceivably inter-
fere with the results.  

Since the distance between the lips and the 
microphone was not controlled for during the 
recordings, the values were first normalized per 
speaker and dialogue (each value was shifted by 
the mean value per speaker and dialogue). 

4 Results 
Figure 1 presents the average normalized inten-
sity for turns initiated with cue phrases and other 
words.  

An independent samples t-test was conducted 
between the intensity of turns initiated with cue 
phrases and other turn-initial words. There was a 
significant difference in intensity between turns 
initiated with cue phrases (M=3.20 dB, SD=6.99) 

and turns initiated with other words (M=-4.20 
dB, SD=9.98), t(597)=10.55, p<.000. This shows 
that, on average, turns initiated with cue phrases 
were significantly louder (on average 6 dB) than 
turns initiated with other words. 

 

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Other words Cue phrases

A
ve

ra
ge

 n
or

m
al

iz
ed

 in
te

ns
ity

 in
 d

 
Figure 1 : Average normalized vocal intensity in dB 

for turn-initial words. Error bars represents the 
standard error. 

In order to explore the vocal intensity as an in-
ter-speaker relation the difference in voice inten-
sity between a new turn and the end of the im-
mediately preceding turn was extracted. The in-
ter-speaker differences in intensity for turn-initial 
cue phrases and other words are presented in 
Figure 2.  

 

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

Other words Cue phrases

A
ve

ra
ge

 d
iff

er
en

ce
 in

 in
te

ns
ity

 in
 d

B

 
Figure 2 Average difference in intensity (in dB) for 

turn-initial words. Error bars represents the stan-
dard error. 

An independent samples t-test was conducted to 
explore the difference in voice intensity as an 
inter-speaker relation. There was a significant 
difference in intensity between turns initiated 
with cue phrases (M=6.14 dB, SD=11.86) and 
turns initiated with other words (M=-1.52 dB, 
SD=13.07); t(595)=7.48, p<.000. This shows that 
the increase in intensity was significantly larger 
for turns initiated with cue phrases (about 7 dB) 
than for turns initiated with other words. 

5 Discussion 
This paper presents analyses of the intensity of 
turn-initial words. It shown that turns are fre-
quently initiated with cue phrases (about 55% of 
the turns in the DEAL corpus). The majority of 

227



these consist of high frequency monosyllabic 
words such as “yes”, “mm” and “okay”. The 
most frequent turn-initial words that were not 
annotated as cue phrases were “den” (Eng: “it”), 
“vad” (Eng: “what”), and “jag” (Eng: “I”). Thus, 
similar to turn-initial cue phrases, this category 
contains high-frequency monosyllabic words, 
items that are not typically associated with pro-
sodic stress. Yet, the results show that turn-initial 
cue phrases are produced with higher intensity 
than other turn-initial words are. In the light of 
previous research, which suggests that increased 
intensity have turn-claiming functions, one can 
speculate that speakers produce talkspurt-initial 
cue phrases with increased intensity in order to 
claim the floor convincingly before having for-
mulated a complete utterance. 

It is further argued that turn-initial cue phrases 
can be used in dialogue systems capable of in-
cremental speech production. Such words can be 
used to initiate turns once the user has stopped 
speaking, allowing the system more time to 
process input without response delays.  

Finally, it is suggested that intensity may be 
better modelled relative to the intensity of the 
immediately preceding speech rather than in ab-
solute of speaker-normalized terms. Speakers 
adjust their intensity to the current acoustical 
environment, and such a dynamic inter-speaker 
relative model may accommodate the current 
acoustic context over the course of a dialogue. In 
support of this approach, the present study shows 
that the increase in intensity can be calculated 
dynamically over the dialogue using the end of 
the previous speaker’s turn as a reference point. 
Inter-speaker relative measures are also moti-
vated practically. Extracting objective measures 
of intensity is problematic since contextual fac-
tors such as the distance between the microphone 
and the lips are difficult to control between dia-
logues and speakers, but the effects are mitigated 
by dynamic and relative measures. This is not to 
say that measuring intensity over the course of a 
single dialogue is trivial. Variation due to for 
example unforeseen alterations of the distance 
between the lips and the microphone during the 
dialogue are still problematic, but it is less of a 
problem within a session than between different 
sessions. 

 

 

 

Acknowledgments 
This research was carried out at Centre for 
Speech Technology, KTH. Funding was pro-
vided by Riksbankens Jubileumsfond (RJ) pro-
ject P09-0064:1-E Prosody in conversation and 
the Graduate School for Language Technology 
(GSLT). Many thanks to Rolf Carlson, Jens Ed-
lund and Joakim Gustafson for valuable com-
ments. 

References  
Fraser, B. (1996). Pragmatic markers. Pragmatics, 

6(2), 167-190. 

Gravano, A. (2009). Turn-Taking and Affirmative Cue 
Words in Task-Oriented Dialogue. Doctoral disser-
tation, Columbia University. 

Healey, C., Jones, R., & Berky, R. (1997). Effects of 
perceived listeners on speakers'vocal intensity. 
Journal of Voice, 11(1), 67-73. 

Hjalmarsson, A. (2008). Speaking without knowing 
what to say... or when to end. In Proceedings of 
SIGDial 2008. Columbus, Ohio, USA. 

Levinson, S. C. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University press. 

Meltzer, L., Hayes, D., & Morris, M. (1971). Interrup-
tion Outcomes and Vocal Amplitude: Explorations 
in Social Psychophysics. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 18(3), 392-402. 

Natale, M. (1975). Convergence of mean vocal inten-
sity in dyadic communication as a function of so-
cial desirability. Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 32(5), 790-804. 

Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production 
and referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27, 
89-110. 

Pick, H. L. J., Siegel, G. M., Fox, P. W., Garber, S. 
R., & Kearney, J. K. (1989). Inhibiting the 
Lombard effect. JASA, 85(2), 894-900. 

Skantze, G., & Hjalmarsson, A. (in press). Towards 
Incremental Speech Generation in Dialogue Sys-
tems. To be published in Proceedings of SigDial. 
Tokyo, Japan. 

Ström, N., & Seneff, S. (2000). Intelligent barge-in in 
conversational systems. In Procedings of ICSLP-
00.  

Swertz, M. (1998). Filled pauses as markers of dis-
course structure. Journal of Pragmatics, 30(4), 
485-496. 

Wik, P., & Hjalmarsson, A. (2009). Embodied con-
versational agents in computer assisted language 
learning. Speech communication, 51(10), 1024-
1037. 

228


