










































Linking SweFN++ with Medical Resources, towards a MedFrameNet for Swedish


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 68–71,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Linking SweFN++ with Medical Resources,
towards a MedFrameNet for Swedish

Dimitrios Kokkinakis Maria Toporowska Gronostaj
Department of Swedish Language, Språkbanken Department of Swedish Language, Språkbanken

University of Gothenburg University of Gothenburg
SE-405 30, Gothenburg, Sweden SE-405 30, Gothenburg, Sweden

dimitrios.kokkinakis@svenska.gu.se maria.gronostaj@svenska.gu.se

Abstract

In this pilot study we define and apply a methodol-
ogy for building an event extraction system for the
Swedish scientific medical and clinical language.
Our aim is to find and describe linguistic expres-
sions which refer to medical events, such as events
related to diseases, symptoms and drug effects. In
order to achieve this goal we have initiated actions
that aim to extend and refine parts of the ongoing
compilation of the Swedish FrameNet++ (SFN++).
SFN++, as its English original predecessor, is
grounded in Frame Semantics which provides a
sound theoretical ground for modeling and linking
linguistic structures encountered in general lan-
guage and in specific domains (after specializa-
tion). Using such resource we have started to
manually annotate domain texts for enriching
SFN++ with authentic samples and for providing
training data for automated event extraction tech-
niques.

1 Introduction

In the clinical setting vast amounts of health-
related data are constantly collected, while medical
and biomedical scientific publications, in e.g. mo-
lecular biology, genetics, proteomics and other
types of -omics, increase in a dramatic manner.
These data are undoubtfully a valuable source of
evidence-based research. However, to empower
researchers to make highly efficient use of the re-
sulting volume of literature and the knowledge that
is encoded therein, the material must be better in-
tegrated and linked via effective automated proc-
essing. Tools have to be developed for the
automatic processing of the textual content in a
deeper, more semantically-oriented fashion having
access to multilayered lexical and grammatical
information. The goal is then to enable rapid, ef-

fective and as far as possible accurate extraction of
relationships, facts and events asserted and de-
scribed in the data. Event extraction is understood
here as an activity, that broadly follows the
BioNLP 2009 shared task view (Kim et al., 2009),
in which an event is considered to be an involve-
ment of multiple entities in varying roles. The task
is fundamental to the objective of Language Tech-
nology systems, such as Question-Answering and
Information Extraction (IE), which have as their
higher-level goal to identify instances of a particu-
lar class of events (or relationships) in a text and to
extract their relevant arguments. We argue that
such information has a direct correlation with Fra-
meNet’s semantic frames, since templates in the
context of IE are frame-like structures with slots
representing the event basic information. Our in-
tention is to explore the applicability of SFN++ to
the clinical and scientific medical domain in Swed-
ish. Therefore, relevant domain specific entities are
explicitly annotated by automatic indexing of the
texts by the Swedish and English Medical Subject
Headings thesauri (MeSH); cf. Kokkinakis (2009).
Non-medical entities such as temporal expressions,
locative expressions and personal characteristics
such as gender and age are provided by an ex-
tended named entity recognition process (Kokki-
nakis, 2004). The partial syntactic analysis that
follows is aware of the preprocessing steps and
uses the background knowledge as features en-
coded in XML using the TIGER-XML format
(Brants & Hansen, 2002).

2 Background

Methods employed in the extraction of events have
generally involved two approaches. The first oneis
based on manual annotation of events in domain-
specific text samples in order to create training

68



resources for processes that may learn to recognize
events in new texts (Kim et al., 2008). The second
is based on methods in which events are automati-
cally acquired from unannotated texts; Nobata &
Sekine (1999), in the sense that no manually pre-
encoded training resources are used for producing
the extraction patterns. Both methodologies have
produced rapid advances in the robustness and ap-
plicability of IE. We believe that Frame Semantics
(Fillmore, 1976) is a suitable resource, for the first
type of method, and in our work we started to ex-
plore means for specializing and refining parts of
the ongoing development of the SFN++ (Borin et
al., 2009), on the medical domain. Our goal is to
enrich domain corpora with layers of syntactic and
semantic information providing relevant support
for IE and text mining research in the field.

2.1 FrameNet

FrameNet <http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu> is based
on the principles of Frame Semantics supported by
corpus evidence. A semantic frame is a script-like
structure of concepts, which are linked to the
meanings of linguistic units and associated with a
specific event or state. Each frame identifies a set
of frame elements, which are frame specific se-
mantic roles (e.g. participants or arguments). FN
documents the range of semantic and syntactic
combinatory possibilities of frame evoking lexical
units, phrases and clauses. FN facilitates modeling
the mapping of form and meaning within these
structures in the medical discourse through manual
annotation of example sentences and automatic
summarization of the resulting annotations. A
word can evoke a frame, and its syntactic depend-
ents can fill the frame element slots (Dolbey et al.,
2006). Moreover, since a single frame element can
have different grammatical realizations it can en-
hance the investigation of combinatorial possibili-
ties more precisely than other standard lexical
resources such as WordNet (cf. Dolbey, 2009).

2.2 FrameNet and Information Extraction

IE is a technology that has a direct correlation with
frame-like structures; since templates in the con-
text of IE are frame-like structures with slots repre-
senting the event information. IE operates on
specific domains, and the objective of IE systems
is to identify instances of a particular class of
events or relationships in a text and to extract the

relevant arguments of the event or relationship. It
has been stated Kilgarriff (1997) that the task re-
quires the key terms of that domain, the “fore-
ground lexicon”, to be tightly bound to the domain
vocabularies (e.g. ontology) and having well-
articulated meaning representations. According to
this philosophy the foreground lexicon for a do-
main will generally contain:

 the key predicates for the domain (trigger
words);

 the sets of lexical items which realize the
predicate (lexical units);

 how they and their arguments relate to the
IE system’s output formalism (core ele-
ments and valencies);

 how their complements relate to the predi-
cate’s arguments (non-core elements).

3 Methodology

A subset of the original English FN already con-
tains relevant frames with direct applicability to
the medical domain, such as: Medical conditions,
Experience bodily harm and Cure (see the Appen-
dix for the SFN++ Cure frame; a snapshot from:
<http://spraakbanken.gu.se/swefn/>); in the figure
‘saldo’ is the name of a freely available modern
Swedish semantic and morphological resource in-
tended for language technology applications; cf.
Borin & Forsberg, 2009). We keep the English
labels for each frame, while the content is manu-
ally adapted to Swedish. We start by identifying
words or phrases that evoke frames and assigning
the correct frame to them interactively using the
SALTO tool (Burchardt et al., 2006). For each in-
stance of a frame that has been found, we label the
parts of the sentence that fill their semantic roles.
Sentences that fulfill these criteria are selected
from a large corpus after preprocessed by a number
of pipelined tools including: multiword and idiom
expression identification, part-of-speech tagging,
lemmatization, named entity and terminology rec-
ognition, shallow parsing, using a cascaded parser
(Abney, 1996) and XML formatting according to
the TIGER-XML. A simplified example (i.e. The
doctor treated her with cortisone) would at the end
of the processing be labeled as:

69



4 Conclusions and Further Research

Our work is a first attempt to get a whole picture of
the requirements and difficulties for specializing
SweFN++ to a domain and gaining experience on
applying it to a sublanguage. Our goal for the near
future is to aid the development of a fully auto-
mated event extraction system for the Swedish
medical domain. This can be accomplished by an-
notating various types of data, in the medical sub-
language, and classifying text segments to the class
type of the event mentioned. Then, by applying
other means (e.g. pattern matching rules) we can
extract the participants of the events and match to
e.g. information extraction templates, depending
on different applications and needs. Of course,
there are several other issues that need to be
worked on, such as devising ways to recognize
negated and/or speculative language usage. Map-
ping medical frame elements onto corresponding
concepts in a thesaurus-based lexicon turns a rela-
tively little lexical resource into a more robust one
and hence more useful for semi-automatic seman-
tic annotation of corpora; cf. Baker et al., 2007.
For annotating the Swedish corpus, we have used
our intern thematically sorted lexicons with medi-
cal vocabulary and the Swedish data from MeSH.

Core FEs in FN MESH thesaurus nodes
Ailment, Affliction Disease
Body_parts Anatomy
Medication Chemicals and Drugs
Treatment Analytical, Diagnostic

and Therapeutic Tech-
niques and Equipment

Patient Person
Table 1. Example of mapping of core frame elements

onto MeSH top nodes

The advantage of the pre-processing stage is very
important and we believe that there is a feasible
way to proceed in order to aid the annotation of
large textual samples. Preliminary quantitative
analysis of the examined instances has shown that
many linguistically optional scheme elements need
to be re-ranked whenever viewed from a medical
pragmatic perspective. For example Time, Measure
and Method provide relevant data for diagnosing
patients’ health condition. Another fact that might
need special attention is the issue of tagging pro-
nouns. It seems that these should not be tagged
before anaphoric relations and their functional

roles have been established. This is particularly
important for distinguishing between patients and
health care providers. Use of frame-semantic re-
sources in general for language technology is evi-
dent. However, the effect of adding frame-
semantic information to LT applications has been
rather low, our work intends to change this situa-
tion in the near future, getting insights into the
deeper semantics of the domain events.

References

Abney S. 1996. Partial Parsing via Finite-State
Cascades. J. Nat. Lang. Eng., 2(4): 337-344.

Baker C., Ellsworth M. and Erk. K. 2007. SemEval'07
task 19: frame semantic structure extraction. Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations. Prague, Czech Republic

Borin L. and Forsberg M. 2009. All in the family: A
comparison of SALDO and WordNet. Nodalida
Workshop: WordNets and other Lexical Semantic
Resources - between Lexical Semantics, Lexicogra-
phy, Terminology and Formal Ontologies. Odense.

Borin L., Dannélls D., Forsberg M., Toporowska
Gronostaj M. and Kokkinakis D. 2009. Thinking
Green: Toward Swedish FrameNet++. FN Master-
class & Workshop. Milan, Italy.

Brants S. and Hansen S. 2002. Developments in the
TIGER Annotation Scheme and their Realization in
the Corpus. 3rd Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC). Pp. 1643-1649 Las Palmas.

Burchardt A., Erk K., Frank A., Kowalski A. and Pado
S. 2006. SALTO – A Versatile Multi-Level Annota-
tion Tool. 5th Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC). Genoa.

Dolbey A., Ellsworth M. and Scheffczyk J. 2006.
BioFrameNet: A Domain-specific FrameNet Exten-
sion with Links to Biomedical Ontologies. KR-MED:
Bio. Ontology in Action. Maryland, USA.

Dolbey A. 2009. BioFrameNet, a FrameNet Extension
to the Domain of Molecular Biology. FRAMES AND
CONSTRUCTIONS. A conference in honor of
Charles J. Fillmore. U of California, Berkeley.

Fillmore C. J. 1976. Frame semantics and the nature of
language. NY Academy of Sciences: Conference on
the Origin and Development of Lang. & Speech, Vol.
280: 20-32.

Kilgarriff A. 1997. Foreground and Background Lexi-
cons and Word Sense Disambiguation for Informa-
tion Extraction. Proceedings of the Lexicon Driven
Information Extraction. Frascati, Italy.

70



Kim J-D., Ohta T., Pyysalo S., Kano Y. and Tsujii J.
2009. Overview of BioNLP’09 Shared Task on Event
Extraction. NAACL-HLT BioNLP-workshop. Boul-
der, Colorado.

Kim J-D., Ohta T. and Tsujii J. 2008. Corpus Annota-
tion for Mining Biomedical Events from Literature.
BMC Bioinformatics, 8;9:10.

Appendix

Kokkinakis D. (2004). Reducing the Effect of Name
Explosion. Beyond Named Entity Recognition, Se-
mantic labelling for NLP tasks. Workshop at the 4th
LREC. Lissabon, Portugal.

Kokkinakis D. (2009). Lexical granularity for automatic
indexing and means to achieve it – the case of Swed-
ish MeSH®. Information Retrieval in Biomedicine:
NLP for Knowledge Integration. Prince V. & Roche
M. (eds). pp. 11-37. IGI Global.

71


