










































Detecting Word Misuse in Chinese


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 5–6,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Word Misuse in Chinese

Wei Liu
Department of Computer Science

University of Sheffield
W.Liu@dcs.shef.ac.uk

Abstract

Social Network Service (SNS) and personal
blogs have become the most popular platform
for online communication and sharing infor-
mation. However because most modern com-
puter keyboards are Latin-based, Asian lan-
guage speakers (such as Chinese) has to rely
on a input system which accepts Romanisation
of the characters and convert them into charac-
ters or words in that language. In Chinese this
form of Romanisation (usually called Pinyin)
is highly ambiguous, word misuses often oc-
cur because the user choose a wrong candi-
date or deliverately substitute the word with
another character string that has the identical
Romanisation to convey certain semantics, or
to achieve a sarcasm effect. In this paper we
aim to develop a system that can automati-
cally identify such word misuse, and suggest
the correct word to be used.

1 Introduction

A certain kind of derogatory opinion is being con-
veyed in Chinese chat forums and SNS sites through
the use of Chinese Hanzi (hieroglyphic) characters.
There is potential for this to happen whenever two
expressions are pronounced in a similar way in Chi-
nese. For exmaple, irate readers have used “妓者”
(”Ji Zhe”) for “记者” (”Ji Zhe”). While “记者”
means reporter or journalist, “妓者” can be inter-
preted as prostitute.

There are 5000 commonly used characters. While
the number of distinct Pinyin (toneless) is only 412.
Therefore Pinyin to character conversion is highly
ambigurous and is a active research topic (Zhou
et al., 2007), (Lin and Zhang, 2008), (Chen and
Lee, 2000). On the other hand, automatic Pinyin
generation is considered a solved task, (Liu and

Guthrie, 2009) shows that using the most frequent
Pinyin approach to assign Pinyin to each character
can achieve 98% accuracy. In fact, we test on the Gi-
gaword Chinese (Verson 2) corpus and find out that
only about 15% of the characters have ambigurous
Pinyin.

2 Automatically Detecting Word Misuse

We divided the detection process into three steps as
below:

• Segmentation: Given a piece of Chinese text,
we first feed it into an automatic word seg-
menter (Zhang et al., 2003) to break the text
into semantic units. Because we consider only
multiple-character anomaly cases, anomalies
can only be contained within sequences of sin-
gle characters.

• Character sequence extraction: After segmen-
tation, we are interested in sequences of sin-
gle characters, because anomalies will occur
only within those sequences. Once we obtain
these sequences, we generate all possible sub-
strings for each sequence because any anoma-
lous words can be part of a character sequence.

• Detection: We assume the anomaly shares
many phonetic similarities with the ”true”
word. As a result we need a method for
comparing pronunciations of two character se-
quences. Here we use the Pinyin to represent
phonetics of a Chinese character, and we de-
fine two pronunciations to be similar when they
both have identical Pinyin (not including the
tone). We use character-to-pinyin conversion
tool1 to create a Pinyin-to-Word hash table us-
ing the machine-segmented Chinese Gigaword

1http://pinyin4j.sourceforge.net/

5



ver. 2. Once we have the resources, we first
produce all possible Pinyin sequences of each
character sequence.Next we do a Pinyin-word
look up in the hash table we created; if there
exists any entries, we know that the Pinyin se-
quence maps to one or more ‘real’ words. Con-
sequently, we consider any character sequences
whose Pinyin maps to these words to be possi-
ble anomalies.

3 Data and Experiments

We have conducted preliminary experiments to test
our algorithm. To start with, we manually gath-
ered a small number of documents which contain
anomalous phrases of the type described above. The
documents are gathered from internet chat-rooms
and contain 3,797 Chinese characters: the anoma-
lies herein are shown in table 1.

Intended Misused Pinyin Freq
word character seq.
美国 霉国 Mei guo 43

(The U.S.)
教授 叫兽 Jiao shou 23

(Professor)
偶像 呕像or呕象 Ou xiang 12

(Role model)

Table 1: Testing document

3.1 Results and Discussions
We evaluate our identification/correction perfor-
mance using standard measures of standard preci-
sion and recall. We tested our performance using
bigram thresholds of 0, 1 and 2.

Table 2 shows the performances of our method.

No. of misused chararcter sequence 78
Total identified 130

Correctly identified 78
Precision 60%

Recall 100%
F-measure 75%

Table 2: Result for word misuse identification

The initial experiments showed that our method
can successfully identify and correct the three ex-

amples of non-word anomalies with reasonable pre-
cision and recall. The method obtains 100% recall
however it generates a lot of false positives; this can
be seen in a relatively low precision of 60%.

In summary, our method is successful at iden-
tifying genuine anomalous non-word character se-
quences; however the method also retrieves some
false positives, due to the highly ambiguous Pinyin
to word mappings.

4 Future Work

Our experiments shows that our preliminary method
can detect word misuses due to the Pinyin sequence
being idential but with a relatively high false posi-
tives. In the future we plan to use other contextual
evidence, such as pointwise mutual information to
model whether the candidate sequence generated by
our method is a better fit than the original sequence.
We also plan to gather more real data that contain
misuse of our interests.

References
Chen, Z. and Lee, K.-F. (2000). A new statistical ap-

proach to chinese pinyin input. In In Proceedings of
the 38th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 241–247, Hong Kong.

Lin, B. and Zhang, J. (2008). A novel statistical chi-
nese language model and its application in pinyin-to-
character conversion. In CIKM ’08: Proceeding of the
17th ACM conference on Information and knowledge
management, pages 1433–1434, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Liu, W. and Guthrie, L. (2009). Chinese pinyin-text
conversion on segmented text. In TSD ’09: Pro-
ceedings of the 12th International Conference on Text,
Speech and Dialogue, pages 116–123, Berlin, Heidel-
berg. Springer-Verlag.

Zhang, H.-P., Liu, Q., Cheng, X.-Q., Zhang, H., and Yu,
H.-K. (2003). Chinese lexical analysis using hierar-
chical hidden markov model. In Proceedings of the
second SIGHAN workshop on Chinese language pro-
cessing, pages 63–70, Morristown, NJ, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Zhou, X., Hu, X., Zhang, X., and Shen, X. (2007). A
segment-based hidden markov model for real-setting
pinyin-to-chinese conversion. In CIKM ’07: Pro-
ceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference on Con-
ference on information and knowledge management,
pages 1027–1030, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

6


