










































Arguments of Nominals in Semantic Interpretation of Biomedical Text


Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL 2010, pages 46–54,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Arguments of Nominals in Semantic Interpretation of Biomedical Text 

 

Halil Kilicoglu,
1,2

 Marcelo Fiszman,
2
 Graciela Rosemblat,

2
  

Sean Marimpietri,
3
 Thomas C. Rindflesch

2
 

1
Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada 

2
National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA 

3
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA 

h_kilico@cse.concordia.ca, sean.marimpietri@gmail.com  

{fiszmanm,grosemblat,trindflesch}@mail.nih.gov 

 

Abstract 

Based on linguistic generalizations, we 

enhanced an existing semantic processor, 

SemRep, for effective interpretation of a 

wide range of patterns used to express 

arguments of nominalization in clinically 

oriented biomedical text. Nominaliza-

tions are pervasive in the scientific litera-

ture, yet few text mining systems ade-

quately address them, thus missing a 

wealth of information. We evaluated the 

system by assessing the algorithm inde-

pendently and by determining its contri-

bution to SemRep generally. The first 

evaluation demonstrated the strength of 

the method through an F-score of 0.646 

(P=0.743, R=0.569), which is more than 

20 points higher than the baseline. The 

second evaluation showed that overall 

SemRep results were increased to F-score 

0.689 (P=0.745, R=0.640), approximate-

ly 25 points better than processing with-

out nominalizations. 

1 Introduction 

Extracting semantic relations from text and 

representing them as predicate-argument struc-

tures is increasingly seen as foundational for 

mining the biomedical literature (Kim et al., 

2008). Most research has focused on relations 

indicated by verbs (Wattarujeekrit et al., 2004; 

Kogan et al., 2005). However nominalizations, 

gerunds, and relational nouns also take argu-

ments. For example, the following sentence has 

three nominalizations, treatment, suppression, 

and lactation (nominalized forms of the verbs 

treat, suppress, and lactate, respectively). Agon-

ist is derived from agonize, but indicates an 

agent rather than an event. 

Bromocriptine, an ergot alkaloid dopamine 

agonist, is a recent common treatment for 

suppression of lactation in postpartum wom-

en. 

In promoting economy of expression, nomina-

lizations are pervasive in scientific discourse, 

particularly the molecular biology sublanguage, 

due to the highly nested and complex biomolecu-

lar interactions described (Friedman et al., 2002). 

However, Cohen et al. (2008) point out that no-

minalizations are more difficult to process than 

verbs. Although a few systems deal with them, 

the focus is often limited in both the nominaliza-

tions recognized and the patterns used to express 

their arguments.  Inability to interpret nominal 

constructions in a general way limits the effec-

tiveness of such systems, since a wealth of 

knowledge is missed.  

In this paper, we discuss our recent work on 

interpreting nominal forms and their arguments. 

We concentrate on nominalizations; however, the 

analysis also applies to other argument-taking 

nouns. Based on training data, we developed a 

set of linguistic generalizations and enhanced an 

existing semantic processor, SemRep, for effec-

tive interpretation of a wide range of patterns 

used to express arguments of nominalization in 

clinically oriented biomedical text. We evaluated 

the enhancements in two ways: by examining the 

ability to identify arguments of nominals inde-

pendently and the effect these enhancements had 

on the overall quality of SemRep output. 

2 Background 

The theoretical linguistics literature has ad-

dressed the syntax of nominalizations (e.g. 

Chomsky, 1970; Grimshaw, 1990; Grimshaw 

and Williams, 1993), however, largely as support 

for theoretical argumentation, rather than de-

tailed description of the facts. Quirk et al. (1985) 

concentrate on the morphological derivation of 

46



nominalizations from verbs. Within the context 

of NomBank, a project dedicated to annotation of 

argument structure, Meyers et al. (2004a) de-

scribe the linguistics of nominalizations, empha-

sizing semantic roles.  However, major syntactic 

patterns of argument realization are also noted. 

Cohen et al. (2008) provide a comprehensive 

overview of nominalizations in biomedical text. 

They include a review of the relevant literature, 

and discuss a range of linguistic considerations, 

including morphological derivation, passiviza-

tion, transitivity, and semantic topics (e.g. 

agent/instrument (activator) vs. ac-

tion/process/state (activation)). Based on an 

analysis of the PennBioIE corpus (Kulick et al., 

2004), detailed distributional results are provided 

on alternation patterns for several nominaliza-

tions with high frequency of occurrence in bio-

medical text, such as activation and treatment.  

In computational linguistics, PUNDIT (Dahl 

et al., 1987) exploited similarities between nomi-

nalizations and related verbs.  Hull and Gomez 

(1996) describe semantic interpretation for a li-

mited set of nominalizations, relying on Word-

Net (Fellbaum, 1998) senses for restricting fillers 

of semantic roles. Meyers et al. (1998) present a 

procedure which maps syntactic and semantic 

information for verbs into a set of patterns for 

nominalizations. They use NOMLEX (MacLeod 

et al., 1998), a nominalization lexicon, as the ba-

sis for this transformation. More recently, the 

availability of the NomBank corpus (Meyers et 

al., 2004b) has supported supervised machine 

learning for nominal semantic role labeling (e.g. 

Pradhan et al., 2004; Jiang and Ng, 2006; Liu 

and Ng, 2007). In contrast, Padó et al. (2008) use 

unsupervised machine learning for semantic role 

labeling of eventive nominalizations by exploit-

ing similarities between the argument structure 

of event nominalizations and corresponding 

verbs. Gurevich and Waterman (2009) use a 

large parsed corpus of Wikipedia to derive lexi-

cal models for determining the underlying argu-

ment structure of nominalizations.   

Nominalizations have only recently garnered 

attention in biomedical language processing. Ge-

neScene (Leroy and Chen, 2005) considers only 

arguments of nominalizations marked by prepo-

sitional cues. Similarly, Schuman and Bergler 

(2006) focus on the problem of prepositional 

phrase attachment. In the BioNLP‟09 Shared 

Task on Event Extraction (Kim et al., 2009), the 

most frequent predicates were nominals. Several 

participating systems discuss techniques that ac-

commodate nominalizations (e.g. K. B. Cohen et 

al., 2009; Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2009). Nomina-

lizations have not previously been addressed in 

clinically oriented text.  

2.1 SemRep 

SemRep (Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003) auto-

matically extracts semantic predications (logical 

subject-predicate-logical object triples) from un-

structured text (titles and abstracts) of MED-

LINE citations.  It uses domain knowledge from 

the Unified Medical Language System
®
 (UMLS

 

®
) (Bodenreider, 2004), and the interaction of 

this knowledge and (underspecified) syntactic 

structure supports a robust system. SemRep ex-

tracts a range of semantic predications relating to 

clinical medicine (e.g. TREATS, DIAGNOSES, AD-

MINISTERED_TO, PROCESS_OF, LOCATION_OF), 

substance interactions (INTERACTS_WITH, INHI-

BITS, STIMULATES), and genetic etiology of dis-

ease (ASSOCIATED_WITH, PREDISPOSES, CAUS-

ES). For example, the program identifies the fol-

lowing predications from input text MRI re-

vealed a lacunar infarction in the left internal 

capsule. Arguments are concepts from the 

UMLS Metathesaurus and predicates are rela-

tions from the Semantic Network.  

Magnetic Resonance Imaging DIAGNOSES Infarc-

tion, Lacunar  

Internal Capsule LOCATION_OF Infarction, Lacu-

nar 

Processing relies on an underspecified syntac-

tic analysis based on the UMLS SPECIALIST 

Lexicon (McCray et al., 1994) and the MedPost 

part-of-speech tagger (Smith et al., 2004). Output 

includes phrase identification, and for simple 

noun phrases, labeling of heads and modifiers.  

[HEAD(MRI)] [revealed] [a MOD(lacunar), 

HEAD(infarction)] [in the MOD(left) MOD(internal), 

HEAD(capsule).] 

MetaMap (Aronson and Lang, 2010) maps sim-

ple noun phrases to UMLS Metathesaurus con-

cepts, as shown below. Associated semantic 

types are particularly important for subsequent 

processing. 

[HEAD(MRI){Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Di-

agnostic Procedure)}] [revealed] [a 

MOD(lacunar), HEAD(infarction) {Infarction, Lacu-

nar(Disease or Syndrome)}] [in the MOD(left) 

MOD(internal), HEAD(capsule) {Internal Cap-

sule(Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component)}.] 

47



This structure is the basis for extracting semantic 

predications, which relies on several mechan-

isms. Indicator rules map syntactic phenomena, 

such as verbs, nominalizations, prepositions, and 

modifier-head structure in the simple noun 

phrase to ontological predications. Examples in-

clude: 

reveal (verb)  DIAGNOSES 

in (prep)  LOCATION_OF 

SemRep currently has 630 indicator rules. Onto-

logical predications are based on a modified ver-

sion of the UMLS Semantic Network and have 

semantic types as arguments. For example:  

Diagnostic Procedure DIAGNOSES Disease or 

Syndrome 

Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component LOCA-

TION_OF Disease or Syndrome 

Construction of a semantic predication begins 

with the application of an indicator rule, and is 

then constrained by two things. Arguments must 

satisfy syntactic restrictions for the indicator and 

must have been mapped to Metathesaurus con-

cepts that match the arguments of the ontological 

predication indicated. As part of this processing, 

several syntactic phenomena are addressed, in-

cluding passivization, argument coordination, 

and some types of relativization. For both verb 

and preposition indicators, underspecified syn-

tactic rules simply ensure that subjects are on the 

left and objects on the right. Enhancing SemRep 

for nominalizations involved extending the syn-

tactic constraints for arguments of nominaliza-

tion indicators.  

3 Methods 

In order to gain insight into the principles under-

lying expression of nominal arguments, we first 

determined the 50 most common nominalizations 

in MEDLINE citations that also occur in the 

UMLS SPECIALIST Lexicon, and then analyzed 

a corpus of 1012 sentences extracted from 476 

citations containing those nominalizations. We 

further limited these sentences to those with no-

minalizations containing two overt arguments 

(since SemRep only extracts predications with 

two arguments), resulting in a final set of 383 

sentences. We determined 14 alternation patterns 

for nominalizations based on this analysis and 

devised an algorithm to accommodate them. We 

then conducted two evaluations, one to assess the 

effectiveness of the algorithm independently of 

other considerations and another to assess the 

contribution of enhanced nominalization 

processing to SemRep generally.  

3.1 Nominal Alternations  

Much work in identifying arguments of nomina-

lizations assigns semantic role, such as agent, 

patient, etc., but SemRep does not. In this analy-

sis, arguments are logical subject and object. Re-

lational nouns often allow only one argument 

(e.g. the weight of the evidence), and either one 

or both of the arguments of a nominalization or 

gerund may be left unexpressed. SemRep doesn‟t 

interpret nominalizations with unexpressed ar-

guments. If both arguments appear, they fall into 

one of several patterns, and the challenge in no-

minalization processing is to accommodate these 

patterns. Cohen et al. (2008) note several such 

patterns, including those in which both argu-

ments are to the right of the nominalization, cued 

by prepositions (treatment of fracture with sur-

gery), the nominalization separates the argu-

ments (fracture treatment with surgery, surgical 

treatment for fracture), and both arguments pre-

cede the nominalizations, as modifiers of it (sur-

gical fracture treatment and fracture surgical 

treatment).  

Cohen et al. (2008) do not list several patterns 

we observed in the clinical domain, including 

those in which the subject appears to the right 

marked by a verb (the treatment of fracture is 

surgery) or as an appositive (the treatment of 

fracture, surgery), and those in which the subject 

appears to the left and the nominalization is ei-

ther in a prepositional phrase (surgery in the 

treatment of fracture, surgery in fracture treat-

ment) or is preceded by a verb or is parenthetical 

(surgery is (the best) treatment for fracture; sur-

gery is (the best) fracture treatment; surgery, the 

best fracture treatment). One pattern, in which 

both arguments are on the right and the subject 

precedes the object, is seen most commonly in 

the clinical domain when the nominalization has 

a lexically specified cue (e.g. the contribution of 

stem cells to kidney repair). The nominal alterna-

tion patterns are listed in Table 1. 

Generalizations about arguments of nominali-

zations are based on the position of the argu-

ments, both with respect to each other and to the 

nominalization, and whether they modify the 

nominalization or not. A modifying argument is 

internal to the simple noun phrase of which the 

nominalization is the head; other arguments 

(both to the left and to the right) are external. 

(Relativization is considered external to the sim-

ple noun phrase.) 

48



 

 [NOM] [PREP OBJ] [PREP SUBJ]  

Treatment of fracture with surgery 

[NOM] [PREP OBJ], [SUBJ] 

The treatment of fracture, surgery 

[NOM] [PREP OBJ] ([SUBJ]) 

The treatment of fracture (surgery) 

[NOM] [PREP OBJ] [BE] [SUBJ] 

The treatment of fracture is surgery 

[NOM] [PREP SUBJ] [PREP OBJ] 

Treatment with surgery of fracture 

[SUBJ NOM] [PREP OBJ] 

Surgical treatment of fracture 

[SUBJ] [PREP NOM] [PREP OBJ] 

Surgery in the treatment of fracture 

[SUBJ] [BE] [NOM] [PREP OBJ] 

Surgery is the treatment of fracture 

[OBJ NOM] [BE] [SUBJ] 

Fracture treatment is surgery 

[OBJ NOM] [PREP SUBJ] 

Fracture treatment with surgery 

[SUBJ] [PREP OBJ NOM] 

Surgery for fracture treatment 

[SUBJ] [BE] [OBJ NOM] 

Surgery is the fracture treatment 

[SUBJ OBJ NOM] 

Surgical fracture treatment 

[OBJ SUBJ NOM] 

Fracture surgical treatment 
Table 1. Patterns 

Argument cuing plays a prominent role in de-

fining these patterns. A cue is an overt syntactic 

element associated with an argument, and can be 

a preposition, a verb (most commonly a form of 

be), a comma, or parenthesis. A cued argument is 

in a dependency with the cue, which is itself in a 

dependency with the nominalization. The cue 

must occur between the nominalization and the 

argument, whether the argument is to the right 

(e.g. treatment of fracture) or to the left (e.g. 

surgery in the treatment). Prepositional cues for 

the objects of some nominalizations are stipu-

lated in the lexicon; some of these are obligatory 

(e.g. contribution – to), while others are optional 

(treatment – for).  

External arguments of nominalizations must 

be cued, and cues unambiguously signal the role 

of the argument, according to the following 

cuing rules (Cohen et al., 2008). Verbs, comma, 

parenthesis, and the prepositions by, with, and 

via cue subjects only. (By is used for semantic 

role agent and with for instrument, but SemRep 

does not exploit this distinction.) Of cues sub-

jects only if the nominalization has an obligatory 

(object) cue; it must cue objects otherwise. There 

is a class of nominalizations (e.g. cause) that do 

not allow a prepositionally cued subject. Consi-

derable variation is seen in the order of subject 

and object; however, if the subject intervenes 

between the nominalization and the object, both 

must have equal cuing status (the only possibili-

ties are that both be either uncued or cued with a 

preposition).  

3.2 Algorithm 

In extending SemRep for identifying arguments 

of nominalizations, existing machinery was ex-

ploited, namely shallow parsing, mapping simple 

noun phrases to Metathesaurus concepts, and the 

application of indicator rules to map nominaliza-

tions to enhanced Semantic Network ontological 

predications (which imposes restrictions on the 

semantic type of arguments). Finally, syntactic 

argument identification was enhanced specifical-

ly for nominalizations and exploits the linguistic 

generalizations noted. For example in the sen-

tence below, phrases have been identified and 

cervical cancer has been mapped to the Metathe-

saurus concept “Cervix carcinoma” with seman-

tic type „Neoplastic Process‟, and vaccination to 

“Vaccination” („Therapeutic or Preventive Pro-

cedure‟). An indicator rule for prevention maps 

to the ontological predication “Therapeutic or 

Preventive Procedure PREVENTS Neoplastic 

Process” (among others) in generating the predi-

cation: “Vaccination PREVENTS Cervix carcino-

ma.” 

Therefore, prevention of cervical cancer with 

HPV vaccination may have a significant fi-

nancial impact.  

Processing to identify arguments for preven-

tion begins by determining whether the nomina-

lization has a lexically specified object cue. This 

information is needed to determine the cuing 

function of of. Since it is common for there to be 

at least one argument on the right, identification 

of arguments begins there. Arguments on the 

right are external and must be cued. If a cued 

argument is found, its role is determined by the 

argument cuing rules. Since prevention does not 

have a lexically specified cue, of marks its ob-

ject. Further, the semantic type of the concept for 

the object of of matches the object of the onto-

logical predication („Neoplastic Process‟).  

The algorithm next looks to the right of the 

first argument for the second argument. Since 

processing addresses only two arguments for 

nominalizations, subject and object, once the role 

49



of the first has been determined, the second can 

be inferred. For cued arguments, the process 

checks that the cue is compatible with the cuing 

rules. In all cases, the relevant semantic type 

must match the subject of the ontological predi-

cation. In this instance, with cues subjects and 

„Therapeutic or Preventive Process‟ matches the 

subject of the ontological predication indicated.  

If only one noun phrase to the right satisfies 

the argument cuing rules, the second argument 

must be on the left. A modifier immediately to 

the left of the nominalization (and thus an inter-

nal argument) is sought first, and its role inferred 

from the first argument. Since internal arguments 

are not cued, there is no need to ensure cuing 

compatibility. The predication “Operative Sur-

gical Procedures TREATS Pregnancy, Ectopic” 

is found for resolution in  

Surgical resolution of an ectopic pregnancy 

in a captive gerenuk (Litocranius walleri wal-

leri).  

Resolution is an indicator for the ontological 

predication “Therapeutic or Preventive Proce-

dure TREATS Disease or Syndrome.” Surgical 

maps to “Operative Surgical Procedures” („The-

rapeutic or Preventive Procedure‟), which 

matches the subject of this predication, and ec-

topic pregnancy maps to “Pregnancy, Ectopic” 

(„Disease or Syndrome‟), which matches its ob-

ject.  Of marks the object of resolution. 

An argument to the left of a nominalization 

may be external, in which case a cue is neces-

sary. For preceding treatment satisfies this re-

quirement in the following sentence. 

Preclinical data have supported the use of 

fludarabine and cyclophosphamide (FC) in 

combination for the treatment of indolent 

lymphoid malignancies. 

The two drugs in this sentence map to concepts 

with semantic type „Pharmacologic Substance‟ 

and the malignancy has „Neoplastic Process‟, as 

above. There is an ontological predication for 

TREATS with subject „Pharmacologic Substance‟. 

After coordination processing in SemRep, two 

predications are generated for treatment:  

Cyclophosphamide TREATS Malignant lymphoid 

neoplasm 

Fludarabine TREATS Malignant lymphoid neop-

lasm 

If there is no argument to the right, both ar-

guments must be on the left. A modifier imme-

diately to the left of the nominalization is sought 

first. Given the properties of cuing (the cue in-

tervenes between the argument and the nominali-

zation), if both arguments occur to the left, at 

least one of them must be internal, since it is not 

possible to have more than one external argu-

ment on the left (e.g. *Surgery is fracture for 

treatment). The role of the first argument is 

found based on semantic type. The first modifier 

to the left of treatment in the following sentence 

is epilepsy, which has semantic type „Disease or 

Syndrome‟, matching the object of the ontologi-

cal predication for TREATS.  

Patients with most chances of benefiting from 

surgical epilepsy treatment 

The second modifier to the left, surgical maps to 

the concept “Operative Surgical Procedures,” 

whose semantic type matches the subject of the 

ontological predication. These conditions allow 

construction of the predication “Operative Sur-

gical Procedures TREATS Epilepsy.”   

In the next sentence, the indicator rule for pre-

diction maps to the ontological predication 

“Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein PREDISPOSES 

Disease or Syndrome.”  

The potential clinical role of measuring these 

apolipoproteins for ischemic stroke predic-

tion warrants further study. 

Ischemic stroke satisfies the object of this predi-

cation and apolipoproteins the subject. Since the 

external subject is cued by for, all constraints are 

satisfied and the predication “Apolipoproteins 

PREDISPOSES Ischemic stroke” is generated.   

3.3 Evaluation 

Three-hundred sentences from 239 MEDLINE 

citations (titles and abstracts) were selected for 

annotating a test set. Some had previously been 

selected for various aspects of SemRep evalua-

tion; others were chosen randomly. A small 

number (30) were sentences in the GENIA event 

corpus (Kim et al., 2008) with bio-event-

triggering nominalizations. Annotation was con-

ducted by three of the authors. One, a linguist 

(A), judged all sentences, while the other two, a 

computer scientist (B) and a medical informatics 

researcher (C), annotated a subset. Annotation 

was not limited to nominalizations. The statistics 

regarding the individual annotations are given 

below. The numbers in parentheses show the 

number of annotated predications indicated by 

nominalizations. 

 

50



Annotator # of Sentences # of Predications 

A  300 533 (286) 

B 200 387 (190) 

C 132 244 (134) 
Table 2. Annotation statistics 

As guidance, annotators were provided UMLS 

Metathesaurus concepts for the sentences. How-

ever, they consulted the Metathesaurus directly 

to check questionable mappings. Annotation fo-

cused on the 25 predicate types SemRep ad-

dresses.  

We measured inter-annotator agreement, de-

fined as the F-score of one set of annotations, 

when the second is taken as the gold standard. 

After individual annotations were complete, two 

annotators (A and C) assessed all three sets of 

annotations and created the final reference stan-

dard. The reference standard has 569 predica-

tions, 300 of which (52.7%) are indicated by 

nominalizations. We further measured the 

agreement between individual sets of annotations 

and the reference standard. Results are given be-

low: 

 

Annotator pair # of Sentences IAA 

A-B  200 0.794 

A-C 132 0.974 

B-C 103 0.722 

A-Gold 300 0.925 

B-Gold 200 0.889 

C-Gold 132 0.906 
Table 3. Inter-annotator agreement 

We performed two evaluations. The first (ev-

al1) evaluated nominalizations in isolation, while 

the second (eval2) assessed the effect of the en-

hancements on overall semantic interpretation in 

SemRep. For eval1, we restricted SemRep to 

extract predications indicated by nominalizations 

only. The baseline was a nominalization argu-

ment identification rule which simply stipulates 

that the subject of a predicate is a concept to the 

left (starting from the modifier of the nominali-

zation, if any), and the object is a concept to the 

right. This baseline implements the underspecifi-

cation principle of SemRep, without any addi-

tional logic. We compared the results from this 

baseline to those from the algorithm described 

above to identify arguments of nominalizations. 

The gold standard for eval1 was limited to predi-

cations indicated by nominalizations.  

We investigated the effect of nominalization 

processing on SemRep generally in eval2, for 

which the baseline implementation was SemRep 

with no nominalization processing. The results 

for this baseline were evaluated against those 

obtained using SemRep with no restrictions. 

Typical evaluation metrics, precision, recall, and 

F-score, were calculated. 

4 Results and Discussion 

The results for the two evaluations are presented 

below.  

 Precision Recall F-Score 

eval1 

Baseline 0.484 0.359 0.412 

With NOM 0.743 0.569 0.645 

 

eval2 

Baseline 0.640 0.333 0.438 

With NOM 0.745 0.640 0.689 
Table 4. Evaluation results 

Results illustrate the importance of nominali-

zation processing for effectiveness of semantic 

interpretation and show that the SemRep metho-

dology naturally extends to this phenomenon. 

With a single, simple, rule (eval1 baseline), Se-

mRep achieves an F-score of 0.412. With addi-

tional processing based on linguistic generaliza-

tions, F-score improves more than 20 points. 

Further, the addition of nominalization 

processing not only enhances the coverage of 

SemRep (more than 30 points), but also increases 

precision (more than 10 points). While nominali-

zations are generally considered more difficult to 

process than verbs (Cohen et al., 2008), we were 

able to accommodate them with greater precision 

than other types of indicators, including verbs 

(0.743 vs. 0.64 in eval1 with NOM vs. eval2 

baseline) with our patterns.  

 Precision Recall F-Score 

eval1 

Baseline 0.233 0.140 0.175 

With NOM 0.690 0.400 0.506 

 

eval2 

Baseline (No 

NOM) 

0.667 0.278 0.392 

With NOM 0.698 0.514 0.592 
Table 5. Results for molecular biology sentences 

 

Limiting the evaluation to sentences focusing on 

biomolecular interactions (from GENIA), while 

not conclusive due to the small number of sen-

tences (30), also shows similar patterns, as 

shown in Table 5. As expected, while overall 

51



quality of predications is lower, since molecular 

biology text is significantly more complex than 

that in the clinical domain, improvements with 

nominalization processing are clearly seen. 

Errors were mostly due to aspects of SemRep 

orthogonal to but interacting with nominalization 

processing. Complex coordination structure was 

the main source of recall errors, as in the follow-

ing example.  

RESULTS: The best predictors of incident 

metabolic syndrome were waist circumfe-

rence (odds ratio [OR] 1.7 [1.3-2.0] per 11 

cm), HDL cholesterol (0.6 [0.4-0.7] per 15 

mg/dl), and proinsulin (1.7 [1.4-2.0] per 3.3 

pmol/l). [PMID 14988303] 

While the system was able to identify the predi-

cation “Waist circumference PREDISPOSES 

Metabolic syndrome,” it was unable to find the 

predications below, due to its inability to identify 

the coordination of waist circumference, HDL 

cholesterol, and proinsulin.  

(FN) Proinsulin PREDISPOSES Metabolic syn-

drome 

(FN) High Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol PRE-

DISPOSES Metabolic syndrome 

 

Mapping of noun phrases to the correct UMLS 

concepts (MetaMap) is a source of both false 

positives and false negatives, particularly in the 

context of the molecular biology sentences, 

where acronyms and abbreviations are common 

and their disambiguation is nontrivial (Okazaki 

et al., 2010). For example, in the following sen-

tence  

PTK inhibition with Gen attenuated both 

LPS-induced NF-kappaB DNA binding and 

TNF-alpha production in human monocytes. 

[PMID 10210645] 

PTK was mapped to “Ephrin receptor EphA8” 

rather than to “Protein Tyrosine Kinase”, causing 

both a false positive and a false negative.  

(FP) Genistein INHIBITS Ephrin receptor EphA8 

(FN) Genistein INHIBITS Protein Tyrosine Kinase 

Some errors were due to failure to recognize a 

relative clause by SemRep. Only the head of 

such a structure is allowed to be an argument 

outside the structure. In the sentence below, the 

subject of treatment is hyperthermic intraperito-

neal intraoperative chemotherapy, which is the 

head of the reduced relative clause, after cytore-

ductive surgery.  

Hyperthermic intraperitoneal intraoperative 

chemotherapy after cytoreductive surgery for 

the treatment of abdominal sarcomatosis: 

clinical outcome and prognostic factors in 60 

consecutive patients. [PMID 15112276] 

SemRep failed to recognize the relative clause, 

and therefore the nominalization algorithm took 

the noun phrase inside it as the subject of treat-

ment, since it satisfies both semantic type and 

argument constraints.  

(FP) Cytoreductive surgery  TREATS Sarcamato-

sis NOS 

(FN) intraperitoneal therapy TREATS Sarcamato-

sis NOS 

A small number of errors were due solely to 

nominalization processing. In the following sen-

tence, the object of contribution is cued with in, 

rather than lexically specified to, which causes a 

recall error.  

Using SOCS-1 knockout mice, we investi-

gated the contribution of SOCS-1 in the 

development of insulin resistance induced 

by a high-fat diet (HFD). [PMID 

18929539] 

(FN) Cytokine Inducible SH-2 Containing Pro-

tein PREDISPOSES Insulin Resistance 

Accurate identification of the arguments of 

nominalizations in the molecular biology sub-

domain is more challenging than in clinically-

oriented text. Some of the syntactic structure re-

sponsible for this complexity is discussed by K. 

B. Cohen et al. (2009). In particular, they note 

the problem of an argument being separated from 

the nominalization, and point out the problem of 

specifying the intervening structure. Although 

we have not focused on molecular biology, the 

analysis developed for clinical medicine shows 

promise in that domain as well. One relevant ex-

tension could address the syntactic configuration 

in which intervening structure involves an argu-

ment of a nominalization shared with a verb oc-

curring to the left of the nominalization, as in-

duced and activation interact in the following 

sentence: 

IL-2 induced less STAT1 alpha activation 

and IFN-alpha induced greater STAT5 acti-

vation in NK3.3 cells compared with preacti-

vated primary NK cells. [PMID 8683106] 

This could be addressed with an extension of our 

rule that subjects of nominalizations can be cued 

with verbs. With respect to argument identifica-

tion, induce can function like a form of be.  

52



5 Conclusion 

We discuss a linguistically principled implemen-

tation for identifying arguments of nominaliza-

tions in clinically focused biomedical text. The 

full range of such structures is rarely addressed 

by existing text mining systems, thus missing 

valuable information. The algorithm is imple-

mented inside SemRep, a general semantic inter-

preter for biomedical text. We evaluated the sys-

tem both by assessing the algorithm independent-

ly and by determining the contribution it makes 

to SemRep generally. The first evaluation re-

sulted in an F-score of 0.646 (P=0.743, 

R=0.569), which is 20 points higher than the 

baseline, while the second showed that overall 

SemRep results were increased to F-score 0.689 

(P=0.745, R=0.640), approximately 25 points 

better than processing without nominalizations. 

Since our nominalization processing is by ex-

tending SemRep, rather than by creating a dedi-

cated system, we provide the interpretation of 

these structures in a broader context. An array of 

semantic predications generated by mapping to 

an ontology (UMLS) normalizes the interpreta-

tion of verbs and nominalizations.  Processing is 

linguistically based, and several syntactic phe-

nomena are addressed, including passivization, 

argument coordination, and relativization. The 

benefits of such processing include effective ap-

plications for extracting information on genetic 

diseases from text (Masseroli et al., 2006), as 

well as research in medical knowledge summari-

zation (Fiszman et al., 2004; Fiszman et al., 

2009), literature-based discovery (Ahlers et al., 

2007; Hristovski et al., 2010), and enhanced in-

formation retrieval (Kilicoglu et al., 2008; T. 

Cohen et al., 2009). 

 

Acknowledgments 

This study was supported in part by the Intra-

mural Research Program of the National Insti-

tutes of Health, National Library of Medicine. 

References 

C. B. Ahlers, D. Hristovski, H. Kilicoglu, T. C. 

Rindflesch. 2007. Using the literature-based dis-

covery paradigm to investigate drug mechanisms. 

In Proceedings of AMIA Annual Symposium, pages 

6-10. 

A. R. Aronson and F.-M. Lang. 2010. An overview of 

MetaMap: historical perspective and recent ad-

vances. Journal of the American Medical Informat-

ics Association, 17:229-236. 

O. Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Medical Language 

System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminol-

ogy. Nucleic Acids Research, 32(Database is-

sue):D267-70.  

N. Chomsky. 1970. Remarks on nominalization. In 

Jacobs, Roderick, and Peter S. Rosenbaum (eds.) 

Readings in English transformational grammar. 

Boston: Ginn and Company, pages 184-221.  

K. B. Cohen, M. Palmer, L. Hunter. 2008. Nominali-

zation and alternations in biomedical language. 

PLoS ONE, 3(9): e3158. 

K. B. Cohen, K. H. Verspoor, H. L. Johnson, C. 

Roeder, P. V. Ogren, W. A. Baumgartner, E. 

White, H. Tipney, L. Hunter. 2009. High-precision 

biological event extraction with a concept recog-

nizer. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 2009 Work-

shop Companion Volume for Shared Task, pages 

50-58. 

T. Cohen, R. Schvaneveldt, T. C. Rindflesch. 2009. 

Predication-based semantic indexing: Permutations 

as a means to encode predications in semantic 

space. In Proceedings of AMIA Annual Symposium, 

pages 114-118. 

D. A. Dahl, M. S. Palmer, R. J. Passonneau. 1987. 

Nominalizations in PUNDIT. In Proceedings of 

ACL, pages 131-139. 

C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical 

Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

M. Fiszman, D. Demner-Fushman, H. Kilicoglu, T. C. 

Rindflesch. 2009. Automatic summarization of 

MEDLINE citations for evidence-based medical 

treatment: A topic-oriented evaluation. Journal of 

Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):801-813.  

M. Fiszman, T. C. Rindflesch, H. Kilicoglu. 2004. 

Abstraction summarization for managing the bio-

medical research literature. In Proceedings of 

HLT/NAACL Workshop on Computational Lexical 

Semantics, pages 76-83. 

C. Friedman, P. Kra, A. Rzhetsky. 2002. Two bio-

medical sublanguages: a description based on the 

theories of Zellig Harris. Journal of Biomedical In-

formatics, 35:222–235. 

J. Grimshaw. 1990.  Argument Structure. MIT Press, 

Cambridge, MA. 

J. Grimshaw and E. Williams. 1993. Nominalizations 

and predicative prepositional phrases. In J. Puste-

jovsky (ed.) Semantics and the Lexicon. Dordrecht: 

Kluwer Academic Publishers, pages  97-106.  

O. Gurevich and S. A. Waterman. 2009. Mining of 

parsed data to derive deverbal argument structure. 

In Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Grammar 

Engineering Across Frameworks. pages 19-27. 

D. Hristovski, A. Kastrin, B. Peterlin, T. C. 

Rindflesch. 2010. Combining semantic relations 

53



and DNA microarray data for novel hypothesis 

generation. In C. Blaschke, H. Shatkay (Eds.) 

ISMB/ECCB2009, Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics, 

Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pages 53-61.  

R. D. Hull and F. Gomez. 1996. Semantic interpreta-

tion of nominalizations. In Proceedings of AAAI, 

pages 1062-1068. 

Z. P. Jiang and H. T. Ng. 2006. Semantic role labeling 

of NomBank: A maximum entropy approach. In 

Proceedings of EMNLP’06, pages 138–145. 

H. Kilicoglu and S. Bergler. 2009. Syntactic depen-

dency based heuristics for biological event extrac-

tion. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 2009 Workshop 

Companion Volume for Shared Task, pages 119-

127. 

H. Kilicoglu, M. Fiszman, A. Rodriguez, D. Shin, A. 

M. Ripple, T. C. Rindflesch. 2008. Semantic 

MEDLINE: A Web application to manage the re-

sults of PubMed searches. In Proceedings of 

SMBM’08, pages 69-76. 

J-D. Kim, T. Ohta, S. Pyysalo, Y. Kano, J. Tsujii. 

2009. Overview of BioNLP‟09 Shared Task on 

Event Extraction. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 

2009 Workshop Companion Volume for Shared 

Task, pages 1-9. 

J-D. Kim, T. Ohta, J. Tsujii. 2008. Corpus annotation 

for mining biomedical events from literature. BMC 

Bioinformatics, 9(1):10. 

Y. Kogan, N. Collier, S. Pakhomov, M. Krautham-

mer. 2005. Towards semantic role labeling & IE in 

the medical literature. In Proceedings of AMIA An-

nual Symposium, pages 410–414. 

S. Kulick, A. Bies, M. Liberman, M. Mandel, R. 

McDonald, M. Palmer. A. Schein, L. Ungar. 2004. 

Integrated annotation for biomedical information 

extraction. In Proceedings of BioLINK: Linking 

Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, 

pages 61–68. 

G. Leroy and H. Chen. 2005.  Genescene: An ontolo-

gy-enhanced integration of linguistic and co-

occurrence based relations in biomedical texts. 

Journal of the American Society for Information 

Science and Technology, 56(5): 457–468. 

C. Liu and H. Ng. 2007. Learning predictive struc-

tures for semantic role labeling of NomBank. In 

Proceedings of ACL, pages 208–215. 

C. Macleod, R. Grishman, A. Meyers, L. Barrett, R. 

Reeves. 1998. NOMLEX: A lexicon of nominali-

zations. In Proceedings of EURALEX’98. 

M. Masseroli, H. Kilicoglu, F-M. Lang, T. C. 

Rindflesch. 2006. Argument-predicate distance as a 

filter for enhancing precision in extracting predica-

tions on the genetic etiology of disease. BMC Bio-

informatics, 7:291. 

A. T. McCray, S. Srinivasan, A. C. Browne. 1994. 

Lexical methods for managing variation in biomed-

ical terminologies. In Proceedings of 18th Annual 

Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical 

Care, pages 235–239. 

A. Meyers, C. Macleod, R. Yanbarger, R. Grishman, 

L. Barrett, R. Reeves. 1998. Using NOMLEX to 

produce nominalization patterns for information 

extraction. In Proceedings of the Workshop on 

Computational Treatment of Nominals (COL-

ING/ACL), pages 25-32. 

A. Meyers, R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekely, V. 

Zielinska, B. Young, R. Grishman. 2004a. Anno-

tating noun argument structure for NomBank. In 

Proceedings of LREC. 

A. Meyers, R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekely, V. 

Zielinska, B. Young, R. Grishman. 2004b. The 

NomBank project: An interim report. In Proceed-

ings of HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in 

Corpus Annotation, pages 24–31. 

N. Okazaki, S. Ananiadou, J. Tsujii. 2010. Building a 

high quality sense inventory for improved abbrevi-

ation disambiguation. Bioinformatics: btq129+. 

S. Padó, M. Pennacchiotti, C. Sporleder. 2008. Se-

mantic role assignment for event nominalisations 

by leveraging verbal data. In Proceedings of CoL-

ing’08, pages 665-672. 

S. Pradhan, H. Sun, W. Ward, J. Martin, D. Jurafsky. 

2004. Parsing arguments of nominalizations in 

English and Chinese. In Proceedings of 

HLT/NAACL, pages 141–144. 

R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, J. Svartvik. 1985. 

A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Lan-

guage. Longman, London. 

T. C. Rindflesch and M. Fiszman. 2003. The interac-

tion of domain knowledge and linguistic structure 

in natural language processing: Interpreting hyper-

nymic propositions in biomedical text. Journal of 

Biomedical Informatics, 36(6):462-77. 

J. Schuman and S. Bergler. 2006. Postnominal prepo-

sitional phrase attachment in proteomics. In Pro-

ceedings of BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural 

Language Processing and Biology, pages 82–89. 

L. Smith, T. C. Rindflesch, W. J. Wilbur. 2004. Med-

Post: a part-of-speech tagger for biomedical text. 

Bioinformatics, 20(14):2320-2321. 

T. Wattarujeekrit, P. K. Shah, N. Collier. 2004. PAS-

Bio: Predicate-argument structures for event ex-

traction in molecular biology. BMC Bioinformat-

ics, 5:155.  

 

54


