




































Unifying Adjunct Islands and Freezing Effects in Minimalist Grammars

Tim Hunter
Department of Linguistics

University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, USA

Abstract

This paper presents a unified account of
two well-known conditions on extraction do-
mains: the “adjunct island” effect and “freez-
ing” effects. Descriptively speaking, ex-
traction is problematic out of adjoined con-
stituents and out of constituents that have
moved. I introduce a syntactic framework
from which it emerges naturally that adjoined
constituents are relevantly like constituents
that have moved, unifying the two descriptive
generalisations noted above.

1 Overview

Research into the nature of “island constraints”
(conditions on domains out of which extraction can
occur) is a prominent issue in mainstream syntac-
tic theory. There has been corresponding research
into the nature of these constraints in a more math-
ematically explicit setting within the TAG formal-
ism, aiming to show how island constraints, par-
ticularly adjunct islands and wh-islands (eg. Kroch,
1987, 1989; Frank, 1992), might emerge from other
independently-motivated properties of the grammar.
However within the MG formalism, developed by
Stabler (1997) as a precise formulation of the main
ideas underlying the most recent incarnation of
Chomskyan syntactic theory (Chomsky, 1995), there
has been relatively little investigation of the na-
ture of island constraints: to the extent that these
phenomena figure in the literature (eg. Gärtner and
Michaelis, 2005, 2007), familiar descriptive con-
straints are simply stipulated individually (eg. no ex-
traction from specifiers, no extraction from adjuncts)

for the purpose of investigating not the origin of
these constraints but their effects on generative ca-
pacity.

In this paper I propose that a particular variant of
the MG formalism, motivated by a number of in-
dependent considerations, permits a unified account
of two well-known island constraints, namely the
“adjunct island” effect and “freezing” effects: de-
scriptively speaking, extraction is generally prob-
lematic out of adjoined constituents (Cattell, 1976;
Huang, 1982) and out of constituents that have
moved (Wexler and Culicover, 1981). The crucial
ingredients of the formalism are two widely-held
intuitions: first, that movement is usefully thought
of as “re-merging” (Epstein et al., 1998; Chom-
sky, 2004), and second, that adjuncts are in some
sense more “loosely” attached than arguments are
(Chametzky, 1996; Hornstein and Nunes, 2008). A
grammatical formalism in which the re-merge con-
ception of movement is fleshed out explicitly makes
possible a natural implementation of the idea of ad-
juncts as loosely attached, which is otherwise dif-
ficult to make precise. From this point it emerges
that adjoined constituents and moving constituents
are, in a certain sense, the same kind of thing; thus
by adding a single constraint to our theory we cap-
ture at once both adjunct island effects and freezing
effects.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In
§2 I develop the syntactic formalism in which the
eventual unification can be stated, starting with the
formalism from Stabler (2006) and then introduc-
ing two additions/modifications concerning the im-
plementations of movement and adjunction. I begin

Unifying Adjunct Islands and Freezing Effects in Minimalist Grammars

17



§3 by focussing on the prohibition against extrac-
tion from adjuncts; having identified the particular
constraint that must be imposed on the formalism to
enforce this prohibition, I then show that this one
constraint also forbids extraction from moved con-
stituents without further stipulation.

2 Syntactic framework

2.1 Insertion and Re-merge: Stabler (2006)

I take as a starting point the variant of the MG for-
malism presented by Stabler (2006). This system
departs from the common conception of movement
as an operation which revises or rearranges some ex-
isting structure: instead of merging into position A
and then moving (perhaps with the help of copying
and/or deletion operations) to position B, an element
satisfies certain requirements associated with posi-
tion A while remaining structurally “disconnected”
from the rest of the sentence, and then is structurally
integrated only into position B. As a result, if we al-
low new elements to be simply inserted into a deriva-
tion with this “disconnected” status, we need only
a single feature-checking operation (as opposed to
a merging operation which builds structure, and a
moving operation which builds structure in addition
to dismantling existing structure).1

Abstracting away from some details, a derivation
of the question ‘who did we see’ will proceed as
shown in Figure 1. Features of the form +f indicate
requirements, and features of the form -f indicate
properties. An element bearing -f can discharge an-
other element’s corresponding +f requirement, re-
sulting in these two features being “checked” or
deleted. Note that when a requirement is discharged,
the element bearing -f may be wholly integrated
into the structure (via string concatenation), never
to be further manipulated, as is case for the subject
and question requirements in Figure 1; or it may re-
main disconnected, as is the case for the object re-
quirement in Figure 1, since ‘who’ has a remain-
ing property that will discharge the question require-
ment later.

This conception of syntactic structure-building
can be seen as an explicit implementation of the
common intuition that movement might be thought

1For further discussion of how this system relates to better-
known variants of MGs, see Hunter (2010, ch.1).

of as merely re-merging: note the parallelism be-
tween the discharging of the subject requirement
(often thought of as a “merge step”) and that of the
question requirement (a “move step”). This unifica-
tion depends on the presence of an insertion opera-
tion that adds an element to the derivation without
checking any features. In the next subsection I will
propose that this insertion operation can also play a
role in insightful accounts of adjuncts; more specifi-
cally, that adjuncts are elements that are inserted into
the derivation but do not thereafter participate in the
discharging of any requirements.

This treatment of adjunction is one of two adjust-
ments that I make to the system of Stabler (2006):
I describe this first in §2.2, and then the second ad-
justment, concerning the derivational status of the
“disconnected” elements, in §2.3.

2.2 Adjunction as (Only) Insertion

First note that in the derivation in Figure 1, phono-
logical/string composition occurs only upon dis-
charging of requirements (though not conversely).
Adjuncts clearly must be phonologically composed
with other constituents; to make room for an ac-
count where they nonetheless do not participate in
any discharging of requirements, these two ideas
must be decoupled. The work done at requirement-
discharging steps in Figure 1 can be broken into two
operations, MRG (“merge”) and SPL (“spellout”).
The former discharges requirements without phono-
logical composition, and the latter composes a new
string from smaller pieces. The string produced by
SPL will of course depend on which requirements
have been discharged by what, so MRG must leave
some record of this for SPL to interpret.

With this division of labour between MRG and
SPL, the question arises of “how often” SPL applies
in the course of the derivation. If SPL were applied
immediately after every application of MRG, the re-
sult would be effectively the same as in Figure 1.
Alternatively, if SPL were applied just once at the
end of the derivation, the result would be a system
where the abstract structural description of the en-
tire sentence is constructed and only then its string
yield computed; this is roughly the position adopted
in most works in transformational grammar, includ-
ing Chomsky (1995) and Stabler (1997). I adopt a
position in between these two extremes, incorporat-

Tim Hunter

18



〈 see:: +d+d-V , {}〉
insert ‘who’ −→〈 see:: +d+d-V , { who:: -d-wh }〉

discharge object requirement −→〈 see:: +d-V , { who:: -wh }〉
insert ‘we’ −→〈 see:: +d-V , { who:: -wh , we:: -d }〉

discharge subject requirement −→〈 we see:: -V , { who:: -wh }〉
...

〈 did we see:: +wh , { who:: -wh }〉
discharge question requirement −→〈 who did we see , {}〉

Figure 1: Intuitive outline of a derivation in the framework of Stabler (2006).

ing the general idea of the “multiple spellout” pro-
posal from Uriagereka (1999).

Specifically, I propose that SPL applies at the end
of each maximal projection. The effect is that the
record of discharged requirements left by applica-
tions of MRG to be interpreted by SPL (i.e. a partial
structural description) can take the simple form of a
list: the first element in the list represents the com-
plement of the current maximal projection, the sec-
ond element the first specifier, and so on.2 A deriva-
tion of the VP constituent of ‘we see the man’ is
shown in Figure 2. Abstracting away from some de-
tails which will change shortly: we call a string with
an associated list of features a unit, and an expres-
sion consists of a unit, a (possibly empty) sequence
of strings, and some additional “disconnected” units
(in Figure 2, a set of them, but this will change
shortly); MRG and SPL are unary functions on ex-
pressions, and INS (“insert”) is a binary function on
expressions. If SPL applies to an expression of the
form e = 〈u, s, t, . . . 〉 where u is a unit and s and
t are strings, then this expression is interpreted as
encoding a phrase headed by u, with a constituent
with yield s in its complement position and a con-
stituent with yield t in its specifier position. Note
that SPL applies at the end of each maximal projec-
tion: once to “flatten” the DP structure encoded in
e2 to produce ‘the man’, and once to “flatten” the
VP structure encoded in e7 to produce ‘we see the
man’. These two steps are illustrated in Figure 3.

2I assume for simplicity that a phrase can have multiple
specifiers, although the examples in this paper will not make

For reasons of space I will not be able to jus-
tify here the particular choice of a maximal pro-
jection as the relevant “phase” or “cycle” of in-
terpretation. The motivation comes in large part
from consideration of a distinctive, independently-
motivated approach to the semantic composition of
neo-Davidsonian logical forms (Parsons, 1990; Piet-
roski, 2005), according to which complement and
specifier positions each take on a particular seman-
tic significance; see Hunter (2010) for extensive dis-
cussion. But to illustrate the basic idea, an argument
of roughly the same form can be made that maxi-
mal projections might constitute a significant phase
of interpretation even with respect to phonologi-
cal/string (rather than semantic) composition: SPL
must be sensitive to the distinction between com-
plements and specifiers since (in English) the for-
mer are linearised to the right and the latter to the
left, and by composing only at the end of each max-
imal projection we ensure that this distinction is en-
coded when SPL applies in Figure 2. In a system like
the one illustrated in Figure 1 where requirement-
discharging and composition are strictly coupled,
some other encoding of the complement/specifier
distinction must be added instead.3

With a VP consisting of just a head, complement
and specifier derived as shown in Figure 2, we now
have available an interesting analysis of adjunction.
I propose that in the derivation of a VP with an
additional adjunct, the adjunct is only inserted and

use of any more than one.
3Stabler (2006) distinguishes two different “types” of ex-

pressions, indicated by ‘:’ and ‘::’, for this purpose.

Unifying Adjunct Islands and Freezing Effects in Minimalist Grammars

19



e1 = INS(〈 the:: +n-d , {}〉 , 〈 man:: -n , {}〉) = 〈 the:: +n-d , { man:: -n }〉
e2 = MRG(e1) = 〈 the:: -d , man , {}〉
e3 = SPL(e2) = 〈 the man:: -d , {}〉
e4 = INS(〈 see:: +d+d-V , {}〉 , e3) = 〈 see:: +d+d-V , { the man:: -d }〉
e5 = MRG(e4) = 〈 see:: +d-V , the man , {}〉
e6 = INS(e5, 〈 we:: -d , {}〉) = 〈 see:: +d-V , the man , { we:: -d }〉
e7 = MRG(e6) = 〈 see:: -V , the man , we , {}〉
e8 = SPL(e7) = 〈 we see the man:: -V , {}〉

Figure 2: A derivation illustrating the division of labour between MRG and SPL.

<

the::-d man

SPL
−−−→ the man::-d

>

we <

saw::-V the man

SPL
−−−→ we saw the man::-V

Figure 3: An intuitive illustration of the effects of SPL in Figure 2.

then immediately interpreted by SPL (as opposed
to playing a more distinguished role by being af-
fected by MRG). This is particularly plausible on
the semantically-motivated understanding of argu-
ment positions (Hornstein and Nunes, 2008; Hunter,
2010). A derivation of ‘we see the man today’ will
therefore proceed as in Figure 2 to the point where
e7 is constructed, and then continue as shown in Fig-
ure 4. The feature *V indicates a constituent that ad-
joins to a phrase whose head bears -V (i.e. adjoins
to a VP).

2.3 Structure Among Disconnected Elements

Intuitively, an expression consists of a central “con-
nected” component — originally a single head unit
in Figure 1 and in Stabler (2006), and as of the pre-
vious subsection a head unit along with a list of
argument-yield strings in Figure 2 and Figure 4 —
and some associated “disconnected” units. In an ex-
pression e = 〈C, {u1, u2, . . .}〉 let us say that the
disconnected units ui are subordinate to the central
component C.

Consider now in more detail the derivation
sketched in Figure 1. Upon completion of the
VP constituent we derive the expression eVP =

〈 we see:: -V , { who:: -wh }〉. Here who is subor-
dinate, in the sense just defined, to we see. Sup-
pose the next maximal projection is a CP, the head
of which is pronounced ‘did’ and which selects
a VP complement and attracts a wh-word to its
specifier position. Then the derivation will con-
tinue by inserting eVP into an expression headed by
did:: +V+wh-c .

In the system of Stabler (2006), the disconnected
units in an expression are structured simply as a set,
so the result of this insertion step will be as fol-
lows, destroying the relationship of subordination
between who and we see.

INS
(
〈 did:: +V+wh-c , {}〉 , eVP

)

= 〈 did:: +V+wh-c , { we see:: -V , who:: -wh }〉

In order to maintain this relationship between who
and we see when the derivation proceeds beyond
construction of the VP (which will be crucial for im-
posing conditions on extraction domains), we need
something more structured than simply a set of
units to store an expression’s disconnected pieces.
Roughly, we might suppose that in place of a set
of units we use a set of expressions; since this per-

Tim Hunter

20



e7 = 〈 see:: -V , the man , we , {}〉
e8 = INS(e7, 〈 today:: *V , {}〉) = 〈 see:: -V , the man , we , { today:: *V }〉
e9 = SPL(e8) = 〈 we see the man today:: -V , {}〉

Figure 4: The end of a derivation showing the adjunction of ‘today’ to the VP.

mits nesting of expressions, a tree notation is sensi-
ble. A tree with C at its root node and u1, u2, . . . as
the unordered daughters of this root node will corre-
spond to the expression 〈C, {u1, u2, . . .}〉. The arcs
of these trees correspond straightforwardly to sub-
ordination relationships. A tree with further levels
of embedding encodes the more elaborate internal
structure now permitted, not corresponding to any
expression of the restricted form 〈C, {u1, u2, . . .}〉

The expression eVP discussed above will therefore
correspond to the tree in (1); when this expression is
inserted into an expression headed by the comple-
mentiser ‘did’ we keep its internal structure intact,
and the result is the tree in (2).

(1) we see:: -V

who:: -wh

(2) did:: +V+wh-c

we see:: -V

who:: -wh

The effect of inserting one tree τ into another τ ′

is to add τ as one of the daughters of the root node
of τ ′. The effect of applying MRG to a tree whose
root node has as its first feature a requirement +f, is
to “look for” a unit u bearing a property -f some-
where else in the tree, and check these features; if
this -f is the only remaining feature on u, then we
furthermore record the yield of u at the root node, to
be phonologically composed at the next application
of SPL, and u is removed from the tree, its daughters
inherited by the root node.

The two applications of MRG and the one of SPL
that complete the derivation of ‘who did we see’,
starting from the expression in (2), are shown in Fig-
ure 5. While all non-root nodes consist of just units,
the root node has a unit plus a (possibly empty) list
of strings, representing current argument yields as
introduced in Figure 2.

Let us say that a unit x is “n-subordinate” to an-

other unit y (in a certain tree τ ) iff x can be reached
from y by a downward path of length n (in τ ). Note
that before the first application of MRG in Figure 5,
the unit who:: -wh was 2-subordinate to the root
of the tree; but when the +V and -V features are
checked and we see is established as an argu-
ment, its daughter who:: -wh is inherited by the
root and is therefore only 1-subordinate to the root.

3 Constraining movement

We can now consider the difference, in our modified
syntactic formalism, between licit extraction from a
complement and illicit extraction from an adjunct.
Having done so we will then see that the property
that distinguishes adjuncts from complements also
distinguishes in-situ constituents from moved ones.
A single constraint can therefore be imposed upon
the system that unifies adjunct island effects and
freezing effects.

3.1 Prohibiting Extraction from Adjuncts

I take the two sentences in (3) and (4) as representa-
tive examples of licit extraction from a complement
and illicit extraction from an adjunct.

(3) Who do you think [that John saw ]?

(4) * Who do you sleep [because John saw ]?

I assume that the bracketed constituent in (4) is ad-
joined to VP, though nothing significant hinges on
this choice of attachment site. The crucial difference
between the two sentences will therefore reside in
the construction of their respective matrix VPs: the
relevant partial derivations, up to the point where no
requirements remain to be discharged and we would
expect SPL to apply, are shown in Figure 6.

The two expressions with which the partial
derivations in Figure 6 begin represent the two sen-
tences’ respective bracketed constituents, extraction
from which we are investigating: a CP ‘that John

Unifying Adjunct Islands and Freezing Effects in Minimalist Grammars

21



did::+V+wh-c

we see::-V

who::-wh

MRG
−−→ did::+wh-c , we see

who::-wh

MRG
−−→ did::-c , we see, who SPL−−→ who did we see::-c

Figure 5: Final steps of the derivation of ‘who did we see’.

that John saw::-c

who::-wh

INS
−−→ think::+c-V

that John saw::-c

who::-wh

MRG
−−→ think::-V , that John saw

who::-wh

(3)

because John saw::*V

who::-wh

INS
−−→ sleep::-V

because John saw::*V

who::-wh

(4)

Figure 6: Comparison of the construction of the matrix VP of the two sentences in (3) and (4).

saw’ with a subordinate disconnected ‘who’ waiting
to re-merge and check its -wh feature in the case of
(3), and a VP-adjunct ‘because John saw’, likewise
with a disconnected ‘who’, in the case of (4). Each
is inserted into an expression headed by the matrix
verb: ‘think’, which requires a CP complement, in
the case of (3), and ‘sleep’, with no such require-
ment, in the case of (4).

After this first step the two partial derivations cru-
cially diverge. For (3) a MRG step is required, to
check the +c and -c features, before SPL can apply,
and as a result who:: -wh is 1-subordinate to the
root when the VP is completed and SPL is due to ap-
ply. For (4), however, no such MRG step is required:
the adjunct is ready to be interpreted as part of the
VP in its 1-subordinate position, just as ‘today’ was
in Figure 4, and so SPL is due to apply immediately
after the insertion step.

In order to encode the adjunct island constraint
we require that the possibility of extracting who is
contingent upon the merging of its mother node in
these tree representations (here, that John saw), into
an argument position. We can do this by stipulat-
ing that SPL does not apply to expressions where
there exist units 2-subordinate to the root. The par-
tial derivation of (3) in Figure 6 can therefore con-

tinue with an application of SPL, producing

think that John saw:: -V

who:: -wh

but the would-be derivation of (4) cannot.4

I should emphasise that I have not said anything
insightful so far about the nature of adjunct island
effects. This constraint on the expressions to which
SPL can apply is simply a restatement of the fact that
extraction from adjuncts is prohibited. The attrac-
tion of it is that in combination with the implemen-
tation of movement that our formalism assumes, the
very same constraint simultaneously prohibits ex-
traction from moved constituents. This is what the
next subsection will illustrate.

3.2 Freezing effects follow

The adjunct island constraint, we have just seen,
amounts to a prohibition on applying SPL to config-
urations in which a moving unit u is 1-subordinate
to a unit u′, which is itself adjoined to, and thus 1-
subordinate to, the expression’s root; in such con-

4Note that this constraint does not rule out multiple adjuncts
independently modifying a single phrase, as long as none of
these adjuncts themselves have subordinate parts waiting to re-
merge.

Tim Hunter

22



figurations u is 2-subordinate to the root. But the
general constraint — that SPL may not apply to ex-
pressions where some unit is 2-subordinate to the
root — also prohibits applying SPL to configurations
in which a moving unit u is 1-subordinate to a unit
u′, which has not yet reached its final position, and
is thus 1-subordinate to the root. This second kind
of configuration is exactly the one that characterises
freezing effects.

As a concrete example, I will suppose that (5) is
ruled out because ‘who’ has moved out of a larger
constituent which has itself moved: specifically, it
has moved out of the subject, which has moved for
Case/EPP reasons. I will show that this can be ruled
out by the same constraint on SPL that we arrived at
above to enforce adjunct islands.

(5) * Who did [a picture of ] fall (on the floor)?

First consider the derivation of a sentence involv-
ing the relevant movement of the subject, but not yet
with any additional wh-movement. The relevant part
of the derivation of (6) is shown in Figure 7.

(6) A picture of John fell (on the floor)

The steps in Figure 7 begin at the point where
the subject ‘a picture of John’ has been fully con-
structed, and it will need to merge into a theta po-
sition (-d) and Case position (-k). Note that since
its theta position is not its final destination, a unit
a picture of John:: -k remains as a daughter of
the root when the +d and -d features are checked
(analogous to ‘who’ remaining disconnected when
the object requirement was discharged in Figure 1).
This causes no problem in the derivation of (6)
where no movement out of the subject is required:
SPL applies to the last expression shown in Figure 7,
since we have completed construction of the VP by
this point, and the subject ‘a picture of John’ re-
merges into its Case position when the opportunity
arises.

Now consider Figure 8, showing the attempted
derivation of (5), where ‘who’ must move out of
the subject. After the two steps shown there the +d
requirement of ‘fall’ has been discharged, so SPL
is due to apply. However, as observed above, the
unit a picture of:: -k remains 1-subordinate to
the root fall:: -V , and who:: -wh remains 1-
subordinate to a picture of:: -k ; therefore we have

a unit, who:: -wh , which is 2-subordinate to the
root fall:: -V and so our constraint from §3.1 pro-
hibits application of SPL.

To see the similarity between adjunct island con-
figurations and freezing configurations, note the
similarity between the attempted derivation of (4) in
Figure 6, and that of (5) in Figure 8. In each case the
constituent out of which who:: -wh needs to move
remains 1-subordinate to the root — in the first case,
because because John saw:: *V is an adjunct,
and in the second case, because a picture of:: -k
has not reached its final position. Contrast these in
particular with the part of the successful derivation
of (3) in Figure 6, where the constituent ‘that John
saw’ out of which who:: -wh needs to move is not
subordinate to the expression’s root. The proposed
constraint therefore makes a natural cut between (i)
adjoined constituents and moving constituents, out
of which movement is disallowed, and (ii) argument
constituents, out of which movement is allowed.

4 Conclusion

In this paper I have argued that two well-known gen-
eralisations concerning extraction domains can be
reduced to a single constraint: first, the generali-
sation that extraction from adjuncts is prohibited,
and second, the generalisation that extraction from
moved constituents is prohibited. I have presented
and integrated independently-motivated implemen-
tations of movement relations and adjunction, and
shown that it emerges from the resulting system that
adjoined constituents and moved constituents have a
certain shared status. This allows us to add a single
constraint to the theory to capture both the existing
generalisations.

Acknowledgments

Thanks to Norbert Hornstein, Juan Uriagereka, Amy
Weinberg and Alexander Williams for helpful dis-
cussion of this work.

References

Cattell, R. (1976). Constraints on movement rules.
Language, 52(1):18–50.

Chametzky, R. A. (1996). A Theory of Phrase Mark-
ers and the Extended Base. State University of
New York Press, Albany, NY.

Unifying Adjunct Islands and Freezing Effects in Minimalist Grammars

23



a picture of John::-d-k INS−−→ fall::+d-V

a picture of John::-d-k

MRG
−−→ fall::-V

a picture of John::-k

Figure 7: Partial derivation illustrating subject movement in (6).

a picture of::-d-k

who::-wh

INS
−−→ fall::+d-V

a picture of::-d-k

who::-wh

MRG
−−→ fall::-V

a picture of::-k

who::-wh

Figure 8: Ill-fated attempted derivation of the sentence in (5).

Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Chomsky, N. (2004). Beyond explanatory adequacy.
In Belletti, A., editor, Structures and Beyond. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford.

Epstein, S. D., Groat, E., Kawashima, R., and Ki-
tahara, H. (1998). A Derivational Approach to
Syntactic Relations. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford.

Frank, R. (1992). Syntactic Locality and Tree Ad-
joining Grammar. PhD thesis, University of
Pennsylvania.

Gärtner, H.-M. and Michaelis, J. (2005). A note on
the complexity of constraint interaction: Locality
conditions and Minimalist Grammars. In Blache,
P., Stabler, E. P., Busquets, J., and Moot, R., ed-
itors, Logical Aspects of Computational Linguis-
tics, volume 3492 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 114–130. Springer.

Gärtner, H.-M. and Michaelis, J. (2007). Local-
ity conditions and the complexity of Minimal-
ist Grammars: A preliminary survey. In Model-
Theoretic Syntax at 10, Proceedings of the ESS-
LLI Workshop (Dublin), pages 87–98.

Hornstein, N. and Nunes, J. (2008). Adjunction, la-
beling, and bare phrase structure. Biolinguistics,
2(1):57–86.

Huang, C. T. J. (1982). Logical relations in Chinese
and the theory of grammar. PhD thesis, MIT.

Hunter, T. (2010). Relating Movement and Adjunc-
tion in Syntax and Semantics. PhD thesis, Univer-
sity of Maryland.

Kroch, A. (1987). Unbounded dependencies and
subjacency in tree adjoining grammar. In
Manaster-Ramer, A., editor, Mathematics of Lan-
guage, pages 143–172. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.

Kroch, A. (1989). Asymmetries in long distance ex-
traction in tree adjoining grammar. In Baltin, M.
and Kroch, A., editors, Alternative conceptions
of phrase structure, pages 66–98. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Parsons, T. (1990). Events in the semantics of En-
glish. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Pietroski, P. M. (2005). Events and Semantic Archi-
tecture. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Stabler, E. P. (1997). Derivational minimalism. In
Retoré, C., editor, Logical Aspects of Computa-
tional Linguistics, volume 1328 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 68–95. Springer.

Stabler, E. P. (2006). Sidewards without copying. In
Monachesi, P., Penn, G., Satta, G., and Wintner,
S., editors, Proceedings of the 11th Conference on
Formal Grammar.

Uriagereka, J. (1999). Multiple spell-out. In Epstein,
S. D. and Hornstein, N., editors, Working Mini-
malism, pages 251–282. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Wexler, K. and Culicover, P. (1981). Formal Princi-
ples of Language Acquisition. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Tim Hunter

24


