



















































Verifying Vowel Harmony Typologies


Proceedings of the 11th Meeting of the ACL-SIGMORPHON, ACL 2010, pages 9–18,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Verifying Vowel Harmony Typologies

Sara Finley
University of Rochester

Rochester, NY, USA
sfinley@bcs.rochester.edu

Abstract

This paper applies finite state technologies to
verify the typological validity of Turbid
Spreading, a theory of vowel harmony in Op-
timality Theory (OT) (Prince & Smolensky,
1993/2004). Previous analyses of vowel har-
mony in OT have been prone to typological
inconsistencies, predicting grammars that do
not occur in natural language (Wilson, 2003).
However, attempts to eliminate typological
pathologies relying on hand-made inputs and
candidate sets have been shown to be highly
prone to error (Wilson, 2005). Using a modi-
fied version of the Contenders Algorithm
(Riggle, 2004b), we verify that Turbid
Spreading makes typologically valid predic-
tions about the types of harmony processes
that may appear in natural language. This
modification of the Contenders Algorithm to
include complex spreading interactions and
intermediate representations demonstrates the
utility of computational methods for verifying
the typological predictions of complex
phonological theories.

1 Introduction

The goal of Optimality Theory (OT) (Prince &
Smolensky, 1993/2004) is to understand and ex-
plain the mechanisms responsible for linguistic
processes. Because it is possible to use constraint
rankings to generate a set of possible grammars,
OT is fundamentally a theory of cross-linguistic
typology.

One of the theoretical assumptions of OT is
that it is the job of the grammar to determine
which languages are possible and which are not.
While the full typology of identifiable languages
can never be verified, it is generally agreed that
there is a difference between unattested lan-
guages that are accidental gaps and unattested
languages that are pathological. While both are
unattested, accidental gaps are theoretically pos-

sible, and might be found given enough time.
Pathological languages are languages that are
logically possible, but violate general principles
of language, and no natural language is expected
to contain such pathologies.

Thus, OT assumes that a valid grammar is ty-
pologically sound if it does not generate pathol-
ogically unattested languages. However, it is ex-
tremely difficult to assess the typological validity
of phonological analyses because the output of a
typological prediction is dependent upon the set
of constraints, the output candidates considered,
and the underlying forms (inputs) of interest. The
theorist must therefore be able to consider all
possible inputs, to select an inclusive set of can-
didates, and to be sure to include the relevant
constraints. If any one of these factors is not
carefully constructed, the theorist may miss an
important typological prediction made by the OT
grammar.

These challenges can be significantly dimin-
ished through computational tools, such as finite-
state techniques. With such tools, it is possible to
understand typological predictions that would
have likely gone unnoticed without a computa-
tional model. This paper presents the results of
computational models used to revise and formu-
late a phonological theory. In this paper, we
make use of finite-state methods (specifically
Riggle’s (2004b) Contenders Algorithm) to un-
derstand and verify the typological predictions of
a particular theory of vowel harmony, Turbid
Spreading (Finley, 2008, in press). Without the
computational tools presented in this paper,
many unwanted predictions would have been
made.

Vowel harmony is a phonological process
whereby a particular phonological feature is
shared by all vowels in a given lexical domain.
For example, in Turkish vowel harmony, if the
first vowel of the word is [+Back], all following
vowels are [+Back], creating a spreading process
whereby [+Back] is spread from the left edge of
the word to the right.

9



In simple1 cases of harmony, all possible vo w-
els undergo spreading. However, harmony fails
when a vowel is unable to take on the spreading
feature (e.g., if the language does not allow
[–High] vowels to be [+Back]). In these cases the
non-participating vowel can either block har-
mony and create a new spreading domain (as an
opaque vowel; [+ – –]) or allow the spreading
domain to skip the nonparticipating vowel (as a
transparent vowel; [+ – +]).

There are two reasons that vowel harmony in
OT is an ideal candidate for the present case
study of the use of finite-state techniques to ver-
ify linguistic typologies. First, vowel harmony is
cross-linguistically widespread, with a clear ty-
pology of patterns that are both frequent as well
as those that are unattested. Further, the ways in
which vowel harmony interacts with other proc-
esses (e.g., epenthesis and deletion) are well un-
derstood, such that it is possible to differentiate
between accidental gaps and pathological unat-
tested languages. For example, direction of
spreading in vowel harmony is determined by the
featural, morphological or (left or right) edge
status of the potential harmony source trigger
vowel. There are no languages that determine the
direction of spreading by fewest changes from
the input to output (referred to as ‘majority
rules’) (Finley & Badecker, 2008). However, this
pattern is easy to produce using Agree con-
straints which merely require adjacent vowels to
agree, and do not specify direction. It is these
kinds of unattested interactions that an ideal
model of vowel harmony in OT should avoid.
This ideal model must also be able to account for
the major harmony patterns (transparency, opac-
ity, etc.).

Establishing a theory of vowel harmony in OT
with both of these properties has been particu-
larly problematic. In addition to ‘majority rules’
patterns, interactions between non-participating
vowels and directionality of spreading have
posed a particular challenge. For example, tradi-
tional constraints used for vowel harmony (e.g.,
Align and Agree) predict harmony interactions
that do not exist, such as failure to spread to
regularly undergoing vowels in the presence of a
non-participating vowel, or deletion of a non-
participating vowel in order to preserve agree-
ment of vowel features (Wilson, 2003). These
harmony pathologies pose a great challenge for

                                                  
1 Like most phonological processes, vowel harmony is
subject to exceptions (Finley, 2010). Future work will in-
corporate exceptions into computational methods.

vowel harmony and OT in general. Turbid
Spreading is a representational approach to
vowel harmony in OT that has been designed
with this challenge in mind.

The second reason that vowel harmony is an
ideal method for studying the interaction of theo-
retical and computational methods is that vowel
harmony requires rich representations. These rich
representations pose a unique opportunity to in-
tegrate theoretical and computational method-
ologies. Specifically, we capture these rich repre-
sentations through the Contenders Algorithm
(Riggle, 2004b).

Further, vowel harmony is an important area
of research in computational phonology (Bird &
Ellison, 1994; Ellison, 1992; Goldsmith & Xan-
thos, 2009) because the representation of agree-
ment between vowels across consonants poses
unique challenges to the learner. This paper dif-
fers from previous computational models of
vowel harmony because the present work is an
instantiation of a generative OT model. The pre-
sent work focuses on framing work done in theo-
retical linguistics in a computational framework.

The paper begins with a brief overview of the
Contenders Algorithm (Section 2). This is fol-
lowed by a description of Turbid Spreading and
its formalization in finite-state representations
(Section 3). Section 4 presents the results of the
typological analysis.

2 The Contenders Algorithm
Riggle’s (2004a, 2004b) algorithm uses finite-
state techniques to find the set of candidates for a
given input that are possible optimal outputs un-
der any possible ranking. In order to compute
constraint violations, both GE N  and the con-
straints in CON are represented in terms of a fi-
nite state transducer. The use of finite represen-
tations of infinite sets of strings has important
consequences for Optimality Theory. As long as
GEN can be represented in terms of finite-state
transducers, it is possible to represent the infinite
candidate set in terms of a single computation.
When all constraints are combined and a single
input is evaluated, there will only be a finite set
of contenders2.

The Contenders Algorithm creates a single fi-
nite state transducer via the intersection of finite-
state transducers for GEN and CON. This com-
bined transducer is an unranked grammar. Be-

                                                  
2 See Riggle (2004b) for proof that the list of contenders
will always be a finite set.

10



cause the goal of the algorithm is to produce a
list of candidates that could ‘win’ under some
ranking, the algorithm must entertain all possible
rankings.

Violations of constraints are instantiated
through costs for specific paths in the transducer
(e.g., a path that changes a [+F] vowel to a [–F]
vowel may have a cost of 1, incurring a single
violation). The combined transducer makes it
possible to find the constraint profile for any in-
put-output mappings created by GEN. This is the
cost of traversing the transducer from start to
finish for a given input-output pair. The Con-
tenders Algorithm compares violation profiles
for given constraints and candidates, making it
possible to predict which violation profiles (can-
didates) are able to win under some ranking (i.e.,
which candidates are contenders).

The Contenders Algorithm uses Ellison’s
(1994) model of finite-state transducers in OT to
find the least costly paths through the finite-state
grammar. Because each arc of the transducer cor-
responds to a segment in the string (along with
the input-output mapping for that segment), the
costs associated with that segment (i.e. constraint
violations) are found in each arc. These costs are
stored as n-tuples that can be used to compare
the costs associated with different candidates.

Riggle’s model is based on Dijktra’s (1959)
shortest path algorithm. Every time a candidate
violates a constraint, it increases the ‘distance’
through the transducer. According to Dijkstra’s
model, the shortest path through a transducer is
also the shortest path through each intermediate
step (as each intermediate step serves as a subset
of the shortest path). This means that candidates
that incur many violations will have the most
costly paths. By comparing each candidate’s cost
for each constraint, it is possible to find which
candidates are harmonically bound (i.e. cannot
win under any ranking) and which are not (the
contenders).

The Contenders Algorithm selects each node
of the intersected finite-state transducer and re-
cords the cost of each arc outside that node. The
cost of visiting that particular node is recorded if
that cost is less than or equal to previously re-
corded costs. After all nodes have been evalu-
ated, a list of the costs associated with each node
is produced. The Contenders Algorithm then
generates a list of all candidates whose costs do
not exceed that of the least-cost list; these are the
contenders for a given input.

The output of the Contenders Algorithm for a
large set of inputs can be used to create a typo-

logical analysis (Bane & Riggle, in press). This
typological analysis provides information about
the relationship between the different contenders
and the rankings that produce them. The typol-
ogy is formed by inputing the list of contenders
for a range of inputs into an algorithm that com-
putes Elementary Ranking Conditions (ERCs)
(Prince, 2002). ERCs produce a set of possible
ranking interactions from a set of candidates and
their violation profiles.

The present paper modifies Riggle’s (2004b)
model in several ways. First, Riggle’s model is
relatively simple in terms of the types of seg-
ments used. Riggle is able to model epenthesis
and deletion of segments listed as /a/ and /b/. In
the present model, we include binary vowel fea-
tures ([±F]) that are active in vowel harmony (in
addition to consonants). Second, the number and
complexity of constraints are increased. The pre-
sent model allows for deletion and insertion, as
well as feature agreement and featural marked-
ness. Third, the present model adds an interme-
diate level of representation between the input
and the output, thereby increasing the level of
complexity in both the constraints and the
evaluation. This demonstrates that Riggle’s
model is capable of handling rich representa-
tions, complex phonological processes and mul-
tiple assumptions about the architecture of repre-
sentations in phonology. Thus, the Contenders
Algorithm is important for a wide range of
problems in phonological theory, and has the
ability to bring computational approaches to
problems that affect researchers in phonology
beyond the computational linguist.

3 Turbid Spreading

Turbid Spreading is a representational approach
to vowel harmony based loosely on Turbidity
Theory (Goldrick, 2001), a model for opaque
representations in phonology. This model uses
hidden representations as a method for account-
ing for incremental phonological processes in a
parallel fashion. Turbid Spreading extends this
idea of hidden representations. In Turbid
Spreading, featural representations for segments
have three levels: the underlying representation
(UR), the projection level (PR), and the surface
level (SR). Relations between the underlying
form and the surface form are achieved at the
projection level. All segments have a feature
value at the projection level. Because we are
concerned with spreading between vowels, we
focus solely on the representations for vowels. In

11



the present implementation, there is a single
harmonic feature of interest (±F) and a secondary
unary feature (B) that is penalized when a seg-
ment that possess both B and +F feature values
(and can therefore block harmony, such as a
[+High] vowel that cannot be [+Back]). All ±
notations refer to the feature F. Thus, +B is a
[+F, B] vowel and –B is a [–F, B] vowel.

All projection level representations are marked
±U, ±R, ±L, and ±P.  The ± refers to the feature
value for F (+F/–F), and the letter (U, L, etc.)
refers to the source of the projection, described
below.

 The source of the projected feature value can
be the underlying form (a faithful representation,
marked as ±U, in which +U refers to a +F vowel
projected by its underlying form, and –U refers
to a –F vowel projected by its underlying form),
a neighboring vowel (via spreading, marked as
±L/±R, in which +L refers to a +F vowel pro-
jected by the vowel to its left) or the phonetic
representation, via the surface level (marked as
±P, in which  +P refers to a +F vowel projected
by its surface form). Each vowel has one and
only one source for its projection value.

In Turbid Spreading, vowel harmony is
achieved when the feature value at the projection
level of the triggering vowel spreads to an adja-
cent vowel. In the example of spreading given in
Figure 1, the pictoral representation of spreading
is given on the left, with the notational features
given on the right.  The first vowel spreads [+F]
to the second vowel, causing the second vowel to
be represented as +L at the projection level (be-
cause it receives a [+F] feature from the vowel to
the left). The underlying form and the surface
form do not change as a result of spreading.

   [+F]      [–F]     UR:   +F   –F
                    

     [+F] [+F]      PR:   +U  +L

     [+F]     [+F]     SR:   +F  +F

Figure 1: Spreading

 An important restriction on spreading is that
the features at both sides of the ‘arrows’ must
match (e.g., [–F]  [+F] is prohibited3). In other
words, vowels may only spread the feature value
at the projection level. However, this does not

                                                  
3 The present model does not account for dissimilation, but
we assume that will be accounted for by some other mecha-
nism, and is subject to future work.

preclude feature values from changing at differ-
ent levels (e.g., from [+F] in the UR to [–F] in
the PR). Allowing changes to feature values at
different levels captures both direct spreading
processes, as well as opaque interactions be-
tween spreading and the surface form. For exam-
ple, a transparent vowel is created when [+F]
spreads to a non-participating vowel (giving
+L/+R at the PR) but the non-participating vowel
pronounces [–F] at the SR. In this case, the fea-
ture values at the projection and pronunciation
levels will not match. Transparent vowels there-
fore satisfy spreading constraints, but violate the
constraints requiring the feature values of the
surface form and the projection level to match.

For the purpose of formalizing Turbid
Spreading into regular expressions for the Con-
tenders Algorithm, we treat each level of repre-
sentation (UR, PR and SR) as an element of a
triple. There are four feature values that appear
in the UR and the SR: /+F, –F, +B, –B/. The
feature B (potential harmony blocker) is a
placeholder for a feature that may or may not
spread that harmonic feature. This allows us to
place restrictions on which vowels can undergo
spreading (e.g., a restriction that non-high vow-
els cannot undergo back harmony). This secon-
dary feature is important for evaluating the ty-
pology of interactions between participating and
non-participating vowels.

The projection level  (PR) representation con-
tains both featural information as well as the
source of spreading. The feature values for F are
shortened to be simply +/–. For example, a +F
vowel projected by U is written as +U rather than
+FU. Thus, ±U implies a faithful ±F feature rep-
resentation of the underlying form (e.g., –U im-
plies a faithful representation of the
–F feature value in the underlying form). ±P im-
plies that the phonetics has caused a change in
the representation. ±R implies leftward spreading
(the vowel to right spread to the current vowel).
±L implies rightward spreading (the vowel to the
left spread to the current vowel). The representa-
tion for each string of vowels is written as [UR:
PR: SR]. The pictorial representation in Figure 1
is therefore [+F –F: +U +L: +F +F].

We implemented Turbid Spreading in the
Contenders Algorithm by using finite state im-
plementations of GE N and of the constraints
known to interact with spreading4. Each arc of
the transducer represents a single segment, pre-

                                                  
4 Text versions of the FSA’s can be found at:
http://www.cog.jhu.edu/grad-students/finley/fsa.pdf

12



sented as a tuple. A ‘.’ notation indicated that the
position in the tuple could be filled by any fea-
ture value. Non-crucial arcs were removed from
the diagrams of finite-state transducers (but were
included in the formal analysis). These include
the potential for vowel epenthesis (notated as [-])
and vowel deletion (notated as an [x]). Note that
the symbols ‘x’ and ‘-‘ are used solely for
‘bookkeeping’ purposes in the FSA’s and are not
necessarily part of the phonological representa-
tion.

We also removed several arcs allowing for the
presence of consonants (represented as [C]). Be-
cause projection from the surface form (+P/–P)
works the same as projection from the UR (in
terms of vowel harmony), these are left out of the
descriptions (but were included in the formal
analysis).

The transducer for Gen is given in Figure 2.
This finite state transducer accepts strings of
concatenated vowels for all potential inputs. This
transducer provides the basis for restrictions on
the representations for spreading. One such re-
striction is that the feature value of the projection
must match the source feature value. For exam-
ple, a vowel with a [+U] projection must have
[+F] in the UR (e.g., arc 0 to 1). A second re-
striction is a practical one; the first vowel in a
word cannot be projected by the vowel to its left
(because such a vowel does not exist).  The third
restriction is that vowels have one and only one
projection. Gen only produces segments that
have a single value at the projection.

Figure 2: GEN

Spreading is initiated by a vowel whose pro-
jection is its underlying form (+U/–U). A vowel
may only be projected by +L if it follows a
vowel that is projected by +U (and likewise for
–L).  This ensures that the only initiator for
rightwards spreading is a vowel projected by its
underlying form.

In Turbid Spreading, deletion of a segment
entails deletion of only the surface form; all

vowels with a UR have a representation at the
PR. Epenthesis can occur at either the PR level
(requiring representations at both the PR and SR)
or the SR (requiring only a representation at the
SR). Epenthetic vowels at the PR level undergo
spreading (e.g., arc 0 to 6), whereas epenthetic
vowels at the SR only are transparent to spread-
ing. The difference between epenthetic and de-
leted vowels is based on the fact that epenthetic
vowels may interact with spreading (at the pro-
jection level) or be transparent (and appear only
at the pronunciation level), but deleted vowels
may not interact with spreading (and therefore
appear only at the pronunciation level).

Rightwards spreading is instantiated in the arcs
from state 0 to states 3, 4, 6 and 7. Transitions
from 0 to 6 and 0 to 7 involve epenthetic vowels
(marked with a /-/ in the UR). Arcs from 0 to 3
and 0 to 6 involve spreading -F to the left (/-R/ at
the PR). Arcs from 0 to 7 and 0 to 4 involve
spreading +F to the right (/+R/ at the PR). In or-
der for a /+R/-R/ projected vowel to reach a final
state, the source of spreading must be +U/-U,
which is reflected in the arcs from 3 to 2, and 4
to 1. Spreading from the left to right involves a
vowel projected by its underlying form (transi-
tions 0 to 1 and 0 to 2). From there a vowel may
be projected as +L  (state 1) or as –L (state 2).

Constraints Turbid Spreading is instantiated
through several constraints. SPREAD-R and
SPREAD-L initiate vowel harmony. ID[F]-UR
regulates  featural identity between the underly-
ing representation and the projection. ID[F]-SR
regulates featural identity between the surface
representation and the projection.  Constraints
that govern epenthesis and deletion are MAX,
DEP, and *CC. The finite state transducers of
these constraints assign violation marks (e.g., -1)
to the output whenever a violation of the con-
straint is encountered.

ID[F]-UR is violated once for every vowel not
projected by its underlying form. Any vowel that
has an underlying form (i.e., not an epenthetic
vowel), but is not marked with ±U at the PR in-
curs a violation.

13



Figure 3: ID[F]-UR

*B is a placeholder for a featural markedness
constraint (e.g., *[+Back, –High]). This con-
straint is violated when a vowel is marked ±B in
the input and is +F in the output (e.g., a [–High]
vowel becoming [+Back]). All other representa-
tions do not receive a violation5.

Figure 4: *B

The ID[F]-SR constraint is violated whenever
the feature values at the projection and the pro-
nunciation level do not match. For example, if
the pronunciation is [+], the projection must be
+U, +L, +R or +P.

Figure 5: ID[F]-SR

                                                  
5 This constraint assumes that no vowels may lose their /B/
specification from the input to the output (e.g., change from
[–HIGH] to [+HIGH] in order to allow spreading of [+Back]).
This process is called ‘re-pairing’ (Bakovic, 2000), and is
subject to future research.

The ‘x’ symbol is used to denote deleted vow-
els, which violate MAX, which assigns a viola-
tion if  ‘x’ appears in the pronunciation.

Figure 6: MAX

DEP is the constraint violated by epenthesis,
represented by the symbol ‘-‘ in the underlying
form. DEP searches for any vowel with (-) in the
UR and assigns a violation for each feature value
that appears on the projection and pronunciation
levels. Epenthesis at the pronunciation level in-
curs two violations of DEP, but epenthesis at the
projection level incurs one violation.

Figure 7: DEP

I assume that epenthesis is driven by the mark-
edness constraint *CC6. This constraint scans the
pronunciation level for two consonants in a row,
and assigns a violation for every pair of conso-
nants. *CC requires two states because *CC is
violated only when there are two consecutive
consonants, making one state for the first conso-
nant (no violations), and a second state for an
adjacent consonant (a violation).

                                                  
6 In addition to *CC, other constraints such as *#C or *C#
may trigger epenthesis. For simplicity, these additional con-
straints are not included in the present analysis.

14



Figure 8: *CC

Violations for both spreading constraints are
assigned directionally such that a violation on the
first vowel is more severe than violations later in
the word (Eisner, 2000), formalized in a simpli-
fied version where violations at different parts of
the word are greater than other parts of the word.
In order to prevent ‘gang’ effects, violations are
assigned exponentially such that for a three-
vowel input, violation on the second vowel in-
curs 100 violations, while a violation on the third
vowel incurs only 10 violations. This simplified
version of directional evaluation only allows for
a finite number of vowels in the input. However,
because the theory is tested with inputs of 3 and
4 vowels in length, these simplified transducers
capture the data analyzed here. Future work will
analyze directional spreading for an unlimited
number of vowels in the input.

SPREAD-R is satisfied if a vowel projects an L
(+/–L only occurs if a vowel spreads rightwards).
Spreading is represented in terms of the target of
spreading (e.g., a [+L] vowel is the target of
spreading). Because initial vowels cannot be a
target of rightward spreading (as there is no
vowel to the left), the initial vowel automatically
satisfies SPREAD-R.

Figure 9: SPREAD-R

From state 1, vowels that project an L satisfy
SPREAD and move to state 5. All other vowels
move to state 2 and incur 100 violations. From
states 2 and 5, if the third vowel satisfies
SPREAD, it moves to state 6. If the final vowel
satisfies SPREAD, it moves to state 7. If the third
vowel fails to satisfy SPREAD, it moves to state 3

(from state 5 or 2) and incurs 10 violations. If the
fourth vowel fails to satisfy SPREAD, it moves to
state 4 (from states 6 or 3) and incurs 1 violation.

One might assume that SPREAD-L simply is a
reversed version of SPREAD-R. However, this
simple reversal is not possible because the oppo-
site vowels trigger spreading for each constraint.
In SPREAD-R, the initial vowel is the optimal
trigger for harmony, but for SPREAD-L the final
vowel is the optimal trigger for harmony.

The final vowel always satisfies SPREAD-L be-
cause final vowels cannot be targets for leftward
spreading. Thus, the final vowel (state 7) never
incurs a violation. If the first vowel is projected
by +R or -R, then it satisfies SPREAD-L (state 3),
otherwise it violates the constraint, and incurs 1
violation (state 4). If the second non-final vowel
violates SPREAD-L, it moves to state 2 and incurs
10 violations. If the third non-final vowel vio-
lates SPREAD-L, it moves to state 3 and incurs
100 violations.

Violations of harmony from epenthetic vowels
are assigned based on the position of the word. If
an epenthetic vowel does not get its projected
feature from the right, it will incur a violation of
SPREAD-L. Epenthesis before the initial vowel
incurs 1 violation, epenthesis after the initial
vowel incurs 10 violations, etc.

Figure 9: SPREAD-L

4 Results

The finite state transducers implementing GEN
and the constraints were fed into the Contenders
Algorithm. This was a modified version of Rig-
gle’s java script program7. This program co m-
putes the contenders for a single input over the
grammar. While the finite-state transducers rep-
resent an infinite candidate set, it would be im-
possible to compute contenders for every possi-
ble input. We limited the input to 4 vowels be-
                                                  
7 Thanks to Colin Wilson for these modifications.

15



cause all previously reported pathologies did not
change for words longer than four vowels (3 with
epenthesis)8. We used Microsoft Excel to co m-
pute all possible feature combinations for up to
four vowels (+F, –F, +B, –B) without epenthesis.
There were 256 combinations with 4 vowels in
the input, 64 combinations with 3 vowels, 16
combinations with 2 vowels, and 4 with 1 vowel
in the input. The input list with epenthesis used
the vowel combinations for up to 3 vowels, and
CC clusters were inserted at the left edge, right
edge, and medially (when applicable).

The results of the Contenders Algorithm were
fed into the Erculator program for computing
typologies using Elementary Ranking Conditions
(ERCs) (Riggle, 2007). Without epenthesis, there
was a typology containing 16 languages: 6
spread right, 6 spread left and 4 with no spread-
ing. For the no spread cases, there was one lan-
guage that allowed the marked segment ([+B]),
and three that did not. In the three that did not
allow [+B] in the output, underlyingly /+B/ seg-
ments were treated differently. In one language,
underlyingly /+B/ segments got their [–F] feature
from the vowel to its left, in another language,
underlyingly /+B/ segments got their [–F] feature
from the vowel to its right, and in the third lan-
guage, underlyingly /+B/ segments got their [–F]
feature from the pronunciation level.

The six spread-right and spread-left languages
were identical except for direction of spreading.
In one language all vowels participated in har-
mony. The second language was a case of ‘allo-
phonic harmony’. In this case, a [+B] vowel only
appears as a result of harmony. That is, harmony
creates allophones of a phoneme that would oth-
erwise not appear on the surface. Non-
participating vowels were transparent in the third
and fourth cases. In the third case, an underly-
ingly +B vowel was changed via spreading; in
the fourth case, an underlyingly +B vowel was
changed at the pronunciation level. In the fifth
and sixths cases, non-participating vowels were
opaque, blocking harmony and starting a new
harmonic domain. In the fifth case, underlyingly
/+B/ segments changed to [–F] via projection
from the surface. In the sixth language, underly-
ingly /+B/ segments could undergo spreading of
[–F] from either the left or the right, if possible.

With epenthesis, the predicted typology con-
tained 68 languages. There were 16 languages
with no epenthesis, 16 languages with epenthesis
always on the projection level and 16 languages
                                                  
8 Pilot tests with longer inputs did not change the results.

with epenthesis at the pronunciation level (giving
48 languages). Each of these sets of 16 languages
corresponded to the 16 languages with no epen-
thesis above. The final 20 languages were from
cases in which epenthesis occurred at the projec-
tion level only if spreading were possible from
the vowel to the left (10 languages) or the vowel
to the right (10 languages). These 20 languages
differed depending on how non-derived vowels
behaved. There were two sets of 4 no-spread
languages, 6 spread-right languages, and 6
spread-left, described above.

Pattern Examples
1. All vowels
participate

Kalenjin (Local & Lodge,
1996)
Degema (Elugbe, 1984)

2. Transparent
Vowels

Hungarian (Goldsmith, 1985)
Finnish (Goldsmith, 1985)

3. Opaque
Vowels

Mongolian (Goldsmith, 1985)
Turkish (Underhill, 1976)

4. Bi-
Directional
Harmony

Lango (Woock & Nooonan,
1979)
Kalenjin (Local & Lodge,
1996)
Turkana (Dimmendaal, 1983)

5. Allophonic
Harmony

Pasiego (Penny, 1969)
Akan (Clements, 1981)
Kinande (Archangeli & Pulley-
blank, 2002)
Nawuri (Casali, 2003)

Epenthetic Vowels
6. Transparent Karchevan (Vaux, 1995)

Agulus (Vaux, 1998)
7. Undergo
Harmony

Turkish (Clements & Sezer,
1982; Underhill, 1976)
Yawelmani (Archangeli, 1988)
Yoruba (Archangeli & Pulley-
blank, 1989)

8. Directional
Harmony

Levantine Arabic (Kenstowicz,
1981)
Mohawk (Postal, 1968),
Sesotho (Rose & Demuth,
2006)

9. Epenthetic
Vowels Only

Ponapean (Kitto & DeLacy,
1999)
Barra Gaelic (Sagey, 1987)
Marash (Vaux, 1998)

Table 1. Patterns of harmony languages

Importantly, all 68 of these languages represent
possible or known languages; none of these lan-
gauges share the properties of pathological ty-
pological predictions described by Wilson

16



(2003). An important result of these computa-
tions is that epenthesis is never blocked by a
failure to participate in harmony, a prediction
that previous analyses of vowel harmony incor-
rectly predicted to be possible (Wilson, 2003).

Because the resulting languages varied system-
atically, we were able to divide the 68 languages
into nine different patterns. Examples from real
languages are presented in Table 1. The first
pattern is that all vowels participate in harmony;
there are no non-participating vowels. The sec-
ond and third patterns are vowel harmony lan-
guages with nonparticipating vowels, either
transparent to harmony (case 2) or opaque to
harmony (case 3). Case 4 occurs when spreading
applies both from right-to-left as well as left-to-
right. Case 5 involves allophonic harmony, dis-
cussed above. Cases 6-9 apply to epenthetic
vowels. In case 6, harmony skips epenthetic
vowels. In case 7, harmony applies to epenthetic
vowels as if they were an underlying vowel. In
case 8, harmony applies to epenthetic vowels,
but directionally (e.g., the epenthetic vowel gets
its features from the right or left, or defaults if
there is no vowel to spread to the epenthetic
vowel). Case 9 occurs when harmony does not
apply to underlying vowels in the language, and
only epenthetic vowels undergo harmony.

The important result found in these 9 case pat-
terns is that all the major harmony phenomena
are predicted (directionality, epenthesis, trans-
parency and opacity), without predicting typo-
logically implausible languages. This is an im-
portant result because many previous theories of
vowel harmony in OT made pathological predic-
tions when harmony interacted with non-
participating vowels, deletion and epenthesis.
For example, alignment constraints predict fail-
ure to epenthesize a vowel in the presence of a
non-participating vowel (Wilson, 2003). Such
pathologies are not found in Turbid Spreading.

While there other instances of vowel harmony
that are not covered in the present analysis, the
present approach provides a mechanism for un-
derstanding the typology of vowel harmony
processes and the mechanisms that produce the
attested and the unattested patterns.

It is important to note that while the present re-
sults are successful, the model is a result of revi-
sions based on previous iterations of the Con-
tenders Algorithm. Many of the unwanted pre-
dictions in previous models could not have been
found without the use of the computational tools
used in this paper.

5 Conclusion

Computations over finite-state transducers
made it possible to compute a complete typology
of vowel harmony interactions, including inter-
actions of vowel harmony and epenthesis. The
computational model verified that Turbid
Spreading only predicts languages known to be
attested in natural language, but does predict the
common pathologies known to be problematic
for previous vowel harmony analyses in OT.

Because we used all possible vowel combina-
tions for up to four vowels, we can be fairly cer-
tain that all relevant inputs were considered. Be-
cause the Contenders Algorithm models the infi-
nite candidate set in GEN, we can be certain that
the relevant candidates were considered. This
paper demonstrates the power of computational
tools for measuring and evaluating theories of
phonological phenomena.

Acknowledgments
I am indebted to Colin Wilson, who provided
crucial guidance and encouragement. I am also
grateful to Jason Riggle, who laid the ground-
work for this project. In addition, I am extremely
grateful to Paul Smolensky for his help imple-
menting the inputs using Excel, and his guidance
in forming Turbid Spreading. I am also thankful
to Matt Goldrick, Joan Chen-Main, Gaja Jarosz-
Snover, Rebecca Morley, and Neil Bardhan for
their helpful comments. Funding was provided
by: NSF IGERT and NIH Grant DC00167. All
errors are my own.

References
Archangeli, D. (1988). Underspecification in Yawel-

mani Phonology and Morphology. New York &
London: Garland Publishing, Inc.

Archangeli, D., & Pulleyblank, D. (1989). Yoruba
vowel harmony. LI, 20, 173-217.

Archangeli, D., & Pulleyblank, D. (2002). Kinande
vowel harmony: domains, grounded conditions and
one-sided alignment. Phonology, 19, 139-188.

Bakovic, E. (2000). Harmony, dominance and con-
trol. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Rutgers
University.

Bane, M., & Riggle, J. (in press). The typological
consequences of weighted constraints. Proceedings
of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Chicago Linguis-
tics Society.

Bird, S., & Ellison, T. M. (1994). One-level phonol-
ogy: Autosegmental representations and rules as fi-
nite automata. Computational Linguistics, 20(1),
55-90.

17



Casali, R. F. (2003). [ATR] value asymmetries and
underlying vowel inventory structure in Niger-
Congo and Nilo-Sahaan. Linguistic Typology, 7,
307-382.

Clements, G. N. (1981). Akan vowel harmony: A
non-linear analysis. Harvard Studies in Phonology,
2, 108-177.

Clements, G. N., & Sezer, E. (1982). Vowel and con-
sonant disharmony in Turkish. In v. d. H. a. Smith
(Ed.), The structure of Phonological Representa-
tions (Vol. II, pp. 213-255). Dordrecht: Foris.

Dijkstra, E. (1959). A note on two problems in con-
nexion with graphs. Numerische Mathematik, 1,
269-271.

Dimmendaal, G. J. (1983). The Turkana language.
Dordecht: Foris.

Eisner, J. (2000). Directional constraint evaluation in
Optimality Theory. Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING), 257-263.

Ellison, M. T. (1992). Learning vowel harmony. Pa-
per presented at the SHOE Workshop, ITK, Til-
burg, Netherlands.

Ellison, M. T. (1994). Phonological derivation in Op-
timality Theory. Proceedings of the 15th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics,
1007-1013.

Elugbe, B. O. (1984). Morphology of the gerund in
Degema and its reconstruction in proto-Edoid.
Studies in African Linguistics, 15(1), 77-89.

Finley, S. (2008). Formal and cognitive restrictions
on vowel harmony. Unpublished doctoral disserta-
tion, Johns Hopkins University.

Finley, S. (2010). Exceptions in vowel harmony are
local. Lingua, 120, 1549-1566.

Finley, S. (in press). The interaction of epenthesis and
vowel harmony. Proceedings of the 44th Annual
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society.

Finley, S., & Badecker, W. (2008). Analytic biases
for vowel harmony languages. WCCFL, 27, 168-
176.

Goldrick, M. (2001). Turbid output representations
and the unity of opacity. NELS, 30, 231-245.

Goldsmith, J. (1985). Vowel harmony in Khalka
Mongolian, Yaka, Finnish and Hungarian. Phonol-
ogy Yearbook, 2, 253-275.

Goldsmith, J., & Xanthos, A. (2009). Learning
phonological categories. Language, 85(1), 4-38.

Kenstowicz, M. (1981). Vowel harmony in Palesitin-
ian Arabic: A suprasegmental analysis. Linguistics,
19, 449-465.

Kitto, C., & DeLacy, P. (1999). Correspondence and
epenthetic quality. In C. Kitto & C. Smallwood
(Eds.), Proceedings of AFLA VI. Holland: Aca-
demic Graphics.

Local, J., & Lodge, K. (1996). Another travesty of
respresentation: Phonological representation and
phonetic interpretation of ATR harmony in Kalen-
jin. York Papers in Linguistics, 17, 77-117.

Penny, R. J. (1969). Vowel harmony in the speech of
Montanes de Pas. ORBIS- Bulletin International de
Documentation Linguistique, 148-166.

Postal, P. M. (1968). Mohawk vowel doubling. Inter-
national Journal of American Linguistics, 35, 291-
298.

Prince, A. (2002). Arguing optimality. In A. Coetzee,
A. Carpenter & P. De Lacy (Eds.), Papers in Opti-
mality Theory II. Amherst, MA: GLSA.

Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1993/2004). Optimality
theory: Constraint interaction in generative gram-
mar. Cambridge: Blackwell.

Riggle, J. (2004a). Contenders and learning. In B.
Schmieser, A. K. Chand & A. Rodriquez (Eds.),
WCCFL (Vol. 23, pp. 101-114). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.

Riggle, J. (2004b). Generation, recognition and
learning in finite-state Optimality Theory. Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, UCLA.

Riggle, J. (2007). Erculator:
http://clml.uchicago.edu/?page_id=11.

Rose, Y., & Demuth, K. (2006). Vowel epenthesis in
loanword adaptation: Representational and phonetic
considerations. Lingua, 116, 1112-1139.

Sagey, E. (1987). Non-constituent spreading in Barra
Gaelic.Unpublished manuscript, UC Irvine.

Underhill, R. (1976). Turkish grammar. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

Vaux, B. (1995). Vowel harmony in the Armenian
dialect of Karchevan. NSL, 9(1-9).

Vaux, B. (1998). The phonology of Armenian. Ox-
ford: Clovendon Press.

Wilson, C. (2003). Analyzing unbounded spreading
with constraints: marks, targets, and deriva-
tions.Unpublished manuscript, UCLA.

Wilson, C. (2005). Localizing constraint violation:
Theoretical consequences of myopic spread-
ing.Unpublished manuscript, Paper presented at
HOWL3, Johns Hopkins.

Woock, E. B., & Nooonan, M. (1979). Vowel har-
mony in Lango. CLS, 15, 20-29.

18


