










































A Hybrid Approach to Unsupervised Relation Discovery Based on Linguistic Analysis and Semantic Typing


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First International Workshop on Formalisms and Methodology for Learning by Reading, pages 105–113,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Hybrid Approach to Unsupervised Relation Discovery Based on 

Linguistic Analysis and Semantic Typing 

 

Zareen Syed Evelyne Viegas 
University of Maryland Baltimore County Microsoft Research 

1000 Hilltop Circle One Microsoft Way 

Baltimore, MD 21229, USA Redmond, WA 98052, USA 

 

Abstract 

 This paper describes a hybrid approach for 

unsupervised and unrestricted relation discov-

ery between entities using output from linguis-

tic analysis and semantic typing information 

from a knowledge base. We use Factz (en-

coded as subject, predicate and object triples) 

produced by Powerset as a result of linguistic 

analysis. A particular relation may be ex-

pressed in a variety of ways in text and hence 

have multiple facts associated with it. We 

present an unsupervised approach for collaps-

ing multiple facts which represent the same 

kind of semantic relation between entities.  

Then a label is selected for the relation based 

on the input facts and entropy based label 

ranking of context words.  Finally, we demon-

strate relation discovery between entities at 

different levels of abstraction by leveraging 

semantic typing information from a know-

ledge base.     

1 Introduction 

There are a number of challenges involved when 

using facts extracted from text to enrich a know-

ledge base (KB) with semantic relations between 

entities:  co-reference resolution as there are 

many co-referent objects; entity resolution in 

order to link the entities mentioned in text to the 

right entities in the KB; handling co-referent re-

lations, as a particular semantic relation between 

entities can be expressed in a variety of ways in 

the text and therefore have multiple facts asso-

ciated between the entities. In addition,  the facts 

extracted from linguistic analysis are usually noi-

sy and sparse. 

Our work focuses on a recent line of explora-

tory work in the direction of Unrestricted Rela-

tion Discovery which is defined as: the automatic 

identification of different relations in text with-

out specifying a relation or set of relations in ad-

vance (Shinyama and Sekine, 2006). We use the 

facts which are the output of linguistic analysis 

from Powerset (www.Powerset.com). Powerset 

is an online search engine for querying Wikipe-

dia using Natural Language Queries. Powerset 

performs a linguistic analysis of the sentences 

within Wikipedia and outputs facts in the form of 

subject, predicate and object triples which can be 

queried through the online interface. For most 

entities like persons, places and things, Powerset 

shows a summary of facts from across Wikipedia 

(figure 1). In our approach we use the readily 

available “Factz” from Powerset as input to our 

system. Powerset is Wikipedia independent and 

can run on any corpus with well-formed sen-

tences and hence our approach is also not limited 

to Wikipedia. The Factz output from Powerset 

may represent relations between named entities 

or just nouns for example, 

 
Bank of America   <acquired>  bank 

Bank of America   <acquired>  Merrill Lynch 

Bank of America    <owned>  building 

 

Linguistic analysis has been recently de-

scribed as an effective technique for relation ex-

traction (Yan et al., 2009; Kambhatla, 2004; 

Nguyen et al., 2007).  Following that trend, we 

incorporate Factz, that are the output of linguistic 

analysis done by Powerset, to discover semantic 

relations between entities.  
Information from existing knowledge re-

 
Figure 1. Demonstration of Powerset Factz available 

online 

105



sources can help in tasks like named entity dis-

ambiguation by providing additional context in 

the form of linked entities in the KB and aid in 

linking the entities mentioned in the text to the 

entities in the KB. The KB can also provide in-

formation about the entity types which can in 

turn be used to discover relations between entity 

types at different levels of abstraction and help in 

enriching the KB itself. This could allow ontolo-

gy engineers  to explore the kind of relations ex-

isting between different entity types in a corpus 

and then design an ontology which is representa-

tive of the entities and relations evident in the 

corpus. 

Our overall approach to automatic relation 

discovery consists in  a hybrid approach  based 

on Powerset Factz that are the output of linguis-

tic analysis, and serve as input to our system; 

Text based label ranking by directly considering 

the context words in the sentences; and, Seman-

tic Typing information from existing knowledge 

resources to discover relations between Entity 

types at different levels of abstraction.  

The paper is organized as follows. We discuss 

the related work in the next section. In section 3 

we propose our approach and give the details of 

different components in our system. In section 4, 

we discuss preliminary experiments and results. 

In the last section we conclude our work and 

give future work directions. 

2 Related Work 

Hasegawa et al. (2004) developed an approach 

for unsupervised relation discovery by clustering 

pairs of entities based on intervening words 

represented as context vectors. They used the 

most frequent common word to label the cluster 

and hence the relation represented by the cluster. 

Shinyama and Sekine (2006) developed an 

approach to preemptively discover relations in a 

corpus and present them as tables with all the 

entity pairs in the table having the same relations 

between them. For pairs of entities they generate 

basic patterns that are parts of text syntactically 

connected to the Entity and use the predicate ar-

gument structure to make the basic patterns more 

generalized. They generate a basic cluster from 

articles based on having similar basic patterns to 

represent the same event and then they cluster 

the basic clusters to get a set of events having the 

same relation. 

Davidov et al. (2007) developed a web mining 

approach for discovering relations in which a 

specified concept participates based on clustering 

patterns in which the concept words and other 

words appear. Their system is based on the initial 

seed of two or more words representing the type 

of concept one is interested in. 

Linguistic analysis has been reported as an ef-

fective technique for semantic relation extrac-

tion. Harabagiu et al. (2005) used shallow se-

mantic parsers to enhance dependency tree ker-

nels and to build semantic dependency structures 

to improve relation extraction, they reported that 

their method improved the quality of the ex-

tracted relations as compared to kernel-based 

models that used semantic class information on-

ly.  

Nguyen et al. (2007) presented an approach 

for relation extraction from Wikipedia by ex-

tracting features from subtrees mined from the 

syntactic structure of text. Kambhatla (2004) de-

veloped a method for extracting relations by ap-

plying Maximum Entropy models to combine 

lexical, syntactic and semantic features and re-

port that they obtain improvement in results 

when they combine variety of features.  Most of 

the existing approaches have used linguistic 

analysis to generate features for supervised or 

semi-supervised relation extraction.  

Recently, Yan et al. (2009) have developed an 

approach for unsupervised relation discovery by 

integrating linguistic analysis done on Wikipedia 

with context generated from the Web. They de-

velop a clustering approach based on dependency 

patterns from dependency analysis of Wikipedia 

and surface patterns by querying the web to in-

troduce redundancy. They report that dependen-

cy patterns improve the precision whereas, the 

surface patterns improved the coverage.  

Banko et al. (2008) introduce the TextRunner 

system which takes a small corpus sample as 

input and uses a linguistic parser to generate 

training data which they use to train the extractor 

which can run at web scale. However, Kok and 

Domingos (2008) have reported that the triples 

output from the TextRunner system are noisy, 

sparse and contain many co-referent objects and 

relations which is also the case with Powerset. 

Their system uses the output from the TextRun-

ner system and uses Multiple Relational Cluster-

ing model to get object clusters and relation clus-

ters.   

106



3 Approach 

In this section we describe in detail the different 

steps in our approach involving querying Factz 

from Powerset, collapsing facts expressing same 

type of relation, Label Selection and introducing 

Semantic Typing information. Figure 2 gives an 

overview of our approach and Figure 3 shows the 

different components in our system. We discuss 

each component in detail below.  

3.1 Querying Powerset and Retrieving 
Factz 

In the first step we query Powerset API by giving 

as input a list of entities or list of entity pairs and 

retrieve all the Factz and sentences that are asso-

ciated with the entities or entity pairs from the 

Powerset API output. 

3.2 Collapsing Similar Relations 

A particular semantic relationship can be ex-

pressed in different ways in sentences. For ex-

ample words like “purchase”, “buy” and “ac-

quire” may represent the same semantic relation 

between the subject and the object. Sometimes 

the words might be direct synonyms in which 

case resources like WordNet (Miller et al., 1990) 

can help in identifying the same relation whereas 

in other cases the words might not be synonyms 

at all but may still imply the same semantic rela-

tion between the subject and the object. For ex-

ample, we queried Powerset to get a sample of 

relations between companies and products. We 

got relations like introduce, produce, sell, manu-

facture and make. It is often the case that compa-

nies introduce and sell the products that they 

manufacture, make or produce.  However, all of 

these words are not synonyms of each other and 

it may not be feasible to express the relation be-

tween a company and a product in all these dif-

ferent ways in a KB.  

We have developed an approach for collaps-

ing relations expressed using different words in 

the facts and represent it using the dominating 

relation between the pair of entities. We explain 

the different steps in our approach below.  

3.2.1 Relation Clustering 

We consider relations to be similar if they appear 

between the same subjects and the objects. We 

take the set of Factz that we got by querying Po-

 

Figure 3. System Framework 

 

 
Figure 2. The Knowledge Discovery approach uses Powerset Factz which are the output from linguistic analy-

sis, article text for entropy based label ranking and existing knowledge resources for discovering relations at 

different levels of abstraction and hence aiding in enriching the existing knowledge resources. 

 

107



werset in the previous step and based on those 

Factz we construct a similarity matrix to 

represent similarity between all pairs of relations 

in the data set. Each entry in the similarity matrix 

represents the number of times the pair of rela-

tions had the same subject and object in the Factz 

data set. For example, in the sample dataset in 

table 1, the similarity matrix entry for the pair 

acquired and purchased would be 3. We use that 

similarity matrix as input and apply average link 

agglomerative clustering algorithm over it.  

 

Subject Predicate Object 

Bank of America acquired Merrill Lynch 

Bank of America acquired MBNA 

Bank of America acquired FleetBoston 

Bank of America purchased FleetBoston 

Bank of America purchased Merrill Lynch 

Bank of America purchased MBNA 

 

Table 1. Relations between same subjects and objects 

in Powerset 

3.2.2 Filtering Ambiguous Relations 

After the clustering step we have a step for filter-

ing ambiguous relations from the clusters. We 

explain the filtering procedure using an example 

from one of the experiments in which two clus-

ters were produced. First cluster had acquire, 

purchase, buy and own relations and the second 

cluster had introduce, produce, make and say 

about relations. After clustering the relations we 

have the following steps: 

1. We take each pair of entities and get the 

set of relations between the pair of entities. For 

example, the set of relation between “Bank of 

America” and “Merrill Lynch” are acquire, pur-

chase and say about (figure 4). 

2. By considering the set of relations be-

tween each pair of entities we assign it to a clus-

ter based on the maximum number of overlap-

ping relations between the set and the cluster 

members. In our example clusters, we assign it to 

cluster one with which there is an overlap of two 

relations i.e. acquire and buy instead of assigning 

it to cluster two with which it has an overlap of 

one relation i.e. say about (figure 4).  

3. Once an entity pair is assigned to a clus-

ter, we consider other relations in the set of rela-

tions present between that entity pair and if any 

of those relations exists as a member of another 

cluster we filter out that relation from that clus-

ter. For example, one of the relations present be-

tween “Bank of America” and “Merill Lynch” is 

say about, and this relation is actually a member 

of cluster two whereas, this pair is assigned to 

cluster one and therefore, we filter out say about 

from cluster two. After cluster filtering, the label 

for the cluster is selected as the label that is the 

most frequent relation found in the set of entity 

pairs being assigned to the cluster. 

3.3 Relation Label Selection 

A pair of entities might have more than one fact 

associated with them. We select a representative 

label based on a hybrid approach by combining 

the output from entropy based label ranking 

(Chen et al., 2005) and clusters of similar rela-

tions found by relational clustering. We select 

the relation label as the cluster label of the clus-

ter which has the maximum member overlap 

with the predicates in the set of facts between a 

pair of entities.  In case there is an overlap of just 

one relation, we select the label that is ranked 

highest through entropy based label ranking ap-

proach (Chen et al., 2005). According to their 

algorithm, the importance of terms can be as-

sessed using the entropy criterion, which is based 

on the assumption that a term is irrelevant if its 

presence obscures the separability of the dataset. 

There may be cases where there are multiple re-

lations existing between a given pair of entities, 

however, in our approach we select the relation 

label that is evident in the majority of the facts 

associated with the pair.   

3.4 Semantic Typing 

For certain applications there might be the need 

of discovering relations between specific types of 

entities rather than instances of entities. For ex-

ample, for ontology engineering, the ontology 

 
 

Figure 4. Filtering ambiguous relations from exist-

ing clusters 

 

108



engineer might want to explore the kind of rela-

tions that exist between different entity types 

based on the data set and then develop an ontol-

ogy representing those relations. Therefore, we 

have a component in our system that incorpo-

rates semantic type information into the Factz 

before collapsing the relations present in the 

facts. The semantic type module queries a know-

ledge base for the entity type and replaces the 

entity instance names with entity types in the 

Factz data set. We have used the Freebase (Me-

taweb Technologies, 2009) Knowledge base to 

associate the entity types for the entities that we 

experimented with. When this modified version 

of the Factz dataset is given as input to the next 

component of the system i.e. Collapse Relations, 

the similarity between relations is computed 

based on having the same subject and object enti-

ty types rather than entity instances. Following 

the Semantic Typing path in the system would 

output the relations discovered between types of 

entities. Introducing Semantic Typing informa-

tion can also help in creating redundancy in the 

dataset and overcome the data sparseness prob-

lem. For example in case of relations such as ac-

quire and purchase if we cannot get evidence of 

overlap in the subject and object in the Factz da-

taset then we cannot assign them any similarity 

score in the similarity matrix however, if we re-

place the instance names with instance types and 

consider the overlap between the instance types 

we can get more evidence about their similarity.  

4 Experiments and Results 

In this section, we present the preliminary expe-

riments we conducted to evaluate the approach. 

We start by an initial evaluation of Powerset 

Factz by comparing them with ground truth and 

text based label ranking (Chen et al., 2005). We 

then use our approach to discover relations be-

tween different entity types. The details of the 

experiments and results are discussed below. 

 

4.1 Preliminary Evaluation of Powerset 
Factz 

Our first experiment was targeted towards a pre-

liminary evaluation of the accuracy of Powerset 

Factz themselves and their performance when 

compared with ground truth and with Entropy 

based label ranking approach which does not use 

any linguistic analysis. To achieve this we took 

the “acquisitions” table from Freebase. The “ac-

quisitions” table has a list of companies and their 

acquisitions.  We considered the acquisitions 

table as ground truth as this information is either 

entered manually by contributors or imported 

from Wikipedia via DBpedia. We queried Po-

werset by giving the entity pairs as input and 

were able to retrieve Factz for 170 pairs out of 

1107 entity pairs present in Freebase table. The 

number of pairs for which Powerset returned 

Factz is low because Powerset currently extracts 

Factz from well formed sentences and not semi-

structured or structured information such as 

tables or info-boxes in Wikipedia and the acqui-

sition relation is mostly expressed in the form of 

tables or lists in Wikipedia articles. We applied 

relational clustering and stopped clustering when 

the similarity between the clusters was less than 

4. We identified one cluster (acquire, purchase, 

buy) having more than one member and got 146 

relations labeled accurately i.e. 85% accuracy 

through our approach. We repeated the experi-

ment using Entropy based label ranking approach 

(Chen et al., 2005). We were mainly focusing on 

relations that were expressed by verbs. We took 

all sentences between a pair of entities from 

which Powerset had extracted Factz. We ex-

tracted verbs from those sentences and ranked 

those verbs based on the entropy based label 

ranking approach and considered any of the la-

bels matching with the cluster members (acquire, 

purchase, buy) as correct prediction. We com-

pared the results with the ground truth and got 

the accuracy of 72% (table 2). Our preliminary 

experiment on the sample dataset demonstrated 

that the relation labels assigned by Powerset 

have reasonably high accuracy when compared 

with ground truth i.e. 85% and also give higher 

accuracy as compared to the entropy based label 

ranking approach for the sample data set. 

4.2 Discovering Relations between Different 

Types of Entity Pairs 

In this experiment we wanted to explore if our 

approach was successful in discovering relations 

existing between different types of entity pairs 

and clusters the pairs into separate clusters.  

We constructed two datasets using Wikipedia 

page links between articles on entities namely 

Persons and Organizations. Using “person” type 

and “organization” type specified in Freebase, 

Approach Accuracy 

Powerset Factz based approach 85% 

Entropy based Label ranking 72% 

 

Table 2. Comparison of Powerset Factz based 

approach and Entropy based label ranking 

109



we were able to construct a list of Wikipedia ar-

ticles that were on Persons and Organizations. 

The Wikipedia article links served the purpose of 

finding out which organizations are related to 

which other organizations and which persons are 

related to which organizations. The first dataset 

represented relations between Organizations 

whereas the second dataset represented relations 

between Persons and Organizations. We applied 

relational clustering for collapsing similar rela-

tions and evaluated the output clusters at differ-

ent thresholds to see if they represented relations 

between different types of entities. At stopping 

with a threshold of 2 we found the following two 

clusters having more than one member: one of 

the clusters represented the relations present be-

tween a pair of Organizations (acquire, pur-

chase, buy, own, say about, take over) and the 

other cluster represented the relations between 

Persons and Organizations (formed, found, lead) 

(table 3). The experiment confirmed the effec-

tiveness of clustering approach as it clusters rela-

tions between different kinds of entity pairs into 

different clusters. 

 
Relations Clusters 

Org-Org 

 

Cluster 1: acquire, purchase, buy, own, say 

about, take over over 

Pers-Org  Cluster 2: found, lead, form 

 
Table 3. Relations between different types of entity 

pairs are clustered into different clusters 

4.3 Improving Recall  

In this experiment we were interested in finding 

if Factz from Powerset can help in discovering 

relations between entities that are not present in 

resources like DBpedia and Freebase. We took a 

list of organization (with > 28,000 organization 

names from Freebase and an internal Knowledge 

Base) and retrieved Powerset Factz having those 

organizations as subjects. We performed relation 

clustering and output clusters at different thre-

sholds. We selected the minimum threshold for 

which there were at least two clusters with more 

than one member. From the two clusters, one 

cluster had manufacture, produce and make rela-

tions and the second had acquire, purchase, own, 

operate and buy relations (table 4). Our intuition 

was that the first cluster represented relations 

between organizations and products. Therefore, 

we took the “company-products” table from 

Freebase and compared it with our dataset. How-

ever, we could only find an overlap of 3 subject 

object pairs. The second cluster had relations that 

we earlier found to exist between organizations 

having the acquisition relation between them, 

therefore, we took the “acquisitions” table from 

Freebase and compared it against our dataset. 

Comparing the pairs with our list of organiza-

tions, we found 104 pairs that had an organiza-

tion as a subject and an object. Out of those 104 

pairs 97 pairs were assigned to cluster 2 and 7 

pairs were assigned to cluster 1. When we com-

pared those 97 pairs with Freebase “acquisition” 

table (which had 73 pairs of organizations that 

overlapped with our dataset) we found that 66 

existed in the set and were therefore predicted 

correctly. We then inspected the rest of the pairs 

manually and found that there were 16 additional 

pairs that were predicted to have the acquire re-

lation and which were not present in the Freebase 

table. Therefore, this approach helped in identi-

fying 16 additional organization pairs having 

acquisition relation between them correctly.  

 
Cluster Cluster Members 

1 manufacture, produce, make 

2 acquire, purchase, own, operate, buy 

 
Table 4. Clustering results for Relations having Or-

ganizations as subjects 

 
Statistics 

No. of pairs in Freebase table 73 

No. of discovered pairs matching Freebase 66 

No. of additional pairs discovered 16 

Total no. of correctly discovered pairs 82/104 

Accurate Predictions %age 78% 

 
Table 5. Evaluation results for improving recall by 

discovering additional entity pairs having the acquisi-

tion relation 

 

Another observation worth mentioning is that the 

acquisition relation is represented mostly in the 

form of tables in Wikipedia whereas Powerset 

only processes information that is present in sen-

tences. In spite of that, our approach was able to 

find new entity pairs from text that did not al-

ready exist in information extracted by other 

sources (table 5).   

4.4 Discovering Relations at Different Le-
vels of Abstraction 

In this experiment we introduced Semantic Type 

information in the Factz data set to discover rela-

tions at different levels of abstraction i.e. be-

tween Entity Types at different levels (For ex-

ample School or Organization, where School is a 

type of Organization).  

We took a list of 13000 organizations for 

which we had their Organization Types available 

110



from an internal KB and queried Powerset for 

Factz between all pairs of organizations and were 

able to retrieve more than 88,000 Factz. We 

passed on the Factz to the Semantic Typing 

module to replace the Organization names with 

their types. The Factz dataset with Semantic 

Type information was given as input for collaps-

ing relations, where the similarity matrix was 

constructed based on the same subject and object 

types (rather than same subject and object in-

stances), after which the clustering was per-

formed. We evaluated the clusters at different 

stopping thresholds but the system did not gener-

ate any meaningful clusters. We then looked into 

the dataset and realized that a lot of noise was 

introduced into the system due to various organi-

zation names which were very ambiguous and 

replacing the ambiguous organization names 

with organization types had magnified the noise. 

For example, in our organizations list there is an 

organization with the name “Systems” which is 

of type “Medical Instrument Supplies”. It had the 

following fact related to it: <3d systems> <man-

ufacture> <systems>. Replacing the organization 

name with the type resulted in the following fact 

i.e., <multimedia graphics software> <manufac-

ture> <medical instruments supplies>. Such am-

biguous names when replaced with wrong types 

further magnified the noise. 

4.4.1 Resolving Ambiguity 

As discussed, ambiguous organization names 

introduced noise and replacing them with organi-

zation types magnified the noise. Therefore, it 

was important to resolve the ambiguity in the 

names of entities before applying Semantic Typ-

ing. There are different approaches than can be 

used to recognize and disambiguate Named Enti-

ties, which we discuss below.  

4.4.1.1 Named Entity Recognition 

Powerset has Factz that are extracted from 

sentences. The Factz may be present between 

Named Entities or even just words in sentences. 

For example “Accord” is a name of a trade union 

and is also a word. Running Named Entity Rec-

ognition systems over the sentences from which 

the Factz have been extracted can help in identi-

fying named entities and in eliminating such 

factz which are not between named entities. In 

general, the relation extraction systems have an 

initial step where they identify entities in sen-

tences through NER systems and then discover 

relations between those entities.  

Most of Named Entity Recognition and Dis-

ambiguation systems use the contextual informa-

tion to disambiguate between entities. The con-

textual information could be words in the sen-

tences or other entities in the sentences where the 

entity is mentioned. Having some evidence that 

two entities are related in some way can also 

help in eliminating much of the ambiguity.  In 

general, the relation extraction systems have an 

initial step where they find related entity pairs 

based on Co-occurrences and then discover rela-

tions between those pairs of entities which fre-

quently co-occur with each other in sentences.  

We followed the approach of getting addition-

al context by using entity pairs for querying Po-

werset for which we have background know-

ledge that the pairs are related through some rela-

tion and only retrieved the Factz that were be-

tween those entity pairs. We repeated the same 

experiment. However, this time we gave as input 

pairs of entity names for which we have evidence 

that the entities are related and then ran the expe-

riment with and without semantic typing infor-

mation to validate if introducing semantic typing 

can give us some additional advantage. We dis-

cuss the details of our experiment below. 

 
Relations between Entity Types Freebase Source 

person - organization PersonEmployment table 

person- school Education table 

organization-organization Acquisitions table 

 

Table 6. Data Set with relations between different 

types of entities extracted from Freebase tables 

 

Using Freebase tables we extracted datasets 

for relations present between three different 

kinds of entity pairs i.e persons and organizations 

(e.g. Person-join-Organization), persons and 

school (e.g. Person-attend-School) and Organiza-

tions and Organizations (e.g. Organization- ac-

quire-Organization) (table 6). We used the pairs 

of entities (Persons - Organizations, Persons - 

Schools and Organizations - Organizations) to 

query Powerset and extracted the Factz that cor-

responded to those pairs. Table 7 gives an exam-

ple of the predicates in the Factz found between 

the different types of entity pairs.  

After clustering we evaluated the clusters and 

were expecting to get the relations between three 

different kinds of entity pairs namely Person - 

Organization, Person - School, Organization - 

Organization into three separate clusters. We 

evaluated the output clusters at different stopping 

thresholds but were not able to get three clusters 

using any threshold. Table 8 shows the clusters 

111



found at threshold of 2. There were two possible 

reasons for this outcome, one reason was that we 

did not have enough redundancy in the data set 

to get meaningful clusters and secondly, 

“school” is a type of “organization” which could 

have introduced ambiguity. In order to introduce 

redundancy we replaced all the entity names with 

their types (i.e., Person, Organization, School) in 

the Factz and repeated the experiment with Enti-

ty Type information rather than Entity names. 

We evaluated the clusters at different thresholds 

and were able to separate the relation sets into 

three clusters with greater than one member. Ta-

ble 9 gives the results of clustering where we got 

three clusters with more than one member at 

minimum threshold.  

The clusters represented the relations present 

between the three different types of entity pairs 

i.e., person and school, organization and organi-

zation and person and organization (table 9). 

Wikipedia is a very non-redundant resource 

and redundancy helps in getting more evidence 

about the similarity between relations.  Other 

approaches (Yan et al., 2009) have used the web 

for getting redundant information and improving 

recall. In addition, there are many sentences in 

Wikipedia for which Powerset has no corres-

ponding Factz associated (it might be due to 

some strong filtering heuristics). Using semantic 

typing helped in introducing redundancy, without 

which we were not able to cluster the relations 

between different types of entity pairs into sepa-

rate clusters. Semantic Typing also helped in 

identifying the relations present between entities 

at different levels of abstraction. This can help in 

suggesting relations between different entity 

types evident in the corpus during the Ontology 

engineering process.  

5 Conclusions 

We have developed a hybrid approach for unsu-

pervised and unrestricted relation discovery be-

tween entities using linguistic analysis via Po-

werset, entropy based label ranking and semantic 

typing information from a Knowledge base. We 

initially compared the accuracy of Powerset 

Factz with ground truth and with entropy based 

label ranking approach on a sample dataset and 

observed that the relations discovered through 

Powerset Factz gave higher accuracy than the 

entropy based approach for the sample dataset. 

We also developed an approach to collapse a set 

of relations represented in facts as a single domi-

nating relation and introduced a hybrid approach 

for label selection based on relation clustering 

and entropy based label ranking. Our experi-

ments showed that the relational clustering ap-

proach was able to cluster different kinds of enti-

ty pairs into different clusters. For the case where 

the kinds of entity pairs were at different levels 

of abstraction, introducing Semantic Typing in-

formation helped in introducing redundancy and 

also in clustering relations between different 

kinds of entity pairs whereas, the direct approach 

was not able to identify meaningful clusters. We 

plan to further test our approach on a greater va-

riety of relations and on a larger scale.  

  

Relation Example of Powerset Factz Predicates  

Person- Organization join, leave, found, form, start, create 

Person – School attend, enter, return to, enroll at, study at 

Organization - Or-

ganization 

acquire, purchase, buy, own 

 

Table 7. Example of Predicates in Powerset Factz 

representing relations between different types of entity 

pairs 

 
No. Cluster Members Semantic Types 

1 enroll at, return to Person-School 

2 found, purchase, buy, acquire, 

create, say about, own 

Organization- Organi-

zation,  

Person-Organization 

 

Table 8. Results of Clustering Relations between Enti-

ty Pairs without using Semantic Typing 

 
No. Cluster Members Semantic Relation 

1 lead, prep at, play for, enter, 

study, play, graduate, transfer 

to, play at, enroll in, go to, 
remain at, enroll at, teach at, 

move to, attend, join, leave, 

teach, study at, return to, work 
at 

Person- School 

2 acquire, purchase, buy, own, 

say about 

Organization - Organi-

zation 

3 found, create Person - Organization 

 

Table 9. Results of Clustering Relations with Semantic 

Typing 

112



References  

Dat P. T. Nguyen, Yutaka Matsuo, and Mitsuru Ishi-

zuka. 2007. Subtree mining for relation extraction 

from Wikipedia. In Proc. of NAACL ’07: pages 

125–128. 

Dmitry Davidov, Ari Rappoport and Moshe Koppel. 

2007. Fully unsupervised discovery of concept-

specific relationships by Web mining. Proceedings 

of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of 

Computational Linguistics,  pp. 232–239. 

George A. Miller ,  Richard Beckwith ,  Christiane 

Fellbaum ,  Derek Gross ,  Katherine Miller. 1990. 

Wordnet: An on-line lexical database. International 

Journal of Lexicography, 3(4):235-312. 

Jinxiu Chen, Donghong Ji, Chew Lim Tan and Zhen-

gyu Niu. Unsupervised Feature Selection for Rela-

tion Extraction. In Proc. of  IJCNLP-2005. 

Metaweb Technologies, Freebase Data Dumps, 

http://download.freebase.com/datadumps/ July, 

2009 

Michele Banko ,  Michael J Cafarella ,  Stephen So-

derl ,  Matt Broadhead ,  Oren Etzioni. 2008. Open 

information extraction from the web. Commun. 

ACM 51, 12 (Dec. 2008), 68-74.  

Nanda Kambhatla. 2004. Combining lexical, syntactic 

and semantic features with maximum entropy 

models. In Proceedings of the ACL 2004 on Inter-

active poster and demonstration sessions. 

Sanda Harabagiu, Cosmin Andrian Bejan, and Paul 

Morarescu. 2005. Shallow semantics for relation 

extraction. In Proc. of IJCAI 2005.  

Soren Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens 

Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives. 

2007. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. 

In Proc. of ISWC 2007.  

Stanley Kok and Pedro Domingos. 2008. Extracting 

Semantic Networks from Text Via Relational Clus-

tering. In Proc. of the ECML-2008.  

Takaaki Hasegawa, Satoshi Sekine and Ralph Grish-

man. 2004. Discovering Relations among Named 

Entities from Large Corpora. In Proc. of ACL-04. 

Powerset. www.Powerset.com 

Yulan Yan, Naoaki Okazaki, Yutaka Matsuo, Zhenglu 

Yang, and Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2009. Unsupervised 

relation extraction by mining Wikipedia texts using 

information from the web. In ACL-IJCNLP ’09: 

Volume 2, pages 1021–1029.  

Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine. 2006. Preemp-

tive information extraction using unrestricted rela-

tion discovery. In HLT/NAACL-2006.  

 

 

 

113


