










































Opinion Identification in Spanish Texts


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 54–61, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Opinion Identification in Spanish Texts

Aiala Rosá Dina Wonsever
Grupo de Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural,

Facultad de Ingeniería, UDELAR
Grupo de Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural,

Facultad de Ingeniería, UDELAR
J. Herrera y Reissig 565 J. Herrera y Reissig 565

Montevideo, 11300, Uruguay Montevideo, 11300, Uruguay
Modyco, UMR 7114, 

Université Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense, 
CNRS France

wonsever@fing.edu.uy

200, avenue de la République, Batiment A, 
Bureau 420, 92 001 Nanterre Cedex 

aialar@fing.edu.uy

Jean-Luc Minel
Modyco, UMR 7114, 

Université Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense, CNRS France
200, avenue de la République, Batiment A, 

Bureau 420, 92 001 Nanterre Cedex 
jean-luc.minel@u-paris10.fr

Abstract

We present our work on the identification of opin-
ions and its components: the source, the topic and 
the message. We describe a rule-based system for 
which we achieved a recall of 74% and a precision 
of  94%.  Experimentation  with  machine-learning 
techniques for the same task is currently underway.

1 Introduction

For some tasks in language processing such as In-
formation  Extraction  or  Q&A Systems,  it  is  im-
portant to know the opinions expressed by differ-
ent sources and their polarity, positive or negative, 
with  respect  to  different  topics.  There  are  even 
commercial applications that provide this kind of 
service (http://www.jodange.com). 

We here present a system for identifying opin-
ions in Spanish texts. We define opinion as the re-
port of someone's statement about any subject ( El  
investigador de la Politécnica afirma que el prin-
cipal  problema de este sistema es conseguir que  
sea fácil de usar / The researcher at the Politéc-
nica asserts that the main problem with this system 

is making it easy to use), or as any mention of dis-
course participants’ beliefs  (El  PRI acepta parti-
cipar en el debate / The PRI agrees to participate  
in the debate).

As a first step, we study the impact of elements 
that typically introduce such expressions in written 
text. These elements are mainly verbs of commu-
nication (decir, declarar / say, state) but other verb 
classes  (belief,  agreement,  appreciation)  are  also 
considered. In other cases, the opinions will be ex-
pressed through nouns  (opinión/opinion,  declara-
ción/statement) or  segments  introduced by  según 
(according to) or similar expressions. To complete 
the  opinion,  we  identify  its  characteristic  argu-
ments: the source, the topic and the message. 

In addition to recognizing an opinion, we try to 
determine its semantic orientation. To this end, we 
consider certain subjective elements and operators 
(reverse,  intensifier,  enhancing,  neutralizing,  etc.) 
which affect them. In this article, we present only 
results  on   the  semantic  orientation  of  opinion 
verbs,  opinion  nouns  and  topic  introducers 
(sobre/about, con respecto a/with respect to, etc.). 

There  are  many  studies  that  address  these  is-
sues: Pang and Lee (2008), for instance, discuss in 

54



detail  various  concepts  in  the  area  of  "Opinion 
Mining" or "Sentiment  Analysis" and present the 
main  proposals,  resources  and  applications.  For 
our work,  which focuses on the identification of 
source, topic and message, we have mainly drawn 
on the following: the scheme for annotating opin-
ions  and  emotions  proposed  by  Wiebe,  Wilson, 
and  Cardie  (2005);  the  work  on  opinion-holder 
(source)  propositional  opinion  identification 
presented in (Bethard et  al.,  2004);  a  system for 
source  identification  using  statistical  methods 
(Choi  et  al,  2005);  a  method  for  opinion-holder 
and topic extraction from Kim and Hovy (2006); 
the study on the identification of source and target 
presented  in  (Ruppenhofer  et  al.,  2008);  and  a 
work on topic  annotation  (Stoyanov  and Cardie, 
2008). 

For  our  semantic  orientation  study,  we  have 
taken  some  concepts  from  Turney  and  Littman 
(2003) and  analyzed  some work on subjectivity 
operators  (Polanyi  and  Zaenen,  2004;  Moilanen 
and Pulman, 2007; Choi and Cardie, 2008). 

In what follows, we briefly present the model 
that  has  been  defined  to  represent  opinions  and 
two methods for their automatic recognition. First, 
we describe a rule-based system that incorporates 
lexical resources. This system, whose evaluation is 
detailed below, achieves a recall of 74% and a pre-
cision of 97%. During the evaluation process we 
produced an annotated corpus of 13,000 words, by 
manually correcting the system output. The second 
system, currently under development, involves the 
application of machine-learning techniques to the 
annotated corpus.  

2 Opinion components

An opinion is composed of a predicative element 
and its characteristic arguments. The set of opinion 
predicates includes verbs, nouns and prepositions 
(or prepositional locutions). Verbs belong to vari-
ous semantic classes: communication (decir / say,  
declarar  /  state), assessment  (criticar  /  criticize,  
felicitar  /  compliment), belief  (creer /  believe,  
opinar / think) and acceptance  (aceptar / accept,  
rechazar / reject). 

These classes  are  similar  to  those proposed in 
(Asher et al., 2008), the main difference being that 
they include  the  class  Sentiment  but  we  do  not. 
Nouns  are  generally  derived  from the  aforemen-
tioned  verbs  (opinión  /  opinion,  declaración  /  

statement, apoyo / support). Some prepositions and 
prepositional  locutions  are  según,  de  acuerdo a,  
para / according to. 

The relevant arguments that we identified for the 
opinion  predicates  are,  as  already  mentioned, 
source,  topic  and  message.  To  establish  this 
scheme we analysed  syntactico-semantic schemes 
proposed  in  ADESSE2 for  selected  verb  classes 
(García-Miguel et al., 2005) and some of the Span-
ish  FrameNet  frames3 (Subirats-Rüggeberg  and 
Petruck.,  2003),  mainly the  opinion frame whose 
frame  elements  include  cognizer  (source),  topic 
and  opinion  (message)  and  the  communication 
frame for which some elements are communicator 
(source), topic and message. 

Our definition deviates from much of the literat-
ure on this subject because we limit our work to 
opinions introduced by an opinion predicate, as ex-
plained  above,  while  many  of  the  cited  works 
identify all kinds of subjective expressions, mainly 
adjectives  with  positive  or  negative  polarity,  as 
with the  expressive subjective elements described 
in (Wiebe et al., 2005). 

As in our work we focus on finding the source, 
the message and the topic for each opinion, we ig-
nore  all  the  text  fragments  in  which  there  is  no 
evidence that the author is quoting or referring to 
other participants’ opinions. These text fragments 
constitute the message, as defined above, stated by 
the text author. So, once our system has identified 
other  participants’  opinions,  the  remaining  text 
should be attributed to the text author. 

Identifying  subjective  elements  is  necessary in 
order to determine the semantic orientation of the 
opinion. We think the treatment of these elements 
within the author’s message is similar to the treat-
ment that must be applied within the message at-
tributed to any other source.  Such a treatment  is 
not addressed in this work, since the semantic ori-
entation study presented here is restricted to opin-
ion predicates and topic introducers. 

In some respects our work is related to that of 
(Bethard et al., 2004). For opinions introduced by 
opinion  verbs,  they  identify  the  source  (opinion 
holder)  and  the  message  (propositional  opinion), 
restricting  the  study  to  messages  that  constitute 
subordinate  clauses.  However,  we  seek  also  to 
identify the explicit references to the topic and we 
consider not only verbs but also some nouns and 
prepositions such as  según / according to. A fur-

55



ther difference is that they distinguish propositions 
containing an opinion from those transmitting facts 
or predictions, whereas we do not make this dis-
tinction. 

In our recognition of  the topic we consider only 
explicit references to the opinion subject. We look 
for  topic-introducing  elements,  such  as  sobre  /  
about, con respecto a / regarding, en contra de /  
against, without  trying  to  deduce the  topic  from 
the study of the message itself.

For this general scheme, there are different in-
stances in which the arguments can take different 
forms.  Thus,  for  some opinion verbs such as  re-
chazar /  reject, the message is usually empty. For 
other verbs the topic will be a noun phrase, such as 
aceptar  la  propuesta  / to  accept  the  proposal, 
while for others it will be a prepositional phrase, 
for example, hablar de literatura / to speak about  
literature.

2.1 Some opinion examples 

In  a  standard  reported  speech  utterance  (1),  the 
opinion  predicate  is  a  communication  verb.  The 
source is the subject of the verb and the message is 
contained  in  the  subordinate  clause.  Normally, 
there is not a segment expressing the topic. 

(1) [El investigador de la Politécnica]f [afirma]p 
[que el principal problema de este sistema es con-
seguir que sea fácil de usar]m.

(1) [The researcher at the Politécnica]f [said] p 
[that the main problem with this system is making 
it easy to use] m.  

In (2),  there is  a verb that  introduces referred 
speech in which a verbal act is mentioned, but the 
words uttered (message) are not reproduced (Mal-
donado, 1999). 

(2) [El abogado de Fernando Botero]s [habló]p 
[sobre el tema]t con Semana. 
(2) [The lawyer of Fernando Botero]s [spoke]p 
[about the subject]t with Semana. 

However, we also found cases in which repor-
ted speech includes an explicit mention of the topic 
(3) and cases in which referred speech includes the 
uttered words (4). In both examples all the defined 
arguments are present in the text. 

(3) [Sobre la partitura]t [Ros Marbá]s 
[afirma]p [que es "enormemente teatral. Se define 
a los personajes desde la propia música, ...."]m.
(3) [Concerning the score]t [Ros Marbá]s [said]p 
[it is "very theatrical. The characters are defined 
from the music itself,  ....]m.
 
(4) En una carta escrita por Dalí en Neuilly en 
abril de 1951, [el artista]s [habla]p [sobre su divina 
inspiración]t: ["Yo quería que ..."]m. 
(4) In a letter written by Dalí at Neuilly in April 
1951, [the artist]s [talks]p [about his divine 
 inspiration]t : ["I wanted to ..."]m.

As noted earlier, the opinion predicate can be a 
noun or a preposition such as según / according to. 
In (5),  the source is the noun complement,  intro-
duced by  de /  of. In  (6),  the  source is  the  noun 
phrase within the prepositional phrase headed by 
según / according to. 

(5) No tenemos por qué criticar las 
[declaraciones]p de [Elizardo Sánchez]s. 
(5) We need not criticize [Elizardo 
 Sanchez’]f [statements] p . 

(6)  [Este  sistema  se  utiliza  en  Estados  Unidos 
desde 1982]m, [según]p [Roque Pifarré]f.
(6) [This system has been used in the 
United  States  since  1982]m,  [according  to]p 
[Roque Pifarré]s.

 
Note that in (5) there is another opinion predic-

ate,  the verb  criticize, occurring in a non-factive 
context. The factivity of events is not addressed in 
this work, but it can be expected to affect opinion 
recognition.

3    The rule-based system

We developed a rule-based system for the identi-
fication of the opinion elements. The system takes 
as input a pre-processed text using the POS-tagger 
Freeling (Atserias et al., 2006) and Clatex (Won-
sever et al, 2006), a system that segments texts into 
propositions.  Several  rule  modules  are  then  ap-
plied,  introducing  XML annotations  showing the 
identified opinions and their elements. 

The  following  example  illustrates  the  system 
output: 

56



<opinion><menssage>Hasta el momento el virus 
H1N1 tiene una predominancia mayor que la de 
los demás virus en esos estudios</message>,
<predicate>precisó</predicate><source>la 
ministra</source></opinion>. 
<opinion><message>So far, the H1N1 virus has a 
higher prevalence than other viruses in these stud-
ies</message>, <predicate>said</predicate> 
<source>Minister</source></opinion>.

 
The  rules  are  based  on  the  contextual  rules 

formalism defined by Wonsever and Minel (2004), 
including  some  further  extensions.  This  type  of 
rule allows the specification of contexts, exclusion 
zones, optionality, negation, and elimination of ex-
isting labels,  among others.  In addition, for each 
rule it is possible to check various conditions on its 
components, for example, membership in a list of 
words.  For applying  the rules we used a system 
implemented in Prolog.

The hand-written rules were derived from cor-
pus analysis.  They are grouped into modules ac-
cording to the element they recognize: opinion pre-
dicate (verbs, nouns and prepositions), source, top-
ic and message. There is also a final module that 
builds the entire opinion and some auxiliary mod-
ules: the complex noun phrase identifying module 
(El director del Hospital Maciel, Daniel Parada / 
The  director  of  the  Hospital  Maciel,  Daniel  
Parada) and the subjective elements and operators 
identifying module. Table 1 shows the number of 
rules contained in each module. In the next section 
we describe the source rules module.

module # rules
opinion predicate 27

source 42
topic 22

message 8
opinion 37
auxiliary 7
TOTAL 143

Table 1: Number of rules in each module

3.1 Source rules

In  order  to  show the  rules  features,  we  will  de-
scribe  the  source  module.  Table  2  shows  some 
(simplified) rules for source identification.  
 

fue1a no(prep), <np>, (zone,3), verOp

fue1b punt, verOp, (zone,3), <np>

fue1c punt, verOp, (zone,3), prep, np, <np>

fue2 verOpPart,  "por", <np> 

fue3a nOp,  "de", <np>

fue3b <np>, verSup, op(det), nOp

fue3c nOp, verSupPart, "por", <np>

fue4a "según", op(verOp), <np>

fue4b endS,  "para", <np>

fue4c "de acuerdo a", <np>

fue4d "de acuerdo con", <np>

fue4e "a juicio de", <np>
Table  2  Simplified  rules  for  source  recognition. 
Notation used: np - nominal phrase; < > - element 
labeled by the rule; zone,x - exclusion zone up to x 
words; verOpFin - finite opinion verb; verOpPart - 
opinion verb, participle;  nOp - opinion noun; ver-
Sup - support verb; endS - end of sentence; det - 
determiner; op - optionality operator 

These rules assign the source tag to text segments 
that match the rule body (indicated by <> in the 
table).  The  elements  that  precede  the  body  and 
those that follow it are the left and right contexts, 
respectively.  In addition to assigning the tag, the 
rules assign values to some attributes: 

- code of the rule that assigned the label 
- syntactic structure (subject before verb / sub-
ject after verb / noun complement introduced by 
de)
- semantic orientation value (-, +, 0)
The three rules fue1 identify sources that are the 

subject of an opinion verb. We allow up to 3 words 
between the subject and the verb; these words can-
not be verb, np, punctuation or conjunction (<El 
senador> este martes dijo ... / <the senator> said  
Tuesday ...). For rule fue1c we also allow a prepos-
itional phrase (prep + np) between the source and 
the  verb  (..., dijo  ayer  a  la  prensa  <el  
senador> / ..., said yesterday to the reporters the  
senator). As mentioned, we show simplified rules; 
the actual rules include other restrictions such as 
checking for subject-verb agreement. 

Rule fue2 is applied when the opinion verb is in 
participle form and the source is an agent comple-
ment (las palabras expresadas por el senador / the  
words uttered by the senator). 

57



The three rules fue3 concern noun phrases. The 
source is usually introduced by  de  (las opiniones 
del senador / the senator’s opinions) but it is also 
common to find nouns in a support verb construc-
tion (el senador emitió  una declaración / the sen-
ator issued a statement). 

Finally, the five rules fue4 identify sources in-
troduced by según, para, de acuerdo a, de acuerdo 
con, a juicio de / according to. When the source 
introducer is  según,  we can find an opinion verb 
between según and the source (según el senador /  
según dijo el senador / according to the senator), 
For the preposition  para / for,  preceding punctu-
ation is required because of its high ambiguity. 

3.2 Lexical Resources 

Some of the rules, especially those for opinion pre-
dicate  identification,  rely  heavily  on  lexical  re-
sources: lists of opinion verbs and nouns, person 
indicators  (señor, doctor, senador / Mr., Dr., sen-
ator), institution  indicators  (institución,  hospital,  
diario  /  institution,  hospital,  journal), support 
verbs (plantear, emitir / make, deliver), topic intro-
ducers (sobre, con respecto a / about, with respect  
to), positive subjective elements (bueno, excelente,  
diversión / good, excellent, fun), negative subject-
ive elements (malo, negativo, pesimista / bad, neg-
ative,  pessimist), and operators  (muy,  extremada-
mente, a penas / very, extremely, just). 

In particular, the list of opinion verbs and nouns 
was  manually  created  from  corpora  containing 
Spanish texts: Corin (Grassi et al., 2001), Corpus 
del  Español  (Davies,  2002)  and  a  digital  media 
corpus created for this study. Only those verbs and 
nouns that are frequently used in opinion contexts 
were included in the list, so as to minimize ambi-
guity. At the time of evaluation, the list comprised 
86 verbs and 42 nouns. 

3.2.1 The opinion verbs and nouns list 

For each verb or noun, we register its lemma and 
other  information  related  to  its  syntactic  and se-
mantic properties. 

For verbs, we record the following information: 
• semantic orientation [-, 0, +] 
• semantic role of the subject [source, topic] 
• prepositions that introduce the subject. 
• subordinate clause admitted (message) 

For example, for the verb  decir  /  say, the cor-
responding values are (0, source, [ ], yes) for the 
verb apoyar / support: (+, source, [a, np], no), for 
the verb molestar / annoy: (-, topic, [ ], no). 

For nouns, the information of interest is: 
• semantic orientation [-, 0, +] 
• semantic  role  of  the  complement  intro-

duced by de [source, topic, ambiguous] 
For example, for the noun anuncio / announce-

ment, the corresponding values are (0, ambiguous). 
Note that this noun is ambiguous because the com-
plement introduced by de can be either the source 
(el anuncio del senador / the senator’s announce-
ment)  or the topic  (el anuncio de la extensión del  
plazo /  the announcement about the deadline ex-
tension).  For the noun  comentario / comment the 
values are (0,source) and for  apoyo / support  the 
values are (+, source).

The information associated to  opinion predic-
ates is taken into account when applying the rules. 
For example,  the second attribute of  the opinion 
noun is checked when rule fue3a is applied: if the 
attribute value is "source", the rule matches all np 
satisfying the remaining rule conditions, whereas if 
the  attribute  value  is  "ambiguous",  the  rule  re-
quires that the np contain a person or institution in-
dicator.  The  rule  does  not  apply  if  the  attribute 
value is "topic". 

Some  of  the  message  rules  (not  shown here) 
check that the final opinion verb attribute has the 
value "yes", indicating that it accepts a subordinate 
clause (dijo que ... / he said that ...). These rules la-
bel  the proposition following the verb as a mes-
sage. The proposition has already been segmented 
by Clatex.

The  attribute  that  indicates  which  is  the  verb 
subject role is important in differentiating the rules 
shown in the table (fue1 to fue4), which only re-
cognize verbs for which the subject role is source, 
from a set  of  additional  rules  (not  shown in the 
table) that look for the source in the dative case, 
when the subject role is topic (la propuesta gustó 
a los senadores / senators liked the proposal). 

3.3 Semantic orientation

For each element recognized, the rules assign a se-
mantic orientation value. For the opinion predicate, 
source and topic this value comes from the lexical 
resources. For the message, this value is calculated 
from  its  subjective  elements  and  operators.  We 

58



consider that the final opinion semantic orientation 
can be calculated from the orientation values of its 
elements.  We hypothesize  that  when the  opinion 
predicate  or  the  topic  introducer  are  not  neutral 
(they have a positive or negative semantic orienta-
tion) the complete opinion takes on the same value 
and  there  is  no  need  to  analyze  the  message.  If 
these two elements are neutral the opinion semant-
ic orientation must be obtained from the message. 

To determine the message semantic orientation 
we carried out some experiments that are still on-
going. Semantic orientation values for opinion pre-
dicates  are  stated  in  the  verb  and  noun  lists,  as 
mentioned. The semantic orientation for topic in-
troducers  is  also  stated  in  the  corresponding  list 
(sobre / about is neutral,  en contra de / against is 
negative,  etc.).  The  number  of  elements  of  this 
type is very limited.  We did not study the source 
semantic orientation, in future work we will ana-
lyze  expressions  like  Los  optimistas  sostienen 
que ... / Optimists say that ....

4 System evaluation 

To evaluate the system we worked with a digit-
al  media  corpus;  the  texts  were  taken  from  the 
same publications as those used to create the deriv-
ation corpus. The corpus contains 38 texts with an 
average of 300 words each, making a total size of 
approximately 13,000 words. 

We applied the system to the entire corpus and 
performed a manual review of the output in order 
to  evaluate  the  identification  of  the  defined  ele-
ments and also the complete opinion identification. 
We also made a partial semantic orientation evalu-
ation, taking into account only opinion predicates 
and topic introducers' values and their effect on the 
complete opinion value. 

In addition to assessing the rules performance, 
during the review stage the annotated corpus was 
manually corrected in order to obtain an opinion 
annotated  corpus  suitable  for  machine-learning. 
Table 3 shows the evaluation results. Rows repres-
ent: 

- total: total number of elements in the text,
- corr-c:  number  of  completely  recognized 
items, 
-  corr-p:  number  of  partially  recognized  ele-
ments, 
- non-rec: number of unrecognized elements, 

- incorr: number of marked segments which do 
not correspond to the item, 
- PR: precision, 
- REC-c: recall calculated using corr-c, 
- REC-p: recall calculated using corr-p, 
- F: F-measure.   

pred sour top mess opinion

total 281 212 74 243 302

corr-c 256 133 33 140 128

corr-p 0 20 13 64 104

no rec 25 57 28 39 70

incorr 23 11 2 10 14

PR 92 % 93 % 96 % 95 % 94 %

REC-c 91 % 63 % 45 % 58 % 42 %

REC-p 91 % 72 % 62 % 84 % 77 %

F 91.5 % 81 % 75 % 89 % 85 %
Table 3: System evaluation results. 

Most opinion predicates present  in the corpus 
are included in  our opinion verbs  and nouns list 
(91%). 

Several sources and topics were partially recog-
nized because the  rules  do not  incorporate  some 
complements (prepositional complements or subor-
dinate clause) to the noun phrase.

Message is partially recognized when a pseudo-
direct  discourse  is  used (Parada agregó que "la 
empresa reconoció que hubo un cálculo entre hor-
as estimadas y horas reales y eso fue lo que pasó.  
Nosotros,  primero  empezamos  a  controlar  a  
nuestro personal ..."). This style is usually present 
in journalistic texts (Maldonado, 1999).

4.1 Semantic orientation evaluation

We recognized 25 non neutral opinion predicates 
in the corpus:  12 positive verbs and 14 negative 
verbs. One verb (especular / speculate) was incor-
rectly assigned a negative value, its means in this 
particular context is neutral. 

We just found 3 non-neutral topic introducers, 
the 3 are negative.    

The opinion predicates or topic introducers' se-
mantic  orientation  values  were  assigned  to  the 
opinions containing them. This method for calcu-
lating opinion semantic orientation was correct in 

59



all cases (except for the verb especular that was in-
correctly analyzed). 

5 Machine-learning system 

The evaluation system resulted in the generation of 
an annotated corpus, processed by the rule-based 
system and then manually reviewed and corrected. 
This corpus of about 13,000 words allows us to un-
dertake  some  experiments  applying   machine-
learning techniques. 

We are currently experimenting with Condition-
al  Random  Fields,  using  the  CRF++  tool 
(http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/). We are now determ-
ining the attributes to be considered for the training 
phase and defining the most appropriate templates 
for the kind of learning we need. While carrying 
out these prior tasks, we will extend the corpus us-
ing  the  same  semi-automatic  procedure  as  that 
already implemented.

6 Linguistic resources 

Many of the linguistic resources needed to achieve 
our objectives have already been mentioned. Some 
of them were created especially in the context of 
this work and are available as a contribution to the 
development of Spanish text processing: 

• opinion verbs and nouns lists with syntact-
ic and semantic attributes, 

• person and institution indicators lists, 
• topic introducers list, 
• subjective  elements  lists,  created  from 

available resources for  Spanish (Redondo 
et al, 2007) and English (General Inquirer: 
www.wjh.harvard.edu),  the  latter  translated 
into Spanish, 

• subjective operators list. 
We also used some resources that are available 

for Spanish, including: 
• Freeling (POS-tagger), 
• Clatex (propositions analyzer). 

Freeling also provides a dependency parser that 
was not used here because the tests we carried out 
scored poorly in sentences containing opinions. 

Resources such as a semantic role tagger or an 
anaphora resolution tool could no doubt improve 
our  system,  but  as  far  as  we  know they are  not 
available for Spanish.

As we did for the General Inquirer dictionary, 
we can apply machine translation to other English 

resources:  subjective  dictionaries  and  annotated 
corpora (Brooke et alt, 2009, Banea et alt, 2009). 
Tools for  subjectivity analysis  in English can be 
applied to a translated Spanish raw corpus (Banea 
et alt, 2009).

7 Conclusions 

We  have  implemented  a  rule-based  system  for 
opinion  identification  in  Spanish  texts.  We  have 
also created some resources for  Spanish:  opinion 
verbs and nouns lists, subjective elements lists and 
an opinion annotated corpus.  We think these  re-
sources are an important contribution to the devel-
opment of Spanish text processing. 

In our present work, we are experimenting with 
machine-learning techniques for recognizing opin-
ion elements.  The results  will  be  compared  with 
those obtained by the rule-based system. We hope 
to  improve  our  results  by  combining  rule-based 
and machine-learning modules.

References 

N. Asher, F. Benamara and Y. Mathieu. 2008. Distilling 
Opinion  in  Discourse:  A  Preliminary  Study.  COL-
ING – Posters. 

J.  Atserias,  B.  Casas,  E.  Comelles,  M.  González,  L. 
Padró and M. Padró. 2006.  FreeLing 1.3: Syntactic  
and  semantic  services  in  an  open-source  NLP lib-
rary. In Proceedings of the fifth international confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC) 
ELRA.

Carmen Banea,  Rada Mihalcea,  Janyce  Wiebe,  Samer 
Hassan. 2008. Multilingual Subjectivity Analysis Us-
ing Machine Translation.  Conference  on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 

J. Brooke, M. Tofiloski and M. Taboada. 2009. Cross-
Linguistic  Sentiment  Analysis:  From  English  to  
Spanish. RANLP 2009, Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing. Borovets, Bulgaria. 

Steven Bethard, Hong Yu, Ashley Thornton, Vasileios 
Hatzivassiloglou, and Dan Jurafsky. 2004. Automatic  
extraction of opinion propositions and their holders. 
In AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude 
and Affect in Text: Theories and Applications. 

Yejin  Choi,  Claire  Cardie,  Ellen Riloff  and Siddharth 
Patwardhan.  2005.  Identifying  sources  of  opinions 
with  conditional  random fields  and extraction  pat-
terns.  In  Proceedings of the Conference on Human 
Language  Technology  and  Empirical  Methods  in 
Natural  Language  Processing  (Vancouver,  British 
Columbia,  Canada).  Human  Language  Technology 

60



Conference. Association for Computational Linguist-
ics.

Yejin  Choi  and  Claire  Cardie.  2008.  Learning  with 
Compositional Semantics as Structural Inference for  
Subsentencial Sentiment Analysis. EMNLP. 

Mark Davies. 2002. Corpus del español (100 millones  
de palabras, siglo XIII - siglo XX). Disponible actual-
mente en http://www.corpusdelespanol.org.

J.  García-Miguel,  L.  Costas  and  S.  Martínez.  2005. 
Diátesis  verbales  y  esquemas  construccionales.  
Verbos,  clases  semánticas  y  esquemas  sintáctico-
semánticos en el proyecto ADESSE. Entre semántica 
léxica, teoría del léxico y sintaxis, 373-384.

Mariela Grassi,  Marisa  Malcuori,  Javier  Couto,  Juan 
José  Prada  and  Dina  Wonsever. 2001. Corpus  in-
formatizado: textos del español del Uruguay (COR-
IN), SLPLT-2 - Second International  Workshop on 
Spanish Language Processing and Language Techno-
logies - Jaén, España.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2006. Extracting opin-
ions, opinion holders, and topics expressed in online 
news media text. In Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Sentiment  and  Subjectivity  in  Text  (Sydney,  Aus-
tralia, July 22 - 22, 2006). ACL Workshops. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Morristown, NJ, 
1-8.  

Concepción Maldonado. 1999. Discurso directo y dis-
curso indirecto.  In Ignacio Bosque and  Violeta De-
monte, Gramática descriptiva de la lengua española 
(Entre la oración y el discurso. Morfología), 3549-
3596. 

K. Moilanen and S. Pulman. 2007. Sentiment Composi-
tion. In RANLP.

Bo  Pang and Lillian  Lee.  2008.  Opinion Mining and 
Sentiment  Analysis.  Foundations  and  Trends  in  In-
formation Retrieval 2(1-2), pp. 1–135.

L.  Polanyi  and A.  Zaenen.  2004.  Contextual  Valence  
Shifters. In AAAI spring Symposium on Attitude.

J. Redondo, I. Fraga, I. Padrón and M. Comesaña. 2007. 
The Spanish Adaptation of ANEW (Affective Norms  
for  English  Words).  Behavior  Research  Methods, 
39(3):600-605, Agosto.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce 
Wiebe.  2008.  Finding  the  Sources  and  Targets  of  
Subjective Expressions. The Sixth International Con-
ference  on  Language  Resources  and  Evaluation 
(LREC 2008). 

Veselin Stoyanov and Claire Cardie. 2008.  Annotating 
Topics of Opinions. Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2008), Marrakech, Morocco.

Carlos Subirats-Rüggeberg and Miriam R. L.  Petruck. 
2003.  Surprise: Spanish FrameNet!  In  E. Hajicova, 
A. Kotesovcova & Jiri Mirovsky (eds.), Proceedings 
of CIL 17. CD-ROM. Prague: Matfyzpress.

P. Turney and M. Littman. 2003. Measuring Praise and 
Criticism:  Inference  of  Semantic  Orientation  from 
Association. In  ACM  Transactions  on  Information 
Systems, 21:315--346.

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson and Claire Cardie. 2005. 
Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in  
language.  In  Language  Resources  and  Evaluation 
(formerly  Computers  and  the  Humanities), 39(2-
3):165210.

Dina Wonsever and Jean-Luc Minel. 2004. Contextual 
Rules for Text Analysis. En Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science.

Dina Wonsever, Serrana Caviglia, Javier Couto and Ai-
ala Rosá and. 2006.  Un sistema para la segmenta-
ción en proposiciones de textos en español. In Letras 
de hoje 144 (41).

61


