










































Syllable-Based Thai-English Machine Transliteration


Proceedings of the 2010 Named Entities Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 66–70,
Uppsala, Sweden, 16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Syllable-based Thai-English Machine Transliteration

Chai Wutiwiwatchai  and  Ausdang Thangthai
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center

Pathumthani, Thailand
{chai.wutiwiwatchai,ausdang.thangthai}@nectec.or.th

Abstract

This article describes the first trial on bidirec-
tional Thai-English machine transliteration ap-
plied on the NEWS 2010 transliteration cor-
pus. The system relies on segmenting source-
language  words into syllable-like units,  find-
ing unit's pronunciations, consulting a syllable 
transliteration  table  to  form  target-language 
word hypotheses, and ranking the hypotheses 
by using syllable n-gram. The approach yields 
84.2% and 70.4% mean F-scores on English-
to-Thai  and  Thai-to-English  transliteration. 
Discussion  on  existing  problems  and  future 
solutions are addressed.

1 Introduction

Transliteration  aims  to  phonetically  transcribe 
text in source languages with text in target lan-
guages.  The  task  is  crucial  for  various  natural 
language  processing  research  and  applications 
such as machine translation, multilingual text-to-
speech synthesis and information retrieval. Most 
of  current  Thai  writings contain both Thai  and 
English scripts. Such English words when writ-
ten in Thai are mainly their translations. Without 
official  translation  forms,  transliterations  often 
take place.

Thai-English  machine  transliteration  and  re-
lated research have been investigated for many 
years.  Works  for  Thai  word  romanization  or 
Thai-to-English transliteration are such as Char-
oenporn  et  al.  (1999),  Aroonmanakun  and 
Rivepiboon (2004). Both works proposed statist-
ical  romanization models  based on the syllable 
unit.  Generating  Thai  scripts  of  English  words 
are mainly via automatic transcription of English 
words.  Aroonmanakun  (2005)  described  a 
chunk-based n-gram model where the chunk is a 
group of characters useful for mapping to Thai 
transcriptions. Thangthai et al. (2007) proposed a 
method  for  generating  Thai  phonetic  transcrip-
tions of  English words for  use in  Thai/English 
text-to-speech  synthesis.  The  CART  learning 
machine was adopted to map English characters 

to  Thai  phonetics.  As  our  literature  review,  a 
general algorithm for bi-directional Thai-to-Eng-
lish  and  English-to-Thai  transliteration  has  not 
been investigated.

The NEWS machine transliteration shared task 
has just included Thai-English words as a part of 
its corpus in 2010, serving as a good source for 
algorithm benchmarking. In this article, a Thai-
English machine transliteration system is evalu-
ated on the NEWS 2010 corpus. The system was 
developed under intuitive concepts that translit-
eration  among  Thai-English  is  mostly  done on 
the basis of sound mimicking of syllable units. 
Therefore, the algorithm firstly segments the in-
put word in a source language into syllable-like 
units  and  finding  pronunciations  of  each  unit. 
The pronunciation in the form of phonetic scripts 
is used to find possible transliteration forms giv-
en a syllable translation table. The best result is 
determined by using syllable n-gram.

The  next  section  describes  more  details  of 
Thai-English  transliteration  problems  and  the 
Thai-English NEWS 2010 corpus. The detail of 
proposed  system is  given  in  Section  3  and  its 
evaluation is reported in Section 4. Section 5 dis-
cusses on existing problems and possible  solu-
tions.

2 Thai-English Transliteration

As  mentioned  in  the  Introduction,  the  current 
Thai writing often contains both Thai and Eng-
lish scripts especially for English words without 
compact  translations.  Many  times,  translitera-
tions  take  place  when  only  Thai  scripts  are 
needed. This is not only restricted to names but 
also  some  common  words  like  “computer”, 
“physics”, etc.

The  Thai  Royal  Institute  (http://www.roy-
in.go.th) is authorized to issue official guidelines 
for Thai transcriptions of foreign words and also 
romanization of Thai words, which are respect-
ively equivalent to English-to-Thai and Thai-to-
English  transliteration.  Romanization  of  Thai 
words is based on sound transcription. Thai con-

66



sonant and vowel alphabets are defined to map to 
roman  alphabets.  Similarly,  English-to-Thai 
transliteration is  defined based on the  phonetic 
transcription of English words. However, in the 
latter case, an English phoneme could be mapped 
to  multiple  Thai  alphabets.  For  example,  the 
sound /k/ could be mapped to either “ก ”,  “ข ” , 
“ค”, or “ฆ”. Moreover, the guideline reserves for 
transliterations generally used in the current writ-
ing and also transliterations appeared in the offi-
cial Royal Institute dictionaries, even such trans-
literations do not comply with the guideline.

Since the guidelines are quite flexible and it is 
also common that  lots  of Thai  people may not 
strictly follow the guidelines, ones can see many 
ways  of  transliteration  in  daily  used  text.  To 
solve this ambiguity, both the official guidelines 
and statistics of  usage must  be incorporated in 
the machine transliteration system.

The Thai-English part of NEWS 2010 corpus 
developed by the National Electronics and Com-
puter  Technology Center  (NECTEC)  composes 
of word pairs collected mainly from 3 sources; 
press from the Thai Royal  Institute, press from 
other sources, and the NEWS 2009 corpus. The 
first two sources, sharing about 40%  of the cor-
pus, mostly contain common English words of-
ten transliterated into Thai and the transliteration 
is  almost  restricted  to  the  Royal  Institute 
guidelines. The rest are English names selected 
from the NEWS 2009 corpus based on their fre-
quencies found by the Google search. Such Eng-
lish names were transliterated into Thai and re-
checked  by  linguists  using  the  Royal  Institute 
transliteration guideline.

3 Proposed Transliteration System

Our proposed model is similar to what proposed 
by Jiang et al. (2009), which introduced transla-
tion among Chinese and English names based on 
syllable units and determined the best candidate 
using the  statistical  n-gram model.  The overall 
structure of our model is shown in Figure 1. 

3.1 Syllabification and letter-to-sound

An input word in the source language is first seg-
mented  into syllable-like  units.  It  is  noted that 
there are some cases where segmented units are 
not  really a  syllable.  For  examples,  “S”  in  the 
word “SPECTOR” might actually be pronounced 
as a single consonant without  vowel.  The Thai 
word “เสนอ”/s-a n-:/ is unbreakable as the letter 
expressed for the first syllable /s-a/ is enclosed in 

the  letters  of  the  second  syllable  /n-:/.  These 
cases are considered exceptional syllables.

Figure 1. The overall system architecture.

In the Thai-to-English system,  syllabification 
of Thai words is a part of a Thai letter-to-sound 
conversion  tool  provided  by  Thangthai  et  al. 
(2006). It is performed using context-free gram-
mar (CFG) rules created by Tarsaku et al. (2001). 
The CFG rules produce syllable-sequence hypo-
theses,  which are  then  disambiguated  by using 
syllable  n-gram.  Simultaneously,  the  tool 
provides  the  phonetic  transcription  of  the  best 
syllable sequence by using a simple syllable-to-
phone mapping. Figure 1 shows an example of 
an input Thai word “สเป
กเตอร” which is segmen-
ted into 3 syllables “ส|เป
ก|เตอร” and converted 
to the phonetic transcription defined for Thai “s-
a|p-e-k|t-:”.

In the English-to-Thai system, a simple syllab-
ification module of English words is created us-
ing the following rules.

1) Marking all vowel letters “a, e, i, o, u”,
     e.g. L[o]m[o]c[a]t[i]v[e], J[a]nsp[o]rt
2) Using some rules, merging consonantal 
     letters surrounding each vowel to form
     basic syllables, 
     e.g. Lo|mo|ca|ti|ve, Jan|sport
3) Post-processing by merging the syllable 
     with “e” vowel into its preceding syllable 
     e.g. Lo|mo|ca|tive,  and re-segmenting for 
     syllables without vowel letters, e.g. 

         mcdo|nald to mc|do|nald, sport to s|port
Letter-to-sound conversion of English words can 
actually be conducted by several public tools like 
Festival  (http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/  fest-
ival/). However, the tool does not meet our re-

67



quirement as it could not output syllable bound-
aries of the phonetic sequence and finding such 
boundaries is not trivial. Instead, a tool for con-
verting English words to Thai phonetic transcrip-
tions developed by Thangthai et al. (2007) is ad-
opted. In this tool, the CART learning machine is 
used to capture the relationship among alphabets 
and  English  phone  transcriptions  of  English 
words  and Thai phone transcriptions.  Since the 
Thai  phonetic transcription is defined based on 
the syllable structure, the syllable boundaries of 
phonetic transcriptions given by this tool can be 
obtained.

3.2 Syllable transliteration and disambigu-
ation

In  the  training  phase,  both  Thai  and  English 
words in pairs  are syllabified and converted to 
phonetic  transcriptions  using  the  methods  de-
scribed in the previous subsection. To reduce the 
effect of errors caused by automatic syllabifica-
tion,  only  word  pairs  having  equal  number  of 
syllables are kept for building a syllable translit-
eration table. The table consists of a list of syl-
lable phonetic transcriptions and its possible tex-
tual syllables in both languages. An n-gram mod-
el  of  textual  syllables  in each language is  also 
prepared from the training set.

In  the  testing  phase,  each  syllable  in  the 
source-language word is mapped to possible syl-
lables in the target language via its phonetic tran-
scription  using  the  syllable  transliteration  table 
described  above.  Since  each  syllable  could  be 
transliterated to multiple hypotheses, the best hy-
pothesis  can be determined by considering syl-
lable n-gram probabilities.

4 Experiments

The Thai-English part of NEWS 2010 were de-
ployed in our experiment. The training set com-
poses  of  24,501  word  pairs  and  two  test  sets, 
2,000 words for English-to-Thai and 1,994 words 
for Thai-to-English  are used for evaluation. All 
training words were syllable segmented and con-
verted to phonetic transcriptions using the tools 
described in the Section 3.1. Since the CFG rules 
could not completely cover all possible syllables 
in  Thai,  some  words  failed  from automatically 
generating  phonetic  transcriptions  were  filtered 
out. As mentioned also in the Section 3.1, only 
word pairs with equal number of segmented syl-
lables were kept for training. Finally, 16,705 out 
of 24,501 word pairs were reserved for building 

the syllable transliteration table and for training 
syllable 2-gram models.

Table 1 shows some statistics of syllables col-
lected  from the  training  word  pairs.  Since  the 
Thai-English  word  pairs  provided  in  NEWS 
2010  were  prepared  mainly  by  transliterating 
English words and names into Thai, it is hence 
reasonable that the number of distinct syllables 
in  Thai  is  considerably lower  than  in  English. 
Similarly, the other statistics like the numbers of 
homophones  per  syllable  phonetic-transcription 
are in the same manner.

Total no. of syllables 39,537

Avg. no. of syllables per word 2.4

No. of distinct syllables 4,367 (Thai)
6,307 (English)

No. of distinct syllable 
phonetic-transcriptions

1,869

Avg. no. of homophones per 
syllable phonetic-transcription

2.3 (Thai)
3.4 (English)

Max. no. of homophones per 
syllable phonetic-transcription

16 (Thai)
38 (English)

Table 2. Some statistics of syllables extracted 
from the training set.

As seen from the Table 1 that there could be 
up to 38 candidates of textual syllables given a 
syllable  phonetic  transcription.  To  avoid  the 
large search space of syllable combinations, only 
top-frequency  syllables  were  included  in  the 
search space. Table 2 shows transliteration res-
ults regarding 4 measures defined in the NEWS 
2010 shared task. Both experiments on English-
to-Thai  and  Thai-to-English  transliteration  are 
non-standard  tests  as  external  letter-to-sound 
conversion tools are incorporated. 

Measure Eng-to-Thai Thai-to-Eng
ACC in Top-1 0.247 0.093

Mean F-score 0.842 0.707

MRR 0.367 0.132

MAPref 0.247 0.093

Table 2. Transliteration results based on the 
NEWS 2010 measurement.

68



5 Analysis and Discussion

There are still some problematic issues regarding 
the transliteration format including hyphenation 
and case sensitivity in the test data. Ignoring both 
problems leads to 0.5% and 8.3% improvement 
on the English-to-Thai and Thai-to-English tests 
respectively. Figure 2 illustrates the distribution 
of test words and error words with respect to the 
word length in the unit  of syllables.  More than 
80% of test words are either 2 or 3 syllables. It 
can be roughly seen that the ratio of error words 
over  test  words  increases  with  respect  to  the 
length  of  words.  This  is  by  the  fact  that  the 
whole word will be considered incorrect even if 
only a syllable in the word is wrongly transliter-
ated. Out of 3,860 syllable units extracted from 
all error words, over 57% are correctly transliter-
ated.

Figure 2. The distribution of test words and error 
words with respect to the word length.

Another issue largely affecting the system per-
formance is as mentioned in the Section 2 that 
the Thai Royal Institute's guideline is somewhat 
flexible  for  multiple  ways  of  transliteration. 
However, the corpus used to train and test cur-
rently provides only one way of transliteration. 
Improving the corpus to cope with such translit-
eration  flexibility  is  needed.  In  developing  the 
Thai-English NEWS 2010 transliteration corpus, 
some  foreign  names  are  difficult  to  pronounce 
even by linguists. Errors in the corpus are then 
unavoidable and required further improvement.

Many algorithms could be conducted to help 
improve the system accuracy.  First,  the current 
system uses only syllable n-gram probabilities to 
determine  the  best  result  without  considering 
how  likely  the  target  syllable  is  close  to  the 
source syllable. For example, the source syllables 
“BIKE” and “BYTE” are transliterated to Thai as 

“ไบค”and “ไบท” respectively. Both Thai translit-
erated syllables are pronounced in the same way 
as  /b-ai/.  It  can  be  seen  that  both  syllables 
“BIKE”  and  “BYTE”  can  be  linked  to  both 
“ไ บ ค ” and “ไ บท ” . Selecting the best syllable 
takes  only  the  syllable  n-gram  into  account 
without considering its right transliteration. Dir-
ect mapping between source and target syllables 
could  solve  this  problem but  leads  to  another 
problem of unseen syllables. A better way is to 
incorporate in the search space another score rep-
resenting the closeness of source and target syl-
lables.  As the example,  the syllable “BIKE” is 
closer to “ไบค” than to “ไบท” as the letter “K” is 
normally pronounced like “ค”  /k/, not “ท”  /th/. 
We have tried incorporating such knowledge by 
introducing  a  syllable  similarity  score  in  the 
search space. Given a pair of source and target 
syllables, the syllable similarity score is the num-
ber  of  consonants  having  the  same  sound like 
“K” and “ค” divided by the total number of con-
sonants  in  the  syllable.  Unfortunately,  this  ap-
proach  could  not  yield  any  improvement  cur-
rently as many syllable pairs happened to have 
the same similarity score. A better definition of 
the score will be conducted in the future work.

6 Conclusion

The Thai-English part of NEWS 2010 translitera-
tion corpus was briefly described and its use in 
building  a  Thai-English  machine  transliteration 
system  was  reported.  The  system  is  based  on 
transliteration of syllable units extracted from the 
whole input word. Within the space of candidate 
transliterated syllables,  the  best  output  was de-
termined by using the statistical syllable n-gram 
model. There are many issues left for further im-
provement. First, possible transliterations of each 
word should be added to the corpus. Second, the 
system itself could be improved by e.g. incorpor-
ating better syllabification approaches, defining a 
better  syllable  similarity  score,  and  comparing 
with  other  potential  algorithms.  Finally,  as  the 
Thai-to-English part of the transliteration corpus 
is  actually  back-transliteration  of  English-to-
Thai, it is interesting to extend the corpus to cope 
with real-use Thai-to-English word pairs.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Thai Royal 
Institute and Assoc. Prof. Dr. Wirote Aroonman-
akun  from the  Faculty  of  Arts,  Chulalongkorn 
University,  who help supply parts  of  the  Thai-
English NEWS 2010 transliteration corpus.

69



References 
Ausdang  Thangthai,  Chatchawarn  Hansakun-

buntheung,  Rungkarn  Siricharoenchai,  and  Chai 
Wutiwiwatchai.  2006.  Automatic  syllable-pattern 
induction  in  statistical  Thai  text-to-phone  tran-
scription,  In  Proc.  of  INTERSPEECH 2006,  pp. 
1344-1347.

Ausdang  Thangthai,  Chai  Wutiwiwatchai,  Anocha 
Ragchatjaroen, Sittipong Saychum. 2007. A learn-
ing  method  for  Thai  phonetization  of  English  
words,  In  Proc.  of  INTERSPEECH  2007,  pp. 
1777-1780.

Thatsanee  Charoenporn,  Ananlada  Chotimongkol, 
and  Virach  Sornlertlamvanich.  1999.  Automatic  
romanization  for  Thai,  In  Proc.  of  the  Oriental 
COCOSDA 1999, Taipei, Taiwan.

Wirote  Aroonmanakun  and  Wanchai  Rivepiboon. 
2004.  A unified model of Thai word segmentation  
and romanization, In Proc. of the 18th Pacific Asia 
Conference on Language, Information and Compu-
tation, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 205-214.

Wirote Aroonmanakun. 2005. A chunk-based n-gram 
English to Thai transliteration, In Proc. of the 6th 
Symposium on Natural Language Processing, Chi-
ang Rai, Thailand, pp. 37-42.

Xue Jiang,  Le Sun, Dakun Zhang. 2009.  A syllable-
based name transliteration system, In Proc. of  the 
2009  Named  Entities  Workshop,  ACL-IJCNLP 
2009, pp. 96–99.

70


