










































Route Communication in Dialogue: a Matter of Principles


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 95–98,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Route Communication in Dialogue: a Matter of Principles 
 

 

Theodora Koulouri 

Department of Information Systems  

and Computing 

Brunel University 

Middlesex UB8 3PH 

theodora.koulouri@brunel.ac.uk 

Stanislao Lauria 

Department of Information Systems 

and Computing 

Brunel University 

Middlesex UB8 3PH 

stasha.lauria@brunel.ac.uk 

 

  

Abstract 

The present study uses the dialogue paradigm 

to explore route communication. It revolves 

around the analysis of a corpus of route in-

structions produced in real-time interaction 

with the follower. It explores the variation in 

forming route instructions and the factors that 

contribute in it. The results show that visual 

co-presence influences the performance, con-

versation patterns and configuration of instruc-

tions. Most importantly, the results suggest an 

analogy between the choices of instruction-

givers and the communicative actions of their 

partners. 

1.1 Spatial language in dialogue 

  The main question this paper attempts to ad-

dress is how people produce route instructions in 

dialogue. The current zeitgeist in language re-

search and dialogue system development seems 

to be the unified investigation of spatial language 

and dialogue (Coventry et al., 2009). Indicative 

of the growing prioritisation of dialogue in the 

study of spatial language are the on-going re-

search efforts within the MapTask
1
 project and 

the GIVE challenge
2
 .  

1.2 A framework for the analysis of route 

instructions 

The study uses CORK (Communication of Route 

Knowledge, (Allen 2000)), a framework which 

provides a component-based analysis of route 

instructions. The CORK taxonomy differentiates 

between instructions that are directives (action 

statements with verbs of movement) and descrip-

tive statements (with state-of-being verbs, like 

“be” and “see”). Descriptives present a static pic-

                                                 
1
 http://www.hcrc.ed.ac.uk/maptask/ 
2
 http://www.give-challenge.org/research/ 

ture of spatial relations and provide the follower 

the opportunity to verify his position or reorient 

himself. The taxonomy also considers elements 

that provide specificity and distinguishing infor-

mation about environmental features, called de-

limiters. Within this framework, Allen (2000) 

describes a set of principles pertaining to the 

configuration of route descriptions. Namely, 

people concentrate descriptives and delimiters on 

points along the route that offer for uncertainty 

(like crossroads). Moreover, the selection and 

placement of these components depends on the 

characteristics of the environment and the per-

ceived needs of the follower. Evidence from em-

pirical work supports the framework, reporting 

that errors in navigation increased when the route 

directions violated these principles. Nevertheless, 

the applicability of the suggested principles has 

only been tested in scenarios in which the direc-

tions were produced beforehand by either the 

experimenters or a separate group of subjects. 

1.3 The effect of visual information  

Studies exploring the effect of visual information 

on task-oriented interaction converge on that vis-

ual feedback leads to more efficient interactions 

and influences the conversational patterns be-

tween participants (Clark and Krych, 2004; Ger-

gle et al., 2004; Koulouri and Lauria, 2009). 

These phenomena are generally attributed to the 

ease of establishing “common ground” when 

visual feedback is available. However, to the au-

thors’ knowledge, most related studies have fo-

cused on high-level analysis of dialogue acts and 

many aspects of how interlocutors adapt their 

linguistic choices remain undefined.  

1.4 Aims and hypotheses of study 

The present study provides an empirical account 

of route instructions, as they emerge in real-time 

interaction with the follower. We offer the fol-

95



lowing tentative hypotheses. Since visual co-

presence facilitates grounding of information, it 

is expected to have a major effect on how route 

instructions are configured. Next, putting addi-

tional emphasis on the inter-individual processes 

involved in language use, this study aims to test 

whether the linguistic options mobilised by the 

instructor ultimately depend upon the contribu-

tions of the follower. 

2 Methods 

A study was designed to elicit natural route in-

structions in a restricted context. Pairs of partici-

pants collaborated in a navigation task, in a “Wi-

zard-of-Oz” set-up. The instructors provided in-

structions to navigate their partners to designated 

locations in a simulated town, being under the 

impression that they were interacting with a 

software agent (robot). The study manipulated 

two factors; i) availability of visual information 

on follower’s actions and ii), follower’s interac-

tive capacity. With regard to the first factor, there 

were two conditions in which the ability to moni-

tor the actions of the “robot” was either removed 

or provided. The second factor also involved two 

conditions. In the first condition, the followers 

could interact using unconstrained language 

(henceforth, “Free” condition). In the second 

condition (henceforth, “Constrained” condition), 

a set of predetermined responses available to the 

followers aimed to coerce them towards more 

“automated” contributions; for instance, “open-

ended” repairs such as “What?”, which provide 

no specific information on the source of the 

problem. However, the followers were still able 

to be interactive if they wished so, by clicking 

the relevant buttons to request clarification or 

provide location information.  

The study followed a between-subjects fac-

torial design. A total of 56 students were allo-

cated in the four conditions: Monitor-Free, 

Monitor-Constrained, No Monitor-Free, No 

Monitor-Constrained. The experimental proce-

dure is described in detail in (Koulouri and 

Lauria, 2009). 

2.1 Set-up 

The experiment relied on a custom-built sys-

tem which supported the interactive simulation 

and enabled real-time direct text communication 

between the pairs. The interfaces consisted of a 

graphical display and a dialogue box.  

The interface of the instructor displayed the 

full map of the simulated town (Figure 1). On the 

upper right corner of the interface, there could be 

a small “monitor”, in which the robot’s imme-

diate locality was displayed, but not the robot 

itself. The presence of the monitor feature de-

pended on the experimental condition.   

The followers’ interface displayed a fraction 

of the map, the surroundings of the robot’s cur-

rent position. The robot was operated by the fol-

lower using the arrow keys on the keyboard. In 

the “Free” conditions followers could freely type 

messages. In the “Constrained” conditions, the 

followers needed to use the buttons on the inter-

face (Figure 2). 

 
Figure 1. The instructor’s interface in the Monitor 

conditions. The monitor window on the upper right 

corner was removed in No Monitor conditions. 

 
Figure 2. The follower’s interface in the Constrained 

conditions. In the Free conditions, there were no but-

tons and followers could freely type any message. 

2.2 Data analysis  

The analysis of the corpus of route instructions 

followed the CORK framework (Allen, 2000). 

Communicative statements were classified as 

Directives or Descriptives. These communica-

tive statements could contain references to envi-

ronmental features. The types of environmental 

features considered were: Locations (e.g., build-

ings or bridges), Pathways (e.g., streets), Choice 

Points (e.g., junctions) and Destination. Last, 

instructions can be composed of delimiters, 

which fall into four categories: 

1. Distance designations: e.g., “...until you 

see a car park”. 

2. Direction designations: e.g., “go left”. 

3. Relational terms: e.g., “on your left”,  

4. Modifiers: e.g., “big red bridge”, “take 

the first/second/last road”. 

96



3 Results  

The experiment yielded a large corpus of 160 

dialogues, composed of 3,386 turns. 1,485 in-

structions were collected. First, the analysis con-

siders some common measures of efficiency. 

Next, the results of the component analysis of 

instructions are presented.  

3.1 Efficiency of interaction 

The number and length of turns and instructions 

and time needed to complete each task are typi-

cally used as measures of the efficiency of inter-

action. Additionally, fewer execution and under-

standing failures are taken as indicators of supe-

rior performance. 

Time, number of turns, words and instruc-

tions: The ANOVA performed on time per task 

showed no reliable significant differences among 

groups. On the other hand, significant effects 

were observed with regard to all other dependent 

variables. An interaction effect was revealed af-

ter analysis on numbers of turns (F(1, 24) = 

3.993, p = .05). Pairs in the Monitor-Free condi-

tion required less turns to complete the task 

compared to the other groups (column 1 of Table 

1). It seems however that instructors in both 

Monitor conditions were dominating the conver-

sational floor, having produced about 58% of the 

turns, compared to instructors in the No Monitor 

conditions (F(1, 24) = 5.303, p = .03). Neverthe-

less, it was not the case that instructors in Moni-

tor conditions were “wordier”. The number of 

words was similar among all instructor groups. 

The results indicated that the total number of 

words required to complete a task was much 

lower in Monitor conditions (F(1, 24) = = 5.215, 

p = 0.03) (see column 3 in Table 1). Next, in-

structors in Monitor conditions gave more in-

structions to guide the followers to the destina-

tion (F(1, 24) = 3.494, p = .07).  However, these 

instructions were considerably shorter compared 

to the instructions provided by No Monitor in-

structors (F(1, 24) = 4.268, p = .05). All differ-

ences are amplified in the Monitor-Constrained 

group, in which more turns and instructions were 

needed but with fewer words and the “turn pos-

session” of the instructor was the highest among 

the groups.  
Con-

dition 

#Turns 

per 

task 

%In-

struc-

tor 

Turns 

#Word

s per 

task 

#Words 

per 

Instruc-

tion 

#Instruc-

tions per 

task 

Miscom-

munica-

tion per 

task 

M-F 16.74 57.12% 87.33 4.70 9.08 1.14 

M-C 23.95 58.86% 65.02 3.01 11.73 2.05 

NM-F 23.63 52.28% 105.38 5.29 8.58 1.20 

NM-C 20.15 50.62% 100.35 5.07 7.68 0.69 

Table 1. Summary of Results (mean values).  

Frequency of miscommunication: Miscom-

munication was calculated by considering two 

measures: the number of execution errors and of 

follower turns that were tagged as expressing 

non-understanding. The ANOVA revealed an 

interaction effect (F (1, 24) = 4.012, p = .05). 

Striking differences were observed between the 

Monitor-Constrained group and the rest; in par-

ticular, followers in this condition were twice or 

three times more likely to fail to understand and 

execute instructions (see last column in Table 1). 

3.2 Component analysis of instructions 

This section presents the results of the analysis 

on inclusion of landmark references, types of 

delimiters and communicative statements.  

Landmark references: Instructors in both No 

Monitor conditions preferred to produce instruc-

tions that were anchored on landmarks, especial-

ly on 3D locations such as buildings (28% of 

instructions contained locations vs 14% in the 

Monitor conditions, (F (1, 24) = 12.034, p = 

.002)). On the other hand, Monitor instructors 

opted for simple action prescriptions. Particular-

ly, 75% of the instructions in the Monitor-

Constrained condition omitted any kind of refer-

ence (compared to an average of 42% in the oth-

er conditions).  

Delimiters: Category 2 delimiters that pro-

vided simple direction information were preva-

lent in Monitor conditions (F (1, 24) = 11.407, p 

= .002). Further, an interaction effect was found 

(F (1, 24) = 3.802, p = .01); the number of cate-

gory 2 delimiters almost doubles in the Monitor-

Constrained condition. On the contrary, the use 

of category 1 delimiters, which provide informa-

tion on the boundary of the route is very limited 

in the Monitor-Constrained condition (F (1, 24) = 

5.350, p = .03). The third category of delimiters 

includes terms that specify the relation between 

traveller and an environmental feature (“on your 

left”) or between environmental features. Again, 

the difference arises in the Monitor-Constrained 

condition, which included the lowest number of 

category 3 delimiters (marginal effect, F (1, 24) 

= 3.392, p = .07). Finally, the analysis performed 

on the frequency of category 4 delimiters did not 

yield any significant effect.  

Directive and descriptive communicative 

statements: An interaction effect was revealed 

with regard to the proportion of directives and 

97



descriptives in the corpus (F (1, 24) = 3.830, p = 

.06). The instructors in the Monitor-Constrained 

condition produced less descriptives, which give 

information about relations among features in the 

environment and tap perceptual experience (“you 

will see a bridge”). In particular, in the Monitor-

Constrained condition, 4.7% of instructions were 

descriptives, whereas the proportion of descrip-

tives averaged 10% in all other conditions. 

4 Discussion 

The results resonate with previous research. The 

actions of the followers served as an immediate, 

accurate and effortless indicator of their current 

state of understanding, making verbal feedback 

redundant. Monitor instructors could readily con-

firm their assumptions about the information re-

quirements of followers and used linguistics 

shortcuts and simpler instructions exactly at the 

moment needed. On the other hand, in the No 

Monitor condition, uncertainty about the position 

and movement of the robot created the need for 

elaborate and explicit instructions. The contribu-

tion of the present study lies on that it grounds 

these observations on quantitative analysis, using 

measures like words, turns and the relative fre-

quencies of certain types of instruction compo-

nents that vary in information value. Most impor-

tantly, it describes the specific ways in which 

instructors configure their directions in the pres-

ence/absence of visual information.  

The CORK framework predicts that route pro-

tocols which are rich in descriptives and rela-

tional terms are associated with more successful 

navigation, compared to simple directional ones. 

Our results partially meet this expectation, since 

large numbers of execution errors and non-

understandings were only observed in the Moni-

tor-Constrained condition, whereas miscommu-

nication rates were similar across the other 

groups. Indeed, this condition was found to gen-

erally differ from the rest. In particular, In the 

Monitor-Constrained condition, the dialogues 

were the shortest in terms of words. Instructors 

produced many but short instructions. The com-

ponent-based analysis revealed that they em-

ployed overwhelmingly more action-based in-

structions without landmark references and de-

scriptives. Boundary information on the route, 

frame of reference and spatial relations between 

environmental features were typically omitted. In 

both Constrained conditions, followers were ex-

pected to resort to a “mechanical” interaction, as 

coerced by the presence of the predefined re-

sponses. Inspection of the dialogues revealed that 

followers in the Monitor-Constrained condition 

did so, given the precedence of visual feedback. 

This was not the case with No Monitor-

Constrained followers who needed to verbally 

ground information. Dialogue examples are pro-

vided in Table 2 below. 
I: turn around 

I: go straight 

ahead 

I: stop 

I: turn left here 

I: go ahead 

F: What? 

I: Go straight 

ahead 

I: Now keep going down the road until 

you see a car park 

F: I am in front of the car park 

I: turn right and walk till the end,  

along the road you will see a gym on your 

right 

F: yes gym to my right side 

I: good, keep going straight and  

you will see a factory on your left 

Table 2. Dialogue excerpts from the Monitor-

Constrained (column 1) and No Monitor-Constrained 

(column 2) conditions. 

Thus, we propose that the linguistic choices of 

the followers “prime” the instructor’s own strat-

egies. In the Monitor-Constrained Condition, 

followers were less interactive, and gave fewer 

responses with lower information value. In har-

mony, their partners provided less elaborate in-

structions, which also lacked important informa-

tion and specificity.  

In conclusion, the findings confirm our initial 

hypotheses. Instructions are sensitive to condi-

tions of (visual) co-presence. Moreover, a direct 

link was identified between the way in which 

instructions and follower’s contributions are 

formulated. Following this lead, we are now fo-

cusing on a fine-grained analysis of the utter-

ances of the follower.  

References 

Darren Gergle, Robert E. Kraut and Susan E. Fussell. 

2004.  Language Efficiency and Visual Technolo-

gy: Minimizing Collaborative Effort with Visual 

Information. Journal of Language and Social Psy-

chology, 23(4):491-517. Sage Publications, CA.  

Gary L. Allen. 2000. Principles and Practices for 

Communicating Route Knowledge. Applied Cog. 

Psychology.14(4):333–359. 

Herbert H. Clark and Meredyth A. Krych. 2004. 

Speaking While Monitoring Addressees for Under-

standing. J. of Memory and Language, 50:62-81. 

Kenny Coventry, Thora Tenbrink and John Bateman, 

2009. Spatial Language and Dialogue: Navigating 

the Domain. In K. Coventry, T. Tenbrink, and J. 

Bateman (Eds.) Spatial Language and Dialogue. 1-

8. Oxford University Press. Oxford, UK. 

Theodora Koulouri and Stanislao Lauria. 2009. Ex-

ploring Miscommunication and Collaborative Be-

haviour in Human-Robot Interaction, SIGdial09.  

98


