










































A Comparison of Several Key Information Visualization Systems for Secondary Use of Electronic Health Record Content


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 76–83,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Comparison of Several Key Information Visualization Systems for 
Secondary Use of Electronic Health Record Content 

 
*Francisco S. Roque1, Laura Slaughter2,3, Alexandr Tkatenko4,5 

 
1Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, The Technical University of Denmark, 

Lyngby, Denmark 
2The Interventional Center, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway 

3Department of Computer and Information Science, Norwegian University of Science and Tech-
nology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway 

4Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia 
5Software Technology and Applications Competence Center, Tartu, Estonia 

http://dsv.su.se/hexanord 
*All three authors contributed equally to this work. 

 

Abstract 

An overview is provided of six information 
visualization systems designed specifically for 
gaining an overview of electronic health re-
cords (EHR). The systems discussed all make 
use of timelines: Lifelines, Lifelines2, 
KNAVE II, CLEF Visual Navigator, Time-
line, and AsbruView. With the exception of 
Lifelines2, the main user groups targeted are 
physicians involved in direct patient care. Lit-
tle attention has been paid towards supporting 
true secondary use of EHR contents, for ac-
tivities such as assessing quality of care, pa-
tient health and safety monitoring, and clinical 
trial recruitment. Future work on such systems 
needs to address the complexity of EHR data, 
missing and incomplete information, and dif-
ficulties in displaying data with differing lev-
els of granularity. 

1 Introduction 

This paper provides an overview of several infor-
mation visualization (infovis) systems that have 
been built for exploring abstracted information 
from Electronic Health Records (EHR). EHRs are 
systems that are used to document care of patients. 
The records can include a wide range of data and 
information, including medications prescribed and 
administered, immunization history, laboratory test 
results, allergies, radiology images, treatment 
plans, and care notes. Currently, most EHR sys-

tems implemented are proprietary and highly cus-
tomized when used by larger care institutions.  
 
It is usually the case that only clinicians and other 
healthcare professionals with direct responsibility 
for providing care have access to patient data. The 
suggestion of secondary use of health data is not 
new and has been handled separately from the is-
sue of creating user interfaces and visualizations. 
Safran et al. discuss the purpose of clinical data 
repositories in their white paper and point towards 
the goal of a national framework for the secondary 
use of health data in the U.S. (Safran et al., 2007). 
According to their definition, secondary use in-
cludes activities such as analysis, research, quality 
and safety measurement, public health, payment, 
provider certification and accreditation, marketing, 
and general business applications, while at the 
same time taking into account the ethical, political, 
technical and social implications of such re-use. De 
Lusignan and van Weel highlight the challenges of 
making use of clinical data for research, stating, 
"The available research methods for working with 
large data sets are limited; it is difficult to infer 
meaning from data; there is a rapid pace of change 
in both medicine and technology; and integrating 
data without reliable unique identifiers is difficult." 
(de Lusignan and van Weel, 2006). Prokosch and 
Ganslandt have recently summarized the latest ad-
vances in enabling clinical data re-use for research 
purposes (Prokosch and Ganslandt, 2009). They 
identify as key challenges the establishment of 
comprehensive clinical data repositories, the estab-
lishment of professional IT infrastructure to sup-

76



port clinical data capture, and the integration of 
medical record systems and clinical trial databases. 
As discussed in these articles, aggregated, ab-
stracted and manipulable information is underutil-
ized and hard to come by.  
 
The emerging field of Visual Analytics (Keim, 
2008) is relevant to this review. This field is focus-
ing on combining related research areas such as 
visualization, data mining and statistics to handle 
large and heterogeneous volumes of data, such as 
EHR. The systems we encountered are integrating 
human judgment with automated analysis, suggest-
ing that future work will be related to handling 
massive amounts of data that contains missing ele-
ments - including the results of textual analysis of 
records content. 

1.1 Purpose 

Our motivation for creating this overview is to 
compare and discuss some of the available infor-
mation visualization/visual analytics tools and how 
are these used for secondary, i.e. for purposes other 
than direct patient care. This is a first step to-
wards infrastructure and coordinating efforts to 
produce systems that are based on standard input 
formats, and meet the needs of specifically defined 
users. The reader of this overview is most likely 
working on information extraction, temporal ab-
straction, and summarizing EHRs. 
 
Source Search Keywords  
Pubmed visualization 

health records 
Medical Records Systems, Computerized 
Computer Graphics 
User-Computer Interface 

ACM DL electronic health records or medical record 
information visualization or visualization 
healthcare or health care 
user interface 

IEEE DL visualization 
medical records 

Google 
Scholar 

electronic medical records or EHR 
information visualization 
visual analytics 

Table 1. Keywords searched. 

1.2 Scope 

The review is non-systematic. We didn't expect to 
find large numbers of articles, since this is a rela-
tively narrow area of interest. The search was con-
fined to user interfaces and visualizations for EHR 
data, we searched pubmed, ACM digital library, 
IEEE library, and Google Scholar, using basic 
keywords and checked references in found articles. 
We also looked for papers on work we had read or 
known about previously from conferences or other 
sources. The literature search covered articles in 
English only. Keywords used are listed in Table 1.  

2 Systems 

In this section, we give an overview of the state-of-
the-art systems related to visualization of temporal 
information in EHRs. Our intention is to cover 
broad areas of application including representation 
of medical histories, visual data query and aggre-
gation, generation of temporal abstractions and 
visualization of treatment plans. Due to the limita-
tions in space, we focus only on the most represen-
tative systems, which feature interesting and 
potentially reusable visualization techniques. 
 
Lifelines  
LifeLines uses a timeline visualization technique to 
represent personal histories, medical records and 
other types on biographical data (Plaisant et al., 
1996). In LifeLines, horizontal bars are used to 
depict temporal duration and location of events on 
a horizontal time axis. Similar events are organized 
into facets, which can be expanded and collapsed 
to provide increasing or decreasing level of detail. 
Color notations and line thickness are used to indi-
cate the importance and relationship of events. To 
handle regions with high data density, LifeLines 
provides zooming functionality allowing users to 
compress and stretch the time scale at any location. 
Additional content (e.g., multimedia) can be added 
in a linked fashion. Authors apply LifeLines in the 
analysis of complex patient medical records to 
visualize temporal relationships between treat-
ments, consultations, disorders, prescriptions, hos-
pitalizations and other events. 
 
Lifelines2 
LifeLines2 (Wang et al., 2008) is an extension of 
LifeLines, allowing the user to analyze records 
from multiple patients at a time. The system facili-
tates comparative visualization of records by 

77



means of aligning, filtering and sorting operations. 
By aligning patient records on some common ref-
erence event (e.g., the first heart attack), users can 
easily spot co-occurring and neighboring events. 
Ranking and filtering operations complement 
alignment by interactively reordering or narrowing 
the set of records to suit a user’s changing focus. 
The system proved to be particularly suitable for 
observational research, where researchers analyze 
data from different studies in order to better under-
stand health problems or study the effect of treat-
ments, and in finding patients for clinical trials. 
Evaluation studies showed that the system signifi-
cantly simplifies typical analytical tasks and that 
medical specialists can quickly learn the interface. 
LifeLines2 is currently used to display EHR data 
provided by the Informatics for Integrating Biol-
ogy & the Bedside (i2b2) Project (Murphy et al., 
2006). 
 
While in LifeLines2 the main focus is on visualiz-
ing temporal ordering of events, Wang et al. em-
phasizes practical need in viewing multiple records 
as an aggregate in order to study frequency of 
event data over time (Wang et al., 2009). For in-
stance, a user might be interested to analyze blood 
pressure of all patients who have had an open-heart 
surgery within 3 months of their first heart attack. 
As a solution, authors complement LifeLines2 
framework with a new visualization technique, 
called temporal summaries, which represents dis-
tributional trends of events over a set of records in 
a histogram-like chart. Furthermore, the system 
allows splitting the whole dataset of records into 
multiple subsets and use temporal summaries to 
compare event patterns between these groups. 
 

 

Figure 1. The Lifelines2 main window, with focus on 
timelines. 
 
 
CLEF  
Hallet (Hallett, 2008) proposes a visualization ar-
chitecture for browsing medical histories, which 
integrates visual navigation tools and automatically 
generated textual summaries. While the graphical 
interface facilitates interactive navigation, textual 
descriptions can, in addition, convey complex tem-
poral information and display details that would 
otherwise be too complex for visualization compo-
nents. Within the system, the patient’s medical his-
tory is represented as a network of semantically 
and temporally organized events, which serves as 
an input for visualization and natural language 
generation components. The visual navigator de-
picts a high level overview of a patient’s medical 
history by plotting events along three parallel time-
lines, corresponding to diagnoses, treatments and 
investigations. In addition to zooming time scale 
and detail-on-demand functionality, the navigator 
provides interactive visualization of semantical 
relationships between events (e.g., caused-by, has-
locus, indicated-by, etc.). Having different features 
from the LifeLines interface, the navigator also 
allows the user to visualize numerical data (e.g., 
results of blood tests) by plotting results of meas-
urements on separate line charts. Natural language 
generation is used for two purposes: 1) to create 
customized textual reports for printing or exchange 
purposes and 2) as a support tool for the visual 
navigator, to enable better description of complex 
events and relationships between them. 
 
KNAVE-II 
KNAVE-II (Goren-Bar et al., 2004) is an interface 
enabling knowledge-based visualization and inter-
active exploration of time-oriented data at different 
levels of temporal abstractions (e.g., abstraction of 
periods of bone marrow toxicity from raw individ-
ual hematological data). Users can navigate 
through the links of a semantic network while si-
multaneously navigating visually through multiple 
degrees of temporal abstraction of the dataset un-
der observation. The evaluation results have shown 
that users of KNAVE-II were able to perform que-
ries both faster and more accurately than with other 
standard tools. 
 

78



 
Figure 2. The Knave-II system. 
 
TimeLine 
The TimeLine system (Bui et al., 2007) is a prob-
lem-centric temporal visualization of patient re-
cords. The contents of the EHR are integrated, 
reorganized, and displayed within the user inter-
face (UI) along a timeline. It is similar to Lifelines 
in the way that the different elements of the EHR 
are grouped along the y-axis: imaging, reports, lab 
tests, etc are collapsible categories. However, un-
like Lifelines, the TimeLine system uses an XML 
data representation to handle data from distributed, 
heterogeneous medical databases. Data elements 
that are displayed in the UI are classified based on 
a knowledge base that guides both data inclusion 
rules and the visualization metaphors used to ren-
der the data. 
  

 
Figure 3. TimeLine system. 
 
ASBRUVIEW 
AsbruView (Kosara and Miksch, 2001) is a visu-
alization and user interface on top of Asbru lan-
guage (Shahar et al., 1996) designed to represent 

treatment procedures as structured time-oriented 
plans. AsbruView represents hierarchical and tem-
poral relationships between treatment plans using a 
3D visualization perspective. Plans are aligned 
along the time axis and can be stacked on top of 
each other and laid out in different ways. To sim-
plify the interface, all graphic elements are repre-
sented by well-known real world objects (e.g., 
track, traffic light, etc.). Also a 2D view is avail-
able which focuses on temporal aspects of plans in 
greater detail. To depict uncertainty of future 
events, AsbruView extends the timeline by using 
time annotation glyphs (Chuah, 1997). 

3 Comparisons  

Infovis techniques are a way of augmenting human 
cognitive capabilities, to help humans find patterns 
in large volumes of data. The systems described 
above target specific user types that will benefit 
from the visualization methods. While some user 
interfaces were developed in close dialog with 
medical practitioners, like Lifelines2 and Knave-II, 
others, such as the first Lifelines, Clef and Asbru-
view have had only minimal input from their in-
tended audience. 

3.1 Users, Goals and Tasks 

Most of the tools were directed at clinicians and 
clinical practice, although they were not always 
developed in close relation to them. Table 2 gives 
an overview of intended users for each of the 
named systems, and their proposed goals/tasks. 
From the user point of view, a number of tasks and 
goals can be defined for each tool. Some are very 
specific and tend to care for niche usages, while 
others provide more general visualization methods 
that can be applied to a number of situations. 
 
System Users, Goals, Tasks 
Lifelines Clinician 
 Patient care 
 Use EHR content in temporal time-based view 

Lifelines2 Clinical researchers 
 Research 
 Compare patterns of events, detecting trends 

CLEF Clinician, Biomedical researcher 
 Patient care 
 Visualize timelines, use NLP to extract com-

plex temporal data, aggregate numerical data 

KNAVE-II Clinician 

79



 Patient care 
 Generation and exploration of context sensitive 

abstractions of temporal data 

TimeLine Clinician 
 Patient care 
 Use EHR content in temporal time-based view, 

with additional filters on data based on NLP 
techniques 

AsbruView Clinician 
 Patient care 
 Medical therapy planning and execution 
Table 2. Users, Goals, Tasks. 
 
These systems were designed with input from only 
a few medical personnel involved in the project. In 
general, articles we read concerning these systems 
that have a more guided development process, i.e. 
closely related with physicians, have more specific 
goals and tasks, because they were designed with 
these in mind. Visualizing data for decision-
making and analyzing treatment outcome is often a 
general goal in many of the tools developed in in-
teraction with medical staff (Aigner and Miksch, 
2006; Mamykina et al., 2004; Portet, 2009). There 
is an emphasis on pre-processed patient data, spe-
cifically numeric, such as lab tests, heart rate, and 
blood pressure. Systems mainly try to help physi-
cians answer questions about correlations in the 
patient's data, and provide a means for supporting 
quick decision-making making when combining 
several types of highly heterogeneous data. Physi-
cians can follow a specific treatment plan and 
check the patient's physiological variables over 
time. This also enables the practitioner to check the 
influence of certain variables in the treatment 
process and change the protocol if needed. CLEF, 
for example, allows the physician to discover 
events during specific time spans, such as search-
ing for past specific liver problems. Lifelines2 is 
specifically geared towards research uses and to-
wards answering complex queries. In Lifelines2, a 
case study involved verifying the results of a clini-
cal study with real-life EHR data to see if clinical 
care data differ from the study results.  
 
The systems we discuss have conducted evaluation 
studies as a part of the end-stages of development. 
The Lifelines evaluations were conducted in an-
other domain (use of pattern searching related to 
monitoring graduate student progress), with limited 
interviews and input from experts in the medical 
domain. The KNAVE system conducted a cross-

over study with doctors, comparing KVAVE with 
existing tools. TimeLine was evaluated following 
the development of the interface by five radiolo-
gists- focusing on questions related to data integra-
tion and the temporal display. Asbruview was 
evaluated using questionnaires sent to clinicians. 

3.2 Visualization Methods 

The focus of this paper is on temporal visualization 
methods since this has been the primary visualiza-
tion type studied for aiding humans in organizing 
and exploring patterns in abstracted EHR content. 
All the systems that are compared in this paper 
display some type of timeline with time running 
from the left part the screen to the right, time being 
on the x-axis, and categories of events along the y-
axis. Various techniques for graphically represent-
ing specific events are used (e.g. icons, shapes), 
AsbruView makes use of 3D, while all the others 
are flat 2D.   
 
Infovis has been the keyword used to describe 
these systems, with the idea of presenting a method 
for human users (most often stated as being clini-
cians), to recognize patterns and thereby "amplify 
cognition" (Chittaro, 2006). Other methods for 
recognizing patterns in EHR for secondary use are 
purely automated and conducted through data min-
ing techniques.  Bertini and Lalanne (2009) wrote 
about the complementary role of automatic data 
analysis and visualization in knowledge discovery. 
They discuss "visual analytics", an outgrowth of 
infovis that can be seen as an integrated approach 
combining visualization, human factors, and data 
analysis. They suggest 4 categories for classifying 
approaches: Pure Visualization (VIS), Computa-
tionally-enhanced Visualization (V++), Visually 
enhanced Mining (M++), and Integrated Visualiza-
tion and Mining (VM). In the systems we have 
compared, there is a spectrum of ideas about how 
to visualize EHR contents, including movements 
towards "enhanced" or "intelligence" in the proc-
essing of the underlying EHR data. In Lifelines2, 
the data visualized was obtained from anonymized 
EHRs though cooperation with the i2b2 Project 
(Murphy et al., 2006) The input form of the data is 
a simple 3-column table containing "ID", "Event 
Type", and "Time".  Each ID can have multiple 
events happening at various times. Lifelines2 al-
lows sorting of the data so that records with the 

80



most incidents of one type of event are shown at 
the top of the screen. This type of infovis relies on 
human pattern recognition only and would be con-
sidered as "VIS" by Bertini and Lalanne (2009). In 
the CLEF project, the CLEF Chronicle, which un-
derlies the visualizations, is a semantic network 
modeling of what happened to the patient, why, 
and how. Semantic relations are: causality, reason, 
finding, and consequence. The types of events 
modeled are: problem, investigation, and treat-
ment. The CLEF Visual Navigator might be con-
sidered as "V++", computationally enhanced 
visualization because some sort of automated com-
putation supports the visualization. In CLEF, the 
visual display is "enhanced with visual techniques 
for highlighting relationships between events on 
the timeline." None of the systems so far that we 
have seen, would qualify as "visually enhanced 
mining" or "integrated visualization and mining." 
Table 3 provides a full overview for all systems 
reviewed. 
 
System Cate-

gory 
Notes 

Lifelines VIS  
Lifelines 2 VIS  
CLEF V++ • automated generation of 

summaries 
• semantic network of EHR 

record events 

KNAVE-II V++ • semantic (ontology-based) 
navigation and exploration 
of the data 

• knowledge base is used to 
interpet raw data 

TimeLine V++ • data mapping and reor-
ganization 

• content-based techniques 
to elucidate predominant 
subject of reports for clas-
sification  

AsbruView VIS  
Table 3. Visual Analytics of Systems using Bertini and 
Lalanne’s (2009) classification. 
 
The papers we have read that cover EHR visualiza-
tion, as seen in the systems presented, express the 
complexity of abstracted EHR data. Missing and 
inconsistent data, dealing with hierarchical data, 
and problems with granularity are all concerns that 
become readily apparent through attempting to 

build infovis systems. Wang (2008) summed it up 
best "Clinical data tend to be messy with aspects 
that become only obvious when the data is visual-
ized. The same heart attack might be recorded 
three times in three days (by the emergency room 
physician, a cardiologist, and a clerk from the bill-
ing office) and it can be hard to differentiate it 
from 3 separate events. Even if medical event in-
formation is carefully recorded at the time of the 
doctor visit or during a hospitalization, the time 
stamp is usually inaccurate by nature." Future 
work on visualizations needs to adequately address 
the complexity of the data rather than work with 
test data that is too simplistic.  

3.3 Text Mining Tasks 

All mentioned systems, except the CLEF and 
TimeLine, operate with readily available lists of 
type- and time-tagged events. However, clinical 
records are often stored in textual form what makes 
them inaccessible for machine processing. Text 
mining techniques need to be applied to automati-
cally transform textual data into structured, nor-
malized form. Key tasks involve event extraction, 
classification and normalization. 
 
The CLEF system uses an advanced information 
extraction engine to identify pre-defined classes of 
entities (e.g. diseases, investigations, problems, 
drugs, etc.) and semantic relationships between 
them (e.g. investigation indicates problem) in natu-
ral language texts. The information extraction 
process involves lexical and terminological analy-
sis, syntactic and semantic analysis, and discourse 
analysis. To address the complexity of medical 
language, the system makes use of language re-
sources including the Unified Medical Language 
System and the Gene Ontology. Extracted informa-
tion is stored in templates, which can be queued or 
used to generate textual summaries. The TimeLine 
system makes use of both textual contents of the 
EHR as well as numerical data and codes. An 
NLP-based system is used in conjunction with the 
TimeLine UI, for example, performing section 
analysis in radiology reports to determine whether 
specific subsections exist within the reports that 
are related to certain medical problems (Bui et al. 
2007).  
 
 

81



4 Conclusions 

The infovis systems analyzed allow secondary use 
of EHR content data especially aimed at clinicians 
documenting patient care. All of them are focused 
on visualizing temporal data in a timeline, while 
displaying specific events from the patient data. 

 
Although directed at medical practitioners in their 
daily patient care routine, they were not always 
developed with user feedback. Evaluation of the 
different tools was often based on situations out-
side of the clinical setting, and might not reflect 
reality. A more intimate dialog with clinicians 
would benefit the creation of targeted systems ad-
dressing specific needs of the medical community. 
 
The overall goal of these tools is to present users 
temporal information contained in a record, im-
proving their ability to recognize patterns for 
knowledge discovery and following treatment. 
They introduce simple visualization tools, but 
some include automated computational enhance-
ments supporting it.  
 
EHR contain missing and inconsistent data, which 
is in general messy. Due to the complexity of the 
underlying data, future work needs to address these 
intricacies rather than using simplistic approaches.  
 
Acknowledgments 
 
We would like to thank Nordforsk and the Nordic 
Council of Ministers for the funding of our re-
search network HEXAnord - Health text Analysis 
network in the Nordic and Baltic countries. This 
work was partially supported by a grant from the 
Villum Kann Rasmussen fund.  

References  

Aigner, W., Miksch, S., 2006. CareVis: integrated 
visualization of computerized protocols and temporal 
patient data. Artif Intell Med 37, 18. 

Bertini, E., Lalanne, D., 2009. Surveying the 
complementary role of automatic data analysis and 
visualization in knowledge discovery, Proceedings of 
the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Visual Analytics and 
Knowledge Discovery: Integrating Automated Analysis 

with Interactive Exploration. ACM, Paris, France, pp. 
12-20. 

Bui, A., Aberle, D.R., Kangarloo, H., 2007. TimeLine: 
Visualizing Integrated Patient Records. IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Technology in Biomedicine 11(4): 
462-473. 

Chittaro, L., 2006. Visualization of patient data at 
different temporal granularities on mobile devices, AVI 
'06: Proceedings of the working conference on 
Advanced visual interfaces, pp. ACM--487. 

Chuah, M.a.E., S., 1997. Glyphs for software 
visualization. 5th International Workshop on Program 
Comprehension (IWPC ’97) Proceedings, 183-191. 

de Lusignan, S., van Weel, C., 2006. The use of 
routinely collected computer data for research in 
primary care: opportunities and challenges. Fam Pract 
23, -263. 

Goren-Bar, D., Shahar, Y., Galperin-Aizenberg, M., 
Boaz, D., Tahan, G., 2004. KNAVE II: the definition 
and implementation of an intelligent tool for 
visualization and exploration of time-oriented clinical 
data, AVI '04: Proceedings of the working conference 
on Advanced visual interfaces, pp. ACM--174. 

Hallett, C., 2008. Multi-modal presentation of medical 
histories, IUI '08: Proceedings of the 13th international 
conference on Intelligent user interfaces, pp. ACM--89. 

Keim, D.A., Mansmann, F., Schneidewind, J., Thomas, 
J., Ziegler, H., 2008. Visual analytics: Scope and 
challenges. Visual Data Mining: Theory, Techniques 
and Tools for Visual Analytics, Springer, 76-90. 

Kosara, R., Miksch, S., 2001. Metaphors of movement: 
a visualization and user interface for time-oriented, 
skeletal plans. Artif Intell Med 22, 111-131. 

Mamykina, L., Goose, S., Hedqvist, D., Beard, D.V., 
2004. CareView: analyzing nursing narratives for 
temporal trends, CHI '04: CHI '04 extended abstracts on 
Human factors in computing systems, pp. ACM--1150. 

Murphy, S.N., Mendis, M.E., Berkowitz, D.A., Kohane, 
I., Chueh, H.C., 2006. Integration of clinical and genetic 
data in the i2b2 architecture. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 

Plaisant, C., Milash, B., Rose, A., Widoff, S., 
Shneiderman, B., 1996. LifeLines: Visualizing Personal 
Histories, CHI, pp. -227. 

82



Portet, F., Reiter, E., Gatt, A., Skyes, C., 2009. 
Automatic generation of textual summaries from 
neonatal intensive care data. Artificial Intelligence, 789-
816. 

Prokosch, H.U., Ganslandt, T., 2009. Perspectives for 
medical informatics. Reusing the electronic medical 
record for clinical research. Methods Inf Med 48, -44. 

Safran, C., Bloomrosen, M., Hammond, W.E., Labkoff, 
S., Markel-Fox, S., Tang, P.C., Detmer, D.E., Panel, E., 
2007. Toward a national framework for the secondary 
use of health data: an American Medical Informatics 
Association White Paper. J Am Med Inform Assoc 14, -
9. 

Shahar, Y., Miksch, S., Johnson, P., 1996. An intention-
based language for representing clinical guidelines. Proc 
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 592-596. 

Wang, T.D., Plaisant, C., Quinn, A.J., Stanchak, R., 
Murphy, S., Shneiderman, B., 2008. Aligning temporal 
data by sentinel events: discovering patterns in 
electronic health records, CHI '08: Proceeding of the 
twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human 
factors in computing systems, pp. ACM--466. 

Wang, T.D., Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B., Spring, N., 
Roseman, D., Marchand, G., Mukherjee, V., Smith, M., 
2009. Temporal Summaries: Supporting Temporal 
Categorical Searching, Aggregation and Comparison. 
IEEE_J_VCG 15, -1056. 

 

 

83


