



















































A Word Segmentation System for Handling Space Omission Problem in Urdu Script


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (WSSANLP), pages 43–50,
the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), Beijing, August 2010

A Word Segmentation System for Handling Space Omission Problem 
in Urdu Script 

 
Gurpreet Singh Lehal 

Department of Computer Science 
Punjabi University, Patiala 
gslehal@gmail.com 

 
  

Abstract 

Word Segmentation is the foremost 
obligatory task in almost all the NLP 
applications, where the initial phase requires 
tokenization of input into words. Like other 
Asian languages such as Chinese, Thai and 
Myanmar, Urdu also faces word 
segmentation challenges. Though the Urdu 
word segmentation problem is not as severe 
as the other Asian language, since space is 
used for word delimitation, but the space is 
not consistently used, which gives rise to 
both space omission and space insertion 
errors in Urdu. In this paper we present a 
word segmentation system for handling 
space omission problem in Urdu script with 
application to Urdu-Devnagri Transliteration 
system. Instead of using manually 
segmented monolingual corpora to train 
segmenters, we make use of bilingual 
corpora and statistical word disambiguation  
techniques. Though our approach is adapted 
for the specific transliteration task at hand by 
taking the corresponding target (Hindi) 
language into account, the techniques 
suggested can  be adapted to  independently 
solve the space omission Urdu word 
segmentation problems. The two major 
components of our system are : 
identification of merged words for 
segmentation and proper segmentation of the 
merged words. The system was tested on 
1.61 million word Urdu test data. The recall 
and precision for the merged word 
recognition component were found to be  
99.29% and 99.38% respectively. The 
words are correctly segmented with 99.15% 
accuracy. 

1 Introduction 

Word segmentation is the foremost obligatory 
task in all NLP application, where the initial 
phase requires tokenization of input into words.  
For languages like English, French and Spanish 
etc. tokenization is considered trivial because the 
white space or punctuation marks between 
words is a good approximation of where a word 
boundary is. Whilst in various Asian languages 
such as Chinese, Thai and Myanmar, white 
spaces is rarely or never used to determine the 
word boundaries, so one must resort to higher 
levels of information such as: information of 
morphology, syntax and statistical analysis to 
reconstruct the word boundary information 
(Papageorgiou, 1994; Nie et al,  1995;  Wang et 
al,  2000;  Xu et al, 2005). 
 Though the Urdu word segmentation problem is 
not as severe as some of the  other Asian 
language, since space is used for word 
delimitation, but the space is not consistently 
used, which gives rise to both space omission 
and space insertion errors in Urdu. 
Durrani(2007) and Durrani and Hussain(2010) 
have discussed in detail the various Urdu word 
segmentation issues while Jawaid and 
Ahmed(2009) and Abbas et al(2009) have 
discussed the Hindi-Urdu transliteration issues. 
A word segmentation system for handling space 
insertion problem in Urdu script has been 
presented by Lehal(2009).  

Hindi and Urdu are variants of the same 
language characterized by extreme digraphia: 
Hindi is written in the Devanagari script from 
left to right, Urdu in a script derived from a 
Persian modification of Arabic script written 
from right to left. Hindi and Urdu share 
grammar, morphology, vocabulary, history, 
classical literature etc. Because of their identical 
grammar and nearly identical core vocabularies, 

43



most linguists do not distinguish between Urdu 
and Hindi as separate languages. The difference 
in the two scripts has created a script wedge as 
majority of Urdu speaking people in Pakistan 
cannot read Devnagri, and similarly the majority 
of Hindi speaking people in India cannot 
comprehend Urdu script. To break this script 
barrier an Urdu-Devnagri transliteration system 
has been developed. The transliteration system 
faced many problems related to word 
segmentation of Urdu script as discussed above.  

In this paper we present a word segmentation 
system for handling space omission problem in 
Urdu script with application to Urdu-Devnagri 
Transliteration system. Instead of using 
manually segmented monolingual corpora to 
train segmenters, we make use of bilingual 
corpora and statistical word disambiguation  
techniques. Though our approach is adapted for 
the specific transliteration task at hand by taking 
the corresponding target (Hindi) language into 
account, the techniques suggested can be 
adapted to independently solve the space 
omission Urdu word segmentation problems. 
 

2 Urdu script: a brief overview 

Urdu is a Central Indo-Aryan language of the 
Indo-Iranian branch, belonging to the Indo-
European family of languages. It is the national 
language of Pakistan. It is also one of the 22 
scheduled languages of India and is an official 
language of five Indian states.  

Urdu script has 35 simple consonants, 15 
aspirated consonants, one character for nasal 
sound and 15 diacritical marks. Urdu characters 
change their shapes depending upon neighboring 
context. But generally they acquire one of these 
four shapes, namely isolated, initial, medial and 
final. Urdu characters can be divided into two 
groups, non-joiners and joiners. The non-joiners 
can acquire only isolated and final shape and do 
not join with the next character. On contrary 
joiners can acquire all the four shapes and get 
merged with the following character. A group of 
joiners and/or non-joiner joined  together form a 
ligature. A word in Urdu is a collection of one or 
more ligatures.  The isolated form of joiners and 
non-joiners is shown in figures 1-2. 

 

  ے و ژ ز ڑ ر ذ ڈ د آا 
Figure 1.  Non-Joiners in Urdu 

 ک ق ف غ ع ظ ط ض ص ش س خ ح چ ج ث ٹ ت پ ب
 ه ی ه ن م ل گ

Figure 2.  Joiners in Urdu 

The space character is used in Urdu both to 
generate correct shaping and also to separate 
words. Though for words ending with non-
joiners correct shaping is generated even when 
space is not typed and thus, many times a user 
omits the space. The sequence of Urdu words 
written together without space is still readable 
because of the character joining property in 
Urdu. As for example, consider the word cluster 
 which is composed of four words , انکارکردياہے
 The Urdu readers can very .ہے and  ديا , کر ,انکار
easily segment and read the four words 
separately, but the computer will read them as a 
single word since there is no space in between. 
Similarly, the word cluster پرزوردياگياہے is 
composed of five words(گيا ,ديا ,زور ,پر and ہے ), 
which can be easily read as five separate words 
by Urdu readers but will be considered as a 
single word by the computer.  

Another unique feature of Urdu is that the 
Urdu words are usually written without short 
vowels or diacritic symbols. Any machine 
transliteration or text to speech synthesis system 
has to automatically guess and insert these 
missing symbols. This is a non-trivial problem 
and requires an in-depth statistical analysis.  

An Urdu word is a combination of ligatures 
(characters which join together) and isolated 
characters. For example انکار  is composed of 
isolated characters ا and ر and ligature  نکا . A 
ligature or isolated character will be called as 
Urdu character cluster (UCC) in this paper. A 
Urdu word is thus a combination of UCCs . As 
for example, the word انکار  is composed of three 
UCCs نکا , ا and ر . We borrow the term, 
Orthographic Word used by Durrani and 
Hussain(2010) to define our segmentation 
process. An Orthographic Word (OW) is a 
combination of  UCCs separated by spaces or 
punctuation marks. An OW may contain single 
or multiple Urdu words. Our task is to identify if 
an OW contains multiple words and in that case 
properly segment the words. 

As for example, consider the sentence: 
 ميزبان ٹيم کی جانب سے رام نريش نے ہيروکاکرداراداکيا

44



It contains nine OWs 
 ميزبان .1
 ٹيم .2
 کی .3
 جانب .4
ےس .5  
 رام .6
 نريش .7
 نے .8
 ہيروکاکرداراداکيا .9
The first eight OWs contain single Urdu 

words, while the last OW contains 5 Urdu 
words(ادا ,کردار ,کا ,ہيرو and کيا)  

3 Segmentation Model for Urdu 

There are three major issues in the automatic 
Urdu word segmentation. The first problem is to 
decide if the orthographic word represents a 
single word or a multiple word cluster. The 
second is the ambiguity issue. Since a word 
cluster can be segmented into words in multiple 
ways, the correct word boundary detection 
becomes a challenge. As for example the OW  
 نا + گيا or اسے + گيان can be segmented as  گياناسے
 The third problem is the segmentation of .سے +
unknown word. Unknown word refers to word 
that does not exist in the dictionary or corpus. 
Unknown words can be categorized into the 
different types such as error words, abbreviation, 
proper names, derived words, foreign words, 
compounds etc. The unknown word causes 
segmentation error since the word does not exist 
in the dictionary, it could be incorrectly 
segmented into shorter words. For example, the 
word, رميٹالوجیڈ   , which is a foreign word, gets 
segmented into four words (لو , ميٹا , ڈر and جی ) 
after dictionary look-up as the word ڈرميٹالوجی is 
not present in the corpus.  

The input is an Urdu Orthographic Word and 
the system first makes the decision if the OW 
contains single or multiple Urdu words. In case 
the OW contains multiple words, the individual 
Urdu words are extracted from the OW. These 
different stages are discussed in detail in 
following sections. As can be seen from the 
figure, at each stage we make use of lexical 
resources both from Urdu and Hindi languages. 
The details of the resources used are in Table 1. 

 

The system architecture is shown in Fig. 3. 

 
Figure 3.  System Architecture 

Table 1. Lexical resources used in system 
Resource Count 

 
Urdu Word Frequency 
List 
 

121,367 words 

Hindi Word Frequency 
List 
 

159,426 words 

Hindi Word Bigram List  2,382,511 
bigrams 
 

  
4 Decision Stage 
 
In the decision stage, the system decides if the 
OW contains single or multiple Urdu words.  It 
could so happen that the OW contains single 
word only and we may break up into smaller 
words. The decision is based on Urdu and Hindi, 
word frequency lists analysis as well as 
Urdu/English/Hindi Morphological rules. To 
decide if the word cluster is containing multiple 
words, we first search for OW in the Urdu word 
list. If it is found then it means that the OW is a 
valid Urdu word and does not need any further 
segmentation and quit over there.  

It could happen that the OW could be an 
inflection, whose root form maybe present in the 

45



Urdu word list. Even though the Urdu word list 
contains inflected forms, but for many words all 
the inflections may not be present. This problem 
is more pronounced for English terms, which 
have become part of Urdu language. For such 
words, the inflections could follow both rules of 
English and Urdu. For example plural of 
 university) could be both universitiyon) يونيورسٹی
ٹیونی  .يونيورسٹيز as well as universities  وںیورس
The first form follows the Urdu infection rules 
while the second form follows the English 
inflection rules. Similarly we found both the 
Urdu and English inflections for the English 
word secretary in Urdu  text (سيکرٹريوں and 
 Thus if the OW is not found in the . (سيکرٹريز
Urdu word list, we use both Urdu and English 
morphological rules to generate its root form and 
search for the root form in the Urdu word list. If 
the root form is found, we assume the word to be 
a valid Urdu word and quit there.  

It is widely reported in word segmentation 
papers, that the greatest barrier to accurate word 
Segmentation is in recognizing words that are 
not in the lexicon of the segmenter. Thus if a 
word or its root form is not present in the Urdu 
word list it will be wrongly presumed to be a 
multi word cluster. To alleviate this problem, the 
Urdu corpus has been supplemented with Hindi 
corpus, which has helped in increasing the word 
segmentation as well as multi-word recognition 
accuracy. It was found many times that the Urdu 
word may be a proper noun, foreign word or 
some valid out of vocabulary word, which is not 
present in Urdu corpus but present in the Hindi 
word list. Another advantage of checking in the 
Hindi corpus is that many of the Hindi words, 
which are written as single word are usually 
written as two words in Urdu. For example, 
 ايمانداری ,े(खेलत) کھيلتے ,(करेगा) کرےگا
(ईमानदार  चेयरमैन) etc. These Urdu) چئيرمين ,(
words are many times written as a single word 
and in that case if passed to Hindi word list 
would still report as correct. For checking the 
OW in Hindi word list, we first transliterate it to 
Hindi and then search for it in the Hindi 
wordlist. If the transliterated word is found, then 
the OW is not considered for segmentation. Like 
Urdu, it may also happen that the root word of 
OW may be present in the Hindi word list. So 
like Urdu, we use both Urdu and English 

morphological rules to generate its root form and 
search for the root form in the Hindi word list. If 
the root form is found, we assume the word to be 
a valid Urdu word and quit there. If the OW 
passes all the above stages, then it is considered 
a candidate for segmentation. 
The steps in brief are : 

• Search for OW in Urdu List. If OW is 
present in the list then quit. example : 
 مطابق

• Determine the root form of OW using 
Urdu Morphological rules and search for 
the root form in Urdu List. If found then 
quit. example : سيکرٹريوں 

• Determine the root form of OW using 
English Morphological rules and search 
for the root form in Urdu List. If found 
then quit. example : ٹورنامنٹس 

• Let HW = Transliteration of OW in 
Hindi. Search for HW in the Hindi Word 
List. If HW is present in the list then 
quit. example : ايمانداری 

• Determine the root form of HW using 
Hindi Morphological rules and search 
for the root form in the Hindi List. If 
found then quit.  example : چيئرمينوں 

• Determine the root form of HW using 
English Morphological rules and search 
for the root form in the Hindi List. If 
found then quit. example : ہولڈرز 

• Go to the segmentation stage. example : 
 تھااس

5 Segmenting the Orthographic Word 

The Urdu orthographic word is next broken into 
Urdu Character Combinations (UCC) using 
Urdu orthographic rules. Unlike word 
segmentation that is a difficult task, segmenting 
a text into UCCs is easily achieved by applying 
the set of rules. These adjacent UCCs are then 
combined to form a sequence of Urdu words. 
We need to list all possible segmentations and 
design a strategy to select the most probable 
correct segmentation from them. 

As for example, consider the OW توجواب: It is 
segmented into four UCCs : ا .جو ,تو and ب . The 
adjacent clusters can be combined to form 6 
word segmentations: 

 جواب + تو •
 اب + توجو •

46



 ب + توجوا •
 اب + جو + تو •
 ب  + ا +  توجو •
 ب + ا + جو + تو •
 

5.1 Longest Matching  

The method scans an input sentence from left to 
right, and select the longest match with a 
dictionary entry at each point. In case that the 
selected match cannot lead the algorithm to find 
the rest of the words in the sentence, the 
algorithm will backtrack to find the next longest 
one and continue finding the rest and so on. This 
algorithm fails to find the correct segmentation 
in many cases because of its greedy 
characteristic. 

5.2 Maximum Matching  

This method first generates all possible 
segmentations for a sentence and then selects the 
one that contain the fewest words, which can be 
done efficiently by using dynamic programming 
technique. When the alternatives have the same 
number of words, the algorithm cannot 
determine the best candidate and some other 
heuristics have to be applied.  

We tried both longest matching and maximum 
matching and the smallest unit taken for 
combining is UCC. But we found shortcomings 
in both the matchings. For example the OW 
 using ہے+ہا +کرار gets segmented as کرارہاہے
longest matching, while it should be ہے+رہا+کرا . 
Similarly the OW بروزاتوارکودن gets segmented 
as کودن+اتوار+بروز using maximum matching 
while it should be دن+کو+اتوار+بروز.  

Thus we see that both longest string match and 
smallest words fail sometimes. If these 
algorithms are supplemented by statistical 
information such as frequency analysis and n-
grams then these failures can be avoided. So in 
our present work, we apply maximal matching 
algorithm along with these statistics. Initially we 
used unigram frequency of occurrence for 
deciding the best word combination. Each Urdu 
word in the combination is formed by joining 
adjacent UCCs. In each of the combination, we 
first convert each of the Urdu word to Hindi. 
The combination with highest combined product 
of the unigram frequency of occurrences is 

finally selected. Thus in the above example, the 
OW توجواب: will be segmented as جواب + تو, as 
shown in Table 2. 
 
Table 2.  Product of Frequency of Occurrence 
 
Urdu 
Combination

Hindi 
Combination 
(Frequency 
of 
occurrence) 

Frequency 
Product 

  تو
 جواب
 

तो   
(0.005161) 
जवाब   
(0.00026) 

1.34221E-06 
 

  توجو
 اب

तोजो   
(4.16E-07) 
अब   
(0.001623) 

6.75557E-10 
 

  توجوا
 ب

तोजवा   (0) 
ब   (4.48E-
05) 

0 

  تو
  جو
 اب

तो   
(0.005161) 
जो   
(0.002602) 
अब   
(0.001623) 

2.18028E-08 
 

 توجو
  ا
 ب

तोजो   
(4.16E-07) 
अ   (3.6E-05) 
ब   (4.48E-
05) 

6.69866E-16 
 

 تو
  جو
  ا
 ب

तो   
(0.005161) 
जो   
(0.002602) 
अ   (3.6E-05) 
ब   (4.48E-
05) 

2.16191E-14 
 

It is interesting to see that for segmentation of 
Urdu words, we used Hindi language statistical 
analysis instead of Urdu language statistical 
analysis. Since the current system is part of 

47



Urdu-Hindi transliteration system, we prefer the 
output to be segmented according to Hindi rules. 
There are many words which are otherwise 
joined in Hindi but written as separate words in 
Urdu. So if we use the Urdu language modeling 
for segmentation, the word gets broken. Some of 
the examples are: 
 is written as combination of two words اغواکار
 in Urdu but its equivalent Hindi word کار +اغوا
अग़वाकार is written as a single word. Similarly, 
in Hindi text the verbs are concatenated with the 
future auxiliaries “gaa”, “gii” and “ge”, while 
they are written separately in Urdu. Thus کرين 
 are written separately, but their equivalent گے+
Hindi form करगे is written as single word. So 
the advantage of using Hindi training data is that 
the words get segmented according to the 
desired Hindi rules. Another problem with Urdu 
training data was that  the Urdu training itself 
contains merged words. So the words had to be 
manually separated, though fortunately the Urdu 
corpus compiled by CRULP (www.crulp.org) 
has been quite clean, but many words were 
missing particularly English ones. Another 
problem is that the words are broken even in the 
cleaned Urdu corpus. On the other hand when 
we used the Hindi training data for word 
segmentation, the problems of merged or broken 
words in the training text were not encountered. 
Also the Hindi corpus compiled by us had much 
larger vocabulary coverage, while the Urdu 
corpus we used for training purpose had many 
common words such as  گاندھی  , خطرے ,اوباما, 
 etc. missing. Thus the word segmentation جيکسن
algorithm which used the Hindi training set had 
much better segmentation accuracy as compared 
to the Urdu training set. 

We observed that though the above scheme 
worked fine in majority of the cases, but in a few 
cases it failed to segment properly as it did not 
take care of the context or adjacent words. As 
for example consider the OW : مردياعورت. It 
contains six CCs: ر ,عو ,يا ,د ,مر and ت. The word 
combination selected by above methodology is : 

 though the correct , عورت + ديا + مر
combination is عورت + يا + مرد. It was observed 
that as we did not take care about adjacent 
words, thus wrong combination was selected. If 

the bigram information is added, then such 
problems were reduced.  

We thus use both unigram and bigram 
frequency analysis for deciding the best word 
combination. Each Urdu word in the 
combination is formed by joining adjacent 
UCCs. In each of the combination, we first 
convert each of the Urdu word to Hindi. Next we 
find the unigram and bigram frequency of 
occurrence of each Hindi word and Hindi word 
pair in the combination. The bigram frequencies 
are normalized to avoid multiplication by zero. 
The combination with highest combined product 
of the unigram and bigram frequencies of 
occurrences is finally selected.  Using this 
methodology we were able to generate the 
sequence combination is عورت + يا + مرد in 
above example. 

As we are using Hindi training data, it was 
observed that sometimes we had merged words 
which did not had equivalent transliterated 
words in our Hindi frequency list. As example, 
the OW ترازابليس had to be segmented as تراز + 
 but the equivalent transliterated Hindi ,ابليس
terms of تراز and ابليس, were not found in the 
Hindi frequency list. As a result, the OW is not 
segmented. To take care of such situations, if we 
cannot segment using the Hindi frequency list, 
our system then goes for maximal matching 
using the Urdu training data. Thus in above 
example, after search fails in Hindi training set, 
the system searches for the minimum word 
combination and on finding the above two words 
in the Urdu training set segments the OW into 
these words. 

6 Over Segmentation 

For wrongly spelled or OOV (out of vocabulary) 
Urdu words, the system may forcibly break the 
word into smaller words. As for example, our 
system forcibly broke the OW گردوہر into دو + گر 
 ,This problem proved difficult to tackle . ہر+
though we were able to partially solve it. It was 
found that usually the OOV words were broken 
into small unrelated words. So we put the 
condition on the system to accept only those 
word segments which contained at least one 
word of length greater than three or at least one 
bigram pair was present in the Hindi bigram list. 
The presence of at least one bigram pair ensured 
that all the words were not unrelated. Thus in the 

48



above example, the OW gets split into three 
words, all of length two. These words when 
transliterated to Hindi get converted to गर + दो 
+ हर. On searching the bigram list, it was found 
that neither of the bigram pair < गर, दो >  and < 
दो , हर > was present and thus this word 
segmentation was rejected. 

7 Experiments 

We tested our system on a test data of 1,613,991 
Urdu words. In the decision stage, it was found 
that 116,078  words, which make  7.19%  of 
original text were not found in the Urdu corpus 
and were considered candidates for 
segmentation. After morphological analysis of 
these words, 2851 Urdu words were found to be 
valid Uru words and were removed from the 
segmentation candidate list. After converting the 
remaining Urdu words to Hindi and checking 
them in Hindi corpus, only 35,226 words were 
left which were not present in Hindi corpus. 
Therefore from original 16,13,991 only 35,226 
(2.19%)  were passed onto segmentation stage 
for checking for merged words. 

In the segmentation stage it was found that out 
of 35,226 words, 24,001 words (68.13%) had 
merged words. The number of merged words 
varied from 2 to 6. Table 3 show the frequency 
of number of merged words found in word 
clusters. As can be seen from the table 96.71% 
of merged word clusters had two merged words.  

Table 3. Frequency of Merged Words 
Number of merged 
words  

Frequency 
Percentage 
 

2 96.71% 
3 2.99% 
4 0.25% 
5 0.037% 
6 0.004% 

  
The recall and precision for the decision 
stage, which decides if the OW needs to be 
segmented, were found to be  99.29% and 
99.38% respectively. 
The word segmentation algorithm was able to 
correctly segment the words with 99.15% 
accuracy. 

8 Conclusions 

In this paper, we have presented a system for 
solving the space omission problem in Urdu text. 
This system is part of the larger system designed 
for transliteration of Urdu text to Hindi. We 
have combined statistical language modeling of 
both Urdu and Hindi languages in development 
of the system. We have presented a new scheme 
of using Hindi for segmenting Urdu text after 
transliteration, because Hindi uses spaces 
consistently versus Urdu which has both space 
omission and insertion problems. This is the first 
time such a segmentation scheme for handling 
Urdu space omission problem has been 
presented. The word segmentation algorithm 
was able to correctly segment the words with 
99.15% accuracy.  

 

Acknowledgements 

The author will like to acknowledge the support 
provided by ISIF grants for carrying out this 
research. 
 

References 
 
Durrani N. 2007. Typology of Word and Automatic 

Word Segmentation in Urdu Text Corpus. National 
University of Computer and Emerging Sciences, 
Lahore, Pakistan. 

 

Durrani N. and Hussain Sarmad. 2010. Urdu Word 
Segmentation.http://www.crulp.org/Publication/pa
pers/2010/Urdu Word Segmentation NAACL.pdf 
(accessed on 5th July 2010). 

Jawaid Bushra and Ahmed Tafseer. 2009.  Hindi to 
Urdu Conversion: Beyond Simple Transliteration. 
Proceedings of the Conference on Language & 
Technology, Lahore,.Pakistan, 24-31. 

Lehal G. S. 2009. A Two Stage Word Segmentation 
System For Handling Space Insertion Problem In 
Urdu Script. Proceedings of World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology, Bangkok, 
Thailand,  60: 321-324.  

Malik Abbas, Besacier Laurent, Boitet Christian and 
Bhattacharyya Pushpak. 2009. A hybrid Model for 
Urdu Hindi Transliteration. Proceedings of the 

49



2009 Named Entities Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 
2009, Singapore, 177-185. 

Nie, J.Y., Hannan, M.L. & Jin, W. 1995. Combining 
dictionary, rules and statistical information in 
segmentation of Chinese. Computer Processing of 
Chinese and Oriental Languages, 9(2): 125-143. 

Papageorgiou Constantine P. 1994. Japanese word 
segmentation by hidden Markov model. Proc. of 
the HLT Workshop, 283–288. 

Wang Xiaolong, , Fu Guohong, Yeung Danial S., Liu 
James N.K., and Luk Robert. 2000. Models and 
algorithms of Chinese word segmentation. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence (IC-AI’2000), Las Vegas, 
Nevada, USA, 1279-1284.  

Xu Jia, Matusov Evgeny, Zens Richard, and Ney. 
2005. Hermann.Integrated Chinese word 
segmentation in statistical machine translation. 
Proceedings of the International Workshop on 
Spoken Language Translation, Pittsburgh, PA, 
141-147. 

50


