



















































A Preliminary Work on Hindi Causatives


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 120–128,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c©2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing

A Preliminary Work on Causative Verbs in Hindi  

Rafiya Begum, Dipti Misra Sharma 

                Language Technologies Research Centre, IIIT. 
rafiya@research.iiit.ac.in, 

dipti@iiit.ac.in  

 

Abstract 

This paper introduces a preliminary 
work on Hindi causative verbs: their 
classification, a linguistic model for 
their classification and their verb 
frames. The main objective of this work 
is to come up with a classification of the 
Hindi causative verbs. In the classifica-
tion we show how different types of 
Hindi verbs have different types of 
causative forms. It will be a linguistic 
resource for Hindi causative verbs 
which can be used in various NLP ap-
plications. This resource enriches the al-
ready available linguistic resource on 
Hindi verb frames (Begum et al., 
2008b). This resource will be helpful in 
getting proper insight into Hindi verbs. 
In this paper, we present the morpholo-
gy, semantics and syntax of the causa-
tive verbs. The morphology is captured 
by the word generation process; seman-
tics is captured by the linguistic model 
followed for classifying the verbs and 
the syntax has been captured by the verb 
frames using relations given by Panini. 

1 Introduction  

Verbs play a major role in expressing the mean-
ing of a sentence and its syntactic behavior. 
They decide the number of participants that will 
participate in the action. Semantically verbs are 
classified into action verbs, state verbs and 
process verbs. Syntactically they are classified 
into intransitives, transitives and ditransitives. 
The morphological, semantic and syntactic 
properties of verbs play an important role in 
deeper level analysis such as parsing. 

Causative verbs are differently realized in dif-
ferent languages. These verbs have been an in-
teresting area of study. The study of causative 
constructions is important as it involves the in-
teraction of various components such as seman-
tics, syntax and morphology (Comrie, 1981). 
This paper presents the preliminary work on 
Hindi causative verbs. 

2 Causative Verbs 

Causative verbs mean that some actor makes 
somebody else do something or causes him to be 

in a certain state (Agnihotri, 2007). The causal 
verb indicates the causing of another to do 
something, instead of doing it oneself (Greaves, 
1983). Semantically causative verbs refer to a 
causative situation which has two components: 
(a) the causing situation or the antecedent; (b) 
the caused situation or the consequent. These 
two combine to make a causative situation (Ne-
dyalkov and Silnitsky, 1973). There are differ-
ent ways in which causation is indicated in dif-
ferent languages. There are three types of causa-
tives: Morphological causatives, Periphrastic 
causatives and Lexical causatives (Comrie, 
1981). 

Morphological Causatives indicate causa-
tion with the help of verbal affixes. Sanskrit, 
Hindi/Urdu, Persian, Arabic, Hebrew, Japanese, 
Khmer and Finnish languages have morpholog-
ical causatives. Periphrastic causatives indi-
cate causation with the help of a verb which 
occurs along with the main verb. For example, 
in English in a sentence such as:  
 

(1) John made the child drink milk. 
 

In the above example the verb make is ex-
pressing causation which is occurring along 
with the verb drink which in turn is expressing 

120



the main action. English, German and French 
are some of the languages which have periph-
rastic causatives. Lexical causatives are those 
in which there is no morphological similarity 
between the base verb root and the causative 
verb form. A different lexical item is used to 
indicate causation. For example, the causative 
of English eat is feed. English and Japanese 
have lexical causatives. English has both pe-
riphrastic and lexical causatives. 

3 Causative verbs in Hindi 

Causatives in Hindi are realized through a mor-
phological process. In Hindi, a base verb root  
changes to a causative verb when affixed by 
either an ‘-aa’ or a ‘-vaa’ suffix.  
 
Base verb First causal  Second causal 
so  sul-aa   sul-vaa  
‘sleep’  ‘put to sleep’ ‘cause to put to  
       sleep’ 
 

In each step of causative derivation there is 
an increase in the valency of the verb (Kachru, 
2006; Comrie, 1981) 
 
(2) baccaa   soyaa                  
      child       sleep.Pst 
      ‘The child slept.’ 
 
(3) aayaa ne     bacce ko         sulaayaa   
      maid   Erg.  child Acc.      sleep.Caus.Pst 
      ‘The maid put the child to sleep.’ 

 
(4) maa.N  ne           aayaa se        bacce ko       
      mother Erg.        maid   by       child  Acc.      
      sulvaayaa   
      sleep.Caus.Pst       
      ‘Mother caused the maid to put the child to    
       sleep.’ 
 

Hindi verbs are divided into two groups 
based on their behaviour in causative sentences: 
affective verbs and effective verbs (Kachru, 
2006). The action of affective verbs benefits or 
affects the agent. Affective verbs will have both 
first and second causal forms. Verbs such as 
ronaa ‘to cry’ and dau.Dnaa ‘to run’ are affec-
tive intransitive verbs. Only verbs belonging to 
khaanaa ‘to eat’ class come under affective 

transitive verbs. The agent of the affective in-

transitive verb becomes the patient and the 
agent of the affective transitive verbs becomes 
the recipient in the first causal and they both 
will take a ko postpositon (Hindi case marker). 
Effective verbs and ditransitive verbs have only 
one causal form. The agent of the effective verb 
and ditransitive verb becomes the causative 
agent in the first causal. So this causative agent 
in the first causal takes a se ‘with’ postposition 
(Hindi case marker). Verbs belonging to karnaa 
‘to do’ class come under the effective verbs.  

The major studies in Hindi causatives: Kach-
ru (1966), Kachru (1980), Kachru (2006), 
McGregor (1995), Greaves (1983), Kellogg 
(1972), Agnihotri (2007), Sahaay (2004), Sa-
haay  (2007), Singh (1997) and Tripathi (1986). 
Kachru (1966) has given the classification of 
Hindi verbs based on their causativization beha-
vior. The others have mostly talked about the 
derivation process of the causative verbs. 

However the classification of causative verbs 
in Hindi remains an issue of discussion. Since 
they are morphologically related, the decision of 
what is the base verb form of these verbs re-
mains a point of discussion. There are two ap-
proaches which are followed in deciding the 
base verb: (1) causative formation based only 
on morphology, (2) causative formation based 
on morphology and semantics. 
 
I.Based on Morphology 

 

Base verb         First causal  Second causal 
(Intransitive)     (Transitive)        (Causative) 
khul         khol   khulvaa 

‘open’    ‘open’                ‘cause to open’ 
 
II. Based on Morphology and Semantics 

 

Intransitive         Base verb  Second causal 
(Intransitive)        (Transitive)     (Causative) 
khul            khol   khulvaa 

‘open’                 ‘open’             ‘cause to open’          
 

In I, khul ‘open’ is taken as the base verb and 
khol ‘open’ and khulvaa ‘cause to open’ are de-
rived from it by adding suffix ‘-aa’ and ‘-vaa’ 
respectively to the base verb (Kachru, 1966; 
Kachru, 1980). The arrow denotes the direction 
of derivation from base verb. Here, the forward 
arrow denotes the increment of the argument 
from base to the causal forms. On the other 

121



hand, in II, khol ‘open’ is taken as the base verb. 
Here, other than morphology, the semantics of 
the verbs is also taken into consideration. Here 
khul ‘open’ and khulvaa ‘cause to open’ are de-
rived from the base verb khol ‘open’. khulvaa 
‘cause to open’ is a causative verb which is de-
rived from the base verb by adding suffix ‘-vaa’ 
to it. khul ‘open’ is a derived intransitive form. 
The agent of the base verb khol ‘open’ is not 
realized on the surface level of the derived in-
transitive verb khul ‘open’ though it is implied 
semantically. Here there is both forward and 
backward derivation. From base verb to the de-
rived intransitive it is a backward derivation 
which means there is a reduction of one argu-
ment from base verb to the derived intransitive 
verb (Tripathi, 1986; Reinhart, 2005).  

In this paper, we motivate our work by pre-
senting our approach for classifying the causa-
tive verbs in Hindi. 

4 Our Approach 

4.1 Linguistic Model for Classifying Caus-
ative verbs 

We have followed Paninian Grammatical 
framework in this model as the theoretical basis 
for our approach. The meaning of every verbal 
root (dhaatu) consists of: (a) activity (vyaapaa-
ra) and; (b) result (phala). Activity denotes the 
actions carried out by the various participants 
(karakas) involved in the action. Result denotes 
the state that is reached, when the action is 
completed (Bharati et al., 1995). The partici-
pants of the action expressed by the verb root 
are called karakas. There are six basic karakas, 
namely; adhikarana ‘location’, apaadaan 
‘source’, sampradaan ‘recipient’, karana ‘in-
strument’, karma ‘theme’ and karta ‘agent’ 
(Begum et al., 2008a). Here the mapping be-
tween karakas and theta roles is a rough map-
ping. 

The karta karaka is the locus of the activity. 
Similarly karma karaka is the locus of the re-
sult. The locus of the activity implied by the 
verbal root can be animate or inanimate. Sen-
tence (2) given above, is the example where the 
locus of the activity is animate. Sentence (5) 
given below, is the example where the locus of 
the activity is inanimate.  

 
(5) darvaazaa   khulaa 

      door             open.Pst 
      ‘Door opened.’   
   

(6) raam ne     darvaazaa    kholaa  
      ram   Erg.   door             open.Pst 
      ‘Ram opened the door.’ 
                       
(7) maiM ne      raam se      darvaazaa  
      I         Erg.   ram    by     door       
      khulvaayaa  
      open.Caus.Pst 
      ‘I made Ram open the door.’ 
 
 When we come to the causatives, the notion 
of prayojak karta ‘causer’, prayojya karta 
‘causee’ and madhyastha karta ‘mediator 
causer’ are introduced. prayojak karta ‘causer’ 
is the initiator of the action. prayojya karta 
‘causee’ is the one who is made to do the action 
by the prayojak karta ‘causer’. madhyasta karta 
‘mediator causer’ is the causative agent of the 
action. The karta of the base verb becomes the 
prayojya karta of the causative verb and the 
prayojak karta of the first causative becomes 
the madhyasta karta of the second causative.  
 This model takes both semantics and 
morphology into consideration. 

4.1.1 Semantics  

(8) caabii  ne    taalaa  kholaa   
      key      Erg   lock     open.Pst 
     ‘The key opened the lock.’ 

 
(9)* raam  ne   caabii  se   taalaa  khulvaayaa 
       ram   Erg.   key    by    lock    open.Caus.Pst    
       ‘Ram caused the key to open the lock.’  

  
(10)raam ne   mohan  dvaaraa caabii  se  taalaa   
       ram  Erg. mohan  by           key     with lock   
      khulvaayaa   
      open.Caus.Pst. 
      ‘Ram made Mohan open the lock with the   
       key.’  
 

In (8), caabii ‘key’ is the karta of the transi-
tive verb khol ‘open’. caabii ‘key’ is an inani-
mate karta so this sentence can’t be causati-
vized. (8) has been tried to causativize in (9) 
which is unacceptable. (9) is actually interpreted 
as (10) where an inanimate  noun with a se 
‘with’ postposition acts as an instrument and not 
as a prayojya karta ‘causee’. So in (10), caabii  

122



‘key’ is an inanimate noun and takes se ‘with’ 
postposition so caabii  se ‘with the key’ acts as 
instrument and mohan ‘Mohan’ acts as the 
prayojya karta ‘causee’ (Kachru, 1966). It 
seems that only those verbs can be causativized 
which take an animate karta.  

Out of the above two given approaches, we 
are following approach II where both morphol-
ogy and semantics are considered. In our ap-
proach we are saying that only those base verbs 
can be causativized which take an animate karta 
and it should also have volitionality (Tripathi, 
1986; Reinhart, 2005). Those base verbs which 
take an inanimate karta can’t be causativized. 
So in our approach the prayojya karta ‘causee’ 
in the causative sentence is always animate as 
the karta of the base verb becomes the prayojya 
karta ‘causee’ in the causative sentences. In our 
approach we have the notion of karmakartri 
which says an intransitive can be derived out of 
a basic transitive verb and the karma of the ba-
sic transitive verb becomes the karta of the de-
rived intransitive verb. So the karta of the de-
rived intransitive verb is called karmakartri. 
The derived intransitive verbs are like unaccusa-
tive verbs of English.  

Whereas in approach I, the intransitive base 
verbs that take both animate and inanimate kar-
ta can be causativized. But in case of transitives, 
base verbs which take only animate karta can be 
causativized. Ditransitives can also be causati-
vized. (Kachru 1966; Kachru 1980) 

We follow the dependency tagging scheme 
proposed by Begum et al. (2008a) for the devel-
opment of a dependency annotation for Indian 
Languages. In this scheme prayojak karta 
‘causer’, prayojya karta ‘causee’ and madhyas-
tha karta ‘mediator causer’ are represented as 
pk1, jk1 and mk1 respectively.  

Some of the base verb forms and their causa-
tive sentences are given below with dependency 
relations marked in the brackets for the appro-
priate arguments: 
 
(11) raam ne(k1)  seb(k2)       khaayaa  
      ram   Erg.      apple           eat.Pst 
     ‘Ram ate an apple.’  

 
(12) siitaa ne(pk1) raam ko(jk1)  seb(k2)   
      sita    Erg.        ram   Acc.      apple   

      khilaayaa   
      eat.Caus.Pst 
     ‘Sita fed Ram an apple.’ 

 
(13)maa.N  ne(pk1) siitaa se(mk1) raam ko(jk1)                   
      mother  Erg.       sita     by          ram  Acc.        
      seb(k2)    khilvaayaa                             
      apple       eat.Caus.Pst. 
     ‘Mother caused Sita to feed Ram an apple.’ 
 
(14) naukar  ne(k1)  kaam(k2)  kiyaa   
        servant Erg.       work         do.Pst 
        ‘The servant did the work.’ 
 
(15) maalik ne(pk1) naukar  se(mk1)   kaam(k2) 
        master Erg.       servant by             work        
        karvaayaa 
        do.Caus.Pst 
       ‘The master caused Ram to do the job.’  
 
(16) raam ne(k1)  siitaa ko(k4) kitaab (k2)  dii 
       ram    Erg.      sita    Dat.      book    give.Pst 
      ‘Ram gave a book to Sita.’ 
                             
(17) mohan ne(pk1) raam se(jk1) siitaa ko(k4)     
        mohan Erg.       ram   by        sita    Dat.   
        kitaab(k2)  dilaaii 
        book           give.Caus.Pst 
       ‘Mohan made Ram give a book to Sita.’ 

 
(18) mujhko(k4a)  chaa.Nd(k1)   dikhaa  
        I.Dat.              moon             appear.Pst 
       ‘The moon became visible to me.’ 
   
(19) maiM ne(k1)  chaa.Nd(k2)  dekhaa  
         I        Erg.       moon            see.Pst  
        ‘I saw the moon.’ 
 
(20) maiM    ne(pk1) raam ko(jk1)  chaa.Nd(k2) 
        mother Erg.         ram  Dat.       moon 
        dikhaayaa  
        see.Caus.Pst    
        ‘Mother showed moon to Ram.’ 
                  
(21) maiM ne(pk1)  mohan se(mk1)   
        I         Erg.        mohan by 
        raam ko(jk1)    chaa.Nd(k2)   dikhlaayaa  
        ram   Dat.          moon             see.Caus.Pst           
        ‘Mother made Mohan show moon to Ram.’ 

123



4.1.2 Morphology  

In this section we have given the derivation 
process of the Hindi causative verbs. We have 
studied 160 Hindi verbs and have come up with 
certain number of rules for the derivation 
process of causative verbs.  

When causative affixes are added to the base 
verb roots then some of the base verb roots 
change in form and some don’t. Various causal 
affixes are added to each verb type to form 
causatives. An example of affix addition for 
each verb type is discussed below. The affixes 
that are added are given in bold. The changes in 
the base verb root are underlined and made bold 
in both root form and the causal form. 

 
4.1.2.1 Type-1 and its causative forms: 

 

Suffix ‘-aa’ is added to the verb root to form the 
first causal and ‘-vaa’ to form the second 
causal.  
 
No Change in the Root: 

Chip  Chip-aa Chip-vaa 
‘hide’  ‘hide’  ‘cause to hide’ 
 

Change in the Root: 

 aa a 
 

naach        nach-aa         nach-vaa 
‘dance’  ‘make someone dance’ ‘cause to make  
                                                   someone dance’ 
 
4.1.2.2 Type-2 and its causative forms: 

 
Suffix ‘-aa’ is added to the verb root to form the 
first causal and ‘-vaa’ to form the second 
causal.  
 
No Change in the Root: 
likh  likh-aa  likh-vaa 

‘write’  ‘dictate’          ‘cause to dictate’ 
 
Change in the root: 

 aa,  ii    i;In addition, 'l' is    
      inserted here between the root and   

      the causative suffix.  

 
khaa          khi-l-aa khi-l-vaa 

‘eat’         ‘feed’   ‘cause to feed’ 

pii    pi-l-aa   pi-l-vaa 

‘drink’ ‘make someone drink’  ‘cause to make   
                                                    someone drink’ 
 

4.1.2.3 Type-3 and its causative forms: 
 

Suffix ‘-vaa’ is added to the verb root to form 
the first causal. 
 
No Change in the Root: 
khariid   khariid-vaa 

‘buy’   ‘cause to buy’ 
 
Change in the Root: 
 aa    a 

 

gaa   ga-vaa 
‘sing’   ‘cause to sing’ 
 
4.1.2.4 Type-4 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ‘-aa/-vaa’ is added to the verb root to 
form the first causal. 
 
No Change in the Root: 
paros   paros-vaa 

‘serve’   ‘cause to serve’ 
 
Change in the root:  
 e    i; In addition, 'l' is  

 inserted here between the root and  

 the causative suffix. 
 
de          di-l-aa /di-l-vaa 

‘give’          ‘cause to give’ 
 

In case type-5 and type-6 verbs, we can de-
rive intransitive verbs out of transitive verbs. 
Here we have two types of word formations: 

 
 causative formation, 
  Derived intransitive verb formation  

 
Causative derivation is the forward deriva-

tion and intransitive derivation is backward de-
rivation.  
 
4.1.2.5 Type-5 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ‘-aa’ is added to the verb root to form the 
first causal and ‘vaa’ to form  the second causal. 
In this verb type there is no example where the 

124



verb root form doesn’t change. 
 
Causative Formation: Change in the root  

 e    i  
 

dekh     dikh-aa  dikh-vaa 

‘see’              ‘show’               ‘cause to show’ 
    
Derived intransitive formation: Change in 

the above root: 
 i          e 

     
dikh             dekh   
‘appear’  ‘see’      
 
4.1.2.6 Type-6 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ‘-aa/-vaa’ is added to the transitive verb 
root to form the first causal. 
 
Causative formation: No change in the root 

bhar   bhar-vaa /bhar-aa 

‘fill’   ‘cause someone to fill’ 
  

Derived intransitive formation: No change in 

the root 

bhar                       bhar   
‘to fill’                         ‘to fill’  
   
Causative formation: Change in the root 

 o          u; In addition, 'l' is inserted 
here between the root and the  

causative suffix  
 

dho   dhu-l-aa /dhu-l-vaa 

‘wash’   ‘cause to wash’ 
 
Derived intransitive formation: Change in 

the above root: 

 u        o; In addition, 'l' is inserted at   
                    the end of the root 
   

dhu-l   dho   

‘be washed’  ‘cause to wash’ 
 

In the implementation of the causative verbs, 
the causative feature of a verb is reflected in the 
morph analysis. There are two possible ways to 
implement causative information: (i) All the 
causative verb roots are included in the root dic-
tionary of the morph analyzer with an additional 
feature marking it a causative verb type. (ii) For 

all causative verbs the following information is 
marked; causative root, base root, verb type and 
causative suffix. In (i), the information of base 
verb root from which the causative root is de-
rived is missing which is captured in (ii). In the 
above mentioned two ways the latter gives more 
detailed information than the former. 

4.2 Methodology of the Work 

For this work, 160 base verbs were taken, their 
causative forms were given and were classified. 
Rules for deriving causative verb forms from 
their base forms were made. Verb frames for 
base verbs and their causative forms were de-
veloped. Based on the analysis of the base verbs 
certain problem cases were logged and generali-
zations regarding causativization were made. In 
this paper, we briefly discuss about all the 
points  mentioned above. 

4.3 Classification of Hindi Causative  
Verbs 

Here Hindi verbs have been classified into 6 
types based on their causativization behavior:  

 
 Type-1: Basic Intransitive verb  

 
Basic intransitive verb has two causal forms 

i.e., first causal and second causal form. First 
causal of the basic intransitive verb functions as 
a transitive verb. The subject of the basic intran-
sitive verb becomes the object of the transitive 
verb or the first causal form. The subject of the 
first causal form becomes the causative agent of 
the second causal form. Sentence (2) is the ex-
ample of basic intransitive and sentences (3) 
and (4) are its causative forms. 
 
 Type-2: Basic Transitive verb type-I (which 

is similar to khaanaa ‘to eat’ verb type giv-
en by Kachru (1966))  

 
 Type-3: Basic Transitive verb type-II 

(which is similar to karnaa ‘to eat’ verb 
type given by Kachru (1966)) 

 
Type-2 and type-3 are transitive verbs which 

are divided into two types based on their causa-
tivization behavior. Basic transitive verbs of 
type-I, like khaanaa ‘to eat’ have two causal 
forms. First causal of khaanaa ‘to eat’ type verb 

125



also functions as ditransitive. Whereas transitive 
verbs of type-II, like karnaa ‘to do’ have one 
causal form. First causal of karnaa ‘to eat’ type 
verb functions as causative. Sentences (11-13) 
are examples for type-2 verb. Sentences (14-15) 
are examples for type-3 verb.  
 
 Type-4: Basic Ditransitive verb  

 
Ditransitive verbs also have one causal form. 

Sentences (16-17) are examples for type-4 verb.  
 
 Type-5: Basic Transitive verb type-I, out of 

which intransitive verbs can be derived 
which takes a dative subject,  

 
 Type-6: Basic Transitive verb type-II, out 

of which intransitive verbs can be derived.  
 
Type-5 and type-6 are transitive verbs which 

have causal forms depending on whether it is 
type-I (khaanaa ‘to eat’) transitive or type-II 
(karnaa ‘to do’) transitive and in addition both 
have a derived intransitive form. Type-5 takes a 
dative subject in the base form. Sentences (18-
21) are examples for type-5 verb. Sentences (5-
7) are examples for type-6 verb. Other than the 
4 classes classified by Kachru (1966), we have 
two more extra classes, i.e., type-5 and type-6.  

An example for each verb type that goes into 
the classification is given below: 

 
 Type-1 
Base verb First causal Second Causal 

so  sulaa  sulvaa  
‘sleep’       ‘put to sleep’ ‘cause to put to sleep’          
                               
 Type-2 
Base verb First causal Second Causal 

khaa  khilaa  khilvaa 

‘eat’  ‘feed’  ‘cause to feed’ 
 
 Type-3 
Base verb First causal 
kar        karaa/karvaa 
‘do’         ‘cause to do’ 
 
 Type-4 
Base verb First causal 
de         dilaa/dilvaa 

‘give’         ‘cause to give’  
 
 Type-5 
Intransitive  Base verb 

dikh             dekh 

‘appear’            ‘see’ 
 
Base verb First causal Second Causal 

dekh  dikhaa  dikhvaa 
‘see’  ‘show’  ‘cause to  
          show’  
 Type-6  
Intransitive  Base verb 

khul            khol  

‘open’            ‘open’ 
 
Base verb   First causal 

khol      khulvaa 
‘open’                 ‘cause to open’ 

5 Verb Frames 

In this section we list out the syntactic frames 
for all the causative types discussed in the pre-
vious sections. Verb frame (Begum et al., 
2008b) is given for the base form and for its 
first and second causal form. For ease of exposi-
tion, below we show only the relevant informa-
tion of a verb frame. Components not necessary 
for the present discussion have been left out. 
Here the structure of a verb frame is given in 
terms of dependency relation, postposition 
(Hindi case marker) and TAM. We have taken 
past tense (yaa is the past tense marker) in the 
TAM. Refer the examples given above for each 
type of causatives for a better understanding of 
the frames.   
 
I.Frame of Type-1 and its Causative Forms:  

 

        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 

 

(a)k1-0     yaa  
(b)pk1-ne      jk1-ko  yaa  
(c)pk1-ne      mk1-se jk1- ko  yaa  

 
II.Frame of Type-2 and its Causative Forms: 

 
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 

 
(a)k1-ne   k2-0 yaa 
(b)pk1-ne          jk1-ko     k2-0 yaa  

126



(c)pk1-ne    mk1-se    jk1- ko     k2-0 yaa 
 
III. Frame of Type-3 and its Causative 

Forms: 

 

        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 

 
(a)k1-ne                           k2-0         yaa  
(b)pk1-ne       jk1-se        k2-0          yaa  
 
IV. Frame of Type-4 and its Causative 

Forms: 

 
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 

 

 (a) k1-ne            k4-ko     k2-0        yaa  
 (b) pk1-ne     jk1-se    k4-ko      k2-0   yaa  
 
V. Frame of Type-5 and its Causative Forms: 

 
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 

 

(a)k4a-ko  k1                      aa 
(b)k1-ne                   k2-0         aa 
(c)pk1-ne                        jk1-ko      k2-0       yaa  
(d)pk1-ne     mk1-se      jk1-ko       k2-0        yaa  
    

VI. Frame of Type-6 and its Causative 

Forms: 

          

        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 

 

(a)k1-0        aa 
(b)k1-ne       k2-0                   aa 
(c)pk1-ne       jk1-se           k2-0            yaa  

6 Issues and Observations 

There are some verbs which can’t be causati-
vized. Motion verbs like aa ‘come’ and jaa ‘go’ 
can’ t be causativized. After analysing certain 
amount of corpus we have observed that not all 
motion verbs behave like the above verbs . aa-
naa ‘to come’ and jaanaa ‘to go’ verbs can't be 
causativized because these verbs always occur 
as main verbs and take the following verbs as 
manner adverbs: chalnaa, bhaagnaa, daudnaa. 
For instance, chalkar aayaa ‘came running’ and 

daudkar gayaa ‘went running’. Those motion 
verbs which occur as manner adverbs and modi-
fy another motion verb can be causativized and  
those verbs which occur as main verbs and nev-

er occur as manner adverbs of another motion 
verb can't be causativized. Natural process verbs 
like khil ‘blossom’, garajnaa ‘thunder’ and ug 

‘rise’ also can’t be causativized. 
There are three types of the verb nikal 

‘leave’. All the three are used as intransitives. 

 derived intransitive: sense  drain out  

(22) paanii  kamre se       nikal   gayaa 
        water   room  from   leave  go.Pst. 
        ‘Water drained out of the room.’ 
 
 Baisc Intransitive: sense  walked out 
 
(23) raam  kamre  se     baahar  nikal    gayaa 
        ram    room  from  out         leave  go.Pst. 
        ‘Ram walked out of the room.’ 
 
 Baisc Intransitive which involves natural   
       process. 

 
(24) gangaa  gangotrii se       nikaltii            
        ganga     gangotri  from  emerge.Impf. 
        hai 

        be.Pres. 
        ‘Ganga emerges from Gangotri.’ 
 

The first type is a derived intransitive which 
is derived from the base transitive verb nikaal 
‘remove’. This base transitive verb root can be 

causativized. The second type is basic intransi-
tive which can also be causativized. The third 
type which is natural process can’t be causati-
vized. This shows how important the property 
of animacy for making causatives is.  

7 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this work we flesh out the linguistic devices 
that work for causativization. In this paper we 
have introduced a preliminary work on Hindi 
causative verbs. We have given the classifica-
tion of causative verbs and the linguistic model 
followed for their classification. We have also 
given the verb frames of the causative verbs. 
These insights have been incorporated in the 
Hindi dependency treebank (Bhatt et al., 2009). 
We also plan to use the verb frames in a Hindi 
dependency parser (Bharati et al., 2009) to im-
prove its performance. 
 

127



References 

Agnihotri, Rama K. 2007. Hindi, An Essential 
Grammar. Routledge, London and New York, pp. 
121-126. 

Balachandran, Lakshmi B. 1973.  A Case Grammar 
of Hindi. Central Institute of India, Agra. 

Begum, Rafiya, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Dipti 
M. Sharma, Lakshmi Bai and Rajeev Sangal. 
2008. Dependency Annotation Scheme for Indian 
Languages. Proceedings of The Third Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language 

Processing (IJCNLP), Hyderabad, India.  

Begum, Rafiya, Samar Husain, Dipti M. Sharma and 
Lakshmi Bai. 2008. Developing Verb Frames in 
Hindi. In Proceedings of The Sixth International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-

tion (LREC). Marrakech, Morocco.  

Bharati, Akshar, Vineet Chaitanya, and Rajeev San-
gal. 1995. Natural Language Processing: A Pani-
nian Perspective, Prentice-Hall of India, New 
Delhi, pp. 65-106.  

Bharati, Akshar, Samar Husain, Dipti Misra Sharma 
and Rajeev Sangal. 2009. Two stage constraint 
based hybrid approach to free word order lan-
guage dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the 
11th International Conference on Parsing Tech-

nologies (IWPT09). Paris.  

Bhatt, Rajesh, Bhuvana Narasimhan, Martha Palmer, 
Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma, Fei Xia. 
2009. A Multi-Representational and Multi-
Layered Treebank for Hindi/Urdu. In the Third 
Linguistic Annotation Workshop (The LAW III) in 

conjunction with ACL/IJCNLP 2009. Singapore.  

Comrie, Bernard. 1981. Language Universals and 
Linguistic typology: Syntax and Morphology. The 
University of Chicago Press. 

Greaves, Edwin. 1983. Hindi Grammar. Asian Edu-
cational Services, New Delhi, pp. 301-313  

Kachru, Yamuna. 1966. Introduction To Hindi Syn-
tax. University of Illinois, Illionois, pp. 62-81  

Kachru, Yamuna. 1980. Aspects of Hindi Grammar. 
Manohar Publications.  

Kachru, Yamuna. 2006. Hindi. London Oriental and 
African Language Libtary. 

Kale, M.R. 1960. A Higher Sanskrit Grammar. Mo-
tilal Banarasidass, Delhi. 

Kellogg, S. H. 1972. A Grammar of the Hindi Lan-
guage. Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, pp. 
253-257.   

McGregor, R. S. 1995. Outline of Hindi Grammar. 
Oxford University Press, pp. 118-125.  

Nedyalkov, Vladmir P., Georgij G. Silnitsky. 1973. 
The typology of Morphological and Lexical 
Causatives, in: F. Kiefer, (ed.), Trends in Soviet 
Theoretical Linguistics, Foundations of Language, 
Supplementary Series 18, Dordrecht, 1-32. 

Reinhart, Tanya. 2005. Causativization and Decau-
sativization: Unpublished technical report. LSA 
2005.  

Sahaay, Chaturbhuj. 2004. Hindi ke Muul Vaakya 
Saanche, Kumar Prakaashan, Agra, pp. 91-100. 

Sahaay, Chaturbhuj. 2007. Hindi Padvigyaan, Ku-
mar Prakaashan, Agra. 

Shastri, Charu D. 1990. Panini: Re-Interpreted. Mo-
tilal Banarasidass, Delhi. 

Singh, Rajendra and Rama K. Agnihotri. 1997. Hindi 
Morphology: A Word-based Description. Motilal 
Banarasidass, Delhi. 

Tripathi, Acharya R. 1986. Hindi Bhashaanushasan. 
Bihar Granth Academy, Patna.  

 

128


