










































Hemispheric processing of Chinese polysemy in the disyllabic verb/ noun compounds: an event-related potential study


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First Workshop on Computational Neurolinguistics, pages 45–51,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Hemispheric processing of Chinese polysemy in the disyllabic verb/ noun 

compounds: an event-related potential study 

 

Chih-ying Huang 
Institute of Linguistics  

128, Sec. 2, Academia Road, Taipei,  

Taiwan, R.O.C  

evelynhg@alumni.nccu.edu.tw 

 

Chia-ying Lee 
Institute of Linguistics  

128, Sec. 2, Academia Road, Taipei,  

Taiwan, R.O.C 

chiaying@gate.sinica.edu.tw 

 

 

Abstract 

Through the application of Chinese WordNet, 

the current study used the manipulation of 

visual field and the number of senses of the 

first character in Chinese disyllabic com-

pounds to investigate the representation and 

the hemispheric processing of related senses 

in nouns and verbs. In the previous study, 

Huang et al. (2009) have found the ERP evi-

dence to indicate single entry representation 

for Chinese polysemy in the left hemisphere; 

however, in the right hemisphere, they found 

sense inhibition which may be due to (1) the 

nature of hemispheric processing in dealing 

with semantic ambiguity or (2) the semantic 

activation from the separate-entry representa-

tion for senses. To clarify these possibilities, 

the study used the word class judgment task 

with the attempt to push subjects in a deeper 

level of lexical processing. The results re-

vealed sense facilitation effect in the RH and 

suggested that in a deeper level, the RH had 

more possibility to observe the sense facilita-

tion due to different efficiency of cerebral 

hemispheres. 

1 Introduction 

1.1 Homonymy vs. polysemy  

Lexical ambiguity is very common in language. 

Linguistically, homonymy and polysemy are tradi-

tionally distinguished as two types of ambiguity. 

Early behavioral studies on semantic ambiguity 

obtained ambiguity advantage effects (e.g., Ru-

benstein et al., 1970; Jastrzembski, 1981, Millis & 

Button, 1989) in lexical decisions in which ambi-

guous words yielded faster reaction time than un-

ambiguous words. However, the same results were 

not replicated in some other studies (e.g., Bo-

rowsky & Masson, 1996; Azuma & Van Orden, 

1997). More recent psycholinguistic studies found 

that the so-called ambiguity advantage effects were 

in fact resulted from the activation of words having 

related senses rather than that of words having un-
related meanings (e.g., Rodd et al., 2002; Beretta et 

al., 2005; Pylkkänen et al., 2006). These studies 

were generally in agreement with the linguistic 

assumption in that homonymy and polysemy might 

be represented differently in the mental lexicon. 

1.2 Hemispheric processing of semantic am-

biguity  

The issue of hemispheric processing in combina-

tion with lexical ambiguity have been widely stu-

died (e.g., Burgess & Simpson, 1988; Beeman & 

Chiarello, 1998; Faust & Lavidor, 2003) and sug-

gested that both cerebral hemispheres process word 

meanings in complementary ways. For example, 

Faust and Lavidor (2003) demonstrated that the 

LH benefited most from semantically congruent 

primes related to dominant meaning of ambiguous 

targets while the RH benefited most from semanti-

cally mixed primes. The overall pattern of priming 

was also suggestive of dissociation in the hemis-

pheric meaning retrieval, with the LH engaging in 

fine semantic coding that focused on a single 

meaning interpretation, and the RH engaging in 

coarser semantic coding where multiple alternate 
meanings were activated. Alternatively, Federmei-

45



er and Kutas (1999) offered electrophysiological 

data in a sentence comprehension task to present 

another explanation in hemispheric language 

processing. They suggested that while both hemis-

pheres involved in lexical resolution, they played 

different roles with the LH being ‘predictive’, the 

RH being ‘integrative’, to complement each other.  

    Pylkkänen et al., (2006) were the first to focus 

on the investigation of how different but related 

senses were psychologically represented in the 

mental lexicon. Their MEG data suggested the sin-

gle-entry representation for related senses in the 

LH whereas they showed the sense inhibition in 

the RH and interpreted it as a potential sense com-

petition effect. In Chinese, Huang et al. (2009) 

demonstrated similar patterns in their ERP data in 

which there was sense facilitation in the LH and 

sense inhibition in the RH. Nevertheless, the ques-

tion concerning the representation of related senses 

in the RH still left unresolved. Early studies on 

Chinese ambiguity such as Lin (1999) obtained 

ambiguity advantage but the calculation of ‘senses’ 
1
included related and unrelated meanings and the 

effect was not reliable enough.  

1.3 Ambiguity in Chinese disyllabic com-

pounds 

In Chinese words recognition process, the issue of 

lexical ambiguity involves the composition of con-

stituent characters and how they contribute to the 

whole word reading. Chinese words differ from 

English in at least two aspects. First, about 80% of 

Chinese words are composed of two characters 

(Huang et al., 2006). Second, unlike the words in 

English, which every word is composed of letters 

corresponding to phonemes, Chinese words consist 

of characters corresponding to morphemes. In oth-

er words, each character in Chinese has its mor-

pheme(s) when they are embedded in two-

character compounds. Therefore, before we look 

into the lexical ambiguity of two-character words 

                                                           
1 The definition of “sense” in Lin (1999) is different from the 

“sense advantage effect” demonstrated by Rodd et al. (2002). 

Lin argued that “meaning” in past research is used as a general 

term to refer to any kind of linguistic meaning. He claimed 

that, based upon Ahrens (1999) and Ahrens et al. (1998), it is 

better to use “sense” and “facets” as a measure index. Though 

the “number of senses” Lin used is a little different from the 

“number of meanings” used by Azuma and Van Orden (1997), 

it is regarded that Lin still did not solve the unreliable findings 

of ambiguity advantage effect.  

as lexical items, we should investigate the sense 

representation of its subcomponent, the representa-

tion of its single character within two-character 

compounds.  

In the circumstance which every character in 

the disyllabic compounds may contribute to word 

recognition, there still exists disparity between the 

roles of the first and second character. In light of 

the studies on the neighborhood size effect, word 

recognition process will be influenced by the com-

position of letters or characters. In English, faci-

litative neighborhood size effects and inhibitory 

neighborhood size effects were robust findings in 

low frequency words (e.g. Andrews, 1989, 1992; 

Grainger and Jacobs, 1996). In the Chinese neigh-

borhood size study (Huang et al., 2006) and eye 

movement study (Tsai et al., 2006), it was sug-

gested that the neighborhood size of the first cha-

racter constituent played a more important role in 

lexical processing than did neighborhood size of 

the second character constituent. Based on the as-

sumption that the first character will play a key 

role in whole word reading, the study primarily 

manipulated the number of senses of the first cha-

racter and attempted to reveal the hypotheses of 

sense representation in the context provided by the 

second character. 

The question left in Huang et al. (2009) was 

that whether the sense inhibition in the RH was 

due to the nature of hemispheric processing in 

dealing with semantic ambiguity or the semantic 

activation from the separate-entry representation 

for senses. Considering the sense inhibition in the 

N400 of the ERP component, the pattern in their 

data was that words having many senses were 

more negative than those having few senses. That 

is, there existed competition when the first charac-

ters of the targets had many related senses. Never-

theless, based on the single entry assumption for 

related senses, we assumed sense facilitation for 

the representation of senses.  

In Huang et al. (2009), they required subjects 

to make word/ non-word lexical decision, but sub-

jects might make their judgments based on percep-

tual familiarity rather than the involvement of 

lexical access. Previous studies on probabilistic 

phonotactics (Vitevitch and Luce, 1998) or on 

Chinese semantic combinability (Cheng, 2006) 

have demonstrated opposing effects in early and 

late levels of word processing. In order to clarify 

the results in Huang et al. (2009), we designed the 

46



word class judgment task to deepen the difficulty 

of the experimental procedure. 

2 The experiment  

By changing the depth of the task, the goal of the 

experiment was to find out if, under the assump-

tion of single entry representation for senses, there 

was a chance to discover the sense facilitation in 

the RH. Suppose the representation of Chinese 

senses had single entry, words having more senses 

should be less negative than few senses in the 

N400 because of the benefits of semantic activa-

tion. On the contrary, if there were multiple entries 

for senses in the RH, words of more senses should 

be more negative than few senses and displayed 

semantic competition and inhibition. 

2.1 Participants  

38 college students (18 to28 years of age, mean 

age 22.39) took part in the experiment (male, right-

handedness). Written consent was obtained from 

all participants. The study was approved by the 

Taiwan governmental ethics committee.  

2.2 Materials 

120 Chinese disyllabic compounds, counterba-

lanced with word class (noun/ verb), were divided 

into four subsets according to visual field (LVF/ 

RVF) and NOS of the first character (few/ many 

senses). Few-sense words were those whose first 

character senses were from 1 to 3 (mean 1.97) 

whereas many-sense words were those whose first 

character senses were over 6 (mean 11.38). Possi-

ble confounding factors such as word frequency, 

NS1, NS2 were controlled.  

The number of senses in the current study was 

collected from the Chinese WordNet, a lexical cor-

pus of Mandarin Chinese and established by Aca-

demia Sinica in Taiwan. The corpus attempts to 

build an up-to-date Chinese lexical network and 

provides complete information of Chinese word 

senses.  

In Chinese, there exists controversy over the 

distinction of verbs and nouns. To avoid this prob-

lem, the resolutions included: (1) to label the word 

class according to the system established in Aca-

demia Sinica balanced corpus of modern Chinese 

and (2) to give pilot pretests to another group of 

people to exclude these possibly confused choices. 

These subjects were asked to use their language 

intuition to write down their word-class judgments 

in a paper sheet containing 120 targets.  

 
Table1. Examples of the stimuli  

No. of 

senses 

Word 

class 

RVF LVF 

Few Noun   

‘a smiling 

face’ 

 

‘a hair pin’ 

Few  Verb   

‘to guess a 

riddle’ 

 

‘to take 

medicine’ 

Many  Noun   

‘first prize’ 

 

‘green tea’ 

Many  Verb   

‘to stoop’ 

 

‘to ex-

change’ 

2.3 Procedure 

Each trial began with a white cross presented cen-

trally for 500 ms. Presentation of the target words 

appeared on the screen for 150 ms. The disyllabic 

compound targets were vertically arranged in the 

left or right visual hemifield with inner edge two 

degrees of visual angle from fixation. Presentation 

of numbers from 1 to 9 appeared pseudorandomly 

in the center of the screen in order to control par-

ticipants’ eyesight. At the end of each trial, a capi-

tal B was presented in the center to allow eye 

blinking for 1500 ms. Participants were asked not 

to blink their eyes until the appearance to the capi-

tal B to minimize the interference of eye move-

ment. 

Participants were instructed to judge whether 

the compound presented was a noun or a verb. For 

odd-number subjects, they were asked to press the 

response box with both of their index fingers when 

the targets were verbs and with both of their mid-

dle fingers when the targets were nouns. For even-

number subjects, the instruction was the opposite. 

To control the central fixation of eyes, numbers 

from 1 to 9 also appeared pseudorandomly. Odd-

number subjects should press the response box 

with both of their index fingers when number 6 to 

9 was presented centrally on the screen and with 

both of their middle fingers when number 1 to 4 

was on the screen. For even-number subjects, in-

struction reversed. Response time and event-

related potentials data were both collected during 

the process.  

47



 
Figure1. Timing diagram of the experimental procedure 

2.4 Event-related potential recording  

The electroencephalogram was recorded from 64 

electrodes embedded in an electro-cap(QuickCap, 

Neuromedical Supplies, Sterling, Texas, USA), 

referenced to the left and right mastoid, M1, M2 

respectively. Positions of all the electrodes were 

arranged according to the international ten-twenty 

system. The electroencephalogram was conti-

nuously recorded and digitized at a rate of 500 Hz. 

The signal was amplified by SYNAMPS2 (Neu-

roscan Inc., El Paso, Texas, USA) with the band-

pass set at 0.5–100 Hz. Blinks and eye movements 

were monitored via electrodes placed on the infra-

orbital ridges of the left eye (VEOG) and the outer 

canthus left and right electrode (HEOG). A ground 

electrode was placed on the forehead anterior to 

the FZ electrode. Electrode impedance was kept 

below 5 kohms.   

2.5 ERP components  

In the analyses of the ERP waveforms elicited by 

every stimulus in each condition, there were typi-

cally composed of a negative-going peak at around 

100ms (N1), a positive-going peak at around 

200ms (P200), a negative-going peak maximizing 

at around 400 ms (N400) over central and parietal 

electrode sites. Among these, N 170 was regarded 

as the early index for visual detection in word 

processing. In the current study, N170 was used to 

examine the manipulation of visual field. N400 

was characterized as an index sensitive to lan-

guage-related processing and was generally consi-

dered in response to violations of semantic 

expectations (Kutas and Hillyard, 1980). With the 

presentation of a semantically inappropriate or in-

congruent word, a large N400 activity would be 

elicited. In Huang et al. (2009), the 400 in the RH 

was regarded as sense competition because words 

with many senses elicit more negativity at around 

400 ms.  

3 Results  

Behavioral accuracy below 70 percent and ERPs 

accepted trials below 16 were excluded from 

ANOVA analyses. Data from 28 of participants 

were used in the following behavioral and ERP 

analyses. 

3.1 Behavioral data 

A 2 2 (number of senses  visual field) analysis of 

variance (ANOVA) was performed on correct RTs 

and accuracy. For RTs, no significant main effect 

of number of senses (F (1, 27) =0.5, p=.48) and 

interaction (F (1, 27) =1.33, p=.26) was observed. 

A main effect of visual field reached marginally 

significance (F (1, 27) = 3.38, p=.077). Stimuli 

presented to RVF/ LH had the tendency to produce 

shorter response time than those presented to LVF/ 

RH. For accuracy, not any main effect or interac-

tion was obtained. 

3.2 ERP data 

Temporal time windows of interest were N170 

(150-180 ms) and N400 (350-500 ms). The mean 

amplitude of each time window from selected elec-

trodes served as dependent measures in a repeated 

measures analysis of variance (ANOVA).  

3.2.1 N170 (150-180 ms) 

The mean amplitude of N170 was analyzed by 

ANOVA with factors of visual field (LVF/RVF), 

number of senses, and electrodes (P3/P4, P5/P6, 

P7/P8, PO5/ PO6). We obtained a significant visu-

al field  electrodes interaction F (7,189) =45.34, 

p<.001. Post-hoc comparison indicated that visual 

field simple main effects reached statistical signi-

ficance in all electrodes (p’s<.001). In electrodes 

on the left, P3, P5, P7, PO5, right visual field pres-

entation elicited much greater negativity than left 

visual presentation and vice versa in electrodes on 

the right, P4, P6, P8, and PO8.  

3.2.2 N400 (350-500 ms) 

Mean amplitudes of all conditions were measured 

from 350 to 500ms and subjected to ANOVA with 

48



factors of visual field, the number of senses, elec-

trodes, hemispheres. The midline analysis revealed 

marginal significance of two way interaction be-

tween the number of senses and visual field (F (1, 

27) =3.83, p=.06). In the lateral analysis, there was 

marginal significance of visual field by number of 

senses interaction (F (1, 27) = 3.18, p=.086) and a 

marginally significant 4-way interaction of visual 

field, number of senses, electrodes and hemis-

pheres (F (4, 108) =2.53, p=.072). Post-hoc com-

parisons showed that in the LVF/ RH few senses 

tended to be more negative than many senses 

(p<.05) while in the RVF/ LH, few and many 

senses did not reveal any difference (p=.73).  

 
Figure 2—Grand averaged ERPs at CPZ in the RVF/LH. 

 
Figure 3—Grand averaged ERPs at CPZ in the LVF/RH 

4 Discussion  

In the behavioral data, no significant main effect of 

the number of senses and interaction was observed. 

Nevertheless, the ERP data demonstrated that there 

was marginal significance of two-way interaction 

(visual field  number of senses) and a marginally 

significant 4-way interaction. Post-hoc comparison 

showed that there were significant sense facilita-

tion effects in the RH and no effect in the LH. ERP 

waveforms showed that words of few senses eli-

cited more negativity than words of many senses 

around 400 ms in the RH, but the two conditions 

did not differ from each other in the LH. 

The marginality of statistical significance led 

to the speculation in that the word category effect 

might dilute the sense effect in the experiment. 

Many studies, in general, suggested that the neural 

systems for lexical processing of nouns and verbs 

were anatomically distinct. For example, in child-

ren’s lexical development, the acquisition of nouns 

seems to be earlier and easier than that of verbs 

(Gentner, 1982). In aphasic findings, case studies 

indicated that patients with lesions located in left 

anterior and middle temporal lobe, outside so 

called language areas, had difficulty in the produc-

tion of nouns whereas patients with lesions areas in 

left frontal premotor cortex had difficulty in the 

production of verbs (Damasio & Damasio, 1992; 

Damasio et al., 1993). Evidence from event-related 

potentials also disclosed electrocortical differences 

between nouns and verbs over widespread cortical 

areas (Pulvermüller et al., 1999). Therefore, verbs 

were assumed to elicit stronger electrocortical ac-

tivity around primary frontal, prefrontal areas as-

sociated with motor, premotor functions. Nouns, 

associated with concrete and well-imaginable 

meanings related to visual modality, were assumed 

to elicit larger electrocortical activity around visual 

cortices. 

There was also evidence indicating that the 

conclusions were oversimplified. For example, 

Tyler et al. (2001, PET) found no significant action 

differences for nouns and verbs in lexical decision 

and semantic categorization task. Similarly, in an 

fMRI Chinese study, Li et al. (2004) pointed out 

that nouns and verbs were found to activate a wide 

range of overlapping brain areas and suggested 

distributed networks for either word class. One 

recent Chinese study on concreteness also showed 

similar distribution over the scalp for both nouns 

and verbs (Tsai et al., 2008).  

The study was not meant to resolve the con-

troversy of neural representations for nous and 

verbs. Instead, from the marginal significance of 

the data in the experiment, we speculated that the 

word class effect may influence the results, which 

led to the failure to reach significance in overall 

data. Therefore, we reanalyzed the data with the 

addition word class as one within-subject factor. 

4.1 Re-analyses 

49



To further examine the sense effect in nouns and 

verbs condition, separate analyses of ANOVA 

were carried out according to different word 

classes. 

4.2 Behavioral data 

A 2 2 2 (number of senses  visual field  word 

class) analysis of variance (ANOVA) was per-

formed on correct RTs and accuracy. For RTs, re-

sults showed marginally significant effects for 

visual field (F (1, 27) = 3.38, p=.077) and word 

class (F (1, 27) = 2.97, p=.096) and for number of 

senses  word class interaction (F (1, 27) = 2.94, 

p=.098). Stimuli presented to the RVF/ LH tended 

to responded more quickly than to the LVF/ RH. 

Stimuli of nouns had shorter response time than 

stimuli of verbs. For accuracy analysis, nouns had 

significant higher accuracy than verbs (word class 

(F (1, 27) =5.41, p<.05). 

4.3 ERP data 

The grand mean ERPs elicited by few and many 

senses in RVF/ LH and LVF/ RH were presented 

in nouns and verbs separately.  

4.3.1 Nouns  

In the midline, there was a marginally significant 

number of senses  electrodes interaction (F (4, 

108) = 2.8, p<.08). Lateral analyses indicated that 

there was a significant visual field  number of 

senses  electrode interaction (F (1, 27) = 3.65, 

p<.05). Planned comparison showed that only 

when stimuli presented to the LVF/ RH, few 

senses were more negative in C, CP, P (p’s <.05 to 

<.01).  

4.3.2 Verbs 

In the midline analysis, there was no significant 

main effect of senses or interaction. In the lateral 

analyses, there were significant interactions of vis-

ual field  number of senses (F (1, 27) =4.69, 

p<.05) and visual field  number of senses  elec-

trodes  hemispheres (F (4, 108) = 4.23, p<.01). 

Planned comparisons of four way interaction 

showed that when presented to LVF/ RH, few 

senses were more negative in F3, C3, CP3 and FC4 

(p’s<.05 to <.01) whereas when presented to the 

RVF/ LH, there was no difference between few 

and many senses.  

5 Discussion  

The purpose of additional analyses of sense effects 

in nouns and verbs was to examine clearer effects 

of senses without the confounding of the word 

class factor. The separate analyses for nouns and 

verbs both showed significant sense effects in the 

lateral sites. Furthermore, planned comparison of 

the senses demonstrated disparate distributions for 

nouns and verbs respectively. To be more specific, 

the sense effects for nouns were located in central-

to-parietal areas of brain, whereas these effects for 

verbs primarily showed up in frontal, central, cen-

tral-parietal electrodes on the left. The re-analyses 

of ERP data showed that the differences of distri-

bution from either word category diluted the sense 

effect observed in the first analysis; therefore, the 

data was only marginally significant in the original 

analyses. Besides, though the current study was not 

meant to resolve the representations for different 

word categories, the additional results seemed to 

support the distinct neural representations for 

nouns and verbs, since each word class had its dis-

tribution for the sense effects. Certainly, further 

evidence of Chinese word class was required to 

approve the statement since there was also evi-

dence suggesting distributed network for Chinese 

lexical processing (e.g. Li et al., 2004).  

According to previous studies, different levels 

of processing in perception of words would lead to 

opposing results (e.g. Vitevitch and Luce, 1998; 

Cheng, 2006). Suppose the results were derived 

from the single entry representation of senses, the 

sense effect should be observed in the RH in the 

experiment since the depth of the task was changed. 

In other words, when subjects were undergoing a 

deeper level of lexical processing, the relatedness 

of senses might have been early processed in the 

LH due to the engagement in fine semantic 

processing; on the other hand, the sense effect 

might appear in the RH because its capacity al-

lowed alternate meanings to maintain. Hence, in a 

deeper level of task, which slowed down the se-

mantic processing, the facilitative sense effect was 

observed in the RH.   

Overall, we suggested that the representation 

of Chinese senses be single entry and obtained the 

sense facilitation effects in LVF/ RH in which few 

50



senses were more negative than many senses both 

in nouns and verbs. We assumed that the results 

also provided empirical evidence indicating that 

the construction of Chinese WordNet has psycho-

logical validity.  

6 Conclusions 

The study attempted to find out whether the repre-

sentation of senses in the RH was single-or sepa-

rate-entry. When the depth of task was changed, 

the RH advantage for the processing of semantical-

ly related senses was observed. The finding was 

consistent with recent studies on the representation 

of polysemy (e.g. Beretta et al. 2005; Pylkkänen et 

al. 2006, Rodd et al., 2002).  

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by grants from Taiwan Na-

tional Science Council (NSC 94-2411-H-001-068, 95-

2413-H-010-002 and NSC 96-2628-H-001-058) and the 

theme project of brain, cognition and behavioral science 

from Academia Sinica, Taiwan (AS-93-TP-C05). The 

authors would like to give gratitude to Jie-Li Tsai, Hsu-

wen Huang, Chun-Hsien Hsu and Wen-Hsuan Chan, 

Chiaju Chou who gave technical support, valuable sug-

gestions and comments on the early draft of this paper. 

References  

Academia Sinica balanced corpus (version 3). (1998). 

Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. 

Azuma, T. & Van Orden, G. C. (1997). Why SAFE Is 

Better Than FAST: The Relatedness of a 

Word's Meanings Affects Lexical Decision 

Times. Journal of Memory and Language, 

36(4), 484-504. 

Beretta, A., Fiorentino, R., & Poeppel, D. (2005). The 

effects of homonymy and polysemy on lexical 

access: an MEG study. Cognitive Brain Re-

search, 24(1), 57-65. 

Burgess, C., & Simpson, G. B. (1988). Cerebral hemis-

pheric mechanisms in the retrieval of ambi-

guous word meanings. Brain Lang, 33(1), 86-

103. 

Damasio A. R. & Daniel, T. (1993). Nouns and verbs 
are retrieved with differently distributed neural 

systems. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 

the National Academy of Science. 

Faust, M., & Lavidor, M. (2003). Semantically conver-

gent and semantically divergent priming in the 

cerebral hemispheres: lexical decision and se-

mantic judgment. Cognitive Brain Research, 

17(3), 585-597. 

Federmeier, K. D. & Kutas, M. (1999). Right words and 

left words: electrophysiological evidence for 

hemispheric differences in meaning processing. 

Cognitive Brain Research, 8(3), 373-392.  

Huang, C-Y, Huang, H-W, Tsai, J-L, Huang, C-C & 

Lee, C-Y (2009, October). Number of senses 
effects of Chinese disyllabic compounds in two 

hemispheres. Poster presented at the 13th In-

ternational Conference on the Processing of 

East Asian Languages, Beijing Normal Univer-

sity, Beijing, China.  

Huang, H. W., Lee, C. Y., Tsai, J. L., Lee, C. L., Hung, 

D. L., & Tzeng, O. J. (2006). Orthographic 

neighborhood effects in reading Chinese two-

character words. Neuroreport, 17(10), 1061-

1065. 

Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless 

sentences: brain potentials reflect semantic in-

congruity. Science, 207(4427), 203. 

Lyons, J. (1977). Semantics. Cambridge, England: 

Cambridge University Press. 

Pulvermuller, F., Lutzenberger, W., & Preissl, H. (1999). 

Nouns and Verbs in the Intact Brain: Evidence 

from Event-related Potentials and High-

frequency Cortical Responses. Cerebral Cortex, 

9(5), 497-506. 
Pylkkänen, L., Llinás, R., & Murphy, G. L. (2006). The 

representation  of Polysemy: MEG Evidence. 

Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(1), 97-

109. 

Rodd, J., Gaskell, G., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (2002). 

Making Sense of Semantic Ambiguity: Seman-

tic Competition in Lexical Access. Journal of 

Memory and Language, 46(2), 245-266. 
Rubenstein, H., Garfield, L., & Millikan, J. A. (1970). 

Homographic entries in the internal lexicon. 

Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Beha-

vior, 9(5), 487–494. 
Vitevitch, M. S., & Luce, P. A. (1998). When Words 

Compete: Levels of Processing in Perception 

of Spoken Words. Psychological Science, 9(4), 

325-329. 

51


