



















































Computational Lexicography: A Feature-based Approach in Designing an E-dictionary of Chinese Classifiers


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex 2010), pages 56–65,
Beijing, August 2010

Computational Lexicography: A Feature-based Approach in 
Designing an E-dictionary of Chinese Classifiers  

Helena H. Gao 
Nanyang Technological University 
helenagao@ntu.edu.sg 

 
Abstract 

Chinese noun classifiers are obligatory as 
a category in association with nouns. 
Conventional dictionaries include 
classifiers as lexical entries but 
explanations given are very brief and 
thus hardly helpful for L2 learners. This 
paper presents a new design of an e-
dictionary of Chinese classifiers. The 
design is based on both theoretical 
studies of Chinese classifiers and 
empirical studies of Chinese classifier 
acquisition by both children and adults. 
My main argument with regards to 
Chinese classifier acquisition is that 
cognitive strategies with a bottom-up 
approach are the key to the understanding 
of the complexity of classifier and noun 
associations. The noun-dependent 
semantic features of classifiers are 
evidence to support my argument. These 
features are categorically defined and 
stored in a separated database in an e-
learning environment linked to the e-
dictionary. The aim of making such a 
design is to provide a platform for L2 
learners to explore and learn with a 
bottom-up approach the associations of 
classifiers with nouns. The computational 
agent-based model that automatically 
links noun features to that of classifiers is 
the technical part of the design that will 
be described in detail in the paper. Future 
development of the e-dictionary will be 
discussed as well.  

1 Introduction 
Noun classifiers are a typical feature of Chinese 
that distinguishes itself from many other 
languages. In simple terms, a classifier is a 
morpheme or word used to classify a noun 
according to its inherent semantic features. Noun 
classifiers in Chinese are obligatory as a category 
of its own and used to specify a noun when it is 

used with a determiner or a numeral. In other 
words, A Chinese classifier is never used 
independently. It must occur before a noun with 
a numeral (e.g., yi ‘one’, liang ‘two’, san ‘three’) 
and/or a determiner (e.g., zhe ‘this’, nei ‘that’), or 
certain quantifiers (e.g., ji ‘how many’, mei 
‘every’). Such a combination is referred to as a 
classifier phrase.  

However, the definition of Chinese 
classifiers is not a simple one. There are different 
types of classifiers in terms of their semantic 
functions. Some of them carry the unique 
features of the Chinese language; others are 
representatives of classifier languages, and yet all 
of them have the grammatical functions of 
measure words, which are a universal category in 
all languages. Due to the complexity of classifier 
functions, different definitions and classifications 
have been found. However, generally speaking, 
classifiers refer to common properties of noun 
objects across domains and common relations of 
objects in the world, rather than to categories 
having to do solely with language-internal 
relations (Lucy, 1992). Some researchers take a 
functional approach and define Chinese 
classifiers based on their grammatical functions. 
For example, Chao (1968) divides classifiers into 
nine categories. They are “classifiers or 
individual measures”, “classifiers associated with 
v-o”, “group measures”, “partitive measures”, 
“container measures”, “temporary measures”, 
“standard measures”, “quasi-measures or 
autonomous measures”, and “measures for verbs 
of action”. From his classification we can see 
that he does not distinguish the concept of a 
classifier from that of a measure word. The 
advantage of such a classification is its inclusion 
of all the three types of classifiers mentioned 
above and being able to define them all as 
measure words, but the disadvantage is that those 
that are Chinese specific noun classifiers are all 
treated under the universal concept of measure 
words. This may be easy for learners to 
understand the grammatical functions of Chinese 
classifiers but the ontological nature of noun 
objects that classifiers are associated with are 

56



largely ignored. In recent decades, researchers 
have started to take a cognitive approach to 
understand the links between nouns and 
classifiers and found it necessary to make a 
distinction between classifiers and measure 
words. For instance, Tai & Wang (1990:38) state 
that “A classifier categorizes a class of nouns by 
picking out some salient perceptual properties, 
either physically or functionally based, which are 
permanently associated with entities named by 
the class of nouns; a measure word does not 
categorize but denotes the quantity of the entity 
named by a noun. ” This definition makes a clear 
distinction between a classifier and a measure 
word, which is assumed to be helpful for L2 
learners to have a better understanding of the 
cognitive basis of a classifier system. This is 
because there are no measure words in English or 
other European languages that can also function 
as classifiers in the same sense as Chinese 
classifiers. A recent study done by Gao (2010) 
has shown that Swedish adult learners of Chinese 
had a lower proficiency in classifier application 
than their general Chinese proficiency and that 
most of them were not aware of the difference 
between the concept of a classifier and that of a 
measure word.  

Other previous studies on classifiers include 
descriptive and experimental studies of classifier 
systems of natural languages. For example, some 
descriptive studies make typological surveys of 
classifier systems in different languages (e.g. 
Allan, 1977; Lyons, 1977; Goddard, 1998); 
others provide semantic analysis of classifiers 
and their associated nouns (e.g. Downing, 1993; 
Huang & Ahrens, 2003; Matsumoto, 1993), and 
some also propose that there is an ontological 
base on which classifiers and nouns are 
associated with (Sowa 2000; Philpot et al., 2003; 
Nichols et al., 2005).    

Experimental studies using computer 
technology to apply findings of classifier 
knowledge to natural language processing (NLP) 
have provided a new approach for the semantic 
analysis of classifiers (e.g. Nirenburg & Raskin, 
2004; Hwang et al., 2007, Quek, 2010) and  for 
computer-assisted language learning (e.g. Guo & 
Zhong, 2005). However, no e-learning systems 
developed so far are found to be able to guide 
second language learners to use the semantic 

properties to understand the links between 
classifiers and their associated nouns.  

The emergence of computer-assisted 
language learning (CALL) provides language 
learners with a user-friendly and flexible e-
learning tool. CALL incorporates technology 
into the language learning process and also 
applies itself across a broad spectrum of teaching 
styles, textbooks, and courses (Donaldson & 
Haggstrom, 2006). Its bidirectional and 
individualized features makes it possible for 
learners to use it effectively to improve different 
aspects of language skills (e.g. Mallon 2006; 
Chang et al., 2008).  

My idea of designing the e-dictionary of 
Chinese classifiers is similar to that of CALL. 
Empirical studies have shown that classifier 
learning is a big challenge for L2 learners of 
Chinese. My argument with regards to Chinese 
classifier acquisition is that cognitive strategies 
with a bottom-up approach are the key to the 
understanding of the complexity of classifier and 
noun associations. Therefore, the design of the e-
dictionary has a focus on guiding learners to 
explore the cognitive foundations of classifier-
noun relations. The e-learning system 
implemented in the e-dictionary is designed to 
promote self-paced accelerated learning. It 
consists of a database of the decomposed 
semantic features of classifiers and their 
associated nouns. These well-defined unique and 
non-unique features will help learners to take a 
cognitive approach to explore case by case the 
matched pairs of classifiers and nouns. Currently 
the e-dictionary has included 168 noun classifiers 
and 680 nouns, of which 80 classifiers and 560 
nouns have been analysed and entered into the e-
learning database. My aim is to define and 
include all Chinese classifiers and their 
associated nouns1 and eventually link them to the 
e-learning system.  
2 Multi-categorization of Classifiers 
In cognitive linguistics, categories are defined by 
groups of features and relationships within a 
same family. From this viewpoint, the 
                                                           
1 Eleven classifier dictionaries are consulted (see 
References). The number of classifiers listed in them ranges 
from 143 to 422 and the number of associated nouns is from 
388 to 8609. However, if we follow Tai and Wang’s (1990) 
definition of classifiers, 178 of them are true classifiers.  

57



occurrence of a noun with a particular classifier 
is dependent upon the categorical features of 
both nouns and classifiers. However, the internal 
semantic network of categories may be 
ambiguous due to historical and social factors, 
which makes categorization dependent on not 
only noun referents’ intrinsic properties but also 
their functional and human perceptual ones. In 
other words, classifier and noun associations 
encode as well human cognitive understandings 
of the real world entities. As a result, classifiers 
are found to be able to link nouns cross-
categorically. That is, one single classifier can 
associate itself with a number of nouns from 
different noun categories and at the same time 
one single noun from certain categories can be 
associated with not one but two classifiers. This 
multiple-categorization nature of classifiers 
complicates the classification of classifiers and 
nouns for the purpose of providing an effective 
learning strategy. It is also virtually impossible 
for linguists to build a meta-theory for a 
systematic organization of any clear logical 
classifier-noun categories and thus hard for 
lexicographers to find an effective way to 
illustrate the semantic connections between 
classifiers and nouns. However, one thing we are 
clear about is that the main obstacles in classifier 
acquisition are that the inhabited meaning 
associations in the nature of classifiers are 
opaque and that the complex classifier 
associations with nouns have caused noun 
categorizations to be linguistically 
unconventional. Yet, from a cognitive viewpoint, 
these associations and categorizations can 
provide cognitive motivations to learners if we 
can provide a learning tool that allows them to 
pay attention to the pragmatic use of classifiers 
on a cognitive basis. 
3 Semantic Decomposition of Classifiers 

and Nouns 
Table 1 is a demonstration of the semantic 
features of some most commonly used noun 
classifiers and their associated nouns. A total of 
168 classifiers are collected and sorted out 
according to the number of noun categories each 
classifier is associated with. One special feature 
of this dictionary design is that the classifiers’ 
associated nouns are grouped into categories 
based on the real-world entities as noun 

referents. Currently I have defined the following 
11 categories in the e-dictionary:  “nature, 
humans & body parts”, “animals”, “vegetables & 
fruits”, “man-made objects”, “buildings”, 
“clothing”, “food”, “furniture”, “tools” and 
“vehicles”. A hierarchy of noun classifiers is 
built up according to the number of noun 
categories they enter into. For instance, the 
classifier liang occurs only in the “vehicles” 
category, (e.g. car, lorry, bicycle, etc.). Out of the 
168 classifiers, 149 occur in fewer than 3 noun 
categories. The cognitive mapping between these 
149 classifiers and their associated nouns are 
straightforward. Hence it is relatively easy for 
users to quickly have a big picture of how a 
classifier is associated with certain type(s) of 
nouns. For the rest of 19 classifiers listed in 
Table 1, each occurs in at least 3 noun categories. 
At the current stage my work focuses on 
individual noun classifiers; the other types of 
classifiers will be added in the future when more 
people are involved in the project. In the e-
learning part of the dictionary, I temporarily 
exclude the general classifier ge because 
cognitively it is not assumed to be a difficult one 
to learn. 

Through semantic decomposition, the 
cognitive mapping between a classifier and its 
associated nouns is revealed. Take the classifier 
tiao for example. It is associated with nouns such 
as rainbow, leg, snake, cucumber, road, scarf, 
potato chip, boat and necklace, which are from 9 
of the 11 noun categories listed above. Despite of 
the different categories they belong to, the 9 
nouns share one same cognitive property – the 
shape of the noun referents that is defined as 
“longitudinal”. This shows that the classifier tiao 
is inhabited with this semantic feature as a 
cognitive basis and links itself to the nouns 
accordingly. 

Similarly, the classifier gen is connected to 
the nouns such as stick, bone, banana, pillar, 
sausage, needle, and ribbon that belong to 7 
noun categories respectively. These nouns 
possess the same “longitudinal” feature as tiao. 
This shows that extracting one same feature from 
gen and tiao is not helpful enough for learners to 
understand the difference between the two 
classifiers, though classifying nouns into 
categories can constrain the interference to 
learners to some extent. What needs to be carried 

58



out is to define each noun with a unique feature 
of its own, no matter whether they are from its 
lexical semantic meanings, pragmatic functions, 
or human perceptions. For instance, besides 
“longitudinal”, “for supporting walking” is added 
as a feature to stick, “a piece of human skeleton” 
to bone, “turns from green to yellow when ripe” 
to banana, “one end stuck to the ground” to 
pillar, etc. More are needed until finally each 
noun is distinguished from other nouns that are 
associated with the same classifier. These feature 
extractions and definitions are the core part of 
the database for the e-learning tool linked to the 
e-dictionary.  
4. Methodology 
4.1. Application of cognitive strategies in noun 
classifier acquisition 
 
In this section we describe an approach that can 
enhance the practical use of the classifier 
dictionary. Developed in the software 
environment of FileMaker Pro 8.5 (see Figure 2), 
the dictionary is established within a database 
system. Categorical records created as data files 
are used to store the associated nouns. The 
records created so far include 11 categories of 
nouns described in Section 3. Such a 
categorization appears explicit, but its top-down 
approach fails to reveal the feature-based 
mapping between a classifier and its associated 
nouns. However, the e-learning part of the 
dictionary can guide learners to search for correct 
classifier and noun pairs by looking for the 
defined features of the noun referents in a 
different database, firstly from those broadly 
defined as “animacy”, “shape”, “size”, 
“thickness”, “length”, “function”, etc., to those 
specific ones extracted from each particular noun 
referent. 

With such a bottom-up approach, the e-
dictionary allows users to learn the particular 
interrelated features of a classifier and its 
associated noun referents in a case-by-case 
fashion. In this way, learners can better 
understand the point that a classifier reflects the 
cognitive classification of its associated noun 
referents. Each individual record thus contains 
both general and specific information of a 
classifier and its associated nouns as data entries. 
The features decomposed from the noun 

referents are defined and recorded as 
independent data entries linked to the e-learning 
tool. For instance, if a learner wants to know 
which classifier is the correct one for boat, he 
can enter the word  boat, finds its category as 
“vehicles”, choose its shape as “longitudinal”. 
Then, tiao should automatically pop up in this 
case because boat is the only noun referent from 
the “vehicles” category (see Table 2). In other 
cases where there are two or more items that are 
featured as “longitudinal”, the learner will be 
guided to look for a more specific or unique 
feature with a few more clicks on the users’ 
interface. 

The e-learning environment in the dictionary 
also provides learners the noun-classifier phrases 
that are commonly used but they may not be easy 
for learners to acquire. Take the noun classifier 
zhi for example. It is associated with noun 
referents that belong to “animals and body-parts”, 
and “man-made objects”, such as bird, hand, pen, 
etc. The unique perceptual features of these noun 
referents are identified and built into the e-
learning system so that users can click different 
categories in the interface to make particular 
associations as long as they have some general 
knowledge of the entities, such as their functions 
and perceptual features, etc.  
4.2 Implementation of Agent-based Model in 

Classifier E-learning 
The e-learning tool in our classifier e-dictionary 
is targeted for automatic classifier-noun 
associations. By adopting an agent-based model 
(Holland, 1995), we2 have developed a classifier-
noun network for learners to learn step by step 
classifier phrases. Included in the prototype 
model will be nouns and classifiers, divided into 
two groups of agents. To design a semantic 
interface between the two types of agents with a 
computational approach, a tag is attached to each 
agent. The tags are of opposite polarity, one to a 
noun, and the other to a classifier. Each tag is a 
pseudo-binary-bit string of {0, 1, #}, where “#” 
is the “doesn’t care” symbol. The position a 
symbol occupies in the string corresponds to a 
particular semantic feature of the agent, with “#” 
                                                           
2 Acknowledgements to Ni Wei my research assistant 
for his contributions to the technical experiment and 
grants from Nanyang Technological University that 
supported preparation of this paper.  

59



indicating that the corresponding feature is not 
critical for the formulation of the classifier 
phrase, even though the noun referent owns such 
a feature. When a noun agent meets a classifier 
agent, we line up the two tags and match the 
digits in one string with those in the other 
position by position. To report a match score at 
the end of this comparison, there are three match 
rules to follow: (i) it scores 1 given there is a 
match between two “1”s or between two “0”s; 
(ii) it scores 0 given there is a match between a 
“1” and a “#” or a “0” and a “#” or between two 
“#”s; (iii) it scores -1 given there is a match 
between a “1” and a “0”. The aggregate match 
score indicates the likeliness of a correct 
classifier phrase with the involved classifier and 
the noun. 

More specifically, in this model each tag 
consists of 4 pseudo-binary bits. Out of the 
noun’s many semantic features, let’s selectively 
represent two of them: the first feature with the 
first two symbols, and the second with the last 
two. For example, a tag “1100” is assigned to the 
agent (noun) leg to represent the noun’s features 
defined as “longitudinal” and “body-part” 
respectively. In this case, “longitudinal” might be 
considered as the most salient feature of leg with 
regards to the selection of a classifier. Hence, it 
is represented by “11”. On the other hand, if 
“longitudinal” is by no means an external or 
internal feature of the associated noun referent, 
the symbols at the corresponding positions would 
be “00”. Other possible combinations of symbols 
such as “01” and “10” are reserved for fuzzy 
states, which are associated with marginally 
accepted classifier phrases.  

Besides, the noun referent leg also has a 
“body-part” property listed, but it is not of 
primary importance for finding its classifier 
match. Therefore, it is represented by “##” at the 
last two string positions, rather than explicitly 
indicated by any of the four combinations 
mentioned above.  

We assign the tags to classifier agents in a 
similar way. For instance, “11##” may be 
assigned to the classifier tiao, due to the fact that 
tiao often occurs in a classifier phrase with nouns 
defined as having “longitudinal” features. On the 
other hand, “##11” may be assigned to the noun 
classifier zhi, which is commonly applied to 
noun referents of body-part. 

Regarding the agent’s interaction with those 
agents of classifiers, when the tag “1100” of leg 
is compared with the tag “11##” of the agent 
tiao, the match score is 1+1+0+0 = 2. In contrast, 
its match score with the tag “##11” of the agent 
zhi is reported as 0+0+0+0 = -2. The match score 
2 indicates tiao is more likely to be linked to leg, 
and the match score -2 implies an undesirable 
match between leg and zhi. It is noteworthy, 
however, that if a user assigns “1111” to leg, 
they will obtain a match score of 2 (0+0+1+1) 
with zhi. They will hence conclude that, beside 
tiao, zhi is another correct classifier for leg. 

In addition, we include the defined features 
of nouns and classifiers as a group of interactive 
agents. This group is designed to facilitate the 
learning process from learner’s perspective. Take 
L2 learners for example. First they may learn that 
tiao is the correct classifier for leg because the 
noun referent of leg has the longitudinal 
attribute. Next, they tend to look for other nouns 
with the longitudinal feature, such as necklace 
and snake, and to verify whether tiao is also the 
correct classifier for these nouns. By establishing 
the mapping between the defined features of 
nouns and classifiers, the agent-based model 
explicitly shows learners the possible 
connections between these groups of agents.  

Among the semantic features, some are 
defined as unique features which distinguish 
their corresponding nouns from the rest of the 
nouns’ group. For instance, we may define 
“chained jewel” as the unique feature of a 
necklace, and “limbless reptile, some of which 
produce venom” as that of a snake (see Figure 1). 
We assign two kinds of tags respectively, one for 
non-unique feature agents and the other for 
unique feature agents. Each non-unique feature 
agent is attached with an adhesion tag (Holland, 
1995). This adhesion tag provides the possibility 
of forming multi-feature agent aggregates with 
individual unique feature agents. On the other 
hand, each unique semantic feature is attached 
with a two-segment tag. The first segment plays 
the same role as the classifier/noun tag, which 
controls the agent’s interaction with agents of 
other groups, i.e. nouns and noun classifiers. The 
second segment functions simply as an adhesion 
tag. To decide whether to form a multi-feature 
agent aggregate, we can match a non-unique 
feature agent’s adhesion tag and the second 

60



segment of a unique feature agent’s tag. The 
match score is calculated in a similar way with 
that between noun’s agents and classifier’s 
agents. To simplify the discussion, we assume 
that adhesion only occurs between one unique 
feature agent and one or more non-unique feature 
agents. In other words, adhesion does not occur 
between either two unique feature agents or two 
non-unique feature agents. 

To explicitly show the cognitive mapping 
between classifiers/nouns and their features, we 
use a collection of condition/action if-then rules 
(Holland, 1995). In our model, both the condition 
and the action are linguistic variables, which are 
in turn represented by pseudo-binary-bit strings. 
The rules represent the interconnection among 
the agent group of classifiers, the agent group of 
nouns, and the group of defined features. For 
instance, the same noun classifier tiao occurs in 
the classifier phrase yi tiao xianglian ‘a 
necklace’. Let ①, ② and ③ respectively denote 
the features of “chained jewel”, “man-made”, 
and “longitudinal”, where ① is the unique 
feature to identify the noun referent of necklace. 
As discussed previously, the individual features 
①, ②, and ③ can form a multi-feature agent 
aggregate, which we denote as ①②③. The if-
then Rule 1 can be implemented as: 
 
Rule 1: {If (①②③) Then (necklace)}.  
 
Following the tag interaction approach discussed 
previously in this section, Rule 2 can be 
implemented to reflect the inter-agent 
communication between the noun and its 
classifier: 
 
Rule 2: {If (necklace) Then (tiao)}.  
 
Based on these two rules, Rule 3 can be 
implemented as  
 
Rule 3: {If (①②③) Then (tiao)}.  
 
Note that Rule 3 has the same input (condition) 
with Rule 1 and the same output (action) with 
Rule 2. Rule 1 outputs its action as a message, 
which is subsequently received by Rule 2 as its 
condition. This is an example of transitivity, a 
property of the rule-based network. The 
condition and action part in each of the three 

rules could also be exchanged to implement three 
inverse rules. 

Now let’s take a look at the noun snake and 
its classifier tiao. Given that ④ represents 
“animate” and ⑤ represents “limbless reptile, 
some of which produce venom”, we can retrieve 
③, ④, ⑤ from the features’ group and form 
them as another multi-feature agent aggregate as 
③④⑤. Here ⑤ is the unique feature of snake. 
We add another three if-then rules concerned 
with snake and tiao as follows: 
 
Rule 4: {If (③④⑤) Then (snake)}; 
Rule 5: {If (snake) Then (tiao)}; 
Rule 6: {If (③④⑤) Then (tiao)}. 
 
So far only multi-feature agent aggregate, rather 
than single feature agents are used as conditions. 
It is also noteworthy that non-unique feature 
agents are incapable of interacting directly with 
noun agents or classifier agents, since their 
adhesion tags cannot be matched with the 
classifier/noun tags. The property of transitivity 
implies, however, that we can establish the 
mapping between nouns and non-unique feature 
agents indirectly. For example, we represent the 
relation between the noun necklace and the 
unique feature agent ① “chained jewel” by Rule 
7 as follows: 
 
Rule 7: {If (necklace) Then (①)} 
 
We also represent the relation between the noun 
snake and the unique feature agent ⑤ “limbless 
reptile, some of which produce venom” by Rule 
8 as follows: 
 
Rule 8: {If (snake) Then (⑤)} 
 
Either ① or ⑤ is related with the non-unique 
feature agent ③ “longitudinal”, which could be 
represented by Rule 9 & 10. 
 
Rule 9: {If (①) Then (③)} 
Rule 10: {If (⑤) Then (③)} 
 
The mapping between necklace/snake and the 
non-unique feature agent ③ “longitudinal” could 
then be implemented by Rule 11 & 12.  

61



Rule 11: {If (necklace) Then (③)} 
Rule 12: {If (snake) Then (③)} 
 
In Rule 11 and 12, the noun is taken as the input 
and the non-unique semantic feature as the 
output. By swapping the two kinds of agents’ 
roles in the message-processing rules, we may 
inversely implement Rule 13 by taking the non-
unique feature as the input and the noun as the 
output. If a learner chooses ③ as the single input 
agent, two possible outputs pop up for his/her 
selection. 
 
Rule 13: {If (③) Then (necklace or snake)} 
 
More rules could be added in the classifier 
network by selecting different agents from the 
three groups in a similar way as we implement 
Rule 1-13. In this way the if-then rule-based 
network explicitly shows the cognitive mapping 
between the classifiers and their associated 
nouns. Learners will find out the association 
between the target words and their features, 
which are essential for their classifier acquisition.  

So far we have tested some commonly used 
classifiers and their associated nouns selected 
from the e-dictionary and tried within the agent-
based model. The automatic matching is 
successful, though more pairs need to be tested.  
 
5. Conclusion 
This paper presents a feature-based approach in 
designing a classifier e-dictionary with an e-
learning environment created for learners to use 
cognitive strategies to explore and learn the 
classifier phrases.  

The current dictionary is based on a database 
with classes of nouns (11 classes at present) and 
classifiers (168 added) that are stored as 
individual records. The records are not organized 
according to the lexical meanings of the words. 
Instead, the classification scheme is based on the 
noun referents’ semantic and salient external or 
functional features. The objective of the design is 
to use such features to set up a classifier network 
that can automatically associate all possible 
nouns. A computer-based model with such a 
design is expected to show learners of Chinese 
the cognitive base of linguistic combinations. 
The proposed agent-based model uses the match 

between pseudo-binary-bit strings to indicate the 
probability of interactions between agents. It 
hence predicts how likely a classifier and a noun 
occurs in a classifier phrase. The relations among 
the agent groups are shown within the framework 
of the if-then rule-based network. Learners can 
explore case by case, when using the dictionary’s 
e-learning function, the classifier and noun 
associations and the defined features that the 
associations are based on. The future task is to 
include the rest of the classifiers and all possible 
associated nouns. Linguistically, a challenge to 
carry out the task would be the definitions of the 
unique features of the noun referents and their 
classifiers that have fuzzy boundaries. 
Technically, the challenge would be the solution 
to making perfect matches of those cases where 
one classifier agent as input is expected to link 
automatically a number of noun agents as output, 
which should follow a step-by-step procedure 
that is interesting and effective from learners’ 
perspective.  
References 
Adams, Karen L., and Nancy Faires Conklin. 

1973. Toward A Theory Of Natural 
Classification. Papers from the Ninth Regional 
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 
Univeristy of Chicago, 1-10. 

Allan, Keith. 1977. Classifiers. Language, 53(2), 
285–311. 

Chang, Yu-Chia, Jason S. Chang, Hao-Jan Chen, 
and Hsien-Chin Liou. 2008. An Automatic 
Collocation Writing Assistant for Taiwanese 
EFL Learners: A Case of Corpus-based NLP 
Technology. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 21(3), 283-299 

Chao, Yuen Ren. 1968. A Grammar of Spoken 
Chinese. University of California Press. 

Donaldson, Randall P., and Margaret A. 
Haggstrom. 2006. Changing Language 
Education Through CALL. Routledge. 

Downing, Pamela. 1993. Pragmatic and 
Semantic Constraints on Numeral Quantifier 
Position in Japanese. Linguistics, 29, 65–93. 

Gao, H. H. (2010 to appear). A Study of the 
Swedish Speakers’ Learning of Chinese 

62



Classifiers. Nordic Journal of Linguistics. 
Special Issue, Vol. 33. 

Goddard, Cliff. 1998. Semantic Analysis: A 
Practical Introduction. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Guo, Hui., and Huayan Zhong. 2005. Chinese 
Classifier Assignment Using SVMs. Paper 
presented at the 4th SIGHAN Workshop on 
Chinese Language Processing, Jeju Island, pp. 
25–31. 

Holland, John. H. 1995. Hidden Order: How 
Adaption Builds Complexity. Addison-Wesley. 

Huang, Chu-Ren, and Ahrens, Katherine. 2003. 
Individuals, Kinds and Events: Classifier 
Coercion of Nouns. Language Sciences, 25, 
353–373 

Hwang, Soonhee, Ae-sun Yoon, and Hyuk-Chul 
Kwon. 2008. Semantic Representation of 
Korean Numeral Classifier and Its Ontology 
Building for HLT Applications. Language 
Resources and Evaluation, 42, 151–172. 

Lyons, John. 1977. Semantics. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Mallon, Adrian. 2006. ELingua Latina: 
Designing a Classical-Language E-Learning 
Resource. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 19(4), 373-387. 

Matsumoto, Yo. 1993. Japanese Numeral 
Classifiers: A Study Of Semantic Categories 
and Lexical Organization. Linguistics, 31(4), 
667–713. 

Nichols, Eric, Francis Bond, and Daniel 
Flickinger. 2005. Robust Ontology 
Acquisition from Machine-Readable 
Dictionaries. Paper Presented at the 19th 
International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, Edinburgh, pp. 1111–1116. 

Nirenburg, Sergei, and Victor Raskin. 2004. 
Ontological Semantics. Cambridge: MIT 
Press. 

Philpot, Andrew G., Michael Fleischman, and 
Eduard H. Hovy. 2003. Semi-automatic 
Construction of A General Purposeontology. 

Paper Presented at the International Lisp 
Conference, New York, pp. 1–8. 

Quek, See Ling. 2010. A Diachronic Semantic 
Study of the Two Collocations: “Tiao + Ming” 
and “Tiao + Xinwen”. The 10th Chinese 
Lexical Semantics workshop (CLSW2010), 
21-23 May, 2010. Soochow University, China. 

Sowa, John. F. 2000. Knowledge Representation. 
Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks Cole Publishing 
Co. 

Tai, James H-Y., and Lianqing Wang. 1990. A 
Semantic Study of the Classifier Tiao. Journal 
of the Chinese Language Teachers 
Association, 25.1: 35-56.  

 
Classifier Dictionaries Consulted  
陈保存等《汉语量词词典》，福州：福建人

民出版社，1988。 
郭先诊《现代汉语量词手册》，北京：中国

和平出版社，1987。 
郭先诊《现代汉语量词用法手册》，北京：

语文出版社，2002。 
何杰《量词一点通》，北京; 北京语言文化大
学出版社，2003。 

焦凡《看图学量词》，北京：华语教学出版

社，1993。 
焦凡《汉英量词词典》，北京：华语教学出

版社，2001。 
刘学武、邓崇谟《现代汉语名词量词搭配词

典》，杭州：浙江教育出版社，1989。 
吕叔湘《现代汉语八百词》（增订本），北

京：商务印书馆，1999。 
殷焕光、何平《现代汉语常用量词词典》，

济南：山东大学出版社，1991。 
俞士文等《现代汉语语法信息词典详解》，

北京：清华大学出版社，2003。 
褚佩如、金乃莉《汉语量词学习手册》，北

京：北京大学出版社，2002。 
 
 
 

63



Classifier 
in 

Chinese 

Classifier  No. of categories the classifier occurs with 
Examples of nouns the 
classifier occurs with 

条 tiao 9 (nature, humans & body parts, animals, vegetables & fruits, buildings, clothing, food, 
vehicles, other man-made objects) 

rainbow, leg, snake, cucumber, 
road, scarf, potato chip, boat, 
necklace 

根 gen 7 (nature, humans & body parts, vegetables & fruits, buildings, food, tools, other man-made 
objects) 

stick, bone, banana, pillar, 
sausage, needle, ribbon 

块 kuai 6 (nature, humans & body parts, clothing, food, tools, other man-made objects) 
stone, scar, handkerchief, 
candy, eraser, soap 

层 ceng 5 (nature, humans & body parts, building, clothing, other man-made objects) 
wave/fog, skin, building storey, 
curtain, paper 

张 zhang 5 (humans & body parts, food, furniture, tool, other man-made objects) mouth, pancake, bed, bow, map 
只 zhi 5 (humans & body parts, animal, clothing, vehicle, other man-made objects) 

ear, tiger, sock, sailing boat, 
watch 

粒 li 4 (nature, vegetables & fruits, food, other man-made objects) 
sand, cherry, rice, sleeping 
tablet 

段 duan 4 (nature, vegetables & fruits, building, other man-made objects) 
wood, lotus root, city wall, iron 
wire 

口 kou 4 (humans & body parts, animal, tools, other man-made objects) 
person(people), pig, sword, 
well 

面 mian 4 (buildings, tools, furniture, other man-made objects) wall, drum, mirror, flag 
节 jie 4 (building, food, tool, vehicle) chimney, sugarcane, battery, railway carriage 
道 dao 3 (nature, humans & body parts, building) lightening, eyebow, dam 
滴 di 3 (nature, humans & body parts, other man-made objects) water/rain, blood, ink 
件 jian 3 (clothing, tools, other man-made objects) shirt, (music) instrument, toy 
把 ba 3 (furniture, tools, other man-made objects) chair, knife, cello 
截 jie 3 (nature, tools, other man-made objects) rope, pencil, pipe 
颗 ke 3 (nature, humans & body parts, other man-made objects) star, tooth, artillery shell 
片 pian 3 (nature, food, other man-made objects) leaf, loaf, tablet 
枝 zhi 3 (nature, tools, other man-made objects) rose, pen, arrow/rifle 

    
 
Table 1. A Selection of classifiers sorted by how many noun categories they are associated with 
 
 

64



 
Classifier phrase in Chinese Properties English equivalent 

of Chinese classifier 
phrase  

numeral classifier noun cognitive intrinsic 
a rainbow yi tiao caihong longitudinal nature 
a leg yi tiao tui longitudinal human 
a snake yi tiao she longitudinal animal 
a cucumber yi tiao huanggua longitudinal vegetable 
a road yi tiao lu longitudinal building 
a scarf yi tiao weijin longitudinal clothing 
a potato chip yi tiao shutiao longitudinal food 
a boat yi tiao Chuan longitudinal vehicle 
a scarf yi tiao weijin longitudinal man-made 
 

Table 2. A Selection of noun-classifier phrases of tiao.  
 

  
Figure 1. Mapping among the tiers of classifiers, nouns, and defined features. 
 
 

  
Figure 2. A display of the database in the e-learning environment 

65


