










































The emergence of the modern concept of introspection: a quantitative linguistic analysis


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 68–75, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

The emergence of the modern concept of introspection: a quantitative
linguistic analysis

I. Raskovsky
Department of Computer Science

University of Buenos Aires
Pabellón I, Ciudad Universitaria

Buenos Aires, C1428EGA, Argentina
iraskovsky@dc.uba.ar

D. Fernández Slezak
Department of Computer Science

University of Buenos Aires
Pabellón I, Ciudad Universitaria

Buenos Aires, C1428EGA, Argentina
dfslezak@dc.uba.ar

C.G. Diuk
Department of Psychology

Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
cdiuk@princeton.edu

G.A. Cecchi
Computational Biology Center

T.J. Watson IBM Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA

gcecchi@us.ibm.com

Abstract

The evolution of literary styles in the west-
ern tradition has been the subject of extended
research that arguably has spanned centuries.
In particular, previous work has conjectured
the existence of a gradual yet persistent in-
crease of the degree of self-awareness or in-
trospection, i.e. that capacity to expound on
one’s own thought processes and behaviors,
reflected in the chronology of the classical lit-
erary texts. This type of question has been tra-
ditionally addressed by qualitative studies in
philology and literary theory. In this paper,
we describe preliminary results based on the
application of computational linguistics tech-
niques to quantitatively analyze this hypoth-
esis. We evaluate the appearance of intro-
spection in texts by searching words related to
it, and focus on simple studies on the Bible.
This preliminary results are highly positive,
indicating that it is indeed possible to statis-
tically discriminate between texts based on a
semantic core centered around introspection,
chronologically and culturally belonging to
different phases. In our opinion, the rigurous
extension of our analysis can provide not only
a stricter statistical measure of the evolution
of introspection, but also means to investigate
subtle differences in aesthetic styles and cog-
nitive structures across cultures, authors and
literary forms.

1 Introduction

The evolution of literary styles in the western tradi-
tion has been the subject of extended research that
arguably has spanned centuries. In particular, previ-
ous work has conjectured the existence of a grad-
ual yet persistent increase of the degree of self-
awareness or introspection, i.e. that capacity to ex-
pound on one’s own thought processes and behav-
iors, reflected in the chronology of the classical lit-
erary texts. This type of question has been tradi-
tionally addressed by qualitative studies in philology
and literary theory. In this paper, we describe pre-
liminary results based on the application of compu-
tational linguistics techniques to quantitatively ana-
lyze this hypothesis.

The striking differences between the Iliad and the
Oddysey in the way the characters’ behaviors are
attributed to divine intervention, or to the individ-
ual’s volition, has been pointed out by numerous
scholars (Onians, 1988; Dodds, 1951; Adkins, 1970;
De Jong and Sullivan, 1994). However, not until
the highly influential work of Marshall McLuhan
(McLuhan, 1962) and Julian Jaynes (Jaynes, 2000)
was it pointed out that these changes may reflect not
just artistic or even cultural tendencies, but profound
alterations in the mental structure of those who
wrote, collected and assimilated the stories. While

68



McLuhan argued for a materialistic effect of the type
of medium (the linearity of written language, the
holistic nature of the moving image) on the orga-
nization of thoughts (linear or integrative, respec-
tively), Jaynes proposed a more radical hypothe-
sis: a relatively abrupt transition from a “bicam-
eral mind”, where one hemisphere produced god-
like commands that the other followed blindly, to
the modern mind with its ability of self-awareness.
Moreover, Jaynes boldly suggested that this transi-
tion may have been accompanied by a physical pro-
cess that altered the relationship between the hemi-
spheres, and changed culture permanently. Since
its publication, The origins of consciousness in the
breakdown of the bicameral mind has been highly
influential inside and outside scientific quarters, as
well as a source of continuing controversy (Cavanna
et al., 2007).

Whether brought about by nature or nurture, how-
ever, Jaynes presents compelling arguments about
the effects of this transition, including stylistic
changes throughout the other foundational text of
the western world, the Bible. Simply put, a less rad-
ical version of Jaynes’ hypothesis would state that,
within the judeo-greco-christian cultural tradition,
there exists an “arrow of time” pointing to increasing
introspection. The question we set out to answer in
the present manuscript is to what extent it is possible
to analyze, quantitatively, this hypothesis.

The widespread availability of classic and modern
literary texts has paved the road to a wide variety of
linguistic studies. Matters of literary style and struc-
ture are necessarily more controversial, although the
recent work of F. Moretti (Moretti, 2005) has shown
that it is indeed possible to quantify the subtle varia-
tions in the structure of the novel over temporal peri-
odizations and geographical locations. In any event,
given that our intention is to complete a preliminary
study of feasibility, we focus here on capturing the
textual traces of words or lexical structures that can
be reasonably argued to reflect introspective think-
ing on the part of the characters, using techniques
from machine learning and computational linguis-
tics.

2 Materials and methods

We downloaded selected texts representative of dif-
ferent ages in literature from the MIT classic texts
archive (Daniel C. Stevenson, 2010), based on refer-
ences in Jaynes’ book (Jaynes, 2000). The selected
texts are: the Iliad and the Odyssey (approx. 1200
BC to 900 BC), The Bible (approx. 1400 BC to
AD 200), Lucretius’ On the Nature of Things (99
BC - 55 BC), St. Augustine’s Confessions (AD 397
- AD 398), Shakespear’s The Merchant of Venice
(AD 1596 - AD 1598), Hamlet (approx. AD 1600),
Macbeth (AD 1603 - AD 1607) and Othello (AD
1603), Cervantes’ Quixote (AD 1605 - AD 1615),
Jean Austen’s Mansfield Park (AD 1814), Emma
(AD 1815) and Persuasion (AD 1816) and Proust’s
Time Regained (AD 1927).

On this preliminary study, we focused on ex-
tremely simple techniques to test our hypothesis.
We have implemented a series of basic routines
to analyze the frequency of certain words related
to introspection, selected by hand. We used very
simple regular expressions to search over the text:
think+, thought, myself, mind+, feel+
and felt. The search was conducted on 10,000-
words windows starting from the beginning of the
text moving towards the end in 2,000-words steps.
Also, the appearance of references to God in the
Bible was measured. In this case, we looked for:
lord, god and almighty; all searches done case
insensitive. In order to control for the possible in-
crease of these selected words as a trivial conse-
quence of an increase in the overall linguistic rich-
ness or expressiveness of the text, we also computed
the total number of distinct words for each step.

As an alternative approach, we applied a data-
driven method to extract the semantic structure of
texts, namely topic modeling (Blei, 2009). We uti-
lized the implementation of the mallet package (Mc-
Callum, 2002), an off-the-shelf tool, generating 100
topics through 10,000 Gibbs sampling rounds. The
topics were then manually inspected for their seman-
tic relevance to the issue at hand, i.e. introspection.

3 Results

The preliminary results are highly positive, indicat-
ing that it is indeed possible to statistically discrim-
inate between texts based on a semantic core cen-

69



500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

Number of distinct words

F
re

qu
en

cy
 o

f i
nt

ro
sp

ec
tio

n 
re

la
te

d 
w

or
ds

 

 

Bible
Iliad
Odyssey
Lucretius
Confessions
Quixote
Merchant
Othello
Macbeth
Hamlet
Emma
Persuasion
Mansfield Park
Time Regained

Figure 1: Frequency of words related to introspection versus the amount of different words. Each text is identified by
a unique color; each point represents a 10,000-words window.

tered around introspection, chronologically and cul-
turally belonging to different phases. In figure 1 we
show the frequency of words related to introspec-
tion versus the amount of different words, for all the
texts we chose. Each author is identified by a unique
color; each text is identified by an unique symbol;
each point represents a 10,000-words window. The
frequency is calculated as count over the number of
different words in the 10K windows. To summarize
this information and provide statistical value to our
analysis, we present in figure 2 the mean and stan-
dard deviation for each of the selected texts.

We clearly observe how different texts are dis-
joint in the graph, both in amount of different words
used in each window, as well as the frequency of
introspection. This is the case for the Iliad and
the Odyssey, confirming that our preliminary mea-
sure captures the semantic differences between both
pieces. We also observe a trend between some of
the sections of the Bible (we will return to this be-
low), to the Homeric texts, Lucretius, Cervantes
and Austen, roughly following a chronological or-
der. St. Augustine’s Confessions is an exception
of this trend, as it shows a higher frequency than
Cervantes. However, given that Confessions is con-
sidered the first auto-biography work in the Western
tradition, the high value of our introspection mea-
sure is to some extent a validation of its pertinence.
A more noticeable exception is Shakespear’s oeuvre,
that seems to consist of very differentiated clusters
for each piece. Taken together, however, the ensem-

ble average of his work seems to fall in line with
the global temporal order. It is beyond the scope of
our manuscript to discuss the nuances of the work
of The Bard, but our analytic approach may pro-
vide new tools to the ongoing Shakespearean schol-
arship. Finally, our analysis seems to really break
down for Proust, as one intuitively would expect a
much higher measure of introspection, even more
so considering that he displays significant richness
in terms of the number of distinct words in the text.
This failure is clearly an indication of the limitations
of our current approach, which as it stands may only
not be applicable to modern or contemporary litera-
ture.

The Bible is of particular interest for this work,
as it was written in parts along a wide time interval
(taking into account the Old and New Testaments).
It enables us to analyze the “arrow of time” of in-
trospection within a relatively coherent framework,
even though a vast and in most cases unknown host
of writers and compilers gave this text its present
shape, and the relationship between textual linear-
ity and chronological order is certainly not simple.
Be it as it may, for our purposes we only require
that this relationship be monotonic in a statistical
sense, which we assume to be the case for the Bible.
In figure 3 we show the frequency of introspection
along different periods of the Bible. The text was di-
vided into 6 pieces of the same length; purposefully,
no semantic division was performed. Introspection
increases towards the more modern sections of the

70



1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

0.045

0.05

Number of distinct words

F
re

qu
en

cy
 o

f i
nt

ro
sp

ec
tio

n 
ap

pe
ar

an
ce

 

 

Bible
Iliad
Odyssey
Lucretius
Confessions
Quixote
Merchant
Othello
Macbeth
Hamlet
Emma
Persuasion
Mansfield Park
Time Regained

Figure 2: Frequency of words related to introspection versus the amount of different words. Each text is identified by
a unique color. Error bars shows the standard deviation in both axis.

text, confirming our initial hypothesis. Note that the
lexical richness (number of distinct words) of the
last period, that includes the New Testament, seems
to be part of the same plateau as the 3rd, 4th and 5th.
Another interesting aspect is how introspection and
citations to God evolve along the lexical, pseudo-
chronological order the the Bible’s test. Figure 4
shows the appearance of introspection and mentions
to God over 10,000-words windows. We observe
a significant increase in introspection as the lexi-
cal order moves ahead, while at the same time the
references to God show a weaker, yet clearly dis-
cernible trend to diminish. This is precisely the an-
alytic counterpart of the phenomenology on which
Jaynes based his hypothesis.

Another avenue of research involves developing
and applying more sophisticated tools of textual
analysis, in order to capture the presence of rele-
vant passages of introspection using data-driven ap-
proaches. In particular, we have done a preliminary
study using Topic Modeling (Blei, 2009), a tech-
nique that uses probabilistic models to uncover the
underlying semantic structure of a text or a collec-
tion of documents. In topic modeling, a topic is
a collection of keywords that are automatically ex-
tracted as highly descriptive of a document. As de-
scribed in the Methods section, we utilized the mal-
let package implementation, choosing 100 topics to
be uncovered. This package produces approximate

inference and therefore different runs may yield dif-
ferent results. In each run, we observed a hand-
ful of topics (between 3 and 6, approximately) that
contained words related to introspection, such as
the mind, think and feel roots. The following
topic, selected as a representative from one of the
mallet runs, was identified based only on the pres-
ence of mind, although some of the other words
may also be relevant for the purpose of revealing in-
trospective activity (soul and desire):

soul love yea desire
mind hate sought loveth

measure fair pleasant nay
keepeth hungry satisfied excellent
occasion rejoicing desired

Figure 5 presents the frequency with which this
topic of interest is considered the main topic by mal-
let, as a running average for every 100 lines of the
Bible. A simple linear regression shows that this
topic becomes more frequent towards the end of the
text, and mirrors the results obtained with the more
hand-crafted approach. This result, while prelimi-
nary (there is a good number of parameters to ex-
plore in setting up topic modeling), is highly promis-
ing, as topic modeling provides a link with the vast
literature of statistical semantic analysis.

71



900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600
0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

Number of distinct words

F
re

qu
en

cy
 o

f i
nt

ro
sp

ec
tio

n 
ap

pe
ar

an
ce

 

 

1st piece
2nd piece
3rd piece
4th piece
5th piece
6th piece

Figure 3: Frequency of words related to introspection versus the amount of different words in the Bible, divided in 6
pieces of the same length.

4 Conclusions

Previous work in the evolution of literary styles in
the Western tradition has conjectured the existence
of a gradual yet persistent increase of the degree of
introspection. In particular, the ideas of Marshall
McLuhan and Julian Jaynes suggest the hypothesis
that these changes reflect profound and permanent
alterations in the cognitive structures of the culture.
We set out to investigate to what extent it is possi-
ble to analyze, quantitatively, this hypothesis. We
focused on Homeric and Biblical texts, given their
cultural preeminence, and utilized relatively simple
analytic techniques to measure the degree of intro-
spection along the texts, assuming they reflect, how-
ever imperfectly, a certain chronological order.

The result of measuring word frequencies is
highly positive, indicating that it is indeed possi-
ble to statistically discriminate between texts based
on a semantic core centered around introspection,
chronologically and culturally belonging to different
phases. However, our analysis seems to really break
down for Proust, as one intuitively would expect a
much higher measure of introspection. This failure
is clearly an indication of the limitations of our cur-
rent approach, which as it stands may only not be
applicable to modern or contemporary literature.

Our analysis on the Bible is of particular interest.
It enables us to analyze the “arrow of time” of in-
trospection within a relatively coherent framework,
and the relationship between textual linearity and

chronological order is certainly not simple. Another
interesting aspect is how introspection and citations
to God evolve along the test, with a significant in-
crease in introspection as the lexical order moves
ahead, while references to God show a weaker, yet
clearly discernible trend to diminish.

As an alternative approach, in order to capture the
presence of relevant passages of introspection us-
ing a data-driven method, we applied topic model-
ing. We observed a handful of topics that contained
words related to introspection. The analysis of the
Bible under this technique mirrors the results ob-
tained with the more hand-crafted approach.

While the analysis presented can only be consid-
ered an initial step towards a systematic characteri-
zation of the textual correlate of the concept of in-
trospection, the simplicity of our methods and the
clarity of the results support our initial hypothesis,
and validate our approach. In our opinion, the rigor-
ous extension of our analysis can provide not only a
stricter statistical measure of the evolution of intro-
spection, but also a means to investigate subtle dif-
ferences in aesthetic styles and cognitive structures
across cultures, authors and literary forms (i.e. the
novel, cf. (Moretti, 2005)).

5 Outlook

Given the necessarily broad, integrative nature of
any approach to introspection, there is a number
of different alternatives we are currently exploring
to expand our analysis, with an emphasis on inter-

72



0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

In
tr

os
pe

ct
io

n 
ap

pe
ar

an
ce

0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

10K−words window number

G
od

’s
 a

pp
ea

ra
nc

e

Figure 4: Frequency of words related to introspection and God versus the 10,000-words window number.

disciplinary perspectives.

A first step is systematizing the routines for fil-
tering, processing and analysis of the texts. We
will incorporate more terms related to introspec-
tion captured in the structure of Wordnet, and even-
tually also incorporate as part of the analysis ele-
ments of the graphical structure that underlies this
database (Sigman and Cecchi, 2002). Some interest-
ing developments in this area are the measures of se-
mantic similarity between concepts (Budanitsky and
Hirst, 2006; Pedersen et al., 2004; Patwardhan et al.,
2003). This measure may result useful for classify-
ing the different topics acquired using topic model-
ing, taking into account the similarity of the words
related to introspection, as an extension to the se-
mantic relationships established by Wordnet and the
various dictionaries and thesaurii currently available
as databases.

We will also incorporate the notion of concept
drift to our topic modeling, expecting it to account
for the temporal evolution of the use of introspec-
tion. A promising proposal for this purpose is that
of Dynamic Topic Modeling. We are particularly in-
terested in approaches that require minimal a priori
intervention; we expect that a dynamic model with
an unconstrained number of topics, as opposed to

the fixed number of topics proposed in the origi-
nal paper (Blei and Lafferty, 2006), may lead more
naturally to the identification of potential transitions
along the text. This approach is not straightforward
to implement, and may require the development of
an appropriate statistical model.

Another step will be a more careful and princi-
pled selection and categorization of our text corpus.
While the techniques at hand enable the analysis of
massive amounts of data, we will select our texts
based on their cultural and historical relevance in a
more systematic way. Comparing different cultures
and ages results in an interesting challenge. We are
specifically interested in the replication of the results
presented here in the case of the aboriginal Ameri-
can cultures. The concept of introspection appears
in many classic American texts such as the Popol
Vuh and the Chilam Balam; however, their compila-
tion by European scholars and translation to differ-
ent languages may not keep the essence of the origi-
nal texts. A robust systematization of our technique
will allow us to analyze texts in different languages
easily. We look forward to compare the measures of
introspection between texts in their native languages
in contrast with its appearance in their translations.
Moreover, this may help with the conservation of se-

73



0 3 6 9 12 15

x 10
4

0

0.04

0.08

0.12

0.16

0.2

Bible line number

F
re

qu
en

cy
 o

f t
op

ic
 o

f i
nt

er
es

t (
ru

nn
in

g 
av

er
ag

e)

Figure 5: Frequency of Introspection topic as the main topic for each section of the Bible, as a running average every
100 lines.

lected concepts along translations of texts. This line
of research will require the interaction with experts
in early American philology.

Finally, it is important to note that the analyti-
cal techniques proposed here, namely the quantifica-
tion of psychological concepts embedded in the text,
can be used as tools for pedagogical and psychiatric
evaluation (Lombardo et al., 2007). This will require
a consorted effort with psychologists and psychia-
trists to collect and organize personal narrations by
patients, as well as the compilation of texts already
available in the literature, in particular by people suf-
fering from schizophrenia and depression.

In summary, we believe the results presented
here will provide a rich source of multi-disciplinary
follow-up and derived lines of research around sta-
tistical measurements of psychological features in
text, within and beyond the concept of introspection.

References
Adkins, A. (1970). From the many to the one: a study of

personality and views of human nature in the context
of ancient Greek society, values and beliefs. Constable
& Company Limited.

Blei, D. (2009). Text Mining: Theory and Applications
(A. Srivastava and M. Sahami editors), chapter Topic
Models. Taylor and Francis.

Blei, D. and Lafferty, J. (2006). Dynamic topic models.
In ICML ’06: Proceedings of the 23rd international
conference on Machine learning, pages 113–120, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Budanitsky, A. and Hirst, G. (2006). Evaluating wordnet-
based measures of lexical semantic relatedness. Com-
putational Linguistics, 32(1):13–47.

Cavanna, A., Trimble, M., Cinti, F., and Monaco, F.
(2007). The “bicameral mind” 30 years on: a critical
reappraisal of Julian Jaynes hypothesis. Functional
Neurology, 22(1):11–15.

Daniel C. Stevenson, W. A. (last accessed: Feb. 27th,
2010). Mit classics. http://classics.mit.
edu/.

De Jong, I. and Sullivan, J. (1994). Modern critical the-
ory and classical literature. Brill Academic Pub.

Dodds, E. (1951). The Greeks and the Irrational. Berke-
ley: Univ. of California Press.

Jaynes, J. (2000). The origin of consciousness in the
breakdown of the bicameral mind. Mariner Books.

Lombardo, M., Barnes, J., Wheelwright, S., and Baron-
Cohen, S. (2007). Self-Referential Cognition and Em-
pathy in Autism. PLoS ONE, 2(9):e883.

McCallum, A. (2002). Mallet: A machine learning for
language toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.

McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy: The mak-
ing of typographic man. Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Moretti, F. (2005). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract mod-
els for a literary history. Verso Books.

74



Onians, R. (1988). The origins of European thought
about the body, the mind, the soul, the world, time, and
fate: new interpretations of Greek, Roman and kindred
evidence also of some basic Jewish and Christian be-
liefs. Cambridge University Press.

Patwardhan, S., Banerjee, S., and Pedersen, T. (2003).
Using measures of semantic relatedness for word sense
disambiguation. Lecture notes in computer science,
pages 241–257.

Pedersen, T., Patwardhan, S., and Michelizzi, J. (2004).
Wordnet:: similarity-measuring the relatedness of con-
cepts. In Proceedings of the National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 1024–1025.

Sigman, M. and Cecchi, G. (2002). Global organization
of the wordnet lexicon. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 99(3):1742.

75


