










































Complex Predicates Annotation in a Corpus of Portuguese


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 100–108,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Complex Predicates annotation in a corpus of Portuguese

Iris Hendrickx, Amália Mendes, Sı́lvia Pereira, Anabela Gonçalves and Inês Duarte
Centro de Linguı́stica da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal

{iris, amalia.mendes}@clul.ul.pt

Abstract

We present an annotation scheme for the
annotation of complex predicates, under-
stood as constructions with more than one
lexical unit, each contributing part of the
information normally associated with a
single predicate. We discuss our anno-
tation guidelines of four types of com-
plex predicates, and the treatment of sev-
eral difficult cases, related to ambiguity,
overlap and coordination. We then discuss
the process of marking up the Portuguese
CINTIL corpus of 1M tokens (written and
spoken) with a new layer of information
regarding complex predicates. We also
present the outcomes of the annotation
work and statistics on the types of CPs that
we found in the corpus.

1 Introduction

Complex predicates are predicates composed of
more than one element but functionally equiva-
lent to a single predicate. Examples of complex
predicates (CPs) are constructions of verb+noun,
like have a rest, take a walk, and constructions
verb+verb, like the constructions with a causative
verb in Portuguese, like mandar ler o livro a
alguém ‘make read the book to someone’. These
constructions raise interesting questions regard-
ing the aspectual, semantic and syntactic proper-
ties which underlie the relationship between the
elements of the CP. There are different theoret-
ical perspectives on the compositional nature of
CPs. For example, in the case of constructions of
the type verb+noun, the verb is either considered
a light verb (Jespersen, 1949) or a support verb
(Gross, 1981), in the sense that it has lost part or
all of its meaning and has no predicative value in
the construction, or as an auxiliary verb with as-
pectual properties (Abeillé et al., 1998).

Our hypothesis is that both elements of the CP
seem to contribute to the properties of complex
predicates, in such a way that the argument struc-
ture and the attribution of thematic roles are deter-
mined by both constituents through the combina-
tion of their thematic structures (Grimshaw, 1988).
One has to address several important questions: is
there a systematic relationship between the syn-
tactic and semantic selection properties of the two
elements? How do the argument structure of the
light verb and the derived noun combine and con-
tribute to define the complex predicate? To study
these questions we annotated the Portuguese CIN-
TIL corpus (Barreto et al., 2006) with a new layer
on CPs. By taking into consideration different
types of CPs and by using corpus data for our anal-
ysis of their properties, the objective is to present
a unified approach to CP formation, along which
the CP constructions available in Portuguese may
be accounted for, namely in what concerns their
lexico-syntactic properties and their interpretation.

Here we focus on the corpus annotation of com-
plex predicates. This paper is structured as fol-
lows. In section 2 we discuss related work on the
annotation of CPs in other languages. In section 3
we present a typology of complex predicates. In
section 4 we detail our the annotation schema and
also focus on several specific cases of CPs and the
annotation labels for these cases. In section 5 we
give more information about the CINTIL corpus
and in 6 we show the outcomes of the annotations
and present statistics on the types of CPs that we
found in the corpus. We conclude in section 7.

2 Related Work

For other languages, people have proposed dif-
ferent representations for CPs and for some lan-
guages there are corpora available enhanced with
CP labeling. The Prague TreeBank for Czech,
which is based on a dependency grammar, labels
CPs explicitly. A complex predicate is represented

100



by two nodes: the verb node is assigned a func-
tor according to the function of the entire complex
predicate in the sentence structure; the nominal
node is assigned the CPHR functor, which signals
that it is a part of a multi-word predicate, and is
represented as an immediate daughter of the node
for the verbal component (Mikulová et al., 2006;
Cinková and Kolár̂ová, 2005).

For German there is an example corpus anno-
tated with verb phrases and light verbs (Fellbaum
et al., 2006). However, only idiomatic expressions
are labeled in this German corpus while we focus
on non-idiomatic CPs. Calzolari et al. (2002) treat
support verb constructions (verb+noun), and focus
their attention, just like we did in our approach,
on constructions where the subject of the verb is a
participant in the event denoted by the noun. Their
objective is however not corpus annotation, but the
creation of a computational lexicon of MWEs with
both syntactic and semantic information.

Also the field of semantic or thematic role label-
ing investigates constructions of verb+noun, but it
focuses on predicate-argument structures in gen-
eral, while we focus on a specific type of re-
lations. FrameNet uses frame semantics theory
to represent such predicate-argument structures
which also includes handling complex predicates
(e.g. (Johnson and Fillmore, 2000)). For Ger-
man, there exists a fully annotated corpus with
semantic frames (Erk et al., 2003). The basis of
the Framenet semantic annotation are conceptual
frames expressing an event or object and the se-
mantic arguments (frame elements) that are (oblig-
atory or optional) parts of the frames. They also
specifically address support verbs and observe that
support verbs often occur with nouns expressing
an event (Johansson and Nugues, 2006). In a
Framenet semantic annotation, support verbs are
not considered as parts of frames or as part of the
frame elements, they are annotated with a specific
‘support verb’ label. We, on the contrary, view CP
as one semantic and syntactic unit.

In Nombank, a distinction is made between id-
ioms (which in principle are not marked) and light
verb plus noun combinations, which are to be an-
notated, and criteria are given to make such dis-
tinction (English (Meyers, 2007), Chinese (Xue,
2006)). In (1) we show a NomBank annotation
example of the sentence with a complex predicate.

Usually, CPs of the type verb+verb are treated
as infinitive dependent clauses and are not anno-

tated as CPs (cf. the Penn Treebank (Marcus et
al., 1993) and the Portuguese treebank Cordial-
SIN (Carrilho and Magro, 2009)).

(1) ‘The campaign takes advantage of the
eye-catching photography.’
SUPPORT = takes
REL = advantage
ARG0 = the campaign
ARG1 = of the eye-catching photography

3 Typology of complex predicates

We consider CPs as constructions sharing certain
properties defined in Butt (1995). A complex
predicate has: a multi-headed and complex argu-
ment structure; more than one lexical unit, each
contributing part of the information normally as-
sociated with a single predicate and a grammatical
functional structure equal to the one of a simple
predicate. Several types of constructions are in ac-
cordance to this definition of CPs: (i) two main
verbs, forming a restructuring construction, like
querer estudar ‘to want to study’ (ii) two main
verbs in a causative construction, like fazer rir
‘to make laugh’; (iii) a light verb followed by a
noun: dar um passeio ‘to take a walk’, ter medo
‘to have fear’; (iv) a light verb followed by a sec-
ondary predicate: either an adjective, like tornar
a história credı́vel ‘make the story believable’, or
a prepositional phrase, like fazer x em pedaços ‘to
make x into pieces’; (v) two concatenated verbs
(serial verb constructions), like O Pedro pegou e
despediu-se (lit: ‘Pedro took and said goodbye’).
This last construction is mostly restricted to the
informal spoken register. Regarding constructions
(i) and (ii) with two main verbs, it is generally as-
sumed that these CPs include at least two verbs
which behave as a single constituent under local
phenomena such as Clitic Climbing or Long Ob-
ject Movement (Kayne, 1975; Gonçalves, 2002;
Gonçalves, 2003). Each one of the verbs preserves
its own argument structure.

In the case of constructions (iii) involving a
light verb and a noun derived from a verb, one of
the most frequently referred property is the possi-
bility of being paraphrased by the main verb from
which the noun is derived (see example 2), al-
though this is not a necessary condition.

(2) (a) dar um contributo /contribuir
‘to give a contribution’ / ‘to contribute’

(b) ter um desmaio / desmaiar
‘to have a blackout’ / ‘to faint’

101



Light verbs occurring in these constructions
have a rather similar semantics across different
languages and involve mostly verbs like have, take
and give in English (Bowern, 2006) and ter ‘to
have’, dar ‘to give’, fazer ‘to make’ in Portuguese.
Furthermore, both the light verb and the derived
noun contribute to predicate information and ar-
gument structure and theta-role assignment appear
to be determined simultaneously by the two con-
stituents. It is important to determine the exact na-
ture of the semantic contribution of light verbs to
the whole predicate and the similarities and differ-
ences between the light verb construction and its
lexicalized verbal counterpart, if it exists.

4 Annotation system

The corpus annotation focused on four of the types
of CPs listed in the previous section, excluding
type (iv): constructions where a main verb is fol-
lowed by a secondary predicate, due to time limi-
tations. Constructions with a light verb (type (iii))
were consequently restricted to verb+noun. We
only annotated constructions in which the subject
of the CP controlled the event denotated by the
noun. For example, constructions like Mary gave
a talk where Mary is the one who is presenting,
and not any other entity. We excluded cases where
the subject does not seem to obligatorily control
the event (e.g. dar um tı́tulo ‘to give a title’).

We further restricted our annotation to a partic-
ular set of nouns:

• nouns derived from a verb, like dar um pas-
seio ‘to take a walk’ (lit: ‘to give a walk’);

• nouns expressing an emotion, i.e., psych-
nouns like ter medo ‘to be afraid’ (lit: ‘to
have fear’);

Nouns derived from a verb are very common.
For example, half of the nouns in the English
Nombank corpus that have semantic frame ele-
ments are actually nominalizations from verbs as
stated on the NomBank homepage1.

The restrictions on the type of noun occurring
in CPs lead to the exclusion of constructions with
idiomatic meaning (like dar a mão ‘to give a
hand’)2.

The annotation guidelines follow the results of
our study of CPs under a generative grammar

1http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/ meyers/NomBank.html
2These are currently under study in the scope of a project

on multi-word expressions in Portuguese.

framework, and are consequently theory-oriented.
We didn’t include for the moment semantic and as-
pectual information in our annotation of CPs. We
have undertaken some work on the aspectual in-
formation conveyed by both light verb and noun
and on the aspectual restrictions that hold between
the two elements (Duarte et al. 2009) and we plan
to latter partially integrate those findings in our an-
notation system.

We divided the annotation of the CPs in two
main groups: verb+verb constructions (type (i),
(ii), (v) as described in section 3) and verb+noun
constructions (type (iii)). The verb+verb con-
structions are denoted with the tag [CV] and the
noun+verb constructions with [CN]. Furthermore,
inside the verb+verb category, we make distinc-
tions between restructuring constructions (tagged
as [CVR]), causative constructions ([CVC]) and
constructions with coordinated verbs ([CVE]). Ex-
ample 3 gives an illustration of each of these sub-
types. For the verb+noun constructions we distin-
guish contexts with bare nouns ([CNB]) and con-
texts where a determiner precedes the noun (just
tagged as [CN]) (cf.example 4).

(3) (a) porque nos [CVR]queriam convidar
because [they] us wanted to invite
‘because they wanted to invite us’

(b) veio abalar estes alicerces espirituais
[CVC]fazendo traduzir ao rapaz
”Pucelle” de Voltaire
he shacked these spiritual foundations
by making translate to the boy
”Pucelle” by Voltaire
‘he shacked these spiritual foundations
by making the boy translate ”Pucelle”
by Voltaire’

(c) e [CVE]vai um e conta ao outro
and goes one and tells to the other
‘and he tells the other’

(4) (a) Facto que leva a CGD a considerar que
não [CNB]tem obrigações em relação
aos trabalhadores.
‘The fact that leads the CGD to believe
that it doesn’t have obligations towards
the workers.’

(b) o erro de [CN]fazer uma interpretação
literal
‘the error of making a literal
interpretation’

102



There is also information on the typical position
of the element inside the CP (position 1, 2, etc.),
as well as on its contextual position in the corpus
(B=Beginning, I=Intermediate, E=End). With typ-
ical position we refer to the ordering of elements
of the CP in its canonical form, corresponding to
the descriptions and examples given in section 3.
The typical and contextual position can differ as is
illustrated in example 5.

(5) depois de um[CN2 B] aviso[CN3 I]
dado[CN1 E]
‘after a warning was given’

The elements forming the CP may not be con-
tiguous and in that case only the elements pertain-
ing to the CP are annotated. In example 6 the ad-
verb logo ’immediately’ is not a part of the CP
and consequently is not annotated. Also, only the
main verb is annotated and not the auxiliary verbs
which might occur (cf. the auxiliary tinha ’had’ is
not tagged in 7).

(6) dar[CN1 B] logo uma[CN2 I]
ajuda[CN3 E]
give immediately an help
‘give help immediately’

(7) tinha dado[CN1 B] uma[CN2 I]
ajuda[CN3 E]
had given an help
‘had given help’

The categories and tags which compose our an-
notation system provide an overview of different
contexts of CP constructions encountered in au-
thentic data, which is a major goal of this annota-
tion project.

The process of annotation was based on con-
cordances extraction using lists of verbs entering
restructuring constructions (type (i)), given in 8
and lists of causative verbs (type (ii)), shown in
9. Considering the large candidate list of possible
CPs with light verbs, the annotation first focused
on constructions with verbs ter, dar and fazer fol-
lowed by a noun. For CPs with coordinated verbs
(type (v)), a list of typical verbs entering the con-
struction was elaborated, shown in 10, and applied
to a search pattern (two verbs separated by a con-
junction and possibly by some other lexical ele-
ment). Concordances retrieved were then manu-
ally evaluated.

(8) querer ’want’
desejar ’desire’
costumar ’use to’
tentar ’try’
pretender ’want’
tencionar ’make plan to’
conseguir ’succeed’

(9) mandar ’order’
deixar ’let’
fazer ’make’

(10) ir ’go’
agarrar ’grab’
pegar ’hold’

Information on the categories, tags, restrictions
and special cases (discussed in section 4.1) were
described in the annotation guidelines.

4.1 Special cases
The observation of corpus data pointed to a range
of specific situations requiring new categories and
tags.

4.1.1 Ambiguity
Some contexts in the corpus are clearly cases of
CPs and are straightforwardly annotated as CPs,
like restructuring constructions with clitic climb-
ing (cf. 3a) and causative constructions with two
internal arguments like in example 3b. Also exam-
ple 11 is a clear case where the subject of the lower
verb occurs as an indirect object (aos cidadãos
em geral) and the that-clause which is the direct
object of the lower verb (que a fotocópia corre-
sponde a um acto de pirataria inaceitável) is re-
analyzed as the direct object of the CP. Other clear
cases of CPs are pronominal passives where the di-
rect object of the second verb occurs as subject of
the higher verb (Long Object Movement), produc-
ing subject-verb agreement (this construction was
not encountered in the corpus, a possible example
would be (12)).

(11) fazer perceber aos cidadãos em geral, que a
fotocópia corresponde a um acto de pirataria
inaceitável
‘make understand to all citizens that a
photocopy corresponds to an act of
unacceptable piratery’

(12) Querem-se estudar os problemas.
‘want-3PL.PASS study the problems’

103



Other contexts are clearly not instances of CPs
and as such are not annotated. This is the case
of constructions with a restructuring verb without
clitic climbing, as in example 13.

(13) querem perpetuá -lo
‘[they] want to perpetuate it’

But many CPs can have an ambiguous interpreta-
tion between a complex predicate construction and
a construction with a main verb and an embedded
infinitive clause, and we found it relevant to mark
those constructions with the information of ambi-
guity (tag [ VINF]). For example, contexts similar
to (12) but with a singular NP, as in example 14a,
can receive two possible structural interpretations:
the NP justiça ‘justice’ can be interpreted as the
subject of the higher verb (a long object movement
construction and consequently a CP construction)
or as the direct object of the second verb (an im-
personal construction). In (14b) we show how we
annotated this example using a label expressing
the ambiguity.

(14) (a) Pretende-se cometer justiça.
Aims-IMP to commit justice [IMP =
Impersonal]
‘One wants to commit justice’

(b) Pretende[CVR VINF1 B]-se
cometer[CVR VINF2 E] (...) justiça

4.1.2 Overlapping CPs
Beside these examples, the corpus includes con-
structions in which one of the elements of a CP
(restructuring type) is also part of another CP
(causative type), so that two CPs are in fact super-
posed. In these cases, the element which is part of
both CPs receives a double tag (see the verb deixar
in example 15).

(15) não o queriam[CVR1 B]
deixar[CVR2 E][CVC VINF1 B]
fugir[CVC VINF2 E]
not him want to let escape
‘they didn’t want to let him escape’

4.2 Coordination inside CPs
There are also occurrences of coordination inside
the CP, possible when two CPs share the same
higher verb (light verb, restructuring or causative
verb). The coordinated elements of the CP are
tagged with extra information on their first or
second position in the coordinated structure (tags

[CVR2 1] and [CVR2 2], cf. 16). The coordi-
nation is usually marked with a conjunction, like
in example 16 with a restructuring construction,
equivalent in fact to two CPs querer ouvir and
querer registar. However, in the spoken subpart
of the corpus there may be no overt connector and
just a slight pause as in example 17 (the pause is
marked by ”/”).

(16) para quem o quis[CVR1 B]
ouvir[CVR2 1 E] e eventualmente
registar[CVR2 2 E]
to whom him wanted to listen and eventually
register
‘to whom wanted to listen and eventually
register him’

(17) nós temos[CN1 B] uma[CN2 1 I]
tristeza[CN3 1 E] / uma[CN2 2 I]
frustração[CN3 2 E] muito grande
‘we have a sadness / a frustration very deep’

5 Corpus constitution

The CINTIL corpus3 contains 1 million tokens and
was compiled using different existing resources
developed at the Centre of Linguistics of the Uni-
versity of Lisbon (CLUL): the written corpus Pa-
role (Bacelar do Nascimento et al., 1998), the
spoken corpus C-ORAL-ROM (Bacelar do Nasci-
mento et al., 2005) and new written texts from the
Reference Corpus of Contemporary Portuguese-
CRPC (Bacelar do Nascimento, 2000), a large
monitor corpus with over 300M words. One third
of the corpus is composed of transcribed spoken
materials (both formal and informal) and the re-
maining two thirds are composed of written mate-
rials.

This corpus has been previously annotated and
manually revised (Barreto et al., 2006), in a joint
project of NLX-FCUL4 and CLUL. The CINTIL
corpus has important features, compared to other
resources for Portuguese, namely the depth of its
linguistic information, its size, range of domains
and sources, and level of accuracy. The annotation
comprises information on part-of-speech (POS),
lemma and inflection, multi-word expressions per-
taining to the class of adverbs and to the closed
POS classes, and multi-word proper names (for

3The CINTIL corpus is available for online queries (//cin-
til.ul.pt) through the use of a concordancer adapted to Por-
tuguese.

4http://nlx.di.fc.ul.pt

104



named entity recognition), together with specific
categories for spoken texts (like Emphasis (/EMP),
Extra-linguistic (/EL), Fragment (/FRG)). Below
is an excerpt of the POS annotation and lemmati-
zation where tags follow the order [lemma/ POS
category # inflected features [named entity] ].

(18) pretende/PRETENDER/vpi#3s[O]
reconverter/RECONVERTER/inf-nifl[O]
o/O/da#ms[O]
centro/CENTRO/cn#ms[B-LOC]
de/de/prep[I-LOC]
Matosinhos/MATOSINHOS/pnm[I-LOC]

In the next section we present the results of the
addition of a new layer of information on complex
predicates to this corpus.

6 Annotation results

The annotation of the whole corpus was done man-
ually by one MA student who was well familiar
with the task. A concordancer was used to iden-
tify possible complex predicate structures. Diffi-
cult cases were picked out and discussed with two
other persons to reach an agreement on the anno-
tation. Several of such hard cases were then added
to the annotation guidelines. After manual annota-
tion, the annotations were checked with a script to
check the consistency of the labels and to correct
some minor errors.

To validate the annotations we performed a
small experiment. A second person annotated
a small sample of sentences independently of
the first annotator. Next we compute the inter-
annotator agreement on the two different annota-
tions. This gives us some indication of the diffi-
culty of the task and the consistency of the label-
ing of the first annotator. We computed the kappa
statistics (Cohen, 1960) on the complex predicates
labeled by the two annotators in 50 sentences. We
acknowledge that this is just a very small sample,
yet this gave us a kappa value of .81 which indi-
cates a high overlap between both annotations.

In Table 1 we list the frequencies of the com-
plex predicates found in the CINTIL corpus. In
total we found 1981 CPs, the majority (1292 CPs)
are combinations of a verb with a noun. For the
verb predicates the table clearly shows that these
cases are mostly ambiguous. We also looked at the
occurrences of the more complex events described
in section 4.1 presented in table 2. We encoun-
tered 28 cases of coordinated complex predicates

label written spoken total
CV total 470 219 689
CVR 34 47 81
CVC 13 3 16
CVE 0 1 1
CVR VINF 300 143 443
CVC VINF 123 25 148
CN total 706 586 1292
CNB 353 213 566
CN 353 373 726
total 1176 805 1981

Table 1: Number of annotated complex predicates
in the spoken and written parts of the CINTIL cor-
pus.

label written spoken total
CV ambiguity 423 168 591
coordination 15 13 28
overlap 6 10 16

Table 2: Zooming in on the frequencies of the spe-
cial cases (sec. 4.1) in the CINTIL corpus.

and 14 times a verb was part of two different CPs
at the same time. The CPs with verb+verb con-
structions show a very high number of ambiguous
occurrences. It is clear that in most cases the con-
text of such a construction does not provide suffi-
cient evidence to disambiguate it. We only found
a handful of cases in which the context did resolve
the ambiguity.

We also looked into the ordering of the CPs
in the corpus. To what extent do the CPs occur
in their canonical form? Table 3 shows the re-
sults. We found a change in ordering only for the
verb+noun CPs. For the CPs with a bare noun we
found only 9 cases of non-canonical order. For
CPs with an NP with a determiner-noun combina-
tion we did see more variation in order, of the total
number of 726 occurrences, 16.9% had a different
word order.

We also wanted to see if all the verbs used to
identify CP constructions (verbs listed in 8 9, 10
plus the 3 light verbs) were equally present in
the CINTIL corpus or if there was any significant
lexical difference. We present the results of the
frequencies of the verbs of each CP type in Ta-
bles 4, 5, 7 and 6. When comparing the list in

105



label written spoken total % of occ
CN 86 37 123 16.9
CNB 7 2 9 1.6

Table 3: Number of complex predicates that do
not follow their canonical form. The last column
presents the percentage of the total number of CN
or CNB occurrences that are not in their canonical
form.

8 with the verbs in Table 4, we can see that the
verbs desejar and tencionar were included for the
query of restructuring predicates but do not oc-
cur in the corpus in CP constructions. Out of
the five verbs, querer ‘want’ is clearly the most
frequent in both written and spoken sub-parts of
the corpus. Apart from conseguir ‘succeed’, the
rest of the verbs have very low frequencies, and
costumar ‘use to’ is only present in the spoken
corpus, while the opposite is true for pretender
‘want’, a verb associated to a more formal regis-
ter. In causative constructions with CPs (Table 5
), the verb fazer ‘make’ is clearly prominent in the
written corpus, although it does not occur in the
spoken one. The only causative verb in CP con-
structions in the spoken corpus is mandar ‘order’.
In causative constructions, contrary to restructur-
ing ones, the genre seems to influence the lexical
choice of the higher verb of the complex predicate.

CVR written spoken
conseguir 6 7
costumar 0 3
pretender 2 0
querer 25 34
tentar 1 3
total 34 47

Table 4: frequencies of the main verb in CVR
complex predicates.

The verb+noun constructions are divided in two
different tables, according to our categorization in
bare nouns (Table 6) and nouns preceded by a de-
terminer (Table 7). The same three verbs enter the
constructions although their frequencies are differ-
ent in the two different structures: the verb fazer
is clearly dominant when followed by a noun pre-
ceded by a determiner, while the verb ter is the

CVC written spoken
deixar 1 0
fazer 11 0
mandar 1 3
total 13 3

Table 5: frequencies of the main verb in CVC
complex predicates.

more frequent light verb with bare nouns.

CNB written spoken
dar 69 27
fazer 87 52
ter 197 134
total 353 213

Table 6: frequencies of the main verb in CNB
complex predicates

CN written spoken
dar 79 34
fazer 193 231
ter 81 108
total 353 373

Table 7: frequencies of the main verb in CN com-
plex predicates.

7 Final remarks

We presented the annotation process of complex
predicates in the CINTIL corpus. We first ex-
plained our theoretical framework and gave a
broad typology of CPs. Next we detailed the anno-
tation schema that we used and zoomed in on some
difficult cases. We presented the outcomes of the
annotation work. We gave a first broad statistical
analysis of the annotations, and next we zoomed
in on some insights in characteristics of CPs in
Portuguese that this new annotation layer has of-
fered. This new resource provides diversified au-
thentic data that will enable a general overview of
CP constructions and can shed new light on the
Syntax-Semantics interface. It is also an important
part for forthcoming tasks of syntactic and seman-
tic corpus annotation.

In the future we plan to further analyze the re-
sults of the verb+verb types of CPs. The large

106



number of ambiguous cases and the few contexts
which give us definite clues for categorizing the
sequence as a CP challenges our concept of com-
plex predicates. The causative and restructuring
constructions require more attention and further
study. As to the verb+noun constructions, we want
to examine the contexts with and without deter-
miner to see if the same CP can occur in both
structures. We also want to look further into the
high frequency of specific light verbs with bare
nouns and the possible relationship with the se-
mantics of the light verbs. In this study we re-
stricted the annotation to a particular group of light
verbs. In a next step we would like to look at a
broader list to try to establish the necessary prop-
erties to categorize a verb as a light verb. We
plan to address, for example, certain contexts of
psych-nouns like sentir medo ‘feel fear’, experi-
enciar uma profunda emoção ‘experience a deep
emotion’, where the predicative nature of the verb
is unclear. We also plan to enlarge our description
and annotation of CPs to include idiomatic expres-
sions with light verbs.

References
A. Abeillé, D. Godard, and I. Sag, 1998. Complex

Predicates in Nonderivational Syntax, volume 30 of
Syntax and Semantics, chapter Two Kinds of Com-
position in French Complex predicates. San Diego
Academic Press, San Diego.

M. F. P. Bacelar do Nascimento, P. Marrafa, L.A.S.
Pereira, R. Ribeiro, R. Veloso, and L. Wittmann.
1998. Le-parole - do corpus à modelização da
informação lexical num sistema-multifunção. In Ac-
tas do XIII Encontro da Associação Portuguesa de
Linguı́stica, APL, pages 115–134, Lisboa.

M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, J. Bettencourt
Gonçalves, R. Veloso, S. Antunes, F. Barreto,
and R. Amaro, 2005. C-ORAL-ROM: Integrated
Reference Corpora for Spoken Romance Languages,
chapter The Portuguese Corpus, pages 163–207.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub-
lishing Company, Studies in Corpus Linguistics.
Editors: E. Cresti and M. Monegnia.

M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, 2000. Corpus,
Méthodologie et Applications Linguistiques, chapter
Corpus de Référence du Portugais Contemporain,
pages 25–30. H. Champion et Presses Universitaires
de Perpignan, Paris. Editor: M. Bilger.

F. Barreto, A. Branco, E. Ferreira, A. Mendes, M. F. P.
Bacelar do Nascimento, F. Nunes, and J. Silva.
2006. Open resources and tools for the shallow pro-
cessing of portuguese. In Proceedings of the 5th In-

ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC2006), Genoa, Italy.

C. Bowern. 2006. Inter theorical approaches to com-
plex verb constructions: position paper. In The
Eleventh Biennal Rice University Linguistics Sym-
posium.

E. Carrilho and C. Magro, 2009. Syntactic Anno-
tation System Manual of corpus CORDIAL-SIN.
http://www.clul.ul.pt/sectores/variacao/cordialsin/
Syntactic%20annotation%20manual.html.

S. Cinková and V. Kolár̂ová. 2005. Nouns as compo-
nents of support verb constructions in the prague de-
pendency treebank. In Insight into Slovak and Czech
Corpus Linguistics. Veda Bratislava.

J. Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nom-
inal scales. Education and Psychological Measure-
men, 20:37–46.

K. Erk, A. Kowalski, S. Padó, and M. Pinkal. 2003.
Towards a resource for lexical semantics: A large
german corpus with extensive semantic annotation.
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 537–
544, Sapporo, Japan, July. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

C. Fellbaum, A. Geyken, A. Herold, F. Koerner, and
G. Neumann. 2006. Corpus-based studies of ger-
man idioms and light verbs. International Journal
of Lexicography, 19(4):349–360.

A. Gonçalves. 2002. The causee in the faire-inf con-
struction of portuguese. Journal of Portuguese Lin-
guistics.

A. Gonçalves. 2003. Defectividade funcional e pred-
icados complexos em estruturas de controlo do por-
tuguês. In I. Castro and I. Duarte, editors, Mis-
celnea de estudos em homenagem a Maria Helena
Mira Mateus, volume I. Imprensa Nacional-Casa da
Moeda.

J. Grimshaw. 1988. Light verbs and marking. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 19(2):205–232.

M. Gross. 1981. Les bases empiriques de la notion de
prédicat sémantique. Langages, 63:7–52.

O. Jespersen. 1949. A Modern English Grammar on
Historical Principles. Londres: George Allen &
Unwin; Copenhaga: Ejnar Munksgaard.

R. Johansson and P. Nugues. 2006. Automatic anno-
tation for all semantic layers in FrameNet. In Pro-
ceedings of EACL-2006, Trento, Italy, April 15-16.

C. R. Johnson and C. J. Fillmore. 2000. The framenet
tagset for frame-semantic and syntactic coding of
predicate-argument structure. In Proceedings of the
1st Meeting of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ANLP-
NAACL 2000), pages 56–62, Seattle WA.

107



R. Kayne. 1975. French Syntax: the Transformational
Cycle. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

M. Marcus, S. Santorini, and M. Marcinkiewicz. 1993.
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English:
the Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):313–330.

M.Butt. 1995. The Structure of Complex Predicates in
Urdu. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

A. Meyers. 2007. Annotation guidelines for
nombank – noun argument structure for prop-
bank. Technical report, New York University.
http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/meyers/nombank/nombank-
specs-2007.pdf.

M. Mikulová, A. Bémová, J. Hajič, E. Hajicková, and
J. Havelka et al. 2006. Annotation on the tec-
togrammatical level in the prague dependency tree-
bank annotation manual. technical report. Technical
Report UFAL CKL Technical Report TR-2006-35,
ÚFAL MFF UK, Prague, Czech Rep.

N. Xue. 2006. Annotating the predicate-argument
structure of chinese nominalizations. In Proceed-
ings of the LREC 2006, pages 1382–1387, Genoa,
Italy.

108


