










































Can Crowds Build parallel corpora for Machine Translation Systems?


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 62–65,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Can Crowds Build Parallel Corpora for Machine Translation Systems?

Vamshi Ambati and Stephan Vogel
{vamshi,vogel}@cs.cmu.edu

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract

Corpus based approaches to machine transla-
tion (MT) rely on the availability of parallel
corpora. In this paper we explore the effec-
tiveness of Mechanical Turk for creating par-
allel corpora. We explore the task of sen-
tence translation, both into and out of a lan-
guage. We also perform preliminary experi-
ments for the task of phrase translation, where
ambiguous phrases are provided to the turker
for translation in isolation and in the context
of the sentence it originated from.

1 Introduction

Large scale parallel data generation for new lan-
guage pairs requires intensive human effort and
availability of bilingual speakers. Only a few lan-
guages in the world enjoy sustained research inter-
est and continuous financial support for develop-
ment of automatic translation systems. For most
remaining languages there is very little interest or
funding available and limited or expensive access to
experts for data elicitation. Crowd-sourcing com-
pensates for the lack of experts with a large pool of
expert/non-expert crowd. However, crowd-sourcing
has thus far been explored in the context of elicit-
ing annotations for a supervised classification task,
typically monolingual in nature (Snow et al., 2008).
In this shared task we test the feasibility of eliciting
parallel data for Machine Translation (MT) using
Mechanical Turk (MTurk). MT poses an interesting
challenge as we require turkers to have understand-
ing/writing skills in both the languages. Our work is
similar to some recent work on crowd-sourcing and

machine translation (Ambati et al., 2010; Callison-
Burch, 2009), but focuses primarily on the setup and
design of translation tasks on MTurk with varying
granularity levels, both at sentence- and phrase-level
translation.

2 Language Landscape on MTurk

We first conduct a pilot study by posting 25 sen-
tences each from a variety of language pairs and
probing to see the reception on MTurk. Language-
pair selection was based on number of speakers in
the language and Internet presence of the popula-
tion. Languages like Spanish, Chinese, English,
Arabic are spoken by many and have a large pres-
ence of users on the Internet. Those like Urdu,
Tamil, Telugu although spoken by many are not well
represented on the Web. Languages like Swahili,
Zulu, Haiti are neither spoken by many nor have
a great presence on the Web. For this pilot study
we selected Spanish, Chinese, English, Urdu, Tel-
ugu, Hindi, Haitian Creole languages. We do not
select German, French and other language pairs as
they have already been explored by Callison-Burch
(2009). Our pilot study helped us calibrate the costs
for different language pairs as well as helped us se-
lect the languages to pursue further experiments. We
found that at lower pay rates like 1 cent, it is difficult
to find a sufficient number of translators to complete
the task. For example, we could not find turkers
to complete the translation from English to Haitian-
Creole even after a period of 10 days. Haitian creole
is spoken by a small population and it seems that
only a very small portion of that was on MTurk. For
a few other languages pairs, while we could find a

62



Pair Cost per sen Days
Spanish-Eng $0.01 1
Telugu-Eng $0.02 2
Eng-Creole $0.06 -
Urdu-Eng $0.03 1
Hindi-Eng $0.03 1

Chinese-Eng $0.02 1

Table 1: Cost vs. Completion for Language pairs

few turkers attempting the task, the price had to be
increased to attract any attention. Table 1 shows the
findings of our pilot study. We show the minimum
cost at which we could start getting turkers to pro-
vide translations and the number of days they took to
complete the task. MTurk has so far been a suppli-
ers’ market, and translation of rare-languages shows
how a limited supply of turkers leads to a buyer’s
market; only fair.

3 Challenges for Crowd-Sourcing and
Machine Translation

We use MTurk for all our crowd-sourcing experi-
ments. In case of MT, a HIT on MTurk is one or
more sentences in the source language that need to
be translated to a target language. Making sure that
the workers understand the task is the first step to-
wards a successful elicitation using the crowd. We
provide detailed instructions on the HIT for both
completion of the task and its evaluation. Mechan-
ical turk also has a provision to seek annotations
from qualified workers, from a specific location with
a specific success rate in their past HITs. For all
our HITs we set the worker qualification threshold
to 90%. We use the terms HIT vs. task and turker
vs. translator interchangeably.

3.1 Quality Assurance

Quality assurance is a concern with an online crowd
where the expertise of the turkers is unknown. We
also notice from the datasets we receive that consis-
tently poor and noisy translators exist. Problems like
blank annotations, mis-spelling, copy-pasting of in-
put are prevalent, but easy to identify. Turkers who
do not understand the task but attempt it anyway are
the more difficult ones to identify, but this is to be
expected with non-experts. Redundancy of transla-

tions for the input and computing majority consen-
sus translation is agreed to be an effective solution to
identify and prune low quality translation. We dis-
cuss in following section computation of majority
vote using fuzzy matching.

For a language pair like Urdu-English, we noticed
a strange scenario, where the translations from two
turkers were significantly worse in quality, but con-
sistently matched each other, there by falsely boost-
ing the majority vote. We suspect this to be a case of
cheating, but this exposes a loop in majority voting
which needs to be addressed, perhaps by also using
gold standard data.

Turking Machines: We also have the problem
of machines posing as turkers – ‘Turking machine’
problem. With the availability of online translation
systems like Google translate, Yahoo translate (Ba-
belfish) and Babylon, translation tasks on MTurk
become easy targets to this problem. Turkers ei-
ther use automatic scripts to get/post data from au-
tomatic MT systems, or make slight modifications
to disguise the fact. This defeats the purpose of the
task, as the resulting corpus would then be biased to-
wards some existing automatic MT system. It is ex-
tremely important to keep gamers in check; not only
do they pollute the quality of the crowd data, but
their completion of a HIT means it becomes unavail-
able to genuine turkers who are willing to provide
valuable translations. We, therefore, collect transla-
tions from existing automatic MT services and use
them to match and block submissions from gamers.
We rely on some gold-standard to identify genuine
matches with automatic translation services.

3.2 Output Space and Fuzzy Matching

Due to the natural variability in style of turkers, there
could be multiple different, but perfectly valid trans-
lations for a given sentence. Therefore it is dif-
ficult to match translation outputs from two turk-
ers or even with gold standard data. We there-
fore need a fuzzy matching algorithm to account
for lexical choices, synonymy, word ordering and
morphological variations. This problem is similar
to the task of automatic translation output evalua-
tion and so we use METEOR (Lavie and Agarwal,
2007), an automatic MT evaluation metric for com-
paring two sentences. METEOR has an internal
aligner that matches words in the sentences given

63



and scores them separately based on whether the
match was supported by synonymy, exact match or
fuzzy match. The scores are then combined to pro-
vide a global matching score. If the score is above a
threshold δ, we treat the sentences to be equivalent
translations of the source sentence. We can set the
δ parameter to different values, based on what is ac-
ceptable to the application. In our experiments, we
set δ = 0.7. We did not choose BLEU scoring met-
ric as it is strongly oriented towards exact matching
and high precision, than towards robust matching for
high recall.

4 Sentence Translation

The first task we setup on MTurk was to translate
full sentences from a source language into a tar-
get language. The population we were interested in
was native speakers of one of the languages. We
worked with four languages - English, Spanish, Tel-
ugu and Urdu. We chose 100 sentences for each
language-pair and requested three different transla-
tions for each sentence. The Spanish data was taken
from BTEC (Takezawa et al., 2002) corpus, consist-
ing of short sentences in the travel domain. Telugu
data was taken from the sports and politics section
of a regional newspaper. For Urdu, we used the
NIST-Urdu Evaluation 2008 data. We report results
in Table 2. Both Spanish and Urdu had gold stan-
dard translations, as they were taken from parallel
corpora created by language experts. As the data
sets are small, we chose to perform manual inspec-
tion rather than use automatic metrics like BLEU to
score match against gold-standard data.

4.1 Translating into English
The first batch of HITs were posted to collect trans-
lations into English. We noticed from manual in-
spection of the quality of translations that most of
our translators were non-native speakers of English.
This calls for adept and adequate methods for evalu-
ating the translation quality. For example more than
50% of the Spanish-English tasks were completed in
India, and in some cases a direct output of automatic
translation services.

4.2 Translating out of English
The second set of experiments were to test the ef-
fectiveness of translating out of English. The ideal

Language Pair Cost #Days #Turkers
Spanish-English $0.01 1 16
Telugu-English $0.02 4 12
Urdu-English $0.03 2 13

English-Spanish $0.01 1 19
English-Telugu $0.02 3 35
English-Urdu $0.03 2 21

Table 2: Sentence translation data

target population for this task were native speakers
of the target language who also understood English.
Most participant turkers who provided Urdu and Tel-
ugu translations, were from India and USA and were
non-native speakers of English. However, one prob-
lem with enabling this task was the writing system.
Most turkers do not have the tools to create content
in their native language. We used ‘Google Translit-
erate’ API 1 to enable production of non-English
content. This turned out to be an interesting HIT
for the turkers, as they were excited to create their
native language content. This is evident from the
increased number of participant turkers. Manual in-
spection of translations revealed that this direction
resulted in higher quality translations for both Urdu
and Telugu and slightly lower quality for Spanish.

5 Phrase Translation

Phrase translation is useful in reducing the cost
and effort of eliciting translations by focusing on
those parts of the sentence that are difficult to
translate. It fits well into the paradigm of crowd-
sourcing where small tasks can be provided to a lot
of translators. For this task, we were interested in
understanding how well non-experts translate sub-
sentential segments, and whether exposure to ‘con-
text’ was helpful. For this set of experiments we use
the Spanish-English language pair, where the turk-
ers were presented with Spanish phrases to trans-
late. The phrases were selected from the standard
phrase tables produced by statistical phrase-based
MT (Koehn et al., 2007), that was trained on the en-
tire 128K BTEC corpus for Spanish-English. We
computed an entropy score for each entry in the
phrase table under the translation probability distri-
butions in both directions and picked the set of 50

1http://www.google.com/transliterate/

64



Type %Agreement %Gold match
Out of Context 64% 32%

In Context 68% 33%

Table 3: Phrase Translation: Spanish-English

Length Count Example
1 2 cierras
2 11 vienes aqu
3 26 hay una en
4 8 a conocer su decisin
5 4 viene bien a esa hora

Table 4: Details of Spanish-English phrases used

most ambiguous phrases according to this metric.
Table 4 shows sample and the length distribution of
the phrases selected for this task.

5.1 In Context vs. Out of Context

We performed two kinds of experiments to study
phrase translation and role of context. In the first
case, the task was designed to be as simple as possi-
ble with each phrase to be translated as an individual
HIT. We provided a source phrase and request turk-
ers to translate a phrase under any hypothesized con-
text. For the second task, we gave a phrase associ-
ated with the sentence that it originated from and re-
quested the turkers to translate the phrase only in the
context of the sentence. For both cases, we analyzed
the data for inter-translator agreement;% of cases
where there was a consensus translation), and agree-
ment with the gold standard; % of times the trans-
lated phrase was present in the gold standard transla-
tion of the source sentence it came from. As shown
in Table 3, translating in-context produced a better
match with gold standard data and scored slightly
better on the inter-translator agreement. We think
that when translating out of context, most translators
choose as appropriate for a context in their mind and
so the inter-translator agreement could be lower, but
when translating within the context of a sentence,
they make translation choices to suit the sentence
which could lead to better agreement scores. In fu-
ture, we will extend these experiments to other lan-
guage pairs and choose phrases not by entropy met-
ric, but to study specific language phenomenon.

6 Conclusion

Our experiments helped us better understand the
formulation of translation tasks on MTurk and its
challenges. We experimented with both translating
into and out of English and use transliteration for
addressing the writing system issue. We also ex-
periment with in-context and out-of-context phrase
translation task. While working with non-expert
translators it is important to address quality concerns
alongside keeping in check any usage of automatic
translation services. At the end of the shared task we
have sampled the ‘language landscape’ on MTurk
and have a better understanding of what to expect
when building MT systems for different language
pairs.

References
Vamshi Ambati, Stephan Vogel, and Jaime Carbonell.

2010. Active learning and crowd-sourcing for ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010,
Malta, May.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, cheap, and creative:
Evaluating translation quality using Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk. In EMNLP 2009, pages 286–295, Sin-
gapore, August. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch Mayne,
Christopher Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico,
Nicola Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Chris-
tine Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar,
Alexandra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007.
Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine
translation. In ACL Demonstration Session.

Alon Lavie and Abhaya Agarwal. 2007. Meteor: an au-
tomatic metric for mt evaluation with high levels of
correlation with human judgments. In WMT 2007,
pages 228–231, Morristown, NJ, USA.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and An-
drew Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast – but is it good?
evaluating non-expert annotations for natural language
tasks. In Proceedings of the EMNLP 2008, pages 254–
263, Honolulu, Hawaii, October.

Toshiyuki Takezawa, Eiichiro Sumita, Fumiaki Sugaya,
Hirofumi Yamamoto, and Seiichi Yamamoto. 2002.
Towards a broad-coverage bilingual corpus for speech
translation of travel conversation in the real world. In
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, Spain.

65


