










































How to Avoid Burning Ducks: Combining Linguistic Analysis and Corpus Statistics for German Compound Processing


Proceedings of the Joint 5th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR, pages 224–234,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

How to Avoid Burning Ducks:
Combining Linguistic Analysis and Corpus Statistics

for German Compound Processing

Fabienne Fritzinger and Alexander Fraser
Institute for Natural Language Processing

University of Stuttgart
{fritzife, fraser}@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

Compound splitting is an important prob-
lem in many NLP applications which must
be solved in order to address issues of data
sparsity. Previous work has shown that lin-
guistic approaches for German compound
splitting produce a correct splitting more
often, but corpus-driven approaches work
best for phrase-based statistical machine
translation from German to English, a
worrisome contradiction. We address this
situation by combining linguistic analysis
with corpus-driven statistics and obtain-
ing better results in terms of both produc-
ing splittings according to a gold standard
and statistical machine translation perfor-
mance.

1 Introduction

Compounds are highly productive in German and
cause problems of data sparsity in data-driven sys-
tems. Compound splitting is an important com-
ponent of German to English statistical machine
translation systems. The central result of work by
(Koehn and Knight, 2003) is that corpus-driven
approaches to compound splitting perform better
than approaches based on linguistic analysis, and
this result has since been confirmed by other re-
searchers (Popović et al., 2006; Stymne, 2008).
This is despite the fact that linguistic analysis per-
forms better in terms of matching a gold standard
splitting. Our work shows that integrating these
two approaches, by employing high-recall lin-
guistic analysis disambiguated using corpus statis-
tics, effectively combines the benefits of both ap-
proaches. This is important due to the wide us-
age of the Koehn and Knight approach in statisti-
cal machine translation systems.

The splittings we produce are best in terms of
both end-to-end machine translation performance

(resulting in an improvement of 0.59 BLEU and
0.84 METEOR over the corpus-driven approach
of Koehn and Knight on the development test set
used for WMT 20091) and two gold standard eval-
uations (see section 4). We provide an exten-
sive analysis of the improvements of our approach
over the corpus-driven approach. The approach
we have developed may help show how to im-
prove previous approaches to handling compounds
in such applications as speech recognition (e.g.,
(Larson et al., 2000)) or information retrieval (e.g.,
(Braschler and Ripplinger, 2004)).

The organization of the paper is as follows. Sec-
tion 2 discusses previous work on compound split-
ting for statistical machine translation. Section 3
presents approaches for compound splitting and
also presents SMOR, the morphological analyzer
that is a key knowledge source for our approach.
Section 4 presents a comparison of compound
splitting techniques using two gold standard cor-
pora and an error analysis. Section 5 presents
phrase-based statistical machine translation (SMT)
results. Section 6 concludes.

2 Related Work on German Compound
Splitting

Rule-based compound splitting for SMT has been
addressed by Nießen and Ney (2000), where
GERTWOL was used for morphological analysis
and the GERCG parser for lexical analysis and dis-
ambiguation. Their results showed that morpho-
syntactic analysis could reduce the subjective sen-
tence error rate.

The empirical approach of Koehn and Knight
(2003) splits German compounds into words
found in a training corpus. A minimal amount
of linguistic knowledge is included in that the
filler letters “s” and “es” are allowed to be intro-
duced between any two words while “n” might be

1See Table 6 in section 5 for details.

224



dropped. A scoring function based on the aver-
age log frequency of the resulting words is used
to find the best splitting option, see section 3.2 for
details. SMT experiments with additional knowl-
edge sources (parallel corpus, part-of-speech tag-
ger) for compound splitting performed worse than
using only the simple frequency metric. Stymne
(2008) varies the Koehn and Knight approach by
examining the effect of a number of parameters:
e.g. word length, scoring method, filler letters.

Popović et al. (2006), compared the approach
of Nießen and Ney (2000) with the corpus-driven
splitting of Koehn and Knight (2003) in terms of
performance on an SMT task. Both systems yield
similar results for a large training corpus, while
the linguistic-based approach is slightly superior
when the amount of training data is drastically re-
duced.

There has recently been a large amount of in-
terest in the use of input lattices in SMT. One use
of lattices is to defer disambiguation of word-level
phenomena such as inflection and compounds to
decoding. Dyer (2009) applied this to German us-
ing a lattice encoding different segmentations of
German words. The work is evaluated by using the
1-best output of a weak segmenter2 on the training
data and then using a lattice of the N-best output
of the same segmenter on the test set to decode,
which was 0.6 BLEU better than the unsegmented
baseline. It would be of interest to test whether de-
ferral of disambiguation to decoding still produces
an improvement when used in combination with a
high-performance segmenter such as the one we
present, an issue we leave for future work.

3 Compound Processing

Previous work has shown a positive impact of
compound splitting on translation quality of SMT
systems. The splitting reduces data sparsity and
enhances word alignment performance. An exam-
ple is given in Figure 1.

Previous approaches for compound splitting
can be characterized as following two basic ap-
proaches: the use of morphological analyzers to
find split points based on linguistic knowledge
and corpus-driven approaches combining large

2The use of the 1-best output of the segmenter for German
to English decoding results in a degradation of 0.3 BLEU,
showing that it is worse in performance than the corpus-
driven method of Koehn and Knight, which improves perfor-
mance (see the evaluation section). However, this segmenter
is interesting because it is language neutral.

Inflationsraten

English translation

unsplit compound

inflation rates

Inflation Ratensplit compound

1−to−n alignment

1−to−1 alignment

Figure 1: Compound splitting enhances the num-
ber of 1-to-1 word alignments.

amounts of data and scoring metrics.
We briefly introduce the computational mor-

phology SMOR (section 3.1) and the corpus-
driven approach of Koehn and Knight (2003) (sec-
tion 3.2), before we present our hybrid approach
that combines the benefits of both in section 3.3.

3.1 SMOR Morphological Analyzer

SMOR is a finite-state based morphological ana-
lyzer covering the productive word formation pro-
cesses of German, namely inflection, derivation
and compounding (Schmid et al., 2004). Word for-
mation is implemented as a concatenation of mor-
phemes filtered according to selectional restric-
tions. These restrictions are based on feature deco-
rations of stems and affixes encoded in the lexicon.
Inflection is realized using inflection classes.

An abbreviated3 SMOR analysis of the word
Durchschnittsauto (“standard car”)4 is given in
Figure 2 (a). The hierarchical structure of the word
formation process is given in Figure 2 (b). Imple-
mented with finite-state technology, SMOR is not
able to produce this hierarchy: in our example it
outputs two (correct) analyses of different depths
and does not perform disambiguation.

3.2 Corpus-Driven Approach

Koehn and Knight (2003) describe a method re-
quiring no linguistically motivated morphological
analysis to split compounds. Instead, a compound
is broken into parts (words) that are found in a
large German monolingual training corpus.

We re-implemented this approach with an ex-
tended list of filler letters that are allowed to oc-

3We show analyses for nominative, and analyses for the
other cases genitive, ,dative, accusative are left out as they
are identical.

4durch = “through”, schneiden = “to cut”, Schnitt = “(the)
cut”, Durchschnitt = “average”, Auto = “car”
part-of-speech: <NN>/<V> (noun/verb)
gender: <Neu> (neutrum)
case: <Nom> (nominative)
number: <Sg> (singular)
suffixation: <SUFF> (suffix)
prefixation: <VPART> (verb particle)

225



analyze> Durchschnittsauto
Durchschnitt<NN>Auto<+NN><Neut><Nom><Sg>
durch<VPART>schneiden<V><NN><SUFF>Auto<+NN><Neut><Nom><Sg>

(a) SMOR output format

Durchschnittsauto

Durchschnitt

schneiden

Auto

durch

<NN>

<NN><NN>

durchschneiden
<V>

<V><VPART>

(b) Morphological analysis

Figure 2: Morphological analysis of Durchschnittsauto (“standard car”).

cur between any two parts (nen, ien, en, es, er, s,
n) such as s in Inflationsrate (cf. Figure 1) and
deletable letters (e, n), required for compounds
such as Kirchturm = Kirche+Turm (“steeple”,
“church+tower”). Filler letters are dropped only
in cases where the part is more frequent without
the letter than with it (an example is that the fre-
quency of the word Inflation is greater than the
frequency of the word Inflations); the same holds
for deletable letters and hyphens (“-”). The min-
imal part size was set to 3 characters. Word fre-
quencies are derived from the true-cased corpus
using case insensitive matching. In order to reduce
wrong splittings, infrequent words (frequency ≤
3) are removed from the training corpus and a stop
list was used5. These are similar choices to those
found to be best in work by Stymne (2008).

The splitting that maximizes the geometric
mean of part frequencies using the following for-
mula6 is chosen:

argmax S(
∏

pi∈S
count(pi))

1
n

Figure 3 contains all splitting options of
the corpus-driven approach for Ministerpräsident
(“prime minister”). As can be seen, the
desired splitting Minister|Präsident is among
the options, but in the end Min|ist|Präsident
(“Min|is|president”) is picked by the corpus-
driven approach because this splitting maximizes
the geometric mean score (mainly due to the
highly frequent verb ist “is”). This is linguisti-
cally implausible, and the system we introduce in
the next section splits this correctly.

Even though this corpus-driven approach tends
to oversplit it works well for phrase-based SMT
because adjacent words (or word parts) are likely

5The stop list contains the following units, which occur in
the corpus as separate words (e.g., as names, function words,
etc.), and frequently occur in incorrect splittings: adr, and,
bes, che, chen, den, der, des, eng, ein, fue, ige, igen, iger,
kund, sen, ses, tel, ten, trips, ung, ver.

6Taken from (Koehn and Knight, 2003):
S = split, pi = part, n = number of parts. The original word
is also considered, it has 1 part and a minimal count of 1.

Ministerprä

Ministerpräsid

Minister

Mini

Minis

Min
ister

ist

ter

Prä

Präsid

Präside

Präsident

ent

sid

sident

Figure 3: Corpus-driven splittings of Minis-
terpräsident (“prime minister”).

to be learned as phrases. We will refer to the
corpus-driven approach using the abbreviation cd.

3.3 Hybrid Approach

We present a novel approach to compound split-
ting: based on linguistically motivated split points
gained from SMOR, we search word frequencies
in a large training corpus (the same corpus as we
will use for the corpus-driven approach) in order
to determine the best splitting option for a word
(or to leave it unsplit). This approach needs no ex-
plicit definition of filler letters or deletable letters,
as this knowledge is encoded in SMOR.

In contrast to the corpus-driven approach de-
scribed in the previous section, the hybrid ap-
proach uses neither a minimal part size constraint,
nor a stop-list. Instead, we make use of the linguis-
tic knowledge encoded in SMOR, i.e. we allow the
hybrid approach to split only into parts that can
appear as free morphemes, such as stems and sep-
aratable particles. An example is auf|gibt (“to give
up”), where the particle auf may occur separated
from the verb, as in Er gibt nicht auf (“he gives
not up”). Bound morphemes, such as prefixes and
suffixes cannot be split from the stem, e.g. verhan-
delbar (“negotiable”) which consists of the prefix
ver-, the stem handeln and the suffix -bar, is left
unsplit by the hybrid approach.

For N-ary compounds (with N>2), we use not
only the split points proposed by SMOR, but we
also search the training corpus for recombinations
of the compound parts: e.g. SMOR provides the
parts A|B|C for the compound ABC, and we addi-

226



(a) SMOR splitting options

Ministerpräsident

wählen Kampf

Wahlkampf

Wahl Kampf

Minister Präsident

(b) Part frequencies
word part frequency
Kampf 30,546
Minister 12,742
Ministerpräsident 22,244
Ministerpräsidentwahl 111
Ministerpräsidentwahlkampf 1
Präsident 125,747
Präsidentenwahl 2,482
Präsidentenwahlkampf 25
Wahl 29,255
Wahlkampf 23,335

(c) Log-based geometric mean scores
splitting option score
Ministerpräsidentenwahlkampf 0
Ministerpräsident|Wahlkampf 10.04
Ministerpräsident|Wahl|Kampf 10.21
Ministerpräsident|wählen|Kampf 9.85
Minister|Präsident|Wahlkampf 10.38
Minister|Präsident|Wahl|Kampf 10.42
Minister|Präsident|wählen|Kampf 10.15
Ministerpräsidentenwahl|Kampf 7.52
Minister|Präsidentenwahl|Kampf 9.19
Minister|Präsidentenwahlkampf 6.34

Table 1: Splitting options for Ministerpräsidentenwahlkampf (“election campaign of the prime minis-
ter”) (a) with part frequencies derived from the corpus (b) and log-based geometric mean scores (c).

tionally search for AB|C and A|BC.
Even though SMOR lemmatizes along with

compound splitting, only the information about
possible split points is used in our splitting ap-
proach. The compound Beitrittsländer (“ac-
cession countries”), for example, is reduced to
Beitritt|Land by SMOR, but is retransformed to
Beitritt|Länder in our approach. This holds also
for adjectives, e.g. firmeninterne “company-
internal” which is split to firma|interne (interne is
the female form of the adjective intern) and verbs,
such as the participle wasser|gebunden “water
bound”, where the lemma is Wasser|binden.

Hyphenated words can also be split with SMOR,
as long as the rightmost part of the word is in its
lexicon. However, the word parts which are to the
left of hyphen(s) are left unanalyzed. The SMOR
analyses for NATO-Berichts (“NATO report”) and
the nonsense XYZabc-Berichts (“XYZabc report”)
are given below:

analyze> NATO-Berichts

NATO-<TRUNC>Bericht<+NN><Masc><Gen><Sg>

analyze> XYZabc-Berichts

XYZabc-<TRUNC>Bericht<+NN><Masc><Gen><Sg>

Such Words where the rightmost part is unknown
to SMOR are left completely unanalyzed by
SMOR. Examples include NATO-Berxchts (which
is a typo of NATO-Berichts) or al-Qaeda (a proper

name). If such words occurred less than 5 times in
the training corpus, they were split at the hyphens.
This procedure splits NATO|Berxchts, while it
leaves al-Qaeda unsplit.

Table 1(a) shows the different splittings7 that
SMOR returns for the ambiguous ad-hoc com-
pound Ministerpräsidentenwahlkampf (“election
campaign of the prime minister”). All of them are
morphologically sound compounds of German.

The corpus frequencies of the parts provided by
SMOR (and their recombinations) are given in Ta-
ble 1 (b). The average natural log frequencies of
the SMOR splittings in Table 1 (c), with the recom-
binations of their parts in the last three rows. We
set the minimal frequency for each part to 1 (which
gives a log frequency of 0) even if it was not seen
in the training corpus.

Even though “prime” is not a literal transla-
tion of Präsident, the best splitting (out of the
given options) is Minister|Präsident|Wahl|Kampf
(“minister|president|election|campaign”). It is
scored highest and thus chosen by the hybrid ap-
proach.

For the purpose of SMT, we want to split com-
pounds into parts that have a translational cor-
respondent in the target language. To accom-
plish that, it is often sufficient to consider the
split at the highest linguistic analysis level. For

7Ministerpräsident = “prime minister”, Wahlkampf =
“election campaign”, Minister = “minister”, Präsident =
“president”, Wahl = “election”, wählen = “to elect”, Kampf
= “fight”

227



the example Durchschnittsauto (“standard car”)
(cf. Figure 2 above), where the ideal split
is Durchschnitt|Auto (“average|car”). Here, the
deeper analysis of Durchschnitt as a nominalisa-
tion of the particle verb durch|schneiden (“to cut
through”) is not relevant. The same holds for Min-
isterpräsidentenwahlkampf of Table 1, where in
one of the splittings Wahl is further reduced to the
verb wählen.

In order to prevent such analyses from be-
ing picked, we investigate the use of restricting
SMOR’s splitting options to analyses having a min-
imal number of component parts. On the other
hand, there are many lexicalized compounds in
German, that, besides being analyzed as a com-
pound also appear as a free word stem in SMOR’s
lexicon (e.g. both Geländewagen “all-terrain vehi-
cle” and Gelände|wagen “terrain vehicle” are re-
turned by SMOR). Therefore, we keep both vari-
ants for our subsequent experiments: the con-
strained version that uses only analyses with a
minimal number of parts (and thus performs a
more conservative splitting) is referred to as smc,
while using all of SMOR’s analyses is named sm.
In addition to these, we use a constraint that splits
only nouns. To do so, the text to be split was POS-
tagged with TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) to deter-
mine the nouns in the context of the whole sen-
tence. Splitting only nouns will be referred to as
@nn in the remainder of this paper.

Compared to the purely corpus-driven ap-
proach, hybrid compound splitting substantially
reduces the number of false splitting options, be-
cause only splittings that are linguistically moti-
vated are looked up in the training corpus. We
will show that this restriction of splitting options
enhances the number of correct splittings being
picked. The purely corpus-driven approach con-
siders the correct splitting in most cases, but often
does not choose it because there is another higher
scoring splitting option (cf. section 4.3).

The main shortcoming of the hybrid approach
is its dependence on SMOR’s lexical coverage.
SMOR incorporates numerous word formation
rules and thousands of word stems (e.g. over
16,000 noun base stems), but our approach will
leave all words unsplit that cannot be analyzed
with SMOR. However, we will show in both the
gold standard evaluations (section 4) and the SMT
evaluation (section 5) that the recall of SMOR is
sufficient to result in substantial gains over the

corpus-driven approach.

4 Gold Standard Evaluation

The accuracies of the compound splitting ap-
proaches are evaluated against two hand-crafted
gold standards: one that includes linguistically
motivated split points (section 4.1), and one indi-
cating compounds that were translated composi-
tionally by a human translator (section 4.2). We
found that the hybrid approach performs best for
both. In section 5, we will show the impact of the
different splitting approaches on translation per-
formance, with the result that the hybrid approach
outperforms the corpus-driven approach even for
translation quality (in contrast to previous work,
where the best system according to the gold stan-
dard was not the best system for translation qual-
ity). In order to better understand the divergent
results of the splitting approaches, we perform a
detailed error analysis in section 4.3.

The accuracy of compound splitting is mea-
sured using the same terminology and metrics as
described in (Koehn and Knight, 2003):

correct split: should be split and was split correctly
correct not: should not be split and was not
wrong split: should not be split but was split
wrong not: should be split but was not
wrong faulty (fty): should be split, but was split wrongly

precision: correctsplit
correctsplit+wrongfaulty+wrongsplit

recall: correctsplit
correctsplit+wrongfaulty+wrongnot

accuracy: correct
correct+wrong

The results of the following splitting approaches
were investigated:

raw = baseline without splitting
cd = corpus-driven splitting
sm = hybrid approach using all SMOR analyses
smc = hybrid approach using the SMOR analysis

with the minimal number of parts
@nn = split only nouns

The word frequencies required for all splitting ap-
proaches were derived from the German monolin-
gual language model training data (∼ 225 million
tokens) of the shared task of the 2009 ACL work-
shop on machine translation.

4.1 Linguistically Motivated Gold Standard

In the course of developing the hybrid approach,
we used a hand-crafted gold standard for testing,
which contains 6,187 distinct word types extracted

228



Correct Wrong Metrics
split not split not fty prec. recall acc.

raw 0 5073 0 1114 0 - 0.00% 81.99%
cd 679 4192 883 120 313 36.21% 61.06% 78.73%
sm 912 4534 541 35 165 56.37% 82.01% 88.02%
sm@nn 628 4845 230 337 147 62.49% 56.73% 88.46%
smc 884 4826 249 135 93 72.10% 79.50% 92.29%
smc@nn 648 4981 94 380 84 78.45% 58.27% 90.98%

Table 2: Linguistically motivated gold standard:
6,187 distinct word types. Bold-face font indi-
cates the best result of each column.

from the development set of the 2009 shared MT
task. The most plausible split points were anno-
tated by a native speaker of German, allowing for
splits into word stems or particles, but not into
bound morphemes such as prefixes or suffixes.

Splits were annotated at the highest word
formation level only, see also Durchschnittsauto
in Figure 2 (section 3.1 above), where only the
split point Durchschnitt|Auto would be annotated
in the gold standard. Another example is the
complex derivative Untersuchungshäftling
(“person being imprisoned on remand”),
where the inherent word structure looks as
follows: [Untersuchung+Haft]+ling (“[investi-
gation+imprisonment]+being a person”). The
splitting into Untersuchung|Häftling is semanti-
cally not correct and the word is thus left unsplit
in the gold standard. Finally, particles are only
split if these can be used separately from the verb
in a grammatically sound sentence, as is the case
in the example mentioned in section 3.3, auf|gibt:
Er gibt nicht auf (“he gives not up”). In contrast,
the particle cannot be separated in a past participle
construction like aufgegeben: *Er gegeben nicht
auf (“he given not up”), because in this example,
-ge- is an infix introduced between the particle
and the verb in order to form the past participle
form. Constructions of this kind are thus left
unsplit in the gold standard.

We found that 1,114 of the 6,187 types we in-
vestigated were compounds, of which 837 were
nouns. The detailed results are given in Table 2.
Due to the fact that the majority of words should
not be split, the raw method reaches a considerable
accuracy of 81.99%.

As can be seen from Table 2, 679 of the 1,114
compounds are split correctly by the corpus-driven
approach (cd). However, the high number of
wrong splits (883), which is the main shortcoming
of the corpus-driven approach, leads to an accu-
racy below the raw system (78.73% vs. 81.99%).

Out of the variants of the hybrid approach,
the less constrained one, sm achieves the high-
est recall (82.01%), while the most constrained
one smc@nn has the highest precision (78.45%).
The smc variant yields the most accurate splitting
92.29%. The higher precision of the @nn-variants
comes from the fact that most of the compounds
are nouns (837 of 1,114) and that these approaches
(sm@nn, smc@nn) leave more words incorrectly
unsplit than oversplit.

Note that the gold standard we presented in this
section was measured on a few times during devel-
opment of the hybrid approach and there might be
some danger of overfitting. Therefore, we used an-
other gold standard based on human translations to
confirm the high accuracy of the hybrid approach.
We introduce it in the next section.

4.2 One-to-one Correspondence
Gold Standard

The one-to-one correspondence gold standard
(Koehn and Knight, 2003) indicates only com-
pounds that were translated compositionally by a
human translator. Such translations need not al-
ways be consistent: the human translator might
decide to translate a compound compositionally in
one sentence and using a different concept in an-
other sentence. As a consequence, a linguistically
correct split might or might not be considered cor-
rect, depending on how it was translated. This is
therefore a harsh metric.

We used data from the 2009 shared MT task8

for this evaluation. The first 5,000 words of the
test text (news-dev2009b) were annotated manu-
ally with respect to compounds that are translated
compositionally into more than one English word.
This is the same data set as used for the evalu-
ation of SMT performance in section 5, but the
compound annotation was done only after all SMT
experiments were completed, to ensure unbiased
translation results. The use of the same data set fa-
cilitates the comparison of the splitting approaches
in terms of the one-to-one gold standard vs. trans-
lation quality.

The results are given in Table 3. In this set, only
155 compounds with one-to-one correspondences
are found amongst the 5,000 word tokens, which
leads to a very high accuracy of 96.90% with no
splitting (raw).

8http://www.statmt.org/wmt09/
translation-task.html

229



Correct Wrong Metrics
split not split not fty prec. recall acc.

raw 0 4,845 0 155 0 —— 0.00% 96.90%
cd 81 4,435 404 14 59 14,89% 52.60% 90.32%
sm 112 4,563 283 8 34 26.11% 72.73% 93.50%
sm@nn 107 4,677 169 15 32 34.74% 69.48% 95.68%
smc 128 4,666 180 12 14 39,75% 83,12% 95,88%
smc@nn 123 4,744 102 18 13 51.68% 79.87% 97.34%

Table 3: Evaluation of splitting approaches with
respect to one-to-one correspondences. Bold-face
font indicates the best result of each column.

The corpus-driven approach (cd) splits 81 of the
155 compounds correctly (52.60% recall), but also
splits 404 words that should have been left unsplit,
which leads to a low precision of only 14.89%.

As can be seen from Table 3, all variants of the
hybrid splitting approach, reach higher accuracies
than the corpus-driven approach, and again, the
most restrictive one (smc@nn) performs best: it is
the only one that achieves a slightly higher accu-
racy than raw (97.34% vs. 96.90%). Even though
the number of correct splits of smc@nn (123) is
lower than for e.g. smc (with 128, the highest re-
call 83.12%), the number of correct not splittings
is higher (4,744 vs. 4,666).

Generally speaking, the results of both gold
standards show that linguistic knowledge en-
hances the number of correct splits, while at the
same time it considerably reduces oversplitting,
which is the main shortcoming of the corpus-
driven approach. A detailed error analysis is pro-
vided in the following section 4.3.

4.3 Error Analysis

4.3.1 Errors of the Corpus-Driven Approach
In gold standard evaluation, the purely corpus-
driven approach exhibited a number of erroneous
splits. These splits are not linguistically motivated
and are thus filtered out a priori by the SMOR-
based systems. In the following, we give some
examples for wrong splits that are typical for the
corpus-driven approach.

In Table 4 we divide typical errors into two cat-
egories: frequency-based where wrong splitting is
solely due to higher frequencies of the parts from
the wrong splitting and insertions/deletions where
filler letters or deletions of letters lead to wrong
splittings of which the parts are again more fre-
quent than for the correct splitting.

The adjective lebenstreuen (“true-to-life”) is the
only true compound of Table 4. Its correct split
is Leben|treuen (“life|true”). All other words in

Table 4 should be left unsplit.

error type word splitting

frequency based

lebenstreuen Leben|streuen
true-to-life life|spread
traumatisch Trauma|Tisch
traumatic trauma|table
Themen the|men
themes the|men

insertions/deletions

entbrannte Ente|brannte
broke out duck|burned
Belangen Bela|Gen
aspect Bela|gene
Toynbeesche toy|been|sche
Toynbeean toy|been|*sche

Table 4: Typical errors of the corpus-driven ap-
proach. The only true compound in this table is
Leben|treuen (“life|true”).

The lookup of word frequencies is done case-
insensitively, i.e. the casing variant with the
highest frequency is chosen. This leads to
cases like traumatisch (“traumatic”), where adjec-
tives are split into nominal head words (namely
Trauma|Tisch = “trauma|table”), which is impos-
sible from a linguistic point of view. If, how-
ever, Traumatisch occurs uppercased and is thus
to be interpreted as a noun, the splitting into
Trauma|Tisch is correct.

The splitting accuracy of the corpus-driven
method is highly dependent on the quality of the
monolingual training corpus from which word
frequencies are derived. The examples Themen
(“themes”) and Toynbeesche (“Toynbeean”) in Ta-
ble 4 show how foreign language material from a
language like English in the training corpus can
lead to severe splitting errors.

In order to account for the lack of linguistic
knowledge, the corpus-driven approach has to al-
low for a high flexibility of filler letters, dele-
tion of letters and combinations of both. The ex-
amples in the lower part of Table 4 show that
this flexibility often leads to erroneous splits that
completely modify the semantic content of the
original word. For example, the verb partici-
ple form of “to break out”, entbrannte is split
into Ente|brannte (“duck|burned”), because the
corpus-driven approach allows to add an “e” at the
end of each but the rightmost part. This transfor-
mation is required to cover compounds like Kirch-
turm (“church tower” (or also “steeple”)) that are
composed of the words Kirche (“church”) and
Turm (“tower”).

Often, one high frequent part of the (possible)

230



compound determines the split of a word, even
though the other part(s) are much less frequent.
This is the case for Belangen (442 occurrences),
where the high frequent Gen (“gene”, 1,397 oc-
currences) leads to a splitting of the word, even
though the proper name Bela is much less frequent
(165 occurrences).

The case of Toynbeesche (which is a proper
noun used as an adjective) shows that the corpus-
driven approach splits everything into parts, as
long as they are more frequent than the unsplit
word. In contrast, all words that are unknown to
SMOR are left unsplit by the hybrid approach.

Finally, the corpus-driven approach often iden-
tifies content-free syllables such as -sche (see last
row of Table 4) as compound parts. These sylla-
bles frequently occur in the training corpus due to
syllabification, making them a prevalent source for
corpus-driven splitting errors. Such wrong split-
tings could be blocked by extending the stopword
list of the corpus-driven approach. See footnote 5
in section 3.2, for the list of stopwords we used in
our implementation.

Previous approaches to corpus-driven com-
pound splitting used a part-of-speech (POS) tagger
to reduce the number of erroneous analyses (e.g.
(Koehn and Knight, 2003), (Stymne, 2008)): the
word class of the rightmost (possible) part of the
compound is restricted to match the word class of
the whole compound, which is coherent to Ger-
man compositional morphology. This constraint
lead to higher accuracies in gold standard evalu-
ations, but it did not improve translation quality
in the experiments of Koehn and Knight (2003)
and Stymne (2008), and therefore, we did not re-
implement the corpus-driven approach with this
POS-constraint. However, some of the errors pre-
sented in this section could have been prevented if
the POS-constraint was used: the erroneous splits
of lebenstreuen and traumatisch were avoided, but
for the splittings of Belangen and entbrannte, the
POS-constraint would not help. A more restrictive
POS-constraint proposed by Stymne (2008), al-
lows splitting only into parts belonging to content-
bearing word classes. This works for Belangen,
but not for entbrannte. In the case of Themen and
Toynbeesche, the output of a POS-tagger for the
last part are not trustworthy, as these are not cor-
rect German words: men belongs to foreign lan-
guage material or it is a content-free syllable, such
as sche.

4.3.2 Errors of the Hybrid Approach
During the development of the hybrid splitting
approach, we did an extensive gold standard eval-
uation along the way, as described in section 4.1
above. The performance of the hybrid approach
is limited by the performance of its constituents,
namely the coverage of SMOR and the quality
of the corpus from which part frequencies are
derived. In the gold standard evaluation, we
distinguished three error categories: wrong split
(should not be split but was), wrong not (should
be split but was not) and wrong faulty (should
be split, and was split, but wrongly). Table 2 (cf.
Section 4.1) contains the results of the gold stan-
dard we used as development set for our approach.
In Table 5, we give a detailed distribution of the
wrong splittings of the less constrained hybrid
approach sm, into the following categories:

frequency-based: SMOR found the correct split, but
a wrong split was scored higher

unknown to SMOR: lexeme or rule missing in SMOR
lexicalized in SMOR: lexeme exists in SMOR, but fully

lexicalized (no splitting possible)

It can be seen from Table 5 that most of the errors
are due to corpus frequencies of the component
parts. An example is Nachteil (“disadvantage”),
which is lexicalized in German, but can also be
correctly divided (even though it is semantically
less plausible) into nach|Teil (“after|part”), and as
both of these parts are high frequent, Nachteil is
split.

As the corpus-driven approach uses the same
disambiguation component, there must be an over-
lap of the frequency-based errors of the two ap-
proaches.

error type Wrongsplit not faulty
frequency-based 538 26 155
unknown to SMOR 3 7 0
lexicalized in SMOR 0 2 10
total number of errors 541 35 165

Table 5: Error analysis of sm with respect to the
gold standard in Table 2 above.

The remaining two categories contain errors
that are attributed to wrong or missing analyses
in SMOR. Compared to the total number of er-
rors, there are very few such errors. Most of the
unknown words are proper names or compounds
with proper names, such as Petrischale (“petri
dish”). Here, the corpus-driven approach is able

231



to correctly the compound into Petri|Schale.
There are a number of compounds in German

that originally consisted of two words, but are
now lexicalized. For some of them SMOR does
not provide any splitting option. An example is
Sackgasse (“dead end street”) which contains the
words Sack (“sack”) and Gasse (“narrow street”),
where SMOR leaves the word unsplit (but not un-
analyzed: it is encoded as one lexeme), while the
corpus-driven approach correctly splits it.

5 Translation Performance

5.1 System Description

The Moses toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007) was used
to construct a baseline PBSMT system (with de-
fault parameters), following the instructions of the
shared task9. The baseline system is Moses built
exactly as described for the shared task baseline.
Contrastive systems are also built identically, ex-
cept for the use of preprocessing on the German
training, tuning and testing data; this ensures that
all measured effects on translation quality are at-
tributable to the preprocessing. We used data from
the EACL 2009 workshop on statistical machine
translation10. The data include ∼1.2 million par-
allel sentences for training (EUROPARL and news),
1,025 sentences for tuning and 1,026 sentences
for testing. All data was lowercased and tok-
enized, using the shared task tokenizer. We used
the English side of the parallel data for the lan-
guage model. As specified in the instructions, sen-
tences longer than 40 words were removed from
the bilingual training corpus, but not from the lan-
guage model corpus. The monolingual language
model training data (containing roughly 227 mil-
lion words11) was used to derive corpus frequen-
cies for the splitting approaches.

For tuning of feature weights we ran Mini-
mum Error Rate Training (Och, 2003) until con-
vergence, individually for each system (optimiz-
ing BLEU). The experiments were evaluated using
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and METEOR (Lavie
and Agarwal, 2007)12. Tuning scores are calcu-
lated on lowercased, tokenized text; all test scores
are case sensitive and performed on automatically

9
http://www.statmt.org/wmt09/baseline.html

10
http://www.statmt.org/wmt09/translation-task.

html
11
http://www.statmt.org/wmt09/

training-monolingual.tar
12The version of METEOR used is 0.7, we use “exact

porter-stem wn-synonmy”, weights are “0.8 0.83 0.28”.

system tuning test testBLEU BLEU METEOR
raw 18.10 15.72 47.65
cd 18.52 16.17 49.29
sm 19.47 16.59 49.98
sm@nn 19.42 16.76 49.77
smc 19.53 16.63 50.13
smc@nn 19.61 16.40 49.64

Table 6: Effects of compound splitting:
raw = without preprocessing, cd = corpus-driven,
sm = hybrid approach using all SMOR analyses,
smc = hybrid approach with minimal SMOR splits
*@nn = split only nouns.
bold-face = significant wrt. raw
underlined = significant wrt. cd

recapitalized, detokenized text.

5.2 Translation Results

The BLEU and METEOR scores of our experi-
ments are summarized in Table 6. Results that
are significantly better than the baseline are bold-
faced13. Underlining indicates that a result is sig-
nificantly better than corpus-driven.

Compared to not-splitting (raw), the corpus-
driven approach (cd) gains 0.45 BLEU points and
+1.64 in METEOR for testing. All variants of the
hybrid approach (sm*) score higher than cd, reach-
ing up to +0.59 BLEU compared to cd and +1.04
BLEU compared to raw for sm@nn. In terms of
METEOR, gains of up to +0.84 compared to cd and
+2.48 compared to raw are observable for smc, all
of them being significant with respect to both, raw
and cd. The smc variant of the hybrid approach
yielded the highest METEOR score and it was also
found to be the most accurate one when evaluated
against the linguistic gold standard in section 4.1.

The restriction to split only nouns (@nn) leads
to a slightly improved performance of sm (+0.17)
BLEU, while METEOR is slightly worse when the
@nn constraint is used: -0.21. Despite the fact that
it had a high precision in the gold standard evalu-
ation of section 4.1 above, smc, when used with
the @nn constraint, decreases in performance ver-
sus smc without the constraint, because the @nn
variant leaves many compounds unsplit (cf. row
“Wrong not”, Table 2), Secion 4.1).

13We used pair-wise bootstrap resampling using sample
size 1,000 and p-value 0.05, code obtained from http:
//www.ark.cs.cmu.edu/MT

232



5.3 Vocabulary Reduction Through
Compound Splitting

One of the main issues in translating from a com-
pounding and/or highly inflected language into
a morphologically less complex language is data
sparsity: many source words occur very rarely,
which makes it difficult to learn the correct transla-
tions. Compound splitting aims at making the vo-
cabulary as small as possible but at the same time
keeping as much of the morphological information
as necessary to ensure translation quality. Table 7
shows the vocabulary sizes of our translation ex-
periments, where “types” and “singles” refer to
the training data and “unknown” refers to the test
set. It can be seen that the vocabulary is smallest
for the corpus-driven approach (cd). However, as
the translation experiments in the previous section
have shown, the cd approach was outperformed by
the hybrid approaches, despite their larger vocab-
ularies.

system types singles unknown
raw 267,392 135,328 1,032
cd 97,378 36,928 506
sm 100,836 37,433 593
sm@nn 130,574 51,799 644
smc 109,837 39,908 608
smc@nn 133,755 52,505 650

Table 7: Measuring Vocabulary Reduction for
Compound Splitting.

6 Conclusion

We combined linguistic analysis with corpus-
based statistics and obtained better results in terms
of both producing splittings and statistical ma-
chine translation performance. We provided an ex-
tensive analysis showing where our approach im-
proves on corpus-driven splitting.

We believe that our work helps to validate the
utility of SMOR. The unsupervised morphology
induction community has already begun to evalu-
ate using SMT (Viripioja et al., 2007). Developers
of high recall hand-crafted morphologies should
also consider statistical machine translation as a
useful extrinsic evaluation.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft grant “Models of Mor-
phosyntax for Statistical Machine Translation”.
We would like to thank Helmut Schmid.

References
Martin Braschler and Bärbel Ripplinger. 2004. How

effective is stemming and decompounding for Ger-
man text retrieval? Information Retrieval, 7(3-
4):291–316.

Chris Dyer. 2009. Using a maximum entropy
model to build segmentation lattices for MT. In
HLT-NAACL’09: Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2003. Empirical
methods for compound splitting. In EACL ’03: Pro-
ceedings of the 10th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 187–193, Morristown, NJ, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexan-
dra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses:
Open source toolkit for statistical machine transla-
tion. In ACL’07: Proceedings of the 45th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Demonstration Session, pages 177–180.

Martha Larson, Daniel Willett, Joachim Köhler, and
Gerhard Rigoll. 2000. Compound splitting and lexi-
cal unit recombination for improved performance of
a speech recognition system for German parliamen-
tary speeches. In ICSLP’00: Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Spoken Language Pro-
cessing, pages 945–948.

Alon Lavie and Abhaya Agarwal. 2007. Meteor: An
automatic metric for MT evaluation with high levels
of correlation with human judgements. In ACL’07:
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation within the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 228–231.

Sonja Nießen and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improving
SMT quality with morpho-syntactic analysis. In
COLING’00: Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
1081–1085. Morgan Kaufmann.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In ACL’03: Proceed-
ings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Compuational Linguistics, pages 160–167.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In ACL’02: Proceed-
ings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318.

Maja Popović, Daniel Stein, and Hermann Ney. 2006.
Statistical machine translation of German compound

233



words. In FinTAL’06: Proceedings of the 5th Inter-
national Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 616–624. Springer Verlag.

Helmut Schmid, Arne Fitschen, and Ulrich Heid.
2004. Smor: A German computational morphology
covering derivation, composition and inflection. In
LREC ’04: Proceedings of the 4th Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 1263–
1266.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, pages 44–49.

Sara Stymne. 2008. German compounds in factored
statistical machine translation. In GoTAL ’08: Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 464–475. Springer
Verlag.

Sami Viripioja, Jaakko J. Väyrynen, Mathias Creutz,
and Markus Sadeniemi. 2007. Morphology-aware
statistical machine translation based on morphs in-
duced in an unsupervised manner. In MT Summit
’07: Proceedings of the 11th Machine Translation
Summit, pages 491–498.

234


