



















































Pruning Non-Informative Text Through Non-Expert Annotations to Improve Aspect-Level Sentiment Classification


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on “Collaboratively Constructed Semantic Resources”, Coling 2010, pages 37–45,
Beijing, August 2010

Pruning Non-Informative Text Through Non-Expert Annotations to
Improve Aspect-Level Sentiment Classification

Ji Fang
Palo Alto Research Center
Ji.Fang@parc.com

Bob Price
Palo Alto Research Center
Bob.Price@parc.com

Lotti Price
Palo Alto Research Center

Lotti.Price@parc.com

Abstract

Sentiment analysis attempts to extract the
author’s sentiments or opinions from un-
structured text. Unlike approaches based
on rules, a machine learning approach
holds the promise of learning robust, high-
coverage sentiment classifiers from la-
beled examples. However, people tend
to use different ways to express the same
sentiment due to the richness of natural
language. Therefore, each sentiment ex-
pression normally does not have many ex-
amples in the training corpus. Further-
more, sentences extracted from unstruc-
tured text (e.g., I filmed my daughter’s
ballet recital and could not believe how
the auto focus kept blurring then focus-
ing) often contain both informative (e.g.,
the auto focus kept blurring then focus-
ing) and extraneous non-informative text
regarding the author’s sentiment towards a
certain topic. When there are few exam-
ples of any given sentiment expression, ex-
traneous non-sentiment information can-
not be identified as noise by the learn-
ing algorithm and can easily become cor-
related with the sentiment label, thereby
confusing sentiment classifiers. In this pa-
per, we present a highly effective proce-
dure for using crowd-sourcing techniques
to label informative and non-informative
information regarding the sentiment ex-
pressed in a sentence. We also show
that pruning non-informative information
using non-expert annotations during the
training phase can result in classifiers with

better performance even when the test data
includes non-informative information.

1 Introduction

Noise in training data can be derived either from
noisy labeling or from noisy features. It has been
shown that labeling quality is one of the important
factors that impacts the performance of a learned
model, and that this quality can be improved by
approaches such as using multiple labelers (Sheng
et al., 2008). However, noisy features can be an
inherent characteristic for some text mining tasks,
and it is unclear how they should be handled.

For example, sentiment analysis/opinion min-
ing from unstructured user generated content such
as online reviews and blogs often relies on learn-
ing sentiments from word-based features extracted
from the training sentences and documents (Pang
et al., 2002; Dave et al., 2003; Kim and Hovy,
2005). However, not all words in the training data
carry information about sentiment. For example,
in sentence (1),

(1)I filmed my daughter’s ballet recital and
could not believe how the auto focus kept blurring
then focusing.

although words such as auto focus, blurring and
focusing are informative for learning sentiment re-
garding the auto focus capability of the camera,
words such as film, daughter and ballet recital are
not informative for that type of sentiment, and they
form noise if included as training data.

If the training data contain a lot of examples
such as (2) in which words such as film, daughter
and ballet recital also appear, but the sentence is
not labelled as invoking sentiment regarding auto
focus, a machine learning algorithm might learn

37



that such words are not informative for sentiment
classification.

(2)I filmed my daughter’s ballet recital and
could not believe how good the picture quality
was.

However, due to the richness of natural lan-
guage, people tend to use different ways to de-
scribe a similar event or to express a similar opin-
ion. Consequently, repeated use of the same ex-
pression is not common in the training data for
sentiment classification. Note that this difficulty
cannot be simply overcome by increasing the size
of the training data. For example, a search on
the completely natural phrase “I filmed my daugh-
ter’s ballet recital” in Google and Bing returns the
same exact sentence as shown in (1). In other
words, there appears to be only one sentence con-
taining that exact phrase, which implies that even
if we use the entire web as our training data set
we would not find an example such as (2) to help
the learning algorithm to determine which feature
words in (1) are informative and which are not.
Therefore, data sparsity is an inherent problem for
a task such as sentiment analysis, and if we adopt
the bag-of-words approach for sentiment classifi-
cation (Pang et al., 2002), which uses the words
that appear in sentences as training features, our
training data will unavoidably include many noisy
non-informative features.

This paper presents a crowd-sourcing technique
to identify and prune the non-informative features.
We explore the effect of using non-expert annota-
tions to gain low-noise training data for sentiment
classification. We show that the cleaner training
data obtained from non-expert annotations signif-
icantly improve the performance of the sentiment
classifier. We also present evidence that this im-
provement is due to reduction in confusion be-
tween classes due to noise words.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 discusses the related work. Sec-
tion 3 describes our approach for pruning non-
informative features. Section 4 presents an empir-
ical study on the effect of training on informative
features in the domain of sentiment analysis. Con-
clusions are summarized in Section 5.

2 Related Work

Feature selection in the domain of sentiment anal-
ysis has focused on the following issues.

a) Should word-based features be selected
based on frequency or presence?

It has been shown that compared to word fre-
quency, word presence is a better sentiment indi-
cator (Pang et al., 2002; Wiebe et al., 2004; Yang
et al., 2006). In other words, unlike in other do-
mains such as topic classification where the fre-
quency of words provides useful information re-
garding the topic class, sentiment information is
not normally indicated by the frequency of certain
words, because people are unlikely to repeatedly
use the same word or phrase to express an opin-
ion in one document. Instead, Researchers (Pang
et al., 2002) found that selecting features based on
word presence rather than word frequency leads
to better performance in the domain of sentiment
analysis.

b) Which are more useful features: uni-
grams, higher-order n-grams or syntactically re-
lated terms?

This issue seems to be debatable. While some
researchers (Pang et al., 2002) reported that un-
igrams outperform both bigrams as well as the
combination of unigrams and bigrams in classi-
fying movie reviews based on sentiment polarity,
some others (Dave et al., 2003) reported the oppo-
site in some settings.

Similarly, some (Dave et al., 2003) found syn-
tactically related terms are not helpful for senti-
ment classification, whereas others (Gamon, 2004;
Matsumoto et al., 2005; Ng et al., 2006) found the
opposite to be true.

c) In terms of part-of-speech, which types of
words are more useful features?

Adjectives and adverbs are commonly used as
features for sentiment learning (Mullen and Col-
lier, 2004; Turney, 2002; Whitelaw et al., 2005).
However, more recent studies show that all con-
tent words including nouns, verbs, adjectives and
adverbs are useful features for sentiment analysis
(Dillard, 2007).

Regardless of which types of features are
used, these traditional approaches are still in-
herently noisy in the sense that non-informative

38



words/features within each sentence are included
as described in Section 1. As far as we are aware,
this is an issue that has not been addressed.

The closest works are Riloff et al. (Riloff and
Wiebe, 2003) and Pang et al. (Pang et al., 2002)’s
work. Riloff et al. explored removing the features
that are subsumed in other features when a com-
bination of different types of features such as un-
igrams, bigrams and syntactically related terms is
used. Pang et al. speculated that words that appear
at certain positions in a movie review are more in-
formative for the overall opinion reflected in that
review. However, according to Pang et al., for the
task of predicting the overall polarity of a movie
review, training on word features assumed to be
more informative resulted in worse performance
than training on all word features appearing in the
reviews.

Our approach is different in that we try to iden-
tify and prune non-informative word features at
the sentence level. We focus on identifying which
portion of the sentence is informative for senti-
ment classification. We then completely remove
the non-informative portion of the sentence and
prevent any terms occurring in that portion from
being selected as feature vectors representing that
sentence. Note that the classification of words as
non-informative is not related to their positions in
a sentence nor to their frequency count in the train-
ing corpus. Instead, whether a word is informative
depends purely on the semantics and the context
of the sentence. For example, the word big would
be non-informative in (3), but informative in (4).

(3)That was a big trip, and I took a lot of pic-
tures using this camera.

(4)This camera has a big LCD screen.
Unlike the traditional approach of using ex-

pert annotation to identify the non-informative text
in a sentence, we instead use non-expert annota-
tions without external gold standard comparisons.
There have been an increasing number of exper-
iments using non-expert annotations for various
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. For ex-
ample, Su et al. (Su et al., 2007) use non-expert
annotations for hotel name entity resolution. In
(Nakov, 2008), non-expert annotators generated
paraphrases for 250 noun-noun compounds, which
were then used as the gold standard data for eval-

uating an automatic paraphrasing system. Kaisser
and Lowe (Kaisser and Lowe, 2008) also use non-
experts to annotate answers contained in sentences
and use the annotation results to help build a ques-
tion answering corpus. Snow et al. (Snow et
al., 2008) reported experiments using non-expert
annotation for the following five NLP tasks: af-
fect recognition, word similarity, recognizing tex-
tual entailment, event temporal ordering, and word
sense disambiguation.

This paper presents a study of using non-expert
annotations to prune non-informative word fea-
tures and training a sentiment classifier based on
such non-expert annotations. The following sec-
tion describes our approach in detail.

3 Non-Informative Feature Pruning
Through Non-Expert Annotations

To prune the non-informative features, a tradi-
tional approach would be to hire and train anno-
tators to label which portion of each training sen-
tence is informative or non-informative. However,
this approach is both expensive and time consum-
ing. We overcome these issues by using crowd-
sourcing techniques to obtain annotations from
untrained non-expert workers such as the ones on
the Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) platform1.
To illustrate our approach, we use an example for
sentiment analysis below.

The key to our approach relies on careful de-
sign of simple tasks or HITs that can elicit the
necessary information for both labeling the senti-
ment information and pruning the non-informative
text of a sentence. These tasks can be performed
quickly and inexpensively by untrained non-expert
workers on the AMT platform. We achieved this
goal by designing the following two experiments.

Experiment 1 asks the workers to judge whether
a sentence indicates an opinion towards a certain
aspect of the camera, and if so, whether the opin-
ion is positive, negative or neutral. For example,
the proper annotations for sentence (5) would be
as shown in Figure 1.

1This is an online market place that offers a small amount
of money to people who perform some “Human Intelligence
Tasks” (HITs). https://www.mturk.com/mturk/
welcome

39



(5) On my trip to California, the camera fell and
broke into two pieces.

Figure 1: Experiment 1

We randomly selected 6100 sentences in total
for this experiment from the Multi-Domain Senti-
ment Dataset created by Blitzer et al. (Blitzer et
al., 2007). Each sentence was independently an-
notated by two AMT workers. Each annotation
consisted of a sentence labeled with a camera as-
pect and a sentiment toward that aspect.

One unique characteristic of Experiment1 is
that it makes the detection of unreliable responses
very easy. Because one sentence is unlikely to in-
voke many different aspects of cameras, an anno-
tation is thus suspicious if many aspects of cam-
era are annotated as being invoked. Figure 2 and
Figure 3 illustrate the contrast between a normal
reliable response and a suspicious unreliable re-
sponse.

Due to this favorable characteristic of Experi-
ment 1, we did not have to design a qualification
test. We approved all of the assignments; how-
ever we later filtered out the detected suspicious
responses, which accounted for 8% of the work.
Even though we restricted our AMT workers to
those who have an approval rate of 95% or above,
we still found 20% of them unreliable in the sense
that they provided suspicious responses.

Given our ability to detecting suspicious re-
sponses, we believe it is very unlikely for two reli-
able AMT workers to annotate any given sentence
exactly the same way merely by chance. There-
fore, we consider an annotation to be gold when
both annotators marked the same sentiment toward
the same aspect. We obtained 2718 gold-standard
annotations from the reliable responses. We define
the agreement rate of annotations as follows.

AgreementRate = NumberofGoldAnnotations×2TotalNumberofAnnotations .
(1)

Based on this measure, the agreement rate of the
AMT workers in this study is 48.4%.

We held randomly selected 587 gold annotated
sentences as our test set, and used the remain-
ing 2131 sentences as our training sentences. To
prune the non-informative text from the training
sentences, we put the 2131 sentences through Ex-
periment 2 as described below.

Experiment 2 asks the workers to point out
the exact portion of the sentence that indicates
an opinion. The opinion and its associated fea-
ture name are displayed along with the sentence in
which they appear. Such information is automati-
cally generated from the results derived from Ex-
periment 1. An example of Experiment 2 is given
in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Experiment 2

The expected answer for this example is the bat-
tery door keeps falling off.

Using this method, we can remove the non-
informative part of the sentences: One thing I have
to mention is that and prevent any of the words in
that part from being selected as our training fea-
tures.

Experiment 2 requires the workers to enter or
copy and paste text in the box, and 100% of the
workers did it. In our sentiment classification ex-
periment described below, we used all of the re-
sults without further filtering.

We paid $0.01 for each assignment in both ex-
periments, and we acquired all of the annotations
in one week’s time with a total cost of $215, in-
cluding fees paid to Amazon. Our pay rate is about
$0.36/hour. For Experiment 1 alone, if we adopted
a traditional approach and hired two annotators,
they could likely complete the annotations in five
8-hour days. Using this approach, the cost for Ex-
periment 1 alone would be $1200, with a rate of
$15/hour. Therefore, our approach is both cheaper
and faster than the traditional approach.

40



Figure 2: Reliable Response

Figure 3: Unreliable Response

Having described our crowd-souring based ap-
proach for pruning the non-informative features,
we next present an empirical study on the effect of
training on informative features.

4 Pruning Non-Informative Features for
Sentiment Classification

We conducted an experiment on sentiment classifi-
cation in the domain of camera reviews to test the
effect of pruning non-informative features based
on AMT workers’ annotations.

In our experiment, we select the Nouns, Verbs,
Adjectives and Adverbs as our unigram features
for training. We define non-informative fea-
tures as the four types of words occurring in the
non-informative portion of the training sentence;
namely, the portion that does not mention any as-
pect of the camera or associated sentiment. For
example, for a training sentence such as (1) (re-
peated below as (6)), training on all features would
select the following words: [film, daughter, ballet,
recital, not-believe2, auto, focus, kept, blurring,
focusing].

(6) I filmed my daughter’s ballet recital and
could not believe how the auto focus kept blurring
then focusing.

By contrast, pruning non-informative features
would yield a shorter list of selected words: [auto,
focus, kept, blurring, focusing].

In our experiment, we compare the performance

2See below for the description regarding how we handle
negation.

of the classifier learned from all of the Nouns,
Verbs, Adjectives and Adverbs in the sentences
with the one learned from these word types oc-
curring only in the informative part of the sen-
tence. When the training set contains all of the fea-
ture words, we refer to it as the All-Features-Set.
When the non-informative features are pruned,
the training set contains only the informative fea-
ture words, which we refer to as the Informative-
Features-Set.

All of the feature words are stemmed using the
Porter Stemmer (Porter, 1980). Negators are at-
tached to the next selected feature word. We also
use a small set of stop words3 to exclude copulas
and words such as take. The reason that we choose
these words as stop words is because they are both
frequent and ambiguous and thus tend to have a
negative impact on the classifier.

All of our training and test sentences are an-
notated through crowd-sourcing techniques as de-
scribed in the last section. In our experiment
we use 2131 sentences in total for training and
587 sentences for hold-out testing. The non-
informative part of the test sentences are not re-
moved. The experiment results and implications
are discussed in detail in the following subsec-
tions.

3The stop words we use include copulas and the following
words: take, takes, make, makes, just, still, even, too, much,
enough, back, again, far, same

41



4.1 Aspect:Polarity Classification Using SVM

In this experiment, the task is to perform a 45 way
sentiment classification. These 45 classes are de-
rived from 22 aspects related to camera purchases
such as picture quality, LCD screen, battery life
and customer support and their associated polar-
ity values positive and negative, as well as a class
of no opinion about any of the 22 aspects. An ex-
ample of such a class is picture quality: positive.
The classifier maps each input sentence into one
of the 45 classes.

One of the approaches we tested is to train the
classifier based on the All-Features-Set derived
from the original raw sentences. We refer to this as
“All Features”. The other approach is to learn from
the Informative-Features-Set derived from the sen-
tences with the non-informative portion removed
by the AMT workers. We refer to this as “Informa-
tive Features”. The experiment is conducted us-
ing SVM algorithm implemented by Chang et al.
(Chang and Lin, 2001). We use linear kernel type
and use the default setting for all other parameters.

The classification accuracy is defined as fol-
lows.

Accuracy = NumberofSentencesCorrectlyClassifiedTotalNumberofSentences .
(2)

The experiment results in terms of classification
accuracy are shown in Table 1.

Table 1: Classification Accuracy

All Features Informative Features
41.7% 45.8%

In this experiment, pruning the non-informative
features improves the accuracy by more than 4%.
This improvement is statistically significant by a
one-tailed sign test at p = 0.15. Training on the in-
formative features also consistently improves the
classification accuracy when we vary the size of
the training data as illustrated by the Figure 54.

4To demonstrate the learning curve, we experimented
with the use of different percentages of the training sen-
tences while always testing on the same 587 test sentences.
When the percentage of the training sentences used is less
than 100%, we randomly pick that percentage of training sen-
tences until the test accuracy converges.

Figure 5: Learning Curve

A salient characteristic of this experiment is that
the training data tend to be very sparse for two rea-
sons. First, the number of classes is large, which
means that the number of training examples for
each class will be fewer. As shown in Table 2,
24 out of the 45 classes have fewer than 30 train-
ing examples, which is an indication of how sparse
the training data is. Second, as shown in Section
1, people tend to use different ways to express the
type of sentiments that we aim to learn in this ex-
periment. Therefore, it is difficult to collect re-
peated training examples and this difficulty cannot
be simply overcome by increasing the size of the
training data. This data sparsity means that it is
difficult for the SVM to learn which feature words
are non-informative noise.

Table 2: Class Distribution in Experiment 1

Number of Classes Number of Training Sentences
6 fewer than 10
14 fewer than 20
24 fewer than 30
33 fewer than 50
41 fewer than 100
4 more than 100

4.2 Automatic Feature Selection vs. Pruning
by AMT Workers

As shown in the previous subsection, pruning non-
informative word features using non-expert anno-
tations can significantly improve the performance
of the sentiment classifier. Can we achieve the
same improvement by using automatic feature se-
lection algorithms?

We tried three widely used feature se-
lection techniques LR(Likelihood Ratio),
WLLR(Weighted Log-Likelihood Ratio) (Nigam
et al., 2000; Ng et al., 2006) and MI(Mutual
Information) and applied them to the original raw
training data. We found that in general, the fewer

42



the feature words selected by these algorithms,
the worse the classifier performs. The classifier
performed the best when using all of the available
feature words. In other words, automatic feature
selection offered no benefit. Table 3 shows the
results of using these three automatic feature
selection techniques as well as the results of
not performing automatic feature selection. The
threshold for the LR algorithm was set to be 5; the
threshold for the WLLR algorithm was set to be
0.005; and the threshold for the MI algorithm was
set to be 2000 (using the top 2000 ranked features
out of a total of 3279 features).

Table 3: Automatic Feature Selection Results

No Feature Selection LR WLLR MI
41.7% 35.4% 40.2% 41.1%

This result is not surprising given the data spar-
sity issue in our experiment. Traditional feature
selection methods either try to remove correlated
features which can cause havoc for some meth-
ods or to prune out features uncorrelated with la-
bels to make learning more efficient. However, we
have sparse data so correlations calcuated are very
unstable - if a feature appears once with a label
what can we conclude? So the same properties
that cause difficulties for the learner cause prob-
lems for feature selection techniques as well.

To summarize, pruning non-informative word
features using non-expert annotations can signif-
icantly improve the performance of the sentiment
classifier even when the test data still contain non-
informative features. We believe this is because
pruning non-informative feature words based on
human knowledge leads to better training data that
cannot be achieved by using automatic feature se-
lection techniques. The subsection below com-
pares the two sets of training sentences we used
in this experiment: one comprises the original raw
sentences and the other comprises sentences with
the non-informative text removed. We show that
our approach of pruning non-informative text in-
deed leads to a better set of training data.

4.3 Comparison of Training Data Before and
After the Feature Pruning

Our assumption is that training data is better if data
belonging to closer classes are more similar and
data belonging to further classes are more differ-
ent. In our sentiment classification experiment, an
example of two very close classes are battery life:
positive and battery life: negative. An example of
two very different classes are battery life: positive
and auto focus: negative. The more similar the
training data belonging to closer classes and the
more dissimilar the training data belonging to dif-
ferent classes, the more accurate the classifier can
predict the involved camera aspect, which in turn
should lead to improvements on the overall classi-
fication accuracy.

To test whether the pruned text produced bet-
ter training data than the original text, an adjusted
cosine similarity measure was used. Note that
our measurement can only reflect partial effects
of AMT workers’ pruning, because our measure
is essentially term frequency based, which can re-
flect similarity in terms of topic (camera aspects
in our case) but not similarity in terms of polarity
(Pang et al., 2002). Nevertheless, this measure-
ment highlights some of the impact resulting from
the pruning.

To compare training data belonging to any two
classes, we produce a tf-idf score for each word
in those two classes and represent each class as a
vector containing the tf-idf score for each word in
that class. Comparing the similarity of two classes
involves calculating the adjusted cosine similarity
in the following formula.

similarity = A·B||A||||B|| . (3)

A and B in the above formula are vectors of tf-
idf scores, whereas in the standard cosine similar-
ity measure A and B would be vectors containing
tf scores. The motivation for using tf-idf scores
instead of the tf scores is to reduce the importance
of highly common words such as the and a in the
comparison. The similarity score produced by this
formula is a number between 0 and 1; 0 being no
overlap and 1 indicating that the classes are iden-
tical. Word stemming was not used in this experi-
ment.

43



We compared similarity changes in two situa-
tions. First, when two classes share the same as-
pect; this involves comparison between 22 class
pairs such as battery life: positive vs. battery life:
negative. Second, when two classes share different
aspects; for example, battery life: positive vs. auto
focus: negative and battery life: positive vs. auto
focus: positive. In this situation, we compared the
similarity changes in 903 class pairs. If pruning
the non-informative text does indeed provide bet-
ter training data, we expect similarity to increase
in the first situation and to decrease in the second
situation after the pruning. This is precisely what
we found; our finding is summarized in Table 4.

Table 4: Average Similarity Changes in the Pruned Training
Data

Same aspect Different aspect
+0.01 -0.02

In conclusion, AMT workers, by highlighting
the most pertinent information for classification
and allowing us to discard the rest, provided more
useful data than the raw text.

5 Conclusions

To summarize, we found that removing the non-
informative text from the training sentences pro-
duces better training data and significantly im-
proves the performance of the sentiment clas-
sifier even when the test data still contain
non-informative feature words. We also show
that annotations for both sentiment classes and
sentiment-informative texts can be acquired effi-
ciently through crowd-sourcing techniques as de-
scribed in this paper.

6 Acknowledgments

We thank Prateek Sarkar, Jessica Staddon and Bi
Chen for insightful discussions and comments.
We thank the anonymous reviewers’ helpful sug-
gestions and feedback. We would also like to
thank Jason Kessler for implementing part of the
sentiment analysis algorithm and the Amazon Me-
chanical Turk experiments.

References
Sheng, Victor S., Provost, Foster, and Ipeirotis, Panagi-

otis G.. 2008. Get Another Label? Improving Data
Quality and Data Mining Using Multiple, Noisy La-
belers. KDD 2008 Proceedings 614-622.

Pang, Bo, Lee, Lillian, and Vaithyanathan, Shivakumar.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) 79-86.

Dave, Kushal, Lawrence, Steve, and Pennock, David
M.. 2003. Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion ex-
traction and semantic classification of product re-
views. Proceedings of WWW 519-528.

Kim, Soo–Min and Hovy, Eduard. 2005. Identifying
opinion holders for question answering in opinion
texts. Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Ques-
tion Answering in Restricted Domains.

Wiebe, Janyce M. , Wilson, Theresa , Bruce, Rebecca
, Bell, Matthew and Martin, Melanie. 2004. Learn-
ing subjective language. Computational Linguistics,
30(3):277-308.

Yang, Kiduk , Yu, Ning , Valerio, Alejandro and Zhang,
Hui. 2006. WIDIT in TREC-2006 Blog track. Pro-
ceedings of TREC.

Gamon, Michael. 2004. Sentiment classification on
customer feedback data: noisy data, large feature
vectors, and the role of linguistic analysis. Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING).

Matsumoto, Shotaro, Takamura, Hiroya and Okumura,
Manabu. 2005. Sentiment classification using word
sub-sequences and dependency sub-trees. Proceed-
ings of PAKDD05, the 9th Pacific-Asia Conference
on Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining.

Ng, Vincent, Dasgupta, Sajib and Arifin, S. M. Niaz.
2006. Examining the role of linguistic knowledge
sources in the automatic identification and classifi-
cation of reviews. Proceedings of the COLING/ACL
Main Conference Poster Sessions 611-618.

Mullen, Tony and Collier, Nigel. 2004. Sentiment
analysis using support vector machines with diverse
in-formation sources. Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) 412-418.

Turney, Peter. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Se-
mantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifi-
cation of reviews. Proceedings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL) 417-424.

44



Whitelaw, Casey, Garg, Navendu and Argamon,
Shlomo. 2005. Using appraisal groups for sen-
timent analysis. Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM) 625-631.

Dillard, Logan. 2007. I Can’t Recommend This Paper
Highly Enough: Valence-Shifted Sentences in Senti-
ment Classification. Master Thesis.

Riloff, Ellen and Wiebe, Janyce. 2003. Learning ex-
traction patterns for subjective expressions. Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Su, Qi, Pavlov, Dmitry, Chow, Jyh-Herng and Baker,
Wendell C.. 2007. Internet-Scale Collection of
Human- Reviewed Data. Proceedings of WWW-
2007.

Nakov, Preslav. 2008. Paraphrasing Verbs for
Noun Compound Interpretation. Proceedings of the
Workshop on Multiword Expressions, LREC-2008.

Kaisser, Michael and Lowe, John B.. 2008. A
Re-search Collection of QuestionAnswer Sentence
Pairs. Proceedings of LREC-2008.

Snow, Rion, O’Connor, Brendan, Jurafsky, Daniel and
Ng, Andrew Y. 2008. Cheap and Fast - But is
it Good? Evaluating Non-Expert Annotations for
Natural Language Tasks. Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP).

Blitzer, John, Dredze, Mark, Biographies, Fernando
Pereira., Bollywood, Boom-boxes and Blenders.
2007. Domain Adaptation for Sentiment Classifica-
tion. Proceedings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).

Porter, M.F.. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping.
Program.

Chang, Chih-Chung and Lin, Chih-Jen. 2001.
LIBSVM: a library for support vector machines.
Software available at http://www.csie.ntu.
edu.tw/˜cjlin/libsvm.

Nigam, K., McCallum, A.K., Thrun, S., and Mitchell,
T.. 2000. Text Classification from labeled and unla-
beled documents using em. Machine Learning 39(2-
3) 103-134.

45


