



















































Proceedings of the...


Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 46–49,
Uppsala, July 2010.

Importance of negations and experimental qualifiers in biomedical
literature

Martin Krallinger
Struct. Biol. and Biocomp. Prog.

Spanish National Cancer Center, Madrid, Spain.
mkrallinger@cnio.es

Abstract

A general characteristic of most biomed-
ical disciplines is their primarily experi-
mental character. Discoveries are obtained
through molecular biology and biochemi-
cal techniques that allow understanding of
biological processes at the molecular level.
To qualify biological events, it is of practi-
cal significance to detect specific types of
negations that can imply either that a given
event is not observed under specific con-
ditions or even the opposite, that a given
event is true by altering the bio-entities
studied (e.g. introducing specific modifi-
cations like mutations). Of special interest
is also to determine if a detected assertion
is linked to experimental support provided
by the authors. Finding experimental qual-
ifier cues and detecting experimental tech-
nique mentions is of great interest to the
biological community in general and par-
ticularly for annotation databases. A short
overview of different types of negations
and biological qualifiers of practical rele-
vance will be provided.

1 Biological Annotations

In line with the rapid accumulation of biological
literature and the growing number of large-scale
experiments in biomedicine, it is becoming more
important to capture essential facts contained in
the literature and storing them in form of biolog-
ical annotations. Such annotations usually con-
sist in structured database records, where biologi-
cal entities of relevance, like genes or proteins are
associated to controlled vocabularies that are use-
ful to describe the most relevant aspects of these
entities (their function, localization, processes or
pathways they participate in or implications in dis-
eases). Also specific types of relations between

bio-entities (e.g. physical or regulatory interac-
tions) are manually extracted from the literature.
For biological interpretation and to determine the
reliability of annotations it is crucial to capture
both negative annotations, whether a given rela-
tion has been studied experimentally and does not
occur, as well as to determine the experimental
method used to study the bio-entity of interest. For
instance, the value of in vitro generated results, or
those obtained by large-scale experiments have a
different significance compared to those generated
in vivo. The most relevant biological annotations
contained in databases and constructed manually
by expert curators are linked to experimental qual-
ifiers. Such experimental qualifiers can range from
simple method terms to more sophisticated ontolo-
gies or hierarchical terminologies. Experimental
qualifiers used to annotate biological entities are
for instance provided by the Proteomics Standards
Initiative Molecular Interaction (PSI-MI) ontol-
ogy, (Orchard S, Kerrien S., 2010) the Evidence
Codes of Gene Ontology (GO) (Rogers MF, Ben-
Hur A, 2010) or the Open REGulatory ANNOta-
tion (ORegAnno) database Evidence Types.

2 Importance of Negations in
Biomedicine

There is an increasing interest to extract from
the literature negative associations. For instance,
one of the most popular biological annotation ef-
forts, Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA), also sup-
ports the annotation of ′NOT ′ relations (associa-
tion.is not) to be able to represent these types of
relations in their annotation data. In GO, such re-
lations are labeled using ′NOT ′ in the qualifier
column for a particular annotation. This negation
qualifier is applied to provide an explicit note that
the bio-entity is not associated with a given GO
term. This is important when a GO term might
otherwise be expected to apply to a bio-entity, but
an experiment proves otherwise. Negative asso-

46



ciations are also used when a cited reference ex-
plicitly states a negation event, e.g. in the form
of: bio-entity X is not found in the location Y. In
addition to annotation efforts there are a range of
scenarios where extraction of negative events are
of practical importance, these are described in the
following subsections.

2.1 Negations and Negative Controls
A common setting in experimental biology is to
use controls to avoid alternative explanations of
results and to minimize experimental artifacts.
Negative controls corroborate that the experimen-
tal outcome is not due to some sort of unrelated ef-
fect; it serves to minimize false positives and can
serve as a background observation. The underly-
ing assumption of negative controls is that one as-
sumes in advance that the result should be nega-
tive, i.e. no significant effect should be obtained.
Such negative controls are mainly expressed in the
literature using negations. For instance in case of
protein-protein interaction experiments, a negative
control could be to demonstrate that a signal is
only obtained when the two interactor proteins are
present, and not when the label (tag-protein) alone
is given to each interactor individually. To illus-
trate this aspect consider the example sentences
provided below:

• Our results show that, when AGG1 is present
in the matrix, it shows a strong ability to bind
35S-labeled AGB1, whereas GST alone is not
able to bind any detectable AGB1.

• GST alone did not interact with FKHR even
in the presence of E2 (Fig. 2B, lane 5), in-
dicating the specific interaction between ER
and FKHR.

• 35S-labeled in vitrotranslated FBXO11
bound to immobilized GST-p53 (lane 3) but
not GST alone (lane 2).

• PKC bound to GST-RINCK1 (lane 2) but not
to GST alone (lane 1), revealing that PKC
binds to RINCK directly.

In those example cases, GST (alone) would rep-
resent the negative control. Only in presence of the
interactor proteins a signal should be observed, if
GST alone is present the assumption is that no sig-
nal should be obtained. Negative controls are cru-
cial for interpretation of the actual experimental
outcome.

2.2 Negative associations in medical and
population genetics

A considerable effort is being made to detect genes
and mutations in genes that have implications in
the susceptibility of complex disorders. Naturally
occurring variations in the sequence of genes, of-
ten called polymorphisms might have a deleteri-
ous, protective or no associations at all to a patho-
logic condition. Not only to capture deleterious
and protective mutations, but also those that do not
have any effect is important to aid in the interpre-
tation of mutations observed in patients. This is
especially true taking into account the increasing
use of molecular screening technologies and per-
sonalized medicine in the clinical domain. Exam-
ple cases of negative associations between genes
and mutations to disease conditions derived from
PubMed abstracts can be seen below:

• CC16 gene may be not a susceptibility gene
of asthmatic patients of Han population in
southwest China.

• The FZD3 gene might not play a role in con-
ferring susceptibility to major psychosis in
our sample.

• Apolipoprotein E gene polymorphism is not
a strong risk factor for diabetic nephropa-
thy and retinopathy in Type I diabetes: case-
control study.

• In view of this evidence, it is likely that the
SIGMAR1 gene does not confer susceptibility
to schizophrenia.

• Thus, this SNP in the PGIS gene is not asso-
ciated with EH.

• The gene encoding GABBR1 is not associ-
ated with childhood absence epilepsy in the
Chinese Han population.

• We did not find an association between OCD,
family history for OCD, and the COMT gene
polymorphism.

Such negative associations can be useful for
the interpretation of relevance of genes for certain
conditions, enabling filtering un-relevant genes
and improving target selection for more detailed
molecular examinations.

47



2.3 Toxicology and negations
A simplified view of toxicology experiments is
to distinguish, given the administration of differ-
ent amounts of a specific compound or drug (e.g.
low, medium and high dosage) during predefined
time spans, between toxic and non-toxic effects.
Such effects can be examined in animal models
like rats or mini-pigs by examining a series of
aspects, such as hematological parameters, organ
histological properties (tissue alterations and size
of organs), biochemical parameters, and changes
in food/water consumption or fertility. Usually an-
imals to which specific amounts of the compound
has been administered are compared to control
cases. Here it is important to determine also three
kinds of negative associations: (1) under which
conditions a given parameter or tissue has not been
negatively affected (save dosage, non-toxic), (2)
which compound did not show the desired bene-
ficial effect (e.g. was not effective in treating the
pathologic condition) and (3) under which admin-
istration conditions a compound was not save. Ex-
ample sentences illustrating these negative associ-
ations are:

• Morphological evaluation showed that 1-BP
did not cause morphological changes in sem-
iniferous epithelium, but 2-BP treatment re-
sulted in the disappearance of spermatogo-
nia, atrophy of the seminiferous tubules and
degeneration of germ cells..

• This is an indication that the extracts may not
be completely safe in male rats when contin-
uously administered for 14days.

• Histopathologic analysis of the vital organs
revealed no significant lesions in the brain,
liver, kidney, heart, spleen, ovary, and testis.

• The extract did not produce any significant
(P>0.05) changes in the mean concentra-
tions of urea, creatinine, Na+, K+, and Cl-
ions of rats in the extract treated groups com-
pared to that of control.

2.4 Experimentally altered bio-entities and
negations

In order to characterize certain biological associa-
tions, it is a common practice to alter the bio-entity
of interest, with the assumption that a given ob-
servation should change upon alteration. This is
the case of mutations or deletions experimentally

introduced to gene or protein sequences, with the
underlying assumption that the mutated or trun-
cated protein/gene should loose it ability to bind
or regulate another bio-entity, or even be non-
functional. Such mutations are useful to pin down
the actual biologically relevant functional parts of
bio-entities, which are usually of great therapeutic
importance (as target sites to inhibit certain bio-
entities or interactions). Such cases can be seen in
the example sentences provided below:

• Accordingly, this p73 N-terminal deletion
was unable to activate transcription or to in-
duce apoptosis.

• The G62D mutant did not bind AMP at all.
• The resulting mutant SOS3 protein was not

able to interact with the SOS2 protein kinase
and was less capable of activating it.

• MYB4 did not localize to the nucleus in the
sad2 mutant, suggesting that SAD2 is re-
quired for MYB4 nuclear trafficking.

In these example cases, altered bio-entities did not
display the biological function of their wild type
(unaltered) counterparts.

3 Experimental qualifiers

Biological annotation efforts are primarily con-
cerned about experimentally confirmed events.
Despite the importance of experimental qualifiers,
only limited effort has been made to construct
comprehensive resources to retrieve assertions that
have experimental support and to construct useful
lexical resources and thesauri of experimental evi-
dence techniques. To detect novel protein interac-
tions that have been experimentally characterized
in the biomedical literature was one of the tasks
posed in the BioCreative challenge, a community
effort to assess text-mining tools developed for the
biomedical domain (Krallinger M, et al, 2008).
Also some systems to detect technical term men-
tions have been developed such as Termine. A
range of recurrent cues relevant for experimental
qualifiers can be observed in the literature, some
of the most relevant ones are summarized in the
table 1.

Using such experimental evidence cues together
with linguistic patterns and NLP techniques it is
feasible to determine whether a given event de-
scribed in the literature has some sort of experi-

48



Cue Pattern PMID
reveal METHOD revealed that EVENT 12506203

show METHOD showed that EVENT 17189287

demonstrate METHOD demonstrated that EVENT 18466309

study EVENT was studied by METHOD 15147239

identify EVENT identified in METHOD 10905349

prove EVENT proved by METHOD 16354655

analyze EVENT analyzed by METHOD 9477575

determine EVENT determined by METHOD 12006647

confirm EVENT confirmed using METHOD 10788494

obtain EVENT obtained by METHOD 16582012

support EVENT supported by METHOD 18156215

corroborate EVENT corroborated using METHOD 15757661

validate EVENT validated by METHOD 17287294

verify EVENT verified by METHOD 18296724

detect EVENT detected with METHOD 14581623

discover EVENT discovered by METHOD 11251078

observe EVENT observed using METHOD 16778013

test EVENTwas tested using METHOD 14646219

Table 1: Experimental evidence cue terms.

mental qualifier associated to it. The simplest pat-
terns of this sort would be for instance:

• METHOD cue (a|that|novel|the|this)

• METHOD cue that

• as cue by METHOD

• was cue by METHOD

• cue (in|by|here by|using|via|with) METHOD

Applying such patterns can be useful to con-
struct automatically an experimental technique
dictionary that can be handcrafted to enrich ex-
isting evidential qualifier resources. Nevertheless,
linking automatically extracted experiment terms
to controlled vocabularies used for annotation in
biology is still a challenging task that need more
manually labeled textual data. Some example sen-
tences illustrating the usefulness of experimental
evidence cues can be seen below:

• Gel-shift and co-immunoprecipitation assays
have revealed that GT-1 can interact with and
stabilize the TFIIA-TBP-TATA complex.

• By yeast two-hybrid assays, we demonstrate
an interaction of APC2 with two other APC/C
subunits.

• The specificity of interaction of VIRP1 with
viroid RNA was studied by different method-
ologies, which included Northwestern blot-
ting, plaque lift, and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays.

• A complex containing Mus81p and Rad54p
was identified in immunoprecipitation exper-
iments.

• In addition, we proved by affinity chromatog-
raphy that NaTrxh specifically interacts with
S-RNase.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Yasmin Alam-Farugue (GOA
team at EBI) for useful information on the anno-
tation of negative associations in GOA and Roser
Morante for important feedback and suggestions
on this topic.

References
MF. Rogers and A. Ben-Hur. 2010. The use of gene

ontology evidence codes in preventing classifier as-
sessment bias., Bioinformatics, 25(9):1173-1177.

M. Krallinger and F. Leitner and C. Rodriguez-Penagos
and A. Valencia 2008. Overview of the protein-
protein interaction annotation extraction task of
BioCreative II., Genome Biol., Suppl 2:S1.

S. Orchard and S. Kerrien 2010. Molecular interac-
tions and data standardisation., Methods Mol Biol.,
604:309-318

49


