










































Using Amazon Mechanical Turk for Transcription of Non-Native Speech


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 53–56,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Amazon Mechanical Turk for Transcription of Non-Native Speech

Keelan Evanini, Derrick Higgins, and Klaus Zechner
Educational Testing Service

{KEvanini, DHiggins, KZechner}@ets.org

Abstract

This study investigates the use of Amazon
Mechanical Turk for the transcription of non-
native speech. Multiple transcriptions were
obtained from several distinct MTurk workers
and were combined to produce merged tran-
scriptions that had higher levels of agreement
with a gold standard transcription than the in-
dividual transcriptions. Three different meth-
ods for merging transcriptions were compared
across two types of responses (spontaneous
and read-aloud). The results show that the
merged MTurk transcriptions are as accurate
as an individual expert transcriber for the read-
aloud responses, and are only slightly less ac-
curate for the spontaneous responses.

1 Introduction

Orthographic transcription of large amounts of
speech is necessary for improving speech recogni-
tion results. Transcription, however, is a time con-
suming and costly procedure. Typical transcription
speeds for spontaneous, conversational speech are
around 7 to 10 times real-time (Glenn and Strassel,
2008). The transcription of non-native speech is an
even more difficult task–one study reports an aver-
age transcription time of 12 times real-time for spon-
taneous non-native speech (Zechner, 2009).

In addition to being more costly and time consum-
ing, transcription of non-native speech results in a
higher level of disagreement among transcribers in
comparison to native speech. This is especially true
when the speaker’s proficiency is low and the speech
contains large numbers of grammatical errors, in-

correct collocations, and disfluencies. For exam-
ple, one study involving highly predictable speech
shows a decline in transcriber agreement (measured
using Word Error Rate, WER) from 3.6% for na-
tive speech to 6.4% for non-native speech (Marge et
al., to appear). Another study involving spontaneous
non-native speech showed a range of WER between
15% and 20% (Zechner, 2009).

This study uses the Amazon Mechanical Turk
(MTurk) resource to obtain multiple transcriptions
for non-native speech. We then investigate several
methods for combining these multiple sources of in-
formation from individual MTurk workers (turkers)
in an attempt to obtain a final merged transcription
that is more accurate than the individual transcrip-
tions. This methodology results in transcriptions
that approach the level of expert transcribers on this
difficult task. Furthermore, a substantial savings in
cost can be achieved.

2 Previous Work

Due to its ability to provide multiple sources of
information for a given task in a cost-effective
way, several recent studies have combined multi-
ple MTurk outputs for NLP annotation tasks. For
example, one study involving annotation of emo-
tions in text used average scores from up to 10 turk-
ers to show the minimum number of MTurk anno-
tations required to achieve performance compara-
ble to experts (Snow et al., 2008). Another study
used preference voting to combine up to 5 MTurk
rankings of machine translation quality and showed
that the resulting judgments approached expert inter-
annotator agreement (Callison-Burch, 2009). These

53



tasks, however, are much simpler than transcription.
MTurk has been used extensively as a transcrip-

tion provider, as is apparent from the success of a
middleman site that act as an interface to MTurk
for transcription tasks.1 However, to our knowledge,
only one previous study has systematically evaluated
the quality of MTurk transcriptions (Marge et al.,
to appear). This recent study also combined multi-
ple MTurk transcriptions using the ROVER method
(Fiscus, 1997) to produce merged transcriptions that
approached the accuracy of expert transcribers. Our
study is similar to that study, except that the speech
data used in our study is much more difficult to
transcribe–the utterances used in that study were rel-
atively predictable (providing route instructions for
robots), and contained speech from native speak-
ers and high-proficiency non-native speakers. Fur-
thermore, we investigate two additional merging al-
gorithms in an attempt to improve over the perfor-
mance of ROVER.

3 Experimental Design

3.1 Audio

The audio files used in this experiment consist of
responses to an assessment of English proficiency
for non-native speakers. Two different types of re-
sponses are examined: spontaneous and read-aloud.
In the spontaneous task, the speakers were asked to
respond with their opinion about a topic described
in the prompt. The speech in these responses is thus
highly unpredictable. In the read-aloud task, on the
other hand, the speakers were asked to read a para-
graph out loud. For these responses, the speech is
highly predictable; any deviations from the target
script are due to reading errors or disfluencies.

For this experiment, one set of 10 spontaneous
(SP) responses (30 seconds in duration) and two sets
of 10 read-aloud (RA) responses (60 seconds in du-
ration) were used. Table 1 displays the characteris-
tics of the responses in the three batches.

3.2 Transcription Procedure

The tasks were submitted to the MTurk interface in
batches of 10, and a turker was required to complete
the entire batch in order to receive payment. Turkers

1http://castingwords.com/

Batch Duration # of Words
(Mean)

# of Words
(Std. Dev.)

SP 30 sec. 33 14
RA1 60 sec. 97 4
RA2 60 sec. 93 10

Table 1: Characteristics of the responses used in the study

received $3 for a complete batch of transcriptions
($0.30 per transcription).

Different interfaces were used for transcribing the
two types of responses. For the spontaneous re-
sponses, the task was a standard transcription task:
the turkers were instructed to enter the words that
they heard in the audio file into a text box. For the
read-aloud responses, on the other hand, they were
provided with the target text of the prompt, one word
per line. They were instructed to make annotations
next to words in cases where the speaker deviated
from the target text (indicating substitutions, dele-
tions, and insertions). For both types of transcription
task, the turkers were required to successfully com-
plete a short training task before proceeding onto the
batch of 10 responses.

4 Methods for Merging Transcriptions

4.1 ROVER

The ROVER method was originally developed for
combining the results from multiple ASR systems to
produce a more accurate hypothesis (Fiscus, 1997).
This method iteratively aligns pairs of transcriptions
to produce a word transition network. A voting pro-
cedure is then used to produce the merged transcrip-
tion by selecting the most frequent word (including
NULL) in each correspondence set; ties are broken
by a random choice.

4.2 Longest Common Subsequence

In this method, the Longest Common Subsequence
(LCS) among the set of transcriptions is found by
first finding the LCS between two transcriptions,
comparing this output with the next transcription to
find their LCS, and iterating over all transcriptions in
this manner. Then, each transcription is compared to
the LCS, and any portions of the transcription that
are missing between words of the LCS are tallied.
Finally, words are interpolated into the LCS by se-

54



lecting the most frequent missing sequence from the
set of transcriptions (including the empty sequence);
as with the ROVER method, ties are broken by a ran-
dom choice among the most frequent candidates.

4.3 Lattice
In this method, a word lattice is formed from the
individual transcriptions by iteratively adding tran-
scriptions into the lattice to optimize the match be-
tween the transcription and the lattice. New nodes
are only added to the graph when necessary. Then,
to produce the merged transcription, the optimal
path through the lattice is determined. Three dif-
ferent configurations for computing the optimal path
through the lattice method were compared. In the
first configuration, “Lattice (TW),” the weight of
a path through the lattice is determined simply by
adding up the total of the weights of each edge
in the path. Note that this method tends to fa-
vor longer paths over shorter ones, assuming equal
edge weights. In the next configuration, “Lattice
(AEW),” a cost for each node based on the aver-
age edge weight is subtracted as each edge of the
lattice is traversed, in order to ameliorate the prefer-
ence for longer paths. Finally, in the third configura-
tion, “Lattice (TWPN),” the weight of a path through
the lattice is defined as the total path weight in the
“Lattice (TW)” method, normalized by the number
of nodes in the path (again, to offset the preference
for longer paths).

4.4 WER calculation
All three of the methods for merging transcriptions
are sensitive to the order in which the individual
transcriptions are considered. Thus, in order to accu-
rately evaluate the methods, for each number of tran-
scriptions used to create the merged transcription,
N ∈ {3, 4, 5}, all possible permutations of all pos-
sible combinations were considered. This resulted
in a total of 5!(5−N)! merged transcriptions to be eval-
uated. For each N, the overall WER was computed
from this set of merged transcriptions.

5 Results

Tables 2 - 4 present the WER results for differ-
ent merging algorithms for the two batches of read-
aloud responses and the batch of spontaneous re-
sponses. In each table, the merging methods are or-

Method N=3 N=4 N=5
Individual Turkers 7.0%
Lattice (TWPN) 6.4% 6.4% 6.4%
Lattice (TW) 6.4% 6.4% 6.4%
LCS 6.0% 5.6% 5.6%
Lattice (AEW) 6.1% 6.0% 5.5%
ROVER 5.5% 5.2% 5.1%
Expert 4.7%

Table 2: WER results 10 read-aloud responses (RA1)

Method N=3 N=4 N=5
Individual Turkers 9.7%
Lattice (TW) 9.5% 9.5% 9.4%
Lattice (TWPN) 8.3% 8.0% 8.0%
Lattice (AEW) 8.2% 7.4% 7.8%
ROVER 7.9% 7.9% 7.6%
LCS 8.3% 8.0% 7.5%
Expert 8.1%

Table 3: WER results for 10 read-aloud responses (RA2)

dered according to their performance when all tran-
scriptions were used (N=5). In addition, the overall
WER results for the individual turkers and an expert
transcriber are provided for each set of responses.
In each case, the WER is computed by comparison
with a gold standard transcription that was created
by having an expert transcriber edit the transcription
of a different expert transcriber.

In all cases, the merged transcriptions have a
lower WER than the overall WER for the individual
turkers. Furthermore, for all methods, the merged
output using all 5 transcriptions has a lower (or
equal) WER to the output using 3 transcriptions. For
the first batch of read-aloud responses, the ROVER
method performed best, and reduced the WER in
the set of individual transcriptions by 27.1% (rela-
tive) to 5.1%. For the second batch of read-aloud
responses, the LCS method performed best, and re-
duced the WER by 22.6% to 7.5%. Finally, for the
batch of spontaneous responses, the Lattice (TW)
method performed best, and reduced the WER by
25.6% to 22.1%.

55



Method N=3 N=4 N=5
Individual Turkers 29.7%
Lattice (TWPN) 29.1% 28.9% 28.3%
LCS 29.2% 28.4% 27.0%
Lattice (AEW) 28.1% 25.8% 25.1%
ROVER 25.4% 24.5% 24.9%
Lattice (TW) 25.5% 23.5% 22.1%
Expert 18.3%

Table 4: WER results for 10 spontaneous responses

6 Conclusions

As is clear from the levels of disagreement be-
tween the expert transcriber and the gold standard
transcription for all three tasks, these responses are
much more difficult to transcribe accurately than
native spontaneous speech. For native speech, ex-
pert transcribers can usually reach agreement lev-
els over 95% (Deshmukh et al., 1996). For these
responses, however, the WER for the expert tran-
scriber was worse than this even for the read-aloud
speech. These low levels of agreement can be at-
tributed to the fact that the speech is drawn from a
wide range of English proficiency levels among test-
takers. Most of the responses contain disfluencies,
grammatical errors, and mispronunciations, leading
to increased transcriber uncertainty.

The results of merging multiple MTurk transcrip-
tions of this non-native speech showed an improve-
ment over the performance of the individual tran-
scribers for all methods considered. For the read-
aloud speech, the agreement level of the merged
transcriptions approached that of the expert tran-
scription when only three MTurk transcriptions were
used. For the spontaneous responses, the perfor-
mance of the best methods still lagged behind the ex-
pert transcription, even when five MTurk transcrip-
tions were used. Due to the consistent increase in
performance, and the low cost of adding additional
transcribers (in this study the cost was $0.30 per au-
dio minute for read-aloud speech and $0.60 per au-
dio minute for spontaneous speech), the approach of
combining multiple transcriptions should always be
considered when MTurk is used for transcription. It
is also possible that lower payments per task could
be provided without a decrease in transcription qual-

ity, as demonstrated by Marge et al. (to appear). Ad-
ditional experiments will address the practicality of
producing more accurate merged transcriptions for
an ASR system—simply collecting larger amounts
of non-expert transcriptions may be a better invest-
ment than producing higher quality data (Novotney
and Callison-Burch, 2010).

It is interesting that the Lattice (TW) method
of merging transcriptions clearly outperformed all
other methods for the spontaneous responses, but
was less beneficial than the LCS and ROVER meth-
ods for read-aloud speech. It is likely that this is
caused by the preference of the Lattice (TW) method
for longer paths through the word lattice, since indi-
vidual transcribers of spontaneous speech may mark
different words as unitelligible, even though these
words exist in the gold standard transcription. Fur-
ther studies with a larger number of responses will
be needed to test this hypothesis.

References
Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, cheap and creative:

Evaluating translation quality using Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk. In Proc. EMNLP.

Neeraj Deshmukh, Richard Jennings Duncan, Aravind
Ganapathiraju, and Joseph Picone. 1996. Benchmark-
ing human performance for continuous speech recog-
nition. In Proc. ICSLP.

Jonathan G. Fiscus. 1997. A post-processing system to
yield word error rates: Recognizer Ooutput Voting Er-
ror Reduction (ROVER). In Proc. ASRU.

Meghan Lammie Glenn and Stephanie Strassel. 2008.
Shared linguistic resources for the meeting domain.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 4625,
pages 401–413. Springer.

Matthew Marge, Satanjeev Banerjee, and Alexander I.
Rudnicky. to appear. Using the Amazon Mechanical
Turk for transcription of spoken language. In Proc.
ICASSP.

Scott Novotney and Chris Callison-Burch. 2010. Cheap,
fast, and good enough: Automatic speech recognition
with non-expert transcription. In Proc. NAACL.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast – But is it
good? Evaluating non-expert annotations for natural
language tasks. In Proc. EMNLP.

Klaus Zechner. 2009. What did they actually say?
Agreement and disagreement among transcribers of
non-native spontaneous speech responses in an En-
glish proficiency test. In Proc. ISCA-SLaTE.

56


