










































Labelling and Spatio-Temporal Grounding of News Events


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 27–28,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Labelling and Spatio-Temporal Grounding of News Events
Bea Alex

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh, UK

balex@staffmail.ed.ac.uk

Claire Grover
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh, UK
grover@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

This paper describes work in progress on
labelling and spatio-temporal grounding of
news events as part of a news analysis system
that is under development.

1 Introduction: News Event Analysis

The SYNC3 project1 is developing a system that
tracks news events and related blogs. A news event
is defined like a TDT event as something that hap-
pened at a particular time and place (TDT, 2004).
It constitutes a cluster of news items which all re-
port on the same event. The system crawls news
sources and clusters incoming news items. These
clusters are then processed by a labelling and a re-
lation extraction component. The former determines
document and event-level labels and the later derives
temporal, geographic and causal relations between
events. Related blog posts are connected to news
events and analysed for sentiment. In the user in-
terface, users can search and select news events and
related blogs, add comments and interact with other
users. Users will also be able to visualise related
news events in a map interface and timeline. In this
paper, the focus is on the labelling of news events.

The input into the news event labeller is made up
of news event clusters containing one or more news
items from different sources. Each news item is fed
through a linguistic processing pipeline, including
named entity recognition, date and geo-resolution.
Each cluster is then labelled with a LABEL (a title
summarising the news event), a DESCRIPTION (the
first sentence of a document), a LOCATION (the loca-
tion where the event took place) and a DATE (the date
of the event). We first compute this information for
every news item as a document summary and then
select the most representative document summary of
the news event cluster.

1http://www.sync3.eu

1.1 News Event Label
News titles tend to be appropriate summaries of
news items and events. They are coherent phrases
or sentences that are understood by users. We there-
fore implemented variations of title labelling (Man-
ning et al., 2008) made up of document-level title
detection and cluster-level title selection. The first
step is done by iterating through the sentences of a
document and settling on a title if certain criteria are
met (e.g. number of tokens is 3 or more, sentence
does not match a set of filter strings etc.). Given all
document titles, we select as the most representative
LABEL:

1. the LABEL of the first published news item,
2. the LABEL of the news item closest to the clus-

ter centroid or
3. the LABEL with the largest ratio of terms com-

mon to all titles divided by title length
The 1st method assumes that a news item which

first reports an event is breaking news and most
interesting to users. News items following it will
provide the same or further information. The 2nd
method assumes that the news item most representa-
tive of the cluster statistically summarises the news
event best. The last method assumes that the most
succinct title with the most common vocabulary in
all titles is most informative about a news event.

1.2 News Event Location
We use the Edinburgh Geoparser (Tobin et al., 2010)
to recognise location names and ground them to the
GeoNames gazetteer.2 Besides latitudes, longitudes
and GeoNames IDs, we also assign population size
and type of location (e.g. populated place, country
etc.). Our Geoparser yields 81.2% accuracy when
evaluating on SpatialML (Mani et al., 2008). It also
compares favourably with Yahoo! Placemaker3 in an
end-to-end run.

2http://www.geonames.org
3http://developer.yahoo.com/geo/

placemaker

27



We only consider locations grounded to lat/long
values as potential news item locations, therefore re-
stricting the set to more accurately recognised ones.
We select the first location in the LABEL and DE-
SCRIPTION or (if none can be found) either the first
or most frequent location in the news item. The news
item location associated with the most representative
cluster LABEL is selected as the news event location.
To allow consistency of the information, we treat all
caps locations in the DESCRIPTION of each article as
reporter locations and will investigate the percent-
age of cases in which this location is the same as,
near or different from the news event location. We
will also experiment with limiting the search space
of locations to the excerpts of a news item that are
evidence for it being part of its cluster.

1.3 News Event Date

We choose the publication date of the earliest pub-
lished news item in the cluster as the news event
date. Our linguistic processing recognises abso-
lute, relative and under-specified temporal expres-
sions (MUC-style TIMEX elements), normalises
them and grounds them to a single number repre-
sentation (the 1st of January 1 AD being 0). This
enables us to determine the day of the week, resolve
relative dates and compute temporal precedence on
a timeline. We are working towards evaluating the
performance of the temporal expression recognition
on the Timebank corpus (Pustejovsky et al., 2003).

2 Clustered News Data

We are developing our components using a static
set of clusters containing 12,547 documents from 9
different news sources (AP: 16.7%, BBC: 12.9%,
CNN: 5.2%, NYT: 9.2%, Reuters: 11.1%, Ria
Novosti: 4.9%, USA TODAY: 12.3%, WP: 6.6%
and Xinhua: 20.7%) which were crawled between
May 20th and June 3rd 2009. The clustering of these
documents changes in regular intervals. The current
release contains 7,456 clusters with an average of
1.7 news items per cluster with up to 41 news items.
2,259 clusters (30.3%) contain 2 or more news items
of which 1,091 (48.3%) contain news items from at
least 2 sources. The duration of a news event is 4
days or less (<=1 day: 85.3%, 2 days: 12.4%, 3
days: 2.0%, 4 days: 0.3%).

The Geoparser extracts 188,932 locations as-
signed with lat/longs from this data. Using the 3rd
labelling method, we currently detect a news event
location in 7,325 of 7,456 news events (98.3%). If
we only consider locations in news item LABELs and
DESCRIPTIONs this figure drops to 83%. 117 clus-
ters contain no location. An error analysis will show
if this is due to false negatives or inexplicit locations.

3 Summary and Future Work
We have presented ongoing work on news event la-
belling, with a focus on title labelling and spatio-
temporal grounding of news events, and have pre-
sented some initial statistics on development data.

We are in the process of creating gold standard
data with which we can test the performance of the
news event labelling. This will allow us to determine
the appropriateness of the news event labels as well
as the accuracy of news event locations and dates
and enable us to fine-tune the labelling process. Our
future work also includes identifying geographical,
temporal and causal relations between news events
for story detection.

Both the clustering of news into news events
and their analysis are crucial for structuring and
analysing the blogosphere accordingly, as one aim
of SYNC3 is to extract news-event-related blog
posts and identify their sentiment.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all project partners of the
SYNC3 project (FP7-231854).

References
I. Mani, J. Hitzeman, J. Richer, D. Harris, R. Quimby, and

B. Wellner. 2008. SpatialML: Annotation scheme,
corpora, and tools. In Proceedings of LREC’08.

C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Schütze. 2008. In-
troduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

J. Pustejovsky, P. Hanks, R. Saurı́, A. See, R.Gaizauskas,
A. Setzer, D. Radev, B. Sundheim, D. Day, L. Ferro,
and M. Lazo. 2003. The TIMEBANK corpus. Corpus
Linguistics, pages 647–656.

TDT. 2004. TDT 2004: Annotation Manual Version
1.2. URL: http://projects.ldc.upenn.
edu/TDT5/Annotation/TDT2004V1.2.pdf.

R. Tobin, C. Grover, K. Byrne, J. Reid, and J. Walsh.
2010. Evaluation of georeferencing. In Proceedings
of GIR’10.

28


