



















































Multilingual Lexical Network from the Archives of the Digital Silk Road


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Ontologies and Lexical Resources (Ontolex 2010), pages 19–27,
Beijing, August 2010

Multilingual Lexical Network from the Archives of the Digital 

Silk Road 

Mohammad Daoud  

LIG, GETALP 

Université Joseph Fourier 

Mohammad.Daoud@imag.fr 

Kyo Kageura 

Graduate School of Education 

The University of Tokyo  

kyo@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp 

Christian Boitet 

LIG, GETALP 

Université Joseph Fourier 
Christian.Boitet@imag.fr 

Asanobu Kitamoto 

The National Institute of Informat-

ics (Tokyo) 

Kitamoto@nii.ac.jp 

Mathieu Mangeot 

LIG, GETALP 

Université Joseph Fourier 
Mathieu.Mangeot@imag.fr 

 

 

Abstract 

We are describing the construction 
process of a specialized multilingual 

lexical resource dedicated for the ar-

chive of the Digital Silk Road DSR. The 
DSR project creates digital archives of 

cultural heritage along the historical Silk 

Road; more than 116 of basic references 

on Silk Road have been digitized and 
made available online. These books are 

written in various languages and attract 

people from different linguistic back-
ground, therefore, we are trying to build 

a multilingual repository for the termi-

nology of the DSR to help its users, and 

increase the accessibility of these books. 
The construction of a terminological da-

tabase using a classical approach is dif-

ficult and expensive. Instead, we are in-
troducing specialized lexical resources 

that can be constructed by the commu-

nity and its resources; we call it Multi-
lingual Preterminological Graphs 

MPGs.  We build such graphs by ana-

lyzing the access log files of the website 

of the Digital Silk Road. We aim at 
making this graph as a seed repository 

so multilingual volunteers can contrib-

ute.  We have used the access log files 
of the DSR since its beginning in 2003, 

and obtained an initial graph of around 

116,000 terms. As an application, We 

have used this graph to obtain a preter-
minological multilingual database that 

has a number of applications. 

1 Introduction 

This paper describes the design and develop-

ment of a specialized multilingual lexical re-

source for the archive constructed and main-

tained by the Digital Silk Road project. The 
Digital Silk Road project (NII 2003) is an initia-

tive started by the National Institute of Infor-

matics (Tokyo/Japan) in 2002, to archive cul-
tural historical resources along the Silk Road, 

by digitizing them and making them available 

and accessible online.  

One of the most important sub-projects is the 
Digital Archive of Toyo Bunko Rare Books 

(NII 2008) where 116 (30,091 pages) of old rare 

books available at Toyo Bunko library have 
been digitized using OCR (Optical Character 

Recognition) technology. The digitized collec-

tion contains books from nine languages includ-
ing English. The website of the project attracts 

visitors from the domain of history, archeology, 

and people who are interested in cultural heri-

tage. It provides services of reading and search-
ing the books of Toyo Bunko, along with vari-

ety of services. Table 1 shows the countries 

from which DSR is being accessed. The table 

19



shows that around 60% of visitors are coming 

from countries other than Japan. The diversity 

of the visitors’ linguistic backgrounds suggests 

two things: 1) Monolingual translation service is 
not enough. 2) It shows that we can benefit from 

allowing them to contribute to a multilingual 

repository. So we design and build a collabora-
tive multilingual terminological database and 

seed using the DSR project and its resources 

(Daoud, Kitamoto et al. 2008). However, Dis-
covering and translating domain specific termi-

nology is a very complicated and expensive 

task, because (1) traditionally, it depends on 

human terminologists (Cabre and Sager 1999) 
which increases the cost, (2) terminology is dy-

namic (Kageura 2002), thousands of terms are 

coined each year, and (3) it is difficult to in-
volve domain experts in the construction proc-

ess. That will not only increase the cost, but it 

will reduce the quality, and the coverage (num-
ber of languages and size). Databases like (UN-

Geo 2002; IATE 2008; UN 2008) are built by 

huge organizations, and it is difficult for a 

smaller community to produce its own multilin-
gual terminological database. 
Country Visitors language Books in the same language  

Japan 117782 JA 2 books 

China 30379 CH 5 books 

USA 15626 EN 44 books 

Germany 8595 GE 14 books 

Spain 7076 SP - 

Australia 5239 EN See USA  

  Italy  4136 IT 1 book 

  France  3875 FR 14 books 

  Poland  2236  PO - 

  Russia  1895  RU 7 books 

other  87573 Other There are many books in 

different language 

Total 284412 

Table 1. Countries of the DSR visitors (from 

jan/2007 to dec/2008) 

In the next section we will give definitions 

for the basic concepts presented in this article, 
in particular, the preterminology and its lexical 

network (graph). Then, in the third section we 

will show the automatic approach to seed the 
multilingual preterminological graph based on 

the resources of the DSR. And then, we will 

discuss the human involvement in the develop-
ment of such a resource by providing a study of 

the possible contributors through analyzing the 

multilinguality and loyalty of the DSR visitors. 

In the fifth section we will show the experimen-
tal results. And finally, we will draw some con-

clusions.   

2 Multilingual Preterminological 
Graphs 

2.1 Preterminology 

Terminological sphere of a domain is the set of 

terms related to that domain. A smaller set of 

that sphere is well documented and available in 

dictionaries and terminological databases such 
as (FAO 2008; IEC 2008; IDRC 2009)... How-

ever, the majority of terms are not multilingual-

ized, nor stored into a database, even though, 
they may be used and translated by the commu-

nity and domain experts. This situation is shown 

in Figure 1, where the majority of terms are in 
area B. Preterminological sphere (area B) of a 

domain is a set of terms (preterms) related to 

the domain and used by the community but it 

might not be documented and included in tradi-
tional lexical databases. 
Multilingual Terminological Sphere

Preterminology

MTDB

B

A

C

 

Figure  1. Preterminological sphere 
Every year thousands of terms are coined and 

introduced in correspondence to new concepts, 

scientific discoveries or social needs. Most of 

these terms are produced in the top dominant 
languages, i.e. English. Interested people from 

different linguistic backgrounds would find 

suitable translations to new terms and use it 
amongst them. For example, the term ‘status 

update’ is used by people who visit social net-

working websites like facebook.com. Transla-
tion of this term to Arabic might not be avail-

able in area A of Figure 1. However the Arabic 

community found a translation that is acceptable 

which is  تحديث الحالة. So this term is in the area B. 
We are trying to use what is in area A, and what 

can be contributed from B to build preterminol-

ogy (Daoud, Boitet et al. 2009).  

20



2.2 Structure of MPG 

We are building preterminological resource as a 

lexical network (graph) to handle the diversity 

of the resources that we use. A multilingual pre-
terminological graph MPG(N,E) is a finite non-

empty set N={n1,n2, …} of objects called 

Nodes together with a set E={e1,e2, …} of un-
ordered pairs of distinct nodes of MPG called 

edges. This definition is based on the general 

definition of a graph at the following references 
(Even 1979; Loerch 2000).  MPG of domain X, 

contains possible multilingual terms related to 

that domain connected to each other with rela-

tions. A multilingual lexical unit and its transla-
tions in different languages are represented as 

connected nodes with labels.  

In an MPG the set of nodes N consists of p,l, 
s, occ, where p is the string of the preterm, l is 

the language, s is the code of the first source of 

the preterm, and occ is the number of occur-
rences. Note that l could be undefined. For ex-

ample: N={[silk road, en, log],[Great Wall of China, en, 

,wikipedia, 5], [الصين, ar, contributorx,6]}, here we have 

three nodes, 2 of them are English and one in 
Arabic, each term came from a different source. 

Note that English and Arabic terms belong to 

the same N thus, the same MPG. 
An Edge e={n, v} is a pair of nodes adjacent in 

an MPG. An edge represents a relation between 

two preterms represented by their nodes. The 

nature of the relation varies. However, edges are 
weighted with several weights (described be-

low) to indicate the possible nature of this rela-

tion. 
The following are the weights that label the 

edges on an MPG: Relation Weights rw: For an 

edge e={[p1,l1,s1], [p2,l2,s2]}, rw indicates 
that there is a relation between the preterm p1 

and p2. The nature of the relation could not be 

assumed by rw. Translation Weights tw: For an 

edge e={[p1,l1,s1], [p2,l2,s2]}, tw suggests that 
p1 in language l1 is a translation of p2 in lan-

guage l2. Synonym Weights sw: For an edge 

e={[p1,l1,s1], [p2,l1,s2]}, sw suggests that p1 
and p2 are synonyms. 

3 Automatic Initialization of DSR-
MPG  

Basically we seeded DSR-MPG, through two 

steps, the firs one is the automatic seeding, 
which consists of the following: 1) Initialization 

by finding interesting terms used to search the 

website of the DSR. 2) Multilingualization, us-

ing online resources. 3) Graph Expansion using 

the structure of the graph it self. The second 
step is the progressive enhancement, by receiv-

ing contributions from users, through set of use-

ful applications. In this section we will discuss 
the first three steps. In section 4, we will discuss 

the human factor in the development of DSR-

MPG. 

3.1 Analyzing Access Log Files 

We analyze two kinds of access requests that 

can provide us with information to enrich the 

MPG: (1) requests made to the local search en-

gine of DSR (2) requests from web-based 
search engine (like Google, Yahoo!…). These 

requests provide the search terms that visitors 

used to access the website. Moreover, we can 
understand the way users interpret a concept 

into lexical units. For example, if we find that 

five different users send two search requests t1 

and t2, then there is a possibility that t1 and t2 
have a relation. The graph constructor analyzes 

the requests to make the initial graph by creat-

ing edges between terms in the same session. 
rw(x,y), is set to the number of sessions contain-

ing x and y within the log file. 

For example, rw(x,y) = 10 means that 10 
people thought about x and y within the same 

search session. Figure 2 shows an example of a 

produced graph. The method did not discover 

the kind of relation between the terms. But it 
discovered that there is a relation, for example, 

three users requested results for “yang” fol-

lowed by “yin” within the same session. Hence, 
edge with weight of 2 was constructed based on 

this. 

21



 
Figure  2. Example of constructing an MPG 

from an access log file 

3.2 Multilingualization Using Online Re-
sources 

Many researchers focused on the usage of dic-

tionaries in digital format to translate lexical 
resources automatically (Gopestake, Briscoe et 

al. 1994) (Etzioni, Reiter et al. 2007). We are 

concerned with the automatic utilization of 
these resources to acquire multilingual preter-

minological resources through the following: 1) 

Wikipedia 2) online MT systems 3) online dic-

tionaries. 
Wikipedia (Wikipedia-A 2008) is a rich 

source of preterminology, it has good linguistic 

and lexical coverage. As of December, 2009, 
there are 279 Wikipedias in different languages, 

and 14,675,872 articles. There are 29 Wikipe-

dias with more that 100000 articles and 91 lan-
guages have more than 10,000 articles. Beside, 

Wikipedia is built by domain experts. We ex-

ploit the structure of Wikipedia to seed an 

MPG, by selecting a root set of terms, for each 
one of them we fetch its wikipedia article, and 

then we use the language roll of the article. For 

example, we fetch the article (Cuneiform script) 
En: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuneiform_script, to reach its 

translation in Arabic from this url:  
http://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/ مسمارية_كتابة  

We use also online machine translation sys-

tems as general purpose MRDs. One of the 

main advantages of MT systems is the good 
coverage even for multiword terms. The agree-

ment of some MT systems with other resources 

on the translation of one term enhanced the con-

fidence of the translation. Another positive 

point is that the results of MT provide a first 

draft to be post edited later. We used 3 MT sys-

tems: 
• Google Translate (Google 2008) (50 

languages) 

• Systran (Systran 2009) (14 languages) 
• Babylon (Babylon 2009) (26 languages) 

Here is an example of translating the term 

“great wall of China” into Arabic. 

 
Figure  3. MPG sample nodes 

In a similar way, we used several online re-

positories; to make good use of what is avail-

able and standardized, to initializing the MPG 
with various resources, and to construct a meta-

system to call online dictionaries automatically. 

We used IATE (IATE 2008)  as an example of a 
terminological db, and Google dictionary 

(Google 2008). The concept is similar to the 

concept of using online translations, where we 
construct an http request, to receive the result as 

html page. 

3.3 Graph Expansion 

 And then, the Graph is expanded by finding the 

synonyms according to formula (1) described at 
(Daoud, Boitet et al. 2009). After finding syno-

nyms we assume that synonyms share the same 

translations. As Figure 4 shows, X1 and X2 have 
translations overlaps, and relatively high rw, so 

that suggest they are synonyms. Therefore we 

constructed heuristic edges between the transla-

tions of X1 and X2. 

Systran 

wight=1 

Wikipedia 

Google 

 Babylon 

wight=3 

great wall 

of China 

سور الصين 
 العظيم

الجدار عظيم 
 الصين

22



 
Figure  4. Graph expansion 

4 Human Involvement in the Develop-
ment of DSR-MPG 

After initializing the graph, we target contribu-

tions from the visitors to the DSR website. In 

this section we will start by analyzing the possi-
bility of receiving contributions from the visi-

tors, and then we will introduce some useful 

applications on the DSR-MPG that can help the 
visitors and attract them to get involved. 

4.1 Analyzing Possible Contributors of the 
DSR 

We are trying to analyze access log files to find 

out the possible contributors to a pretermi-
nological multilingual graph dedicated to an 

online community. This kind of information is 

necessary for the following reasons: 1) it pro-
vide feasibility analysis predicting the possibil-

ity of receiving contribution to a multilingual 

preterminological repository. 2) it gives infor-
mation that can be used by the collaborative 

environment to personalize the contribution 

process for those who prove to be able to con-

tribute. 
In the analysis process we are using the fol-

lowing information that can be easily extracted 

the access records: 
• Key terms to access the historical resources of 

the Digital Silk Road, whether it is the local 

search engine, or any external search engine. 

• Access frequency: number of access requests 
by a visitor over a period of time. 

• Language preferences 

• Period of visits 
Knowing these points helps determining the 

possible users who might be willing to contrib-

ute. A contributor should satisfy the following 

characteristics: 1) Loyalty 2) Multilinguality.  A 

multilingual user is a visitor who uses multilin-

gual search terms to access the online resources. 

We rank users based on their linguistic compe-
tence, we measure that by tracking users’ search 

requests, and matching them with the multilin-

gual preterminological graph, users with higher 
matches in certain pair of languages are ranked 

higher. A loyal user is a user who visits the web 

site frequently and stays longer than other users. 
Users based on how many months they accessed 

the website more that k times. 

4.2 DSR-MPG Applications 

For a historical archive like the DSR, we find 

that reading and searching where the most im-
portant for users. Log files since 2003 shows 

that 80% of the project visitors were interested 

in reading the historical records. Moreover, 
around 140000 search requests have been sent 

to the internal search engine. So we imple-

mented two applications (1) “contribute-while-

reading” and (2) “contribute-while-searching”. 

4.2.1 Contribute While Searching 

Physical books have been digitized and indexed 

into a search engine. We expect users to send 

monolingual search requests in any language 
supported by our system to get multilingual an-

swers. Having a term base of multilingual 

equivalences could achieve this (Chen 2002). A 
bilingual user who could send a bilingual search 

request could be a valid candidate to contribute. 

We plan that users who use our search engine 

will use the DSR-pTMDB to translate their re-
quests and will contribute to the graph sponta-

neously. As Figure 5 shows, a user would trans-

late the search request, during the searching 
process; the user can ask to add new translation 

if s/he was not happy with the suggested transla-

tion, by clicking on “Add Suggestions” to view 

a contribution page. 

 
Figure  5. A Japanese user translating his re-

quest 

23



4.2.2 Contribute While Reading 

The other application is trying to help users 

from different linguistic backgrounds to trans-

late some of the difficult terms into their lan-
guages while they are reading, simply by select-

ing a term from the screen. As shown in Figure 

6, readers will see a page from a book as an im-
age, with its OCR text. Important terms will be 

presented with yellow background. Once a term 

is clicked, a small child contribution/lookup 
window will be open, similar. Also user can 

lookup/translate any term from the screen by 

selecting it. This application helps covering all 

the important terms of each book. 

 
Figure 6. Translate while reading 

5 Experimental Results 

In this section present we will present the ex-
periment of seeding DSR-MPG, and the results 

of discovering possible contributors from the 

visitors of the DSR. 

5.1 DSR-MPG Initialization 

To build the initial DSR-MPG, we used the ac-
cess log files of the DSR website (dsr.nii.ac.jp) 

from December 2003 to January 2009. The ini-

tial graph after normalization contained 89,076 
nodes.  Also we extracted 81,204 terms using 

Yahoo terms. 27,500 of them were not discov-

ered from the access files. So, the total number 

of nodes in the initial graph was 116,576 nodes, 
see Figure 7 for sample nodes. 

After multilingualization, the graph has 210,781 

nodes containing terms from the most important 

languages. The graph has now 779,765 edges 

with tw > 0.  The important languages are the 
languages of the majority of the visitors, the 

languages of the archived books, and represen-

tative languages a long the Silk Road. DSR-
MPG achieved high linguistic coverage as 20 

languages have more than 1000 nodes on the 

graph. To evaluate the produced graph, we ex-
tracted 350 English terms manually from the 

index pages of the following books: 

Ancient Khotan, vol.1: 

http://dsr.nii.ac.jp/toyobunko/VIII-5-B2-7/V-1/ 
On Ancient Central-Asian Tracks, 

vol.1:http://dsr.nii.ac.jp/toyobunko/VIII-5-B2-

19/V-1 
Memoir on Maps of Chinese Turkistan and 

Kansu, vol.1: 

http://dsr.nii.ac.jp/toyobunko/VIII-5-B2-11/V-1 

0

5 0

10 0

15 0

2 0 0

2 5 0

3 0 0

DS R- M P G 2 D S R - M P G 1 P a n Ima g e s W i ki t io n a ry B i- d i c t io n a ry DS R1

En-Ar (only correct tranlstions) En-Fr (only correct translations)

 
Figure  7. A comparison between DSR-MPG, 

and other dictionaries. The En-Ar bi-dictionary 

is Babylon (Babylon 2009), and the En-Fr bi-

dictionary was IATE. 

We assume that the terms available in these 
books are strongly related to the DSR. Hence, 

we tried to translate them into Arabic and 

French. Figure 7 compares between DSR-MPG, 
and various general purpose dictionaries. Out of 

the 350 terms, we found 189 correct direct 

translations into Arabic. However, the number 

reached 214 using indirect translations.  On the 
other hand, the closest to our result was PanI-

mages, which uses Wikitionaries and various 

dictionaries, with only 83 correct translations. 
DSR-MPG1 is the translations obtained from 

formula 1, DSR-MPG2 represents the transla-

tions obtained from indirect translations, which 
increased the amount of correct translation by 

24



25 terms in the case of En-Ar. The result can be 

progressively enhanced by accepting contribu-

tions from volunteers through the applications 

we described in the section three and the generic 
nature of MPG makes it easy to accept contribu-

tions from any dictionary or terminological da-

tabase. 
Around 55200 root English terms were used 

as a seed set of terms; these terms were selected 

from the initial DSR-MPG. Around 35000 
terms have been translated from Wikipedia into 

at least 1 language, mostly in French, German. 

Wikipedia increased the density of the graph by 

introducing around 113,000 edges (with tw). 

Translations

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

fr de ja it zh es ru ar

 
Figure 8. Number of translated terms in sam-

ple languages using Wikipedia 

Naturally MT would achieve better coverage; 

we checked the results for Arabic, we selected 
60 terms randomly from the root set, around 25 

terms were translated correctly. 13 terms needed 

slight modification to be correct. 

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

fr de ja it zh es ru ar

Wikipedia

Google Translate confirmations

 
Figure 9. Terms translated by Google MT 

and matched the translation of Wikipedia 

5.2 DSR Possible Contributors 

With K=2, meaning that a multilinguality com-

petence is counted only if the two terms sent by 

a user has to have more than 2 points of transla-
tion weight on the MPG. 

The highest score was 33, achieved by this 

IP: p27250-adsao05douji-acca.osaka.ocn.ne.jp. 

That means that this user sent 33 multilingual 

search requests. We have another 115 users with 
score higher than 5.  

For example, the following two request, sent by 

one user: 
p27250-adsao05douji-acca.osaka.ocn.ne.jp

 &input=peshawar 

p27250-adsao05douji-acca.osaka.ocn.ne.jp

  &input=ペシャワール 
On the DSR-MPG the translation weight be-

tween peshawer and ペシャワール = 5, thus 
this IP earned a point. With k=10, means that a 

user should send 10 requests to earn a loyalty 
point, only 309 users earned 12 point (for 12 

months), 43 of them has more than 3 points. 

6 Conclusions 

We presented our work in constructing a new 

lexical resource that can handle multilingual 

terms based on the historical archive of the 
Digital Silk Road. Multilingual Preterminologi-

cal Graphs (MPGs) are constructed based on 

domain dedicated resources, and based on vol-

unteer contributions.  

DSR Terminology

DSR-MPG (200,000 nodes)

previous DSR
dictionary (500

entries)

 
Figure  10. DSR preterminology 

It compiles terms available in the pretermi-

nological sphere of a domain. In this article we 

defined the framework of the construction of 
preterminology, and we described the approach 

for using access log files to initialize such pre-

terminological resource by finding the trends in 
the search requests used to access the resources 

of an online community. Aiming at a standard-

ized multilingual repository is very expensive 

25



and difficult.  Instead of that, MPGs tries to use 

all available contributions.  This way will en-

hance the linguistic and informational coverage, 

and tuning the weights (tw, rw, and sw) will 
give indications for the confidence of the trans-

lation equivalences, as the tedges accumulate 

the agreements of the contributors and MDRs 
(online resources). 

We used the resources of the Digital Silk 

Road Project to construct a DSR-MPG and 
some applications that attract further contribu-

tion to the MPG.  DSR-MPG achieved high lin-

guistic and informational coverage compared to 

other general purpose dictionaries, Figure 10. 
Furthermore, the generic structure of the MPG 

makes it possible to accept volunteer contribu-

tions, and it facilitates further study of comput-
ing more lexical functions and ontological rela-

tions between the terms. We made a study on 

the possibility of receiving contributions from 
users, by analyzing the access log file to find 

multilinguality and loyalty of the DSR visitors; 

we found 115 users with the needed linguistic 

capacity 43 of them scored high loyalty points. 
This gives an indication of the future of the con-

tributions. These measures are just estimations 

and expected to go high with the help of the 
MPG-DSR applications. 

References 

Babylon. (2009). "Babylon Dictionary."   Retrieved 

5/5/2009, 2009, from 
http://www.babylon.com/define/98/English-

Arabic-Dictionary.html. 

Cabre, M. T. and J. C. Sager (1999). Terminology: 

Theory, methods, and applications, J. Benjamins 

Pub. Co. 

Chen, A. (2002). "Cross-Language Retrieval Ex-

periments at CLEF 2002." in CLEF-2002 working 

notes,. 

Daoud, M., C. Boitet, et al. (2009). Constructing 

multilingual preterminological graphs using vari-

ous online-community resources. the Eighth In-
ternational Symposium on Natural Language 

Processing (SNLP2009), Thailand. 

Daoud, M., C. Boitet, et al. (2009). Building a 

Community-Dedicated Preterminological Multi-

lingual Graphs from Implicit and Explicit User In-

teractions. Second International Workshop on 

REsource Discovery (RED 2009), co-located with 

VLDB 2009, Lyon, France. 

Daoud, M., A. Kitamoto, et al. (2008). A CLIR-

Based Collaborative Construction of Multilingual 

Terminological Dictionary for Cultural Resources. 

Translating and the Computer 30, London-UK. 

Etzioni, O., K. Reiter, et al. (2007). Lexical transla-

tion with application to image searching on the 

web. MT Summit XI, Copenhagen, Denmark. 

Even, S. (1979). Graph Algorithms, Computer Sci-

ence Press. 

FAO. (2008). "FAO TERMINOLOGY."   Retrieved 

1/9/2008, 2008, from http://www.fao.org/faoterm. 

Google. (2008). "Google Dictionary."   Retrieved 

1/9/2008, 2008, from 

http://www.google.com/dictionary. 

Google. (2008). "Google Translate."   Retrieved 1 

June 2008, 2008, from http://translate.google.com. 

Gopestake, A., T. Briscoe, et al. (1994). "Acquisition 

of lexical translation relations from MRDS." Ma-

chine Translation Volume 9, Numbers 3-4 / Sep-

tember, 1994: 183-219. 

IATE. (2008). "Inter-Active Terminology for 

Europe."   Retrieved 10/10/2008, 2008, from 
http://iate.europa.eu. 

IDRC. (2009, 10 January 2009). "The Water De-

mand Management Glossary (Second Edition)." 

from 

http://www.idrc.ca/WaterDemand/IDRC_Glossar

y_Second_Edition/index.html. 

IEC. (2008). "Electropedia."   Retrieved 10/10/2008, 

2008, from 

http://dom2.iec.ch/iev/iev.nsf/welcome?openform. 

Kageura, K. (2002). The Dynamics of Terminology: 

A descriptive theory of term formation and termi-

nological growth. 

Loerch, U. (2000). An Introduction to Graph Algo-

rithms Auckland, New Zealand, University of 

Auckland. 

NII. (2003). "Digital Silk Road."   Retrieved 

1/9/2008, 2008, from 

http://dsr.nii.ac.jp/index.html.en. 

NII. (2008). "Digital Archive of Toyo Bunko Rare 

Books."   Retrieved 1 June 2008, 2008, from 

http://dsr.nii.ac.jp/toyobunko/. 

Systran. (2009). "Systran Web Tranlstor."   Re-

trieved 20/12/2009, 2009, from 
www.systransoft.com/. 

UN-Geo (2002). Glossary of Terms for the Stan-

dardization of Geographical Names, UN, New 

York. 

26



UN. (2008). "United Nations Multilingual Terminol-

ogy Database."   Retrieved 10/10/2008, 2008, 

from http://unterm.un.org/. 

Wikipedia-A. (2008). "Wikipedia."   Retrieved 1 

June 2008, 2008, from http://www.wikipedia.org/. 

 

 

 

27


