




































TAG Analysis of Turkish Long Distance Dependencies

Elif Eyigöz
University of Rochester
Computer Studies Bldg.

Rochester, NY 14627, USA
eyigoz@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract

All permutations of a two level embedding sen-
tence in Turkish is analyzed, in order to develop an
LTAG grammar that can account for Turkish long
distance dependencies. The fact that Turkish allows
only long distance topicalization and extraposition
is shown to be connected to a condition -the coher-
ence condition- that draws the boundary between the
acceptable and inacceptable permutations of the five
word sentence under investigation. The LTAG gram-
mar for this fragment of Turkish has two levels: the
first level assumes lexicalized and linguistically ap-
propriate elementary trees, where as the second level
assumes elementary trees that are derived from the
elementary trees of the first level, and are not lexi-
calized.

1 Introduction

The formal power of lexicalized TAG (LTAG) (Joshi et
al., 1975; Schabes et al., 1988; Schabes, 1990) is ad-
equate to assign appropriate structural descriptions to
Turkish long distance scrambling. This provides an un-
complicated ground for the investigation of the mecha-
nisms behind long distance scrambling in Turkish. In this
paper, all permutations of a five word two level embed-
ding structure are analyzed and an LTAG grammar is de-
veloped for this fragment of Turkish. Sentences involving
scrambling from more than two levels of embedding are
difficult to interpret, therefore the optimum compromise
between the complexity of the structure and the validity
of the analysis is determined by restricting the number of
the words in the structure under investigation, which as a
result limits the number of permutations to a manageable
quantity.

The use of the adjunction operation to explain sev-
eral linguistic phenomena such as raising, extraction, and
long distance dependencies has been demonstrated in
(Kroch and Joshi, 1985; Kroch and Joshi, 1987; Kroch
and Baltin, 1989; Frank, 2000; Frank, 1992). However,
it has been shown that German long distance scrambling

can not be adequately described within the framework of
lexicalized TAGs, as elements from subordinate clauses
can scramble to any position in the matrix clause in Ger-
man (Becker et al., 1991; Becker et al., 1992; Rambow,
1994). As a consequence, multi-component TAG (MC-
TAG) (Weir, 1988; Becker et al., 1991; Rambow, 1994)
grammars have been proposed for German and Korean
scrambling (Rambow and Lee, 1994). Since Turkish, un-
like German, allows only long distance topicalization and
long distance extraposition, the formal power of LTAG is
adequate to explain Turkish long distance dependencies.

The detailed analysis of the two level embedding sen-
tence in section 2 brings forth a condition -the coherence
condition- that draws the boundary between the accept-
able and inacceptable permutations of the five word sen-
tence. The LTAG grammar for this fragment of Turk-
ish developed in section 3 and 4 serves multiple pur-
poses. First, it was complied into a linear indexed gram-
mar as explained in (Schabes and Shieber, 1992), and
parsed with a parser written in Prolog (Shieber et al.,
1995). Second, it shows that the set of derivations can
be meaningfully partitioned according to the coherence
condition. Finally, it reveals a connection between the
coherence condition and the semantic function of long
distance scrambling in Turkish.1

2 Turkish Long Distance Scrambling

Turkish is an head-final SOV language. Yet, there is no
restriction on the order of arguments and adjuncts of sim-
ple sentences, as long as they are not referentially depen-
dent and the sentence does not contain non-specific NPs
or WH-phrases (Kural, 1992). Scrambling in Turkish
causes different semantic interpretations. Scrambling to
the sentence initial position marks the constituent as the
topic, the immediately preverbal position marks it as the
focus, and the post-verbal position as the background in-
formation (Ergüvanlı, 1984). Scrambling of case marked

1Following the literature on the free word order phenomena in Turk-
ish, the term scrambling, in this paper, refers to any word order variation
from the unmarked word order.

TAG Analysis of Turkish Long Distance Dependencies

151



arguments and adjuncts out of subordinate clauses to sen-
tence initial and sentence final positions, i.e. long dis-
tance topicalization and extraposition are also grammat-
ical. Long distance scrambling to positions other than
these two, i.e. scrambling without a semantic function is
unnatural, and is considered ungrammatical.

This section gives an analysis of the two level em-
bedding structure in (1) to determine the grammatical,
acceptable and inacceptable permutations this five word
sentence. This structure has two subordinate clauses, the
subject positions of which are empty.2 The sentence has
two noun phrases: the most embedded verb has an NP
complement NP3, and the matrix sentence has an NP sub-
ject NP1. The matrix verb V1 has an infinitival comple-
ment (INF) with an ablative case (ABL). Likewise, V2
has a verbal noun (VN) complement with accusative case
(ACC). The most embedded verb V3 has an NP comple-
ment with accusative case (ACC).3

(1) Unmarked Order

Mary
Mary

çocukları
children-ACC

susturmayı
silence-VN-ACC

denemekten
try-INF-ABL

yoruldu.
tired-PAST

‘Mary is tired of trying to silence the children.’

NP1 NP3 V3 V2 V1

(2) Çocukları
children-ACC

Mary
Mary

susturmayı
silence-VN-ACC

denemekten
try-INF-ABL

yoruldu.
tired-PAST

[NP3] NP1 V3 V2 V1

(3) Mary
Mary

susturmayı
silence-VN-ACC

denemekten
try-INF-ABL

yoruldu
tired-PAST

çocukları.
children-ACC

NP1 V3 V2 V1 [NP3]

(4) ? Çocukları
children-ACC

susturmayı
silence-VN-ACC

Mary
Mary

denemekten
try-INF-ABL

yoruldu.
tired-PAST

[NP3 V3] NP1 V2 V1

2Since the discussion on long distance scrambling does not hinge
upon the existence of the silent PRO, it is left out in the analysis for the
sake of the clarity of the presentation.

3The analysis proposed in this paper is independent of the choice of
the verbs, the case markers on their complements, and the type of sub-
ordination. The analysis is intended to explain the least pragmatically
restricted cases, the sentences that in fact can undergo long distance
scrambling described in this work.

(5) ? Mary
Mary

denemekten
try-INF-ABL

yoruldu
tired-PAST

çocukları
children-ACC

susturmayı.
silence-VN-ACC

NP1 V2 V1 [NP3 V3]

The most embedded argument NP3 is long distance top-
icalized in (2), and is long distance extraposed in (3).
[NP3 V3], which is the complement of V2, is long dis-
tance topicalized in (4) and is long distance extraposed in
(5).

(6) shows an ungrammatical sentence in which NP3
extraposes and V3 topicalizes. If NP3, V2 and V3 are
separated into three as in (6), then the sentence not only
becomes ungrammatical but also becomes inacceptable.
Such a sentence is not more informative than a ‘word
salad’ with respect to pragmatic inference. The coher-
ence condition in (7) is proposed to rule out such inac-
ceptable sentences.

(6) * uğraşmaktan
try-INF-ABL

Mary
Mary

bırakmaya
quit-VN-DAT

bıktı
tire-PAST-3SG

Sigarayı.
Cigarette-ACC

[V3] NP1 [V2] V1 [NP3]

‘Mary is tired of trying to quit smoking.’

(7) The Coherence Condition
In acceptable sentences, [[NP3 V3] V2] is sepa-
rated as [NP3 V3] - V2 or NP3 - [V3 V2].

It is not the case that all sentences that do not violate the
coherence condition are grammatical. The sentence in
(8a) exemplify long distance topicalization of NP3 when
[V3 V2] is extraposed. Similarly in (8b), [NP3 V3] is top-
icalized and V2 is extraposed. In both cases, an element
of a subordinate clause is topicalized when its verb is ex-
traposed, which results in an ungrammatical sentence.

(8) a. *? Çocukları
children-ACC

Mary
Mary

yoruldu
tired-PAST

susturmaya
silence-VN-DAT

uğraşmaktan.
try-INF-ABL

[NP3] NP1 V1 [V3 V2]

b. *? Çocukları
children-ACC

susturmaya
silence-VN-ACC

Mary
Mary

yoruldu
tired-PAST

uğraşmaktan.
try-INF-ABL

[NP3 V3] NP1 V1 [V2]

Since Turkish is a head-final language, embedding
a sentence inside another one creates a center embed-
ding structure. Moreover, long distance scrambling cre-
ates center embedding with crossing dependencies. Psy-
cholinguistics studies indicate that such sentences in-

Elif Eyigöz

152



1
Long Distance Left Scrambling of NP3 • NP3 • [V3 V2]
Long Distance Left Scrambling of [NP3 V3] • [NP3 V3] • V2

2
Long Distance Right Scrambling of NP3

[V3 V2] NP3 • •
[V3 V2] • NP3 •
• [V3 V2] NP3 •

Long Distance Right Scrambling of [NP3 V3] V2 • [NP3 V3]•

3 Local Extraposition of [NP3 V3]
• V2 [NP3 V3] •
V2 [NP3 V3] • •

Table 1: Permutations without a Semantic Function

crease processing load, which results in low acceptabil-
ity judgments associated with these sentences. As indi-
cated with the judgment ‘?’ for (4) and (5), long dis-
tance topicalization and extraposition of [V3 V2] is more
marked than long distance topicalization and extraposi-
tion of NP3.

Both the tendency to group the verbs as [V3 V2
V1], and the coherence condition are reminiscent of the
‘clause union’ account of German and Dutch verb con-
structions (Evers, 1975). According to the ‘clause union’
hypothesis, verbs undergo a process by which they form
a single complex verb. Similarly, the coherence condition
seems to collapse the two level embedding structure into
a one level embedding structure by either combining the
[V3 V2] into one complex verb, or freezing [NP3 V3] as
one complex object.

2.1 Semantic Function of Scrambling

Among the 120 permutations of the sentence in (1), only
42 word orders do not violate the coherence condition.
However, 16 more sentences have to be ruled out be-
cause scrambling without a semantic function, i.e scram-
bling to positions other than the sentence initial topic and
sentence final background positions is ungrammatical in
Turkish. Therefore, only 26 out of 120 word orders are
left to be accounted for.

The word orders that have to be ruled out are given in
Table 1. The • shows the positions of the two elements
of the matrix clause. In row one, a constituent from a
subordinate clause is scrambled to the left, but it is not
at the sentence initial position. In row two, a constituent
from a subordinate clause is scrambled to the right, but it
is not at the sentence final position. In row three, [NP3
V3] undergoes local extraposition.

The following section presents an LTAG grammar for
the word orders that do not violate the coherence con-
dition and involve scrambling with a semantic function.
The grammar, through the adjunction operation, reveals a

relation between the coherence condition and the seman-
tic function of long distance scrambling. However, local
extraposition cannot be related to the coherence condition
in the same way, because derivation of local extraposition
does not involve the adjunction operation.

Moreover, local extraposition of the subject in a one
level embedding sentence is grammatical, as exemplified
below. (9) shows the unmarked order. S1 refers to the
subject of the matrix clause, S2 to the subject of the em-
bedded clause, O2 to the object of the embedded clause,
V1 and V2 to the verbs of the matrix and the embedded
clauses respectively. S2 is extraposed in (10). Local ex-
traposition of the subject in a subordinate clause places
the subject in the preverbal focus position of the matrix
clause, therefore it is not semantically vacuous. Local
extraposition of a direct object in a subordinate clause,
however, may be semantically vacuous because the ob-
ject is already in a preverbal focus position at its base
position.

(9) Elif
Elif

Ali’nin
Ali-GEN

Ankara’dan
Ankara-ABL

geldiğini
come-NOM-P2SG-ACC

biliyor.
know-PROG

S1 [S2 O2 V2] V1

‘Elif knows that Ali came from Ankara.’

(10) Elif
Elif

Ankara’dan
Ankara-ABL

geldiğini
come-NOM-P2SG-ACC

Ali’nin
Ali-GEN

biliyor.
know-PROG

S1 [O2 V2 S2] V1

‘Elif knows that Ali came from Ankara.’

Since local extraposition is ungrammatical in the struc-
ture under investigation, the sentences in row three of Ta-
ble 1 are omitted in the LTAG grammar developed in the
following section.

TAG Analysis of Turkish Long Distance Dependencies

153



SOV OSV OVS SVO VSO VOS

V2-0 V3-0 Unmarked
√ √ √ √ √ √

V2-0 V3-1 Topicalization of [NP3]
√

SE SE A A A

V2-0 R3-1 Extraposition of [NP3]
√

A A A A A

V2-1 V3-0 Topicalization of [NP3 V3]
√

SE SE A A A

R2-1 V3-0 Extraposition of [NP3 V3]
√

A A A A A

Table 2: The summary of the 26 legitimate derivations

Figure 1: Elementary Matrix Trees

3 LTAG Grammar

The elementary structures that participate in the deriva-
tion of the two level embedding sentence are the clausal
trees shown in Figure 1 and 2. Figure 1 and 2 show all
word orders for each clause, only one of which partici-
pates in the derivation. The initial tree is the tree of the
most subordinate clause, which is headed by V3. The two
possibilities for the initial tree are shown in Figure 2: the
head-initial tree is represented as ‘R3’, the head-final tree
as ‘V3’. Likewise, the head-final and head-initial auxil-
iary trees headed by V2 are shown in 2. The matrix verb
V1 is a transitive verb, so there are six possible orders on
the matrix clause, as shown in Figure 1. An MC-TAG
grammar for Turkish local scrambling was demonstrated
in (Eyigöz, 2007). Therefore, the elementary trees in Fig-
ure 1 and 2 are presumably derived by a set internal merge
operation.

Adjoining a tree at a node below the root node may
result in topicalization or extraposition of the arguments
that are higher than the node of adjunction. The elements
above the node of adjunction may be topicalized or ex-
traposed depending on their directionality with respect to
the node of adjunction. To derive this effect, clausal sub-

Figure 2: Elementary Trees

categorization is indicated by a footnode, as opposed to a
substitution node.

A matrix V1 tree adjoins into a tree of its subordinate
clause headed by V2 through its root and foot nodes, la-
beled X in Figure 1. A tree headed by V2 adjoins into
a tree of its subordinate clause headed by V3 through its
Root and Foot nodes. Since there is no clause that ma-
trix V1 is subordinate to, nothing adjoins into V1 trees.
As for V2, R2, V3, R3 trees, it is assumed that adjoin-
ing does not take place at a foot node or a substitution
node. Therefore, keeping track of the level of the node of
adjunction is sufficient, as there is at most one possible
node of adjunction at each level. As shown in Figure 2,
adjunction at level 0 takes place at a root node, adjunction
at the level 1 takes place at the sister of the Foot node on
V2/R2 trees, and at the sister of NP3 on V3/R3 trees. Fi-
nally, there is no possible node of adjunction at the third
level. Therefore, there are two nodes of adjunction per
tree, one at level 0 and one at level 1.

3.1 Restricting the Derivations

Two possible nodes for adjunction per tree means that
there are 16x6 possible TAG derivations that could be

Elif Eyigöz

154



performed with the grammar in Figure 1 and 2. However,
some of these derivations result in word orders that vio-
late the coherence condition. Adjunction at the trees of
V2/R2 and V3/R3 both at the first level results in word or-
ders that either violate the coherence condition, or word
orders that are string equivalent to the word orders de-
rived by other derivations. Likewise, adjoining at the R3
tree at the root level yields word orders that violate the co-
herence condition. Ruling out such derivations decreases
the number of derivations to 6x6.

An interesting result of eliminating the derivations that
violate the coherence condition is that only the deriva-
tions that involve long distance scrambling to the sen-
tence initial and the sentence final positions, and local
extraposition are left as legitimate derivations.

Figure 3: Derivation Examples

As argued in section 2, local extraposition in subordi-
nate clauses has to be ruled out on grounds independent
of the coherence condition. Adjoining at the root of the
head-initial tree headed by V2 (R2 in Figure 2) results in
the local extraposition of its argument [NP3 V3]. There-
fore, this derivation is also eliminated, which decreases
the number of derivations from 6x6 to 5x6.

Figure 4: Revised Initial Trees

Figure 3 shows the results of the five legitimate deriva-
tions on the SOV order of the matrix clause. The trees in
Figure 3 yield grammatical sentences. Figure (a) shows
the unmarked order. Comparing (b) with the unmarked
order in (a), we can see that adjoining the tree headed
by V2 into the tree headed by V3 at level 1 results in
topicalization of its argument N3. Figures (b) and (c)
illustrate the derivation of topicalization and extraposi-
tion based on the directionality of the tree headed by V3
(head-initial vs. head-final). Likewise, the trees in (d) and
(e) show topicalization and extraposition of the argument
[NP3 V3] based on the directionality of the tree headed
by V2.

Table 2 summarizes the 5x6 legitimate derivations and
acceptability judgments associated with them. Not all 30
possibilities are realized because topicalization out of a
topicalized constituent is string vacuous topicalization.
Therefore, topicalization does not apply to OSV and OVS
word orders on the matrix clause, because the foot node
is already at the sentence initial topic position in these
trees. Accordingly, SE in Table 2 stands for sentences that
are string equivalent to sentences derived by other deriva-
tions.

√
in Table 2 stands for the grammatical sentences.

Finally, A stands for sentences that are not grammatical
but acceptable.

In section 2.1, the number of permutations that do not
violate the coherence condition and involve scrambling
with a semantic function was determined to be 26. Table
2 shows the linguistically appropriate derivations of these
26 word orders.

4 TAG Grammar Revisited

The coherence condition is enforced on the LTAG gram-
mar developed in section 3 by restricting the set of possi-
ble derivations. In order to move from restrictions placed
on derivations to restrictions placed on elementary trees,
there are alternative paths to pursue. Motivated by the

TAG Analysis of Turkish Long Distance Dependencies

155



grammaticality judgments listed in Table 2 and the co-
herence condition, the revised TAG grammar comprises
of the revised initial trees in Figure 4 and the auxiliary
matrix trees in Figure 1. Adjunction takes place at the
nodes with the label X on the initial trees, through the
nodes with the same label on the auxiliary trees.

The revised grammar comprises of two sets of trees
to be combined. The first set -the initial trees in Figure
4- corresponds to the five rows of Table 2. The second
set -the auxiliary matrix trees in Figure 1- corresponds
to the six columns of Table 2. The combination of the
unmarked SOV tree with any tree in Figure 4 results in
a grammatical sentence. Similarly, the combination of
the unmarked [NP3 V3 V2] tree with any tree in Figure
1 results in a grammatical sentence. The combination of
the unmarked SOV tree with the unmarked [NP3 V3 V2]
tree derives the unmarked word order at the upper left
corner of Table 2.

As argued in section 2, the coherence condition is rem-
iniscent of the ‘clause union’ hypothesis for German and
Dutch verb constructions, in that the coherence condition
seems to collapse the two level embedding structure into
a one level embedding structure by either combining the
[V3 V2] into one complex verb, or freezing [NP3 V3]
as one complex object. The trees in Figure 4 reflect the
merger expressed by the coherence condition.

5 Conclusion

The LTAG grammar proposed in this work has two lev-
els: the first level assumes lexicalized and linguistically
appropriate elementary trees, where as the second level
assumes elementary trees that are derived from the ele-
mentary trees of the first level, and are not lexicalized.
The choice of the grammar proposed in this work, espe-
cially the introduction of the second level, is motivated
mainly by how conveniently the grammar expresses the
special status of the unmarked order and how the gram-
mar relates the unmarked order to the other grammatical
word orders of the same sentence. Moreover, the coher-
ence condition, which is a filter on the acceptable per-
mutations of the two level embedding sentence, seems to
express the merger that results in the second level of the
LTAG grammar.

References

Tilman Becker, Aravind K. Joshi, and Owen Rambow. 1991.
Long-distance scrambling and tree adjoining grammars. In
ACL, pages 21–26.

Tilman Becker, Owen Rambow, and Michael Niv. 1992. The
derivational generative power of formal systems or scram-
bling is beyond lcfrs. Technical Report IRCS-92-38, Insti-
tute for Research in Cognitive Science, University of Penn-
sylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Emine E. Ergüvanlı. 1984. The Function of Word Order in
Turkish Grammar. University of California Press, Los An-
geles, California.

Arnold Evers. 1975. The Transformational Cycle in Dutch and
German. Ph.D. thesis, University of Utrecht.

Elif Eyigöz. 2007. Tag analysis of turkish scrambling. Mas-
ter’s thesis, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.

Robert Evan Frank. 1992. Syntactic locality and Tree Ad-
joining Grammar: grammatical, acquisition and process-
ing perspectives. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Robert Frank. 2000. Phrase Structure Composition and Syn-
tactic Dependencies. MIT Press.

Aravind K. Joshi, Leon S. Levy, and Masako Takahashi. 1975.
Tree adjunct grammars. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 10(1):136–
163.

Antony Kroch and Mark Baltin, editors, 1989. Asymmetries
in Long Distance Extraction in a Tree Adjoining Grammar.
University of Chicago Press.

Anthony Kroch and Aravind Joshi. 1985. Linguistic relevance
of tree adjoining grammar. Technical Report MS-SC-85-16,
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania.

Antony Kroch and Aravind Joshi, 1987. Analyzing Extraposi-
tion in a Tree Adjoining Grammar, page 107149. Syntax and
semantics. Academic Press, New York.

Murat Kural. 1992. Properties of Turkish scrambling. Master’s
thesis, UCLA.

Owen Rambow and Young-Suk Lee. 1994. Word order vari-
ation and tree-adjoining grammar. Computational Intelli-
gence, 10:386–400.

Owen Rambow. 1994. Formal and Computational Aspects of
Natural Language Processing. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Pennsylvania.

Yves Schabes and Stuart M. Shieber. 1992. An alternative con-
ception of tree-adjoining derivation. In ACL, pages 167–176.

Yves Schabes, Anne Abeille, and Aravind K. Joshi. 1988.
Parsing strategies with ’lexicalized’ grammars: application
to tree adjoining grammars. In Proceedings of the 12th con-
ference on Computational linguistics, pages 578–583, Mor-
ristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Yves Schabes. 1990. Mathematical and computational aspects
of lexicalized grammars. Ph.D. thesis, University of Penn-
sylvania.

Stuart M. Shieber, Yves Schabes, and Fernando C. N. Pereira.
1995. Principles and implementation of deductive parsing.
J. Log. Program., 24(1&2):3–36.

David Weir. 1988. Characterizing Mildly Context-Sensitive
Grammar Formalisms. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsyl-
vania, Philadelphia.

Elif Eyigöz

156


