










































The Impact of Dimensionality on Natural Language Route Directions in Unconstrained Dialogue


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 99–102,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Impact of Dimensionality on Natural Language Route Directions 
in Unconstrained Dialogue

Vivien Mast
University of Bremen

Bremen, Germany
viv@tzi.de

Jan Smeddinck
University of Bremen

Bremen, Germany
smeddinck 
@tzi.de

Anna Strotseva
University of Bremen

Bremen, Germany
anna.strotseva 
@uni-bremen.de

Thora Tenbrink
University of Bremen

Bremen, Germany
tenbrink 

@uni-bremen.de

Abstract

In  this paper we examine the influence  of 
dimensionality  on  natural  language  route 
directions  in  dialogue.  Specifically,  we 
show  that  giving  route  instructions  in  a 
quasi-3d  environment  leads  to  experiential 
descriptive  accounts,  as  manifested  by  a 
higher  proportion  of  location  descriptions, 
lack of chunking, use of 1st person singular 
personal pronouns, and more frequent use of 
temporal and spatial deictic terms. 2d scen-
arios  lead  to  informative  instructions,  as 
manifested by a frequent use of motion ex-
pressions,  chunking of route elements,  and 
use of mainly 2nd person singular personal 
pronouns.

1 Introduction

In order to build artificial agents that are com-
petent  in  creating  and  understanding  natural 
language route directions in situated discourse, 
it is necessary to explore how situatedness af-
fects  the  communication  of  humans  about 
routes. The current study aims at exploring in 
which  ways  dimensionality  influences  the 
choice  of  communicative  strategies  for  route 
directions in discourse. 

Previous  research  about  route  directions 
mostly deals with monologues or pretend dia-
logue (e.g.  Rehrl  et  al.,  2009;  Klippel  et  al., 
2003), and concerns two-dimensional stimuli, 
such as map-based tasks (Klippel et al., 2003; 
Goschler et al., 2008).

The study presented here examines pairs of 
participants collaborating on a route instruction 
task  in  a  naturalistic  discourse  setting  under 
two  conditions:  In  the  2d  condition,  the  in-
structor  was  shown  a  two-dimensional  map 
with the route drawn into it. In the 3d condition 

however, the instructor navigated along a pre-
set route in Google Maps Street View.

2 Route Instruction Strategies  

Route directions consist of procedures and de-
scriptions that combine to a step-by-step pre-
scription of the actions that are necessary for 
executing the given course (Michon and Denis, 
2001; Longacre, 1983). Since spatial linguistic 
expressions  reflect  the  mental  model  already 
existing on the part  of  the  instructor,  the di-
mensions in which route instructors experience 
an environment (2d or 3d) may have a system-
atic impact on the discourse strategies they use. 
In the following we analyze a range of spatial 
descriptions, focusing on aspects known to be 
crucial for spatial interaction, such as descrip-
tions of locations and motion, the use of per-
spective  expressions,  chunking  of  route  ele-
ments, and personal and spatiotemporal deixis.

2.1 Static and Dynamic Descriptions

Since route directions deal with a static envir-
onment in which a movement takes place, they 
usually include a high proportion of dynamic 
descriptions of actions (procedures in Michon 
and Denis' (2001) terms), and additional static 
information  about  the  surroundings  (descrip-
tions). In our analysis, we distinguished speak-
ers’ utterances as  motion descriptions if  they 
described or requested the literal  motion of an 
entity. In contrast, an utterance was marked as 
location if it described a static spatial relation, 
for example the position of the speaker or an 
object at a certain point in time.

2.2 Perspective Use

When  describing  routes,  speakers  either  use 
the  route  perspective,  describing  route  ele-
ments or motions from the point of view of a 

99



person traveling along the route, or the survey  
perspective, where the description is based on 
cardinal  directions,  or  directions  as  they  are 
defined  by  the  map  as  a  whole  (Taylor  and 
Tversky,  1996).  Previous  research  has indic-
ated that perspective choice can be influenced 
by the specific situation, and by the coordina-
tion  between  speakers  in  natural  discourse 
(Pickering  and  Garrod,  2004;  Watson  et  al., 
2006). In the present study, we test the hypo-
thesis that navigating a route in a 3d perspect-
ive makes it more difficult for the instructor to 
use the survey perspective, leading to a prefer-
ence for the route perspective. Further we as-
sume  that  the  follower  will  adapt  to  the  in-
structor’s  perspective choice in  terms  of  lan-
guage use.

2.3 Chunking of Route Segments

In a study examining online route descriptions 
to  an imaginary  follower  based on a two-di-
mensional  map,  Klippel  et  al.  (2003)  found 
that  participants  tended  to  chunk  decision 
points without directional change together. For 
example, a speaker could say “turn right at the 
second intersection” instead of “Go straight on, 
and then turn right”. This occurred even when 
the route was shown as a moving dot on the 
map.  In  our  study,  we  address  the  question 
whether this also holds for instructors with a 
three-dimensional  view.  We  expected  a  fre-
quent usage of chunking in the 2d condition, in 
which the participants have access to compre-
hensive structural information, as opposed to a 
higher degree of separate references in the 3d 
condition, in which participants experience the 
environment incrementally.

3 Experiment

22 students (average age 25, 14 male and 8 fe-
male) volunteered to participate in the experi-
ment.  They formed  11  pairs  that  each  com-
pleted one test run and three permuted critical 
trials.  Instructor  and follower  were placed  in 
different  rooms  and  interacted  via  telephone 
software. 

The four predetermined routes were identic-
al for all participants, and they differed mildly 
in complexity,  ranging from 9 to 14 decision 
points. All  routes  were  located  in  San Fran-
cisco and were specifically designed such that, 
at most decision points, descriptions would be 
unambiguous with respect to perspective use. 

In  the  2d  condition  (5  pairs),  instructors 
were  given a  map  that  showed mostly street 
names  and  major  landmarks  such  as  parks, 
schools, restaurants, etc., as they appear in the 
standard  Google  Maps  map  view.  The  route 
consisted of a marked starting and end point, 
and was signaled by a thick blue line with ar-
rows indicating the direction. In the 3d condi-
tion  (6  pairs),  instructors  interacted  directly 
with Google  Street View which had a photo-
graphic quasi-3d view and allowed them to ob-
serve the surroundings as if navigating on the 
roads,  seeing a vast  amount  of details  of  the 
environment.  Street names were clearly read-
able as an overlay on top of the photographic 
imagery.  The route was indicated by fat blue 
arrows that  the  instructors could click on,  in 
order to move in the given direction.

In both conditions, the followers were asked 
to draw the route on a map that only contained 
the starting point. The task instruction was the 
same for both conditions, priming for proced-
ural  discourse yet  ambiguous  with respect  to 
perspective use:  “Now you  have to  tell  your 
partner where you are going. Please do this by 
giving instructions via the microphone.” (trans-
lated  from German).  In  the  3d  condition  in-
structors were informed that the follower had a 
different view of the same surroundings.

Taken together this setup differs from pre-
vious studies in that it  features unconstrained 
spoken dialogue and is  set  in a realistic use-
case with a three-dimensional setting.

4 Results

The participants in the 3d condition took signi-
ficantly longer (M = 125.61 utterances per tri-
al) to complete a task than the participants in 
the 2d perspective (M = 46.40 utterances per 
trial, t(9) = 4.781, p = 0.001). 

Figure 1 shows typical examples of the in-
structors’  language  in  the  two  conditions.  In 
the 2d condition, instructors as well as follow-
ers used survey perspective, as in line 2.2 in 
Figure 1, significantly more frequently than in 
the 3d condition (see Table 1).  A Chi-square 
test  showed  the  following results  for  the  in-
structors: χ2(1) = 200.14, p < 0.0001 and χ2(1) = 
91.25, p < 0.0001 for the followers1. It is not-
able  that  the  followers  in  the  2d  condition 
showed  a  preference  for  survey  perspective 
(χ²(1)  = 15.38;  p  < 0.0001),  while  in  the  3d 

1 Mixed, conflated and unclear expressions were 
excluded from the analysis.

100



condition they clearly favored route perspect-
ive, which was the perspective of the instruct-
or.

3d condition:
1.1 Yes... erm ... 
now ... there is a 
crossing again
1.2 Moraga Street
1.3 to the left
1.4 into Moraga 
Street […]
1.5 then there is a 
crossing again
1.6 the twelfth
1.7 straight on over there
1.8 So Moraga further

2d condition:
2.1 And then we go down that one up to Moraga 
Street
2.2 And there we also go right into Moraga Street
2.3 We go through that one up to Eleventh 
Avenue

Figure 1. Typical examples of instructors’ lan-
guage in the two conditions.

The instructors in  the 3d condition used a 
significantly higher proportion of location de-
scriptions than the instructors in the 2d condi-
tion  (t(6.5)  = 4.500,  p  = 0.003). As  Table  2 
shows, the instructors in the 2d condition relied 
mainly on motion descriptions  (see Figure 1, 
location  descriptions  in  lines  1.1  and  1.5  as 
well as motion descriptions in lines 2.1-2.3). 

Perspective 
expressions

3D 2D

Instructor Follower Instructor Follower

Route 98.93% 
(370)

93.33% 
(112)

50.88% 
(87)

21.57% 
(11)

Survey 1.07%
(4)

 6.67% 
(8)

49.12% 
(84)

78.43% 
(40)

Totals 374 120 171 51

Table 1. Use of perspective expressions in 2d 
and 3d conditions (absolute values in paren-
theses).

Chunking of route elements did not occur at 
all  in  the  3d  condition.  In  the  2d  condition 
there were 29 intersections that were skipped 
through chunking, as shown in line 2.3 in Fig-
ure 1. This amounts to a mean of 1.9 chunked 
intersections per route.

Instructors in the 2d condition strongly pre-
ferred 2nd person singular pronouns, whereas

instructors in the 3d condition showed a prefer-
ence - though not as strong - for 1st person sin-
gular (see Figure 2). Instructors in the 3d con-
dition also used the German formal pronoun es 
‘it’ more frequently than those in the 2d condi-
tion. This preference is usually displayed in ut-
terances noting the presence of landmarks  in 
the  surroundings  (e.g.  “Da  gibt  es  eine  Hal-
testelle.” – “There is a tram stop here.”). 

Condition Location Motion

3D 36.81% 63.19%

2D 14.31% 85.69%
Table 2. Location and motion descriptions by 
instructor (means per trial).

In  the  3d  condition,  the  participants  used 
temporal  and  spatial  deictic  terms  more  fre-
quently than in  the 2d condition (jetzt ‘now’ 
3d:  7.3  occurrences  per  100  utterances,  2d: 
2.73. hier ‘here’ 3d: 2.21, 2d: 0.14).

Figure 2. Relative frequency of personal pro-
nouns in the two conditions.

5 Discussion

Our comparison of route directions given while 
perceiving an environment either as a 2d map 
or  in  a 3d view revealed that  dimensionality 
has  systematic  consequences  for  discourse 
strategies on various levels. Location descrip-
tions, route perspective expressions, 1st person 
singular personal pronouns, impersonal es ‘it’, 
as well  as  temporal  and spatial  deictic  terms 
occurred  more  frequently  in  the  instructors’ 
discourse  in  the  3d condition  than in  the  2d 
condition. Also, in the 3d condition, instructors 
did not chunk route elements together. These 
findings  reflect  the  fact  that  the  instructors 

 

3D 2D
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

ich
wir
du
es
sie
er

101



consistently  chose  a  different  discourse 
strategy in this condition. Instead of producing 
procedural step-by-step instructions, they gave 
descriptions of the events happening to them 
and accounts of their surroundings, whereas in-
structors in the 2d condition gave typical route 
directions for their partner to follow.

There are three aspects that may be respons-
ible for the different discourse strategies. First, 
it can be assumed that there is a habitual pref-
erence,  due to  the  fact  that  people  providing 
route directions usually have a 2d representa-
tion available to them, or prior knowledge of 
the relevant route,  whereas someone navigat-
ing new surroundings would not normally be 
expected  to  provide  efficient  procedural  in-
structions.  Second,  the  lack  of  structural  in-
formation in the 3d condition makes it difficult 
for instructors to describe the route from a sur-
vey perspective, or to deliver precise goal-ori-
ented instructions. Third, in the 3d condition, 
progress for the instructor was slow - compar-
able to riding a bicycle along the route at mod-
erate speed - due to the technical properties of 
Google Maps Street View This severed the ef-
fect of the inherent lack of structural informa-
tion, and most probably led the participants to 
verbalize their  progress  more  frequently than 
necessary,  in  order  to  keep  the  conversation 
flowing,  instead  of  to  waiting  until  they 
reached a point where more efficient instruc-
tions would be possible. This factor is also re-
flected in  the  number  of  utterances  per  trial: 
The higher number of utterances per trial in the 
3d condition (see section 4) is at least partly a 
result of the technical setup. 

In the case of chunking, time does not seem 
to  be  the  only relevant  factor.  Klippel  et  al. 
(2003) showed that in a 2d scenario in which 
the  route  was  only gradually revealed in  the 
form of a moving dot on a map,  participants 
still made use of chunking. It remains to be in-
vestigated whether the lack of chunking in the 
present scenario occurred due to the differing 
dimensionality,  or  resulted  from  the  uncon-
strained real dialogue situation, in contrast to 
the  pretend-dialogue  used  in  Klippel  et  al. 
(2003).

Further research should differentiate the role 
of time in the choice of strategy from the im-
pact of perspective. This requires experimental 
setups that allow for the systematic variation of 
the speed of the navigation, as well as for bet-
ter control of such factors as previous know-
ledge and information density on the route. It 

would also be necessary to examine two fur-
ther  conditions  (instructor:  3d,  follower:  2d 
and instructor: 2d, follower: 3d). 

Acknowledgments

Funding by the DFG for the SFB/TR 8, project 
I5-[DiaSpace], is gratefully acknowledged. We 
thank  the  students  who  participated  in  our 
study, as well as Robert Porzel and Elena An-
donova for their helpful advice.

References 
Juliana  Goschler,  Elena  Andonova  and  Robert  J. 

Ross.  2008.  Perspective  Use  and  Perspective 
Shift in Spatial Dialogue. In: Christian Freksa et 
al. (Eds.): Spatial Cognition VI, 250-265. Berlin: 
Springer.

Alexander  Klippel,  Heike  Tappe  and  Christopher 
Habel.  2003.  Pictorial  Representations  of 
Routes: Chunking Route Segments during Com-
prehension.  In:  Christian  Freksa  et  al.  (Eds.): 
Spatial Cognition III, 11-33. Berlin: Springer.

Robert  E.  Longacre.  1983.  The Grammar of  Dis-
course.  Plenum Press, New York / London.

Pierre-Emmanuel Michon and Michel Denis. 2001. 
When and Why Are Visual Landmarks Used in 
Giving Directions? In: Daniel R. Montello (Ed.): 
COSIT 2001, 292-305.

Martin J. Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. To-
ward a Mechanistic Psychology of Dialogue. In 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27:169-225.

Karl  Rehrl, Sven Leitinger, Georg Gartner and Fe-
lix  Ortag.  2009.  An Analysis  of  Direction and 
Motion  Concepts  in  Verbal  Descriptions  of 
Route  Choices.  In:  Kathleen  Stewart  Hornsby, 
Christophe Claramunt, Michel Denis and Gérard 
Ligozat (Eds.): COSIT 2009, 471-488. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin / Heidelberg.

Holly A. Taylor  and Barbara Tversky.  1996. Per-
spective  in  Spatial  Descriptions.  In  Journal  of  
Memory and Language, 35:371-391.

Matthew E. Watson, Martin J. Pickering and Holly 
P. Branigan.  2006. Why Dialogue Methods are 
Important for Investigating Spatial Language. In: 
Kenny  R.  Coventry,  John  Bateman  and  Thora 
Tenbrink (Eds.):  Spatial Language in Dialogue, 
8-22. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

102


