



















































Construction of Chinese Idiom Knowledge-base and Its Applications


Proceedings of the Multiword Expressions: From Theory to Applications (MWE 2010), pages 11–18,
Beijing, August 2010

Construction of a Chinese Idiom Knowledge Base and Its Applications 

 
Lei Wang  

Key Laboratory of Computational 

Linguistics of Ministry of Education 
Department of English, Peking University 

wangleics@pku.edu.cn 

Shiwen Yu  

Key Laboratory of Computational 

Linguistics of Ministry of Education,  
Peking University 
yusw@pku.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Idioms are not only interesting but also 
distinctive in a language for its continuity 
and metaphorical meaning in its context. 
This paper introduces the construction of 
a Chinese idiom knowledge base by the 
Institute of Computational Linguistics at 
Peking University and describes an 
experiment that aims at the automatic 
emotion classification of Chinese idioms. 
In the process, we expect to know more 
about how the constituents in a fossilized 
composition like an idiom function so as 
to affect its semantic or grammatical 
properties. As an important Chinese 
language resource, our idiom knowledge 
base will play a major role in applications 
such as linguistic research, teaching 
Chinese as a foreign language and even as 
a tool for preserving this non-material 
Chinese cultural and historical heritage. 

1  Introduction 

An idiom is a multi-word expression that has a 
figurative meaning that is comprehended in 
regard to a common use of that expression that 
is separate from the literal meaning or definition 
of the words of which it is made (McArthur, 
1992). From a linguistic perspective, idioms are 
usually presumed to be figures of speech that 
are contradictory to the principle of 
compositionality. The words that construct an 
idiom no longer keep their original meaning or 
popular sense, while in the process of its 
formation it develops a specialized meaning as 
an entity whose sense is different from the 
literal meanings of the constituent elements.  

Although an idiom is an expression not 
readily analyzable from its grammatical 
structure or from the meaning of its component 

words, it is the distinctive form or construction 
of a particular language that has a unique form 
or style characteristic only of that language. An 
idiom is also used, in most cases, with some 
intention of the writer or to express certain 
emotion or attitude. Thus in nature, idioms are 
exaggerative and descriptive and do not belong 
to the plain type.  

Therefore, to classify idioms according to 
its emotional property or descriptive property is 
important for many practical applications. In 
recent years, emotion classification has become 
a very popular task in the area of Natural 
Language Processing (NLP), which tries to 
predict sentiment (opinion, emotion, etc.) from 
texts. Most research has focused on subjectivity 
(subjective/objective) or polarity 
(positive/neutral/negative) classification. The 
applications with this respect include human or 
machine translation, automatic text 
classification or Teaching Chinese as a Foreign 
Language (TCFL). For example, when a student 
learning Chinese as a foreign language 
encounters an idiom in his or her reading or 
conversation, for better understanding it is 
important for him or her to know whether the 
idiom is used to indicate an appreciative or 
derogatory sense which is very crucial to 
understand the attitude of the idiom user. 
Another example is that long articles about 
politics in newspapers often include a lot of 
idiom usage to boost their expressiveness and 
these idioms may carry emotional information. 
Obviously by knowing the emotional 
inclination we may easily obtain a clue about 
the general attitude of the particular medium. 
We may even be able to detect or monitor 
automatically the possible hostile attitude from 
certain electronic media which today provide so 
huge amount of information that seems hard for 
human processing on a daily basis.  

The rest of this paper is organized as 
follows. Section 2 describes the construction of 

11



a Chinese Idiom Knowledge Base (CIKB) and 
introduces its several applications so far. 
Section 3 concludes the related work that serves 
as the basis of the building of CIKB and the 
emotion classification experiment introduced in 
this paper. Section 4 describes the classification 
method, feature settings, the process of emotion 
classification and the analysis of the result. 
Section 5 includes conclusions and our future 
work. 

2 Chinese Idioms and Chinese Idiom 

Knowledge Base 

Generally an idiom is a metaphor — a term 
requiring some background knowledge, 
contextual information, or cultural experience, 
mostly to use only within a particular language, 
where conversational parties must possess 
common cultural references. Therefore, idioms 
are not considered part of the language, but part 
of a nation’s history, society or culture. As 
culture typically is localized, idioms often can 
only be understood within the same cultural 
background; nevertheless, this is not a definite 
rule because some idioms can overcome 
cultural barriers and easily be translated across 
languages, and their metaphoric meanings can 
still be deduced. Contrary to common 
knowledge that language is a living thing, 
idioms do not readily change as time passes. 
Some idioms gain and lose favor in popular 
literature or speeches, but they rarely have any 
actual shift in their constructs as long as they do 
not become extinct. In real life, people also 
have a natural tendency to over exaggerate what 
they mean or over describe what they see or 
hear sometimes and this gives birth to new 
idioms by accident.  

Most Chinese idioms (成语: chéng1  yǔ, 
literally meaning ―set phrases‖) are derived 
from ancient literature, especially Chinese 
classics, and are widely used in written Chinese 
texts. Some idioms appear in spoken or 
vernacular Chinese. The majority of Chinese 
idioms consist of four characters, but some have 
fewer or more. The meaning of an idiom 
usually surpasses the sum of the meanings 

                                                                 
1 The marks on the letters in a Pinyin are for the five tones 

of Chinese characters.   

carried by the few characters, as Chinese idioms 
are often closely related with the fable, story or 
historical account from which they were 
originally born. As their constructs remain 
stable through history, Chinese idioms do not 
follow the usual lexical pattern and syntax of 
modern Chinese language which has been 
reformed many a time. They are instead highly 
compact and resemble more ancient Chinese 
language in many linguistic features.  

Usually a Chinese idiom reflects the moral 
behind the story that it is derived. (Lo, 1997) 

For example, the idiom ―破釜沉舟‖ (pò fǔ chén 
zhōu) literally means ―smash the cauldrons and 
sink the boats.‖ It was based on a historical 
story where General Xiang Yu in Qin Dynasty 
(221 B. C. – 207 B. C.) ordered his army to 
destroy all cooking utensils and boats after they 
crossed a river into the enemy’s territory. He 
and his men won the battle for their ―life or 
death‖ courage and ―no-retreat‖ policy. 
Although there are similar phrases in English, 
such as ―burning bridges‖ or ―crossing the 
Rubicon‖, this particular idiom cannot be used 
in a losing scenario because the story behind it 
does not indicate a failure. Another typical 

example is the idiom ―瓜田李下‖ (guā tián lǐ 
xià) which literally means ―melon field, under 
the plum trees‖. Metaphorically it implies a 
suspicious situation. Derived from a verse 

called 《君子行》 (jūn zǐ xíng, meaning ―A 
Gentleman’s Journey‖) from Eastern Han 
Dynasty (A. D. 25 – A. D. 220), the idiom is 

originated from two lines of the poem ―瓜田不

纳履，李下不整冠‖ (guā tián bù nà lǚ, lǐ xià bù 
zhěng guān) which describe a code of conduct 
for a gentleman that says ―Don't adjust your 
shoes in a melon field and don’t tidy your hat 
under plum trees‖ in order to avoid suspicion of 
stealing. However, most Chinese idioms do not 
possess an allusion nature and are just a 
combination of morphemes that will give this 
set phrase phonetic, semantic or formal 

expressiveness. For example, the idiom ―欢天

喜地‖ (huān tiān xǐ dì, metaphorically meaning 
―be highly delighted‖) literally means ―happy 

heaven and joyful earth‖; or in the idiom ―锒铛

入狱‖ (láng dāng rù yù, meaning ―be thrown 

into the jail‖), the word ―锒铛‖ is just the sound 
of a prisoner’s fetters. 

12



For the importance of idioms in Chinese 
language and culture, an idiom bank with about 
6,790 entries were included in the most 
influential Chinese language knowledge base – 
the Grammatical Knowledge base of 
Contemporary Chinese (GKB) completed by 
the Institute of Computational Linguistics at 
Peking University (ICL), which has been 
working on language resources for over 20 
years and building many knowledge bases on 
Chinese language. Based on that, the Chinese 
Idiom Knowledge Base (CIKB) had been 
constructed from the year 2004 to 2009 and 
collects more than 38, 000 idioms with more 
semantic and pragmatic properties added. 

Basically the properties of each entry in 
CIKB can be classified into four categories: 
lexical, semantic, syntactic and pragmatic, each 
of which also includes several fields in its 
container -- the SQL database. Table 1 shows 
the details about the fields. 

 

Categories Properties 

Lexical idiom, Pinyin
2
, full Pinyin

3
, 

bianti
4
, explanation, origin 

Semantic synonym, antonym, literal 
translation, free translation, 
English equivalent 

Syntactic compositionality, syntactic 
function 

Pragmatic frequency, emotion, event 
(context), grade 

 
Table 1. Property categories of CIKB. 

 
There are three fields of translation as we 

can see in Table 1. In spite of the fact that a 

                                                                 
2 Pinyin (拼音, literally ―phonetics‖, or more literally, 
―spelling sound‖ or ―spelled sound‖), or more formally 

Hanyu Pinyin (汉语拼音, Chinese Pinyin), is currently the 
most commonly used Romanization system for standard 

Mandarin. The system is now used in mainland China, 

Hong Kong, Macau, parts of Taiwan, Malaysia and 
Singapore to teach Mandarin Chinese and internationally 

to teach Mandarin as a second language. It is also often 

used to spell Chinese names in foreign publications and 

can be used to enter Chinese characters on computers and 

cell phones. 
3 full Pinyin, a form of Pinyin that replaces the tone marks 

with numbers 1 to 5 to indicate the five tones of Chinese 

characters for the convenience of computer processing. 
4 bianti, a variant form of the idiom that was caused by 

random misuse, literary malapropism, etc. 

literal translation of an idiom will not reflect its 
metaphorical meaning generally, it will still be 
of value to those who expect to get familiar 
with the constituent characters and may want to 
connect its literal meaning with its metaphorical 
meaning, especially for those learners of 
Chinese as a foreign language. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1. The hierarchical structure of CIKB. 
 

The idioms are classified into three grades 
in terms of appearance in texts and complexity 
of annotation. The most commonly used 3,000 
idioms serve as the core idioms based on the 
statistics obtained from the corpus of People’s 
Daily (the year of 1998), a newspaper that has 
the largest circulation in China. Another 11,000 
idioms are selected into a category named as 
basic idioms (fully annotated in every field) and 
the total 38,117 forms the whole knowledge 
base. Its hierarchical structure can be seen in 
Figure 1. 

The syntactic category aims at NLP tasks 
like automatic identification or machine 
translation. Compared with English idioms, the 
identification of Chinese idioms is not so 
difficult for its fossilized structure, i.e. 
continuity in a text. To build a lexicon like 
CIKB will complete the task successfully. As 
for machine translation, however, it is 
completely another story because the 
compositional complexity of Chinese idioms 
enables them to function as different syntactic 
constituents with variable part-of-speech (POS). 
We classify them into nine categories according 
to its compositional relations of the morphemes 
and into seven categories according to its 
syntactic functions that they may serve in a 
sentence, as is shown in Table 2. 

 

 

 

 

CIKB 38,117 

 

 

   Basic 11,000 

Core 3,000 

13



No. Compositionality Tag No. Syntactic function Tag 
1 modifier-head construction pz 1 as a noun IN 

2 subject-predicate phrase zw 2 as a verb IV 

3 Coordination bl 3 as an adjective IA 
4 predicate-object phrase db 4 as a complement IC 

5 predicate-complement dbu 5 as an adverbial ID 
6 predicate-object-complement dbb 6 as a classifier IB 

7 serial verb ld 7 as a modifier IM 
8 pivotal verb jy    

9 Repetition fz    
 

Table 2.  Compositionality and syntactic functions of idioms. 
 

Upon the completion of CIKB, a few 
research projects have been conducted to 
investigate possible applications. Li (2006) 
investigates the frequency and formation of 
idiom usage in People’s Daily and Wang (2010) 
selects 1,000 popular idioms from CIKB to 
compile a book for Chinese learners. On the 
basis of CIKB, we also made a couple of 
attempts on the automatic classification of 
idioms to identify the token-level characteristics 
of an idiom. This paper will focus on the 
emotion classification of idioms with machine 
learning method and the work will be elaborated 
in section 4. Here we define the emotion types 
as ―appreciative (A)‖, ―derogatory (D)‖ and 
―neutral (N)‖.  

3 Related Work on Idiom Knowledge 

Base and Its Applications 

There has not been much work on the 
construction of an idiom corpus or an idiom 
knowledge base. With this respect, Birke and 
Sarkar (2006) and Fellbaum (2007) are 
exceptions. Birke and Sarkar (2006) constructed 
a corpus of English idiomatic expressions with 
automatic method. They selected 50 expressions 
and collected about 6,600 examples. They call 
the corpus TroFi Example Base, which is 
available on the Web. 

As far as idiom identification is concerned, 
the work is classified into two kinds : one is for 
idiom types and the other is for idiom tokens. 
With the former, phrases that can be interpreted 
as idioms are found in text corpora, typically for 
lexicographers to compile idiom dictionaries. 
Previous studies have mostly focused on the 

idiom type identification (Lin, 1999; Baldwin et 
al., 2003; Shudo et al., 2004). However, there 
has been a growing interest in idiom token 
identification recently (Katz and Giesbrecht, 
2006; Hashimoto et al., 2006; Cook et al. , 2007). 
Our work elaborated in section 4 is also an 
attempt in this regard. 
    Despite the recent enthusiasm for 
multiword expressions, the idiom token 
identification is in an early stage of its 
development. Given that many language 
teaching and learning tasks like TCFL have been 
developed as a result of the availability of 
language resources, idiom token identification 
should also be developed when adequate idiom 
resources are provided. To this end, we have 
constructed the CIKB and hope to find 
applications of value, for example, emotion 
classification, event classification and text 
analysis based on idiom usage and its context.  

According to the granularity of text, 
emotion analysis of texts can be divided into 
three levels: text (Pang et al., 2002; Cui et al., 
2006), sentence (Pang et al., 2004), word 
(Hatzivassiloglou et al., 1997; Wiebe 2000). 
According to the sources of emotion prediction, 
classification methods can be divided into 
knowledge based methods and machine learning 
based methods. The former uses lexicons or 
knowledge bases to build a new lexicon that 
contains emotion words. WordNet is often used 
to compute the emotion prediction of words 
(Hatzivassiloglou et al., 1997; Andrea 2005). 
Meanwhile, incorporating knowledge into the 
machine learning architecture as features is a 
popular trend and untagged copra are often used 
to do emotion classification research (Turney et 
al., 2002; Akkaya et al., 2009).  

14



4 An NLP Application of Emotion 

Classification on CIKB 

In this paper, we focus on the emotion prediction 
of idioms conducted by machine learning 
method. To do this, we aim to investigate how 
the compositional constituents of an idiom affect 
its emotion orientation from the token level, 
especially for multi-word expressions with so 

obvious an exaggerative and descriptive nature 
like idioms. From CIKB, 20,000 idioms are 
selected as the training corpus and 3,000 idioms 
as the test corpus. The detailed distribution of 
idioms in each emotion group is shown in Table 
3. We can see that neutral has the largest number 
of idioms, accounting for 41.08% and 36.67% in 
the training and test corpus respectively, but 
there is not a big difference between groups. 

 

 

Training corpus Test corpus 

number percentage number Percentage 

Appreciative(A) 6967 34.84% 1011 33.70% 

Neutral(N) 8216 41.08% 1100 36.67% 

Derogatory(D) 4817 24.08% 889 29.63% 

 
Table 3.  The distribution of idioms in each emotion group. 

 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Cortes 

and Vapnik, 1995) is adopted as the 
classification method to predict emotions in 
idioms. LIBLINEAR (Fan et al., 2008), a 
library for large SVM linear classification, is 
used for implementation. The solver is set be 
L2-loss SVM dual. Parameter C is set to be 2

-5
. 

Three classes of features and their various 
combinations are examined and used, including 
Chinese characters, words and part-of-speeches. 
Detailed features and related abbreviations are 
shown as in Table 4. 

Because Chinese sentences are written in 
a consecutive string of characters, we need to 
segment a sentence into individual words to 
obtain the word feature. ICTCLAS (Zhang et 

al., 2003), a tool developed by the Institute of 
Computing Technology of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences (ICT), is used for word 
segmentation and part-of-speech tagging. We 

adopt precision, recall and F-score (ß=1) as the 
evaluation parameters. From Table 5 we can 
see that i_cb has a better performance than i_cu, 
which indicates that a bigram model usually 
performs better than a unigram model. But 
when we segment the idioms and use i_wu, we 
find that the performance gets bad. This may 
be because the compositionality of Chinese 
idioms is quite fossilized and the errors caused 
by segmentation introduce some noise.  

 

Features and their abbreviations Idiom(i) Explanation(e) 

Chinese characters character unigram(i_cu, e_cu) √
5
 √ 

character bigram(i_cb, e_cb) √ √ 
Words word unigram(i_wu, e_wu) √ √ 

word bigram(i_wb, e_wu) × √ 

Word/part-of-speech word/pos unigram(i_wpu, e_wpu) √ √ 

word/pos bigram(i_wpb, e_wpb) × × 
 

Table 4.  Features selected for emotion prediction. 

                                                                 
5 “√” indicates  the feature is selected while “×” indicates the feature is not selected. 

15



We want to know whether we will have a 
better performance if we add more features 
from the other fields of CIKB. Obviously the 
most relevant feature will be the explanation of 
an idiom. Therefore we add the texts in the 
explanation field as features in the experiment.  
We find that by adding more features from the 
explanation field, the performance does 
improve. But when the POS feature is 
introduced, the performance gets bad. This may 
be because as Chinese idioms keep 
grammatical properties of ancient Chinese 
language and its POS is very different from the 
setting of the tool designed primarily for 
modern Chinese, more noise is introduced by 

using POS here. Finally we can see that the 
combination i_cu+i_cb+e_wu+e_wb achieves 
the best performance in both Chinese character 
features and word features.  

Most importantly, we notice that although 
for idioms themselves segmentation does not 
affect the performance in a positive way, 
segmentation of the explanations does improve 
the performance. Thus we may conclude that 
the compositionality of an idiom is very 
different from its explanation which is written 
in modern Chinese while the idiom itself is still 
character-based and keeps its original 
morphemes that are inherited from ancient 
Chinese language.  

 

Features or features 

combined 

Result 

Precision Recall F-score 
i_cu 63.23% 75.16% 68.68% 

i_cb 65.78% 78.24% 71.47% 
i_wu 62.51% 73.42% 68.35% 

i_wpu 60.03% 71.89% 65.43% 
i_cu+e_wu 66.40% 80.05% 72.59% 

i_cu+e_wpu 65.68% 77.95% 71.29% 
i_cu+e_wb 65.08% 76.14% 70.18% 

I_cu+i_cb 67.33% 80.82% 73.46% 
i_cu+i_cb+e_wu 68.55% 81.37% 74.41% 

i_cu+i_cb+e_wu+e_wb  70.18% 82.71% 75.93% 
 

Table 5. The result of emotion classification with idioms and their explanations. 
 

55%

60%

65%

70%

75%

80%

1k 2k 5k 10k 15k 20k

Size of training data

Ac
cu

ra
cy

 
Figure 2. Learning curve of the feature combination i_cu+i_cb+e_wu+e_wb. 

 
Figure 2 shows the learning curve of the 

best classifier with the feature combination 
i_cu+i_cb+e_wu+e_wb. We can see that the 

accuracy keeps improving with the increase of 
the size of training set, and peaks at 20,000 
idioms. It shows the potential to improve the 

16



performance of emotion classification by 
enlarging the training data set. 

5  Conclusions and Future Work 

This paper introduces the construction of CIKB 
by ICL at Peking University and its several 
applications so far. One application – the 
emotion classification of idioms – was 
elaborated to show our effort in exploring the 
token-level characteristics of Chinese idioms. 
Therefore we select a number of idioms from 
CIKB to classify them into three emotion 
groups. SVM is employed for automatic 
classification. Three classes of features are 
examined and experiments show that certain 
feature combinations achieve good 
performance. The learning curve indicates that 
performance may be further improved with the 
increase of training data size.  

Now we also hope to classify the idioms 
into categories according to their usage in 

context, i.e., under what circumstances they are 
often used (event classification). Various 
linguistic features and real-world knowledge 
will be considered to incorporate into the 
machine learning classifier to improve 
classification result. The work is in progress 
and we hope the emotion classification and the 
event classification will be compared to 
determine their underlining relations and hope 
that more applications can be found in our 
future work based on CIKB. 

Acknowledgements  

The work in this paper is supported by a grant 
from the 973 National Basic Research Program 
of China (No. 2004CB318102). The authors 
are grateful to Dr. Li Yun and Professor Zhu 
Xuefeng for their work on CIKB and the 
anonymous reviewers for their helpful advice 
to improve the paper. 

 

References 
 
Akkaya, Cem, Janyce Wiebe, and Rada 

Mihalcea. 2009. Subjectivity Word Sense 
Disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 
2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing: Volume 1: 
pp.190-199. 

Andrea, Esuli. 2005. Determining the Semantic 
Orientation of Terms through Gloss 
Classification. In Proceedings of the 14

th
 

ACM International Conference on 
Information and Knowledge Management : 
pp.617-624.  

Baldwin, Timothy, Colin Bannard, Takaaki 
Tanaka, and Dominic Widdows. 2003. An 
Empirical Model of Multiword Expression 
Decomposability. In Proceedings of the 
ACL 2003 Workshop on Multiword 
Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition and 
Treatment - Volume 18: pp.89-96. 

Cook, Paul, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne 
Stevenson. 2007. Pulling Their Weight : 
Exploiting Syntactic Forms for the 
Automatic Identification of Idiomatic 
Expressions in Context. In Proceedings of 
the Workshop on A Broader Perspective 
on Multiword Expressions: pp. 41-48. 

Cortes, Corinna and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. 

Support-Vector Networks. Machine 

Learning, 20(3): pp. 273-297. 
Cui, Hang, Vibhu Mittal, and Mayur Datar. 

2006. Comparative Experiments on 
Sentiment Classification for Online 
Product Reviews. In Proceedings of the 
21st National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence-Volume 2: pp.1265-1270. 

Fan, Rong-En, Chang Kai-Wei, Cho-Jui Hsieh, 
Xiang-Rui Wang, Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. 
LIBLINEAR: A Library for Large Linear 
Classification. Journal of Machine 
Learning Research 9 (2008): 
pp.1871-1874. 

Fellbaum, Christiane. 2007. Idioms and 
Collocations: Corpus-based Linguistic 
and Lexicographic Studies (Research in 
Corpus and Discourse). Continuum 
International Publishing Group Ltd. , 
London, UK. 

Hashimoto, Chikara, Satoshi Sato, and 
Takehito Utsuro. 2006. Japanese Idiom 
Recognition: Drawing a Line between 
Literal and Idiomatic Meanings. In 
Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on 

17



Main Conference Poster Sessions: pp. 
353-360. 

Hatzivassiloglou, Vasileios, and Kathleen 
McKeown. 1997. Predicting the Semantic 
Orientation of Adjectives. In Proceedings 
of the Eighth Conference on European 
Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics: pp.174-181. 

Katz, Graham, and Eugenie Giesbrecht. 2006. 
Automatic Identification of 
Non-compositional Multi-word 
Expressions Using Latent Semantic 
Analysis. In Proceedings of the Workshop 
on Multiword Expressions: Identifying 
and Exploiting Underlying Properties: 
pp.12-19. 

Li, Yun, Zhang Huarui, Wang Hongjun, and 
Yu Shiwen. 2006. Investigation on the 
Frequency and Formation of Idioms in 
People’s Daily. In Proceedings of the 7th 
Chinese Lexicon and Semantics Workshop: 
pp.241-248. 

Lin, Dekang. 1999. Automatic Identification of 
Noncompositional Phrases. In 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics on Computational Linguistics: 
pp.317-324. 

Lo, Wing Huen. 1997. Best Chinese Idioms 
(Vol. 3). Hai Feng Publishing Co., Hong 
Kong, China.  

McArthur, Tom. 1992. The Oxford Companion 
to the English Language. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, UK. 

Pang, Bo and Lillian Lee. 2004. A Sentimental 
Education: Sentiment Analysis Using 
Subjectivity Summarization Based on 
Minimum Cuts. In Proceedings of the 
42nd Annual Meeting on Association for 
Computational Linguistics: pp.271-278. 

Pang, Bo, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar 
Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumb up? 
Sentiment Classification Using Machine 
Learning Techniques. In Proceedings of 
the ACL-02 Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing: 
pp.79-86. 

Shudo, Kosho, Toshifumi Tanabe, Masahito 
Takahashi, and Kenji Yoshimura. 2004. 
MWEs as Nonpropositional Content 
Indicators. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: 
Integrating Processing: pp.32-39. 

Turney, Peter D. 2002. Thumps Up or Thumps 
Down? Semantic Orientation Applied to 

Unsupervised Classification of Reviews. 
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual 
Meeting on Association for Computational 
Linguistics: pp.417-424. 

Wang, Lei. Forthcoming 2010. 1,000 Idioms 
for Chinese Learners. Peking University 
Press, Beijing, China. 

Wiebe, Janyce. 2000. Learning Subjective 
Adjectives from Corpora. In Proceedings 
of the Seventeenth National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence and Twelfth 
Conference on Innovative Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence: pp.735-740. 

Zhang, Huaping, Yu Hongkui, Xiong Deyi,  
Liu Qun. 2003. HHMM-based Chinese 
Lexical Analyzer ICTCLAS. In 
Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN 
Workshop on Chinese Language 
Processing: pp.184-187. 

 

18


