



















































Unaccusative/Unergative Distinction in Turkish: A Connectionist Approach


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 111–119,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c©2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing

 

Unaccusative/Unergative Distinction in Turkish:  
A Connectionist Approach 

Cengiz Acartürk 
Middle East Technical University 

Ankara, Turkey 
acarturk@acm.org 

Deniz Zeyrek 
Middle East Technical University 

Ankara, Turkey 
dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr 

 

Abstract 

This study presents a novel computational 
approach to the analysis of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in Turkish by 
employing feed-forward artificial neural 
networks with a backpropagation algo-
rithm. The findings of the study reveal cor-
respondences between semantic notions 
and syntactic manifestations of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in this language, 
thus presenting a computational analysis of 
the distinction at the syntax/semantics in-
terface. The approach is applicable to other 
languages, particularly the ones which lack 
an explicit diagnostic such as auxiliary se-
lection but has a number of diagnostics in-
stead. 

1 Introduction 
Ever since Unaccusativity Hypothesis (UH, 
Perlmutter, 1978), it is widely recognized that 
there are two heterogeneous subclasses of in-
transitive verbs, namely unaccusatives and un-
ergatives. The phenomenon of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction is wide-ranging and 
labeled in a variety of ways, including active, 
split S, and split intransitivity (SI). (cf. Mithun, 
1991).1 
  Studies dealing with SI are numerous and re-
cently, works taking auxiliary selection as the 
basis of this syntactic phenomenon have in-
creased (cf. McFadden, 2007 and the references 
therein). However, SI in languages that lack 

                                                 
1  In this paper, the terms unaccusative/unergative 
distinction and split intransitivity (SI) are used 
interchangeably. 

explicit syntactic manifestations such as auxil-
iary selection has been less studied.2 Computa-
tional approaches are even scarcer. The major 
goal of this study is to discuss the linguistic is-
sues surrounding SI in Turkish and present a 
novel computational approach that decides 
which verbs are unaccusative and which verbs 
are unergative in this language. The computa-
tional approach may in turn be used to study the 
split in lesser-known languages, especially the 
ones lacking a clear diagnostic. It may also be 
used with well-known languages where the split 
is observed as a means to confirm earlier predic-
tions made about SI.  

2 Approaches to Split Intransitivity (SI) 

Broadly speaking, approaches to the SI may be 
syntactic or semantic. Syntactic approaches di-
vide intransitive verbs into two syntactically 
distinct classes. According to the seminal work 
of Perlmutter (1978), unaccusative and unerga-
tive verbs form two syntactically distinct classes 
of intransitive verbs. Within the context of Rela-
tional Grammar, Perlmutter (1978) proposed 
that unaccusative verbs have an underlying ob-
ject promoted to the subject position, while un-
ergative verbs have a base-generated subject. 
This hypothesis, known as the Unaccusativity 
Hypothesis (UH) maintains that the mapping of 
the sole argument of an intransitive verb onto 
syntax as subject or direct object is semantically 
predictable. The UH distinguishes active or ac-
tivity clauses (i.e., unergative clauses) from un-
accusative ones. Unergative clauses include 

                                                 
2 An exception is Japanese. For example see Kishimoto 
(1996), Hirakawa (1999), Oshita (1997), Sorace and Sho-
mura (2001), and the references therein. Also see Richa 
(2008) for Hindi. 

111



willed or volitional acts (work, speak) and cer-
tain involuntary bodily process predicates 
(cough, sleep); unaccusative clauses include 
predicates whose initial term is semantically 
patient (fall, die), predicates of existing and 
happening (happen, vanish), nonvoluntary 
emission predicates (smell, shine), aspectual 
predicates (begin, cease), and duratives (remain, 
survive). 
   From a Government and Binding perspective, 
Burzio (1986) differentiates between two in-
transitive classes by the verbs’ theta-marking 
properties. In unaccusative verbs (labeled ‘erga-
tives’), the sole argument is the same as the 
deep structure object; in unergative verbs, the 
sole argument is the same as the agent at the 
surface. The configuration of the two intransi-
tive verb types may be represented simply as 
follows: 
 
 Unergatives: NP [VP  V]  John ran. 
 Unaccusatives: [VP  V NP]   John fell. 
 
In its original formulation, the UH claimed that 
the determination of verbs as unaccusative or 
unergative somehow correlated with their se-
mantics and since then, there has been so much 
theoretical discussion about how strong this 
connection is. It has also been noted that a strict 
binary division is actually not tenable because 
across languages, some verbs fail to behave 
consistently with respect to certain diagnostics. 
For example, it has been shown that, with stan-
dard diagnostics, certain verbs such as last, stink, 
bleed, die, etc can be classified as unaccusative 
in one language, unergative in a different lan-
guage (Rosen, 1984; Zaenen, 1988, among 
many others). This situation is referred to as 
unaccusativity mismatches. New proposals that 
specifically focus on these problems have also 
been made (e.g., Sorace, 2000, below).  

2.1 The Connection of Syntax and Seman-
tics in SI  

Following the initial theoretical discussions 
about the connection between syntactic diagnos-
tics and their semantic underpinnings, various 
semantic factors were suggested. These involve 
directed change and internal/external causation 
(Levin & Rappaport-Hovav, 1995), inferable 
eventual position or state (Lieber & Baayen, 
1997), telicity and controllability (Zaenen, 

1993), and locomotion (see Randall, 2007; 
Alexiadou et al., 2004, and, Aranovich, 2007, 
and McFadden, 2007 for reviews). Some re-
searchers have suggested that syntax has no role 
in SI. For example, van Valin (1990), focusing 
on Italian, Georgian, and Achenese, proposed 
that SI is best characterized in terms of Aksion-
sart and volitionality. Kishimoto (1996) sug-
gested that volitionality is the semantic parame-
ter that largely determines unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in Japanese.  
   Auxiliary selection is among the most reliable 
syntactic diagnostics proposed for SI. This re-
fers to the auxiliary selection properties of lan-
guages that have two perfect auxiliaries corre-
sponding to be and have in English. In Romance 
and Germanic languages such as Italian, Dutch, 
German, and to a lesser extent French, the equi-
valents of be (essere, zijn, sein, etre) tend to be 
selected by unaccusative predicates while the 
equivalents of have (avere, haben, hebben, 
avoir) tend to be selected by unergative predi-
cates (Burzio, 1986; Zaenen, 1993; Keller, 
2000; Legendre, 2007, among others). In (1a–b) 
the situation is illustrated in French (F), German 
(G) and Italian (I). (Examples are from Legen-
dre, 2007). 
 
(1) a. Maria a travaillé (F)/hat gearbeitet 

(G)/ha lavorato (I).  
  ‘Maria worked.’ 
 b. Maria est venue (F)/ist gekommen 

(G)/é venuta (I).  
  ‘Maria came.’ 

 
Van Valin (1990) and Zaenen (1993) discuss 
auxiliary selection as a manifestation of the se-
mantic property of telicity. Hence in Dutch, 
zijn-taking verbs are by and large telic, hebben-
taking verbs are atelic.  
   Impersonal passivization is another diagnostic 
that seems applicable to a wide range of lan-
guages and used by a number of authors, e.g. 
Perlmutter (1978), Hoekstra and Mulder (1990), 
Keller (2000). This construction is predicted to 
be grammatical with unergative clauses but not 
with unaccusative clauses. Zaenen (1993) notes 
that impersonal passivization is controlled by 
the semantic notion of protagonist control in 
Dutch; therefore incompatibility of examples 
such as bleed with impersonal passivization is 

112



attributed to the fact that bleed is not a protago-
nist control verb. Levin and Rappaport-Hovav 
(1995:141) take impersonal passivization as an 
unaccusativity diagnostic but take its sensitivity 
to protagonist control as a necessary but an in-
sufficient condition for unergative verbs to al-
low it. In other words, only unergative verbs 
will be found in this construction, though not all 
of them. 
   Refinements of the UH have also been pro-
posed. Most notably, Sorace (2000) argued that 
the variation attested across languages (as well 
as within the dialects of a single language) is 
orderly, and that there are a number of cut-off 
points to which verb classes can be sensitive.  
   Sorace’s work on (monadic) intransitive verbs 
is built on variation in the perfective auxiliary 
selection of verbs in Romance and Germanic 
languages and called Auxiliary Selection Hier-
archy (ASH). She demonstrates that the varia-
tion is based on a hierarchy of thematic and as-
pectual specification of the verbs (viz., telicity 
and agentivity) and that it is a function of the 
position of a verb on the hierarchy. Verbs with a 
high degree of aspectual and thematic specifica-
tion occupy the extreme ends; variable verbs 
occupy the middle position, reflecting the de-
creasing degree of aspectual specification. Both 
cross-dialectally and across languages, these 
verbs may be used either with unaccusative or 
unergative syntax.3 The ASH therefore is a de-
scriptive statement considering auxiliary selec-
tion as a property characterized by both syntax 
and semantics, as originally viewed by the UH.  
   We now turn to Turkish, which lacks perfec-
tive auxiliaries. A number of other syntactic 
diagnostics, reviewed below, have been pro-
posed but unlike auxiliaries in other languages, 
these are not obligatory constructions in Turk-
ish. In addition, the semantic properties underly-
ing the proposed diagnostics have not been 
studied extensively. Therefore, Turkish presents 
a particular challenge for any study about SI.   

                                                 
3 The claim that the two notions of ASH lie within a single 
dimensional hierarchy has been questioned by Randall 
(2007). The ASH has also been criticized since it does not 
explain the reason why a certain language shows the 
pattern it does (McFadden, 2007).  

3 Diagnostics for SI in Turkish 

Just as other languages, intransitive verbs in 
Turkish are sensitive to a set of syntactic envi-
ronments, summarized below. 

3.1   The –ArAk Construction 
One of the diagnostics is the –ArAk construc-
tion, which is an adverbial clause formed with 
the root verb plus the morpheme –ArAk 
(Özkaragöz, 1986). In a Turkish clause which 
involves the verbal suffix –ArAk, both the con-
troller (the complement verb) and the target (the 
matrix verb) have to be either unaccusative or 
unergative. In addition, both the controlled and 
the target have to be the final (surface) subjects 
of the clause. The examples below contain sen-
tences where both the controller and the target 
verbs are unaccusative (2) or both are unerga-
tive (3). The examples also contain ungram-
matical sentences where the controller verb is 
unergative whereas the target verb is unaccusa-
tive (4), and those in which the controller verb 
is unaccusative whereas the target verb is 
unergative (5). (Examples are from Özkaragöz, 
1986). 

(2) Hasan [kol-u  kana -y -arak] acı çek  
-ti. 

            arm-POSS bleed-GL-ArAk suffer 
-PST 

 ‘Hasan, while his arm bled, suffered.’  
(3) Kız [ (top) oyna-y -arak]    şarkı söyle-

di. 
 girl    ball  play-GL-ArAk   sing 

-PST 
 ‘The girl, while playing (ball), sang.’  
(4) * Kız [ (top) oyna-y -arak]    kay-dı. 
    girl    ball  play-GL-ArAk   slip -PST 
 ‘The girl, while playing (ball), slipped.’  
(5) * Kız [kayak kay-arak]   düş-tü. 
    girl    ski-ArAk              fall-PST 
 ‘The girl, while skiing, fell.’ 

3.2   Double Causatives  
Double construction is allowed with unaccusa-
tive verbs but not with unergatives, as shown in 
(6) and (7) below (Özkaragöz, 1986). 

(6) Sema Turhan-a                çiçeğ-i         
sol- dur     -t      -tu. 

                      -DAT flower-ACC 
fade-CAUS-CAUS-PST 

113



 ‘Sema made Turhan cause the flower 
to fade.’ 

(7) * Ben Turhan-a Sema-yı koş-tur       
-t       -t   -um 

 I                 -DAT   -ACC run-CAUS-
CAUS-PST-1sg 

 ‘I made Turhan make Sema run.’ 

3.3   Gerund Constructions 
The gerund constructions –Irken ‘while’ and  
–IncE ‘when’ are further diagnostics. The for-
mer denotes simultaneous action and the latter 
denotes consecutive action. Unergative verbs 
are predicted to be compatible with the –Irken 
construction, whereas unaccusatives are pre-
dicted to be compatible with the –IncE con-
struction, as shown in (8) and (9).4  
 
(8) Adam çalış-ırken esne-di. 
 man work-Irken yawn-PAST.3per.sg 
 ‘The man yawned while working.’ 
(9) Atlet takıl-ınca    düş-tü. 
 athlete trip-IncE fall-PAST.3per.sg 
 ‘The athlete when tripped fell.’ 

3.4   The Suffix –Ik 
It has also been suggested that the derivational 
suffix –Ik, used for deriving adjectives from 
verbs, is compatible with unaccusatives but not 
with unergatives, as shown in (10) and (11).  
 
(10) bat-ık    gemi 
 sink-Ik  ship 
 the sunk ship 
(11) *çalış-ık adam 
  work-Ik man 
 the worked man  

3.5   The –mIş Participle 
The past participle marker –mIş, which is used 
for deriving adjectives from verbs has been pro-
posed as yet another diagnostic. The suffix –mIş 
forms participles with transitive and intransitive 
verbs, as well as passivized verbs. The basic 
requirement for the acceptability of the –mIş 
participle is the existence of an internal argu-
ment in the clause. In well-formed –mIş partici-
ples, the modified noun must be the external 
                                                 
4 Examples in sections 3.3 and 3.4 are from Nakipoğlu 
(1998). 

argument of a transitive verb (e.g., anne 
‘mother’ in [12]), or the internal argument of a 
passivized verb (e.g., borç ‘debt’ in [13]). The 
internal argument of a transitive verb is not al-
lowed as the modified noun as illustrated in 
(14).  
 
(12) Çocuğu-n-u      bırak-mış anne 
 Child-POSS-ACC  leave-mIş  mother 
 ‘a/the mother who left her children’ 
(13) Öde-n-miş borç 
 pay-PASS-mIş  debt 
 ‘the paid debt’ 
(14) *Öde-miş  borç 
 pay-mIş     debt 
 *‘the pay debt’ 

 
As expected, the adjectives formed by intransi-
tive verbs and the –mIş participle is more ac-
ceptable with unaccusatives compared to uner-
gatives, as shown in (15) and (16). 
 
(15) sol-muş/ karar-mış çiçek 
 wilt/ blacken -mIş flower 
 ‘The wilted/blackened flower’ 
(16) *sıçra-mış/ yüz-müş/ bağır-mış çocuk 
 jump/ swim/ shout -mIş child 
 ‘The jumped/ swum/ shouted child’ 

3.6   Impersonal Passivization 
Impersonal passivization, used as a diagnostic 
to single out unergatives by some researchers, 
appears usable for Turkish as well. In Turkish, 
impersonal passives carry the phonologically 
conditioned passive suffix marker, -Il, accom-
panied by an indefinite human interpretation 
and a resistance to agentive by-phrases. It has 
been suggested that the tense in which the verb 
appears affects the acceptability of impersonal 
passives: when the verb is in the aorist, the im-
plicit subject has an arbitrary interpretation, i.e. 
either a generic or existential interpretation. On 
the other hand, in those cases when the verb is 
in past tense, the implicit subject has a referen-
tial meaning, namely a first person plural read-
ing. It was therefore suggested that impersonal 
passivization is a proper diagnostic environment 
only in the past tense, which was also adopted 
in the present study (Nakipoğlu-Demiralp, 
2001, cf. Sezer, 1991). (17) and (18) exemplify 

114



impersonal passivization with the verb in the 
past tense. 
 
(17) Burada koşuldu. 
 Here     run-PASS-PST 
 ‘There was running here.’ (existential 

interpretation)  
(18) ??Bu yetimhanede     büyündü. 
 This orphanage-LOC grow-PASS-PST 
 ‘It was grown in this orphanage.’ 

 
The diagnostics summarized above do not al-
ways pick out the same verbs in Turkish. For 
example, most diagnostics will fare well with 
the verbs düş- ‘fall’, gel- ‘come’, gir- ‘enter’ 
(with a human subject) just as well as imper-
sonal passivization. In other words, these verbs 
are unaccusative according to most diagnostics 
and unergative according to impersonal 
passivization. The opposite of this situation also 
holds. The stative verb devam et- ‘continue’ is 
bad or marginally acceptable with most 
diagnostics as well as impersonal passivization. 
   The conclusion is that in Turkish, acceptabil-
ity judgments with the proposed diagnostic en-
vironments do not yield a clear distinction be-
tween unaccusative and unergative verbs. In 
addition, it is not clear which semantic proper-
ties these diagnostics are correlated with. The 
model described below is expected to provide 
some answers to these issues. It is based on na-
tive speaker judgments but it goes beyond them 
by computationally showing that there are cor-
respondences between semantic notions and 
syntactic manifestations of SI in Turkish. The 
model is presented below. 

4 The Model 

This study employs feed-forward artificial neu-
ral networks with a backpropagation algorithm 
as computational models for the analysis of un-
accusative/unergative distinction in Turkish. 

4.1 Artificial Neural Networks and Learn-
ing Paradigms  

An artificial neural network (ANN) is a compu-
tational model that can be used as a non-linear 
statistical data modeling tool. ANNs are gener-
ally used for deriving a function from observa-
tions, in applications where the data are com-
plex and it is difficult to devise a relationship 

between observations and outputs by hand. 
ANNs are characterized by interconnected 
group of artificial neurons, namely nodes. An 
ANN generally has three major layers of nodes: 
a single input layer, a single or multiple hidden 
layers, and a single output layer. In a feedfor-
ward ANN, the outputs from all the nodes go to 
succeeding but not preceding layers. 
   There are three major learning paradigms that 
are used for training ANNs: supervised learning, 
unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learn-
ing. A backpropagation algorithm is a super-
vised learning method which is used for teach-
ing a neural network how to perform a specific 
task. Accordingly, a feed-forward ANN with a 
backpropagation algorithm is a computational 
tool that models the relationship between obser-
vations and output by employing supervised 
learning method (see Hertz et al., 1991; Ander-
son & Rosenfeld, 1988, among many others for 
ANNs). The following section presents how 
such an ANN is used for analyzing unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in Turkish.  

4.2 The Analysis  
Two feed-forward ANNs with a backpropaga-
tion algorithm were developed for the analysis. 
Both models had a single input layer, a single 
hidden layer, and a single output layer of nodes. 
Both models had a single output node, which 
represents the binary status of a given verb as 
unaccusative (0) or unergative (1). The number 
of nodes in the hidden layer was variable (see 
below for a discussion of network parameters).  
   The difference between the two models was 
the design of the input layer. The first model 
(henceforth, the diagnostics model DIAG) took 
diagnostics as input nodes, whereas the second 
model (henceforth, the semantic parameters 
model SEMANP) took semantic parameters as 
input nodes, as presented in detail below. 

   The Diagnostics Model (DIAG): Binary ac-
ceptability values of the phrases or sentences 
formed by the syntactic diagnostics constituted 
the input nodes for the network (see above for 
the SI diagnostics). Each syntactic diagnostic 
provided a binary value (either 0 or 1) to one of 
the input nodes. For example, consider the –mIş 
participle as one of the syntactic diagnostics for 
SI in Turkish. As discussed above, the –mIş par-
ticiple forms acceptable adjectival phrases with 

115



unaccusative verbs (e.g., sol- ‘wilt’) but not 
with the unergative verbs (e.g., sıçra- ‘jump, 
leap’), as shown in (19) and (20) below. 
 
   (19) sol-muş çiçek-ler  
           wilt-mIş flower-PLU 
           ‘wilted flowers’ 
   (20) *sıçra-mış sporcu-lar 
             jump-mIş   sportsman-PLU 
            ‘jumped sportsmen’ 
 
Accordingly, for the verb sol- ‘wilt’, the –mIş 
participle diagnostic provides the value 1 with 
one of the input nodes, whereas for the verb 
sıçra- ‘jump, leap’ it provides the value 0 with 
the corresponding input node. In this way, the 
syntactic diagnostics constituted an input pat-
tern with eight members for each verb.5 The 
construction of an input pattern is exemplified 
in (21) for the unergative verb konuş- ‘talk’. 
 
(21) A sample input pattern for DIAG. 

a. *Adam konuşarak kızardı. :0 
 The man talk-ArAk blush-PST  
 ‘The man blushed by talking.’  
b. Adam konuşarak yürüdü. :1 
 The man talk-Arak walk-PST  
 ‘The man walked by talking.’  
c. *Adam kadına çocuğu konuşturttu. :0 
 ‘The man made the woman have 

the boy talked.’ 
 

d. Adam konuşurken yürüdü. :1 
 The man talk-Irken walk-PST    
 ‘The man walked while talking.’  
e. Adam konuşunca yürüdü. :1 
 The man speak-IncE walk-PST  
 ‘The man walked when he talked.’  
f. *Konuş-uk adam :0 
 Talk-Ik man  
 ‘The talked man’  
g. *Konuş-muş adam :0 
 Talk-mIş man  
 ‘The talked man’  
h. Törende konuşuldu. :1 
 Ceremony-LOC talk-PASS  
 ‘It was spoken in the ceremony.’  

                                                 
5  One of the syntactic diagnostics (the gerund suffix   
–ArAk ) involves two verbs (i.e., the target and the matrix 
verb). Therefore, two sentences/phrases were formed–one 
with unaccusatives and the other with unergatives–which 
provided two binary values with the input pattern. 

Accordingly, the input pattern for the verb 
konuş- ‘talk’ is schematically shown below. 

0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 

   The Semantic Parameters Model (SE-
MANP): The input nodes for the SEMANP 
network were constituted by four binary values 
that represented the status of four semantic pa-
rameters (telicity, volitionality, dynamicity, and 
directed motion) for each verb. Each semantic 
parameter provided a binary value (either 0 or 1) 
to one of the input nodes. The value of the input 
nodes were determined by applying the follow-
ing tests for the relevant semantic aspects: (1) 
in/for an hour test for telicity (e.g. the phrase to 
talk *in/for an hour shows that the verb talk is 
atelic whereas the phrase to wilt in/*for an hour 
shows that the verb wilt is telic), (2) on purpose 
test for volitionality, (3) hala- ‘still’ test for dy-
namicity, (4) and the dative test (i.e., acceptabil-
ity of adding a dative term to the verb) for di-
rected motion. 
   The construction of an input pattern for SE-
MANP is exemplified in (22) for the unaccusa-
tive verb sol- ‘wilt’. 
 
(22) A sample input pattern for DIAG. 

a. Telic :1 
b. Non-volitional :0 
c. Non-dynamic :0 
d. No directed motion :0 

 

Accordingly, the input pattern for the verb sol- 
‘wilt’ is schematically shown below. 

1 0 0 0 

4.3 The Training Phase 
The network was trained by providing patterns 
for 52 verbs that are recognized as unaccusa-
tives in the SI literature or placed closer to the 
unaccusative end rather than the unergative end 
of the Auxiliary Selection Hierarchy (ASH, So-
race, 2000); and 52 verbs that are recognized to 
be unaccusative in the SI literature or placed 
closer to the unergative end rather than the un-
accusative end of the ASH. As a result, a total 
of 104 input patterns, each composed of eight 
nodes, were used to train the DIAG model and 
104 input patterns, each composed of four nodes, 
were used to train the SEMANP model. The 

116



single output node was set to 0 if the verb with 
the given input pattern was unaccusative and it 
was set to 1 if the verb was unergative. Super-
vised learning method was used, as employed 
by the backpropagation algorithm. 
   One hidden layer with a variable number of 
hidden units was used (see below for the analy-
sis of model parameters). Sigmoid activation 
function, shown in (23), was used for modeling 
the activation function. 
 

(23)   
xe

xf
−+

=
1
1)(  

 
The number of maximum iterations per epoch 
was set to 20. The system sensitivity was de-
fined by a global variable (ε=0.01) which de-
cided whether the loops in the code converge or 
not. 

4.4 The Test Phase 
The DIAG and SEMANP models were tested 
by providing the following input patterns: 

   Group A: five verbs that are either recog-
nized as unaccusatives in the SI literature or 
placed closer to the unaccusative end rather than 
the unergative end of the ASH. 

   Group B: Five verbs that are either recog-
nized as unergatives in the SI literature or 
placed closer to the unergative end rather than 
the unaccusative end of the ASH. 

   Group C: Three verbs that are reported to 
exhibit variable behavior within the ASH. 

   After the training, the networks provided the 
binary outputs for the test verbs, which showed 
whether a test verb was unaccusative or unerga-
tive according to the models. 

5 Results 

The results are presented in the two sections 
below, separately for the DIAG model and for 
the SEMANP model. 

5.1 The DIAG Model 
After the training of the network and the opti-
mization of the number of hidden units and the 
learning rate, the DIAG model classified all 
verbs in Group A as unaccusatives. The model 

also classified all Group-B verbs as unergatives. 
Finally, the model categorized three Group-C 
verbs that were reported to show variable be-
havior (kana- ‘bleed’, parla- ‘shine’ and üşü- 
‘be, feel cold’) as unaccusative verbs in Turkish. 
   The distribution of weights after the training 
showed that the –mIş participle received the 
highest weight, which indicates that the –mIş 
participle is the most reliable diagnostics for 
analyzing unaccusative/unergative distinction in 
Turkish. 

5.2  The SEMANP Model 
The SEMANP model classified two of the 
Group-A verbs (namely, gir- ‘enter’ and yetiş- 
‘grow’) as unaccusatives and the three remain-
ing verbs (dur- ‘remain, stay’, kal- ‘stall, stay, 
and varol- ‘exist’) as unergatives. The model 
also classified four of five Group-B verbs (gül- 
‘laugh’, sırıt- ‘grin’, söylen- ‘mutter’, yakın- 
‘complain’) as unergatives and the remaining 
verb (yüz- ‘swim’) as unaccusative. Finally, the 
model categorized three Group-C verbs (kana- 
‘bleed’, parla- ‘shine’ and üşü- ‘be, feel cold’) 
as unaccusative verbs in Turkish. 

The distribution of weights after the training 
showed that among the four semantic parame-
ters that were selected in this study, telicity re-
ceived the highest weight, which indicates that 
unaccusative and unergative verbs are most sen-
sitive to the telicity aspect of the verb in Turkish. 

5.3 Evaluation of Model Parameters 
Four model design parameters, their initial val-
ues and acceptable ranges after optimization are 
discussed below. 

   The number of hidden units: The number of 
hidden layers was set to 1 as a non-variable de-
sign parameter of the network. The initial num-
ber of hidden units was set to 3. Keeping the 
learning rate (η=-0.25) and the momentum term 
(λ=0.25) constant, the number of hidden units 
was adjusted and the behavior of the network 
was observed. The analyses showed that the 
optimum range for the number of hidden units 
was between 2 and 6. 

   The learning rate: The learning rate was ini-
tially set to η=-0.25. Keeping the number of 
hidden units (hidden_size=3) and the momen-
tum term (λ=0.25) constant, adjusting the learn-

117



ing rate between η=-0.005 and η=-0.9 did not 
have an effect on the results. 

   The momentum term: The momentum term 
was set to λ=0.25 initially. Keeping the number 
of hidden units (hidden_size=3) and the learn-
ing rate (η=-0.25) constant, adjusting the mo-
mentum term between λ=0.01 and λ=1.0 did not 
have an effect on the results. However, the sys-
tem did not converge to a solution for the mo-
mentum term equal to and greater than λ=1.0. 

6 Discussion 

A major finding of the suggested model is that 
the predictions of the two models are compati-
ble with the UH (Perlmutter, 1978) in that they 
divide most intransitive verbs into two, as ex-
pected. Furthermore, the differences between 
the decisions of the diagnostics-based DIAG 
model and the semantic-parameters-based  
SEMANP model reflect a reported finding in 
the unaccusativity literature, i.e., the tests used 
to differentiate between unaccusatives and 
unergatives do not uniformly delegate all verbs 
to the same classes (the solution of why such 
mismatches occur in Turkish is beyond the 
scope of this study, see Sorace, 2000; Randall, 
2007, for some suggestions). More specifically, 
the three Group-A verbs that were predicted as 
unaccusative by the DIAG model and unerga-
tive by the SEMANP model (dur- ‘remain, stay’, 
kal- ‘stall, stay, and varol- ‘exist’) are stative 
verbs, which are known to show inconsistent 
behavior in the literature and classified as vari-
able-behavior verbs by Sorace (2000). An un-
expected finding is the Group-B verb (yüz- 
‘swim’), which is predicted as unergative by the 
DIAG model and unaccusative by the SEMANP 
model. This seems to reflect the role of seman-
tic parameters other than telicity (namely, dy-
namicity and directed motion) in Turkish. The 
remaining nine verbs of thirteen tested verbs 
were predicted to be of the same type (either 
unaccusative or unergative) by both models. 
   Another finding of the model is the alignment 
between the most weighted syntactic diagnos-
tics for unaccusative/unergative distinction in 
Turkish, namely the –mIş participle which re-
ceived the highest weight after the training, and 
the most weighted semantic parameter, namely 
telicity.  

7 Conclusion and Future Research 

This study contributes to our understanding of 
the distinction in several respects. 
   Firstly, it proposes a novel computational ap-
proach that tackles the unaccusative/unergative 
distinction in Turkish. The model confirms that 
a split between unaccusative and unergative 
verbs indeed exists in Turkish but that the divi-
sion is not clear-cut. The model suggests that 
certain verbs (e.g., stative verbs) behave incon-
sistently, as mentioned in most accounts in the 
literature. Moreover, the model reflects a corre-
spondence between syntactic diagnostics and 
semantics, which supports the view that unaccu-
sativity is semantically determined and syntacti-
cally manifested (Permutter, 1978, Levin & 
Rappaport-Hovav, 1995). Since this approach 
uses relevant language-dependent features, it is 
particularly applicable to languages that lack 
explicit syntactic diagnostics of SI. 
   The computational approach is based on the 
connectionist paradigm which employs feed-
forward artificial neural networks with a back-
propagation algorithm. There are several dimen-
sions in which the model will further be devel-
oped. First, the reliability of input node values 
will be strengthened by conducting acceptability 
judgment experiments with native speakers, and 
the training of the model will be improved by 
increasing the number of verbs used for training. 
Acceptability judgments are influenced not only 
by verbs but also by other constituents in 
clauses or sentences; therefore the input data 
will be improved to involve different senses of 
verbs under various sentential constructions. 
Second, alternative classifiers, such as decision 
trees and naïve Bayes, as well as the classifiers 
that use discretized weights may provide more 
informative accounts of the findings of SI in 
Turkish. These alternatives will be investigated 
in further studies.  

   Acknowledgements We thank Cem 
Bozşahin and three anonymous reviewers for 
their helpful comments and suggestions. All 
remaining errors are ours.  
 
 
 

118



References 
Alexiadou, Artemis, Anagnostopoulou, Elena, and 

Everaert, Martin (eds.). 2004. The unaccusativity 
puzzle: Explorations of the syntax-lexicon inter-
face. Oxford University Press. 

Anderson, James, and Rosenfeld, Edward. 1988. 
Neurocomputing: Foundations of research. MIT 
Press. 

Aranovich, Raúl (ed.). 2007. Split auxiliary systems. 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 

Burzio, Luigi. 1986. Italian syntax: A Government-
Binding approach. Dordrecht: Reidel. 

Hertz, John, Krogh, Anders, and Palmer, Richard G. 
1991. Introduction to the theory of neural compu-
tation. Addison-Wesley, Massachusetts. 

Hirakawa, Makiko. 1999. L2 acquisition of Japanese 
unaccusative verbs by speakers of English and 
Chinese. In The acquisition of japanese as a se-
cond language, ed. Kazue Kanno, 89-113. Am-
sterdam: John Benjamins. 

Hoekstra, Teun, and Mulder, René. 1990. Unergati-
ves as copular verbs: Locational and existential 
predication. The Linguistic Review 7: 1-79. 

Keller, Frank. 2000. Gradience in grammar: Expe-
rimental and computational aspects of degrees of 
grammaticality. University of Edinburgh disserta-
tion. 

Kishimoto, Hideki. 1996. Split intransitivity in Japa-
nese and the Unaccusative Hypothesis. Language 
72: 248-286. 

Legendre, Géraldine. 2007. On the typology of auxi-
liary selection. Lingua 117: 1522-1540. 

Levin, Beth, and Rappaport-Hovav, Malka. 1995. 
Unaccusativity at the syntax-lexical semantics in-
terface. MIT Press. 

Lieber, R., and Baayen, H. 1997. A semantic princi-
ple of auxiliary selection in Dutch. Natural Lan-
guage and Linguistic Theory 15: 789-845. 

McFadden, Thomas. 2007. Auxiliary selection. Lan-
guage and Linguistics Compass 1/6: 674-708. 

Mithun, Marianne. 1991. Active/agentive case mar-
king and its motivations. Language 67: 510-546. 

Nakipoğlu, Mine. 1998. Split intransitivity and the 
syntax-semantics interface in Turkish, Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota dissertation. 

Nakipoğlu-Demiralp, Mine. 2001. The referential 
properties of the implicit arguments of impersonal 
passive constructions. In The verb in Turkish, ed. 

E. Eser Taylan, 129-150, John Benjamins. 

Oshita, Hiroyuki. 1997. The unaccusative trap: L2 
acquisition of English intransitive verbs. Universi-
ty of Southern California dissertation. 

Özkaragöz, İnci Z. 1986. The relational structure of 
Turkish syntax, San Diego: University of Califor-
nia dissertation. 

Perlmutter, David M. 1978. Impersonal passives and 
the Unaccusative Hypothesis. In Proceedings of 
the Fourth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Lingui-
stics Society, ed. Farrell Ackerman et al., 157-189. 

Randall, J. 2007. Parameterized auxiliary selection: 
A fine-grained interaction of features and linking 
rules. In Split auxiliary systems, ed. Raúl Arano-
vich, 207-236. John Benjamins. 

Richa, Srishti. 2008. Unaccusativity, unergativity 
and the causative alternation in Hindi: A minima-
list analysis. New Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru Uni-
versity dissertation. 

Rosen, Carol G. 1984. The interface between seman-
tic roles and initial grammatical relations. In Stu-
dies in relational grammar, eds. Carol G. Rosen 
and David M. Perlmutter. University of Chicago 
Press. 

Sezer, Engin. 1991. Issues in Turkish syntax. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University dissertation. 

Sorace, Antonella. 2000. Gradients in auxiliary se-
lection with intransitive verbs. Language 76: 859-
890. 

Sorace, Antonella, and Shomura, Yoko. 2001. Lexi-
cal constraints on the acquisition of split intransiti-
vity. Evidence from L2 Japanese. Studies in Se-
cond Language Acquisition 23: 247-278. 

van Valin, Robert D., Jr. 1990. Semantic parameters 
of split transitivity. Language 66: 221-260. 

Zaenen, Annie. 1988. Unaccusative verbs in Dutch 
and the syntax-semantics interface. CSLI Reports 
88-123, CSLI, Stanford University. 

Zaenen, Annie. 1993. Unaccusativity in Dutch: Inte-
grating syntax and lexical semantics. In Semantics 
and the lexicon, ed. James Pustejovsky. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

119


