



















































Helping Volunteer Translators, Fostering Language Resources


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on “Collaboratively Constructed Semantic Resources”, Coling 2010, pages 63–66,
Beijing, August 2010

Helping Volunteer Translators, Fostering Language Resources

Masao Utiyama
MASTAR Project

NICT

mutiyama@nict.go.jp

Takeshi Abekawa
National Institute

of Informatics

abekawa@nii.ac.jp

Eiichiro Sumita
MASTAR Project

NICT

eiichiro.sumita@nict.go.jp

Kyo Kageura
Tokyo University

kyo@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

This paper introduces a website called
Minna no Hon’yaku (MNH, “Translation
for All”), which hosts online volunteer
translators. Its core features are (1) a
set of translation aid tools, (2) high qual-
ity, comprehensive language resources,
and (3) the legal sharing of translations.
As of May 2010, there are about 1200
users and 4 groups registered to MNH.
The groups using it include such major

Figure 1: Screenshot of “Minna no Hon’yaku”NGOs as Amnesty International Japan
site (http://trans- )and Democracy Now! Japan. aid.jp

1 Introduction

This paper introduces a website called Minna Second, MNH provides comprehensive lan-
no Hon’yaku (MNH, “Translation for All”, Fig- guage resources, which are easily looked up in
ure 1), which hosts online volunteer translators QRedit. MNH, in cooperation with Sanseido,
(Utiyama et al., 2009).1 Its core features are (1) a provides “Grand Concise English Japanese Dic-
set of translation aid tools, (2) high quality, com- tionary” (Sanseido, 2001) and plans to provide
prehensive language resources, and (3) the legal “Grand Concise Japanese English Dictionary”
sharing of translations. (Sanseido, 2002) in fiscal year 2010. These dic-

First, the translation aid tools in MNH con- tionaries have about 360,000 and 320,000 en-

sist of the translation aid editor, QRedit, a bilin- tries, respectively, and are widely accepted as

gual concordancer, and a bilingual term extrac- standard and comprehensive dictionaries among

tion tool. These tools help volunteer translators translators. MNH also provides seamless access

to translate their documents easily as described to the web. For example, MNH provides a dictio-

in Section 3. These tools also produce language nary that was made from the English Wikipedia.

resources that are useful for natural language This enable translators to reference Wikipedia

processing as the byproduct of their use as de- articles during the translation process as if they

scribed in Section 4. are looking up dictionaries.

1Currently, MNH hosts volunteer translators who trans- Third, MNH uses Creative Commons Li-
late Japanese (English) documents into English (Japanese). censes (CCLs) to help translators share their
The English and Japanese interfaces are available at http:

translations. CCLs are essential for sharing and//trans-aid.jp/en and http://trans-aid.
jp/ja, respectively. opening translations.

63



Figure 2: Screenshot of QRedit

2 Related work

There are many translation support tools, such
as Google Translator Toolkit, WikiBABEL (Ku-
maran et al., 2009), BEYtrans (Bey et al., 2008),
Caitra (Koehn, 2009) and Idiom WorldServer
system,2 an online multilingual document man-
agement system with translation memory func-
tions.

The functions that MNH provides are closer
to those provided by Idiom WorldServer, but
MNH provides a high-quality bilingual dictio-
naries and functions for seamless Wikipedia and
web searches within the integrated translation
aid editor QRedit. It also enables translators to
share their translations, which are also used as
language resources.

3 Helping Volunteer translators

This section describes a set of translation aid
tools installed in MNH.

3.1 QRedit

QRedit is a translation aid system which is de-
signed for volunteer translators working mainly
online (Abekawa and Kageura, 2007). When a
URL of a source language (SL) text is given to
QRedit, it loads the corresponding text into the
left panel, as shown in Figure 2. Then, QRedit
automatically looks up all words in the SL text.
When a user clicks an SL word, its translation
candidates are displayed in a pop-up window.

2http://www.idiominc.com/en/

Figure 3: Screenshot of bilingual concordancer

3.2 Bilingual concordancer

The translations published on MNH are used
to make a parallel corpus by using a sentence
alignment method (Utiyama and Isahara, 2003).
MNH also has parallel texts from the Amnesty
International Japan, Democracy Now! Japan,
and open source software manuals (Ishisaka et
al., 2009). These parallel texts are searched by
using a simple bilingual concordancer as shown
in Figure 3.

3.3 Bilingual term extraction tool

MNH has a bilingual term extraction tool that
is composed of a translation estimation tool
(Tonoike et al., 2006) and a term extraction tool
(Nakagawa and Mori, 2003).

First, we apply the translation estimation tool
to extract Japanese term candidates and their En-
glish translation candidates. Next, we apply the
term extraction tool to extract English term can-
didates. If these English term candidates are
found in the English translation candidates, then,
we accept these term candidates as the transla-
tions of those Japanese term candidates.

4 Fostering language resources

Being a “one stop” translation aid tool for on-
line translators, MNH incorporates mechanisms
which enable users to naturally foster impor-
tant translation resources, i.e. terminological re-
sources and translation logs.

64



4.1 Terminological resources

As with most translation-aid systems, MNH pro-
vides functions that enable users to register their
own terminologies. Users can assign the status
of availability to the registered terms. They can
keep the registered terms for private use, make
them available for a specified group of people,
or make them publicly available. Several NGO
groups are using MNH for their translation activ-
ities. For instance, Amnesty International, which
uses MNH, maintains a list of term translations
in the field of human rights by which translators
should abide. Thus groups such as Amnesty up-
load a pre-compiled list of terms and make them
available among volunteers. It is our assumption
and aim that these groups make their termino-
logical resources not only available among the
group but also publicly available, which will cre-
ate win-win situation: NGOs and other groups
which make their lists of terms available will
have more chance of recruiting volunteer trans-
lators, while MNH has more chance of attracting
further users.

At the time of writing this paper (May 2010),
56,319 terms are registered, of which 45,843 are
made publicly available. More than 80 per cent
of the registered terms are made public. Cur-
rently, MNH does not identify duplicated terms
registered by different users, but when the num-
ber of registered terms become larger, this and
other aspects of quality control of registered
terms will become an important issue.

4.2 Translation corpus

Another important language resources accumu-
lated on MNH is the translation corpus. As
mentioned in the introduction, being a hosting
site, MNH naturally accumulates source and tar-
get documents with a clear copyright status. Of
particular importance in MNH, however, is that
it can accumulate a corpus that contains draft
and final translations made by human together
with their source texts (henceforth SDF corpus
for succinctness). This type of corpus is im-
portant and useful, because it can be used for
the training of inexperienced translators (for in-
stance, the MeLLANGE corpus, which contains

different versions of translation, is well known
for its usefulness in translator training (MeL-
LANGE, 2009)) and also because it provides
a useful information for improving the perfor-
mance of machine translation and translation-aid
systems. While the importance of such corpora
has been widely recognized, the construction of
such a corpus is not easy because the data are
not readily available due to the reluctance on the
side of translators of releasing the draft transla-
tion data.

The basic mechanisms of accumulating SDF
corpus is simple. Translators using MNH save
their translations to keep the data when they fin-
ish the translation. MNH keeps the log of up
to 10 versions of translation for each document.
MNH introduced two saving modes, i.e. snap-
shot mode and normal mode. The translation
version saved in the normal mode is overwrit-
ten when the next version is saved. Translation
versions saved in snapshot mode are retained, up
to 10 versions. Translators can thus consciously
keep the versions of their translations.

MNH can collect not only draft and final trans-
lations made by a single translator, but also those
made by different translators. MNH has a func-
tion that enables users to give permission for
other translators registered with MNH to edit
their original translations, thus facilitating the
collaborative translations. Such permission can
be open-ended, or restricted to a particular group
of users.

This function is of particular importance
for NGOs, NPOs, university classes and other
groups involved in group-based translation. In
these groups, it is a common process in transla-
tion that a draft translation is first made by inex-
perienced translators, which is then revised and
finalized by experienced translators. If an inex-
perienced translator gives permission of editing
his/her draft translations to experienced transla-
tors, the logs of revisions, including the draft and
final versions, will be kept on MNH database.

This is particularly important and useful for
the self-training of inexperienced translators and
thus potentially extremely effective for NGOs
and other groups that rely heavily on volunteer

65



Figure 4: Comparative view of different transla-
tion versions

translators. Many NGOs face chronically the
problem of a paucity of good volunteer transla-
tors. The retention rate of volunteer translators is
low, which increase the burden of a small num-
ber of experienced translators, leaving them no
time to give advice to inexperienced translators,
which further reduce the retention rate of volun-
teers. To overcome this vicious cycle, mecha-
nisms to enable inexperienced volunteer trans-
lators to train themselves in the cycle of actual
translation activities is urgently needed and ex-
pected to be highly effective. MNH provides a
comparative view function of any pairwise trans-
lation versions of the same document, as shown
in Figure 4. Translators can check which parts
are modified very easily through the compara-
tive view screen, which can effectively works as
a transfer of translation knowledge from experi-
enced translators to inexperienced translators.

At the time of writing this paper, MNH con-
tains 1850 documents that have more than one
translation versions, of which 764 are published.
The number of documents translated by a group
(more than one translator) is 110, of which 48 are
published. Although the number of translations
made by more than one translators is relatively
small, they are steadily increasing both in num-
ber and in ratio.

5 Conclusion

We have developed a website called Minna no
Hon’yaku (MNH, “Translation for All”), which

hosts online volunteer translators. We plan to ex-
tend MNH to other language pairs in our future
work.

References

Abekawa, Takeshi and Kyo Kageura. 2007. QRedit:
An integrated editor system to support online vol-
unteer translators. In Digital humanities, pages 3–
5.

Bey, Y., K. Kageura, and C. Boitet. 2008. BEY-
Trans: A Wiki-based environment for helping on-
line volunteer translators. Yuste, E. ed. Topics in
Language Resources for Translation and Localisa-
tion. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. p. 139–154.

Ishisaka, Tatsuya, Masao Utiyama, Eiichiro Sumita,
and Kazuhide Yamamoto. 2009. Development of
a Japanese-English software manual parallel cor-
pus. In MT summit.

Koehn, Philipp. 2009. A web-based interactive com-
puter aided translation tool. In ACL-IJCNLP Soft-
ware Demonstrations.

Kumaran, A, K Saravanan, Naren Datha, B Ashok,
and Vikram Dendi. 2009. Wikibabel: A wiki-style
platform for creation of parallel data. In ACL-
IJCNLP Software Demonstrations.

MeLLANGE. 2009. Mellange. ttp://corpus.
leeds.ac.uk/mellange/ltc.tml.

Nakagawa, Hiroshi and Tatsunori Mori. 2003. Au-
tomaic term recognition based on statistics of com-
pound nouns and their components. Terminology,
9(2):201–209.

Sanseido. 2001. Grand Concise English Japanese
Dictionary. Tokyo, Sanseido.

Sanseido. 2002. Grand Concise Japanese English
Dictionary. Tokyo, Sanseido.

Tonoike, Masatsugu, Mitsuhiro Kida, Toshihiro Tak-
agi, Yasuhiro Sasaki, Takehito Utsuro, and Satoshi
Sato. 2006. A comparative study on composi-
tional translation estimation usign a domain/topic-
specific corpus collected from the web. In Proc. of
the 2nd International Workshop on Web as Corpus,
pages 11–18.

Utiyama, Masao and Hitoshi Isahara. 2003. Reli-
able measures for aligning Japanese-English news
articles and sentences. In ACL, pages 72–79.

Utiyama, Masao, Takeshi Abekawa, Eiichiro Sumita,
and Kyo Kageura. 2009. Hosting volunteer trans-
lators. In MT summit.

66


