



















































Identifying and Ranking Topic Clusters in the Blogosphere


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on “Collaboratively Constructed Semantic Resources”, Coling 2010, pages 55–62,
Beijing, August 2010

Identifying and Ranking Topic Clusters in the Blogosphere 

M. Atif Qureshi 
Korea Advanced Institute of  

Science and Technology  
atifms@kaist.ac.kr 

Arjumand Younus                    
Korea Advanced Institute of 

Science and Technology  
arjumandms@kaist.ac.kr 

Muhammad Saeed 
University of Karachi  
saeed@uok.edu.pk 

Nasir Touheed                    
Institute of Business Administra-

tion 
ntouheed@iba.edu.pk 

Abstract 

The blogosphere is a huge collaboratively 
constructed resource containing diverse 
and rich information. This diversity and 
richness presents a significant research 
challenge to the Information Retrieval 
community. This paper addresses this 
challenge by proposing a method for 
identification of “topic clusters” within 
the blogosphere where topic clusters 
represent the concept of grouping togeth-
er blogs sharing a common interest i.e. 
topic, the algorithm takes into account 
both the hyperlinked social network of 
blogs along with the content in the blog 
posts. Additionally we use various forms 
and parts-of-speech of the topic to pro-
vide a broader coverage of the blogos-
phere. The next step of the method is to 
assign topic-specific ranks to each blog 
in the cluster using a metric called “Topic 
Discussion Rank,” that helps in identify-
ing the most influential blog for a specif-
ic topic. We also perform an experimen-
tal evaluation of our method on real blog 
data and show that the proposed method 
reaches a high level of accuracy. 

1 Introduction 

With a proliferation of Web 2.0 services and ap-
plications there has been a major paradigm shift 
in the way we envision the World Wide Web 

(Anderson, 2007; O’Reilly, 2005). Previously the 
Web was considered as a medium to access in-
formation in a read-only fashion. Weblogs or 
blogs is one such application that has played an 
effective role in making the Web a social gather-
ing point for masses. The most appealing aspect 
of blogs is the empowerment they provide to 
people on the World Wide Web by enabling 
them to publish their own opinions, ideas, and 
thoughts on many diverse topics of their own 
interest generally falling into politics, economics, 
sports, technology etc.  A blog is usually like a 
personal diary (Sorapure, 2003) with the differ-
ence that it's now online and accessible to remote 
people, it consists of posts arranged chronologi-
cally by date and it can be updated on a regular 
basis by the author of the blog known as blogger. 
Moreover bloggers have the option to link to 
other blogs thereby creating a social network 
within the world of blogs called the blogos-
phere – in short the blogosphere is a collabora-
tively constructed resource with rich information 
on a wide spectrum of topics having characteris-
tics very different from the traditional Web. 
   However with these differing characteristics of 
blogs arise many research challenges and this is 
in particular the case for the Information Retriev-
al domain. One important problem that arises 
within this huge blogosphere (Sifry, 2009) is 
with respect to identification of topic clusters. 
Such a task involves identification of the key 
blog clusters that share a common interest point 
(i.e., topic) reflected quite frequently through 
their blog posts. This is a special type of cluster-

55



ing problem with useful applications in the do-
main of blog search as Mishne and de Rijke 
(2006) point out in their study of blog search 
about the concept queries submitted by users of 
blog search systems.  
   Moreover ranking these bloggers with respect 
to their interest in the topic is also a crucial task 
in order to recognize the most influential blogger 
for that specific topic. However the blog ranking 
problem has a completely different nature than 
the web page ranking problem and link populari-
ty based algorithms cannot be applied for ranking 
blogs. The reasons for why link based methods 
cannot be used for blog ranking are as follows:  

 

Blogs have very few links when com-
pared to web pages; Leskovec et al. 
report that average number of links 
per blog post is only 1.6 links (2007). 
This small number of links per blog 
results in formation of very sparse 
network especially when trying to find 
blogs relevant to a particular topic. 

 

Blog posts are associated with a time-
stamp and they need some time for 
getting in-links. In most of the cases 
when they receive the links the topics 
which they talk about die out. 

 

When link based ranking techniques are 
used for blogs, bloggers at times as-
sume the role of spammers and try to 
exploit the system to boost rank of 
their blogs.  

   In this paper we propose a solution for identifi-
cation of topic clusters from within the blogos-
phere for any topic of interest. We also devise a 
way to assign topic-specific ranks for each iden-
tified blog within the topic cluster. The cluster is 
identified by the calculation of a metric called 
“Topic Discussion Isolation Rank (TDIR).” Each 
blog in the cluster is also assigned a topic rank 
by further calculation of another metric “Topic 
Discussion Rank (TDR).” The first metric 
"TDIR" is applied to a blog in isolation for the 
topic under consideration and the second metric 
"TDR" takes into account the blog’s role in its 
neighborhood for that specific topic. Our work 
differs from past approaches (Kumar et al., 2003; 
Gruhl et al., 2004; Chi et al., 2007; Li et al., 2009) 
in that it takes into consideration both the links 

between the blogs as well as the content in the 
blog posts whereas a majority of the past me-
thods follow only link structure. Furthermore we 
make use of some natural language processing 
techniques to ensure better coverage of our clus-
ter-finding and ranking methodology. We also 
perform an experimental evaluation of our pro-
posed solution and release the resultant data of 
blog clusters and the ranks as an XML corpus.  
   The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows. Section 2 presents a brief summary of 
related work in this dimension and explains how 
our proposed methodology differs from these 
works. Section 3 explains the concept of “topic 
clusters” in detail along with a description of our 
solution for clustering and ranking blogs on basis 
of topics. Section 4 explains our experimental 
methodology and presents our experimental 
evaluations on a corpus of 50,471 blog posts ga-
thered from 102 blogs. Section 5 concludes the 
paper with a discussion of future work in this 
direction.  

2 Related Work 

Given the vast amount of useful information in 
the blogosphere there have been many research 
efforts for mining and analysis of the 
blogosphere. This section reviews some of the 
works that are relevant to our study.  
   There have been several works with respect to 
community detection in the blogosphere: one of 
the oldest works in this dimension is by Kumar 
et al. who studied the bursty nature of the 
blogosphere by extracting communities using the 
hyperlinks between the blogs (2003). Gruhl et al. 
proposed a transmission graph to study the flow 
of information in the blogosphere and the 
proposed model is based on disease-propagation 
model in epidemic studies (2004). Chi et al. 
studied the evolution of blog communities over 
time and introduced the concept of community 
factorization (2007). A fairly recent work is by 
Li et al. that studies the information propagation 
pattern in the blogosphere through cascade 
affinity which is an inclination of a blogger to 
join a particular blog community (2009). Apart 
from detection of communities within the 
blogosphere another related study which has 
recently attracted much interest is of identifying 
influentials within a “blog community” 
(Nakajima et al., 2005; Agarwal et al., 2008). All 

56



these works base their analysis on link structure 
of the blogosphere whereas our analytical model 
differs from these works in that it assigns topic 
based ranks to the blogs by taking into account 
both links and blog post’s contents.  

Along with the community detection problem 
in the blogosphere there has also been an increas-
ing interest in ranking blogs. Fujimura et al. 
point out the weak nature of hyperlinks in the 
web blogs and due to that nature they devise a 
ranking algorithm for blog entries that uses the 
structural characteristic of blogs; the algorithm 
enables a new blog entry or other entries that 
have no in-links to be rated according to the past 
performance of the blogger (2005). There is a 
fairly recent work closely related to ours per-
formed by Hassan et al (2009) and this work 
identifies the list of particularly important blogs 
with recurring interest in a specific topic; their 
approach is based on lexical similarity and ran-
dom walks. 

3 Cluster Finding and Ranking Metho-
dology 

In this section we explain the concept of “topic 
clusters” in detail and go into the details of why 
we deviate from the traditional term of “blog 
community” in the literature. After this signifi-
cant discussion we then move on to explain our 
proposed method for identification and ranking 
of the “topic clusters” in the blogosphere: two 
metrics “topic discussion isolation rank” and 
“topic discussion rank” are used for this purpose.  

3.1 Topic Clusters 

As explained in section 2 the problem of group-
ing together blogs has been referred to as the 
“community detection problem” in the literature. 
However an aspect ignored by most of these 
works is the contents of the blogs. Additionally 
most of the works in this dimension find a blog 
community by following blog threads’ discus-
sions/conversations (Nakajima et al., 2005; 
Agarwal et al., 2008) which may not always be 
the case as blogs linking to each other are not 
necessarily part of communications or threads. 

With the advent of micro blogging tools such 
as Twitter (Honeycutt and Herring, 2009) the 
role of blogs as a conversational medium has 
diminished and bloggers link to each other as a 
socially networked cluster by linking to their 

most favorite blogs on their home page as is 
shown in the snapshot of a blog in Figure 1:     

Normally those bloggers link to each other 
that have similar interests and importantly talk 
about same topics. Hence the idea of topic cluster 
is used to extract those clusters from the blogos-
phere that have  strong interest in some specific 
topics which they mention frequently in their 
blog posts and additionally they form a linked 
cluster of blogs. As pointed out by Hassan et al. 
the “task of providing users with a list of particu-
larly important blogs with a recurring interest in 
a specific topic is a problem that is very signifi-
cant in the Information Retrieval domain” 
(2009). For the purpose of solving this problem 
we propose the notion of “topic clusters.” The 
task is much different from traditional communi-

Figure 1: Blog Showing the List of Blogs it Follows 

57



ty detection in the blogosphere as it utilizes both 
content and link based analysis. The process of 
finding topic clusters is carried out by calculating 
a metric “Topic Discussion Isolation Rank” 
which we explain in detail in section 3.3. 

3.2 Rank Assignment to Topic Clusters 

As we explained in section 1, due to the unique 
nature of the blogosphere, traditional link-based 
methods such as PageRank (Page et al., 1998) 
may not be appropriate for the ranking task in 
blogs. This is the main reason that we use the 
content of blog posts and lexical similarity in 
blog posts along with links for the rank assign-
ment function that we propose. Furthermore we 
take a blog as aggregate of all its posts for the 
retrieval task.  

3.3 Topic Discussion Isolation Rank 

Topic Discussion Isolation Rank is a metric that 
is used to find the cluster of blogs for a specific 
topic. It takes each blog in isolation and analyses 
the contents of its posts to discover its interest in 
a queried topic. We consider a blog along three 
dimensions as Figure 2 shows:                

As mentioned in section 1 of this paper we 
utilize some natural language processing tech-
niques to ensure better coverage of our cluster-
finding and ranking methodology: those tech-
niques are applied along the part of speech di-
mension shown in Figure 1, for a given topic we 
analyze blog post contents not only for that par-
ticular topic but also for its associated adjectives 
and adverbs i.e. the topic itself is treated as a 
noun and its adjectives and adverbs are also used. 
For example if the topic of interest is “democra-

cy” we will also analyze the blog post contents 
for adjective “democratic” and adverb “demo-
cratically.” Furthermore, a weight in descending 
order is assigned to the noun (denoted as wn), 
adjective (denoted as wadj) and adverb (denoted 
as wadv) of the queried topic where wn>wadj>wadv.  
This approach guarantees better coverage of the 
blogosphere and the chances of missing out blogs 
that have interest in the queried topic are minim-
al. The blog post number denotes the number of 
the post in which the word is found and occur-
rence is a true/false parameter denoting whether 
or not the word exists in the blog post. Based on 
these three dimensions we formulated the TDIR 
metric as follows:  

1+ (nnounx wn)+(nadjective x wadj)+(nadverbx wadv) 
Number of total posts  

   Here wn, wadj and wadv are as explained pre-
viously in this section and nnoun denotes the num-
ber of times nouns are found in all the blog posts, 
nadjective denotes the number of times adjectives 
are found in all the blog posts and nadverb denotes 
the number of times adverbs are found in all the 
blog posts. This metric is calculated for each 
blog in isolation and the blogs that have TDIR 
value of greater than 1 are considered part of the 
topic cluster. 

Additionally we also use various forms of the 
queried topic in the calculation of TDIR as this 
also ensures better coverage during the cluster 
detection process. In the world of the blogos-
phere, bloggers have all the freedom to use what-
ever terms they want to use for a particular topic 
and it is this freedom which adds to the difficulty 
of the Information Retrieval community. Within 
the TDIR metric we propose use of alternate 
terms/spellings/phrases for a given topic – an 
example being the use of “Obama” by some 
bloggers and “United States first Black Presi-
dent” or “United States’ Black President” by oth-
ers. Such ambiguity with respect to posts talking 
about same topic but using different phras-
es/spellings/terms can be resolved by using a 
corpus-based approach with listing of alternate 
phrases and terms for the broad topics. Moreover 
the weights used for each of the part of speech 
“noun”, “adjective” and “adverb” in the TDIR 
metric can be adjusted differently for different 
topics with some topics having a stronger indica-

Figure 2: Blog TDIR Dimensions 

58



tion of discussion of that topic through occur-
rence of noun and some through occurrence of 
adjective or adverb. Some examples of these var-
ious measures are shown in our experimental 
evaluations that are explained in section 4. 

3.4 Topic Discussion Rank 

After the cluster-finding phase we perform the 
ranking step by means of Topic Discussion Rank. 
It is in this phase that the socially networked and 
linked blogs play a role in boosting each other’s 
ranks. It is reasonable to assign a higher topic 
rank to a blog that has interest in the specific top-
ic and is also a follower of many blogs with simi-
lar topic discussions than one that mentions the 
topic under consideration but does not link to 
other similar blogs: Topic Discussion Rank does 
that by taking into account both link structure 
and TDIR explained in previous section. This has 
the advantage of taking into account both factors: 
the content of the blog posts and the link struc-
ture of its neighborhood. 

The following piecewise function shows how 
the metric Topic Discussion Rank is calculated:       

Explanation of notations used:  
b - blog  
o : (o,b) – outlinks from blog b  

The TDR is same as the TDIR in case of the 
blog having zero outlinks as such a blog exists in 
isolation and does not have a strong participation 
within the social network of the blogosphere. In 
the case of a blog having one or more outlinks to 
other blogs we add its own TDIR to the factor  

.   

Here matching links represent blogs that are 
part of topic cluster for a given topic (i.e. those 
having TDIR greater than 1 as explained in sec-
tion 3.3) and each matching link’s TDIR is 
summed up and multiplied by a factor called 

damp. Note that summation of TDIR is used in 
the first iteration only, in the other iterations it is 
replaced by TDR of the blogs.  

Furthermore it is important to note that the 
process of TDR computation is an iterative one 
similar to PageRank (Page et al., 1998) computa-
tion, however the termination condition is unlike 
PageRank in that PageRank terminates when 
rank values are normalized whereas our approach 
uses the blog depth as a termination condition 
which is an adjustable parameter. Due to the 
changed termination condition the role of spam 
blogs is minimized. 

The damping factor damp is introduced to mi-
nimize biasness as is explained below. Consider 
the two blogs as shown with the link structure 
represented by arrows:      

In this case let’s assume the TDIR of blog A is 
2 and the TDIR of blog B is 1. Using the formu-
lation for TDR without the damping factor we 
would have 2+(1/1x1)=3 for blog A and 
1+(1/1x2)=3 for blog B which is not the true ref-
lection of their topic discussion ranks. However 
when we use the damping factor the resultant 
TDR’s are 2+(1/1x1x0.9)=2.9 for blog A and 
1+(1/1x2x0.9)=2.8 for blog B and this more cor-
rectly represents the topic discussion ranks of 
both the blogs. 

4 Experimental Evaluations 

This section presents details of our experiments 
on real blog data. We use precision and recall to 
measure the effectiveness of our approach of 
cluster-finding. The experimental data is released 
as an XML corpus which can be downloaded 
from: 
http://unhp.com.pk/blogosphereResearch/data.tar
.gz. 

Figure 3: Example for Damping Factor Explanation  

 

59



4.1 Data and Methodology 

The data used in the experiments was gathered 
from 102 blog sites which comprised of 50,471 
blog posts. Currently we have restricted the data 
set to only the blogspot domain (blogger.com 
service by Google).We used four blog sites as 
seeds and from them the link structure of the 
blogs was extracted after which the crawl (Qure-
shi et al., 2010) was performed using the XML 
feeds of the blogs to retrieve all the posts in each 
blog. Each blog had an average of 494 posts. 

The topics for which we perform the experi-
ments of finding TDIR and TDR were taken to 
be “compute”, “democracy”, “secularism”, 
“bioinformatics”, “haiti” and “obama.”  

The measures that we use to assess the accura-
cy of our method are precision and recall which 
are widely used statistical classification measures 
for the Information Retrieval domain. The two 
measures are calculated using equations 4.1 and 
4.2:  

Precision =    |Ct nCa|            (4.1) 
  |Ca|   

Recall  =      |Ct nCa|              (4.2)  
|Ct| 

Here Ca represents the topic cluster set found 
using our algorithm i.e. the set of blogs that have 
interest in the queried topic, in other words it is 
the set of the blogs that have TDIR greater than 1. 
Ct represents the true topic cluster set meaning 
the set of those blogs that not just mention the 
topic but are really interested in it. The reason for 
distinguishing between true cluster set Ct and 
algorithmic cluster set Ca is that our method just 
searches for the given keyword i.e. topic in all 
the posts and since natural language is so rich 
that just mentioning the topic does not represent 
the fact that the blog is a part of that topic cluster. 
Hence we use a human annotator/labeler for 
identification of the true cluster set from the set 
of the 102 blogs for each of the 6 topics that we 
used in our experiments.  

4.2 Results 

We plot the precision and recall graphs for the 
topics chosen. Figure 4 shows the graph for pre-
cision: 
       

The average precision was found to be 0.87 
which reflects the accurate relevance of our me-
thod. As can be seen from the graph in figure 4 
the precision falls below the 0.8 mark only for 
the topics compute and secularism – the reason 
for this is that for these two topics a higher pro-
portion of false positives were discovered. Not 
all the posts having the word “compute” were 
actually related to computing as found by human 
annotator. Same was the case for the word secu-
larism – since our method searches for adjective 
secular and adverb secularly in case of secular-
ism not being found hence there were some blogs 
in which secular was used but the blog’s focus 
was not in secularism as an idea. On the other 
hand precision measures for the topics “democ-
racy”, “obama”, “haiti” and “bioinformatics” 
were quite good because these words are likely 
to be found in the blogs that actually focus on 
them as a topic hence reducing the chances of 
false positives. 

Figure 5 shows the graph for recall:  

    The average recall was found to be 0.971 
which reflects the high coverage of our method. 
As the graph in figure 5 shows the recall value is 

Figure 4: Precision Graph for Chosen Topics  

 

Figure 5: Recall Graph for Chosen Topics  

 

60



mostly close to 1 for the chosen topics. This high 
coverage is attributed to the part of speech di-
mension as discussed in section 3.3; this tech-
nique rules out the chances of false negatives and 
hence we obtain a high recall for our method. 

4.3 Additional Experiments 

In addition to experiments on the six coarse-
grained topics mentioned above we performed 
some additional experiments on two fine-grained 
topics and also repeated the experiment per-
formed on topic “Obama” with an additional 
term “Democrats.” On formulating the cluster 
with these two terms the precision increased 
from 0.907 to 0.95 which clearly shows that in-
corporation of extra linguistic features into the 
TDIR formulation ensures better results. Moreo-
ver the ranks of some blogs were found to be 
higher than the ranks obtained previously and 
this increase in rank was due to the fact that 
many posts had subject theme “Obama” but they 
used the term “Democrats” – when we used this 
alternate term the ranks i.e. TDR more correctly 
represented the role of the blogs in the cluster. 

The two fine grained topics for which we re-
peated our experiments were: healthcare bill and 
avatar. Additional terms were also included in 
the TDIR and TDR computation process which 
were as follows:  

healthcare bill – obamacare 
avatar- sky people,  jake sully  

These alternate terms were chosen as these are 
the commonly associated terms when these top-
ics are discussed. At this point we provided them 
as query topics but for future work our plan is to 
use a machine learning approach for learning 
these alternate phrases for each topic, and know-
ledge bases such as Wikipedia may also be used 
to gather the alternate terms for different topics. 

The precision for the topic healthcare bill was 
found to be 0.857 which had a negligible effect 
on excluding “obamacare”; however recall suf-
fered more on exclusion of alternate term “ob-
amacare” as it fell from 1 to 0.667. Results for 
the topic “avatar” however were quite different 
with a precision of 0.47 and a recall of 1; this 
was due to the large number of false positives 
that were retrieved for the term avatar and we 
found reason for this to be that our approach does 

not take into consideration case-sensitivity at this 
point hence it failed to distinguish between the 
term “avatar” and movie “Avatar”. Also in the 
case of topic “avatar” the alternate phrases did 
not have any effect and hence there is a need to 
refine the approach for fine-grained topics such 
as this one – we present future directions for re-
finement of our approach in section 5. 

5 Conclusions and Future Work 

In this paper we proposed the concept of “topic 
clusters” to solve the blog categorization task for 
the Information Retrieval domain. The proposed 
method offers a new dimension in blog commu-
nity detection and blog ranking by taking into 
account both link structure and contents of blog 
posts. Furthermore the natural language 
processing techniques we use provide a higher 
coverage thereby leading to a high average recall 
value of 0.971 in the experiments we performed. 
At the same time we achieved a good accuracy as 
was reflected by an average precision of 0.87. 

For future work we aim to combine our pro-
posed solution into a framework for auto genera-
tion of useful content on a variety of topics such 
as “blogopedia”; the content can be obtained au-
tomatically from the blog posts and in this way 
manual effort may be saved. We also plan to re-
fine our approach by taking into account the 
temporal aspects of blog posts such as time in-
terval between blog posts, start post date and 
time, end post data and time into our formulation 
for “Topic Discussion Isolation Rank” and “Top-
ic Discussion Rank”. Moreover as future direc-
tions of this work we plan to incorporate a ma-
chine learning framework for the assignment of 
the weights corresponding to each topic and for 
the additional phrases to use for each of the top-
ics that we wish to cluster.         

61



References 

Agarwal, Nitin, Huan Liu, Lei Tang, and Philip S. Yu, 
2008. Identifying the influential bloggers in a 
community. In Proceedings of the international 
Conference on Web Search and Web Data Mining 
(Palo Alto, California, USA, February 11 - 12, 
2008). WSDM '08. ACM. 

Anderson, Paul, 2007. What is Web 2.0? Ideas, tech-
nologies and implications for education. Technical 
report, JISC. 

Chi, Yun, Shenghuo Zhu, Xiaodan Song, Junichi Ta-
temura, and Belle L. Tseng,  2007. Structural and 
temporal analysis of the blogosphere through 
community factorization. In Proceedings of the 
13th ACM SIGKDD international Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (San Jose, 
California, USA, August 12 - 15, 2007). KDD '07. 
ACM. 

Fujimura,Ko, Takafumi Inoue, and Masayuki Sugiza-
ki, 2005. The EigenRumor Algorithm for Ranking 
Blogs. In Proceedings of the WWW 2005 Work-
shop on the Weblogging Ecosystem: Aggregation, 
Analysis and Dynamics. 

Gruhl, Daniel, R. Guha, David Liben-Nowell, and 
Andrew Tomkins, 2004. Information diffusion 
through blogspace. In Proceedings of the 13th in-
ternational Conference on World Wide Web (New 
York, NY, USA, May 17 - 20, 2004). WWW '04. 
ACM. 

Hassan, Ahmed, Dragomir Radev, Junghoo Cho and 
Amruta Joshi, 2009. Content Based Recommenda-
tion and Summarization in the Blogosphere. Third 
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and 
Social Media, AAAI Publications. 

Honeycutt, Courtenay, and Susan C. Herring, 2009. 
Beyond microblogging: Conversation and collabo-
ration via Twitter. In Proceedings Hawaii Interna-
tional Conference on System Sciences, IEEE Press 

Kumar, Ravi, Jasmine Novak, Prabhakar Raghavan, 
and Andrew Tomkins, 2003. On the bursty evolu-
tion of blogspace. In Proceedings of the 12th inter-
national Conference on World Wide Web (Budap-
est, Hungary, May 20 - 24, 2003). WWW '03. 
ACM. 

Leskovec, Jure, Andreas Krause, Carlos Guestrin, 
Christos Faloutsos, Jeanne Van-Briesen, and Nata-
lie  Glance, 2007. Costeffective outbreak detection 
in networks. In The 13th International Conference 
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) 
2007. ACM.   

Li, Hui,  Sourav S. Bhowmick,  and Aixin Sun, 2009. 
Blog cascade affinity: analysis and prediction. In 
Proceeding of the 18th ACM Conference on infor-
mation and Knowledge Management (Hong Kong, 
China, November 02 - 06, 2009). CIKM '09. ACM. 

Mishne, G. and Maarten de Rijke, 2006. A Study of 
Blog Search. In Proceedings of ECIR-2006. LNCS 
vol 3936. Springer. 

Nakajima,Shinsuke, Junichi Tatemura, Yoichiroara 
Hino, Yoshinori Hara and Katsumi Tanaka, 2005. 
Discovering Important Bloggers based on Analyz-
ing Blog Threads. In Proceedings of the 14th inter-
national Conference on World Wide Web (Chiba, 
Japan, May 10 - 14, 2005). WWW '05. ACM. 

O'Reilly, Tim, 2005. What is Web 2.0: Design Pat-
terns and Business Models for the next generation 
of software.  

Page, Larry, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani and Terry 
Winograd, 1999. The PageRank citation ranking: 
Bringing order to the Web, Technical Report, Stan-
ford University. 

Qureshi, M. Atif, Arjumand Younus and Francisco 
Rojas, 2010. Analyzing Web Crawler as Feed For-
ward Engine for Efficient Solution to Search Prob-
lem in the Minimum Amount of Time through a 
Distributed Framework. In Proceedings of 1st In-
ternational Conference on Information Science and 
Applications, IEEE Publications. 

Sifry, David, 2009 Sifry’s Alerts. 
http://www.sifry.com/alerts/

 

Sorapure, Madeleine. 2003. Screening moments, 
scrolling lives: Diary writing on the web. Biogra-
phy: An Interdisciplinary Quarterly, 26(1), 1-23.  

62


