



















































Exploiting Lexical Resources for Therapeutic Purposes: the Case of WordNet and STaRS.sys


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex 2010), pages 12–17,
Beijing, August 2010

Exploiting Lexical Resources for Therapeutic Purposes: the 
case of WordNet and STaRS.sys 

Gianluca E. Lebani†‡ 
†Center for Mind/Brain Sciences 

University of Trento 
gianluca.lebani@unitn.it 

Emanuele Pianta‡ 
‡HLT Group 

Fondazione Bruno Kessler 
pianta@fbk.eu 

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we present an on-going 
project aiming at extending the WordNet 
lexical database by encoding common 
sense featural knowledge elicited from 
language speakers. Such extension of 
WordNet is required in the framework of 
the STaRS.sys project, which has the 
goal of building tools for supporting the 
speech therapist during the preparation of 
exercises to be submitted to aphasic pa-
tients for rehabilitation purposes. We re-
view some preliminary results and illu-
strate what extensions of the existing 
WordNet model are needed to accommo-
date for the encoding of commonsense 
(featural) knowledge. 

1 Introduction 

Electronic lexical resources such as WordNet 
and FrameNet are used for a great variety of nat-
ural processing tasks, ranging from query expan-
sion, to word sense disambiguation, text classifi-
cation, or textual entailment. Some of these re-
sources are also used by human users as on-line 
dictionaries; see the Princeton WordNet1 and the 
MultiWordNet 2  on-line sites. In this paper we 
describe a novel attempt to exploit the informa-
tion contained in wordnets to build a tool de-
signed to support the therapy of language disord-
ers. In doing so, we will tackle also an interesting 
theoretical issue. Is the WordNet conceptual 
model apt to represent the common sense know-
ledge associated to concepts, which is partly lost 
in case of language disorders (aphasia) due to a 

                                                 
1 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
2 http://multiwordnet.fbk.eu/ 

brain damage? Note that, in cognitively oriented 
studies of the lexicon such knowledge is often 
represented in the form of featural descriptions 
elicited from speakers, such as <a cat> is 
lazy 3 , <camels> are found in deserts, 
<planes> fly etc. 

Anomia is the most pervasive and persistent of 
aphasia symptoms. It has been described as “a 
difficulty in finding high information words, 
both in fluent discourse and when called upon to 
identify an object of action by name” (Goodglass 
and Wingfield, 1997:3). The naming difficulties 
experienced by anomic patients can vary sub-
stantially, so that different “anomias” can be cha-
racterized as arising from either a mainly lexical 
or mainly semantic breakdown. Depending on 
the kind of anomia, therapeutic approaches can 
vary, so as to employ the more appropriate tasks 
and stimuli. 

Computers can support the rehabilitation of 
language disorders in many ways: from assisting 
the administrative management to enhancing 
common assessment methods, from helping the 
clinician during the therapeutic session to alle-
viating the communicative difficulties of a pa-
tient by exploiting his unimpaired abilities (Pe-
theram, 2004). 

In these pages we introduce STaRS.sys (Se-
mantic Task Rehabilitation Support system), a 
Computer Assisted Therapy (CAT) tool designed 
to support the therapist in the preparation of se-
mantic exercises such as odd-one-out, yes/no 
attribute question answering, property generation 
and so forth. All these exercises are based on the 
kinds of information that are carried by featural 
                                                 
3 Concepts and features will be printed in italics couri-
er new font. When reporting a concept-feature pair, the 
concept will be further enclosed by <angled brackets>. 
Feature types and concept categories will be reported in 
italics times new roman. 

12



descriptions. Such a scenario motivates the need 
for a lexical semantic resource which is richer 
and somehow more cognitively-oriented than the 
existing ones. We will argue that such needs can 
be satisfied by enhancing the WordNet model 
(WN: Fellbaum, 1998 ed) as implemented in the 
Italian MultiWordNet (MWN: Pianta et al, 2002) 
lexicon. Our project is developed in collabora-
tion with the CIMeC’s Center for Neuropsycho-
logical Rehabilitation (CeRiN), and focuses on 
Italian. We leave to the future the evaluation of 
whether and how our model can be expanded to 
other languages. 

These pages are organized as follows: Sec. 2 
shows the possibilities offered by the exploita-
tion of STaRS.sys in a therapeutic context, and 
the lexical semantics requirements that such use 
poses. In Sec. 3 and 4 we illustrate specific is-
sues related to the encoding of featural know-
ledge into the MWN model. 

2 STaRS.sys in a therapeutic context 

In this section we will illustrate the semantic re-
quirements that the therapeutic use of STaRS.sys 
poses, and how we foresee the tool will be used 
in practical therapeutic scenarios. 

2.1 Semantic requirements 

An essential requirement of the STaRS.sys tool 
is the capability of managing the major variables 
that influence the performance of anomic pa-
tients in semantic therapeutic tasks (Raymer and 
Gonzalez-Rothi, 2002; Cree and McRae, 2003). 
Accordingly, we identified a minimum of five 
types of information which should be available 
for every lexical concept:  

Conceptual Taxonomy. A fully-specified 
conceptual taxonomy is an essential requirement 
for our tool, in the light of the existence of pa-
tients affected by language disorders specific to 
certain semantic categories, such as tools, or liv-
ing beings (Capitani et al, 2003).  

Featural Descriptions. Featural descriptions 
are assumed to play a central role in the human 
semantic memory (Murphy, 2002) and will be 
represented here as <concept> feature 
couples, e.g. <dog> has a tail. 

This information can be exploited for selecting 
sets of concepts which are relevant in a certain 
therapeutic context, e.g. concepts sharing a fea-
ture value (“red objects”) or those for which a 

type of feature is particularly relevant (e.g. “ani-
mals with a peculiar fur”).  

Feature Types Classification. A grouping of 
FDs into feature types is needed for selectively 
working on feature types of interest, or for the 
estimation of semantic measures such as feature 
distinctiveness, semantic relevance, concept si-
milarity and feature correlation (Cree and 
McRae, 2003; Sartori and Lombardi, 2004; Vin-
son et al, 2003). As we will see in the following 
sections, feature types can be mapped onto 
WordNet-like relations. 

Prototypicality. A concept can be more or 
less representative of its category. Choosing and 
working on concepts with different levels of pro-
totypicality can be informative, for both thera-
peutic and diagnostic purposes. 

Word Frequency. Patients’ performance can 
be affected by word frequency. Thereby, a criti-
cal skill for our tool is the ability to discriminate 
between words used with different frequencies. 

2.2 Use Case Scenarios 

By exploiting a lexical infrastructure encoding 
such semantic information, STaRS.sys can be 
used by a therapist for: 

• retrieving concepts; 
• retrieving information associated to concepts; 
• comparing concepts. 

These three functionalities can be illustrated 
by the preparation of three different tasks for a 
patient affected by, e.g., a semantic deficit selec-
tively affecting animal concepts. Such a kind of 
patient would show comprehension and produc-
tion difficulties restricted to concepts belonging 
to the animal category (Capitani et al, 2003). 
Plausibly, furthermore, his production problems 
would manifest both as naming failure in con-
trolled conditions (i.e. in tests like the ones re-
ported below) and as a difficulty/inability to re-
trieve the intended word in spontaneous speech 
(Semenza, 1999).  

In the first scenario, the therapist looks for 
concepts that match given specifications in order 
to prepare a feature generation task. As an exam-
ple, she submits to STaRS.sys a request for con-
cepts of frequent use, referring to animals, asso-
ciated to highly distinctive color features and 
having a high mean feature distinctiveness. The 
system returns concepts such as zebra, tiger 

13



and cow. Finally the patient is asked to generate 
phrasal descriptions for these concepts. 

In a second scenario, STaRS.sys is used to re-
trieve FDs for a given set of concepts. Right and 
wrong concept-feature couples are created to 
build a questionnaire, in which the patient is re-
quired to distinguish the right from the wrong 
pairs. For instance, the therapist submits to 
STaRS.sys a query for features of the concept 
leopard that are highly relevant and either per-
ceptual or taxonomical, and obtains features such 
as is yellow with black spots and is a 
cat. 

Finally, in the third scenario the therapist uses 
STaRS.sys to find concepts for an odd-one-out 
task. That is, she looks for triples composed of 
two similar concepts plus an incoherent one that 
has to be found by the patient. As an example, 
starting from the concept lion, she looks for 
animals that typically live in a similar/different 
natural habitat, and obtains similar concepts such 
as leopard and cheetah, and a dissimilar con-
cept such as wolf. 

3 WN as semantic lexical resource for 
STaRS.sys 

The STaRS.sys application scenario motivates 
the need for a lexical semantic resources that: 

R1: is cognitively motivated; 
R2: is based on a fully-specified is-a hierarchy; 
R3: is intuitive enough to be used by a therapist; 
R4: allows for the encoding of featural properties 
and their association to concepts; 

While designing the STaRS.sys tool, we made 
the hypothesis that a semantic lexical resource 
built according to the WN model could meet 
most of the above requirements.  

In the WN model every concept is represented 
as a synset (set of synonyms) such as {hand, ma-
nus, hook, mauler, mitt, paw}. Such semantic 
units are organized in a network interconnected 
trough several relations. Examples of semantic 
relations include the is-a relation, e.g.{left_hand, 
left} is-a {hand, …}, and the meronymy relation, 
e.g. {hand, …} has-part {finger}. 

At a first glance, WN seems to easily meet 
three of the above criteria. First, WN was initial-
ly conceived as a model of the human lexical 
memory. Second, WordNet implement extensive 

and systematic noun hierarchies. More specifi-
cally, a preliminary analysis of the Italian MWN 
nominal hierarchy has shown that the semantic 
categories which are relevant for rehabilitation 
purposes can be easily mapped onto MWN top 
level nodes (tools, animals, people). Third, WN 
is based on a conceptual model which is relative-
ly simple and near to language use (as opposed 
to more sophisticated logics-based models). We 
expect that this feature will facilitate the use of 
STaRS.sys by therapists, which may not have all 
the formal logics awareness that is needed to use 
formal ontologies. Furthermore, MWN is ma-
nually developed trough an on-line Web applica-
tion. We expect that such application can be used 
by therapists using STaRS.sys for the shared and 
community-based development/maintenance of 
the lexical resource they need.  

A final motivation in favor of the choice of 
MWN is the fact that this Italian resource is 
strictly aligned at the semantic level to English 
and other European languages (e.g. Spanish, Por-
tuguese, Romania, Hebrew). Thus, we can envi-
sage that at least part of the semantic information 
which is encoded for Italian can be ported to the 
aligned languages and used for similar purposes. 

4 Mapping featural descriptions into 
MWN 

Our hypothesis about the usefulness of the WN 
model for the needs of STaRS.sys can be fully 
confirmed only if we find a way to encode in 
such a model all or most of the knowledge which 
is contained in feature descriptions elicited from 
Italian speakers (R4 in previous section). In more 
general terms we need to answer the following 
questions. Does MWN already contain all the 
information that is needed by the STaRS.sys re-
quirements? If we need to extend the existing 
MWN, can we simply add new synsets and in-
stances of existing relations, or do we need to 
add new relation types? Is the conceptual model 
of MWN or of any other WN variant powerful 
enough to encode all the information contained 
in feature descriptions?  

A first simple approach to representing fea-
ture descriptions in MWN is associating feature 
descriptions to synset glosses. As a consequence, 
a MWN gloss, which is currently composed of a 
definition and a list of usage examples, all 
crafted by lexicographers, would contain also a 

14



list of feature descriptions, elicited from lan-
guage speakers. 

This approach may be useful for some of the 
foreseen usages of STaRS.sys (e.g. retrieving 
feature descriptions from concepts), and can also 
be interesting for a generic use of MWN. How-
ever, to fully exploit the knowledge contained in 
FDs (e.g. for calculating concept similarity) it is 
necessary to encode that knowledge in a more 
explicit way; that is we need to map each FD in a 
wordnet-like relation between a source and a 
target concept. For instance, a pair such as <cup> 
is used for drinking can be represented as a 
is_used_for relation holding between the source 
concept {cup} and the target concept {drink}. 

Encoding the source concept is relatively easy 
given that it is usually expressed as an isolated 
word that is used as stimulus for feature elicita-
tion from subjects, e.g. “scimmia” (“monkey”). 
The only problematic aspect in this step may be 
the choice of the right sense which was meant 
when the word has been proposed to subjects. In 
some cases this may be not trivial, even if, in 
principle, stimulus words are supposed to be 
chosen so as to avoid ambiguities; see for in-
stance the word “cipolla” (“onion”), which in 
MWN is ambiguous between the vegetable and 
food sense. 

More complex is the encoding of the feature 
itself which is a free and possibly complex lin-
guistic description (e.g. likes eating bana-
nas). To fulfill our goal, we need to map such 
description in a wordnet-like relation and a target 
concept. Such goal can be accomplished in two 
steps. 

4.1 Mapping feature types into MWN rela-
tions 

Given the semantic requirements illustrated in 
Sec. 2.1, one the first steps in the development of 
the STaRS.sys tool has been the design of a clas-
sification of FDs in feature types; see Lebani and 
Pianta (2010). In a second moment, we realized 
that assigning a FD to a feature type is equivalent 
to assigning it to a wordnet relation, given that it 
is possible to create one-to-one mappings be-
tween features types and relations.  

The adopted feature type classification has 
been designed so as to be (1) reasonably intui-
tive, (2) robust and (3) cognitively plausible. The 
cognitive plausibility requirement has been ful-

filled by moving from an analysis of similar pro-
posals put forwards in the experimental litera-
ture, or exploited in the therapeutic practice. As 
for the former, we considered research fields as 
distant as lexicography, theoretical linguistics 
and cognitive psychology. Examples of compati-
ble proposals currently exploited in the therapeu-
tic practice are the question type of Laiacona et 
al’s (1993) semantic questionnaire, a type classi-
fication adopted by the therapists of the CIMeC’s 
CeRiN (personal communication) and the Se-
mantic Feature Analysis paradigm (Boyle and 
Coelho, 1995). 

The resulting classification only considers 
concrete objects and is composed of 25 feature 
types. All of them (except the is associated with 
relations) belong to one of the following six rela-
tions) belong to one of the following six major 
classes: taxonomic properties, part-of- relations, 
 
Feature Type Example 

has Portion <bread> cut into slices 

has Geographical Part <Africa> Egitto 

has Size <elephant> is big 

has Shape <clock> is round 

has Texture 
<eel> is slimy / <biscuit> 
is crunchy 

has Taste <lemon> is bitter 

has Smell 
<rose water> smells of 
rose 

has Sound 
<lighting> produces a 
thunder 

has Colour <lemon> is yellow 

is Used for <cup> is used for drinking 

is Used by 
<cleaver> is used by 
butchers 

is Used with 
<violin> is played with a 
bow 

Situation Located <jacket> used in occasions 

Space Located <camel> in the desert 

Time Located <pajamas> used at night 

has Origin <milk> comes from cows 

is Involved in 
<bird> eats seeds - is 
hunted 

has Attribute <subway> is fast 

has Affective Property <horror movie> is scary 

is Associated with <dog> man 

 
Table 1: STaRS.sys types not having a parallel word-
net semantic relation 

15



perceptual properties, usage properties, location-
al properties and associated events and attributes. 

A first version of this classification has been 
evaluated by asking 5 naïve Italian speakers to 
assign the appropriate type label to 300 concept4-
feature pairs from a non-normalized version of 
the Kremer et al’s (2008) norms. The inter-coder 
agreement between subjects (Fleiss’ Multi-π = 
0,73) validated the skeleton of our classification, 
at the same time suggesting some minor changes 
that have been applied to the classification pro-
posed here. An evaluation of the improved clas-
sification involving therapists has been planned 
for the (very near) future.  

Note that in order to map all of the feature 
types into wordnet relations we had to create a 
number of new relations which are not available 
in existing wordnets. The list of existing MWN 
relations used to encode STaRS.sys feature types 
includes five items: hypernym, has_co-ordinate, 
has_part, has_member, has_substance. The fol-
lowing table contains the list of the 20 additional 
relations, along with examples. 

4.2 Encoding target concepts in MWN 

A second step needed in order to fully represent 
the semantics of feature descriptions in MWN is 
the encoding of target concepts.  

Target concepts can be expressed by a noun 
(e.g. has a <neck>), an adjective (e.g. is <big>) 
or a verb or a verbal construction (e.g. is used 
for <drinking>, is used to <cut bread>). 
In principle this is not problematic as WN en-
codes all these lexical categories. 

What is problematic instead is the possible 
complexity of target concepts. Whereas in WN 
synsets are bound to contain only lexical units 
(with the few exceptions of the so called artificial 
nodes), the target of a featural description can be 
a free combination of words, for instance a noun 
modified by an adjective (e.g. has a <long 
neck>), an adjective modified by an adverb (e.g. 
is <very big>) or a verb with an argument (e.g. 
is used to <cut bread>). For giving an idea of 
the phenomenon, consider that 27,6% of the fea-
tures that composes the experimental sample in 

                                                 
4 In details, the subjects were submitted with concrete con-
cepts belonging to one of the following categories: mam-
mals, birds, fruits, vegetables, body parts, clothing, mani-
pulable tools, vehicles, furniture and buildings. 

Lebani and Pianta (2010) contain target concepts 
expressed by free combination of words  

The solution we adopted to solve this problem 
relies on the notion of phraset proposed by Ben-
tivogli and Pianta (2003; 2004), that is a data 
structure used for encoding “sets of synonymous 
free combination of words (as opposed to lexical 
units) which are recurrently used to express a 
concept”. In the original proposal, the authors 
introduced such a data structure to cope with 
lexical gaps in multingual resources or to encode 
alternative (linguistically complex) ways of ex-
pressing an existing concept. Phrasets can be as-
sociated to existing synsets to represent alterna-
tive (non lexical) ways of expressing lexicalized 
concepts, e.g. the Italian translations of “dish-
cloth”: 

Synset: {canovaccio, strofinaccio} 
Phraset: {strofinaccio_per_i_piatti,  

straccio_per_i_piatti} 

where “strofinaccio per i piatti” and “straccio per 
i piatti” and are free combinations of words. In 
alternative, they can be used to represent lexical 
gaps, such as the Italian translation equivalent of 
“breadknife”: 

Synset: {GAP} 
Phraset: {coltello_da_pane,  

coltello_per_il_pane} 

Phrasets can be annotated by exploiting the com-
poses/composed-of lexical relation linking phra-
set with the synsets corresponding to the con-
cepts that compose it. For instance the expression 
in the above phraset is linked by a hypernym and 
by a composed-of relation with the synset {col-
tello} (knife) and {pane} (bread). As far as 
FDs are concerned, the use of phrasets is com-
patible with the received view about the compo-
sitional nature of the human conceptual know-
ledge (Murphy, 2002).  

Figure 1 shows how phrasets allow for 
representing the complex FD <breadknife> is 
used to cut bread in the MWN model. 

5 Conclusion and future directions 

This paper presents the preliminary results of a 
research aiming at exploiting and extending the 
WordNet conceptual model as an essential com-
ponent of a tool for supporting the rehabilitation 
of patients with language disorders. A crucial  
 

16



 
 

Figure 1: Representation of the concept-feature pair 
<breadknife> is used to cut bread 

 
aspect for the use of wordnet-like resources in 
such a context is the possibility of representing 
lexical knowledge represented in the form of fea-
ture descriptions elicited from language speakers. 
Our work has illustrated the steps which are 
needed to encode feature descriptions in the WN 
model. To this purpose we introduced twenty 
new wordnet relations, and relied on phrasets for 
representing complex (non-lexicalized) concepts. 

The study presented in these pages is a neces-
sary theoretical step for the development of our 
tool. A practical evaluation of its feasibility is 
planned for the very near future, together with 
other (equally important but less relevant in this 
context) issues concerning both the population of 
our semantic knowledge base and the overall 
design of STaRS.sys. 

 
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Rita 

Capasso and Alessia Monti for the useful discus-
sion of the application scenario sketched in these 
pages. 

References 

Luisa Bentivogli and Emanuele Pianta. 2003. Beyond 
Lexical Units: Enriching WordNets with Phrasets. 
Proceedings of EACL 2003: 67-70. 

Luisa Bentivogli and Emanuele Pianta. 2004. Extend-
ing WordNet with Syntagmatic Information. Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd International WordNet Confe-
rence: 47-53. 

Mary Boyle and Carl A. Coelho. 1995. Application of 
semantic feature analysis as a treatment for aphasia 
dysnomia. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 4: 94-98. 

Erminio Capitani, Marcella Laiacona, Brad Z. Mahon 
and Alfonso Caramazza. 2003. What are the Facts 

of Semantic Category-Specific Deficits? A Criti-
cal Review of the Clinical Evidence. Cognitive 
Neuropsychology, 20(3): 213-261. 

George S. Cree and Ken McRae. 2003. Analyzing the 
Factors Underlying the Structure and Computa-
tion of the Meaning of Chipmunk, Cherry, Chisel, 
Cheese, and Cello (and Many Other Such Con-
crete Nouns). Journal of Experimental Psycholo-
gy: General, 132 (2): 163-201. 

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998 ed. WordNet: an electronic 
lexical database. The MIT Press. 

Harold Goodglass and Arthur Wingfield. 1997. Ano-
mia: Neuroanatomical & Cognitive Correlates. 
Academic Press. 

Gerhard Kremer, Andrea Abel and Marco Baroni. 
2008. Cognitively salient relations for multilingual 
lexicography. Proceedings of COLING-CogALex 
Workshop 2008: 94-101. 

Marcella Laiacona, Riccardo Barbarotto, Cristina Tri-
velli and Erminio Capitani. 1993. Dissociazioni 
Semantiche Intercategoriali. Archivio di Psicologi-
a, Neurologia e Psichiatria, 54: 209-248. 

Gianluca E. Lebani and Emanuele Pianta. 2010. A 
Feature Type Classification for Therapeutic Pur-
poses: a preliminary evaluation with non expert 
speakers. Proceedings of ACL-LAW IV Workshop. 

Gregory L. Murphy. 2002. The big book of concepts. 
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

Brian Petheram. 2004, ed. Special Issue on Computers 
and Aphasia. Aphasiology, 18 (3): 187-282. 

Emanuele Pianta, Luisa Bentivogli and Christian Gi-
rardi. 2002. MultiWordNet: developing an aligned 
multilingual database. Proceedings of the 1st Inter-
national Conference on Global WordNet. 

Anastasia Raymer and Leslie Gonzalez-Rothi. 2002. 
Clinical Diagnosis and Treatment of Naming Dis-
orders. In A.E. Hillis (ed) The Handbook of Adult 
Language Disorders. Psychology Press: 163-182. 

Giuseppe Sartori and Luigi Lombardi. 2004. Semantic 
Relevance and Semantic Disorders. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16 (3): 439-452. 

Carlo Semenza. 1999. Lexical-semantic disorders in 
aphasia. In G. Denes and L. Pizzamiglio (eds.). 
Handbook of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsy-
chology. Psychology Press, Hove: 215-244. 

David P. Vinson, Gabriella Vigliocco, Stefano Cappa 
and Simona Siri. 2003. The Breakdown of Seman-
tic Knowledge: Insights from a Statistical Model of 
Meaning Representation. Brain and Language, 86: 
347-365. 

17


