










































Towards Incremental Speech Generation in Dialogue Systems


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 1–8,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Incremental Speech Generation in Dialogue Systems 

 
Gabriel Skantze 

Dept. of Speech Music and Hearing 
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden 
gabriel@speech.kth.se 

Anna Hjalmarsson 
Dept. of Speech Music and Hearing 

KTH, Stockholm, Sweden 
annah@speech.kth.se 

 
 

Abstract 

We present a first step towards a model of 
speech generation for incremental dialogue 
systems. The model allows a dialogue system 
to incrementally interpret spoken input, while 
simultaneously planning, realising and self-
monitoring the system response. The model 
has been implemented in a general dialogue 
system framework. Using this framework, we 
have implemented a specific application and 
tested it in a Wizard-of-Oz setting, comparing 
it with a non-incremental version of the same 
system. The results show that the incremental 
version, while producing longer utterances, 
has a shorter response time and is perceived 
as more efficient by the users. 

1 Introduction 

Speakers in dialogue produce speech in a piece-
meal fashion and on-line as the dialogue pro-
gresses. When starting to speak, dialogue partici-
pants typically do not have a complete plan of 
how to say something or even what to say. Yet, 
they manage to rapidly integrate information 
from different sources in parallel and simultane-
ously plan and realize new dialogue contribu-
tions. Moreover, interlocutors continuously self-
monitor the actual production processes in order 
to facilitate self-corrections (Levelt, 1989). Con-
trary to this, most spoken dialogue systems use a 
silence threshold to determine when the user has 
stopped speaking. The user utterance is then 
processed by one module at a time, after which a 
complete system utterance is produced and real-
ised by a speech synthesizer.  

This paper has two purposes. First, to present 
an initial step towards a model of speech genera-
tion that allows a dialogue system to incremen-
tally interpret spoken input, while simultaneously 
planning, realising and self-monitoring the sys-
tem response. The model has been implemented 

in a general dialogue system framework. This is 
described in Section 2 and 3. The second purpose 
is to evaluate the usefulness of incremental 
speech generation in a Wizard-of-Oz setting, us-
ing the proposed model. This is described in Sec-
tion 4. 

1.1 Motivation 

A non-incremental dialogue system waits until 
the user has stopped speaking (using a silence 
threshold to determine this) before starting to 
process the utterance and then produce a system 
response. If processing takes time, for example 
because an external resource is being accessed, 
this may result in a confusing response delay. An 
incremental system may instead continuously 
build a tentative plan of what to say as the user is 
speaking. When it detects that the user’s utter-
ance has ended, it may start to asynchronously 
realise this plan while processing continues, with 
the possibility to revise the plan if needed.  

There are many potential reasons for why dia-
logue systems may need additional time for 
processing. For example, it has been assumed 
that ASR processing has to be done in real-time, 
in order to avoid long and confusing response 
delays. Yet, if we allow the system to start 
speaking before input is complete, we can allow 
more accurate (and time-consuming) ASR proc-
essing (for example by broadening the beam). In 
this paper, we will explore incremental speech 
generation in a Wizard-of-oz setting. A common 
problem in such settings is the time it takes for 
the Wizard to interpret the user’s utterance 
and/or decide on the next system action, resulting 
in unacceptable response delays (Fraser & Gil-
bert, 1991). Thus, it would be useful if the sys-
tem could start to speak as soon as the user has 
finished speaking, based on the Wizard’s actions 
so far. 

1



1.2 Related work 

Incremental speech generation has been studied 
from different perspectives. From a psycholin-
guistic perspective, Levelt (1989) and others 
have studied how speakers incrementally pro-
duce utterances while self-monitoring the output, 
both overtly (listening to oneself speaking) and 
covertly (mentally monitoring what is about to 
be said). As deviations from the desired output is 
detected, the speaker may initiate  self-repairs. If 
the item to be repaired has already been spoken, 
an overt repair is needed (for example by using 
an editing term, such as “sorry”). If not, the ut-
terance plan may be altered to accommodate the 
repair, a so-called covert repair. Central to the 
concept of incremental speech generation is that 
the realization of overt speech can be initiated 
before the speaker has a complete plan of what to 
say. An option for a speaker who does not know 
what to say (but wants to claim the floor) is to 
use hesitation phenomena such as filled pauses 
(“eh”) or cue phrases such as “let’s see”.  

A dialogue system may not need to self-
monitor its output for the same reasons as hu-
mans do. For example, there is no risk of articu-
latory errors (with current speech synthesis tech-
nology). However, a dialogue system may utilize 
the same mechanisms of self-repair and hesita-
tion phenomena to simultaneously plan and real-
ise the spoken output, as there is always a risk 
for revision in the input to an incremental mod-
ule (as described in Section 2.1).  

There is also another aspect of self-monitoring 
that is important for dialogue systems. In a sys-
tem with modules operating asynchronously, the 
dialogue manager cannot know whether the in-
tended output is actually realized, as the user 
may interrupt the system. Also, the timing of the 
synthesized speech is important, as the user may 
give feedback in the middle of a system utter-
ance. Thus, an incremental, asynchronous system 
somehow needs to self-monitor its own output.   

From a syntactic perspective, Kempen & 
Hoenkamp (1987) and Kilger & Finkler (1995) 
have studied how to syntactically formulate sen-
tences incrementally under time constraints. 
Dohsaka & Shimazu (1997) describes a system 
architecture for incremental speech generation. 
However, there is no account for revision of the 
input (as discussed in Section 2.1) and there is no 
evaluation with users. Skantze & Schlangen 
(2009) describe an incremental system that partly 
supports incremental output and that is evaluated 

with users, but the domain is limited to number 
dictation. 

In this study, the focus is not on syntactic con-
struction of utterances, but on how to build prac-
tical incremental dialogue systems within limited 
domains that can handle revisions and produce 
convincing, flexible and varied speech output in 
on-line interaction with users.  

2 The Jindigo framework 

The proposed model has been implemented in 
Jindigo – a Java-based open source framework 
for implementing and experimenting with incre-
mental dialogue systems (www.jindigo.net). We 
will here briefly describe this framework and the 
model of incremental dialogue processing that it 
is based on. 

2.1 Incremental units 

Schlangen & Skantze (2009) describes a general, 
abstract model of incremental dialogue process-
ing, which Jindigo is based on. In this model, a 
system consists of a network of processing mod-
ules. Each module has a left buffer, a processor, 
and a right buffer, where the normal mode of 
processing is to receive input from the left 
buffer, process it, and provide output in the right 
buffer, from where it is forwarded to the next 
module’s left buffer. An example is shown in 
Figure 1. Modules exchange incremental units 
(IUs), which are the smallest ‘chunks’ of infor-
mation that can trigger connected modules into 
action (such as words, phrases, communicative 
acts, etc). IUs are typically part of larger units: 
individual words are parts of an utterance; con-
cepts are part of the representation of an utter-
ance meaning. This relation of being part of the 
same larger unit is recorded through same-level 
links. In the example below, IU2 has a same-level 
link to IU1 of type PREDECESSOR, meaning that 
they are linearly ordered. The information that 
was used in creating a given IU is linked to it via 
grounded-in links. In the example, IU3 is 
grounded in IU1 and IU2, while IU4 is grounded 
in IU3. 

 

IU1 IU2

IU1 IU2

IU3 IU3
IU3

IU4
IU4

Module A

Module B
left buffer processor right buffer

left buffer processor right buffer  
Figure 1: Two connected modules. 

2



A challenge for incremental systems is to han-
dle revisions. For example, as the first part of the 
word “forty” is recognised, the best hypothesis 
might be “four”. As the speech recogniser re-
ceives more input, it might need to revise its pre-
vious output, which might cause a chain of revi-
sions in all subsequent modules. To cope with 
this, modules have to be able to react to three 
basic situations: that IUs are added to a buffer, 
which triggers processing; that IUs that were er-
roneously hypothesized by an earlier module are 
revoked, which may trigger a revision of a mod-
ule’s own output; and that modules signal that 
they commit to an IU, that is, won’t revoke it 
anymore. 

Jindigo implements an efficient model for 
communicating these updates. In this model, IUs 
are associated with edges in a graph, as shown in 
Table 1. The graph may be incrementally 
amended without actually removing edges or 
vertices, even if revision occurs. At each time-
step, a new update message is sent to the con-
suming module. The update message contains a 
pair of pointers [C, A]: (C) the vertex from which 
the currently committed hypothesis can be con-
structed, and (A) the vertex from which the cur-

rently best tentative hypothesis can be con-
structed. In Jindigo, all modules run as threads 
within a single Java process, and therefore have 
access to the same memory space.  

2.2 A typical architecture 

A typical Jindigo system architecture is shown in 
Figure 2. The word buffer from the Recognizer 
module is parsed by the Interpreter module 
which tries to find an optimal sequence of top 
phrases and their semantic representations. These 
phrases are then interpreted in light of the current 
dialogue context by the Contextualizer module 
and are packaged as Communicative Acts (CAs). 
As can be seen in Figure 2, the Contextualizer 
also self-monitors Concepts from the system as 
they are spoken by the Vocalizer, which makes it 
possible to contextually interpret user responses 
to system utterances. This also makes it possible 
for the system to know whether an intended ut-
terance actually was produced, or if it was inter-
rupted. The current context is sent to the Action 
Manager, which generates a SpeechPlan that is 
sent to the Vocalizer. This is described in detail 
in the next section.  

Figure 2: A typical Jindigo system architecture. 

 

String Right buffer Update 
message 

t1: one w1 one w2  [w1, w2] 

t2: one five w1 one w2 five w3  [w1, w3] 

t3: one w1 one w2 five w3  [w1, w2] 

t4: one four five w1 one w2 five w3

five w5four w4  

[w1, w5] 

t5: [commit] w1 one w2 five w3

five w5four w4  

[w5,w5] 

Table 1: The right buffer of an ASR module, and up-
date messages at different time-steps. 

 

Figure 3: Incremental Units at different levels of processing. Some grounded-in relations are shown with dotted 
lines. W=Word, SS=SpeechSegment, SU=SpeechUnit, CA=Communicative Act. 

Interpreter

VAD

ASR

Action Manager

Vocalizer

Contextualizer

SpeechPlan

Speech

Segment

SU SU SU SU SU SU

Self

Delay

Other

Delay

W W W W W W W W W

P

CA

SS

Concept

CA

Response

To
SS

C Phrase Concept

Utterance Utterance

Utterance

Segment
US US

User System

SS

User

Vocalizer

Speech

Speech
Interpreter

Word

ContextualizerActionManager

Utterance
Segment

ASR

SpeechPlan

Context

Phrase
Concept

3



3 Incremental speech generation 

3.1 Incremental units of speech 

In order for user and system utterances to be in-
terpreted and produced incrementally, they need 
to be decomposed into smaller units of process-
ing (IUs). This decomposition is shown in Figure 
3. Using a standard voice activity detector 
(VAD) in the ASR, the user’s speech is chunked 
into Utterance-units. The Utterance bounda-
ries determine when the ASR hypothesis is 
committed. However, for the system to be able to 
respond quickly, the end silence threshold of 
these Utterances are typically too long. Therefore 
smaller units of the type UtteranceSegment 
(US) are detected, using a much shorter silence 
threshold of about 50ms. Such short silence 
thresholds allow the system to give very fast re-
sponses (such as backchannels). Information 
about US boundaries is sent directly from the 
ASR to the Vocalizer. As Figure 3 illustrates, the 
grounded-in links can be followed to derive the 
timing of IUs at different levels of processing.  

The system output is also modelled using IUs 
at different processing levels. The widest-
spanning IU on the output side is the 
SpeechPlan. The rendering of a SpeechPlan 
will result in a sequence of SpeechSegment’s, 
where each SpeechSegment represents a con-
tinuous audio rendering of speech, either as a 
synthesised string or a pre-recorded audio file. 
For example, the plan may be to say “okay, a red 
doll, here is a nice doll”, consisting of three seg-
ments. Now, there are two requirements that we 
need to meet. First, the output should be varied: 
the system should not give exactly the same re-
sponse every time to the same request. But, as 
we will see, the output in an incremental system 
must also be flexible, as speech plans are incre-
mentally produced and amended. In order to re-
lieve the Action Manager of the burden of vary-
ing the output and making time-critical adjust-
ments, we model the SpeechPlan as a directed 
graph, where each edge is associated with a 
SpeechSegment, as shown in Figure 4. Thus, the 
Action Manager may asynchronously plan (a set 
of possible) responses, while the Vocalizer se-
lects the rendering path in the graph and takes 
care of time-critical synchronization. To control 
the rendering, each SpeechSegment has the 
properties optional, committing, selfDelay 
and otherDelay, as described in the next sec-
tion. It must also be possible for an incremental 
system to interrupt and make self-repairs in the 
middle of a SpeechSegment. Therefore, each 

SpeechSegment may also be decomposed into an 
array of SpeechUnit’s, where each SpeechUnit 
contains pointers to the audio rendering in the 
SpeechSegment. 

3.2 Producing and consuming SpeechPlans 

The SpeechPlan does not need to be complete 
before the system starts to speak. An example of 
this is shown in Figure 4. As more words are 
recognised by the ASR, the Action Manager may 
add more SpeechSegment’s to the graph. Thus, 
the system may start to say “it costs” before it 
knows which object is being talked about.  

 
w1 how w2 much w3 is w4 the w5 doll w6

eh

well

s1

you can have it for

it costs

let’s say s3 s640 crowns

 
Figure 4: The right buffer of an ASR (top) and the 
SpeechPlan that is incrementally produced (bottom). 
Vertex s1 is associated with w1, s3 with w3, etc. Op-
tional, non-committing SpeechSegment’s are marked 
with dashed outline. 

The SpeechPlan has a pointer called 
finalVertex. When the Vocalizer reaches the 
finalVertex, the SpeechPlan is completely 
realised. If finalVertex is not set, it means that 
the SpeechPlan is not yet completely con-
structed. The SpeechSegment property 
optional tells whether the segment needs to be 
realised or if it could be skipped if the 
finalVertex is in sight. This makes it possible 
to insert floor-keeping SpeechSegment’s (such 
as “eh”) in the graph, which are only realised if 
needed. The Vocalizer also keeps track of which 
SpeechSegment’s it has realised before, so that it 
can look ahead in the graph and realise a more 
varied output. Each SpeechSegment may carry a 
semantic representation of the segment (a 
Concept). This is sent by the Vocalizer to the 
Contextualizer as soon as the segment has been 
realised. 

The SpeechSegment properties selfDelay 
and otherDelay regulate the timing of the out-
put (as illustrated in Figure 3). They specify the 
number of milliseconds that should pass before 
the Vocalizer starts to play the segment, depend-
ing on the previous speaker. By setting the 
otherDelay of a segment, the Action Manager 
may delay the response depending on how cer-
tain it is that it is appropriate to speak, for exam-
ple by considering pitch and semantic complete-
ness. (See Raux & Eskenazi (2008) for a study 

4



on how such dynamic delays can be derived us-
ing machine learning.)  

If the user starts to speak (i.e., a new 
UtteranceSegment is initiated) as the system is 
speaking, the Vocalizer pauses (at a SpeechUnit 
boundary) and waits until it has received a new 
response from the Action Manager. The Action 
Manager may then choose to generate a new re-
sponse or simply ignore the last input, in which 
case the Vocalizer continues from the point of 
interruption. This may happen if, for example, 
the UtteranceSegment was identified as a back-
channel, cough, or similar. 

3.3 Self-repairs  

As Figure 3 shows, a SpeechPlan may be 
grounded in a user CA (i.e., it is a response to 
this CA). If this CA is revoked, or if the 
SpeechPlan is revised, the Vocalizer may initial-
ize a self-repair. The Vocalizer keeps a list of the 
SpeechSegment’s it has realised so far. If the 
SpeechPlan is revised when it has been partly 
realised, the Vocalizer compares the history with 
the new graph and chooses one of the different 
repair strategies shown in Table 2. In the best 
case, it may smoothly switch to the new plan 
without the user noticing it (covert repair). In 
case of a unit repair, the Vocalizer searches for a 
zero-crossing point in the audio segment, close to 
the boundary pointed out by the SpeechUnit.  

 
covert 
segment 
repair 

you are right it is blue

you are right they are blue  
overt 
segment 
repair 

you are right it is blue

you are wrong it is redsorry  
covert 
unit 
repair 

you are right it is blue

you are wrong it is red  
overt 
unit 
repair 

you are right it is blue

you are wrong it is red

sorry

 
Table 2: Different types of self-repairs. The shaded 
boxes show which SpeechUnit’s have been realised, 
or are about to be realised, at the point of revision. 

The SpeechSegment property committing 
tells whether it needs to be repaired if the 
SpeechPlan is revised. For example, a filled 
pause such as “eh” is not committing (there is no 

need to insert an editing term after it), while a 
request or an assertion usually is. If (parts of) a 
committing segment has already been realised 
and it cannot be part of the new plan, an overt 
repaired is made with the help of an editing term 
(e.g., “sorry”). When comparing the history with 
the new graph, the Vocalizer searches the graph 
and tries to find a path so that it may avoid mak-
ing an overt repair. For example if the graph in 
Figure 4 is replaced with a corresponding one 
that ends with “60 crowns”, and it has so far 
partly realised “it costs”, it may choose the cor-
responding path in the new SpeechPlan, making 
a covert repair. 

4 A Wizard-of-Oz experiment 

A Wizard-of-Oz experiment was conducted to 
test the usefulness of the model outlined above. 
All modules in the system were fully functional, 
except for the ASR, since not enough data had 
been collected to build language models. Thus, 
instead of using ASR, the users’ speech was 
transcribed by a Wizard. As discussed in section 
1.1, a common problem is the time it takes for 
the Wizard to transcribe incoming utterances, 
and thus for the system to respond. Therefore, 
this is an interesting test-case for our model. In 
order to let the system respond as soon as the 
user finished speaking, even if the Wizard hasn’t 
completed the transcription yet, a VAD is used. 
The setting is shown in Figure 5 (compare with 
Figure 2). The Wizard may start to type as soon 
as the user starts to speak and may alter whatever 
he has typed until the return key is pressed and 
the hypothesis is committed. The word buffer is 
updated in exactly the same manner as if it had 
been the output of an ASR.  

User VAD

Vocalizer

Speech

Speech
Interpreter

Word

ContextualizerActionManager

Utterance
Segment

Wizard

 
Figure 5: The system architecture used in the Wizard-
of-Oz experiment. 

For comparison, we also configured a non-
incremental version of the same system, where 
nothing was sent from the Wizard until he com-

5



mitted by pressing the return key. Since we did 
not have mature models for the Interpreter either, 
the Wizard was allowed to adapt the transcrip-
tion of the utterances to match the models, while 
preserving the semantic content. 

4.1 The DEAL domain 

The system that was used in the experiment was 
a spoken dialogue system for second language 
learners of Swedish under development at KTH, 
called DEAL (Hjalmarsson et al., 2007). The 
scene of DEAL is set at a flea market where a 
talking agent is the owner of a shop selling used 
goods. The student is given a mission to buy 
items at the flea market getting the best possible 
price from the shop-keeper. The shop-keeper can 
talk about the properties of goods for sale and 
negotiate about the price. The price can be re-
duced if the user points out a flaw of an object, 
argues that something is too expensive, or offers 
lower bids. However, if the user is too persistent 
haggling, the agent gets frustrated and closes the 
shop. Then the user has failed to complete the 
task.  

For the experiment, DEAL was re-
implemented using the Jindigo framework. Fig-
ure 6 shows the GUI that was shown to the user. 

 

 
Figure 6: The user interface in DEAL. The object on 
the table is the one currently in focus. Example ob-
jects are shown on the shelf. Current game score, 
money and bought objects are shown on the right. 

4.2 Speech segments in DEAL 

In a previous data collection of human-human 
interaction in the DEAL domain (Hjalmarsson, 
2008) it was noted that about 40% of the speaker 
turns were initiated with standardized lexical ex-
pressions (cue phrases) or filled pauses. Such 
speech segments commit very little semantically 
to the rest of the utterance and are therefore very 
useful as initiations of utterances, since such 

speech segments can be produced immediately 
after the user has stopped speaking, allowing the 
Wizard to exploit the additional time to tran-
scribe the rest of the utterance.  

The DEAL corpus was used to create utter-
ance initial speech segments for the experiment. 
The motivation to use speech segments derived 
from human recordings was to make the system 
sound convincing in terms of both lexical choice 
and intonation. In particular, we wanted a reper-
toire of different types of filled pauses and feed-
back expression such as “eh” and “mm” in order 
to avoid a system that sounds monotone and re-
petitive. First, a number of feedback expression 
such as “ja”, “a”, “mm” (Eng: “yes”), filled 
pauses such as “eh”, “ehm” and expressions used 
to initiate different domain specific speech acts 
(for example “it costs” and “let me see”) were 
extracted.  The segments were re-synthesized 
using Expros, a tool for experimentation with 
prosody in diphone voices (Gustafson & Edlund, 
2008). Based on manual transcriptions and sound 
files, Expros automatically extracts pitch, dura-
tion and intensity from the human voice and cre-
ates a synthetic version using these parameters. 
In the speech plan, these canned segments were 
mixed with generated text segments (for example 
references to objects, prices, etc) that were syn-
thesized and generated on-line with the same 
diphone voice. 

An example interaction with the incremental 
version of the system is shown in Table 3. S.11 
exemplifies a self-correction, where the system 
prepares to present another bid, but then realizes 
that the user’s bid is too low to even consider. A 
video (with subtitles) showing an interaction 
with one of the users can be seen at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cQQmgItIMvs. 

 
S.1 [welcome] [how may I help you] 
U.2 I want to buy a doll 
S.3 [eh] [here is] [a doll] 
U.4 how much is it? 
S.5 [eh] [it costs] [120 crowns] 
U.6 that is too expensive 

how much is the teddy bear? 
S.7 [well] [you can have it for] [let’s see] 

[40 crowns] 
U.8 I can give you 30 crowns 
S.9 [you could have it for] [37 crowns] 
U.10 I can give you 10 crowns 
S.11 [let’s say] [or, I mean] [that is way too 

little] 
Table 3: An example DEAL dialogue (translated from 
Swedish). Speech segments are marked in brackets. 

6



4.3 Experimental setup 

In order to compare the incremental and non-
incremental versions of the system, we con-
ducted an experiment with 10 participants, 4 
male and 6 female. The participants were given a 
mission: to buy three items (with certain charac-
teristics) in DEAL at the best possible price from 
the shop-keeper. The participants were further 
instructed to evaluate two different versions of 
the system, System A and System B. However, 
they were not informed how the versions dif-
fered. The participants were lead to believe that 
they were interacting with a fully working dia-
logue system and were not aware of the Wizard-
of-Oz set up. Each participant interacted with the 
system four times, first two times with each ver-
sion of the system, after which a questionnaire 
was completed. Then they interacted with the 
two versions again, after which they filled out a 
second questionnaire with the same questions. 
The order of the versions was balanced between 
subjects.  

The mid-experiment questionnaire was used to 
collect the participants’ first opinions of the two 
versions and to make them aware of what type of 
characteristics they should consider when inter-
acting with the system the second time. When 
filling out the second questionnaire, the partici-
pants were asked to base their ratings on their 
overall experience with the two system versions. 
Thus, the analysis of the results is based on the 
second questionnaire. In the questionnaires, they 
were requested to rate which one of the two ver-
sions was most prominent according to 8 differ-
ent dimensions: which version they preferred; 
which was more human-like, polite, efficient, and 
intelligent; which gave a faster response and bet-
ter feedback; and with which version it was eas-
ier to know when to speak. All ratings were done 
on a continuous horizontal line with System A on 
the left end and System B on the right end. The 
centre of the line was labelled with “no differ-
ence”.  

The participants were recorded during their in-
teraction with the system, and all messages in the 
system were logged.  

4.4 Results 

Figure 7 shows the difference in response time 
between the two versions. As expected, the in-
cremental version started to speak more quickly 
(M=0.58s, SD=1.20) than the non-incremental 
version (M=2.84s, SD=1.17), while producing 
longer utterances. It was harder to anticipate 

whether it would take more or less time for the 
incremental version to finish utterances. Both 
versions received the final input at the same 
time. On the one hand, the incremental version 
initiates utterances with speech segments that 
contain little or no semantic information. Thus, if 
the system is in the middle of such a segment 
when receiving the complete input from the 
Wizard, the system may need to complete this 
segment before producing the rest of the utter-
ance. Moreover, if an utterance is initiated and 
the Wizard alters the input, the incremental ver-
sion needs to make a repair which takes addi-
tional time. On the other hand, it may also start 
to produce speech segments that are semantically 
relevant, based on the incremental input, which 
allows it to finish the utterance more quickly. As 
the figure shows, it turns out that the average 
response completion time for the incremental 
version (M=5.02s, SD=1.54) is about 600ms 
faster than the average for non-incremental ver-
sion (M=5.66s, SD=1.50), (t(704)=5.56, 
p<0.001).  

 

0,00

1,00

2,00

3,00

4,00

5,00

6,00

start end length

S
e
c
o
n
d
s

inc

non

 
Figure 7: The first two column pairs show the average 
time from the end of the user’s utterance to the start 
of the system’s response, and from the end of the 
user’s utterance to the end of the system’s response. 
The third column pair shows the average total system 
utterance length (end minus start).  

In general, subjects reported that the system 
worked very well. After the first interaction with 
the two versions, the participants found it hard to 
point out the difference, as they were focused on 
solving the task. The marks on the horizontal 
continuous lines on the questionnaire were 
measured with a ruler based on their distance 
from the midpoint (labelled with “no difference”) 
and normalized to a scale from -1 to 1, each ex-
treme representing one system version. A Wil-
coxon Signed Ranks Test was carried out, using 
these rankings as differences. The results are 
shown in Table 4. As the table shows, the two 
versions differed significantly in three dimen-
sions, all in favour of the incremental version. 

7



Hence, the incremental version was rated as 
more polite, more efficient, and better at indicat-
ing when to speak. 

 
 diff z-value p-value 
preferred 0.23 -1.24 0.214 
human-like 0.15 -0.76 0.445 
polite 0.40 -2.19 0.028* 
efficient 0.29 -2.08 0.038* 
intelligent 0.11 -0.70 0.484 
faster response 0.26 -1.66 0.097 
feedback 0.08 -0.84 0.400 
when to speak 0.35 -2.38 0.017* 

Table 4: The results from the second questionnaire. 
All differences are positive, meaning that they are in 
favour of the incremental version. 

A well known phenomena in dialogue is that 
of entrainment (or adaptation or alignment), that 
is, speakers (in both human-human and human-
computer dialogue) tend to adapt the conversa-
tional behaviour to their interlocutor (e.g., Bell, 
2003). In order to examine whether the different 
versions affected the user’s behaviour, we ana-
lyzed both the user utterance length and user re-
sponse time, but found no significant differences 
between the interactions with the two versions. 

5 Conclusions & Future work 

This paper has presented a first step towards in-
cremental speech generation in dialogue systems. 
The results are promising: when there are delays 
in the processing of the dialogue, it is possible to 
incrementally produce utterances that make the 
interaction more efficient and pleasant for the 
user.  

As this is a first step, there are several ways to 
improve the model. First, the edges in the 
SpeechPlan could have probabilities, to guide 
the path planning. Second, when the user has 
finished speaking, it should (in some cases) be 
possible to anticipate how long it will take until 
the processing is completed and thereby choose a 
more optimal path (by taking the length of the 
SpeechSegment’s into consideration). Third, a 
lot of work could be done on the dynamic gen-
eration of SpeechSegment’s, considering syntac-
tic and pragmatic constraints, although this 
would require a speech synthesizer that was bet-
ter at convincingly produce conversational 
speech. 

The experiment also shows that it is possible 
to achieve fast turn-taking and convincing re-
sponses in a Wizard-of-Oz setting. We think that 
this opens up new possibilities for the Wizard-of-

Oz paradigm, and thereby for practical develop-
ment of dialogue systems in general.  

6 Acknowledgements 

This research was funded by the Swedish research 
council project GENDIAL (VR #2007-6431). 

References 

Bell, L. (2003). Linguistic adaptations in spoken hu-
man-computer dialogues. Empirical studies of user 
behavior. Doctoral dissertation, Department of 
Speech, Music and Hearing, KTH, Stockholm. 

Dohsaka, K., & Shimazu, A. (1997). System architec-
ture for spoken utterance production in collaborative 
dialogue. In Working Notes of IJCAI 1997 Work-
shop on Collaboration, Cooperation and Conflict in 
Dialogue Systems.  

Fraser, N. M., & Gilbert, G. N. (1991). Simulating 
speech systems. Computer Speech and Language, 
5(1), 81-99. 

Gustafson, J., & Edlund, J. (2008). expros: a toolkit 
for exploratory experimentation with prosody in 
customized diphone voices. In Proceedings of Per-
ception and Interactive Technologies for Speech-
Based Systems (PIT 2008) (pp. 293-296). Ber-
lin/Heidelberg: Springer. 

Hjalmarsson, A., Wik, P., & Brusk, J. (2007). Dealing 
with DEAL: a dialogue system for conversation 
training. In Proceedings of SigDial (pp. 132-135). 
Antwerp, Belgium. 

Hjalmarsson, A. (2008). Speaking without knowing 
what to say... or when to end. In Proceedings of 
SIGDial 2008. Columbus, Ohio, USA. 

Kempen, G., & Hoenkamp, E. (1987). An incremental 
procedural grammar for sentence formulation. Cog-
nitive Science, 11(2), 201-258. 

Kilger, A., & Finkler, W. (1995). Incremental Gen-
eration for Real-Time Applications. Technical Re-
port RR-95-11, German Research Center for Artifi-
cial Intelligence. 

Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From Intention to 
Articulation. Cambridge, Mass., USA: MIT Press. 

Raux, A., & Eskenazi, M. (2008). Optimizing end-
pointing thresholds using dialogue features in a 
spoken dialogue system. In Proceedings of SIGdial 
2008. Columbus, OH, USA. 

Schlangen, D., & Skantze, G. (2009). A general, ab-
stract model of incremental dialogue processing. In 
Proceedings of EACL-09. Athens, Greece. 

Skantze, G., & Schlangen, D. (2009). Incremental 
dialogue processing in a micro-domain. In Proceed-
ings of EACL-09. Athens, Greece. 

 

8


