



















































Being Theoretical is Being Practical: Multiword Units and Terminological Structure Revitalised


Proceedings of the Multiword Expressions: From Theory to Applications (MWE 2010), page 1,
Beijing, August 2010

Being Theoretical is Being Practical:
Multiword Units and Terminological Structure Revitalised

Kyo Kageura
University of Tokyo

kyo@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp

1 Invited Talk Abstract

Multiword units (MWUs) are critical in processing and understanding texts and have been extensively
studied in relation to their occurrences in texts. MWUs also play an essential role in organising vocab-
ulary, which is most prominently visible in domain-specific terminologies. There has been, however,
a limited and mostly theoretical concern with the latter aspect of MWUs; researchers interested in
NLP-related applications of terminologies have not paid sufficient attention to this aspect.

In this talk I will start by giving the basic framework within which the study of MWUs from the point
of view of vocabulary can be carried out, in the process clarifying the relationships between studies
of MWUs in texts and those in relation to vocabulary. I will then introduce some of the theoretical
studies in terminological structure which I have carried out in recent years. Referring to some of the
problems that practically-oriented research in terminology processing is currently facing, I will argue
why, how and in what possible ways the understanding of the roles MWUs take in terminological
structure constitute a sin qua non condition for making a breakthrough in current text-oriented studies
of terminological MWUs.

2 Speaker Biography

Kyo Kageura, PhD, is a Professor at the Library and Information Science Course, Graduate School of
Education, University of Tokyo. He works in the field of terminology and is interested in applying NLP
methods in constructing practicaly useful reference resources. His publications include Quantitative
Informatices (Maruzen, 2000, in Japanese) and The Dynamics of Terminology (John Benjamins, 2002).
He is currently the editor of the journal Terminology and a book series Terminology and Lexicography:
Research and Practice, both published by John Benjamins, with Professor Marie-Claude L’Homme of
the University of Montreal. He is also a member of the development and management team of an online
hosting site Minna no Hon’yaku (Translation of/by/for all: http://trans-aid.jp/).

1


