










































Using Common Sense to generate culturally contextualized Machine Translation


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 24–31, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Common Sense to generate culturally contextualized
Machine Translation

Helena de Medeiros Caseli Bruno Akio Sugiyama
Department of Computer Science (DC)

Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar)
Rod. Washington Luı́s, km 235 – CP 676
CEP 13565-905, São Carlos, SP, Brazil

{helenacaseli,bruno sugiyama,junia}@dc.ufscar.br

Junia Coutinho Anacleto

Abstract

This paper reports an ongoing work in
applying Common Sense knowledge to
Machine Translation aiming at generating
more culturally contextualized translations.
Common Sense can be defined as the
knowledge shared by a group of people in
a given time, space and culture; and this
knowledge, here, is represented by a semantic
network called ConceptNet. Machine
Translation, in turn, is the automatic process
of generating an equivalent translated version
of a source sentence. In this work we intend
to use the knowledge represented in two
ConceptNets, one in Brazilian Portuguese and
another in English, to fix/filter translations
built automatically. So, this paper presents
the initial ideas of our work, the steps taken
so far as well as some opportunities for
collaboration.

1 Introduction

In this paper we describe an ongoing work con-
cerning the studies in gathering and using Common
Sense knowledge and building Machine Translation
applications. Common Sense (CS) can be defined
as the knowledge shared by a group of people in a
given time, space and culture.1 Machine Translation
(MT), in turn, is the application of computer
programs to generate a translated equivalent version
of a source text, in a target language.

1This definition of Common Sense is adopted by Open Mind
Common Sense (OMCS) and Brazilian Open Mind Common
Sense (OMCS-Br) projects and is only one of the several
possible definitions.

MT is one of the oldest and most important
areas of Natural Language Processing (NLP) /
Computational Linguistics (CL).2 From its begin-
nings we have witnessed some changes in the
proposed MT paradigms ranging from the basic
level —in which MT is performed by just replacing
words in a source language by words in a target
language— to more sophisticated ones —which rely
on manually created translation rules (Rule-based
Machine Translation) or automatically generated
statistical models (Statistical Machine Translation,
SMT). Nowadays, the majority of the researches has
being centered around the phrase-based statistical
MT (PB-SMT) approach —such as (Koehn et
al., 2003) and (Och and Ney, 2004). PB-SMT
is considered the state-of-the-art according to the
automatic evaluation measures BLEU (Papineni et
al., 2002) and NIST (Doddington, 2002)3.

Although PB-SMT models have achieved the
state-of-the-art translation quality, there are strong
evidences that these models will not be able to
go further without more linguistically motivated
features, as stated by Tinsley and Way (2009). This
is already being illustrated by the recent shift of
researches towards linguistically enriched models as
(Koehn and Hoang, 2007) and (Tinsley and Way,
2009) among others.

Following the same idea of these most recent
researches, here we are also interested in seeing

2In this paper we will use the terms NLP and CL
interchangeably since this is the assumption adopted in Brazil.

3BLEU and NIST are two automatic measures widely
applied to evaluate the target MT output sentence regarding one
our more reference sentences.

24



how it is possible to improve MT performance
based on more linguistically motivated features.
In our case, we intend to investigate how to
apply Common Sense knowledge to generate more
culturally contextualized automatic translations.

For example, considering the translation of
slangs4 as in the English sentence “Jump, you
chicken!”5. In this case, the word “chicken” do
not mean “a kind of bird” but “a coward” or “a
person who is not brave”. However, its translation
to Portuguese (“galinha”) can also be applied as a
slang with a completely different meaning. In the
Portuguese language, the slang “galinha” means a
men with a lot of girlfriends. Although the problem
stated in the given example could also be fixed by
some dictionary entries, CS knowledge is the kind
of information that varies a lot and frequently can
not be found in traditional dictionaries. Thus, we
believe that the CS knowledge derived from the
OMCS projects is an alternative way to cope with
these translation problems.

Before presenting our ideas, section 2 describes
some related work on SMT and more recent
linguistically motivated empirical MT. Common
sense and the Open Mind Common Sense project
are the subjects of sections 3. Section 4 brings some
of our ideas on how to apply the common sense
knowledge in the automatic translation from/to
Brazilian Portuguese and to/from English. After
presenting the current scenario of our ongoing work,
we point out some opportunities for collaboration in
section 5. Finally, section 6 finishes this paper with
insights about the next steps of our research.

2 Machine Translation

Machine Translation (MT) has about 70 years of
history and lot of its recent achievements are directly
related to the advances in computer science, which
enable almost everyone to have access and use
MT tools. Some of these tools were traditionally
developed following the rule-based approach (e.g.,

4Slangs are typically cultural because they characterize the
mode of a group’s speech in a given space and time.

5Sentence extracted from Cambridge Advanced Learner’s
Dictionary: http://dictionary.cambridge.org/
define.asp?key=13018&dict=CALD.

Systran6 and Apertium7) but the statistical approach
is now being widely applied at least in part (e.g.,
Google8) (Cancedda et al., 2009).

The SMT was born in the late 1980s as an effort of
researchers from IBM (Brown et al., 1990). In those
days, SMT was performed based on two models:
a word-based translation model and a language
model. While the first model is concerned with
the production of target equivalent versions of the
source sentences, the second one guarantees that the
output sentence is a possible one (it is grammatical
and fluent) in the target language. In the current PB-
SMT systems, the word-based models were replaced
by the phrase-based ones built based on sequences of
words (the phrases).9

The translation and language models used in SMT
are built from a training parallel corpora (a set
of source sentences and their translations into the
target language) by means of IBM models (Brown
et al., 1993) which calculate the probability of
a given source word (or sequences of words) be
translated to a target word (or sequence of words).
The availability of some open-source toolkits (such
as Moses (Koehn et al., 2007)10) to train, test
and evaluate SMT models has helping the widely
employment of this MT approach to perhaps almost
any language pair and corpus type. In fact, SMT
is an inexpensive, easy and language independent
way for detecting recurrent phrases that form the
language and translation models.

However, while PB-SMT models have achieved
the state-of-the-art translation quality, its perfor-
mance seams to be stagnated. Consequently, there is
a recent common trend towards enriching the current
models with some extra knowledge as the new
approaches of factored translation models (Koehn
and Hoang, 2007) or syntax-based (or syntax-
augmented) MT systems (Tiedemann and Kotzé,
2009; Tinsley and Way, 2009; Zollmann et al.,
2008).

More related to our work are the proposals of
Musa et al. (2003) and Chung et al. (2005). Both

6http://www.systransoft.com/
7http://www.apertium.org/
8http://www.google.com/language_tools
9In SMT, a phrase is a sequence of two or more words even

though they do not form a syntactic phrase.
10http://www.statmt.org/moses/

25



of them are CS-based translation tools which take
the topics of a bilingual conversation guessed by a
topic spotting mechanism, and use them to generate
phrases that can be chosen by the end-user to follow
the conversation. Since they are interactive tools,
the phrases are first displayed on the screen in the
end-user’s native language and, then, he/she selects
a phrase to be translated (by a text-to-speech engine)
in the language in which the conversation is taking
place.

In our work, the main goal is also investigating
new ways to improve MT performance, but instead
of greater BLEU or NIST values we are interested
in producing more culturally contextualized transla-
tions. Similarly to (Musa et al., 2003) and (Chung
et al., 2005), we intend to help two bilingual users
to develop a communication. However, in our
case we are not only concerned with the language
differences, but also the cultural divergences. To
achieve this ambitious goal we rely on common
sense knowledge collected from Brazilian and
North-American individuals as explained in the next
section.

3 Common Sense

Common sense (CS) plays an important role in
the communication between two people as the
interchanged messages carries their prior beliefs,
attitudes, and values (Anacleto et al., 2006b).
When this communication involves more than one
language, translation tools can help to deal with the
language barrier but they are not able to cope with
the cultural one. In this case, the CS knowledge is a
powerful mean to guarantee that the understanding
will overcomes the cultural differences.

The CS knowledge applied in our research was
collaboratively collected from volunteers through
web sites and reflects the culture of their com-
munities (Anacleto et al., 2006a; Anacleto et al.,
2006b). More specifically, our research relies on CS
collected as an effort of the Open Mind Common
Sense projects in Brazil (OMCS-Br11) and in the
USA (OMCS12).

The OMCS started in 1999, at the MIT Media
Lab, to collect common sense from volunteers on

11http://www.sensocomum.ufscar.br
12http://commons.media.mit.edu/en/

the Internet. More than ten years later, this project
encompass many different areas, languages, and
problems. Nowadays, there are over a million
sentences in the English site collected from over
15,000 contributors.13

OMCS-Br is a younger project that has being
developed by LIA-DC/UFSCar (Advanced Interac-
tion Laboratory of the Federal University of São
Carlos) since August 2005. Figure 1 illustrates the
OMCS-Br architecture to collect and manipulate CS
knowledge in five work fronts: (1) common sense
knowledge collection, (2) knowledge representation,
(3) knowledge manipulation, (4) access and (5) use.
A detailed explanation of each work front can be
found in (Anacleto et al., 2008a).14

As can be seen in Figure 1, the CS knowledge
is collected in the OMCS-Br site (bottom-left) by
means of templates15. Then, the collected fact is
stored in a knowledge base (up-left) from which it is
converted into graphs that form a semantic network.
These semantic networks, called ConceptNets, are
composed of nodes and arcs (to connect nodes) as
shown in the bottom-right part of Figure 1. The
nodes represent the knowledge derived from the CS
base while the arcs represent relations between two
nodes based on studies on the theory of (Minsky,
1986). Examples of Minsky relations extracted
from the ConceptNet, in English, related to the term
“book” are: IsA (“book” IsA “literary work”),
UsedFor (“book” UsedFor “learn”), CapableOf
(“book” CapableOf “store useful knowledge”),
PartOf (“book” PartOf “library”) and DefinedAs
(“book” DefinedAs “foundation knowledge”).

Figure 2 brings an extract of our Brazilian
ConceptNet (Anacleto et al., 2008b) and Figure 3,
a parallel extract obtained from the North-American
ConceptNet (Singh, 2002). As it is possible to notice
from these figures, there is a straight relationship
between these ConceptNets. It is possible to find
many cases in which relations in English have

13http://csc.media.mit.edu/
14Examples of successful applications using the CS knowl-

edge derived from OMCS-Br can be fount at http://lia.
dc.ufscar.br/

15The templates are semi-structured statements in natural
language with some gaps that should be filled out with the
contributors’ knowledge so that the final statement corresponds
to a common sense fact (Anacleto et al., 2008a).

26



Figure 1: OMCS-Br Project architecture (Anacleto et al., 2008a)

their counterpart in Portuguese as in the example
given in which “book” is connected with “learn”
by the relation UsedFor and the book’s translation
to Portuguese, “livro”, is also linked with the
translation of learn (“aprender”) by a relation of the
same type.

Different from other researches using semantic
networks, such as MindNet16 (Vanderwende et
al., 2005), WordNet17 (Fellbaum, 1998) and
FrameNet18 (Baker et al., 1998), here we propose
the application of source and target ConceptNets
together in the same application.

16http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/
projects/mindnet/

17http://wordnet.princeton.edu/
18http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/

4 Culturally Contextualized Machine
Translation

As presented in the previous sections, the main
goal of our research is to investigate how CS
knowledge can help MT systems to generate more
culturally contextualized translations. To do so, we
are working with two ConceptNets derived from
OMCS and OMCS-Br projects, that represent the
CS knowledge in English and Brazilian Portuguese,
respectively, as presented in section 3.

In this context, we intend to investigate the
application of CS knowledge in the MT process in
three different moments:

1. Before the automatic translation – In this case
the source sentence input is enriched with
some CS knowledge (for example, context
information) that can help the MT tool to
choose the best translation;

27



Figure 2: Graphical representation of the Brazilian ConceptNet (Meuchi et al., 2009)

Figure 3: Graphical representation of the North-American ConceptNet (Meuchi et al., 2009)

2. During the automatic translation – In this case
the CS knowledge is used as a new feature in
the machine learning process of translation;

3. After the automatic translation – In this case
some target words in the output sentence can be
enriched with CS knowledge (for example, the
knowledge derived from the “DefinedAs” or
“IsA” Minsky relations) to better explain their
meanings.

Currently, we are dealing with the last moment
and planing some ways to fix/filter the target
sentences produced by a SMT system. This part
of the work is being carried out in the scope of a
master’s project which aims at building a bilingual
culturally contextualized chat. By using a SMT tool
(SMTT) and a CS knowledge tool (CSKT), this chat
will help the communication between two users with
different languages and cultures.

The SMTT is a phrase-based one trained using
Moses and a corpus of 17,397 pairs of Portuguese–
English parallel sentences with 1,026,512 tokens
(494,391 in Portuguese and 532,121 in English).

The training corpus contains articles from the online
version of the Brazilian scientific magazine Pesquisa
FAPESP19 written in Brazilian Portuguese (original)
and English (version) and, thus, a vocabulary that
do not fit exactly the one found in chats. The
SMTT trained based on this training corpus had
a performance of 0.39 BLEU and 8.30 NIST for
Portuguese–English translation and 0.36 BLEU and
7.83 NIST for English–Portuguese, in a test corpus
composed of 649 new parallel sentences from
the same domain of the training corpus (Caseli
and Nunes, 2009).20 For our experiments with
culturally-contextualized MT, the option of using
SMT models trained on general language in spite of
building specific ones for the chat domain was taken
aiming at measuring the impact that the CSKT has
on the final translation.

The CSKT, in turn, will help one user to
write his/her messages taking into account the

19http://revistapesquisa.fapesp.br
20In previous experiments carried out on the same corpora,

the best online MT system was Google with 0.33 BLEU and
7.61 NIST for Portuguse–English and 0.31 BLEU and 6.87
NIST for English–Portuguese translation (Caseli et al., 2006).

28



cultural differences between he/she and the other
user. A culturally contextualized translation will
be generated by applying the knowledge derived
from the two ConceptNets (see section 3) to fix/filter
the automatically generated translations in a semi-
automatic process assisted by both chat users.

To illustrate the use of both tools in the production
of a culturally contextualized translation, lets work
with slangs in the following example. Imagine a
Brazilian and an American communicating through
our bilingual chat supported by the SMTT and the
CSKT. The American user writes the sentence:

American says: “Hey dude, I will borrow a C-
note from someone tomorrow!”.

Supposing that our SMTT is not able to provide
a translation for the words “dude” and “C-note”
—what is, indeed, a true possibility— outputting
an incomplete translation in which these words
remain untranslated. Consequently, the Brazilian
user would not understand the American’s sentence
incompletely translated to Portuguese. So, since
the SMTT do not know the translation of these
slangs, the CSKT will be started to look for
possible definitions in the CS knowledge bases.
At this moment, the CSKT could provide some
basic information about the untranslated words,
for example that “dude is a slang” and “dude (is)
defined as guy” or that “C-note (is) defined as 100
dollars”, etc. Being aware of the untranslated words
and their cultural meanings displayed by the CSKT,
the American user could change or edit his/her
original message by writing:

American says: “Hey guy, I will borrow 100
dollars from someone tomorrow!”.

The final edited sentence has a higher probability
to occur in the target language than the original one
and, so, to be corrected translated by the SMTT.

In addition to this master’s project, we are also
developing two undergraduate researches aiming at
discovering useful knowledge from the “parallel”
ConceptNets. The first ongoing undergraduate
research (Barchi et al., 2009) aims at aligning the
parallel concepts found in Brazilian and English
ConceptNets. This alignment can be performed, for

example, based on lexical alignments automatically
generated by GIZA++21 (Och and Ney, 2000) or the
hierarchical structure of the nodes and arcs in the
ConceptNets. The second ongoing undergraduate
research (Meuchi et al., 2009), in turn, is involved
with the enrichment of one ConceptNet based on the
relations found in the other (parallel) ConceptNet
and also in lexically aligned parallel texts.

5 Opportunities for Collaboration

The work described in this paper presents the
first steps towards applying semantic knowledge to
generate more culturally contextualized translations
between Brazilian Portuguese and English texts.
In this sense, we see some opportunities for
collaboration regarding the roles that are played by:
(1) our research work, (2) the semantic resources
available to be used and (3) the resources and results
that will be produced by our work.

First of all, this work is a joint effort of two
research areas: NLP/CL (machine translation) and
human-computer interaction (HCI) (common sense
knowledge gathering and usage). From this fact, we
see a great opportunity to bring a new “vision” to
the NLP/CL applications in which we are concerned
with not only to produce a correct answer to the
proposed problem, but also an answer that sounds
more natural and user-friendly. So, regarding our
work’s role, we see the opportunity to improve
the collaboration between researchers from NLP/CL
and HCI.

The second possibility of collaboration envi-
sioned by us is related to other sources of semantic
knowledge that could be applied to our work.
Although we are using common sense knowledge
to support the generation of more culturally con-
textualized translations, other semantic information
bases could also be applied. In this case, we
believe that this workshop is a great opportunity
to be aware of other research projects that apply
semantic knowledge to MT or are engaged with
the construction of semantic resources that could be
used in our work.

Finally, we also see a future source of col-
laboration regarding the use of the bilingual
resources obtained as the product of this research.

21http://code.google.com/p/giza-pp/

29



The parallel-aligned (in Brazilian Portuguese and
English) common sense base, the translation know-
ledge inferred from this aligned base or even
the bilingual culturally contextualized chat would
be useful in other research projects in MT or
other bilingual applications such as information
retrieval or summarization. We also believe that the
methodology applied to develop these resources and
the results obtained from this work could be applied
to other language pairs to derive new bilingual
similar resources.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we have described the first ideas and
steps towards the culturally contextualized machine
translation, a new approach to generate automatic
translations using a phrase-based SMT tool and a
common sense knowledge tool.

It is important to say that this proposal involves
researchers from NLP/CL an HCI and it brings an
opportunity for collaboration between these related
areas. Furthermore, this work aims at stimulating
researchers from other countries to work with the
Brazilian Portuguese and presenting its ideas in this
workshop is a great opportunity to achieve this goal.

Future steps of this ongoing work are concerned
with the implementation of the proposed prototypes
designed for the bilingual culturally contextualized
chat, the alignment and the enrichment of the
ConceptNets. After the implementation of these
prototypes they will be tested and refined to
encompass the needed improvements.

Acknowledgments

We thank the support of Brazilian agencies CAPES,
CNPq and FAPESP and also the workshop organiz-
ers by making possible the presentation of this work.

References

Junia Coutinho Anacleto, Henry Lieberman,
Aparecido Augusto de Carvalho, Vânia Paula
de Almeida Néris, Muriel de Souza Godoi, Marie
Tsutsumi, José H. Espinosa, Américo Talarico
Neto, and Silvia Zem-Mascarenhas. 2006a. Using
common sense to recognize cultural differences. In
IBERAMIA-SBIA, pages 370–379.

Junia Coutinho Anacleto, Henry Lieberman, Marie
Tsutsumi, Vnia Neris, Aparecido Carvalho, Jose
Espinosa, and Silvia Zem-mascarenhas. 2006b.
Can common sense uncover cultural differences in
computer applications. In Proceedings of IFIP
WCC2006, Spring-Verlag, pages 1–10.

Junia Coutinho Anacleto, Aparecido Fabiano P. de
Carvalho, Alexandre M. Ferreira, Eliane N. Pereira,
and Alessandro J. F. Carlos. 2008a. Common sense-
based applications to advance personalized learning.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC 2008), pages
3244–3249, Singapore.

Junia Coutinho Anacleto, Aparecido Fabiano P. de
Carvalho, Eliane N. Pereira, Alexandre M. Ferreira,
and Alessandro J. F. Carlos. 2008b. Machines with
good sense: How can computers become capable of
sensible reasoning? In IFIP AI, pages 195–204.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B.
Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In
Proceedings of the COLING-ACL, Montreal, Canada.

Paulo Henrique Barchi, Helena de Medeiros Caseli, and
Junia Coutinho Anacleto. 2009. Alinhamento de
Grafos: Investigação do Alinhamento de ConceptNets
para a Tradução Automática. In Anais do I Workshop
de Iniciação Cientı́fica em Tecnologia da Informação
e da Linguagem Humana (TILic), pages 1–4.

Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen A. Della Pietra,
Vincent J. Della Pietra, Fredrick Jelinek, John D.
Lafferty, Robert L. Mercer, and Paul S. Roossin.
1990. A statistical approach to machine translation.
Computational Linguistics, 16(2):79–85.

Peter F. Brown, Vincent J.Della Pietra, Stephen A. Della
Pietra, and Robert. L. Mercer. 1993. The Mathematics
of Statistical Machine Translation: Parameter Estima-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 19:263–311.

Nicola Cancedda, Marc Dymetman, George Foster, and
Cyril Goutte, 2009. A Statistical Machine Translation
Primer, chapter 1, pages 1–36. The MIT Press.

Helena de Medeiros Caseli and Israel Aono Nunes.
2009. Statistical machine translation: little changes
big impacts. In Proceedings of the 7th Brazilian
Symposium in Information and Human Language
Technology, pages 1–9.

Helena de Medeiros Caseli, Maria das Graças
Volpe Nunes, and Mikel L. Forcada. 2006. Automatic
induction of bilingual resources from aligned parallel
corpora: application to shallow-transfer machine
translation. Machine Translation, 20:227–245.

Jae-woo Chung, Rachel Kern, and Henry Lieberman.
2005. Topic Spotting Common Sense Translation
Assistant. In Gerrit C. van der Veer and Carolyn Gale,
editors, Extended Abstracts Proceedings of the 2005

30



Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI 2005), Portland, Oregon, USA, April 2-7. ACM.

G. Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation quality using n-gram cooccurrence
statistics. In Proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference (HLT 2002), pages 128–132.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored
Translation Models. In Proceedings of the 2007
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 868–876, Prague, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
(HLT/NAACL 2003), pages 127–133.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2007), pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Laı́s Augusta Silva Meuchi, Helena de Medeiros Caseli,
and Junia Coutinho Anacleto. 2009. Inferência de
relações em ConceptNets com base em corpus paralelo
alinhado. In Anais do VI WorkShop de Trabalhos
de Iniciação Cientı́fica (WTIC) - evento integrante do
WebMedia 2009, pages 1–3.

M. Minsky. 1986. The Society of Mind. Simon and
Schuster, New York.

Rami Musa, Madleina Scheidegger, Andrea Kulas, and
Yoan Anguilet. 2003. Globuddy, a dynamic broad
context phrase book. In CONTEXT, pages 467–474.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved
statistical alignment models. In Proceedings of the
38th Annual Meeting of the ACL (ACL 2000), pages
440–447, Hong Kong, China.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The
Alignment Template Approach to Statistical Machine
Translation. Computational Linguistics, 30(4):417–
449.

K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. J. Zhu. 2002.
BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2002), pages 311–318.

P. Singh. 2002. The OpenMind Commonsense
project. KurzweilAI.net. Available at:
<http://web.media.mit.edu/˜push/OMCSProject.pdf>.

Jörg Tiedemann and Gideon Kotzé. 2009. Building a
large machine–aligned parallel treebank. In Marco
Passarotti, Adam Przepirkowski, Savina Raynaud, and
Frank Van Eynde, editors, Proceedings of the 8th
International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories (TLT’08), pages 197–208. EDUCatt, Mi-
lano/Italy.

John Tinsley and Andy Way. 2009. Automatically
generated parallel treebanks and their exploitability in
machine translation. Machine Translation, 23:1–22.

Lucy Vanderwende, Gary Kacmarcik, Hisami Suzuki,
and Arul Menezes. 2005. Mindnet: an
automatically-created lexical resource. In Proceed-
ings of HLT/EMNLP on Interactive Demonstrations,
pages 8–9, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Andreas Zollmann, Ashish Venugopal, Franz Och,
and Jay Ponte. 2008. A systematic comparison
of phrase–based, hierarchical and syntax–augmented
statistical mt. In COLING ’08: Proceedings of
the 22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 1145–1152, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

31


