



















































A Simple Ensemble Method for Hedge Identification


Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning: Shared Task, pages 144–147,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Simple Ensemble Method for Hedge Identification

Ferenc P. Szidarovszky1, Illés Solt1, Domonkos Tikk1,2
1 Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Budapest, Hungary

2 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany
ferenc.szidarovszky@hotmail.com,{solt,tikk}@tmit.bme.hu

Abstract

We present in this paper a simple hedge
identification method and its application
on biomedical text. The problem at hand
is a subtask of CoNLL-2010 shared task.
Our solution consists of two classifiers, a
statistical one and a CRF model, and a
simple combination schema that combines
their predictions. We report in detail on
each component of our system and discuss
the results. We also show that a more so-
phisticated combination schema could im-
prove the F-score significantly.

1 Problem definition

The CoNLL-2010 Shared Task focused on the
identification and localization of uncertain infor-
mation and its scope in text. In the first task, a
binary classification of sentences had to be per-
formed, based on whether they are uncertain or
not. The second task concentrated on the identi-
fication of the source of uncertainty – specifying
the keyword/phrase that makes its context uncer-
tain –, and the localization of its scope. The orga-
nizers provided training data from two application
domains: biomedical texts and Wikipedia articles.
For more details see the overview paper by the or-
ganizers (Farkas et al., 2010). We focused on task
1 and worked with biomedical texts exclusively.

The biomedical training corpus contains se-
lected abstracts and full text articles from the Bio-
Scope corpus (Vincze et al., 2008). The corpus
was manually annotated for hedge cues on the
phrase level. Sentences containing at least one cue
are considered as uncertain, while sentences with
no cues are considered as factual. Though cue tag-
ging was given in the training data, their marking
in the submission was not mandatory.

The evaluation of systems at task 1 was per-
formed on the sentence level with the F-measure

of the uncertain class being the official evaluation
metric. For evaluation, corpora also from both do-
mains were provided that allowed for in-domain
and cross-domain experiments as well. Neverthe-
less, we restricted the scope of our system to the
in-domain biomedical subtask.

2 Background

Automatic information extraction methods may
incorrectly extract facts that are mentioned in a
negated or speculative context. If aiming at high
accuracy, it is therefore crucial to be able to clas-
sify assertions to avoid such false positives. The
importance of assertion classification has been re-
cently recognized by the text mining community,
which yielded several text-mining challenges cov-
ering this task. For example, the main task of
Obesity Challenge (Uzuner, 2008) was to iden-
tify based on a free text medical record whether
a patient is known to, speculated to or known
not to have a disease; in the BioNLP ’09 Shared
Task (Kim et al., 2009), mentions of bio-molecular
events had to be classified as either positive or neg-
ative statements or speculations.

Approaches to tackle assertion classification
can be roughly organized into following classes:
rule based models (Chapman et al., 2001), sta-
tistical models (Szarvas, 2008), machine learning
(Medlock and Briscoe, 2007), though most con-
tributions can be seen as a combination of these
(Uzuner et al., 2009). Even when classifying sen-
tences, the most common approach is to look for
cues below the sentence-level (Özgür and Radev,
2009). The common in these approaches is that
they use a text representation richer than bag-of-
words, usually tokens from a fixed-width window
with additional surface features.

Evaluation of assertion classification is mostly
performed at the sentence level, where state-of-
the-art systems have been reported to achieve
an F-measure of 83–85% for hedge detection in

144



biomedical literature (Medlock and Briscoe, 2007;
Szarvas, 2008).

3 Methods

Although the problem itself is a binary categoriza-
tion problem, we approach the problem at the to-
ken/phrase level. We search for hedge cues and
used the decision model also applied by the an-
notators of the training corpus: when a sentence
contains at least one uncertainty cue then it is un-
certain, otherwise factual.

We applied two different models to identify
hedge cues:

• a statistical model that creates a candidate list
of cue words/phrases from the training sam-
ples, and cuts off the list based on the preci-
sion measured on the trial set;

• a sequence tagger CRF model, trained again
with hedge cues using various feature sets.

Finally, we combined the outputs of the meth-
ods at the sentence level. Here we applied two
very simple ways of combination: the aggres-
sive one assigns a sentence to the uncertain class
if any of the models finds a cue phrase therein
(OR merger), while the conservative only if both
models predict the sentence as uncertain (AND
merger). We submitted the version which pro-
duced better result on the trial set. The overview
of our system is depicted on Figure 1.

3.1 Preprocessing

The biomedical corpus was provided in two
train/trial pairs (abstracts and full texts), see also
Table 1. Because the ratio of uncertain sentences
is similar in both train and trial sets, we merged
the two train sets and the two trial sets, respec-
tively, to obtain a single train/trial pair. Since the
trial set was originally included also in the train
set, we removed the elements of the merged trial
set from the merged train set. In the following, we
refer to them as train and trial sets. All data (train,
trial, evaluation) were given as separate sentences;
therefore no sentence segmentation had to be per-
formed.

Merging train and trial sets was also motivated
by the sparsity of data and the massively differ-
ent train/trial ratio observed for the two types of
biomedical texts (Table 1). Therefore building
separate models for abstracts and full texts may

CRF model
Statistical 

model

Input

CRF 

classification

Statistical 

classification

OR merger

Final 

classification

Figure 1: System overview

only yield overfitting, particularly because such a
distinction is not available for the evaluation set.

3.2 Statistical model

The statistical model considers a sentence uncer-
tain, if it contains at least one cue from a validated
set of cue phrases. To determine the set of cue
phrases to be used, we first collected all annotated
cues from the training data. From this candidate
cue set we retained those ones that had a precision
over a predefined threshold. To this end we mea-
sured on the training set the precision of each cue
phrase. We depicted on Figure 2 the precision, re-
call and F-measure values obtained on the trial set
with different cue phrase precision thresholds.

The candidate cue set contains 186 cue phrases,
among which 83 has precision 1.0 and 141 has
precision greater or equal 0.5. Best cue phrases
include words/phrases like cannot + verb phrase,
hypothesis, indicate, may, no(t) + verb/noun, raise
the + noun, seem, suggest, whether etc., while low
precision cues are, e.g., assume, not fully under-
stood, not, or, prediction, likelihood.

3.3 CRF model

Identifying entities such as speculation cues can be
efficiently solved by training conditional random
field (CRF) models. As a general sequence tagger,
a CRF can be naturally extended to incorporate to-
ken features and features of neighboring tokens.
The trained CRF model is then applied to unseen

145



Train set Trial set Evaluation set

sentences uncertain ratio sentences uncertain ratio sentences uncertain ratio

Abstract 11 832 2 091 17.7 % 39 10 25.6 % – – –
Full text 2 442 468 19.2 % 228 51 22.4 % – – –

Total 14 274 2 559 17.9 % 267 61 22.9 % 5 003 790 15.8 %

Table 1: Basic statistics of the provided train, trial, and evaluation sets

73.62

85.71 86.40

78.57

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00

P
er

ce
nt

ag
e

Threshold

F-Measure

Precision

Recall

Figure 2: Cue phrase threshold selection

text, whenever a speculation cue is found the con-
taining sentence is annotated as being speculative.
In our experiments, we used MALLET (McCal-
lum, 2002) to train CRF models using custom to-
kenization (Section 3.3.1) and feature sets (Sec-
tion 3.3.2). We included features of 2–2 neigh-
boring tokens in each direction, not surpassing the
sentence limits.

3.3.1 Tokenization
We split text into tokens using punctuation and
white-space tokenization, keeping punctuation
symbols as separate tokens.

3.3.2 Feature sets
We experimented with the following binary sur-
face features:

1. token text
2. token text in lowercase
3. stem of token in lowercase
4. indicator of the token being all lowercase
5. indicator whether the token is in sentence

case (first character upper-, others lowercase)
6. indicator whether the token contains at least

one digit
7. indicator of token being a punctuation sym-

bol
These features were evaluated both in isolation

and in combination on the trial set. The best per-
forming combination was then used to train the fi-
nal model.

3.3.3 Feature selection
Evaluating all combinations of the above features,
we found that the combination of features 2 and 4
produced the best results on the trial set. For com-
putational efficiency, when selecting the best per-
forming feature subset, we considered lower fea-
ture count to overrule a slight increase in perfor-
mance.

4 Results

Table 2 and Table 3 summarize the results for the
statistical and CRF models and their AND and OR
combinations on the trial and on the evaluation
sets, respectively. For the latter, we used naturally
all available labeled data (train and trial sets) for
training. Numbers shown correspond to the out-
put of the official evaluation tool. Results on the
combination OR represent our official shared task
evaluation.

5 Discussion

In the development scenario (Table 2), the main
difference between the statistical and CRF model
was that the former was superior in recall while the
latter in precision. It was thus unclear which of the
combinations OR and AND would perform better,
we chose OR, the combination method which per-
formed better on the trial set. Unfortunately, the
rank of combination methods was different when
measured on the evaluation set (Table 3). A possi-
ble explanation for this non-extrapolability is the
different prior probability of speculative sentences
in each set, e.g., 17.9% on the train set while
22.9% on the trial set and 15.8% on the evaluation
set.

While using only a minimal amount of features,
both of our models were on par with other partic-
ipants’ solutions. Overfitting was observed by the
statistical model only (14% drop in precision on
the evaluation set), the CRF model showed more
consistent behavior across the datasets.

146



Model

Statistical CRF Combination AND Combination OR

Precision (%) 84.4 92.3 93.9 83.6
Recall (%) 88.6 78.7 75.4 91.8
F-measure (%) 86.4 85.0 83.6 87.5

Table 2: Results on trial set (development)

Model

Statistical CRF Combination AND Combination OR

Precision (%) 70.5 87.0 88.0 70.1
Recall (%) 89.4 82.7 81.0 91.0
F-measure (%) 78.8 84.8 84.4 79.2

Table 3: Results on evaluation set

6 Conclusion

We presented our method to identify hedging in
biomedical literature, and its evaluation at the
CoNLL-2010 shared task. We solved the sen-
tence level assertion classification problem by us-
ing an ensemble of statistical and CRF mod-
els that identify speculation cue phrases. The
non-extrapolability of the combination methods’
performance observed emphasizes the sensitivity
of ensemble methods to the distributions of the
datasets they are applied to. While using only a
minimal set of standard surface features, our CRF
model was on par with participants’ systems.

Acknowledgement

D. Tikk was supported by the Alexander-von-
Humboldt Foundation.

References
Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury,

Gregory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001.
A simple algorithm for identifying negated findings
and diseases in discharge summaries. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, 2001:34–301.

Richárd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, György Móra, János
Csirik, and György Szarvas. 2010. The CoNLL-
2010 Shared Task: Learning to Detect Hedges and
their Scope in Natural Language Text. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2010): Shared
Task, pages 1–12, Uppsala, Sweden. ACL.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshi-
nobu Kano, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. Overview

of BioNLP’09 shared task on event extraction. In
BioNLP ’09: Proc. of the Workshop on BioNLP,
pages 1–9, Morristown, NJ, USA. ACL.

Andrew K. McCallum. 2002. MALLET: A Ma-
chine Learning for Language Toolkit. http://
mallet.cs.umass.edu.

Ben Medlock and Ted Briscoe. 2007. Weakly super-
vised learning for hedge classification in scientific
literature. In Proc. of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages
992–999, Prague, Czech Republic, June. ACL.

Arzucan Özgür and Dragomir R. Radev. 2009. Detect-
ing speculations and their scopes in scientific text.
In EMNLP ’09: Proc. of Conf. on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1398–
1407, Morristown, NJ, USA. ACL.

György Szarvas. 2008. Hedge Classification in
Biomedical Texts with a Weakly Supervised Selec-
tion of Keywords. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT,
pages 281–289, Columbus, Ohio, June. ACL.

Özlem Uzuner, Xiaoran Zhang, and Tawanda Sibanda.
2009. Machine Learning and Rule-based Ap-
proaches to Assertion Classification. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association,
16(1):109–115.

Özlem Uzuner. 2008. Second i2b2 workshop on
natural language processing challenges for clinical
records. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings,
pages 1252–3.

Veronika Vincze, György Szarvas, Richárd Farkas,
György Móra, and János Csirik. 2008. The Bio-
Scope corpus: biomedical texts annotated for uncer-
tainty, negation and their scopes. BMC Bioinformat-
ics, 9(Suppl 11):S9.

147


