



















































Proceedings of the...


Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 69–77,
Uppsala, July 2010.

Evaluating a Meta-Knowledge Annotation Scheme for Bio-Events 

 

 

Raheel Nawaz
1
 Paul Thompson

1,2
 Sophia Ananiadou

1,2
 

1
School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, UK 

2
National Centre for Text Mining, University of Manchester, UK  

E-mail: nawazr@cs.man.ac.uk, paul.thompson@manchester.ac.uk, 

sophia.ananiadou@manchester.ac.uk 
 

  

 

Abstract 

The correct interpretation of biomedical texts 

by text mining systems requires the recogni-

tion of a range of types of high-level informa-

tion (or meta-knowledge) about the text. Ex-

amples include expressions of negation and 

speculation, as well as pragmatic/rhetorical in-

tent (e.g. whether the information expressed 

represents a hypothesis, generally accepted 

knowledge, new experimental knowledge, 

etc.) Although such types of information have 

previously been annotated at the text-span 

level (most commonly sentences), annotation 

at the level of the event is currently quite 

sparse. In this paper, we focus on the evalua-

tion of the multi-dimensional annotation 

scheme that we have developed specifically 

for enriching bio-events with meta-knowledge 

information. Our annotation scheme is in-

tended to be general enough to allow integra-

tion with different types of bio-event annota-

tion, whilst being detailed enough to capture 

important subtleties in the nature of the meta-

knowledge expressed in the text. To our 

knowledge, our scheme is unique within the 

field with regards to the diversity of meta-

knowledge aspects annotated for each event, 

whilst the evaluation results have confirmed 

its feasibility and soundness.  

1 Introduction 

The ability to recognise high-level information 

(or meta-knowledge) relating to the interpreta-

tion of texts is an important task for text mining 

systems. There are several types of meta-

knowledge that fall under this category. For ex-

ample, the detection of expressions of specula-

tion and negation is important across all do-

mains, although the way in which these phenom-

ena are expressed may be domain-specific. In 

scientific texts, it is also important to be able to 

determine other types of information, such as the 

author‟s rhetorical/pragmatic intent (de Waard et 

al., 2009). This would correspond to whether the 

information expressed represents a hypothesis, 

accepted knowledge, new experimental knowl-

edge, etc.  

The ability to distinguish between these dif-

ferent types of information can be important for 

tasks such as  building and updating models of 

biological processes, like pathways (Oda et al., 

2008), and curation of biological databases 

(Ashburner et al., 2000). Central to both of these 

tasks is the identification of new knowledge that 

can enhance these resources, e.g. to build upon 

an existing, but incomplete model of a biological 

process (Lisacek et al., 2005) or to ensure that 

the database is kept up to date. Any new knowl-

edge added should be supported though evi-

dence, which could include linking hypotheses 

with experimental findings. It is also important to 

take into account inconsistencies and contradic-

tions reported in the literature. 

The production of annotated corpora can help 

to train text mining systems to recognise types of 

meta-knowledge, such as the above. Although a 

number of such corpora have already been pro-

duced, different annotation schemes are required 

according to the exact domain under considera-

tion, as well as the types of task that will be un-

dertaken by the text mining system.  

The work described in this paper is focused on 

the design and evaluation of the meta-knowledge 

annotation scheme described in Nawaz et al., 

(2010). The annotation scheme has been specifi-

cally designed to recognise a range of meta-

knowledge types for events extracted from bio-

medical texts (henceforth bio-events). The aim is 

to facilitate the development of more useful sys-

tems in the context of various biomedical infor-

mation extraction (IE) and textual inference (TI) 

tasks. Although the scheme has been designed 

69



for application to existing bio-event corpora, it is 

intended to be applied to any type of bio-relation 

corpora, and can easily be tailored for other types 

of relations/events within the domain. 

1.1  Bio-Event Representation of Text 

Searching for relevant information in electronic 

documents is most commonly carried out by en-

tering keywords into a search engine. However, 

such searches will normally return a huge num-

ber of documents, many of which will be irrele-

vant to the user‟s needs.  

A more promising and efficient way of search-

ing is over events that have been extracted from 

texts through the application of natural language 

processing methods. An event is a structured rep-

resentation of a certain piece of information con-

tained within the text, which is usually anchored 

to a particular word in the text (typically a verb 

or noun) that is central to the description of the 

event. Events are often represented by a tem-

plate-like structure with slots that are filled by 

the event participants. Each event participant is 

also assigned a role within the event. These par-

ticipants can be entities, concepts or even other 

events. This kind of event representation allows 

the information contained in a text to be repre-

sented as a collection of nested events.  

A bio-event is an event specialised for the 

biomedical domain. Kim et al. (2008) define a 

bio-event as a dynamic bio-relation involving 

one or more participants. These participants can 

be bio-entities or (other) bio-events, and are each 

assigned a semantic role/slot like theme and 

cause etc. Each bio-event is typically assigned a 

type/class from a chosen bio-event taxon-

omy/ontology, e.g., the GENIA Event Ontology 

(Kim et al., 2008). Similarly, the bio-entities are 

also assigned types/classes from a chosen bio-

term taxonomy/ontology, e.g., the Gene Ontol-

ogy (Ashburner et al., 2000). 

As an example, consider the simple sentence 

shown in Figure 1. 

This sentence contains a single bio-event, an-

chored to the verb activates. Figure 2 shows a 

typical structured representation of this bio-

event. 

The fact that the verb is anchored to the verb 

activates allows the event-type of positive regu-

lation to be assigned. The event has two slots, 

i.e. theme and cause whose labels help to charac-

terise the contribution that the slot filler makes 

towards the meaning of the event. In this case, 

the slots are filled by the subject and object of 

the verb activates, both of which correspond to 

different types of bio-entities (i.e. operon and 

protein).  

IE systems trained to extract bio-events from 

texts allow users to formulate semantic queries 

over the extracted events. Such queries can  

specify semantic restrictions on the events in 

terms of event types, semantic role labels and 

named entity types etc. (Miyao et al., 2006), in 

addition to particular keywords. For example, it 

would be possible to search only for those texts 

containing bio-events of type nega-

tive_regulation where the cause is an entity of 

type protein. Such queries provide a great deal 

more descriptive power than traditional keyword 

searches over unstructured documents.  Bio-

medical corpora that have been manually anno-

tated with event level information (e.g., Pyysalo 

et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2008; Thompson et al., 

2009) facilitate the training of systems such as 

those described above.  

Whilst event-based querying has advantages 

for efficient searching, the extracted events have 

little practical use if they are not accompanied by 

meta-knowledge information to aid in their inter-

pretation.  

1.2 Existing Meta-knowledge Annotation 

Various corpora of biomedical literature (ab-

stracts and/or full papers) have been produced 

that feature some degree of meta-knowledge an-

notation. These corpora vary in both the richness 

of the annotation added, and the type/size of the 

units at which the meta-knowledge annotation 

has been performed. Taking the unit of annota-

tion into account, we can distinguish between 

annotations that apply to continuous text-spans, 

and annotations that have been performed at the 

event level. 

Text-Span Annotation: Such annotations have 

mostly been carried out at the sentence level. 

They normally concentrate on a single aspect (or 

The results suggest that the narL gene product 

activates the nitrate reductase operon. 

 
Figure 1. A Simple Sentence from a Biomedi-

cal Abstract 

Figure 2. Typical Structured Representation 

of the Bio-Event mentioned in Figure 1 

EVENT-TRIGGER: activates 

EVENT-TYPE: positive_regulation 

THEME: nitrate reductase operon: operon 

CAUSE: narL gene product: protein 

 

70



dimension) of meta-knowledge, normally either 

speculation/certainty level, (e.g., Light et al., 

2004; Medlock & Briscoe, 2007; Vincze et al., 

2008) or general information content/rhetorical 

intent, e.g., background, methods, results, in-

sights. This latter type of annotation has been 

attempted both on abstracts, (e.g., McKnight & 

Srinivasan, 2003; Ruch et al., 2007) and full pa-

pers, (e.g. Teufel et al., 1999; Langer et al., 2004; 

Mizuta & Collier, 2004), with the number of dis-

tinct annotation categories varying between 4 

and 14.  

Despite the availability of these corpora, anno-

tation at the sentence level can often be too 

granular. In terms of information content, a sen-

tence may describe, for example, both an ex-

perimental method and its results. The situation 

becomes more complicated if a sentence contains 

an expression of speculation. If this is only 

marked at the sentence level, there may be con-

fusion about which part(s) of the sentence are 

affected by the speculative expression.  

Certain corpora and associated systems have 

attempted to address these issues. The BioScope 

corpus (Vincze et al., 2008) annotates the scopes 

of negative and speculative keywords, whilst 

Morante & Daelemans (2009) have trained a sys-

tem to undertake this task. The scheme described 

by Wilbur et al. (2006) applies annotation to 

fragments of sentences, which are created on the 

basis of changes in the meta-knowledge ex-

pressed. The scheme consists of multiple annota-

tion dimensions which capture aspects of both 

certainty and rhetorical/pragmatic intent, 

amongst other things. Training a system to auto-

matically annotate these dimensions is shown to 

be highly feasible (Shatkay et al., 2008). 

Event-Level Annotation: Explicit annotation of 

meta-knowledge at the event-level is currently 

rather minimal within biomedical corpora. 

Whilst several corpora contain annotations to 

distinguish positive and negative events (e.g. 

Sanchez-Graillet & Poesio, 2007; Pyysalo et al., 

2007), the annotation of the GENIA Event Cor-

pus (Kim et al., 2008) is slightly more extensive, 

in that it additionally annotates certainty level. 

To our knowledge, no existing bio-event corpus 

has attempted annotation that concerns rhetori-

cal/pragmatic intent.  

 

1.3 The Need for an Event-Centric Meta-
Knowledge Annotation Scheme 

In comparison to meta-knowledge annotation 

carried out at the text-span level, the amount of 

annotation carried out at the event level is quite 

sparse. The question thus arises as to whether it 

is possible to use systems trained on text-span 

annotated corpora to assign meta-knowledge to 

bio-events, or whether new annotation at the 

event level is required.  

Some corpora seem better suited to this pur-

pose than others – whilst sentence-level annota-

tions are certainly too granular for an event-

centric view of the text, sentence fragments, such 

as those identified by Wilbur et al. (2006), are 

likely to correspond more closely to the extent of 

text that describes an event and its slots. Like-

wise, knowing the scopes of negative and specu-

lative keywords within a sentence may be a use-

ful aid in determining whether they affect the 

interpretation of a particular event.   

However, the information provided in these 

corpora is still not sufficiently precise for event-

level meta-knowledge annotation. Even within a 

text fragment, there may be several different bio-

events, each with slightly different meta-

knowledge interpretations. In a similar way, not 

all events that occur within the scope of a nega-

tion or speculation keyword are necessarily af-

fected by it.  

  Based on these observations, we have devel-

oped a meta-knowledge annotation scheme that 

is specifically tailored to bio-events. Our scheme 

annotates various different aspects or dimensions 

of meta-knowledge. A close examination of a 

large number of relevant bio-events has resulted 

in a scheme that has some similarities to previ-

ously proposed schemes, but has a number of 

differences that seem especially relevant when 

dealing with events, e.g. the annotation of the 

manner of the event. The scheme is intended to 

be general enough to allow integration with ex-

isting bio-event annotation schemes, whilst being 

detailed enough to capture important subtleties in 

the nature of the meta-knowledge expressed 

about the event.  

1.4 Lexical Markers of Meta-Knowledge 

Most of the existing corpora mentioned above 

annotate text spans or events with particular 

categories (e.g. certainty level or general infor-

mation type) in different meta-knowledge di-

mensions. However, what they do not normally 

do is to annotate lexical clues or keywords used 

to determine the correct values.  

A number of previous studies have demon-

strated the importance of lexical markers (i.e., 

words or phrases) that can accompany statements 

in scientific articles in determining the intended 

71



interpretation of the text (e.g. Hyland, 1996; Ri-

zomilioti 2006). We also performed a similar 

study (Thompson et al., 2008) although, in con-

trast to other studies, we took a multi-

dimensional approach to the categorisation of 

such lexical items, acknowledging that several 

types of important information may be expressed 

through different words in the same sentence. As 

an example, let us consider the example sentence 

in Figure 3.  

The author‟s pragmatic/rhetorical intent to-

wards the statement that the catalytic role of 

these side chains is associated with their interac-

tion with the DNA substrate is encoded by the 

word indicate, which shows that the statement 

represents an analysis of the evidence stated at 

the beginning of the sentence, i.e., that the muta-

tions at positions 849 and 668 have DNA-

binding properties. Furthermore, the author‟s 

certainty level (i.e., their degree of confidence) 

towards this analysis is shown by the word may. 

Here, the author is uncertain about the validity of 

their analysis. 

Whilst our previous work served to demon-

strate that the different aspects of meta-

knowledge that can be specified lexically within 

texts require a multi-dimensional analysis to cor-

rectly capture their subtleties, it showed that the 

presence of particular lexical items is not the 

only important feature for determining meta-

knowledge categories. In particular, their pres-

ence does not guarantee that the “expected” in-

terpretation can be assumed (Sándor, 2007). In 

addition, not all types of meta-knowledge are 

indicated through explicit markers. Mizuta & 

Collier (2004) note that  rhetorical zones may be 

indicated not only through explicit lexical mark-

ers, but also through features such as the main 

verb in the clause and the position of the sen-

tence within the article or abstract. 

For these reasons, we perform annotation on 

all relevant instances, regardless of the presence 

of lexical markers. This will allow systems to be 

trained that can learn to determine the correct 

meta-knowledge category, even when lexical 

markers are not present. However, due to the 

proven importance of lexical markers in deter-

mining certain meta-knowledge dimensions, our 

annotation scheme annotates such markers, 

whenever they are present. 

2 Annotation Scheme 

The annotation scheme we present here is a 

slightly modified version of our original meta-

knowledge annotation scheme (Nawaz et al., 

2010). The modified scheme consists of five 

meta-knowledge dimensions, each with a set of 

complete and mutually-exclusive categories, i.e., 

any given bio-event belongs to exactly one cate-

gory in each dimension. Our chosen set of anno-

tation dimensions has been motivated by the 

major information needs of biologists discussed 

earlier, i.e., the ability to distinguish between 

different intended interpretations of events. 

In order to minimise the annotation burden, 

the number of possible categories within each 

dimension has been kept as small as possible, 

whilst still respecting important distinctions in 

meta-knowledge that have been observed during 

our corpus study.     

The advantage of using a multi-dimensional 

scheme is that the interplay between different 

values of each dimension can reveal both subtle 

and substantial differences in the types of meta-

knowledge expressed in the surrounding text. 

Therefore, in most cases, the exact rhetori-

cal/pragmatic intent of an event can only be de-

termined by considering a combination of the 

values of different dimensions. This aspect of our 

scheme is further discussed in section 3. 

 

Figure 4 provides an overview of the annota-

tion scheme. The boxes with the light-coloured 

(grey) background correspond to information 

that is common to most bio-event annotation 

schemes, i.e., the participants in the event, to-

gether with an indication of the class or type of 

Figure 4. Bio-Event Annotation 
 

Figure 3. Example Sentence 
 

The DNA-binding properties of mutations at posi-

tions 849 and 668 may indicate that the catalytic 

role of these side chains is associated with their 

interaction with the DNA substrate. 

 

72



the event. The boxes with the darker (green) 

backgrounds correspond to our proposed meta-

knowledge annotation dimensions and their pos-

sible values. The remainder of this section pro-

vides brief details of each annotation dimension.  

2.1 Knowledge Type (KT) 

This dimension is responsible for capturing the 

general information content of the event. Whilst 

less detailed than some of the previously pro-

posed sentence-level schemes, its purpose is to 

form the basis of distinguishing between the 

most critical types of rhetorical/pragmatic intent, 

according to the needs of biologists. Each event 

is thus classified into one of the following four 

categories: 

Investigation: Enquiries or investigations, which 

have either already been conducted or are 

planned for the future, typically marked by lexi-

cal clues like examined, investigated and studied, 

etc.  

Observation: Direct observations, often repre-

sented by lexical clues like found, observed and 

report, etc.  Simple past tense sentences typically 

also describe observations. Such events represent 

experimental knowledge.  

Analysis: Inferences, interpretations, specula-

tions or other types of cognitive analysis, typi-

cally expressed by lexical clues like suggest, in-

dicate, therefore and conclude etc. Such events, 

if they are interpretations or reliable inferences 

based on experimental results, can also constitute 

another type of (indirect) experimental knowl-

edge. Weaker inferences or speculations, how-

ever, may be considered as hypotheses which 

need further proof through experiments.  

General: Scientific facts, processes, states or 

methodology. This is the default category for the 

knowledge type dimension. 

2.2 Certainty Level (CL) 

The value of this dimension is almost always 

indicated through the presence/absence of an ex-

plicit lexical marker. In scientific literature, it is 

normally only applicable to events whose KT 

corresponds either to Analysis or General. In the 

case of Analysis events, CL encodes confidence 

in the truth of the event, whilst for General 

events, there is a temporal aspect, to account for 

cases where a particular process is explicitly 

stated to occur most (but not all) of the time, us-

ing a marker such as normally, or only occasion-

ally, using a marker like sometimes.  Events cor-

responding to direct Observations are not open to 

judgements of certainty, nor are Investigation 

events, which refer to things which have not yet 

happened or have not been verified.  

Regarding the choice of values for the CL di-

mension, there is an ongoing discussion as to 

whether it is possible to partition the epistemic 

scale into discrete categories (Rubin, 2007). 

However, the use of a number of distinct catego-

ries is undoubtedly easier for annotation pur-

poses and has been proposed in a number of pre-

vious schemes. Although recent work has sug-

gested the use of  four or more categories (Shat-

kay et al., 2008; Thompson et al., 2008), our ini-

tial analysis of bio-event corpora has shown that 

only three levels of certainty seem readily distin-

guishable for bio-events. This is in line with 

Hoye (1997), whose analysis of general English 

showed that there are at least three articulated 

points on the epistemic scale.  

We have chosen to use numerical values for 

this dimension, in order to reduce potential anno-

tator confusions or biases that may be introduced 

through the use of labels corresponding to par-

ticular lexical markers of each category, such as 

probable or possible, and also to account for the 

fact that slightly different interpretations apply to 

the different levels, according to whether the 

event has a KT value of Analysis or General.  

L3: No expression of uncertainty or speculation 

(default category)  

L2: High confidence or slight speculation.  

L1: Low confidence or considerable speculation; 

typical lexical markers include may, might and 

perhaps.  

2.3 Source 

The source of experimental evidence provides 

important information for biologists. This is 

demonstrated by its annotation during the crea-

tion of the Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 

2000) and in the corpus created by Wilbur et al. 

(2006). The Source dimension can also help in 

distinguishing new experimental knowledge 

from previously reported knowledge. Our 

scheme distinguishes two categories, namely: 

Other: The event is attributed to a previous 

study. In this case, explicit clues (citations or 

phrases like previous studies etc.) are normally 

present. 

Current: The event makes an assertion that can 

be (explicitly or implicitly) attributed to the cur-

rent study. This is the default category, and is 

assigned in the absence of explicit lexical or con-

textual clues. 

73



2.4 Polarity 

This dimension identifies negated events. Al-

though certain bio-event corpora are annotated 

with this information, it is still missing from oth-

ers. The indication of whether an event is ne-

gated is vital, as the interpretation of a negated 

event instance is completely opposite to the in-

terpretation of a non-negated (positive) instance 

of the same event.  

We define negation as the absence or non-

existence of an entity or a process. Negation is 

typically expressed by the adverbial not and the 

nominal no. However, other lexical devices like 

negative affixals (un- and in-, etc.), restrictive 

verbs (fail, lack, and unable, etc.), restrictive 

nouns (exception, etc.), certain adjectives (inde-

pendent, etc.), and certain adverbs (without, etc.) 

can also be used. 

2.5 Manner 

Events may be accompanied by a word or phrase 

which provides an indication of the rate, level, 

strength or intensity of the interaction. We refer 

to this as the Manner of the event. Information 

regarding manner is absent from the majority of 

existing bio-event corpora, but yet the presence 

of such words can be significant in the correct 

interpretation of the event. Our scheme distin-

guishes 3 categories of Manner, namely:  

High: Typically expressed by adverbs and adjec-

tives like strongly, rapidly and high, etc.  

Low: Typically expressed by adverbs and adjec-

tives like weakly, slightly and slow, etc.  

Neutral: Default category assigned to all events 

without an explicit indication of manner. 

3 Hyper-Dimensions 

Determining the pragmatic/rhetorical intent be-

hind an event is not completely possible using 

any one of our explicitly annotated dimensions. 

Although the Knowledge Type value forms the 

basis for this, it is not in itself sufficient. How-

ever, a defining feature of our annotation scheme 

is that additional information can be inferred by 

considering combinations of some of the explic-

itly annotated dimensions. We refer to this addi-

tional information as “latent” or “hyper” dimen-

sions of our scheme. We have identified two 

such hyper-dimensions. 

3.1 New Knowledge 

The isolation of events describing new knowl-

edge can be important in certain tasks undertaken 

by biologists, as explained earlier. Events with 

the Knowledge Type of Observation could corre-

spond to new knowledge, but only if they repre-

sent observations from the current study, rather 

than observations cited from elsewhere. In a 

similar way, an Analysis drawn from experimen-

tal results in the current study could be treated as 

new knowledge, but generally only if it repre-

sents a straightforward interpretation of results, 

rather than something more speculative.  

 Hence, we consider New Knowledge to be a 

hyper-dimension of our scheme. Its value (either 

Yes or No) is inferred by considering a combina-

tion of the value assignments for the KT, Source 

and CL dimensions.  

Table 1 shows the inference table that can be 

used to obtain the value for the New Knowledge 

hyper-dimension from the assigned values of the 

Source, KT and CL dimensions. The symbol „X‟ 

indicates a “don‟t care condition”, meaning that 

this value does not have any impact on the result.  
 

Source 

(Annotated) 

KT 

(Annotated) 

CL 

(Annotated) 

New  

Knowledge 

(Inferred) 

Other X X No 

X X L2 No 

X X L1 No 

Current Observation L3 Yes 

Current Analysis L3 Yes 

X General X No 

X Investigation X No 
 

Table 1. Inference-Table for New Knowledge 

Hyper-Dimension 
 

3.2 Hypothesis 

A further hyper-dimension of our scheme is Hy-

pothesis. The binary value of this hyper-

dimension can be inferred by considering the 

values of KT and CL. Events with a KT value of 

Investigation can always be assumed to be a hy-

pothesis, However, if the KT value is Analysis, 

then only those events with a CL value of L1 or 

L2 (speculative inferences made on the basis of 

results) should be considered as hypothesis, to be 

matched with more definite experimental evi-

dence when available. A value of L3 in this in-

stance would normally be classed as new knowl-

edge, as explained in the previous section.   

Table 2 shows the inference table that can be 

used to get the value for the Hypothesis hyper-

dimension.  
 

74



KT 

(Annotated) 

CL 

(Annotated) 

Hypothesis 

(Inferred) 

General X No 

Observation X No 

Analysis L3 No 

Analysis L2 Yes 

Analysis L1 Yes 

Investigation X Yes 
 

Table 2. Inference-Table for Hypothesis 

Hyper-Dimension 

4 Evaluation 

The annotation scheme has been evaluated 

through a small annotation experiment. We ran-

domly choose 70 abstracts from the GENIA 

Pathway Corpus, which collectively contain over 

2600 annotated bio-events. Two of the authors 

independently annotated these bio-events using a 

set of annotation guidelines. These guidelines 

were developed following an analysis of the 

various bio-event corpora and the output of the 

initial case study (Nawaz et al., 2010). 

The highly favourable results of this experi-

ment further confirmed the feasibility and 

soundness of the annotation scheme. The re-

mainder of this section discusses the results in 

more detail. 

 

Dimension Cohen’s Kappa 

Knowledge Type 0.9017 

Certainty Level 0.9329 

Polarity 0.9059 

Manner 0.8944 

Source 0.9520 

Table 3. Inter-Annotator Agreement 

4.1 Inter-Annotator Agreement 

We have used the familiar measure of Cohen‟s 

kappa (Cohen, 1960) for assessing the quality of 

annotation. Table 3 shows the kappa values for 

each annotated dimension. The highest value of 

kappa was achieved for the Source dimension, 

while the KT dimension yielded the lowest kappa 

value. Nevertheless, the kappa scores for all an-

notation dimensions were in the good region 

(Krippendorff, 1980).  

4.2 Category Distribution 

Knowledge Type:  The most prevalent category 

found in this dimension was Observation, with 

45% of all annotated events belonging to this 

category. Only a small fraction (4%) of these 

events was represented by an explicit lexical clue 

(mostly sensory verbs).  In most cases the tense, 

local context (position within the sentence) or 

global context (position within the document) 

were found to be important factors. 

The second most common category (37% of 

all annotated events) was General. We discov-

ered that most (64%) of the events belonging to 

this category were processes or states embedded 

in noun phrases (such as c-fos expression). More 

than a fifth of the General events (22%) ex-

pressed known scientific facts, whilst a smaller 

fraction (14%) expressed experimental/scientific 

methods (such as stimulation and incubation 

etc.). Explicit lexical clues were found only for 

facts, and even then in only 1% of cases. 

Analysis was the third most common category, 

comprising 16% of all annotated events. Of the 

events belonging to this category, 44% were de-

ductions (CL=L1), whilst the remaining 54% 

were hedged interpretations (CL=L2/L3). All 

Analysis events were marked with explicit lexical 

clues. 

The least common category was Investigation 

(1.5% of all annotated events). All Investigation 

events were marked with explicit lexical clues. 

Certainty Level: L3 was found to be the most 

prevalent category, corresponding to 93% of all 

events. The categories L2 and L1 occurred with 

frequencies of 4.3% and 2.5%, respectively. The 

relative scarcity of speculative sentences in sci-

entific literature is a well documented phenome-

non (Thompson et al., 2008; Vincze et al., 2008). 

Vincze et al. (2008) found that less than 18% of 

sentences occurring in biomedical abstracts are 

speculative. Similarly, we found that around 20% 

of corpus events belong to speculative sentences. 

Since speculative sentences contain non-

speculative events as well, the frequency of 

speculative events is expected to be much less 

than the frequency of speculative sentences. In 

accordance with this hypothesis, we found that 

only 7% of corpus events were expressed with 

some degree of speculation. We also found that 

almost all speculated events had explicit lexical 

clues.  

Polarity:  Our event-centric view of negation 

showed just above 3% of the events to be ne-

gated. Similarly to speculation, the expected fre-

75



quency of negated events is lower than the fre-

quency of negated sentences. Another reason for 

finding fewer negated events is the fact that, in 

contrast to previous schemes, we draw a distinc-

tion between events that are negated and events 

expressed with Low manner. For example, cer-

tain words like limited and barely are often con-

sidered as negation clues. However, we consider 

them as clues for Low manner. In all cases, nega-

tion was expressed through explicit lexical clues. 

Manner: Whilst only a small fraction (4%) of 

events contains an indication of Manner, we 

found that where present, manner conveys vital 

information about the event. Our results also re-

vealed that indications of High manner are three 

times more frequent than the indications of Low 

manner. We also noted that both High and Low 

manners were always indicated through the use 

of explicit clues. 

Source: Most (99%) of the events were found to 

be of the Current category. This is to be ex-

pected, as authors tend to focus on current work 

in within abstracts. It is envisaged, however, that 

this dimension will be more useful for analyzing 

full papers. 

Hyper-dimensions: Using the inference tables 

shown in section 3, we calculated that almost 

57% of the events represent New Knowledge, and 

just above 8% represent Hypotheses.  

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

We have evaluated a slightly modified version of 

our meta-knowledge annotation scheme for bio-

events, first presented in Nawaz et al. (2010). 

The scheme captures key information regarding 

the correct interpretation of bio-events, which is 

not currently annotated in existing bio-event cor-

pora, but which we have shown to be critical in a 

number of text mining tasks undertaken by bi-

ologists. The evaluation results have shown high 

inter-annotator agreement and a sufficient num-

ber of annotations along each category in every 

dimension. These results have served to confirm 

the feasibility and soundness of the annotation 

scheme, and provide promising prospects for its 

application to existing and new bio-event cor-

pora. 

We are currently working on a large scale an-

notation effort, involving multiple independent 

annotators. Although our main objective is to 

enrich the entire GENIA event corpus with meta-

knowledge information, we also plan to create a 

small corpus of full papers enriched with bio-

event and meta-knowledge annotations. 

Acknowledgments 

The work described in this paper has been 

funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sci-

ences Research Council through grant numbers 

BBS/B/13640, BB/F006039/1 (ONDEX) 

References  

M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. 

Butler, J. M. Cherry, A. P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S. 

S. Dwight, J. T. Eppig, M. A. Harris, D. P. Hill, L. 

Issel-Tarver, A. Kasarskis, S. Lewis, J. C. Matese, 

J. E. Richardson, M. Ringwald, G. M. Rubin and 

G. Sherlock.  2000. Gene ontology: tool for the 

unification of biology.  Nature Genetics 25:25-29. 

J. Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nomi-

nal scales. Educational and Psychological Meas-

urement 20: 37–46. 

A. de Waard, B. Shum, A. Carusi, J. Park, M. Sam-

wald and Á. Sándor. 2009. Hypotheses, Evidence 

and Relationships: The HypER Approach for Rep-

resenting Scientific Knowledge Claims. In Pro-

ceedings of the Workshop on Semantic Web Appli-

cations in Scientific Discourse. Available at:  

http://oro.open.ac.uk/18563/ 

L. Hoye. 1997. Adverbs and Modality in English. 

London & New York: Longman 

K. Hyland. 1996. Talking to the Academy: Forms of 

Hedging in Science Research Articles. Written 

Communication 13(2):251-281. 

K. Hyland. 2005. Metadiscourse: Exploring Interac-

tion in Writing. London: Continuum 

J. Kim, T. Ohta and J. Tsujii. 2008. Corpus annotation 

for mining biomedical events from literature. BMC 

Bioinformatics 9:10 

K. Krippendorff. 1980. Content Analysis: An Intro-

duction to Its Methodology. Beverly Hills: Sage 

Publications 

H. Langer, H. Lungen and P. S. Bayerl. 2004. Text 

type structure and logical document structure. In 

Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Discourse 

Annotation, pages 49-56 

M. Light, X. T. Qui and P. Srinivasan. 2004. The lan-

guage of bioscience: Facts, speculations, and 

statements in between. In Proceedings of the Bio-

Link 2004 Workshop on Linking Biological Litera-

ture, Ontologies and Databases: Tools for Users, 

pages 17-24. 

F. Lisacek, C. Chichester, A. Kaplan and A. Sandor. 

2005. Discovering Paradigm Shift Patterns in Bio-

medical Abstracts: Application to Neurodegenera-

tive Diseases. In Proceedings of SMBM 2005, 

pages 212-217 

76



L. McKnight and P. Srinivasan. 2003. Categorization 

of sentence types in medical abstracts. In Proceed-

ings of the 2003 Annual Symposium of AMIA, 

pages 440-444. 

B. Medlock and T. Briscoe. 2007. Weakly supervised 

learning for hedge classification in scientific litera-

ture. In Proceedings of ACL 2007, pages 992- 999. 

Y. Miyao, T. Ohta, K. Masuda, Y. Tsuruoka, K. Yo-

shida, T. Ninomiya and J. Tsujii. 2006. Semantic 

Retrieval for the Accurate Identification of Rela-

tional Concepts in Massive Textbases. In Proceed-

ings of COLING-ACL 2006, pages 1017-1024. 

Y. Mizuta and N. Collier. 2004. Zone identification in 

biology articles as a basis for information extrac-

tion. In Proceedings of the joint NLPBA/BioNLP 

Workshop on Natural Language for Biomedical 

Applications, pages 119-125. 

R. Morante and W. Daelemans. 2009. A metalearning 

approach to processing the scope of negation. In 

Proceedings of CoNLL 2009, pages 21-29. 

R. Nawaz, P. Thompson, J. McNaught and S. 

Ananiadou. 2010. Meta-Knowledge Annotation of 

Bio-Events. In Proceedings of LREC 2010, pages 

2498-2507. 

K. Oda, J. Kim, T. Ohta, D. Okanohara, T. Matsuzaki,  

Y. Tateisi and J. Tsujii. 2008. New challenges for 

text mining: mapping between text and manually 

curated pathways. BMC Bioinformatics 9(Suppl 3): 

S5. 

S. Pyysalo, F. Ginter, J. Heimonen, J. Bjorne, J. 

Boberg, J. Jarvinen and T. Salakoski. 2007. BioIn-

fer: a corpus for information extraction in the bio-

medical domain. BMC Bioinformatics 8:50. 

V. Rizomilioti. 2006. "Exploring Epistemic Modality 

in Academic Discourse Using Corpora." Informa-

tion Technology in Languages for Specific Pur-

poses 7, pages 53-71 

V. L. Rubin. 2007. Stating with certainty or stating 

with doubt: Intercoder reliability results for manual 

annotation of epistemically modalized statements. 

In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2007, Companion 

Volume,  pages 141-144. 

P. Ruch, C. Boyer, C. Chichester, I. Tbahriti, A. 

Geissbühler, P. Fabry, J. Gobeill, V. Pillet, D. 

Rebholz-Schuhmann and C. Lovis. 2007. Using 

argumentation to extract key sentences from bio-

medical abstracts. International Journal of Medical 

Informatics 76(2-3):195-200. 

O. Sanchez-Graillet and M. Poesio. 2007. Negation of 

protein-protein interactions: analysis and extrac-

tion. Bioinformatics 23(13):i424-i432 

Á. Sándor. 2007. Modeling metadiscourse conveying 

the author‟s rhetorical strategy in biomedical re-

search abstracts. Revue Française de Linguistique 

Appliquée 200(2):97-109. 

H. Shatkay, F. Pan, A. Rzhetsky and W. J. Wilbur.  

2008. Multi-dimensional classification of biomedi-

cal text: toward automated, practical provision of 

high-utility text to diverse users. Bioinformatics 

24(18): 2086-2093. 

S. Teufel, J. Carletta and M. Moens. 1999. An annota-

tion scheme for discourse-level argumentation in 

research articles. In Proceedings of EACL 1999, 

pages  110-117. 

S. Teufel, A. Siddharthan and C. Batchelor. 2009. 

Towards discipline-independent argumentative 

zoning: Evidence from chemistry and computa-

tional linguistics. In Proceedings of EMNLP-09, 

pages 1493-1502 

P. Thompson, S. Iqbal, J. McNaught and S. 

Ananiadou. 2009. Construction of an annotated 

corpus to support biomedical information extrac-

tion. BMC Bioinformatics 10: 349. 

P. Thompson, G. Venturi, J. McNaught, S. Monte-

magni and S. Ananiadou. 2008. Categorising Mo-

dality in Biomedical Texts. In Proceedings of the 

LREC 2008 Workshop on Building and Evaluating 

Resources for Biomedical Text Mining, pages 27-

34. 

V. Vincze, G. Szarvas, R. Farkas, G. Mora and J. 

Csirik. 2008. The BioScope corpus: biomedical 

texts annotated for uncertainty, negation and their 

scopes. BMC Bioinformatics 9(Suppl 11): S9. 

W. J. Wilbur, A. Rzhetsky and H. Shatkay. 2006. 

New directions in biomedical text annotations: 

definitions, guidelines and corpus construction. 

BMC Bioinformatics 7: 356. 

 

77


