



















































Arabic morpho-syntactic feature disambiguation in a translation context


Proceedings of SSST-4, Fourth Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 61–65,
COLING 2010, Beijing, August 2010.

Arabic morpho-syntactic feature disambiguation in            
a translation context 

Ines Turki Khemakhem, Salma Jamoussi, Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou 
MIRACL Laboratory, ISIM Sfax, Pôle Technologique

ines_turki@yahoo.fr, salma.jammoussi@isimsf.rnu.tn, 
abdelmajid.benhamadou@isimsf.rnu.tn 

 

Abstract 

Morphological analysis and disambigua-
tion are crucial stages in a variety of nat-
ural language processing applications 
such as machine translation, especially 
when languages with complex morphol-
ogy are concerned such as Arabic. Arab-
ic is a highly flexional language, in that, 
the same root can lead to various forms 
according to its context. In this paper, we 
present a system which disambiguates 
the output of a morphological analyzer 
for Arabic. The Arabic morphological 
analyzer used consists of a set of all 
possible morphological analyses for each 
word, with the unique correct syntactic 
feature. We want to choose the correct 
features using the features generated by 
the morphological analyzer for the 
French language in the other side. To ob-
tain this data, we used the results of the 
alignment of word trained with GIZA++ 
(Och and Ney, 2003). 

1 Introduction 
Arabic is characterized by a rich morphology. 
Due to the fact that the Arabic script usually 
does not encode short vowels, the degree of 
morphological ambiguity is very high. In addi-
tion to being inflected for gender, number, 
words can be attached to various clitics for con-
junction "و" (and), the definite article "ال" (the), 
prepositions (e.g. "ب" (by/with), "ل" (for), "ك" 
(as)), object pronouns (e.g. "هم" (their/them)). 

The morphological analysis of a word consists 
of determining morphological information about 
each word, such as part-of-speech (i.e., noun, 
verb, particle, etc), voice, gender, number, in-

formation about the clitics, etc. Morphological 
analysis and disambiguation are crucial pre-
processing steps for a variety of natural language 
processing applications, from search and infor-
mation extraction to machine translation. For 
languages with complex morphology these are 
nontrivial processes. 

Arabic words are often ambiguous in their 
morphological analysis. This is due to Arabic’s 
rich system of affixation and clitics and the 
omission of disambiguating short vowels. The 
problem is that many words have different 
meanings depending on their diacritization. This 
leads to ambiguity when processing data for nat-
ural language processing applications such as 
machine translation. This propriety has an im-
portant implication for statistical modeling of the 
Arabic language. 

In this paper, we present a novel morphology 
preprocessing technique for Arabic. We exploit 
the Arabic morphology-French alignment to 
choose a correct morpho-syntactic feature pro-
duced by a morphological analyzer. 

This paper is organized as follows: section 2 
gives a brief description of some related works 
to the introduction of morphological disambigu-
ation. Section 3 presents the used morphological 
analyzer Morph2 for Arabic texts, able to recog-
nize word composition and to provide more spe-
cific morphological information about it. We 
present in section 4 some problems in context 
morpho-syntactic feature choice; in the remaind-
er of this section we discuss the complexity of 
Arabic morphology and the challenge of mor-
phological disambiguation. Section 5 gives a 
short overview of the data and tools used for our 
Arabic word Morpho-syntactic feature disam-
biguation and shows the experimental details of 
our system. Finally, section 6 presents some 
conclusions. 

61



2 Related work 
Morphological analysis and disambiguation are 
crucial pre-processing steps for a variety of 
natural language processing applications. 

Previous research has focused on 
disambiguating the output of a morphological 
analyzer. Hajic (2000) is the first to use a 
dictionary as a source of possible morphological 
analyses (and hence tags) for an inflected word 
form. He convincingly shows that for five 
Eastern European languages with complex 
inflection plus English, using a morphological 
analyzer improves performance of a tagger. He 
concludes that for highly inflectional languages 
“the use of an independent morphological 
dictionary is the preferred choice more annotated 
data”. He redefines the tagging task as a choice 
among the tags proposed by the dictionary, using 
a log-linear model trained on specific ambiguity 
classes for individual morphological features. 
Hajic (2000) demonstrates convincingly that 
morphological disambiguation can be aided by a 
morphological analyzer, which, given a word 
without any context, gives us the set of all 
possible morphological tags.  

The only work on Arabic tagging that uses a 
corpus for training and evaluation, (Diab et al., 
2004), does not use a morphological analyzer. 
Diab et al. (2004) perform tokenization, POS 
tagging and base phrase chunking using a SVM 
based learner.  

The Morphological Analysis and 
Disambiguation of Arabic (MADA) system is 
described in (Habash and Rambow, 2005). The 
basic approach used in MADA is inspired by the 
work of Hajic (2000) for tagging 
morphologically rich languages, which was 
extended to Arabic. Habash and Rambow (2005) 
use SVM-classifiers for individual 
morphological features and a simple combining 
scheme for choosing among competing analyses 
proposed by the dictionary. 

3 Arabic word  segmenter 
Arabic is a morphologically complex language. 
Compared with French, an Arabic word can 
sometimes correspond to a whole French sen-
tence (Example : the Arabic word "أتتذّآروننا" cor-
responds in French to the sentence "Est-ce que 

vous vous souvenez de nous", in English: "Do 
you remember us").  

The aim of a morphological analysis step is to 
recognize word composition and to provide spe-
cific morphological information about it. For 
Example : the word "يعرفون" (in French: con-
naîssent, in English: they know) is the result of 
the concatenation of the prefix "ي" indicating the 
present and suffix "ون" indicating the plural 
masculine of the verb "عرف" (in French: con-
naître, in English: to know). The morphological 
analyzer determines for each word the list of all 
its possible morphological features.  

In Arabic language, some conjugated verbs or 
inflected nouns can have the same orthographic 
form due to absence of vowels (Example : non-
voweled Arabic word "فصل" can be a verb in the 
past "َفَصَل" (He dismissed), or a masculine noun 
 chapter / season), or a concatenation of) "َفْصٌل"
the coordinating conjunction " َف  " (then) with the 
verb "صل": imperative of the verb (bind)). 

In this work, In order to handle the morpho-
logical ambiguities, we decide to use MORPH2 
(Belguith et al., 2006), an Arabic morphological 
analyzer developed at the Miracl laboratory1. 
MORPH2 is based on a knowledge-based com-
putational method. It accepts as input an Arabic 
text, a sentence or a word. Its morphological dis-
ambiguation and analysis method is based on 
five steps: 

• A tokenization process is applied in a 
first step. It consists of two sub-steps. 
First, the text is divided into sentences, 
using the system Star (Belguith et al., 
2005), an Arabic text tokenizer based on 
contextual exploration of punctuation 
marks and conjunctions of coordination. 
The second sub-step detects the different 
words in each sentence. 

• A morphological preprocessing step 
which aims to extract clitics agglutinated 
to the word. A filtering process is then 
applied to check out if the remaining 
word is a particle, a number, a date, or a 
proper noun. 

• An affixal analysis is then applied to de-
termine all possible affixes and roots. It 
aims to identify basic elements belonging 

                                                 
1 http://www.miracl.rnu.tn 

62



to the constitution of a word (the root and 
affixes i.e. prefix, infix and suffix). 

• The morphological analysis step consists 
of determining for each word, all its 
possible morpho-syntactic features (i.e, 
part of speech, gender, number, time, 
person, etc.). Morpho-syntactic features 
detection is made up on three stages. The 
first stage identifies the part-of-speech of 
the word (i.e. verb "فعل", noun "اسم", par-
ticle "أداة" and proper noun "اسم علم"). The 
second stage extracts for each part-of-
speech a list of its morpho-syntactic fea-
tures. A filtering of these feature lists is 
made in the third stage. 

• Vocalization and validation step : each 
handled word is fully vocalized accord-
ing to its morpho-syntactic features de-
termined in the previous step.  

 
In our method, each Arabic word, from Arab-

ic data, is replaced by its segmented form, where 
stem, clitic and affix are featured with their 
morphological classes (e.g. proclitic, prefix, 
stem, suffix and enclitic). For example: the word 
 ,"in French: "et nous les avons connu) "فعرفناهم"
in English: "and we have known them") is the 
result of the concatenation of the proclitic "َف" 
(then): coordinating conjunction, the suffix "نا" 
for the present masculine plural, enclitic "هم" (for 
the masculine plural possession pronoun), and 
the rest of the word "عرف" indicating the stem. 
So, the word "فعرفناهم" will be replaced by: 
 

"enclitic _هم   suffix_ نا  Stem_ عرف  proclitic _ف " 

4 Problems in context Morpho-
syntactic feature choice 

As mentioned in section 1, ambiguities in Arabic 
word are mainly caused by the absence of the 
short vowels. Thus, a word can have different 
meanings. There are also the usual homographs 
of uninflected words with/without the same pro-
nunciation, which have different meanings and 
usually different POS’s. For example: the word 
 :in English ,"ذهب" in English: "gold" and ,"ذهب"
"go". In Arabic there are four categories of 
words: noun, proper noun, verbs and particles. 
The absence of short vowels can cause ambigui-
ties within the same category or across different 

categories. For example: the word "بعد" corres-
ponds to many categories (table 1). 

meanings of a word "بعد" Categories 
after Particule 
remoteness Noun 
remove Verb 
go away Verb 

 
Table 1. Different meanings of a word "بعد" 

 
Arabic uses a diverse system of prefixes, suf-

fixes, and pronouns that are attached to the 
words (Soudi, 2007). 

In fact, in Arabic language, the word: "وضع" 
can be a verb in the past (He filed), or a mascu-
line noun (state), or a concatenation of the coor-
dinating conjunction "و" (and) with the verb 
-imperative of the verb (filed). For this rea :"ضع"
son, correct morphological analysis is required 
to resolve structural ambiguities among Arabic 
sentence. 

5 Word Morpho-syntactic feature dis-
ambiguation 

5.1 Training corpus 
The training corpus used in this work is an 
Arabic-French bitext aligned at the sentence 
level. Each Arabic word, from Arabic data, is 
replaced by its segmented form. In the other 
side, the French corpus is part-of-speech (POS) 
tagged by using treetagger tool (Schmid, 1994) 
for annotating text with part-of-speech and 
lemma information. 

5.2 Alignment model 
The aligned model was trained with GIZA++ 
(Och and Ney, 2003), which implements the 
most typical IBM and HMM alignment models. 
The alignment model used consists of IBM-1, 
HMM, IBM-3 and IBM-4. 

5.3 Using treetagger for Arabic Word 
Morpho-syntactic feature disambigua-
tion 

To pre-process the Arabic data, we use the 
MORPH2 morphological analyzer (Belguith et 
al., 2006).  A sample output of the morphologi-
cal analyzer is shown in Figure 1.  
 

63



 
Figure 1. Possible analyses for the word "بعد" 
 
The obtained output consists of a set of all 

possible morphological analyses for each word, 
with the unique correct analysis. One needs to 
select the right meaning by looking at the con-
text. Given the highly inflection nature of Arab-
ic, resolving ambiguities is syntactically harder 
within the same category. We want to choose the 
correct output using the features generated by 
TreeTagger applied to the French corpus.  

To obtain this correct feature, we needed to 
match data in the segmented Arabic corpus to 
the lexeme and feature representation output by 
TreeTagger. The matching included the results 
of the alignment of word between the segmented 
Arabic corpus and the part-of-speech tagged 
French corpus. 

Example : the word "فعرفناهم" (in French: "et 
nous les avons connu", in English: "and we have 
known them") is segmented by: 

 enclitic" _هم suffix _نا stem _عرف proclitic _ف"
 

The part-of-speech tagged of the French sen-
tence is: 

 

"et_KON nous_PRO:PER les_PRO:PER 
avons_VER:pres connu_VER:pper" 

 
The result of the alignment between these two 

sentences is: 
 

(a)  enclitic _هم suffix   _نا stem      _عرف proclitic     _ف

 
 
 

 
(b) Et nous les avons Connu 
 KON PRO:PER PRO:PER VER:pres VER:pper 
 
Figure 2. (a) Output of morphological analysis 
MORPH2: segmented Arabic sentence, (b) 
French translation and its alignment with seg-
mented morphological analysis 

 
The stem "عرف" is aligned with the word: 

"connu" : the past participle of the verb "con-
naître" (in English : "known"). We can deduce 
that the part of speech of the stem "عرف" is a 
verb.  

Morpho-syntactic features provided by Tree-
Tagger are verb, proper noun, noun, adjective, 
adverb, conjunction, pronoun, preposition, etc. 
The morpho-syntactic feature of Arabic words 
aligned with French words tagged by adjective 
or noun will be replaced by the morpho-
syntactic feature : noun: "اسم". While, the mor-
pho-syntactic feature : adverb, conjunction, or 
prepostion will be replaced by the Arabic mor-
pho-syntactic feature : particle : "أداة".  

We can attest that the use of morpho-syntactic 
features provided by the part-of-speech tagged 
corpus in the other side can remove disambigua-
tion of morpho-syntactic feature of the Arabic 
word provided by a morphological analyser, es-
pecially for agglutinative and inflectional lan-
guages. 

5.4 Experimental results 
In our experiments, on the entire corpus, the 
MORPH2 morphological analyzer makes 1152 
errors (27%). Table 2 shows the results obtained 
with the morphological analyzer MORPH2, 
BASELINE, and the results obtained with the 
Arabic morphology-French alignment, treetag-
ger-to-morph2, where Arabic morphology-
French alignment is used to choose a correct 

64



morpho-syntactic feature produced by a morpho-
logical analyzer  MORPH2. 
 

System Accuracy (%) 
BASELINE 73% 
treetagger-to-
morph2 

88% 

 
Table 2. Results of treetagger-to-morph2 com-
pared against BASELINE on the task of POS 
tagging of Arabic text 

 
Thus one can observe that, for Arabic, the 

treetagger-to-morph2 outperforms the BASE-
LINE tagger with a significant absolute differ-
ence of 15% in tagging accuracy. 

The performance of treetagger-to-morph2 is 
better than the baseline BASELINE. The errors 
encountered result from confusing nouns with 
verbs, particles or vice versa. This is to be 
caused by the presence of homographs of Arabic 
words, which have different meanings and dif-
ferent POS’s. 

6 Conclusion 
Morphological disambiguation of Arabic is a 
difficult task which involves, in theory, thou-
sands of possible tags. 

In this paper, we present a system which dis-
ambiguates the output of a morphological ana-
lyzer for Arabic. Arabic is a morphologically 
rich language, and Morphological analysis and 
disambiguation are crucial stages in a variety of 
natural language processing applications.  

We first applied an Arabic word segmentation 
step, to improve the alignments models. So we 
use the Arabic morphological analyzer 
MORPH2. Then, we proposed to use TreeTag-
ger tool, able to annotate text with part-of-
speech and lemma information, where each 
word from French corpus is agglutinated to its 
part-of-speech (POS). The sentence alignment 
between Arabic and French corpus was trained 
with GIZA++. The core idea is to avoid morpho-
syntactic ambiguity of the Arabic words ob-
tained in the MORPH2 output by using the part 
of speech of corresponding aligned French word. 
We showed that imposing Arabic-French align-
ment dependent constraints on possible se-
quences of analyses improves the morphological 
disambiguation.  

Future work will focus on taking advantage of 
our efficient technique. We are very interested to 
use Word Morpho-syntactic feature disambigua-
tion to build up an efficient French-Arabic trans-
lation system.  

References 
Belguith L., and Chaâben N. 2006. Analyse et dé-

sambiguïsation morphologiques de textes    arabes    
non voyellés, Actes de la 13ème confrence sur le 
Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles, 
Leuven Belgique, 493-501. 

Belguith L., Baccour L. and Mourad G. 2005. Seg-
mentation des textes arabes basée sur l'analyse 
contextuelle des signes de ponctuations et de cer-
taines particules. Actes de la 12éme Conférence 
annuelle sur le Traitement Automatique des 
Langues Naturelles, 451-456. 

Diab M., Hacioglu K., and Jurafsky D. 2004. Auto-
matic tagging of Arabic text: From raw text to 
base phrase chunks. In 5th Meeting of the North 
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics/Human Language Technologies 
Conference (HLT-NAACL04), Boston, MA. 

Habash N. and Rambow O.. 2005. Arabic tokeniza-
tion, part-of-speech tagging and morphological 
disambiguation in one fell swoop. In Proceedings 
of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL’05), Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 573–580 

Hajic J. 2000. Morphological tagging: Data vs. dic-
tionaries. In 1st Meeting of the North American 
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (NAACL’00), Seattle, WA. 

Och F. J., and Ney H. 2003. A Systematic compari-
son of various statistical alignment models, Com-
putational Linguistics, 29(1): 19-51. 

Och F. J., Ney H. 2004. The alignment template ap-
proach to statistical machine translation, Computa-
tional Linguistics, 30(4): 417-449. 

Schmid H. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. In Proceedings of In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, Manchester. 44-49. 

Soudi A., Bosch A. and Neumann G. Arabic Compu-
tational Morphology: Knowledge-based and Em-
pirical Methods. Springer, 2007. 

65


