



















































Developing a Biosurveillance Application Ontology for Influenza-Like-Illness


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Ontologies and Lexical Resources (Ontolex 2010), pages 58–66,
Beijing, August 2010

Developing a Biosurveillance Application Ontology for
Influenza-Like-Illness

Mike Conway, John Dowling and Wendy Chapman
Department of Biomedical Informatics

University of Pittsburgh
{conwaym|dowling|wec6}@pitt.edu

Abstract

Increasing biosurveillance capacity is a
public health priority in both the devel-
oped and the developing world. Effec-
tive syndromic surveillance is especially
important if we are to successfully iden-
tify and monitor disease outbreaks in their
early stages. This paper describes the
construction and preliminary evaluation
of a syndromic surveillance orientated ap-
plication ontology designed to facilitate
the early identification of Influenza-Like-
Illness syndrome from Emergency Room
clinical reports using natural language
processing.

1 Introduction and Motivation

Increasing biosurveillance capacity is a public
health priority in both the developed and devel-
oping world, both for the early identification of
emerging diseases and for pinpointing epidemic
outbreaks (Chen et al., 2010). The 2009 Mexican
flu outbreak provides an example of how an out-
break of a new disease (in this case a new vari-
ant of H1N1 influenza) can spend some weeks
spreading in a community before it is recognized
as a threat by public health officials.

Syndromic surveillance is vital if we are to de-
tect outbreaks at an early stage (Henning, 2004;
Wagner et al., 2006). The United States Cen-
ter for Disease Control (CDC) defines syndromic
surveillance as “surveillance using health-related
data that precede diagnosis and signal a sufficient
probability of a case or outbreak to warrant fur-
ther public health response.”1 That is, the focus of

1www.webcitation.org/5pxhlyaxX

syndromic surveillance is the identification of dis-
ease outbreaks before the traditional public health
apparatus of confirmatory laboratory testing and
official diagnosis can be used. Data sources for
syndromic surveillance have included, over the
counter pharmacy sales (Tsui et al., 2003), school
absenteeism records (Lombardo et al., 2003), calls
to NHS Direct (a nurse led information and advice
service in the United Kingdom) (Cooper, 2007),
and search engine queries (Eysenbach, 2006).

However, in this paper we concentrate on min-
ing text based clinical records for outbreak data.
Clinical interactions between health workers and
patients generate large amounts of textual data —
in the form of clinical reports, chief complaints,
and so on — which provide an obvious source of
pre-diagnosis information. In order to mine the
information in these clinical reports we are faced
with two distinct problems:

1. How should we define a syndrome of inter-
est? That is, how are signs and symptoms
mapped to syndromes?

2. Given that we have established such a set
of mappings, how then do we map from the
text in our clinical reports to the signs and
symptoms that constitute a syndrome, given
the high level of terminological variability in
clinical reports.

This paper presents an application ontology that
attempts to address both these issues for the do-
main of Influenza-Like-Illness Syndrome (ILI).
The case definition for ILI, as defined by the
United States Center for Disease Control is “fever
greater than or equal to 100 degrees Fahrenheit

58



and either cough or sore throat.”2 In contrast
to the CDC’s straightforward definition, the syn-
drome is variously described as a cluster of symp-
toms and findings, including fever and cold symp-
toms, cough, nausea, vomiting, body aches and
sore throat (Scholer, 2004). In constructing an ap-
plication specific syndrome definition for this on-
tology, we used a data driven approach to defining
ILI, generating a list of terms through an analysis
of Emergency Room reports.

The remainder of the paper is divided into five
parts. First, we briefly describe related work, be-
fore going on to report on the ontology develop-
ment process. We then set forth an evaluation of
the ontology with respect to its coverage of terms
in the target domain. We go on to outline areas for
future work, before finally presenting some con-
cluding comments.

2 Related Work

In recent years there has been significant progress
in interfacing lexical resources (in particular
WordNet (Miller, 1995)) and upper level ontolo-
gies (like the Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic
and Cognitive Engineering (DOLCE) (Gangemi
et al., 2002) and the Suggested Upper Merged On-
tology (SUMO) (Niles and Pease, 2003)). How-
ever, as our domain of interest employs a highly
specialized terminology, the use of general lin-
guistic resources like WordNet was inappropriate.

Our work has focused on the representation of
ILI relevant concepts that occur in clinical re-
ports in order to facilitate syndromic surveillance.
While the widely used medical taxonomies and
nomenclatures (for example Unified Medical Lan-
guage System3 and the Systematized Nomencla-
ture of Medicine Clinical Terms4) contain many
of the ILI relevant concepts found in clinical texts,
these general resources do not have the specific re-
lations (and lexical information) relevant to syn-
dromic surveillance from clinical reports. Cur-
rently, there are at least four major terminological
resources available that focus on the public health
domain: PHSkb, SSO, and the BioCaster Ontol-
ogy.

2www.webcitation.org/5q22KTcHx
3www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
4www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/

2.1 PHSkb
The Public Health Surveillance knowledge base
PHSkb (Doyle et al., 2005) developed by the CDC
is a coding system for the communication of no-
tifiable disease5 findings for public health profes-
sionals at the state and federal level in the United
States. There are however several difficulties in
using the PHSkb directly in an NLP orientated
syndromic surveillance context:

1. Syndromic surveillance requires that syn-
dromes and signs are adequately represented.
The PHSkb emphasizes diagnosed diseases.
That is, the PHSKb is focused on post diag-
nosis reporting, when laboratory tests have
been conducted and the presence of a disease
is confirmed. This approach is not suitable
for syndromic surveillance where we seek to
identify clusters of symptoms and signs be-
fore a diagnosis.

2. PHSkb is no longer under active develop-
ment.

2.2 SSO
The Syndromic Surveillance Ontology (SSO)
(Okhmatovskaia et al., 2009) was developed to
address a pressing problem for system develop-
ers and public health officials. How can we inte-
grate outbreak information when every site uses
different syndrome definitions? For instance, if
State X defines sore throat as part of ILI, yet State
Y does not, syndromic surveillance results from
each state will not be directly comparable. When
we apply this example to the wider national scene,
with federal regional and provincial public health
agencies attempting to share data with each other,
and international agencies, we can see the scale of
the problem to be addressed.

In order to manage this data sharing problem,
a working group of eighteen researchers, repre-
senting ten functional syndromic surveillance sys-
tems in the United States (for example, Boston
Public Health Department and the US Depart-
ment of Defense) convened to develop standard

5A notifiable disease is a disease (or by extension, con-
dition) that must, by law, be reported to the authorities for
monitoring purposes. In the United States, examples of noti-
fiable diseases are: Shigellosis, Anthrax and HIV infection.

59



definitions for four syndromes of interest (respi-
ratory, gastro-intestinal, constitutional and ILI)6

and constructed an OWL ontology based on these
definitions. While the SSO is a useful starting
points, there are several reasons why — on its own
— it is insufficient for clinical report processing:

1. SSO is centered on chief complaints. Chief
complaints (or “presenting complaints”) are
phrases that briefly describe a patient’s pre-
senting condition on first contact with a med-
ical facility. They usually describe symp-
toms, refrain from diagnostic speculation
and employ frequent abbreviations and mis-
spellings (for example “vom + naus” for
“vomiting and nausea”). Clinical texts —
the focus of attention in this paper — are
full length documents, normally using cor-
rect spellings (even if they are somewhat
“telegraphic” in style). Furthermore, clini-
cal reports frequently list physical findings
(that is, physical signs elicited by the physi-
cian, like, for instance reflex tests) which are
not present in symptom orientated chief com-
plaints.

2. The range of syndromes represented in SSO
is limited to four. Although we are starting
out with ILI, we have plans (and data) to ex-
tend our resource to four new syndromes (see
Section 5 for details of further work).

3. The most distinctive feature of the SSO is
that the knowledge engineering process was
conducted in a face-to-face committee con-
text. Currently, there is no process in place
to extend the SSO to new syndromes, symp-
toms or domains.

2.3 BioCaster Ontology

The BioCaster application ontology was built to
facilitate text mining of news articles for disease
outbreaks in several different Pacific Rim lan-
guages (including English, Japanese, Thai and
Vietnamese) (Collier et al., 2006). However, the

6A demonstration chief complaint classifier based on
SSO is available at:
http://onto-classifier.dbmi.pitt.edu
/onto classify.html

ontology, as it stands, is not suitable for support-
ing text mining clinical reports, for the following
reasons:

1. The BioCaster ontology concentrates on the
types of concepts found in published news
outlets for a general (that is, non medical)
readership. The level of conceptual granular-
ity and degree of terminological sophistica-
tion is not always directly applicable to that
found in documents produced by health pro-
fessionals.

2. The BioCaster ontology, while it does repre-
sent syndromes (for example, constitutional
and hemorrhagic syndromes) and symptoms,
does not represent physical findings, as these
are beyond its scope.

In addition to the application ontologies de-
scribed above, the Infectious Disease Ontology
provides an Influenza component (and indeed
wide coverage of many diseases relevant to syn-
dromic surveillance). In Section 5 we describe
plans to link to other ontologies.

3 Constructing the Ontology

Work began with the identification of ILI terms
from clinical reports by author JD (a board-
certified infectious disease physician with thirty
years experience of clinical practice) supported by
an informatician [author MC]. The term identifi-
cation process involved the project’s domain ex-
pert reading multiple reports,7 searching through
appropriate textbooks, and utilizing professional
knowledge. After a provisional list of ILI con-
cepts had been identified, we compared our list
to the list of ILI concepts generated by the SSO
ILI component (see Section 2.2) and attempted to
reuse SSO concepts where possible. The resulting
ILI concept list consisted of 40 clinical concepts
taken from SSO and 15 new concepts. Clinical
concepts were divided into three classes: Disease
(15 concepts), Finding (21 concepts) and Symp-
tom (19 concepts). Figure 1 shows the clinical

7De-identified (that is, anonymized) clinical reports were
obtained through partnership with the University of Pitts-
burgh Medical Center.

60



concepts covered. As part of our knowledge en-
gineering effort, we identified concepts and as-
sociated relations for several different syndromes
which we plan to add to our ontology at a later
date.8

Early on in the project development process, we
took the decision to design our ontology in such a
way as to maintain consistency with the BioCaster
ontology. We adopted the BioCaster ontology as
a model for three reasons:

1. A considerable knowledge engineering effort
has been invested in BioCaster since 2006,
and both the domain (biosurveillance) and
application area (text mining) are congruent
to our own.

2. The BioCaster ontology has proven utility in
its domain (biosurveillance from news texts)
for driving NLP systems.

3. We plan to import BioCaster terms and re-
lations, and thus settled on a structure that
facilitated this goal.

The BioCaster ontology (inspired by the struc-
ture of EuroWordNet9) uses root terms as interlin-
gual pivots for the multiple languages represented
in the ontology.10 One consequence of following
this structure is that all clinical concepts are in-
stances.11 Additionally, all specified relations are
relations between instances.

Relations relevant to the syndromic surveil-
lance domain generally were identified by our
physician in conjunction with an informatician
(MC). Although some of these relations (like
is bioterrorismDisease) are less relevant
to ILI syndrome, they were retained in order to
maintain consistency with planned future work.
Additionally, we have added links to other ter-
minological resources (for example, UMLS and
Snomed-CT)

8Note that finer granularity was used in the initial knowl-
edge acquisition efforts (for example, we distinguished sign
from physical finding).

9http://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet/
10Note that we are using root term instead of the equivalent

EuroWordNet term Inter Lingual Index.
11Note that from a formal ontology perspective, concepts

are instantiated in text. For example, “Patient X presents with
nausea and high fever” instantiates the concepts nausea and
high fever.

Lexical resources and regular expressions are
a vital component of our project, as the ontology
has been built with the public health audience in
mind (in practice, state or city public health IT
personnel). These users have typically had lim-
ited exposure to NLP pipelines, named entity rec-
ognizers, and so on. They require an (almost) “off
the shelf” product that can easily be plugged into
existing systems for text analysis.

The ontology currently includes 484 English
keywords and 453 English regular expression.
The core classes and relations were developed in
Protege-OWL, and the populated ontology is gen-
erated from data stored in a spreadsheet (using a
Perl script). Version control was managed using
Subversion, and the ontology is available from a
public access Google code site.12 Figure 2 pro-
vides a simplified example of relations for the
clinical concept instance fever.

4 Evaluation

In recent years, significant research effort has
centered on the evaluation of ontologies and
ontology-like lexical resources, with a smorgas-
bord of techniques available (Zhu et al., 2009;
Brank et al., 2005). Yet no single evaluation
method has achieved “best practice” status for all
contexts. As our ontology is an application on-
tology designed to facilitate NLP in a highly con-
strained domain (that is, text analysis and infor-
mation extraction from clinical reports) the notion
of coverage is vital. There are two distinct ques-
tions here:

1. Can we map between the various textual in-
stantiations of ILI concepts clinical reports
and our ontology concepts? That is, are
the NLP resources available in the ontology
(keywords, regular expressions) adequate for
the mapping task?

2. Do we have the right ILI concepts in our on-
tology? That is, do we adequately represent
all the ILI concepts that occur in clinical re-
ports?

Inspired by Grigonyte et al. (2010), we at-
tempted to address these two related issues using

12http://code.google.com/p/ss-ontology

61



ClinicalConcept

Disease

SymptomFinding

Instances:
 - athma
 - bronchiolitis
 - croup
 - ili
 - influenza
 - pertussis
 - pharyngitis
 - pneumonia
 - pneumonitis
 - reactiveAirways
 - respiratorySyncytialVirus

Instances:
 - chill
 - conjunctivitis
 - coryza
 - cyanosis
 - dyspnea
 - elevatedTemperature
 - failureToThrive
 - fever
 - hemoptysis
 - infiltrate
 - lethargy
 - nasalObstruction
 - persistentNonProductiveCough
 - photophobia
 - rales
 - rhinorrhea
 - rigor
 - somnolent
 - throatSwelling
 - wheezing

Instances:
 - anorexia
 - arthralgia
 - asthenia
 - bodyAche
 - coldSymptom
 - cough
 - diarrhea
 - fatigue
 - generalizedMuscleAche
 - headache
 - hoarseness
 - malaise
 - myalgia
 - nausea
 - painOnEyeMovement
 - productiveCough
 - soreThroat
 - substernalDiscomfortOrBurning
 - viralSymptom
 

is_a

is_a

is_a

Figure 1: Clinical concepts.

techniques derived from terminology extraction
and corpus linguistics. Our method consisted of
assembling a corpus of twenty Emergency Room
clinical reports which had been flagged by ex-
perts (not the current authors) as relevant to ILI.
Note that these articles were not used in the initial
knowledge engineering phase of the project. We
then identified the “best” twenty five terms from
these clinical reports using two tools, Termine and
KWExT.

1. Termine (Frantzi et al., 2000) is a term ex-
traction tool hosted by Manchester Univer-
sity’s National Centre for Text Mining which
can be accessed via web services.13 It uses
a method based on linguistic preprocessing
and statistical methods. We extracted 231
terms from our twenty ILI documents (using
Termine’s default configuration). Then we
identified the twenty-five highest ranked dis-
ease, finding and symptom terms (that is, dis-
carding terms like “hospital visit” and “chief
complaint”).

13www.nactem.ac.uk/software/termine/

2. KWExT (Keyword Extraction Tool) (Con-
way, 2010) is a Linux based statistical key-
word extraction tool.14 We used KWExT
to extract 1536 unigrams, bigrams and tri-
grams using the log-likelihood method (Dun-
ning, 1993). The log-likelihood method is
designed to identify n-grams that occur with
the most frequency compared to some ref-
erence corpus. We used the FLOB cor-
pus,15 a one million multi-genre corpus con-
sisting of American English from the early
1990s as our reference corpus. We ranked
all n-grams according to their statistical sig-
nificance and then manually identified the
twenty-five highest ranked disease, finding
and symptom terms.

Term lists derived using the Termine and
KWExT tools are presented in Tables 1 and 2 re-
spectively. For both tables, column two (“Term”)
details each of the twenty-five “best” terms (with
respect to each term recognition algorithm) ex-

14http://code.google.com/p/kwext/
15www.webcitation.org/5q1aKtnf3

62



Thing

ClinicalConcept

Syndrome

Keyword

Link

Regular
Expression

SymptomFindingDisease

UmlsLink

English
Keyword

EnglishRegular
Expression

ILI

fever
elevated

Temperature

chill
"febrile"

"fever"

\bfiebre\b

\bfeel.*?\s+hot\b

is_a

is_a
is_a

is_a

is_a

is_a

is_a

is_a i is_a is_a

is_a

instance

instance

instance

instance

instance

fever

instance

instance class
is_a

(class to class)
instance

(instance of a class)
relation

(instance to instance relation)

hasAssociatedSyndrome

hasKeyword

hasKeyword

isSynonymous

hasRegularExpression

hasRegularExpression

hasLink

isRelatedTo

instance

instance

instance

Figure 2: Example of clinical concept “fever” and its important relations (note the diagram is simpli-
fied).

tracted from our twenty document ILI corpus.
Column three (“Concept”) specifies the concept in
our ontology to which the term maps (that is, the
lexical resources in the ontology — keywords and
regular expressions — can map the term in col-
umn two to the clinical concept in column three).
For instance the extracted term slight crackles can
be mapped to the clinical concept RALE using the
keyword “crackles.” Note that “-” in column three
indicates that no mapping was possible. Under-
lined terms are those that should be mapped to
concepts in the ontology, but currently are not (ad-
ditional concepts and keywords will be added in
the next iteration of the ontology).

There are two ways that mappings can fail here
(mirroring the two questions posed at the begin-
ning of this section). “Shortness of breath” should
map to the concept DYSPNEA, but there is no key-
word or regular expression that can bridge be-
tween text and concept. For the terms “edema”
and “lymphadenopathy” however, no suitable can-
didate concept exists in the ontology.

5 Further Work

While the current ontology covers only ILI, we
have firm plans to extend the current work along
several different dimensions:

• Developing new relations, to include model-
ing DISEASE → SYMPTOM, and DISEASE
→ FINDING relations (for example TONSIL-
LITIS hasSymptom SORE THROAT).

• Extend the application ontology beyond ILI
to several other syndromes of interest to the
biosurveillance community. These include:

– Rash Syndrome
– Hemorrhagic Syndrome
– Botulic Syndrome
– Neurological Syndrome

• Currently, we have links to UMLS (and also
Snomed-CT and BioCaster). We intend to
extend our coverage to the MeSH vocabu-
lary (to facilitate mining PubMed) and also
the Infectious Disease Ontology.

63



Term Concept
1 abdominal pain -
2 chest pain -
3 urinary tract infection -
4 sore throat SORE THROAT
5 renal disease -
6 runny nose CORYZA
7 body ache MYALGIA
8 respiratory distress PNEUMONIA
9 neck stiffness -

10 yellow sputum -
11 mild dementia -
12 copd -
13 viral syndrome VIRAL SYN.
14 influenza INFLUENZA
15 febrile illness FEVER
16 lung problem -
17 atrial fibrillation -
18 severe copd -
19 mild cough COUGH
20 asthmatic bronchitis BRONCHIOLITIS
21 coronary disease -
22 dry cough COUGH
23 neck pain -
24 bronchial pneumonia PNEUMONIA
25 slight crackles RALE

Table 1: Terms generated using the Termine tool

• Currently evaluation strategies have concen-
trated on coverage. We plan to extend our
auditing to encompass both intrinsic evalu-
ation (for example, have our relations eval-
uated by external health professionals using
some variant of the “laddering” technique
(Bright et al., 2009)) and extrinsic evaluation
(for example, plugging the application ontol-
ogy into an NLP pipeline for Named Entity
Recognition and evaluating its performance
in comparison to other techniques).

In addition to these ontology development and
evaluation goals, we intend to use the ontology as
a “gold standard” against which to evaluate au-
tomatic term recognition and taxonomy construc-
tion techniques for the syndromic surveillance do-
main. Further, we seek to integrate the resulting
ontology with the BioCaster ontology allowing
the potential for limited interlingual processing in
priority languages (in the United States, Spanish).

Currently we are considering two ontology in-
tegration strategies. First, using the existing map-
pings we have created between the ILI ontology
and BioCaster to access multi-lingual information
(using OWL datatype properties). Second, fully

Term Concept
1 cough COUGH
2 fever FEVER
3 pain -
4 shortness of breath -
5 vomiting -
6 influenza INFLUENZA
7 pneumonia PNEUMONIA
8 diarrhea DIARRHEA
9 nausea NAUSEA

10 chills CHILL
11 abdominal pain -
12 chest pain -
13 edema -
14 cyanosis CYANOSIS
15 lymphadenopathy -
16 dysuria -
17 dementia -
18 urinary tract inf -
19 sore throat SORE THROAT
20 wheezing WHEEZING
21 rhonchi -
22 bronchitis BRONCHIOLITIS
23 hypertension -
24 tachycardia -
25 respiratory distress PNEUMONIA

Table 2: Terms generated using the KWExT tool

integrating — that is, merging — the two on-
tologies and creating object property relations be-
tween them.

For example (using strategy 1), we could move
from the string “flu” in a clinical report (iden-
tified by the \bflu\b regular expression) to
the ILI ontology concept ili:influenza. In
turn, ili:influenza could be linked (using
a datatype property) to the BioCaster root term
biocaster:DISEASE 378 (which has the la-
bel “Influenza (Human).”) From the BioCaster
root term, we can — for example — generate the
translation “Gripe (Humano)” (Spanish).

6 Conclusion

The ILI application ontology developed from the
need for knowledge resources for the text mining
of clinical documents (specifically, Emergency
Room clinical reports). Our initial evaluation in-
dicates that we have good coverage of our domain,
although we plan to incrementally work on im-
proving any gaps in coverage through a process of
active and regular updating. We have described
our future plans to extend the ontology to new
syndromes in order to provide a general commu-

64



nity resource to facilitate data sharing and inte-
gration in the NLP based syndromic surveillance
domain. Finally, we actively solicit feedback on
the design, scope and accuracy of the ontology.

Acknowledgments

This project was partially funded by Grant Num-
ber 3-R01-LM009427-02 (NLM) from the United
States National Institute of Health.

References

Brank, J., Grobelnik, M., and Mladenić, D.
(2005). A Survey of Ontology Evaluation Tech-
niques. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Data Mining and Data Warehouses (SiKDD
2005), pages 166–170.

Bright, T., Furuya, E., Kuperman, G., and Bakken,
S. (2009). Laddering as a Technique for On-
tology Evaluation. In American Medical Infor-
matics Symposium (AMIA 2009).

Chen, H., Zeng, D., and Dang, Y. (2010). Infec-
tious Disease Informatics: Syndromic Surveil-
lance for Public Health and Bio-Defense.
Springer, New York.

Collier, N., Shigematsu, M., Dien, D., Berrero,
R., Takeuchi, K., and Kawtrakul, A. (2006).
A Multilingual Ontology for Infectious Dis-
ease Surveillance: Rationale, Design and Chal-
lenges. Language Resources and Evaluation,
40(3):405–413.

Conway, M. (2010). Mining a Corpus of Bio-
graphical Texts Using Keywords. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 25(1):23–35.

Cooper, D. (2007). Disease Surveillance: A Pub-
lic Health Informatics Approach, chapter Case
Study: Use of Tele-health Data for Syndromic
Surveillance in England and Wales, pages 335–
365. Wiley, New York.

Doyle, T., Ma, H., Groseclose, S., and Hopkins,
R. (2005). PHSkb: A Knowledgebase to Sup-
port Notifiable Disease Surveillance. BMC Med
Inform Decis Mak, 5:27.

Dunning, T. (1993). Accurate Methods for the
Statistics of Surprise and Coincidence. Com-
putational Linguistics, 19(1):61–74.

Eysenbach, G. (2006). Infodemiology: Track-
ing Flu-Related Searches on the Web for Syn-
dromic Surveillance. In American Medical In-
formatics Association Annual Symposium Pro-
ceedings (AMIA 2006), pages 244–248.

Frantzi, K., Ananiadou, S., and Mima, H.
(2000). Automatic Recognition for Multi-word
Terms. International Journal of Digital Li-
braries, 3(2):117–132.

Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Masolo, C., Oltramari,
A., and Schneider, L. (2002). Sweetening On-
tologies with DOLCE. In Proceedings of the
13th International Conference on Knowledge
Engineering and Knowledge Management. On-
tologies and the Semantic Web, pages 166–181.

Grigonyte, G., Brochhausen, M., Martin, L., Tsik-
nakis, M., and Haller, J. (2010). Evaluating
Ontologies with NLP-Based Terminologies - A
Case Study on ACGT and its Master Ontol-
ogy. In Formal Ontology in Information Sys-
tems: Proceedings of the Sixth International
Conference (FOIS 2010), pages 331–344.

Henning, K. (2004). What is Syndromic Surveil-
lance? MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 53
Suppl:5–11.

Lombardo, J., Burkom, H., Elbert, E., Ma-
gruder, S., Lewis, S. H., Loschen, W., Sari,
J., Sniegoski, C., Wojcik, R., and Pavlin, J.
(2003). A Systems Overview of the Electronic
Surveillance System for the Early Notification
of Community-Based Epidemics (ESSENCE
II). J Urban Health, 80(2 Suppl 1):32–42.

Miller, G. (1995). WordNet: A Lexical Database
for English. Communications of the Associa-
tion for Computing Machinary, 38(11):39–41.

Niles, I. and Pease, A. (2003). Linking Lexicons
and Ontologies: Mapping WordNet to the Sug-
gested Upper Merged Ontology. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Engineering (IKE
03), pages 23–26.

Okhmatovskaia, A., Chapman, W., Collier, N.,
Espino, J., and Buckeridge, D. (2009). SSO:
The Syndromic Surveillance Ontology. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Society for Dis-
ease Surveillance.

65



Scholer, M. (2004). Development of a Syndrome
Definition for Influenza-Like-Illness. In Pro-
ceedings of American Public Health Associa-
tion Meeting (APHA 2004).

Tsui, F., Espino, J., Dato, V., Gesteland, P., Hut-
man, J., and Wagner, M. (2003). Technical De-
scription of RODS: a Real-Time Public Health
Surveillance System. J Am Med Inform Assoc,
10(5):399–408.

Wagner, M., Gresham, L., and Dato, V. (2006).
Handbook of Biosurveillance, chapter Case
Detection, Outbreak Detection, and Outbreak
Characterization, pages 27–50. Elsevier Aca-
demic Press.

Zhu, X., Fan, J.-W., Baorto, D., Weng, C., and
Cimino, J. (2009). A Review of Auditing
Methods Applied to the Content of Controlled
Biomedical Terminologies. Journal of Biomed-
ical Informatics, 42(3):413 – 425.

66


