










































A Machine Learning Approach for Recognizing Textual Entailment in Spanish


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 62–67, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Machine Learning Approach for  
Recognizing Textual Entailment in Spanish 

 
 

Julio Javier Castillo 
National University of Córdoba 

Ciudad Universitaria, 5000 
Córdoba, Argentina 

jotacastillo@gmail.com 

  
 
 
 

Abstract 

This paper presents a system that uses ma-
chine learning algorithms for the task of re-
cognizing textual entailment in Spanish 
language. The datasets used include SPARTE 
Corpus and a translated version to Spanish of 
RTE3, RTE4 and RTE5 datasets. The features 
chosen quantify lexical, syntactic and seman-
tic level matching between text and hypothe-
sis sentences. We analyze how the different 
sizes of datasets and classifiers could impact 
on the final overall performance of the RTE 
classification of two-way task in Spanish. The 
RTE system yields 60.83% of accuracy and a 
competitive result of 66.50% of accuracy is 
reported by train and test set taken from 
SPARTE Corpus with 70% split. 

1 Introduction 

The objective of the Recognizing Textual Entail-
ment Challenge is determining whether the mean-
ing of the Hypothesis (H) can be inferred from a 
text (T) (Ido Dagan et al., 2006). This challenge 
has been organized by NIST in recent years.  

Another related antecedent was Answer Valida-
tion Exercise (AVE), part of Cross Language 
Evaluation Forum (CLEF), whose objective is to 
develop systems which are able to decide whether 
the answer to a question is correct or not (Peñas et 
al, 2006). It was a three year-old track, from 2006 
to 2008. 

AVE challenge was an evaluation framework 
for Question Answering (QA) systems to promote 
the development and evaluation of subsystems 
aimed at validating the correctness of the answers 
given by a QA system. The Answer Validation 
task must select the best answer for the final out-
put. There is a subtask for each language involved 
in QA, the Spanish is one of these. Thus, AVE task 
is very similar to RTE (Recognition of Textual 
Entailments). 

In this paper, we address the RTE task problem 
of determining the entailment value between Text 
and Hypothesis pairs in Spanish, applying machine 
learning techniques.  

In the past, RTEs Challenges machine learning 
algorithms were widely used for the task of recog-
nizing textual entailment (Marneffe et al., 2006; 
Zanzotto et al., 2007; Castillo, 2009) and they have 
reported goods results for English language. Also, 
our system applies machine learning algorithms to 
the Spanish. 

We built a set of datasets based on public avail-
able datasets for English, together to SPARTE 
(Peñas et al, 2006), an available Corpus in Spanish. 
This corpus contains 2962 hypothesis with a doc-
ument label and a True/False value indicating 
whether the document entails the hypothesis or not. 
Up to our knowledge, SPARTE corpus in the only 
corpus aimed at evaluating RTE systems in Span-
ish. 

Finally, we generated a feature vector with the 
following components for both Text and Hypothe-
sis: Levenshtein distance, a lexical distance based 
on Levenshtein, a semantic similarity measure 
Wordnet based, and the LCS (longest common 

62



substring) metric; in order to characterize the rela-
tionships between the Text and the Hypothesis. 

The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 shows the system description, whe-
reas Section 3 describes the results of experimental 
evaluation and discussion of them. Section 4 dis-
cusses opportunities of collaboration. Finally, Sec-
tion 5 summarizes the conclusions and lines for 
future work. 

2 System  Description 

This section provides an overview of our system 
which is based on a machine learning approach for 
recognizing textual entailment to the Spanish. The 
system produces feature vectors for the available 
development data RTE3, RTE4, RTE5, and 
SPARTE(Peñas et al, 2006). Weka (Witten and 
Frank, 2000) is used to train classifiers on these 
feature vectors. 

The SPARTE Corpus, was built from the Span-
ish corpora used at Cross-Language Evaluation 
Forum (CLEF) for evaluating QA systems during 
the years 2003, 2004 and 2005. This corpus con-
tains 2962 hypothesis with a True/False value indi-
cating whether the document entails the hypothesis 
or not. 
Due to, all available dataset of PASCAL Text 
Analysis Conference were in English, we trans-
lated every dataset to Spanish by using an online 
translator engine1. So, we had a Spanish dataset but 
with some translation errors provided by the trans-
lator. It is important to note, that the “quality” of 
the translation is given by the Translator engine, 
and we suppose that the sense of the sentence 
should not be modified by the Translator. Indeed, it 
is the situation for the majority of the cases that we 
analyzed. The new datasets were named RTE3-Sp 
(Spanish), RTE4-Sp, and RTE5-Sp. 
The following example is the pair number 799 
from RTE3-Sp with False as entailment value. 
 
Text: 

Otros dos marines, Tyler Jackson y Juan Jodka 
III, ya han se declaró culpables de asalto agra-
vantes y conspiración para obstruir la justicia y 
fueron condenados a 21 meses y 18 meses, respec-
tivamente. 
 

                                                        
1 http://www.microsofttranslator.com/ 

Hypothesis:  
 Tyler Jackson ha sido condenado a 18 meses. 

 
This example shows a little noisy (and a minimal 
syntactic error) in the translation of the Text to 
Spanish (instead of “ya han se declaró” should be 
“ya se han declarado”); but the whole meaning was 
not changed. 

Also, we show a pair example (pair id=3) taken 
from Sparte Corpus with False as entailment value: 

 
Text: ¿Cuál es la capital de Croacia? 
 
Hypothesis :   
  La capital de Croacia es ONU. 

 
In a similar way, all pairs from SPARTE belong to 
QA task and these are syntactically simpler than 
RTE’s Corpus pairs. 

Additionally, we generate the following devel-
opment sets: RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp, and SPARTE-
Bal+RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp in order to train with dif-
ferent corpus and different sizes.  In all cases, 
RTE5-Sp TAC 2009 gold standard dataset was 
used as test-set.  

Also, we did additional experiments with 
SPARTE, using cross-validation technique and 
percentage split method, in order to test the accu-
racy of our system taking only this corpus as de-
velopment and training set. 
 

2.1 Features 

We experimented with the following four ma-
chine learning algorithms: Support Vector Ma-
chine (SVM), Multilayer Perceptron(MLP), 
Decision Trees(DT) and AdaBoost(AB).  

The Decision Trees are interesting because we 
can see what features were selected from the top 
levels of the trees. SVM and AdaBoost were se-
lected because they are known for achieving high 
performances, and MLP was used because it has 
achieved high performance in others NLP tasks.  

We experimented with various settings for the 
machine learning algorithms, including only the 
results for the best parameters. 

We generated a feature vector with the follow-
ing components for every possible <T,H>: Le-
venshtein distance, a lexical distance based on 
Levenshtein, a semantic similarity measure Word-

63



net based, and the LCS (longest common sub-
string) metric. 

We chose only four features in order to learn 
the development sets, having into account that 
larger feature sets do not necessarily lead to im-
proving classification performance because it 
could increase the risk of overfitting the training 
data.  

Below the motivation for the input features: 
Levenshtein distance is motivated by the good re-
sults obtained as a measure of similarity between 
two strings. Using stems, this measure improves 
the Levenshtein over words. The lexical distance 
feature based on Levenshtein distance is interesting 
because works to a sentence level. Semantic simi-
larity using WordNet is interesting because of the 
capture of the semantic similarity between T and H 
to sentence level. Longest common substring is 
selected because it is easy to implement and pro-
vides a good measure for word overlap.  

2.2 Lexical Distance 

The standard Levenshtein distance is a string me-
tric for measuring the amount of difference be-
tween two strings. This distance quantifies the 
number of changes (character based) to generate 
one text string (T) from the other (H). The algo-
rithm works independently from the language that 
we are analyzing. 

We used a Spanish Stemmer that stems words 
in Spanish based on a modified version of the 
Snowball algorithm2. 
Additionally, by using Levenshtein distance we 
defined a lexical distance and the procedure is the 
following: 

 Each string T and H are divided in a list of 
tokens. 

 The similarity between each pair of tokens 
in T and H is performed using the Le-
venshtein distance over stems. 

 The string similarity between two lists of 
tokens is reduced to the problem of “bipar-
tite graph matching”, performed using the 
Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn, 1955) over 
this bipartite graph. Then, we found the as-
signment that maximizes the sum of rat-
ings of each token. Note that each graph 
node is a token of the list. 

                                                        
2 http://snowball.tartarus.org/ 

The final score is calculated by:  

))(),(( HLengthTLengthMax
TotalSimfinalscore   

 
Where: 
TotalSim is the sum of the similarities with 
the optimal assignment in the graph. 
Length (T) is the number of tokens in T. 
Length (H) is the number of tokens in H. 

2.3 Wordnet Distance 

Since, all datasets are in Spanish, we need to con-
vert <T, H> pair to English. In the case of RTEs-
Sp datasets, this action will backward to the Eng-
lish language (source).  

Our ideal case would be to use EuroWordNet3 
to obtain the semantic information that we need, 
but we won’t be able to access to this resource.  

Thus, WordNet is used to calculate the seman-
tic similarity between T and H. The following pro-
cedure is applied: 

1. Word sense disambiguation using the Lesk 
algorithm (Lesk, 1986), based on Wordnet defini-
tions. 

2. A semantic similarity matrix between words 
in T and H is defined. Words are used only in syn-
onym and hyperonym relationship. The Breadth 
First Search algorithm is used over these tokens; 
similarity is calculated by using two factors: length 
of the path and orientation of the path. 

3. To obtain the final score, we use matching 
average. 

The semantic similarity between two words is 
computed as: 

)()(
)),((2),(

tDepthsDepth
tsLCSDepthtsSim


  

Where: s,t are source and target words that we 
are comparing (s is in H and t is in T). Depth(s) is 
the shortest distance from the root node to the cur-
rent node. LCS(s,t):is the least common subsume 
of s and t. 

The matching average (step 3) between two 
sentences X and Y is calculated as follows: 

)()(
),(2

YLengthXLength
YXMatcherageMatchingAv


  

 

                                                        
3 http://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet/ 

64



2.4 Longest Common Substring 

Given two strings, T of length n and H of length m, 
the Longest Common Sub-string (LCS) problem 
(Dan, 1999) will find the longest string that is a 
substring of both T and H. It is found by dynamic 
programming.  
 
 
 
 
 

3 Experimental Evaluation and Discus-
sion of the Results 

 
With the aim of exploring the differences among 
training sets and machine learning algorithms, we 
did many experiments looking for the best result to 
our system. 

First, we converted the RTE4 and RTE5 data-
sets with Contradiction/Unknown/Entailment pair 
information to a binary True/False problem, named 
two-way problem. 

Then, we used the following combination of da-
tasets: RTE3-Sp, RTE4-Sp, RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp, 
SPARTE-Bal (balanced SPARTE Corpus with the 
same number of true and false cases), and 
SPARTE-Bal+ RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp. The training 
set SPARTE-Balanced was created by taking all 
true cases and randomly taking false cases, and 
then we build a balanced training set containing 
1352 pairs, with 676 true and 676 false pairs. 

We used four classifiers to learn every devel-
opment set: (1) Support Vector Machine, (2) Ada 
Boost, (3) Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and (4) 
Decision Tree using the open source WEKA Data 
Mining Software (Witten & Frank, 2005). In all the 
tables results we show only the accuracy of the 
best classifier. 

The results obtained to predict RTE5-Sp in a 
two-way classification task are summarized in Ta-
ble 1 below. In addition, table 2 shows our results 
reported in RTE two-way classification task by 
using with Cross Validation technique with 10 
folds. 

 
 
 
 
 

Dataset Classifier Accuracy% 
RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp SVM 60.83% 
RTE3-Sp SVM 60.50% 
RTE4-Sp MLP 60.50% 
SPARTE-Bal+ 
RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp 

MLP 60.17% 

SPARTE-Bal DT 50% 
Baseline - 50% 

Table 1.Results obtained in two-way classification task. 
 
Dataset Classifier Accuracy% 
SPARTE-Bal DT 68.19% 
RTE3-Sp SVM 66.50% 
RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp MLP 61.44% 
RTE4-Sp MLP 59.60% 
SPARTE-Bal+ 
RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp 

AdaBoost 56.83% 

Baseline - 50% 
Table 2.Results obtained with Cross Validation 10 folds 

in two-way task. 
 
The performance in all cases was clearly above 
those baselines. Only when using SPARTE-Bal we 
obtained a result equal to the baseline (50% true 
pairs and 50% false pairs). 

The SPARTE-Balanced dataset yields the worst 
results, maybe because this dataset contains only 
pairs with QA task, and an additional reason, could 
be that SPARTE is syntactically simpler than 
PASCAL RTE. In that sense, some authors have 
reported low performance when using syntactically 
simpler datasets; for instance, by using BPI4 data-
set to predict RTEs datasets in English. Therefore, 
SPARTE seems to be not enough good training set 
to predict RTEs test sets. 

The best performance of our system was 
achieved with SVM classifier with RTE3-
Sp+RTE4-Sp dataset; it was 60.83% of accuracy. 
In the majority of the cases, SVM or MLP classifi-
ers appear as ‘favorite’ in all classification tasks. 

Surprisingly, in the two-way task, a slight and 
not statistical significant difference of 0.66% be-
tween the best and worst combination (except for 
SPARTE-Bal) of datasets and classifiers is found. 
So, it suggests that the combination of dataset and 
classifiers do not produce a strong impact predict-
ing RTE5-Sp, at least, for these feature sets. 
 

                                                        
4 http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/pclark/bpi-test-suite/ 

))(),(min(
)),((),(

HLengthTLength
HTMaxComSubLengthHTlcs 

65



Also, we observed that by including SPARTE-Bal 
to RTE3-Sp+RTE4-Sp dataset, the performance 
slightly decreases, although this difference was not 
statistical significant. 

The results obtained in table 2(and table 4) with 
SPARTE-Bal and decision tree algorithm, are the 
best for cross-validation experiments. In fact, an 
accuracy of 68.19% was obtained, which is 
18.19% bigger than the result obtained in table 1, 
and was statistical significant. 

Finally, we assessed our system only over the 
SPARTE Corpus.  First, we used cross validation 
technique with ten folds over SPARTE-Bal, testing 
over our four classifiers. Then, we tested 
SPARTE-Bal by splitting the corpus in training set 
(70%), and test set (30%). 
 The results are shown in the tables 4 and 5 below. 
 

Classifier Accuracy% 
DT 68.19% 
MLP 62.64% 
AdaBoost 61.31% 
SVM 60.35% 
Baseline 50% 

Table 4.Results obtained with Cross Validation 10 folds 
in two-way task to predict SPARTE. 

 
 

Classifier Accuracy% 
DT 66.50% 
AdaBoost 62.31% 
SVM 59.60% 
MLP 52.70% 
Baseline 50% 

Table 5.Results obtained with SPARTE with split 70%. 
 
The results on cross-validation are better than 
those obtained on test set, which is most probably 
due to overfitting of classifiers. 

Table 5 shows a good performance of 66.50%, 
predicting test set and using Decision trees. These 
results are opposed to the bad performance re-
ported by SPARTE to predict RTEs datasets. Here, 
in fact, the syntactic complexity and original task 
do not change between train and test set; and it 
seems to be the main problem with the low per-
formance of SPARTE in Table 1.  

 

 

3.1 Related Work 

Up to our knowledge, there are not available re-
sults of other teams that used SPARTE to predict 
RTE, or used RTEs applied to Spanish.  However, 
some comparison with other results for Spanish 
could be done in AVE Challenge (Alberto Téllez- 
Valero et al., 2008; Ferrández et al., 2008; Castillo, 
2008), but we will need to modify our system to 
test AVE 2008 test set and computing different 
metric for the ranking of the result.  

On the other hand, comparing the results ob-
tained with English in RTE5 TAC Challenge, we 
obtained a result not statistical significant with re-
spect to the median score for English systems that 
is 61.17% of accuracy. Also, our system could be 
compared to independent-language RTE systems. 

To finish, we think that several improvements 
could be done in order to improve the accuracy of 
the system, using syntactic features, more semantic 
information, and new external resources such as 
Acronyms database.  

4 Opportunities  for Collaboration 

Our work is oriented to create a Textual Entailment 
System. Such system could be used by another sys-
tem or teams of others Universities, as an internal 
module.  

The entailment relations between texts or 
strings are very useful for a variety of Natural 
Language Processing applications, such as Ques-
tion Answering, Information Extraction, Informa-
tion Retrieval and Document Summarization. 

For example, a RTE module could be used in a 
Question Answering system, where the answer of a 
question must be entailed by the text that supports 
the correctness of the answer; or an Automatic 
Summarization system could eliminate the passag-
es whose meaning is already entailed by other pas-
sages and, by this way, reduce the size of the 
passages. 

In addition, a question answering system could 
be enhanced by a RTE module, and also, these re-
sults are useful as Answer Validation System.  

Our system was designed having in mind the 
interoperation among systems. Thus, the system 
inputs accept files in .xml format, and the output is 
text plain files and .xml files. 

On the other hand, one of the resources that 
would allow this work advance is the EuroWord-

66



net, because it could provide additional semantic 
information improving our semantic features, and 
so the performance of our system. Due to being an 
expensive and not freely available resource, we are 
avoiding using it, but we expect to be able to use it 
in the future. In section 3, we used Wordnet in or-
der to obtain the relationship between two different 
concepts. Since Wordnet includes only synsets for 
English and not for Spanish, we have translated the 
<t,h> pairs to English using the online Microsoft 
Bing translator5, in order to use Wordnet. As a re-
sult, a loss of performance was obtained. We be-
lieve that the use of EuroWordNet could benefit 
our semantic features. 

Currently, we are keeping improving our sys-
tem, and we are looking forward to get opportuni-
ties for collaboration with other teams of all the 
Americas. 

5 Conclusion and Future work  

In this paper we present an initial RTE System 
based for the Spanish language, based on machine 
learning techniques that uses some of the available 
textual entailment corpus and yields 60.83% of 
accuracy.  

One issue found is that SPARTE Corpus seems 
to be not useful to predict RTEs-Sp datasets, be-
cause of the syntactic simplicity and the absence of 
task information different to QA task.  

On the other hand, we found that a competitive 
result of 66.50%acc is reported by train and test set 
taken from SPARTE Corpus. 

Future work is oriented to experiment with ad-
ditional lexical and semantic similarities features 
and to test the improvements they may yield. Also, 
we must explore how to decrease the computation-
al cost of the system. Our plan is keeping applying 
machine learning algorithms, testing with new fea-
tures, and adding new source of knowledge.  

References  
Luisa Bentivogli, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang Dang, Danillo 

Giampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009. The Fifth 
PASCAL Recognizing Textual Entailment Challenge. 
In proceedings of Textual Analysis Conference 
(TAC). NIST, Maryland USA.  

Adrian Iftene, Mihai-Alex Moruz.2009. UAIC Partici-
pation at RTE5, TAC 2009, Gaithersburg, Maryland, 
USA. 

                                                        
5 http://www.microsofttranslator.com/ 

S. Mirkin, R. Bar-Haim, J. Berant, I. Dagan, E. Shnarch, 
A. Stern, and I. Szpektor.2009. Bar-Ilan University’s 
submission to RTE5, TAC 2009, Gaithersburg, Mary-
land, USA. 

Castillo, Julio. Sagan in TAC2009: Using Support Vec-
tor Machines in Recognizing Textual Entailment and 
TE Search Pilot task. TAC 2009, Gaithersburg, Mar-
yland, USA. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, Trond 
Grenager, Daniel Cer, Anna Rafferty and Christopher 
D. Manning. 2006. Learning to distinguish valid tex-
tual entailments. RTE2 Challenge, Italy. 

F. Zanzotto, Marco Pennacchiotti and Alessandro Mo-
schitti.2007. Shallow Semantics in Fast Textual En-
tailment Rule Learners, RTE3, Prague. 

Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. “Data Mining: 
Practical machine learning tools and techniques", 
2nd Edition, Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 
USA. 

Anselmo Peñas, Alvaro Rodrigo, Felisa Verdejo. 
SPARTE, a Test Suite for Recognising Textual En-
tailment in Spanish. Cicling 2006, Mexico. 

Peñas A., Rodrigo A., Sama V., and Verdejo F. Over-
view of the Answer Validation Exercise 2006, In-
Working notes for the Cross Language Evaluation 
Forum Workshop (CLEF 2006), September 2006, 
Spain. 

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman and Bernardo Magnini. The 
PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment Challenge. 
In Quiñonero-Candela, J.; Dagan, I.; Magnini, B.; 
d'Alché-Buc, F. (Eds.) Machine Learning Chal-
lenges. Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Vol. 
3944, pp. 177-190, Springer, 2006. 

M. Lesk. Automatic sense disambiguation using ma-
chine readable dictionaries: How to tell a pine cone 
from a ice cream cone. In SIGDOC ’86, 1986. 

Harold W. Kuhn, The Hungarian Method for the 
assignment problem, Naval Research Logistics Quar-
terly. 1955 

Alberto Téllez-Valero, Antonio Juarez-Gonzalez, Ma-
nuel Montes-y-Gomez, Luis Villasenior-Pineda. 
INAOE at QA@CLEF 2008:Evaluating Answer Va-
lidation in Spanish Question Answering. CLEF 2008. 

Julio J. Castillo. The Contribution of FaMAF at 
QA@CLEF 2008.Answer ValidationExercise.CLEF 
2008. 

Oscar Ferrández, Rafael Muñoz, and Manuel Palomar. 
A Lexical Semantic Approach to AVE. CLEF 2008. 

67


