










































Discourse indicators for content selection in summarization


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 147–156,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Discourse indicators for content selection in summarization

Annie Louis, Aravind Joshi, Ani Nenkova
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

{lannie,joshi,nenkova}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We present analyses aimed at eliciting
which specific aspects of discourse pro-
vide the strongest indication for text im-
portance. In the context of content selec-
tion for single document summarization of
news, we examine the benefits of both the
graph structure of text provided by dis-
course relations and the semantic sense
of these relations. We find that structure
information is the most robust indicator
of importance. Semantic sense only pro-
vides constraints on content selection but
is not indicative of important content by it-
self. However, sense features complement
structure information and lead to improved
performance. Further, both types of dis-
course information prove complementary
to non-discourse features. While our re-
sults establish the usefulness of discourse
features, we also find that lexical overlap
provides a simple and cheap alternative
to discourse for computing text structure
with comparable performance for the task
of content selection.

1 Introduction
Discourse relations such as cause, contrast or
elaboration are considered critical for text inter-
pretation, as they signal in what way parts of a text
relate to each other to form a coherent whole. For
this reason, the discourse structure of a text can be
seen as an intermediate representation, over which
an automatic summarizer can perform computa-
tions in order to identify important spans of text
to include in a summary (Ono et al., 1994; Marcu,
1998; Wolf and Gibson, 2004). In our work, we
study the content selection performance of differ-
ent types of discourse-based features.
Discourse relations interconnect units of a text

and discourse formalisms have proposed different

resulting structures for the full text, i.e. tree (Mann
and Thompson, 1988) and graph (Wolf and Gib-
son, 2005). This structure is one source of in-
formation from discourse which can be used to
compute the importance of text units. The seman-
tics of the discourse relations between sentences
could be another indicator of content importance.
For example, text units connected by “cause” and
“contrast” relationships might be more important
content for summaries compared to those convey-
ing “elaboration”. While previous work have fo-
cused on developing content selection methods
based upon individual frameworks (Marcu, 1998;
Wolf and Gibson, 2004; Uzda et al., 2008), little is
known about which aspects of discourse are actu-
ally correlated with content selection power.
In our work, we separate out structural and se-

mantic features and examine their usefulness. We
also investigate whether simpler intermediate rep-
resentations can be used in lieu of discourse. More
parsimonious, easy to compute representations of
text have been proposed for summarization. For
example, a text can be reduced to a set of highly
descriptive topical words, the presence of which
is used to signal importance for content selection
(Lin and Hovy, 2002; Conroy et al., 2006). Sim-
ilarly, a graph representation of the text can be
computed, in which vertices represent sentences,
and the nodes are connected when the sentences
are similar in terms of word overlap; properties of
the graph would then determine the importance of
the nodes (Erkan and Radev, 2004; Mihalcea and
Tarau, 2005) and guide content selection.
We compare the utility of discourse features for

single-document text summarization from three
frameworks: Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann
and Thompson, 1988), Graph Bank (Wolf and
Gibson, 2005), and Penn Discourse Treebank
(PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008). We present a de-
tailed analysis of the predictive power of different
types of discourse features for content selection

147



and compare discourse-based selection to simpler
non-discourse methods.

2 Data

We use a collection of Wall Street Journal (WSJ)
articles manually annotated for discourse infor-
mation according to three discourse frameworks.
The Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) and Graph
Bank (GB) corpora are relatively small compared
to the Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) annota-
tions that cover the 1 million word WSJ part of the
Penn Treebank corpus (Marcus et al., 1994). Our
evaluation requires gold standard summaries writ-
ten by humans, so we perform our experiments on
a subset of the overlapping documents for which
we also have human summaries available.

2.1 RST corpus
RST (Mann and Thompson, 1988) proposes that
coherent text can be represented as a tree formed
by the combination of text units via discourse re-
lations. The RST corpus developed by Carlson et
al. (2001) contains discourse tree annotations for
385 WSJ articles from the Penn Treebank corpus.
The smallest annotation units in the RST corpus
are sub-sentential clauses, also called elementary
discourse units (EDUs). Adjacent EDUs combine
through rhetorical relations into larger spans such
as sentences. The larger units recursively partici-
pate in relations with others, yielding one hierar-
chical tree structure covering the entire text.
The discourse units participating in a RST re-

lation are assigned either nucleus or satellite sta-
tus; a nucleus is considered to be more central,
or important, in the text than a satellite. Rela-
tions composed of one nucleus and one satellite
are called mononuclear relations. On the other
hand, in multinuclear relations, two or more text
units participate, and all are considered equally
important. The RST corpus is annotated with 53
mononuclear and 25 multinuclear relations. Rela-
tions that convey similar meaning are grouped, re-
sulting in 16 classes of relations: Cause, Comparison,
Condition, Contrast, Attribution, Background, Elaboration,
Enablement, Evaluation, Explanation, Joint, Manner-Means,
Topic-Comment, Summary, Temporal and Topic-Change.

2.2 Graph Bank corpus
Sometimes, texts cannot be described in a tree
structure as hypothesized by the RST. For exam-
ple, crossing dependencies and nodes with multi-

ple parents appear frequently in texts and do not
allow a tree structure to be built (Lee et al., 2008).
To address this problem, general graph representa-
tion was proposed by Wolf and Gibson (2005) as
a more realistic model of discourse structure.
Graph annotations of discourse are available for

135 documents (105 from AP Newswire and 30
from the WSJ) as part of the Graph Bank cor-
pus (Wolf and Gibson, 2005). Clauses are the ba-
sic discourse segments in this annotation. These
units are represented as the nodes in a graph, and
are linked with one another through 11 differ-
ent rhetorical relations: Cause-effect, Condition, Vio-
lated expectation, Elaboration, Example, Generalization, At-
tribution, Temporal sequence, Similarity, Contrast and Same.
The edge between two nodes representing a rela-
tion is directed in the case of asymmetric relations
such as Cause and Condition and undirected for
symmetric relations like Similarity and Contrast.

2.3 Penn Discourse Treebank

The Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) (Prasad et
al., 2008) is theory-neutral and does not make
any assumptions about the form of the overall dis-
course structure of text. Instead, this approach fo-
cuses on local and lexically-triggered discourse re-
lations. Annotators identify explicit signals such
as discourse connectives: ‘but’, ‘because’, ‘while’
and mark the text spans which they relate. The
relations between these spans are called explicit
relations. In addition, adjacent sentences in a dis-
course are also semantically related even in the ab-
sence of explicit markers. In the PDTB, these are
called implicit relations and are annotated between
adjacent sentences in the same paragraph.
For both implicit and explicit relations, senses

are assigned from a hierarchy containing four
top-level categories: Comparison (contrast, prag-
matic contrast, concession, pragmatic concession), Contin-
gency (cause, pragmatic cause, condition, pragmatic con-
dition) , Expansion (conjunction, instantiation, restate-
ment, alternative, exception, list) and Temporal (asyn-
chronous, synchronous). The top level senses are di-
vided into types and subtypes that represent more
fine grained senses—the second level senses are
listed in parentheses above.
PDTB also provides annotations for the text

spans of the two arguments (referred to Arg1 and
Arg2) involved in a relation. In explicit relations,
the argument syntactically bound to the discourse
connective is called Arg2. The other argument is

148



referred to as Arg1. For implicit relations, the ar-
gument occurring first in the text is named Arg1,
the one appearing later is called Arg2.

2.4 Human summaries

Human summaries are available for some of the
WSJ articles. These summaries are extractive: hu-
man judges identified and extracted important text
units from the source articles and used them as
such to compose the summary.
The RST corpus contains summaries for 150

documents. Two annotators selected the most im-
portant EDUs from these documents and created
summaries that contain about square root of the
number of EDUs in the source document. For
convenience, we adopt sentences as the common
unit for comparison across all frameworks. So,
we mapped the summary EDUs to the sentences
which contain them. Two variable length sum-
maries for each document were obtained in this
way. In some documents, it was not possible to
align EDUs automatically with gold standard sen-
tence boundaries given by the Penn Treebank and
these were not used in our work. We perform
our experiments on the remaining 124 document-
summary pairs. These documents consisted of
4,765 sentences in total, of which 1,152 were la-
beled as important sentences because they con-
tained EDUs selected by at least one annotator.
The Graph Bank corpus also contains human

summaries. However, only 15 are for documents
for which RST and PDTB annotations are also
available. These summaries were created by fif-
teen human annotators who ranked the sentences
in each document on a scale from 1 (low impor-
tance) to 7 (very important for a summary). For
each document, we ordered the sentences accord-
ing to the average rank from the annotators, and
created a summary of 100 words using the top
ranked sentences. The number of summary (im-
portant) sentences is 67, out of a total of 308 sen-
tences from the 15 documents.

3 Features for content selection

In this section, we describe two sets of discourse
features–structural and semantic. The structure
features are derived from RST trees and do not
involve specific relations. Rather they compute
the importance of a segment as a function of its
position in the global structure of the entire text.
On the other hand, semantic features indicate the

sense of a relation between two sentences and
do not involve structure information. We com-
pute these from the PDTB annotations. To un-
derstand the benefits of discourse information, we
also study the performance of some non-discourse
features standardly used in summarization.

3.1 Structural features: RST-based
Prior work in text summarization has developed
content selection methods using properties of the
RST tree: the nucleus-satellite distinction, notions
of salience and the level of an EDU in the tree.
In early work, Ono et al. (1994) suggested

a penalty score for every EDU based on their
nucleus-satellite status. Since satellites of rela-
tions are considered less important than the corre-
sponding nuclei, spans that appear as satellites can
be assigned a lower score than the nucleus spans.
This intuition is implemented by Ono et al. (1994)
as a penalty value for each EDU, defined as the
number of satellite nodes found on the path from
the root of the tree to that EDU. Figure 1 shows
the RST tree (Carlson et al., 2002) for the follow-
ing sentence which contains four EDUs.

1. [Mr. Watkins said] 2. [volume on Interprovincial’s sys-
tem is down about 2% since January] 3. [and is expected to
fall further,] 4. [making expansion unnecessary until perhaps
the mid-1990s.]
The spans of individual EDUs are represented

at the leaves of the tree. At the root of the tree, the
span covers the entire text. The path from EDU 1
to the root contains one satellite node. It is there-
fore assigned a penalty of 1. Paths to the root from
all other EDUs involve only nucleus nodes and
subsequently these EDUs do not incur any penalty.

Figure 1: RST tree for the example sentence in
Section 3.1.

Marcu (1998) proposed another method to uti-
lize the nucleus-satellite distinction, rewarding nu-
cleus status instead of penalizing satellite. He put
forward the idea of a promotion set, consisting of

149



salient/important units of a text span. The nu-
cleus is the more salient unit in the full span of
a mononuclear relation. In a multinuclear relation,
all the nuclei are salient units of the larger span.
For example, in Figure 1, EDUs 2 and 3 partici-
pate in a multinuclear (List) relation. As a result,
both EDUs 2 and 3 appear in the promotion set of
their combined span. The salient units (promotion
set) of each text span are shown above the horizon-
tal line which represents the span. At the leaves,
salient units are the EDUs themselves.
For the purpose of identifying important con-

tent, units in the promotion sets of nodes close to
the root are hypothesized to be more important
than those at lower levels. The highest promo-
tion of an EDU occurs at the node closest to the
root which contains that EDU in its promotion set.
The depth of the tree from the highest promotion
is assigned as the score for that EDU. Hence, the
closer to the root an EDU is promoted, the better
its score. Since EDUs 2, 3 and 4 are promoted all
the way up to the root of the tree, the score as-
signed to them is equal to 4, the total depth of the
tree. EDU 1 receives a depth score of 3.
However, notice that EDUs 2 and 3 are pro-

moted to the root from a greater depth than EDU
4 but all three receive the same depth score. But
an EDU promoted successively over multiple lev-
els should be more important than one which is
promoted fewer times. In order to make this dis-
tinction, a promotion score was also introduced by
Marcu (1998) which is a measure of the number
of levels over which an EDU is promoted. Now,
EDUs 2 and 3 receive a promotion score of three
while the score of EDU 4 is only two.
For our experiments, we use the nucleus-

satellite penalty, depth and promotion based scores
as features. Because all these scores depend on the
length of the document, another set of the same
features normalized by number of words in the
document are also included. The penalty/score for
a sentence is computed as the maximum of the
penalties/scores of its constituent EDUs.

3.2 Semantic features: PDTB-based

These features represent sentences purely in terms
of the relations which they participate in. For each
sentence, we use the PDTB annotations to encode
the sense of the relation expressed by the sentence
and the type of realization (explicit or implicit).
For example, the sentence below expresses a

Contingency relation.
In addition, its machines are easier to operate, so cus-

tomers require less assistance from software.
For such sentences that contain both the argu-

ments of a relation ie., expresses the relation by
itself, we set the feature “expresses relation”. For
the above sentence, the binary feature “expresses
Contingency relation” would be true.
Alternatively, sentences participating in multi-

sentential relations will have one of the following
features on: “contains Arg1 of relation” or “con-
tains Arg2 of relation”. Therefore, for the follow-
ing sentences in an Expansion relation, we record
the feature “contains Arg1 of Expansion relation”
for sentence (1) and for sentence (2), “contains
Arg2 of Expansion relation”.
(1) Wednesday’s dominant issue was Yasuda &Marine In-

surance, which continued to surge on rumors of speculative
buying. (2) It ended the day up 80 yen to 1880 yen.
We combine the implicit/explicit type distinc-

tion of the relations with the other features de-
scribed so far, doubling the number of features.
We also added features that use the second level
sense of a relation. So, the relevant features for
sentence (1) above would be “contains Arg1 of
Implicit Expansion relation” as well as “contains
Arg1 of Implicit Restatement relation” (Restate-
ment is a type of Expansion relation (Section 2.3)).
In addition, we include features measuring the

number of relations shared by a sentence (implicit,
explicit and total) and the distance between argu-
ments of explicit relations (the distance of Arg1
when the sentence contains Arg2).

3.3 Non-discourse features
We use standard non-discourse features used in
summarization: length of the sentence, whether
the sentence is paragraph initial or the first sen-
tence of a document, and its offsets from docu-
ment beginning as well as paragraph beginning
and end (Edmundson, 1969). We also include the
average, sum and product probabilities of the con-
tent words appearing in sentences (Nenkova et al.,
2006) and the number of topic signature words in
the sentence (Lin and Hovy, 2000).

4 Predictive power of features

We used the human summaries from the RST cor-
pus to study which features strongly correlate with
the important sentences selected by humans. For
binary features such as “does the sentence con-

150



tain a Contingency relation”, a chi-square test was
computed to measure the association between a
feature and sentence class (in summary or not in
summary). For real-valued features, comparison
between important and unimportant/non-summary
sentences was done using a two-sided t-test. The
significant features from our different classes are
reported in the Appendix–Tables 5, 6 and 7. A
brief summary of the results is provided below.
Significant features that have higher values for

sentences selected in a summary are:
Structural: depth score and promotion score–both normal-
ized and unnormalized.
Semantic-PDTB-level11: contains Arg1 of Explicit Expan-
sion, contains Arg1 of Implicit Contingency, contains Arg1
of Implicit Expansion, distance of other argument
Non-discourse: length, is the first sentence in the article, is
the first sentence in the paragraph, offset from paragraph end,
number of topic signature terms present, average probability
of content words, sum of probabilities of content words
Significant features that have higher values for

sentences not selected in a summary are:
Structural: Ono penalty–normalized and unnormalized.
Semantic-PDTB-level1: expresses Explicit Expansion, ex-
presses Explicit Contingency, contains Arg2 of Implicit Tem-
poral relation, contains Arg2 of Implicit Contingency, con-
tains Arg2 of Implicit Expansion, contains Arg2 of Implicit
Comparison, number of shared implicit relations, total shared
relations
Non-discourse: offset from paragraph beginning, offset
from article beginning, sentence probability based on content
words.
All the structural features prove to be strong in-

dicators for content selection. RST depth and pro-
motion scores are higher for important sentences.
Unimportant sentences have high penalties.
On the other hand, note that most of the sig-

nificant sense features are descriptive of the ma-
jority class of sentences—those not important or
not selected to appear in the summary (refer Ta-
ble 7). For example, the second arguments of
all the first level implicit PDTB relations are not
preferred in human summaries. Most of the sec-
ond level sense features also serve as indicators
for what content should not be included in a sum-
mary. Such features can be used to derive con-
straints on what content is not important, but there
are only few indicators associated with important
sentences. Overall, out of the 25 first and second

1Features based on the PDTB level 1 senses. The signif-
icant features based on the level 2 senses are reported in the
appendix.

level sense features which turned out to be signifi-
cantly related to a sentence class, only 8 are those
indicative of important content.
Another compelling observation is that highly

cognitively salient discourse relations such as
Contrast and Cause are not indicative of important
sentences. Of the features that indicate the occur-
rence of a particular relation in a sentence, only
two are significant, but they are predictive of non-
important sentences. These are “expresses Ex-
plicit Expansion” (also subtypes Conjunction and
List) and “expresses Explicit Contingency”.
An additional noteworthy fact is the differences

between implicit and explicit relations that hold
across sentences. For implicit relations, the tests
show a strong indication that the second arguments
of Implicit Contingency or Expansion would not
be included in a summary, their first arguments
however are often important and likely to appear
in a summary. At the same time, for explicit rela-
tions, there is no regularity for any of the relations
of which of the two arguments is more important.
All the non-discourse features turned out highly

significant (Table 6). Longer sentences, those in
the beginning of an article or its paragraphs and
sentences containing frequent content words are
preferred in human summaries.

5 Classification performance

We now test the strengths and complementary be-
havior of these features in a classification task to
predict important sentences from input texts.

5.1 Comparison of feature classes
Table 1 gives the overall accuracy, as well as pre-
cision and recall for the important/summary sen-
tences. Features classes were combined using lo-
gistic regression. The reported results are from 10-
fold cross-validation runs on sentences from the
124 WSJ articles for which human summaries are
available in the RST corpus. For the classifier us-
ing sense information from the PDTB, all the fea-
tures described in Section 3.2 were used.
The best class of features turn out to be the

structure-based ones. They outperform both non-
discourse (ND) and sense features by a large mar-
gin. F-measure for the RST-based classifier is
33.50%. The semantic type of relations, on the
other hand, gives no indication of content impor-
tance obtaining an F-score of only 9%. Non-
discourse features provide an F-score of 19%,

151



which is much better than the semantic class but
still less than structural discourse features.
The structure and semantic features are com-

plementary to each other. The performance of
the classifier is substantially improved when both
types of features are used (line 6 in Table 1). The
F-score for the combined classifier is 40%, which
amounts to 7% absolute improvement over the
structure-only classifier.
Discourse information is also complementary

to non-discourse. Adding discourse structure
or sense features to non-discourse (ND) features
leads to better classification decisions (lines 4, 5
in Table 1). Particularly notable is the improve-
ment when sense and non-discourse features are
combined–over 10% better F-score than the classi-
fier using only non-discourse features. The overall
best classifier is the combination of discourse—
structure as well as sense—and non-discourse fea-
tures. Here, recall for important sentences is 34%
and the precision of predictions is 62%.
We also evaluated the features using ROUGE

(Lin and Hovy, 2003; Lin, 2004). ROUGE com-
putes ngram overlaps between human reference
summaries and a given system summary. This
measure allows us to compare the human sum-
maries and classifier predictions at word level
rather than using full sentence matches.
To perform ROUGE evaluation, summaries for

our different classes of features were obtained as
follows. Important sentences for each document
were predicted using a logistic regression classi-
fier trained on all other documents. When the
number of sentences predicted to be important
was not sufficient to meet the required summary
length, sentences predicted with lowest confidence
to be non-important were selected. All summaries
were truncated to 100 words. Stemming was used,
and stop words were excluded from the calcula-
tion. Both human extracts were used as references.
The results from this evaluation are shown in

Table 2. They closely mirror the results obtained
using precision and recall. The sense features per-
form worse than the structural and non-discourse
features. The best set of features is the one com-
bining structure, sense and non-discourse features,
with ROUGE-1 score (unigram overlap) of 0.479.
Overall, combining types of features considerably
improves results in all cases. However, unlike
in the precision and recall evaluation, structural
and non-discourse features perform very similarly.

Features used Acc P R F
structural 78.11 63.38 22.77 33.50
semantic 75.53 44.31 5.04 9.05
non-discourse (ND) 77.25 67.48 11.02 18.95
ND + semantic 77.38 59.38 20.62 30.61
ND + structural 78.51 63.49 26.05 36.94
semantic + structural 77.94 58.39 30.47 40.04
structural + semantic + ND 78.93 61.85 34.42 44.23

Table 1: Accuracy (Acc) and Precision (P), Recall
(R) and F-score (F) of important sentences.

Features ROUGE Features ROUGE
structural + semantic + ND 0.479 ND 0.432
structural + ND 0.468 LEAD 0.411
structural + semantic 0.453 semantic 0.369
semantic + ND 0.444 TS 0.338
structural 0.433

Table 2: ROUGE-1 recall scores

Their ROUGE-1 recall scores are 0.433 and 0.432
respectively. The top ranked sentences by both
sets of features appear to contain similar content.
We also evaluated sentences chosen by two

baseline summarizers. The first, LEAD, includes
sentences from the beginning of the article up to
the word limit. This simple method is a very com-
petitive baseline for single document summariza-
tion. The second baseline ranks sentences based
on the proportion of topic signature (TS) words
contained in the sentences (Conroy et al., 2006).
This approach leads to very good results in identi-
fying important content for multi-document sum-
maries where there is more redundancy, but it is
the worst when measured by ROUGE-1 on this
single document task. Structure and non-discourse
features outperform both these baselines.

5.2 Tree vs. graph discourse structure
Wolf and Gibson (2004) showed that the Graph
Bank annotations of texts can be used for sum-
marization with results superior to that based on
RST trees. In order to derive the importance of
sentences from the graph representation, they use
the PageRank algorithm (Page et al., 1998). These
scores, similar to RST features, are based only on
the link structure; the semantic type of the relation
linking the sentences is not used. In Table 3, we
report the performance of structural features from
RST and Graph Bank on the 15 documents with
overlapping annotations from the two frameworks.
As discussed by Wolf and Gibson (2004), we

find that the Graph Bank discourse representation
(GB) leads to better sentence choices than using
RST trees. The F-score is 48% for the GB clas-

152



Features Acc P R F ROUGE
RST-struct. 81.61 63.00 31.56 42.05 0.569
GB-struct. 82.58 62.50 39.16 48.15 0.508

Table 3: Tree vs graph-based discourse features

sifier and 42% for the RST classifier. The better
performance of GB method comes from higher re-
call scores compared to RST. Their precision val-
ues are comparable. But, in terms of ngram-based
ROUGE scores, the results from RST (0.569)
turn out slightly better than GB (0.508). Over-
all, discourse features based on structure turn out
as strong indicators of sentence importance and
we find both tree and graph representations to be
equally useful for this purpose.

6 Lexical approximation to discourse
structure

In prior work on summarization, graph models of
text have been proposed that do not rely on dis-
course. Rather, lexical similarity between sen-
tences is used to induce graph structure (Erkan
and Radev, 2004; Mihalcea and Tarau, 2005).
PageRank-based computation of sentence impor-
tance have been used on these models with good
results. Now, we would like to see if the discourse
graphs from the Graph Bank (GB) corpus would
be more helpful for determining content impor-
tance than the general text graph based on lexi-
cal similarity (LEX). We perform this comparison
on the 15 documents that we used in the previous
section for evaluating tree versus graph structures.
We used cosine similarity to link sentences in the
lexical graph. Links with similarity less than 0.1
were removed to filter out weak relationships.
The classification results are shown in Table 4.

The similarity graph representation is even more
helpful than RST or GB: the F-score is 53% com-
pared to 42% for RST and 48% for GB. The most
significant improvement from the lexical graph is
in terms of precision 75% which is more than 10%
higher compared to RST and GB features. Using
ROUGE as the evaluation metric, the lexical sim-
ilarity graph, LEX (0.557), gives comparable per-
formance with both GB (0.508) and RST (0.569)
representations (refer Table 3). Therefore, for use
in content selection, lexical overlap information
appears to be a good proxy for building text struc-
ture in place of discourse relations.

Features Acc P R F ROUGE
LEX-struct. 83.23 75.17 41.14 53.18 0.557

Table 4: Performance of lexrank summarizer

7 Discussion

We have analyzed the contribution of different
types of discourse features–structural and seman-
tic. Our results provide strong evidence that dis-
course structure is the most useful aspect. Both
tree and graph representations of discourse can be
used to compute the importance of text units with
very good results. On the other hand, sense in-
formation from discourse does not provide strong
indicators of good content but some constraints
as to which content should not be included in
a summary. These sense features complement
structure information leading to improved perfor-
mance. Further, both these types of discourse fea-
tures are complementary to standardly used non-
discourse features for content selection.
However, building automatic parsers for dis-

course information has proven to be a hard task
overall (Marcu, 2000; Soricut and Marcu, 2003;
Wellner et al., 2006; Sporleder and Lascarides,
2008; Pitler et al., 2009) and the state of cur-
rent parsers might limit the benefits obtainable
from discourse. Moreover, discourse-based struc-
ture is only as useful for content selection as sim-
pler text structure built using lexical similarity.
Even with gold standard annotations, the perfor-
mance of structural features based on the RST
and Graph Bank representations is not better than
that obtained from automatically computed lexical
graphs. So, even if robust discourse parsers exist
to use these features on other test sets, it is not
likely that discourse features would provide better
performance than lexical similarity. Therefore, for
content selection in summarization, current sys-
tems can make use of simple lexical structures to
obtain similar performance as discourse features.
But it should be remembered that summary

quality does not depend on content selection per-
formance alone. Systems should also produce lin-
guistically well formed summaries and currently
systems perform poorly on this aspect. To address
this problem, discourse information is vital. The
most comprehensive study of text quality of au-
tomatically produced summaries was performed
by Otterbacher et al. (2002). A collection of 15
automatically produced summaries was manually
edited in order to correct any problems. The study

153



found that discourse and temporal ordering prob-
lems account for 34% and 22% respectively of all
the required revisions. Therefore, we suspect that
for building summarization systems, most benefits
from discourse can be obtained with regard to text
quality compared to the task of content selection.
We plan to focus on this aspect of discourse use
for our future work.

References
L. Carlson, D. Marcu, and M. E. Okurowski. 2001.
Building a discourse-tagged corpus in the frame-
work of rhetorical structure theory. In Proceedings
of SIGdial, pages 1–10.

L. Carlson, D. Marcu, andM. E. Okurowski. 2002. Rst
discourse treebank. Corpus number LDC 2002T07,
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia.

J. Conroy, J. Schlesinger, and D. O’Leary. 2006.
Topic-focused multi-document summarization using
an approximate oracle score. In Proceedings of
ACL.

H.P. Edmundson. 1969. New methods in automatic
extracting. Journal of the ACM, 16(2):264–285.

G. Erkan and D. Radev. 2004. Lexrank: Graph-based
centrality as salience in text summarization. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR).

A. Lee, R. Prasad, A. Joshi, and B. Webber. 2008. De-
partures from Tree Structures in Discourse: Shared
Arguments in the Penn Discourse Treebank. In Pro-
ceedings of the Constraints in Discourse Workshop.

C. Lin and E. Hovy. 2000. The automated acquisition
of topic signatures for text summarization. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING, pages 495–501.

C. Lin and E. Hovy. 2002. Manual and automatic
evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings of the ACL
Workshop on Automatic Summarization.

C. Lin and E. Hovy. 2003. Automatic evaluation of
summaries using n-gram co-occurrence statistics. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL.

C. Lin. 2004. ROUGE: a package for automatic eval-
uation of summaries. In Proceedings of ACL Text
Summarization Workshop.

W.C. Mann and S.A. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical
structure theory: Towards a functional theory of text
organization. Text, 8.

D. Marcu. 1998. To build text summaries of high qual-
ity, nuclearity is not sufficient. In Working Notes
of the the AAAI-98 Spring Symposium on Intelligent
Text Summarization, pages 1–8.

D. Marcu. 2000. The rhetorical parsing of unrestricted
texts: A surface-based approach. Computational
Linguistics, 26(3):395–448.

M. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M. Marcinkiewicz.
1994. Building a large annotated corpus of en-
glish: The penn treebank. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(2):313–330.

R. Mihalcea and P. Tarau. 2005. An algorithm for
language independent single and multiple document
summarization. In Proceedings of IJCNLP.

A. Nenkova, L. Vanderwende, and K. McKeown.
2006. A compositional context sensitive multi-
document summarizer: exploring the factors that in-
fluence summarization. In Proceedings of SIGIR.

K. Ono, K. Sumita, and S. Miike. 1994. Abstract gen-
eration based on rhetorical structure extraction. In
Proceedings of COLING, pages 344–348.

J.C. Otterbacher, D.R. Radev, and A. Luo. 2002. Revi-
sions that improve cohesion in multi-document sum-
maries: a preliminary study. In Proceedings of ACL
Text Summarization Workshop, pages 27–36.

L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. 1998.
The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to
the web. Technical report, Stanford Digital Library
Technologies Project.

E. Pitler, A. Louis, and A. Nenkova. 2009. Automatic
sense prediction for implicit discourse relations in
text. In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP, pages 683–
691.

R. Prasad, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, E. Miltsakaki,
L. Robaldo, A. Joshi, and B. Webber. 2008. The
penn discourse treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of
LREC.

R. Soricut and D. Marcu. 2003. Sentence level dis-
course parsing using syntactic and lexical informa-
tion. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL.

C. Sporleder and A. Lascarides. 2008. Using automat-
ically labelled examples to classify rhetorical rela-
tions: An assessment. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 14:369–416.

V.R. Uzda, T.A.S. Pardo, and M.G. Nunes. 2008.
Evaluation of automatic text summarization meth-
ods based on rhetorical structure theory. Intelligent
Systems Design and Applications, 2:389–394.

B. Wellner, J. Pustejovsky, C. Havasi, A. Rumshisky,
and R. Saurı́. 2006. Classification of discourse co-
herence relations: An exploratory study using mul-
tiple knowledge sources. In Proceedings of SIGdial,
pages 117–125.

F. Wolf and E. Gibson. 2004. Paragraph-, word-, and
coherence-based approaches to sentence ranking: A
comparison of algorithm and human performance.
In Proceedings of ACL, pages 383–390.

F. Wolf and E. Gibson. 2005. Representing discourse
coherence: A corpus-based study. Computational
Linguistics, 31(2):249–288.

154



Appendix: Feature analysis

This appendix provides the results from statistical tests for identifying predictive features from the dif-
ferent classes (RST-based structural features–Table 5, Non-discourse features–Table 6 and PDTB-based
sense features–Table 7).
For real-valued features, we performed a two sided t-test between the corresponding feature values

for important versus non-important sentences. For features which turned out significant in each set, the
value of the test statistic and significance levels are reported in the tables.
For binary features, we report results from a chi-square test to measure how indicative a feature is

for the class of important or non-important sentences. For results from the chi-square test, a (+/-) sign
is enclosed within parentheses for each significant feature to indicate whether the observed number of
times the feature was true in important sentences is greater (+) than the expected value (indication that
this feature is frequently associated with important sentences). When the observed frequency is less than
the expected value, a (-) sign is appended.

RST Features t-stat p-value
Ono penalty -21.31 2.2e-16
Depth score 16.75 2.2e-16
Promotion score 16.00 2.2e-16
Normalized penalty -11.24 2.2e-16
Normalized depth score 17.24 2.2e-16
Normalized promotion score 14.36 2.2e-16

Table 5: Significant RST-based features

Non-discourse features t-stat p-value
Sentence length 3.14 0.0017
Average probability of content words 9.32 2.2e-16
Sum probability of content words 11.83 2.2e-16
Product probability of content words -5.09 3.8e-07
Number of topic signature terms 9.47 2.2e-16
Offset from article beginning -12.54 2.2e-16
Offset from paragraph beginning -28.81 2.2e-16
Offset from paragraph end 7.26 5.8e-13

χ
2 p-value

First sentence? 224.63 (+) 2.2e-16
Paragraph initial? 655.82 (+) 2.2e-16

Table 6: Significant non-discourse features

155



PDTB features t-stat p-value
No. of implicit relations involved -9.13 2.2e-16
Total relations involved -6.95 4.9e-12
Distance of Arg1 3.99 6.6e-05

Based on level 1 senses
χ

2 p-value
Expresses explicit Expansion 12.96 (-) 0.0003
Expresses explicit Contingency 7.35 (-) 0.0067
Arg1 explicit Expansion 12.87 (+) 0.0003
Arg1 implicit Contingency 13.84 (+) 0.0002
Arg1 implicit Expansion 29.10 (+) 6.8e-08
Arg2 implicit Temporal 4.58 (-) 0.0323
Arg2 implicit Contingency 60.28 (-) 8.2e-15
Arg2 implicit Expansion 134.60 (-) 2.2e-16
Arg2 implicit Comparison 27.59 (-) 1.5e-07

Based on level 2 senses
χ

2 p-value
Expresses explicit Conjunction 8.60 (-) 0.0034
Expresses explicit List 4.41 (-) 0.0358
Arg1 explicit Conjunction 10.35 (+) 0.0013
Arg1 implicit Conjunction 5.26 (+) 0.0218
Arg1 implicit Instantiation 18.94 (+) 1.4e-05
Arg1 implicit Restatement 15.35 (+) 8.9-05
Arg1 implicit Cause 12.78 (+) 0.0004
Arg1 implicit List 5.89 (-) 0.0153
Arg2 explicit Asynchronous 4.23 (-) 0.0398
Arg2 explicit Instantiation 10.92 (-) 0.0009
Arg2 implicit Conjunction 51.57 (-) 6.9e-13
Arg2 implicit Instantiation 12.08 (-) 0.0005
Arg2 implicit Restatement 28.24 (-) 1.1e-07
Arg2 implicit Cause 58.62 (-) 1.9e-14
Arg2 implicit Contrast 30.08 (-) 4.2e-08
Arg2 implicit List 12.31 (-) 1.9e-14

Table 7: Significant PDTB-based features

156


