










































Chunking German: An Unsolved Problem


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 147–151,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Chunking German: An Unsolved Problem

Sandra Kübler
Indiana University

Bloomington, IN, USA
skuebler@indiana.edu

Kathrin Beck, Erhard Hinrichs, Heike Telljohann
Universität Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany

{kbeck,eh,telljohann}@sfs.
uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
This paper describes a CoNLL-style
chunk representation for the Tübingen
Treebank of Written German, which as-
sumes a flat chunk structure so that each
word belongs to at most one chunk. For
German, such a chunk definition causes
problems in cases of complex prenominal
modification. We introduce a flat annota-
tion that can handle these structures via a
stranded noun chunk.

1 Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to investigate how the
annotation of noun phrases in the Tübingen Tree-
bank of Written German (TüBa-D/Z) can be trans-
formed into chunks with no internal structure, as
proposed in the CoNLL 2000 shared task (Tjong
Kim Sang and Buchholz, 2000). Chunk parsing is
a form of partial parsing, in which non-recursive
phrases are annotated while difficult decisions,
such as prepositional phrase attachment, are left
unsolved. Flat chunk representations are particu-
larly suitable for machine learning approaches to
partial parsing and are inspired by the IOB ap-
proach to NP chunking first proposed by Ramshaw
and Marcus (1995). They are particularly relevant
for approaches that require an efficient analysis but
not necessarily a complete syntactic analysis.
German allows a higher degree of syntactic

complexity in prenominal modification of the syn-
tactic head of an NP compared to English. This
is particularly evident in written texts annotated
in the TüBa-D/Z. The complexity of German
NPs that causes problems in the conversion to
CoNLL-style chunks also affects PCFG parsing
approaches to German.The complexity of NPs is
one of the phenomena that have been addressed in
tree transformation approaches for German pars-
ing (Trushkina, 2004; Ule, 2007; Versley and Reh-
bein, 2009).

2 Defining Chunks

The notion of a chunk is orginally due to Abney
(1991), who considers chunks as non-recursive
phrases which span from the left periphery of a
phrase to the phrasal head. Accordingly, the sen-
tence “The woman in the lab coat thought you
had bought an expensive book.” is assigned the
chunk structure: “[S [NP The woman] [PP in [NP
the lab coat] ] [VP thought] ] [S [NP you] [VP
had bought] [NP an [ADJP expensive] book]] .”.
Abney-style chunk parsing is implemented as cas-
caded, finite-state transduction (cf. (Abney, 1996;
Karlsson et al., 1995)).
Notice that cascaded, finite-state transduction

allows for the possibility of chunks containing
other chunks as in the above sentence, where the
prepositional chunk contains a noun chunk within.
The only constraint on such nested chunks is the
prohibition on recursive structures. This rules out
chunks in which, for example, a noun chunk con-
tains another noun chunk. A much stricter con-
straint on the internal structure of chunks was sub-
sequently adopted by the shared task on chunk
parsing as part of the Conference for Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL) in the year 2000 (Tjong
Kim Sang and Buchholz, 2000). In this shared
task, chunks were defined as non-overlapping,
non-recursive phrases so that each word is part of
at most one chunk. Based on this definition, the
prepositional phrase in the sentence above would
be chunked as “[Prep in] [NP the lab coat]”. Since
the prepositional chunk cannot have an embedded
noun chunk, the definition of the CoNLL shared
task assumed that the prepositional chunk only
contains the preposition, thus taking the definition
seriously that the chunk ends with the head. The
noun chunk remains separate. Additionally, the
noun phrase “an expensive book” is annotated as a
noun chunk without internal structure.
The CoNLL shared task definition of chunks is

147



Figure 1: Treebank annotation for the sentence in (2).

useful for machine learning based approaches to
chunking since it only requires one level of anal-
ysis, which can be represented as IOB-chunking
(Tjong Kim Sang and Buchholz, 2000). For En-
glish, this definition of chunks has become stan-
dard in the literature on machine learning.
For German, chunk parsing has been investi-

gated by Kermes and Evert (2002) and by Müller
(2004). Both approaches used an Abney-style
chunk definition. However, there is no corre-
sponding flat chunk representation for German be-
cause of the complexity of pre-head modification
in German noun phrases. Sentence (1) provides a
typical example of this kind.

(1) [NC der
the

[NC seinen
his

Sohn]
son

liebende
loving

Vater]
father

‘the father who loves his son’

The structure in (1) violates both the Abney-
style and the CoNLL-style definitions of chunks –
Abney’s because it is recursive and the CoNLL-
style definition because of the embedding. A
single-level, CoNLL-style chunk analysis will
have to cope with the separation of the determiner
“der” and the head of the outer phrase. We will
discuss an analysis in section 5.

3 The Treebank: TüBa-D/Z

The Tübingen Treebank of Written German
(TüBa-D/Z) is a linguistically annotated corpus
based on data of the German newspaper ‘die
tageszeitung’ (taz). Currently, it comprises ap-
proximately 45 000 sentences. For the syntactic
annotation, a theory-neutral and surface-oriented

annotation scheme has been adopted that is in-
spired by the notion of topological fields and
enriched by a level of predicate-argument struc-
ture. The annotation scheme comprises four lev-
els of syntactic annotation: the lexical level, the
phrasal level, the level of topological fields, and
the clausal level. The primary ordering princi-
ple of a clause is the inventory of topological
fields, which characterize the word order regu-
larities among different clause types of German,
and which are widely accepted among descrip-
tive linguists of German (cf. (Drach, 1937; Höhle,
1986)). Below this level of annotation, i.e. strictly
within the bounds of topological fields, a phrase
level of predicate-argument structure is applied
with its own descriptive inventory based on a min-
imal set of assumptions that has to be captured by
any syntactic theory. The context-free backbone of
phrase structure (Telljohann et al., 2004) is com-
bined with edge labels specifying the grammatical
functions and long-distance relations. For more
details on the annotation scheme see Telljohann et
al. (2009).

(2) Der Spitzenreiter in der europäischen
Gastgeberliga war bei den bosnischen
Bürgerkriegsflüchtlingen noch weitaus
großzügiger.
‘The front-runner in the European league of host
countries was far more generous with the Bosnian
civil war refugees.’

Figure 1 shows the tree for the sentence in (2).
The main clause (SIMPX) is divided into three
topological fields: initial field (VF), left sentence
bracket (LK), and middle field (MF). The finite

148



verb in LK is the head (HD) of the sentence.
The edge labels between the level of topological
fields and the phrasal level constitute the gram-
matical function of the respective phrase: sub-
ject (ON), ambiguous modifier (MOD), and predi-
cate (PRED). The label V-MOD specifies the long-
distance dependency of the prepositional phrase
on the main verb. Below the lexical level, the parts
of speech are annotated. The hierarchical annota-
tion of constituent structure and head (HD) / non-
head (-) labels capture phrase internal dependen-
cies. While premodifiers are attached directly on
the same level, postmodifiers are attached higher
in order to keep their modification scope ambigu-
ous. The PP “in der europäischen Gastgeberliga”
is the postmodifier of the head-NX and therefore
attached on a higher phrase level.

4 General Conversion Strategy

The conversion to CoNLL-style chunks starts
from the syntactic annotation of the TüBa-D/Z.
In general, we directly convert the lowest phrasal
projections with lexical content to chunks. For
the sentence in (2) above, the chunk annotation is
shown in (3). Here, the first noun phrase1, “Der
Spitzenreiter”, as well as the finite verb phrase and
the adverbial phrase are used as chunks.

(3) [NX Der Spitzenreiter] [PX in
der europäischen Gastgeberliga]
[VXFIN war] [PX bei den bosnischen
Bürgerkriegsflüchtlingen] [ADVX noch]
[ADJX weitaus großzügiger].

This sentence also shows exceptions to the
general conversion rule: We follow Tjong
Kim Sang and Buchholz (2000) in including
ADJPs into the NCs, such as in “den bos-
nischen Bürgerkriegsflüchtlingen”. We also in-
clude premodifying adverbs into ADJCs, such as
in “weitaus großzügiger”. But we deviate from
Tjong Kim Sang and Buchholz in our definition of
the PCs and include the head NP into this chunk,
such as in “in der europäischen Gastgeberliga”.

(4) a. Allerdings werden wohl Rational-
isierungen mit der Modernisierung

1For the sake of convenience, we will use acronyms in the
remainder of the paper. Since we use the same labels in the
treebank annotation and in the chunk representation (mostly
ending in X), we will use labels ending in P (e.g. NP, PP) to
talk about phrases in the treebank and labels ending in C (e.g.
NC, PC) to talk about chunks.

der Behördenarbeit einhergehen.
‘However, rationalizations will accompany
modernization in the workflow of civil service
agencies.’

b. [ADVX Allerdings] [VXFIN wer-
den] [ADVX wohl] [NX Rationalis-
ierungen] [PX mit der Moder-
nisierung] [NX der Behördenarbeit]
[VXINF einhergehen].

In cases of complex, post-modified noun
phrases grouped under the prepositional phrase,
we include the head noun phrase into the preposi-
tional chunk but group the postmodifying phrase
into a separate phrase. The sentence in (4a)
gives an example for such a complex noun phrase.
This sentence is assigned the chunk annotation in
(4b). Here, the head NP “der Modernisierung” is
grouped in the PC while the post-modifying NP
“der Behördenarbeit” constitutes its own NC.
The only lexical constituent in the treebank that

is exempt from becoming a chunk is the named
entity constituent (EN-ADD). Since these con-
stituents do not play a syntactic role in the tree,
they are elided in the conversion to chunks.

5 Complications in German

While the conversion based on the phrasal anno-
tation of TüBa-D/Z results in the expected chunk
structures, it is incapable of handling a small num-
ber of cases correctly. Most of these cases involve
complex NPs. We will concentrate here on one
case: complex premodified NPs that include the
complement of a participle or an adjective, as dis-
cussed in section 2. This is a non-trivial problem
since the treebank contains 1 497 cases in which
an ADJP within an NP contains a PP and 415
cases, in which an ADJP within an NP contains
another NP. Sentence (5a) with the syntactic an-
notation in Figure 2 gives an example for such an
embedded PP.

(5) a. Die teilweise in die Erde gebaute
Sporthalle wird wegen ihrer futuris-
tischen Architektur auch als “Sport-
Ei” bezeichnet.
‘The partially underground sports complex is
also called the “sports egg” because of its fu-
turistic architecture.’

b. [sNX Die] [ADVX teilweise] [PX in
die Erde] [NX gebaute Sporthalle]
[VXFIN wird] [PX wegen ihrer futu-
ristischen Architektur] [ADVX auch]

149



Figure 2: Treebank annotation for the sentence in (5a).

[NX als “ Sport-Ei] ” [VXINF be-
zeichnet].

Since we are interested in a flat chunk annota-
tion in which each word belongs to at most one
chunk, the Abney-style embedded chunk defini-
tion shown in sentence (1) is impossible. If we de-
cide to annotate the PP “in die Erde” as a chunk,
we are left with two parts of the embedding NP:
the determiner “Die” and the ADVP “teilweise” to
the left of the PP and the ADJP “gebaute” and the
noun on the right. The right part of the NP can
be easily grouped into an NC, and the ADVP can
stand on its own. The only remaining problem is
the treatment of the determiner, which in German,
cannot constitute a phrase on its own. We decided
to create a new type of chunk, stranded NC (sNX),
which denotes that this chunk is part of an NC, to
which it is not adjacent. Thus the sentence in (5a)
has the chunk structure shown in (5b).
The type of complex NPs shown in the previ-

ous section can become arbitrarily complex. The
example in (6a) with its syntactic analysis in Fig-
ure 3 shows that the attributively used adjective
“sammelnden” can have all its complements and
adjuncts. Here, we have a reflexive pronoun “sich”
and a complex PP “direkt vor ihrem Sezessions-
Standort am Karlsplatz”. The chunk analysis
based on the principles from section 4 gives us the
analysis in (6b). The complex PP is represented as
three different chunks: an ADVC, and two PCs.

(6) a. Sie “thematisierten” auf Anraten des
jetzigen Staatskurators Wolfgang
Zinggl die sich direkt vor ihrem
Sezessions-Standort am Karlsplatz

sammelnden Fixer.
’On the advice of the current state curator
Wolfgang Zinggl, they “broach the issue” of
the junkies who gather right in front of their
location of secession at the Karlsplatz .’

b. [NX Sie] “ [VXFIN thematisierten]
” [PX auf Anraten] [NX des jet-
zigen Staatskurators] [NX Wolfgang
Zinggl] [sNX die] [NX sich] [ADVX
direkt] [PX vor ihrem Sezessions-
Standort] [PX am Karlsplatz] [NX
sammelnden Fixer].

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have shown how a CoNLL-
style chunk representation can be derived from
TüBa-D/Z. For the complications stemming from
complex prenominal modification, we proposed
an analysis in which the stranded determiner is
marked as such. For the future, we are planning
to make this chunk representation available to li-
cense holders of the treebank.

References
Steven Abney. 1991. Parsing by chunks. In Robert
Berwick, Steven Abney, and Caroll Tenney, editors,
Principle-Based Parsing, pages 257–278. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.

Steven Abney. 1996. Partial parsing via finite-state
cascades. In John Carroll, editor, ESSLLI Workshop
on Robust Parsing, pages 8–15, Prague, Czech Re-
public.

Erich Drach. 1937. Grundgedanken der Deutschen
Satzlehre. Diesterweg, Frankfurt/M.

150



Figure 3: Treebank annotation for the sentence in (6a).

Tilman Höhle. 1986. Der Begriff ”Mit-
telfeld”, Anmerkungen über die Theorie der topo-
logischen Felder. In Akten des Siebten Interna-
tionalen Germanistenkongresses 1985, pages 329–
340, Göttingen, Germany.

Fred Karlsson, Atro Voutilainen, J. Heikkilä, and Atro
Anttila, editors. 1995. Constraint Grammar: A
Language-Independent System for Parsing Unre-
stricted Text. Mouton de Gruyter.

Hannah Kermes and Stefan Evert. 2002. YAC – a
recursive chunker for unrestricted German text. In
Proceedings of the Third International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
Las Palmas, Gran Canaria.

Frank H. Müller. 2004. Annotating grammatical func-
tions in German using finite-state cascades. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2004, Geneva, Switzerland.

Lance A. Ramshaw and Mitchell P. Marcus. 1995.
Text chunking using transformation-based learning.
In Proceedings of the ACL 3rd Workshop on Very
Large Corpora, pages 82–94, Cambridge, MA.

Heike Telljohann, Erhard Hinrichs, and Sandra Kübler.
2004. The TüBa-D/Z treebank: Annotating German
with a context-free backbone. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 2229–2235,
Lisbon, Portugal.

Heike Telljohann, Erhard W. Hinrichs, Sandra Kübler,
Heike Zinsmeister, and Kathrin Beck, 2009. Style-
book for the Tübingen Treebank of Written German
(TüBa-D/Z). Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft, Uni-
versität Tübingen, Germany.

Erik Tjong Kim Sang and Sabine Buchholz. 2000. In-
troduction to the CoNLL shared task: Chunking. In

Proceedings of The Fourth Conference on Computa-
tional Language Learning, CoNLL’00, and the Sec-
ond Learning Language in Logic Workshop, LLL’00,
pages 127–132, Lisbon, Portugal.

Julia S. Trushkina. 2004. Morpho-Syntactic Annota-
tion andDependency Parsing of German. Ph.D. the-
sis, Eberhard-Karls Universität Tübingen.

Tylman Ule. 2007. Treebank Refinement: Opti-
mising Representations of Syntactic Analyses for
Probabilistic Context-Free Parsing. Ph.D. thesis,
Eberhard-Karls Universität Tübingen.

Yannick Versley and Ines Rehbein. 2009. Scalable dis-
criminative parsing for German. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Parsing Technology
(IWPT’09), Paris, France.

151


