










































Syntactic Construct : An Aid for translating English Nominal Compound into Hindi


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Extracting and Using Constructions in Computational Linguistics, pages 32–38,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Syntactic Construct : An Aid for translating English Nominal Compound
into Hindi

Soma Paul

IIIT Hyderabad

soma@iiit.ac.in

Prashant Mathur

IIIT Hyderabad

mathur@research.iiit.ac.in

Sushant Kishore

IIIT Hyderabad

susanta@research.iiit.ac.in

Abstract

This paper illustrates a way of using para-

phrasal interpretation of English nominal

compound for translating them into Hindi.

Input Nominal compound is first para-

phrased automatically with the 8 preposi-

tions as proposed by Lauer (1995) for the

task. English prepositions have one-to-one

mapping to post-position in Hindi. The

English paraphrases are then translated

into Hindi using the mapping schema. We

have got an accuracy of 71% over a set of

gold data of 250 Nominal Compound. The

translation-strategy is motivated by the

following observation: It is only 50% of

the cases that English nominal compound

is translated into nominal compound in

Hindi. In other cases, they are translated

into varied syntactic constructs. Among

them the most frequent construction type

is “Modifier + Postposition + Head”. The

translation module also attempts to deter-

mine when a compound is translated using

paraphrase and when it is translated into a

Nominal compound.

1 Introduction

Nominal Compounds are syntactically condensed

constructs which have extensively been attempted

to expand in order to unfold the meaning of the

constructions. Currently there exist two different

approaches in Computational Linguistics: (a) La-

beling the semantics of compound with a set of

abstract relations (Moldovan and Girju, 2003) (b)

Paraphrasing the compound in terms of syntac-

tic constructs. Paraphrasing, again, is done in

three ways: (1) with prepositions (“war story”

→ “story about war”) (Lauer 1995) (2) with
verb+preposition nexus (“war story” → “story
pertaining to war”, “noise pollution” → “pol-
lution caused by noise”) (Finin 1980) (3) with

Copula (“tuna fish” → “fish that is tuna”) (Van-
derwende,1995). Nominal compound (henceforth

NC) is a frequently occurring construct in En-

glish1. A bigram or two word nominal compound,

is a construct of two nouns, the rightmost noun

being the head (H) and the preceding noun the

modifier (M) as found in “cow milk”, “road condi-

tion”, “machine translation” and so on. Rackow et

al. (1992) has rightly observed that the two main

issues in translating the source language NC cor-

rectly into the target language involves (a) correct-

ness in the choice of the appropriate target lex-

eme during lexical substitution and (b) correctness

in the selection of the right target construct type.

The issue stated in (a) involves correct selection of

sense of the component words of NCs followed by

substitution of source language word with that of

target language that best fits for the selected sense

(see Mathur and Paul 2009).

From the perspective of machine translation, the

issue of selecting the right construct of target lan-

guage becomes very significant because English

NCs are translated into varied construct types in

Hindi. This paper motivates the advantage of ex-

panding English nominal compounds into “para-

phrases with prepositions“ for translating them

into Hindi. The English NCs are paraphrased us-

ing Lauer’s (1995) 8 prepositions. In many cases

prepositions are semantically overloaded. For ex-

ample, the NC “Hindu law” can be paraphrased

as “law of Hindu”. This paraphrase can mean

“Law made by Hindu” (not for Hindu people alone

though) or “Law meant for Hindu” (law can be

made by anyone, not by the Hindus necessarily).

Such resolution of meaning is not possible from

“preposition paraphrase”. The paper argues that

this is not an issue from the point of view of trans-

1Kim and Baldwin (2005) reports that the BNC corpus (84
million words: Burnard (2000)) has 2.6% and the Reuters has
(108M words: Rose et al. (2002)) 3.9% of bigram nominal
compound.

32



lation at least. It is because the Hindi correspon-

dent of “of”, which is “kA”, is equally ambiguous.

The translation of “Hindu law” is “hinduoM kA

kAnUn” and the construction can have both afore-

mentioned interpretations. Human users can se-

lect the right interpretation in the given context.

On the other hand, ’paraphrase with preposition’

approach has the following advantages: (a) An-

notation is simpler; (b) Learning is easier and (c)

Data sparseness is less; (d) Most importantly, En-

glish prepositions have one to one Hindi postpo-

sition correspondents most of the times. There-

fore we have chosen the strategy of “paraphrasing

with prepositions” over other kind of paraphrasal

approach for the task of translation. The pa-

per explores the possibility of maintaining one to

one correspondence of English-Hindi preposition-

postpositions and examines the accuracy of trans-

lation. At this point it is worth mentioning that

translation of English NC as NC as well as differ-

ent syntactic constructs in Hindi is almost equal.

Therefore the task of translating English NCs into

Hindi is divided into two levels: (1) Paraphrases

for an NC are searched in the web corpus, (2) An

algorithm is devised to determine when the para-

phrase is to be ignored and the source language

NC to be translated as NC or transliterated in NC,

and (3) English preposition is replaced by Hindi

corresponding postposition. We have compared

our result with that of google translation system

on 250 that has been manually created.

The next section describes the data in some de-

tail. In section 3, we review earlier works that have

followed similar approaches as the present work.

Our approach is described in section 4. Finally the

result and analysis is discussed in section 5.

2 Data

We made a preliminary study of NCs in English-

Hindi parallel corpora in order to identify the dis-

tribution of various construct types in Hindi which

English NCs are aligned to. We took a paral-

lel corpora of around 50,000 sentences in which

we got 9246 sentences (i.e. 21% cases of the

whole corpus) that have nominal compounds. We

have found that English nominal compound can be

translated into Hindi in the following varied ways:

1. As Nominal Compound

“Hindu texts” → hindU shAstroM

“milk production” → dugdha utpAdana

2. M + Postposition + H Construction

“rice husk”→ cAvala kI bhUsI,

“room temperature”→ kamare ke tApa-
mAna

“wax work”→ mom par citroM
“work on wax”

“body pain”→ sharIra meM darda
“pain in body”

English NCs are frequently translated into

genitive2 construct in Hindi. In English “of”

is heavily overloaded(very ambiguous), so

the genitives are in Hindi. The two other

postpositions that we see in the above data

are par “on” and meM “in/at” and they refer

to location.

3. As Adjective Noun Construction

“nature cure” → prAkritika cikitsA

“hill camel” → pahARI UMta
The words prAkrtik and pahARI being ad-

jectives derived from prakriti and pAhAR re-

spectively.

4. Single Word

“cow dung” → gobara

The distribution of various translations is given

below:

Construction Type No. of Occurrence

Nominal Compound 3959

Genitive(of-kA/ke/kI) 1976

Purpose (for-ke liye) 22

Location (at/on-par) 34

Location (in-meM) 93

Adjective Noun Phrase 557

Single Word 766

Transliterated NC 1208

Table 1: Distribution of translations of English NC

from English Hindi parallel corpora.

There are 8% cases (see table 1) when an En-

glish NC becomes a single word form in Hindi.

For rest of the cases, they either remain as NC

(translated 43% or transliterated 13%) or corre-

spond to syntactic construct. When NC is trans-

lated as NC, they are mostly technical terms

2“of” corresponds to “kA/ke/kI”, which are genitive
markers in Hindi.

33



or proper names. Our data shows that there are

around 40% cases when English NC is translated

as various kinds of syntactic constructs such M

+ Postposition + H, Adj + H or longer para-

phrases (“Hand luggage” → hAth meM le jAne
vAle sAmAn “luggage to be carried by hand”). Out

of these data, 70% cases are when English NC is

translated into M3 + postposition + H. Thus the

translation of NC into postpositional construction

is very common in Hindi.

For preparation of test data, we extracted nomi-

nal compound from BNC corpus (Burnard et al.,

1995). BNC has varied amount of text ranging

from newspaper article to letters, books etc. We

extracted a sample of noun-noun bigrams from the

corpus and manually translated them into Hindi.

In this paper, we propose an algorithm that de-

termines when the syntactic paraphrase of English

NC is to be considered for translation and when it

is left for direct lexical substitution in Hindi.

3 Related Works

There exists no work which has attempted the

approach that we will be discussing here for

translating English NC into Hindi. From that per-

spective, the proposed approach is first of its kind

to be attempted. However, paraphrasing English

NCs is a widely studied issue. Scholars (Levi

1978; Finin 1980) agree there is a limited number

of relations that occur with high frequency in

noun compounds. However, the number and

the level of abstraction of these frequently used

semantic categories are not agreed upon. They

can vary from a few prepositional paraphrases

(Lauer, 1995) to hundreds and even thousands

more specific semantic relations (Finin, 1980).

Lauer (1995), for example, considers eight prepo-

sitional paraphrases as semantic classification

categories: of, for, with, in, on, at, about, and

from. According to this classification, the noun

compound “bird sanctuary”, for instance, can

be classified both as “sanctuary of bird” and

“sanctuary for bird”.

The automatic interpretation of noun compounds

is a difficult task for both unsupervised and super-

vised approaches. Currently, the best-performing

NC interpretation methods in computational lin-

guistics focus only on two-word noun compounds

and rely either on rather ad-hoc, domain-specific,

hand-coded semantic taxonomies, or on statistical

3M: Modifier, H: Head

models on large collections of unlabeled data.

The majority of corpus based statistical ap-

proaches to noun compound interpretation

collects statistics on the occurrence frequency

of the noun constituents and uses them in a

probabilistic model (Resnik, 1993; Lauer, 1995;

Lapata and Keller, 2004). Lauer (1995) was the

first to devise and test an unsupervised probabilis-

tic model for noun compound interpretation on

Grolier encyclopedia, an 8 million word corpus,

based on a set of 8 prepositional paraphrases. His

probabilistic model computes the probability of a

preposition p given a noun-noun pair n1-n2 and

finds the most likely prepositional paraphrase

p∗ = argmaxP (p|n1, n2) (1)

However, as Lauer noticed, this model requires

a very large training corpus to estimate these

probabilities. Lapata and Keller (2004) showed

that simple unsupervised models applied to the

noun compound interpretation task perform sig-

nificantly better when the n-gram frequencies are

obtained from the web (accuracy of 55.71% on Al-

tavista), rather than from a large standard corpus.

Our approach also uses web as a corpus and exam-

ines frequency of various preposition paraphrases

of a given NC. The next section describes our ap-

proach.

4 Approach

This section describes our procedure in details.

The system is comprised of the following stages:

(a) Web search of prepositional paraphrase for En-

glish NC; (b) mapping the English preposition to

corresponding Hindi postposition; (c) Evaluation

of correct paraphrasing on English side as well as

evaluation of translation.

4.1 Paraphrase Selection for Translation

Based on the observation from English-Hindi par-

allel corpus data that we examined as part of this

project, we have designed an algorithm to deter-

mine whether an English NC is to be translated

as an analytic construct or retained as an NC in

Hindi. We used Yahoo search engine to perform

a simple frequency search for “M Preposition H”

in web corpus for a given input NC. For example,

the paraphrases obtained for the NC “finance min-

ister” is given in table 2 and frequency of various

paraphrases is shown in the second column:

34



Paraphrase Web Frequency

minister about finance 2

minister from finance 16

minister on finance 34300

minister for finance 1370000

minister with finance 43

minister by finance 20

minister to finance 508

minister in finance 335

minister at finance 64

minister of finance 5420000

Table 2: Frequency of Paraphrases for “finance

minister” after Web search.

In the table we notice that the distribution is

widely varied. For some paraphrase the count is

very low (minister about finance) while the high-

est count is 5420000 for “minister of finance”. The

wide distribution is apparent even when the range

is not that high as shown in following table:

Paraphrase Web Frequency

agencies about welfare 1

agencies from welfare 16

agencies on welfare 64

agencies for welfare 707

agencies with welfare 34

agencies in welfare 299

agencies at welfare 0

agencies of welfare 92

Table 3: Frequency of Paraphrases for “welfare

agencies” after Web search.

During our experiment we have come across

three typical cases: (a) No paraphrase is avail-

able when searched; (b) Frequency counts of some

paraphrases for a given NC is very low and (c) Fre-

quency of a number of paraphrases cross a thresh-

old limit. The threshold is set to be mean of all

the frequencies of paraphrases. Each of such cases

signifies something about the data and we build

our translation heuristics based on these observa-

tions. When no paraphrase is found in web corpus

for a given NC, we consider such NCs very close-

knit constructions and translate them as nominal

compound in Hindi. This generally happens when

the NC is a proper noun or a technical term. Sim-

ilarly when there exists a number of paraphrases

each of those crossing the threshold limit, it indi-

cates that the noun components of such NCs can

occur in various contexts and we select the first

3 paraphrase as probable paraphrase of NCs. For

example, the threshold value for the NC finance

minister is: Threshold = 6825288/8 = 853161.

The two paraphrases considered as probable para-

phrase of this NC is are therefore “minister of fi-

nance” and “minister for finance”. The remain-

ing are ignored. When count of a paraphrase is

less than the threshold, they are removed from the

data. We presume that such low frequency does

not convey any significance of paraphrase. On the

contrary, they add to the noise for probability dis-

tribution. For example, all paraphrases of “ante-

lope species” except “species of antelope” is very

low as shown in Table 4. They are not therefore

considered as probable paraphrases.

Paraphrase Web Frequency

species about antelope 0

species from antelope 44

species on antelope 98

species for antelope 8

species with antelope 10

species in antelope 9

species at antelope 8

species of antelope 60600

Table 4: Frequency of Paraphrases for antelope

species after Web search.

4.2 Mapping English Preposition to Hindi

Post-position

The strategy of mapping English preposition to

one Hindi post-position is a crucial one for the

present task of translation. The decision is mainly

motivated by a preliminary study of aligned paral-

lel corpora of English and Hindi in which we have

come across the distribution of Lauer’s 8 preposi-

tions as shown in table 5.

The table (Table 5) shows that English preposi-

tions are mostly translated into one Hindi postpo-

sition except for a few cases such as “at”, “with”

and “for”. The probability of “on” getting trans-

lating into “ko” and “of” into “se” is very less

and therefore we are ignoring them in our map-

ping schema. The preposition “at” can be trans-

lated into “meM” and “para” and both postposi-

tions in Hindi can refer to “location”. However,

the two prepositions “with” and “for” can be trans-

lated into two distinct relations as shown in Ta-

ble 5. From our parallel corpus data, we therefore

35



Prep Post-Pos Sense Prob.

of

kA Possession 0.13

ke Possession 0.574

kI Possession 0.29

se Possession 0.002

from se Source .999

at
meM Location 0.748

par Location .219

with
se Instrument 0.628

ke sAtha Association 0.26

on
par Loc./Theme 0.987

ko Theme 0.007

about ke bAre meM Subj.Matter 0.68

in meM Location .999

for
ke lie Beneficiary 0.72

ke Possession 0.27

Table 5: Mapping of English Preposition to Hindi

postposition from alligned English-Hindi parallel

corpora.

find that these prepositions are semantically over-

loaded from Hindi language perspective. The right

sense and thereafter the right Hindi correspondent

can be selected in the context. In the present task,

we are selecting the mapping with higher prob-

ability. English Prepositions are mapped to one

Hindi Post-position for all cases except for “at”

and “about”.

Preposition Postposition

of kA/kI/ke

on para

for ke liye

at para/meM

in meM

from se

with ke sAtha

about

ke bAre meM

ke viSaya meM

ke sambaMdhi

Table 6: Preposition-Postposition Mapping

Post-positions in Hindi can be multi-word as in

“ke bAre meM”, “ke liye” and so on. In the present

paper we are translating the English preposition to

the mostly probable postposition of Hindi. That

does not mean that the preposition cannot be trans-

lated into any other postposition. However, we are

taking the aforementioned stand as an preliminary

experiment and further refinement in terms of se-

lection of postposition will be done as future work.

For the present study, lexical substitution of head

noun and modifier noun are presumed to be cor-

rect.

5 Result and Analysis

In this section we will describe results of two

steps that are involved in our work: (a) Selection

of English preposition paraphrase for a given En-

glish NC; (b) Translation of English Preposition to

Hindi Post-position.

For a given NC we used a brute force method

to find the paraphrase structure. We used Lauer’s

prepositions (of, in, about, for, with, at, on, from,

to, by) for prepositional paraphrasing. Web search

is done on all paraphrases and frequency counts

are retrieved. Mean frequency (F) is calculated us-

ing all frequencies retrieved. All those paraphrases

that give frequency more than F are selected. We

first tested the algorithm on 250 test data of our

selection. The result of the top three paraphrases

are given below :

Selection Technique Precision

Top 1 61.6%

Top 2 67.20%

Top 3 71.6%

Table 7: Paraphrasing Accuracy

We have also tested the algorithm on Lauer’s

test data (first 218 compounds out 400 of NCs)

and got the following results (Table 8). Each of

the test data was marked with a preposition which

best explained the relationship between two noun

components. Lauer gives X for compounds which

cannot be paraphrased by using prepositions For

eg. tuna fish.

Prep OLauer OCI Percentage

Of 54 37 68.50%

For 42 20 47.62%

In 24 9 37.50%

On 6 2 33.33%

Table 8: Distribution of Preposition on Lauer test

data of 218 NC

OLauer : Number of occurrence of each prepo-

sition in Lauer test data

36



OCI : Number of correctly identified preposition

by our method

In Table 9 we compare our result with that of

Lauer’s on his data. We gave the results with cri-

teria: 1) only “N prep N” is considered. 2) Non-

Prepositions (X) are also considered.

Case Our Method Lauer’s

N-prep-N 43.67% 39.87%

All 42.2% 28.8%

Table 9: Comparison of our approach with Lauer’s

Approach

Now that we have paraphrased NCs, we attempt

to translate the output into Hindi. We assume that

we have the right lexical substitution. In this pa-

per we have checked for the accuracy of the right

Hindi construction selection.

For a given NC we got the paraphrase as “H

prep M” or “MH”. We use English preposition

mapping as described in section 4.2 for translat-

ing NC in Hindi. For MH type compounds di-

rect lexical substitution is tried out. We tested our

approach on the gold data of 250 Nominal Com-

pounds. We translate the same 250 NCs using

google translation system in order to set up a base-

line. Google Translator could translate the data

with 68.8% accuracy.

Google returns only one translation which we

evaluated against our test data. In our case, we

have taken 3 top paraphrases as described in sec-

tion 4.1 and translated them into Hindi by using

the English preposition to Hindi postposition map-

ping schema. The following table presents the

accuracy of the translation of the top three para-

phrases

Case Precision

Top 1 61.6%

Top 2 68.4%

Top 3 70.8%

Table 10: Translation Accuracy

In this work we have not considered the context

of English NC while translating them into Hindi.

Table 11 gives the accuracy of each post-position

as translated from English preposition.

The other prepositions have occurred very less

in number and therefore not given in the table.

Preposition Post Position Accuracy

Of kA/ke/kI 94.3%

For ke liye 72.2%

In meM 42.9%

Table 11: Translation Accuracy for some individ-

ual prepositions

6 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper describes a preliminary approach for

translating English nominal compound into Hindi

using paraphrasing as a method of analysis of

source data. The result of translation is encourag-

ing as a first step towards this kind of work. This

work finds out a useful application for the task

of paraphrasing nominal compound using prepo-

sition. The next step of experiment includes the

following tasks: (a) Designing the test data in such

a way that all correspondents get equal represen-

tation in the data. (b) To examine if there are any

other prepositions (besides Lauer’s 8 preposition)

which can be used for paraphrasing (c) To use con-

text for translation.

References

Gildea. D. and Jurafsky. D. 2002. Automatic labeling
of semantic roles, Computational Linguistics 28 (3),
245-288.

Lapata, M. and Keller, F. 2004. The Web as a baseline:
evaluating the performance of unsupervised Web-
based models for a range of NLP tasks. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Human Language Technology con-
ference (HLT/NAACL), Boston, MA, pp. 121-128.

Lauer, M. 1995 Designing statistical language learn-
ers: experiments on noun compounds, Ph.D. Thesis,
Macquarie University, Australia

Moldovan, D. and Girju, R. 2003 Knowledge discov-
ery from text In: The Tutorial Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL), Sapporo, Japan.

Mathur, P. and Paul, S. 2009 Automatic Translation of
Nominal Compound into Hindi. In: Proceedings of
International Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (ICON), Hyderabad

Moldovan, D., Girju, R., Tatu, M., and Antohe, D.
2005 On the semantics of noun compounds Com-
puter Speech & Language 19(4): 479-496

Girju, R. 2009 The Syntax and Semantics of Preposi-
tions in the Task of Automatic Interpretation of Nom-
inal Phrases and Compounds: A Cross-Linguistic
Study Computational Linguistics 35(2): 185-228

37



Vanderwende, L. 1995 The analysis of noun sequences
using semantic information extracted from on-line
dictionaries Ph.D. Dissertation, Georgetown Uni-
versity.

Barker, K. and Szpakowicz, S. 1998 Semi-automatic
recognition of noun modifier relationships In Proc.
of the 36th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 17th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING/ACL-98) , pages 96-102, Montreal,
Canada.

Finin, T.W. 1980 The semantic interpretation of nom-
inal compounds In Proc. of the 1st Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-80), 1980.

Isabelle, P. 1984 Another look at nominal com-
pounds In Proc. of the 10th International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics (COLING ’84),
Stanford, USA, 1984.

Kim, S.N. and Baldwin, T. 2005 Automatic Interpreta-
tion of Noun Compounds Using WordNet Similarity
IJCNLP 2005:945-956

Rackow, U., Dagan, I. and Schwall, U. 1992 Auto-
matic translation of noun compounds In Proc. of
the 14th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING ’92), Nantes, Frances, 1992

38


