










































An Integrated Tool for Annotating Historical Corpora


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 217–221,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

An integrated tool for annotating historical corpora

Pablo Picasso Feliciano de Faria∗
University of Campinas

Campinas, Brazil
pablofaria@gmail.com

Fabio Natanael Kepler†
University of Sao Paulo

Sao Paulo, Brazil
kepler@ime.usp.br

Maria Clara Paixão de Sousa
University of Sao Paulo

Sao Paulo, Brazil
mclara.ps@gmail.com

Abstract

E-Dictor is a tool for encoding, applying
levels of editions, and assigning part-of-
speech tags to ancient texts. In short, it
works as a WYSIWYG interface to en-
code text in XML format. It comes from
the experience during the building of the
Tycho Brahe Parsed Corpus of Historical
Portuguese and from consortium activities
with other research groups. Preliminary
results show a decrease of at least 50% on
the overall time taken on the editing pro-
cess.

1 Introduction

The Tycho Brahe Parsed Corpus of Historical Por-
tuguese (CTB) (Cor, 2010) consists of Portuguese
texts written by authors born between 1380 and
1845. Been one of the forefront works among
projects dedicated to investigate the history of Por-
tuguese language, it contributed to the renovation
of the theoretical relevance of studies about the
linguistic change in different frameworks (Mat-
tos e Silva, 1988; Kato and Roberts, 1993; de
Castilho, 1998).

This resulted in crescent work with ancient texts
in the country (Megale and Cambraia, 1999), and,
by the end of the 1990s, the work on Corpus Lin-
guistics has given rise to a confluence between
philology and computer science, a relationship not
so ease to equate.

1.1 Philological and computational needs
In studies based on ancient texts, above all, one
has to guarantees fidelity to the original forms of
the texts. Starting with a fac-simile, a first op-
tion would be the automatic systems of character

∗Thanks to FAPESP, n. 2008/04312-9, for funding part
of the development of E-Dictor.

† Thanks to CAPES for the scholarship granted during
the initial part of this work.

recognition (OCR). For the older texts, however,
the current recognition technologies have proven
inefficient and quite inadequate for handwritten
documents (Paixão de Sousa, 2009). Anyway one
cannot totally avoid manual transcription.

There are different degrees of fidelity between
the transcription and the original text. In prac-
tice, one often prepares a “semi-diplomatic” edi-
tion, in which a slightly greater degree of interfer-
ence is considered acceptable – eg., typographical
or graphematic modernization. A central goal of
the philological edition is to make the text accessi-
ble to the specialist reader, with maximum preser-
vation of its original features.

However, it needs to be integrated with compu-
tational and linguistic requirements: the need for
quantity, agility and automation in the statistical
work of selecting data. The original spelling and
graphematic characteristics of older texts, for ex-
ample, may hinder the subsequent automatic pro-
cessing, such as morphological annotation. Thus,
the original text needs to be prepared, or edited,
with a degree of interference higher than that ac-
ceptable for a semi-diplomatic edition and that is
where the conflict emerges.

1.2 Background

The modernization of spellings and standardiza-
tion of graphematic aspects, during the first years
of CTB, made texts suitable for automated pro-
cessing, but caused the loss of important features
from the original text for the historical study of
language. This tension has led to the project
“Memories of the Text” (Paixão de Sousa, 2004),
which sought to restructure the Corpus, based
on the development of XML annotations (W3C,
2009), and to take advantage of the core features of
this type of encoding, for example, XSLT (W3C,
1999) processing.

A annotation system was conceived and applied
to 48 Portuguese texts (2, 279, 455 words), which

217



allowed keeping philological informations while
making the texts capable of being computationally
treated in large-scale. Since 2006, the system has
been being tested by other research groups, no-
tably the Program for the History of Portuguese
Language (PROHPOR-UFBA). The system, then,
met its initial objectives, but it had serious issues
with respect to reliability and, especially, ease of
use.

We noted that manual text markup in XML
was challenging to some and laborious for every-
one. The basic edition process was: transcription
in a text editor, application of the XML markup
(tags plus philological edition), generation of a
standardized plain text version to submit to auto-
matic part-of-speech tagging, revision of both files
(XML and tagged). All in this process, except for
text tagging, been manually done, was too subject
to failures and demanded constant and extensive
revision of the encoding. The need for an alter-
native, to make the task more friendly, reliable,
and productive, became clear. In short, two things
were needed: a friendly interface (WYSIWYG),
to prevent the user from dealing with XML code,
and a way to tighten the whole process (transcrip-
tion, encode/edition, POS tagging and revision).

1.3 Available tools
A search for available options in the market (free
and non-free) led to some very interesting tools,
which may be worth trying:

• Multext1: a series of projects for corpora en-
coding as well as developing tools and lin-
guistic resources. Not all tools seem to have
been finished, and the projects seems to be
outdated and no longer being maintained.

• CLaRK2: a system for corpora development
based on XML and implemented in Java. It
does not provide a WYSIWYG interface.

• Xopus3: an XML editor, which offers a
WYSIWYG interface. Some of its funcional-
ities can be extended (customized) throught a
Javascript API.

• <oXygen/> XML Editor4: a complete XML
development platform with support for all

1http://aune.lpl.univ-aix.fr/projects/
multext/.

2http://www.bultreebank.org/clark.
3http://xopus.com/.
4http://www.oxygenxml.com/.

major XML related standards. An XML
file can be edited in the following perspec-
tives: XML text editor, WYSIWYG-like edi-
tor, XML grid editor, tree editor.

Unfortunately, all the cited tools lack the ca-
pability of dealing proper with levels of edition
for tokens (words and punctuations) and an inte-
grated environment for the whole process of edi-
tion. Thus, in spite of their amazing features, none
of them was sufficiently suitable, specially con-
cerning spelling modernization and normalization
of graphematic aspects. In fact, this is expected
for the tools are intended to broader purposes.

1.4 Solution
Conception and development of a tool, E-Dictor,
where the need for a WYSIWYG interface joined
a second goal, ie., integrating the tasks of the
whole process, which would then be performed
inside the same environment, with any necessary
external tools being called by the system, trans-
parently.

2 Integrated annotation tool

2.1 General features
E-Dictor has been developed in Python5 and, to-
day, has versions for both Linux and Windows
(XP/Vista/7) platforms. A version for MacOS is
planned for the future. It is currently at 1.0 beta
version (not stable).

2.2 General interface features
As shown in Figure 1, the main interface has an
application menu, a toolbar, a content area (di-
vided into tabs: Transcription, Edition, and Mor-
phology), and buttons to navigate throught pages.
The tabs are in accordance with the flow of the en-
coding process. Many aspects of the functioning
described in what follows are determined by the
application preferences.

In the ‘Transcription’ tab, the original text
is transcribed “as is” (the user can view the
fac-simile image, while transcribing the text).
Throught a menu option, E-Dictor will automat-
ically apply an XML structure to the text, “guess-
ing” its internal structure as best as it can. Then,
in the ‘Edition’ tab, the user can edit any token or

5Available on internet at http://www.python.
org/, last access on Jan, 21th, 2010. Python has been used
in a number of computational linguistics applications, e.g.,
the Natural Language Toolkit (Bird et al., 2009).

218



Figure 1: E-Dictor GUI.

structural element (eg., paragraph). Finally, in the
‘Morphology’ tab, tokens and part-of-speech tags
are displayed in token/TAG format, so they can be
revised6.

2.3 The XML structure
The XML structure specified meets two main
goals: (i) be as neutral as possible (in relation to
the textual content encoded) and (ii) suit philolog-
ical and linguistic needs, i.e., edition must be sim-
ple and efficient without losing information rele-
vant to philological studies. In the context of CTB,
it was initially established a structure to encode the
following information:

• Metadata: information about the source text,
e.g., author information, state of processing,
etc.

• Delimitation of sections, pages, paragraphs,
sentences, headers and footers, and tokens.

• Class of tokens (part-of-speech tags) and
phonological form for some tokens.

• Types (levels) of edition for each token.

• Comments of the editor.

• Subtypes for some text elements, like sec-
tions, paragraphs, sentences and tokens (eg.,
a section of type “prologue”).

6The current version of E-Dictor comes with a POS tag-
ger, developed by Fabio Kepler, accessed by a menu option.

2.4 Encoding flexibility

A key goal of E-Dictor is to be flexible enough so
as to be useful in other contexts of corpora build-
ing. To achieve this, the user can customize the
“preferences” of the application. The most promi-
nent options are the levels of edition for tokens; the
subtypes for the elements ‘section’, ‘paragraph’,
‘sentence’, and ‘token’; and the list of POS tags to
be used in the morphological analysis. Finally, in
the ’Metadata’ tab, the user can create the suitable
metadata fields needed by his/her project.

2.5 Features

Throught its menu, E-Dictor provides some com-
mon options (eg., Save As, Search & Replace,
Copy & Paste, and many others) as well as those
particular options intended for the encoding pro-
cess (XML structure generation, POS automatic
tagging, etc.). E-Dictor provides also an option
for exporting the encoded text and the lexicon
of editions7 in two different formats (HTML and
TXT/CSV).

2.6 Edition

To conclude this section, a brief comment about
token (words and punctuation) edition, which is
the main feature of E-Dictor. The respective in-
terface is shown in Figure 2. When a token is se-

7The actual editions applied to words and punctuations of
the original text.

219



Figure 2: Details of the token edition interface.

lected, the user can: (i) in the “Properties” panel,
specify the type of the token (according to the sub-
types defined by the preferences), its foreign lan-
guage, and format (bold, italic, and underlined);
(ii) in the “Edition” panel, specify some other
properties (eg., phonological form) of the token
and include edition levels (according to the levels
defined by the preferences).

To each token, the user must click on “Apply
changes” to effectivate (all) the editions made to it.
The option “Replace all” tells E-Dictor to repeat
the operation over all identical tokens in the re-
maining of the text (a similar functionality is avail-
able for POS tags revision).

3 Discussion

The dificulties of encoding ancient texts in XML,
using common text editors, had shown that a tool
was necessary to make the process efficient and
friendly. This led to the development of E-Dictor,
which, since its earlier usage, has shown promis-
ing results. Now, the user does not even have to
know that the underlying encoding is XML. It is
only necessary for him/her to know the (philolog-
ical and linguistics) aspects of text edition.

E-Dictor led to a decrease of about 50% in the
time required for encoding and editing texts. The
improvement may be even higher if we consider
the revision time. One of the factors for this im-
provement is the better legibility the tool provides.
The XML code is hidden, allowing one to prac-
tically read the text without any encoding. To il-
lustrate the opposite, Figure 3 shows the common
edition “interface”, before E-Dictor. Note that the
content being edited is just “Ex.mo Sr. Duque”.

Finally, the integration of the whole process into
one and only environment is a second factor for the
overall improvement, for it allows the user to move
freely and quickly between “representations” and

Figure 3: Example of XML textual encoding.

to access external tools transparently.

3.1 Improvements

E-Dictor is always under development, as we dis-
cuss its characteristics and receive feedback from
users. There is already a list of future improve-
ments that are being developed, such as extending
the exporting routines, for example. A bigger goal
is to incorporate an edition lexicon, which would
be used by the tool for making suggestions during
the edition process, or even to develop an “auto-
matic token edition” system for later revision by
the user.

3.2 Perspectives

Besides CTB, E-Dictor is being used by the BBD
project (BBD, 2010), and, recently, by various
subgroups of the PHPB project (For a History of
Portuguese in Brazil). These groups have large
experience in philological edition of handwritten
documents, and we hope their use of E-Dictor will
help us improve it. The ideal goal of E-Dictor is to
be capable of handling the whole flow of linguistic
and philological tasks: transcription, edition, tag-
ging, and parsing.

220



References
[BBD2010] BBD. 2010. Biblioteca Brasiliana Digital.

[Bird et al.2009] Steven Bird, E. Klein, and E. Loper.
2009. Natural Language Processing with Python.
O’Reilly.

[Cor2010] IEL-UNICAMP and IME-USP, 2010. Cór-
pus Histórico do Português Anotado Tycho Brahe.

[de Castilho1998] Ataliba Teixeira de Castilho. 1998.
Para a história do português brasileiro, volume Vol
I: Primeiras idéias. Humanitas, São Paulo.

[Kato and Roberts1993] Mary A. Kato and Ian Roberts.
1993. Português brasileiro: uma viagem Di-
acrônica. Editora da Unicamp, Campinas.

[Mattos e Silva1988] Rosa Virgínia Mattos e Silva.
1988. Fluxo e refluxo: uma retrospectiva da lingüís-
tica histórica no brasil. D.E.L.T.A., 4(1):85–113.

[Megale and Cambraia1999] Heitor Megale and César
Cambraia. 1999. Filologia portuguesa no brasil.
D.E.L.T.A., 15(1:22).

[Paixão de Sousa2004] Maria Clara Paixão de Sousa.
2004. Memórias do texto: Aspectos tecnológicos
na construção de um corpus histórico do português.
Projeto de pós-doutorado – fapesp, Unicamp.

[Paixão de Sousa2009] Maria Clara Paixão de Sousa.
2009. Desafios do processamento de textos anti-
gos: primeiros experimentos na brasiliana digital. In
I Workshop de Linguística Computacional da USP,
São Paulo, 11.

[W3C1999] W3C. 1999. Extensible stylesheet lan-
guage transformation.

[W3C2009] W3C. 2009. Extensible markup language.

221


