



















































Proceedings of the...


Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 28–31,
Uppsala, July 2010.

Speculation and negation annotation in natural language texts: what the
case of BioScope might (not) reveal

Veronika Vincze
University of Szeged

Szeged, Hungary
vinczev@inf.u-szeged.hu

1 Introduction

In information extraction, it is of key impor-
tance to distinguish between facts and uncertain
or negated information. In other words, IE appli-
cations have to treat sentences / clauses containing
uncertain or negated information differently from
factual information that is why the development of
hedge and negation detection systems has received
much interest – e.g. the objective of the CoNLL-
2010 Shared Task was also to develop hedge de-
tection systems (Farkas et al., 2010). For the train-
ing and evaluation of such systems, corpora anno-
tated for negation and speculation are necessary.

There are several linguistic phenomena that can
be grouped under the term uncertainty. Besides
hedge and speculation, doubtful events are also
considered as a subtype of uncertainty (Kim et al.,
2008) and Ganter and Strube (2009) argue that the
notion of weasel words are similar to hedges. A
word is considered to be a weasel word if it creates
an impression that something important has been
said, but what is really communicated is vague,
misleading, evasive or ambiguous, thus, it is also
related to uncertainty. All these phenomena might
be of interest for IE applications, which yields that
the creation of corpora with uncertainty annotation
is indispensable.

2 Related work

There exist some corpora that contain annota-
tion for speculation and/or negation. The GE-
NIA Event corpus (Kim et al., 2008) annotates
biological events with negation and two types of
uncertainty. In the BioInfer corpus (Pyysalo et
al., 2007) biological relations are annotated for
negation. The system developed by Medlock and
Briscoe (2007) made use of a corpus consisting
of six papers from genomics literature in which
sentences were annotated for speculation. Set-
tles et al. (2008) constructed a corpus where sen-

tences are classified as either speculative or defi-
nite, however, no keywords are marked in the cor-
pus and Shatkay et al. (2008) describe a database
where sentences are annotated for certainty among
other features. As a corpus specifically annotated
for weasel words, WikiWeasel should be men-
tioned, which was constructed for the CoNLL-
2010 Shared Task (Farkas et al., 2010) and con-
tains Wikipedia paragraphs annotated for weasel
words.

3 The BioScope corpus

The BioScope corpus (Vincze et al., 2008) is – to
our best knowledge – the largest corpus available
that is annotated for both negation and hedge key-
words and the only one that contains annotation
for linguistic scopes. It includes three types of
texts from the biomedical domain – namely, radio-
logical reports, biological full papers and abstracts
from the GENIA corpus. (15 new full biomedi-
cal papers were annotated for hedge cues and their
scopes, which served as the evaluation database
of the CoNLL-2010 Shared Task (Farkas et al.,
2010), and this dataset will be added to BioScope
in the near future.) The annotation was carried out
by two students of linguistics supervised by a lin-
guist. Problematic cases were continuously dis-
cussed among the annotators and dissimilar anno-
tations were later resolved by the linguist.

3.1 Annotation principles
In BioScope, speculation is understood as the pos-
sible existence of a thing is claimed – neither its
existence nor its non-existence is known for sure.
Only one level of uncertainty is marked (as op-
posed to the GENIA corpus (Kim et al., 2008) or
Shatkay et al. (2008)) and no weasels are anno-
tated. Negation is seen as the implication of non-
existence of something.

The annotation was based on four basic princi-
ples:

28



• Each keyword has a scope.
• The scope must include its keyword.
• Min-max strategy:

– The minimal unit expressing
hedge/negation is marked as keyword.

– The scope is extended to the maximal
syntactic unit.

• No intersecting scopes are allowed.
These principles were determined at the very

beginning of the annotation process and they were
strictly followed throughout the corpus building.

3.2 Problematic cases
However, in some cases, some language phenom-
ena seemed to contradict the above principles.
These issues required a thorough consideration of
the possible solutions in accordance with the basic
principles in order to keep the annotation of the
corpus as consistent as possible. The most notable
examples include the following:

• Negative keywords without scope:
[Negative] chest radiograph.

In this case, the scope contains only the key-
word.

• Elliptic sentences
Moreover, ANG II stimulated NF-
kappaB activation in human mono-
cytes, but [not] in lymphocytes
from the same preparation.

With the present encoding scheme of scopes,
there is no way to signal that the negation
should be extended to the verb and the object
as well.

• Nested scopes
One scope includes another one:

These observations (suggest that
TNF and PMA do (not lead to NF-
kappa B activation through induc-
tion of changes in the cell redox
status)).

The semantic interpretation of such nested
scopes should be understood as ”it is possi-
ble that there is no such an event that. . . ”.

• Elements in between keyword and target
word

Although however is not affected by the
hedge cue in the following example, it is in-
cluded in the scope since consecutive text
spans are annotated as scopes:

(Atelectasis in the right mid zone
is, however, <possible>).

• Complex keywords
Sometimes a hedge / negation is expressed
via a phrase rather than a single word: these
are marked as complex keywords.

• Inclusion of modifiers and adjuncts
It is often hard to decide whether a modifier
or adjunct belongs to the scope or not. In or-
der not to lose potentially important informa-
tion, the widest scope possible is marked in
each case.

• Intersecting scopes
When two keywords occur within one sen-
tence, their scopes might intersect, yielding
one apparently empty scope (i.e. scope with-
out keyword) and a scope with two keywords:

(Repression did ([not] <seem> to
involve another factor whose activ-
ity is affected by the NSAIDs)).

In such cases, one of the scopes (usually the
negative one) was extended:

((Repression did [not] <seem> to
involve another factor whose activ-
ity is affected by the NSAIDs)).

On the other hand, there were some cases where
the difficulty of annotation could be traced back to
lexical issues. Some of the keyword candidates
have several senses (e.g. if ) or can be used in dif-
ferent grammatical structures (e.g. indicate vs. in-
dicate that) and not all of them are to be marked
as a keyword in the corpus. Thus, senses / usages
to be annotated and those not to be annotated had
to be determined precisely.

Finally, sometimes an apparently negative key-
word formed part of a complex hedge keyword
(e.g. cannot be excluded), which refers to the
fact that speculation can be expressed also by a
negated word, thus, the presence of a negative
word does not automatically entail that the sen-
tence is negated.

29



4 Outlook: Comparison with other
corpora

Besides BioScope, the GENIA Event corpus (Kim
et al., 2008) also contains annotation for negation
and speculation. In order to see what the main dif-
ferences are between the corpora, the annotation
principles were contrasted:

• in GENIA Event, no modifier keywords are
marked, however, in BioScope, they are;

• the scope of speculation and negation is ex-
plicitly marked in BioScope and it can be
extended to various constituents within the
clause / sentence though in GENIA Event, it
is the event itself that is within the scope;

• two subtypes of uncertainty are distinguished
in GENIA Event: doubtful and probable,
however, in BioScope there is one umbrella
term for them (speculation).

An essential difference in annotation principles
between the two corpora is that GENIA Event fol-
lows the principles of event-centered annotation
while BioScope annotation does not put special
emphasis on events. Event-centered annotation
means that annotators are required to identify as
many events as possible within the sentence then
label each separately for negation / speculation.

The multiplicity of events in GENIA and the
maximum scope principle exploited in BioScope
(see 3.1) taken together often yields that a GENIA
event falls within the scope of a BioScope key-
word, however, it should not be seen as a specu-
lated or negated event on its own. Here we provide
an illustrative example:

In summary, our data suggest that
changes in the composition of tran-
scription factor AP-1 is a key molecu-
lar mechanism for increasing IL-2 tran-
scription and may underlie the phe-
nomenon of costimulation by EC.

According to the BioScope analysis of the sen-
tence, the scope of suggest extends to the end of
the sentence. It entails that in GENIA it is only
the events is a key molecular mechanism and un-
derlie the phenomenon that are marked as proba-
ble, nevertheless, the events changes, increasing,
transcription and costimulation are also included
in the BioScope speculative scope. Thus, within

this sentence, there are six GENIA events out of
which two are labeled as probable, however, in
BioScope, all six are within a speculative scope.

In some cases, there is a difference in between
what is seen as speculative / negated in the cor-
pora. For instance, negated ”investigation” verbs
in Present Perfect are seen as doubtful events in
GENIA and as negative events in BioScope:

However, a role for NF-kappaB in hu-
man CD34(+) bone marrow cells has not
been described.

According to GENIA annotation principles, the
role has not been described, therefore it is doubt-
ful what the role exactly is. However, in BioScope,
the interpretation of the sentence is that there has
not been such an event that the role for NF-kappaB
in human CD34(+) bone marrow cells has been de-
scribed. Thus, it is marked as negative.

Another difference between the annotation
schemes of BioScope and GENIA is that instances
of weaseling are annotated as probable events in
GENIA, however, in BioScope they are not. An
example for a weasel sentence is shown below:

Receptors for leukocyte chemoattrac-
tants, including chemokines, are tradi-
tionally considered to be responsible for
the activation of special leukocyte func-
tions such as chemotaxis, degranulation,
and the release of superoxide anions.

5 Conclusions

Some interesting conclusions can be drawn from
the difficulties encountered during annotation pro-
cess of the BioScope corpus. As for method-
ology, it is unquestionable that precisely defined
rules (on scope marking, keyword marking and on
the interpretation of speculation / negation) are es-
sential for consistent annotation, thus, pre-defined
guidelines can help annotation work a lot. How-
ever, difficulties or ambiguities not seen previ-
ously may emerge (and they really do) only dur-
ing the process of annotation. In this way, a con-
tinuous reformulation and extension of annotation
rules is required based on the corpus data. On the
other hand, problematic issues sometimes might
be solved in several different ways. When decid-
ing on their final treatment, an ideal balance be-
tween gain and loss should be reached, in other
words, the min-max strategy as a basic annotation

30



principle can also be applied here (minimize the
loss and maximize the gain that the solution can
provide).

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the National
Office for Research and Technology (NKTH,
http://www.nkth.gov.hu/) of the Hun-
garian government within the framework of the
project MASZEKER.

References
Richárd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, György Móra, János

Csirik, and György Szarvas. 2010. The CoNLL-
2010 Shared Task: Learning to Detect Hedges and
their Scope in Natural Language Text. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2010): Shared
Task, pages 1–12, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Viola Ganter and Michael Strube. 2009. Finding
Hedges by Chasing Weasels: Hedge Detection Us-
ing Wikipedia Tags and Shallow Linguistic Features.
In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Confer-
ence Short Papers, pages 173–176, Suntec, Singa-
pore, August. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii.
2008. Corpus annotation for mining biomedi-
cal events from literature. BMC Bioinformatics,
9(Suppl 10).

Ben Medlock and Ted Briscoe. 2007. Weakly Super-
vised Learning for Hedge Classification in Scientific
Literature. In Proceedings of the ACL, pages 992–
999, Prague, Czech Republic, June.

Sampo Pyysalo, Filip Ginter, Juho Heimonen, Jari
Björne, Jorma Boberg, Jouni Järvinen, and Tapio
Salakoski. 2007. BioInfer: a corpus for information
extraction in the biomedical domain. BMC Bioin-
formatics, 8(50).

Burr Settles, Mark Craven, and Lewis Friedland. 2008.
Active learning with real annotation costs. In Pro-
ceedings of the NIPS Workshop on Cost-Sensitive
Learning, pages 1–10.

Hagit Shatkay, Fengxia Pan, Andrey Rzhetsky, and
W. John Wilbur. 2008. Multi-dimensional classifi-
cation of biomedical text: Toward automated, prac-
tical provision of high-utility text to diverse users.
Bioinformatics, 24(18):2086–2093.

Veronika Vincze, György Szarvas, Richárd Farkas,
György Móra, and János Csirik. 2008. The Bio-
Scope Corpus: Biomedical Texts Annotated for Un-
certainty, Negation and their Scopes. BMC Bioin-
formatics, 9(Suppl 11):S9.

31


