



















































Query Expansion for Khmer Information Retrieval


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 80–87,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c©2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing

Query Expansion for Khmer Information Retrieval

Channa Van and Wataru Kameyama
GITS, Waseda University

Honjo, Saitama, Japan
channa@fuji.waseda.jp, wataru@waseda.jp

Abstract
This  paper  presents  the proposed Query
Expansion  (QE) techniques  based  on
Khmer specific characteristics to improve
the retrieval performance of Khmer Infor-
mation Retrieval (IR) system. Four types
of Khmer specific characteristics: spelling
variants, synonyms, derivative words and
reduplicative  words  have  been  investi-
gated in this research. In order to evalu-
ate the effectiveness and the efficiency of
the proposed QE techniques, a prototype of
Khmer IR system has been implemented.
The system is built  on top of the popu-
lar open source information retrieval soft-
ware library Lucene1. The Khmer word
segmentation tool  (Chea et  al., 2007) is
also implemented into the system to im-
prove the accuracy of indexing as well as
searching. Furthermore, the Google web
search engine is also used in the evalua-
tion process. The results show the pro-
posed QE techniques improve the retrieval
performance both of the proposed system
and the Google web search engine. With
the reduplicative word QE technique, an
improvement of 17.93% of recall can be
achieved to the proposed system.

1 Introduction
Similar to the other major languages in the world,
the  number  of  Khmer  digital  content  has  been
rapidly growing over the world-wide web, and it is
becoming very difficult to obtain the relevant in-
formation as needed from the Internet. Although

1Apache Lucene: http://lucene.apache.org

some major web search engine providers such as
Google has a localized version of Khmer in its web
search engine2, it is not specifically designed for
Khmer due to the lack of integration of Khmer spe-
cific characteristics. Consequently, it misses a lot
of information of Khmer websites found in the In-
ternet. For this reason, we propose the QE tech-
niques using the specific characteristic of Khmer
to improve the effectiveness of Khmer IR system.
Four types of QE technique are proposed based
on the four types of Khmer specific characteris-
tic that are spelling variants, synonyms, deriva-
tive words (Khin, 2007) and reduplicative words
(Long, 2007). Moreover, a prototype of Khmer IR
system is implemented in order to evaluate the ef-
fectiveness of these proposed QE techniques. The
proposed system is  built  on  top  of  the  popular
open source information retrieval software library
Lucene in order to take the advantage from its pow-
erful indexing and searching algorithms. Further-
more, to improve the accuracy of indexing and
searching, we have also implemented the specific
Khmer word segmentation into the system. Due to
the lack of Khmer text collection which is required
in the evaluation process, we have also created our
own Khmer text corpus. The corpus has been built
to be useful and beneficial to all types of the re-
search in Khmer Language Processing.

2 Khmer Specific Characteristics
Khmer is the official language of Cambodia. It is
the second most widely spoken Austroasiatic lan-
guage family3. Due to the long historical contact

2Google Khmer: http://www.google.com.kh
3Khmer language: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

Khmer_language

80



with India, Khmer has been heavily influenced by
the Sanskrit and Pali. However, Khmer still pos-
sesses its own specific characteristics so far such
as the word derivation rules and word reduplica-
tion techniques. Furthermore, the specific written
rule is also found in Khmer, for instance the case
of multiple spelling words. These characteristics
are very useful especially in the Khmer IR due to
the lexical-semantic relation between the words.
2.1 Spelling Variants
In Khmer, multiple spelling words exist. They
have same meaning and pronunciation but only
different in spelling. Most of the spelling variants
are loan words, and others are the result of the sub-
stitutability between characters. For example:

- The wordសមុ [sămŭt] ''sea'' ,which is orig-
inated  from  Sanskrit, can  also  be  spelled
សមុទ្ទ [sămŭt]  ''sea''  (Khmer  Dictionary,
1967) which is originated from Pali.

- And the word ឫទ្ធិ [rœ̌ttȟi] ''power'' has an-
other  spelling រទ្ធិ [rœ̌ttȟi]  ''power''  because
''ឫ'' can be substituted by ''រ''.

2.2 Synonyms
Synonyms exist in all the natural languages. Thus,
there is no exception for Khmer as well. Khmer
has  rich  and  variety  of  synonym  vocabularies.
Most  of  these  synonyms are  found in  the  loan
words ( influenced by Sanskrit and Pali ) and the
social status's words. For instance the word ញាំ
''to eat'' has many synonyms for each social status:
សុី ​(impolite word), ពិសា (polite word),ឆាន់ (reli-
gious word), យ (royal word) and etc.
2.3 Derivative Words
Derivative words in Khmer are the words which
are derived from the root words by affixation, in-
cluding prefixation, infixation and suffixation (Jen-
ner, 1969). Interestingly, derivative word's mean-
ing is semantically related to its root word. For
example:
ចាស់ ''old'' + កញ (prefix) →ក ស់ ''very old''
ើរ ''to walk'' + មណ (infix) →ដំ ើរ ''the walk''

ឯករាជ ''independence'' +ភាព (suffix) →
ឯករាជ ភាព ''the state of independence''

2.4 Reduplicative Words
Reduplicative words are very common in Khmer.
They are used for several purposes including em-
phasis, pluralization and complex thought expres-
sions. Three kinds of duplicating techniques are
found in Khmer: word duplication, synonym du-
plication and symmetrical  duplication (Noeurng
and Haiman, 2000).
2.4.1 Word duplication

Word duplication is the process of duplicating a
word to express pluralisation meaning. The dupli-
cation symbol ''ៗ'' is put after the word to indicate
the duplication. For example:

្កធំ [chhkê thum] ''a big dog'' →
្កធំៗ [chhkê thum thum] ''many big dogs''

2.4.2 Synonym duplication
Also called synonym compounding words. This

kind of words are created by combining two dif-
ferent words which are either synonyms or related
meaning. For example:

បំណង ''goal'' + ថា ''intention'' →
បំណង ថា ''goal and intention''

2.4.3 Symmetrical duplication
Symmetrical duplication is the process of cre-

ating a word by combining a word and its simi-
lar phonetic syllables. It is similar to create words
which sound like ''zigzag'' or ''hip hop'' in English.
This duplication technique is usually used to em-
phasize the meaning of the original word. There
are quite remarkable amount of this kind of words
found in Khmer. For example:

ធំ [thum] ''big'' + ង [théng] (similar phonetic
syllable) →ធំ ង [thum théng] ''very big''
ី [krei] (similar phonetic syllable) + [krar]

''poor'' → ី [krei krar] ''very poor''

3 Khmer Text Corpus
A large collection of Khmer text is required in the
evaluation process. Due to the lack of Khmer lan-
guage resource especially the Khmer text corpus,
we have built our own Khmer text corpus. The cor-
pus was designed to be useful and beneficial to all

81



Figure 1: System Design of Building a Khmer Text Corpus

kinds of the research in Khmer language process-
ing. Building such text corpus for Khmer is a chal-
lenging task since there is no implementation yet
on Khmer optical character recognition, and a few
research in Khmer have been done . All texts have
to be collected manually from various Khmer web-
site in the Internet. The corpus includes some basic
corpus annotations such as word annotation, sen-
tence annotation and part-of-speech annotation. It
was encoded in eXtensible Corpus Encoding Stan-
dard (XCES) (Nancy et al., 2000) to assure the fu-
ture extensibility. Figure 1 illustrates the whole
process of building a Khmer text corpus in which
four main steps were carried out: text collection,
preprocessing tasks, corpus annotations and cor-
pus encoding. The detail of each step is described
in the following subsections:

3.1 Text Collection

Collecting Khmer digital text is the most difficult
and time consuming task in the process of build-
ing this corpus. As there is no implementation on
Khmer optical character recognition, it is not pos-
sible to scan or extract Khmer texts neither from
books nor from other paper sources. However,
thanks to the websites as well as Khmer blog com-
munity  that  provide the valuable  Khmer digital
texts for this research. All text were manually col-
lected from all the available sources.

3.2 Preprocessing Tasks
The texts collected from the Internet are usually
not clean and unstructured. It may contain un-
wanted elements such as images, links and some
HTML elements. Therefore, cleaning process is
carried out to remove the unwanted elements and
to restructure the texts before proceeding to the
next step.

After cleaning, each text is categorized by its do-
main according to its content by the labeling pro-
cess. There are twelve domains in this corpus:
newspaper, magazine, medical, technology, cul-
ture, history, law, agriculture, essay, novel, story
and other. The text descriptions such as author's
name, publisher's name, publishing date and pub-
lisher's digital address, are kept along with each
text.
3.3 Corpus Annotations
Corpus annotation information is very important
for the corpus-based research. Therefore, this cor-
pus also includes the sentence annotation, word an-
notation and POS annotation.
3.3.1 Sentence Annotation

Each sentence is annotated with three kinds of
information: position, identification and length.

1. Position: it is defined by the position of the
first character and the last character of a sen-
tence in the text.

82



2. Identification: the sequence number of a sen-
tence within a text file.

3. Length: the number of characters of a sen-
tence.

Like English, each sentence in Khmer can be sep-
arated  by  special  symbols. In  modern  Khmer,
there exists a series of characters that are used to
mark the boundaries of different kind of sentences
(Khin, 2007). Based on these characters, each sen-
tence in a text can be separated easily.

• ។ and ។ល។ : end of declarative sentences.
• ? : end of interrogative sentences.
• ! : end of exclamative sentences.
• ៕ end of the last sentence in a text.

3.3.2 Word Annotation
The position, identification and length of each

word are also annotated as in sentence annotation.
1. Position: it is defined by the position of the

first character and the last character of a word
in the text.

2. Identification: the sequence number of a word
within a text file.

3. Length: the number of characters of a word.
Khmer is non-segmented script. There is no sepa-
rator between words which is very difficult to seg-
ment. In order to do that, we have used the Khmer
word segmentation tool (Chea et al., 2007) devel-
oped by PAN Localization Cambodia4.
3.3.3 Part-of-Speech Annotation

To enhance the usefulness of the corpus, we also
include the Part-of-Speech annotation. We have
used a Khmer POS tagger which is based on the
work of Nou et al. where a transformation-based
approach with hybrid unknown word handling for
Khmer POS tagger is proposed (Nou et al., 2007).
There are 27 types of Khmer tagset which can be
obtained by this Khmer POS tagger. Each obtained
POS tag is assigned to each word in the corpus, and
it is kept along with the word annotation.

4Cambodia  PAN Localization: http://www.
pancambodia.info/

3.4 Corpus Encoding
To assure the extensibility of corpus and the fa-
cility of development for the future works, this
corpus  has  been  encoded  in  eXtensible  Corpus
Encoding Standard (XCES) (Nancy et al., 2000).
XCES is an XML-based standard to codify text
corpus. It is highly based on the previous Cor-
pus Encoding Standard (Nancy, 1998) but using
XML as the markup language. Since the corpus
encoding is based on XML, the corpus is suitable
for many programming languages which support
XML. Furthermore, it can fully take the advan-
tage of the powerful XML framework including
XQuery, XPath and so on. In addition, XCES sup-
ports many types of corpora especially the annota-
tion corpora which our corpus is based on. The en-
coding of annotation files and text description files
are conformed to XCES schema version 1.0.4.
3.5 Corpus Statistic
Table  1 shows  the  corpus  statistic. We  have
achieved  more  than  one  million  words  within
twelve different domains of text. The corpus size
is relatively small at the moment, the expansion of
the corpus size is continuously undergoing.

Table 1: Corpus Statistic
Domain # of Article # of Sentence # of Word
Newspaper 571 13222 409103
Magazine 52 1335 42566
Medical 3 76 2047
Technical 15 607 16356
Culture 33 1178 43640
Law 43 5146 101739
History 9 276 7778
Agriculture 29 1484 30813
Essay 8 304 8318
Story 108 5642 196256
Novel 78 12012 236250
Other 5 134 5522
Total 954 41416 1100388

4 Retrieval Environment
This section provides the necessary background to
understand the context in which the experiment

83



Figure 2: Query Expansion Procedures

was carried out.

4.1 Query Expansion Procedures
Query Expansion is a technique commonly used in
IR (Manning et al., 2009) to improve retrieval per-
formance by reformulating the original query. We
have proposed four types of QE technique based
on the four types of Khmer specific characteristics
that we have presented in the section 2. During
the expansion process, the original search query is
analyzed and expanded corresponding to the type
of words (Figure 2). Four types of QE is carried
out: spelling variants expansion, synonym expan-
sion, derivative word expansion and reduplicative
word expansion. The expanded query is obtained
after adding the the expansion term to the original
query.

4.2 Khmer IR System Design and
Implementation

A prototype of Khmer IR system, which is shown
in the Figure 3, has been implemented to evalu-
ate the efficiency of the proposed QE techniques.
There are two main processes in the system im-
plementation: indexing and searching. We have
started to implement the system by constructing
searching index from the text corpus. All texts in
the corpus are tokenized into words. Then these
words are indexed by the Lucene's indexer, and
stored in an index database. On the other hand in
the searching part, the search query is tokenized
into words before being analyzed in the QE pro-
cess. Finally, the search results are obtained by
the Lucene's searcher which searches through the
index database and returns results that correspond
to the expanded query.

4.3 Indexing
Indexing is very important because it determines
what search results are returned when a user sub-
mits  query. Our  proposed  system's  indexer  is
based on the Lucene's  indexer with the modifi-
cations adapted to Khmer language. Lucene in-
dexes a document by indexing the tokens, which
are words, obtained by tokenizing text of the doc-
ument (Hatcher et al., 2009). Since the default
Lucene's tokenizer can only work with segmented
western  languages  such  as  English  or  French
where spaces are used between each word, it is
impossible to tokenize document in Khmer which
belongs to the class of non-segmenting language
group, where words are written continuously with-
out using any explicit delimiting character. Khmer
word tokenizer, which is developed by the a re-
search group of Cambodia PAN Localization, has
been used to handle this task.

5 Experiments
The experiment to evaluate the proposed QE tech-
niques was initially conducted only on the proto-
type of the Khmer IR system that we have imple-
mented. As Google also has a localized Khmer
version of its popular web search engine, and it
can explicitly  specify websites  to be searched5,
we have extended our experiment to Google web
search engine in order to obtain more precise re-
sult.

5.1 Experiment Setup
The Khmer text corpus, which consists 954 docu-
ments collected from various websites in the In-

5http://www.google.com/advanced_search

84



Figure 3: Proposed Khmer Information Retrieval System Design

ternet, was  used  for  the  experiments. A web-
site, which contains all documents from the cor-
pus, was hosted in our laboratory's web server in
order that these documents can be indexed by the
Google's indexer. Then we followed up the index-
ing progress by consulting the Google Webmaster
Tools6 service. In Khmer where words are writ-
ten one after the other, word processing programs,
Internet browsers and other programs that format
text need to know where they can cut a sentence
in order to start a new line. This kind of problem
does not appear in the western languages where
space are used between words. Thus, the zero-
width space character was proposed to solve this
problem by inputting the zero-width space at the
end of each word while typing7. In Unicode, the
zero-width space character is a type of space char-
acter but it is invisible. Using the zero-width space
is very confusing because of the invisibility of the
character, plus it is unnatural to Khmer writing sys-
tem. As a result, most people only partly used it
for the text display purpose. Therefore, we can
find the zero-width space in almost all Khmer texts
found in the Internet. Since all texts in the cor-
pus are collected from the Internet, the zero-width

6http://www.google.com/webmasters/tools
7Khmer Unicode typing: http://www.khmeros.info/

download/KhmerUnicodeTyping.pdf

space also can be found in almost all the texts in
the corpus. Based on the zero-width space charac-
ter, the Google can separate and index the Khmer
texts in our text corpus hosted in our laboratory
web server. After Google completely indexed all
the documents, the experiment was proceeded.

5.2 Experiment Procedures
We conducted the experiment for each type of pro-
posed QE technique in our implemented system
and the Google web search engine. Four similar
experiments of the four proposed QE techniques
were carried out to the both systems. Due to the
small  size  of  the  text  corpus, only  ten  original
queries have been chosen for each type of experi-
ment. Each query possesses a specific topic in or-
der that we can judge the relevant results after. The
experiment processes are as following:

1. Input ten original queries into the both sys-
tems, and calculate the precisions and recalls.
All queries are selected from the different top-
ics, and each query contains at least an ex-
pandable word corresponding to its expansion
type.

2. Expand the original queries according to their
expansion type. Then input the ten expanded

85



Table 2: Results of Spelling Variants and Synonyms Expansions
Spelling Variants Synonyms

Precision Recall F-measure Precision Recall F-measure
Google 39.79% 46.72% 37.35% 38.91% 39.99% 34.66%
Proposed Sys. 62.09% 47.63% 50.78% 46.74% 47.03% 44.71%
Google & QE 46.83% 53.04% 46.13% 44.32% 58.99% 45.28%
Proposed Sys. & QE 60.73% 64.01% 58.38% 48.34% 64.59% 51.66%

Table 3: Results of Derivative Word and Reduplicative Word Expansions
Derivative Words Reduplicarive Words

Precision Recall F-measure Precision Recall F-measure
Google 28.35% 56.04% 36.56% 21.14% 42.61% 26.16%
Proposed Sys. 41.07% 51.07% 44.10% 31.69% 39.05% 29.00%
Google & QE 29.18% 60.41% 38.32% 24.69% 48.58% 26.35%
Proposed Sys. & QE 33.93% 62.38% 41.71% 34.28% 56.98% 36.25%

queries into the both systems and recalculate
the precisions and recalls.

The relevance judgments were manually done
based on the content of each document obtained
by the both IR systems. Since there is no Khmer
digital thesaurus yet, the expansions were manu-
ally done by respecting the query syntax of Lucene
and Google8. Moreover, as Google web search
engine  cannot  tokenize  Khmer  words, the  tok-
enization was also done manually. For example:
the query តុលាការ ្មរ ហម ''Khmer Rough tri-
bunal'' consists two words តុលាការ ''tribunal'' and
្មរ ហម ''Khmer Rough''. We know that the syn-

onym of តុលាការ ''tribunal'' isសាលាក្ដី ''tribunal''.
So the expanded query for our proposed system is
''តុលាការ ្មរ ហម OR សាលាក្ដី ្មរ ហម''. On
the other hand, the expanded query for Google is
''[តុលាការ ORសាលាក្ដ]ី AND ្មរ ហម''.

5.3 Results and Discussion
Table 2 and 3 show the results of precision, re-
call and F-Measure before and after implementing
each QE techniques to the proposed system and
Google web search engine. The improvement in
recall of our proposed system is 16.38%, 17.56%,
11.31%, 17.93% after applying the respective QE

8http://www.google.com/support/websearch/
bin/answer.py?answer=136861

techniques, while the increase in recall at 6.32%,
19.00%, 4.37%, 5.97% after applying the QE tech-
niques respectively to Google web search engine.

In  addition, comparing  our  proposed  system
with QE to Google web search engine without QE,
the recall improvement is 17.29%, 24.60%, 6.34%,
14.37% respectively, while to Google web search
engine with QE, the recall improvement is 10.97%,
5.60%, 1.97%, 8.40% respectively.

As a summary, the search results using our pro-
posed system with QE techniques is significantly
better than the conventional Google search results.
This can be seen clearly from the improvement of
F-Measure 21.03%, 17.00%, 5.15%, 10.09% re-
spectively.
6 Conclusion and Future Works
In this research, we have investigated four types
of QE technique based on Khmer linguistic char-
acteristics. These QE techniques are specifically
designed to improve the retrieval performance of
Khmer IR System. The experiments have demon-
strated the improvement of retrieval performance
of the proposed system and the Google web search
engine after applying the proposed QE techniques.
However, the improvement in precision after uti-
lizing our proposed QE techniques is not so sig-
nificant. In the case of derivative words, it even
shows some slight decrement. This is one of the

86



main problems that we will tackle in our future re-
search to reduce non-relevant contents by seman-
tically analyzing Khmer content. At the moment
the size of the corpus is very small, and we are ac-
tively dealing with this issue in hope to provide a
good Khmer language resource for the future re-
search in Khmer language processing.

In addition, due to the lack of research in Khmer
IR as well as in Khmer language processing, a lot
of aspects can still be worked on in order to im-
prove the system performance. For example, the
improvement  of  Khmer word segmentation and
the building of Khmer thesaurus for IR system,
which are expected to improve the IR system per-
formance, are also in the priority tasks of our future
works.

References
Beaulieu, Micheline and Susan Jones. 1998. Inter-

active searching and interface issues in the Okapi
best match probabilistic retrieval system. Interact-
ing With Computers, 10(3):237--248.

Buddhist Institute. 1967. វចនានុ ម ្មរ ​''Khmer Dic-
tionary''. Buddhist Institute, Phnom Penh, Cambo-
dia.

Chea, Sok-Huor, Rithy  Top, Pich-Hemy Ros, Navy
Vann, Chanthirith  Chin  and  Tola  Chhoeun.
2007. Word  Bigram  Vs  Orthographic  Syl-
lable  Bigram  in  Khmer  Word  Segmentation.
http://www.panl10n.net/english/OutputsCambodia1
.htm, (Last retrieved 30 April 2010).

Hatcher, Erik, Otis Gospodnetić and Michael McCand-
less. 2009. Lucene in Action, Second Edition. Man-
ning Publications, Connecticut, USA.

Ide, Nancy 1998. Corpus Encoding Standard: SGML
Guidelines for Encoding Linguistic Corpora. In Pro-
ceedings  of  the  First  International  Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 463-70.

Ide, Nancy, Patrice Bonhomme and Laurent Romary
2000. XCES: An XML-based standard for linguis-
tic  corpora. In Proceeding  of  Second Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), pp.
825--830, Athens. Greece.

Jenner, Philip Norman. 1969. Affixation in modern
Khmer. A dissertation submitted to the graduate di-
vision, University of Hawaii.

Khin, Sok. 2007. យ ករណ៍ភាសា ្មរ ​''Khmer Gram-
mar''. Royal Academy of Cambodia, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.

Long, Siem. 1999. ប ចនស័ព្ទវទ ្មរ ​''Khmer
Lexicology  Problem''. National  Language  Insti-
tute, Royal University of Phnom Penh, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.

Manning, Christopher  D., Prabhakar  Raghavan  and
Hinrich Schütze 2009. An Introduction to Informa-
tion Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, England.

Nou, Chenda and Wataru Kameyama 2007. Khmer
POS Tagger: A Transformation-based  Approach
with Hybrid Unknown Word Handling. In Proceed-
ing of International Conference on Semantic Com-
puting (ICSC), pp. 482--492. Irvine, USA.

Ourn, Noeurng and John Haiman. 2000. Symmetrical
Compounds in Khmer. Studies in Language. 24(3),
pp. 483--514.

Singhal, Amit. 2001. Modern Information Retrieval:
A Brief Overview. Bulletin of the IEEE Computer
Society Technical Committee on Data Engineering,
24(4):35--43.

87


