










































Ontology-Based Extraction and Summarization of Protein Mutation Impact Information


Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL 2010, pages 128–129,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Ontology-Based Extraction and Summarization of
Protein Mutation Impact Information

Nona Naderi and René Witte
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering

Concordia University, Montréal, Canada

1 Introduction

NLP methods for extracting mutation information
from the bibliome have become an important new
research area within bio-NLP, as manually curated
databases, like the Protein Mutant Database (PMD)
(Kawabata et al., 1999), cannot keep up with the
rapid pace of mutation research. However, while
significant progress has been made with respect
to mutation detection, the automated extraction of
the impacts of these mutations has so far not been
targeted. In this paper, we describe the first work
to automatically summarize impact information
from protein mutations. Our approach is based
on populating an OWL-DL ontology with impact
information, which can then be queried to provide
structured information, including a summary.

2 Background

Mutations are alterations, rearrangements, or
duplications of genetic material, impacting protein
properties like stability or activity. For example:

H86A/E/F/K/Q/W decreased the enzyme stability at 60◦C by
up to 95% and the transition temperature by 2.5◦C to 5.8◦C.

Impacts are described through other concepts,
since mutational events may cause changes to phys-
ical quantities such as pH and temperature. As
presented in the above example, the named mu-
tations (H86A/E/F/K/Q/W) made changes to the
thermostability by 2.5–2.8 degrees Celsius. Hence,
we extract (i) units of measurement, e.g., %, degree
Celsius, min; (ii) protein properties: stability, ac-
tivity and others; and (iii) impact words, including
increase, stabilize, and reduce.

Measurable impacts can thus be classified based
on the type of effect (increase, decrease or destabi-
lize) on the protein property.

3 Related work

Little previous work exists on automatically detect-
ing and extracting mutation impacts. An excep-

tion is EnzyMiner (Yeniterzi and Sezerman, 2009),
which performs document classification for disease-
related mutations. This work differs significantly
from ours, as we are concerned with sentence-level
impact detection and summarization.

4 Mutation Impact Detection

Our main contribution for impact detection and
summarization consists of two major parts: an on-
tology describing impacts on a semantic level, and
an NLP pipeline for detecting impacts in docu-
ments in order to populate the ontology. Further
analysis, including summarization, can then be per-
formed on this NLP-populated ontology through
ontology queries and reasoning.
Ontology Design. Our Mutation Impact Ontol-
ogy conceptualizes impacts and the mutations asso-
ciated with them. The main concepts are: Mutation:
An alteration or a change to a gene and developing
a different offspring. UnitOfMeasurement: A class
for measurement units. MutImpact: Mutation effect
on protein properties. ProteinProperty: A class for
properties of “Protein” and subclassed by different
properties like “Activity” and “Stability.” To design
the Mutation Impact Ontology, information about
several other elements is needed: Text elements,
biological entities and entity relations. The rela-
tions between these entities are expressed as OWL
object properties.
Mutation Impact Extraction. Impacts are de-
tected through a combination of an OntoGazetteer
annotating impact words, measurement units, etc.,
and JAPE grammar transducers, e.g.:
Rule: MutationImpact
({Lookup.majorType == ”onto impact”}):impact −−> {
try {

// get Impact annotations
gate.AnnotationSet impactSet = (gate.AnnotationSet)bindings.get(”impact”);
...

}

Here, the impact word that is marked as “Lookup”
with a feature of “majorType,” “onto impact” is

128



annotated as “MutImpact.” Accordingly, “Protein-
Property” and “UnitOfMeasurement” are annotated
through similar JAPE grammars. Finally, each sen-
tence is annotated as containing impact information
or not. All the units of measurement and protein
properties (ProteinProperty) existing in that sen-
tence (impact) are recorded for subsequent ontol-
ogy export.
Mutation-Impact Relation Extraction. When
the entities such as mutations and impacts are iden-
tified and annotated, the sentence containing the
impact word expressions (MutImpact) is associated
with the nearest “Mutation,” making the simple
assumption that the nearest mutation invokes the
impacts mentioned. The complete sentence is then
considered as an impact sentence.

For each mutation-impact relation, we record the
connection together with a number of properties,
including units of measurement and effects.
Ontology Population. After preprocessing the
documents and extracting the entities, the ontol-
ogy is populated with the extracted entities such
as mutations, mutation impact and their relations
mutation impact relations.

5 Impact Summarization

The exported, populated OWL impact ontology can
be queried using the SPARQL query language. To
summarize impacts for a certain mutation, we can
simply query the ontology for all detected impacts
and extract the corresponding impact sentences:
PREFIX onto: <http://www.owl−ontologies.com/unnamed.owl#>
SELECT ?sentence
FROM <http://www.owl−ontologies.com/unnamed.owl#>
WHERE { ?document onto:containsSentence ?sentence.

?sentence onto:contains ?MutImpact.
?Mutation onto:mutationMutImpactRel ?MutImpact}

ORDER BY DESC (?document) DESC (?Mutation)

These are then collected into a textual summary
providing the mutations with their impacts for the
user, as shown in Fig. 1.

6 Evaluation

The performance of the system was evaluated on
the abstracts of four different mutation corpora,
each on a specific protein family: Xylanase
(19 documents), Haloalkane Dehalogenase
(23 documents), Subtilisin (5 documents), and
Dioxygenase (11 documents). Altogether, 58
documents were manually annotated with their
impacts. For each annotation “Sentence,” a binary
feature “impact” is considered. As long as an
impact exists in the sentence, the feature “impact”

PMID 10860737
Mutation Impacts
N35D As predicted from sequence comparisons, substitution of this

asparagine residue with an aspartic acid residue (N35D BCX)
shifts its pH optimum from 5.7 to 4.6, with an 20 % increase in
activity.. . .

PMID 8855954
Mutation Impacts
E123A Mutation of a third conserved active site carboxylic acid (E123A)

resulted in rate reductions of up to 1500-fold on poorer sub-
strates,...

E127A Elimination of the acid/base catalyst (E127A) yields a mutant for
which the deglycosylation step is slowed some 200-300-fold as
a consequence of removal of general base catalysis, but with lit-
tle effect on the transition state structure at the anomeric center.
Effects on the glycosylation step due to removal of the acid cat-
alyst depend on the aglycon leaving group ability, with minimal
effects on substrates requiring no general acid catalysis but large
(>105-fold) effects on substrates with poor leaving groups...

. . . . . .

Figure 1: Impact Summaries (Excerpts)

is set to “Yes;” otherwise to “No.” The results are
shown in the Table below; here, #C, #P, #M, and #S
correspond to the correct, partially correct, miss-
ing, and spurious impact sentences, respectively;
and P, R, F are the precision, recall, and F-measure:

Impact detection evaluation results on four corpora
Corpus #C #P #M #S P R F
Haloalkane D. 171 2 24 22 0.882 0.873 0.877
Xylanase 140 2 19 17 0.886 0.875 0.881
Dioxygenase 77 0 13 14 0.846 0.855 0.850
Subtilisin 32 2 9 10 0.750 0.767 0.758

The evaluation of associating the mutations with
their impacts has so far been performed on the
“Xylanase” corpus:

Precision Recall F-Measure
Lenient (Partial matches included) 88% 80% 91%
Average (of Lenient and Strict) 86% 76% 80%
Strict (Partial matches not counted) 51.8% 46.6% 49.06%

7 Discussion
Our Mutation Impact Ontology models mutation
impacts in the biomedical domain, linking them
to the texts where they are found. Although the
detection of mutation impacts has shown to be suc-
cessful by this simple proximity heuristic to some
extent, in some cases the impacts are missing or
detected partially. Also, in cases where the impacts
caused by a set of mutations, just one mutation
(the nearest one) is considered, and the remaining
mutations are ignored. Impacts are not always the
result of the nearest mutation; However, automati-
cally analysing the text and specifying the correct
mutation associated with the impacts needs more
complex analysis.

References
T. Kawabata, M. Ota, and K. Nishikawa. 1999. The Protein

Mutant Database. Nucleic Acids Res, 27(1):355–357.
S. Yeniterzi and U. Sezerman. 2009. Enzyminer: automatic

identification of protein level mutations and their impact
on target enzymes from pubmed abstracts. BMC Bioinfor-
matics, 10(Suppl 8):S2.

129


