










































Demo Session Abstracts


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, page 71,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies
Demo Session

1 “How was School today...?” A Prototype
System that Uses Environmental Sensors
and NLG to Support Personal Narrative
for Children with Complex
Communication Needs

Rolf Black, Joseph Reddington, Ehud Reiter, Nava
Tintarev and Annalu Waller

We will show an in-situ sensor based proto-
type that supports personal narrative for children
with complex communication needs. We will
demonstrate the process from data collection, story
generation and editing, to the interactive narration
of stories about a child’s school day. The challeng-
ing environment of a special school for prototype
testing will be discussed and improvements of the
next generation prototype presented.

2 Interactive SIGHT Demo: Textual
Summaries of Simple Bar Charts

Seniz Demir, David Oliver, Edward Schwartz,
Stephanie Elzer, Sandra Carberry and Kathleen F.
McCoy

Interactive SIGHT is intended to provide peo-
ple with visual impairments access to the kind
of information graphics found in popular media.
It works as a browser extension, and is able to
generate a summary of a simple bar chart containing
its high-level intention as natural language text.
The user may request further information about the
graphic through a follow-up question facility.

3 Project Jumbo: Transcription as an
Assistive Technology for Instant
Messaging

Ira R. Forman and Allen K. Wilson

The integration of VoIP into Instant Messaging
may be a boon for most of us, but not for those
who are deaf and hard of hearing. The IBM Human
Ability & Accessibility Center initiated Project
Jumbo to address this problem. Our remedy is to
add a speech-to-text capability to augment voice
services with transcripts. In particular, Project
Jumbo augments IBM Lotus Sametime. Project
Jumbo, which is transitioning to product status
under name IBM AbilityLab Sametime Conference
Transcriber, will be demonstrated. The demo
consists of a chat between the demonstrator and a
remote colleague in which the demonstrator speaks
rather than types. A major point of the demo is
that interactive communication is a new domain
for ASR. This domain differs from dictation in a
number of ways; prominent among them is that
most speech recognition errors do not need to be
corrected.

4 COMUNICA - A Voice Question
Answering System for Portuguese

Rodrigo Wilkens, Aline Villavicencio, Leandro
Wives, Daniel Muller, Fabio da Silva and Stanley
Loh

This is a voice QA system for Brazilian Por-
tuguese that performs speech recognition, text
processing, database access and speech synthesis
for consulting both structured and unstructured
datasets. This system provides multi-modal com-
munication and has the potential to help users with
disabilities to access relevant information, and may
help to significantly increase digital inclusion.

71


