




































Gapping through TAG Derivation Trees∗

Timm Lichte and Laura Kallmeyer
Emmy Noether Research Group, SFB 833, University of Tübingen

timm.lichte@uni-tuebingen.de, lk@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract

This work provides a TAG account of gapping
in English, based on a novel deletion-like op-
eration that is referred to as de-anchoring. De-
anchoring applies onto elementary trees, but it
is licensed by the derivation tree in two ways.
Firstly, de-anchored trees must be linked to the
root of the derivation tree by a chain of adjunc-
tions, and the sub-graph of de-anchored nodes
in a derivation tree must satisfy certain inter-
nal constraints. Secondly, de-anchoring must
be licensed by the presence of a homomorphic
antecedent derivation tree.

1 Introduction

Existing TAG-accounts of gapping propose the con-
traction of nodes (Sarkar and Joshi, 1997) or adopt
elementary trees with a gap that lack the ver-
bal anchor (Babko-Malaya, 2006) or combine the
gapped elementary tree with its antecedent site into a
tree set within an MCTAG-account (Seddah, 2008).
This work breaks new ground in that it uses de-
anchoring, a deletion-like operation, for the mod-
elling of gapping, which applies to elementary trees
while being licensed by the derivation tree of licit
TAG-derivations. De-anchoring removes the an-
chors of an elementary tree and can be seen to par-
allel PF-deletion in generative grammar (Hartmann,
2000; Merchant, 2001).

∗We are grateful to Maribel Romero and Andreas Koniet-
zko; the paper has benefitted a lot from discussions with them.
Furthermore, we would like to thank three anonymous review-
ers for their valuable comments.

Our work is inspired by recent ideas from (Os-
borne, 2008; Kobele, 2009). Working in minimal-
ist grammar, (Kobele, 2009) states the following
Derivational Identity Hypothesis (DIH): “If a syn-
tactic object SO1 is elided under identity with SO2,
then SO1 and SO2 have been derived in exactly the
same way.” A strict reading of the DIH then leads to
the prediction that subtrees of the derivational struc-
ture can be a target of a deletion-like operation that
yields gapped structures only if an isomorphic an-
tecedent subtree of the derivation structure exists.

(Osborne, 2008), on the other side, transfers the
notion of major constituent, that is seen as being
central to the licensing of gapping (Hankamer, 1973;
Neijt, 1979; Chao, 1987), from generative gram-
mar to a dependency-based description of gapping.
A major constituent is then “a constituent the head
[i.e. the governor] of which is, but the root of which
is not, a link in the predicate chain”. The predi-
cate chain is made of the verbal complex. Gapping
then complies to the Restriction on Internal Sharing
(RIS): “The gap of conjunct-internal sharing may
not cut into a major constituent.”

We combine these approaches by describing gap-
ping in TAG as a de-anchoring operation restricted
by the derivation tree.

The paper is structured as follows: In the next
section, we introduce the operation of de-anchoring.
Then, in Sections 3 and 4, we develop relevant con-
straints for de-anchoring, based on the derivation
tree. Section 5 points out some potential problems of
our approach while Section 6 discusses its relation
to the aforementioned proposals. Finally, Section 7
briefly mentions some aspects of implementation.

Gapping through TAG derivation trees

93



2 The Idea of De-Anchoring

In our TAG derivation trees, the edge label S, fol-
lowed by the Gorn address of the substitution node,
indicates substitution, whereas A indicates adjunc-
tion, again followed by the Gorn address of the ad-
junction site.1 As an example, Fig. 1 shows the
derivation of (1-a).

S

NP↓ VP

V NP↓

praised

NP

N

Peter

NP

D NP∗

the

NP

N

waitress

a

praised

Peter

S.1

waitress

S.22

the

A.ε

Figure 1: Derivation and derivation tree for “Peter praised
the waitress”.

(1) a. Peter praised the waitress.
b. Adam praised Mary, and Peter praised the

waitress.

We write derivation trees as graphs 〈V,E, r〉 where
V is the set of vertices or nodes, E ⊂ V × V the
set of edges and there is a labeling function l that
assigns a label l(v) to each node v ∈ V and a label
l(e) to each edge e ∈ E. r ∈ V is the root node,
i.e., the node with in-degree 0. E∗ represents the
reflexive transitive closure of E, i.e., the dominance
relation in the tree.

We say that an elementary tree γ is de-anchored
if the terminals of γ are deleted (i.e., replaced with
a label ε), while the other parts of γ are retained,
thus preserving, e.g., case marking and semantics.

1The Gorn address of the root node is ε while the Gorn ad-
dress of the ith daughter of a node with Gorn address p is p · i.

An example is the gapping correlate of (1-a) in (1-b)
and its derivation tree in Fig. 2, in which the root
node is de-anchored, indicated by crossing out the
node label.

praised

Peter

S.1

waitress

S.22

the

A.ε

Figure 2: Derivation tree for “Peter praised the waitress”.

Interesting questions are now, what kind of elemen-
tary trees can be de-anchored (“internal conditions
on de-anchoring”), and what types of configurations
allow for de-anchoring (“external conditions on de-
anchoring”). We will formulate both types of condi-
tions depending on the TAG derivation tree.

3 Internal Conditions on De-Anchoring

Based on Fig. 2, a preliminary formulation of the
internal condition would be that only root nodes of
derivation trees can be de-anchored while complete
subtrees of the root node are major constituents.
This explains the unavailability of (2).

(2) *Adam praised Mary and Peter praised the wait-
ress.

However, there are cases where not only the root is
part of the gap. Examples are (3) and (4).

(3) a. John gives Mary a book and Peter gives
Mary a disk.

b. John gives Mary a book and John gives Pe-
ter a disk.

(4) a. John is fond of Mary and Mary is fond of
Sue.

b. John is a reader in linguistics and Mary is a
reader in philosophy.

In (3), in addition to the deleted verb, one of its sub-
stituted arguments is deleted as well. The deriva-
tion trees for the parts containing the gaps are shown
in Fig. 3. This suggests that, if an element is
de-anchored, each of its S-daughters can be de-
anchored as well.

Timm Lichte, Laura Kallmeyer

94



gives

S.1 S.22 S.23

Peter Mary a book
gives

S.1 S.22 S.23

John Peter a book

Figure 3: Derivation trees for (3).

In (4) , the deleted part includes a copula and a
predicate. In XTAG (XTAG Research Group, 2001),
copula as in (4) receive a small clause analysis. We
adapt this idea, differing from the XTAG-analysis,
however, in treating prepositions not as co-anchors
of the predicate (see Fig. 4). In this analysis the
predicate fond is the root of the derivation tree, and
it dominates the copula verb.

NP

N

Mary

S

NP↓ VP

V AP

ǫ A PP↓

fond

VP

V VP*

is

PP

P NP↓

of
NP

N

Sue
fond

Mary

S.1

is

A.2

of

S.222

Sue

S.2

Figure 4: Derivation for “Mary is fond of Sue”.

In order to account for (4) and (3), we revise our
internal condition as follows: The gap constitutes a
single A-branch in the derivation tree. An A-branch
is a path of nodes connected by A-edges. Further-
more, if a node in the derivation tree is de-anchored,

its S-daughters can be de-anchored as well.
The gap may also contain a chain of control verbs,

as has been noted already in (Ross, 1970), exempli-
fied in (5).

(5) I want to try to begin to write a novel, and

a. Mary wants to try to begin to write a play.
b. Mary wants to try to begin to write a play.
c. Mary wants to try to begin to write a play.
d. Mary wants to try to begin to write a play.

XTAG adopts an analysis of control verbs that ad-
joins the control verb at the embedded infinitive and
that uses an empty category PRO that substitutes
into the subject NP slot. Such infinitives allow only
PRO as subjects; this constraint is achieved via cor-
responding features on the substitution node. The
elementary trees are shown in Fig. 5.

S

NP↓ VP

V S*

want|try|begin

V

V V*

to

S

NP↓ VP

V NP↓

write

NP

N

PRO

Figure 5: Elementary trees for control verbs in the spirit
of XTAG.

The derivation tree for (5-a) is shown in Fig. 6.
Three observations are striking: (i) the remnants
Mary and a play are complements of different verbs;
(ii) the gaps are variable in size; (iii) the gaps con-
stitute A-subtrees rather than just A-branches.

The first observation contradicts the here pro-
posed conception of major constituency, since the
first remnant Mary is not an immediate daughter of
the root. Instead, it is the immediate S-daughter of a
node on a A-subtree.

The second observation suggests that a partial de-
anchoring of the A-subtree is possible: the maximal
gap in (5-a) corresponds to the A-branch, which is
de-anchorable from the edge towards and including
the root, as the other gap options in (5-b)-(5-d) show.

Gapping through TAG derivation trees

95



write

A.ε A.21 S.1 S.22

begin to PRO a play

A.ε A.21 S.1

try to PRO

A.ε A.21 S.1

want to PRO

S.1

Mary

Figure 6: Derivation for (5-a).

Finally, we learn from the third observation that
we have to either disallow the infinitive marker to
to adjoin to the verbal stem and rather give it a lex-
ical analysis, or we have to allow the de-anchoring
of sister nodes, hence of A-subtrees of the deriva-
tion tree. When the mother is not de-anchored, how-
ever, it moreover holds that only the node adjoining
highest can be de-anchored. This captures the un-
availability of a sole de-anchoring of the infinitive
marker:

(6) *. . . and I want to try to begin to write a novel.

In order to formulate our internal condition, we need
the following notions: Given a derivation tree δ =
〈V,E, r〉, we call the sub-graph γ of de-anchored
nodes a gap. Given a node v ∈ V with A-daughters
v1, . . . , vk, we call 〈v, vi〉 a maximally high adjunc-
tion if its label is A.p and all edges 〈v, vj〉, j 6= i,
1 ≤ j ≤ k, are labeled A.pq with q 6= ε.

Gaps must satisfy the following Internal Condi-
tion on De-Anchoring:

1. γ must be a tree γ = 〈Vg, Eg, rg〉 with Vg ⊂
V,Eg ⊂ E;

2. there must be an A-branch (possibly empty)
from the root of δ to the root of γ such that all
edges on this path are maximally high adjunc-
tions;

3. for every node vg ∈ Vg, it holds that all A-
daughters of vg in δ are also part of γ. I.e., for
all vg ∈ Vg and all v ∈ V , if 〈vg, v〉 ∈ E and

l(〈vg, v〉) = A.p for some Gorn address p, then
v ∈ Vg;

4. for every node vg ∈ Vg , it holds that an S-
daughter vs of vg in δ can be part of γ; if so, all
nodes dominated by vs in δ must also be part
of γ. I.e., for all vg ∈ Vg and all v ∈ V such
that 〈vg, v〉 ∈ E and l(〈vg, v〉) = S.p for some
Gorn address p, if v ∈ Vg, then it holds for all
v′ with 〈v, v′〉 ∈ E∗ that v′ ∈ Vg.

It follows that in our model major constituents
correspond to S-daughters of nodes of the A-subtree
below the root node. It is not permitted to delete
only parts of them. This use, however, is not exten-
sionally congruent with Osborne’s use of the term,
since he also applies it to modifiers.

4 External Conditions on De-Anchoring

Gapping is further constrained by a certain paral-
lelism of the ellipsis site and the antecedent site. We
assume here that an antecedent derivation tree repre-
sents the first conjunct of a coordinative construction
whose second conjunct includes the ellipsis. We call
this aspect the external conditions on de-anchoring,
and we will be mainly dealing with homomorphism
properties of the derivation trees of the ellipsis site
and the antecedent site. A strict formulation of the
external condition would be that de-anchored nodes
must have a corresponding node in the antecedent
derivation tree, such that both have (i) an identical
position in their derivation trees (i.e. an identical
path to the respective root nodes) and (ii) an identi-
cal node label, given that the node label always iden-
tifies an elementary tree unambiguously.

This is however too restrictive: Gapping is known
to allow number mismatch between elided material
and its antecedent, see (7) and also (5) above.

(7) I am flying to Europe, and you are flying to
Asia. (Osborne, 2008)

We hence need complex node labels that help to ab-
stract away from number information, as is depicted
in Fig. 7. Then, instead of requiring the identity of
the entire feature structure, we require only the iden-
tity of specific features. In particular, we require
the LEMMA feature to be identical for the two nodes

Timm Lichte, Laura Kallmeyer

96



while the ANCHOR and NUM features can be differ-
ent.

flying

I

S.1 


anchor am
lemma be
num sg




A.2

to

S.222

Europe

S.2

flying

you

S.1 


anchor are
lemma be
num pl




A.2

to

S.222

Asia

S.2

Figure 7: Derivation trees of the first and second conjunct
of (7) with complex nodes.

Furthermore, dissimilarities of other properties of
ellipsis and antecedent could be permissible, though
not as easily as number mismatch. For example, the
gapped verb could be differing from the antecedent
verb wrt. word order, such as in (8), and subcatego-
rization properties, as shown in (9).

(8) ?This guy she likes, and Mary likes Peter.

(9) a. ?Peter was looking for the Olympic games
and Mary was looking after the children.

b. ?Peter ate and Mary ate a whole chicken.

These kinds of mismatch would also be handled in
terms of partial identity of complex node labels in
the derivation tree.

On the other side, certain properties of the nodes
in question must be identical, most prominently their
position within the derivation tree: In (10), the an-
tecedent verb ordered is embedded in a fronted ad-
verbial clause, whereas the elided correspondent is
the matrix verb and hence in the root position of the
second conjunct.

(10) *Since Peter ordered a beer, the waitress in-
stantly reached for the fridge and
Mary ordered a whole chicken.

Likewise, we claim that mismatches of voice and

tense are not acceptable (see (11)).

(11) a. *Peter was informed by the young police
officer, and the older one was informing
Mary.

b.?*Peter had to clean the floor last week, and
Mary has to clean the kitchen this week

The External Condition on De-Anchoring is then
as follows: A derivation tree δ containing a gap γ =
〈Vg, Eg〉 is licensed if the following holds: There are
two subtree δ1 = 〈V1, E1, r1〉, δ2 = 〈V2, E2, r2〉 of
δ such that δ represents the conjunction of δ1 and δ2,
γ is a subtree of δ2 and there is a homomorphism
h : Vg → V1 such that:

1. Identity of paths to root nodes: for all v ∈ Vg:
There are v(2)1 , . . . , v

(2)
k ∈ V2 for some k ≥ 1

with v(2)1 = r2, v
(2)
k = v and 〈v

(2)
i , v

(2)
i+1〉 ∈

E2 and l(〈v(2)i , v
(2)
i+1〉) = li for 1 ≤ i < k

iff there are v(1)1 , . . . , v
(1)
k ∈ V1 with v

(1)
1 =

r1, v
(1)
k = h(v) and 〈v

(1)
i , v

(1)
i+1〉 ∈ E1 and

l(〈v(1)i , v
(1)
i+1〉) = li for 1 ≤ i < k.

2. Identity of specific features: for all v ∈ Vg:
Certain feature values are identical for v and
h(v) in δ. These include at least LEMMA,
TENSE and VOICE.

5 Problems

The internal condition on de-anchoring correctly al-
lows for the de-anchoring of S-nodes, accounting for
examples such as (12).

(12) John gave a book to Mary and

a. Peter gave a book to Sue.
b. Peter gave a report to Mary.

This, however, is too permissive. It needs to be care-
fully constrained, in order to rule out instances of
bare argument ellipsis such as in (13), which are
traditionally judged ungrammatical (see, e.g., (Jack-
endoff, 1971, (27-a)), (Johnson, 2004, p.3)).

(13) *John gave a book to Mary and
Peter gave a book to Mary.

Interestingly enough, Osborne’s proposal is also too
permissive in this respect, and this also holds for

Gapping through TAG derivation trees

97



the proposals of, e.g., (Neijt, 1979) and (Hartmann,
2000, p.144).

The internal condition, moreover, turns out to be
too restrictive when it comes to adverbial remnants.
Consider the gapping instance in (14) and its deriva-
tion tree in Fig. 8.2

(14) Mary always finishes her homework, but
Peter finishes his homework only sometimes.

finish

Peter

S.1

only sometimes

A.2

homework

S.22

Figure 8: Derivation tree of (14).

We must observe that the adverb remains overt while
its dominating A-node is de-anchored. This con-
tradicts the internal condition according to which
A-daughters of de-anchored nodes must be de-
anchored as well. A solution could be to enable
the optionality of the de-anchoring of adverbs. This
would make it necessary to have access to a distinc-
tive feature of adverbs and verbs in the process of
de-anchoring, e.g., by having access to the feature
structure used for implementing the external condi-
tion below. The distinction could be a distinction be-
tween modifier auxiliary trees (adverbs, adjectives,
etc.) and predicative auxiliary trees (verbs select-
ing for a sentential complement). This distinction al-
ready has been used in (Schabes and Shieber, 1994).

A further example of an adverb that is not de-
anchored is (15). The derivation tree is shown in
Fig. 9.

(15) Mary is always fond of cheese cake, but
Peter is only sometimes fond of cheese cake.

Here, the adverb remains overt while not only
its dominating A-node but also its dominated A-
node are de-anchored. Hence, the A-branch is
de-anchored with a hole. This clearly contra-
dicts the internal condition on de-anchoring. Mak-
ing use of concepts such as sister adjunction, one

2Note that the alternative gapping instance “Peter always
finishes his homework only sometimes” is not ruled out by the
syntax.

fond

Peter

S.1

only sometimes

A.2

is

A.ε

of

S.222

cheese cake

S.2

Figure 9: Derivation tree of (15).

could rearrange the derivation tree such that is
and only sometimes are siblings, directly dom-
inated by fond. This would reduce the example to
an example of the type of (14).

Finally, the internal condition on de-anchoring
proves too permissive in cases, where the A-tree
does not correspond to a small clause or a control
chain, but rather to , e.g., a bridge verb construction.
Consider the derivation tree in Fig. 10 resulting from
the XTAG analysis for (16):

(16) Larry thinks Sue is nice.

nice

Sue

S

thinks

A

Larry

S

is

A

Figure 10: Derivation trees for “Larry thinks Sue is nice”.

Since both the bridging verb thinks and the embed-
ded finite auxiliary verb is directly adjoin to the
small clause anchored by nice, the derivation tree
contains exactly two A-branches. Taken the internal
condition for granted, the acceptability of the fol-
lowing gaps is predicted:

(17) Larry thinks Sue is nice and

a. *Sue thinks Larry is funny.
b. *Sue thinks Larry is nice.

(17-a) and (17-b) are claimed to be unacceptable
(see, e.g., (Sag, 1976, p.198)), (Johnson, 2004,
p.18), (Osborne, 2008, (106))).3 The internal con-

3(17-a) can be improved by adding a that-complementizer,
i.e. “Larry thinks that Sue is nice and Sue thinks that Larry is

Timm Lichte, Laura Kallmeyer

98



dition might thus be too permissive.
One could argue that the verb thinks in (16) is

no bridge verb, but receives an analysis, where the
clausal complement is substituted into the elemen-
tary tree of thinks. Gapping into the clausal comple-
ment would thus be blocked since a de-anchoring of
nice would also require a de-anchoring of the entire
complement clause. This move, however, would ex-
plain only such simple cases. Where the bridge verb
analysis with adjunction is inevitable, it would still
predict the availability of the following, highly awk-
ward gapping instance:

(18) ?*Who does Mary think Bill likes and
who does Sue think Joe likes.

Note however that the available literature on gapped
bridge verb constructions seems to be very slim.
Furthermore, the dependency analysis in (Osborne,
2008) can correctly predict the unacceptability of
(17-b) only by the cost of stipulating two separate
predicate chains. The syntactic characterization of
those predicate chains and their separation is again
obscure.

6 Related Work

Previous TAG-accounts of gapping consider only a
very limited set of data. Furthermore, complex gaps
such as (4) and (5) pose a serious challenge for those
accounts that model the ellipsis-antecedent relations
syntactically, such as (Sarkar and Joshi, 1997) and
(Seddah, 2008). In the simple cases of gapping,
(Sarkar and Joshi, 1997) let the preterminal nodes
contract such that anchoring (i.e. lexicalization)
happens at the same time as substitution and adjunc-
tion during the parse. When gaps are complex, how-
ever, not yet anchored derived trees have to be con-
tracted instead of not yet anchored elementary trees.
In other words, contraction would then also operate
on non-immediate daughters of the conjunctor in the
derivation tree. Unfortunately, Sarkar and Joshi do
not elaborate on the details of this powerful exten-
sion, in particular on how to constrain it.

(Seddah, 2008) also analyzes simple cases of gap-
ping. In his approach, he combines the elemen-
tary trees of the antecedent verb and the elided verb

funny”. (c.f. (Sag, 1976, p.198)),(Osborne, 2008, (5))

into a single tree set. The resulting MCTAG is con-
strained to be tree-local. To process complex gaps in
this vein, however, requires more expressive power:
since, e.g., the control verbs and their elided coun-
terpart adjoin into different trees from different el-
ementary trees belonging to the same tree set, we
need at least set-locality. This illustrates the so far
unnoticed complication due to complex gaps.

It remains to say that the semantic account in
(Babko-Malaya, 2006) is not affected in this respect.

Even though we share with (Kobele, 2009)
the interest in derivational structures along the
Derivational Identity Hypothesis (DIH), his account
(within the minimalist grammar framework) differs
considerably from ours. The main reason for this
contrast is the fundamentally differing nature of
the respective derivational structures. In minimal-
ist grammar, the non-terminal nodes of the deriva-
tion tree indicate combinatorial operations, i.e.,
merge and move. Most importantly, the predicate-
argument relation is opaque, which also follows
from the fact that minimalist grammar does not dis-
pose of an extended domain of locality. Since the
DIH suggests that only common subderivations are
subject to deletion, Kobele’s account seems to run
into difficulties when applied even to simple cases of
gapping. In fact, Kobele does not flesh out a theory
of gapping in his paper. He is more concerned with
voice mismatches in sluicing constructions, where
his account is particularly fruitful.

Compared to (Kobele, 2009), our account bears
more similarity to the theory of gapping in terms
of dependency structures as presented in (Osborne,
2008). This follows from the fact that TAG-
derivation trees and dependency structures share
crucial commonalities, even though complementa-
tion in some cases (e.g. with control verbs) receives
an inverted dominance relation. Hence, the empir-
ical predictions for gapping should overlap for the
most part, if not completely. Crucial differences,
however, can be found in the technical specifica-
tion: while Osborne remains vague about the syn-
tactic nature of a “predicate chain”, which consti-
tutes a gap, and refers to its semantic contribution
instead, we propose an intrinsically syntactic delim-
itation of gaps based on A-subtrees. Osborne’s pro-
posal, furthermore, does not account for the vari-
ability of gaps within control chains. This is maybe

Gapping through TAG derivation trees

99



due to the fact that Osborne aims at rephrasing ma-
jor constituency in terms of dependency, and con-
trol chains are considered not to involve major con-
stituents. Finally, our account includes an expli-
cation of the antecedent-ellipsis relation in terms
of a homomorphism on derivation trees, which Os-
borne’s proposal lacks completely.

The problems of our account concerning the role
of adverbs reflect the ambivalence of adjunction
with respect to complementation and modification.
This work would, thus, benefit from a convergence
with dependency representations in this regard.

7 Implementation Issues

As we have seen when formulating the external con-
dition, de-anchoring is licensed only if we can find a
homomorphic antecedent node in the derivation tree
of the first conjunct. This could be exploited for
parsing. The idea is to allow some kind of multi-
ple use under de-anchoring for selected elementary
trees. Whenever a de-anchored tree is used during
parsing, we check the internal and external condi-
tions for de-anchoring on the part of the derivation
tree that is already available.

8 Conclusion

This paper has provided an account of gapping in
English within LTAG. We have exploited the fact
that LTAG provides an extended domain of locality
and, besides the derived trees, generates also deriva-
tion trees that abstract away from details of the con-
stituency structure and that are close to dependency
trees. We claim that LTAG derivation trees are an
appropriate structure for restricting the availability
of gapping constructions.

In our approach, gapping is achieved via an op-
eration of de-anchoring that deletes lexical anchors
from elementary trees. Inspired by recent research
on gapping and relations to the derivation structure
in the context of minimalist grammar, we have for-
mulated a list of licensing conditions on the deriva-
tion tree that allow for de-anchoring within gapping
constructions. Even though there are cases that re-
main problematic, our approach covers a large part
of the gapping phenomena discussed in the litera-
ture.

References

Olga Babko-Malaya. 2006. Semantic interpretation of
unrealized syntactic material in LTAG. In Proceed-
ings of the Eighth International Workshop on Tree Ad-
joining Grammar and Related Formalisms, pages 91–
96, Sydney, Australia, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Wynn Chao. 1987. On ellipsis. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts.

Jorge Hankamer. 1973. Unacceptable ambiguity. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 4(1):17–68.

Katharina Hartmann. 2000. Right Node Raising and
Gapping. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.

Ray S. Jackendoff. 1971. Gapping and related rules.
Linguistic Inquiry, 2(1):21–35.

Kyle Johnson. 2004. In search of the English middle
field. Unpublished manuscript. University of Mas-
sachusetts at Amherst.

Gregory M. Kobele. 2009. Syntactic identity in survive-
minimalism. Ellipsis and the derivational identity hy-
pothesis. In Towards a Derivational Syntax: Survive-
Minimalism. John Benjamins.

Jason Merchant. 2001. The Syntax of Silence. Oxford
Univ. Press.

Anna H. Neijt. 1979. Gapping: A Contribution to Sen-
tence Grammar. Ph.D. thesis, Utrecht University.

Thomas Osborne. 2008. Major constituents and two de-
pendency grammar constraints on sharing in coordina-
tion. Linguistics, 46:1109–1165.

John Robert Ross. 1970. Gapping and the order of con-
stituents. In Manfred Bierwisch and Karl Erich Hei-
dolph, editors, Progress in Linguistics, pages 249–259.
Mouton, The Hague.

Ivan A. Sag. 1976. Deletion and logical form. Ph.D.
thesis, MIT.

Anoop Sarkar and Aravind Joshi. 1997. Handling coor-
dination in a tree adjoining grammar. Longer version
of paper in Proceedings of COLING 1996. Draft of
August 19, 1997.

Yves Schabes and Stuart M. Shieber. 1994. An Alterna-
tive Conception of Tree-Adjoining Derivation. Com-
putational Linguistics, 20(1):91–124, March.

Djamé Seddah. 2008. The use of MCTAG to process el-
liptic coordination. In Proceedings of The Ninth Inter-
national Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and
Related Formalisms (TAG+9).

XTAG Research Group. 2001. A Lexicalized Tree Ad-
joining Grammar for English. Technical report, Insti-
tute for Research in Cognitive Science, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Timm Lichte, Laura Kallmeyer

100


