










































Annotation Scheme for Social Network Extraction from Text


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 20–28,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotation Scheme for Social Network Extraction from Text

Apoorv Agarwal
Computer Science Department

Columbia University
New York, U.S.A.

apoorv@cs.columbia.edu

Owen Rambow
CCLS

Columbia University
New York, U.S.A.

rambow@ccls.columbia.edu

Rebecca J. Passonneau
CCLS

Columbia University
New York, U.S.A.

becky@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

We are interested in extracting social net-
works from text. We present a novel an-
notation scheme for a new type of event,
called social event, in which two people
participate such that at least one of them
is cognizant of the other. We compare
our scheme in detail to the ACE scheme.
We perform a detailed analysis of inter-
annotator agreement, which shows that
our annotations are reliable.

1 Introduction

Our task is to extract a social network from written
text. The extracted social network can be used for
various applications such as summarization, ques-
tion answering, or the detection of main charac-
ters in a story. We take a “social network” to be
a network consisting of individual human beings
and groups of human beings who are connected
to each other through various relationships by the
virtue of participating in events. A text can de-
scribe a social network in two ways: explicitly, by
stating the type of relationship between two indi-
viduals (Example ??); or implicitly, by describ-
ing an event which creates or perpetuates a so-
cial relationship (Example 2). We are interested in
the implicit description of social relations through
events. We will call these types of events so-
cial events. Crucially, many social relations are
described in text largely implicitly, or even en-
tirely implicitly. This paper presents an annotation
project for precisely such social events.

To introduce the terminology and conventions
we use throughout the paper, consider the follow-
ing Example 2. In this example, there are two
entities: Iraqi officials and Timothy McVeigh.
These entities are present in text as nominal
and named entity mentions respectively (within
[. . .]). Furthermore, these entities are related by

an event, whose type we call INR.NONVERBAL-
NEAR (a non-verbal interaction that occurs in
physical proximity), and whose textual mention is
the extent (or span of text) provided money and
training.1

(1) [[Sharif]’s {wife} Tahari Shad Tabussum],
27, (. . .) made no application for bail at the
court, according to local reports. PER-SOC

(2) The suit claims [Iraqi officials] {provided
money and training} to [convicted bomber
Timothy McVeigh] (. . .) INR.Nonverbal-
Near

One question that immediately comes to mind
is how would these annotations be useful? Let
us consider the problem of finding the hierarchy
of people in the Enron Email corpus (Klimt and
Yang, 2004; Diesner et al., 2005). Much work to
solve this problem has focused on using social net-
work analysis algorithms for calculating the graph
theoretical quantities (like degree centrality, clus-
tering coefficient (Wasserman and Faust, 1994))
of people in the email sender-receiver network
(Rowe et al., 2007). Attempts have been made to
incorporate the content of emails usually by us-
ing topic modeling techniques (McCallum et al.,
2007; Pathak et al., 2008). These techniques con-
sider a distribution of words in emails to classify
the interaction between people into topics and then
cluster together people that talk about the same
topic. Researchers also map relationships among
individuals based on their patterns of word use
in emails (Keila and Skillicorn, 2005). But these
techniques do not attempt to create an accurate so-
cial network in terms of interaction or cognitive
states of people. In comparison, our data allows

1Throughout this paper we will follow this representation
scheme for examples – entity mentions will be enclosed in
square brackets [. . .] and relation mentions will be enclosed
in set brackets {. . .}

20



Sender→ Receiver Email content
Kate→ Sam [Jacob], the City attorney had a couple of questions which [I] will {attempt to

relay} without having a copy of the documents.
Sam→ Kate, Mary Can you obtain the name of Glendale’s bond counsel (lawyer’s name, phone

number, email, etc.)?
Kate→ Sam Glendale’s City Attorney is Jacob. Please let [me] {know} if [you] need any-

thing else.
Mary→ Sam I do not see a copy of an opinion in the file nor have we received one since [I]

{sent} the execution copies of the ISDA to [Jacob].
Kate→ Jacob Jacob, could you provide the name, phone number, etc. of your bond council

for our attorney, Sam?
Kate→ Sam [I] will {work on this for} [you] - and will be in touch.

Figure 1: An email thread from the Enron Email Corpus. (For space concerns some part of the conversation is removed. The
missing conversation does not affect our discussion.)

Kate
Sam

MaryJacob

Figure 2: Network formed by considering email exchanges
as links. Identical color or shape implies structural equiva-

lence. Only Sam and Mary are structurally equivalent

for such a technique to be created. This is because
our annotations capture interactions described in
the content of the email such as face-to-face meet-
ings, physical co-presence and cognizance.

To explore if this is useful, we analyzed an En-
ron thread which is presented in Figure 1. Fig-
ure 2 shows the network formed when only the
email exchange is considered. It is easy to see
that Sam and Mary are structurally equivalent and
thus have the same role and position in the so-
cial network. When we analyze the content of the
thread, a link gets added between Mary and Ja-
cob since Mary in her email to Sam talks about
sending something to Jacob. This link changes
the roles and positions of people in the network. In
the new network, Figure 3, Kate and Mary appear
structurally equivalent to each other, as do Sam
and Jacob. Furthermore, Mary now emerges as
a more important player than the email exchange
on its own suggests. This rather simple example is
an indication of the degree to which a link may af-
fect the social network analysis results. In emails
where usually a limited number of people are in-
volved, getting an accurate network seems to be
crucial to the hierarchal analysis.

There has been much work in the past on an-

Kate

Sam

Mary
Jacob

Figure 3: Network formed by augmenting the email ex-
change network above with links that occur in the content of

the emails. Now, Kate and Mary are structurally equivalent,
as are Sam and Jacob.

notating entities, relations and events in free text,
most notably the ACE effort (Doddington et al.,
2004). We intend to leverage this work as much
as possible. The task of social network extrac-
tion can be broadly divided into 3 tasks: 1) en-
tity extraction; 2) social relation extraction; 3) so-
cial event extraction. We are only interested in the
third task, social event extraction. For the first two
tasks, we can simply use the annotation guidelines
developed by the ACE effort. Our social events,
however, do not clearly map to the ACE events:
we introduce a comprehensive set of social events
which are very different from the event annotation
that already exists for ACE. This paper is about the
annotation of social events.

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec-
tion 2 we present a list of social relations that we
annotate. We also talk about some design deci-
sions and explain why we took them. We com-
pare this annotation to existing annotation, notably
the ACE annotation, in Section 3. In section 4
we present the procedure of annotation. Section 5
gives details of our inter-annotator agreement cal-
culation procedure and shows the inter-annotator
agreement on our task. We conclude in section 6

21



and mention future direction of research.

2 Social Event Annotation

In this section we define the social events that the
annotators were asked to annotate. Here, we are
interested in the meaning of the annotation; de-
tails of the annotation procedure can be found in
Section 4. Note that in this annotation effort, we
do not consider issues related to the truth of the
claims made in the text we are analyzing — we
are interested in finding social events whether they
are claimed as being true, presented as specula-
tion, or presented as wishful thinking. We assume
that other modules will be able to determine the
factive status of the described social events, and
that social events do not differ from other types of
events in this respect.

A social event is an event in which two or more
entities relate, communicate or are associated such
that for at least one participant, the interaction is
deliberate and conscious. Put differently, at least
one participant must be aware of relating to the
other participant. In this definition, what consti-
tutes a social relation is an aspect of cognitive
state: an agent is aware of being in a particular re-
lation to another agent. While two people passing
each other on a street without seeing each other
may be a nice plot device in a novel, it is not a
social event in our sense, since it does not entail a
social relation.

Following are the four types of social events that
were annotated:2

Interaction event (INR): When both entities
participating in an event have each other in their
cognitive state (i.e., are aware of the social re-
lation) we say they have an INR relation. The
requirement is actually deeper: it extends to the
transitive closure under mutual awareness, what in
the case of belief is called “mutual belief”. An
INR event could either be of sub-type VERBAL or
NONVERBAL. Note that a verbal interaction event
does not mean that all participants must actively
communicate verbally, it is enough if one partic-
ipant communicates verbally and the others are
aware of this communication.3 Furthermore, the
interaction can be in physical proximity or from a
distance. Therefore, we have further subtypes of

2Details of the annotation guidelines can be found in the
unpublished annotation manual, which we will refer to in the
final version of the paper.

3For this reason we explicitly annotate legal events as
VERBAL because legal interactions usually involve words

INR relation: NEAR and FAR. In all, INR has
four subtypes: VERBAL-NEAR, VERBAL-FAR,
NONVERBAL-NEAR, NONVERBAL-FAR. Con-
sider the following Example (3). In this sen-
tence, our annotators recorded an INR.VERBAL-
FAR between entities Toujan Faisal and the com-
mittee.

(3) [Toujan Faisal], 54, {said} [she] was
{informed} of the refusal by an [Inte-
rior Ministry committee] overseeing election
preparations. INR.Verbal-Far

As is intuitive, if one person informs the other
about something, both have to be cognizant of
each other and of the informing event. Also, the
event of informing involves words, therefore, it is a
verbal interaction. From the context it is not clear
if Toujan was informed personally, in which case
it would be a NEAR relation, or not. We decided
to default to FAR in case the physical proximity is
unclear from the context. We decided this because,
on observation, we found that if the author of the
news article was reporting an event that occurred
in close proximity, the author would explicitly say
so or give an indication. INR is the only relation
which is bi-directional.

Cognition event (COG): When only one person
(out of the two people that are participating in an
event) has the other in his or her cognitive state,
we say there exists a cognition relationship be-
tween entities. Consider the aforementioned Ex-
ample (3). In this sentence, the event said marks
a COG relation between Toujan Faisal and the
committee. This is because, when one person
talks about the other person, the other person must
be present in the first person’s cognitive state.
COG is a directed event from the entity which
has the other entity in its cognitive state to the
other entity. In the example under consideration,
it would be from Toujan Faisal to the committee.
There are no subtypes of this relation.

Physical Proximity event (PPR): We record a
PPR event when both the following conditions
hold: 1) exactly one entity has the other entity in
their cognitive state (this is the same requirement
as that for COG) and 2) both the entities are
physically proximate. Consider the following
Example (4). Here, one can reasonably assume
that Asif Muhammad Hanif was aware of being
in physical proximity to the three people killed,
while the inverse was not necessarily true.

22



(4) [Three people] were killed when (. . .), [Asif
Muhammad Hanif], (. . .), {detonated explo-
sives strapped to [his] body} PPR

PPR is a directed event like COG. There are no
subtypes of this relation. Note that if there exists
a PPR event then of course there would also be
a COG event. In such cases, the PPR event sub-
sumes COG, and we do not separately record a
COG event.

Perception event (PCR): The Perception Rela-
tionship is the distant equivalent of the Physi-
cal Proximity event. The point is not physical
distance; rather, the important ingredient is the
awareness required for PPR, except that physical
proximity is not required, and in fact physical dis-
tance is required. This kind of relationship usually
exists if one entity is watching the other entity on
TV broadcast, listening to him or her on the radio
or using a listening device, or reading about the
other entity in a newspaper or magazine etc. Con-
sider the following Example (5). In this example,
we record a PCR relation between the pair and
the Nepalese babies. This is because, the babies
are of course not aware of the pair. Moreover, the
pair heard about the babies so there is no physical
proximity. It is not COG because there was an ex-
plicit external information source which brought
the babies to the attention of the pair.

(5) [The pair] flew to Singapore last year af-
ter {hearing} of the successful surgery on
[Nepalese babies] [Ganga] and [Jamuna
Shrestha], (. . .). PCR

PCR is a directed event like COG. There are no
subtypes of this relation. Note that if there exists
a PCR event then we do not separately record a
COG event.

Figure 4 represents the series of decisions that
an annotator is required to take before reaching a
terminal node (or an event annotation label). The
interior nodes of the tree represent questions that
annotators answer to progress downwards in the
tree. Each question has a binary answer. For ex-
ample, the first question the annotators answer to
get to the type and subtype of an event is: “Is
the relation directed (1-way) or bi-directional (2-
way)?” Depending on the answer, they move to
the left or the right in the tree respectively. If its a
2-way relation, then it has to one of the sub-types
of INR because only INR requires that both enti-
ties be aware of each other.

	  

Event	  
Present	  

Event	  
Absent	  

Verbal	  

2-­‐Way	  

Nonverbal	  

1-­‐Way	  

Mind	  Far	  	  	  	  	  	  Near	  

Near	   Far	  

Near	   	  	  	  Far	  

Figure 4: Tree representation of decision points for select-
ing an event type/subtype out of the list of social events. Each

decision point is numbered for easy reference. We refer to

these number later when we present our results. The num-

bers in braces ([. . .]) are the number of examples that reach a

decision point.

3 Comparison Between Social Events
and ACE Annotations

In this section, we compare our annotations
with existing annotation efforts. To the best of
our knowledge, no annotation effort has been
geared towards extracting social events, or to-
wards extracting expressions that convey social
relations in text. The Automated Content Ex-
traction (ACE) annotations are the most similar
to ours because ACE also annotates Person Enti-
ties (PER.Individual, PER.Group), Relations be-
tween people (PER-SOC), and various types of
Events. Our annotation scheme is different, how-
ever, because the focus of our event annotation is
on events that occur only between people. Fur-
thermore, we annotate text that expresses the cog-
nitive states of the people involved, or allows the
annotator to infer it. Therefore, at the top level
of classification we differentiate between events
in which only one entity is cognizant of the other
versus events when both entities are cognizant of
each other. This distinction is, we believe, novel
in event or relation annotation. In the remainder
of this section, we will present statistics and de-
tailed examples to highlight differences between
our event annotations and the ACE event annota-
tions.

The statistics we present are based on 62 docu-
ments from the ACE-2005 corpus that one of our
annotator also annotated.4 Since our event types
and subtypes are not directly comparable to the

4Due to space constraints we do not give statistics for the
other annotator.

23



ACE event types, we say there is a “match” when
both the following conditions hold:

1. The span of text that represents an event in
the ACE event annotations overlap with ours.

2. The entities participating in the ACE event
are same as the entities participating in our
event.5

Our annotator recorded a total of 212 events
in 62 documents. We found a total of 63 can-
didate ACE events that had at least two Per-
son entities involved. Out of these 63 candi-
date events, 54 match both the aforementioned
conditions and hence our annotations. A clas-
sification of all of the events (those found by
our annotators and the ACE events involving at
least two persons) into our social event categories
and into the ACE categories is given in Fig-
ure 5. The figure shows that the majority of so-
cial events that match the ACE events are of type
INR.VERBAL-NEAR. On analysis, we found that
most of these correspond to the ACE type/subtype
CONTACT.MEET. It should be noted, how-
ever, our type/subtype INR.VERBAL-NEAR has a
broader definition than ACE type/subtype CON-
TACT.MEET, as will become apparent later in this
section. In the following, we discuss the 9 ACE
events that are not social events, and then we dis-
cuss the 158 social events that are not ACE events.

Out of the nine candidate ACE events which did
not match our social event annotation, we found
five are our annotation errors, i.e. when we an-
alyzed manually and looked for ACE events that
did not correspond to our annotations, we found
that our annotator missed these events. The re-
maining four, in contrast, are useful for our dis-
cussion because they highlight the differences in
ACE and our annotation perspectives. This will
become clearer with the following example:

(6) In central Baghdad, [a Reuters cameraman]
and [a cameraman for Spain’s Telecinco]
died when an American tank fired on the
Palestine Hotel

ACE has annotated the above example as an
event of type CONFLICT-ATTACK in which there
are two entities that are of type person: the
Reuters cameraman and the cameraman for

5Recall that our event annotations are between exactly
two entities of type PER.Individual or PER.Group.

Spain’s Telecinco, both of which are arguments
of type “Victim”. Being an event that has two per-
son entities involved makes the above sentence a
valid candidate (or potential) ACE event that we
match with our annotations. However, it fails to
match our annotations, since we do not annotate
an event in this sentence. The reason is that this
example does not reveal the cognitive states of the
two entities – we do not know whether one was
aware of the other.

We now discuss social events that are not ACE
events. From Figure 5 we see that most of the
events that did not overlap with ACE event anno-
tations were Cognition (COG) social events. In
the following, our annotator records a COG rela-
tion between Digvijay Singh and Abdul Kalam
(also Atal Behari Vajpayee and Varuna). The
reason is that by virtue of talking about the two
entities, Digvijay Singh’s cognitive state contains
those entities. However, the sentence does not re-
veal the cognitive states of the other two entities
and therefore it is not an INR event. In contrast,
ACE does not have any event annotation for this
sentence.

(7) The Times of India newspaper quoted [Digvi-
jay Singh] as {saying} that [Prime Minister
Atal Behari Vajpayee] and [President Abdul
Kalam] had offended [the Hindu rain God
Varuna] by remaining bachelors. COG

It is easy to see why COG relations are not usu-
ally annotated as ACE events. But it is counter-
intuitive for INR social events not to be annotated
as ACE events. We explain this using Example (3)
in Section 2. Our annotator recorded an INR re-
lation between Toujan Faisal and the commit-
tee (event span: informed). ACE did not record
any event between the two entities.6 This exam-
ple highlights the difference between our defini-
tion of Interaction events and ACE’s definition of
Contact events. For this reason, in Figure 5, 51 of
our INR relations do not overlap with ACE event
categories.

4 Annotation Procedure

We used Callisto (a configurable workbench) (Day
et al., 2004) to annotate the ACE-2005 corpus for

6The ACE event annotated in the sentence is of type
“Personell-Elect” (span election) which is not recorded as an
event between two or more entities and is not relevant here.

24



62 Documents
Conflict (5) Contact (32)

Justice-* (13)
Life (7) Transaction (2)

Not Found
Attack Meet Phone-Write Die Divorce Injure Transfer-Money

 INR 

 Verbal 
 Near (66) 0 26 0 9 0 0 0 0 31

 Far (17) 0 0 3 3 0 1 0 0 10

 NonVerbal 
 Near (14) 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 8

 Far (3) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2

 COG (109) 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 106

 PPR (2)  0  0  0  0  1  0  1  0  0 

 PCR (1)  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1 

 Errors  0  3  0  1  1  0  0  0 

Figure 5: This table maps the type and subtype of ACE events to our types and subtypes of social events. The columns have
ACE event types and sub-types. The rows represent our social event types and sub-types. The last column is the number of our

events that are not annotated as ACE events. The last row has the number of social events that our annotator missed but are

ACE events.

the social events we defined earlier. The ACE-
2005 corpus has already been annotated for enti-
ties as part of the ACE effort. The entity anno-
tation is therefore not part of this annotation ef-
fort. We hired two annotators. Annotators opened
ACE-2005 files one by one in Callisto. They could
see the whole document at one time (top screen
of Figure 6) with entities highlighted in blue (bot-
tom screen of Figure 6). These entities were only
of type PER.Individual and PER.Group and be-
longed to class SPC. All other ACE entity annota-
tions were removed. The annotators were required
to read the whole document (not just the part that
has entities) and record a social event span (high-
lighted in dark blue in Figure 6), social event type,
subtype and the two participating entities in the
event.

The span of a event mention is the minimum
span of text that best represents the presence of the
type of event being recorded. It can also be viewed
as the span of text that evokes the type of event be-
ing recorded. The span may be a word, a phrase
or the whole sentence. For example, the span in
Example (4) in Section 2 includes strapped to his
body because that confirms the physical proximity
of the two entities. We have, however, not paid
much attention to the annotation of the span, and
will not report inter-annotator agreement on this
part of the annotation. The reason for this is that
we are interested in annotating the underlying se-
mantics; we will use machine learning to find the
linguistics clues to each type of social event, rather
than relying on the annotators’ ability to deter-
mine these. Also note that we did not give precise

instructions on which entity mentions to choose
in case of multiple mentions of the same entity.
Again, this is because we are interested in anno-
tating the underlying semantics, and we will rely
on later analysis to determine which mentions par-
ticipate in signaling the annotated social events.

Figure 6: Snapshot of Callisto. Top screen has the text
from a document. Bottom screen has tabs for Entities, Entity

Mentions etc. An annotator selected text said, highlighted

in dark blue, as an event of type COG between Entities with

entity ID E1 and E9.

Both our annotators annotated 46 common doc-
uments. Out these, there was one document that
had no entity annotations, implying no social event
annotation. The average number of entities in the
remaining 45 documents was 6.82 per document,
and the average number of entity mentions per
document was 23.78. The average number of so-
cial events annotated per document by one anno-

25



tator was 3.43, whereas for the other annotator it
was 3.69. In the next section we present our inter-
annotator agreement calculations for these 45 doc-
uments.

5 Inter-annotator Agreement

Annotators consider all sentences that contain at
least two person entities (individuals or group),
but do not always consider all possible labels, or
annotation values. As represented in the decision
tree in Figure 5, many of the labels are conditional.
At each next depth of the tree, the number of in-
stances can become considerably pruned. Due to
the novelty of the annotation task, and the condi-
tional nature of the labels, we want to assess the
reliability of the annotation of each decision point.
For this, we report Cohen’s Kappa (Cohen, 1960)
for each independent decision. We use the stan-
dard formula for Cohen’s Kappa given by:

Kappa =
P (a)− P (e)

1− P (e)

where P (a) is probability of agreement and P (e)
is probability of chance agreement. These proba-
bilities can be calculated from the confusion ma-
trix represented as follows:

In addition, we present the confusion matrix for
each decision point to show the absolute number
of cases considered, and F-measure to show the
proportion of cases agreed upon. For most de-
cision points, the Kappa scores are at or above
the 0.67 threshold recommended by Krippen-
dorff (1980) with F-measures above 0.90. Where
Kappa is low, F-measure remains high. As dis-
cussed below, we conclude that the annotation
schema is reliable.

We note that in the ACE annotation effort, inter-
annotator agreement (IAA) was measured by a
single number, but this number did not take chance
agreement into account: it simply used the eval-
uation metric to compare systems against a gold
standard. Furthermore, this metric is composed
of distinct parts which were weighted in accor-
dance with research goals from year to year, mean-
ing that the results of applying the metric changed
from year to year. We have also performed an

ACE-style IAA evaluation, which we report at the
end of this section.

Figure 7 shows the results for the seven binary
decision points, considered separately. The num-
ber of the decision point in the table corresponds
to the decision points in Figure 4. The (flattened)
confusion matrices in column two present annota-
tor two’s choices by annotator one’s, with positive
agreement in the upper left (cell A) and negative
agreement in the lower right (cell D). In all cases
the cell values on the agreement diagonal (A, D)
are much higher than the cells for disagreement
(B, C). The upper left cell (A) of the matrix for
decision 1 represents the positive agreements on
the presence of a social event (N=133), and these
are the cases considered for decision 2. For the
remaining decisions, agreement is always unbal-
anced towards agreement on the positive cases,
with few negative cases. In the case of decision
4, for example, this reflects the inherent unlike-
lihood of the NONVERBAL-FAR event. In other
cases, it reflects a property of the genre. For ex-
ample, when we apply this annotation schema to
fiction, we find a much higher frequency of phys-
ically proximate events (PPR), corresponding to
the lower left cell (D) of the confusion matrix for
decision 6.

For decision 4 (NONVERBAL-NEAR) and 7
(PCR/COG), kappa scores are low but the con-
fusion matrices and high F-measures demonstrate
that the absolute agreement is very high. Kappa
measures the amount of agreement that would not
have occurred by chance, with values in [-1,1]. For
binary data and two annotators, values of -1 can
occur, indicating that the annotators have perfectly
non-random disagreements. The probability of an
annotation value is estimated by its frequency in
the data (the marginals of the confusion matrix).
It does not measure the actual amount of agree-
ment among annotators, as illustrated by the rows
for decisions 4 and 7. Because NONVERBAL-
FAR is chosen so rarely by either annotator (never
by annotator 2), the likelihood that both annota-
tors will agree on NONVERBAL-NEAR is close to
one. In this case, there is little room for agreement
above chance, hence the Kappa score of zero. We
should point out, however, that this skewness was
revealed from the annotated corpus. We did not
bias our annotators to look for a particular type of
relation.

The five cases of high Kappa and high F-

26



measure indicate aspects of the annotation where
annotators generally agree, and where the agree-
ment is unlikely to be accidental. We conclude that
these aspects of the annotation can be carried out
reliably as independent decisions. The two cases
of low Kappa and high F-measure indicate aspects
of the annotation where, for this data, there is rel-
atively little opportunity for disagreement.

Decision Point
Confusion Matrix

Kappa F1
A B C D

1 (+/- Relation) 133 31 34 245 0.68 0.80

2 (1 or 2 way) 51 8 1 73 0.86 0.91

3 (Verbal/NonV) 40 4 0 7 0.73 0.95

4 (NonV-Near/Far) 6 0 1 0 0.00 0.92

5 (Verbal-Near/Far) 30 1 2 7 0.77 0.95

6 (+/- PPR) 71 0 1 1 0.66 0.99

7 (PCR/COG) 69 1 1 0 -0.01 0.98

Figure 7: This table presents the Inter-annotator agreement
measures. Column 1 is the decision point corresponding to

the decision tree. Column 2 represents a flattened confusion

matrix where A corresponds to top left corner, D corresponds

to the bottom right corner, B corresponds to top right corner

and C corresponds to the bottom left corner of the confusion

matrix. We present values for Cohen’s Kappa in column 3

and F-measure in the last column.

Now, we present a measure of % agreement
for our annotators by using the ACE evaluation
scheme.7 We considered one annotator to be the
gold standard and the other to be a system being
evaluated against the gold standard. For the cal-
culation of this measure we first take the union of
all event spans. As in the ACE evaluation scheme,
we associate penalties with each wrong decision
annotators take about the entities participating in
an event, type and sub-type of an event. Since
these penalties are not public, we assign our own
penalties. We choose penalties that are not biased
towards any particular event type or subtype. We
decide the penalty based on the number of options
an annotator has to consider before taking a cer-
tain decision. For example, we assign a penalty
of 0.5 if one annotator records an event which the
other annotator does not. If annotators disagree
on the relation type, the penalty is 0.25 because
there are four options to select from (INR, COG,
PPR, PCR). Similarly, we assign a penalty of 0.2

7http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig//tests/ace/2007/doc/ace07-
evalplan.v1.3a.pdf

if the annotators disagree on the relation sub-types
(VERBAL-NEAR, VERBAL-FAR, NONVERBAL-
NEAR, NONVERBAL-FAR, No sub-type). We as-
sign a penalty of 0.5 if the annotators disagree on
the participating entities (incorporating the direc-
tionality in directed relations). Using these penal-
ties, we get % agreement of 69.74%. This is a high
agreement rate as compared to that of ACE’s event
annotation, which was reported to be 31.5% at the
ACE 2005 meeting.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented a new annotation scheme for
extracting social networks from text. We have
argued, social network created by the sender -
receiver links in Enron Email corpus can ben-
efit from social event links extracted from the
content of emails where people talk about their
“implicit” social relations. Our annotation task
is novel in that we are interested in the cogni-
tive states of people: who is aware of interact-
ing with whom, and who is aware of whom with-
out interacting. Though the task requires detec-
tion of events followed by conditional classifica-
tion of events into four types and subtypes, we
achieve high Kappa (0.66-0.86) and F-measure
(0.8-0.9). We also achieve a high global agree-
ment of 69.74% which is inspired by Automated
Content Extraction (ACE) inter-annotator agree-
ment measure. These measures indicate that our
annotations are reliable.

In future work, we will apply our annotation
effort to other genres, including fiction, and to
text from which larger social networks can be
extracted, such as extended journalistic reporting
about a group of people.

Please contact the second author of the paper
about the availability of the corpus.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by NSF grant IIS-0713548.
We thank Dr. David Day for help with adapting
the annotation interface (Callisto) to our require-
ments. We would like to thank David Elson for
extremely useful discussions and feedback on the
annotation manual and the inter-annotator calcu-
lation scheme. We would also like to thank the
Natural Language Processing group at Columbia
University for their feedback on our classification
of social events.

27



References
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coeffiecient of agreement

for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20:37–46.

David Day, Chad McHenry, Robyn Kozierok, and Lau-
rel Riek. 2004. Callisto: A configurable annotation
workbench. International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation.

Jana Diesner, Terrill L Frantz, and Kathleen M Car-
ley. 2005. Communication networks from the enron
email corpus it’s always about the people. enron is
no different. Computational & Mathematical Orga-
nization Theory, 11(3):201–228.

G Doddington, A Mitchell, M Przybocki, L Ramshaw,
S Strassel, and R Weischedel. 2004. The auto-
matic content extraction (ace) program–tasks, data,
and evaluation. LREC, pages 837–840.

P S Keila and D B Skillicorn. 2005. Structure in the
enron email dataset. Computational & Mathemati-
cal Organization Theory, 11 (3):183–199.

Bryan Klimt and Yiming Yang. 2004. Introducing
the enron corpus. In First Conference on Email and
Anti-Spam (CEAS).

Klaus Krippendorff. 1980. Content Analysis: An In-
troduction to Its Methodology. Sage Publications.

Andrew McCallum, Xuerui Wang, and Andres
Corrada-Emmanuel. 2007. Topic and role discovery
in social networks with experiments on enron and
academic email. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 30 (1):249–272.

Nishith Pathak, Colin DeLong, Arindam Banerjee, and
Kendric Erickson. 2008. Social topic models for
community extraction. Proceedings of SNA-KDD.

Ryan Rowe, German Creamer, Shlomo Hershkop, and
Salvatore J Stolfo. 2007. Automated social hi-
erarchy detection through email network analysis.
Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD
2007 workshop on Web mining and social network
analysis, pages 109–117.

Stanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust. 1994. Social
Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

28


