



















































Constructing Thai Opinion Mining Resource: A Case Study on Hotel Reviews


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 64–71,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c©2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing

Constructing Thai Opinion Mining Resource:
A Case Study on Hotel Reviews

Choochart Haruechaiyasak, Alisa Kongthon,
Pornpimon Palingoon and Chatchawal Sangkeettrakarn

Human Language Technology Laboratory (HLT)
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC)

choochart.har@nectec.or.th, alisa.kon@nectec.or.th,
pornpimon.pal@nectec.or.th, chatchawal.san@nectec.or.th

Abstract

Opinion mining and sentiment analy-
sis has recently gained increasing atten-
tion among the NLP community. Opin-
ion mining is considered a domain-
dependent task. Constructing lexicons
for different domains is labor intensive.
In this paper, we propose a framework
for constructing Thai language resource
for feature-based opinion mining. The
feature-based opinion mining essentially
relies on the use of two main lexicons,
features and polar words. Our approach
for extracting features and polar words
from opinionated texts is based on syn-
tactic pattern analysis. The evaluation
is performed with a case study on ho-
tel reviews. The proposed method has
shown to be very effective in most cases.
However, in some cases, the extraction
is not quite straightforward. The rea-
sons are due to, firstly, the use of conver-
sational language in written opinionated
texts and, secondly, the language seman-
tic. We provide discussion with possible
solutions on pattern extraction for some
of the challenging cases.

1 Introduction

With the popularity of Web 2.0 or social net-
working websites, the amount of user-generated
contents has increased exponentially. One in-
teresting type of these user-generated contents
is texts which are written with some opinions
and/or sentiments. An in-depth analysis of these

opinionated texts could reveal potentially use-
ful information regarding the preferences of peo-
ple towards many different topics including news
events, social issues and commercial products.
Opinion mining and sentiment analysis is such
task for analyzing and summarizing what people
think about a certain topic.

Due to its potential and useful applications,
opinion mining has gained a lot of interest in text
mining and NLP communities (Ding et al., 2008;
Jin et al., 2009). Much work in this area focused
on evaluating reviews as being positive or nega-
tive either at the document level (Turney, 2002;
Pang et al., 2002; Dave et al., 2003; Beineke
et al., 2004) or sentence level (Kim and Hovy,
2004; Wiebe and Riloff, 2005; Wilson et al.,
2009; Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003). For in-
stance, given some reviews of a product, the sys-
tem classifies them into positive or negative re-
views. No specific details or features are identi-
fied about what customers like or dislike. To ob-
tain such details, a feature-based opinion mining
approach has been proposed (Hu and Liu, 2004;
Popescu and Etzioni, 2005). This approach typi-
cally consists of two following steps.

1. Identifying and extracting features of an ob-
ject, topic or event from each sentence upon
which the reviewers expressed their opin-
ion.

2. Determining whether the opinions regard-
ing the features are positive or negative.

The feature-based opinion mining could pro-
vide users with some insightful information re-
lated to opinions on a particular topic. For exam-
ple, for hotel reviews, the feature-based opinion

64



mining allows users to view positive or negative
opinions on hotel-related features such as price,
service, breakfast, room, facilities and activities.
Breaking down opinions into feature level is very
essential for decision making. Different cus-
tomers could have different preferences when se-
lecting hotels to stay for vacation. For example,
some might prefer hotels which provide full fa-
cilities, however, some might prefer to have good
room service.

The main drawback of the feature-based opin-
ion mining is the preparation of different lex-
icons including features and polar words. To
make things worse, these lexicons, especially the
features, are domain-dependent. For a partic-
ular domain, a set of features and polar words
must be prepared. The process for language
resource construction is generally labor inten-
sive and time consuming. Some previous works
have proposed different approaches for automat-
ically constructing the lexicons for the feature-
based opinion mining (Qiu et al., 2009; Riloff
and Wiebe, 2003; Sarmento et al., 2009). Most
approaches applied some machine learning al-
gorithms for learning the rules from the corpus.
The rules are used for extracting new features
and polar words from untagged corpus. Reviews
of different approaches are given in the related
work section.

In this paper, we propose a framework for
constructing Thai language resource for the
feature-based opinion mining. Our approach
is based on syntactic pattern analysis of two
lexicon types: domain-dependent and domain-
independent. The domain-dependent lexicons
include features, sub-features and polar words.
The domain-independent lexicons are particles,
negative words, degree words, auxiliary verbs,
prepositions and stop words. Using these lexi-
cons, we could construct a set of syntactic rules
based on the frequently occurred patterns. The
rule set can be used for extracting more unseen
sub-features and polar words from untagged cor-
pus.

We evaluated the proposed framework on the
domain of hotel reviews. The experimental re-
sults showed that our proposed method is very

effective in most cases, especially for extracting
polar words. However, in some cases, the extrac-
tion is not quite straightforward due to the use of
conversational language, idioms and hidden se-
mantic. We provide some discussion on the chal-
lenging cases and suggest some solutions as the
future work.

The remainder of this paper is organized as
follows. In next section, we review some related
works on different approaches for constructing
language resources for opinion mining and sen-
timent analysis. In Section 3, we present the pro-
posed framework for constructing Thai opinion
mining resource by using the dual pattern extrac-
tion method. In Section 4, we apply the proposed
framework with a case study of hotel reviews.
The performance evaluation is given with the ex-
periment results. Some difficult cases are dis-
cussed along with some possible solutions. Sec-
tion 5 concludes the paper with the future work.

2 Related work

The problem of developing subjectivity lexicons
for training and testing sentiment classifiers has
recently attracted some attention. The Multi-
perspective Question Answering (MPQA) opin-
ion corpus is a well-known resource for senti-
ment analysis in English (Wiebe et al., 2005).
It is a collection of news articles from a vari-
ety of news sources manually annotated at word
and phrase levels for opinions and other private
states (i.e., beliefs, emotions, sentiments, spec-
ulations, etc.). The annotation in this work also
took into account the context, which is essential
for resolving possible ambiguities and accurately
determining polarity.

Although most of the reference corpora has
been focused on English language, work on other
languages is growing as well. Kanayama et
al. (2006) proposed an unsupervised method to
detect sentiment words in Japanese. In this work,
they used clause level context coherency to iden-
tify candidate sentiment words from sentences
that appear successively with sentences contain-
ing seed sentiment words. Their assumption is
that unless the context is changed with adver-
sative expressions, sentences appearing together

65



in that context tend to have the same polari-
ties. Hence, if one of them contains sentiments
words, the other successive sentences are likely
to contain sentiment words as well. Ku and
Chen (2007) proposed the bag-of-characters ap-
proach to determine sentiment words in Chinese.
This approach calculates the observation proba-
bilities of characters from a set of seed sentiment
words first, then dynamically expands the set and
adjusts their probabilities. Later in 2009, Ku
et al. (2009), extended their bag-of-characters
approach by including morphological structures
and syntactic structures between sentence seg-
ment. Their experiments showed better perfor-
mance of word polarity detection and opinion
sentence extraction.

Some other methods to automatically gener-
ate resources for subjectivity analysis for a for-
eign language have leveraged the resources and
tools available for English. For example, Be-
nea et al. (2008) applied machine translation and
standard Naive Bayes and SVM for subjectiv-
ity classification for Romanian. Their exper-
iments showed promising results for applying
automatic translation to construct resources and
tools for opinion mining in a foreign language.
Wan (2009) also leveraged an available English
corpus for Chinese sentiment classification by
using the co-training approach to make full use
of both English and Chinese features in a uni-
fied framework. Jijkoun and Hofmann (2009)
also described a method for creating a Dutch
subjectivity lexicon based on an English lexi-
con. They applied a PageRank-like algorithm
that bootstraps a subjectivity lexicon from the
translation of the English lexicon and rank the
words in the thesaurus by polarity using the net-
work of lexical relations (e.g., synonymy, hy-
ponymy) in Wordnet.

3 The proposed framework

The performance of the feature-based opinion
mining relies on the design and completeness
of related lexicons. Our lexicon design dis-
tinguishes lexicons into two types, domain-
dependent and domain-independent. The design
of domain-dependent lexicons is based on the

feature-based opinion mining framework pro-
posed by Liu et al. (2005). The framework starts
by setting the domain scope such as digital cam-
era. The next step is to design a set of features
associated with the given domain. For the do-
main of digital camera, features could be, for in-
stance, “price”, “screen size” and “picture qual-
ity”. Features could contain sub-features. For
example, the picture quality could have the sub-
features as “macro mode”, “portrait mode” and
“night mode”. Preparing multiple feature levels
could be time-consuming, therefore, we limit the
features into two levels: main features and sub-
features.

Another domain-dependent lexicon is po-
lar words. Polar words are sentiment words
which represent either positive or negative views
on features. Although some polar words are
domain-independent and have explicit meanings
such as “excellent”, “beautiful”, “expensive”
and “terrible”. Some polar words are domain-
dependent and have implicit meanings depend-
ing on the contexts. For example, the word
“large” is generally considered positive for the
screen size feature of digital camera domain.
However, for the dimension feature of mobile
phone domain, the word “large” could be con-
sidered as negative.

On the other hand, the domain-independent
lexicons are regular words which provide differ-
ent parts of speech (POS) and functions in the
sentence. For opinion mining task, we design
six different domain-independent lexicons as fol-
lows (some examples are shown in Table 1).

• Particles (PAR): In Thai language, these
words refer to the sentence endings which
are normally used to add politeness of the
speakers (Cooke, 1992).

• Negative words (NEG): Like English,
these words are used to invert the opinion
polarity. Examples are “not”, “unlikely”
and “never”.

• Degree words (DEG): These words are
used as an intensifier to the polar words.
Examples are “large”, “very”, “enormous”.

66



• Auxiliary verbs (AUX): These words are
used to modify verbs. Examples are
“should”, “must” and “then”.

• Prepositions (PRE): Like English, Thai
prepositions are used to mark the relations
between two words.

• Stop words (STO): These words are used
for grammaticalization. Thai language is
considered an isolating language, to form a
noun the words “karn” and “kwam” are nor-
mally placed in front of a verb or a noun,
respectively. Therefore, these words could
be neglected when analyzing opinionated
texts.

Table 1: Domain-independent lexicons

Although some of the above lexicons are sim-
ilar to English, however, some words are placed
in different position in a sentence. For example,
in Thai, a degree word is usually placed after a
polar word. For example, “very good” would be
written as “good very” in Thai.

Figure 1 shows all processes and work flow
under the proposed framework. The process
starts with a corpus which is tagged based on
two lexicon types. From the tagged corpus,
we construct patterns and lexicons. The pat-
tern construction is performed by collecting text
segments which contain both features and polar

words. All patterns are sorted by the frequency
of occurrence. The lexicon construction is per-
formed by simply collecting words which are al-
ready tagged with the lexicon types. The lex-
icons are used for performing the feature-based
opinion mining task such as classifying and sum-
marizing the reviews as positive and negative
based on different features. The completeness of
lexicons is very important for the feature-based
opinion mining. To collect more lexicons, pat-
terns are used in the dual pattern extraction pro-
cess to extract more features and polar words
from the untagged corpus.

Figure 1: The proposed opinion resource con-
struction framework based on the dual pattern
extraction.

4 A case study of hotel reviews

To evaluate the proposed framework, we per-
form some experiments with a case study of
hotel reviews. In Thailand, tourism is ranked
as one of the top industries. From the statis-
tics provided by the Office of Tourism Develop-
ment1, the number of international tourists vis-
iting Thailand in 2009 is approximately 14 mil-

1The Office of Tourism Development,
http://www.tourism.go.th

67



lions. The number of registered hotels in all re-
gions of Thailand is approximately 5,000. Pro-
viding an opinion mining system on hotel re-
views could be very useful for tourists to make
decision on hotel choice when planning a trip.

4.1 Corpus preparation

We collected customer reviews from the Agoda
website2. The total number of reviews in the cor-
pus is 8,436. Each review contains the name of
the hotel as the title and comments in free-form
text format. We designed a set of 13 main fea-
tures: service, cleanliness, hotel condition, loca-
tion, food, breakfast, room, facilities, price, com-
fort, quality, activities and security. The set of
main features is designed based on the features
obtained from the Agoda website. Some addi-
tional features, such as activities and security, are
added to provide users with more dimensions.

In this paper, we focus on two main fea-
tures: breakfast and service. Table 2 shows the
domain-dependent lexicons related to the break-
fast feature. For breakfast main feature (FEA),
we include all synonyms which could be used to
describe breakfast in Thai. These include En-
glish terms with their synonyms, transliterated
terms and abbreviations.

The breakfast sub-features (FEA*) are spe-
cific concepts of breakfast. Examples include
“menu”, “taste”, “service” and “coffee”. It can
be observed that some of the sub-features could
also act as a main feature. For example, the
sub-feature “service” of breakfast is also used
as the main feature “service”. Providing sub-
feature level could help revealing more insight-
ful dimension for the users. However, designing
multiple feature levels could be time-consuming,
therefore, we limit the features into two levels,
i.e., main feature and sub-feature. The polar
words (POL) are also shown in the table. We
denote the positive and negative polar words by
placing [+] and [-] after each word. It can be
observed that some polar words are dependent
on sub-features. For example, the polar word
“long line” can only be used for the sub-feature
“restaurant”.

2Agoda website: http://www.agoda.com

Table 2: Domain-dependent lexicons for the
breakfast feature.

Table 3 shows the domain-dependent lexicons
related to the service feature. The main fea-
tures include synonyms, transliterated and En-
glish terms which describe the concept service.
The service sub-features are, for example, “re-
ception”, “security guard”, “maid”, “waiter” and
“concierge”. Unlike the breakfast feature, the
polar words for the service feature are quite gen-
eral and could mostly be applied for all sub-
features. Another observation is that some of the
polar words are based on Thai idiom. For ex-
ample, the phrase “having rigid hands” in Thai
means “impolite”. In Thai culture, people show
politeness by doing the “wai” gesture.

4.2 Experiments and results

Using the tagged corpus and the extracted lexi-
cons, we construct the most frequently occurred
patterns. For two main features, breakfast and
service, the numbers of tagged reviews for each
feature are 301 and 831, respectively. We ran-
domly split the corpus into 80% as training set
and 20% as test set. We only consider the pat-
terns which contain both features (either main
features or sub-features) and polar words. For
the breakfast feature, the total number of ex-
tracted patterns is 86. For the service feature, the
total number of extracted patterns is 192. Table
4 and 5 show some examples of most frequently

68



Table 3: Domain-dependent lexicons for the ser-
vice feature.

occurred patterns extracted from the corpus. The
symbols of the tag set are as shown in Table 1
and 2 with the tag <OTH> denoting any other
words.

From the tables, two patterns which occur fre-
quently for both features are <FEA><POL>
and <FEA*><POL>. These two patterns are
very simple and show that the opinionated texts
in Thai are mostly very simple. Users just simply
write a word describing the feature followed by
a polar word (either positive or negative) with-
out using any verb in between. Some examples
for the pattern <FEA*><POL> are <coffee
cup><dirty> and <employee><friendly>. In
English, a verb “to be” (is/am/are) is usually re-
quired between <FEA*> and <POL>.

Using the extracted patterns, we perform the
dual pattern extraction process to collect the
sub-features and polar words from the test data
set. Table 6 shows the evaluation results of
sub-features and polar words extraction for both
breakfast and service features. It can be observed
that the set of patterns could extract polar words
(POL) with higher accuracy than sub-features
(FEA*). This could be due to the patterns used to

Table 4: Top-ranked breakfast patterns with ex-
amples

describe the polar words are straightforward and
not complicated. This is especially true for the
case of breakfast feature in which the accuracy
is approximately 95%.

Table 5: Top-ranked service patterns with exam-
ples

4.3 Discussion

Table 7 and 8 show some examples of challeng-
ing cases for breakfast and service features, re-
spectively. The polar words shown in both tables
are very difficult to extract since the patterns can

69



Feature Accuracy (%)FEA* POL
Breakfast 80.00 95.74
Service 82.56 89.29

Table 6: Evaluation results of features and polar
words extraction.

not be easily captured. The difficulties are due to
many reasons including the language semantic
and the need of world knowledge. For example,
in case #5 of service feature, the whole phrase
can be interpreted as “attentive”. It is difficult
for the system to generate the pattern based on
this phrase. Another example is case #4 of both
tables, the customers express their opinions by
comparing to other hotels. To analyze the senti-
ment correctly would require the knowledge of a
particular hotel or hotels in specific locations.

Table 7: Examples of difficult cases of breakfast
feature

5 Conclusion and future work

We proposed a framework for constructing Thai
opinion mining resource with a case study on
hotel reviews. Two sets of lexicons, domain-
dependent and domain-independent, are de-
signed to support the pattern extraction process.
The proposed method first constructs a set of pat-
terns from a tagged corpus. The extracted pat-
terns are then used to automatically extract and
collect more sub-features and polars words from
an untagged corpus. The performance evaluation

Table 8: Examples of difficult cases of service
feature

was done with a collection of hotel reviews ob-
tained from a hotel reservation website. From
the experimental results, polar words could be
extracted more easily than sub-features. This
is due to the polar words often appear in spe-
cific positions with repeated contexts in the opin-
ionated texts. In some cases, extraction of sub-
features and polar words are not straightforward
due to the difficulties in generalizing patterns.
For example, some subjectivity requires com-
plete phrases to describe the polarity. In some
cases, the sub-features are not explicitly shown
in the sentence. For future work, we plan to com-
plete the construction of the corpus by consider-
ing the rest of main features. Another plan is to
include the semantic analysis into the pattern ex-
traction process. For example, the phrase “forget
something” could imply negative polarity for the
service feature.

References
Banea, Carmen, Rada Mihalcea, Janyce Wiebe, and

Samer Hassan. 2008. Multilingual subjectivity
analysis using machine translation. Proc. of the
2008 empirical methods in natural language pro-
cessing, 127–135.

Beineke, Philip, Trevor Hastie and Shivakumar
Vaithyanathan. 2004. The sentimental factor: im-
proving review classification via human-provided
information. Proc. of the 42nd Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, 263–
270.

70



Cooke, J.R. 1992. Thai sentence particles: putting
the puzzle together. Proc. of the The Third Inter-
national Symposium on Language and Linguistics,
1105–1119.

Dave, Kushal, Steve Lawrence and David M. Pen-
nock. 2003. Mining the peanut gallery: opinion
extraction and semantic classification of product
reviews. Proc. of the 12th international confer-
ence on World Wide Web, 519–528.

Ding, Xiaowen, Bing Liu and Philip S. Yu. 2008. A
holistic lexicon-based approach to opinion mining.
Proc. of the int. conf. on web search and web data
mining, 231–240.

Hu, Minqing and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and sum-
marizing customer reviews. Proc. of the 10th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, 168–177.

Jin, Wei, Hung Hay Ho and Rohini K. Srihari. 2009.
OpinionMiner: a novel machine learning system
for web opinion mining and extraction. Proc. of
the 15th ACM SIGKDD, 1195–1204.

Kim, Soo-Min and Eduard Hovy. 2004. Determining
the sentiment of opinions. Proc. of the 20th inter-
national conference on Computational Linguistics,
1367–1373.

Qiu, Guang, Bing Liu, Jiajun Bu, and Chun Chen.
2009. Expanding domain sentiment lexicon
through double propagation. Proc. of the 21st In-
ternational Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelli-
gence, 1199–1204.

Jijkoun, Valentin and Katja Hofmann. 2009. Gener-
ating a non-English subjectivity lexicon: relations
that matter. Proc. of the 12th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 398–405.

Kanayama, Hiroshi and Tetsuya Nasukawa. 2006.
Fully automatic lexicon expansion for domain-
oriented sentiment analysis. Proc. of the 2006
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, 355–363.

Ku, Lun-Wei and Hsin-Hsi Chen. 2007 Mining opin-
ions from the Web: Beyond relevance retrieval.
Journal of American Society for Information Sci-
ence and Technology, 58(12):1838–1850.

Ku, Lun-Wei, Ting-Hao Huang and Hsin-Hsi Chen.
2009. Using morphological and syntactic struc-
tures for Chinese opinion analysis. Proc. of the
2009 empirical methods in natural language pro-
cessing, 1260–1269.

Liu, Bing, Minqing Hu and Junsheng Cheng. 2005.
Opinion observer: analyzing and comparing opin-
ions on the Web. Proc. of the 14th World Wide
Web, 342–351.

Pang, Bo, Lillian Lee and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. Proc. of the ACL-
02 conf. on empirical methods in natural language
processing, 79–86.

Popescu, Ana-Maria and Oren Etzioni. 2005. Ex-
tracting product features and opinions from re-
views. Proc. of the conf. on human language tech-
nology and empirical methods in natural language
processing, 339–346.

Riloff, Ellen and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning ex-
traction patterns for subjective expressions. Proc.
of the 2003 conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing, 105–112.

Sarmento, Luı́s, Paula Carvalho, Mário J. Silva, and
Eugénio de Oliveira. 2009. Automatic creation
of a reference corpus for political opinion min-
ing in user-generated content. Proc. of the 1st
CIKM workshop on topic-sentiment analysis for
mass opinion, 29–36.

Turney, Peter D. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?:
semantic orientation applied to unsupervised clas-
sification of reviews. Proc. of the 40th ACL, 417–
424.

Wan, Xiaojun. 2009. Co-training for cross-lingual
sentiment classification. Proc. of the joint conf. of
ACL and IJCNLP, 235–243.

Wiebe, Janyce and Ellen Riloff. 2005. Creating
subjective and objective sentence classifiers from
unannotated texts. Proc. of Conference on Intelli-
gent Text Processing and Computational Linguis-
tics, 486–497.

Wiebe, Janyce, Theresa Wilson and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and
emotions in language. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 39(2-3):165–210.

Wilson, Theresa, Janyce Wiebe and Paul Hoffmann.
2009. Recognizing contextual polarity: An explo-
ration of features for phrase-level sentiment analy-
sis. Comput. Linguist., 35(3):399–433.

Yu, Hong and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. To-
wards answering opinion questions: separating
facts from opinions and identifying the polarity of
opinion sentences. Proc. of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
129–136.

71


