










































Scientific Authoring Support: A Tool to Navigate in Typed Citation Graphs


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Writing, pages 7–14,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Scientific Authoring Support: A Tool to Navigate in Typed Citation Graphs

Ulrich Schäfer
Language Technology Lab

German Research Center for
Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)

D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
ulrich.schaefer@dfki.de

Uwe Kasterka
Computer Science Department

Saarland University
Campus

D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
uwe.kasterka@dfki.de

Abstract

Scientific authors urgently need help in man-
aging the fast increasing number of publica-
tions. We describe and demonstrate a tool
that supports authors in browsing graphically
through electronically available publications,
thus allowing them to quickly adapt to new
domains and publish faster. Navigation is as-
sisted by means of typed citation graphs, i.e.
we use methods and resources from compu-
tational linguistics to compute the kind of ci-
tation that is made from one paper to another
(refutation, use, confirmation etc.). To verify
the computed citation type, the user can in-
spect the highlighted citation sentence in the
original PDF document. While our classi-
fication methods used to generate a realistic
test data set are relatively simple and could
be combined with other proposed approaches,
we put a strong focus on usability and quick
navigation in the potentially huge graphs. In
the outlook, we argue that our tool could be
made part of a community approach to over-
come the sparseness and correctness dilemma
in citation classification.

1 Introduction and Motivation

According to different studies, the number of scien-
tific works is doubled every 5-10 years. Important
issues to be addressed by the scientific community
are finding relevant information and avoiding redun-
dancy and duplication of work. The organization
and preservation of scientific knowledge in scientific
publications, vulgo text documents, thwarts these ef-
forts. From a viewpoint of a computer scientist, sci-
entific papers are just ‘unstructured information’.

One specific, but very important aspect of the con-
tent of scientific papers is their relation to previous
work and, once published, their impact to subse-
quent or derived research. While it is still hard if
not impossible to capture and formalize the semantic
content of a scientific publication automatically, at
least citation properties and derived scientific impact
can be and usually are measured automatically on
the basis of simple citation graphs. In other words,
these graphs can be used to describe I/O behavior of
publications in a very simple way.

However, just counting citations is a very coarse
approach and does not tell much about the reasons
for citing one’s work in a specific situation. More-
over, once such measure is formalized and standard-
ized e.g. for science evaluation, it can be exploited
to tune up statistics. Since the first proposal of the
Science Citation Index (Garfield, 1955), it has also
provoked criticism.

In the bibliometrics and computational linguistics
literature, many proposals are available on how ci-
tations could be further classified by careful analy-
sis of citation sentences and context (Garfield, 1965;
Garzone, 1996; Mercer and Di Marco, 2004; Teufel
et al., 2006; Bornmann and Daniel, 2008).

The number of different classes proposed varies
from 3 to 35. Different authors try to identify di-
mensions and mutually exclusive classes, but the
more classes a schema contains, the more difficult
becomes the automatic classification.

The focus of our paper is to combine automatic
classification approaches with a tool that supports
scientists in graphically navigating through typed ci-
tation graphs (TCG). Such TCGs can be generated

7



by augmenting a simple citation graph with informa-
tion synonymously called citation function (Teufel
et al., 2006), citation relation (Mercer and Di Marco,
2004) or citation sentiment, forming the labels of the
graph’s edges. In the following, we use the more
neutral and general term citation type.

The idea is to help scientists, especially those not
so familiar with an area, understanding the relations
between publications and quickly get an overview of
the field. Moreover, the goal is to embed this tool in
a larger framework for scientists that also supports
semantic search assisted by domain ontologies and
further tools for authoring support (Schäfer et al.,
2008).

Our paper is structured as follows. In Section 2,
we describe how we automatically compute the
typed citation graph from the raw text content of a
scientific paper corpus to generate realistic data for
testing the visualization and navigation tool. Sec-
tion 3 contains an evaluation of the quality of the
extracted unlabeled graphs and of the citation classi-
fication step. We then describe in Section 4 the ideas
of efficient and at the same time well-arranged visu-
alization and navigation in the typed citation graph.
We compare with related work in Section 5. Finally,
we conclude and give an outlook to future work in
Section 6.

2 Data Preparation and Automatic
Citation Type Classification

Our corpus is based on 6300 electronically-available
papers, a subset (published 2002-2008) of the ACL
Anthology (Bird et al., 2008), a comprehensive col-
lection of scientific conference and workshop papers
in the area of computational linguistics and language
technology.

The overall workflow of the employed tools and
data is shown in Fig. 1.

We ran the open source tool ParsCit (Councill et
al., 2008) to extract references lists and correspond-
ing citation sentences from raw paper texts. To build
the citation graph, we used the Levenshtein distance
(Levenshtein, 1966) to find and match titles and au-
thors of identical papers yet tolerating spelling and
PDF extraction errors.

To increase robustness, publication years were
not considered as they would hinder matches for

Figure 1: Workflow from ACL Anthology data (top)
to citation graph navigation applet and citation sentence
viewer (bottom)

delayed journal publications. Generation of the
graph edges, i.e. matching of papers and reference
strings, is performed by means of the ACL ID, a
unique identifier for each paper, available for the
PDF (source nodes of references) and BibTeX files
(targets of references).

We evaluated the generated graph against the one
that was corrected manually by the ACL Anthol-
ogy Network (AAN) group (Radev et al., 2009) and
found that 10821 citation links were shared between
both and can be considered correct1.

3883 additional ones were in the AAN but not rec-
ognized by us, the other way round, 1021 discovered
by us were not in the AAN. In addition, the publica-
tion bases were not identical. The anthology net-
work data ends in February 2007 but covers years
before 2002, while our data covers 2002-2008 in-
clusively. Given the fact that our graph is computed
fully automatically, the result can be considered very
good.

In the next step, we augmented the citation graph
by types for each edge. In contrast to other ap-
proaches, we currently only consider the citation
sentence itself to determine the citation type, neither
a wider context, its position nor the abstract, title or
content of the cited paper. A reference (from the
references section at the end of a paper) may be as-
sociated with several citation sentences mentioning
the paper referenced at the end.

1We only consider intra-network links here, not those point-
ing to books or other publications outside the corpus.

8



In only considering the citation sentence itself, we
may lose some citation type information, as it may
be (also) contained in follow-up sentences referring
to the citation using a pronoun (“they”, “their ap-
proach” etc.). Considering follow-up or even pre-
ceding sentences is planned to be addressed in future
work.

After consulting the rich literature on citation
classification (Bornmann and Daniel, 2008; Gar-
zone, 1996; Teufel et al., 2006), we derived a simpli-
fied classification schema consisting of the follow-
ing five classes.

• Agree: The citing paper agrees with the cited
paper

• PRecycle: The citing paper uses an algorithm,
data, method or tool from the cited paper

• Negative: The paper is cited nega-
tively/contrastively

• Neutral: The paper is cited neutrally

• Undef: impossible determine the sentiment of
the citation (fallback)

Then, we used a blend of methods to collect ver-
bal and non-verbal patterns (cue words) and asso-
ciated each with a class from the aforementioned
schema.

• A list from (Garzone, 1996) devised for
biomedical texts; it is largely applicable to the
computational linguistics domain as well.

• Simple negation of positive cue words to obtain
negative patterns.

• A list of automatically extracted synonyms and
antonyms (the latter for increasing number of
patterns for negative citations) from WordNet
(Miller et al., 1993).

• Automatically computed most frequent cooc-
currences from all extracted citation sentences
of the corpus using an open source cooccur-
rence tool (Banerjee and Pedersen, 2003).

• Inspection: browse and filter cue words manu-
ally, remove redundancies.

3 Results: Distribution and Evaluation

These pattern where then used for the classification
algorithm and applied to the extracted citation sen-
tences. In case of multiple citations with different
classes, a voting mechanism was applied were the
‘stronger’ classes (Agree, Negative, PRecycle) won
in standoff cases. For the total of 91419 citations we
obtained the results shown in Table 1.

Classes Citations Percent
Agree 3513 3.8%
Agree, Neutral 2020 2.2%
Negative 1147 1.2%
PRecycle 10609 11.6%
PRecycle, Agree 1419 1.6%
PRecycle, Agree, Neutral 922 1.0%
PRecycle, Neutral 3882 4.2%
Neutral 13430 14.7%
Undef 54837 60.0%

Table 1: Citation classification result

The numbers reflect a careful classification ap-
proach where uncertain citations are classified as
Undef. In case of multiple matches, the first (left-
most) was taken to achieve a unique result.

The results also confirm obervations made in
other works: (1) citation classification is a hard task,
(2) there are only a few strongly negative citations
which coincides with observations made by (Teufel
et al., 2006), (Pendlebury, 2009) and others, (3) the
majority of citations is neutral or of unknown type.

An evaluation on a test set of 100 citations spread
across all the types of papers with a manual check
of the accuracy of the computed labels showed an
overall accuracy of 30% mainly caused by the fact
that 90% of undefined hits were in fact neutral
(i.e., labeling all undefs neutral would increase ac-
curacy). Negative citations are sparse and unreliable
(33%), neutral ones are about 60% accurate, PRecy-
cle: 33%, Agree: 25%.

To sum up, our automatic classification approach
based on only local citation information could surely
be improved by applying methods described in the
literature, but it helped us to quickly (without an-
notation effort) generate a plausible data set for the
main task, visualization and navigation in the typed
citation graphs.

9



Figure 2: Typed citation graph navigator applet

4 Visualization Algorithm and Navigation
User Interface

The overall idea of the citation visualization and
navigation tool is simple and intuitive. Each paper is
represented by a node, all citations between papers
are drawn as edges between nodes where the color
of the edge indicates the computed (overall) citation
type, e.g. green for agree, red for negative, blue for
recycle and black for neutral or undefined.

To cope with flexible layouts and scalability of
the graph, we decided to use the open source tool
Java Universal Network/Graph Framework (JUNG,
http://jung.sourceforge.net). Its main advantages
over similar tools are that it supports user interaction
(clicking on nodes and edges, tool tips) and user-
implemented graph layout algorithms. A screenshot
of the final user interface is presented in Figure 2.

The decision for and development of the visual-
ization and navigation tool was mainly driven by the
fact that citation graphs quickly grow and become

unmanagable by humans when extended to the tran-
sitive closures of citing or cited papers of a given
publication. The sheer number of crossing edges
would make the display unreadable.

Figure 3: Focused paper in the center

The main design goal therefore was reducing the
number of nodes and edges where possible and (by
default) have only one paper in focus (Fig. 3), with

10



all cited papers on the left side (Fig. 4), and all citing
papers on the right (Fig. 5).

This also reflects a time line order where the ori-
gin (oldest papers) is on the left. In the graphical
user interface, the citation depth (default 1) is ad-
justable by a slider to higher numbers. The graph
display is updated upon change of the configured
depth.

Figure 4: Papers cited by the focused paper

At level 1, papers citing the citing papers (anal-
ogously for cited papers), are not fully drawn as
nodes, but only adumbrated by short ingoing or out-
going edges (arrows). However, the color of these
short edges still signifies the citation type and may
attract interest which can easily be satisfied by click-
ing on the edge’s remaining node (cf. screenshot in
Figure 2). When the mouse is moved over a node,
a tooltip text display pops up displaying full author
list and paper title.

Figure 5: Papers citing the focused paper

To avoid crossing edges caused by citations at
the same level (citing or cited papers also cite

each other), we devised a fan-out layout generation
(Fig. 6). It increases the width of the displayed
graph, but leads to better readability. Fan-out lay-
out can also be switched off in the user interface.

Figure 6: Fan-out layout: avoid crossing edges caused by
citations on the same level

In addition, the graph layout algorithm orders pa-
pers chronologically in the vertical direction. Here,
we have implemented another technique that helps
to avoid crossing edges. As shown in Fig. 7, we
sort papers vertically by also taking into account the
position of its predecessor, the cited paper. It often
leads to less crossing edges.

Figure 7: Order: avoid crossing edges by ordering
chronologically (strict, simple variant on the left for com-
parison), taking into account the position of the cited pa-
per on the previous level (right)

11



By double-clicking on any node representing a
paper (cited or citing), this node can be made the
new center and the graph is re-arranged accordingly.

Zooming in and out is possible via mouse wheel
or shortcut buttons (‘overview’, ‘center’).

Using the right mouse button context menu on a
node, it is possible to open a details page for the
selected paper with bibliographic metadata and all
citations and types. All references in the document
with their citation sentences identified are displayed
in a structured list.

The citation context around a citation sentence
is shown as well, while the citation sentence itself
is colored according to the citation type color and
clickable. If clicked, the original PDF document
opens with the citation sentence highlighted (Fig. 8;
currently only possible in Acrobat Reader).

By clicking on an edge instead of a node, only the
citations between the two papers at both ends are
displayed, in the same way as described above for
all citations of a document.

5 Related Work

Our paper touches and combines results of three
disciplines, (1) bibliometrics, (2) computational lin-
guistics, and (3) information visualization. We
briefly discuss related and mostly recent literature,
being aware of the fact that this list is necessarily
incomplete.

(Garfield, 1965) is probably the first to discuss
an automatic computation of citation types. He is
also the founder of citation indexing and the Insti-
tute of Scientific Information (ISI). His first publica-
tion on science citation indexing appeared in 1955
(Garfield, 1955) and he remained the probably most
influential scientist in this field for decades. (Born-
mann and Daniel, 2008) is a comprehensive recent
metastudy on citing behavior.

Investigating citation classification has a long tra-
dition in bibliometrics and information science and
in the last 20 years also attracted computational
linguistics researchers trying to automate the task
based on rhetorics of science, statistical methods and
sentence parsing.

There is much more work than we can cite here
on citation function computation worth combination
with our approach (Bornmann and Daniel, 2008;

Garzone, 1996; Teufel et al., 2006) – using our tool
one can easily browse to further publications!

There is little work on innovative layout tech-
niques for displaying and navigating citation graphs.
We found three independent approaches to citation
graph visualization: CiteViz (Elmqvist and Tsigas,
2004), CircleView (Bergström and Jr., 2006), and
(Nguyen et al., 2007). They share a disadvantageous
property in that they try to visualize too much infor-
mation at the same time. In our opinion, this con-
tradicts the need to navigate and keep control over
displayable parts of large paper collections.

Moreover, these approaches do not provide infor-
mation on citation types derived from text as our
system does. Further ideas on visualizing science-
related information such as author co-citation net-
works are also discussed and summarized in (Chen,
2006).

6 Summary and Outlook

We have presented an innovative tool to support sci-
entific authors in browsing graphically through large
collections of publications by means of typed cita-
tion graphs. To quickly generate a realistic data set,
we devised a classification approach avoiding man-
ual annotation and intervention.

Our classification results cannot compete with ap-
proaches such as (Teufel et al., 2006) based on con-
siderable manual annotation for machine learning.
However, we think that our application could be
combined with this or other approaches described
for classifying citations between scientific papers.

We envisage to integrate the navigation tool in
a larger framework supporting scientific authoring
(Schäfer et al., 2008). When publishing a service of
this kind on the Web, one would be faced with ethi-
cal issues such as the problem that authors could feel
offended by wrongly classified citations.

The reason is that citation type classification is
potentially even more subjective than a bare citation
index—which itself is already highly controversal,
as discussed in the introduction. Moreover, there is
not always a single, unique citation type, but often
vagueness and room for interpretation.

Therefore, we suggest to augment such a service
by a Web 2.0 application that would allow regis-
tered users to confirm, alter and annotate precom-

12



Figure 8: Citation sentence viewer; citation sentence in context on the left, highlighted in PDF on the right when
selected on the left

puted citation classifications. In this community ap-
plication, all citation links in the automatically gen-
erated graph could be represented by dashed arrows
initially, and users could turn them solid by confirm-
ing or correcting the citation type and also adding a
comment text.

Line thickness could be increased (up to an appro-
priate maximum) each time another user confirms a
classified citation type. The results could then also
be employed for active learning and help to improve
the automatic classification procedure.

Acknowledgments

First of all, we are indebted to the anonymous re-
viewers for their useful, encouraging and detailed
comments. Many thanks also to Donia Scott for her
feedback on an earlier version of the tool and helpful
comments on terminology. We would like to thank
Madeline Maher and Boris Fersing for generating
and evaluating the citation type data on a subcorpus
of the ACL Anthology.

The work described in this paper has been carried
out in the context of the project TAKE (Technolo-

gies for Advanced Knowledge Extraction), funded
under contract 01IW08003 by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research.

References

Satanjeev Banerjee and Ted Pedersen. 2003. The de-
sign, implementation, and use of the ngram statistics
package. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 370–381, Mexico City.

Peter Bergström and E. James Whitehead Jr. 2006. Cir-
cleView: Scalable visualization and navigation of cita-
tion networks. In Proceedings of the 2006 Symposium
on Interactive Visual Information Collections and Ac-
tivity IVICA, College Station, Texas.

Steven Bird, Robert Dale, Bonnie Dorr, Bryan Gibson,
Mark Joseph, Min-Yen Kan, Dongwon Lee, Brett
Powley, Dragomir Radev, and Yee Fan Tan. 2008. The
ACL anthology reference corpus: A reference dataset
for bibliographic research. In Proceedings of the Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-
2008), Marrakesh, Morocco.

Lutz Bornmann and Hans-Dieter Daniel. 2008. What
do citation counts measure? A review of studies on

13



citing behavior. Journal of Documentation, 64(1):45–
80. DOI 10.1108/00220410810844150.

Chaomei Chen. 2006. Information Visualization: Be-
yond the Horizon. Springer. 2nd Edition, Chapter 5.

Isaac G. Councill, C. Lee Giles, and Min-Yen Kan. 2008.
ParsCit: An open-source CRF reference string parsing
package. In Proceedings of the Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2008), Marrakesh,
Morocco.

Niklas Elmqvist and Philippas Tsigas. 2004. CiteWiz:
A tool for the visualization of scientific citation net-
works. Technical Report CS:2004-05, Department of
Computing Science, Chalmers University of Technol-
ogy and Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.

Eugene Garfield. 1955. Citation indexes for science: A
new dimension in documentation through association
of ideas. Science, 123:108–111.

Eugene Garfield. 1965. Can citation indexing be auto-
mated? In Mary Elizabeth Stevens, Vincent E. Giu-
liano, and Laurence B. Heilprin, editors, Statistical
Association Methods for Mechanical Documentation.
National Bureau of Standards, Washington, DC. NBS
Misc. Pub. 269.

Mark Garzone. 1996. Automated classification of ci-
tations using linguistic semantic grammars. Master’s
thesis, Dept. of Computer Science, The University of
Western Ontario, Canada.

Vladimir I. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of
correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. Soviet
Physics Doklady, 10(8):707–710.

Robert. E Mercer and Chrysanne Di Marco. 2004. A
design methodology for a biomedical literature index-
ing tool using the rhetoric of science. In Lynette
Hirschman and James Pustejovsky, editors, HLT-
NAACL 2004 Workshop: BioLINK 2004, Linking Bi-
ological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pages
77–84, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. Miller. 1993.
Five papers on WordNet. Technical report, Cognitive
Science Laboratory, Princeton University.

Quang Vinh Nguyen, Mao Lin Huang, and Simeon
Simoff. 2007. Visualization of relational structure
among scientific articles. Advances in Visual Informa-
tion Systems, pages 415–425. Springer LNCS 4781,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-540-76414-4 40.

David A. Pendlebury. 2009. The use and misuse of jour-
nal metrics and other citation indicators. Archivum Im-
munologiae et Therapiae Experimentalis, 57(1):1–11.
DOI 10.1007/s00005-009-0008-y.

Dragomir R. Radev, Pradeep Muthukrishnan, and Vahed
Qazvinian. 2009. The ACL anthology network cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Nat-

ural Language Processing and Information Retrieval
for Digital Libraries, Singapore.

Ulrich Schäfer, Hans Uszkoreit, Christian Federmann,
Torsten Marek, and Yajing Zhang. 2008. Extract-
ing and querying relations in scientific papers. In
Proceedings of the 31st Annual German Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, KI 2008, pages 127–134,
Kaiserslautern, Germany. Springer LNAI 5243. DOI
10.1007/978-3-540-85845-4 16.

Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Dan Tidhar.
2006. Automatic classification of citation function.
In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 103–
110, Sydney, Australia.

14


