










































NewsViz: Emotional Visualization of News Stories


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text, pages 125–130,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

NewsViz:
Emotional Visualization of News Stories

Eva Hanser, Paul Mc Kevitt, Tom Lunney and Joan Condell
School of Computing & Intelligent Systems

Faculty of Computing & Engineering
University of Ulster, Magee

Derry/Londonderry, BT48 7JL
Northern Ireland

hanser-e@email.ulster.ac.uk,
{p.mckevitt, tf.lunney, j.condell}@ulster.ac.uk

Abstract

The NewsViz system aims to enhance news
reading experiences by integrating 30 seconds
long Flash-animations into news article web
pages depicting their content and emotional
aspects. NewsViz interprets football match
news texts automatically and creates abstract
2D visualizations. The user interface en-
ables animators to further refine the anima-
tions. Here, we focus on the emotion extrac-
tion component of NewsViz which facilitates
subtle background visualization. NewsViz de-
tects moods from news reports. The origi-
nal text is part-of-speech tagged and adjec-
tives and/or nouns, the word types convey-
ing most emotional meaning, are filtered out
and labeled with an emotion and intensity
value. Subsequently reoccurring emotions are
joined into longer lasting moods and matched
with appropriate animation presets. Differ-
ent linguistic analysis methods were tested on
NewsViz: word-by-word, sentence-based and
minimum threshold summarization, to find a
minimum number of occurrences of an emo-
tion in forming a valid mood. NewsViz proved
to be viable for the fixed domain of football
news, grasping the overall moods and some
more detailed emotions precisely. NewsViz
offers an efficient technique to cater for the
production of a large number of daily updated
news stories. NewsViz bypasses the lack of
information for background or environment
depiction encountered in similar applications.
Further development may refine the detection
of emotion shifts through summarization with
the full implementation of football and com-
mon linguistic knowledge.

1 Introduction

News reports are regarded as objective facts, com-
monly delivered in an objective, unbiased manner
and represented in a neutral and formal format: typ-
ically a static headline, a summarizing paragraph
with one image and eventually the body text with
one to three more images. Even though reporters
find the content of news stories worth mentioning for
emotional reasons and the content often affects read-
ers emotionally, story brevity, scarce background in-
formation and poor combination of visual and verbal
information hinders learning and feeling by view-
ers. In order to reach the audience emotionally, to
educate and to entertain, emphasis on visual ele-
ments is important as they tend to be more memo-
rable than verbal ones. The emphasis of NewsViz
lies on expression, impacting on the reader’s under-
standing of the article and making it more memo-
rable. The software prototype, NewsViz, automat-
ically creates animations from news articles. Ab-
stract design elements show emotions conveyed in
the stories. The main objective of NewViz remains
information provision and thus our focus is emotion
extraction which is universally applicable and with-
out opinion bias. NewsViz is an efficient software
tool for designers to be able to build daily updated
animations. Input for NewsViz is natural language
text. Multimodal systems automatically mapping
text to visuals face challenges in interpreting human
language which is variable, ambiguous, imprecise
and relies on the communicative partners possess-
ing common knowledge. Enabling a machine to un-
derstand a natural language text involves feeding the

125



machine with grammatical structures, e.g. part-of-
speech, semantic relations, e.g. emotion value and
intensity, and visual descriptions, e.g. colors and
motion direction, to match suitable graphics.

2 Background and Related Research

Text-to-visual mapping relates to the areas of natu-
ral language processing (NLP) and multimodal sto-
rytelling which attempt to enable computers to in-
terpret and generate natural human language and
mental images. Text-to-visual mapping starts with
linguistic analysis of the text. Despite variability,
ambiguity and imprecision, syntactic analysis tools
achieve mostly reliable results, such as trainable
part-of-speech tagger software tools which identify
parts of speech with 97% accuracy. For example,
Qtag (Mason, 2003) attaches a tag to each word la-
beling it as noun, verb, adjective or other.

Semantic interpretation and actual understanding
of the meaning of a text is more difficult, because it
depends largely on commonsense knowledge. Com-
monsense knowledge and mental images need to be
structured, related through logical rules and entered
into databases before computational text interpreta-
tion is possible. WordNet (Miller, 1995) determines
semantic relations between words and is an extended
dictionary specifying word relations such as simi-
larity, part-of relations, hierarchy or manner. Story
segmentation is performed by e.g. SeLeCT (Stokes,
2003), an example application based on semantic
analysis to find story or subtopic changes within a
text. Groups of semantically related words called
cohesive ‘lexical chains’ are extracted from a text.
They are determined through WordNet’s seman-
tic relations and additionally through statistically
acquired co-occurrences (e.g. Diego Maradonna,
Hand of God). Their starting and end points indi-
cate topical unit boundaries.

Sensing emotions from multimodal input has
mainly been investigated with the objective of de-
veloping human-like agents. The football commen-
tary system, Byrne (Binsted and Luke, 1999), in-
cludes a commentator with emotions influenced by
his personality and intentions. SOCCER (Retz-
Schmidt, 1988) analyses football scenes visually in
order to simultaneously add linguistic descriptions
of the events. SOBA (Buitelaar et al., 2006) ex-

tracts information from soccer match reports, an-
notates relevant expressions (e.g. players, teams,
goals.) and generates knowledge base entities. The
collected football knowledge can set preconditions
and context to consequently evaluate current events
and assign appropriate emotions. The MoodNews
website (Mitchell, 2005) demonstrates a very sim-
ple linguistic method to distinguish positive, neg-
ative and neutral content in BBC news headlines.
It effectively ranks them on a color scale between
good to bad. The three kinds of emotions are ap-
pointed through keyword scoring based on a small
vocabulary of 160 words and phrases. The Emo-
tion Sensitive News Agent (ESNA) (Shaikh et al.,
2007) chategorizes news stories from different RSS
sources into eight emotion categories according to
their emotional content, determined through a cog-
nitive evaluation and user preferences.

Automated story visualization systems deliver
initial results for object and action depiction, as in
WordsEye (Coyne and Sproat, 2001), creating static
3D images from written descriptions. Additionally,
automated camera and character animation, inter-
action and speech synthesis is realized in CONFU-
CIUS (Ma, 2006). ScriptViz (Liu and Leung, 2006)
renders 3D scenes from NL screenplays immedi-
ately during the writing process, extracting verbs
and adverbs to interpret events and states in sen-
tences. The Unseen Video (Scheibel and Wein-
rother, 2005), is a good example of abstract mood
visualization. Local weather data is automatically
retrieved from news websites and influences the look
and feel of the Flash animation through shapes, col-
ors and images. The Story Picturing Engine (Joshi
et al., 2004) visualizes texts selecting and matching
pictures and their annotations from image databases.

The work discussed here demonstrates that suffi-
cient subsets of the English language can be mapped
to computer understandable language for the visual-
ization of stories.

3 The NewsViz System

NewsViz takes online news articles as input and out-
puts animations reflecting the content of these news
stories. NewViz consists of three main components:
the linguistic analysis, the animation composer and
an interface for editing text and animations (Figure

126



Figure 1: NewsViz System Architecture.

1). The linguistic component constructs three ele-
ments of the animation in different processes. The
emotion extraction tool creates atmospheric back-
ground visuals, the action visualizer depicts people,
objects and their actions and the audio creator se-
lects music and sound effects. The composer syn-
chronizes the different outputs. Here, we focus on
the emotion extraction component (Figure 2) devel-
oped in Flash MX and Photoshop. Emotional as-
pects within the news story are identified and linked
to appropriate presets of background animations.

3.1 Emotion Extraction

The first step in processing the text is to tag parts
of speech for all words. The part-of-speech tagger,
Qtag (Mason, 2003), attaches tags to nouns, verbs,
adjectives and other parts of speech. The tagged text
is sent on to the adjective and noun detector. These

Figure 2: Emotion Extraction Component.

two types of words are selected for further process-
ing because they are most central to conveying emo-
tional meaning and sufficient for the visualisation of
the emotional content. Nouns and adjectives are the
parts of speech which represent the highest num-
ber of affective words as found in WordNet-Affect
(Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004). Verbs and adverbs
will be addressed in future work to increase sensi-
tivity and precision, but their impact on the resulting
animations may not be as significant. Next, the emo-
tion word selector checks the adjectives and nouns
in the emotion dictionary and attaches emotion tags
indicating their kind of emotion and intensity. The
dictionary holds manually created emotion-indices
and default intensity values of all affective words.

Figure 3: Animations for Sadness (blue), Boredom (green), Tension (red) and Happiness (yellow).

127



Four emotions have been found relevant in relation
to football matches - happiness, sadness, tension and
boredom. Words with a neutral emotion index do
not describe football relevant emotions. To achieve
a coherent course of emotion and animation, neutral
phrases are replaced by the previous mood with de-
creasing intensity. The list of emotion tagged words
is handed to the emotion summarizer. During the
summarization process subsequent emotions of the
same type are combined to form one longer-lasting
mood. Each mood is labeled with its type, average
intensity and display duration. With the ‘word-by-
word’ summarization method mood boundaries ap-
pear as soon as the emotion type of the next word
differs. In order to reduce error and excessive mood
swings, the minimum threshold method sets a mini-
mum number of words required to represent a mood.
Alternatively, the sentence-based method assumes
that one sentence conveys one idea and consequently
one emotion. Hence, it calculates an average emo-
tion for each sentence, before combining identical
emotions. A chronological list of mood chunks is
created.

3.2 Animation Construction

The animation selection component loads the in-
dividual animation elements from the graphics
database and combines them in a 30 seconds long
animation. The graphics database contains prefab-
ricated graphics sorted by an emotion index which
are combined and adjusted according to mood in-
tensities. Based on the weighted mood list, the emo-
tion sequence order, the type of graphic element, its
display duration, and the background color are de-
termined. The intensity value specifies the element
size and the number of objects loaded. An emo-
tion change causes the current animation elements
to fade out and to load different elements. Anima-
tion examples are shown in Figure 3.

3.3 User Interface

NewsViz provides users with options to load or type
news stories into the text editor. The options menu
offers different emotion extraction and mood sum-
marization methods. By pressing the ‘run’ button
the visualization can be watched in the preview win-
dow. The text processing runs ‘on the fly’ in the
background. If the user is satisfied they can save

the animation. If the user prefers to alter the anima-
tion manually, they have the option to edit the orig-
inal text or the animation elements frame by frame.
Figure 4 shows the user interface with animation
player. The final animations are integrated at the top
of the news article’s internet page (Figure 5).

Figure 4: NewsViz User Interface.

Figure 5: Animation Integrated into Website.

4 Evaluation and Testing

NewsViz was tested on a set of four news articles
related to the same news domain - football match
reports. The articles were taken from BBC and
FIFA online describing the same two World Cup
2006 matches. The three different emotion extrac-
tion methods, word-by-word, sentence-based and

128



Figure 6: Results Analysis of all Test Texts.

threshold were run on these news stories with vary-
ing word types or word type combinations. The out-
put of NewsViz is evaluated against two forms of
human interpretation of the articles. A short man-
ual description outlines the general course of emo-
tion of a match as reported in each article naming
three to five emotions. A second more fine grained
interpretation assigns one (or two) emotions to each
sentence. In correspondence to Beeferman’s proba-
bilistic error metric (Beeferman et al., 1999) three
types of emotion extraction error are distinguished.
Falsely detected emotions are rated with zero points.
Missing emotions were assessed depending on their
significance in the text. If the overall feeling of the
match was represented, two to three points would
be given, but if the main emotions were missing, no
points were assigned. Very close, but not exact emo-
tions, got a value of four. A correct representation
of the course of emotion received five points. The
grain counts the number of the extracted emotions
per text. The results for correctness of emotional
findings and amount of emotions detected (grain)
of each method run on each part-of-speech or word
type combination are presented in Figure 6.

The results analysis shows that the effectiveness
of adjectives or nouns varies from text to text, but
generally the best results are achieved with the ex-
traction of both kinds of words. On average the
word-by-word method produces emotion sequences
with the closest correctness, but unfortunately its
output is too fine grained for visualization. Thirty
second long animations are best visualized with two
to ten mood swings. This means that some form
of summarization is needed. Combining emotions
of logically structured chunks of text, namely sen-

tences, in the sentence-based summarization method
achieved better results than the minimum subse-
quent occurrence of two or three emotions with
the threshold method. The sentence-based sum-
marizaion as well as the threshold method with a
minimum value of 3 produce the most appropriate
grain/number of emotions. Some misinterpretation
is due to false part-of-speech tagging by Qtag which
has particular trouble with proper nouns. More accu-
racy can be achieved through training Qtag on foot-
ball reports. Overall the results for NewsViz are sat-
isfactory and it demonstrates that it is possible to ex-
tract emotions from news texts. The generally differ-
ent sensations of the two described football matches
are distinguishable. Three of the four test texts show
good results, but for one article the extracted emo-
tions do not seem to match the human sensation.

5 Relation to Other Work

NewsViz uses natural human language as input to
create animated output. NewsViz aims to solely re-
flect emotions as they are mentioned in the news ar-
ticle to keep the objective and formal character of
news reporting. Therefore, NewsViz applies a re-
duced, universal and ’personality-free’ version of
existing concepts for emotion and mood construc-
tion. Instead of facial expressions and gestures
NewsViz combines and illustrates emotions with de-
sign principles. NewsViz offers manual reediting of
the automatically created animations.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

NewsViz extracts emotion-bearing words from on-
line football news reports based on an extended dic-
tionary with emotion-indices assigned to each en-

129



try. The extracted emotions are processed and illus-
trated in abstract background animations. Results
from initial testing demonstrate that this automated
process has satisfactory performance. Technolog-
ically, NewsViz is viable for the fixed domain of
football reports and offers a sound basis for more
affective text-to-visual mapping. Future work will
aim to improve the linguistic and semantic process-
ing of emotions. This involves the extension of the
parts of speech selection to include verbs and ad-
verbs, assuming that more input data will lead to bet-
ter results. Rules for common and linguistic knowl-
edge will be integrated. Linguistic knowledge iden-
tifies emotions in context applying language rules
to emotion interpretation, i.e. it solves negation by
inverting emotions. With the integration of a de-
pendency parser, which relates words according to
their sentence structure, emotions of related words
can be found and their average emotion determined.
Domain-specific knowledge (e.g. football) provides
background information including match statistics,
players’ and teams’ names, team colors and league
tables. It also accommodates game rules or match
situations with their emotional consequences. The
mood list is refined through moods discovered with
commonsense knowledge and football facts which
set pre-conditions and context representing long-
term moods influencing current event-based emo-
tions. Future work will reveal whether NewsViz is
feasible when extended to different domains. The
emotion database could be extended through the
WordNet-Affect dictionary (Strapparava and Vali-
tutti, 2004). NewsViz enriches standard news web-
sites with attractive and informative animations and
can track emotional aspects of people’s views on
world events. NewsViz brings news reported on
the internet closer to readers, making it more eas-
ily understood and memorized which is much appre-
ciated by online users overloaded with information.
NewsViz assists animation designers in the produc-
tion of daily updated visualizations creating initial
scenes.

References

D. Beeferman, A. Berger and J. Lafferty. 1999. Statisti-
cal models for text segmentation. Machine Learning,
34:177–210. Springer Netherlands.

K. Binsted and S. Luke. 1999. Character Design for Soc-
cer Commentary. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
RoboCup-98: Robot Soccer World Cup II, 1604:22–
33. Springer-Verlag, London, UK.

P. Buitelaar, T. Eigner, G. Gulrajani, A. Schutz, M.
Siegel, N. Weber, P. Cimiano, G. Ladwig, M. Mantel,
H. Zhu. 2006. Generating and Visualizing a Soccer
Knowledge Base. Proceedings of the EACL06 Demo
Session, 4/2006:123–126.

B. Coyne and R. Sproat. 2001. WordsEye: an auto-
matic text-to-scene conversion system. Proceedings
of the 28th Annual Conference on Computer Graph-
ics and Interactive Techniques, 487–496. ACM Press,
Los Angeles, USA.

D. Joshi, J. Z. Wang and J. Li. 2004. The Story Pictur-
ing Engine: Finding Elite Images to Illustrate a Story
Using Mutual Reinforcement. Proceedings of the 6th
ACM SIGMM International Workshop on Multimedia
Information Retrieval, 119–126. ACM Press, New
York, USA.

Z. Liu and K. Leung. 2006. Script visualiza-
tion (ScriptViz): a smart system that makes writ-
ing fun. Soft Computing, 10(1), 34–40. Springer
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany.

Minhua Ma. 2006. Automatic Conversion of Natural
Language to 3D Animation. Ph.D. Thesis. School
of Computing and Intelligent Systems, University of
Ulster, UK.

O. Mason. 2003. Qtag. http://phrasys.net/
uob/om/software.

G. A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: a lexical database for
English. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–41.

Davy Mitchell. 2005. MoodNews. http://www.
latedecember.com/sites/moodnews.

G. Retz-Schmidt. 1988. A REPLAI of SOCCER Recog-
nizing intensions in the domain of soccer games. Proc.
European Conf. AI (ECAI-88), 8:455-457.

Daniel Scheibel and Ferdinand Weinrother.
2005. The Unseen Video. http://www.
theunseenvideo.com.

Mostafa Al Masum Shaikh, Helmut Prendinger and Mit-
suru Ishizuka. 2007. Emotion Sensitive News Agent:
An Approarch Towards User Centric Emotion Sensing
from the News. Proceedings 2007 IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI07),
614–620. Silicon Valley, USA.

N. Stokes. 2003. Spoken and Written News Story Seg-
mentation Using Lexical Chains. Proceedings of HTL-
NAACL 2003, 49–54. Edmonton, Canada.

C. Strapparava and A. Valitutti. 2004. WordNet-Affect:
an Affective Extension of WordNet. Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), 1083–1086.

130


