










































Proposal for MWE Annotation in Running Text


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 152–156,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Proposal for Multi-Word Expression Annotation in Running Text

Iris Hendrickx, Amália Mendes and Sandra Antunes
Centro de Linguı́stica da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal

{iris, amalia.mendes, sandra.antunes}@clul.ul.pt

Abstract
We present a proposal for the annotation
of multi-word expressions in a 1M corpus
of contemporary portuguese. Our aim is
to create a resource that allows us to study
multi-word expressions (MWEs) in their
context. The corpus will be a valuable ad-
ditional resource next to the already ex-
isting MWE lexicon that was based on a
much larger corpus of 50M words. In this
paper we discuss the problematic cases for
annotation and proposed solutions, focus-
ing on the variational properties of MWEs.

1 Introduction

Given the widespread studies of co-occurring
words phenomenon, the term ‘multi-word expres-
sion’ (MWE) usually refers to a sequence of words
that act as a single unit, embracing all different
types of word combinations. Their study is of
extreme importance for computational linguistics,
where applications find notorious difficulties when
dealing with them (Sag et al., 2002).

Having a well-balanced corpus annotated with
multi-word expressions offers the possibility to
analyze the behavior of MWEs as they appear in
running text. Such corpus will contain a rich and
diversified set of MWE and also be an excellent
resource to evaluate automatic MWE identifica-
tion systems. Here we propose our approach to
the manual annotation of the CINTIL corpus (Bar-
reto et al., 2006) with MWE information. This
Portuguese corpus of 1M tokens is a balanced cor-
pus of both spoken and written data from different
sources and has been previously annotated with
linguistic information such as part-of-speech and
lemma and inflection.

As the starting point for our annotation project,
we want to use a Portuguese MWE lexicon con-
taining approximately 14,000 entries. The lexi-
con contains besides idiomatic expressions, also

many collocations: expressions of frequently co-
occurring words that do not show syntactic or se-
mantic fixedness. We are mostly interested in the
idiomatic expressions and will only mark up these
in the corpus.

2 Related Work

There is already quite some work about the cre-
ation and representation of MWE lexicons (Bald-
win and Kim, 2010). Most of the currently avail-
able corpora annotated with MWE information
consist of a collection of extracted sentences con-
taining a MWE (for example the data sets in the
MWE 2008 shared task1). Fellbaum et al. (2006)
report on a larger German example corpus consist-
ing of MWEs with their surrounding sentences.
There are also data sets specifically designed for
automatic MWE identification, in which part of
the sentences contains an idiomatic expression and
the other part expresses a literal meaning (e.g.
(Sporleder and Li, 2009)). An example of a bal-
anced corpus fully annotated with MWEs is the
Prague Treebank which is enriched with a diverse
set of MWE annotations (Böhmová et al., 2005).

3 MWE Lexicon

Our annotation proposal uses information from
a lexicon of MWE for Portuguese (available on-
line2). This lexicon is implemented on a MySQL
relational database. The MWEs were extracted
from a 50M words balanced corpus of Portuguese.
The MWE are organized under canonical forms.
Also inflectional variations of the canonical forms
are recorded, in total the lexicon contains 14,153
canonical forms and 48,154 MWEs variations. For
each of those several examples are collected from
the corpus. Each MWE entry is also assigned

1More infomation at: http://multiword.sourceforge.net/
2MWE lexicon: http://www.clul.ul.pt/sectores/linguistica

de corpus/manual combinatorias online.php

152



to one or multiple word lemmas, of a total num-
ber of 1180 single word lemmas. The MWE
were selected from a sorted list of n-grams based
on the mutual information measure (Church and
Hanks, 1990) and validated manually (Mendes et
al., 2006; Antunes et al., 2006; Bacelar do Nasci-
mento et al., 2006).

4 Proposed annotation

In this section we discuss our approach to the an-
notation of MWEs in the corpus.

4.1 Typology
We want to classify each idiomatic MWE occur-
ring in the CINTIL corpus according to a typol-
ogy that expresses the typical properties of the
MWE. Although the lexicon of MWEs covers a
wide range of units, from idiomatic expressions
to collocations, we decided to restrict our anno-
tation of the corpus to cases of idiomatic MWEs
because those are the problematic ones for any
task of semantic annotation and disambiguation.
The MWE lexicon does not provide labels for id-
iomatic vs. compositional expressions, so this in-
formation will have to be added during the anno-
tation task. Identifying idiomatic MWEs is not a
simple task. For clear cases of idiomatic units, the
global meaning can not be recovered by the sum of
the individual meanings of the elements that com-
pose the expression.

In other cases, only part of the MWE has an id-
iomatic meaning, while one or more of the ele-
ments are used in their literal meaning (e.g saúde
de ferro ‘iron health’). Deciding if one of the ele-
ments of the MWE is literal or not depends in fact
of our definition of literal: if we consider it to be
the first prototypical meaning of a word, this very
restrictive definition will trigger us to label a large
number of MWEs as idiomatic. Other MWEs are
compositional but receive an additional meaning,
like cartão vermelho in football, which is literally
a red card but has an additional meaning of pun-
ishment.

We want to cover these different cases in our an-
notation, and to establish a typology that takes into
account morpho-syntactic and semantic aspects of
the MWE: its functional part-of-speech (PoS) cat-
egory, the PoS categories of its internal elements,
its fixed or semi-fixed nature, its global or partial
idiomatic property and motivation, and possible
additional meanings.

4.2 Division by syntactic category
When studying the MWE lexicon, we noticed dif-
ferent properties of MWEs according to their syn-
tactic patterns. Consequently, we propose to di-
vide our annotation guidelines according to each
syntactic pattern and to establish different proper-
ties that enables us to distinguish literal from id-
iomatic usage. At the sentence level, MWEs such
as proverbs or aphorisms (e.g. água mole em pe-
dra dura tanto bate até que fura lit. ‘water in hard
rock beats so long that it finally breaks’) have spe-
cific properties: they do not accept any possible
syntactic changes like passivization or relativiza-
tion, they do not accept any inflectional variation,
the only possible change is lexical (when speakers
substitute one or more elements, like we will dis-
cuss in section 4.4). However fixed, the meaning
of this example is clearly motivated and composi-
tional in the sense that it is recovered by the mean-
ing of the individual elements. On the contrary,
MWEs which are verb phrases will admit much
more morpho-syntactic variation. Moreover, noun
phrases raise specific issues: the most syntacti-
cally fixed units will be very close or identical to
compound nouns. For example, the meaning of
the prepositional modifier of the noun can be lit-
eral but the overall expression will still be used as
a compound and will denote a very specific entity,
frequently from domain-specific languages (pro-
jecto de lei ‘project of legislation’, contrato de
compra e venda ‘sell contract’). Moreover, the
prepositional and adjectival modifiers of the noun
will express many different semantic relationships
(part of, made of, used for) which interact with the
meaning (literal or idiomatic) of the noun (Calzo-
lari et al., 2002). Establishing specific guidelines
for these different types of MWEs will enable a
more accurate annotation. To decide upon the dif-
ficult cases of idiomatic and non-idiomatic usage,
we plan to use the intuitions of different annota-
tors.

4.3 Linking to MWE lexicon
We will annotate each encountered MWE in the
corpus with a link to the MWE-entry in the lexi-
con, instead of labelling each MWE with its typol-
ogy. This way we link each MWE to its canonical
form and other additional information. Moreover,
we can easily gather all occurrences of one par-
ticular canonical MWE and check its variation in
the corpus. It will also allow us to work with a

153



more detailed typology and will give us the possi-
bility to revise it during the annotation process. It
might be difficult to establish beforehand very pre-
cise guidelines that will apply to all the MWEs and
even to all the MWEs of a specific subtype. Of-
ten, guidelines are constantly in need of revision as
we encounter slightly different contexts who chal-
lenges decisions previously taken.
The corpus annotation will enable us to extend
the information in the MWE lexicon with typol-
ogy labels regarding the whole expression (func-
tion, idiomatic meaning) but also regarding indi-
vidual words of the expression as to whether they
are obligatory or not.

We plan to add a meaning to idiomatic expres-
sions using a dictionary. We expect that MWEs
will be unambiguous: they have the same meaning
each time they are used. In some cases, the syn-
onym or paraphrase proposed for the MWE might
not be able to replace the MWE in the corpus
context. For example, the MWE às mãos cheias
means em grande quantidade ‘in large quantity’,
but this meaning can not always replace the MWE
in context.

The annotation process of fully fixed expres-
sions could be retrieved automatically. For the
variable expressions we will combine automatic
retrieval with manual validation, Here the auto-
matic retrieval step will aim for a high recall and
select all sentences that contain the lemmas of
the MWE. Without doubt our corpus will contain
many MWEs that are not yet listed in the MWE
lexicon. Therefore each sentence will need to be
checked manually for MWEs. We can create the
links between the lexicon and MWEs in the cor-
pus automatically, but again, as not all MWEs will
occur in the lexicon, we will need to do a manual
validation of the automatic labelling and also add
newly discovered MWEs to the lexicon.

4.4 MWE Variation
Corpus analysis clearly shows that MWEs have
different types of internal variation. Following
Moon (1998), we will also assume that, in most of
the cases, these expressions “have fixed or canon-
ical forms and that variations are to some extent
derivative or deviant”. The canonical forms of
(variable) expressions are listed in the MWE lex-
icon. Mapping MWE occurrences in the corpus
to their canonical form can be a hard task depend-
ing on the flexibility of the MWE. In the next part

we discuss our proposal how to handle the anno-
tation of several types of variation in MWEs: lex-
ical, syntactic and structural variation, lexical in-
sertions and truncation of MWEs.

4.4.1 Lexical diversity
MWEs have a wide range of lexical variation and
it can apply to any type of grammatical category,
although we do notice that verb variation is the
commonest type. Studying the lexicon showed
us that there is a group of cases in which a word
in a MWE can only be replaced by another word
from a very limited set (usually not larger than 10
words) of synonyms or antonyms. For these cases
this set is already recorded in the MWE lexicon.
We mark these variable words as: ‘obligatory parts
of the MWE and member of a specified list’. In 1
we show an example: the canonical form followed
by a sentence containing this MWE and the En-
glish translations.

Many MWEs also contain parts that are almost
lexically free or only restricted to a semantic class
such as person or named entity. These elements
are represented in the MWE lexicon with a pro-
noun (e.g. alguém, algum (‘someone’, ‘some-
thing’)) or the tag NOUN (with possible gen-
der/number restrictions) when a pronoun cannot
substitute the free part. When marking up these
elements in the corpus, we will label them with
a reference to the pronoun used in the canonical
form (example 2).

(1) dizer/ sair da boca para fora
(to say / to get out from the mouth outside)
Arrependeu-se com o que lhe saiu da boca
para fora
‘She regretted her slip of the tongue’

(2) estar nas mãos de ALGUÉM
A nossa vida está nas mãos de Deus
‘Our life is in the hands of God’

MWEs are not always contiguous: it is frequent
to encounter insertion of lexical elements which
do not belong to the canonical form of the MWE.
Often, the function of the inserted elements is ad-
verbial, quantificational or emphatic. Or the MWE
occurs in a negative context, by the insertion of the
adverb não. Such inserted elements that are not
part of the MWE are not labelled. This is the case
of the quantifier muitas in (3), which is not part
of the canonical form of the MWE dar voltas à
cabeça ‘to think’.

154



(3) Dei muitas voltas à cabeça para encontrar
uma solução.
‘I’ve been thinking a lot to find a solution.’

Another type of MWE variation is truncation:
only a part of the full expression is lexically re-
alized. This phenomenon usually occurs with
proverbs and sayings. For example in 4 the brack-
eted part was not realized in the sentence, but it
is part of the canonical form in the MWE lexicon.
When marking up such truncated expressions we
do not label explicitly this phenomenon, we just
mark up the occurring part with a reference link to
MWEs in the lexicon.

(4) mais vale um pássaro na mão (do que dois a
voar)
‘bird in the hand is worth (two in the bush)’

4.4.2 Syntactic variation
An obvious form of syntactic variation is inflec-
tion of verbs and nouns. Since Portuguese is
a highly inflectional language, practically all the
verbs that occur in MWEs inflect, except for some
fixed sayings. Also shifting from active to passive
voice leads to syntactic variation. We do not label
auxiliary verbs as part of the MWE.

Several MWEs that have a free part such as ex-
ample 2 do not only exhibit lexical variation but
also syntactic variation: pronominalization (estar
nas mãos dele) or with a possessive form (estar
nas suas mãos). In such cases we will mark up
possessives as part of the MWE but give them an
additional label to signal that they are optional el-
ements. However, possessives are not always op-
tional, sometimes it is an obligatory part of the
canonical form and we will annotate it normally
(e.g. o leão mostra a sua raça. ‘the lion shows
what he’s made off’).

Also permutations of the MWE can occur
(ex.5). We do not signal this phenomenon in our
annotation as this can easily be detected when
comparing to the canonical form.

(5) estar de mãos e pés atados / estar de pés e
mãos atados
‘to be tied hand and foot/ foot and hand’

4.4.3 Structural variation
True idioms are both semantically and syntacti-
cally fixed. However, language use is creative and
can lead to MWEs that only partly match the ‘real’
MWE as listed in the MWE lexicon. For these

cases we mark up the different part with an extra
label to clarify which part exactly varies. For ex-
ample 6.

(6) no poupar é que está o ganho
in the saving is the profit
no esperar / provar / comparar é que está
o ganho
in waiting / proving / comparing is the profit

(7) já dei voltas e voltas à cabeça
‘thoughs went on and on in my mind’

(8) ALGO é a mãe de todas NOUN-PL
‘something is the mother of all x’
a educação é a mãe de todas as civilizações
a liberdade é a mãe de todas as virtudes
‘education is the mother of all civilizations’
‘freedom is the mother of all virtues’

Another interesting case is shown in example 7 in
wich a part of the MWE is duplicated for empha-
sis. This should be treated differently than the ex-
ample in 3. In these cases we will label the du-
plicated part as ‘part of the MWE but optional’
(similar to possessives).

There are cases in which part of the MWE may
vary without any apparent limits, while the other
part remains fixed. An example can be found in 8.
These are actually just an extension of ones we al-
ready discussed (see example 2) and we treat them
in the same matter.

5 Conclusion

In sum, we propose to split the annotation of
MWEs to develop separate annotation guidelines
for the grammatical categories, as we have ob-
served that e.g. nominal MWEs behave differ-
ently than verbal MWEs. Each MWE in the run-
ning text will be linked to its canonical form in the
lexicon. The lexicon itself will be enhanced with
additional information such as typology informa-
tion and MWE meaning. Special elements of the
MWE such as optional or variable parts will be ex-
plicitly marked as such both in the lexicon and in
the annotation of the MWE in the corpus. We are
convinced that the implementation of our proposal
will lead to a rich new resource that can help us
study the behavior of MWE in more depth. We
also plan to use this resource for the development
and evaluation of automatic MWE identification
systems.

155



References
S. Antunes, M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, J. M. Caster-

leiro, A. Mendes, L. Pereira, and T. Sá. 2006. A lex-
ical database of portuguese multiword expressions.
In LNAI, volume 3960, pages 238–243. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, (PROPOR 2006).

M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, A. Mendes, and S. An-
tunes, 2006. Spoken Language Corpus and Linguis-
tic Informatics, chapter Typologies of MultiWord
Expressions Revisited: A Corpus-driven Approach,
pages 227–244. Coll. Usage-Based Linguistic Infor-
matics, vol.V. John Benjamins.

T. Baldwin and S. Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword ex-
pressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau,
editors, Handbook of Natural Language Process-
ing, Second Edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis
Group, Boca Raton, FL. ISBN 978-1420085921.

F. Barreto, A. Branco, E. Ferreira, A. Mendes, M. F. P.
Bacelar do Nascimento, F. Nunes, and J. Silva.
2006. Open resources and tools for the shallow pro-
cessing of portuguese. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC2006), Genoa, Italy.

A. Böhmová, S. Cinková, and E. Hajičová. 2005. A
Manual for Tectogrammatical Layer Annotation of
the Prague Dependency Treebank (English transla-
tion). Technical report, ÚFAL MFF UK, Prague,
Czech Republic.

N. Calzolari, C. Fillmore, R. Grishman, N. Ide,
A. Lenci, C. MacLeod, and A. Zampolli. 2002.
Towards best practice for multiword expressions in
computational lexicon. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’2002), pages 1934–1940,
Las Palmas, Spain.

K.W. Church and P. Hanks. 1990. Word association
norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Com-
putational Linguistics, 16(1):22–29.

C. Fellbaum, A. Geyken, A. Herold, F. Koerner, and
G. Neumann. 2006. Corpus-based studies of ger-
man idioms and light verbs. International Journal
of Lexicography, 19(4):349–360.

A. Mendes, M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, S. Antunes,
and L. Pereira. 2006. COMBINA-PT: a large
corpus-extracted and hand-checked lexical database
of portuguese multiword expressions. In Proceed-
ings of LREC 2006, pages 1900–1905, Genoa, Italy.

R. Moon. 1998. Fixed expressions and idioms in en-
glish: A corpus-based approach. In Oxford Studies
in Lexicography and Lexicology. Clarendon Press,
Oxford.

I. Sag, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, A. Copestake, and
D. Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Expressions: A
Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proceedings of
CICLING-2002.

C. Sporleder and L. Li. 2009. Unsupervised recog-
nition of literal and non-literal use of idiomatic ex-
pressions. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference
of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009),
pages 754–762, Athens, Greece, March. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

156


