










































Engineering Linguistic Creativity: Bird Flight and Jet Planes


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 23–30,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Engineering Linguistic Creativity: Bird Flight and Jet Planes

Pablo Gervás
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
c/ Profesor Garcı́a Santesmases s/n

Madrid, 28040, Spain
pgervas@sip.ucm.es

Abstract
Man achieved flight by studying how birds fly,
and yet the solution that engineers came up
with (jet planes) is very different from the one
birds apply. In this paper I review a number of
efforts in automated story telling and poetry
generation, identifying which human abilities
are being modelled in each case. In an anal-
ogy to the classic example of bird-flight and
jet planes, I explore how the computational
models relate to (the little we know about) hu-
man performance, what the similarities are be-
tween the case for linguistic creativity and the
case for flight, and what the analogy might
have to say about artificial linguistic creativ-
ity if it were valid.

1 Introduction
The achievement of flight by man is often used as
an example of how engineering practice may lead
to the successful emulation of behaviours observed
in nature. It is also used to illustrate the idea that a
successful engineering solution (such as a jet plane)
need not always mirror faithfully the natural phe-
nomenon which inspired it (the flight of birds).

The task of engineering solutions for linguistic
creativity is made difficult by an incomplete under-
standing of how we manage language and how we
achieve creativity. Nevertheless, over the past few
years a large research effort has been devoted to ex-
ploring issues such as computational creativity, au-
tomated story telling, or poetry generation. In these
cases, there is also a combination of a naturally oc-
curring source phenomenon and a set of engineering
techniques that provide an emulation of it.

In this paper I review a number of such research
and development efforts that I have been involved
in or studied in detail, paying particular attention to
identifying which traits of human activity are being
modelled in each case. In an analogy to the clas-
sic example of bird-flight and jet planes, I explore
how the computational models of linguistic creativ-
ity relate to (the little we know about) human per-
formance, what the similarities are between the case
for linguistic creativity and the case for flight, and
what the analogy might have to say about artificial
linguistic creativity if it were valid.

2 Creativity at Different Levels of
Linguistic Decision

Creativity is a tricky word because it can mean dif-
ferent things to different people. There seems to be
a historical reason for this, in as much as the actual
word we now use seems to have been invented in
the 19th century in an attempt to cover the differ-
ent concepts of innovation that were accepted in art
and science (Weiner, 2000). As it is very difficult
to make progress without a minimal agreement on
what we are talking about, I will set off with an at-
tempt to clarify what I refer to when I use the word
in what follows. This is not intended to be prescrip-
tive of how it should be used or descriptive of what
other people may mean when they use it. And it is
not meant to be exhaustive.1 The goal here is to pro-
vide a brief sketch for readers to have a general idea
of what is being talked about.

1Interested readers can refer to (Gervás, 2009) for a more
detailed discussion of my personal view on creativity.

23



For me creativity suggests the idea of someone
(a creator) generating something (an output) that is
somehow new, but also somewhat unexpected or dif-
ferent from what others might have produced. This
output should satisfy some goal, though in many
cases the particular goal implied is not altogether
clear. The expectation of novelty implicitly brings in
a second agent (an audience which usually involves
more than one individual) that perceives or evaluates
the result.

When used in different contexts, the word cre-
ativity acquires different meanings by virtue of in-
volving different concepts of author, product, goal,
or audience. The assumption that there is a generic
framework common to all the different cases should
be taken with a pinch of salt, as commonalities may
not go far beyond this basic sketch.

It may seem that restricting the study to linguis-
tic creativity simplifies the issue. Surely once the
domain is constrained to linguistic outputs, the de-
scription of creativity should indeed boil down to a
simple common framework. This assumption may
also be risky, as I discuss below.

There are several possible levels of decision at
which the final form of a sentence is shaped. At any
(or all) of these it is possible to exercise creativity in
the sense described above. At the level of phonetics,
the way letters are put together to make sounds can
be explored in search of pleasing uses of rhyme, in-
ternal rhyme or alliteration, as done in sound poetry
(Hultberg, 1993). If one considers rhythm, the stress
patterns of words may shape the stress pattern of a
sentence or a text into rhythms that are uncommon
in the language, or in existing poetry, as Poe claims
to have done in “The Raven” (Poe, 1846). With re-
spect to lexical choice, the actual words chosen for
the text may be words that the user does not know
but which actually convey a certain meaning to the
reader, as done by Lewis Carrol in the poem “Jab-
berwocky” (Carrol, 1872).

For other levels of decisions, such as syntax, se-
mantics or narrative, it is more difficult to pinpoint
specific examples of creative uses, because instances
occur in larger contexts and because they occur
much more frequently. They can be considered of
two different kinds: those in which the main ob-
jective is the communication of a certain message
or information, and those geared towards obtaining

a pleasing effect of some sort. The first kind oc-
curs for instance when a speaker in a hurry waives
the rules of correct syntax in his effort to get his
message accross briefly. In going beyond the ac-
cepted rules, such a speaker may be deemed to be
behaving creatively. This type of linguistic creativ-
ity (say, corner-cutting creative communication) is
worth exploring in detail, but it would require ac-
cess to enough samples of specific instances of the
phenomenon to provide starting material. The sec-
ond kind, in contrast, tend to get explicitly recorded
for this pleasing effect to be available at later times,
and they provide an easier starting point for a study
of this sort.

A number of examples of linguistic creativity of
the second kind were reviewed in (Gervás, 2002).
This study showed that creative behaviour does not
occur in the same degree across all levels. Creativ-
ity applied simultaneously at several linguistic lev-
els can be counterproductive for communication if
abused. Instead, a conservative approach in some
levels is required for a successful interpretation of
creative innovations at other levels. An additional
problem that would have to be tackled is the extent
to which the interaction between the theories for the
different levels complicates the picture significantly.
Intuition suggests that it will to a considerable ex-
tent. Creativity may operate at each of the levels of
decision involved in linguistic production, but it may
interact between different levels in ways that are not
evident.

Under this light, we can see that even within the
realm of linguistic creativity we seem to be faced
with a broad range of different types of creativity,
with different concepts of product and goal, giving
shape to widely differing phenomena. In the hope
of reducing even further the scope of the problem,
I will concentrate more specifically on instances
where a computer program is written to generate
pieces of text that, when produced by a human au-
thor, would be interpreted to have deliberate aspira-
tions of creativity.

3 Some Automatic Creators in the
Literary Field

An exhaustive study of existing automatic creators
of this kind would take more space than I have avail-

24



able here. The selection below must not be under-
stood to be exhaustive. It is not even intended to
indicate that the particular creators mentioned con-
stitute the most significant efforts in the field. I have
selected only a few for purposes of illustration, and I
have chosen examples where relevant features of the
corresponding human processes have been consid-
ered. There are two main fields where computer pro-
grams attempt to generate literary material: story-
telling programs and poetry generators. Again, a
difference in genre introduces differences in prod-
uct, goal and evaluation criteria, which leads to the
application of different construction processes, so I
will review each field separately.

3.1 Automatic Story Tellers
Research on storytelling systems has experienced
considerable growth over the years. Although it has
never been a popular research topic, nonetheless it
has received sustained attention over the years by a
dedicated community of researchers. In recent years
the number of systems developed has increased sig-
nificantly. The body of work resulting from these ef-
forts has identified a significant number of relevant
issues in storytelling. Successive systems have iden-
tified particular elements in stories that play a role in
the process of generation. Only a few illustrative ex-
amples will be mentioned here.

It is clear that planning has been central to ef-
forts of modelling storytelling for a long time. Most
of the existing storytelling systems feature a plan-
ning component of some kind, whether as a main
module or as an auxiliary one. TALESPIN (Mee-
han, 1977), AUTHOR (Dehn, 1981), UNIVERSE
(Lebowitz, 1983), MINSTREL (Turner, 1993) and
Fabulist (Riedl, 2004), all include some representa-
tion of goals and/or causality, though each of them
uses it differently in the task of generating stories.
An important insight resulting from this work (orig-
inally formulated by (Dehn, 1981) but later taken up
by others) was the distinction between goals of the
characters in the story or goals of the author. This
showed that planning is a highly relevant tool for
storytelling, both at the level of how the coherence
of stories can be represented and how the process of
generating them is related to goals and causality.

Another aspect that is obviously relevant for sto-
rytelling is emotion. This has been less frequently

addressed in automatic storytellers, but has an out-
standing champion in the MEXICA system. MEX-
ICA (Pérez y Pérez, 1999) was a computer model
designed to study the creative process in writing
in terms of the cycle of engagement and reflec-
tion (Sharples, 1999), which presents a description
of writing understood as a problem-solving process
where the writer is both a creative thinker and a de-
signer of text. MEXICA was designed to generate
short stories about the Mexicas (also wrongly known
as Aztecs), and it is a flexible tool where the user
can set the value of different parameters to constrain
the writing process and explore different aspects of
story generation. An important aspect of MEXICA
is that it takes into account emotional links and ten-
sions between the characters as means for driving
and evaluating ongoing stories. The internal repre-
sentation that MEXICA uses for its stories (a Story
World Context) is built incrementally as a story is
either read or produced (the system can do both,
as it learns its craft from a set of previous stories).
This representation keeps track of emotional links
and emotional tensions between characters. These
elements are represented as preconditions and post-
conditions of the set of available actions. The system
evaluates the quality of a partial draft for a story in
terms of the the rising and falling shape of the arc of
emotional tensions that can be computed from this
information.

In general, most storytelling systems, being AI-
style programs, can be said to operate by searching
a space of solutions, guided by a traversal function
that leads to new points in the space and an evalu-
ation function that rates each point of the space in
terms of quality. In general, most systems concen-
trate on the development and innovation efforts in
the function for generating new stories (the traversal
function), hoping that the candidates generated will
progressively get better. However, human authors
seem to learn their craft mostly by learning to distin-
guish good stories from bad stories (which would in-
volve focusing more on the evaluation function). A
fairly recent proposal (Gervás and León, ) describes
a story generation system that outputs new stories
obtained by exploring a restricted conceptual space
under the guidance of a set of evaluation rules. The
interesting feature in this system is that it uses ex-
haustive enumeration of the search space as its only

25



exploration procedure, and relies solely on its eval-
uation rules to identify good stories. This is a di-
rect application of the generate & test paradigm of
problem solving. This system also models the way
in which the evaluation rules can evolve over time,
leading to the production of new results.

3.2 Automatic Poetry Generators
Automatic poetry generators differ significantly
from storytellers in two aspects: they are expected to
satisfy very specific metric restrictions (in terms of
number of syllables per line, and position of stressed
syllables within the line) on the form of the out-
put text (which story tellers do not usually take into
account), and they are allowed a certain poetic li-
cence which boils down to relaxing, sometimes quite
dramatically, any expectations of meaning or coher-
ence in the output (which are fundamental for story-
tellers). As a result, there is a larger sample of poetry
generators. The review presented below attempts to
cover some of the basic techniques that have been
used as underlying technologies.

The generate & test paradigm of problem solving
has also been widely applied in poetry generators.
Because metric restrictions are reasonably easy to
model computationally, very simple generation so-
lutions coupled with an evaluation function for met-
ric constraints are likely to produce acceptable re-
sults (given an assumption of poetic licence as re-
gards to the content). An example of this approach
is the early version of the WASP system (Gervás,
2000). Initial work by Manurung (Manurung, 1999)
also applied a generate & test approach based on
chart generation, but added an important restriction:
that poems to be generated must aim for some spe-
cific semantic content, however vaguely defined at
the start of the composition process. This consti-
tutes a significant restriction on the extent of poetic
licence allowed.

Manurung went on to develop in his Phd thesis
(Manurung, 2003) an evolutionary solution for this
problem. Evolutionary solutions seem particularly
apt to model this process as they bear certain sim-
ilarities with the way human authors may explore
several possible drafts in parallel, progressively edit-
ing them while they are equally valuable, focusing
on one of them when it becomes better valued than
others, but returning to others if later modifications

prove them more interesting.
Another important tactic that human authors are

known to use is that of reusing ideas, structures, or
phrasings from previous work in new results. This is
very similar to the AI technique of Case-Based Rea-
soning (CBR). Some poetry generators have indeed
explored the use of this technique as a basic genera-
tion mechanism. An evolution of the WASP system
(Gervás, 2001) used CBR to build verses for an input
sentence by relying on a case base of matched pairs
of prose and verse versions of the same sentence.
Each case was a set of verses associated with a prose
paraphrase of their content. An input sentence was
used to query the case base and the structure of the
verses of the best-matching result was adapted into
a verse rendition of the input. This constituted a dif-
ferent approach to hardening the degree of poetic li-
cence required to deem the outputs acceptable (the
resulting verses should have a certain relation to the
input sentence).

Another important mechanism that has been em-
ployed by automatic poets is grammar-based gen-
eration. By using a grammar to produce gram-
matically correct combinations of words, the re-
sults obtained start to resemble understandable sen-
tences. As Chomsky mentioned in 1957, the fact
that a sentence is grammatically correct does not
imply that it will be interpretable. However, in the
context of automatically generated poetry, sentences
like Chomsky’s classic counterexample (“Colorless
green ideas sleep furiously”) acquire a special inter-
est, as they provide both a sense of validity (due to
their syntactic correctness) and a sense of adventure
(due to the impossibility of pinpointing a specific
meaning for them). On reading such sentences, the
human mind comes up with a number of conflicting
interpretations, none fully compatible with its literal
meaning. This multiplicity of shifting meanings is
very atractive in the light of modern theories about
the role of reader interpretation in the reading pro-
cess.

In 1984 William Chamberlain published a book
of poems called “The Policeman’s Beard is Half
Constructed” (Chamberlain, 1981). In the preface,
Chamberlain claimed that all the book (but the pref-
ace) had been written by a computer program. The
program, called RACTER, managed verb conjuga-
tion and noun declension, and it could assign cer-

26



tain elements to variables in order to reuse them
periodically (which gave an impression of thematic
continuity). Although few details are provided re-
garding the implementation, it is generally assumed
that RACTER employed grammar-based generation.
The poems in Chamberlain’s book showed a degree
of sophistication that many claim would be impos-
sible to obtain using only grammars, and it has been
suggested that a savvy combination of grammars,
carefully-crafted templates and heavy filtering of a
very large number of results may have been em-
ployed.

The use of n-grams to model the probability of
certain words following on from others has proven
to be another useful tecnique. An example of poetry
generation based on this is the cybernetic poet devel-
oped by Ray Kurtzweil. RKCP (Ray Kurtzweils Cy-
bernetic Poet)2 is trained on a selection of poems by
an author or authors and it creates from them a lan-
guage model of the work of those authors. From this
model, RKCP can produce original poems which
will have a style similar to the author on which they
were trained. The generation process is controlled
by a series of additional parameters, for instance,
the type of stanza employed. RKCP includes an al-
gorithm to avoid generating poems too close to the
originals used during its training, and certain algo-
rithms to maintain thematic coherence over a given
poem. Over specific examples, it could be seen that
the internal coherence of given verses was good, but
coherence within sentences that spanned more than
one verse was not so impressive.

4 Discussion

The selection of automatic creators reviewed above
provides a significant sample of human abilities re-
lated with linguistic creativity that have been mod-
elled with reasonable success. These include: the
ability to recognise causality and use plans as skele-
tons for the backbone of a text, the ability to identify
emotional reactions and evaluate a story in terms of
emotional arcs, the ability to relax restrictions at the
time of building and delay evaluation until fuller re-
sults have been produced, the ability to iterate over
a draft applying successive modifications in search
of a best fit, the ability to measure metric forms, the

2http://www.kurzweilcyberart.com/poetry/rkcp overview.php3

ability to reuse the structures of texts we liked in the
past, the ability to rely on grammars for generating
valid text, and the ability to use n-grams to produce
a stream of text with surface form in a certain style.
This list of abilities is doubtless not exhaustive, but it
covers a broad range of aspects. The important idea
is that although existing systems have identified and
modelled these abilities, very few have considered
more than one or two of them simultaneously. And
yet intuition suggests that human authors are likely
to apply a combination of all of these (and proba-
bly many more additional ones that have not been
modelled yet) even in their simplest efforts.

It may pay to look in more detail at the set of tools
that we have identified, with a view to considering
how they might be put together in a single system
if we felt so inclined. The engagement and reflec-
tion model (Sharples, 1999) may provide a useful
framework for this purpose. Sharples’ concept of
engagement seems to correspond with the ability to
generate a new instance of a given artefact, without
excessive concern to the quality or fitness for pur-
pose of the partial result at any intermediate stage of
the process. According to this view, planners, case-
based reasoning, grammars, or n-gram models can
provide reasonable implementations of procedures
for engagement. The concept of reflection captures
the need to evaluate the material generated during
engagement. Abilities like identifying emotional re-
actions and evaluating a story in terms of emotional
arcs, or measuring metric forms would clearly have
a role to play during reflection. However, it is im-
portant to consider that we are looking at a number
of possible mechanisms for use in engagement, to-
gether with a number of possible mechanisms for
use in reflection. This does indeed have a place in
the general scheme proposed by Sharples. Sharples
proposes a cyclic process moving through two dif-
ferent phases: engagement and reflection. During
the reflection phase, the generated material is revised
in a three step process of reviewing, contemplating
and planning the result. During reviewing the re-
sult is read, minor edits may be carried out, but most
important it is interpreted to represent “the proce-
dures enacted during composition as explicit knowl-
edge”. Contemplation involves the process of oper-
ating on the results of this interpretation. Planning
uses the results of contemplation to create plans or

27



intentions to guide the next phase of engagement.
The evidence that we have presented so far suggests
that a specific mechanism (or maybe more than one)
may have been chosen to be used during a partic-
ular cycle of engagement. The process of review-
ing mentioned by Sharples might simply be one of
explicitly considering the choice of mechanism to
use in engagement. The process of contemplating
might be an application of the full set of evaluation
mechanisms particular to reflection. The process of
planning could be a complex process which would
include among other things a decision of whether
to change the engagement mechanism in use (or the
configuration of any parameters it may need), and
which mechanism to apply in each situation.

But we should not only study how closely auto-
matic creators resemble human ones, assuming any
divergence is a negative factor. Particular attention
must be paid to the question of whether certain char-
acteristics of human creativity are necessary condi-
tions for creativity or simply the ingenious solution
that makes it possible for the human mind while re-
maining within its limitations. This is particularly
important if one is to consider modelling creativity
in computer systems, which have different limita-
tions, but also different advantages.

Humans have limited memory. Many of the so-
lutions they seem to apply (such as providing con-
straints over a generative system so that it generates
only “appropriate” solutions) are intended to avoid
problems arising from the large amount of memory
that would be required to consider all possible solu-
tions provided by the generative system. But com-
puters do not usually have the same problem. Com-
puters can store and consider a much large num-
ber of solutions. This has in the past been the big
advantage presented by computers over people. It
is such a significant advantage that, for some tasks
such as chess playing, computers can perform bet-
ter by computing all options and evaluating them
all (very fast) than people can by using intelligent
heuristics.

Though little definite is known about how the
brain works, it seems to follow a highly parallel
approach to computation. This is not true of most
modern day computers. The most widely extended
model for modern computers is the Von Neumann
architecture, a computer design model that uses a

single processing unit and a single separate storage
structure to hold both instructions and data. Over
this simple model, subsequent layers of abstraction
may be built, resulting in very complex models of
performance as perceived by a human user running
the computer. Many of these complex behaviours
(such as, for instance, evolutionary problem solv-
ing techniques) have often been considered prime
candidates for simulating creative behaviour in com-
puters on the grounds that they implement a par-
allel search method, but they are reckoned to be
slow, taking a long time to produce results. The
lack of speed is highy influenced by the fact that,
when run on computers with a Von Neumann ar-
chitecture, each possible solution must be built and
evaluated sequentially by the underlying single pro-
cessing unit. If any computational solution based
on parallel search methods shows merit for emulat-
ing creativity, it should not be discounted until it has
been tested over hardware that allows it to operate
in a really parallel manner, and instances of these
are becoming more and more popular. Nowadays it
has become more difficult to buy a new computer
without finding it has at least two cores. For gam-
ing consoles, this trend has gone even further, with
the new generations sporting up to nine processing
units.

5 Our Latest Efforts

Although the aim of the paper is not to report orig-
inal work, a brief description of my ongoing work
constitutes an example of the type of system that can
be considered along the lines described above. The
WASP poetry generator is still going strong. Only
recently a selection of 10 poems produced by WASP
has been published in a book about the possibilities
of computers writing love poems (Gervás, 2010).
The version of WASP used here is more advanced
than previous ones, and some of the ideas outlined
in the discussion have been introduced as modifica-
tions on earlier designs.

This version of WASP operates as a set of fami-
lies of automatic experts: one family of content gen-
erators (which generate a flow of text that is taken
as a starting point by the poets), one family of po-
ets (which try to convert flows of text into poems in
given strophic forms), one family of judges (which

28



evaluate different aspects that are considered impor-
tant), and one family of revisers (which apply modi-
fications to the drafts they receive, each one oriented
to correct a type of problem, or to modify the draft
in a specific way). These families work in a coor-
dinated manner like a cooperative society of read-
ers/critics/editors/writers. All together they generate
a population of drafts over which they all operate,
modifying it and pruning it in an evolutionary man-
ner over a pre-established number of generations of
drafts, until a final version, the best valued effort of
the lot, is chosen.

The overall style of the resulting poems is
strongly determined by the accumulated sources
used to train the content generators, which are
mostly n-gram based. The poems presented in
the book were produced with content generators
trained on collections of texts by Federico Garcı́a
Lorca, Miguel Hernández and a selection of Six-
teenth Century Spanish poets. Readers familiar with
the sources can detect similarities in vocabulary,
syntax and theme. A specific judge is in charge of
penalising instances of excessive similarity with the
sources, which then get pushed down in the ranking
and tend not to emerge as final solutions.

The various judges assign scores on specific pa-
rameters (on poem length, on verse length, on
rhyme, on stress patterns of each line, on similar-
ity to the sources, fitness against particular strophic
forms...) and an overall score for each draft is ob-
tained by combining all individual scores received
by the draft.

Poets operate mainly by deciding on the introduc-
tion of line breaks over the text they receive as input.

Revisers rely on scores assigned by judges to in-
troduce changes to drafts. Modifications can be of
several types: deletion of spans of text, substitution
of spans for newly generated ones, word substitu-
tion, sentence elimination, and simple cross-over of
fragments of poems to obtain new ones.

Because an initial draft produced by an n-gram
based content generator is then processed many
times over by poets and revisers, final results oscil-
late between surprising faithfulness to the sources
and very radical surreal compositions.

6 Conclusions

In view of the material presented, and taking up the
analogy between linguistic creativity and bird flight,
we can say we are still trying to model birds. So
far, we have only achieved small models of parts of
birds. The various features of automatic creators that
have been vaguely related to human abilities in sec-
tion 4 are clearly tools that human writers apply in
their daily task. Having systems that model these
techniques, and testing how far each technique goes
towards modelling human activity are steps forward.
Bird’s wings or bird’s feathers do not fly, but hav-
ing good models of them is crucial to understanding
what makes flight possible.

Yet humans do not apply any of them in isola-
tion, but rather rely on them as a set of tools and
combine them at need to produce new material, us-
ing different combinations at different times. In the
same way as research into flight considered how the
parts of birds interact to achieve flight, in the realm
of linguistic creativity more effort should be made to
model the way in which humans combine different
techniques and tools to achieve results. This could
not have been done a few years back for lack of a
valid set of tools to start from, but it is feasible now.

Aside from this positive optimistic analysis, there
is a darker thought to keep in mind. Because we
recognise that the models we are building at the
current stage are only reproductions of parts of the
whole mechanism, it would be unrealistic to demand
of them that they exhibit right now creativity at the
level of humans. As long as they focus on one as-
pect and leave out others, they are likely to perform
poorly in the overall task when compared with their
human couterparts. Yet even if they do not they are
still worthy pursuits as initial and fundamental steps
on which to build better solutions.

Once the various elements that contribute to the
task have been identified and modelled with reason-
able success, and the way in which they interact
when humans apply them, a new universe of pos-
sibilities opens up. Future research should address
the way in which humans apply these various ele-
ments, especially the way in which they combine
some with others to achieve better results. In do-
ing this, researchers should inform themselves with
existing research on this subject in the fields of psy-

29



chology, but also in the study of poetry, narratology
and literary theory in general.

By doing this, it will become more likely that
computer programs ever produce output compara-
ble to that of human authors. Yet the overall goal
should not just be to obtain a pastiche of specific
human artifacts, indistinguishable from the corre-
sponding human-produced versions. Jet planes are
perfectly distinguishable from birds. Which does
not mean they are worthless. Jet planes are differ-
ent from birds because the engineering solutions that
scientists found for achieving flight required differ-
ent materials (metal rather than bone and feathers),
different applications of the basic principles (static
rather than flapping wings) and different means of
propulsion (jet engines rather than muscle power).
However, these departures from the original model
have made the current solution capable of feats that
are impossible for birds. Jet planes can fly much
faster, much higher, and carrying much more weight
than any bird known. Yet all this was made possi-
ble by trying to emulate birds. If we carry the anal-
ogy to its full extent, we should generally consider
departures from human models of linguistic creativ-
ity wherever they result in methods better suited for
computers. This is already being done. However,
we should at some stage also start considering de-
partures from the models for the output as generated
by humans. I would say a second, more idealistic,
purpose of computational creativity might be to look
for things that machines can do that people cannot
do, but which people might yet learn to appreciate.

Acknowledgments

The work reported in this paper was partially
supported by the Ministerio de Educación y
Ciencia (TIN2006-14433-C02-01, TIN2009-14659-
C03-01).

References
L. Carrol. 1872. Through the Looking-Glass and What

Alice Found There. Bo Ejeby Edition, Sweden.
W. Chamberlain. 1981. The Policeman’s Beard is Half

Constructed. Warner Books, New york.
Natalie Dehn. 1981. Story generation after tale-spin. In

In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 16–18.

P. Gervás and León. Story generation driven by system-
modified evaluation validated by human judges. In
Proc. of the First International Conference on Com-
putational Creativity.

P. Gervás. 2000. WASP: Evaluation of different strate-
gies for the automatic generation of spanish verse. In
Proceedings of the AISB-00 Symposium on Creative &
Cultural Aspects of AI, pages 93–100.

P. Gervás. 2001. An expert system for the composition of
formal spanish poetry. Journal of Knowledge-Based
Systems, 14(3-4):181–188.

P. Gervás. 2002. Linguistic creativity at different levels
of decision in sentence production. In Proceedings of
the AISB 02 Symposium on AI and Creativity in Arts
and Science, pages 79–88.

P. Gervás. 2009. Computational approaches to story-
telling and creativity. AI Magazine, 30(3):49–62.

P. Gervás. 2010. Diez poemas emocionales gen-
erados por un computador. In D. Cañas and
C. González Tardón, editors, ¿Puede un computador
escribir un poema de amor?, pages 189–196. Editorial
Devenir.

T. Hultberg. 1993. Literally Speaking: sound poetry &
text-sound composition. Bo Ejeby Edition, Sweden.

M. Lebowitz. 1983. Story-telling as planning and learn-
ing. In International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
telligence, volume 1.

H. M. Manurung. 1999. Chart generation of rhythm-
patterned text. In Proc. of the First International
Workshop on Literature in Cognition and Computers.

H. M. Manurung. 2003. An evolutionary algorithm ap-
proach to poetry generation. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Edimburgh, Edimburgh, UK.

James R. Meehan. 1977. TALE-SPIN, an interactive
program that writes stories. In In Proceedings of the
Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence, pages 91–98.

R. Pérez y Pérez. 1999. MEXICA: A Computer Model of
Creativity in Writing. Ph.D. thesis, The University of
Sussex.

Edgar Allan Poe. 1846. The philosophy of composition.
Graham’s Magazine, XXVIII(28):163–167.

M. Riedl. 2004. Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot
and Character. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer
Science, North Carolina State University.

Mike Sharples. 1999. How We Write: Writing As Cre-
ative Design. Routledge, June.

Scott R. Turner. 1993. Minstrel: a computer model of
creativity and storytelling. Ph.D. thesis, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

R. Weiner. 2000. Creativity & beyond : cultures, val-
ues, and change. State University of New York Press,
Albany, NY.

30


