



















































Proceedings of the...


Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 5–13,
Uppsala, July 2010.

Creating and Evaluating a Consensus for Negated and Speculative Words
in a Swedish Clinical Corpus

Hercules Dalianis, Maria Skeppstedt
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV)

Stockholm University
Forum 100

SE-164 40 Kista, Sweden
{hercules, mariask}@dsv.su.se

Abstract

In this paper we describe the creation
of a consensus corpus that was obtained
through combining three individual an-
notations of the same clinical corpus in
Swedish. We used a few basic rules that
were executed automatically to create the
consensus. The corpus contains nega-
tion words, speculative words, uncertain
expressions and certain expressions. We
evaluated the consensus using it for nega-
tion and speculation cue detection. We
used Stanford NER, which is based on the
machine learning algorithm Conditional
Random Fields for the training and detec-
tion. For comparison we also used the
clinical part of the BioScope Corpus and
trained it with Stanford NER. For our clin-
ical consensus corpus in Swedish we ob-
tained a precision of 87.9 percent and a re-
call of 91.7 percent for negation cues, and
for English with the Bioscope Corpus we
obtained a precision of 97.6 percent and a
recall of 96.7 percent for negation cues.

1 Introduction

How we use language to express our thoughts, and
how we interpret the language of others, varies be-
tween different speakers of a language. This is
true for various aspects of a language, and also
for the topic of this article; negations and spec-
ulations. The differences in interpretation are of
course most relevant when a text is used for com-
munication, but it also applies to the task of anno-
tation. When the same text is annotated by more
than one annotator, given that the annotating task
is non-trivial, the resulting annotated texts will not
be identical. This will be the result of differences
in how the text is interpreted, but also of differ-
ences in how the instructions for annotation are

interpreted. In order to use the annotated texts,
it must first be decided if the interpretations by the
different annotators are similar enough for the pur-
pose of the text, and if so, it must be decided how
to handle the non-identical annotations.

In the study described in this article, we have
used a Swedish clinical corpus that was anno-
tated for certainty and uncertainty, as well as for
negation and speculation cues by three Swedish-
speaking annotators. The article describes an eval-
uation of a consensus annotation obtained through
a few basic rules for combining the three different
annotations into one annotated text.1

2 Related research

2.1 Previous studies on detection of negation
and speculation in clinical text

Clinical text often contains reasoning, and thereby
many uncertain or negated expressions. When,
for example, searching for patients with a specific
symptom in a clinical text, it is thus important to
be able to detect if a statement about this symptom
is negated, certain or uncertain.

The first approach to identifying negations in
Swedish clinical text was carried out by Skeppst-
edt (2010), by whom the well-known NegEx algo-
rithm (Chapman et al., 2001), created for English
clinical text, was adapted to Swedish clinical text.
Skeppstedt obtained a precision of 70 percent and
a recall of 81 percent in identifying negated dis-
eases and symptoms in Swedish clinical text. The
NegEx algorithm is purely rule-based, using lists
of cue words indicating that a preceding or follow-
ing disease or symptom is negated. The English
version of NegEx (Chapman et al., 2001) obtained
a precision of 84.5 percent and a recall of 82.0 per-
cent.

1This research has been carried out after approval from
the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm (Etikprvn-
ingsnmnden i Stockholm), permission number 2009/1742-
31/5.

5



Another example of negation detection in En-
glish is the approach used by Huang and Lowe
(2007). They used both parse trees and regu-
lar expressions for detecting negated expressions
in radiology reports. Their approach could de-
tect negated expressions both close to, and also
at some distance from, the actual negation cue (or
what they call negation signal). They obtained a
precision of 98.6 percent and a recall of 92.6 per-
cent.

Elkin et al. (2005) used the terms in SNOMED-
CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine-
Clinical Terms), (SNOMED-CT, 2010) and
matched them to 14 792 concepts in 41 health
records. Of these concepts, 1 823 were identified
as negated by humans. The authors used Mayo
Vocabulary Server Parsing Engine and lists of cue
words triggering negation as well as words in-
dicating the scope of these negation cues. This
approach gave a precision of 91.2 percent and
a recall of 97.2 percent in detecting negated
SNOMED-CT concepts.

In Rokach et al. (2008), they used clinical nar-
rative reports containing 1 766 instances annotated
for negation. The authors tried several machine
learning algorithms for detecting negated findings
and diseases, including hidden markov models,
conditional random fields and decision trees. The
best results were obtained with cascaded decision
trees, with nodes consisting of regular expressions
for negation patterns. The regular expressions
were automatically learnt, using the LCS (longest
common subsequence) algorithm on the training
data. The cascaded decision trees, built with LCS,
gave a precision of 94.4 percent, a recall of 97.4
percent and an F-score of 95.9 percent.

Szarvas (2008) describes a trial to automatically
identify speculative sentences in radiology reports,
using Maximum Entropy Models. Advanced fea-
ture selection mechanisms were used to automat-
ically extract cue words for speculation from an
initial seed set of cues. This, combined with man-
ual selection of the best extracted candidates for
cue words, as well as with outer dictionaries of
cue words, yielded an F-score of 82.1 percent for
detecting speculations in radiology reports. An
evaluation was also made on scientific texts, and
it could be concluded that cue words for detecting
speculation were domain-specific.

Morante and Daelemans (2009) describe a ma-
chine learning system detecting the scope of nega-

tions, which is based on meta-learning and is
trained and tested on the annotated BioScope Cor-
pus. In the clinical part of the corpus, the au-
thors obtained a precision of 100 percent, a re-
call of 97.5 percent and finally an F-score of 98.8
percent on detection of cue words for negation.
The authors used TiMBL (Tilburg Memory Based
Learner), which based its decision on features
such as the words annotated as negation cues and
the two words surrounding them, as well as the
part of speech and word forms of these words.
For detection of the negation scope, the task was
to decide whether a word in a sentence contain-
ing a negation cue was either the word starting
or ending a negation scope, or neither of these
two. Three different classifiers were used: sup-
port vector machines, conditional random fields
and TiMBL. Features that were used included the
word and the two words preceding and following
it, the part of speech of these words and the dis-
tance to the negation cue. A fourth classifier, also
based on conditional random fields, used the out-
put of the other three classifiers, among other fea-
tures, for the final decision. The result was a pre-
cision of 86.3 percent and a recall of 82.1 percent
for clinical text. It could also be concluded that the
system was portable to other domains, but with a
lower result.

2.2 The BioScope Corpus

Annotated clinical corpora in English for nega-
tion and speculation are described in Vincze et al.
(2008), where clinical radiology reports (a sub-
set of the so called BioScope Corpus) encompass-
ing 6 383 sentences were annotated for negation,
speculation and scope. Henceforth, when refer-
ring to the BioScope Corpus, we only refer to the
clinical subset of the BioScope Corpus. The au-
thors found 877 negation cues and 1 189 specu-
lation cues, (or what we call speculative cues) in
the corpora in 1 561 sentences. This means that
fully 24 percent of the sentences contained some
annotation for negation or uncertainty. However,
of the original 6 383 sentences, 14 percent con-
tained negations and 13 percent contained spec-
ulations. Hence some sentences contained both
negations and speculations. The corpus was anno-
tated by two students and their work was led by a
chief annotator. The students were not allowed to
discuss their annotations with each other, except at
regular meetings, but they were allowed to discuss

6



with the chief annotator. In the cases where the
two student annotators agreed on the annotation,
that annotation was chosen for the final corpus. In
the cases where they did not agree, an annotation
made by the chief annotator was chosen.

2.3 The Stanford NER based on CRF
The Stanford Named Entity Recognizer (NER) is
based on the machine learning algorithm Condi-
tional Random Fields (Finkel et al., 2005) and has
been used extensively for identifying named enti-
ties in news text. For example in the CoNLL-2003,
where the topic was language-independent named
entity recognition, Stanford NER CRF was used
both on English and German news text for train-
ing and evaluation. Where the best results for En-
glish with Stanford NER CRF gave a precision of
86.1 percent, a recall of 86.5 percent and F-score
of 86.3 percent, for German the best results had
a precision of 80.4 percent, a recall of 65.0 per-
cent and an F-score of 71.9 percent, (Klein et al.,
2003). We have used the Stanford NER CRF for
training and evaluation of our consensus.

2.4 The annotated Swedish clinical corpus
for negation and speculation

A process to create an annotated clinical corpus
for negation and speculation is described in Dalia-
nis and Velupillai (2010). A total of 6 740 ran-
domly extracted sentences from a very large clin-
ical corpus in Swedish were annotated by three
non-clinical annotators. The sentences were ex-
tracted from the text field Assessment (Bedömning
in Swedish). Each sentence and its context from
the text field Assessment were presented to the an-
notators who could use five different annotation
classes to annotate the corpora. The annotators
had discussions every two days on the previous
days’ work led by the experiment leader.

As described in Velupillai (2010), the anno-
tation guidelines were inspired by the BioScope
Corpus guidelines. There were, however, some
differences, such as the scope of a negation or of
an uncertainty not being annotated. It was instead
annotated if a sentence or clause was certain, un-
certain or undefined. The annotators could thus
choose to annotate the entire sentence as belong-
ing to one of these three classes, or to break up the
sentence into subclauses.

Pairwise inter-annotator agreement was also
measured in the article by Dalianis and Velupillai
(2010) . The average inter-annotator agreement in-

creased after the first annotation rounds, but it was
lower than the agreement between the annotators
of the BioScope Corpus.

The annotation classes used were thus negation
and speculative words, but also certain expression
and uncertain expression as well as undefined. The
annotated subset contains a total of 6 740 sen-
tences or 71 454 tokens, including its context.

3 Method for constructing the consensus

We constructed a consensus annotation out of the
three different annotations of the same clinical cor-
pus that is described in Dalianis and Velupillai
(2010). The consensus was constructed with the
general idea of choosing, as far as possible, an an-
notation for which there existed an identical anno-
tation performed by at least two of the annotators,
and thus to find a majority annotation. In the cases
where no majority was found, other methods were
used.

Other options would be to let the annotators dis-
cuss the sentences that were not identically an-
notated, or to use the method of the BioScope
Corpus, where the sentences that were not iden-
tically annotated were resolved by a chief annota-
tor (Vincze et al., 2008). A third solution, which
might, however, lead to a very biased corpus,
would be to not include the sentences for which
there was not a unanimous annotation in the re-
sulting consensus corpus.

3.1 The creation of a consensus
The annotation classes that were used for annota-
tion can be divided into two levels. The first level
consisted of the annotation classes for classifying
the type of sentence or clause. This level thus in-
cluded the annotation classes uncertain, certain
and undefined. The second level consisted of
the annotation classes for annotating cue words
for negation and speculation, thus the annotation
classes negation and speculative words. The an-
notation classes on the first level were considered
as more important for the consensus, since if there
was no agreement on the kind of expression, it
could perhaps be said to be less important which
cue phrases these expressions contained. In the
following constructed example, the annotation tag
Uncertain is thus an annotation on the first level,
while the annotation tags Negation and Specula-
tive words are on the second level.

7



<Sentence>
<Uncertain>
<Speculative_words>
<Negation>Not</Negation>
really

</Speculative_words>
much worse than before

</Uncertain>
<Sentence>

When constructing the consensus corpus, the
annotated sentences from the first rounds of an-
notation were considered as sentences annotated
before the annotators had fully learnt to apply
the guidelines. The first 1 099 of the annotated
sentences, which also had a lower inter-annotator
agreement, were therefore not included when con-
structing the consensus. Thereby, 5 641 sentences
were left to compare.

The annotations were compared on a sentence
level, where the three versions of each sentence
were compared. First, sentences for which there
existed an identical annotation performed by at
least two of the annotators were chosen. This was
the case for 5 097 sentences, thus 90 percent of the
sentences.

For the remaining 544 sentences, only annota-
tion classes on the first level were compared for a
majority. For the 345 sentences where a majority
was found on the first level, a majority on the sec-
ond level was found for 298 sentences when the
scope of these tags was disregarded. The annota-
tion with the longest scope was then chosen. For
the remaining 47 sentences, the annotation with
the largest number of annotated instances on the
second level was chosen.

The 199 sentences that were still not resolved
were then once again compared on the first level,
this time disregarding the scope. Thereby, 77 sen-
tences were resolved. The annotation with the
longest scopes on the first-level annotations was
chosen.

The remaining 122 sentences were removed
from the consensus. Thus, of the 5 641 sentences,
2 percent could not be resolved with these basic
rules. In the resulting corpus, 92 percent of the
sentences were identically annotated by at least
two persons.

3.2 Differences between the consensus and
the individual annotations

Aspects of how the consensus annotation differed
from the individual annotations were measured.
The number of occurrences of each annotation

class was counted, and thereafter normalised on
the number of sentences, since the consensus an-
notation contained fewer sentences than the origi-
nal, individual annotations.

The results in Table 1 show that there are fewer
uncertain expressions in the consensus annotation
than in the average of the individual annotations.
The reason for this could be that if the annotation
is not completeley free of randomness, the class
with a higher probability will be more frequent in
a majority consensus, than in the individual anno-
tations. In the cases where the annotators are un-
sure of how to classify a sentence, it is not unlikely
that the sentence has a higher probability of being
classified as belonging to the majority class, that
is, the class certain.

The class undefined is also less common in
the consensus annotation, and the same reasoning
holds true for undefined as for uncertain, perhaps
to an even greater extent, since undefined is even
less common.

Also the speculative words are fewer in the con-
sensus. Most likely, this follows from the uncer-
tain sentences being less common.

The words annotated as negations, on the other
hand, are more common in the consensus anno-
tation than in the individual annotations. This
could be partly explained by the choice of the 47
sentences with an annotation that contained the
largest number of annotated instances on the sec-
ond level, and it is an indication that the consensus
contains some annotations for negation cues which
have only been annotated by one person.

Type of Annot. class Individ. Consens.
Negation 853 910
Speculative words 1 174 1 077
Uncertain expression 697 582
Certain expression 4 787 4 938
Undefined expression 257 146

Table 1: Comparison of the number of occurrences
of each annotation class for the individual annota-
tions and the consensus annotation. The figures
for the individual annotations are the mean of the
three annotators, normalised on the number of sen-
tences in the consensus.

Table 2 shows how often the annotators have
divided the sentences into clauses and annotated
each clause with a separate annotation class. From
the table we can see that annotator A and also an-

8



notator H broke up sentences into more than one
type of the expressions Certain, Uncertain or Un-
defined expressions more often than annotator F.
Thereby, the resulting consensus annotation has a
lower frequency of sentences that contained these
annotations than the average of the individual an-
notations. Many of the more granular annotations
that break up sentences into certain and uncertain
clauses are thus not included in the consensus an-
notation. There are instead more annotations that
classify the entire sentence as either Certain, Un-
certain or Undefined.

Annotators A F H Cons.
No. sentences 349 70 224 147

Table 2: Number of sentences that contained more
than one instance of either one of the annotation
classes Certain, Uncertain or Undefined expres-
sions or a combination of these three annotation
classes.

3.3 Discussion of the method

The constructed consensus annotation is thus dif-
ferent from the individual annotations, and it could
at least in some sense be said to be better, since 92
percent of the sentences have been identically an-
notated by at least two persons. However, since for
example some expressions of uncertainty, which
do not have to be incorrect, have been removed, it
can also be said that some information containing
possible interpretations of the text, has also been
lost.

The applied heuristics are in most cases specific
to this annotated corpus. The method is, however,
described in order to exemplify the more general
idea to use a majority decision for selecting the
correct annotations. What is tested when using the
majority method described in this article for de-
ciding which annotation is correct, is the idea that
a possible alternative to a high annotator agree-
ment would be to ask many annotators to judge
what they consider to be certain or uncertain. This
could perhaps be based on a very simplified idea
of language, that the use and interpretation of lan-
guage is nothing more than a majority decision by
the speakers of that language.

A similar approach is used in Steidl et al.
(2005), where they study emotion in speech. Since
there are no objective criteria for deciding with
what emotion something is said, they use manual

classification by five labelers, and a majority vot-
ing for deciding which emotion label to use. If less
than three labelers agreed on the classification, it
was omitted from the corpus.

It could be argued that this is also true for un-
certainty, that if there is no possibility to ask the
author of the text, there are no objective criteria
for deciding the level of certainty in the text. It is
always dependent on how it is perceived by the
reader, and therefore a majority method is suit-
able. Even if the majority approach can be used for
subjective classifications, it has some problems.
For example, to increase validity more annotators
are needed, which complicates the process of an-
notation. Also, the same phenomenon that was
observed when constructing the consensus would
probably also arise, that a very infrequent class
such as uncertain, would be less frequent in the
majority consensus than in the individual annota-
tions. Finally, there would probably be many cases
where there is no clear majority for either com-
pletely certain or uncertain: in these cases, having
many annotators will not help to reach a decision
and it can only be concluded that it is difficult to
classify this part of a text. Different levels of un-
certainty could then be introduced, where the ab-
sence of a clear majority could be an indication of
weak certainty or uncertainty, and a very weak ma-
jority could result in an undefined classification.

However, even though different levels of cer-
tainty or uncertainty are interesting when study-
ing how uncertainties are expressed and perceived,
they would complicate the process of information
extraction. Thus, if the final aim of the annota-
tion is to create a system that automatically detects
what is certain or uncertain, it would of course be
more desirable to have an annotation with a higher
inter-annotator agreement. One way of achieving
a this would be to provide more detailed annota-
tion guidelines for what to define as certainty and
uncertainty. However, when it comes to such a
vague concept as uncertainty, there is always a thin
line between having guidelines capturing the gen-
eral perception of uncertainty in the language and
capturing a definition of uncertainty that is specific
to the writers of the guidelines. Also, there might
perhaps be a risk that the complex concept of cer-
tainty and uncertainty becomes overly simplified
when it has to be formulated as a limited set of
guidelines. Therefore, a more feasible method of
achieving higher agreement is probably to instead

9



Class Neg-Spec Relevant Retrieved Corpus Precision Recall F-score
Negation 782 890 853 0.879 0.917 0.897
Speculative words 376 558 1061 0.674 0.354 0.464
Total 1 158 1 448 1 914 0.800 0.605 0.687

Table 3: The results for negation and speculation on consensus when executing Stanford NER CRF using
ten-fold cross validation.

Class Cert-Uncertain Relevant Retrieved Corpus Precision Recall F-score
Certain expression 4 022 4 903 4 745 0.820 0.848 0.835
Uncertain expression 214 433 577 0.494 0.371 0.424
Undefined expression 2 5 144 0.400 0.014 0.027
Total 4 238 5 341 5 466 0.793 0.775 0.784

Table 4: The results for certain and uncertain on consensus when executing Stanford NER CRF using
ten-fold cross validation.

simplify what is being annotated, and not annotate
for such a broad concept as uncertainty in general.

Among other suggestions for improving the an-
notation guidelines for the corpus that the consen-
sus is based on, Velupillai (2010) suggests that the
guidelines should also include instructions on the
focus of the uncertainties, that is, what concepts
are to be annotated for uncertainty.

The task could thus, for example, be tailored to-
wards the information that is to be extracted, and
thereby be simplified by only annotating for un-
certainty relating to a specific concept. If diseases
or symptoms that are present in a patient are to be
extracted, the most relevant concept to annotate is
whether a finding is present or not present in the
patient, or whether it is uncertain if it is present or
not. This approach has, for example, achieved a
very high inter-annotator agreement in the anno-
tation of the evaluation data used by Chapman et
al. (2001). Even though this approach is perhaps
linguistically less interesting, not giving any infor-
mation on uncertainties in general, if the aim is to
search for diseases and symptoms in patients, it
should be sufficient.

In light of the discussion above, the question to
what extent the annotations in the constructed con-
sensus capture a general perception of certainty or
uncertainty must be posed. Since it is constructed
using a majority method with three annotators,
who had a relatively low pairwise agreement, the
corpus could probably not be said to be a precise
capture of what is a certainty or uncertainty. How-
ever, as Artstein and Poesio (2008) point out, it
cannot be said that there is a fixed level of agree-
ment that is valid for all purposes of a corpus, but
the agreement must be high enough for a certain
purpose. Therefore, if the information on whether

there was a unanimous annotation of a sentence or
not is retained, serving as an indicator of how typ-
ical an expression of certainty or uncertainty is,
the constructed corpus can be a useful resource.
Both for studying how uncertainty in clinical text
is constructed and perceived, and as one of the re-
sources that is used for learning to automatically
detect certainty and uncertainty in clinical text.

4 Results of training with Stanford NER
CRF

As a first indication of whether it is possible to use
the annotated consensus corpus for finding nega-
tion and speculation in clinical text, we trained the
Stanford NER CRF, (Finkel et al., 2005) on the an-
notated data. Artstein and Poesio (2008) write that
the fact that annotated data can be generalized and
learnt by a machine learning system is not an in-
dication that the annotations capture some kind of
reality. If it would be shown that the constructed
consensus is easily generalizable, this can thus not
be used as an evidence of its quality. However, if it
would be shown that the data obtained by the an-
notations cannot be learnt by a machine learning
system, this can be used as an indication that the
data is not easily generalizable and that the task
to learn perhaps should, if possible, be simplified.
Of course, it could also be an indication that an-
other learning algorithm should be used or other
features selected.

We created two training sets of annotated con-
sensus material.

The first training set contained annotations on
the second level, thus annotations that contained
the classes Speculative words and Negation. In 76
cases, the tag for Negation was inside an annota-
tion for Speculative words, and these occurrences

10



Class Neg-Spec Bio Relevant Retrieved Corpus Precision Recall F-score
Negation 843 864 872 0.976 0.967 0.971
Speculative words 1 021 1 079 1 124 0.946 0.908 0.927
Scope1 1 295 1 546 1 5952 0.838 0.812 0.825

Table 5: The results for negations, speculation cues and scopes on the BioScope Corpus when executing
Stanford NER CRF using ten-fold cross validation.

Class Neg-Spec Relevant Retrieved Corpus Precision Recall F-score
Negation A 791 1 005 896 0.787 0.883 0.832
Speculative words 684 953 1 699 0.718 0.403 0.516
Negation F 938 1097 1023 0.855 0.916 0.884
Speculative words 464 782 1 496 0.593 0.310 0.407
Negation H 722 955 856 0.756 0.843 0.797
Speculative words 552 853 1 639 0.647 0.336 0.443

Table 6: The results for negations and speculation cues and scopes for annotator A, F and H respectively
when executing Stanford NER CRF using ten-fold cross validation.

of the tag Negation were removed. It is detecting
this difference between a real negation cue and a
negation word inside a cue for speculation that is
one of the difficulties that distinguishes the learn-
ing task from a simple string matching.

The second training set only contained the con-
sensus annotations on the first level, thus the anno-
tation classes Certain, Uncertain and Undefined.

We used the default settings on Stanford NER
CRF. The results of the evaluation using ten-fold
cross validation (Kohavi, 1995) are shown in Table
3 and Table 4.

As a comparison, and to verify the suitabil-
ity of the chosen machine learning method, we
also trained and evaluated the BioScope Corpus
using Stanford NER CRF for negation, specula-
tion and scope. The results can be seen in Ta-
ble 5. When training the detection of scope, only
BioScope sentences that contained an annotation
for negation and speculation were selected for the
training and evaluation material for the Stanford
NER CRF. This division into two training sets fol-
lows the method used by Morante and Daelemans
(2009), where sentences containing a cue are first
detected, and then, among these sentences, the
scope of the cue is determined.

We also trained and evaluated the annotations
that were carried out by each annotator A, F and
H separately, i.e. the source of consensus. The re-
sults can be seen in Table 6.

We also compared the distribution of Negation
and Speculative words in the consensus versus the
BioScope Corpus and we found that the consen-
sus, in Swedish, used about the same number of
(types) for negation as the BioScope Corpus in
English (see Table 7), but for speculative words

the consensus contained many more types than the
BioScope Corpus. In the constructed consensus,
72 percent of the Speculative words occurred only
once, whereas in the BioScope Corpus this was the
case for only 24 percent of the Speculative words.

Type of word Cons. Bio
Unique words (Types)
annotated as Negation 13 19
Negations that
occurred only once 5 10
Unique words (Types)
annotated as Speculative 408 79
Speculative words that
occurred only once 294 19

Table 7: Number of unique words both in the Con-
sensus and in the BioScope Corpus that were an-
notated as Negation and as Speculative words, and
how many of these that occurred only once.

5 Discussion

The training results using our clinical consensus
corpus in Swedish gave a precision of 87.9 percent
and a recall of 91.7 percent for negation cues and a
precision of 67.4 percent and a recall of 35.4 per-
cent for speculation cues. The results for detecting
negation cues are thus much higher than for de-
tecting cues for speculation using Stanford NER
CRF. This difference is not very surprising, given

1The scopes were trained and evaluated separetely from
the negations and speculations.

2The original number of annotated scopes in the BioScope
Corpus is 1 981. Of these, 386 annotations for nested scopes
were removed.

11



the data in Table 7, which shows that there are only
a very limited number of negation cues, whereas
there exist over 400 different cue words for spec-
ulation. One reason why the F-score for negation
cues is not even higher, despite the fact that the
number of cues for negations is very limited, could
be that a negation word inside a tag for speculative
words is not counted as a negation cue. There-
fore, the word not in, for example, not really could
have been classified as a negation cue by Stanford
NER CRF, even though it is a cue for speculation
and not for negation. Another reason could be that
the word meaning without in Swedish (utan) also
means but, which only sometimes makes it a nega-
tion cue.

We can also observe in Table 4, that the results
for detection of uncertain expressions are very low
(F-score 42 percent). For undefined expressions,
due to scarce training material, it is not possible
to interpret the results. For certain expressions the
results are acceptable, but since the instances are
in majority, the results are not very useful.

Regarding the BioScope Corpus we can ob-
serve (see Table 5) that the training results both
for detecting cues for negation and for specula-
tions are very high, with an F-score of 97 and 93
percent, respectively. For scope detection, the re-
sult is lower but acceptable, with an F-score of
83 percent. These results indicate that the chosen
method is suitable for the learning task.

The main reason for the differences in F-score
between the Swedish consensus corpus and the
BioScope Corpus, when it comes to the detection
of speculation cues, is probably that the variation
of words that were annotated as Speculative word
is much larger in the constructed consensus than
in the BioScope Corpus.

As can be seen in Table 7, there are many more
types of speculative words in the Swedish consen-
sus than in the BioScope Corpus. We believe that
one reason for this difference is that the sentences
in the constructed consensus are extracted from
a very large number of clinics (several hundred),
whereas the BioScope Corpus comes from one ra-
diology clinic. This is supported by the findings of
Szarvas (2008), who writes that cues for specula-
tion are domain-specific. In this case, however, the
texts are still within the domain of clinical texts.

Another reason for the larger variety of cues for
speculation in the Swedish corpus could be that
the guidelines for annotating the BioScope Cor-

pus and the method for creating a consensus were
different.

When comparing the results for the individual
annotators with the constructed consensus, the fig-
ures in Tables 3 and 6 indicate that there are no
big differences in generalizability. When detecting
cues for negation, the precision for the consensus
is better than the precision for the individual an-
notations. However, the results for the recall are
only slightly better or equivalent for the consensus
than for the individual annotations. If we analyse
the speculative cues we can observe that the con-
sensus and the individual annotations have similar
results.

The low results for learning to detect cues for
speculation also serve as an indicator that the task
should be simplified to be more easily generaliz-
able. For example, as previously suggested for
increasing the inter-annotator agreement, the task
could be tailored towards the specific information
that is to be extracted, such as the presence of a
disease in a patient.

6 Future work

To further investigate if a machine learning algo-
rithm such as Conditional Random Fields can be
used for detecting speculative words, more infor-
mation needs to be provided for the Conditional
Random Fields, such as part of speech or if any
of the words in the sentence can be classified as a
symptom or a disease. One Conditional Random
Fields system that can treat nested annotations is
CRF++ (CRF++, 2010). CRF++ is used by several
research groups and we are interested in trying it
out for the negation and speculation detection as
well as scope detection.

7 Conclusion

A consensus clinical corpus was constructed by
applying a few basic rules for combining three in-
dividual annotations into one. Compared to the
individual annotations, the consensus contained
fewer annotations of uncertainties and fewer an-
notations that divided the sentences into clauses.
It also contained fewer annotations for speculative
words, and more annotations for negations. Of
the sentences in the constructed corpus, 92 percent
were identically annotated by at least two persons.

In comparison with the BioScope Corpus, the
constructed consensus contained both a larger
number and a larger variety of speculative cues.

12



This might be one of the reasons why the results
for detecting cues for speculative words using the
Stanford NER CRF are much better for the Bio-
Scope Corpus than for the constructed consensus
corpus; the F-scores are 93 percent versus 46 per-
cent.

Both the BioScope Corpus and the constructed
consensus corpus had high values for detection of
negation cues, F-scores 97 and 90 percent, respec-
tively.

As is suggested by Velupillai (2010), the guide-
lines for annotation should include instructions
on the focus of the uncertainties. To focus the
decision of uncertainty on, for instance, the dis-
ease of a patient, might improve both the inter-
annotator agreement and the possibility of auto-
matically learning to detect the concept of uncer-
tainty.

Acknowledgments

We are very grateful for the valuable comments by
the three anonymous reviewers.

References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder

agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury,
Gregory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001.
A simple algorithm for identifying negated findings
and diseases in discharge summaries. Journal of
biomedical informatics, 34(5):301–310.

CRF++. 2010. CRF++: Yet another CRF toolkit, May
8. http://crfpp.sourceforge.net//.

Hercules Dalianis and Sumithra Velupillai. 2010.
How certain are clinical assessments? Annotating
Swedish clinical text for (un)certainties, specula-
tions and negations. In Proceedings of the Seventh
conference on International Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, May.

Peter L. Elkin, Steven H. Brown, Brent A. Bauer,
Casey S. Husser, William Carruth, Larry R.
Bergstrom, and Dietlind L. Wahner-Roedler. 2005.
A controlled trial of automated classification of
negation from clinical notes. BMC Medical Infor-
matics and Decision Making, 5(1):13.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs
sampling. In ACL ’05: Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 363–370.

Yang Huang and Henry J. Lowe. 2007. A novel hybrid
approach to automated negation detection in clinical
radiology reports. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 14(3):304.

Dan Klein, Joseph Smarr, Huy Nguyen, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2003. Named entity recognition
with character-level models. In Proceedings of the
seventh conference on Natural language learning at
HLT-NAACL 2003, pages 180–183. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ron Kohavi. 1995. A study of cross-validation and
bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selec-
tion. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, volume 14, pages 1137–1145.

Roser Morante and Walter Daelemans. 2009. A met-
alearning approach to processing the scope of nega-
tion. In CoNLL ’09: Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 21–29. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Lior Rokach, Roni Romano, and Oded Maimo. 2008.
Negation recognition in medical narrative reports.
Information Retrieval, 11(6):499–538.

Maria Skeppstedt. 2010. Negation detection in
Swedish clinical text. In Louhi’10 - Second Louhi
Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Doc-
uments, held in conjunction with NAACL HLT 2010,
Los Angeles, June.

SNOMED-CT. 2010. Systematized nomen-
clature of medicine-clinical terms, May 8.
http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/.

Stefan Steidl, Michael Levit, Anton Batliner, Elmar
Nöth, and Heinrich Niemann. 2005. ”Off all
things the measure is man” Automatic classification
of emotions and inter-labeler consistency. In Pro-
ceeding of the IEEE ICASSP,2005, pages 317–320.

György Szarvas. 2008. Hedge classification in
biomedical texts with a weakly supervised selec-
tion of keywords. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT,
pages 281–289, Columbus, Ohio, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Sumithra Velupillai. 2010. Towards a better un-
derstanding of uncertainties and speculations in
swedish clinical text – analysis of an initial anno-
tation trial. To be published in the proceedings of
the Negation and Speculation in Natural Language
Processing Workshop, July 10, 2010, Uppsala, Swe-
den.

Veronika Vincze, György Szarvas, Richárd Farkas,
György Móra, and János Csirik. 2008. The bio-
scope corpus: biomedical texts annotated for uncer-
tainty, negation and their scopes. BMC Bioinformat-
ics, 9(S-11).

13


