



















































The Color of Emotions in Texts


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex 2010), pages 28–32,
Beijing, August 2010

The Color of Emotions in Texts

Carlo Strapparava and Gozde Ozbal
FBK-irst

strappa@fbk.eu, gozbalde@gmail.com

Abstract

Color affects every aspect of our lives.
There has been a considerable interest
in the psycholinguistic research area ad-
dressing the impact of color on emotions.
In the experiments conducted by these
studies, subjects have usually been asked
to indicate their emotional responses to
different colors. On the other side, sensing
emotions in text by using NLP techniques
has recently become a popular topic in
computational linguistics. In this paper,
we introduce a semantic similarity mecha-
nism acquired from a large corpus of texts
in order to check the similarity of col-
ors and emotions. Then we investigate
the correlation of our results with the out-
comes of some psycholinguistic experi-
ments. The conclusions are quite inter-
esting. The correlation varies among dif-
ferent colors and globally we achieve very
good results.

1 Introduction

In our daily speech, we frequently make use of
colors in order to increase our expressiveness by
invoking different emotions. For instance, we usu-
ally stress the redness of someone’s face for the
implication of his/her anger or excitement, or we
use phrases including the color black to refer to a
depressed mood. On the other hand, the color pink
is mostly used with positive connotations such as
‘to see everything in pink light’, where the mean-
ing is related to optimism and happiness.

Actually, the parts of the nervous system which
are responsible for emotional arousal are affected

as soon as a color is perceived. Thus, the term
color emotion has lately been used to represent
the emotions arousing in human beings when they
percept a color (Xin et al., 2004).

The correlation of color and emotion has been
the focus of a lot of psycholinguistic studies so
far. In the experiments conducted by these studies,
subjects have usually been asked to indicate their
emotional responses to different colors so that
some general results stating which color arouses
what kind of emotion could be obtained.

Sensing emotion, or in other words, affective
sensing in text by using Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) techniques is recently a very pop-
ular topic in computational linguistics. There ex-
ist several studies focusing on the automatic iden-
tification of emotions in text with the help of
both knowledge-based and corpus-based methods.
Thus it is conceivable to explore whether state-of-
the-art corpus analysis techniques can give sup-
port to psycholinguistic experiments.

Considering that psycholinguistic experiments
are very costly since a lot of resources are required
for both the setup and evaluation phases, employ-
ing a corpus-based approach for affective sensing
could be much more efficient for all analysis to be
held in the future, if this technique was proven to
give reasonable results.

In this paper, we employ a semantic similarity
mechanism automatically obtained in an unsuper-
vised way from a large corpus of texts in order
to check the similarity of color and emotion via
computational analysis methods. We adopt the
psycholinguistic experiments as references, with
which we compare our results to find out if there
is a correlation between the two approaches.

28



The paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we introduce some related work focusing on
the association of color and emotion only from
a psycholinguistic point of view, since this topic
has not been addressed by computational analysis
techniques so far. In Section 3, we describe the
methodology for implementing a similarity be-
tween colors and emotions, in particular how to
represent an emotion in a latent semantic space.
We present the evaluation of our approach and
make a comparison with the results of psycholin-
guistic experiments in Section 4. Lastly, we report
the conclusions and possible future work in Sec-
tion 5.

2 Background

As we mentioned previously, there has been a con-
siderable interest in the psycholinguistic research
area addressing the impact of color on emotions.

(Zentner, 2001) mainly addressed the question
of whether young children could show reliable
color preferences. This study also tried to make a
comparison with the results obtained with adults
and older children. Subjects’ color preferences
were obtained by asking them to choose the one
that they prefer among an array of colored card-
board rectangles. As an alternative way to repre-
sent musical information for providing feedback
on emotion expression in music, (Bresin, 2005)
suggested to use a graphical non-verbal represen-
tation of expressivity in music performance by ex-
ploiting color as an index of emotion. And for the
purpose of determining which colors were most
suitable for an emotional expression, some ex-
periments were conducted, where subjects rated
how well several colors and their nuances corre-
sponded to music performances expressing differ-
ent emotions. (Kaya, 2004) tried to investigate
and discuss the associations between color and
emotion by conducting experiments where college
students were asked to indicate their emotional re-
sponses to principal, intermediate and achromatic
colors, and the reasons for their choices.

There exist also some research investigating
whether the color perception is related to the re-
gion of the subject. For instance, (Gao et al.,
2007) analyzed and compared the color emotions
of people from seven regions in a psychophysical

experiment, with an attempt to clarify the influ-
ences of culture and color perception attributes on
color emotions. This study suggested that it might
be possible to compose a color emotion space by
using a restricted number of factors. As for (So-
riano and Valenzuela, 2009), this study tried to
find out why there was often a relationship be-
tween color and emotion words in different lan-
guages. In order to achieve this, a new experi-
mental methodology called the Implicit Associa-
tion Test (IAT) was used to explore the implicit
connotative structure of the Peninsular Spanish
color terms in terms of Osgood’s universal se-
mantic dimensions explained in (Adams and Os-
good, 1973). The research conducted by (Xin et
al., 2004) tried to compare the color emotional re-
sponses that were obtained by conducting visual
experiments in different regions by using a set of
color samples. A quantitative approach was used
in this study in an attempt to compare the color
emotions among these regions. (Madden et al.,
2000) focused on the possible power of color for
creating and sustaining brand and corporate im-
ages in international marketing. This study tried
to explore the favorite colors of consumers from
different countries, the meanings they associated
with colors, and their color preferences for a logo.

The study that we will use for evaluating our re-
sults is a work which focused on the topic “emo-
tional responses to color used in advertisement”
(Alt, 2008). During the experiments, this study
conducted a survey where the subjects were re-
quired to view an advertisement with a dominant
color hue, and then select a specific emotional re-
sponse and a positive/negative orientation related
with this color. More than 150 subjects partici-
pated in this study, roughly equally partitioned in
gender. There are two main reasons why we pre-
ferred to use this study for our evaluation proce-
dure. Firstly, the presentation and organization of
the results provide a good reference for our own
experiments. In addition, it focusses on adver-
tisement, which is one of the applicative fields we
want to address in future work.

3 Methodology

Sensing emotions from text is an appealing task
of natural language processing (Pang and Lee,

29



2008; Strapparava and Mihalcea, 2007): the au-
tomatic recognition of affective states is becom-
ing a fundamental issue in several domains such
as human-computer interaction or sentiment anal-
ysis for opinion mining. Indeed, a large amount
of textual material has become available form the
Web (e.g. blogs, forums, social networks), rais-
ing the attractiveness of empirical methods analy-
sis on this field.

For representing the emotions, we exploit the
methodology described in (Strapparava and Mi-
halcea, 2008). The idea underlying the method is
the distinction between direct and indirect affec-
tive words.

For direct affective words (i.e. words that di-
rectly denote emotions), authors refer to the
WORDNET AFFECT (Strapparava and Valitutti,
2004) lexicon, a freely available extension of the
WORDNET database which employs some basic
emotion labels (e.g. anger, disgust, fear, joy, sad-
ness) to annotate WORDNET synsets.

For indirect affective words, a crucial aspect
is building a mechanism to represent an emotion
starting from affective lexical concepts and to in-
troduce a semantic similarity among generic terms
(and hence also words denoting colors) and these
emotion representations.

Latent Semantic Analysis is used to acquire,
in an unsupervised setting, a vector space from
the British National Corpus1. In LSA, term co-
occurrences in a corpus are captured by means of
a dimensionality reduction operated by a singu-
lar value decomposition on the term-by-document
matrix representing the corpus. LSA has the
advantage of allowing homogeneous representa-
tion and comparison of words, word sets (e.g.
synsets), text fragments or entire documents. For
representing word sets and texts by means of a
LSA vector, it is possible to use a variation of
the pseudo-document methodology described in
(Berry, 1992). This variation takes into account
also a tf-idf weighting schema. In practice, each
document can be represented in the LSA space by
summing up the normalized LSA vectors of all the

1BNC is a very large (over 100 million words) cor-
pus of modern English, both spoken and written (see
http://www.hcu.ox.ac.uk/bnc/). Other more spe-
cific corpora could also be considered, to obtain a more do-
main oriented similarity.

terms contained in it. Therefore a set of words
(and even all the words labeled with a particular
emotion) can be represented in the LSA space,
performing the pseudo-document technique on
them.

As stated in (Strapparava and Mihalcea, 2008),
each emotion can be represented in various ways
in the LSA space. The particular one that we are
employing is the ‘LSA Emotion Synset’ setting,
which has proved to give the best results in terms
of fine-grained emotion sensing. In this setting,
the synsets of direct emotion words, taken form
WORDNET AFFECT, are considered.

For our purposes, we compare the similarities
among the representations of colors and emotions
in the latent similarity space.

4 Experiments

For the experiments in this paper, we built an
LSA vector space on the full BNC corpus us-
ing 400 dimensions. To compare our approach
with the psycholinguistic experiments reported in
(Alt, 2008), we represent the following emotions:
anger, aversion/disgust, fear, happiness/joy, and
sadness. And we consider the colors Blue, Red,
Green, Orange, Purple, Yellow. Table 1 reports
the rankings of emotions according to colors from
(Alt, 2008).

Color Ranking of Emotions
Anger Aversion/

Disgust
Fear Joy Sadness

Blue 5 2 4 1 3
Red 1 4 2 3 5

Green 5 2 3 1 4
Orange 4 2 3 1 5
Purple 5 2 4 1 3
Yellow 5 2 4 1 3

Table 1: Emotions ranked by colors from psy-
cholinguistic experiments

In Table 2 we report our results of ranking emo-
tions with respect to colors using the similarity
mechanism described in the previous section. To
evaluate our results with respect to the psycholin-
guistic reference, we use Spearman correlation
coefficient. The resulting correlation between two
approaches for each color is reported in Table 3.

We can observe that the global correlation is
rather good (0.75). In particular, it is very high

30



Color Ranking Emotions using Similarity with Color
Anger Aversion/

Disgust
Fear Joy Sadness

Blue 4 2 3 1 5
Red 4 3 2 1 5

Green 4 2 3 1 5
Orange 4 2 3 1 5
Purple 5 2 3 1 4
Yellow 4 2 3 1 5

Table 2: Emotions ranked by similarity with col-
ors

Color Correlation
Blue 0.7
Red 0.3

Green 0.9
Orange 1.0
Purple 0.9
Yellow 0.7
Total 0.75

Table 3: Correlation

for the colors Orange, Green and Purple, which
implies that the use of language for these colors is
quite in accordance with psycholinguistic results.
The results are good for Blue and Yellow as well,
while the correlation is not so high for Red. This
could suggest that Red is a quite ambiguous color
with respect to emotions.

5 Conclusions

There are emotional and symbolic associations
with different colors. This is also revealed in our
daily use of language, as we frequently make ref-
erences to colors for increasing our expressiveness
by invoking different emotions. While most of
the research conducted so far with the aim of an-
alyzing the relationship between color and emo-
tion was based on psycholinguistic experiments,
the goal of this study was exploring this associ-
ation by employing a corpus-based approach for
affective sensing.

In order to show that our approach was provid-
ing reasonable results, we adopted one of the ex-
isting psycholinguistic experiments as a reference.
Following that adoption, we made a comparison
between the results of this research and our own
technique. Since we have observed that these two
results were highly correlated as we expected, we
would like to explore further this direction. Cer-

tainly different cultures can play a role for variant
emotional responses (Adams and Osgood, 1973).
Thus, as a next step, we are planning to investi-
gate how the perception of color by human be-
ings varies in different languages by again con-
ducting a computational analysis with NLP tech-
niques. Employing this approach could be very
useful and efficient for the design of applications
related to the fields of multimedia, automatic ad-
vertisement production, marketing and education
(e.g. e-learning environments)

In addition, based on our exploration about the
color perception of emotions from a corpus-based
point of view, we suggest that “visual” informa-
tion regarding objects and events could be ex-
tracted from large amounts of text, using the same
kind of techniques proposed in the present paper.
This information can be easily exploited for cre-
ation of dictionaries or used in dynamic visualiza-
tion of text such as kinetic typography (Strappar-
ava et al., 2007). As a concrete example, our ap-
proach can be extended to discover the association
of colors not only with emotions, but also with in-
direct affective words in various languages. We
believe that the discovery of this kind of relation-
ship would allow us to automatically build col-
orful dictionaries, which could substantially help
users with both interpretation and memorization
processes.

References
Adams, F. M. and C. E. Osgood. 1973. A cross-

cultural study of the affective meanings of colour.
Journal of cross-cultural psychology, 4:135—156.

Alt, M. 2008. Emotional responses to color associated
with an advertisement. Master’s thesis, Graduate
College of Bowling Green State University, Bowl-
ing Green, Ohio.

Berry, M. 1992. Large-scale sparse singular value
computations. International Journal of Supercom-
puter Applications, 6(1):13–49.

Bresin, R. 2005. What is the color of that music
performance? In Proceedings of the International
Computer Music Conference (ICMA 2005), pages
367–370.

Gao, X.P., J.H. Xin, T. Sato, A. Hansuebsai, M. Scalzo,
K. Kajiwara, S. Guan, J. Valldeperas, M. Lis Jose,

31



and M. Billger. 2007. Analysis of cross-cultural
color emotion. Color research and application,
32(223—229).

Kaya, N. 2004. Relationship between color and emo-
tion: a study of college students. College Student
Journal, pages 396–405.

Madden, T. J., K. Hewett, and S. Roth Martin. 2000.
Managing images in different cultures: A cross-
national study of color meanings and preferences.
Journal of International Marketing, 8(4):90–107.

Ortony, A., G. L. Clore, and M. A. Foss. 1987.
The psychological foundations of the affective lexi-
con. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
53:751–766.

Pang, B. and L. Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and senti-
ment analysis. Foundations and Trends in Informa-
tion Retrieval, 2(1-2):1–135.

Soriano, C. and J. Valenzuela. 2009. Emotion and
colour across languages: implicit associations in
spanish colour terms. Social Science Information,
48:421–445, September.

Strapparava, C. and R. Mihalcea. 2007. SemEval-
2007 task 14: Affective Text. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ations (SemEval 2007), pages 70–74, Prague, June.

Strapparava, C. and R. Mihalcea. 2008. Learning to
identify emotions in text. In SAC ’08: Proceedings
of the 2008 ACM symposium on Applied computing,
pages 1556–1560, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Strapparava, C. and A. Valitutti. 2004. WordNet-
Affect: an affective extension of WordNet. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC, volume 4, pages 1083–1086.

Strapparava, C., A. Valitutti, and O. Stock. 2007.
Dances with words. In Proc. of the 20th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI-07), Hyderabad, India, January.

Xin, J.H., K.M. Cheng, G. Taylor, T. Sato, and A. Han-
suebsai. 2004. A cross-regional comparison of
colour emotions. part I. quantitative analysis. Color
Research and Application, 29:451—457.

Zentner, M. R. 2001. Preferences for colors and color-
emotion combinations in early childhood. Develop-
mental Science, 4(4):389–398.

32


