










































The Deep Re-Annotation in a Chinese Scientific Treebank


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 123–126,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Deep Re-annotation in a Chinese Scientific Treebank  

Kun Yu1 Xiangli Wang1 Yusuke Miyao2 Takuya Matsuzaki1 Junichi Tsujii1,3 
1. The University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan 
{kunyu, xiangli, matuzaki, tsujii}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp 

2. National Institute of Informatics, Hitotsubashi 2-1-2, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan 
yusuke@nii.ac.jp 

3. The University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK 
 

Abstract 

In this paper, we introduce our recent work 
on re-annotating the deep information, which 
includes both the grammatical functional tags 
and the traces, in a Chinese scientific tree-
bank. The issues with regard to re-annotation 
and its corresponding solutions are discussed. 
Furthermore, the process of the re-annotation 
work is described. 

1 Introduction 

A Chinese scientific Treebank (called the NICT 
Chinese Treebank) has been developed by the 
National Institute of Information and Communi-
cations Technology of Japan (NICT). This tree-
bank annotates the word segmentation, pos-tags, 
and bracketing structures according to the anno-
tation guideline of the Penn Chinese Treebank 
(Xia, 2000(a); Xia, 2000(b); Xue and Xia, 
2000). Contrary to the Penn Chinese Treebank 
in news domain, the NICT Chinese Treebank 
includes sentences that are manually translated 
from Japanese scientific papers. Currently, the 
NICT Chinese Treebank includes around 8,000 
Chinese sentences. The annotation of more sen-
tences in the science domain is ongoing.  

The current annotation of the NICT Chinese 
Treebank is informative for some language 
analysis tasks, such as syntactic parsing and 
word segmentation. However, the deep informa-
tion, which includes both the grammatical func-
tional tags and the traces, are omitted in the an-
notation. Without grammatical functions, the 
simple bracketing structure is not informative 
enough to represent the semantics for Chinese. 
Furthermore, the traces are critical elements in 
detecting long-distance dependencies.  

Gabbard et al. (2006) and Blaheta and 
Charniak (2000) applied machine learning mod-
els to automatically assign the empty categories 
and functional tags to an English treebank.  

However, considering about the different do-
mains that the Penn Chinese Treebank and the 
NICT Chinese Treebank belong to, the machine 
learning model trained on the Penn Chinese 
Treebank may not work successfully on the 
NICT Chinese Treebank. In order to guarantee 
the high annotation quality, in our work, we 
manually re-annotate both the grammatical 
functional tags and the traces to the NICT Chi-
nese Treebank. With the deep re-annotation, the 
NICT Chinese Treebank could be used not only 
for the shallow natural language processing 
tasks, but also as a resource for deep applica-
tions, such as the lexicalized grammar develop-
ment from treebanks (Miyao 2006; Guo 2009; 
Xia 1999; Hockenmaier and Steedman 2002).  

Considering that the translation quality of the 
sentences in the NICT Chinese Treebank may 
affect the quality of re-annotation, in the current 
phase, we only selected 2,363 sentences that are 
of good translation quality, for re-annotation. In 
the future, with the expansion of the NICT Chi-
nese Treebank, we will continue this re-
annotation work on large-scale sentences.  

2 Content of Re-annotation 
Because the NICT Chinese Treebank follows 
the annotation guideline of the Penn Chinese 
Treebank, our re-annotation uses similar annota-
tion criteria in the Penn Chinese Treebank.  

Figure 1 exemplifies our re-annotation to a 
sentence in the NICT Chinese Treebank. In this 
example, we first re-annotate the trace (as indi-
cated by the italicized part in Figure 1(b)) for 
the extracted head noun ‘词/word’. Furthermore, 
we re-annotate the functional tag of the trace (as 
indicated by the dashed-box in Figure 1(b)), to 
indicate that the extracted head noun should be 
restored into the relative clause as a topic. 

There are 26 functional tags in the Penn Chi-
nese Treebank (Xue and Xia, 2000), in which 
seven functional tags describe the grammatical 

123



roles and one functional tag (i.e. LGS) indicates 
a logical subject. Since the eight functional tags 
are crucial for obtaining the grammatical func-
tion of constituents, we re-annotate the eight 
functional tags (refer to Table 1) to the NICT 
Chinese Treebank. 

(NP (CP (IP (NP (NN 单词) 
                            (NN 亲密度)) 

                              (VP (VA 高))) 
                                 (DEC 的)) 
                          (NP (NN 词))) 

(the word of which the word cohesion is high) 
(a) A relative clause in the NICT Chinese Treebank  

        (NP (CP (WHNP-1 (-NONE- *OP*) 
     (CP (IP (NP-TPC (-NONE- *T*-1)) 
                  (NP (NN 单词) 
                          (NN 亲密度)) 
                  (VP (VA 高))) 

                               (DEC 的))) 
               (NP (NN 词))) 

(b) The relative clause after re-annotation 

Figure 1.  Our re-annotation to a relative clause. 

Functional Tag Description 
IO indirect object 

OBJ direct object 

EXT post-verbal complement that describes the extent, frequency, or quantity 

FOC object fronted to a pre-verbal but post-subject position 
PRD non-verbal predicate 
SBJ surface subject 
TPC topic 
LGS logical subject 

Table 1. Functional tags that we re-annotate. 

                (IP (NP-TPC-1 (NN 信息)) 
                (VP (ADVP (AD 比较)) 
                       (VP (ADVP (AD 容易)) 
                              (VP (VV 获得) 
                                     (NP-OBJ (-NONE- *T*-1)))))) 

                           (It is easier to obtain information.) 
(a) A topic construction with long-distance dependency 

after re-annotation of functional tag and trace 

         (IP (NP-TPC (DP (DT 该)) 
                               (NP (NN 算法))) 
               (NP-SBJ (NP (PN 其)) 
                              (NP (NN 合理性))) 
               (VP (ADVP (AD 已)) 
                       (VP (VV 得到) 
                              (VV 证实))))  

              (The rationality of this algorithm has been verified.) 
 (b) A topic construction without long-distance dependency 

after re-annotation of functional tag 

Figure 2. Our re-annotation to topic constructions. 

In addition, in the annotation guideline of the 
Penn Chinese Treebank, four constructions are 
annotated with traces: BA-construction, BEI-
construction, topic construction and relative 
clause. The BEI-construction and relative 

clause introduce long-distance dependency. 
Therefore, we re-annotate the traces for the two 
constructions. The topic construction introduces 
the topic phrase. For the topic constructions that 
contain long-distance dependency, we re-
annotate both the traces and the functional tags 
(refer to the italicized part in Figure 2(a)). Some 
topic constructions, however, do not include 
long-distance dependency. In such cases, we 
only re-annotate the functional tag to indicate 
that it is a topic (refer to the italicized part in 
Figure 2(b)). In addition, the BA-construction 
moves the object to a pre-verbal position. Al-
though the BA-construction does not contain 
long-distance dependency, we still re-annotate 
the trace to acquire the original position of the 
moved object in the sentence. 

3 Issues and Solutions 
3.1 Trace re-annotation in the BA/BEI 

construction 

The NICT Chinese Treebank follows the word 
segmentation and pos-tag annotation guideline 
of the Penn Chinese Treebank. Therefore, there 
are some BA-constructions and BEI-
constructions that cannot be re-annotated with 
traces. The principle reason for this is that the 
moved object has semantic relations with only 
part of the verb. For example, in the sentence 
shown in Figure 3(a), the moved head noun ‘家
乡/hometown’ is the object of ‘建/construct’, 
but not for ‘建成/construct to be’.  

(VP (BA 把) 
               (IP (NP (NN 家乡)) 
                     (VP (VV 建成) 
                            (NP (NN 花园))))) 

(construct the hometown to be a garden) 
(a) The annotation in the NICT Chinese Treebank 

 (VP (BA 把) 
                           (IP (NP-SBJ-1 (NN 家乡)) 
                                 (VP (VV 建) 
                                        (NP-OBJ (-NONE- *-1)) 
                                        (AM 成) 
                                        (NP (NN 花园))))) 

(b) Our proposed re-annotation of functional tag and trace 

Figure 3.  Our re-annotation to a BA construction with split 
verb. 

Our analysis of the Penn Chinese Treebank 
shows that only a closed list of characters (such 
as ‘成/to be’) can be attached to verbs in such a 
case. Therefore, we solve the problem by fol-
lowing four steps (for an example, refer to Fig-
ure 3(b)): 

124



(1) A linguist manually collects the characters 
that can be attached to verbs in such a case from 
the Penn Chinese Treebank and assigns them a 
new pos-tag ‘AM (argument marker)’.  

(2) The annotators use the character list as a 
reference during the re-annotation. When the 
verb in a BA/BEI construction ends with a char-
acter in the list, and the annotators think the 
verb should be split, the annotators record the 
sentence ID without performing any re-
annotation.  

(3) The linguist collects all of the recorded 
sentences, and defines pattern rules to automati-
cally split the verbs in the BA/BEI construc-
tions. 

(4) The annotators annotate trace for the sen-
tences with the split verbs. This step will be fin-
ished in our future work. 

3.2 Topic detection 
In the annotation guideline of the Penn Chinese 
Treebank, a topic is defined as ‘the element that 
appears before the subject in a declarative sen-
tence’. However, the NICT Chinese Treebank 
does not annotate the omitted subject. Therefore, 
we could not use the position of the subject as a 
criterion for topic detection.  

In order to resolve this issue, we define some 
heuristic rules based on both the meaning and 
the bracketing structure of phrases, to help de-
tect the topic phrase. Only the phrase that satis-
fies all the rules will be re-annotated as a topic. 
The following exemplifies some rules: 

(1) If there is a phrase before a subject, the 
phrase is probably a topic. 

(2) A topic phrase must be parallel to the fol-
lowing verb phrase. 

(3) The preposition phrase and localization 
phrase describing the location or time are not 
topics. 

3.3 Inconsistent annotation in the NICT 
Chinese Treebank 

There are some inconsistent annotations in the 
NICT Chinese Treebank, which makes our re-
annotation work difficult.  

These inconsistencies include: 
(1) Inconsistent word segmentation, such as 

segmenting the word ‘相对应 /corresponding’ 
into two words ‘相对/opposite’ and ‘应/ought’. 

(2) Inconsistent pos-tag annotation. For ex-
ample, when the word  ‘的’  exists between two 
noun phrases, it should be tagged as an associa-
tive marker (i.e. DEG), according to the guide-

line of the Penn Chinese Treebank. However, in 
the NICT Chinese Treebank, sometimes it is 
tagged as a nominalizer (i.e. DEC). 

 (3) Inconsistent bracketing annotation. Fig-
ure 4(a) shows the annotation of a relative 
clause in the NICT Chinese Treebank. In this 
annotation, the noun phrase ‘大阪/Osaka 地铁
/subway’ is incorrectly treated as the extracted 
head; furthermore, the adverb ‘人工/by hand’ 
that modifies the verb ‘制作/make’ is incor-
rectly annotated as an adjective that modifies the 
noun ‘变形图/deformation graph’. After cor-
recting these inconsistencies, the relative clause 
should be annotated as shown in Figure 4(b). 

(NP (QP (CD 很多)) 
             (ADJP (JJ 人工)) 
             (DNP (NP (CP (IP (VP (VV 制作))) 
                                      (DEC 的)) 
                               (NP (NR 大阪) 
                                      (NN 地铁))) 
                        (DEG 的)) 
             (NP (NN 变形图))) 

(many deformation graphs of Osaka subway that are made by hand) 
 (a) The inconsistent annotation of a relative clause 

(NP (QP (CD 很多)) 
       (NP (CP (IP (VP (ADVP (AD 人工)) 
                                    (VP (VV 制作)))) 
                      (DEC 的)) 
               (NP (DNP (NP (NR 大阪) 
                                        (NN 地铁)) 
                                 (DEG 的)) 
                      (NP (NN 变形图))))) 

 (b) The annotation after correcting the inconsistencies 

Figure 4. An inconsistent annotation in the NICT Chinese 
Treebank and its correction. 

In our re-annotation, these inconsistently an-
notated sentences in the NICT Chinese Tree-
bank were recorded by the annotators. We then 
sent them back to NICT for further verification. 

4 Process of Re-annotation 
4.1 Annotation Guideline  
During the re-annotation, we basically follow 
the annotation guideline of the Penn Chinese 
Treebank (Xue and Xia, 2000). However, in 
order to fit with the characteristics of scientific 
sentences in the NICT Chinese Treebank, some 
constraints are added to the guideline.  

For example, in the science domain, the rela-
tive clause is often used to describe a phenome-
non, in which the extracted head noun is usually 
an abstract noun, and the relative clause is an 
appositive of the extracted head noun. Figure 5 
shows an example in which the relative clause 
‘系统/system 停止/stop 工作/working’ is a de-

125



scription of the extracted head noun ‘现象
/phenomenon’. In such a case, the head noun 
cannot be restored into the clause. Therefore, we 
add the following restriction in our re-
annotation guideline: Do not re-annotate the 
trace when the head noun of a relative clause is 
an abstract noun and it is an appositive of the 
relative clause. 

        (NP (CP (IP (NP (NN 系统)) 
                             (VP (VV 停止) 
                                     (NP (NN 工作)))) 
                       (DEC 的)) 
                (NP (NN 现象))) 

(the phenomenon that the system stops working) 

Figure 5. A relative clause in the NICT Chinese Treebank. 

4.2 Quality Control 
Several processes were undertaken to guarantee 
the quality of our re-annotation:  

(1) We chose graduate students who major in 
Chinese for all of the annotators.  

(2) A visualization tool - XConc Suite (Kim 
et al., 2008) was used as assistance during the 
re-annotation.  

(3) Only 2,363 sentences with good transla-
tion quality in the NICT Chinese Treebank were 
chosen for re-annotation in the current phase.  

 (4) Before starting the re-annotation, a lin-
guist selected 200 representative sentences, 
which contain all the linguistic phenomena that 
we want to re-annotate, from among the 2,363 
sentences in the NICT Chinese Treebank. The 
selected 200 sentences were manually re-
annotated by the linguist, and were split into 
two sets for training the annotators sequentially. 
We evaluated the annotation quality of the anno-
tators during training. The average annotation 
quality of all the annotators after training is 
shown in Table 2. 

Annotation Quality Inter-annotator Consistency 
Precision Recall Precision Recall 
70.71% 70.75% 61.59% 61.59% 

Table 2. The average annotation quality of the annotators 
after training.     

 (5) After training, the remaining sentences 
were split into several parts and assigned to the 
annotators for re-annotation. In each part, there 
were around 20% sentences that were shared by 
all of the annotators. These shared sentences 
were used to check and guarantee inter-
annotator consistency during the re-annotation.  

5 Conclusion and Future Work  
We re-annotated the deep information, which 
includes eight types of grammatical functional 

tags and the traces in four constructions, to a 
Chinese scientific treebank, i.e. the NICT Chi-
nese Treebank. Since the NICT Chinese Tree-
bank is based on manually translated sentences, 
only 2,363 sentences with good translation qual-
ity were re-annotated in the current phase to 
guarantee the re-annotation quality.  

In the future, we will finish the trace annota-
tion for the BA and BEI constructions with split 
verbs. Furthermore, we will continue our re-
annotation on more sentences in the NICT Chi-
nese Treebank. 

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Dr. Kiyotaka Uchimoto 
and Dr. Junichi Kazama for providing the NICT 
Chinese Treebank. 

References  
Don Blaheta and Eugene Charniak. 2000. Assigning Func-

tion Tags to Parsed Text. Proceedings of NAACL 2000. 
Ryan Gabbard, Seth Kulick and Mitchell Marcus. 2006. 

Fully Parsing the Penn Treebank. Proceedings of HLT-
NAACL 2006. 

Yuqing Guo. 2009. Treebank-based acquisition of Chinese 
LFG Resources for Parsing and Generation. Ph.D. 
Thesis. Dublin City University. 

Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2002. Acquiring 
Compact Lexicalized Grammars from a Cleaner Tree-
bank. Proceedings of the 3rd LREC. 

Jindong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Junichi Tsujii. 2008. 
Corpus Annotation for Mining Biomedical Events from 
Literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(10).  

Yusuke Miyao. 2006. From Linguistic Theory to Syntactic 
Analysis: Corpus-oriented Grammar Development and 
Feature Forest Model. Ph.D Thesis. The University of 
Tokyo. 

Fei Xia. 1999. Extracting Tree Adjoining Grammars from 
Bracketed Corpora. Proceedings of the 5th NLPRS. 

Fei Xia. 2000 (a). The Segmentation Guidelines for the 
Penn Chinese Treebank (3.0). 

Fei Xia. 2000 (b). The Part-of-speech Tagging Guidelines 
for the Penn Chinese Treebank (3.0). 

Nianwen Xue, Fudong Chiou, and Martha Palmer. 2002. 
Building a Large-Scale Annotated Chinese Corpus. 
Proceedings of COLING 2002. 

Nianwen Xue and Fei Xia. 2000. The Bracketing Guide-
lines for the Penn Chinese Treebank. 

Shiwen Yu et al. 2002. The Basic Processing of Contempo-
rary Chinese Corpus at Peking University Specification. 
Journal of Chinese Information Processing, 16 (5). 

Qiang Zhou. 2004. Annotation Scheme for Chinese Tree-
bank. Journal of Chinese Information Processing, 18 
(4). 

126


