










































Intelligent Linux Information Access by Data Mining: the ILIAD Project


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 15–16,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Intelligent Linux Information Access by Data Mining: the ILIAD Project

Timothy Baldwin,♠ David Martinez,♥ Richard B. Penman,♠ Su Nam Kim,♠

Marco Lui,♠ Li Wang♠ and Andrew MacKinlay♠

♠ Dept of Computer Science and Software Engineering, University of Melbourne, Australia

♥ NICTA Victoria Research Laboratory

Abstract

We propose an alternative to conventional in-

formation retrieval over Linux forum data,

based on thread-, post- and user-level analysis,

interfaced with an information retrieval engine

via reranking.

1 Introduction

Due to the sheer scale of web data, simple keyword

matching is an effective means of information ac-

cess for many informational web queries. There

still remain significant clusters of information access

needs, however, where keyword matching is less

successful. One such instance is technical web fo-

rums and mailing lists (collectively termed “forums”

for the purposes of this paper): technical forums

are a rich source of information when troubleshoot-

ing, and it is often possible to resolve technical

queries/problems via web-archived data. The search

facilities provided by forums and web search en-

gines tend to be over-simplistic, however, and there

is a desperate need for more sophisticated search (Xi

et al., 2004; Seo et al., 2009), including: favour-

ing threads which have led to a successful resolu-

tion; reflecting the degree of clarity/reproducibility

of the proposed solution in a given thread; repre-

senting threads via their threaded rather than sim-

ple chronological structure; the ability to highlight

key aspects of the thread, in terms of the problem

description and solution which led to a successful

resolution; and ideally, the ability to represent the

problem and solution in normalised form via infor-

mation extraction.

This paper provides a brief outline of an attempt

to achieve these and other goals in the context of

Linux web user forum data, in the form of the IL-

IAD (Intelligent Linux Information Access by Data

Mining) project. Linux users and developers rely

particularly heavily on web user forums and mail-

ing lists, due to the nature of the community, which

is highly decentralised — with massive proliferation

of packages and distributions — and notoriously bad

at maintaining up-to-date documentation at a level

suitable for newbie and even intermediate users.

2 Project Outline

Our proposed solution is as follows: (1) crawl data

from a variety of web user forums; (2) analyse each

thread, to identify named entities and generate meta-

data; (3) analyse post-level linkages; (4) predict

user-level features which are expected to impinge on

the quality of search results; and finally (5) draw to-

gether the features from (1) to (4) to enhance the

quality of a traditional ranked IR approach. We

briefly review each step below. Given space limi-

tations, we focus on outlining our interpretation of

the task in this paper. For further details and results,

the reader is referred to the key papers cited herein.

2.1 Crawling

The first step is to crawl data from a variety of fo-

rums and mailing lists, for which we have developed

open-source scraping software in the form of SITE-

SCRAPER.1 SITESCRAPER is designed such that the

user simply copies relevant content from a browser-

rendered version of a given set of pages, which it

interprets as a structured record, and translates into

a generalised XPATH query.

2.2 Thread-level analysis

Next, we perform named entity recognition (NER)

over each thread to identify entities such as package

and distribution names, version numbers and snip-

pets of code; as part of this, we perform version

1http://sitescraper.googlecode.com/

15



anchoring, in identifying what entity each version

number relates to.

To generate thread-level metadata, we classify

each thread for the following three features, based

on an ordinal scale of 1–5 (Baldwin et al., 2007):

Complete: Is the problem description complete?

Solved: Is a solution provided in the thread?

Task Oriented: Is the thread about a specific

problem?

We additionally automatically classify the nature

of the thread content, in terms of, e.g., whether it

contains documentation or installation details, or re-

lates to software, hardware or programming.

Our experiments on thread-level classification are

based on a set of 250 annotated threads from Lin-

uxQuestions and other forums, as well as a dataset

from CNET.

2.3 Post-level analysis

We automatically analyse the post-to-post discourse

structure of each thread, in terms of which (preced-

ing) post(s) each post relates to, and how, building

off the work of Rosé et al. (1995) and Wolf and Gib-

son (2005). For example, a given post may refute

the solution proposed in an earlier post, and also

propose a novel solution in response to the initiat-

ing post.

Separately, we are developing techniques for

identifying whether a new post to a given forum

is sufficiently similar to other (ideally resolved)

threads that the author should be prompted to first

check the existing threads for redundancy before a

new thread is initiated.

Our experiments on post-level analysis are, once

again, based on data from LinuxQuestions and

CNET.

2.4 User-level analysis

We are also experimenting with profiling users vari-

ously, based on a 5-point ordinal scale across a range

of user characteristics. Our experiments are based

on data from LinuxQuestions (Lui, 2009).

2.5 IR ranking

The various features are interfaced with an ad hoc

information retrieval (IR) system via a learning-to-

rank approach (Cao et al., 2007). In order to carry

out IR evaluation, we have developed a set of queries

and relevance judgements over a large-scale set of

forum data.

Our experiments to date have been based on com-

bination over three IR engines (LUCENE, ZETTAIR

and LEMUR), and involved thread-level metadata

only, but we have achieved encouraging results, sug-

gesting that thread-level metadata can enhance IR

effectiveness.

3 Conclusions

This paper provides an outline of the ILIAD project,

focusing on the tasks of crawling, thread-level anal-

ysis, post-level analysis, user-level analysis and IR

reranking. We have designed a series of class sets

for the component tasks, and carried out experimen-

tation over a range of data sources, achieving en-

couraging results.

Acknowledgements

NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as rep-
resented by the Department of Broadband, Communica-
tions and the Digital Economy and the Australian Re-
search Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence pro-
gram.

References

T Baldwin, D Martinez, and RB Penman. 2007. Auto-

matic thread classification for Linux user forum infor-

mation access. In Proc of ADCS 2007.

Z Cao, T Qin, TY Liu, MF Tsai, and H Li. 2007. Learn-

ing to rank: from pairwise approach to listwise ap-

proach. In Proc of ICML 2007.

M Lui. 2009. Impact of user characteristics on online fo-

rum classification tasks. Honours thesis, University of

Melbourne. http://repository.unimelb.edu.

au/10187/5745.

CP Rosé, B Di Eugenio, LS Levin, and C Van Ess-

Dykema. 1995. Discourse processing of dialogues

with multiple threads. In Proc of ACL 1995.

J Seo, WB Croft, and DA Smith. 2009. Online commu-

nity search using thread structure. In Proc of CIKM

2009.

F Wolf and E Gibson. 2005. Representing discourse co-

herence: A corpus-based study. Comp Ling, 31(2).

W Xi, J Lind, and E Brill. 2004. Learning effective rank-

ing functions for newsgroup search. In Proc of SIGIR

2004.

16


