



















































Proceedings of the...


Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 32–40,
Uppsala, July 2010.

Automatic annotation of speculation in biomedical texts: new perspec-

tives and large-scale evaluation 

 

Julien Desclés 

julien.descles@gmail.com 

Olfa Makkaoui 

olfa_makkaoui@yahoo.fr 

Taouise Hacène 

taouise@gmail.com 

LaLIC Université Paris-Sorbonne Maison de la Recherche 28 rue Serpente, 75006 Paris 
  

 

Abstract 

 

One emergent field in text mining tools ap-

plied to biological texts is the automatic de-

tection of speculative sentences. In this pa-

per, we test on a large scale BioExcom, a 

rule-based system which annotates and ca-

tegorizes automatically speculative sen-

tences (“prior” and “new”). This work 

enables us to highlight a more restrictive 

way to consider speculations, viewed as a 

source of knowledge, and to discuss the cri-

teria used to determine if a sentence is spe-

culative or not. By doing so, we demonstrate 

the efficiency of BioExcom to extract these 

types of speculations and we argue the im-

portance of this tool for biologists, who are 

also interested in finding hypotheses. 

1 Introduction 

In one of the first studies about biological 

speculations in Natural Language Processing, 

Light et al. (2004) have reported that biologists 

can have a dual posture concerning this sub-

ject: 

 
“In the context of information retrieval, an ex-

ample information need might be “I am looking 

for speculations about the X gene in liver tis-

sue.” One of the authors spoke at a research 

department of a drug company and the biolo-

gists present expressed this sort of information 

need. On the other hand, one of the authors has 

also encountered the opposite need: “I am look-

ing for definite statements about transcription 

factors that interact with NF Kappa B.” Both 

these information needs would be easier to ful-

fill if automated annotation of speculative pas-

sages was possible.” (Light et al., 2004) 
 

 In this quotation, the term “speculation” has 

not exactly the same meaning in these two 

statements (depending if it comes from compu-

tational linguists or from biologists). Indeed, 

because biologists are almost interested in 

knowing only factual statements, the informa-

tion extraction tools have to remove all uncer-

tain statements, identified as hedging or specu-

lation, or at least to present them separately 

from definite results. Consequently, the vast 

majority of Natural Language Processing tools 

dealing with the identification of speculation 

have followed this very large meaning of the 

word “speculation”, in order to avoid extract-

ing uncertain information as factual informa-

tion (Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2008; Medlock, 

2008; Szarvas, 2008; Morante and Daelemans, 

2009; Özgur and Radev, 2009). To help im-

prove the information extraction tools, a cor-

pus, called BioScope, has been annotated for 

speculation, negation and its linguistic scopes 

in biomedical texts (Szarvas et al., 2008). 

 However, when a biologist says he is inter-

ested in knowing all speculations about a bio-

logical entity (gene or protein for example) or 

a biological process, this claim concerns 

another meaning of the word “speculation”. 

The latter is in this case more restrictive than 

previously, and close to the notion of hypothe-

sis and uncertain proposal. This interest of bi-

ologists can be explained by different reasons. 

Firstly, since speculations give meaning to re-

sults, they sometimes carry more useful infor-

mation than factual sentences. In addition, spe-

culative sentences emphasize important data, 

which can be very useful in data-collection 

papers (genomic and post-genomic papers, see 

(Brent and Lok, 2005)). Finally, speculations 

can also give current trends or directions, by 

enabling the researchers to anticipate future 

experimental discoveries, or by suggesting 

other ways to envision biological problems and 

giving new ideas for future experiments (Bla-

gosklonny and Pardee, 2002). Hence, despite 

its importance for biologists, the need to find 

speculation according to this view has been 

neglected until now in Natural Language 

32



Processing. To our knowledge, the only work 

focusing specifically on this issue is the devel-

opment of the rule-based system BioExcom 

(Desclés et al., 2009). Since BioExcom has 

obtained good results for detecting specula-

tions but in a relatively small scale evaluation, 

it seems useful to test this tool on a large, un-

known corpus like BioScope. Furthermore, it is 

important to compare in greater detail these 

two different approaches to characterize spe-

culative sentences and see more precisely in 

what they differ.  

 We performed an automatic annotation of 

the BioScope corpus by BioExcom and we 

measured raw performance. We observed that 

the vast majority of the divergences between 

BioExcom results and BioScope were due to 

the criteria used for detecting a speculative 

sentence. We manually treated the diverging 

sentences in order to correctly evaluate BioEx-

com according to its own criteria.  

The contributions of this paper are the fol-

lowing: 

 We present an original approach for consi-

dering speculative sentences in bio text min-

ing. It concerns the definition of a specula-

tion, the criteria used to find it and its im-

portance for biologists. 

 We demonstrate the efficiency of BioEx-

com to recognize these statements on a 

large-scale evaluation with good results. 

 According to this new approach we pro-

vide an annotated corpus freely available in 

order to be used by researchers.  

2 Related work 

Hyland (1995) has extensively studied hedg-

ing, from a linguistic perspective, (the term of 

hedging has been introduced by Lakoff (1972)) 

in biological papers. Hedging represents an 

absence of certainty and is employed to 

indicate either a lack of commitment to the 

truth value of an accompanying proposition; 

either a desire not to express that commitment 

categorically. Three main functions are 

outlined for hedging: weakening the strength 

of a statement, signalling uncertainty and 

expressing deference to the reader. 

 From a Natural Language Processing pers-

pective, the first work was carried out by Light 

et al. (2004). After a linguistic study of the use 

of speculative language in MEDLINE ab-

stracts, the authors tested the possibility of ma-

nually annotating the speculative sentences by 

experts and linguists whilst providing small 

annotation guidelines. They concluded that 

humans can reliably annotate speculative sen-

tences but that it is not possible to distinguish 

between “high” speculations and “low” specu-

lations. Furthermore they performed an expe-

riment with different automated methods based 

principally on the retrieval of keywords. Wil-

bur et al. (2006) defined five qualitative di-

mensions for scientific text annotations. Two 

of them concerned speculative statements (cer-

tainty and evidence) and they defined various 

guidelines for annotating text using them. 

 Medlock and Briscone (2007) provided 

much more detailed guidelines for hedge de-

tection. A linguist and a domain expert without 

any input into the guideline development 

process, labelled a publicly available dataset 

(FlyBase dataset, consisting of 6 papers on 

Drosophila melanogaster) in order to perform 

a probabilistic acquisition model and to test it. 

A separation of the acquisition and classifica-

tion phases in semi-supervised machine learn-

ing was used.  

 Svarzas (2008) managed to devise a hedge 

classification in biomedical texts based on a 

weakly supervised selection of keywords. To 

evaluate their system, they manually annotated 

four papers of BMC Bioinformatics with the 

same criteria as Medlock and Briscone (2007). 

They obtained an F-Measure of 85% on the 

FlyBase dataset and an F-Measure of 75% on 

the BMC Bioinformatics dataset, when the 

training was carried out with the FlyBase data-

set, demonstrating that the probability of their 

hedge classifiers is limited.  

 To recognize speculative sentences, Kili-

coglu and Bergler (2008) also used speculative 

keywords from prior linguistic work and ex-

panded them by WordNet, UMLS Specialist 

Lexicon, and by introducing syntactic patterns. 

In order to determine the speculative strength 

of sentences, they assigned speculative cues to 

weights in two methods. They worked on the 

two publicly available corpora, obtaining an F-

Measure of 85% on the FlyBase data set and 

an F-Measure of 82% on the BMC Bioinfor-

matics data. 

 The BioScope corpus is a manually anno-

tated corpus for speculation and negation key-

words (token level), and their linguistic scopes 

(sentence level) (Szarvas et al., 2008). This 

corpus is publicly available
1
 and the annotation 

                                                 
1
 http://www.inf.u-szeged.hu/rgai/bioscope  

33



process has been performed by two indepen-

dent annotators and a chief linguist. In particu-

lar, the corpus consists of 9 full texts papers 

(five papers from the FlyBase dataset and four 

papers from the journal BMC Bioinformatics), 

and 1273 abstracts (from the Genia Corpus 

(Collier et al., 1999)). The annotation guide-

lines are provided and speculation is identified 

to uncertainty and hedging. However the crite-

ria used here are not detailed very accurately, 

unlike the detailed work of Medlock and Bris-

cone (2007).    

 In order to detect hedging but also their 

scope, two recent works were recently 

published. Morante and Daelemans (2009) 

present a machine learning system based on a 

previous system used to detect the scope of 

negation cues. Thus they show that the same 

scope finding system can be applied to both 

negation and hedging. They used the three 

subcropora of the BioScope corpus to test the 

efficiency of their system: the best F-Measures 

they obtained were 85% on the abstracts (10-

fold cross-validation experiments), 72% on the 

Full Text Papers and 60% on the Clinical 

reports for hedge detection (training phase on 

the full abstract subcorpus). Özgur and Radev 

(2009) built also a system that detects specula-

tions and their scopes in biomedical scientific 

texts. They performed a supervised classifica-

tion task, where they classified the potential 

keywords as real speculation keywords or not 

by using a diverse set of linguistic features that 

represent the contexts of the keywords. They 

obtained F-Measure of 92% for the scientific 

abstracts (10-fold cross-validation 

experiments). The F-Measure for Full Text 

Papers (leave-one-out-cross-validation) was 

83%. 

3 BioExcom 

EXCOM
2 
 (Djioua et al., 2006; Alrahabi, 2010) 

is a rule-based system using the computational 

principles of the Contextual Exploration 

processing (Desclés, 2006). EXCOM does not 

need any morpho-syntactic analysis and only 

requires one pre-treatment step of corpus seg-

mentation into segments (which are sentences 

or sometimes clauses according to the punctua-

tion) (Figure 1). EXCOM uses declarative 

rules built by linguists or domain experts and 

based on the search for linguistic markers in 

the text. The latter are hierarchically organized 

                                                 
2 http://www.excom.fr/  

into the rules: they are either indicators (strong 

markers) or clues (complementary markers). 

Only the presence of indicators in the text 

triggers the associated CE rules, and then the 

additional clues can be searched for in the 

context defined by the rules, which is in our 

case the same sentence as the indicator (Figure 

2). 

 
Figure 1: Overview of Excom processing (Alrahabi, 

2010) 

 EXCOM allows the use of already 

annotated segments as markers, and also to 

order the rules and to use “negative” clues that 

cancel certain rules. The clues can be arranged 

between each other and versus the indicator (at 

its left, right or inside it). They are used to con-

firm, invalidate or specify an annotation car-

ried by an indicator. If all the examined 

conditions of a rule are satisfied, EXCOM 

attributes the corresponding annotation to the 

designated segment. Generally the indicators 

are interconnected into graphs called “semantic 

maps” (Alrahabi and Desclés, 2008). EXCOM 

has been used for various tasks such as auto-

matic summarization, relationships between 

concepts, categorization of bibliographic cita-

tions and reported speech. 

BioExcom is the system that uses the anno-

tation performed by EXCOM thanks to 

specific linguistic resources built for detecting 

speculations in biomedical papers (Desclés et 

al., 2009). Furthermore, BioExcom performs 

an indexation of the annotated segments in or-

der to provide the possibility of searching for 

34



specific terms. The rules used for the annota-

tion processing are based on a precise semantic 

analysis of the multiple ways to express specu-

lation performed by an expert in about seventy 

biological papers. BioExcom also categorizes 

speculative segments into “new speculation” 

(speculative sentences presented for the first 

time in the paper or not explicitly presented as 

prior speculation) and “prior speculation” 

(speculative sentences cited in the paper, but 

presented as having been proposed previously). 

BioExcom uses thirty rules, based on twelve 

indicator classes. 

 

 
Figure 2: The contextual exploration principles: 

search for an indicator and then for some clues in a 

contextual space (a sentence or a clause in our case) 

according to some associated rules. 

 

The criteria used to find speculations are de-

scribed in detailed annotation guidelines, 

which are available on line
3
. Only the seg-

ments containing at least one linguistic element 

expressing speculation are considered. A spec-

ulation is defined as a proposal still not dem-

onstrated about a biological issue and explicit-

ly presented as uncertain in the paper. Thus, 

speculations are considered as potential 

sources of relevant information for biologists. 

Others types of statements such as deductions, 

conclusions, arguments and discussions are not 

considered as speculative but as intermediary 

statements, because they either present con-

cepts more or less certain, or they do not make 

a proposal.  

It is worth noting that contrary to other ap-

proaches, like Medlock (2008), the open ques-

tions are not speculative because they only ask 

a question about a biological problem without 

proposing a mechanism (sentence 1). 

 

                                                 
3
 http://www.bioexcom.net/  

(1) How endocytosis of DI leads to the 

activation of N remains to be 

elucidated. 

In order to better illustrate what a proposal 

is and how BioExcom performs annotation we 

can compare this sentence with the example 

(2) where BioExcom finds the indicator “is not 

known”. Nevertheless, as the goal of this tool is 

not to extract all sentences expressing 

uncertainty, BioExcom searches for the clue 

“whether” at the right or at the left of the indi-

cator. The presence of this clue indicates that, 

contrary to the sentence (1) with “how”, the 

sentence (2) proposes a mechanism and 

consequently is a speculation.  

 

(2) Also, whether the signaling activity of 
Ser is similarly regulated by 

endocytosis is not known. 

 

The sentences which discuss a speculation 

without being informative about the content of 

the speculation are also not considered as 

speculations (sentence 3, extracted from the 

guidelines of Medlock (2008)). Indeed the goal 

of BioExcom is to detect a sentence explaining, 

at least partially, a speculation, and not to 

know, as the example (3), whether a specula-

tion is purely speculative or is supported (or 

not) by facts. For the same reason, BioExcom 

extracts speculation without taking into ac-

count whether this speculation is denied or not. 

 

(3) The rescue of the D-mib mutant    

phenotype by ectopic expression of 

Neur strongly supports this 

interpretation 

At present, the evaluation process of BioEx-

com has only been performed on a relatively 

small scale (2 full-text papers read by five ex-

perts and containing 59 speculative sentences 

in total) and after the automatic annotation 

process (Desclés et al., 2009). Promising re-

sults have been reported for BioExcom in de-

tecting speculations, by providing a high Preci-

sion of 98,3%, and a Recall of 95,1% (F-

Measure of 96,7%). This rate is consistent with 

the goal of BioExcom to be a monitoring and 

decision support tool. 

35



4 Raw evaluation  

The Bioscope corpus (Szarvas et al., 2008) 

consists of three parts; namely medical free 

texts, biological full papers and biological 

scientific abstracts. However in this test, we 

only used two parts of the Bioscope corpus 

(full papers and abstracts) because we were 

preferentially interested in the biomedical 

scientific domain.  

First, we cleaned the corpus from all element 

tags (angled brackets marking hedge keywords 

and parentheses marking scopes) and saved 

these documents into text files. The latter could 

then be automatically segmented into sen-

tences or clauses and semantically annotated 

by BioExcom. As a result of this processing, 

BioExcom automatically extracted 341 seg-

ments from the Full Text Papers Corpus and 

1489 segments from the Abstract Corpus (1830 

segments in total)
4
. We could then compare 

our output files with the Bioscope Corpus 

which contained manual annotations. In this 

task we do not consider the categorization of 

BioExcom (“new speculation” and “prior 

speculation”) and these annotated sentences 

are only considered as speculative. Thus, we 

obtained the results presented in Table 1. Con-

sistent with the previous evaluation performed 

on BioExcom (Desclés et al., 2009), the Preci-

sion is high (approximately 93% in average, 

calculated from the total of segments of the 

two corpora). Nevertheless, the Recall dramat-

ically falls to approximately 68% (in average) 

compared to the first evaluation (Recall of 

93%). 

 
 Precision Recall F-Measure 

Full Text Pa-

pers 

89,35 62,92 73,84 

Abstracts 94,75 68,83 79,74 

 

Table 1: Summary of raw results for BioExcom 

evaluation 

 

Presented briefly are comments and some 

annotations performed by BioExcom which are 

in agreement with BioScope. 

                                                 
4
 The results of the annotation of BioScope corpus by 

BioExcom are publicly available: 

http://www.bioexcom.net/. It is worth mentioning that a 

few sentences were not segmented exactly in the same 

way by BioExcom and in the BioScope corpus 

(approximately 2% of divergences). We based all our 

calculations on BioExcom segmentation. 

(4) High conservation of residues near the 

inframe stop codon also suggests the 

importance of this region. 

(5)  Therefore, sets of genes identified from 

co-expression data may often contain 

multiple extraneous upstream 

sequences. 

(6)  To test the hypothesis that cortivazol 

acts in dex-resistant cells by making 

use of the residual GR found there, 

wild-type and dex-resistant clones 

were treated with various 

concentrations of cortivazol and the 

induction of GR mRNA was studied. 

(7) To determine whether specific mem-
bers of the NF-kappa B family contri-

bute to this effect, we examined the 

abilities of different NF-kappa B subu-

nits to act with Tat-I to stimulate 

transcription of HIV in Jurkat T-

leukemia cells. 

If we compare the speculative keywords in-

dicated in BioScope (underlined) and the 

markers used by BioExcom, we see some con-

vergences (“suggests” and “may” for the sen-

tences (4) and (5)), but also some divergences. 

In the sentence (6), BioExcom uses “hypothe-

sis that” as an indicator in order to extract in-

formative speculations and not only sentences 

containing the word “hypothesis”. The exam-

ple of the sentence (7) is much more illustra-

tive for the differences: whereas only “wheth-

er” is taken into account as a keyword in Bi-

oScope, BioExcom uses “to determine” as an 

indicator and “whether” as a positive clue, al-

lowing extracting only sentences containing a 

proposal (see example 2). The minimalist 

strategy (searching for the minimal unit that 

expresses speculation) followed by the annota-

tors of BioScope for the keywords can explain 

these observations.  

5 Corrected evaluation 

Our goal was to evaluate the performance of 

BioExcom according to its own definition of 

speculation. To analyze the observed low Re-

call (Table 1), we assumed that all sentences 

presenting an agreement between both me-

thods (manual annotation in BioScope and au-

tomatic annotation by BioExcom) were cor-

rectly annotated and we checked manually all 

the segments (984 segments) presenting a di-

vergence of annotation. This checking was per-

formed by a biologist as chief evaluator (writer 

36



of the annotation guidelines) and two indepen-

dent linguists, not allowed to communicate 

with each other. None of these evaluators knew 

the annotation performed by BioExcom or in 

BioScope (blind study). The conflicts were 

resolved by discussions during regular meet-

ings and, in case of important uncertainty for at 

least two annotators, the sentences (54 in total) 

were not taken into account. The BioScope 

corpus re-annotated according to the criteria of 

BioExcom is publicly available
5
.  

We can divide the segments presenting a 

disagreement between BioExcom and BioS-

cope into two groups depending on the annota-

tion performed either automatically by BioEx-

com or manually in the BioScope corpus (Fig-

ure 3). 

The first group consists of 865 segments 

which were considered as speculations in Bi-

oScope (representing around 36% of the total 

of annotated sentences in BioScope) and which 

were not annotated by BioExcom (see Figure 

2). After manual checking, we found that only 

around one third of these segments in the cor-

pus Full papers were speculative according to 

the criteria of BioExcom. This proportion was 

around one fourth in the BioScope corpus Ab-

stract. The goal of BioExcom to avoid annotat-

ing open questions (see examples (1-2)) or lack 

of knowledge (sentence (8)) can explain some 

of the absences of annotation by BioExcom. 

 

(8) The exact role of the ubiquitination 
pathway in regulating apoptosis is still 

unclear. 

 

In other cases, some differences linked to 

the semantic conception of speculation play a 

role. Thus, the following sentences are consi-

dered as speculative in BioScope: 

 

(9) Furthermore, genetic and 
transplantation studies indicate that 

both Neur and Mib act in a non-

autonomous manner 

[18,21,22,23,25,29], indicating that 

endocytosis of Dl is associated with 

increased Dl signalling activity. 

(10) It can be deduced that the erythroid 

ALAS precursor protein has a molecu-

lar weight of 64.6 kd, and is similar in 

size to the previously isolated human 

                                                 
5
 http://www.bioexcom.net/  

housekeeping ALAS precursor of mo-

lecular weight 70.6 kd. 

Although these sentences correspond to 

hedging as it has been defined by Hyland 

(1995), we argue that the sentences (9-10) can 

be characterized more as a demonstration or a 

deduction with the expressions “indicate that” 

and “it can be deduced” than a speculation. 

According to the criteria used for establishing 

BioExcom rules, these sentences do not cor-

respond to a speculation because they present 

things more or less as certain (see also 

(Thompson et al., 2008)). In this view, the case 

of “indicate that” is interesting to be detailed. 

Whereas many studies use it as a linguistic 

marker of speculation, Kilicoglu and Bergler 

(2008) recently moderated its speculative 

meaning by highlighting the additional need to 

take into account its context. The linguistic 

analysis used to establish the rules in BioEx-

com is much more restrictive and does not 

consider it as a marker. 

It should also be mentioned that we noticed a 

few sentences which were incorrectly anno-

tated in BioScope as speculation. Thus, the 

sentence (11) is rather, in our opinion, a defi-

nite statement (“or” can be replaced by “and”).  

 

(11) Tandem copies of this 67-bp MnlI-AluI 

fragment, when fused to the 

chloramphenicol acetyltransferase 

gene driven by the conalbumin 

promoter, stimulated transcription in 

B cells but not in Jurkat T cells or 

HeLa cells.  

 

There are also some sentences annotated in 

Bioscope which are undoubtedly speculations 

but they were not identified by BioExcom. 

Thus, BioExcom has not annotated some spe-

culative sentences because of the lack of some 

accurate markers into its linguistic resources. 

This is the case in the sentence (12): “seems” is 

recognized by BioExcom only when it is asso-

ciated with some adjectives (“seems probable” 

for example). We can also cite the more ambi-

guous case of “predicted” (sentence (13)) 

which is also absent from the linguistic re-

sources of BioExcom. Although a prediction 

can be considered as having a more particular 

status because it presents a low degree of un-

certainty, we can consider that it should be 

taken into account because the predicted pro-

posal remains hypothetical.  

37



 

 
Figure 3: Results of the annotation of BioScope by BioExcom and of the manual checking (the calculations are 

based on BioExcom segmentation). Spe = speculative segment; no Spe = non speculative segment. 

 

(12) A transcription factor, NF-AT, which 

is essential for early T-cell gene 

activation, seems to be a specific 

target of cyclosporin A and FK506 

action because transcription directed 

by this protein is blocked in T cells 

treated with these drugs, with little or 

no effect on other transcription factors 

such as AP-1 and NF-kappa B.  

(13) Expression of full-length and mutant 

cDNA clones in bacteria reveal that 

the single HMG motif, which is 

predicted to contain two extended 

alpha-helical segments, is sufficient to 

direct the sequence-specific binding of 

TCF-1 alpha to DNA. 

 

Beside the lack of accurate markers, the ab-

sence of specific markers in some sentences 

does not allow the detection of some specula-

tions by BioExcom. For example, in BioEx-

com, the ambiguity of the indicator “could” 

(past form or conditional form) is lifted by the 

presence of some positive clues expressing 

conditionality or possibility, such as “if” or 

“whether”. But in the sentence (14), “could” 

has no clues to be disambiguated and although 

it is a speculation, BioExcom did not annotate 

it. 

 

  (14) This method could be quite useful to 

detect not only CAG repeats in SBMA 

but also other polymorphic 

dinucleotide and trinucleotide repeats. 

 

The second group consists of segments anno-

tated by BioExcom and not in BioScope  

 

(119 segments, see Figure 2). Around 80% of 

these sentences appeared to be speculative af-

ter manual examination. As an illustration, the 

following sentence is clearly a speculation 

(“We hypothesize that”) but is not annotated in 

BioScope. 

   

  (15) We hypothesize that a mutation of the 

hGR glucocorticoid-binding domain is 

the cause of cortisol resistance. 

 

Finally, based on these results, we decided to 

recalculate the Precision, Recall and F-

Measure to be more in agreement with the no-

tion of speculation as it has been described by 

Desclés et al. (2009) (last lines in Tables 2 and 

3). Corrected Precision, Recall and F-Measure 

are respectively around 99%, 83% and 90% 

(averages calculated from the total of segments 

of the two corpora). These results are close to 

the first evaluation performed by Desclés et al. 

(2009), even if Recall is still lower than pre-

viously. 

Obviously, our results are not directly com-

parable with the prior studies because BioEx-

com does not use exactly the same criteria to 

recognize the speculative sentences and conse-

quently we re-annotated the BioScope corpus 

according to the criteria of BioExcom. One 

other difference is that the source used for lin-

guistic resources and rules of BioExcom is 

completely different from the source of the 

corpus used for the evaluation, aside from the 

studies using directly BioScope like Morante 

and Daelemans (2009) or Özgur and Radev 

(2009). Nevertheless, considering that there are 

a few studies using a part of the BioScope cor-

38



pus, it can be interesting to mention that Bio-

Excom achieves good performances in particu-

lar for Precision rate (Table 2 and 3). 

 
  Precision Recall F-Measure 

1 Fruit-fly dataset   85,08 

1 BMC dataset   74,93 

2 Fruit-fly dataset 85 86 85 

2 BMC dataset 80 85 82 

3 BioScope 75,35 68,18 71,59 

4 BioScope  90,81 76,17 82,82 

5 BioScope (cor-

rected)  

97,63 77,46 86,39 

 
Table 2: Results reported in different publications 

and concerning the recognition of speculations in 

Scientific Full Text Papers, representing a part of 

the BioScope corpus: (1) (Szarvas, 2008), (2) (Kili-

coglu and Bergler, 2008), (3) (Morante and Daele-

mans, 2009), (5) (Özgur and Radev, 2009), (5) 

BioExcom in this study  

 
 Corpus Precision Recall F-Measure 

1 BioScope 90,81 79,84 84,77 

2 BioScope  95,56 88,22 91,69 

3 BioScope (cor-

rected)  

99,39 83,93 91,01 

 
Table 3: Results reported in different publications 

and concerning the recognition of speculations in 

Scientific Abstracts, representing a part of the Bi-

oScope corpus: (1) (Morante and Daelemans, 2009) 

(2) (Özgur and Radev, 2009), (3) BioExcom in this 

study   

6 Conclusion and Perspectives 

Our aim was to test on a large scale (the ma-

nually annotated BioScope corpus) the rule 

based system BioExcom that automatically 

annotates speculations in biomedical papers. 

We observed an important disagreement be-

tween the two annotations and as a result, 

treated it manually.  We put forward three 

principal reasons for the differences in annota-

tion: 

  The lack of certain linguistic markers in 

BioExcom (false negative): some of them have 

to be added in the system (for example “seem” 

or “it appears”). Some other markers are too 

ambiguous to be relevant (for example “could” 

without a positive clue). 

  An error in the annotation of BioExcom or in 

BioScope (false positives): this is relatively 

rare, especially for BioExcom, which favors 

the Precision. 

  The difference of criteria used to determine 

whether a sentence is speculative or not: this is 

the main reason and we discuss it hereafter. 

Obtaining a good manual annotation is a 

recurrent problem in semantic annotation 

(Uren et al., 2006) and some studies have stu-

died the disagreement in human judgment (Ve-

ronis, 1998). This phenomenon is undoubtedly 

found here since Szarvas et al. (2008) and 

Desclés et al. (2009) have reported the difficul-

ty even for experts to detect speculations. But 

the disagreement between BioExcom and Bi-

oScope has to be seen almost as a conflict con-

cerning the meaning given to the word “specu-

lation” and if we agree on its definition, we 

demonstrated the efficiency of BioExcom. 

 Indeed, in order to provide good tools to 

biologists, computational linguists seek to ex-

tract only definite statements and consequently 

try to remove or to present separately hedging. 

Some of them have also tried to indicate the 

degree of uncertainty, in order to better charac-

terize hedging. Despite the promising use of 

weighting of hedging cues (Kilicoglu and 

Bergler, 2008), the task of determining the 

strength of speculation appears to be difficult, 

even for biologists (Light et al., 2004). In 

another hand biologists can also consider spec-

ulation as a source of knowledge (for example, 

Thompson et al. (2008) categorize speculation 

as a type of knowledge), giving actual trends, 

new ideas and hypothesis useful for them. In 

this view, BioExcom extracts them according 

to more restrictive criteria and categorizes 

them into “prior” and “new” in order to better 

highlight speculations. Knowing the new spec-

ulations of a paper can reveal some of the real 

new output of it and so help to decide which 

paper is worth spending time. The categoriza-

tion into prior speculation highlights the emer-

gence of an idea which is taken into considera-

tion by the scientific community and thus can 

also, at least partially, give an indication of its 

importance among the huge amount of specu-

lations in the literature.  

The availability of the corpora (raw BioEx-

com annotations and re-annotations of BioS-

cope according to these criteria) could help to 

better take into account these views. In particu-

lar, these corpora will be useful to improve the 

rules of BioExcom for detecting speculations. 

And many of the other sentences belonging to 

hedging and discarded during the re-annotation 

process (previously annotated or not in BioS-

cope) will serve to develop other semantic cat-

egories such as demonstration/conclusion or 

deduction.  

 

39



Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank J.P Desclés and M. 

Alrahabi for helpful discussions. 

References  

Alrahabi M (2010) EXCOM-2: a platform for au-

tomatic annotation of semantic categories: Con-

ception, modeling and implementation. Applica-

tion to the categorisation of quotations in French 

and Arabic, PhD, University of Paris-Sorbonne. 

Alrahabi M, Desclés JP (2008) Automatic annota-

tion of direct reported speech in Arabic and 

French, according to semantic map of enuncia-

tive modalities. In 6th International Conference 

on Natural Language Processing, GoTAL, Go-

thenburg, Sweden, pp 41-51 

Blagosklonny MV, Pardee AB (2002) Conceptual 

biology: unearthing the gems. Nature 416: 373 

Brent R, Lok L (2005) Cell biology. A fishing bud-

dy for hypothesis generators. Science 308: 504-

506 

Collier, N., Park, H., Ogata, N., Tateishi, Y., Noba-

ta, C., Ohta, T., Sekimizu, T., Imai, H., and Tsu-

jii, J. (1999), "The GENIA project: corpus-based 

knowledge acquisition and information extrac-

tion from genome research papers", Proc. An-

nual Meeting of the European Association for 

Computational Linguistics (EACL-99), Bergen, 

Norway, June 8-12, pp.271-272. 

Desclés JP, (2006) Contextual Exploration 

Processing for Discourse Automatic Annotations 

of Texts. In FLAIRS 2006, invited speaker, Mel-

bourne, Florida, pp 281-284 

Desclés J, Alrahabi M, Desclés JP (2009), BioEx-

com: Automatic Annotation and categorization 

of speculative sentences in biological literature 

by a Contextual Exploration processing, In Pro-

ceedings of the 4th Language & Technology 

Conference (LTC), Poznań, Poland 

Djioua B, Flores JG, Blais A, Desclés JP, Guibert 

G, Jackiewicz A, Le Priol F, Nait-Baha L, Sau-

zay B (2006) EXCOM: an automatic annotation 

engine for semantic information. In FLAIRS 

2006, Melbourne, Florida, 11-13 mai, Mel-

bourne, Florida, pp 285-290 

Hyland K (1995) The author in the text: Hedging 

Scientific Writing. Hong Kong papers in linguis-

tics and language teaching 18: 33-42 

Kilicoglu H, Bergler S (2008) Recognizing specula-

tive language in biomedical research articles: a 

linguistically motivated perspective. BMC Bioin-

formatics 9 Suppl 11: S10 

Lakoff G (1972) Hedges: a study in meaning crite-

ria and the logic of fuzzy concepts. In Chicago 

Linguistics Society Papers, 8:183-228 

Light M, Qiu XY, Srinivasan P (2004) The Lan-

guage of Bioscience: Facts, Speculations, and 

Statements in Between. In HLT-NAACL, ed, 

Workshop On Linking Biological Literature On-

tologies And Databases, pp 17-24 

Medlock B, Briscone T (2007) Weakly Supervised 

Learning for Hedge Classification in Scientific 

Literature. In AfC Linguistics, ed, Proceedings of 

the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of 

Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech Re-

public, pp 992-999 

Morante R, Daelemans W (2009) Learning the 

scope of hedge cues in biomedical texts, In Pro-

ceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pp 28-36, 

Boulder, Colorado, USA, June 2009, ACL 

Özgür A, Radev DR (2009) Detecting Speculations 

and their Scopes in Scientific Text, In Proceed-

ings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Me-

thods in Natural Language Processing, pp 1398-

1407, Singapore, 6-7 August, 2009 

Szarvas G (2008) Hedge classification in biomedi-

cal texts with a weakly supervised selection of 

keywords, In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pp 

281-289, Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008 

Szarvas G, Vincze V, Farkas R, Csirik J (2008) The 

BioScope corpus: annotation for negation, uncer-

tainty and their scope in biomedical texts. In Bi-

oNLP ACL-2008 workshop  

Thompson P, Venturi G, McNaught J, Montemagni 

S, Ananiadou S (2008) Categorising modality in 

biomedical texts. Proceedings of the LREC 2008 

Workshop on Building and Evaluating Resources 

for Biomedical Text Mining. Marrakech, Moroc-

co 2008.  

Uren V, Cimiano P, Iria J, Handschuh S, Vargas-

Vera M, Motta E, Ciravegna F (2006) Semantic 

annotation for knowledge management: Re-

quirements and a survey of the state of the art. In 

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on 

the World Wide Web Volume 4, Issue 1, January 

2006, Pages 14-28 

Véronis, J. (1998) A study of polysemy judgements 

and inter-annotator agreement, Programme and 

advanced papers of the Senseval workshop (pp. 

2-4). Herstmonceux Castle (England) 

Wilbur WJ, Rzhetsky A, Shatkay H (2006) New 

directions in biomedical text annotation: defini-

tions, guidelines and corpus construction. BMC 

Bioinformatics 7: 35 

40


