










































Influence of Pre-Annotation on POS-Tagged Corpus Development


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 56–63,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Influence of Pre-annotation on POS-tagged Corpus Development

Karën Fort
INIST CNRS / LIPN
Nancy / Paris, France.

karen.fort@inist.fr

Benoı̂t Sagot
INRIA Paris-Rocquencourt / Paris 7

Paris, France.
benoit.sagot@inria.fr

Abstract

This article details a series of carefully de-
signed experiments aiming at evaluating
the influence of automatic pre-annotation
on the manual part-of-speech annotation
of a corpus, both from the quality and the
time points of view, with a specific atten-
tion drawn to biases. For this purpose, we
manually annotated parts of the Penn Tree-
bank corpus (Marcus et al., 1993) under
various experimental setups, either from
scratch or using various pre-annotations.
These experiments confirm and detail the
gain in quality observed before (Marcus et
al., 1993; Dandapat et al., 2009; Rehbein
et al., 2009), while showing that biases do
appear and should be taken into account.
They finally demonstrate that even a not
so accurate tagger can help improving an-
notation speed.

1 Introduction

Training a machine-learning based part-of-speech
(POS) tagger implies manually tagging a signifi-
cant amount of text. The cost of this, in terms of
human effort, slows down the development of tag-
gers for under-resourced languages.

One usual way to improve this situation is to
automatically pre-annotate the corpus, so that the
work of the annotators is limited to the validation
of this pre-annotation. This method proved quite
efficient in a number of POS-annotated corpus de-
velopment projects (Marcus et al., 1993; Danda-
pat et al., 2009), allowing for a significant gain
not only in annotation time but also in consistency.
However, the influence of the pre-tagging quality
on the error rate in the resulting annotated corpus
and the bias introduced by the pre-annotation has
been little examined. This is what we propose to
do here, using different parts of the Penn Treebank

to train various instances of a POS tagger and ex-
periment on pre-annotation. Our goal is to assess
the impact of the quality (i.e., accuracy) of the
POS tagger used for pre-annotating and to com-
pare the use of pre-annotation with purely manual
tagging, while minimizing all kinds of biases. We
quantify the results in terms of error rate in the re-
sulting annotated corpus, manual annotation time
and inter-annotator agreement.

This article is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion 2, we mention some related work, while Sec-
tion 3 describes the experimental setup, followed
by a discussion on the obtained results (Section 4)
and a conclusion.

2 Related Work

2.1 Pre-annotation for POS Tagging

Very few manual annotation projects give details
about the campaign itself. One major exception is
the Penn Treebank project (Marcus et al., 1993),
that provided detailed information about the man-
ual annotation methodology, evaluation and cost.
Marcus et al. (1993) thus showed that manual tag-
ging took twice as long as correcting pre-tagged
text and resulted in twice the inter-annotator dis-
agreement rate, as well as an error rate (using a
gold-standard annotation) about 50% higher. The
pre-annotation was done using a tagger trained on
the Brown Corpus, which, due to errors introduced
by an automatic mapping of tags from the Brown
tagset to the Penn Treebank tagset, had an error
rate of 7–9%. However, they report neither the in-
fluence of the training of the annotators on the po-
tential biases in correction, nor that of the quality
of the tagger on the correction time and the ob-
tained quality.

Dandapat et al. (2009) went further and showed
that, for complex POS-tagging (for Hindi and
Bangla), pre-annotation of the corpus allows for
a gain in time, but not necessarily in consis-

56



tency, which depends largely on the pre-tagging
quality. They also noticed that untrained annota-
tors were more influenced by pre-annotation than
the trained ones, who showed “consistent perfor-
mance”. However, this very complete and inter-
esting experiment lacked a reference allowing for
an evaluation of the quality of the annotations. Be-
sides, it only took into account two types of pre-
tagging quality, high accuracy and low accuracy.

2.2 Pre-annotation in Other Annotation
Tasks

Alex et al. (2008) led some experiments in the
biomedical domain, within the framework of a
“curation” task of protein-protein interaction. Cu-
ration consists in reading through electronic ver-
sion of papers and entering retrieved information
into a template. They showed that perfectly pre-
annotating the corpus leads to a reduction of more
than 1/3 in curation time, as well as a better recall
from the annotators. Less perfect pre-annotation
still leads to a gain in time, but less so (a little less
than 1/4th). They also tested the effect of higher
recall or precision of pre-annotation on one anno-
tator (curator), who rated recall more positively
than precision. However, as they notice, this result
can be explained by the curation style and should
be tested on more annotators.

Rehbein et al. (2009) led quite thorough ex-
periments on the subject, in the field of semantic
frame assignment annotation. They asked 6 an-
notators to annotate or correct frame assignment
using a task-specific annotation tool. Here again,
pre-annotation was done using only two types of
pre-tagging quality, state-of-the-art and enhanced.
The results of the experiments are a bit disappoint-
ing as they could not find a direct improvement of
annotation time using pre-annotation. The authors
reckon this might be at least partly due to “an inter-
action between time savings from pre-annotation
and time savings due to a training effect.” For
the same reason, they had to exclude some of the
annotation results for quality evaluation in order
to show that, in line with (Marcus et al., 1993),
quality pre-annotation helps increasing annotation
quality. They also found that noisy and low qual-
ity pre-annotation does not overall corrupt human
judgment.

On the other hand, Fort et al. (2009) claim that
pre-annotation introduces a bias in named entity
annotation, due to the preference given by anno-

tators to what is already annotated, thus prevent-
ing them from noticing entities that were not pre-
annotated. This particular type of bias should not
appear in POS-tagging, as all the elements are to
be annotated, but a pre-tagging could influence
the annotators, preventing them from asking them-
selves questions about a specific pre-annotation.

In a completely different field, Barque et
al. (2010) used a series of NLP tools, called
MACAON, to automatically identify the central
component and optional peripheral components of
dictionary definitions. This pre-processing gave
disappointing results as compared to entirely man-
ual annotation, as it did not allow for a significant
gain in time. The authors consider that the bad
results are due to the quality of the tool that they
wish to improve as they believe that “an automatic
segmentation of better quality would surely yield
some gains.”

Yet, the question remains: is there a quality
threshold for pre-annotation to be useful? and if
so, how can we evaluate it? We tried to answer
at least part of these questions for a quite simple
task for which data is available: POS-tagging in
English.

3 Experimental Setup

The idea underlying our experiments is the follow-
ing. We split the Penn Treebank corpus (Marcus et
al., 1993) in a usual manner, namely we use Sec-
tions 2 to 21 to train various instances of a POS
tagger, and Section 23 to perform the actual ex-
periments. In order to measure the impact of the
POS tagger’s quality, we trained it on subcorpora
of increasing sizes, and pre-annotated Section 23
with these various POS taggers. Then, we man-
ually annotated parts of Section 23 under various
experimental setups, either from scratch or using
various pre-annotations, as explained below.

3.1 Creating the Taggers

We used the MElt POS tagger (Denis and Sagot,
2009), a maximum-entropy based system that is
able to take into account both information ex-
tracted from a training corpus and information ex-
tracted from an external morphological lexicon.1

It has been shown to lead to a state-of-the-art POS
tagger for French. Trained on Sections 2 to 21

1MElt is freely available under LGPL license, on the web
page of its hosting project (http://gforge.inria.
fr/projects/lingwb/) .

57



of the Penn Treebank (MEltALLen ), and evaluated
on Section 23, MElt exhibits a 96.4% accuracy,
which is reasonably close to the state-of-the-art
(Spoustová et al. (2009) report 97.4%). Since it is
trained without any external lexicon, MEltALLen is
very close to the original maximum-entropy based
tagger (Ratnaparkhi, 1996), which has indeed a
similar 96.6% accuracy.

We trained MElt on increasingly larger parts of
the POS-tagged Penn Treebank,2 thus creating dif-
ferent taggers with growing degrees of accuracy
(see table 1). We then POS-tagged the Section 23
with each of these taggers, thus obtaining for each
sentence in Section 23 a set of pre-annotations,
one from each tagger.

Tagger Nb train. sent. Nb tokens Acc. (%)
MElt10en 10 189 66.5
MElt50en 50 1,254 81.6
MElt100en 100 2,774 86.7
MElt500en 500 12,630 92.1
MElt1000en 1,000 25,994 93.6
MElt5000en 5,000 126,376 95.8
MElt10000en 10,000 252,416 96.2
MEltALLen 37,990 944,859 96.4

Table 1: Accuracy of the created taggers evaluated
on Section 23 of the Penn Treebank

3.2 Experiments
We designed different experimental setups to
evaluate the impact of pre-annotation and pre-
annotation accuracy on the quality of the resulting
corpus. The subparts of Section 23 that we used
for these experiments are identified by sentence
ids (e.g., 1–100 denotes the 100 first sentences in
Section 23).

Two annotators were involved in the experi-
ments. They both have a good knowledge of lin-
guistics, without being linguists themselves and
had only little prior knowledge of the Penn Tree-
bank POS tagset. One of them had previous exper-
tise in POS tagging (Annotator1). It should also
be noticed that, though they speak fluent English,
they are not native speakers of the language. They
were asked to keep track of their annotation time,
noting the time it took them to annotate or correct
each series of 10 sentences. They were also asked
to use only a basic text editor, with no macro or
specific feature that could help them, apart from

2More precisely, MEltien is trained on the i first sentences
of the overall training corpus, i.e. Sections 2 to 21.

the usual ones, like Find, Replace, etc. The set
of 36 tags used in the Penn Treebank and quite
a number of particular cases is a lot to keep in
mind. This implies a heavy cognitive load in short-
term memory, especially as no specific interface
was used to help annotating or correcting the pre-
annotations.

It was demonstrated that training improves
the quality of manual annotation in a significant
way as well as allows for a significant gain in
time (Marcus et al., 1993; Dandapat et al., 2009;
Mikulová and Štĕpánek, 2009). In particular, Mar-
cus et al. (1993) observed that it took the Penn
Treebank annotators 1 month to get fully efficient
on the POS-tagging correction task, reaching a
speed of 20 minutes per 1,000 words. The speed of
annotation in our experiments cannot be compared
to this, as our annotators only annotated and cor-
rected small samples of the Penn Treebank. How-
ever, the annotators’ speed and correctness did
improve with practice. As explained below, we
took this learning curve into account, as previous
work (Rehbein et al., 2009) showed it has an sig-
nificant impact on the results.

Also, during each experiment, sentences were
annotated sequentially. Moreover, the experiments
were conducted in the order we describe them be-
low. For example, both annotators started their
first annotation task (sentences 1–100) with sen-
tence 1.

We conducted the following experiments:

1. Impact of the pre-annotation accuracy on
precision and inter-annotator agreement:
In this experiment, we used sentences 1–
400 with random pre-annotation: for each
sentence, one pre-annotation is randomly
selected among its possible pre-annotations
(one for each tagger instance). The aim of
this is to eliminate the bias caused by the an-
notators’ learning curve. Annotation time for
each series of 10 consecutive sentences was
gathered, as well as precision w.r.t. the refer-
ence and inter-annotator agreement (both an-
notators annotated sentences 1–100 and 301–
400, while only one annotated 101–200 and
the other 201–300).

2. Impact of the pre-annotation accuracy on
annotation time: This experiment is based
on sentences 601–760, with pre-annotation.
We divided them in series of 10 sentences.

58



For each series, one pre-annotation is se-
lected (i.e., the pre-annotation produced by
one of the 8 taggers), in such a way that each
pre-annotation is used for 2 series. We mea-
sured the manual annotation time for each se-
ries and each annotator.

3. Bias induced by pre-annotation: In this
experiment, both annotators annotated sen-
tences 451–500 fully manually.3 Later,
they annotated sentences 451–475 with the
pre-annotation from MEltALLen (the best tag-
ger) and sentences 476–500 with the pre-
annotation from MElt50en (the second-worst
tagger). We then compared the fully man-
ual annotations with those based on pre-
annotations to check if and how they diverge
from the Penn Treebank “gold-standard”; we
also compared annotation times, in order to
get a confirmation of the gain in time ob-
served in previous experiments.

4 Results and Discussion

4.1 Impact of the Pre-annotation Accuracy
on Precision and Inter-annotator
Agreement

The quality of the annotations created during ex-
periment 1 was evaluated using two methods.
First, we considered the original Penn Treebank
annotations as reference and calculated a simple
precision as compared to this reference. Figure 1
gives an overview of the obtained results (note that
the scale is not regular).

However, this is not sufficient to evaluate the
quality of the annotation as, actually, the reference
annotation is not perfect (see below). We therefore
evaluated the reliability of the annotation, calcu-
lating the inter-annotator agreement between An-
notator1 and Annotator2 on the 100-sentence se-
ries they both annotated. We calculated this agree-
ment on some of the subcorpora using π, aka Car-
letta’s Kappa (Carletta, 1996)4. The results of this
are shown in table 2.

3During this manual annotation step (with no pre-
annotation), we noticed that the annotators used the
Find/Replace all feature of the text editor to fasten
the tagging of some obvious tokens like the or Corp., which
partly explains that the first groups of 10 sentences took
longer to annotate. Also, as no specific interface was use to
help annotating, a (very) few typographic errors were made,
such as DET instead of DT.

4For more information on the terminology issue, refer to
the introduction of (Artstein and Poesio, 2008).

Subcorpus π
1-100 0.955

301-400 0.963

Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement on subcorpora

The results show a very good agreement accord-
ing to all scales (Krippendorff, 1980; Neuendorf,
2002; Krippendorff, 2004) as π is always superior
to 0.9. Besides, it improves with training (from
0.955 at the beginning to 0.963 at the end).

We also calculated π on the corpus we used to
evaluate the pre-annotation bias (Experiment 3).
The results of this are shown in table 3.

Subcorpus Nb sent. π
No pre-annotation 50 0.947
MElt50en 25 0.944
MEltALLen 25 0.983

Table 3: Inter-annotator agreement on subcorpora
used to evaluate bias

Here again, the results are very good, though a
little bit less so than at the beginning of the mixed
annotation session. They are almost perfect with
MEltALLen .

Finally, we calculated π throughout Experi-
ment 2. The results are given in Figure 2 and,
apart from a bizarre peak at MElt50en, they show a
steady progression of the accuracy and the inter-
annotator agreement, which are correlated. As for
the MElt50en peak, it does not appear in Figure 1, we
therefore interpret it as an artifact.

4.2 Impact of the Pre-annotation Accuracy
on Annotation Time

Before discussing the results of Experiment 2, an-
notation time measurements during Experiment 3
confirm that using a good quality pre-annotation
(say, MEltALLen ) strongly reduces the annotation
time as compared with fully manual annotation.
For example, Annotator1 needed an average time
of approximately 7.5 minutes to annotate 10 sen-
tences without pre-annotation (Experiment 3),
whereas Experiment 2 shows that it goes down to
approximately 2.5 minutes when using MEltALLen
pre-annotation. For Annotator2, the correspond-
ing figures are respectively 11.5 and 2.5 minutes.

Figure 3 shows the impact on the pre-annotation
type on annotation times. Surprisingly, only the
worst tagger (MElt10en) produces pre-annotations
that lead to a significantly slower annotation. In

59



Figure 1: Accuracy of annotation

other words, a 96.4% accurate pre-annotation does
not significantly speed up the annotation process
with respect to a 81.6% accurate pre-annotation.
This is very interesting, since it could mean that
the development of a POS-annotated corpus for a
new language with no POS tagger could be drasti-
cally sped up. Annotating approximately 50 sen-
tences could be sufficient to train a POS tagger
such as MElt and use it as a pre-annotator, even
though its quality is not yet satisfying.

One interpretation of this could be the follow-
ing. Annotation based on pre-annotations involves
two different tasks: reading the pre-annotated sen-
tence and replacing incorrect tags. The reading
task takes a time that does not really depends on
the pre-annotation quality. But the correction task
takes a time that is, say, linear w.r.t. the num-
ber of pre-annotation errors. Therefore, when the
number of pre-annotation errors is below a cer-
tain level, the correction task takes significantly
less time than the reading task. Therefore, be-
low this level, variations in the pre-annotation er-
ror rate do not lead to significant overall annota-
tion time. Apparently, this threshold is between
66.5% and 81.6% pre-annotation accuracy, which
can be reached with a surprisingly small training
corpus.

4.3 Bias Induced by Pre-annotation

We evaluated both the bias induced by a pre-
annotation with the best tagger, MEltALLen , and the
one induced by one of the least accurate taggers,

MElt50en. The results are given in table 4 and 5, re-
spectively.

They show a very different bias according to
the annotator. Annotator2’s accuracy raises from
94.6% to 95.2% with a 81.6% accuracy tagger
(MElt50en) and from 94.1% to 97.1% with a 96.4%
accuracy tagger (MEltALLen ). Therefore, Annota-
tor2, whose accuracy is less than that of Annota-
tor1 under all circumstances (see figure 1), seems
to be positively influenced by pre-annotation,
whether it be good or bad. The gain is however
much more salient with the best pre-annotation
(plus 3 points).

As for Annotator1, who is the most accurate an-
notator (see figure 1), the results are more surpris-
ing as they show a significant degradation of ac-
curacy, from 98.1 without pre-annotation to 95.8
with pre-annotation using MElt50en, the less accu-
rate tagger. Examining the actual results allowed
us to see that, first, Annotator1 non pre-annotated
version is better than the reference, and second,
the errors made in the pre-annotated version with
MElt50en are so obvious that they can only be due to
a lapse in concentration.

The results, however, remain stable with pre-
annotation using the best tagger (from 98.4 to
98.2), which is consistent with the results obtained
by Dandapat et al. (2009), who showed that bet-
ter trained annotators are less influenced by pre-
annotation and show stable performance.

When asked about it, both annotators say
they felt they concentrated more without pre-

60



Figure 2: Annotation accuracy and π depending on the type of pre-annotation

Annotator No pre-annotation with MEltALLen
Annotator1 98.4 98.2
Annotator2 94.1 97.1

Table 4: Accuracy with or without pre-annotation
with MEltALLen (sentences 451-475)

Annotator No pre-annotation with MElt50en
Annotator1 98.1 95.8
Annotator2 94.6 95.2

Table 5: Accuracy with or without pre-annotation
with MElt50en (sentences 476-500)

annotation. It seems that the rather good results
of the taggers cause the attention of the annotators
to be reduced, even more so as the task is repeti-
tive and tedious. However, annotators also had the
feeling that fully manual annotation could be more
subject to oversights.

These impressions are confirmed by the com-
parison of the contingency tables, as can be seen
from Tables 6, 7 and 8 (in these tables, lines cor-
respond to tags from the annotation and columns
to reference tags; only lines containing at least
one cell with 2 errors or more are shown, with
all corresponding columns). For example, Anno-
tator1 makes more random errors when no pre-
annotation is available and more systematic er-
rors when MEltALLen pre-annotations are used (typ-
ically, JJ instead of VBN, i.e., adjective instead of
past participle, which corresponds to a systematic
trend in MEltALLen ’s results).

JJ VBN
JJ 36 4

(Annotator 1)

JJ NN NNP NNPS VB VBN
JJ 36 4

NN 1 68 2
NNP 24 2

(Annotator 2)

Table 6: Excerpts of the contingency tables for
sentences 451–457 (512 tokens) with MEltALLen
pre-annotation

IN JJ NN NNP NNS RB VBD VBN
JJ 30 2 2

NNS 1 2 40
RB 2 16

VBD 1 17 2
WDT 2

(Annotator 1)

JJ NN RB VBN
JJ 28 3

NN 2 75 1
RB 2 16

VBN 2 10

(Annotator 2)

Table 7: Excerpts of the contingency tables for
sentences 476–500 (523 tokens) with MElt50en pre-
annotation

61



Figure 3: Annotation time depending on the type of pre-annotation

CD DT JJ NN NNP NNS
CD 30 2
JJ 2 72

NN 2 148
NNS 3 68

(Annotator 1)

CD DT IN JJ JJR NN NNP NNS RB VBN
IN 104 2
JJ 2 61 2 1 9

NN 1 4 145
NNPS 2
NNS 1 2 68
RBR 2

(Annotator 2)

Table 8: Excerpts of the contingency tables for
sentences 450–500 (1,035 tokens) without pre-
annotation

5 Conclusion and Further Work

The series of experiments we detailed in this arti-
cle confirms that pre-annotation allows for a gain
in quality, both in terms of accuracy w.r.t. a ref-
erence and in terms of inter-annotator agreement,
i.e., reliability. We also demonstrated that this
comes with biases that should be identified and
notified to the annotators, so that they can be extra
careful during correction. Finally, we discovered
that a surprisingly small training corpus could be
sufficient to build a pre-annotation tool that would
help drastically speeding up the annotation.

This should help developing taggers for under-
resourced languages. In order to check that, we

intend to use this method in a near future to de-
velop a POS tagger for Sorani Kurdish.

We also want to experiment on other, more
precision-driven, annotation tasks, like complex
relations annotation or definition segmentation,
that are more intrinsically complex and for which
there exist no automatic tool as accurate as for
POS tagging.

Acknowledgments

This work was partly realized as part of the
Quaero Programme5, funded by OSEO, French
State agency for innovation.

References
Beatrice Alex, Claire Grover, Barry Haddow, Mijail

Kabadjov, Ewan Klein, Michael Matthews, Stu-
art Roebuck, Richard Tobin, and Xinglong Wang.
2008. Assisted Curation: Does Text Mining Really
Help? In Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing.

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder
Agreement for Computational Linguistics. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Lucie Barque, Alexis Nasr, and Alain Polguère. 2010.
From the Definitions of the Trésor de la Langue
Française to a Semantic Database of the French Lan-
guage. In Proceedings of the 14th EURALEX Inter-
national Congress, Leeuwarden.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing Agreement on Classi-
fication Tasks: the Kappa Statistic. Computational
Linguistics, 22:249–254.
5http://quaero.org/

62



Sandipan Dandapat, Priyanka Biswas, Monojit Choud-
hury, and Kalika Bali. 2009. Complex Linguistic
Annotation - No Easy Way Out! a Case from Bangla
and Hindi POS Labeling Tasks. In Proceedings of
the third ACL Linguistic Annotation Workshop.

Pascal Denis and Benoı̂t Sagot. 2009. Coupling an An-
notated Corpus and a Morphosyntactic Lexicon for
State-of-the-art POS Tagging with Less Human Ef-
fort. In Proceedings of PACLIC 2009, Hong-Kong,
China.

Karën Fort, Maud Ehrmann, and Adeline Nazarenko.
2009. Vers une méthodologie d’annotation des
entités nommées en corpus ? In Actes de la
16ème Conférence sur le Traitement Automatique
des Langues Naturelles 2009 Traitement Automa-
tique des Langues Naturelles 2009, Senlis, France.

Klaus Krippendorff, 1980. Content Analysis: An Intro-
duction to Its Methodology, chapter 12. Sage, Bev-
erly Hills, CA.

Klaus Krippendorff, 2004. Content Analysis: An In-
troduction to Its Methodology, second edition, chap-
ter 11. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.

Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a Large Annotated
Corpus of English: the Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Marie Mikulová and Jan Štĕpánek. 2009. Annotation
Quality Checking and its Implications for Design
of Treebank (in Building the Prague Czech-English
Dependency Treebank). In Proceedings of the Eight
International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories, volume 4-5, Milan, Italy, December.

Kimberly Neuendorf. 2002. The Content Analysis
Guidebook. Sage, Thousand Oaks CA.

Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1996. A Maximum Entropy
Model for Part-Of-Speech Tagging. In Proceedings
of International Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 133–142.

Ines Rehbein, Josef Ruppenhofer, and Caroline
Sporleder. 2009. Assessing the Benefits of Partial
Automatic Pre-labeling for Frame-semantic Anno-
tation. In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Anno-
tation Workshop, pages 19–26, Suntec, Singapore,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Drahomı́ra “Johanka” Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Raab,
and Miroslav Spousta. 2009. Semi-supervised
Training for the Averaged Perceptron POS Tagger.
In EACL ’09: Proceedings of the 12th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 763–771, Morristown,
NJ, USA.

63


