










































Reranking with Multiple Features for Better Transliteration


Proceedings of the 2010 Named Entities Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 62–65,
Uppsala, Sweden, 16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Reranking with Multiple Features for Better Transliteration

Yan Song† Chunyu Kit† Hai Zhao‡†
†Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics

City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Ave., Kowloon, Hong Kong
‡Department of Computer Science and Engineering

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, #800, Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai, China
{yansong,ctckit}@cityu.edu.hk, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Effective transliteration of proper names
via grapheme conversion needs to find
transliteration patterns in training data,
and then generate optimized candidates
for testing samples accordingly. However,
the top-1 accuracy for the generated candi-
dates cannot be good if the right one is not
ranked at the top. To tackle this issue, we
propose to rerank the output candidates for
a better order using the averaged percep-
tron with multiple features. This paper de-
scribes our recent work in this direction for
our participation in NEWS2010 transliter-
ation evaluation. The official results con-
firm its effectiveness in English-Chinese
bidirectional transliteration.

1 Introduction

Since transliteration can be considered a direct or-
thographic mapping process, one may adopt gen-
eral statistical machine translation (SMT) proce-
dures for its implementation. Aimed at finding
phonetic equivalence in another language for a
given named entity, however, different translitera-
tion options with different syllabification may gen-
erate multiple choices with the symphonic form
for the same source text. Consequently, even the
overall results by SMT output are acceptable, it
is still unreliable to rank the candidates simply by
their statistical translation scores for the purpose
of selecting the best one. In order to make a proper
choice, the direct orthographic mapping requires a
precise alignment and a better transliteration op-
tion selection. Thus, powerful algorithms for ef-
fective use of the parallel data is indispensable, es-
pecially when the available data is limited in vol-
ume.

Interestingly, although an SMT based approach
could not achieve a precise top-1 transliteration re-

sult, it is found in (Song et al., 2009) that, in con-
trast to the ordinary top-1 accuracy (ACC) score,
its recall rate, which is defined in terms of whether
the correct answer is generated in the n-best output
list, is rather high. This observation suggests that
if we could rearrange those outputs into a better
order, especially, push the correct one to the top,
the overall performance could be enhanced signif-
icantly, without any further refinement of the orig-
inal generation process. This reranking strategy is
proved to be efficient in transliteration generation
with a multi-engine approach (Oh et al., 2009).

In this paper, we present our recent work on
reranking the transliteration candidates via an on-
line discriminative learning framework, namely,
the averaged perceptron. Multiple features are in-
corporated into it for performance enhancement.
The following sections will give the technical de-
tails of our method and present its results for
NEWS2010 shared task for named entity translit-
eration.

2 Generation

For the generation of transliteration candidates,
we follow the work (Song et al., 2009), using a
phrase-based SMT procedure with the log-linear
model

P (t|s) = exp[
∑n

i=1 λihi(s, t)]∑
t exp[

∑n
i=1 λihi(s, t)]

(1)

for decoding. Originally we use two directional
phrase1 tables, which are learned for both direc-
tions of source-to-target and target-to-source, con-
taining different entries of transliteration options.
In order to facilitate the decoding by exploiting all
possible choices in a better way, we combine the
forward and backward directed phrase tables to-
gether, and recalculate the probability for each en-

1It herein refers to a character sequence as described in
(Song et al., 2009).

62



try in it. After that, we use a phoneme resource2 to
refine the phrase table by filtering out the wrongly
extracted phrases and cleaning up the noise in it.
In the decoding process, a dynamic pruning is per-
formed when generating the hypothesis in each
step, in which the threshold is variable according
to the current searching space, for we need to ob-
tain a good candidate list as precise as possible
for the next stage. The parameter for each fea-
ture function in log-linear model is optimized by
MERT training (Och, 2003). Finally, a maximum
number of 50 candidates are generated for each
source name.

3 Reranking

3.1 Learning Framework

For reranking training and prediction, we adopt
the averaged perceptron (Collins, 2002) as our
learning framework, which has a more stable per-
formance than the non-averaged version. It is pre-
sented in Algorithm 1. Where ~ω is the vector of
parameters we want to optimize, x, y are the cor-
responding source (with different syllabification)
and target graphemes in the candidate list, and Φ
represents the feature vector in the pair of x and
y. In this algorithm, reference y∗i is the most ap-
propriate output in the candidate list according to
the true target named entity in the training data.
We use the Mean-F score to identify which candi-
date can be the reference, by locating the one with
the maximum Mean-F score value. This process
updates the parameters of the feature vector and
also relocate all of the candidates according to the
ranking scores, which are calculated in terms of
the resulted parameters in each round of training
as well as in the testing process. The number of
iteration for the final model is determined by the
development data.

3.2 Multiple Features

The following features are used in our reranking
process:

Transliteration correspondence feature, f(si, ti);

This feature describes the mapping between
source and target graphemes, similar to the
transliteration options in the phrase table in
our previous generation process, where s and

2In this work, we use Pinyin as the phonetic representa-
tion for Chinese.

Algorithm 1 Averaged perceptron training
Input: Candidate list with reference

{LIST (xj , yj)nj=1, y∗i }Ni=1
Output: Averaged parameters

1: ~ω ← 0, ~ωa ← 0, c← 1
2: for t = 1 to T do
3: for i = 1 to N do
4: ŷi ← argmaxy∈LIST (xj ,yj)~ω · Φ(xi, yi)
5: if ŷi 6= y∗i then
6: ~ω ← ~ω + Φ(x∗i , y∗i )− Φ(x̂i, ŷi)
7: ~ωa ← ~ωa + c · {Φ(x∗i , y∗i )−Φ(x̂i, ŷi)}
8: end if
9: c← c + 1

10: end for
11: end for
12: return ~ω − ~ωa/c

t refer to the source and target language re-
spectively, and i to the current position.

Source grapheme chain feature, f(sii−1);

It measures the syllabification for a given
source text. There are two types of units
in different levels. One is on syllable level,
e.g., “aa/bye”, “aa/gaar/d”, reflecting the
segmentation of the source text, and the other
on character level, such as “a/b”, “a/g”,
“r/d”, showing the combination power of
several characters. These features on differ-
ent source grapheme levels can help the sys-
tem to achieve a more reliable syllabification
result from the candidates. We only consider
bi-grams when using this feature.

Target grapheme chain feature, f(tii−2);

This feature measures the appropriateness of
the generated target graphemes on both char-
acter and syllables level. It performs in a
similar way as the language model for SMT
decoding. We use tri-gram syllables in this
learning framework.

Paired source-to-target transition feature, f(<
s, t >ii−1);

This type of feature is firstly proposed in
(Li et al., 2004), aiming at generating source
and target graphemes simultaneously under
a suitable constraint. We use this feature
to restrict the synchronous transition of both
source and target graphemes, measuring how
well are those transitions, such as for “st”,

63



whether “s” transliterated by “斯” is followed
by “t” transliterated by “特”. In order to deal
with the data sparseness, only bi-gram transi-
tion relations are considered in this feature.

Hidden Markov model (HMM) style features;

There are a group of features with HMM
style constraint for evaluating the candi-
dates generated in previous SMT process,
including, previous syllable HMM features,
f(sii−n+1, ti), posterior syllable HMM fea-
tures, f(si+n−1i , ti), and posterior character
HMM features, f(si, l, ti), where l denotes
the character following the previous syllable
in the source language. For the last feature,
it is effective to use both the current sylla-
ble and the first letter of the next syllable
to bound the current target grapheme. The
reason for applying this feature in our learn-
ing framework is that, empirically, the letters
following many syllables strongly affect the
transliteration for them, e.g., Aves → 埃维
斯, “a” followed by “v” is always translated
into “埃” rather than “阿”.

Target grapheme position feature, f(ti, p);

This feature is an improved version of that
proposed in (Song et al., 2009), where p
refers to the position of ti. We have a mea-
sure for the target graphemes according to
their source graphemes and the current posi-
tion of their correspondent target characters.
There are three categories of such position,
namely, start (S), mediate (M) and end (E). S
refers to the first character in a target name, E
to the final, and the others belong to M. This
feature is used to exploit the observation that
some characters are more likely to appear at
certain positions in the target name. Some are
always found at the beginning of a named en-
tity while others only at the middle or the end.
For example, “re” associated to first charac-
ter in a target name is always transliterated as
“雷”, such as Redd →雷德. When “re” ap-
pears at the end of a source name, however,
its transliteration will be “尔” in most cases,
just like Gore →戈尔.

Target tone feature;

This feature is only applied to the translit-
eration task with Chinese as the target lan-
guage. It can be seen as a combination

of a target grapheme chain with some posi-
tion features, using tone instead of the target
grapheme itself for evaluation. There are 5
tones (0,1,2,3,4) for Chinese characters. It is
easy to conduct a comprehensive analysis for
the use of a higher ordered transition chain as
a better constraint. Many fixed tone patterns
can be identified in the Chinese translitera-
tion training data. The tone information can
also be extracted from the Pinyin resource we
used in the previous stage.

Besides the above string features, we also have
some numeric features, as listed below.

Transliteration score;

This score is the joint probabilities of all
transliteration options, included in the output
candidates generated by our decoder.

Target language model score;

This score is calculated from the probabilistic
tri-gram language model.

Source/target Pinyin feature;

This feature uses Pinyin representation for a
source or target name, depending on what
side the Chinese language is used. It mea-
sures how good the output candidates can be
in terms of the comparison between English
text and Pinyin representation. The resulted
score is updated according to the Levenshtein
distance for the two input letter strings of En-
glish and Pinyin.

For a task with English as the target language,
we add the following two additional features into
the learning framework.

Vowel feature;

It is noticed that when English is the target
language, vowels can sometimes be missing
in the generated candidates. This feature is
thus used to punish those outputs unqualified
to be a valid English word for carrying no
vowel.

Syllable consistent feature;

This feature measures whether an English tar-
get name generated in the previous step has
the same number of syllables as the source
name. In Chinese-to-English transliteration,
Chinese characters are single-syllabled, thus

64



Table 1: Evaluation results for our NEWS2010 task.
Task Source Target ACC Mean F MRR Map ref Recall ACCSMT
EnCh English Chinese 0.477 0.740 0.506 0.455 0.561 0.381
ChEn Chinese English 0.227 0.749 0.269 0.226 0.371 0.152

we can easily identify their number. For syl-
labification, we have an independent segmen-
tation process for calculating the syllables.

4 Results

For NEWS2010, we participated in all two
Chinese related transliteration tasks, namely,
EnCh (English-to-Chinese) and ChEn (Chinese-
to-English back transliteration). The official eval-
uation scores for our submissions are presented
in Table 1 with recall rate, and the ACC score
(ACCSMT ) for original SMT outputs. It is easy
to see the performance gain for the reranking, and
also from the recall rate that there is still some
room for improvement, in spite of the high ratio of
ACC/Recall3 calculated from Table 1. However, it
is also worth noting that, some of the source texts
cannot be correctly transliterated, due to many
multiple-word name entities with semantic com-
ponents in the test data, e.g., “MANCHESTER
BRIDGE”, “BRIGHAM CITY” etc. These seman-
tic parts are beyond our transliteration system’s ca-
pability to tackle, especially when the training data
is limited and the only focus of the system is on the
phonetic equivalent correspondence.

Compared to the EnCh transliteration, we get a
rather low ACC score for the ChEn back translit-
eration, suggesting that ChEn task is somewhat
harder than the EnCh (in which Chinese char-
acters are always limited). The ChEn task is a
one-to-many translation, involving a lot of pos-
sible choices and combinations of English sylla-
bles. This certainly makes it a more challenge-
able task than EnCh. However, looking into the
details of the outputs, we find that, in the ChEn
back transliteration, some characters in the test
corpus are unseen in the training and the devel-
opment data, resulting in incorrect transliterations
for many graphemes. This is another factor affect-
ing our final results for the ChEn task.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented our work on
multiple feature based reranking for transliteration

3Compared to the results from (Song et al., 2009)

generation. It NEWS2010 results show that this
approach is effective and promising, in the sense
that it ranks the best in EnCh and ChEn tasks. The
reranking used in this work can also be consid-
ered a regeneration process based on an existing
set, as part of our features are always used directly
to generate the initial transliteration output in other
researches. Though, those features are strongly
dependent on the nature of English and Chinese
languages, it is thus not an easy task to transplant
this model for other language pairs. It is an inter-
esting job to turn it into a language independent
model that can be applied to other languages.

Acknowledgments

The research described in this paper was par-
tially supported by City University of Hong Kong
through the Strategic Research Grants (SRG)
7002267 and 7008003. Dr. Hai Zhao was sup-
ported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) through the grant 60903119. We also
thank Mr. Wenbin Jiang for his helpful sugges-
tions on averaged perceptron learning.

References
Michael Collins. 2002. Discriminative training meth-

ods for hidden markov models: Theory and exper-
iments with perceptron algorithms. In Proceedings
of EMNLP-2002, pages 1–8, July.

Haizhou Li, Min Zhang, and Jian Su. 2004. A
joint source-channel model for machine transliter-
ation. In Proceedings of ACL-04, pages 159–166,
Barcelona, Spain, July.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
ACL-03, pages 160–167, Sapporo, Japan, July.

Jong-Hoon Oh, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, and Kentaro Tori-
sawa. 2009. Machine transliteration using target-
language grapheme and phoneme: Multi-engine
transliteration approach. In Proceedings of NEWS
2009, pages 36–39, Suntec, Singapore, August.

Yan Song, Chunyu Kit, and Xiao Chen. 2009. Translit-
eration of name entity via improved statistical trans-
lation on character sequences. In Proceedings of
NEWS 2009, pages 57–60, Suntec, Singapore, Au-
gust.

65


