










































The Annotation Scheme of the Turkish Discourse Bank and an Evaluation of Inconsistent Annotations


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 282–289,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Annotation Scheme of the Turkish Discourse Bank and An  

Evaluation of Inconsistent Annotations 

 
Deniz Zeyrek, Işın Demirşahin, Ayışığı Sevdik-Çallı, Hale Ögel Balaban,  

İhsan Yalçınkaya 
Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey 

and 
  Ümit Deniz Turan 

Anadolu University, Eskişehir, Turkey 
 

Corresponding author: dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr 
 

Abstract 

 

In this paper, we report on the annotation 
procedures we developed for annotating 
the Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB), an 
effort that extends the Penn Discourse 
Tree Bank (PDTB) annotation style by 
using it for annotating Turkish discourse. 
After a brief introduction to the TDB, we 
describe the annotation cycle and the 
annotation scheme we developed, 
defining which parts of the scheme are an 
extension of the PDTB and which parts 
are different. We provide inter-coder 
reliability calculations on the first and 
second arguments of some connectives 
and discuss the most important sources of 
disagreement among annotators.   

1 A brief introduction to the Turkish 
Discourse Bank 

1.1 The Data 
The Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) project aims 
to annotate the 500,000-word-subcorpus of the 
two-million-word METU Turkish Corpus (MTC) 
(Say et al, 2002). The subcorpus includes a wide 
range of texts, e.g. fiction, interviews, memoirs, 
news articles, etc. reflecting the distribution of 
the genres in the MTC (Zeyrek et al, 2009). The 
main objective of the project is to annotate 
discourse connectives with their two arguments, 
modifiers and supplementary text spans. 
Following the Penn Discourse Tree Bank 
(PDTB), we take discourse connectives as 
discourse-level predicates taking two (and only 

two) arguments, called Arg1 and Arg2, which 
may span one or more clauses and sentences that 
are adjacent or nonadjacent to the connective 
(Prasad et al, 2007, Webber, 2004). Discourse 
relations can certainly be expressed without 
connectives but we have chosen to annotate 
discourse relations encoded by connectives since 
they are more specific about their semantics.  

Discourse connectives are identifiable from 
three syntactic classes, namely, coordinating 
conjunctions, subordinating conjunctions, and 
discourse adverbials. As in the PDTB, we take 
elements belonging to these syntactic classes as 
discourse connectives when they semantically 
relate syntactic entitities such as clauses, 
sentences, sequences of sentences, and 
nominalizations having an abstract object 
interpretation i.e., eventualities, possibilities, 
situations, facts, and propositions (as in Asher, 
1993, cf. Webber, et al, 2005). Major departures 
from the PDTB are, attribution is not annotated, 
only overt connectives are being annotated, and 
the nominal arguments of connectives are being 
annotated where they denote an abstract object. 
Annotation of implicit connectives is further 
work.  

1.2 The annotation cycle 
Before the annotation process started, the 
annotators studied the guidelines, which defined 
some general principles and illustrated difficult 
cases. The guidelines were written in a way to 
allow the annotators enough freedom to reflect 
their intuitions on the annotations. The 
annotators were also told to observe the 
minimality principle (MP) of the PDTB 
guidelines, which expects them to mark as 
argument parts of a clause or sentence that are 

282



minimally sufficient and necessary for the 
discourse relation encoded by the connective. 

The annotation cycle includes three steps. 
First, the annotators go through the whole 
subcorpus to annotate a given connective at a 
time. Any disagreements are discussed and 
resolved by the project team. In the second step, 
the definitions in the annotation guidelines are 
revised with the new issues that emerged in 
annotating the connective. Finally, the agreed 
annotations are checked to ensure they obeyed 
the annotation guidelines fully. The annotations 
were created by a tool designed by Aktaş (2008).  

The connectives are being annotated for the 
categories given in the next section by three 
annotators, who have been in the project since 
the annotation effort started. The three-step 
annotation process and the number of annotators 
we use slow down the task considerably but 
given the complexity of discourse annotation and 
the need for annotation efforts in Turkish, we 
were compelled to target maximum reliability 
achieved by three annotators.  

The inter-coder reliability has recently 
stabilized and to speed the annotation effort, two 
annotators have started to carry out their task as a 
pair, while the other annotator works 
independently. This annotation style involves 
two annotators working side-by-side at one 
computer, continuously collaborating on one 
connective type at a time to code all its tokens in 
the subcorpus. One of the annotators carries out 
the task on the annotation tool, while the other 
observes her continuously for any defects and 
problems and suggests alternative solutions. This 
style of annotation, created by our group 
independently of pair programming, corresponds 
to the practice explained in Williams, et al 
(2000) and Williams and Kessler (2000). It is 
quite a beneficial and reliable method that also 
speeds up the process (Demirşahin, et al ms). 1 
We give the preliminary results of this procedure 
in section 2.1.4.  

1.3 An outline of Turkish connectives and 
the annotation scheme 

We annotate discourse connectives belonging to 
the syntactic classes listed below, leaving out 
converbs that may function as discourse 
connectives.  

 

                                                 
1 Except for ve ‘and’, the statistics reported in this paper 
reflect the agreement among 3 independent annotators. 

• Coordinating conjunctions (ve ‘and’, ya 
da ‘or’, ama ‘but’) 

• Complex subordinators (için ‘for’, 
rağmen ‘although, despite’), 
converbs/simplex subordinators (-Ince 
‘when,’ –ken ‘while, now that’)2 

• Anophoric connectives (bundan başka 
‘in addition to/separate from these’, 
bunun sonucunda ‘as a result of this,’ 
bunun için ‘due to/for this reason’, buna 
rağmen ‘despite this’) and discourse 
adverbials (oysa ‘however’, öte yandan 
‘on the other hand’, then ‘sonradan’) 

In Turkish, coordinators are typically 
s(entence)-medial, they may also be found s-
initially, or s-finally. Coordinators show an 
affinity with the second clause, as evidenced by 
punctuation and their ability to move to the end 
of the second clause. Subordinators take as their 
second argument a nonfinite clause that contains 
a genitive marked subject that agrees with the 
subordinate verb in terms of person and number.  
The subordinate clause may also be assigned 
case by the postposition that functions as the 
connective. The subordinator and its host clause 
are always adjacent and the subordinate clause 
may appear s-initially or s-finally. Anaphoric 
connectives are characterized by an anaphoric 
element in the phrase and hence they have the 
ability to access the inference in the prior 
discourse (Webber, et al 2003). Furthermore, 
they may take as their first argument text spans 
that are nonadjacent to the sentence containing 
the connective (Zeyrek and Webber, 2008).3  As 
example (1) illustrates, discourse adverbials can 
be used with connectives from other syntactic 
classes, e.g. a coordinating conjunction, fakat 
‘but’ may be used with sonradan ‘then’, and in 
accessing its first argument, the discourse 
adverbial may cross one or more clauses. In the 
examples, Arg1 is italicized, Arg2 set in bold, 
and the connective head is underlined.  

                                                 
2 The capital letters are used to capture the cases where a 
vowel agrees with the vowel harmony rules of the language. 
The vowel rendered by the capital letter I may be resolved 
as any of the high vowels in the language, i.e., i, ü, ı, u.  
3In the PDTB, expressions like after that are coded as 
“alternative lexicalization” while coding implicit 
connectives, i.e., as a “nonconnective expression” (Prasad et 
al, 2007:22).  In Turkish, such phrasal expressions are 
abundant. They are two-part expressions with one part 
referring to the relation, the other anaphorically to Arg1 as 
in English. We decided to take these expressions as 
connectives because otherwise, we would be missing an 
important fact about Turkish. Therefore they are being 
annotated as connectives in the TDB project.  

283



(1) 
a. Bunları açıkladığımız vakit yöneticiler 

evvela şaşırdılar 
 When (we) explained these, the 

administrators were first surprised. 
b. Böyle bir şeyi asla beklemiyorlardı.    
 (They) were never expecting such a thing. 
c. Fakat sonradan kendilerini toparladılar. 
 But then they gained their composure. 
 
Largely following the annotation style of the 

PDTB, we determined the categories that form 
the annotation of a relation as follows:  

Conn: This is the connective head of an 
explicit connective. 

Arg2: This tag refers to the argument that 
forms a syntactic unit with the connective.  

Arg1: This tag is for the other argument that 
the connective relates semantically to Arg2. 

Sup1/Sup2: This attribute specifies either the 
material that makes the semantic contribution of 
the argument more specific (as in the PDTB), or 
the clause/sentence where an anaphoric element 
expressed in the argument is resolved. The Sup 
tag is not specifically used for anaphor resolution 
in the PDTB.  

Mod: This tag specifies the following 
features: (a) the adverbs that are used along with 
connective heads, e.g. tam aksine ‘just to the 
contrary’, (b) the focus particle dE used together 
with the connective head (e.g., ve de ‘and-focus 
particle ‘and’), (c) adverbs showing the 
determinacy of the relation, e.g. belki  ‘perhaps’, 
sadece ‘only’ etc., (d) polarity of postpositional 
phrases (e.g. için değil ‘not for’). In the PDTB, 
the Mod category is utilized only for adverbs 
used together with connective heads. The other 
categories are used to capture aspects of 
attribution and verbs of attribution.   

Shared: This attribute identifies the subjects, 
objects, or any temporal adverbs shared by the 
arguments of the discourse relation. This 
category was required for Turkish, which is a 
pro-drop and free word-order language. In 
Turkish, subjects, objects or adverbs can appear 
s-initially, s-medially or s-finally. Subjects and 
objects are dropped if they are salient in the 
discourse. This category allows us to capture the 
variable position of subjects, objects and adverbs 
shared by the arguments of a discourse relation.  
The PDTB does not have this feature.   

 In what follows, we will report on the inter-
coder reliability statistics on Arg1 and Arg2 of a 
set of connectives for which we obtained low 
inter-coder reliability results and discuss the 
most common inconsistencies. The remaining 

categories mentioned above are under use but 
inter-coder reliability statistics have not been 
calculated for them.  

2 A quantitative and qualitative 
evaluation of the inconsistent 
annotations in the TDB  

So far, 60 types of discourse connectives 
amounting to 6873 relations have been annotated 
in the TDB project.  We computed the reliability 
of the coders’ agreement for Arg1 and Arg2 of 
these connectives by means of the Kappa statistic 
(Carletta, 1996). A value of K agreement 
coefficient (henceforth K values) between 0.80 
and 1.00 shows a good agreement, and a value 
between 0.60 and 0.80 indicates some agreement 
(Poesio, 2000). The K values we obtained for 
Arg1 and Arg2 of most connectives annotated so 
far range between 0.80 and 1.00 but for the 
connectives that are in focus in this paper, the K 
values for Arg1 are less than 0.80 (see Appendix 
B). It is these connectives that we now turn to.  

These connectives are listed below again, 
along with the K values obtained for their Arg1 
and Arg2. Before calculating the K values, all 
annotated text spans were re-processed in order 
to express the annotations in (pseudo) categories. 
During re-processing, for each annotator the 
annotated text span boundary characters (i.e., the 
beginning and end characters) were coded as 1 
and the remaining text was coded as 0, so that an 
agreement table could be constructed (Artstein, 
and Poesio, 2008; Di Eugenio and Glass, 
2004).  It is on the basis of this table which we 
measured inter-coder reliability.   
 

Connective K value 
 Arg1 Arg2 
yandan ‘on the other 
hand’ 

0.523 0.645 

ayrıca ‘in addition, 
separately’ 

0.545 0.760 

rağmen ‘despite, 
despite this’ 

0.688 0.742 

fakat ‘but’ 0.719 0.855 
tersine ‘on the 
contrary’ 

0.741 1.000 

dolayısıyla ‘as a 
result’ 

0.759 0.930 

oysa ‘however’ 0.767 0.913 
amaçla ‘for this 
purpose’ 

0.785 0.876 

Table 1. Eight connectives with K values less than 
0.80 (total number of annotations: 554) 

 

284



For comparison, we provide the K values for 
two discontinuous connectives in Table 2: 
 

Connective K value 
 Arg1 Arg2 
ne .. ne ‘neither 
nor’ 

0.820 0.930 

hem .. hem ‘both .. 
and’ 

1.000 0.982 

Table 2. Two discontinous connectives with K values 
higher than 0.80 (total number of annotations: 126) 
 
As seen in Table 2, inter-coder agreement in 
discontinuous connectives is high. We argue that 
discontinuous connectives are maximally 
different from anaphoric connectives (and 
discourse adverbials) since they unambiguously 
draw the boundaries of their arguments.  As a 
result, the inter-coder reliability tests yield good 
agreements, with K values > 0.80. Anaphoric 
connectives relate their second argument with 
another argument adjacent or nonadjacent to the 
connective, in a way much similar to how 
definite NPs find their antecedents in the 
previous discourse. Depending on the relation 
encoded by the connective, the previous 
discourse is likely to contain clauses that 
elaborate and expand a generalization, refute an 
assertion, list the components of a statement, 
explain the cause of an eventuality, etc. It may 
not be an easy task to decide whether one should 
take all or part of these clauses as Arg1; 
therefore inconsistencies are expected in drawing 
the Arg1’s boundaries. Arg2, on the other hand, 
is relatively easier to determine since it is 
syntactically related to the connective and hence 
its domain is determined. 

Example (2), which shows a relation encoded 
by the connective tersine ‘on the contrary’, 
presents one of the most common cases of 
inconsistency in determining the Arg1 span. 

 
(2) 

a. Eyleme değil, karaktere ağırlık veren 
modern romanda biliyoruz ki roman 
kişilerinin psikolojisi, iç dünyası, bilinci ve 
bilinçaltı yazarın dikkatle çözmeye çalıştığı 
ilginç sorunları içerir. 

 (We) know that in the modern novel, which 
emphasizes character rather than action, the 
novel contains the interesting problems that 
the writer wants to solve and the characters’ 
psychology, their inner world, 
consciousness, and the subconscious. 

 
 

b. Bundan ötürü önemli bir yönünü 
oluşturur romanın. 

 For this reason, (it) constitutes an 
 important aspect of the novel. 

c. Ama gene biliyoruz ki halk edebiyatı 
ürünlerinde önemli olan kişinin iç 
dünyası değil, 

 But we also know that in folk literature 
what is important is not the person’s 
inner world, 

d. tersine, eylemidir. 
 on the contrary, (it) is his action.  

 
Two annotators selected as Arg1 the italicized 
part in (2c) while the third one selected as Arg1 
the clauses in (2a), and (2c). In fact, a careful 
analysis of the discourse connective tersine ‘on 
the contrary’ reveals that in all tokens in the 
corpus, the speaker introduces an assertion, then 
refutes some aspect of it with an overt negation 
and then rectifies it in Arg2.  (Turan and Zeyrek, 
2010). The third annotator’s selection of Arg1 is 
compatible with this observation, while the other 
annotators’ selection of Arg1 appears to be 
guided by the MP.   

2.1 Common Sources of Disagreement 
An examination of the 8 connectives for which 

K values were below 0.80 for Arg1 or Arg2 
showed that there were 6 main sources for the 
inconsistencies. These were (a) no overlapping 
annotations for Arg1, (b) partially overlapping 
annotations for Arg1 or (c) Arg2, (d) lack of 
adequate definitions in the guidelines, (e) 
annotators’ errors in following the linguistic 
definitions in the guidelines, (f) other 
inconsistencies, e.g., errors in selecting spaces, 
leaving characters out, etc. (Appendix A). 4 
Among these, partially overlapping Arg1 
annotations is the major source of discrepancy 
observed in 63.98% of the inconsistent cases, 
followed by partially overlapping Arg2 
annotations observed in 10.17% of the cases, and 
no overlapping annotations in 9.74% of the 
cases. While errors grouped under the ‘other’ 
category is 9.74%, annotators’ errors in 
following the linguistic definitions in the 
guidelines is negligible (2.97%). The percentage 
of lacking definitions in the guidelines is also 
low (3.39%), showing that the coverage is good 
in the updated guidelines. Let us now turn to the 

                                                 
4 There were also missing annotations but since we did not 
calculate inter-coder statistics for them, they are not 
mentioned in this work.  

285



common sources of disagreement among 
annotators. 
 
2.1.1 Interpretations of the minimality 

principle 
 

A frequent reason for inconsistent annotations 
was lack of agreement in determining the exact 
boundaries of argument spans, which is 
ultimately related to how the MP is interpreted. 
For example, in (3), the connective fakat ‘but’ 
may be taken as linking clauses (3a) and (3b).  
Yet, the scope of the predicative morpheme (i.e. 
–tır in (3c)) that determines finiteness is shared 
by the verbs of (3b) and (3c), i.e. this morpheme 
takes into its scope two consecutive clauses. 
While two annotators coded only clause (3b) as 
Arg2, the third annotator tended to interpret Arg2 
as the clauses within the scope of the shared 
predicative morpheme (-tır), coding (3b) and 
(3c) as Arg2. It appears that the disagreement in 
example (3) stems from different interpretations 
of the MP coupled with a structural property of 
Turkish.  
 
(3) 
a. Onlara sunulan kurbanlar, başlangıçta insanlardı 
 At the beginning, it was humans that were 

sacrified for them.  
b. Fakat bu âdet sonraları hafifletilerek, insan 

yerine hayvanlar kurban edilmeğe başlanmış, 
 But later on, loosening this tradition, (they) 

started to sacrifice animals instead of humans,  
c. sonunda da bu hayvanları temsil eden bazı 

şeylerin (…) kâğıt hayvan figürlerinin  (…) 
yahut da bir taşın suya atılmasının yeterli 
olacağına inanılmıştır. 

 finally, it was believed that it would be sufficient 
to throw a stone or paper animal figures to the 
water, as well as other objects that represent 
these animals. 

 
The text given in (4) further illustrates a case 
where the annotators disagreed on the final 
boundary of Arg2. One annotator selected as 
Arg2 the span “this is .. noted” (4b), while the 
other annotators selected the span “this is…. a 
lost place” ((4b)-(4c)); i.e., they included as Arg2 
not only the clause adjacent to the connective, 
but they also selected the clause that followed 
where the cataphor is resolved. Faced with such 
inconsistencies, we decided to annotate the 
material that is needed for pronoun resolution as 
supplementary text. In this case, the clause in 
(4c) is marked as Sup2.  
 

(4) 
a. … ikincisindeki ayrıntı bolluğu Recaizade 

Ekrem’in gerçekçiliğine atfedilmiştir.  
 .. the richness of details in the second 

(novel) was attributed to Recaizade Ekrem’s 
realism. 

b. Oysa asıl dikkat çekmesi gereken şudur: 
 However, this is what should be noted: 
c. Araba Sevdasının Çamlıca’sı yitik bir 

Çamlıca’dır. 
 The Çamlıca described in Araba Sevdası is a 

lost place. 
 

The inconsistencies that derive from different 
interpretations of the minimality requirement is 
particularly interesting from a theoretical 
perspective. It appears that this principle may be 
interpreted as syntactic minimality as illustrated 
in example (3), and as a factor that goes against 
basic insights of discourse interpretation such as 
anaphor/cataphor resolution as in example (4). In 
the former case, the MP pulls the annotators in 
one direction, and the need to reflect their 
understanding of the discourse in the annotations 
pulls them in the opposite direction, especially 
when there is morphological/syntactic evidence 
for them to choose more than one clause. In the 
latter case, the annotators seem to feel they 
would lose the anaphoric/coreference chains in 
the discourse if they left out the text span where 
the anaphor was resolved.  After using the Sup 
label for anaphor resolution/coreference chains, 
disagreements of the latter sort diminished 
considerably but this was a methodological 
approach with a bias towards the MP rather than 
the desired solution of the role of 
anaphoric/coreference chains in argument spans. 
We aim to tackle this issue in further research.   

A parenthetical or evaluative clause in the 
argument span also led to inconsistencies in 
determining argument boundaries. For example, 
the annotators gave conflicting decisions as to 
whether or not they should select parenthetical 
clauses, especially when they are s-medial, as in 
(5): 

(5) 
 Kemal, bir yandan askeri bir savaş 

verirken öte yandan yerli 
işbirlikçilerle –ki bunların başında 
da basın- savaşmak zorunda 
kalmıştır. 

 Kemal, while on the one hand 
fighting a military war, on the other 
hand (he) had to fight with local 
accomplices –which mainly included 
the media. 

 

286



Disagreements that arise from parenthetical 
clauses have diminished after we added a new 
principle to the guidelines, asking annotators to 
select the parenthetical together with the 
argument if it contributed to the meaning of the 
argument.   
 
2.1.2 Ambiguity 
 

Another reason for inconsistent annotations 
was ambiguity in meaning. Consider example (1) 
once again, where the contrast relation can be 
interpreted in three ways: it is not clear whether 
the contrast is between to be surprised in (1a) 
and to regain composure in (1c) or whether it is 
between not expecting such a thing in (1b) and to 
regain composure in (1c). Alternatively, the 
contrast can be interpreted between (1a) and (1b) 
on the one hand, and between (1a) and (1c) on 
the other. We observed that some of the 
disagreements concerning the span of Arg 1 
stemmed from such cases.  

 
2.1.3 Type of discourse relation 

 
Yet another type of inconsistency appears to 

be associated with the type of discourse relation. 
Sanders and Noordman (2000) and Pitler, et. al. 
(2008) state that causal (contingency) relations 
are among the most salient coherence relations. 
They suggest that the connectives that signal 
comparison and contingency are mostly 
unambiguous. Being cognitively salient, causal 
and contingency relations are more tightly 
organized than the additive list relation. This is 
because in causal relations, one target sentence is 
more important than the other; while in a list 
relation there is more than one sentence 
contributing to the discourse. Sanders and 
Noordman (2000:53) argue that causal relations 
are more strongly connecting than additive 
relations. This salience in discourse relations can 
be universal.  In fact, we found that the inter-
coder agreement of the causal connective çünkü 
‘because’ was high (0.888 for Arg1 and 0.941 for 
Arg2). However, for the connective ayrıca ‘in 
addition to’, which encodes the list relation, the 
inter-coder K value was 0.545 for Arg1, 0.765 
for Arg 2. An example of the list reading 
interpretation of this connective is illustrated in 
(6) below.  

(6) 
a. Babanın yaşamı artık derli toplu olmuştu.  
 The father’s life now became orderly.   
b. Evde kavgalar da azalmıştı. 
 The fights at home have diminished 

c. Ayrıca yeni bir çevrede de bulunuyorlardı. 
 Besides, (they) are now in a new 

neighborhood.  
 
In the extract given in (6), the topic under 
discussion seems to be the list of the family’s 
diminishing problems: Father’s having an 
orderly life, reduced fights at home, etc.  While 
two annotators preferred to select (6b) as Arg 1, 
the third one preferred to select (6a) and (6b) 
together.  The connective ayrıca, marking a 
weaker relation between its two arguments, is 
among the connectives that yielded such 
instances of disagreement.  
 
2.1.4 Nominalized arguments 
 
In this section, we will report on some 
preliminary results about a common 
inconsistency that occurred while annotating the 
connective ve ‘and,’ namely the problem of 
teasing apart nominalized arguments that have an 
abstract object interpretation and those that do 
not. We also explain the pair annotation process. 

In Turkish, a nominalizing process realized by 
various inflectional suffixes forms nonfinite 
clauses. The clauses formed by some of these 
suffixes are abstract enough to be easily 
specified as an argument of a discourse relation, 
e.g. –mAk. On the other hand, some of the 
suffixes (e.g. –mA, -Iş) are very productive in 
deriving ordinary nouns referring to actual 
instances or things. It is these cases where 
disagreement among the annotators increases. 
Example (7) illustrates the use of –mAk, where 
the clauses it forms were easily determined as 
arguments with abstract object interpretations.  
 
(7) 
 18. yüzyılın yaptığı,  17. Yüzyılın yarattıklarını 

çoğaltmak ve yaymaktır. 
 What the 18th century did was to increase and 

to extend what the 17th century created. 
 
Example (8) shows a difficult case where the 
annotators were inconsistent in deciding whether 
the connective’s arguments have abstract object 
interpretations or not. This is because the 
morphological form of the words gelişme 
(improve-mA) ‘improvement’ and yapılaşma 
(construct-mA) ‘(re)construction’ are very much 
the same as the words bekleme (wait-mA) 
‘waiting’ and arama (search-mA) ‘search, 
searching’ shown in (9). The final decision was 
to annotate (9) only.  

287



(8) 
 Deprem bölgesinde yeniden [gelişme] ve 

[yapılaşmanın] planlanması gibi ciddi bir sorun 
bulunmaktadır. 

 There is the important issue of planning the 
[improvement] and [re-construction] of the 
areas affected by the earthquake.  

 
(9) 
 Artık onu beklemenin ve aramanın boşuna 

olduğunu anlamıştır. 
 He has already figured out that it was futile to 

wait for her and to search her.  
 
We noticed such inconsistencies in annotating 
1/3 of the files for and. When we shifted to the 
pair annotation procedure, we obtained high 
agreement on Arg1 and Arg2 annotations of and 
because we observed that when done in pairs, 
resolving any disagreements between the 
annotations was faster since the members of the 
pair discussed difficult cases between them and 
sometimes determined a preferred annotation 
before presenting the results to the group. Table 
3 shows the results for and annotations. A 
repeated measures test shows that the increase in 
K values is significant (p< 0.01). 
 

Annotators K value 
 Arg1 Arg2 
3 annotators 0.692 0.791 
A pair of annotators 
and an independent 
annotator 

0.945 0.964 

Table 3 K values for ve ‘and’ of 3 independent 
annotators, and a pair and an independent annotator 

3 Summary  

In this paper we presented common sources of 
disagreement we observed in annotating the 
arguments of discourse connectives in the TDB, 
a project of discourse-level annotation on written 
Turkish. We defined our annotation scheme and 
annotation cycle. We achieved high agreement 
on argument annotations of discontinuous 
connectives but agreement on some other 
connectives was low, particularly for Arg1. Since 
these connectives belong to different syntactic 
classes, the inconsistencies cannot be easily 
explained by the properties of the syntactic class 
of connectives. We discussed various potential 
factors affecting inter-coder agreement, 
including the minimality principle coupled with 
language specific properties, the structure of 
discourse (as in the case of our example in 
tersine), cognitive salience of discourse relations, 

and ambiguity.  We discussed inconsistencies 
resulting form the difficulty of distinguishing the 
non-abstract object interpretation of a 
nominalized clause from its abstract object 
interpretation. We argued that once inter-coder 
reliability stabilizes, it is beneficial to shift to the 
procedure where a pair of annotators works 
together to annotate a specific connective while 
the third works independently.    
 
Acknowledgments 
We acknowledge the grant form The Scientific 
and Technological Research Council of Turkey 
and thank our anonymous referees for comments.  

References 
Berfin Aktaş. 2008. Computational Aspects of 

Discourse Annotation. Unpublished MS Thesis, 
Cognitive Science Program, Middle East Technical 
University  

Ron, Artstein and Massimo Poesio (2008). Inter-coder 
agreement for computational 
linguistics. Computational Linguistics, 34(4). pp. 
555-596. 

Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects 
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

Işın Demirşahin, İhsan Yalçınkaya, Deniz Zeyrek 
(ms). Pair Annotation: Adaption of Pair 
Programming to Corpus Annotation.  

Barbara Di Eugenio, & Michael Glass (2004). The 
Kappa statistic: a second look. Computational 
Linguistics, 30(1). pp. 95-101. 

Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, 
Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotating Discourse 
Connectives and Their Arguments. In Proceedings 
of the HLT/NAACL Workshop on Frontiers in 
Corpus Annotation. Boston, MA. 2004. 

Emily Pitler, Mridhula Raghupathy, Hena Mehta, Ani 
Nenkova, Alan Lee, and Aravind Joshi. 2008. 
Easily Identifiable Discourse Relations 
Proceedings of COLING, 2008. Poster paper.  

Massimo Poesio. 2000. Annotating a Corpus to 
Develop and Evaluate Discourse Entity Realization 
Algorithms: Issues and Preliminary Results. 
Proceedings of LREC-2000. Athens, May 2000. 

Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan 
Lee, Aravind Joshi, Livio Robaldo and Bonnie 
Webber. 2007. The Penn Discourse Tree Bank 2.0 
Annotation Manual. December 17, 2007.  

Ted J. M. Sanders and Leo G. M. Noordman.  2000. 
The Role of Coherence Relations and Their 
Linguistic Markers in Text Processing. Discourse 
Processes 29(1):  37–60. 

288



Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oflazer, and Umut 
Özge. 2002. Development of a Corpus and a 
Treebank for Present-day Written Turkish. In 
Proceedings of the Eleventh International 
Conference of Turkish Linguistics.  

Ümit Deniz Turan and Deniz Zeyrek. 2010. Context, 
Contrast, and the Structure of Discourse in 
Turkish. ms. 

Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Eleni Miltsakaki, 
Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, and Kate 
Forbes. 2005. A Short Introduction to the Penn 
Discourse Treebank. Copenhagen Working Papers 
in Language and Speech Processing. 

Bonnie Webber. D-LTAG: Extending Lexicalized 
TAG to Discourse. Cognitive Science, 28(5). 
September 2004. 

Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Matthew Stone, and 
Alistair Knott. 2003. Anaphora and Discourse 
Structure. Computational Linguistics 29(4). pp. 
545-587. 2003 

Laurie Williams, Robert R. Kessler, Ward 
Cunningham, Ron Jeffries. 2000. Strengthening the 
Case for Pair Programming. IEEE Software, 
July/August 2000, pp. 19-25. 

Laurie Williams and Kessler, Robert R. 2000. All I 
Really Need to Know about Pair Programming I 
Learned In Kindergarten, Communications of the 
ACM, Vol. 43, No., 5, pp. 108-114, May 2000. 

Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A Discourse 
Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse 
Connectives in the METU Turkish Corpus. The 6th 
Workshop on Asian Language Resources, The 
Third International Joint Conference on Natural 
Language Processing (IJNLP), Hyderabad, India, 
January 2008. 

Deniz Zeyrek, Ümit Turan, Cem Bozşahin, Ruket 
Çakıcı, Ayışığı Sevdik-Çallı, Işın Demirşahin, 
Berfin Aktaş, İhsan Yalçınkaya, Hale Ögel. 2009. 
Annotating Subordinators in the Turkish Discourse 
Bank.ACL-IJCNLP, In Proceedings of LAW III 
Annotation Workshop III. Singapore, August 6-7, 
2009, pp. 44-48. 

Appendix A. Sources of disagreement in 8 
connectives (Turkish equivalents of ‘but’, ‘however’, 
‘for this reason’, ‘despite’, ‘on the other hand’, ‘for 
this reason’, ‘on the contrary’, ‘in addition’)  

Source of disagreement No. % 
Partial Arg1 overlap 151 63.98 
Partial Arg2 overlap 24 10.17 
No overlap of Arg1 23 9.74 
Other 23 9.75 
Lack of guidelines 8 3.39 
Guidelines not followed 7 2.97 
Total 236 100 

Appendix B. K values of connective types annotated 
in the TDB project5  
 

  K Value 

C
on

ne
ct

iv
e 

(ty
pe

) 

E
ng

lis
h 

eq
ui

va
le

nt
  

Arg1 Arg2 
ne ..ne neither .. nor 1.000 0.982 
veya or 0.942 0.980 
dolayı since 0.892 0.957 
çünkü because 0.888 0.941 

örneğin 
for  

example 0.870 0.898 
ya da or 0.843 0.974 
yoksa otherwise 0.837 0.938 
ama but 0.832 0.901 

karşın 
despite, 

despite this 0.824 0.893 
hem .. 
hem 

both .. and 
0.820 0.930 

dahası moreover 0.785 0.908 

amaçla 
for the 

purpose of 0.785 0.876 

için 
for, for this 

reason 0.776 0.915 
oysa however 0.767 0.913 
dolayı-
sıyla 

for this 
reason 0.759 0.930 

tersine 
on the 

contrary 0.741 1.000 
fakat but 0.719 0.855 

amacıyla 
for the 

purpose of 0.700 0.912 
ve and 0.692 0.791 

rağmen 
despite, 

despite this 0.688 0.742 

ayrıca 
in addition; 
separately 0.545 0.760 

yandan 
on the one 

hand 0.523 0.645 
 

 
 
 
 
 

                                                 
5 The results about the connective types for which 10 or 
more relations have been annotated by three annotators are 
included in the appendices. 

289


