










































Statistical Dialog Management Methodologies for Real Applications


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 269–272,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Statistical Dialog Management Methodologies for Real Applications

David Griol
Dept. of Computer Science

Carlos III University of Madrid
Av. Universidad, 30, 28911, Leganés

dgriol@inf.uc3m.es

Zoraida Callejas, Ramón López-Cózar
Dept. of Languages and Computer Systems, CITIC-UGR

University of Granada
C/ Pdta. Daniel Saucedo Aranda, 18071, Granada

{zoraida, rlopezc}@ugr.es

Abstract
In this paper we present a proposal for the
development of dialog systems that, on the
one hand, takes into account the benefits of
using standards like VoiceXML, whilst on
the other, includes a statistical dialog mod-
ule to avoid the effort of manually defin-
ing the dialog strategy. This module is
trained using a labeled dialog corpus, and
selects the next system response consider-
ing a classification process that takes into
account the dialog history. Thus, system
developers only need to define a set of
VoiceXML files, each including a system
prompt and the associated grammar to rec-
ognize the users responses to the prompt.
We have applied this technique to develop
a dialog system in VoiceXML that pro-
vides railway information in Spanish.

1 Introduction

When designing a spoken dialog system, develop-
ers need to specify the system actions in response
to user utterances and environmental states that,
for example, can be based on observed or inferred
events or beliefs. In addition, the dialog manager
needs a dialog strategy that defines the conversa-
tional behavior of the system. This is the funda-
mental task of dialog management (Paek and Pier-
accini, 2008), as the performance of the system is
highly dependent on the quality of this strategy.
Thus, a great effort is employed to empirically de-
sign dialog strategies for commercial systems. In
fact, the design of a good strategy is far from be-
ing a trivial task since there is no clear definition
of what constitutes a good strategy (Schatzmann
et al., 2006). Once the strategy has been designed,
the implementation of the system is leveraged by
programming languages such as VoiceXML, for
which different programming environments and
tools have been created to help developers.

As an alternative of the previously described
rule-based approaches, the application of statis-
tical approaches to dialog management makes it
possible to consider a wider space of dialog strate-
gies (Georgila et al., 2006; Williams and Young,
2007; Griol et al., 2009). The main reason is that
statistical models can be trained from real dialogs,
modeling the variability in user behaviors. The fi-
nal objective is to develop dialog systems that have
a more robust behavior and are easier to adapt to
different user profiles or tasks.

(Pieraccini et al., 2009) highlights the imprac-
ticality of applying statistical learning approaches
to develop commercial applications, in the sense
that it is difficult to consider the expert knowl-
edge of human designers. From his perspective,
a hybrid approach, combining statistical and rule-
based approaches, could be a good solution. The
reason is that statistical approaches can offer a
wider range of alternatives at each dialog state,
whereas rule based approaches may offer knowl-
edge on best practices.

For example, (Williams, 2008) proposes taking
advantage of POMDPs and rule-based approaches
by using POMDPs to foster robustness and at the
same time being able to incorporate handcrafted
constraints which cover expert knowledge in the
application domain. Also (Lee et al., 2010) have
recently proposed a different hybrid approach to
dialog modeling in which n-best recognition hy-
potheses are weighted using a mixture of expert
knowledge and data-driven measures by using an
agenda and an example-based machine translation
approach respectively. In both approaches, the hy-
brid method achieved significant improvements.

Additionally, speech recognition grammars for
commercial systems have been usually built on
the basis of handcrafted rules that are tested re-
cursively, which in complex applications is very
costly (McTear, 2004). However, as stated by
(Pieraccini et al., 2009), many sophisticated com-

269



mercial systems already available receive a large
volume of interactions. Therefore, industry is be-
coming more interested in substituting rule based
grammars with statistical approaches based on the
large amounts of data available.

As an attempt to improve the current technol-
ogy, we propose to merge statistical approaches
with VoiceXML. Our goal is to combine the flex-
ibility of statistical dialog management with the
facilities that VoiceXML offers, which would help
to introduce statistical approaches for the develop-
ment of commercial (and not strictly academic) di-
alog systems. To this end, our technique employs
a statistical dialog manager that takes into account
the history of the dialog up to the current dialog
state in order to decide the next system prompt.
In addition, the system prompts and the gram-
mars for ASR are implemented in VoiceXML-
compliant formats, for example, JSGF or SRGS.
As it is often difficult to find or gather a human-
machine corpus which cover an identical domain
as the system which is to be implemented, our ap-
proach is also based on the compilation of cor-
pora of interactions of simulated users, which is
a common practice when using machine learning
approaches for system development.

In contrast with other hybrid approaches, our
main aim is not to incorporate knowledge about
best strategies in statistical dialog management,
but rather to take advantage of an implementa-
tion language which has been traditionally used
to build rule-based systems (such as VoiceXML),
for the development of statistical dialog strate-
gies. Expert knowledge about deployment of
VoiceXML applications, development environ-
ments and tools can still be exploited using our
technique. The only change is in the transition be-
tween states, which is carried out on a data-driven
basis (i.e., is not deterministic). We have applied
our technique to develop a dialog system that pro-
vides railway information, for which we have de-
veloped a statistical dialog management technique
in a previous study.

2 Our Proposal to Introduce Statistical
Methodologies in Commercial
Applications

As stated in the introduction, our approach to inte-
grate statistical methodologies in commercial ap-
plications is based on the automatic learning of the
dialog strategy using a statistical dialog manage-

ment methodology. In most dialog systems, the
dialog manager makes decisions based only on the
information provided by the user in the previous
turns and its own dialog model. For example, this
is the case with most dialog systems for slot-filling
tasks. The methodology that we propose for the
selection of the next system response for this kind
of task is detailed in (Griol et al., 2008). It is based
on the definition of a data structure that we call
Dialog Register (DR), which contains the infor-
mation provided by the user throughout the dialog
history. In brief, it is as follows: for each time i,
the selection of the next system prompt Ai is car-
ried out by means of the following maximization:

Âi = argmax
Ai∈A

P (Ai|DRi−1, Si−1)

where the set A contains all the possible system
responses and Si−1 is the state of the dialog se-
quence (system-turn, user-turn) at time i.

Each user turn supplies the system with infor-
mation about the task; that is, he/she asks for a
specific concept and/or provides specific values
for certain attributes. However, a user turn could
also provide other kinds of information, such as
task-independent information. This is the case of
turns corresponding to Affirmation, Negation and
Not-Understood dialog acts. This kind of infor-
mation implies some decisions which are different
from simply updating the DRi−1. Hence, for the
selection of the best system response Ai, we take
into account the DR that results from turn 1 to
turn i− 1, and we explicitly consider the last state
Si−1. Our model can be extended by incorporating
additional information to the DR, such as some
chronological information (e.g. number of turns
up to the current turn) or user profiles (e.g. user
experience or preferences).

The selection of the system response is car-
ried out through a classification process, for which
a multilayer perceptron (MLP) is used. The in-
put layer receives the codification of the pair
(DRi−1, Si−1). The output generated by the MLP
can be seen as the probability of selecting each of
the different system answers defined for a specific
task.

To learn the dialog model we use dialog sim-
ulation techniques. Our approach for acquiring a
dialog corpus is based on the interaction of a user
simulator and a dialog manager simulator (Griol et
al., 2007). The user simulation replaces the user
intention level, that is, it provides concepts and

270



attributes that represent the intention of the user.
This way, the user simulator carries out the func-
tions of the ASR and NLU modules. Errors and
confidence scores are simulated by a specific mod-
ule in the simulator. The acquired dialogs are em-
ployed to automatically generate VoiceXML code
for each system prompt and create the grammar
needed to recognize the possible user utterances
after each one of the system prompts.

3 Development of a railway information
system using the proposed technique

To test our proposal, we have used the defini-
tions taken to develop the DIHANA dialog system,
which was developed in a previous study to pro-
vide information about train services, schedules
and fares in Spanish (Griol et al., 2009; Griol et
al., 2008). The DR defined for the our railway in-
formation system is a sequence of 15 fields, corre-
sponding to the five concepts (Hour, Price, Train-
Type, Trip-Time, Services) and ten attributes (Ori-
gin, Destination, Departure-Date, Arrival-Date,
Departure-Hour, Arrival-Hour, Class, Train-Type,
Order-Number, Services). The system generates a
total of 51 different prompts.

Three levels of labeling are defined for the la-
beling of the system dialog acts. The first level
describes general acts which are task independent.
The second level is used to represent concepts and
attributes involved in dialog turns that are task-
dependent. The third level represents values of at-
tributes given in the turns. The following labels
are defined for the first level: Opening, Closing,
Undefined, Not-Understood, Waiting, New-Query,
Acceptance, Rejection, Question, Confirmation,
and Answer. The labels defined for the second and
third level were the following: Departure-Hour,
Arrival-Hour, Price, Train-Type, Origin, Destina-
tion, Date, Order-Number, Number-Trains, Ser-
vices, Class, Trip-Type, Trip-Time, and Nil. There
are dialog turns which are labeled with several di-
alog acts.

Having this kind of labeling and the values of
attributes obtained during a dialog, it is straightfor-
ward to construct a sentence in natural language.
Some examples of the dialog act labeling of the
system turns are shown in Figure 1.

Two million dialogs were simulated using a set
of two types of scenarios. Type S1 defines one
objective for the dialog, whereas Type S2 defines
two. Table 1 summarizes the statistics of the ac-

[SPANISH] Bienvenido al servicio de información de
trenes. ¿En qué puedo ayudarle?
[ENGLISH] Welcome to the railway information sys-
tem. How can I help you?
(Opening:Nil:Nil)

[SPANISH] El único tren es un Euromed que sale a las

0:27. ¿Desea algo más?

[ENGLISH] There is only one train, which is a Eu-

romed, that leaves at 0:27. Anything else?
(Answer:Departure-Hour:Departure-Hour:Departure-
Hour[0.27],Number-Trains[1],Train-Type[Euromed])

(New-Query:Nil:Nil)

Figure 1: Labeling examples of system turns from
the DIHANA corpus

quisition for the two types of scenarios.

Type S1 Type S2
Simulated dialogs 106 106

Successful dialogs 15,383 1,010

Different dialogs 14,921 998

Number of user turns per dialog 4.9 6.2

Table 1: Statistics of the new corpus acquisition

The 51 different system prompts have been au-
tomatically generated in VoiceXML using the pro-
posed technique. For example, Figure 2 shows the
VXML document to prompt the user for the origin
city, whereas Figure 3 shows the obtained gram-
mar for ASR.

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<vxml xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/vxml"

xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/
XMLSchema-instance"
xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.w3.org/2001/vxml
http://www.w3.org/TR/voicexml20/vxml.xsd"
version="2.0" application="app-dihana.vxml">

<form id="origin_form">
<field name="origin">

<grammar type="application/srgs+xml"
src="/grammars/origin.grxml"/>

<prompt>Tell me the origin city.</prompt>
<filled>
<return namelist="origin"/>

</filled>
</field>

</form>
</vxml>

Figure 2: VXML document to require the origin
city

4 Conclusions

In this paper, we have described a technique for
developing dialog systems using a well known

271



#JSGF V1.0;
grammar origin;
public <origin> = [<desire>]
[<travel> <city> {this.destination=$city}]
[<proceed> <city> {this.origin=$city}];
<desire> = I want [to know] | I would like
[to know] | I would like | I want | I need
| I have to;
<travel> = go to | travel to | to go to
| to travel to;
<city> = Jaén | Córdoba | Sevilla | Huelva |
Cádiz | Málaga | Granada | Almerı́a |
Valencia | Alicante | Castellón | Barcelona
| Madrid;
<proceed> = from | going from | go from;

Figure 3: Grammar defined to capture the origin
city

standard like VoiceXML, and considering a statis-
tical dialog model that is automatically learnt from
a dialog corpus.

The main objective of our work is to reduce the
gap between academic and commercial systems
by reducing the effort required to define optimal
dialog strategies and implement the system. Our
proposal works on the benefits of statistical meth-
ods for dialog management and VoiceXML, re-
spectively. The former provide an efficient means
to exploring a wider range of dialog strategies,
whereas the latter makes it possible to benefit from
the advantages of using the different tools and
platforms that are already available to simplify
system development. We have applied our tech-
nique to develop a dialog system that provides rail-
way information, and have shown that it enables
creating automatically VoiceXML documents to
prompt the user for data, as well as the necessary
grammars for ASR. As a future work, we plan to
study ways for adapting the proposed dialog man-
agement technique to more complex domains.

Additionally, we are interested in investigating
possible ways for easing the adoption of our tech-
nique in industry, and the main challenges that
might arise in using it to develop commercial sys-
tems.

Acknowledgments

This research has been funded by the Spanish
Ministry of Science and Technology, under project
HADA TIN2007-64718.

References
K. Georgila, J. Henderson, and O. Lemon. 2006. User

Simulation for Spoken Dialogue Systems: Learn-
ing and Evaluation. In Proc. of the 9th Inter-
speech/ICSLP, pages 1065–1068, Pittsburgh (USA).

D. Griol, L.F. Hurtado, E. Sanchis, and E. Segarra.
2007. Acquiring and Evaluating a Dialog Corpus
through a Dialog Simulation Technique. In Proc.
of the 8th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dia-
logue, pages 39–42, Antwerp (Belgium).

D. Griol, L.F. Hurtado, E. Segarra, and E. Sanchis.
2008. A Statistical Approach to Spoken Dialog Sys-
tems Design and Evaluation. Speech Communica-
tion, 50(8–9):666–682.

D. Griol, G. Riccardi, and Emilio Sanchis. 2009. A
Statistical Dialog Manager for the LUNA project.
In Proc. of Interspeech/ICSLP’09, pages 272–275,
Brighton (UK).

Cheongjae Lee, Sangkeun Jung, Kyungduk Kim, and
Gary Geunbae Lee. 2010. Hybrid approach to
robust dialog management using agenda and dia-
log examples. Computer Speech and Language,
24(4):609–631.

Michael F. McTear, 2004. Spoken Dialogue Technol-
ogy: Towards the Conversational User Interface.
Springer.

T. Paek and R. Pieraccini. 2008. Automating spoken
dialogue management design using machine learn-
ing: An industry perspective . Speech Communica-
tion, 50(8–9):716–729.

Roberto Pieraccini, David Suendermann, Krishna
Dayanidhi, and Jackson Liscombe. 2009. Are We
There Yet? Research in Commercial Spoken Dia-
log Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
5729:3–13.

J. Schatzmann, K. Weilhammer, M. Stuttle, and
S. Young. 2006. A Survey of Statistical User Sim-
ulation Techniques for Reinforcement-Learning of
Dialogue Management Strategies. In Knowledge
Engineering Review, volume 21(2), pages 97–126.

J. Williams and S. Young. 2007. Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes for Spoken Dialog Sys-
tems. In Computer Speech and Language, volume
21(2), pages 393–422.

Jason D. Williams. 2008. The best of both
worlds: Unifying conventional dialog systems and
POMDPs. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Spoken Language Processing.

272


