










































Negation Detection in Swedish Clinical Text


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 15–21,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Negation Detection in Swedish Clinical Text

Maria Skeppstedt
DSV/Stockholm University

Forum 100
SE-164 40 Kista, Sweden
mariask@dsv.su.se

Abstract

NegEx, a rule-based algorithm that detects
negations in English clinical text, was trans-
lated into Swedish and evaluated on clini-
cal text written in Swedish. The NegEx al-
gorithm detects negations through the use of
trigger phrases, which indicate that a preced-
ing or following concept is negated. A list
of English trigger phrases was translated into
Swedish, taking grammatical differences be-
tween the two languages into account. This
translation was evaluated on a set of 436 man-
ually classified sentences from Swedish health
records. The results showed a precision of
70% and a recall of 81% for sentences con-
taining the trigger phrases and a negative pre-
dictive value of 96% for sentences not con-
taining any trigger phrases. The precision
was significantly lower for the Swedish adap-
tation than published results on the English
version, but since many negated propositions
were identified through a limited set of trigger
phrases, it could nevertheless be concluded
that the same trigger phrase approach is possi-
ble in a Swedish context, even though it needs
to be further developed.

1 Introduction

Medical documentation, such as patient records, is
today often stored in a digital, searchable format.
This opens the possibility of extracting information,
which for example could be used for disease surveil-
lance or to find new, unknown connections between
patient background, symptoms and diseases. When
extracting information from a text, it is not only the

words that occur in the text that are important, but
also whether these words are negated or not. This
is especially true when it comes to patient records,
since when describing the status of a patient, the
physician often reasons by excluding various pos-
sible diagnoses and symptoms.

Most work on detecting negations in medical lan-
guage has been carried out for English, and very lit-
tle has been carried out for other languages, as for
example Swedish. This article will therefore focus
on the task of finding whether a concept in a clinical
text written in Swedish is negated or not.1

2 Related research

There are many different methods for detecting
whether a concept is negated. Rokach et al. (2008)
give a good overview of some approaches for de-
tecting negations. The methods can be divided into
two main groups; knowledge engineering methods
and machine learning methods. Knowledge engi-
neering methods have the advantage that a large an-
notated corpus is not needed, but the disadvantage
that rules have to be written manually, which is often
time-consuming. Negation detection based on ma-
chine learning methods, on the other hand, is faster
to implement and often works better when a text is
not completely grammatical, which is often the case
with clinical texts. (Rokach et al., 2008)

Since little previous work has been done on nega-
tion detection in Swedish medical text, the first step

1This research has been carried out after approval
from the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm
(Etikprövningsnämnden i Stockholm), permission number
2009/1742-31/5.

15



for Swedish negation detection is to adapt a sim-
ple knowledge engineering method that is used for
detecting negations in English, an algorithm called
NegEx. (Chapman et al., 2001b)

2.1 The NegEx algorithm
NegEx detects pertinent negatives in English patient
records, that is ”findings and diseases explicitly or
implicitly described as absent in a patient”. Given a
sentence and a chosen proposition in this sentence,
NegEx determines if that proposition is negated or
not. An example would be ”Extremities showed
no cyanoses.”, in which the proposition is cyanoses.
(Chapman et al., 2001b)

The NegEx algorithm uses regular expressions
and three lists of phrases. The first list, the pre-
negation list, consists of trigger phrases which indi-
cate that a proposition that follows them is negated
in the sentence, for example no signs of. The second
list, the post-negation list, consists of trigger phrases
that indicate that a proposition preceding them is
negated, as the phrase unlikely. Finally, the third
list consists of pseudo-negation phrases, phrases that
are similar to negation triggers, but that do not trig-
ger negation, for example not certain if. The algo-
rithm judges the proposition to be negated if it is in
the range of one to six words from a post- or pre-
negation trigger. (Chapman et al., 2001b)

NegEx has later been further developed into
NegEx version 22, for example through the addition
of more triggers and by limiting the scope of the
negation through a list of conjunctions.

In the evaluation of NegEx, the propositions con-
sisted of UMLS3 phrases that belonged to any of
the UMLS categories finding, disease or syndrome
or mental or behavioral dysfunction and that could
also be found in the describing text of an ICD-10
code4. Sentences containing these UMLS phrases
were extracted from discharge summaries. There-
after, 500 of the extracted sentences that contained
at least one negation trigger and 500 sentences that
did not contain a negation trigger were randomly se-
lected. A few sentences that contained phrases that
were suspected to sometimes indicate a negation, but
that were not in the three lists, were included in the

2http://www.dbmi.pitt.edu/chapman/negex.html
3See Bodenreider (2004) for a description of UMLS
4http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/

first group. The sentences were then categorised by
physicians into containing an affirmed proposition,
a negated proposition or an ambiguous proposition.
The inter-rater agreement was almost 100%. For the
NegEx evaluation, the categories affirmed and am-
biguous were grouped into the category not negated.
The results showed a precision of 84% and a recall
of 82% for sentences in the group with negation trig-
gers and a negative predictive value of 97% for sen-
tences in the group without triggers. Of the correctly
found negations, 82% were triggered by only three
negation triggers; no, without and no evidence of.
Moreover, only 15 of the 35 negation triggers were
found in the test set. The trigger not had a preci-
sion of 58%, which was much lower than the preci-
sion for the other common triggers. (Chapman et al.,
2001b)

An evaluation of the NegEx algorithm on ten
other kinds of reports has also been carried out. The
average precision of NegEx was 97%, and 90% of
the detected negations were triggered by only seven
negation phrases, with the four most frequent being
no, denies, without and no evidence. (Chapman et
al., 2001a)

In a later study by Goldin and Chapman (2003), a
Naive Bayes classifier and a decision tree were used
to classify which occurrences of the trigger not that
indicated a negation, based on features such as sur-
rounding words and their part of speech. Both these
methods resulted in an increased precision.

3 Research Question

An evaluation was carried out on how the NegEx
algorithm performs on health records written in
Swedish, compared to health records written in
English. The hypothesis was that the results for
Swedish would be similar to the results for En-
glish, since the two languages are grammatically
close. This comparison could give an indication of
whether it is possible to adapt more advanced meth-
ods for negation detection into Swedish, and the re-
sults could also be used as a baseline for comparing
the results of other methods.

4 Translation and adaption method

In order to use NegEx on a Swedish text, there must
be a list of Swedish phrases that trigger negation.

16



4.1 Translating trigger phrases

The triggers for Swedish were obtained by translat-
ing the phrases for NegEx version 2. The translations
were made with the help of a web-based English-
Swedish dictionary5 and with the help of Google
translate6. In the cases where there was a good trans-
lation neither in the dictionary nor in the Google
translation, the negation was translated by the au-
thor of this article. When it was not possible to find
a good Swedish translation, the phrase was omitted.
A total of 148 phrases were translated. Almost all
negation phrases were general English terms. How-
ever, in a few cases they consisted of specific med-
ical terms, and in these cases the translation was
made by a physician. In many instances the dictio-
nary offered many translations, and in other cases
the same translation was offered for different En-
glish phrases. In the cases where several translations
were offered, all of them were added to the list of
Swedish negations.

4.2 Expanding the translated trigger phrases

English and Swedish are both Germanic languages
(Crystal, 1997) and they have a similar grammar.
Nevertheless, there are some grammatical differ-
ences that have to be taken into account through an
expansion of the list of translated trigger phrases.

Swedish has two grammatical genders (common
gender and neuter gender), whereas the English lan-
guage lacks grammatical gender. Adjectives and
some quantifiers in Swedish have a gender concord,
as well as a number concord (Dahl, 1982). To com-
pensate for this, the English negative quantifier no
was translated into three different forms of the corre-
sponding Swedish negative quantifier, namely inga,
ingen and inget. Inflections of all adjectives in the
trigger phrases were also generated. This was ac-
complished by invoking the Granska inflector7.

The English combinations of aspect and tense do
not always correspond directly to a Swedish verb
form (Dahl, 1982). Therefore, a direct translation
of the different forms of a verb in the trigger phrase
list was not performed. The lemma form of the verb
was instead added to the list of negation triggers in

5http://www.norstedtsord.se
6http://translate.google.com
7http://www.csc.kth.se/tcs/humanlang/tools.html

Swedish, and from this all inflections of the verb
were generated, again using the Granska inflector.

The difference connected with the do-
construction did not need to be taken into account.
When negating a non-auxiliary verb in English, the
do-construction is used. This type of construction
does not exist in Swedish. The phrase han vet (he
knows) would for example be negated as han vet
inte (he knows not) (Svartvik and Sager, 1996).
However, the NegEx algorithm only checks if
the proposition is less than six words to the right
of the word inte (not), and when it is, it will
consider the proposition to be negated. The lack
of a do-construction should therefore not affect the
results.8

Swedish has a word order inversion in subordi-
nate clauses. The position of the negating adverb
is changed, and it is instead positioned immedi-
ately before the verb (Holmes and Hinchliffe, 2008).
When stressing the negation, there is also the possi-
bility of using this word order in the main clause
(Sells, 2000). A version with reversed word order
was therefore generated for trigger phrases contain-
ing some of the most common adverbs. From the
translation of the trigger phrase has not, a version
with the word order not has was for example gener-
ated.

The frequency of the Swedish trigger phrases was
counted on a text other than the test set, and the
most frequent trigger phrases were selected. The
number of selected phrases was two more than used
in the English NegEx evaluation, to compensate for
Swedish gender and number concord9.

5 Evaluation method

5.1 Construction of test data
Propositions to use for evaluating the performance
of the Swedish version of NegEx were taken from
the Swedish translation of the ICD-10 codes. How-
ever, the description in the ICD-10 code list often
contains both the name of a symptom or disease and
a clarification or specification of it, which has the

8When negating the actual verb on the other hand, the posi-
tion of the word not is different in English and Swedish. In order
for the Swedish NegEx to handle verb phrase propositions, this
difference has to be accounted for.

9The triggers that were used can be downloaded from
http://people.dsv.su.se/∼mariask/resources/triggers.txt

17



effect that simple string matching would not find
some of the most common symptoms and diseases.
An automatic pre-processing of the ICD-10 code list
was therefore first accomplished, where for exam-
ple text within parenthesis and clarifications such
as not specified or other specified forms were re-
moved. To find more names of symptoms and dis-
eases, additional lists were also added, including the
KSH97-P10, an adaption of the ICD-10 codes for
primary care, and the MeSH terms under the sec-
tions diseases and mental disorders.

The test data was extracted from a set of sen-
tences randomly chosen from the assessment part
of Swedish health records from the Stockholm EPR
Corpus (Dalianis et al., 2009). From this set, sen-
tences that contained any of the propositions in the
proposition list were extracted, also when the propo-
sition was part of a compound word. Neither the pre-
processing of the ICD-10 code list nor the detection
of a proposition in a compound word was perfect
and therefore some words that were not compara-
ble with findings, diseases or syndromes or mental
or behavioral dysfunctions, were added to the list of
propositions. Sentences containing these were man-
ually filtered out from the test data.

The chosen sentences were ordered in a list of
pairs, consisting of the sentence and the proposition.
If a sentence contained more than one proposition,
the sentence was added to the list one time for each
proposition.

In order to be able to compare the English and
Swedish versions of NegEx, the same evaluation
method was used, and two groups of test sentences
were constucted. The first group, Trig, contained
202 sentences with at least one of the trigger phrases.
The second group, Non-Trig, contained 234 sen-
tences without any of the trigger phrases.

5.2 Classification of test data

The propositions were manually classified into the
categories affirmed, negated and ambiguous by a
rater without medical education. The categories af-
firmed and ambiguous were thereafter collapsed into
the category not negated. The results are presented
in Table 1.

Of the 202 sentences in group Trig, 70 were also

10http://www.socialstyrelsen.se/publikationer1996/1996-4-1

Negated Not negated Total
Trig 90 112 202
Non-Trig 10 224 234

Table 1: Number of sentences manually classified as
negated and not negated for each of the groups Trig and
Non-Trig. Group Trig only contains sentences with trig-
ger phrases and Group Non-Trig only contains sentences
without trigger phrases.

classified by a physician. The inter-rater agreement
between the physician and the other rater with re-
spect to the two groups negated and not negated was
80%.

The majority of the sentences where there was
disagreement were judged as negated by the physi-
cian rater and ambiguous by the other rater, or am-
biguous by the physician rater and negated by the
other rater. There was no evident systematic ten-
dency to judge the propositions as more or less am-
biguous by either of the two raters.

When there was a difference in opinion of how to
classify the proposition, the classification made by
the physician was chosen. Also sentences that were
subjectively judged by the rater as not possible to
rate without deep medical knowledge, were rated by
the physician.

6 Results

The Swedish version of NegEx was executed with
the sentences in group Trig and the sentences in
group Non-Trig as input sentences.11 As shown in
Table 2, group Trig had a precision of 70% and a
recall of 81%. Group Non-Trig had a negative pre-
dictive value of 96%, as shown in Table 3.

When comparing Swedish and English results for
recall using the χ2-test, no significant difference was
found between them. (p-value >> 0.1). When com-
paring the results for precision using the χ2-test, it
was significantly lower for Swedish. (p < 0.001).

The precision of each trigger was also counted
and the results are shown in Table 4.

11http://code.google.com/p/negex/updates/list is the web lo-
cation of NegEx (negex.python.zip, 2009). NegEx could be
used in a Swedish context without any major modifications.

18



Group Trig English Swedish
recall (sensitivity) 82.00 % 81 %
specificity 82.50 % 71 %
precision (ppv) 84.49 % 70 %
npv 80.21 % 82 %

Table 2: Group Trig, 500 English sentences and 202
Swedish sentences. Recall: No. of correctly detected
negated propositions divided by no. of manually rated
negated propositions. Specificity: No. of propositions
correctly detected as not negated divided by no. propo-
sitions that were manually rated as not negated. Preci-
sion: No. of correctly detected negated propositions di-
vided by total no. of propositions that NegEx classified
as negated. Negative predictive value: No. of proposi-
tions that NegEx correctly did not classify as negated di-
vided by total no. of propositions that NegEx did not clas-
sify as negated. (Figures for English from Chapman et al.
(2001b).)

Group Non-Trig English Swedish
npv 96.99 % 96 %

Table 3: Group Non-Trig, 500 English sentences and 234
Swedish sentences. (Figures for English from Chapman
et al. (2001b).)

7 Discussion

The comparison between the English and Swedish
evaluations is complicated by the fact that the
Swedish test data had lower inter-rater agreement,
which adds uncertainty to the Swedish results. This
difference could perhaps be partly explained by the
different types of health records; the English version
was evaluated on discharge summaries, whereas the
Swedish version was evaluated on the assessment
part of a health record, which possibly contains more
reasoning and thereby perhaps more ambiguous ex-
pressions.

Also, the fact that group Trig in the evaluation
of the English version also included some sentences
not containing trigger phrases complicates the com-
parison.

It could, however, be concluded that the preci-
sion is lower for Swedish. The following error types
could at least account for some of this difference:

It is difficult to draw a line between what is an
ambiguous expression and what is a negation, both
for the raters and for the NegEx program. The

Phrase Precision Occur.
inga tecken (no signs of) 89 % 9
ingen (no) 89 % 27
ej (not) 75 % 8
inga (no, plural) 67 % 15
utan (without) 63 % 8
inte har (not have) 60 % 5
inte (not) 57 % 21
icke (non-, not) 0 % 4

Table 4: The most frequent triggers, their precision and
the number of times they occur in the sentences.

above-mentioned difference in type of evaluation
data could have resulted in lower precision and re-
call for the Swedish version.

It is a common construction for a name of a dis-
ease, or a version of a disease, to have a name that
starts with the word icke (non-, not), for example
icke allergisk astma. The disease is present in the
patient, even though the word icke is interpreted as
a negation trigger by NegEx. In the test data, all the
occurrences of the word icke are constructions like
this, thus having a negative impact on precision.

The Swedish word for without (utan) has a double
meaning. It is also a conjunction meaning but. This
gives rise to a few instances where the program in-
correctly classifies a proposition as negated, result-
ing in lower precision.

Other error types were also identified. These
were, however, not specific for Swedish or for the
type of test data, and could therefore not account for
the difference in precision between the English and
Swedish versions of NegEx. Examples are when the
negation of the proposition occurs in a conditional
clause or when the scope of the trigger should be
less than the NegEx scope of six words, for example
when the scope is limited by a conjunction.

7.1 Identified negation triggers

In the test set, only 16 of the 39 negation triggers
were found, and among them, only 12 correctly
negated a proposition. This is close to the English
version where 15 of 37 triggers were found. None of
the post-negation triggers were found in the Swedish
test data.

In the English version of NegEx, 82% of the cor-

19



rectly found negations were triggered by the three
negation phrases no, without and no evidence of. In
the Swedish version, the three most common trig-
gers were the common gender version of no (ingen),
not (inte) and the plural form of no (inga). Together,
they constitute 63% of the total number of correctly
identified negations. If the trigger in fourth place, no
signs of, is also counted, they make up 75% of the
correctly negated propositions. In both English and
Swedish there are thus a small number of negation
triggers that are very common.

It can also be noted that both in Swedish and En-
glish, the precision of the trigger not (inte) is low.

No other common negation triggers were found in
the test data. The only re-occurring trigger that was
not included in any of the three lists were different
forms of the phrase rule out.

8 Conclusion

The Swedish version of the NegEx algorithm had a
significantly lower precision than the English ver-
sion, and for the recall no significant conclusions
could be drawn. Not taking the uncertainty of the
low inter-rater agreement into account, the Swedish
version has a precision of 70% and a recall of 81%
for sentences containing the trigger phrases and a
negative predictive value of 96% for sentences not
containing any trigger phrases. As for the English
version, a small number of trigger phrases accounted
for the majority of detected negations.

Since a limited set of triggers can be used to iden-
tify many negations also in Swedish, this simple ap-
proach of the NegEx algorithm can be used as a base
method for identifying negations in Swedish. How-
ever, even for use in a system without high demands
on robustness, the method needs to be further devel-
oped.

From the relatively low inter-rater agreement, es-
pecially with respect to concepts that might be clas-
sified as either ambiguous or negated, it can be con-
cluded that it is a difficult task also for a human rater
to determine what is an ambiguity expressed as a
negation or an actual negation.

9 Limitations

The most important limitation of this study is the rel-
atively low inter-rater agreement, and the fact that

most of the sentences were rated by a person who
did not have a medical education. The lack of medi-
cal knowledge may have lead to mistakes when clas-
sifying the test data and could probably also partly
explain the low inter-rater agreement.

Another limitation is that errors in the module for
selecting sentences lead to that a few test sentences
did not contain a symptom, disease or equivalent.
Consequently, these sentences had to be filtered out
manually.

As in the study by Chapman et al. (2001a), no
analysis has been made of the occurrences of nega-
tions that stretch over sentence boundaries.

10 Future work

To automatically distinguish an ambiguity from a
negation is not always trivial. However, the er-
rors originating from the other error types mentioned
could be limited through the use of more advanced
natural language processing methods. The cases
where the phrase icke does not trigger a negation,
could probably be detected by a simple regular ex-
pression rule. Which meaning of the phrase utan
that is intended could perhaps be detected by the ma-
chine learning methods used by Goldin and Chap-
man (2003). A list of conjunctions that limit the
scope of the negations, as in NegEx version 2, could
also be used to increase the precision, and a similar
method could be used to detect when the proposition
is negated in a conditional phrase.

It would also be interesting to use the complete
list of negation triggers that was constructed for
this study, instead of limiting the size to that of
the NegEx trigger list, and to evaluate this list on
a larger test set. This evaluation could also deter-
mine whether there are any common Swedish nega-
tion triggers that were not obtained by translating the
English trigger list.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank my supervisors Hercules Dalia-
nis and Gunnar Nilsson for valuable comments on
this paper, and specifically Gunnar for the help with
the classification of the sentences. I would also
like to thank Birgitta Melin Skeppstedt for initial
help with the statistical calculations and Sumithra
Velupillai for the support on the early stages of the

20



work. Many thanks also to the three anonymous re-
viewers of the paper.

References
Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The unified medical lan-

guage system (umls): integrating biomedical terminol-
ogy. Nucleic Acids Res, 1;32(Database issue).

Wendy W Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury, Gre-
gory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001a. Eval-
uation of negation phrases in narrative clinical reports.
Proc AMIA Symp, pages 105–109.

Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury, Gre-
gory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001b. A
simple algorithm for identifying negated findings and
diseases in discharge summaries. J Biomed Inform,
34(5):301–310, Oct.

David Crystal. 1997. The Cambridge encyclopedia of
language. Cambridge University Press, second edi-
tion.

Östen Dahl. 1982. Grammatik. Studentlitteratur.
Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hassel, and Sumithra Velupil-

lai. 2009. The Stockholm EPR Corpus - Charac-
teristics and Some Initial Findings. In Proceedings
of ISHIMR 2009, Evaluation and implementation of
e-health and health information initiatives: interna-
tional perspectives. 14th International Symposium for
Health Information Management Research, Kalmar,
Sweden, pages 243–249.

Ilya M. Goldin and Wendy W. Chapman. 2003. Learn-
ing to detect negation with ‘not’ in medical texts. ACM
SIGIR ’03 Workshop on Text Analysis and Search for
Bioinformatics: Participant Notebook, Acknowledge-
ments Toronto, Canada: Association for Computing
Machinery;.

Philip Holmes and Ian Hinchliffe. 2008. Swedish: An
Essential grammar. Routledge.

Lior Rokach, Roni Romano, and Oded Maimon. 2008.
Negation recognition in medical narrative reports. In-
formation Retrieval, 11(6):499–538, December.

Peter Sells. 2000. Negation in Swedish: Where it’s
not at. In Online Proceedings of the LFG-00 Con-
ference. Stanford: CSLI Publications. (At http://csli-
publications.stanford.edu/LFG/5/lfg00.html).

Jan Svartvik and Olof Sager. 1996. Engelsk universitets-
grammatik. Liber.

21


