










































Cheap Facts and Counter-Facts


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 163–167,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cheap Facts and Counter-Facts

Rui Wang
Computational Linguistics Department

Saarland University
Room 2.04, Building C 7.4

Saarbruecken, 66123 Germany
rwang@coli.uni-sb.de

Chris Callison-Burch
Computer Science Department

Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles Street (CSEB 226-B)

Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
ccb@cs.jhu.com.edu

Abstract

This paper describes our experiments of us-
ing Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to generate
(counter-)facts from texts for certain named-
entities. We give the human annotators a para-
graph of text and a highlighted named-entity.
They will write down several (counter-)facts
about this named-entity in that context. The
analysis of the results is performed by com-
paring the acquired data with the recognizing
textual entailment (RTE) challenge dataset.

1 Motivation

The task of RTE (Dagan et al., 2005) is to say
whether a person would reasonably infer some short
passage of text, the Hypothesis (H), given a longer
passage, the Text (T). However, collections of such
T-H pairs are rare to find and these resources are the
key to solving the problem.

The datasets used in the RTE task were collected
by extracting paragraphs of news text and manu-
ally constructing hypotheses. For the data collected
from information extraction task, the H is usually
a statement about a relation between two named-
entities (NEs), which is written by expertise. Simi-
larly, the H in question answering data is constructed
using both the question and the (in)correct answers.
Therefore, the research questions we could ask are,

1. Are these hypotheses really those ones people
interested in?

2. Are hypotheses different if we construct them
in other ways?

3. What would be a good negative hypotheses
compared with the positive ones?

In this paper, we address these issues by using
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk), online non-
expert annotators (Snow et al., 2008). Instead of
constructing the hypotheses targeted to IE or QA, we
just ask the human annotators to come up with some
facts they consider as relevant to the given text. For
negative hypotheses, we change the instruction and
ask them to write counter-factual but still relevant
statements. In order to narrow down the content of
the generated hypotheses, we give a focused named-
entity (NE) for each text to guide the annotators.

2 Related Work

The early related research was done by Cooper et al.
(1996), where they manually construct a textbook-
style corpus aiming at different semantic phenom-
ena involved in inference. However, the dataset is
not large enough to train a robust machine-learning-
based RTE system. The recent research from the
RTE community focused on acquiring large quan-
tities of textual entailment pairs from news head-
lines (Burger and Ferro, 2005) and negative exam-
ples from sequential sentences with transitional dis-
course connectives (Hickl et al., 2006). Although
the quality of the data collected were quite good,
most of the positive examples are similar to summa-
rization and the negative examples are more like a
comparison/contrast between two sentences instead
of a contradiction. Those data are the real sen-
tences used in news articles, but the way of obtain-
ing them is not necessarily the (only) best way to

163



find entailment pairs. In this paper, we investigate
an alternative inexpensive way of collecting entail-
ment/contradiction text pairs by crowdsourcing.

In addition to the information given by the text,
common knowledge is also allowed to be involved
in the inference procedure. The Boeing-Princeton-
ISI (BPI) textual entailment test suite1 is specifically
designed to look at entailment problems requiring
world knowledge. We will also allow this in the de-
sign of our task.

3 Design of the Task

The basic idea of the task is to give the human an-
notators a paragraph of text with one highlighted
named-entity and ask them to write some (counter-
)facts about it. In particular, we first preprocess
an existing RTE corpus using a named-entity rec-
ognizer to mark all the named-entities appearing in
both T and H. When we show the texts to Turkers,
we highlight one named-entity and give them one of
these two sets of instructions:

Facts: Please write several facts about the high-
lighted words according to the paragraph. You
may add additional common knowledge (e.g.
Paris is in France), but please mainly use the
information contained in the text. But please
do not copy and paste!

Counter-Facts: Please write several statements that
are contradictory to the text. Make your state-
ments about the highlighted words. Please use
the information mainly in the text. Avoid using
words like not or never.

Then there are three blank lines given for the annota-
tors to fill in facts or counter-factual statements. For
each HIT, we gather facts or counter-facts for five
texts, and for each text, we ask three annotators to
perform the task. We give Turkers one example as a
guide along with the instructions.

4 Experiments and Results

The texts we use in our experiments are the develop-
ment set of the RTE-5 challenge (Bentivogli et al.,

1http://www.cs.utexas.edu/˜pclark/
bpi-test-suite/

Total Average (per Text)
Extracted NEs
Facts 244 1.19
Counter-Facts 121 1.11
Generated Hypotheses
Facts 790 3.85
Counter-Facts 203 1.86

Table 1: The statistics of the (valid) data we collect. The
Total column presents the number of extracted NEs and
generated hypotheses and the Average column shows the
average numbers per text respectively.

2009), and we preprocess the data using the Stan-
ford named-entity recognizer (Finkel et al., 2005).
In all, it contains 600 T-H pairs, and we use the texts
to generate facts and counter-facts and hypotheses as
references. We put our task online through Crowd-
Flower2, and on average, we pay one cent for each
(counter-)fact to the Turkers. CrowdFlower can help
with finding trustful Turkers and the data were col-
lected within a few hours.

To get a sense of the quality of the data we collect,
we mainly focus on analyzing the following three
aspects: 1) the statistics of the datasets themselves;
2) the comparison between the data we collect and
the original RTE dataset; and 3) the comparison be-
tween the facts and the counter-facts.

Table 1 show some basic statistics of the data we
collect. After excluding invalid and trivial ones3, we
acquire 790 facts and 203 counter-facts. In general,
the counter-facts seem to be more difficult to obtain
than the facts, since both the total number and the
average number of the counter-facts are less than
those of the facts. Notice that the NEs are not many
since they have to appear in both T and H.

The comparison between our data and the original
RTE data is shown in Table 2. The average length of
the generated hypotheses is longer than the original
hypotheses, for both the facts and the counter-facts.
Counter-facts seem to be more verbose, since addi-
tional (contradictory) information is added. For in-
stance, example ID 425 in Table 4, Counter Fact 1
can be viewed as the more informative but contra-
dictory version of Fact 1 (and the original hypoth-

2http://crowdflower.com/
3Invalid data include empty string or single words; and the

trivial ones are those sentences directly copied from the texts.

164



esis). The average bag-of-words similarity scores
are calculated by dividing the number of overlap-
ping words of T and H by the total number of words
in H. In the original RTE dataset, the entailed hy-
potheses have a higher BoW score than the contra-
dictory ones; while in our data, facts have a lower
score than the counter-facts. This might be caused
by the greater variety of the facts than the counter-
facts. Fact 1 of example ID 425 in Table 4 is almost
the same as the original hypothesis, and Fact 2 of
example ID 374 as well, though the latter has some
slight differences which make the answer different
from the original one. The NE position in the sen-
tence is another aspect to look at. We find that peo-
ple tend to put the NEs at the beginning of the sen-
tences more than other positions, while in the RTE
datasets, NEs appear in the middle more frequently.

In order to get a feeling of the quality of the
data, we randomly sampled 50 generated facts and
counter-facts and manually compared them with the
original hypotheses. Table 3 shows that generated
facts are easier for the systems to recognize, and the
counter-facts have the same difficulty on average.

Although it is subjective to evaluate the difficulty
of the data by human reading, in general, we follow
the criteria that

1. Abstraction is more difficult than extraction;

2. Inference is more difficult than the direct en-
tailment;

3. The more sentences in T are involved, the more
difficult that T-H pair is.

Therefore, we view the Counter Fact 1 in example
ID 16 in Table 4 is more difficult than the original
hypothesis, since it requires more inference than the
direct fact validation. However, in example ID 374,
Fact 1 is easier to be verified than the original hy-
pothesis, and same as those facts in example ID 506.
Similar hypotheses (e.g. Fact 1 in example ID 425
and the original hypothesis) are treated as being at
the same level of difficulty.

After the quantitive analysis, let’s take a closer
look at the examples in Table 4. The facts are usually
constructed by rephrasing some parts of the text (e.g.
in ID 425, “after a brief inspection” is paraphrased
by “investigated by” in Fact 2) or making a short

Valid Harder Easier Same
Facts 76% 16% 24% 36%
Counter-Facts 84% 36% 36% 12%

Table 3: The comparison of the generated (counter-)facts
with the original hypotheses. The Valid column shows the
percentage of the valid (counter-)facts; and other columns
present the distribution of harder, easier cases than the
original hypotheses or with the same difficulty.

RTE-5 Our Data
Counter-/Facts 300/300 178/178

All “YES” 50% 50%
BoW Baseline 57.5% 58.4%

Table 5: The results of baseline RTE systems on the data
we collected, compared with the original RTE-5 dataset.
The Counter-/Facts row shows the number of the T-H
pairs contained in the dataset; and the other scores in per-
centage are accuracy of the systems.

summary (e.g. Fact 1 in ID 374, “George Stranahan
spoke of Thompson’s death.”). For counter-facts, re-
moving the negation words or changing into another
adjective is one common choice, e.g. in ID 374,
Counter Fact 1 removed “n’t” and Counter Fact 3
changed “never” into “fully”. The antonyms can
also make the contradiction, as “rotten” to “great”
in Counter Fact 2 in ID 374.

Example ID 506 in Table 4 is another interest-
ing case. There are many facts about Yemen, but
no valid counter-facts are generated. Furthermore,
if we compare the generated facts with the original
hypothesis, we find that people tend to give straight-
forward facts instead of abstracts4.

At last, we show some preliminary results on test-
ing a baseline RTE system on this dataset. For
the sake of comparison, we extract a subset of the
dataset, which is balanced on entailment and con-
tradiction text pairs, and compare the results with
the same system on the original RTE-5 dataset. The
baseline system uses a simple BoW-based similar-
ity measurement between T and H (Bentivogli et al.,
2009) and the results are shown in Table 5.

The results indicate that our data are slightly “eas-
ier” than the original RTE-5 dataset, which is consis-
tent with our human evaluation on the sampled data

4But this might also be caused by the design of our task.

165



Ave. Length Ave. BoW NE PositionHead Middle Tail
Original Entailment Hypotheses 7.6 0.76 46% 53% 1%
Facts 9.8 0.68 68% 29% 3%
Original Contradiction Hypotheses 7.5 0.72 44% 56% 0%
Counter-Facts 12.3 0.75 59% 38% 3%

Table 2: The comparison between the generated (counter-)facts and the original hypotheses from the RTE dataset. The
Ave. Length column represents the average number of words in each hypothesis; The Ave. BoW shows the average
bag-of-words similarity compared with the text. The three columns on the right are all about the position of the NE
appearing in the sentence, how likely it is at the head, middle, or tail of the sentence.

(Table 3). However, it is still too early to draw con-
clusions based on the simple baseline results.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we report our experience of using
MTurk to collect facts and counter-facts about the
given NEs and texts. We find that the generated hy-
potheses are not entirely the same as the original
hypotheses in the RTE data. One direct extension
would be to use more than one NE at one time, but it
may also cause problems, if those NEs do not have
any relations in-between. Another line of research
would be to test this generated resources using some
real existing RTE systems and compare the results
with the original RTE datasets, and also further ex-
plore the potential application of this resource.

Acknowledgments

The first author is supported by the PIRE scholar-
ship program. The second author is supported by
the EuroMatrixPlusProject (funded by the European
Commission), by the DARPA GALE program under
Contract No. HR0011-06-2-0001, and by the NSF
under grant IIS-0713448. The views and findings
are the authors’ alone.

References

L. Bentivogli, B. Magnini, I. Dagan, H.T. Dang, and
D. Giampiccolo. 2009. The fifth pascal recogniz-
ing textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of
the Text Analysis Conference (TAC 2009) Workshop,
Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA, November. National
Institute of Standards and Technology.

John Burger and Lisa Ferro. 2005. Generating an entail-
ment corpus from news headlines. In Proceedings of

the ACL Workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic
Equivalence and Entailment, pages 49–54, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Robin Cooper, Dick Crouch, Jan Van Eijck, Chris Fox,
Johan Van Genabith, Jan Jaspars, Hans Kamp, David
Milward, Manfred Pinkal, Massimo Poesio, and Steve
Pulman. 1996. Using the framework. Technical Re-
port LRE 62-051 D-16, The FraCaS Consortium.

I. Dagan, O. Glickman, and B. Magnini. 2005. The
pascal recognising textual entailment challenge. In
Proceedings of the PASCAL Challenges Workshop on
Recognising Textual Entailment.

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local information
into information extraction systems by gibbs sampling.
In Proceedings of the 43nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005),
pages 363–370. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Andrew Hickl, John Williams, Jeremy Bensley, Kirk
Roberts, Bryan Rink, and Ying Shi. 2006. Recogniz-
ing textual entailment with lcc’s groundhog system. In
Proceedings of the Second PASCAL Challenges Work-
shop.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and An-
drew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast - but is it good?
Evaluating non- expert annotations for natural lan-
guage tasks. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

166



ID: 16 Answer: Contradiction
Original Text The father of an Oxnard teenager accused of gunning down a gay classmate who was romanti-

cally attracted to him has been found dead, Ventura County authorities said today. Bill McIner-
ney, 45, was found shortly before 8 a.m. in the living room of his Silver Strand home by a friend,
said James Baroni, Ventura County’s chief deputy medical examiner. The friend was supposed
to drive him to a court hearing in his son’s murder trial, Baroni said. McInerney’s 15-year-old
son, Brandon, is accused of murder and a hate crime in the Feb. 12, 2008, shooting death of
classmate Lawrence “Larry” King, 15. The two boys had been sparring in the days before the
killing, allegedly because Larry had expressed a romantic interest in Brandon.

Original Hypothesis Bill McInerney is accused of killing a gay teenager.
NE 1: Bill McInerney
Counter Fact 1 Bill McInerney is still alive.
ID: 374 Answer: Contradiction
Original Text Other friends were not surprised at his death. “I wasn’t surprised,” said George Stranahan, a

former owner of the Woody Creek Tavern, a favourite haunt of Thompson. “I never expected
Hunter to die in a hospital bed with tubes coming out of him.” Neighbours have said how his
broken leg had prevented him from leaving his house as often as he had liked to. One neighbour
and long-standing friend, Mike Cleverly, said Thompson was clearly hobbled by the broken leg.
“Medically speaking, he’s had a rotten year.”

Original Hypothesis The Woody Creek Tavern is owned by George Stranahan.
NE 1: George Stranahan
Fact 1 George Stranahan spoke of Thompson’s death.
Fact 2 George Stranahan once owned the Woody Creek Tavern.
Counter Fact 1 George Stranahan was surprised by his friend’s death.
Counter Fact 2 Medically, George Stranahan’s friend, Humter Thompson, had a great year.
Counter Fact 3 George Stranahan fully expected Thompson to die in a hospital with tubes coming out of him.
NE 2: Woody Creek Tavern
Fact 1 Woody Creek Tavern was previously owned by George Stranahan.
ID: 425 Answer: Entailment
Original Text Merseyside Police concluded after a brief inspection that the controversial blog Liverpool Evil

Cabal does not break criminal law. However the council officers continue to search for the
editor. The blog has been blocked on computers controlled by Liverpool Direct Ltd, a company
jointly owned by Liverpool City Council and British Telecom. The council’s elected officials
have denied ordering the block and are currently investigating its origin.

Original Hypothesis Liverpool Evil Cabal is the name of an online blog.
NE 1: Liverpool Evil Cabal
Fact 1 Liverpool Evil Cabal is a web blog.
Fact 2 Liverpool Evil Cabal was a blog investigated by the Merseyside Police.
Counter Fact 1 Liverpool Evil Cabal is a blog of Liverpool Direct Ltd.
Counter Fact 2 Liverpool Evil Cabal is freed from the charges of law breaking.
ID: 506 Answer: Entailment
Original Text At least 58 people are now dead as a result of the recent flooding in Yemen, and at least 20,000

in the country have no access to shelter. Five people are also reported missing. The Yemeni
government has pledged to send tents to help the homeless. The flooding is caused by the recent
heavy rain in Yemen, which came as a shock due to the fact that the country only receives several
centimeters of rain per year.

Original Hypothesis Heavy rain caused flooding in Yemen.
NE 1: Yemen
Fact 1 58 people are dead in Yemen because of flooding.
Fact 2 5 people in Yemen are missing.
Fact 3 At least 58 people are dead in Yemen because of flooding.

Table 4: Examples of facts and counter-facts, compared with the original texts and hypotheses. We ask the Turkers to
write several (counter-)facts about the highlighted NEs, and only part of the results are shown here.

167


