










































Human Language Technology for Text-based Analysis of Psychotherapy Sessions in the Spanish Language


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 32–39, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Human Language Technology for Text-based Analysis of Psychotherapy
Sessions in the Spanish Language

Horacio Saggionα, Elena Stein-Sparvieriβ , David Maldavskyβ , Sandra Szaszγ
αDTIC - Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Calle Tanger 122-140, Poble Nou

Barcelona - Spain
H.Saggion@dcs.shef.ac.uk

βIAEPCS - Universidad de Ciencias Sociales y Empresariales
Paraguay 1401, PB, Bs. As. Argentina

estein@solutiion.com.ar;dmaldavsky@elsitio.net
γUniversity of Sheffield - Department of Computer Sciences

211 Portobello Street - Sheffield - UK
S.Szasz@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

We present work in progress in the application
of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tech-
nology to the analysis of textual transcriptions
of psychotherapy sessions in the Spanish Lan-
guage. We are developing a set of NLP tools
as well as adapting an existing dictionary for
the analysis of interviews framed on a psycho-
analytic theory. We investigate the applica-
tion of NLP techniques, including dictionary-
based interpretation, and speech act identifica-
tion and classification for the (semi) automatic
identification in text of a set of psychoanalyt-
ical variables. The objective of the work is to
provide a set of tools and resources to assist
therapist during discourse analysis.

1 Introduction

Computer-based textual analysis in psychology is
not new; in psychotherapy, electronic dictionaries
and other lexical resources are widely used to anal-
yse both therapist’s and patient’s discourses pro-
duced during psychotherapy sessions. In this pa-
per we present work in progress in the applica-
tion of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tech-
nology to the analysis of psychotherapy sessions in
the Spanish Language. Based on a psychoanalytic
theory, we are developing a set of NLP tools as
well as adapting an existing dictionary for the anal-
ysis of interviews. We investigate the application
of NLP techniques, including dictionary-based in-
terpretation, and speech act identification and clas-

sification for the automatic analysis of spoken tran-
scriptions in Spanish of psychoanalysis sessions be-
tween therapists and patients. In Figure 1 we show
a fragment of a manually transcribed interview in
Spanish (and its translation to English) from our de-
velopment corpus.

The automatic analysis of the sessions, which is
used as a tool for assessment and interpretation of
the transcribed psychotherapy sessions is based on
a theory developed by Liberman and extended by
Maldavsky (Liberman and Maldavsky, 1975) and
framed on Freudian theory (Freud, 1925). The au-
tomatic tools to be presented here aim at recogniz-
ing a subset of Freudian drives manifested in both
patient’s and therapist’s discourse.

The objective of the analysis is not to provide a
full automated solution to discourse interpretation
in this area, but a set of tools and resources to as-
sist therapists during discourse analysis. Although
work in text-based interpretation in psychology is
not new, researchers in our project have identified
limitations in current practices due to the fact that
current text-based systems do not tackle ambiguity
problems at lexical, syntactic, or semantic levels:
for example systems that consider out-of-context su-
perficial forms would are unable to distinguish be-
tween different used of the same lexical item (“para”
as a preposition vs. “para” as a form of the verb
“parar” (to stop); “rio” as a common noun vs. “rio”
as a contextual clue for the identification of a geo-
graphical name; etc.). The use of advanced natural
language processing techniques could help produce

32



Transcribed Session (Spanish/English Version)
T: ¿con que te cortaste? (T: What did you cut
yourself with?)
L: con un vidrio que encontré en el patio (L: With
a glass I found in the patio.)
T: ¿donde lo tenı́as? (T: Where did you have it?)
L: en el locker, en la puertita del locker, y después
lo puse en la jabonera cuando baje a bañarme (L:
In the locker, in the locker’s small door, and then
I put it in the soap box when I went down to have
a bath.)
T: o sea, ya tenı́as un vidrio escondido (T: so, you
already had the glass hidden.)
L: sı́ı, ayer lo encontré (L: Yes, I found it yester-
day.)
T: ¿ayer a la tarde? (T: Yesterday afternoon?)
L: sı́, sı́, de ayer a la tarde (L: Yes, yes, yesterday
afternoon.)

Figure 1: Transcription of a small fragment of a therapy session in Spanish and its translation to English. T indicates
therapist and L indicates patient.

better analysis of the input material and therefore
be used for a better diagnosis and follow-up. It is
worth mentioning that full interpretation of therapy
sessions is not only based on textual analysis, but
also in other elements of the session such as the ac-
tual speech (e.g. pitch), para-verbal elements such
as patient movement, etc. This work addresses only
text interpretation issues.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 describes related work in the area of com-
putational tools for text analysis in psychology. In
Section 3, the theoretical framework for our work is
briefly introduced. Section 4 describes the imple-
mentation of NLP tools for the analysis of the in-
terviews and Section 5 closes the paper describing
current and future work.

2 Related Work

There are a number of well-established compu-
tational tools for the analysis and extraction of
meaning from text in the social sciences (See
(Alexa and Zuell, 2000) for an overview of tools
and resources). Some tools are bound to particular
theoretical principles, for example the LWIC dic-
tionary (Pennebaker et al., 2001) encodes specific

categories to be identified in text while others follow
a theory-free approach (Iker and Klein, 1974) where
the theory emerges from the analysis of the data.

There has been substantial research in the de-
velopment of methods to analyze linguistic input
in the field of psychotherapy in order to measure a
number of psychological variables such as emotion,
abstraction, referential activity, etc. among them
Bucci’s Referential Activity (RA) non-weighted
(Bucci, 2002) and weighted dictionaries (Bucci and
Maskit, 2006) for the English language, or Höltzer
and others’ affective dictionary (Hölzer et al., 1997)
for the German language. The LIWC tool has been
used to detect different types of personalities in
written self-descriptions (Chung and Pennebaker,
2008). This program counts meaningful words
that express emotion, abstraction, verbal behavior,
demographic variables, traditional personality mea-
sures, formal and informal settings, deception and
honesty, emotional upheavals, social interaction,
use of cognitive and emotion words, word analysis
in psychotherapy, references to self and others.
For Spanish (Roussos and O’Connell, 2005) have
developed a dictionary in the area of psychotherapy

33



to measure referential activity.

Early work on dictionaries in the area of psy-
chology include the General Inquirer psycho-
sociological dictionary (Stone and Hunt, 1963)
which can be used in various applications; current
work on lexical resources for identifying particu-
lar text variables – such as measuring strong/weak
opinions, sentiments, subjective/objective language,
etc. – include the SentiWordnet resource (Esuli and
Sebastiani, 2006) derived from WordNet which has
been used in various opinion mining works (Devitt
and Ahmad, 2007); other lines of research include
the derivation of word-lists (semi) automatically for
opinion classification (Turney, 2002). To the best of
our knowledge, little research has been carried out
on natural language processing for discourse inter-
pretation in psychology.

3 Theoretical Framework Overview

Liberman’s theory identifies 7 drives (i.e., a sub-
set of Freud’s drives) which are introduced in Ta-
ble 1 we may associate these drives with emotional
or affective states such as: strong emotions asso-
ciated with IL; ecstasy or trance with O1; sadness
with O2; anger with A1; concrete language with
A2; warnings, suspense, and premonition with UPH
; and congratulation, adulation, and promises with
GPH. In diagnosis these variables are associated to
pathologies such as addiction, schizophrenia, de-
pression, paranoia, obsession, phobia, and hysteria;
so their manifestation in text is of paramount impor-
tance for diagnosis.

Abbreviation Drive Name
IL Intra-somatic libido
O1 Primary oral
O2 Secondary oral sadistic
A1 Primary anal sadistic
A2 Secondary anal sadistic
UPH Urethrae phallic
GPH Genital phallic

Table 1: Drives in Liberman and Maldavsky theory

The theory also associates lexicalizations to each
of the drives (Maldavsky, 2003), thus creating a se-
mantic dictionary with 7 categories, the main work-

Drive Lexicalisation
IL verbs: to throw up, to break; nouns: hos-

pital, throat; adjectives: sick, fat; ad-
verbs: fatally, greedily

O1 verbs: to sip, to suck; nouns: enigma,
research; adjectives: mystical, enlighten-
ing; adverbs: elliptically, enigmatically

O2 verbs: to feel, to feel like; nouns: feel-
ing, victim; adjectives: sensitive, happy,
sad; adverbs: fondly, obediently

A1 verbs: to bother, to kick; nouns: vio-
lence, transgression; adjectives: angry,
locked; adverbs: angrily,boldly, crossly

A2 verbs: must, to know; nouns: vice,
doubt; adjectives: good, bad; adverbs:
but, although, however

UPH verbs: to be able, to dare; nouns: scar,
precipice, wound; adjectives: coward,
scared; adverbs: almost, a bit

GPH verbs: to promise, to give; nouns:
beauty, ugliness; adjectives: wavy,
pretty; adverbs: more, even

Table 2: Sample of drives and associated lexicalisation

ing hypothesis is that drives manifest through lin-
guistic style, present at word level, phrase, and nar-
rative. Lexicalisations for each drive have been care-
fully selected following a variety of methods includ-
ing manual derivation of words from concepts, study
of texts where a scene is clearly present (e.g., every-
day activities), use of thesaurus, etc. Ambiguity is
preserved and a lexicalisation can signal more than
one drive. We show some lexicalisations in Table 2.

In addition to word-level analysis, the theory pro-
vides methods for analysis at narrative and speech
act level.

Speech acts are actions performed when making
an utterance (Searle, 1969) and they include (Searle,
1976) illocutionary (e.g. assert, suggest), perlocu-
tionary (e.g. convince, insult), and propositional
(e.g. making a reference) types. There has been sub-
stantial work on speech act segmentation and classi-
fication. Different authors adopt different classifica-
tions or theories of speech acts in order to restrict
the categories to those relevant for the purpose of
analysis. For example, in dialogue systems (Allen et

34



Drive Speech Acts
IL references to the state of things; reference

to body and body processes; etc.
O1 abstract deduction; negation; reference to

physical disomfort; etc.
O2 lamentation; complain; beg; etc.
A1 verbally abuse; provoke; confront; etc.
A2 judge; clarify; confirm; etc.
UPH forewarning; warning; inquest; counsel;

etc.
GPH congratulate; thank; promise; exaggerate;

etc.

Table 3: Drives and Speech Acts

al., 1996; Henry Prakken, 2000), the list of speech
acts may vary from 4 to 10 categories and it may
include acts such as assertion, WH-question, direc-
tives, greeting, direct/indicrect request, etc.
The pychoanalytic framework we are following has
its own inventory of speech acts. The objective is
also to link scenes in narratives and speech acts to
the 7 drives (in Table 1). There is a variety of speech
acts in the adopted framework, in Table 3 we present
a sample of speech acts associated to each of the
drives. The objective of the semi-automatic analysis
is to help their identification to facilitate the work of
the psychotherapist.

4 Text Analysis of Interviews

We have implemented a series of programs, lexical
resources, and grammars to process interviews and
other types of textual data in Spanish. We are us-
ing the GATE system (Maynard et al., 2002) as an
infrastructure or development framework; most de-
velopments are new, not included in the GATE sys-
tem, and they are packaged in a plug-in which can
be accessed through the GATE system or used stand-
alone. We have developed various programs to auto-
matically annotate the interviews including segmen-
tation of the transcription, word-based thematic seg-
mentation, tagging, and dictionary-based interpreta-
tion and analysis.

4.1 Dictionary
One of the main components of the system is a
dictionary which is taken as the basis for text inter-

pretation. This is being implemented as a language
resource in GATE. It is based on lists of word forms
which have been created for each of the drives.
The lists are organized according to their parts
of speech. The available dictionary (Maldavsky,
2003) contains all inflected forms of verbs, nouns,
adjectives, and adverbs which we are transforming
into a dictionary which will contain only roots. An
instance of the dictionary is created from the set of
lists and kept on-line for processing. The current
version of the dictionary (inflected forms) contains
over 298 thousand verb forms, over 22 thousand
noun forms, over 137 thousand adjectives, and over
9 thousand adverbs. An annotation tool has been
implemented based on a schema for our dictionary,
we use the graphical user interface functionalities
provided by the GATE infrastructure allowing a
researcher annotate words she may want to included
in the dictionary or segment the text in units for
further analysis.

4.2 Programs for Interviews’ Interpretation
The following programs used for the automatic
analysis of the interviews.

• A wrapper to the TreeTagger parts of speech
package (Schmid, 1995) (See http://www.
clarin.eu/tools/treetagger) has
been implemented in order to call it from
the GATE system and an alignment program
has been developed to associate the output of
the tagger to the actual text of the interview,
therefore creating word annotations containing
features from the TreeTagger and additional
features computed by our programs. Note that
the TreeTagger distributed with GATE was
innapropriate for our purposes because it does
require tokenisation of the input performed
before invoking the tagger, this is the reason
why we had to create our own wrapper.

• A segmentation program is used to identify pa-
tient and therapist interventions.

• Text chuncking and named entity recognition
is being developed using Support Vector
Machines and training data from the CoNLL

35



evaluation program. We have created a train-
able system using machine learning resources
provided by the GATE framework. The
CoNLL 2002 Spanish dataset which provides
information on named entities such as Loca-
tion, Organization, Person, and Miscellaneous
was analyzed using parts-of-speech tagging,
morphological analysis, and gazetteer lookup
in order to derive a set of features for learn-
ing. A supports vector machine was trained
that uses gazetteer information, word level
information, orthography, parts-of-speech, and
lemmatization. We have collected a number
of lists to assist the identification of names
of organization, persons, locations, time ex-
pressions, etc. The performance of the current
system is at 68% F-score. Note that named
entity recognition is particularly important
to track names in longitudinal analysis of
interviews, but also to disambiguate names
which in Spanish are ambiguous (e.g. “amado”
can be a person name in addition to a form of
the verb “amar”; “quito” can be the name of a
place in addition to a form of the verb “quitar”,
etc.)

• A program uses the dictionary and interprets
each word or complex term according to the
drives in the dictionary taking into account
parts of speech information and named entity
recognition.

• A topic segmentation program has been
implemented to break the interview in frag-
ments which can be selected for fine-grained
interpretation. This module is based on tf*idf
similarity between candidate segments. A
second module we are implementing aims
at the recognition of segments referring to
prototypical scenes a patient may refer to:
family, work, love, health, money, etc. Further
gazetteer list information has been collected
from Spanish sources to create lexicons for
assisting the automatic identification of the
above categories. We are in the process of
manually annotating a set of transcriptions as

the basis for training a classification system for
this task. Conceptual information will be used
for this purpose.

• A processing resource has been implemented to
generate an interpretation of the different lan-
guages or drives’ variables for different seg-
ments chosen by the human analyst (thera-
pist or patient or any other segment of inter-
est) and statistics are computed for each of the
segments; these can be exported for the ther-
apist to carry out additional analysis and in-
terpretation. Note that the current tool con-
siderably improves the previous practises in
dictionary-based interpretation, since the im-
plemented tool takes into account syntactic and
semantic information as a filter for interpreta-
tion.

4.3 Rule-based Speech Acts’ Detection

We are carrying out induction sessions with psy-
chotherapits in order to capture ways in which
speech acts in the adopted framework are expressed.
The induction sessions provided valuable material
to start implementation of a rule-based speech act
detection program (with regular expressions and a
dictionary) based on use use of syntactic and lexical
information. These procedures allow us to collect a
set of expressions and lexical/syntactic patterns for
objective identification of a subset of speech acts.
We are also annotating the development corpus of
interviews (a total of 30 will be annotated with a
minimum of 2 annotators per interview) with speech
acts categories. Each speech segment is annotated
with one main speech act and a number (possibly
zero) subordinate speech acts. We are using the
GATE environment to provide appropriate support
for the annotation process. In Figure 2 we show a
fragment of interview in the annotation tool anno-
tated according to the interpretation of one of our
judges (the annotation window shows a “complaint”
speech act associated to the fragment “no me estaba
tratando de entender como él siempre hace” (“he did
not understand as he always does”)). We expect the
annotated corpus to be a valuable resource for the
development of a trainable speech act recognition
program based on lexical clues and syntactic infor-

36



mation. This trainable system will extend the rule-
based approach or incorporate the rule-based analy-
sis into it.

A sample of expressions we have identified and
implemented for a subset of speech acts is presented
in Table 4. The analysis of speech acts will provide
an additional level for drive’s identification.

5 Perspectives and Current Work

We have described our initial work on a set of tools
being developed for the analysis of psychotherapy
interviews in the Spanish language. The tools ex-
tend work on dictionary-based text interpretation by
incorporating NLP tools such as tagging, topic/scene
segmentation, speech act detection, and named en-
tity recognition. One main contribution of our re-
search is the implementation of a dictionary for the
Spanish language which can be used not only for the
identification of Freudian variables but also for work
on affective language and sentiment analysis. We
are currently working on the development of a full
module for speech-act recognition and on the cre-
ation of a corpus of annotated interviews which will
serve for further training and evaluation purposes.
The set of resources developed in the project will
be made available to the computational linguistics
community for research purposes. We think that al-
though this is work in progress it is worth mention-
ing evaluation. Where evaluation of the tools is con-
cerned, we are carrying out intrinsic evaluation com-
paring annotated categories against predicted cate-
gories currently for named entity recognition and
discourse segmentation and in the future for speech
act recognition and classification. Where more ex-
trinsic evaluation is concerned, we will evaluate how
the tools presented here can help theraphist in bet-
ter interpretation of clinical data. The implemented
tools will also be used to compare word-level based
interpretation produced by the dictionary to interpre-
tation produced by the analysis at speech act level.

Acknowledgements

We thank the reviewers for their very useful com-
ments. This work was partially supported by a grant
from the Royal Society (JP090069), UK. The first
author is grateful to Programa Ramón y Cajal 2009
from the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Spain.

References
M. Alexa and C. Zuell. 2000. Text analysis software:

Commonalities, differences and limitations: The re-
sults of a review. Quality & Quantity, 34:299–231.

J. F. Allen, B. W. Miller, E. K. Ringger, and T. Sikorski.
1996. A robust system for natural spoken dialogue.
In Proceedings of the 34th annual meeting on Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 62–70,
Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

W. Bucci and B. Maskit. 2006. A Weighted Referential
Activity Dictionary. In Computing Attitude and Affect
in Text: Theory and Applications, volume 20 of The
Information Retrieval Series, pages 49–60. Springer
Verlag.

W. Bucci. 2002. Referential Activity (RA): Scales and
computer procedures. In An Open Door Review of
Outcome Studies in Psychoanalysis. International Psy-
choanalytical Association.

C.K. Chung and J.W. Pennebaker. 2008. Revealing di-
mensions of thinking in open-ended self-descriptions:
An automated meaning extraction method for natural
language. Journal of Research in Personality, 42:96–
132.

Ann Devitt and Khurshid Ahmad. 2007. Sentiment
polarity identification in financial news: A cohesion-
based approach. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual
Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 984–991, Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. SENTI-
WORDNET: A publicly available lexical resource for
opinion mining. In Proceedings of LREC-06, 5th Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation, pages
417–422, Genova, IT.

S. Freud. 1925. Obras Completas. Amorrortu (Eds.),
Madrid, Spain.

H. Henry Prakken. 2000. On dialogue systems
with speech acts, arguments, and counterarguments.
In Logics in Artificial Intelligence, pages 224–238.
Springer Verlag.

M. Hölzer, D. Pokorny, H. Kächele, and L. Luborsky.
1997. The Verbalization of Emotions in the Thera-
peutic Dialogue-A Correlate of Therapeutic Outcome?
Psychotherapy Research, 7(3):261–273.

H.P. Iker and R. Klein. 1974. WORDS: A computer
system for the analysis of content. Behavior Research
Methods and Instrumentation, 6:430–438.

D. Liberman and D. Maldavsky. 1975. Psicoanlisis y
semitica. Paidos, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

D. Maldavsky. 2003. La investigacin psicoanaltica del
lenguaje: algoritmo David Liberman. Editorial Lugar,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

37



Speech Act Pattern or Expression
beg PPX + rogar | implorar | suplicar
demand PPX + exhortar | exigir | demandar | perdir
demand recognition decir que esta bien | correcto | perfecto |

bueno; está bien, no?
demand forgiveness PPX + perdonar
justify por que; por eso; debido a que; por esa razón
permission con PPO permiso; pedir; PPX + dejar
interrupt para... para; espera...; ah me olvide...
cite como dijo NP | PPX ; según NP | PPX ; de

acuerdo con NP | PPX
sinthesis en resumen; para concluir; en sı́ntesis
doubt no PPX quedar | ser | estar claro; quien sabe
trust/distrust no confiar | desconfiar; confiar | desconfiar
submission tener razón; no + PPX + enojar
appeal decime que me querés; ...
compassion/self-compassion me da pena; pobre; pobrecito;...
sacrifice yo que hice todo esto; yo que te di todo; si no

fuera por mi; ...

Table 4: Speech Acts and Lexical/Syntactic Patterns (PPX = pronouns; NP = proper nouns; PPO = possessive)

D. Maynard, V. Tablan, H. Cunningham, C. Ursu, H. Sag-
gion, K. Bontcheva, and Y. Wilks. 2002. Architectural
Elements of Language Engineering Robustness. Jour-
nal of Natural Language Engineering – Special Issue
on Robust Methods in Analysis of Natural Language
Data, 8(2/3):257–274.

J.W. Pennebaker, M.E. Francis, and R.j. Both. 2001.
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC). Erlbaum
Publishers.

A. Roussos and M. O’Connell. 2005. Construcción de
un diccionario ponderado en español para medir la Ac-
tividad Referencial. Revista del Instituto de Investiga-
ciones de la Facultad de Psicologı́a - UBA, 10(2):99–
119.

H. Schmid. 1995. Improvements in part-of-speech tag-
ging with an application to german. In In Proceedings
of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop, pages 47–50.

J. Searle. 1969. Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy
of language. Cambridge University Press.

John R. Searle. 1976. A classification of illocutionary
acts. Language in Society, 5(1):1–23.

P. J. Stone and E. B. Hunt. 1963. A Computer Ap-
proach to Content Analysis: Studies using the General
Inquirer System. In Proceedings of the Spring Joint
Computer Conference, pages 241–256, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

P. D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?: se-
mantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifica-
tion of reviews. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL ’02), pages 417–424, Morristown, NJ, USA,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

38



Figure 2: Speech Acts Segmentation and Interpretation

39


