



















































Syntactic Constraints on Phrase Extraction for Phrase-Based Machine Translation


Proceedings of SSST-4, Fourth Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 28–33,
COLING 2010, Beijing, August 2010.

Syntactic Constraints on Phrase Extraction for Phrase-Based 
Machine Translation 

Hailong Cao, Andrew Finch and Eiichiro Sumita 
Language Translation Group, MASTAR Project 

National Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
{hlcao,andrew.finch,eiichiro.sumita }@nict.go.jp

 

Abstract 

A typical phrase-based machine transla-
tion (PBMT) system uses phrase pairs 
extracted from word-aligned parallel 
corpora. All phrase pairs that are consis-
tent with word alignments are collected. 
The resulting phrase table is very large 
and includes many non-syntactic phrases 
which may not be necessary. We propose 
to filter the phrase table based on source 
language syntactic constraints. Rather 
than filter out all non-syntactic phrases, 
we only apply syntactic constraints when 
there is phrase segmentation ambiguity 
arising from unaligned words. Our 
method is very simple and yields a 
24.38% phrase pair reduction and a 0.52 
BLEU point improvement when com-
pared to a baseline PBMT system with 
full-size tables. 

1 Introduction 
Both PBMT models (Koehn et al., 2003; Chiang, 
2005) and syntax-based machine translation 
models (Yamada et al., 2000; Quirk et al., 2005; 
Galley et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2006; Marcu et al., 
2006; and numerous others) are the state-of-the- 
art statistical machine translation (SMT) meth-
ods. Over the last several years, an increasing 
amount of work has been done to combine the 
advantages of the two approaches. DeNeefe et al. 
(2007) made a quantitative comparison of the 
phrase pairs that each model has to work with 
and found it is useful to improve the phrasal 
coverage of their string-to-tree model. Liu et al. 
(2007) proposed forest-to-string rules to capture 
the non-syntactic phrases in their tree-to-string 
model. Zhang et al. (2008) proposed a tree se-

quence based tree-to-tree model which can de-
scribe non-syntactic phrases with syntactic struc-
ture information. 

The converse of the above methods is to in-
corporate syntactic information into the PBMT 
model. Zollmann and Venugopal (2006) started 
with a complete set of phrases as extracted by 
traditional PBMT heuristics, and then annotated 
the target side of each phrasal entry with the la-
bel of the constituent node in the target-side 
parse tree that subsumes the span. Marton and 
Resnik (2008) and Cherry (2008) imposed syn-
tactic constraints on the PBMT system by mak-
ing use of prior linguistic knowledge in the form 
of syntax analysis. In their PBMT decoders, a 
candidate translation gets an extra credit if it re-
spects the source side syntactic parse tree but 
may incur a cost if it violates a constituent 
boundary. Xiong et al. (2009) proposed a syn-
tax-driven bracketing model to predict whether a 
phrase (a sequence of contiguous words) is 
bracketable or not using rich syntactic con-
straints. 

In this paper, we try to utilize syntactic 
knowledge to constrain the phrase extraction 
from word-based alignments for PBMT system. 
Rather than filter out all non-syntactic phrases, 
we only apply syntactic constraints when there is 
phrase segmentation ambiguity arising from un-
aligned words. Our method is very simple and 
yields a 24.38% phrase pair reduction and a 0.52 
BLEU point improvement when compared to the 
baseline PBMT system with full-size tables. 

2 Extracting Phrase Pairs from Word-
based Alignments 

In this section, we briefly review a simple and 
effective phrase pair extraction algorithm upon 
which this work builds. 

28



The basic translation unit of a PBMT model is 
the phrase pair, which consists of a sequence of 
source words, a sequence of target words and a 
vector of feature values which represents this 
pair’s contribution to the translation model. In 
typical PBMT systems such as MOSES (Koehn, 
2007), phrase pairs are extracted from word-
aligned parallel corpora. Figure 1 shows the 
form of training example. 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 1: An example parallel sentence pair 

and word alignment 
 

Since there is no phrase segmentation infor-
mation in the word-aligned sentence pair, in 
practice all pairs of “source word sequence ||| 
target word sequence” that are consistent with 
word alignments are collected. The words in a 
legal phrase pair are only aligned to each other, 
and not to words outside (Och et al., 1999). For 
example, given a sentence pair and its word 
alignments shown in Figure1, the following nine 
phrase pairs will be extracted: 
 

Source phrase ||| Target phrase 
f1 ||| e1 
f2 ||| e2 
f4 ||| e3 

f1 f2 ||| e1 e2 
f2 f3 ||| e2 
f3 f4 ||| e3 

f1 f2  f3 ||| e1 e2 
f2 f3 f4 ||| e2 e3 

f1 f2 f3 f4 ||| e1 e2 e3 
 

Table 1: Phrase pairs extracted from the example 
in Figure 1 

 
Note that neither the source phrase nor the 

target phrase can be empty. So “f3 ||| EMPTY” is 
not a legal phrase pair. 

Phrase pairs are extracted over the entire 
training corpus. Given all the collected phrase 
pairs, we can estimate the phrase translation 
probability distribution by relative frequency. 
The collected phrase pairs will also be used to 

build the lexicalized reordering model. For more 
details of the lexicalized reordering model, 
please refer to Tillmann and Zhang (2005) and 
section 2.7.2 of the MOSES’s manual1. 

The main problem of such a phrase pair ex-
traction procedure is the resulting phrase transla-
tion table is very large, especially when a large 
quantity of parallel data is available. This is not 
desirable in real application where speed and 
memory consumption are often critical concerns. 
In addition, some phrase translation pairs are 
generated from training data errors and word 
alignment noise. Therefore, we need to filter the 
phrase table in an appropriate way for both effi-
ciency and translation quality (Johnson et al., 
2007; Yang and Zheng, 2009).  

  f1        f2      f3   f4 
        |           |               | 

  e1        e2            e3 
 

3 Syntactic Constraints on Phrase Pair 
Extraction 

We can divide all the possible phrases into two 
types: syntactic phrases and non-syntactic 
phrases. A “syntactic phrase” is defined as a 
word sequence that is covered by a single sub-
tree in a syntactic parse tree (Imamura, 2002). 
Intuitively, we would think syntactic phrases are 
much more reliable while the non-syntactic 
phrases are useless. However, (Koehn et al., 
2003) showed that restricting phrasal translation 
to only syntactic phrases yields poor translation 
performance – the ability to translate non-
syntactic phrases (such as “there are”, “note 
that”, and “according to”) turns out to be critical 
and pervasive. 

 (Koehn et al., 2003) uses syntactic constraints 
from both the source and target languages, and 
over 80% of all phrase pairs are eliminated. In 
this section, we try to use syntactic knowledge in 
a less restrictive way.  

Firstly, instead of using syntactic restriction 
on both source phrases and target phrases, we 
only apply syntactic restriction to the source 
language side. 

Secondly, we only apply syntactic restriction 
to the source phrase whose first or last word is 
unaligned. 

For example, given a parse tree illustrated in 
Figure 2, we will filter out the phrase pair “f2 f3 
||| e2” since the source phrase “f2 f3” is a non-
syntactic phrase and its last word “f3” is not 
                                                 
1 http://www.statmt.org/moses/ 

29



aligned to any target word. The phrase pair “f1 
f2  f3 ||| e1 e2” will  also be eliminated for the 
same reason. But we do keep phrase pairs such 
as “f1 f2 ||| e1 e2” even if its source phrase “f1 
f2” is a non-syntactic phrase. Also, we keep “f3 
f4 ||| e3” since “f3 f4” is a syntactic phrase. Ta-
ble 2 shows the completed set of phrase pairs 
that are extracted with our constraint-based 
method. 

 
Source phrase ||| Target phrase 

f1 ||| e1 
f2 ||| e2 
f4 ||| e3 

f1 f2 ||| e1 e2 
f3 f4 ||| e3 

f2 f3 f4 ||| e2 e3 
f1 f2 f3 f4 ||| e1 e2 e3 

 
Table 2: Phrase pairs extracted from the example 

in Figure 2 
 
 

 
Figure 2: An example parse tree and word-

based alignments 
 
The state-of-the-art alignment tool such as 

GIZA++ 2  can not always find alignments for 
every word in the sentence pair. The possible 
reasons could be: its frequency is too low, noisy 
data, auxiliary words or function words which 
have no obvious correspondence in the opposite 
language. 

In the automatically aligned parallel corpus, 
unaligned words are frequent enough to be no-
ticeable (see section 4.1 in this paper). How to 
decide the translation of unaligned word is left to 
the phrase extraction algorithm. An unaligned 

                                                 
2 http://fjoch.com/GIZA++.html 

source word should be translated together with 
the words on the right of it or the words on the 
left of it. The existing algorithm considers both 
of the two directions. So both “f2 f3 ||| e2” and 
“f3 f4 ||| e3” are extracted. However, it is 
unlikely that “f3” can be translated into both 
“e2” and “e3”.  So our algorithm uses prior syn-
tactic knowledge to keep “f3 f4 ||| e3” and ex-
clude “f2 f3 ||| e2”. 

4 Experiments 
Our SMT system is based on a fairly typical 
phrase-based model (Finch and Sumita, 2008). 
For the training of our SMT model, we use a 
modified training toolkit adapted from the 
MOSES decoder. Our decoder can operate on 
the same principles as the MOSES decoder. 
Minimum error rate training (MERT) with re-
spect to BLEU score is used to tune the de-
coder’s parameters, and it is performed using the 
standard technique of Och (2003). A lexicalized 
reordering model was built by using the “msd-
bidirectional-fe” configuration in our experi-
ments. 

The translation model was created from the 
FBIS parallel corpus. We used a 5-gram lan-
guage model trained with modified Kneser-Ney 
smoothing. The language model was trained on 
the target side of the FBIS corpus and the Xin-
hua news in the GIGAWORD corpus. The de-
velopment and test sets are from the NIST MT08 
evaluation campaign. Table 3 shows the statis-
tics of the corpora used in our experiments. 

N3 

N2

N1 

  f1        f2      f3   f4 
 
  e1       e2             e3 
 

 
Data Sentences Chinese words 

English 
words 

Training set 221,994 6,251,554 8,065,629 

Development set 1,664 38,779 46,387 

Test set 1,357 32,377 42,444 

GIGAWORD 19,049,757 - 306,221,306

 
Table 3: Corpora statistics 

 
The Chinese sentences are segmented, POS 

tagged and parsed by the tools described in Kru-
engkrai et al. (2009) and Cao et al. (2007), both 
of which are trained on the Penn Chinese Tree-
bank 6.0.  

30



4.1 Experiments on Word Alignments 
We use GIZA++ to align the sentences in both 
the Chinese-English and English-Chinese direc-
tions. Then we combine the alignments using the 
standard “grow-diag-final-and” procedure pro-
vided with MOSES. 

In the combined word alignments, 614,369 or 
9.82% of the Chinese words are unaligned. Ta-
ble 4 shows the top 10 most frequently un-
aligned words. Basically, these words are auxil-
iary words or function words whose usage is 
very flexible. So it would be difficult to auto-
matically align them to the target words.  

 
Unaligned word Frequency 

的 77776 
, 29051 
在 9414 
一 8768 
中 8543 
个 7471 
是 7365 
上 6155 
了 5945 
不 5450 

 
Table 4: Frequently unaligned words from the 

training corpus 

4.2 Experiments on Chinese-English SMT 
In order to confirm that it is advantageous to 
apply appropriate syntactic constraints on phrase 
extraction, we performed three translation ex-
periments by using different ways of phrase ex-
traction.  

In the first experiment, we used the method 
introduced in Section 2 to extract all possible 
phrase translation pairs without using any con-
straints arising from knowledge of syntax.  

The second experiment used source language 
syntactic constraints to filter out all non-
syntactic phrases during phrase pair extraction. 

The third experiment used source language 
syntactic constraints to filter out only non-
syntactic phrases whose first or last source word 
was unaligned.  

With the exception of the above differences in 
phrase translation pair extraction, all the other 

settings were the identical in the three 
experiments. Table 5 summarizes the SMT per-
formance. The evaluation metric is case-
sensitive BLEU-4 (Papineni et al., 2002) which 
estimates the accuracy of translation output with 
respect to a set of reference translations. 

 
Syntactic Con-

straints 
Number of 

distinct phrase pairs BLEU

None 14,195,686 17.26

Full constraint 4,855,108 16.51

Selectively 
constraint 10,733,731 17.78

 
Table 5: Comparison of different constraints on 

phrase pair extraction by translation quality 
 

As shown in the table, it is harmful to fully 
apply syntactic constraints on phrase extraction, 
even just on the source language side. This is 
consistent with the observation of (Koehn et al., 
2003) who applied both source and target con-
straints in German to English translation ex-
periments. 

Clearly, we obtained the best performance if 
we use source language syntactic constraints 
only on phrases whose first or last source word 
is unaligned. In addition, we reduced the number 
of distinct phrase pairs by 24.38% over the base-
line full-size phrase table. 

The results in table 5 show that while some 
non-syntactic phrases are very important to 
maintain the performance of a PBMT system, 
not all of them are necessary. We can achieve 
better performance and a smaller phrase table by 
applying syntactic constraints when there is 
phrase segmentation ambiguity arising from un-
aligned words. 

5 Related Work 
To some extent, our idea is similar to Ma et al. 
(2008), who used an anchor word alignment 
model to find a set of high-precision anchor 
links and then aligned the remaining words rely-
ing on dependency information invoked by the 
acquired anchor links. The similarity is that both 
Ma et al. (2008) and this work utilize structure 
information to find appropriate translations for 
words which are difficult to align. The differ-

31



ence is that they used dependency information in 
the word alignment stage while our method uses 
syntactic information during the phrase pair ex-
traction stage. There are also many works which 
leverage syntax information to improve word 
alignments (e.g., Cherry and Lin, 2006; DeNero 
and Klein, 2007; Fossum et al., 2008; Hermja-
kob, 2009). 

Johnson et al., (2007) presented a technique 
for pruning the phrase table in a PBMT system 
using Fisher’s exact test. They compute the sig-
nificance value of each phrase pair and prune the 
table by deleting phrase pairs with significance 
values smaller than a certain threshold. Yang 
and Zheng (2008) extended the work in Johnson 
et al., (2007) to a hierarchical PBMT model, 
which is built on synchronous context free 
grammars (SCFG). Tomeh et al., (2009) de-
scribed an approach for filtering phrase tables in 
a statistical machine translation system, which 
relies on a statistical independence measure 
called Noise, first introduced in (Moore, 2004). 
The difference between the above research and 
this work is they took advantage of some statis-
tical measures while we use syntactic knowledge 
to filter phrase tables. 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 
Phrase pair extraction plays a very important 
role on the performance of PBMT systems. We 
utilize syntactic knowledge to constrain the 
phrase extraction from word-based alignments 
for a PBMT system. Rather than filter out all 
non-syntactic phrases, we only filter out non-
syntactic phrases whose first or last source word 
is unaligned. Our method is very simple and 
yields a 24.38% phrase pair reduction and a 0.52 
BLEU point improvement when compared to the 
baseline PBMT system with full-size tables. 

In the future work, we will use other language 
pairs to test our phrase extraction method so that 
we can discover whether or not it is language 
independent. 

References 
Robert C. Moore. 2004. On log-likelihood-ratios and 

the significance of rare events. In EMNLP. 

Hailong Cao, Yujie Zhang and Hitoshi Isahara. Em-
pirical study on parsing Chinese based on Collins' 
model. 2007. In PACLING. 

Colin Cherry and Dekang Lin. 2006. Soft syntactic 
constraints for word alignment through discrimina-
tive training. In ACL. 

Colin Cherry. 2008. Cohesive phrase-Based decoding 
for statistical machine translation. In ACL-HLT. 

David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based 
model for statistical machine translation. In ACL. 

Steve DeNeefe, Kevin Knight, Wei Wang, and 
Daniel Marcu. 2007. What can syntax-based MT 
learn from phrase-based MT? In EMNLP-CoNLL. 

John DeNero and Dan Klein. 2007. Tailoring word 
alignments to syntactic machine translation. In 
ACL. 

Andrew Finch and Eiichiro Sumita. 2008. Dynamic 
model interpolation for statistical machine transla-
tion. In SMT Workshop. 

Victoria Fossum, Kevin Knight and Steven Abney. 
2008. Using syntax to improve word alignment 
precision for syntax-based machine translation. In 
SMT Workshop, ACL. 

Michel Galley, Jonathan Graehl, Kevin Knight, 
Daniel Marcu, Steve Deneefe, Wei Wang and 
Ignacio Thayer. 2006. Scalable inference and 
training of context-rich syntactic translation mod-
els. In ACL. 

Ulf Hermjakob. 2009. Improved word alignment with 
statistics and linguistic heuristics. In EMNLP. 

Kenji Imamura. 2002. Application of translation 
knowledge acquired by hierarchical phrase align-
ment for pattern-based MT. In TMI. 

Howard Johnson, Joel Martin, George Foster and 
Roland Kuhn. 2007. Improving translation quality 
by discarding most of the phrase table. In EMNLP-
CoNLL. 

Franz Josef Och, Christoph Tillmann and Hermann 
Ney. 1999. Improved alignment models for statis-
tical machine translation. In EMNLP-VLC. 

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training 
in statistical machine translation. In ACL. 

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu. 
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In HLT-
NAACL. 

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris 
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Ber-
toldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine 
Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, 
Alexandra Constantin, Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: 
Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine 
Translation. In ACL demo and poster sessions. 

32



Canasai Kruengkrai, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Jun'ichi 
Kazama, Yiou Wang, Kentaro Torisawa and Hito-
shi Isahara. 2009. An error-driven word-character 
hybrid model for joint Chinese word segmentation 
and POS tagging. In ACL-IJCNLP. 

Yang Liu, Qun Liu, Shouxun Lin. 2006. Tree-to-
string alignment template for statistical machine 
translation. In ACL-COLING. 

Yang Liu, Yun Huang, Qun Liu and Shouxun Lin. 
2007. Forest-to-string statistical translation rules. 
In ACL. 

Yanjun Ma, Sylwia Ozdowska, Yanli Sun and Andy 
Way. 2008. Improving word alignment using syn-
tactic dependencies. In SSST. 

Daniel Marcu, Wei Wang, Abdessamad Echihabi, 
and Kevin Knight. 2006. SPMT: Statistical ma-
chine translation with syntactified target language 
phrases. In EMNLP. 

Yuval Marton and Philip Resnik. 2008. Soft syntactic 
constraints for hierarchical phrased-based transla-
tion. In ACL-HLT. 

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward and 
WeiJing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for auto-
matic evaluation of machine translation. In ACL. 

Chris Quirk and Arul Menezes and Colin Cherry. 
2005. Dependency treelet translation: Syntactically 
informed phrasal SMT. In ACL. 

Christoph Tillmann and Tong Zhang. 2005. A local-
ized prediction model for statistical machine trans-
lation. In ACL. 

Nadi Tomeh, Nicola Cancedda and Marc Dymetman. 
2009. Complexity-based phrase-table filtering for 
statistical machine translation. In MT Summit. 

Deyi Xiong, Min Zhang, Aiti Aw and Haizhou Li. 
2009. A syntax-driven bracketing model for 
phrase-based translation. In ACL-IJCNLP. 

Kenji Yamada and Kevin Knight. 2000. A syntax-
based statistical translation model. In ACL. 

Mei Yang and Jing Zheng. 2009. Toward smaller, 
faster, and better hierarchical phrase-based SMT. 
In ACL. 

Min Zhang, Hongfei Jiang, Aiti Aw, Chew Lim Tan 
and Sheng Li. 2008. A tree sequence alignment-
based tree-to-tree translation model. In ACL- HLT. 

Andreas Zollmann and Ashish Venugopal. 2006. 
Syntax augmented machine translation via chart 
parsing. In SMT Workshop, HLT-NAACL. 

33


