










































Automatic conjugation and identification of regular and irregular verb neologisms in Spanish


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 1–5,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic conjugation and identification of regular and irregular verb
neologisms in Spanish

Luz Rello and Eduardo Basterrechea
Molino de Ideas s.a.

Nanclares de Oca, 1F
Madrid, 28022, Spain

{lrello, ebaste}@molinodeideas.es

Abstract

In this paper, a novel system for the automatic
identification and conjugation of Spanish verb
neologisms is presented. The paper describes
a rule-based algorithm consisting of six steps
which are taken to determine whether a new
verb is regular or not, and to establish the rules
that the verb should follow in its conjugation.
The method was evaluated on 4,307 new verbs
and its performance found to be satisfactory
both for irregular and regular neologisms. The
algorithm also contains extra rules to cater for
verb neologisms in Spanish that do not exist as
yet, but are inferred to be possible in light of
existing cases of new verb creation in Spanish.

1 Introduction

This paper presents a new method consisting of a set
of modules which are implemented as part of a free
online conjugator called Onoma1.

The novelty of this system lies in its ability to
identify and conjugate existing verbs and potential
new verbs in Spanish with a degree of coverage
that cannot completely be achieved by other ex-
isting conjugators that are available. Other exist-
ing systems do not cope well with the productively
rich word formation processes that apply to Spanish
verbs and lead to complexities in their inflectional
forms that can present irregularities. The operation
of these processes mean that each Spanish verb can
comprise 135 different forms, including compound
verb forms.

1Onoma can be accessed at http://conjugador.onoma.es

Several researchers have developed tools and
methods related to Spanish verbs. These include
morphological processors (Tzoukermann and Liber-
man, 1990), (Santana et al., 1997), (Santana et al.,
2002), semantic verb classification (Esteve Ferrer,
2004) or verb sense disambiguation (Lapata and
Brew, 2004). Nevertheless, to our knowledge, ours
is the first attempt to automatically identify, classify
and conjugate new Spanish verbs.

Our method identifies new and existing Spanish
verbs and categorises them into seven classes: one
class for regular verbs and six classes of irregular
verbs depending on the type of the irregularity rule
whose operation produced it. This algorithm is im-
plemented by means of six modules or transducers
which process each new infinitive form and classify
the neologism. Once the new infinitive is classified,
it is conjugated by the system using a set of high
accuracy conjugation rules according to its class.

One of the advantages of this procedure is that
only very little information about the new infinitive
form is required. The knowledge needed is exclu-
sively of a formal kind. Extraction of this informa-
tion relies on the implementation and use of two ex-
tra modules: one to detect Spanish syllables, and the
other to split the verb into its root and morphological
affixes.

In cases where the neologism is not an infinitive
form, but a conjugated one, the system generates a
hypothetical infinitive form that the user can corrob-
orate as a legitimate infinitive.

Given that the transducers used in this system
are easy to learn and remember, the method can be
employed as a pedagogic tool itself by students of

1



Spanish as a foreign language. It helps in the learn-
ing of the Spanish verb system since currently ex-
isting methods (e.g. (Puebla, 1995), (Gomis, 1998),
(Mateo, 2008)) do not provide guidance on the ques-
tion of whether verbs are regular or irregular. This
is due to the fact that our method can identify the
nature of any possible verb by reference only to its
infinitive form. The application of other kinds of
knowledge about the verb to this task are currently
being investigated to deal with those rare cases in
which reference to the infinitive form is insufficient
for making this classification.

This study first required an analysis of the exist-
ing verb paradigms used in dictionary construction
(DRAE, 2001) followed by the detailed examination
of new verbs’ conjugations (Gomis, 1998), (Santana
et al., 2002), (Mateo, 2008) compiled in a database
created for that purpose. For the design of the algo-
rithm, in order to validate the rules and patterns, an
error-driven approach was taken.

The remainder of the paper is structured as fol-
lows: section 2 presents a description of the cor-
pora used. In Section 3, the different word formation
processes that apply to Spanish verbs are described,
while Section 4 is devoted to the detailed description
of the rules used by the system to classify the neolo-
gisms, which are evaluated in Section 5. Finally, in
Section 6 we draw the conclusions.

2 Data

Two databases were used for the modeling pro-
cess. The first (named the DRAE Verb Conjugation
Database (DRAEVC-DB)) is composed of all the
paradigms of the verbs contained in the 22nd edition
of the Dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy
(DRAE, 2001). This database contains 11,060 exist-
ing Spanish verbs and their respective conjugations.
The second database (named the MolinoIdeas Verb
Conjugation Database (MIVC-DB)), created for this
purpose, contains 15,367 verbs. It includes all the
verbs found in the DRAE database plus 4,307 con-
jugated Spanish verbs that are not registered in the
Royal Spanish Academy Dictionary (DRAE, 2001),
which are found in standard and colloquial Spanish
and whose use is frequent on the web.

The MIVC-DB contains completely conjugated
verbs occurring in the Spanish Wikipedia and in

Corpus Number of verbs
DRAE 11,060
MolinoIdeas 15,367

Table 1: Corpora used.

a collection of 3 million journalistic articles from
newspapers in Spanish from America and Spain2.

Verbs which do not occur in the Dictionary of the
Royal Spanish Academy (DRAE, 2001) are consid-
ered neologisms in this study. Thus 4,307 of the
15,367 verbs in the MIVC-DB are neologisms. The
paradigms of the new verbs whose complete con-
jugation was not found in the sources were auto-
matically computed and manually revised in order
to ensure their accuracy. The result of this semi-
automatic process is a database consisting only of
attested Spanish verbs.

3 Creativity in Spanish verbs

The creation of new verbs in Spanish is especially
productive due to the rich possibilities of the diverse
morphological schema that are applied to create ne-
ologisms (Almela, 1999).

New Spanish verbs are derived by two means: ei-
ther (1) morphological processes applied to exist-
ing words or (2) incorporating foreign verbs, such
as digitalizar from to digitalize.

Three morphological mechanisms can be distin-
guished: prefixation, suffixation and parasynthe-
sis. Through prefixation a bound morpheme is at-
tached to a previously existing verb. The most
common prefixes used for new verbs found in our
corpus are the following: a- (abastillar), des- (de-
sagrupar), inter- (interactuar), pre- (prefabricar),
re- (redecorar), sobre- (sobretasar), sub- (subval-
uar) and super- (superdotar). On the other hand,
the most frequent suffixes in Spanish new verbs are
-ar (palar), -ear (panear), -ificar (cronificar) and -
izar (superficializar). Finally, parasynthesis occurs
when the suffixes are added in combination with a
prefix (bound morpheme). Although parasynthesis
is rare in other grammatical classes, it is quite rele-
vant in the creation of new Spanish verbs (Serrano,

2The newspapers with mayor representation in our corpus
are: El Paı́s, ABC, Marca, Público, El Universal, Cları́n, El
Mundo and El Norte de Castilla

2



1999). The most common prefixes are -a or -en in
conjunction with the suffixes -ar, -ear, -ecer and -
izar (acuchillear, enmarronar, enlanguidecer, aban-
dalizar).

In this paper, the term derivational base is used
to denote the immediate constituent to which a mor-
phological process is applied to form a verb. In or-
der to obtain the derivational base, it is necessary
to determine whether the last vowel of the base is
stressed. When the vowel is unstressed, it is re-
moved from the derivational base while a stressed
vowel remains as part of the derivational base. If a
consonant is the final letter of the derivational base
it remains a part of it as well.

4 Classifying and conjugating new verbs

Broadly speaking, the algorithm is implemented by
six transduction modules arranged in a switch struc-
ture. The operation of most of the transducers is
simple, though Module 4 is implemented as a cas-
cade of transduction modules in which inputs may
potentially be further modified by subsequent mod-
ules (5 and 6).

The modules were implemented to determine the
class of each neologism. Depending on the class to
which each verb belongs, a set of rules and patterns
will be applied to create its inflected forms. The
proposed verb taxonomy generated by these trans-
ducers is original and was developed in conjunction
with the method itself. The group of patterns and
rules which affect each verb are detailed in previous
work (Basterrechea and Rello, 2010). The modules
described below are activated when they receive as
input an existing or new infinitive verb form. When
the infinitive form is not changed by one transducer,
it is tested against the next one. If not adjusted by
any transducer, then the new infinitive verb is as-
sumed to have a regular conjugation.

Module 1: The first transducer checks whether
the verb form is an auxiliary verb (haber), a copu-
lative verb (ser or estar), a monosyllabic verb (ir,
dar or ver), a Magnificent verb3, or a prefixed form
whose derivational base matches one of these afore-
mentioned types of verbs. If the form matches one

3There are 14 so-called Magnificent verbs: traer, valer, salir,
tener, venir, poner, hacer, decir, poder, querer, saber, caber, an-
dar and -ducir (Basterrechea and Rello, 2010).

of these cases, the verb is irregular and will undergo
the rules and patterns of its own class. (Basterrechea
and Rello, 2010).

Module 2: If the infinitive or prefixed infinitive
form finishes in -quirir (adquirir) or belongs to the
list: dormir, errar, morir, oler, erguir or desosar, the
form is recognized as an irregular verb and will be
conjugated using the irregularity rules which oper-
ate on the root vowel, which can be either diphthon-
gized or replaced by another vowel (adquiero from
adquirir, duermo and durmió from dormir).

Module 3: The third transducer identifies whether
the infinitive form root ends in a vowel. If the verb
belongs to the second or third conjugation (-er and -
ir endings) (leer, oı́r), it is an irregular verb, while if
the verb belongs to the first conjugation (-ar ending)
then it will only be irregular if its root ends with an
-u or -i (criar, actuar). For the verbs assigned to the
first conjugation, diacritic transduction rules are ap-
plied to their inflected forms (crı́o from criar, actúo
from actuar); in the case of verbs assigned to the
second and third conjugations, the alterations per-
formed on their inflected forms are mainly additions
or subtitutions of letters (leyó de leer, oigo de oı́r).

There are some endings such as (-ier, -uer and
-iir) which are not found in the MIVC-DB. In the
hypothetical case where they are encountered, their
conjugation would have followed the rules detailed
earlier. Rules facilitating the conjugation of poten-
tial but non-existing verbs are included in the algo-
rithm.

Module 4: When an infinitive root form in the
first conjugation ends in -c, -z, -g or -gu (secar,
trazar, delegar) and in the second and third conju-
gation ends in -c, -g, -gu or -qu (conocer, corregir,
seguir), that verb is affected by consonantal ortho-
graphic adjustments (irregularity rules) in order to
preserve its pronunciation (sequé from secar, tracé
from trazar, delegué from delegar, conozco from
conocer, corrijo from corregir, sigo from seguir).

In case the infinitive root form of the second and
third conjugation ends in -ñ or -ll (tañer, engullir),
the vowel i is removed from some endings of the
paradigm following the pattern detailed in (Baster-
rechea and Rello, 2010).

Verbs undergoing transduction by Module 4 can
undergo further modification by Modules 5 and 6.
Any infinitive form which failed to meet the trig-

3



gering conditions set by Modules 1-4 is also tested
against 5 and 6.

Module 5: This module focuses on determining
the vowel of the infinitive form root and the verb’s
derivational base. If the vowel is e or o in the first
conjugation and the verb derivational base includes
diphthongs ie or ue (helar, contar), or if the vowel is
e in the infinitive forms belonging to the second and
third conjugation (servir, herir), then the verb is ir-
regular and it is modified by the irregularity rules
which perform either a substitution of this vowel
(sirvo from servir) or a diphthongization (hielo from
helar, cuento from contar or hiero from herir).

Module 6: Finally, the existence of a diphthong in
the infinitive root is examined (reunir, europeizar).
If the infinitive matches the triggering condition for
this transducer, its paradigm is considered irregu-
lar and the same irregularity rules from module 3
-inserting a written accent in certain inflected forms-
are applied (reúno from reunir, europeı́zo from eu-
ropeizar).

Any verb form that fails to meet the triggering
conditions set by any of these six transducers has
regular conjugation.

It is assumed that these 6 modules cover the full
range of both existing and potential verbs in Span-
ish. The modules’ reliability was tested using the
full paradigms of 15,367 verbs. As noted earlier,
there are some irregularity rules in module 3 which
predict the irregularities of non existing but possible
neologisms in Spanish. Those rules, in conjunction
with the rest of the modules, cover the recognition
and conjugation of the potential new verbs.

5 Evaluation

The transducers have been evaluated over all the
verbs from the DRAEVC-DB and the 4,307 new
verbs from MICV-DB.

In case a new verb appears which is not similar
to the ones contained in our corpus, the transduc-
tion rules in Module 3 for non existing but poten-
tial verbs in Spanish would be activated, although
no examples of that type have been encountered in
the test data used here. As this system is part of the
free online conjugator Onoma, it is constantly being
evaluated on the basis of users’ input.

Every time a new infinitive form absent from

Verb neologism Verb neologism Number of
type class neologisms
regular regular rules 3,154
irregular module 1 rules 27
irregular module 2 rules 9
irregular module 3 rules 39
irregular module 4 rules 945
irregular module 5 rules 87
irregular module 6 rules 46
Total verb
neologisms 4,307

Table 2: New verbs evaluation

MIVC-DB is introduced by the user4, it is automati-
cally added to the database. The system is constantly
updated since it is revised every time a new irregu-
larity is detected by the algorithm. The goal is to
enable future adaptation of the algorithm to newly
encountered phenomena within the language. So far,
non-normative verbs, invented by the users, such as
arreburbujear, insomniar, pizzicatear have also been
conjugated by Onoma.

Of all the new verbs in MIVC-DB, 3,154 were
regular and 1,153 irregular (see Table 2). The ma-
jority of the irregular neologisms were conjugated
by transducer 4.

6 Conclusions

Creativity is a property of human language and the
processing of instances of linguistic creativity repre-
sents one of the most challenging problems in NLP.
Creative processes such as word formation affect
Spanish verbs to a large extent: more than 50% of
the actual verbs identified in the data set used to
build MIVC-DB do not appear in the largest Span-
ish dictionary. The processing of these neologisms
poses the added difficulty of their rich inflectional
morphology which can be also irregular. Therefore,
the automatic and accurate recognition and gener-
ation of new verbal paradigms is a substantial ad-
vance in neologism processing in Spanish.

In future work we plan to create other algorithms
to treat the rest of the open-class grammatical cate-
gories and to identify and generate inflections of new

4Forms occurring due to typographical errors are not in-
cluded.

4



words not prescribed by dictionaries.

Acknowledgments

We would like to express or gratitude to the Molino
de Ideas s.a. engineering team who have success-
fully implemented the method, specially to Daniel
Ayuso de Santos and Alejandro de Pablos López.

References
Ramón Almela Pérez. 1999. Procedimientos de for-

mación de palabras en español. Ariel, Barcelona,
España.

Eduardo Basterrechea and Luz Rello. 2010. El verbo en
español. Construye tu propio verbo. Molino de Ideas,
Madrid, España.

Eva Esteve Ferrer. 2004. Towards a semantic classifi-
cation of Spanish verbs based on subcategorisation in-
formation. Proceedings of the ACL 2004 workshop on
Student research, 13.

Pedro Gomis Blanco and Laura Segura. 1998. Va-
demécum del verbo español. SGEL. Sociedad General
Española de Librerı́a, Madrid, España.

Mirella Lapata and Chris Brew. 2004. Verb class dis-
ambiguation using informative priors. Computational
Linguistics, 30(1): 45–73.

Francis Mateo. 2008. Bescherelle. Les verbes espagnols.
Hatier, Paris, France.

Jorge Puebla Ortega. 1995. Cómo conjugar todos los
verbos del español. Playor, Madrid, España.

Real Academia Española. 2001. Diccionario de la
lengua española, 22 edición. Espasa, Madrid, España.

David Serrano Dolader. 1999. La derivación verbal y
la parası́ntesis. Gramática descriptiva de la lengua
española, I. Bosque, V. Demonte, (eds.), (3): 4683-
4756. Real Academia Española / Espasa, Madrid,
España.

Evelyne Tzoukermann and Mark Y. Liberman. 1990.
A Finite-State Morphological Processor for Spanish.
Proceedings of the 13th conference on Computational
linguistics, (1): 277-282.

Octavio Santana Suárez, José Rafael Pérez Aguiar, Zenón
José Hernández Figueroa, Francisco Javier Carreras
Riudavets, Gustavo Rodrı́guez Rodrı́guez. 1997.
FLAVER: Flexionador y lematizador automático de
formas verbales. lingüı́stica española actual XIX, (2):
229-282. Arco Libros, Madrid, España.

Octavio Santana Suárez, Francisco Javier Carreras Riu-
davets, Zenón José Hernández Figueroa, José Rafael
Pérez Aguiar and Gustavo Rodrı́guez Rodrı́guez.
2002. Manual de la conjugacin del español. 12 790
verbos conjugados. Arco Libros, Madrid, España.

5


