










































A unified account of the semantics of discourse particles


Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 132–138,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

A unified account of the semantics of discourse particles

Markus Egg
Humboldt-Universität Berlin

markus.egg@anglistik.hu-berlin.de

Abstract

The paper investigates discourse particles
on the example of German doch, assigning
to them very specific semantic interpreta-
tions that still cover a wide range of their
uses.

The analysis highlights the role of dis-
course particles in managing the common
ground and crucially takes into account
that discourse particles can refer not only
to utterances they are a part of and to previ-
ously uttered utterances, but also to felicity
conditions of these utterances.

1 Introduction

This paper advocates very specific semantic in-
terpretations for discourse particles, concentrating
on German doch. There is a very wide range of
concrete usages of discourse particles in context
(which has motivated analysing them as polyse-
mous, e.g., in Helbig (1988)).

Assigning them a uniform semantic interpreta-
tion seems to be subject to two conflicting require-
ments:

• the interpretation must be sufficiently specific
to allow deriving the interpretation of con-
crete uses

• it must be sufficiently general to cover a wide
range of concrete uses

So far, research on the interpretation of doch
focusses on the second requirement (e.g., Thur-
mair (1989), König (1997), Karagjosova (2004),
or König and Requardt (1997)).

The meaning of doch emerges as a two-place
relation between the utterance doch is a part of and
a previous utterance to which the doch-utterance is
a reaction.

This relation is described by the features
KNOWN and CORRECTION in Thurmair (1989),
i.e., doch-utterances correct a previous utterance
by introducing old information. Karagjosova
(2004) regards doch-utterances act as reminders,
which present old information to hearers. Ac-
cording to König and Requardt (1997), doch-
utterances point out inconsistencies between old
information and a new piece of information or ac-
tion.

Such general descriptions of doch apply to cases
like Karagjosova’s (1): B reminds A of Peter’s
illness, which seems inconsistent with A’s an-
nouncement and therefore can act as a correction
of A:

(1) A: Peter wird auch mitkommen. B: Er ist
doch krank.
‘A: Peter will come along, too. B: But he is
ill.’

While these general descriptions (excepting
Karagjosova (2004)) do not spell out in detail the
way in which doch contributes to the meaning of
larger discourses, they can capture a wide range of
uses of these particles.

There remain a number of problematic cases,
including discourse-initial uses of doch-utterances
like König and Requardt’s (2), which functions as
an opening line in a conversation, it neither cor-
rects nor reminds the hearer, nor is there an incon-
sistency between the utterance and the context:

(2) Sie sind doch Paul Meier.
‘You must be Paul Meier.’

The proposed analysis of the particle doch is
sufficiently general to account for a wide range of
uses yet being specific enough to specify the se-
mantic construction for discourses that comprise
doch.

I follow much previous work in developing my
analysis on the basis of simple examples like (1),

132



and then extending it to cases like (2). Most ex-
amples consist of two utterances, the second utter-
ance comprises a discourse particle and is a reac-
tion to the first one. In the remainder of this pa-
per, these two utterances are called ‘involved ut-
terances’.

In (1), the (propositional) semantic arguments
of the particle are the meanings of these two utter-
ances. But the semantic arguments of a discourse
particle may differ from the meanings of the in-
volved utterances, as illustrated by (3) (from Thur-
mair 1989):

(3) A: Seit wann hast du denn den
,,Zauberberg“? B: Den hast du mir doch vor
zwei Jahren geschenkt.
A: ‘Since when have you owned the
‘Zauberberg’? B: But you gave it to me two
years ago.’

B reacts to the implicit statement that A does not
know the answer to his question. This statement is
an argument of doch in (3), even though it is not
the meaning of A’s utterance. This shows that the
semantic arguments of discourse particles must be
distinguished from the meanings of their involved
utterances.

Utterances with a discourse particle and pre-
ceding utterances to which they react are called
‘p(article)-utterances’ (or ‘doch-utterances’) and
‘a(ntecedent)-utterances’. They are distinguished
from the semantic arguments of the particle,
which are referred to as ‘p-proposition’ and ‘a-
proposition’, respectively.

This is not just a question of nomenclature but
reflects a fundamentally different view on the role
of discourse particles. Instead of indicating the re-
lation between two already identified propositions,
the meaning of the particle applied to its first ar-
gument (very often but not always the interpreta-
tion of the p-utterance) determines the range of po-
tential a-propositions in the context of utterance.
From this range, the hearer selects the appropriate
proposition.

This resembles the intuition of König and
Requardt (1997) that discourse particles are
‘metapragmatic instructions’ which tell hearers
how to deal with the p-utterance in a communica-
tive situation.

Consequently, a- and p-utterances do not deter-
mine the semantic arguments for all uses of dis-
course particles, which might account for some

problems of defining the semantics of the particles
in the literature, which is characteristically based
on the meanings of a- and p-utterance.

My claim is that there is a link between a- and p-
proposition and a- and p-utterance, respectively, in
that the propositions can either be the meanings of
the utterances or emerge through the felicity con-
ditions of the utterances.

E.g., in (3) the doch-proposition reminds A of
the fact that the first preparatory condition for a
question (that the speaker does not know the an-
swer) does not hold, since A (as the one who gave
the book to B) should know since when the book
has been in B’s possession.

The plan of the paper is to introduce back-
ground assumptions on discourse particles in sec-
tion 2, to apply the proposed approach to the (un-
stressed) particle doch in section 3, and to con-
clude with an outlook on further research.

2 Formal background

This paper follows much previous work in assum-
ing that discourse particles refer to the common
ground (CG), e.g., König (1997), Karagjosova
(2004), or Zimmermann (2009).

Common ground and the interlocutors’ individ-
ual backgrounds are modelled as common or in-
dividual belief (Stalnaker, 2002). Individual be-
lief is equated with the set of propositions that are
true in all possible worlds compatible with the in-
dividual’s beliefs; common belief, with the set of
propositions believed by all members of the re-
spective group of believers.

Stalnaker notes that this is an idealisation in that
the CG might comprise propositions not shared by
the background of every member of the group. But
this idealisation is not a problem for the analysis
presented in this paper.

Reasoning on CG and individual backgrounds
often uses defeasible deduction (Asher and Las-
carides, 2003). I.e., from statements of the form
‘p defeasibly entails q’ (p > q) together with p
one can defeasibly deduce q.

This defeasible Modus Ponens applies if ¬q
does not hold and ¬q cannot be deduced simulta-
neously (Asher and Lascarides, 2003). Defeasible
deducability of p from a set of propositions C is
written as ‘C |∼ p’.

Reference to the common ground makes the se-
mantics of discourse particles context-dependent,
because the CG is relative to the interlocutor(s) of

133



a- and p-utterances. This shows up in the shifting
effects observed in Döring (2010). Consider e.g.
what happens if one embeds (1) in a quotation like
in (4):

(4) A sagte, Peter komme auch mit. B
entgegnete, er sei doch krank.
‘A said Peter would come along, too. B
retorted that he was ill.’

The shift in (4) arises because doch presents a
proposition (here, that Peter is ill) as part of the
common ground, and the relevant CG is calcu-
lated with respect to A and B, not with respect to
the interlocutors of (4). I.e., (4) does not express
that Peter’s illness is in the common ground of the
speaker and hearer of (4).

3 The analysis

The proposed approach to discourse particle is
now applied to doch, which introduces a notion
of tension between the a- and the p-proposition.

3.1 Declarative a- and p-utterances
I will first illustrate this notion with simple ex-
amples in which the a-utterance expresses the a-
proposition, and the meaning of the declarative p-
utterance provides the p-proposition.

In (5) [= (1)] and (6), adapted from Karagjosova
(2004), there is tension between being ill on the
one hand and going out and living healthily on the
other hand, respectively:

(5) A: Peter wird auch mitkommen. B: Er ist
doch krank.
‘A: Peter will come along, too. B: But he is
ill.’

(6) Ich bin oft krank. Dabei lebe ich doch
gesund.
‘I am often ill. But I have a healthy lifestyle.’

The intuitive notion of tension between two
propositions p and q is formalised as defeasible
entailment q > ¬p. I.e., given q, one would ex-
pect p, but the propositions are not incompatible,
even though q is a potential impediment for p.

The effect of doch q as a reaction to an a-
proposition p against the common ground C is to
remind the hearer that C comprises a potential im-
pediment q for p, which expresses either surprise
at the fact that p nevertheless holds or puts doubt
on p. Still, p is not explicitly denied.

Formally, doch states that the common ground
C defeasibly entails q and the fact that q defeasi-
bly entails ¬p (which by defeasible Modus Ponens
would allow one to infer ¬p, if the conditions for
defeasible Modus Ponens are met):

(7) [[doch]](q)(p) iff C |∼ q ∧ C |∼ q > ¬p

This analysis differs from the one of König
(1997), who assumes that doch q points out a con-
tradiction in the CG, in that p is incompatible with
a consequence of q. In contrast, I regard this
incompatibility as a default only. The status of
q as derivable from the CG is also expressed in
Karagjosova (2004) claim that doch introduces q
as a reminder and in Thurmair’s (1989) feature
KNOWN.

In (5) and (6), p and q are the semantics of the a-
and the doch-utterance. Being ill is a potential im-
pediment for going out, so, by pointing out Peter’s
illness in (5), B expresses surprise or disbelief at
A’s announcement but does not necessarily correct
it or refute it, because even ill people can go out in
principle.

Similarly, the speaker of (6) is surprised at his
frequent illness, in spite of his healthy lifestyle.
(6) shows that q is only a default impediment: If q
and p were contradictory, (6) would be nonsensi-
cal, but, intuitively, it is not.

The use of defeasible implications to model the
tension between two propositions as indicated by
doch is closely related to accounts of the discourse
relation of CONCESSION in Grote et al. (1997),
Oversteegen (1997), Lagerwerf (1998), and Knott
(1996).

They assume the same kind of defeasible impli-
cation for this discourse relation and model it as a
presupposition, which is compatible with giving it
common ground status.

3.2 Non-declarative a-utterances
In (5) and (6), the a-proposition enters the CG
as the meaning of an a-utterance. But the a-
proposition can also emerge as a felicity condition
of the a-utterance. Consider e.g. doch-utterances
as reactions to questions, as in (8) [= (3)]:

(8) A: Seit wann hast du denn den
,,Zauberberg“? B: Den hast du mir doch vor
zwei Jahren geschenkt.
A: ‘Since when have you owned the
‘Zauberberg’? B: But you gave it to me two
years ago.’

134



Doch in (8) expresses surprise at the question
being asked, since A himself gave the book to B
and hence should know that B owns it.

The proposed analysis reconstructs this intu-
ition: B’s utterance expresses a proposition q (that
A gave the book to B) and points out that q is part
of the CG. It is also part of the CG that q is a po-
tential obstacle for a specific a-proposition p (for-
mally, the CG entails q > ¬p).

Such p-utterances restrict the range of poten-
tial a-propositions p, and their hearers try to iden-
tify the a-propositions in the given context. The
a-utterance in (8), however, cannot directly con-
tribute p in any context, since its meaning is not a
proposition.

But due to the assumption that A is coopera-
tive, the question introduces into the CG the felic-
ity conditions for questions, among them the first
preparatory condition, viz., that A does not know
the answer to his question. This is a suitable p, be-
cause it is reasonable to assume that if A gave the
book to B (= q), he should know the answer to the
question (= ¬p).

The intuition that the semantic arguments of
discourse particles need not be identical to the
meanings of the involved utterances is related to
suggestions to let discourse relations relate ei-
ther to the content of the discourse segments that
they link or to the corresponding intensions of
the speaker or the intended effencts on the hearer,
which is suggested by Sweetser (1990) and Knott
(2001).

Doch-utterances in reaction to imperatives work
analogously, e.g., (9):

(9) A: Übersetze mir bitte diesen Brief. B: Ich
kann doch kein Baskisch.
A: ‘Please translate this letter for me.’ B:
‘But I do not know Basque’.

Here B’s lack of proficiency in Basque (= q)
and A’s belief that B can translate a Basque letter
(i.e., the first preparatory condition of the request,
our p) are in tension.

Now q can be deduced from the common
ground either because it has been explicitly in-
troduced before or because it makes sense to as-
sume defeasibly that someone does not speak a
less known language like Basque. In either case, A
should not take for granted that B speaks Basque,
i.e., has a reason not to require B to translate letters
written in Basque.

This use of doch also shows up in reactions
to declarative statements: The p-utterance of (10)
states no potential impediment for the proposition
expressed by A.

Rather, B’s use of doch refers to A’s surprise,
suggesting that A should not be surprised at all.
The felicity condition of expressing surprise that
is cast into doubt by B is considering the fact
about which one is surprised as something extraor-
dinary, which would not have happened in a nor-
mal course of events.

(10) A: Peter sieht schlecht aus. B: Er war doch
lange im Krankenhaus.
‘A: Peter does not look healthy. B: But he
has been in hospital for a long time.’

Peter’s long stay in the hospital (= q) is no
potential obstacle to looking unhealthy, on the
contrary, it entails defeasibly that his looking un-
healthy is quite normal (= ¬p). This would negate
the abovementioned felicity condition for A’s sur-
prise (= p), hence suggests that A should not be
surprised.

3.3 Non-declarative p-utterances
Another group of doch-utterances are imperative
or interrogative (the latter adapted from Thurmair
(1989)):

(11) Verklag mich doch!
‘Go ahead and sue me.’

(12) Komm doch nach Hause!
‘Do come home.’

(13) Wie heißt doch diese Kneipe in der
Sredzkistraße?
‘What is the name of this pub in the
Sredzkistraße?’

(14) Wie sagt Goethe doch so treffend?
‘What was this piercing remark of Goethe
again?’

(15) Du kommst doch?
‘I presume that you will be there.’

Doch is used provocatively in imperatives like
(11); it suggests that the hearer cannot fulfil the
request. In cases like (12), doch signals that the re-
quested or suggested action is a very natural thing
to do. Doch-questions refer to a piece of knowl-
edge that the speaker knows or is supposed to

135



know (Thurmair, 1989), e.g., (13) indicates that
the speaker knows the answer at least in principle,
(14) announces a quotation, and (15) suggests that
the answer can only be affirmative.

There are two issues in interpreting these sen-
tences; the p-utterance does not denote a propo-
sition (which could be the semantic argument of
doch), and there need not be an a-utterance at all
from which to derive the a-proposition.

But in all these utterances, speakers use doch to
point out that they are aware of evidence from the
CG which suggests that a felicity condition of the
utterance itself does not hold. This can be mod-
elled by identifying the p-proposition q (the argu-
ment of doch) with the fact that the sentences were
uttered, which can be (trivially) deduced from the
common ground C (the condition C |∼ q in (7)).

Then the felicity conditions associated with dif-
ferent kinds of illocutionary acts emerge from the
common ground C as default entailments from the
utterance of the respective illocutionary type (the
condition C |∼ q > ¬p in (7); here ¬p refers to
one of the felicity conditions).

I.e., using doch in these cases triggers a search
for a suitable a-proposition p in the CG which
negates a felicity condition of the utterance. E.g.,
doch in (11) shows that the first preparatory con-
dition of a request (the speaker believes that the
hearer can do it) does not hold, even though this
condition follows defeasibly from the fact that the
request was made.

In (12), doch addresses the second preparatory
condition of a request or advice (that it is not obvi-
ous to speaker and hearer that the hearer complies
with the request in a normal course of events).
Thus, doch suggests that it is obvious that the
hearer will do anyway what is requested or ad-
vised, even though uttering (12) defeasibly entails
the contrary. Consequently, (12) presents a request
or advice as a very natural thing to do.

I.e., doch-imperatives do not correct unwanted
behaviour by the hearer (pace Thurmair (1989)),
which is confirmed by examples like (16), which
can be uttered between future lovers during their
courtship to take the process of courting one step
further:

(16) Komm doch mal vorbei!
‘Just drop by.’

(16) does not request the hearer to change his
behaviour, because calling on the speaker was not

an option yet. Instead, visiting the speaker is pre-
sented as a very natural thing to do for the hearer,
i.e., once more the second preparatory condition
of a request does not hold.

Using doch in questions also indicates that a
felicity condition of the utterance does not hold,
even though its validity could be deduced defeasi-
bly from the fact that the question has been asked.
The relevant condition is the first preparatory con-
dition for questions (that the speaker does not
know the answer already).

Doch signals that this condition is not fulfilled,
either because the answer escapes the speaker only
momentarily, as in (13), because he obviously
knows, as in the conventionalised announcement
(14), or because he would not accept a refusal,
which settles the question, like in (15).

The analysis predicts that doch is not acceptable
in ordinary questions, which is borne out e.g. by
(17), because in these questions there is no ten-
sion between uttering the question and potential
obstacles for its felicity conditions:

(17) *Wer schreibt dir doch?
‘But who is corresponding with you?’

Rhetorical questions are also incompatible with
doch, but for a different reason. Consider e.g.
the contrasting dialogue pairs (18a)/(18b) and
(18a)/(18c):

(18) (a) A: Ich werde meinen 30. Geburtstag
mit einem großen Fest feiern.
A: ‘I’ll throw a big party on the
occasion of my 30th birthday.’

(b) B: Es würde doch keiner zu deinem Fest
kommen.
B: ‘But no one would come to your
party.’

(c) B: *Wer würde doch zu deinem Fest
kommen?
B: ‘But who would come to your
party?’

The inacceptability of (18a)/(18c) - and of the
rhetorical doch-question in particular - is not due
to the function of the rhetorical question as a
negated statement: In this case, (18b) should be
an inacceptable response to (18a), too.

(18c) is inacceptable because rhetorical ques-
tions characterise statements as CG information
(Egg, 2007). This is also one of the effects of
doch; consequently, (18c) is as informative as

136



(18b) but more complex, hence, its use would
not comply to conversation maxims (Grice, 1975;
Krifka, 1989).

To sum up, non-declarative doch-utterances re-
fer to their own felicity conditions; since they do
not denote propositions, the first semantic argu-
ment of doch cannot be the meaning of the doch-
utterance.

Instead, doch applies to the fact that the speaker
uttered the sentence. In contrast, declarative doch-
utterances like in (8) or (9) refer to a felicity con-
dition of the non-declarative a-utterance.

This analysis of non-declarative doch-
utterances also applies to the hitherto extremely
problematic group of discourse-initial doch-
utterances:

(19) Morgen fahre ich doch nach Wien.
‘Well, I’ll go to Vienna tomorrow.’

(20) Du hast doch ein Auto.
‘Well, you have a car.’

These examples are characterised by doch as a
reminder. This means that the p-utterance (the
speaker’s travel plans or the fact that the hearer has
a car) contributes information semantically that is
already in the CG. However, this information is
not obviously in tension to any other information.
This raises the question of what the semantic ar-
guments of doch are in these cases.

Here doch addresses the first preparatory condi-
tion for statements, viz., that it is not obvious to
the speaker that the hearer already knows what the
speaker will say. Uttering the statement (= q) de-
feasibly implies this condition (= ¬p), but accord-
ing to the CG the speaker knows that the hearer
knows (= p).

(21) [= (2)] instantiates this case, too:

(21) Sie sind doch Paul Meier.
‘You must be Paul Meier.’

Telling someone his name obviously violates
the first preparatory condition for statements,
whence the use of doch.

Another such case is the use of doch in expres-
sions of outrage. Here doch signals that it is com-
mon knowledge that the hearer knows that the sit-
uation or action to which the speaker refers is out-
rageous:

(22) Das ist doch die Höhe!
‘That is the limit!’

Finally, the sincerity condition of a statement
can also be targeted by doch:

(23) Da sagt er doch im letzten Moment ab!
‘I can’t believe that he cancelled the
appointment at the last moment.’

In (23), doch expresses disbelief of the speaker,
he cannot believe what he is saying. This violates
the sincerity condition for statements. The effect
of doch here is one of expressing surprise.

The same effect shows up in exclamative wh-
sentences:

(24) Wie schön Amélie doch ist!
‘How beautiful Amélie is!’

Following analyses of these sentences like
Zanuttini and Portner (2003) or Rett (2009), (24)
characterises the degree of Amélie’s beauty as un-
expectedly or surprisingly high. Hence, doch nat-
urally occurs in these exclamatives to deny a belief
of the speaker in what he is stating.

In sum, I offered a uniform semantic analysis
of doch, which still covers a wide range of its us-
ages. Doch relates two propositions p and q iff q is
derivable from the common ground as well as the
fact that q defeasibly implies ¬p, i.e., q presents a
potential impediment for p.

The correlation of p and q with utterances is
flexible, however: Often q is the meaning of
the doch-utterance, but for non-declarative and
discourse-initial declarative doch-utterances, q is
the fact that this utterance has been made.

The proposition p can be the meaning of a pre-
ceding a-utterance to which the doch-utterance is
a reaction. But especially for non-declarative a-
utterances, p can also be one of its felicity con-
ditions, or, for discourse-initial doch-utterances, a
felicity condition of the utterance itself.

4 Conclusion and outlook

The paper outlined a research programme for dis-
course particles that captures their meanings in
very specific semantic descriptions that neverthe-
less account for the wide range of their uses. These
two competing goals can be pursued simultane-
ously because doch-utterances can be integrated
flexibly into the meaning of the surrounding dis-
course.

While discourse particles like doch uniformly
relate two propositions semantically, the meaning
of the utterance of which the particle is a part, and

137



the meaning of the utterance to which this first ut-
terance reacts are not the only feasible semantic
arguments of the particles: They can also have fe-
licity conditions of these two utterances as seman-
tic arguments.

This research programme was illustrated by in-
vestigating the particle doch. The next steps now
are to extend the coverage of this analysis to other
particles, in particular, schon, and to contrast ‘min-
imal pairs’ of discourses which differ only by dis-
course particles (e.g., Komm schon! as opposed
to Komm doch!, which both require the hearer to
come).

This analysis can also be used for investigations
of stressed and unstressed forms of discourse par-
ticles and of the relation between them. Here it is
particularly interesting to take prosody seriously
and to look into the semantic effects of emphasis-
ing a discourse particle.

References
Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics

of conversation. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge.

Sophia Döring. 2010. On context shift in German dis-
course particles. BA thesis, Humboldt-Universität
Berlin.

Markus Egg. 2007. Meaning and use of rhetorical
questions. In Maria Aloni, Paul Dekker, and Floris
Roelofsen, editors, Proceedings of the 16th Amster-
dam Colloquium, pages 73–78. Universiteit van Am-
sterdam, ILLC.

Paul Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In Peter
Cole and Jerry Morgan, editors, Syntax and seman-
tics 3: Speech acts, pages 41–58. Academic Press,
New York.

Brigitte Grote, Nils Lenke, and Manfred Stede. 1997.
Ma(r)king concessions in English and German. Dis-
course Processes, 24:87–118.

Gerhard Helbig. 1988. Lexikon deutscher Partikeln.
Verlag Enzyklopädie, Leipzig.

Elena Karagjosova. 2004. The meaning and function
of German modal particles. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sität des Saarlandes.

Alistair Knott. 1996. A Data-Driven Methodology for
Motivating a Set of Coherence Relations. Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Edinburgh.

Alistair Knott. 2001. Semantic and pragmatic relations
and their intended effects. In T. Sanders, J. Schilper-
oord, and W. Spooren, editors, Text representation:
linguistic and psycholinguistic aspects, pages 127–
151. Benjamins, Amsterdam.

Ekkehard König and Susanne Requardt. 1997. A
relevance-theoretic approach to the analysis of
modal particles. Multilingua, 10:63–77.

Ekkehard König. 1997. Zur Bedeutung von Modal-
partikeln im Deutschen: Ein Neuansatz im Rah-
men der Relevanztheorie. Germanistische Linguis-
tik, 136:57–75.

Manfred Krifka. 1989. Nominalreferenz und Zeitkon-
stitution. Fink, München.

Luuk Lagerwerf. 1998. Causal connectives have
presuppositions. Effects on coherence and discourse
structure. Ph.D. thesis, Universiteit van Tilburg.

Leonoor Oversteegen. 1997. On the pragmatic nature
of causal and contrastive connectives. Discourse
Processes, 24:51–85.

Jessica Rett. 2009. A degree account of exclamatives.
In Proceedings of SALT XVIII, pages 601–608. CLC
Publications.

Robert Stalnaker. 2002. Common ground. Linguistics
& Philosophy, 25:701–721.

Eve Sweetser. 1990. From etymology to pragmat-
ics. Metaphorical and cultural aspects of semantic
structure. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Maria Thurmair. 1989. Modalpartikeln und ihre Kom-
binationen. Niemeyer, Tübingen.

Raffaela Zanuttini and Paul Portner. 2003. Exclama-
tive clauses: At the syntax-semantics interface. Lan-
guage, 79:39–81.

Malte Zimmermann. 2009. Discourse particles.
In Claudia Maienborn, Klaus von Heusinger, and
Paul Portner, editors, Semantics: an international
handbook of natural language meaning. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin. In press.

138


