










































Mining and Classification of Neologisms in Persian Blogs


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 6–13,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mining and Classification of Neologisms in Persian Blogs 

 

 
Karine Megerdoomian Ali Hadjarian 
The MITRE Corporation The MITRE Corporation 

7515 Colshire Drive 7515 Colshire Drive 

McLean, VA 22102, USA McLean, VA 22102, USA 

karine@mitre.org ahadjarian@mitre.org 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Abstract 

The exponential growth of the Persian blo-

gosphere and the increased number of neolog-

isms create a major challenge in NLP 

applications of Persian blogs. This paper de-

scribes a method for extracting and classifying 

newly constructed words and borrowings from 

Persian blog posts. The analysis of the occur-

rence of neologisms across five distinct topic 
categories points to a correspondence between 

the topic domain and the type of neologism 

that is most commonly encountered. The re-

sults suggest that different approaches should 

be implemented for the automatic detection 

and processing of neologisms depending on 

the domain of application.  

1 Introduction* 

Since its beginnings in 2001, the Persian blogos-

phere has undergone a dramatic growth making 

Persian one of the top ten languages of the global 

blog community in 2007 [Sifry 2007].  

One of the main challenges in the automatic 

analysis and processing of Persian language blogs 

is the accelerated emergence of neologisms in on-

line discourse. These newly created words that 

cannot be found in traditional lexicons primarily 

consist of adopted English loanwords, such as داًلىد 

dânlod ‘download’ or  آًالیي ânlâyn ‘online’, and 

innovative constructions based on Persian word-

                                                           
* This research is part of a larger project on the study of Per-

sian language blogs supported by a Mission-Oriented Investi-

gation and Experimentation (MOIE) program at MITRE. 

formation principles, as in  فیلترشکي filtershekan ‘an-

ti-filter software’ or  چتیدى chatidan ‘to chat’. 

In this paper, we investigate the distinct classes 

of neologisms encountered in Persian language 

blogs. Since the main goal of the project is to build 

a topic classification system for blogs, we focused 

on extracting neologisms that would have the most 

discriminatory power in distinguishing between the 

various classes.  

For the purposes of this study, we collected a 

corpus of Persian language blogs from five differ-

ent topic categories of sports, medicine, politics, 

Internet, and cinema. The neologisms are automat-

ically extracted by running the documents through 

a morphological analyzer. Since these new word 

coinages are not recognized by the analyzer, they 

are tagged as unknowns. A weight-ordered list of 

unknown words is then generated for each topic 

category, using information gain as the measure, as 

described in Section 2.3. The more significant neo-

logisms for each category are then manually identi-

fied from the generated weight-ordered lists, 

focusing on the top 200 words, and classified 

based on their linguistic characteristics. The results 

indicate that the type of neologism found in the 

blog posts in fact corresponds to the topic domain. 

Hence, for example, while English loans are highly 

prominent in technical and Internet related posts, 

new morphological constructions are more com-

mon in the domain of politics. Building on these 

results, we argue that distinct approaches are re-

quired for processing the adopted loan words and 

the morphologically constructed neologisms. 
 

 

6



2 Extraction Process 

2.1 Blog Data 

The blog data for this study comes from Blogfa
1
, a 

popular Persian blog hosting site. The topic index 

provided by Blogfa itself has allowed us to rapidly 

collect large amounts of blog data coming from 

topic categories of interest, by eliminating the need 

to manually label the data.  Table 1 provides a list 

of the five topic categories used in this study, as 

well as the total number and the median size of the 

collected blogs for each. The table also includes 

the average number of words in each topic catego-

ry. The blogs were collected in February 2010, 

starting with the most recent blog posted in each 

topic and moving back chronologically.  

 

topic category 
# of  

blogs 

median  

size 

average 

 # of words 

Internet 497 14 kb 986 

Cinema and theatre 

(sinama va ta’atr) 
255 18 kb 1380 

Political 

(siyasat-e-rooz) 
500 22 kb 2171 

Medical 

(pezeshki) 
499 27 kb 2285 

Sports  

(varzesh) 
498 19 kb 1528 

Table 1 – Topic categories of interest and the total  

number, median size, and average length of the  

collected blogs for each topic 

2.2 Linguistic Parsing 

The collected documents are run through a Persian 

morphological parser that analyzes all word forms 

including compounds and provides a part of speech 

tag for the valid analyses [Amtrup 2003]. The 

morphological analyzer was developed for use in a 

Persian-English machine translation system and 

provides part of speech as well as all syntactically 

relevant inflectional features for a word [cf. Me-

gerdoomian 2000]. The morphological formalism 

consists of a declarative description of rules utiliz-

ing typed feature structures with unification. The 

morphological analysis component takes advantage 

of a lexicon of about 40,000 entries in citation 

form that had been developed in the period of 

1999-2002 for coverage of online news articles and 

includes nouns, adjectives, verbs, adverbs and 

                                                           
1 www.blogfa.com 

closed class items. In addition, there are about 

5,000 common proper noun entities listed in the 

lexicon. After morphological analysis, dictionary 

lookup eliminates all erroneous analyses.  Any 

element that is not successfully associated with a 

word in the lexicon is tagged as an unknown.  

The current morphological analyzer has a cover-

age of 97% and an accuracy of 93% on a 7MB 

corpus collected from online news sources. The 

system fails to analyze conversational forms. Other 

unanalyzed tokens are mainly proper nouns and 

words missing in the lexicon.   

2.3 Information Gain 

To automatically detect the most pertinent un-

known terms per blog category, we employ an in-

formation gain (IG) based feature selection 

approach. IG’s effectiveness as a feature selection 

measure for text topic categorization, the ultimate 

objective of this project, has been well studied 

[Yang and Pedersen 1997]. 

Information gain is a statistical measure for cal-

culating the expected reduction in entropy [Mit-

chell 1997]. Entropy, a common measure in 

information theory, captures the impurity of a col-

lection of examples relative to the intended classi-

fication. For a binary classification task, the 

entropy of a set of examples E is defined as: 

 

  ppppEEntropy 22 loglog)(  

 

where p  is the proportion of positive examples 

and p  is the proportion of negative examples in 

E. Moreover, it is assumed that 0log0 2  is equal 

to zero. The discriminatory power of an attribute 

for a given class can then be measured by IG, 

which is the reduction in entropy caused by the 

partitioning of the data using that attribute. The IG 

for example set E and attribute A is defined as: 

 

)()(),(
)(

v

AValuesv

v
EEntropy

E

E
EEntropyAEIG 



  

where Values(A) represents the set of all possible 

values that attribute A can take on and vE  is the set 

of examples for which attribute A takes on value v. 

In this study, each attribute has a binary value 

which signifies the presence or absence of a given 

unknown term in the document. So for the purpos-

7



es of this study, the above equation can be formu-

lated as: 
 

)()()(),( t
t

t

t
DEntropy

D

D
DEntropy

D

D
DEntropytDIG 

 

where  D is the set of all documents, t  is a given 

term, Dt is the set of documents in which term t 

occurs, and tD   is the set of documents in which 

term t does not occur.  

 

Translit. Weight Translation 

vyndvz 0.100033 Windows 

danlvd 0.080559 download 

fayl 0.058319 file 

karbran 0.051595 users 

Java 0.048287 Java 

klyk 0.048180 click 

yahv 0.044999 Yahoo  

nvkya 0.044807 Nokia 

flG 0.042718 Flash 

mrvrgr 0.041374 browser 

hk 0.041074 hack 

msnJr 0.040853 Messenger 

Ct 0.039987 chat 

psvrd 0.039213 password 

kd 0.035936 code 
Table 2 –The top weighted unknown terms for the In-

ternet topic category and their associated  

information gain 

 

Since the aim of feature selection for this paper 

is that of identifying the most pertinent unknown 

terms for each topic category, an additional con-

straint is imposed on the feature selection process. 

Here, for a term to be selected, it not only needs to 

have a high IG, but it needs to be present in a high-

er proportion of positive examples than the nega-

tive ones. This prevents the selection of terms that 

while are good descriptors of the negative class 

and thus carry a high IG, are not necessarily perti-

nent to the positive class (i.e., the topic category 

under consideration). So IG of a term not meeting 

the above constraint is effectively set to zero.  

As indicated previously, the 200 unknown 

terms with the highest IG for each topic category 

are thus selected for the analysis portion of this 

study. Table 2 depicts a sample set of the top 

weighted terms for the Internet category in transli-

teration and translation. The transliteration schema 

was designed to display the results of the morpho-

logical analyzer system. It directly represents the 

Persian script and provides a bijective, one-to-one 

mapping of the characters. The transliteration 

omits any diacritics, including vowels, that are not 

represented in the original script. 

2.4 Candidate List 

The weight-ordered list of unknown words pro-

vides a candidate list of potential neologisms. 

However, the set of unknown terms extracted from 

each topic category includes proper names, spel-

ling errors, conversational language forms and 

neologisms. We therefore manually study the can-

didate list in order to identify the appropriate 

classes of neologisms. The results are classified 

based on the observed linguistic characteristics and 

a quantitative analysis is performed for each topic 

category. 

3 Neologism Classification 

Persian language blogs include a large number of 

neologisms ranging from new usages in conversa-

tional language to newly coined words to designate 

new technology or political concepts. We per-

formed a qualitative, linguistic investigation of 

Persian language blogs, consisting of posts from 

four main categories of technical, political, arts, 

and personal diary [Megerdoomian 2008]. The 

goal of this study was to identify elements of Per-

sian Blogspeak that indicate language change and 

which fail to be analyzed by the existing Persian 

machine translation and information extraction 

systems that had been developed for online news 

sources. The study pointed to four main categories 

of new word formation found in Persian language 

blogs: 

 

 Borrowings (mainly from English and 
French) 

 Compounding 

 Affixation 

 Conversion: Semantic and functional shift 
 

These neologisms were identified based on the 

prevalent linguistic classification of newly formed 

words (see for instance the classification of neo-

logisms described in [Grzega and Schoener 2007]). 

8



These four classes of neologisms are described in 

more detail in the rest of this section. 

3.1 Borrowings 

A large number of new loan words can be found in 

blogs. Although they may sometimes be inserted 

within the text in the original language, they are 

generally transcribed into Persian script. These 

loans are used as regular words and can take Per-

sian inflectional affixes. Some examples are pro-

vided in Table 3. 

 

Persian Transcription Translation 

 monitor Monitor هىًیتىر

 filteringeshun their filtering فیلتریٌگشىى
 sâythâ sites سایتها

تاىپسىرد  pasvordetân your password 
 vâyerles Wireless وایرلس

الیي تاًن  tâym lâyn Timeline 
 seksuâliteh Sexuality سکسىالیته
 nostâlji Nostalgy ًىستالژی

Table 3 – Loan words in Persian blogs 

 

 An analysis of the occurrence of loans with re-

spect to the various topic domains shows that the 

Internet category contains a large number of Eng-

lish language loans, whereas the more established 

scientific domain of medicine tends to use French 

borrowings. Also within the same category, new 

technological or scientific additions are generally 

expressed in English. For instance, in the cinema 

category, most technical words are of French ori-

gin – e.g., اکراى from écran ‘screen’ or تیتراژ from 

titrage ‘opening credits’. However, new loans have 

entered the field from English, e.g., اًیویشي animey-

shen ‘animation’. 

3.2 Compounding 

Compounding is a productive word-formation 

process in Persian and refers to cases where two or 

more roots are combined to form a new word. Ex-

amples of compounding include راهکار   râhkâr 

(consisting of râh ‘path’ and kâr ‘work’ and now 

being used to mean ‘guideline’ or ‘solution’); 

 ,sarbarg (from sar ‘head’ and barg ‘leaf سربرگ

piece of paper’ signifying ‘letterhead’); and دگرباش 

degarbâsh (formed with degar ‘other’ and bâsh 

‘being’, meaning ‘queer’). In many cases, howev-

er, one of the roots is a borrowing that is combined 

with a Persian root form. Examples of this multi-

lingual compounding construction include تابىسازی 

tâbusâzi (taboo + to make) ‘making taboo’ and 

-linkduni (link + storage) meaning ‘blo لیٌکدوًی

groll’. 

Recently, there has been a concerted effort by 

the Persian Language Academy to replace borrow-

ings from foreign languages by equivalent Persian 

constructions. Thus, the traditional هلیکىپتر helikop-

ter ‘helicopter’ has been replaced by بالگرد bâlgard  

by combining Persian bâl ‘wing’ and gard ‘turn’. 

Similarly, the French loanword سٌاریى senâryo 

‘screenplay’ is now being replaced by فیلوٌاهه 

filmnâmé composed of film and nâmé ‘letter, 

book’. 

Persian has a very productive compounding 

strategy for forming new verbs where a nominal or 

adjectival root is combined with a light verb, i.e., a 

verb that has lost some of its semantic value. Many 

new verbs, especially in the technical domain, are 

formed following this construction as illustrated in 

Table 4. 
 

Persian Transcription Translation 

 kelik kardan to click کلیک کردى

 chat kardan to chat چت کردى
اس  زدى ام اس  es-em-es zadan to send a text 

message 
 kansel shodan to be cancelled کٌسل شدى

Table 4 – Compound verb formation 

3.3 Affixation 

New words are often created following a produc-

tive word-formation pattern using suffixes. For 

instance, the agentive suffix –gar is used to form 

 morurgar ‘browser’ by combining with هرورگر

morur ‘review’, and  گر فتٌه  fetne-gar ‘seditious’ 

when combined with fetne ‘sedition’
2
. Another 

common affix used to form new words is –estân 

which indicates a place. This suffix can be found in 

terms like وبالگستاى veblâgestân (weblog + -stan) 

‘blogosphere’ or لیٌکستاى linkestân (link + -stan) 

‘blogroll’. 

In addition to the compound verb formation, 

bloggers have started creating simple verbs by 

combining the verbal ending –idan with nominal 

                                                           
2 Fetne-gar is a relatively new creation that is used alongside 

the traditional fetne-ju ‘seditious’. There is a clear sense 

among native speakers, however, that fetne-gar refers to a 

person who is more agentive, actively causing discord. 

9



 

 
Figure 1 – Loan neologisms across topic categories 

 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Internet Cinema Medical Political Sport

count
Loan English 
Transliterated

Loan French 
Transliterated

roots as in چتیدى chatidan ‘to chat’ or الگیدى lâgidan 

‘to blog’.  

3.4 Conversion 

Another type of neologism found in Persian lan-

guage blogs consists of existing words that are be-

ing used in a new context, bringing about a 

semantic shift. In certain instances, the part-of-

speech category may also shift. One example is the 

adjective شفاف shafâf ‘transparent’ that is being 

used more and more frequently as an adverb in 

political contexts with the meaning ‘openly, trans-

parently’. 

This category, however, is difficult to detect au-

tomatically with the methodology used since these 

words already exist in traditional lexicons and are 

not tagged as unknowns by the morphological 

parser. Identifying conversions and semantic shifts 

currently requires a manual exploration of the data; 

we leave a study of this class of neologisms for 

future work.  

4 Topic and Neologism Correspondence 

An investigation of the neologisms for each topic 

category clearly suggests that there is a close rela-

tionship between the class of neologisms and the 

topic domain.  

Starting from the weight-ordered candidate list 

for each topic category, we manually examined 

and labeled each unknown word according to the 

neologism classification described in Section 3. In 

order to identify the correct class, each unknown 

word was considered within its context of occur-

rence in the corresponding blog posts and classi-

fied according to the usage within the sentence. In 

addition, proper names, conversational forms of 

existing words, and spelling errors were tagged 

separately.  

10



Figure 1 illustrates the correspondence of the 

number of borrowings per topic category in the 

corresponding candidate list. The results show that 

the most common way of forming new words with-

in blogs dealing with Internet and computer tech-

nology is to use borrowings from English. In the 

medical domain, however, most neologisms are 

scientific terms borrowed mainly from the French 

language. The domain of cinema and theatre also 

includes a large number of loans from French. 

However, most of the French loans across topics 

seem to be older borrowings while the newer loans 

(i.e, within the last three to five years) are almost 

always from the English language. A statistical 

analysis of the results indicate that these corres-

pondences are significant as shown in Figure 2 for 

English loans and in Figure 3 for French loans. 

Figure 2 illustrates a pairwise comparison between 

the Internet category and other blog topics based 

on the average percentage of documents in which a 

given term from the English loan neologism cate-

gory is included. (*) indicates a statistically signif-

icant difference between the two percentages. 

Figure 3 shows a similar result for the pairwise 

comparison between the Medical category and oth-

er topics for the French loan class.  

 
Figure 2 – Pairwise comparison of Internet blogs and other topics for English loans 

 

 
Figure 3 – Pairwise comparison for Medical blogs and other topics for French loans 

 

11



 

Figure 4 shows the relative usage of affixation 

and compounding strategies for the creation of new 

words. Although affixation is used to some degree 

in both the Internet and medical domains, they do 

not occur as often as the English or French loans 

(cf. Figure 1 above). Interestingly, the blogs that 

fall within the political topic category do not make 

much use of borrowings from English and French. 

Instead, they tend to create new words by applying 

productive affixation and compounding strategies. 

In most instances, the words used to form neolog-

isms in the politics category are based on words of 

Arabic and Persian origin. Figure 5 illustrates the 

pairwise comparison between the Political and oth-

er blog topics based on the average percentage of 

documents in which a given term from the affixa-

tion and compounding class of neologisms is in-

cluded. (*) indicates a statistically significant 

difference between the two percentages.  

Hence, while the Internet blogs make heavy use 

of English loans in the creation of new words, po-

litical blogs tend to use affixation and compound 

strategies for word-formation. These results sug-

 

  
Figure 4 – Affixation and compounding strategies for the creation of new words  

across various blog topics 

 

 
Figure 5 – Pairwise comparison for Political blogs and other topics for affixation and compounding  

 

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Internet Cinema Medical Political Sport

count Affixation

Compound

12



gest that, depending on the domain of interest for 

the particular NLP application, distinct methodolo-

gies for the automatic detection and processing of 

neologisms should be implemented.  

5 Conclusion 

This paper presents an investigation of neolog-

isms in Persian blog posts across five distinct topic 

areas. We employ morphological analysis in con-

junction with a profile-based classification tech-

nique to successfully extract a pertinent candidate 

list for identifying new word-level constructions in 

blogs. These neologisms are then classified based 

on their linguistic characteristics and word-

formation strategies and the quantitative analysis 

points to a significant correspondence between 

neologism classes and blog topic domains.  

Based on these results, we propose that the de-

tection and processing strategies should be tailored 

to the domain of the NLP application for greater 

efficiency. In particular, a derivational morpholog-

ical system can be developed by implementing the 

productive affixation and compounding rules used 

in Persian word formation. This system can be 

used to extend the existing analysis and translation 

systems in the domain of politics. Loans from Eng-

lish, on the other hand, can be automatically 

processed by using previously implemented me-

thodologies for transcribing Persian script into the 

English writing system [Megerdoomian 2006, Jo-

hanson 2007]. Such a system would be beneficial 

in recognizing the large number of loans encoun-

tered in the technical and scientific domains. 

This work is part of a larger project for automat-

ic topic classification and sentiment analysis in 

Persian language blogs. We extract the most perti-

nent neologisms encountered in the blog corpus in 

order to enhance the topic classification system. In 

addition, the results obtained will be used to extend 

the current morphological parser to improve cover-

age and identification of newly formed words. 

References  

Amtrup, Jan W. 2003. Morphology in machine transla-

tion systems: Efficient integration of finite state 

transducers and feature structure descriptions. Ma-

chine Translation, 18(3), pp. 217-238. 

Grzega, Joachim and Marion Schoener. 2007. English 

and general historical lexicology: Materials for 

onomasiology seminars. Onomasiology Online Mo-

nographs, Vol. 1. Germany. 

Ittner, D.J., Lewis, D.D., and Ahn, D.D. (1995). Text 

categorization of low quality images. In Symposium 

on Document Analysis and Information Retrieval. 

Las Vegas, NV. 

Johanson, Joshua. 2007. Transcription of names written 

in Farsi into English. In Proceedings of the Computa-

tional Approaches to Arabic Script-based Languages 

(CAASL2). LSA Linguistic Institute, Stanford. 

Kelly, John and Bruce Etling (2008). Mapping Iran’s 

online public: Politics and culture in the Persian blo-

gosphere. Research Publication No. 2008-01, The 

Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard 

Law School. April 6.  

Megerdoomian, Karine. 2008. Analysis of Farsi web-

logs. MITRE Tech Report 080206. August 2008. 

Megerdoomian, Karine. 2006. Transcription of Persian 

proper name entities into English. Technical report, 

Inxight Software, Inc. 

Megerdoomian, Karine. 2000. Unification-based Per-

sian morphology. In Proceedings of CICLing 2000. 

Alexander Gelbukh, ed. Centro de Investigacion en 

Computacion-IPN, Mexico.  

Mitchell, Tom M. 1997. Machine learning. McGraw-

Hill. 

Pacea, Otilia. 2009. New worlds, new words: On lan-

guage change and word formation in Internet English 

and Romanian. In The annals of Ovidius University 

Constanta- Philology, issue 20, pp: 87-102. 

Salton, G. 1991. Developments in automatic text re-

trieval. Science, v.253: 974-980. 

Sebastiani, F. 2002. Machine learning in automated text 

categorization. In ACM Computing Surveys, 34(1): 

1-47 

Sifry, Dave. 2007. The Technorati state of the live web: 

April 2007.  

Yang, Yiming and Jan Pedersen, J.O. 1997. A compara-

tive study on feature selection in text categorization. 

In Proceedings of International Conference on Ma-

chine Learning.  

 

13


