



















































Proceedings of the...


Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 51–59,
Uppsala, July 2010.

What’s Great and What’s Not: Learning to Classify the Scope of Negation
for Improved Sentiment Analysis

Isaac G. Councill
Google, Inc.

76 Ninth Avenue
New York, NY 10011

icouncill@google.com

Ryan McDonald
Google, Inc.

76 Ninth Avenue
New York, NY 10011

ryanmcd@google.com

Leonid Velikovich
Google, Inc.

76 Ninth Avenue
New York, NY 10011

leonidv@google.com

Abstract

Automatic detection of linguistic negation
in free text is a critical need for many text
processing applications, including senti-
ment analysis. This paper presents a nega-
tion detection system based on a condi-
tional random field modeled using fea-
tures from an English dependency parser.
The scope of negation detection is limited
to explicit rather than implied negations
within single sentences. A new negation
corpus is presented that was constructed
for the domain of English product reviews
obtained from the open web, and the pro-
posed negation extraction system is eval-
uated against the reviews corpus as well
as the standard BioScope negation corpus,
achieving 80.0% and 75.5% F1 scores, re-
spectively. The impact of accurate nega-
tion detection on a state-of-the-art senti-
ment analysis system is also reported.

1 Introduction

The automatic detection of the scope of linguistic
negation is a problem encountered in wide variety
of document understanding tasks, including but
not limited to medical data mining, general fact or
relation extraction, question answering, and senti-
ment analysis. This paper describes an approach
to negation scope detection in the context of sen-
timent analysis, particularly with respect to sen-
timent expressed in online reviews. The canoni-
cal need for proper negation detection in sentiment
analysis can be expressed as the fundamental dif-
ference in semantics inherent in the phrases, “this
is great,” versus, “this is not great.” Unfortunately,
expressions of negation are not always so syntac-
tically simple.

Linguistic negation is a complex topic: there
are many forms of negation, ranging from the use

of explicit cues such as “no” or “not” to much
more subtle linguistic patterns. At the highest
structural level, negations may occur in two forms
(Givón, 1993): morphological negations, where
word roots are modified with a negating prefix
(e.g., “dis-”, “non-”, or “un-”) or suffix (e.g., “-
less”), and syntactic negation, where clauses are
negated using explicitly negating words or other
syntactic patterns that imply negative semantics.
For the purposes of negation scope detection, only
syntactic negations are of interest, since the scope
of any morphological negation is restricted to an
individual word. Morphological negations are
very important when constructing lexicons, which
is a separate but related research topic.

Tottie (1991) presents a comprehensive taxon-
omy of clausal English negations, where each
form represents unique challenges for a negation
scope detection system. The top-level negation
categories – denials, rejections, imperatives, ques-
tions, supports, and repetitions – can be described
as follows:

• Denials are the most common form and are
typically unambiguous negations of a partic-
ular clause, such as, “There is no question
that the service at this restaurant is excellent,”
or, “The audio system on this television is not
very good, but the picture is amazing.”

• Rejections often occur in discourse, where
one participant rejects an offer or sugges-
tion of another, e.g., “Can I get you any-
thing else? No.” However, rejections may ap-
pear in expository text where a writer explic-
itly rejects a previous supposition or expec-
tation, for instance, “Given the poor reputa-
tion of the manufacturer, I expected to be dis-
appointed with the device. This was not the
case.”

• Imperatives involve directing an audience

51



away from a particular action, e.g., “Do not
neglect to order their delicious garlic bread.”

• Questions, rhetorical or otherwise, can indi-
cate negations often in the context of surprise
or bewilderment. For example, a reviewer of
a desk phone may write, “Why couldn’t they
include a decent speaker in this phone?”, im-
plying that the phone being reviewed does not
have a decent speaker.

• Supports and Repetitions are used to ex-
press agreement and add emphasis or clar-
ity, respectively, and each involve multiple
expressions of negation. For the purpose of
negation scope detection, each instance of
negation in a support or repetition can be iso-
lated and treated as an independent denial or
imperative.

Tottie also distinguishes between intersenten-
tial and sentential negation. In the case of inter-
sentential negation, the language used in one sen-
tence may explicitly negate a proposition or impli-
cation found in another sentence. Rejections and
supports are common examples of intersentential
negation. Sentential negation, or negations within
the scope of a single sentence, are much more
frequent; thus sentential denials, imperatives, and
questions are the primary focus of the work pre-
sented here.

The goal of the present work is to develop a sys-
tem that is robust to differences in the intended
scope of negation introduced by the syntactic and
lexical features in each negation category. In par-
ticular, as the larger context of this research in-
volves sentiment analysis, it is desirable to con-
struct a negation system that can correctly identify
the presence or absence of negation in spans of text
that are expressions of sentiment. It so follows that
in developing a solution for the specific case of the
negation of sentiment, the proposed system is also
effective at solving the general case of negation
scope identification.

This rest of this paper is organized as follows.
§2 presents related work on the topic of auto-
matic detection of the scope of linguistic nega-
tions. The annotated corpora used to evaluate
the proposed negation scope identification method
are presented in §3, including a new data set de-
veloped for the purpose of identifying negation
scopes in the context of online reviews. §4 de-
scribes the proposed negation scope detection sys-

tem. The novel system is evaluated in §5 in
terms of raw results on the annotated negation cor-
pora as well as the performance improvement on
sentiment classification achieved by incorporating
the negation system in a state-of-the-art sentiment
analysis pipeline. Lessons learned and future di-
rections are discussed in §6.

2 Related work

Negation and its scope in the context of senti-
ment analysis has been studied in the past (Moila-
nen and Pulman, 2007). In this work we focus
on explicit negation mentions, also called func-
tional negation by Choi and Cardie (2008). How-
ever, others have studied various forms of nega-
tion within the domain of sentiment analysis, in-
cluding work on content negators, which typi-
cally are verbs such as “hampered”, “lacked”, “de-
nied”, etc. (Moilanen and Pulman, 2007; Choi
and Cardie, 2008). A recent study by Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2009) looked at the prob-
lem of finding downward-entailing operators that
include a wider range of lexical items, includ-
ing soft negators such as the adverbs “rarely” and
“hardly”.

With the absence of a general purpose corpus
annotating the precise scope of negation in sen-
timent corpora, many studies incorporate nega-
tion terms through heuristics or soft-constraints in
statistical models. In the work of Wilson et al.
(2005), a supervised polarity classifier is trained
with a set of negation features derived from a
list of cue words and a small window around
them in the text. Choi and Cardie (2008) com-
bine different kinds of negators with lexical polar-
ity items through various compositional semantic
models, both heuristic and machine learned, to im-
prove phrasal sentiment analysis. In that work the
scope of negation was either left undefined or de-
termined through surface level syntactic patterns
similar to the syntactic patterns from Moilanen
and Pulman (2007). A recent study by Nakagawa
et al. (2010) developed an semi-supervised model
for sub-sentential sentiment analysis that predicts
polarity based on the interactions between nodes
in dependency graphs, which potentially can in-
duce the scope of negation.

As mentioned earlier, the goal of this work is to
define a system that can identify exactly the scope
of negation in free text, which requires a robust-
ness to the wide variation of negation expression,

52



both syntactic and lexical. Thus, this work is com-
plimentary to those mentioned above in that we
are measuring not only whether negation detec-
tion is useful for sentiment, but to what extent we
can determine its exact scope in the text. Towards
this end in we describe both an annotated nega-
tion span corpus as well as a negation span detec-
tor that is trained on the corpus. The span detec-
tor is based on conditional random fields (CRFs)
(Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira, 2001), which is
a structured prediction learning framework com-
mon in sub-sentential natural language process-
ing tasks, including sentiment analysis (Choi and
Cardie, 2007; McDonald et al., 2007)

The approach presented here resembles work by
Morante and Daelemans (2009), who used IGTree
to predict negation cues and a CRF metalearner
that combined input from k-nearest neighbor clas-
sification, a support vector machine, and another
underlying CRF to predict the scope of nega-
tions within the BioScope corpus. However, our
work represents a simplified approach that re-
places machine-learned cue prediction with a lex-
icon of explicit negation cues, and uses only a sin-
gle CRF to predict negation scopes, with a more
comprehensive model that includes features from
a dependency parser.

3 Data sets

One of the only freely available resources for eval-
uating negation detection performance is the Bio-
Scope corpus (Vincze et al., 2008), which consists
of annotated clinical radiology reports, biological
full papers, and biological abstracts. Annotations
in BioScope consist of labeled negation and spec-
ulation cues along with the boundary of their as-
sociated text scopes. Each cue is associated with
exactly one scope, and the cue itself is considered
to be part of its own scope. Traditionally, negation
detection systems have encountered the most dif-
ficulty in parsing the full papers subcorpus, which
contains nine papers and a total of 2670 sentences,
and so the BioScope full papers were held out as a
benchmark for the methods presented here.

The work described in this paper was part of a
larger research effort to improve the accuracy of
sentiment analysis in online reviews, and it was
determined that the intended domain of applica-
tion would likely contain language patterns that
are significantly distinct from patterns common in
the text of professional biomedical writings. Cor-

rect analysis of reviews generated by web users
requires robustness in the face of ungrammatical
sentences and misspelling, which are both exceed-
ingly rare in BioScope. Therefore, a novel cor-
pus was developed containing the text of entire
reviews, annotated according to spans of negated
text.

A sample of 268 product reviews were obtained
by randomly sampling reviews from Google Prod-
uct Search1 and checking for the presence of nega-
tion. The annotated corpus contains 2111 sen-
tences in total, with 679 sentences determined to
contain negation. Each review was manually an-
notated with the scope of negation by a single per-
son, after achieving inter-annotator agreement of
91% with a second person on a smaller subset of
20 reviews containing negation. Inter-annotator
agreement was calculated using a strict exact span
criteria where both the existence and the left/right
boundaries of a negation span were required to
match. Hereafter the reviews data set will be re-
ferred to as the Product Reviews corpus.

The Product Reviews corpus was annotated ac-
cording to the following instructions:

1. Negation cues: Negation cues (e.g., the
words “never”, “no”, or “not” in it’s various
forms) are not included the negation scope.
For example, in the sentence, “It was not X”
only “X” is annotated as the negation span.

2. General Principles: Annotate the minimal
span of a negation covering only the portion
of the text being negated semantically. When
in doubt, prefer simplicity.

3. Noun phrases: Typically entire noun
phrases are annotated as within the scope
of negation if a noun within the phrase is
negated. For example, in the sentence, “This
was not a review” the string “a review” is an-
notated. This is also true for more complex
noun phrases, e.g., “This was not a review
of a movie that I watched” should be anno-
tated with the span “a review of a movie that
I watched”.

4. Adjectives in noun phrases: Do not anno-
tate an entire noun phrase if an adjective is all
that is being negated - consider the negation
of each term separately. For instance, “Not

1http://www.google.com/products/

53



top-drawer cinema, but still good...”: “top-
drawer” is negated, but “cinema” is not, since
it is still cinema, just not “top-drawer”.

5. Adverbs/Adjective phrases:

(a) Case 1: Adverbial comparatives like
“very,” “really,” “less,” “more”, etc., an-
notate the entire adjective phrase, e.g.,
“It was not very good” should be anno-
tated with the span “very good”.

(b) Case 2: If only the adverb is directly
negated, only annotate the adverb it-
self. E.g., “Not only was it great”, or
“Not quite as great”: in both cases the
subject still “is great”, so just “only”
and “quite” should be annotated, respec-
tively. However, there are cases where
the intended scope of adverbial negation
is greater, e.g., the adverb phrase “just a
small part” in “Tony was on stage for the
entire play. It was not just a small part”.

(c) Case 3: “as good as X”. Try to identify
the intended scope, but typically the en-
tire phrase should be annotated, e.g., “It
was not as good as I remember”. Note
that Case 2 and 3 can be intermixed,
e.g., “Not quite as good as I remem-
ber”, in this case follow 2 and just anno-
tate the adverb “quite”, since it was still
partly “as good as I remember”, just not
entirely.

6. Verb Phrases: If a verb is directly negated,
annotate the entire verb phrase as negated,
e.g., “appear to be red” would be marked in
“It did not appear to be red”.

For the case of verbs (or adverbs), we made no
special instructions on how to handle verbs that
are content negators. For example, for the sen-
tence “I can’t deny it was good”, the entire verb
phrase “deny it was good” would be marked as the
scope of “can’t”. Ideally annotators would also
mark the scope of the verb “deny”, effectively can-
celing the scope of negation entirely over the ad-
jective “good”. As mentioned previously, there are
a wide variety of verbs and adverbs that play such
a role and recent studies have investigated meth-
ods for identifying them (Choi and Cardie, 2008;
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2009). We leave
the identification of the scope of such lexical items

hardly lack lacking lacks
neither nor never no
nobody none nothing nowhere
not n’t aint cant
cannot darent dont doesnt
didnt hadnt hasnt havnt
havent isnt mightnt mustnt
neednt oughtnt shant shouldnt
wasnt wouldnt without

Table 1: Lexicon of explicit negation cues.

and their interaction with explicit negation as fu-
ture work.

The Product Reviews corpus is different from
BioScope in several ways. First, BioScope ignores
direct adverb negation, such that neither the nega-
tion cue nor the negation scope in the the phrase,
“not only,” is annotated in BioScope. Second,
BioScope annotations always include entire adjec-
tive phrases as negated, where our method distin-
guishes between the negation of adjectives and ad-
jective targets. Third, BioScope includes nega-
tion cues within their negation scopes, whereas
our corpus separates the two.

4 System description

As the present work focuses on explicit negations,
the choice was made to develop a lexicon of ex-
plicit negation cues to serve as primary indicators
of the presence of negation. Klima (1964) was the
first to identify negation words using a statistics-
driven approach, by analyzing word co-occurrence
with n-grams that are cues for the presence of
negation, such as “either” and “at all”. Klima’s
lexicon served as a starting point for the present
work, and was further refined through the inclu-
sion of common misspellings of negation cues and
the manual addition of select cues from the “Neg”
and “Negate” tags of the General Inquirer (Stone
et al., 1966). The final list of cues used for the
evaluations in §5 is presented in Table 1. The lex-
icon serves as a reliable signal to detect the pres-
ence of explicit negations, but provides no means
of inferring the scope of negation. For scope de-
tection, additional signals derived from surface
and dependency level syntactic structure are em-
ployed.

The negation scope detection system is built as
an individual annotator within a larger annotation
pipeline. The negation annotator relies on two dis-

54



tinct upstream annotators for 1) sentence boundary
annotations, derived from a rule-based sentence
boundary extractor and 2) token annotations from
a dependency parser. The dependency parser is an
implementation of the parsing systems described
in Nivre and Scholz (2004) and Nivre et al. (2007).
Each annotator marks the character offsets for the
begin and end positions of individual annotation
ranges within documents, and makes the annota-
tions available to downstream processes.

The dependency annotator controls multiple
lower-level NLP routines, including tokenization
and part of speech (POS) tagging in addition to
parsing sentence level dependency structure. The
output that is kept for downstream use includes
only POS and dependency relations for each to-
ken. The tokenization performed at this stage is re-
cycled when learning to identify negation scopes.

The feature space of the learning problem ad-
heres to the dimensions presented in Table 2,
and negation scopes are modeled using a first or-
der linear-chain conditional random field (CRF)2,
with a label set of size two indicating whether a
token is within or outside of a negation span. The
features include the lowercased token string, token
POS, token-wise distance from explicit negation
cues, POS information from dependency heads,
and dependency distance from dependency heads
to explicit negation cues. Only unigram features
are employed, but each unigram feature vector is
expanded to include bigram and trigram represen-
tations derived from the current token in conjunc-
tion with the prior and subsequent tokens.

The distance measures can be explained as fol-
lows. Token-wise distance is simply the number
of tokens from one token to another, in the order
they appear in a sentence. Dependency distance is
more involved, and is calculated as the minimum
number of edges that must be traversed in a de-
pendency tree to move from one node (or token)
to another. Each edge is considered to be bidi-
rectional. The CRF implementation used in our
system employs categorical features, so both inte-
ger distances are treated as encodings rather than
continuous values. The number 0 implies that a
token is, or is part of, an explicit negation cue.
The numbers 1-4 encode step-wise distance from
a negation cue, and the number 5 is used to jointly
encode the concepts of “far away” and “not appli-
cable”. The maximum integer distance is 5, which

2Implemented with CRF++: http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/

Feature Description

Word The lowercased token string.
POS The part of speech of a token.
Right Dist. The linear token-wise distance to

the nearest explicit negation cue
to the right of a token.

Left Dist. The linear token-wise distance to
the nearest explicit negation cue
to the left of a token.

Dep1 POS The part of speech of the the first
order dependency of a token.

Dep1 Dist. The minimum number of depen-
dency relations that must be tra-
versed to from the first order de-
pendency head of a token to an
explicit negation cue.

Dep2 POS The part of speech of the the sec-
ond order dependency of a token.

Dep2 Dist. The minimum number of depen-
dency relations that must be tra-
versed to from the second order
dependency head of a token to an
explicit negation cue.

Table 2: Token features used in the conditional
random field model for negation.

was determined empirically.

The negation annotator vectorizes the tokens
generated in the dependency parser annotator and
can be configured to write token vectors to an out-
put stream (training mode) or load a previously
learned conditional random field model and ap-
ply it by sending the token vectors directly to the
CRF decoder (testing mode). The output annota-
tions include document-level negation span ranges
as well as sentence-level token ranges that include
the CRF output probability vector, as well as the
alpha and beta vectors.

5 Results

The negation scope detection system was evalu-
ated against the data sets described in §3. The
negation CRF model was trained and tested
against the Product Reviews and BioScope biolog-
ical full papers corpora. Subsequently, the practi-
cal effect of robust negation detection was mea-
sured in the context of a state-of-the-art sentiment
analysis system.

55



Corpus Prec. Recall F1 PCS
Reviews 81.9 78.2 80.0 39.8
BioScope 80.8 70.8 75.5 53.7

Table 3: Results of negation scope detection.

5.1 Negation Scope Detection

To measure scope detection performance, the
automatically generated results were compared
against each set of human-annotated negation cor-
pora in a token-wise fashion. That is, precision
and recall were calculated as a function of the pre-
dicted versus actual class of each text token. To-
kens made up purely of punctuation were consid-
ered to be arbitrary artifacts of a particular tok-
enization scheme, and thus were excluded from
the results. In keeping with the evaluation pre-
sented by Morante and Daelemans (2009), the
number of perfectly identified negation scopes is
measured separately as the percentage of correct
scopes (PCS). The PCS metric is calculated as the
number of correct spans divided by the number of
true spans, making it a recall measure.

Only binary classification results were consid-
ered (whether a token is of class “negated” or “not
negated”) even though the probabilistic nature of
conditional random fields makes it possible to ex-
press uncertainty in terms of soft classification
scores in the range 0 to 1. Correct predictions of
the absence of negation are excluded from the re-
sults, so the reported measurements only take into
account correct prediction of negation and incor-
rect predictions of either class.

The negation scope detection results for both
the Product Reviews and BioScope corpora are
presented in Table 3. The results on the Product
Reviews corpus are based on seven-fold cross vali-
dation, and the BioScope results are based on five-
fold cross validation, since the BioScope data set
is smaller. For each fold, the number of sentences
with and without negation were balanced in both
training and test sets.

The system was designed primarily to support
the case of negation scope detection in the open
web, and no special considerations were taken to
improve performance on the BioScope corpus. In
particular, the negation cue lexicon presented in
Table 1 was not altered in any way, even though
BioScope contains additional cues such as “rather
than” and “instead of”. This had a noticeable ef-
fect on on recall in BioScope, although in several

Condition Prec. Recall F1 PCS
BioScope,
trained on
Reviews

72.2 42.1 53.5 52.2

Reviews,
trained on
Bioscope

58.8 68.8 63.4 45.7

Table 4: Results for cross-trained negation mod-
els. This shows the results for BioScope with
a model trained on the Product Reviews corpus,
and the results for Product Reviews with a model
trained on the BioScope corpus.

cases the CRF was still able to learn the missing
cues indirectly through lexical features.

In general, the system performed significantly
better on the Product Reviews corpus than on Bio-
Scope, although the performance on BioScope full
papers is state-of-the-art. This can be accounted
for at least partially by the differences in the nega-
tion cue lexicons. However, significantly more
negation scopes were perfectly identified in Bio-
Scope, with a 23% improvement in the PCS metric
over the Product Reviews corpus.

The best reported performance to date on the
BioScope full papers corpus was presented by
Morante and Daelemans (2009), who achieved an
F1 score of 70.9 with predicted negation signals,
and an F1 score of 84.7 by feeding the manually
annotated negation cues to their scope finding sys-
tem. The system presented here compares favor-
ably to Morante and Daelemans’ fully automatic
results, achieving an F1 score of 75.5, which is
a 15.8% reduction in error, although the results
are significantly worse than what was achieved via
perfect negation cue information.

5.2 Cross training

The degree to which models trained on each
corpus generalized to each other was also mea-
sured. For this experiment, each of the two mod-
els trained using the methods described in §5.1
was evaluated against its non-corresponding cor-
pus, such that the BioScope-trained corpus was
evaluated against all of Product Reviews, and the
model derived from Product Reviews was evalu-
ated against all of BioScope.

The cross training results are presented in Ta-
ble 4. Performance is generally much worse, as
expected. Recall drops substantially in BioScope,

56



which is almost certainly due to the fact that not
only are several of the BioScope negation cues
missing from the cue lexicon, but the CRF model
has not had the opportunity to learn from the lex-
ical features in BioScope. The precision in Bio-
Scope remains fairly high, and the percentage of
perfectly labeled scopes remains almost the same.
For Product Reviews, an opposing trend can be
seen: precision drops significantly but recall re-
mains fairly high. This seems to indicate that the
scope boundaries in the Product Reviews corpus
are generally harder to predict. The percentage
of perfectly labeled scopes actually increases for
Product Reviews, which could also indicate that
scope boundaries are less noisy in BioScope.

5.3 Effect on sentiment classification

In addition to measuring the raw performance of
the negation scope detection system, an experi-
ment was conducted to measure the effect of the
final negation system within the context of a larger
sentiment analysis system.

The negation system was built into a senti-
ment analysis pipeline consisting of the following
stages:

1. Sentence boundary detection.

2. Sentiment detection.

3. Negation scope detection, applying the sys-
tem described in §4.

4. Sentence sentiment scoring.

The sentiment detection system in stage 2 finds
and scores mentions of n-grams found in a large
lexicon of sentiment terms and phrases. The sen-
timent lexicon is based on recent work using label
propagation over a very large distributional simi-
larity graph derived from the web (Velikovich et
al., 2010), and applies positive or negative scores
to terms such as “good”, “bad”, or “just what the
doctor ordered”. The sentence scoring system in
stage 4 then determines whether any scored senti-
ment terms fall within the scope of a negation, and
flips the sign of the sentiment score for all negated
sentiment terms. The scoring system then sums all
sentiment scores within each sentence and com-
putes overall sentence sentiment scores.

A sample of English-language online reviews
was collected, containing a total of 1135 sen-
tences. Human raters were presented with consec-
utive sentences and asked to classify each sentence

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Recall

P
re

ci
si

on

 

 
With Negation Detection
Without Negation Detection

Figure 1: Precision-recall curve showing the effect
of negation detection on positive sentiment predic-
tion.

as expressing one of the following types of sen-
timent: 1) positive, 2) negative, 3) neutral, or 4)
mixed positive and negative. Each sentence was
reviewed independently by five separate raters,
and final sentence classification was determined
by consensus. Of the original 1135 sentences 216,
or 19%, were found to contain negations.

The effect of the negation system on sentiment
classification was evaluated on the smaller subset
of 216 sentences in order to more precisely mea-
sure the impact of negation detection. The smaller
negation subset contained 73 sentences classified
as positive, 114 classified as negative, 12 classified
as neutral, and 17 classified as mixed. The num-
ber of sentences classified as neutral or mixed was
too small for a useful performance measurement,
so only sentences classified as positive or negative
sentences were considered.

Figures 1 and 2 show the precision-recall curves
for sentences predicted by the sentiment analysis
system to be positive and negative, respectively.
The curves indicate relatively low performance,
which is consistent with the fact that sentiment
polarity detection is notoriously difficult on sen-
tences with negations. The solid lines show per-
formance with the negation scope detection sys-
tem in place, and the dashed lines show perfor-
mance with no negation detection at all. From
the figures, a significant improvement is immedi-
ately apparent at all recall levels. It can also be
inferred from the figures that the sentiment analy-
sis system is significantly biased towards positive
predictions: even though there were significantly
more sentences classified by human raters as neg-

57



0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35
0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

Recall

P
re

ci
si

on

 

 
With Negation Detection
Without Negation Detection

Figure 2: Precision-recall curve showing the ef-
fect of negation detection on negative sentiment
prediction.

Metric w/o Neg. w/ Neg. % Improv.

Positive Sentiment

Prec. 44.0 64.1 35.9
Recall 54.8 63.7 20.0
F1 48.8 63.9 29.5

Negative Sentiment

Prec. 68.6 83.3 46.8
Recall 21.1 26.3 6.6
F1 32.3 40.0 11.4

Table 5: Sentiment classification results, show-
ing the percentage improvement obtained from in-
cluding negation scope detection (w/ Neg.) over
results obtained without including negation scope
detection (w/o Neg.).

ative, the number of data points for positive pre-
dictions far exceeds the number of negative pre-
dictions, with or without negation detection.

The overall results are presented in Table 5, sep-
arated by positive and negative class predictions.
As expected, performance is improved dramati-
cally by introducing negation scope detection. The
precision of positive sentiment predictions sees the
largest improvement, largely due to the inherent
bias in the sentiment scoring algorithm. F1 scores
for positive and negative sentiment predictions im-
prove by 29.5% and 11.4%, respectively.

6 Conclusions

This paper presents a system for identifying the
scope of negation using shallow parsing, by means

of a conditional random field model informed by
a dependency parser. Results were presented on
the standard BioScope corpus that compare favor-
ably to the best results reported to date, using a
software stack that is significantly simpler than the
best-performing approach.

A new data set was presented that targets the
domain of online product reviews. The product re-
view corpus represents a departure from the stan-
dard BioScope corpus in two distinct dimensions:
the reviews corpus contains diverse common and
vernacular language patterns rather than profes-
sional prose, and also presents a divergent method
for annotating negations in text. Cross-training by
learning a model on one corpus and testing on an-
other suggests that scope boundary detection in the
product reviews corpus may be a more difficult
learning problem, although the method used to an-
notate the reviews corpus may result in a more
consistent representation of the problem.

Finally, the negation system was built into a
state-of-the-art sentiment analysis system in order
to measure the practical impact of accurate nega-
tion scope detection, with dramatic results. The
negation system improved the precision of positive
sentiment polarity detection by 35.9% and nega-
tive sentiment polarity detection by 46.8%. Error
reduction on the recall measure was less dramatic,
but still significant, showing improved recall for
positive polarity of 20.0% and improved recall for
negative polarity of 6.6%.

Future research will include treatment of im-
plicit negation cues, ideally by learning to predict
the presence of implicit negation using a prob-
abilistic model that generates meaningful confi-
dence scores. A related topic to be addressed
is the automatic detection of sarcasm, which is
an important problem for proper sentiment anal-
ysis, particularly in open web domains where lan-
guage is vernacular. Additionally, we would like
to tackle the problem of inter-sentential negations,
which could involve a natural extension of nega-
tion scope detection through co-reference resolu-
tion, such that negated pronouns trigger negations
in text surrounding their pronoun antecedents.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Andrew Hogue
and Kerry Hannan for useful discussions regarding
this work.

58



References

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2007. Structured Lo-
cal Training and Biased Potential Functions for Con-
ditional Random Fields with Application to Coref-
erence Resolution. Proceedings of The 9th Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL,
Rochester, NY.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2008. Learning with
Compositional Semantics as Structural Inference for
Subsentential Sentiment Analysis. Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods on Natural
Language Processing. ACL, Honolulu, HI.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee, and
Richard Ducott. 2008. Without a ‘doubt’? Un-
supervised discovery of downward-entailing opera-
tors. Proceedings of The 10th Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. ACL, Boulder, CO.

Talmy Givón. 1993. English Grammer: A Function-
Based Introduction. Benjamins, Amsterdam, NL.

Edward S. Klima. 1964. Negation in English. Read-
ings in the Philosophy of Language. Ed. J. A. Fodor
and J. J. Katz. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
246-323.

John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
Pereira. 2001. Conditional random elds: Prob-
abilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann,
Williamstown, MA.

Ryan McDonald, Kerry Hannan, Tyler Neylon, Mike
Wells, and Jeff Reynar. 2007. Structured Models for
Fine-to-Coarse Sentiment Analysis. Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. Prague, Czech Republic.

Karo Moilanen and Stephen Pulman 2007. Sentiment
Composition. Proceedings of the Recent Advances
in Natural Language Processing International Con-
ference Borovets, Bulgaria

Roser Morante and Walter Daelemans. 2009. A
metalearning approach to processing the scope of
negation. Proceedings of the Thirteenth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL). ACM, Boulder, CO.

Tetsuji Nakagawa, Kentaro Inui, and Sadao Kurohashi.
2010. Dependency Tree-based Sentiment Classifi-
cation using CRFs with Hidden Variables. Proceed-
ings of The 11th Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics ACL, Los Angeles, CA.

Joakim Nivre and Mario Scholz. 2004. Deterministic
Dependency Parsing of English Text. Proceedings
of the 20th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics. ACM, Geneva, Switzerland.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas
Chanev, Gulsen Eryigit Sandra Kubler, Svetoslav
Marinov and Erwin Marsi. 2007. MaltParser:
A language-independent system for data-driven de-
pendency parsing Natural Language Engineering
13(02):95–135

Philip J. Stone, Dexter C. Dunphy, Marshall S. Smith,
Daniel M. Ogilvie. 1966. The General Inquirer:
A Computer Approach to Content Analysis. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Gunnel Tottie. 1991. Negation in English Speech
and Writing: A Study in Variation Academic, San
Diego, CA.

Leonid Velikovich, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, Kerry
Hannan, and Ryan McDonald. 2010. The viabil-
ity of web-derived polarity lexicons. Proceedings of
The 11th Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. ACL, Los Angeles, CA.

Veronika Vincze, György Szarvas, Richárd Farkas,
György Móra, and János Csirik. 2008. The Bio-
Scope corpus: biomedical texts annotated for uncer-
tainty, negation and their scopes. BMC Bioinformat-
ics, 9(Suppl 11):S9.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Human Language Technology and Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing Van-
couver, Canada.

59


