










































An Analysis of Verbs in Financial News Articles and their Impact on Stock Price


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 3–4,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Analysis of Verbs in Financial News Articles and their Impact on 

Stock Price 

    

    
Robert P. Schumaker  

Iona College  
715 North Ave  

New Rochelle, NY 10801, USA  
rob.schumaker@gmail.com  

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

Article terms can move stock prices.  By ana-
lyzing verbs in financial news articles and 
coupling their usage with a discrete machine 
learning algorithm tied to stock price move-
ment, we can build a model of price move-
ment based upon the verbs used, to not only 
identify those terms that can move a stock 
price the most, but also whether they move the 
predicted price up or down. 

1 Introduction 

Predicting market movements is a difficult prob-
lem that deals mostly with trying to model human 
behavior.  However, with the advent of quantita-
tive trading systems its now easier to dissect their 
trading decisions.  These systems are nearly instan-
taneous in their ability to make trades, but their 
Achilles heel is a reliance on human counterparts 
to translate relevant news into numeric data.  This 
introduces a serious lag-time in trading decisions. 

2 Literature Review  

Information is fed into the market all the time.  
While some information sources can move a stock 
price, e.g., rumors and scandals; financial news 
articles are considered more stable and a form of 
its own commodity (Mowshowitz, 1992).   

The first challenge of a textual financial predic-
tion system is to manage the large amounts of tex-

tual information that exist for securities such as 
periodic SEC filings, press releases and financial 
news articles.  These textual documents can then 
be parsed using Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) techniques to identify specific article terms 
most likely to cause share price changes.  By au-
tomating this process, machines can take advan-
tage of arbitrage opportunities faster than human 
counterparts by repeatedly forecasting price fluctu-
ations and executing immediate trades. 

Once financial news articles have been gathered, 
we need to represent their important features in 
machine-friendly form.  We chose to implement a 
verb representation scheme which was found to be 
most predictive for financial news articles. 

Assigning a representational mechanism is not 
sufficient to address scalability issues associated 
with large datasets.  A common solution is to in-
troduce a term frequency threshold (Joachims, 
1998).  This technique not only eliminates noise 
from lesser used terms, but also reduces the num-
ber of features to represent.  Once scalability issues 
have been addressed, the data needs to be prepared 
in a more machine-friendly manner.  One popular 
method is to represent article terms in binary where 
the term is either present or not in a given article.  
This solution leads to large but sparse matrices 
where the number of represented terms throughout 
the dataset will greatly outnumber the terms used 
in an individual article. 

Once financial news articles have been 
represented, learning algorithms can then begin to 
identify patterns of predictable behavior.  One ac-

3



cepted method, Support Vector Regression (SVR), 
is a regression equivalent of Support Vector Ma-
chines (SVM) but without the aspect of classifica-
tion.  This method is also well-suited to handling 
textual input as binary representations and has 
been used in similar financial news studies (Schu-
maker & Chen, 2006; Tay & Cao, 2001). 

3 System Design 

To analyze our data, we constructed the AZFin-
Text system.  The numeric component gathers 
price data in one minute increments from a stock 
price database.  The textual piece gathers financial 
news articles from Yahoo! Finance and represents 
them by their verbs.   

For the machine learning algorithm we chose to 
implement the SVR Sequential Minimal Optimiza-
tion function through Weka.  This function allows 
discrete numeric prediction instead of classifica-
tion.  We selected a linear kernel and ten-fold 
cross-validation. 

4 Experimental Design 

For the experiment, we selected a consecutive five 
week period of time to serve as our experimental 
baseline.  This period of research from Oct. 26, 
2005 to Nov. 28, 2005 was selected because it did 
not have unusual market conditions and was a 
good testbed for our evaluation.  We further li-
mited our scope of activity to only those compa-
nies listed in the S&P 500 as of Oct. 3, 2005.  
Articles gathered during this period were restricted 
to occur between the hours of 10:30am and 
3:40pm.  A further constraint to reduce the effects 
of confounding variables was introduced where 
two articles on the same company cannot exist 
within twenty minutes of each other or both will be 
discarded.  The above processes filtered the 9,211 
candidate news articles gathered during this period 
to 2,802, and 10,259,042 stock quotations.   

The first task is to extract financial news ar-
ticles.  The entire corpus of financial news articles 
are represented by their verbs in binary.  If a par-
ticular verb is present in the article, that feature is 
given a 1, else a 0 and then stored in the database.  
To build a model, we first pair together the repre-
sentational verb and stock quotation at the time the 
article was released, for each financial news ar-
ticle.  This data is then passed to the SVR algo-

rithm where a multi-dimensional price prediction 
model is constructed.  This weighted model can 
then be dissected to determine the most relevant 
factors that can influence price movement. 

5 Results and Discussion  

From the trained AZFinText system, it was unsur-
prising that a majority of weight was placed on the 
stock price at the time the article was released and 
is consistent with prior observation where the ar-
ticle terms were found to be important and were 
used to fine-tune price prediction.  Of the verbs, 
211 were used by the system as support vectors.  
An abbreviated multi-dimensional price prediction 
model is as follows.  The constants represent the 
weight given by the SVR algorithm and the verbs 
are binary, representing their existence within the 
financial news article. 

0.9997Intial_Price + 0.0045planted + 
0.004announcing + 0.003front + 
0.0029smaller + 0.0028crude – 0.0029hereto – 
0.002comparable – 0.0018charge – 
0.0015summit – 0.0015green 

 
The five verbs with highest negative impact on 

stock price are hereto, comparable, charge, summit 
and green.  If the verb hereto were to appear in a 
financial article, AZFinText would discount the 
price by $0.0029.  While this movement may not 
appear to be much, the continued usage of negative 
verbs is additive. 

The five verbs with the highest positive impact 
on stock prices are planted, announcing, front, 
smaller and crude. 

References  

Joachims, T. 1998. Text Categorization with Support 
Vector Machines: Learning with Many Relevant Fea-
tures. European Conference on Machine Learning, 
Chemnitz, Germany. 

Mowshowitz, A. 1992. On the Market Value of Infor-
mation Commodities.  The Nature of Information and 
Information Commodities. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science 43(3): 225-232. 

Schumaker, R. P. & H. Chen 2006. Textual Analysis of 
Stock Market Prediction Using Financial News Ar-
ticles. Americas Conference on Information Systems, 
Acapulco, Mexico. 

Tay, F. & L. Cao 2001. Application of Support Vector 
Machines in Financial Time Series Forecasting. 
Omega 29: 309-317. 

4


