










































Dialogue Systems for Virtual Environments


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 132–140, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Dialogue Systems for Virtual Environments

Luciana Benotti, Paula Estrella, Carlos Areces
Grupo de Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural (PLN)

Sección de Ciencias de la Computación
Facultad de Matemática, Astronomı́a y Fı́sica (FaMAF)

Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Argentina

Abstract

We present an on-going research project car-
ried out at the Universidad Nacional de Córdo-
ba in Argentina. This project investigates the-
oretical and practical research questions re-
lated to the development of a dialogue system
situated in a virtual environment. We describe
the PLN research group in which this project
is being developed and, in particular, we spell
out the areas of expertise of the authors. More-
over, we discuss relevant past, current and fu-
ture collaborations of the research group.

1 Introduction

The goal of this project is to implement a dialogue
system which automatically generates instructions
in order to help a user to fulfill a given task in a 3D
virtual environment. In this context, we will investi-
gate fundamental issues about human-computer in-
teraction. The expected results of the project can be
classified in three areas: pragmatics of interaction;
information representation and inference; and eval-
uation of dialogue systems. Once a working proto-
type is finished, we will adapt it to the specific task
of language learning, using the system as a virtual
language teacher. Our prototype will teach English
to native Spanish speakers. Hence, it will need to
understand and produce both languages.

Initially, we will investigate a model of unidirec-
tional linguistic interaction (i.e., linguistic informa-
tion flows only from the system to the user). In sub-
sequent stages, the model will be extended to allow
bidirectional language exchange. For example, the

user may ask clarifications to the system or redefine
the goal of the interaction.

The architecture of the envisioned dialogue sys-
tem presents both theoretical and practical chal-
lenges. On the theoretical side, heuristics are needed
in order to govern decisions such as what to say,
when, and how (given the current context). In addi-
tion, the system should implement inference meth-
ods in order to figure out how to modify the cur-
rent situation and reach the task goal. The complex-
ity of the theoretical issues is reflected, in practice,
in a system of multiple components: a natural lan-
guage generator, a planner, a 3D interactive envi-
ronment, to mention a few. Designing and imple-
menting all these components from scratch would
require a prohibitive effort. Instead we will adapt
tools already implemented and freely available for
prototyping this kind of systems, such as the plat-
form GIVE1, Generating Instructions in Virtual En-
vironments (Byron et al., 2009).

The quality of each of the components of the sys-
tem affects the perception users have of it. It is im-
perative to carry out extensive evaluation. We plan
to adapt and apply different evaluation techniques
and metrics from the area of Machine Translation to
assess the performance of the system.

The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2
describes the project in detail. Section 3 spells out
the expected results as well as their foreseen impact
in the Argentinean socio-economic landscape. Sec-
tion 4 presents the PLN research group including its
lines of research. Section 5 discuss past, current and
future collaborations that are relevant to the project.

1http://www.give-challenge.org

132



2 Description of the Project

This section first introduces the virtual environ-
ment in which our dialogue system will be situated,
namely the GIVE platform, which is the basic ar-
chitecture of our dialogue system. Then we explain
in detail the tasks that our situated dialogue system
will implement, and we spell out the evaluation chal-
lenges that such a system poses. We close the sec-
tion discussing the application of our dialogue sys-
tem for the task of second language learning.

2.1 The Virtual Environment

In the scenario proposed by GIVE (Byron et al.,
2009), a human user carries out a “treasure hunt” in
a 3D virtual environment and the task of the genera-
tion system is to provide real-time, natural language
instructions that help the user find the hidden trea-
sure.

In the GIVE setup, the instruction giving system
must guide the user through interconnected rooms.
The final goal is to get a trophy which is hidden in
a safe. In order to achieve this goal, the system in-
structs the user to perform several subtasks such as
deactivating alarms and opening the safe combina-
tion by pressing a sequence of buttons on the walls
of the rooms.

Figure 1: The user’s view of the 3D world

Figure 1 shows a screen-shot of the user’s view on
the 3D world. On the top of the picture, the current
instruction generated by the dialogue system is dis-
played. The picture shows a closed door and an open

door that has an activated alarm (that looks like a red
tile) in the doorway. There are five visible buttons in
this room (two yellow, two red and one green) and
the instruction giver is instructing the user to press
a red button. Pressing a button can have different
effects such as opening a door, moving an object,
deactivating an alarm, etc.

The characteristics of the world, including the
functions of the buttons, are described in the world
specification by the world designers. The user can
move freely around the world (using the direction
keys as indicated in the bottom of the screen) but
she can loose the game if she triggers an alarm. The
user can also ask for help pressing ‘H’ if she did not
manage to read or understand the last instruction.

For the correct definition of the interaction poli-
cies of our prototype we need a corpus that pro-
vides examples of typical interactions in the domain.
GIVE provides tools for collecting such a corpus in
the form of a Wizard of Oz platform that records all
details of the interaction, thus allowing to easily ob-
tain a corpus of interaction in virtual environments
annotated automatically.

2.2 The Dialogue System Tasks
From the collected corpus we will begin the design,
implementation and testing of our dialogue system.
The main components that we will have to design
and implement can be organized using the tradi-
tional four tasks that a dialogue system should ad-
dress: (1) content planning, (2) generation of refer-
ring expressions, (3) management of the interaction
context, and (4) interpretation of user responses.

(1) Content Planning: Given the envisioned setup
we described before, the first task of the system is to
obtain a plan to reach the desired goal, from the cur-
rent state. The plan will contain physical actions to
be performed in the virtual environment. The second
step is to decide how to transmit this sequence of ac-
tions to the user. E.g, to decide how many actions
to communicate per instruction, and how to aggre-
gate them coherently. The result of the action ag-
gregation process can be represented as a tree de-
scribing the task structure at different levels of ab-
straction. The third and final step is to decide how
to navigate the tree of actions to verbalize the in-
structions (for example, post or preorder as explored
in (Foster et al., 2009)). We will investigate different

133



aggregation policies (e.g., aggregating actions that
manipulate similar objects) and innovative ways in
which to navigate the task tree (e.g., moving to a
lower level of abstraction in case of misunderstand-
ings). Plan computation can be solved using clas-
sical planners (Kautz and Selman, 1999; Hoffmann
and Nebel, 2001; Nau et al., 2004). However, while
there are planners that work well when optimized for
certain applications, none provides services such as
the generation of alternative plans, or the generation
of incomplete plans in case of the absence of plan.
One of the goals of the project is to design and im-
plement these extensions to classical planning algo-
rithms. We will also study the theoretical behavior
(e.g., complexity) of these new algorithms.

(2) Generation of Referring Expressions: Once
content planning is complete, the next step is to gen-
eration adequate referring expressions. This task
involves producing a phrase that describes a refer-
able entity so that the user can identify it (e.g., “the
vase on the table”). To be acceptable, these expres-
sions should be “natural:” they should be at the same
time sufficiently but not overly constrained, and they
should not impose on the user a heavier cognitive
load than necessary. For example, producing the
expression “the vase that is not above the chair or
sofa or under the table” would probably not be ac-
ceptable. Areces et al. (2008b) propose to use sym-
bolic minimization of the model that represents the
state of the world, in order to obtain a logical repre-
sentation that describe each object uniquely. In our
project we will implement this method and evaluate
it within the dialogue system.

(3) Management of the Interaction Context: To
manage the use of the interaction context we will use
existing knowledge maintenance systems such as
RACER2 or Pellet3, which support inference tasks
such as definition, maintenance and querying of on-
tologies. These systems have been used as infer-
ence engines in numerous applications in the area
and, in particular, in dialogue systems for text ad-
ventures (Benotti, 2009b). Once we have studied
the behavior of these inference engines on the task,
we will analyze its limitations and investigate the re-
quired extensions.

2http://www.racer-systems.com
3http://clarkparsia.com/pellet

(4) Interpretation of User Responses: The inter-
pretation of user responses in the unidirectional sys-
tem is relatively simple: it amounts to discretizing
the continuous flow of user behavior in the 3D world
into actions meaningful for the domain task. In a
first stage, we will use the discretizer provided by
GIVE. After evaluating it we can determine whether
or not this module meets the requirements of our
task and what are its limitations. In the bidirectional
system, however, the interpretation of user responses
is the task that will require more attention. To start
with, the bidirectional system should be expanded
with capabilities for processing statements coming
from the user (namely, parsing, semantic construc-
tion, resolution of references, etc.). We will study,
in particular, two types of user contributions: re-
quests for clarification of the instruction given (what
we call ‘short-term repairs’), and for redefinition of
goals (what we call ‘long-term repairs’). We will
implement short-term repairs using the approach de-
scribed in (Purver, 2006). For long-term repairs we
will use the guidelines of (Blaylock, 2005).

A sample interaction with the unidirectional sys-
tem guiding the player in the identification of a par-
ticular blue button is as follows:

(1) System says: Push a blue button.
The user focuses a blue button.
System says: Not this one.

Look for another one.
The user turns and focuses another blue button.
System says: Yes this one!
The user pushes the button.

This interaction illustrates the tasks described
above. To begin with, the verbalization of the in-
struction “Push a blue button” is making explicit one
of the steps of the plan that needs to be performed in
order to achieve the task goal. As we can see, the
system implements in this case a referring strategy
which does not uniquely identify the referent (the
system generates “a blue button” when there is more
than one blue button in the domain). But it is ca-
pable of producing further details about the referent
if the user focus in the wrong object. Finally, this
example makes evident that the interpretation of the
user responses is crucial even in a linguistically uni-
directional system. The user cannot make linguistic

134



contributions but can change the context by perform-
ing physical acts, the correct interpretation of such
acts is essential if the system is to react coherently.

2.3 Evaluation

To determine the quality of the obtained prototypes
we propose to create a quality model following the
ISO/IEC 9126 and 14528 standards for the evalua-
tion of software products (ISO/IEC, 2001; ISO/IEC,
1999). These standards were successfully applied
to the Machine Translation domain, resulting in the
FEMTI4, Framework for the Evaluation of Machine
Translation (Estrella et al., 2005). FEMTI guides
evaluators towards creating parameterized evalua-
tion plans that include various aspects of the to-be-
evaluated system and offer a relevant set of met-
rics. The identification of relevant metrics can be
performed using various methods, e.g., based on
previous experience (Hajdinjak and Mihelic, 2006;
Litman and Pan, 2002), conducting surveys or re-
quirement specifications (Lecoeuche et al., 1998), or
collecting such data through Wizard of Oz experi-
ments (Dahlbäck et al., 1998). After developing a
quality model, several methodologies to assess vari-
ous aspects of the system can be applied: automatic
metrics, subjective metrics or metrics based on the
task (to evaluate both the contribution of each com-
ponent and the quality of the whole system).

The GIVE platform is used every year as a uni-
fied framework for evaluating generation systems.
Systems have to generate natural language instruc-
tions and be able to participate in a real-time interac-
tion situated in a 3D environment. The GIVE Chal-
lenge is one of the shared tasks endorsed by ACL’s
special interests groups in generation, dialogue and
semantics. We plan to participate in the challenge,
which will serve as an additional source of informa-
tion about aspects of the system that need improve-
ment. The evaluation metrics used in the Challenge
(such as average reference identification time) are
described in (Byron et al., 2009). In (Amoia et al.,
2010) we extended such metrics in order to measure
alingment between system and user. Once the pro-
totype is evaluated and improved using the results of
the challenge, we will investigate its use as a virtual
language tutor as described in the next section.

4http://www.issco.unige.ch/femti/

2.4 An Application: A Virtual Tutor

The project outcome will be a system capable of giv-
ing natural language instructions situated in a virtual
3D environment. The technology and theoretical ad-
vances of the project could be used in various appli-
cations, but one of the most interesting character-
istics we plan to investigate is that, a priori, by just
changing the linguistic resources, the language of in-
teraction with the system (input and output) can be
changed as desired. After obtaining a first prototype
of an instruction giving dialogue system, we will in-
vestigate its use for distance learning, adapting the
system to operate as a foreign language tutor (Wik
and Hjalmarsson, 2009).

A one-way system that generates instructions in
English can be used to test the user understanding
of a foreign language. The correct interpretation of
the instructions can be evaluated from the proper ex-
ecution of the instructions. The two-way system
will allow the user to formulate clarifications (ei-
ther in their native language or in the foreign lan-
guage). The user may also redefine the objective to
be achieved during the interaction, and thus select
the type of vocabulary he wants to practice.

Virtual worlds (like Second Life) are being
rapidly incorporated into education, both initial
and superior (Doswell, 2005; Molka-Danielsen and
Deutschmann, 2009). The use of a virtual tutor
has certain advantages over a human tutor. Eng-
wall (2004) mentioned the following. (1) Amount
of practice: the chance to practice the new language
is essential for learning, and a virtual tutor provides
opportunities only limited by the technological re-
sources. (2) Prestige: a student may feel embar-
rassed about making mistakes with a human tutor,
and this might limit his willingness to speak in the
foreign language. (3) Augmented Reality: a virtual
tutor can provide additional material (e.g., examples
in context, explanatory images, etc.) with less effort
than a human tutor.

Such a virtual tutor can be used in distance learn-
ing. To develop distance learning systems, it is es-
sential to model the user’s learning progress. This
requires a system aware of the evolution of the user,
and that takes into account their achievements and
their problems. The system must be able to interpret
requirements, and generate appropriate responses,

135



for non-experts uses whose knowledge evolves dur-
ing the interaction. Moreover, the system must be
able to properly represent both the information con-
cerning the course material, and information about
the evolution of the user. For example, the system
must be able to diagnose what part of the course ma-
terial should be reviewed from the wrong answers of
the user. Finally, the system must be able to evaluate
the user interaction in order to decide which learning
objectives have been achieved. The theoretical and
practical results of the project contribute to solving
these difficult problems.

3 Impact of the Project

This project aims to achieve a balance between a
system which is sufficiently generic to be applica-
ble in different areas, and specific enough to ben-
efit from the efficient use of existing techniques
for knowledge management, planning and natural
language processing. Designing and implementing
such a system is a multidisciplinary effort leading to
research in diverse scientific areas:

Pragmatics is an interdisciplinary field which inte-
grates insights from linguistics (e.g., conversational
implicatures (Grice, 1975)), sociology (e.g., conver-
sational analysis (Schegloff, 1987)) and philosophy
(e.g., theory of speech acts (Austin, 1962)). It aims
to explore how the context (in which a conversation
is situated) contributes to the meaning (of everything
that is said during that conversation). The meaning
conveyed during a conversation depends not only on
linguistic information (entities in focus, grammati-
cal and morphological rules, etc.) but also on extra-
linguistic information (physical situation of conver-
sation, previous experiences of speakers, etc.). As a
result, the same sentence may mean different things
in different contexts. The area of pragmatics studies
the process by which a sentence is disambiguated
using its context. A dialogue system needs to have
pragmatic capabilities in order to interact in a nat-
ural way with its users. In particular, it must define
what kind of contextual information should be repre-
sented; and what inference tasks on a sentence and
context are necessary in order to interpret an utter-
ance. In such a system it is important that sentences
makes explicit the right amount of information: too
much information will delay and bore the user, but if

the information is not enough the user will not know
how to perform the task and make mistakes.

One of the major contributions of the project in
this area will be a virtual laboratory for pragmatic
theories: a controlled environment for studying in-
teraction set in a world where physical actions and
language intermingle. The prototype will let us in-
vestigate the impact that different instruction giving
policies (e.g., post order on the tree structure of the
task) have on successful achievement of the goal.
Similar studies have been done before (e.g., (Fos-
ter et al., 2009)) but they usually assume a prede-
termined task. Since our prototype allows for the
specification of the virtual world, the available ac-
tions, and the goal, we will be able to determine
when the impact associated to a particular policy is
dependent on the task or not. We will also investi-
gate short and long term repairs. Repairs are usu-
ally caused by conversational implicatures (Benotti,
2009a). Modeling these implicatures in a generic di-
alogue system is difficult because they are too open
ended. However, since the present prototype pro-
vides a situated interaction, restricted to the virtual
world, it will be possible to test the relationship be-
tween implicatures, the type of repairs they give rise
to, and the inference tasks needed to predict them.

Inference can be understood as any operation that
transforms implicit information in explicit informa-
tion. This definition is general enough to cover tasks
ranging from logical inference (i.e., deduction in
a formal language) to inference tasks common in
AI (e.g., planning and non-monotonic inference), as
well as statistical operations (e.g. obtaining estima-
tors on a data set). A dialogue system has to contin-
ually perform inference operations. E.g., inference
is needed to interpret information received from the
user, incorporate it to the system’s data repository,
and then decide what should be conveyed back to
the user. The very problem of deciding what kind
of logical representation and what type of inference
to use in a given situation is complex (propositional
logic vs. first-order logic, validity vs. model check-
ing, logical inference vs. statistical inference). Inde-
pendently of which type of inference is used, they
are usually computationally expensive. The chal-
lenge here is to find the appropriate balance between
the expressivity of the representation formalism and

136



the cost of the required inference methods.
The main contribution of the project in this area

is in the design, development and study of planning
algorithms. A typical planning system takes three
inputs –initial state, possible actions and expected
goal– and returns a sequence of actions (a plan) that
when sequentially applied to the initial state, ends
in a state that satisfies the goal. Different methods
to obtain a plan have been studied (forward chain-
ing, backward chaining, coding in terms of proposi-
tional satisfiability, etc.), and they are currently im-
plemented in systems that can solve many planning
tasks efficiently. However, most of these systems
make assumptions that simplify the problem (deter-
ministic atomic time, complete information, absence
of a background theory, etc.). And most of them re-
turn a single plan. We will investigate algorithms
that eliminate some of these simplifications (in par-
ticular, we will study planning with incomplete in-
formation and based on a background theory). We
will also provide extended planning services: alter-
native plans, minimal plans, conditional plans, in-
complete plans, affordability of a given state, etc.

Evaluation of natural language generation systems
is one of the most difficult tasks in the area of NLP.
A given concept can be expressed in many different
ways, all of them correct. Hence, it is not possible
to determining the quality of a generated sentence
simply by, for example, comparing the result with a
gold standard. The problem of absence of gold stan-
dards is shared with another area of the NLP, namely
Machine Translation, for which various evaluation
methodologies, both direct and indirect, have been
proposed. Direct methods applies a metric to the
text generated by the system, while indirect meth-
ods evaluates the performance of the system through
the use of the generated text to perform some task.
But none of these methods is a standard and gener-
ally accepted methodology, which has been proven
to be effective in all cases. Since what is being eval-
uated in this project is a system that interacts via the
generation of natural language instructions, we can
determine its performance through quantitative met-
rics (e.g., average task completion time), qualitative
metrics (e.g., general user satisfaction) and metrics
based on the context (e.g., how well the system ad-
dressed the user needs in particular situations). We

will study the portability of evaluation techniques
from the domain of machine translation and multi-
modal human-computer interaction to the evaluation
of the system proposed in this project.

One of the main contributions of our project at
this respect is the integration of assessment tech-
niques from different areas into a methodology for
evaluating dialog systems for virtual environments,
aiming to estimate their usability and effectiveness.
This methodology could be used both to determine
whether a system is suitable for a task type and
user, and to compare the performance of different
systems of the same type. Another contribution
will be the study and application of software eval-
uation standards to the developed systems, creat-
ing a standardized quality model and proposing a
set of appropriate metrics to assess each of the as-
pects of the model. Finally, the annotated corpus
of human-human interaction, together with the cor-
pus of human-machine interaction collected during
the project will be made public. Such corpora will
serve, for example, to design more general platforms
for evaluating dialog systems, going beyond the as-
pects evaluated by existing platforms like GIVE.

Impact in the Argentinean Landscape: Natural
language processing, and in particular the field of
dialogue systems is a rapidly growing area in devel-
oped countries. The automatic processing of natu-
ral language has become a strategic capability for
companies and the wider community. However, this
area is extremely underdeveloped in Argentina. This
can be attributed to several factors. (a) The relative
youth of the area of NLP, which implies a relative
dearth of trained professionals throughout the world.
(b) The underdevelopment of the area of research in
Artificial Intelligence and Formal Linguistics in Ar-
gentina, for historical reasons and lack of industry
demand. (c) Poor interaction between the few re-
searchers in NLP that are in the region.

NLP is a strategic research area for Argentina
which can achieve academic excellence and indus-
try relevance. We believe in supporting the devel-
opment of this area by promoting the following.
(a) Training of human resources through doctoral
programs and courses taught in Argentina by in-
ternationally renowned professionals. (b) Incorpo-
ration of trained human resources to contribute to

137



the growth and diversification of the critical mass in
the area. (c) Improving interaction between various
groups and individual researchers in NLP, through
the organization of workshops, courses, visits, co-
tutoring, coordinated specialization programs, etc.

The particular topics investigated in the frame-
work of this project are of relevance in the current
Argentinean landscape for at least two reasons. On
the one hand, the project integrates and develops var-
ious key aspects of the area of computational lin-
guistics (syntax, semantics, pragmatics, representa-
tion, inference, evaluation); an area which, as we
mentioned, is today almost nonexistent in Argentina.
This project will be a step towards reversing this sit-
uation. On the other hand, the ultimate goal of the
project is to investigate the use of the developed plat-
form for distance education (specifically, as a tool
for language learning). Distance education is a valu-
able resource to overcome the problem of centraliza-
tion of educational resources in the country.

4 Introducing the Research Group

The PLN5 research group, in which the describe
scientific project will be carried out, was funded
in 2005. Te group is developing an important
role in human resource training, delivering courses
to undergraduate and postgraduate student at the
Universidad de Córdoba and other universities. It
also works in the development of various research
projects and integration with other groups in the re-
gion, both within Argentina and with neighboring
countries (Chile, Brazil and Uruguay).

The current project pools together many of the
key areas of expertise of the members of the group.
To begin with, some members of the group special-
ize in computational logic, particularly in the theo-
retical and applied study of languages for knowledge
representation (e.g., modal, hybrid and description
logics). They have also developed automated theo-
rem provers for these languages6. In relation with
the study of knowledge representation, they have
also investigated and developed algorithms for gen-
erating referring expressions (Areces et al., 2008b).

The second line of research of the PLN group that
is relevant for this project is context-based evalua-

5http://www.cs.famaf.unc.edu.ar/˜pln
6http://www.glyc.dc.uba.ar/intohylo/

tion. Members of the group have proposed an eval-
uation model for machine translation systems which
relates the context of use to potentially important
quality characteristics (Estrella et al., 2008; Estrella
et al., 2009). This model is general enough to be
applied to other systems that produce natural lan-
guage like the ones proposed in this paper. Thanks to
the background on machine translation systems the
team has experience evaluating and comparing natu-
ral language output produced in different languages
(Spanish and English in particular), which will be
relevant for the development of the language tutor
described in Section 2.4. Finally, the team has ex-
perience developing and evaluating multimodal cor-
pora like those described in Section 2 (Estrella and
Popescu-Belis, 2008).

The third line of research that is relevant for this
project is pragmatics. In this area the team has im-
plemented a conversational agent which is able to
infer and negotiate conversational implicatures us-
ing inference tasks such as classical planning and
planning under incomplete information (Benotti,
2009b). We have also investigated how to infer
conversational implicatures triggered by compara-
tive utterances (Benotti and Traum, 2009). Recently
we have done corpus-based work, which shows what
kinds of implicatures are inferred and negotiated by
human dialogue participants during a task situated
in a 3D virtual environment (Benotti, 2009a).

Other lines of research in the PLN group are not
directly related to the project at this stage, but might
become relevant in the future. They include gram-
mar induction, text mining, statistical syntactic anal-
ysis and ontology population from raw text.

5 Ongoing and Future Collaborations

The members of the PLN in general and the authors
of this paper in particular have several collaborations
with national and international research groups in
computational linguistics and related fields that are
relevant for this project.

At the international level, we have ongoing col-
laboration with the TIM/ISSCO7 Multilingual In-
formation Processing Department at the University
of Geneva, with the Idiap Research Institute8 and

7http://www.issco.unige.ch/en
8http://www.idiap.ch

138



with some members of the PAI9, Pervasive Artifi-
cial Intelligence group of the University of Fribourg.
These collaborations include the evaluation of NLP
systems and the development of multilingual and
multimodal human language technology systems.

Members of the group have a long standing col-
laboration with the TALARIS10 group of the Labo-
ratoire Lorrain de Recherche en Informatique et ses
Applications (LORIA). The main research topic at
TALARIS is computational linguistics with strong
emphasis on semantics and inference. In the frame-
work of this collaboration we are participating in the
2010 edition of the GIVE Challenge. In the pro-
cess of designing the systems that will participate in
the challenge we jointly investigated the use of dif-
ferent referring strategies in situated instruction giv-
ing (Amoia et al., 2010).

We have also collaborated with the Virtual Hu-
mans group of the Institute for Creative Technolo-
gies11 from the University of Southern California.
In particular we computationally modeled the in-
ference of conversational implicatures triggered by
comparative utterances (Benotti and Traum, 2009).
The Institute for Creative Technologies offers In-
ternship programs every year that we plan to use in
order to strengthen our collaboration.

All these collaborations are directly related to the
main theme of the project described in this arti-
cle. The PLN group has also research collaborations
with other international research teams in the frame-
work of other scientific programs. For example, the
PLN group has being part of a recently finished in-
ternational project MICROBIO12 on ontology popu-
lation from raw text. The project was funded by the
Stic-Amsud13 program, a scientific-technological
cooperation program integrated by France, Argen-
tine, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay. The
expertise obtained during this project might be use-
ful in the future when trying to extend our GIVE on-
tologies to new domains. Similarly, the team main-
tain scientific relations with the University of Texas
at Austin (mainly with Dr. J. Moore in projects re-

9http://diuf.unifr.ch/pai/wiki
10http://talaris.loria.fr
11http://ict.usc.edu/projects/virtual_humans
12http://www.microbioamsud.net
13http://www.sticamsud.org

lated to the development of the ACL214 prover); and
with the Research team Symbiose15 of the Institut de
Recherche en Informatique et Systémes Aléatoires
(working on the use of linguistic techniques for the
modelisation of genomic sequences).

At the national level, the group has inten-
sively collaborated with GLyC16, Grupo de Lógica,
Lenguaje y Computabilidad on knowledge represen-
tation and inference (see, e.g. (Areces and Gorı́n,
2005; Areces et al., 2008a)). GLyC is part of the
Computer Science Department of the Universidad
de Buenos Aires. During 2010, teams PLN and
GLyC will join forces and collaborate in the organi-
zation of ELiC17, the First School in Computational
Linguistics in Argentina, which will take place in
July at the Universidad de Buenos Aires. ELiC 2010
will be co-located with the ECI18, Escuela de Cien-
cias Informáticas which has a long standing repu-
tation as a high-quality winter school in Computer
Science in Argentina, and is being organized yearly
since 1987. With ELiC we aim at creating, for the
first time, a space to introduce the field of computa-
tional linguistics to graduate students in Argentina.
Thanks to the support of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (NAACL) and of the Universidad de Buenos
Aires, ELiC is offering student travel grants and fee
waivers to encourage participation.

The PLN group is also contacting other groups
working in computational linguistics in Argentina
like the research group in Artificial Intelligence from
the Universidad Nacional del Comahue19. Taking
advantage of previous co-participation in different
project we plan to organize exchange programs in
the framework of a research network.

Finally, the PLN group is planning to orga-
nize a workshop on Computational Linguistics as
a satellite event of IBERAMIA 201020, the Ibero-
American Conference on Artificial Intelligence, that
will be organized by the Universidad del Sur, in the
city of Bahı́a Blanca, Argentina.

14http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/moore/acl2
15http://www.irisa.fr/symbiose
16http://www.glyc.dc.uba.ar
17http://www.glyc.dc.uba.ar/elic2010
18http://www.dc.uba.ar/events/eci/2009/eci2009
19http://www.uncoma.edu.ar/
20http://cs.uns.edu.ar/iberamia2010

139



References

M. Amoia, A. Denis, L. Benotti, and C. Gardent. 2010.
Evaluating referring strategies in situated instruction
giving. Topics in Cognitive Science. Submitted.

C. Areces and D. Gorı́n. 2005. Ordered resolution with
selection for H(@). In F. Baader and A. Voronkov,
editors, Proc. of LPAR 2004, volume 3452 of LNCS,
pages 125–141. Springer.

C. Areces, D. Figueira, S. Figueira, and S. Mera. 2008a.
Expressive power and decidability for memory log-
ics. In Logic, Language, Information and Computa-
tion, volume 5110 of LNCSs, pages 56–68. Springer.

C. Areces, A. Koller, and K. Striegnitz. 2008b. Referring
expressions as formulas of description logic. In Proc.
of INLG-08.

J. Austin. 1962. How to do Things with Words. Oxford
University Press.

L. Benotti and D. Traum. 2009. A computational ac-
count of comparative implicatures for a spoken dia-
logue agent. In Proc. of IWCS-8.

L. Benotti. 2009a. Clarification potential of instructions.
In SIGDIAL-09.

L. Benotti. 2009b. Frolog: An accommodating text-
adventure game. In Proc. of EACL-09.

N. Blaylock. 2005. Towards tractable agent-based dia-
logue. Ph.D. thesis, University of Rochester, Depart-
ment of Computer Science.

D. Byron, A. Koller, K. Striegnitz, J. Cassell, R. Dale,
J. Moore, and J. Oberlander. 2009. Report on the 1st
GIVE challenge. In Proc. of ENLG, pages 165–173.

N. Dahlbäck, A. Jönsson, and L. Ahrenberg. 1998. Wiz-
ard of Oz studies—why and how. In Readings in intel-
ligent user interfaces, pages 610–619. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.

J. Doswell. 2005. It’s virtually pedagogical: pedagogi-
cal agents in mixed reality learning environments. In
Proc. of SIGGRAPH-05, page 25. ACM.

O. Engwall, P. Wik, J. Beskow, and G. Granström. 2004.
Design strategies for a virtual language tutor. In
S. Kim and D. Young, editors, Proc. of ICSLP-04, vol-
ume 3, pages 1693–1696.

P. Estrella and A. Popescu-Belis. 2008. Multi-eval: an
evaluation framework for multimodal dialogue anno-
tations. Poster at the Joint IM2 and ASSI.

P. Estrella, A. Popescu-Belis, and N. Underwood. 2005.
Finding the system that suits you best: Towards the
normalization of MT evaluation. In Proc. of ASLIB-
05, pages 23–34.

P. Estrella, A. Popescu-Belis, and M. King. 2008. Im-
proving contextual quality models for MT evaluation
based on evaluators’ feedback. In Proc. of LREC-08.

P. Estrella, A. Popescu-Belis, and M. King. 2009. The
femti guidelines for contextual mt evaluation: princi-
ples and tools. In W. Daelemans and V. Hoste, ed-
itors, Evaluation of Translation Technology. Linguis-
tica Antverpiensia.

M. Foster, M. Giuliani, A. Isard, C. Matheson, J. Ober-
lander, and A. Knoll. 2009. Evaluating description
and reference strategies in a cooperative human-robot
dialogue system. In Proc. of IJCAI-09.

P. Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole
and J. Morgan, editors, Syntax and Semantics: Vol. 3:
Speech Acts, pages 41–58. Academic Press.

M. Hajdinjak and F. Mihelic. 2006. The paradise evalu-
ation framework: Issues and findings. Computational
Linguistics, 32(2):263–272.

J. Hoffmann and B. Nebel. 2001. The FF planning
system: Fast plan generation through heuristic search.
JAIR, 14:253–302.

ISO/IEC. 1999. 14598-1:1999 (E) – Information Tech-
nology – Software Product Evaluation – Part 1: Gen-
eral Overview.

ISO/IEC. 2001. 9126-1:2001 (E) – Software Engineer-
ing – Product Quality – Part 1:Quality Model.

H. Kautz and B. Selman. 1999. Unifying SAT-based
and graph-based planning. In Proc of the IJCAI, pages
318–325.

R. Lecoeuche, C. Mellish, and D. Robertson. 1998. A
framework for requirements elicitation through mixed-
initiative dialogue. In Proc. ICRE-98. IEEE.

D. Litman and S. Pan. 2002. Designing and evaluating
an adaptive spoken dialogue system. User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction, 12(2-3):111–137.

J. Molka-Danielsen and M. Deutschmann, editors. 2009.
Learning and Teaching in the Virtual World of Second
Life. Tapir Academic Press.

D. Nau, M. Ghallab, and P. Traverso. 2004. Automated
Planning: Theory & Practice. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc.

M. Purver. 2006. CLARIE: Handling clarification re-
quests in a dialogue system. Research on Language
and Computation, 4(2-3):259–288.

E. Schegloff. 1987. Some sources of misunderstanding
in talk-in-interaction. Linguistics, 8:201–218.

P. Wik and A. Hjalmarsson. 2009. Embodied conversa-
tional agents in computer assisted language learning.
Speech Commun., 51(10):1024–1037.

140


