




































Surprisal Derives the Recent Filler Heuristic in Mildly Context Sensitive
Grammars

Kyle Grove
Linguistics

Cornell University
211 Morrill Hall

Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
kwg33@cornell.edu

Abstract

This paper provides a new account for why
online processing of filler-gap relative clause
dependencies is more difficult in cases where
filler-gap interacts with object control than in
cases involving subject control, as reported by
Frazier et al. (1983). Frazier et al. (1983) ar-
gued for a Recent Filler heuristic in which the
parser expects to discharge the most recent
filler at every gap site. We observe that statis-
tical subcategorization preferences on the con-
trol verb and the embedded verb ‘sing’ inter-
act, favoring subject control disambiguation.

We employ surprisal (Hale, 2001) as a com-
plexity metric on filler-gap structures by con-
struing control as a Movement operation in
Minimalist Grammars (Stabler, 1997). We ob-
tain greater surprisals for the Distant Filler
condition, deriving the prediction that the Re-
cent Filler heuristic falls out from statistical
subcategorization preferences.

1 Introduction

In filler-gap constructions, 1 the parser must map
a non-local dependency between an extraposed el-
ement (the ‘filler’ nominal element) and a position
in the subcategorization frame (the ‘gap’) of a verb
to-be-determined. When filler-gap sentences con-
tain complex verb structure such as control verbs,
ambiguity can result because there are multiple po-
tential gap sites the filler could conceivably have
been extraposed from. The complexity of this task

1Many thanks are due to John Hale, Julie Balazs, David Lutz
and Effi Georgala for advice and critique of this paper. Any
errata and shortcomings in this work are surely mine, and not
theirs.

is demonstrated in 1, where a single prefix (1a. and
1b.) can be disambiguated in two quite different
ways.

(1) a. Everyone liked the woman the little
child begged to sing those stupid French
songs.

b. Everyone liked the woman the little
child begged to sing those stupid French
songs for.

(Frazier et al., 1983, 203)

(2) a. The child1 begged the woman2 to t2 sing
those songs.

b. The child1 begged to t1 sing those songs
for the woman.

With object control (OC) verbs (1a and 2a), the sub-
ject of the infinitival ‘sing’ is the object of the tran-
sitive control verb ‘begged’, but with subject control
(SC) verbs (1b and 2b), the subject of the infinitival
is the subject of an intransitive control verb. While
these conditions can generally be disambiguated at
the control verb in non-relativized contexts (2), rel-
ativization of the control verb’s object removes the
disambiguating cue in object control cases. Thus,
the prefix ‘Everyone loved the woman the child
begged to sing those ...’ is locally ambiguous, and
is disambiguated by either the continuation (... for.),
in the subject control case, or the sentence abruptly
ending (.), in the object control case.

Frazier et al. (1983) argued that the lesser difficulty
of SC filler-gap supports an account where a strictly
serial parsing strategy is guided by a Recent Filler
heuristic. The Recent Filler heuristic holds that in

Surprisal Derives the Recent Filler Hypothesis in Mildly Context Sensitive Grammars

77



cases where the parser is presented with multiple
fillers for a single gap, it expects to map the most
recent filler to that gap. When this expectation is
defeated by new sentential material, the parser must
backtrack until it can recover to an analysis congru-
ent with this material.

The Recent Filler heuristic was disconfirmed in
Boland et al. (1990). Boland et al. (1990) employed
a semantic mismatch paradigm for object control
verbs in which the raiser-to-object is potentially an
implausible subject of the embedded infinitival. This
effect is seen in 3, where 3b is semantically anoma-
lous due only to the infinitival verb; horses and out-
laws both make excellent receivers of signals, but
horses lack the ability to surrender weapons.

(3) a. The cowboy signaled the outlaw to sur-
render his weapons quietly.

b. The cowboy signaled the horse to sur-
render his weapons quietly.

(Boland et al., 1990, 416)

By applying semantic mismatch to filler-gap depen-
dencies, an extraposed element could be manipu-
lated for semantic plausibility as a potential filler
for a gap site. Boland et al. (1990) developed Dis-
tant Filler sentences which featured such plausabil-
ity mismatches, using wh-questions. In these sen-
tences, the recent filler matched the gap-site verb for
plausability, but the distant filler did not.

(4) a. Which outlaw did the cowboy signal to
surrender his weapons quietly?

b. Which horse did the cowboy signal to
surrender his weapons quietly?

(Boland et al., 1990, 417)

Boland et al. (1990) used an online plausability
monitoring task in which participants where asked
to incrementally indicate whether the sentence was
plausible. If participants employed the Recent Filler
heuristic, then they should be unaware of plausabil-
ity mismatches which obtain only on the Distant
Filler structural analysis. Participants detected im-
plausibility immediately, suggesting that they do not
rely on a Recent Filler heuristic.

2 Hypothesis

We argue contra Frazier et al. (1983) that the Re-
cent Filler effect arises from the parser’s statistical
knowledge of verb subcategorization. We observe
(in Fig. 14, Appendix) that the Recent Filler analy-
sis requires a prepositional attachment for the verb
‘sing’ and a subject control frame for the control
verb, while the Distant Filler analysis requires there
to be no PP attachment on ‘sing’, and an object con-
trol frame for the control verb. We anticipate the
verb ‘sing’, used throughout the materials in Fra-
zier et al. (1983), to exhibit frequent prepositional
phrase attachment. We hypothesize that corpus-
derived probabilistic weightings on PP-attachment
and control verb subcategorization frames are incor-
porated in a probabilistic grammar that biases to-
wards the Recent Filler analysis. As sentences are
parsed, the probabilities in this grammar represent
degrees of belief which are prone to revision as evi-
dence is collected; dramatic revisions of belief sug-
gest that the parse has been particularly difficult. We
employ surprisal (Hale, 2001) as a psycholinguis-
tic linking theory which characterizes the severity
of this belief update. We predict that object control
Distant Filler continuations will have greater sur-
prisal at the disambiguating continuation than sub-
ject control Recent Filler continuations.

3 Background

3.1 Grammar

How best to represent the argument sharing that
control and raising verbs exhibit has generated de-
bate among syntacticians and semanticists (Jacob-
son, 1992; Chomsky and Lasnik, 1993; Steed-
man, 1994; Hornstein, 2000). Chomsky and Las-
nik (1993) represents the external argument of the
infinitival verb as being satisfied by a phonetically
unrealized pronominal, PRO, which is to be mapped
thematically to the corresponding argument in the
control verb by a structural construal operation ex-
ternal to the core grammar. Hornstein (2000) argues
instead that the Movement operation available to the
core grammar is responsible for this mapping. Ja-
cobson (1992) focuses more on the subcategoriza-
tion frames of the verbs than the arguments them-

Kyle Grove

78



selves. On an approach such as in Jacobson (1992),
a control or raising verb acts as a functor on the in-
finitival verb, mapping the arguments of the infiniti-
val onto the matrix verb.

We constructed a mildly context sensitive Minimal-
ist Grammar (MG) (Stabler, 1997) that implements a
non-pronominal theory of control (Jacobson, 1992;
Pollard and Sag, 1994; Steedman, 1994; Hornstein,
2000) as a type of Movement operation between the
subject position of the embedded verb and an object
or subject position in the control verb. We leave as
an empirical question whether other approaches to
control would yield the same human sentence pro-
cessing prediction. Rendering control as Move in
MG is advantageous in several ways. First, prop-
erties of the Minimalist Grammars formalism have
been studied in depth: sentences in an MG language
can be parsed efficiently and parses in MG possess a
context-free backbone which can be leveraged with
PCFG methods. Second, since relative clause extra-
position is also treated as Move in our grammar, we
can model the complexity of the interaction between
filler-gap and control more easily than we could if
control were handled in some other component of
the grammar.

In MGs, a lexical item has a distinct set of syn-
tactic (SYN) features, which uniquely determine a
movement chain that the lexical item can participate
in (Hale and Stabler, 2005). Thus, we model lex-
ical subcategorization frames in MGs by a one-to-
many encoding between phonetic (PHON) features
and SYN features: an ambiguous control verb such
as ‘wanted’ is modeled in an MG lexicon with re-
dundant lexical entries, as shown in Fig. 1.

::=>V =D v to :: =v inf
wanted :: =inf +k v wanted :: =inf +k V
the :: =N D -k the :: =N D
woman :: N child :: N

Figure 1: MG Fragment for Control

Derived Trees for Subject and Object Control are de-
picted in Figs. 2 and 3.

In both subject and object control verbs, the con-
trol dependency is triggered by the Merge of a nom-
inal category whose SYN is D -k in the specifier of

>

the child
D

<

wanted
=inf +k V

<

to
=v inf

>

t1
D -k

sing
=D v

Figure 2: Derived Tree for Subject Control

>

the child
D

<

=>V =D v >

the woman
D

<

wanted
=inf +k V

<

to
=v inf

>

t1
D -k

sing
=D v

Figure 3: Derived Tree for Object Control

the infinitival verb. The landing site of this nominal
category is determined by the location of the cor-
responding +k attractor feature. When the control
verb has SYN =inf +k v as in Fig. 2, the nominal
with -k feature will move to the specifier of ‘little
v’, the subject position of the control verb. Subject-
to-subject movement derives the semantic intuition

Surprisal Derives the Recent Filler Hypothesis in Mildly Context Sensitive Grammars

79



that in ‘The child asked to sing’, the child has two
semantic roles: it is both an asker and a (potential)
singer. However, when the control verb has SYN
=inf +k V, such in Fig. 2, the subject of the embed-
ded verb raises to the object position of the matrix
verb, specifier of V. Raising-to-object derives the se-
mantic intuition that in ‘The child asked the woman
to sing’, the woman is a potential singer but the re-
cipient of the request; the child is the asker.

The object of an object control verb could undergo
further extraposition via relativization. The interac-
tion of an ambiguous control verb and relativization
renders thematic assignment difficult because the
extraposed object could either have moved from the
object of the control verb or from another position
in the structure. In Figs. 4 and 5, we demonstrate
a promotion analysis of relative clauses following
Kayne (1994) and Bianchi (2004). On this analy-
sis, the relative pronoun and relativized nominal are
a constituent underlyingly. As seen in Fig. 5, the
=N feature on relative pronoun ‘who’ triggers Merge
with the N category feature on woman, yielding a
category whose PHON is ‘who woman’ and syntac-
tic feature inventory is D -arel. This D is Merged
into an argument position as the embedded verb’s
argument structure is composed with Merge opera-
tions up to the head ‘=T +arel Crel’. The Merge of
‘=T +arel Crel’ with the derived category ‘T -arel’
establishes an embedded clause with syntactic fea-
tures ‘+arel Crel -arel’. The ‘+arel/-arel’ feature pair
cancels by triggering Movement of the -arel feature,
extracting ‘who woman’ out of the embedded clause
as indicated by the lower arrow in Fig. 5. Merge of
‘=Crel +nom agrD’ ultimately results in the remnant
movement of ‘woman’, as indicated by the higher
arrow in Fig. 5. This series of movement correctly
derives the ordering of subject and object relative
clauses in English. This strategy treats reduced rela-
tive clauses by substituting the null relative pronoun
‘::=N D -arel’ in Fig. 4 for its non-null counterpart
‘who :: = N D -arel’.

the :: =>agrD D :: =Crel +nom agrD
:: =T +arel Crel =v T
who :: =N D -arel :: =N D -arel
woman :: N sing :: =D v

Figure 4: MG Fragment for Relative Clause

<

the
=> agrD D

>

woman
N

<

=Crel
+nom agrD

>

>

who
D

t1
N -nom

<

=T +arel Crel <

=v T >

t2
D -arel -nom

sing
=D v

Figure 5: Derived Tree for Relative Clause

3.2 Surprisal

Following Hale (2001), we employ information the-
ory to model the strangeness of parser actions.
This study pursues the hypothesis that information
about verbal subcategorization frequencies biases
the human sentence processor against object con-
trol (Distant Filler) filler-gap resolutions of the am-
biguous prefix. We predict that a parser with this
stochastic grammatical knowledge will model this
expectancy by exhibiting greater surprisal on object
control/Distant Filler continuations than on subject
control/Recent Filler continuations.

Surprisal (Hale, 2001) hypothesizes that perceived
difficulty of human sentence processing at a token

Kyle Grove

80



of interest is associated with the unexpectedness of
the new token. On a given string, the surprisal of
a token situated between positions n-1 and n is the
logarithm of the ratio of the probabilities of prefixes
starting at 0 and ending at n-1 and n.

surprisal = log 2
αn−1
αn

Figure 6: Surprisal of a word given a PCFG

Surprisal formalizes the intuition that some words
are syntactically costly to incorporate, by measuring
the rate at which those words reduce the total proba-
bility allocated to all incrementally viable analyses.
Surprisal predicts garden pathing when new tokens
rule out much probability mass.

4 Methodology

We used Tregex (Levy and Andrew, 2006) on Penn
Treebank (Marcus et al., 1994) to obtain counts for
object control and subject control for each control
verb used in Experiment 2 of Frazier et al. (1983),
using the queries indicated in Fig. 7. We considered
a verb frame as an instance of subject control when
the verb node was sister to an S node which dom-
inated a null pronominal subject (NP-SBJ) whose
annotation was either PRO or -NONE-. We con-
sidered a verb frame as an instance of object con-
trol when the verb frame was sister to an S-node
whose NP-SBJ had non-null string yield. We ex-
cluded instances of passivized object control, which
structurally resemble cases of subject control.

Subject Control
VP<(/VB.?/<(/expect.[s|ed|ing]/)

$+NP $(S<(NP-SBJ<-NONE-$(VP<TO))))
VP < (/VB.?/ < (/expect.[s|ed|ing]/)

$+NP $(S<(NP-SBJ<PRO$(VP<TO))))
Object Control
VP < (/VB.?/ < (/expect.[s|ed|ing/])

$(S<(NP-SBJ<!-NONE-$(VP<TO))))

Figure 7: Tregex Queries for Control Verbs

We obtained the following counts in Fig. 8 for the
four verbs in Experiment 2 of Frazier et al. (1983),
verifying that subject control is prevalent in the Penn
Treebank.

Verb Subject Control Object Control
want 344 47
expect 509 200
choose 23 1
ask 16 35

Figure 8: Corpus Counts for Control Verbs

We also obtained counts for prepositional phrase at-
tachment preferences for the verb ‘sing’, as shown
in Fig. 9, also verifying that PP-attachment is par-
ticularly frequent for the verb ‘sing’.

Verb PP ¬ PP
sing 7 6

Figure 9: Corpus Counts for PP Attachment

We also obtained counts for reduced relative con-
structions and main clause constructions, as well as
counts for the transitivity of ’sing’. These factors
were common across all conditions. For each of the
factors, we constructed a parameter by converting
the count into a ratio, through dividing the individ-
ual outcome’s count by the summed count of all pos-
sible outcomes. We built a representative minitree-
bank of 4 ∗ 24 = 64 sentences, where each sentence
contained: either a subject or object control verb; in
either a main clause or reduced relative clause usage;
with or without a prepositional phrase attachment to
the verb; and with either a transitive or intransitive
use of the verb ‘sing’, for each of the four control
verbs. Each sentence was weighted with the product
of the parameters particular to that condition.

An MG statistical prefix parsing system was used
to obtain surprisals for the ambiguous prefix com-
mon to 1a and 1b and the subject and object con-
trol continuations. For each prefix, a parse forest
is built; this parse forest is equivalent to a context-
free grammar (Billot and Lang, 1989), which can be
augmented with probabilities to obtain a probabilis-
tic context free grammar. At training time, the parser
uses Weighted Relative Frequency Estimation (Chi,
1999) to estimate a PCFG model of the minitree-
bank. At testing time, the parser constructs a proba-
bilistic model at each prefix; these prefixes are rep-
resented as straightline finite state automata whose
suffixes are self loops. The parser estimates for each

Surprisal Derives the Recent Filler Hypothesis in Mildly Context Sensitive Grammars

81



0v6 → 0D2 2= D v6
Figure 10: A situated MG rule.

prefix automaton a weighted intersection PCFG us-
ing the renormalization technique in Nederhof and
Satta (2006). In this intersection PCFG, each cate-
gory is ‘situated’ with indices, i.e. the situated cat-
egory is the product of grammatical categories and
automaton transitions used in its derivation.

5 Results

We found greater surprisals on distant filler continu-
ations for three of the four verbs.

Verb Recent Filler Distant Filler
wanted 1.448 bits 2.978 bits
expected 1.819 bits 2.176 bits
asked 2.392 bits 1.608 bits
chose 1.213 bits 4.241 bits

Figure 11: Surprisal Results

These compare to the Frazier et al. (1983) results,
presented below.

Verb Recent Filler Distant Filler
wanted 980 msec. 1168 msec.
expected 997 msec. 1082 msec.
asked 969 msec. 1132 msec.
chose 915 msec. 1050 msec.

Figure 12: Frazier Mean Reaction Times

The surprisal data suggest that no special heuristic
is required to explain the Recent Filler expectation
in Frazier et al. (1983); the expectation arises nat-
urally on a probabilistic grammar which has knowl-
edge of subcategorization frequencies for verbs. The
Recent Filler analysis of the ambiguous prefix re-
quires that 1) the verb ‘sing’ exhibit PP-attachment;
2) the control verb be a subject control verb. The
Distant Filler analysis requires the conjunction of
two lower probability events: 1) that the verb ‘sing’
exhibit no PP-attachment; 2) that the control verb
be an object control verb. The Distant Filler con-
tinuations yield greater surprisals because the parser

must segue rapidly from a highly probable parse for-
est which is uncommitted to verb information to a
much less probable parse forest which is commit-
ted to generally unlikely beliefs about the matrix and
embedded verb.

6 Discussion

Our claim that the surprisal results reflect rapid
shifts in parser beliefs about control and PP-
attachment is borne out by examining the parse for-
est conditioned on each prefix. We examined the
parse forest conditioned on the ambiguous prefix
(of the‘want’ condition) and found an MG cate-
gory which was parent of two different MG rules;
one which reflected the Recent Filler/Subject Con-
trol strategy and one which reflected the Distant
Filler/Object Control strategy. We depict these rules
in Fig. 13.

0.766(: v -arel -nom)→(: +k v -arel -nom -k)
0.234(: v -arel -nom)→(: =D v -arel -nom) (:D)
Figure 13: Probabilistic MG Rules for Recent and Dis-
tant Filler

The derived MG category (v -arel -nom) is simply
a verbal category with features that license relative
clause extraction. In the Recent Filler rewrite, this
category is formed from a unary Move application
which moves ‘the child’ to derive Subject Control
via the (+k,-k) case feature pair. In the Distant Filler
rewrite, (v -arel -nom) is formed from the binary
Merge application where ‘the child’ is merged as
the subject of the control verb; ‘woman’ has already
moved for Object Control. The probabilities 2 at-
tached to these rules show that the Recent Filler bias
falls out from statistical verb subcategorization in-
formation; the parser predicts that the Recent Filler
continuation is three times as likely as the Distant
Filler continuation.

We built a Minimalist Grammar which treats Control
as Move so that we could easily model the interac-
tions of control and filler-gap. Future work would
look to explore whether other approaches to control
verbs would yield similar surprisal results. We could

2Importantly, all the categories below this production in the
‘branch’ have deterministic rewrites with probability 1.

Kyle Grove

82



for instance operationalize Jacobson (1992) syntac-
tically with MG adjunction; we would allow the con-
trol verb to incorporate the infinitival verb directly,
rather than using Move to share nominal arguments
between them. Alternatively, we could develop a
system that treats control using a null pronominal
utilizing Conjunctive Grammars (Okhotin, 2001) to
simulate the seperate Base and Control modules of a
Government and Binding style grammar.

We derived Frazier et al. (1983)’s Recent Filler
preference as an epiphenomenon of a statistical
parser’s knowledge of verb subcategorizations. The
embedded verb ‘sing’ exhibits an affinity for PP-
attachment which together with knowledge of sub-
categorization rates of control verbs directly gives
rise to the effect in Frazier et al. (1983). Our model
showed that the Recent Filler effect is more likely
due to the rapid integration of verbal subcategoriza-
tion frames which provide rich information about
the structural environment.

References

Valentina Bianchi. 2004. Resumptive relatives and lf
chains. In Luigi Rizzi, editor, The Structure of CP and
IP, pages 76–114. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Sylvie Billot and Bernard Lang. 1989. The struc-
ture of shared forests in ambiguous parsing. In
Proceedings of the 27th annual meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 143–151. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics Morristown, NJ,
USA.

Julie E. Boland, Michael K. Tanenhaus, and Susan M.
Garnsey. 1990. Evidence for the immediate use of verb
control information in sentence processing. Journal of
Memory and Language, 29(4):413–432.

Zhiyi Chi. 1999. Statistical properties of probabilis-
tic context-free grammars. Computational Linguistics,
25(1):131–160.

Noam Chomsky and Howard Lasnik. 1993. The theory
of principles and parameters. Syntax: An international
handbook of contemporary research, 1:506–569.

Lyn Frazier, Charles Clifton, and Janet Randall. 1983.
Filling gaps: Decision principles and structure in sen-
tence comprehension. Cognition, 13(2):187–222.

John T. Hale and Edward P. Stabler. 2005. Strict deter-
ministic aspects of minimalist grammars. Logical aspects
of computational linguistics, pages 162–176.

John T. Hale. 2001. A probabilistic Earley parser as a
psycholinguistic model. In Proceedings of NAACL, vol-
ume 2, pages 159–166.
Norbert Hornstein. 2000. Move! A Minimalist Theory
of Construal. Blackwell, Oxford.
Pauline Jacobson. 1992. Raising without movement.
48:149–194.
Richard S. Kayne. 1994. The Antisymmetry of Syntax.
MIT Press.
Roger Levy and Galen Andrew. 2006. Tregex and
Tsurgeon: tools for querying and manipulating tree data
structures. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.
Citeseer.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1994. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational
linguistics, 19(2):313–330.
Mark-Jan Nederhof and Giorgio Satta. 2006. Es-
timation of consistent probabilistic context-free gram-
mars. In Proceedings of the main conference on Human
Language Technology Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association of Computational Linguistics,
pages 343–350. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics Morristown, NJ, USA.
A. Okhotin. 2001. Conjunctive grammars. Journal of
Automata, Languages and Combinatorics, 6(4):519–535.
Carl J. Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-driven
phrase structure grammar. University of Chicago Press.
Edward P. Stabler. 1997. Derivational minimalism.
In Logical Aspects of Computational Linguistics., pages
68–95. Springer.
Mark Steedman. 1994. Binding and Control in CCG and
its Relatives. IRCS Technical Reports Series, page 161.

Surprisal Derives the Recent Filler Hypothesis in Mildly Context Sensitive Grammars

83



7 Appendix

Figure 14: Online Processing of Control and Relativization with Mean Surprisals

Kyle Grove

84


