



















































A Paradigm-Based Finite State Morphological Analyzer for Marathi


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (WSSANLP), pages 26–34,
the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), Beijing, August 2010

A Paradigm-Based Finite State Morphological Analyzer for Marathi 

Mugdha Bapat 

 

Harshada Gune 

 

Pushpak Bhattacharyya 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay  

 

 {harshadag,mbapat,pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in

 
 

Abstract 

A morphological analyzer forms the 

foundation for many NLP applications of 

Indian Languages. In this paper, we pro-
pose and evaluate the morphological 

analyzer for Marathi, an inflectional lan-

guage. The morphological analyzer ex-
ploits the efficiency and flexibility of-

fered by finite state machines in model-

ing the morphotactics while using the 

well devised system of paradigms to 
handle the stem alternations intelligently 

by exploiting the regularity in inflection-

al forms. We plug the morphological 
analyzer with statistical pos tagger and 

chunker to see its impact on their per-

formance so as to confirm its usability as 
a foundation for NLP applications. 

1 Motivation and Problem Definition 

A highly inflectional language has the capability 

of generating hundreds of words from a single 
root. Hence, morphological analysis is vital for 

high level applications to understand various 

words in the language. Morphological analyzer 

forms the foundation for applications like infor-
mation retrieval, POS tagging, chunking and 

ultimately the machine translation. Morphologi-

cal analyzers for various languages have been 
studied and developed for years. But, this re-

search is dominated by the morphological ana-

lyzers for agglutinative languages or for the lan-
guages like English that show low degree of in-

flection. Though agglutinative languages show 

high morpheme per word ratio and have com-

plex morphotactic structures, the absence of fu-

sion at morpheme boundaries makes the task of 
segmentation fluent once the model for imple-

mentation of morphotactics is ready. On this 

background, a morphological analyzer for highly 

inflectional language like Marathi which has the 
tendency to overlay the morphemes in a way that 

aggravates the task of segmentation presents an 

interesting case study. 
Eryiğit and Adalı (2004) propose a suf-

fix stripping approach for Turkish. The rule 

based and agglutinative nature of Turkish allows 
the language to be modeled using FSMs and 

does not need a lexicon. The morphological ana-

lyzer does not face the problem of the changes 

taking place at morpheme boundaries which is 
not the case with inflectional languages. Hence, 

although apprehensible this model is not suffi-

cient for handling the morphology of Marathi. 
Many morphological analyzers have 

been developed using the two-level morphologi-

cal model (Koskenniemi, 1983) for 

morphological analysis. (Oflazer, 1993; Kim et 
al., 1994) have been developed using PC-

Kimmo (Antworth, 1991), a morphological 

parser based on the two-level model. Concep-
tually, the model segments the word in its con-

stituent parts, and accounts for phonological and 

orthographical changes within a word. While, 
the model proves to be very useful for develop-

ing the morphological analyzers for agglutina-

tive languages or the languages with very less 

degree of inflection, it fails to explicitly capture 
the regularities within and between paradigms 

present in the inflectional languages. Marathi 

has a well defined paradigm-based system of 
inflection. Hence, we decided to develop our 

own model which works on the similar lines of 

PC-Kimmo (Antworth, 1991) but exploits the 

26



usefulness of paradigm-based inflectional sys-

tem. 
Bharati et al. (2004) propose a paradigm 

based algorithm for morphological analysis of 

Hindi, an inflecting language. In Hindi, the in-

flected forms of roots do not allow further at-
tachment of any other suffixes. In contrast, in 

Marathi once the root is transformed into its in-

flected form it is followed by suffixes to show 
its agreement with the other words in the sen-

tence. Some postpositions derive new words 

which themselves may undergo inflection and 
allow attachment of other suffixes. This makes 

the simple paradigm-based model proposed in 

this work unfit for Marathi morphological analy-

sis. 
Dixit et al. (2006) developed a morphological 

analyzer with a purpose of using it for spell 

checking. Though their analyzer successfully 
analyzes the words with a single suffix, its scope 

is restricted to the handling of only first level 

suffixes. 

1.1 Our Approach 

In this paper, we present the morphological 
analyzer for Marathi which is official language 

of the state of Maharashtra (India). With 90 

million fluent speakers worldwide, Marathi 
ranks as the 4

th
 most spoken language in India 

and the 15
th
 most in the world. The methodology 

is based on the use of paradigm-based 
inflectional system combined with finite state 

machines (FSMs) for modeling the 

morphotactics. To the best of our knowledge, 

such an approach has never been tried out for 
Marathi. The crux of the system lies in the 

detailed study of morphosyntactic phenomena, 

the morphotactic structure of the language and 
the use of paradigm-based inflectional system. 

The approach can be used for other inflection-

al languages by developing the resources like 
language specific inflection rules and the FSM 

that models the morphotactics for the language. 

1.2 Marathi Morphology 

Marathi is a morphologically rich language. It is 

highly inflectional and also shows derivation to 
a high degree. Like other synthetic languages, 

Marathi morphological analysis faces some 

well-known challenges. Words contain multiple 
morphemes fused together in such a way that, it 

becomes difficult to segment them. A single 

morpheme contains a bunch of grammatical 
attributes associated with it which creates a chal-

lenge for morphological parsing. A single root is 

capable of generating hundreds of words by 

combining with the other morphemes. 
The complexity involved in the formation of a 

polymorphemic word can be better illustrated 

using an example. Consider the word 

 {devaasaarakhyaalaa} (to the one 

like the god). The nominal root ‘ ’ {deva} 

(god) gets inflected to the oblique case, singular 

form ‘ ’ {devaa} which is then followed by 

the adjectival suffix ‘ ’ {saarakhaa} (alike). 

This derives the adjective ‘ ’ {devaa-

saarakhaa} (the one like the god) which then 

starts behaving like a noun. This noun on getting 
inflected to the oblique case, singular form 

 {devasaarakhyaa} is followed by the 

case marker  {laa} (to). This gives the word 

 {devaasaarakhyaalaa} (to the one 

like the god). Equation 1 illustrates this process. 

 

 

 

Equation 1. Formation of  {de-

vaasaarakhyaalaa} (to the one like the god) 

 

This suggests that the process of formation of 
polymorphemic words is recursive in nature with 

inflection taking place at every level of recur-

sion. 
Section 2 discusses the design of the morpho-

logical analyzer which tries to overcome the 

problems discussed above with respect to Mara-
thi language. Sections 3 and 4 discuss the lin-

guistic resources and the processing of words 

belonging to various categories respectively. 

Sections 5 and discuss the classification of suf-
fixes and development of automata based on this 

classification respectively. Section 7 briefs on 

the experimental setup and the results. 

27



2 Morphological Analyzer for Marathi 

The formation of polymorphemic words leads to 

complexities which need to be handled during 

the analysis process. FSMs prove to be elegant 

and computationally efficient tools for modeling 
the suffix ordering in such words. However, the 

recursive process of word formation in Marathi 

involves inflection at the time of attachment of 
every new suffix. The FSMs need to be capable 

of handling them. Koskenniemi (1983) suggests 

the use of separate FSMs to model the ortho-

graphic changes. But, Marathi has a well devised 
system of paradigms to handle them. One of our 

observations led us to a solution that combines 

paradigm-based inflectional system with FSM 
for modeling. The observation was that, during 

the i
th

 recursion only (i-1)
th
 morpheme changes 

its form which can be handled by suitably mod-
ifying the FSM. The formation of the same word 

devaasaarakhyaalaa described above can be 

viewed as illustrated in Equation 2. 

 

 
Equation 2. Simulating the formation of 

 {devaasaarakhyaalaa} (to the 

one like the god) 

Generalizing the word formation process we ar-
rived at the formulation specified by Equation 3.  

 
Equation 3. Formulation of Polymorphemic 

Word Formation 

This requires a morphotactic FSM which is 

aware of the inflected forms of morphemes in 
addition to the actual morphemes to handle the 

above recursive process of word formation. We 

use the paradigm-based system to generate the 

inflected form of the morphemes and feed them 
to the FSM. Figure 1 shows the architecture of 

the morphological analyzer based on this philos-

ophy. 
Inflector inflects all morphemes in the lex-

icon using the inflection rules associated with 

the paradigms to which they belong.  
Given a word, Morphological Recognizer 

recognizes the constituent morphemes in their 

inflected forms using finite state machine that 

models the morphotactics. For example, the out-
put of the Morphological Recognizer for the 

word devaasaarakhyaalaa is devaa + saarakhyaa 

+ laa. Morphological Parser outputs per mor-
pheme analysis of the word using the mor-

phemes recognized by the Morphological Re-

cognizer. 

3 Linguistic Resources 

The linguistic resources required by the morpho-

logical analyzer include a lexicon and inflection 
rules for all paradigms. 

3.1 Lexicon 

An entry in lexicon consists of a tuple <root, 

paradigm, category>. The category specifies the 

grammatical category of the root and the para-
digm helps in retrieving the inflection rules as-

sociated with it. Our lexicon contains in all 

24035 roots belonging to different categories. 
 

Figure 1. Architecture of Marathi Morphological Analyzer 

28



3.2 Inflection Rules 

Inflection rules specify the inflectional suffixes 
to be inserted (or deleted) to (or from) different 

positions in the root to get its inflected form. An 

inflectional rule has the format: <inflectional 

suffixes, morphosyntactic features, label>. The 
element morphosyntactic features specifies the 
set of morphosyntactic features associated with 
the inflectional form obtained by applying the 
given inflection rule. Following is the exhaustive 
list of morphosyntactic features to which differ-
ent morphemes get inflected: 

1) Case: Direct, Oblique 
2) Gender: Masculine, Feminine, Neuter, 

Non-specific 
3) Number: Singular, Plural, Non-specific 
4) Person: 1st, 2nd, 3rd 
5) Tense: Past, Present, Future 
6) Aspect: Perfective, Completive, Fre-

quentative, Habitual, Durative, Incep-

tive, Stative 

7) Mood: Imperative, Probabilitive, Sub-

junctive, Conditional, Deontic, Abiltive, 

Permissive 

The label specifies the morphotactic class to 
which the inflected form (generated by applying 

the inflection rule) belongs. It is used by the 

Morphological Recognizer. 

4 Category Wise Morphological For-
mulation 

The grammatical categories observed in Marathi 
include nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, ad-

verbs, conjunctions, interjections and postposi-

tions. The morphemes belonging to different 
categories undergo different treatment. 

4.1 Noun Morphology 

Marathi nouns inflect for number and case. 

Postpositions get attached to the oblique forms 
of the nouns (known as stems) to show their re-

lationship with other words in the sentence. A 

single stem is used for the attachment of all 

postpositions which makes nominal morphology 
absolute economic in nature. For example vari-

ous forms of the word  {daara} (door) are 

 {daaraasa} (to the door),  {daa-

raane} (by the door),  {daaraashejarii} 

(besides the door). Please note that the same 

stem  {daaraa} is used for the attachment of 

various postpositions. 
Depending upon their ending, gender 

and the inflectional patterns, the nouns in Mara-

thi can be classified into various paradigms. A 

paradigm is a complete set of related inflectional 
forms associated with a given root. All words 

that share the similar inflectional forms fall in 

the same paradigm. Table 1 presents the para-

digm  {daara} (door). 

 Case 

 Direct  Oblique 

Number Singular  {daa-

ra} 

 {daaraa} 

Plural  

{daare} 

 {daa-

raaN} 

Table 1. Paradigm Table for  {daara} 

(door) 

 {kaapaDa} (cloth),  {paana} (leaf), 

 {pustaka} (book),  {kapaaTa} (cup-

board) are the few nouns that fall into this para-

digm. 

Every paradigm has a set of inflection rules 
associated with it one corresponding to every 

inflectional form of the word. A noun has four 

inflectional forms each one corresponding to a 
case-number pair. Hence, every paradigm has 

four inflectional rules associated with it. 

An inflectional rule for Marathi consists of a 

tuple specifying the inflectional suffixes that 
should be inserted and deleted from ultimate and 

penultimate position of the root. Table 2 lists the 

inflectional suffixes that collectively form an 
inflectional rule. 

The procedure to obtain the inflected form 

of the given root R belonging to paradigm P by 
applying the inflectional rule I <UD, UI, PUD, 

PUI> is as follows: 

i. R =R - PUD 

ii. R = R + PUI 

iii. R = R – UD 

iv. R = R + UI 

Suffix Description 

Ultimate 

Deletion 

Suffix to be deleted from the ul-

timate position of the root 

29



(UD) 

Ultimate 

Insertion 
(UI) 

Suffix  to be inserted at the ulti-

mate position of the root 

Penultimate 

Deletion 
(PUD) 

Suffix  to be deleted from the pe-

nultimate position of the root 

Penultimate 

Insertion 

(PUI) 

Suffix  to be inserted at the ulti-

mate position of the root 

Table 2. Suffixes in an Inflectional Rule 

For a given word, even if a single rule out of the 

four is different from the set of available para-

digms, a new paradigm needs to be created. Ta-

ble 3 shows the paradigm  {bhakta} (devo-

tee). Note that, the only difference between the 

two paradigm tables is in the direct case plural 

form. 
 

 Case 

 Direct  Oblique 

Number Singular  

{bhakta} 

   {bhak-

taa} 

Plural 

{bhakta} 

 {bhak-

taaN} 

Table 3. Paradigm Table for  {bhakta} 

(devotee) 

In this way, our lexicon contains 16448 nouns 

categorized into 76 paradigms. Out of the 76 
paradigms, 30 correspond to feminine gender, 29 

to masculine and 17 to neuter gender. This set of 

paradigms includes three null paradigms, one 
corresponding to each gender. In modern Mara-

thi, the stem of the proper nouns or foreign 

words transliterated in Marathi is same as the 

root. In short, postpositions can be directly at-
tached to these roots without any modification. 

Such nouns belong to the null paradigm. 

4.2 Postposition Morphology 

Postpositions follow the stems of nouns and 
pronouns. Postpositions in Marathi can be 

broadly classified into case markers and shab-

dayogi avyayas. Shabdayogi avyayas show the 

relationship of nouns and pronouns with the oth-
er words in the sentence while deriving the ad-

jectives or adverbs in most of the cases. Depend-

ing upon the category of the word derived by 
them they are classified as adjectival and adver-

bial suffixes respectively. We have 142 postpo-

sitions listed in our lexicon.  

4.3 Classification of Postpositions 

The first step towards defining the morphotactics 

of a language is the classification of various suf-

fixes into classes depending upon the mor-

phemes they can follow and the morphemes that 
can follow them. Given the list of 142 postposi-

tions, we carefully examined each one to under-

stand its morphotactic behavior and came up 
with the classification of Marathi postpositions 

as presented in the Table 4. 

 

Class Ordering Rules Ex-

ample 

Case 

markers 

They can follow any ob-

lique form. No other suf-
fixes can follow them. 

 

{ne} 

(by) 

Adjectival 
Suffixes 

They can follow an obli-
que form of a root. Since 

they derive an adjective, 

they can be followed by 
any other suffixes. 

 

{saa-

rak-

haa} 

(alike 

Possessive 

case 

marker 

It can follow any oblique 

form. It can be followed 

by any other suffixes. 

 

{chaa} 

(the 

one 

belong

ing to 

some-

thing) 

Closing 

suffixes 

They can follow any ob-

lique form. No other suf-

fixes can follow them. 

 

{pek-

shaa} 

(in-

stead 
of) 

 {chaa} 

adjectival 

suffix 

It can follow Peculiar 

NSTs and Nearly closing 
postpositions. It can be 

followed by case mark-

ers. 

 

{chaa} 

(the 
one) 

Peculiar They can follow any ob-  

30



NSTs lique form. They can be 

followed only by Exclu-

sive postpositions and  

{chaa} adjectival suffix. 

{ja-

waLa} 
(near) 

Exclusive 

postposi-

tions 

They can follow peculiar 

NSTs. They close the 

word. 

 {ii} 

(in-

side) 

Nearly 
closing 

postposi-

tions 

They can follow oblique 
forms of nouns and pro-

nouns. They can be fol-

lowed by  {chaa} ad-

jectival suffix. 

 

{pa-
ryan-

ta} 

(uptil) 

Shuddha-
shabdayo-

gi avyayas 

They can follow almost 
any morpheme except 

oblique forms of nouns. 

They can be followed by 
some postpositions. But, 

this behavior is quite ir-

regular and needs more 

investigation. In most of 
the cases, these suffixes 

close the word. Hence, 

we consider them to be 
occurring only at the end 

of the word. 

 

{cha} 
(only) 

Table 4. Classification of Postpositions 

4.4 Verbs 

The verbs inflect for gender, number and person 
of the subject and the direct object in a sentence. 

They also inflect for tense and aspect of the ac-

tion as well as mood of the speaker in an illocu-
tionary act. They may even undergo derivation. 

Further discussion on verbal morphology will be 

based on Aakhyaata theory (inflection) and Kru-

danta theory (derivation) (Damale, 1970). Our 
lexicon contains 1160 verb roots classified into 

22 paradigms. 

Aakhyaata Theory forms the basis of 

verbal inflection in Marathi. Aakhyaata  

refers to tense, aspect, and mood. Aakhyaata is 

realized through an aakhyaata suffix which is a 

closing suffix, attached to the verb root. There 
are 8 types of aakhyaatas named after the pho-

nemic shape of the aakhyaata suffix. Associated 

with every aakhyaata are various aakhyaata-

arthas which indicate the features: tense, aspect 
and mood. An aakhyaata may or may not agree 

with gender. There are around 80 Aakhyaata 

suffixes in Marathi. 
Krudanta Theory forms the basis of 

verbal derivation in Marathi. Krudanta refers to 

the word ending in a krut-pratyaya (a suffix 

which refers to an action). Krut-pratyayas are 
attached at the end of verbs to form non-

infinitive verb forms. These forms usually be-

long to one of the categories: noun, adverb or 
adjective. They contribute to the aspect of the 

verb from which they are derived. We cover on-

ly the krudanta forms which are regular in beha-
vior. 

Irregular Verbs: Some verbs in Marathi have 

different behavior as compared to the other 

verbs (regular verbs). These verbs are present in 
some inflected forms for which no definite stem 

exists.  

4.5 Adjectives 

Marathi adjectives can be classified into two 
categories: ones that do not inflect and others 

that inflect for gender, number and case where 

such an inflection agrees with the gender and 

number of the noun modified by them. The in-
flectional forms of the adjectives are generated 

using similar procedure as that of nouns.  

4.6 Pronouns 

There are nine types of pronouns in Marathi. 
Pronouns possess very irregular behavior result-

ing into a large number of suppletive forms. In 

addition to these forms every pronoun has a spe-
cific oblique form (one each for singular and 

plural) to which shabdayogi avyayas can be at-

tached. 

4.7 Indeclinable Words 

Adverbs, conjunctions and interjections are the 
indeclinable words. Some adverbs can be fol-

lowed by a subset of postpositions. 

5 Morphotactics and Automata 

Along with the postpositions mentioned in the 

Table 4 the complete set of morphemes in Mara-

thi includes the roots and their inflectional 
forms. Every morpheme is labeled according to 

the class it belongs to. These labels are used to 

define the ‘Morphotactic FSM’ that models Ma-

31



rathi language. Table 5 enlists various labels 

used in the Morphotactic FSM. 
 

Type of Suffix Label 

Nouns, pronouns, nominal or 

adjectival krudantas 

DF 1 

OF 2 

Case markers 3 

Adjectival postpositions DF 4 

OF 5 

Possessive case marker DF 6 

OF 7 

Closing postpositions 8 

Peculiar NSTs 9 

Exclusive postpositions 10 

Nearly closing postpositions 11 

 {chaa} adjectival suffix 12 

Adjective 1 

Aakhyaatas 1 

Adverbial krudantas 1 

Adverbs-1  1 

Adverbs-2 13 

Shuddhashabdayogi avyayas 14 

Table 5. Morphotactic Labels of Morphemes 

DF: Direct form of a root or a suffix 

OF: Oblique form of a root or a suffix 
Adverb-1: The adverbs those cannot be followed 

by any postpositions 

Adverb-2: The adverbs those can be followed by 
some postpositions 

Note that, the label field mentioned in the inflec-

tion rules refers to the corresponding labels of 
the morphemes mentioned in Table 5. 

Figure 2 shows the FSM for morphological 

recognition of Marathi. The input symbols are 
the labels of the morphemes as mentioned in the 

Table 5. The classification of the suffixes as 

specified in Table 5 explains the construction of 
FSM. We use SFST

1
 (Stuttgart Finite State 

Transducer) for implementing the FSM. 

6 Experiments 

Morphological analysis caters to the needs of 

variety of application like machine translation, 

information retrieval, spell-checking. Different 
applications are interested in different bit of in-

formation provided by the analyzer like the 

stem, the root, the suffixes or the morphosyntac-

tic features. Hence, the performance evaluation 
of a morphological analyzer has to be observed 

in terms of its impact on the performance of the 

applications that use it. Hence, we carry out the 
evaluation in two parts: In direct evaluation we 

directly measure the accuracy of morphological 

analyzer on the given data. In indirect evalua-

tion, we observe the improvement in the per-
formances of statistical pos tagger and chunker 

                                                
1
 http://www.ims.uni-

stuttgart.de/projekte/gramotron/SOFTWARE/SFST.html 

Figure 2. Morphotactic FSM 

32



by using the morphological analyzer to generate 

the morphological features that help in boosting 
their accuracies. We used the corpora in TOUR-

ISM and NEWS domain for all our experiments.  

6.1 Direct Evaluation 

We used Marathi Morphological Analyzer for 

the analysis of 21096 unique words. We manual-
ly measured the accuracy of the morphological 

analyzer by counting the number of correctly 

analyzed words out of the total number of 
words. In the cases where a word has multiple 

analyses, the word was counted as correctly ana-

lyzed only when all of the correct analyses are 
present. Note that, in order to emphasize more 

on the usefulness of our approach towards mor-

phological analysis of Marathi, we added most 

of the roots used in the corpus to the lexicon be-
fore starting the experiments. For a language like 

Marathi, it is required to build a very rich lex-

icon which can be done over a larger period of 
time. 

 Out of the 21096 unique words, 20503 

(97.18%) were found to be correctly analyzed. 

Of the remaining 593 words, 394 words could 
not be recognized by Morphological Recognizer 

and 199 words were assigned the incorrect or 

insufficient analyses. 
By taking a closer look at the 394 words 

which were not recognized (segmented) we 

could come up with the causes of recognition 
failure as listed in Table 6.  

 

Cause Number of 

Words 

Lexicon Coverage 82    (20.81%) 

Absence of Rules 69    (17.51%) 

Acronyms 66    (16.75%) 

Compound words  55    (13.96%) 

Irregular forms needing 
further investigation 

47    (11.92%) 

Transliterated words which 

are uncommon 

25    (6.34%) 

Unidentified words 20    (5.08%) 

Dialect words/ words used 

in spoken language 

20    (5.08%) 

Use of common nouns as 

proper nouns  

5     (1.27%) 

Missing Paradigm 3     (0.76%) 

Fusion (Sandhii) 2     (0.51%) 

Table 6. Causes of Recognition Failure 

6.2 Indirect Evaluation 

CRF based sequence labelers (pos tagger 

and chunker) were trained using morpholog-

ical features and the other elementary features 
like (contextual words and bigram tags). The 

morphological features include ambiguity 

scheme (set of all possible categories of a word) 
and the suffixes for the pos tagger whereas just 

the suffixes in case of chunker.  

    To throw the light of role played by morpho-
logical analyzer in improving the accuracies of 

the sequence labelers, we performed the experi-

ments using two sets of features: The Learning 

Based (LB) labeler was trained using only ele-
mentary features whereas Morphologically Dri-

ven Learning Based (MDLB) labeler used the 

morphological features along with the elementa-
ry features. The results were obtained by per-

forming 4-fold cross validation over the corpora. 

The average accuracy of MDLB Pos tagger 
turned out to be 95.03 as compared to 85% of 

LB. The average accuracy of MDLB chunker 

was found to be 97.87% whereas that of LB was 

found to be 96.91%. . 

7 Conclusion and Future Work 

We presented a high accuracy morphological 
analyzer for Marathi that exploits the regularity 

in the inflectional paradigms while employing 

the Finite State Systems for modeling the lan-

guage in an elegant way. The accuracy figures as 
high as 97.18% in direct evaluation and the per-

formance improvement in shallow parsing speak 

about the performance of the morphological ana-
lyzer. We gave detailed description of the mor-

phological phenomena present in Marathi. The 

classification of postpositions and the develop-

ment of morphotactic FSA is one of the impor-
tant contributions since Marathi has complex 

morphotactics. As a next step the morphological 

analyzer can be further extended to handle the 
derivation morphology and compound words.  

 

References 
Antworth, E. L. 1990.  PC-KIMMO: A Two-

level Processor for Morphological Analysis. 

Occasional Publications in Academic Com-

puting. Summer Institute  of  Linguistics,  

Dallas,  Texas. 
 

33



Bharati, Akshar, Vin eet  Chaitanya, and 

Rajeev Sanghal 1995. Natural Language 
Processing: A Paninian Perspective. Pren-

tice Hall, India. 
 
Damale, M. K. 1970. Shastriya Marathii 

Vyaakarana. Deshmukh 

and Company, Pune, India. 

 

Dixit, Veena, Satish Dethe, and Rushikesh 

K. Joshi. 2006. Design and Implementation 

of a Morphology-based Spellchecker for 

Marathi, an Indian Language. 

In Special issue on Human Language Tech-

nologies as a challenge for Computer 

Science 

and Linguistics. Part I. 15, pages 309–316. 

Archives of Control Sciences. 

 

Eryiğit, Gülşen and Adalı Eşref. 2004. An 

Affix Stripping Morphological Analyzer for 

Turkish. In IASTED International Multi-

Conference on Artificial Intelligence and 

Applications. Innsbruck, Austria, pages 

299–304. 
 
 
Kim, Deok-Bong., Sung-Jin Lee, Key-Sun 

Choi, and Gil-Chang Kim (1994). A two-

level Morphological Analysis of Korean. In 

Conference on Computational Linguistics 

(COLING), pages 535–539. 
 
Koskenniemi, Kimmo 1983.  Two-level 

Morphology: a general  computational 

model for word-form recognition and pro-

duction. University of Helsinki, Helsinki. 
 
Oflazer, Kemal 1993.  Two-level Description 

of Turkish Morphology. In The European 

Chapter of the ACL (EACL). 
 
 

 

 

34


