










































Recognition and extraction of definitional contexts in Spanish for sketching a lexical network


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 109–116, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Recognition and extraction of definitional contexts in Spanish for sketch-
ing a lexical network

César Aguilar Olga Acosta Gerardo Sierra
Department of Linguistics Postgraduate School of Computer 

Science
Language Engineering Group

Autonomous University of 
Queretaro

UNAM Engineering Institute, UNAM

Cerro de las Campanas, s/n, 
Queretaro, Mexico

Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico City Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico City

CAguilar@iingen.unam.mx OAcostaL@iingen.unam.mx GSierraM@iingen.unam.mx

Abstract

In this paper we propose a method to exploit ana-
lytical definitions extracted from Spanish corpora, 
in order to build a lexical network based on the hy-
ponymy/hyperonymy,  part/whole  and  attribution 
relations.  Our  method  considers  the  following 
steps: (a) the recognition and extraction of defini-
tional contexts from specialized documents, (b) the 
identification of analytical definitions on these def-
initional contexts, using verbal predications, (c) the 
syntactic and probabilistic analysis of the associa-
tion observed between verbal predication and ana-
lytical definitions, (d) the identification of the hy-
ponymy/hyperonymy,  part/whole  and  attribution 
relations  based on the lexical information that lies 
between  predications  and  definitions  and  other 
types of phrases, in particular prepositional phrases 
mapped by the preposition de (Eng. of/from).

1 Introduction

Nowadays, the possibility of searching and recog-
nizing lexical relations in definitions occurring in 
specialized  text  corpora  is  an  important  task  in 
computational lexicography and terminology. 

In  this  sense,  authors  such  as  Vossen  and 
Copestake (1993), as well as  Wilks, Slator & Gu-
thrie (1995) are pioneers in offering a relevant set 
of experiments and techniques about how to identi-
fy hyponymy/hypernymy relations from analytical 
definitions, taking into account  the underlying as-
sociation  that  exists  between  terms  and  genus 
terms.

Complementary to these first attempts for iden-
tifying  such  lexical  relations,  Riloff  & Shepherd 
(2004) argue that while these efforts have been ori-

ented  to  extract  lexical  relations  from corpus  of 
general  language, it  is  necessary to focus on do-
main-specific corpora, in order to obtain a special-
ized knowledge that is required for in-depth under-
standing of the subject matter. 

In line with the argument formuled by Riloff & 
Shepherd,  Buiteelar,  Cimiano & Magnini  (2005) 
have  proposed  several  methods  for  building  on-
tologies from text corpora, priorizing the automatic 
recognition  of  syntactic  patterns  that  codify 
hyponymy/hyperonymy relations.

Following all  these authors,  we sketch here a 
research  project  to  design  a  lexical  network,  fo-
cused on classifying scientific and technical con-
cepts extracted from Spanish text corpora. In par-
ticular, we obtain these concepts by extracting def-
initional contexts (DCs) with terms and definitions 
clearly  formulated,  according  to  the  theoretical 
framework  developed  by  Sierra,  Alarcon  & 
Aguilar (2006). 

After  extracted  these  DCs,  we  propose  a 
method to identify lexical relations between terms 
inserted into the DCs.  The method considers,  on 
the one hand, a grammatical analysis for detecting 
syntactic  patterns  that  represent  term  and  genus 
term, bearing in mind their association through lex-
ical relations such as hyponymy/hyperonymy, part/
whole or attribution relations. On the other hand, 
we proposed a semi-automatic evaluation to deter-
mine the degree of accuracy respect to the results 
obtained by our method.   

The issues that we will deal in this paper are or-
ganized as follows: (a) as a starting point, we ex-
pose briefly  the  theoretical  framework to  extract 
DCs from Spanish corpora. (b) According to this 
framework, we describe how analytical definitions 

109



linked to terms can be identified, considering the 
identification of verbal  predications  that  function 
as connectors between such definitions and terms. 
(c) Thus, we offer a probabilistic evaluation for de-
termining the degree of association between pre-
dications and analytical definitions. (d) After this 
evaluation, we sketch a method for exploiting this 
association  between  predications  and  definitions, 
in  order  to  identify  lexical  relations,  specifically 
hyponymy/hyperonymy, part/whole and attribution 
relations.

2 Theoretical framework: DC extraction 

We situate our analysis  within the framework of 
definitional contexts (or DCs) extraction. Accord-
ing to  Sierra  et  al.  (2008),  a  DC is  a  discursive 
structure that contains relevant information to de-
fine a term. DCs have at least two constituents: a 
term and a definition, and usually linguistic or met-
alinguistic  forms,  such  as  verbal  phrases,  typo-
graphical  markers  and/or  pragmatic  patterns.  An 
example is:

(1) La cuchilla fusible [Term] se define como [Verbal 
Phrase] un elemento de conexión y desconexión 
de circuitos eléctricos [Definition]. (Engl. The 
fuse-switch disconnector is defined as an ele-
ment of connection and disconnection of 
electric circuits).

In (1), the term cuchilla flexible is  emphasized by 
the use of bold font, and it appears linked with the 
verbal predication  se define como, and the defini-
tion un elemento de conexión y desconexión de cir-
cuitos eléctricos. Following to Sierra et al. (2008), 
we  consider  the  term,  the  verbal  phrase  and  the 
definition as the three main units constituting the 
syntactic structure of a DC.

This  kind of  syntactic  structure  introduces  an 
analytical  definition  (in  the  Aristotle's  sense), 
where  the  genus  term  is  represented  by  a  noun 
phrase (NP) un elemento and the differentia is rep-
resented by a prepositional phrase (PP)  de conex-
ión y desconexión de circuitos eléctricos.

In a detailed analysis on these syntactic struc-
tures, Aguilar (2009) explains that these structures 
are  predicate  phrases  (PrP),  according to  the  de-
scription proposed by Bowers (1993, 2001). A PrP 
is a phrase mapped by a functional head, and its 
grammatical behavior is similar to other functional 

phrases such as Inflexional Phrase (IP) or Comple-
ment Phrase (CP). A graphical tree representation 
of a PrP is:

Figure 1: Tree representation for PrP, according to 
Bowers (1993: 596)

The Figure 1 describes the syntactic configuration 
of a PrP. We recognise a functional head with the 
feature +/- predicative (Pr). This head maps two sub-
jects: a primary subject in the Specifier position of 
PrP (represented for a NP); and a secondary sub-
ject,  in the Specifier position of verbal phrase or 
VP (often a NP). Finally, both subjects, the VP and 
the PrP are linked to one or several complements, 
which assume phrasal representations (e.g.: NP, IP, 
CP, and other types of phrases).

Based on this description about PrP, Sierra  et  
al. (2008) and Aguilar (2009) observed that both 
primary and secondary predications  have a close 
relation  with  analytical  definitions  expressed  in 
specialized  texts.  Examples  of  this  relation  be-
tween PrP and analytical definitions are:

(2) [Una computadora [es [un tipo de máquina 
electrónica que sirve para hacer operaciones 
PrP] VP] IP] (Eng. [A computer [is [a kind of 
electronic machine used to make operations 
PrP] VP] IP]).

(3) [Turing [define una computadora [como un 
mecanismo electrónico que procesa conjuntos 
de datos PrP] VP] IP] (Eng. [Turing [defines a 
computer [as a kind of electronic device that 
processes a set of data PrP] VP] IP]).

We observe in (2) a canonical primary predication 
where  the  subject  una computadora  represents  a 
term directly associated to predicate es un tipo de  
máquina que... This predicate introduces an analyt-
ical  definition,  conformed  by  a  genus  term 

110



eletronic  machine,  and  the  differentia  que  sirve  
para hacer operaciones. In (3), the predicate como 
un  mecanismo  electrónico...  (Engl.  as  a  kind  of  
electronic  device...)  affects  the secondary subject 
una computadora (Engl.  a computer), in concord-
ance with the explanation of Bowers (1993). Our 
analysis  considers  both  types  of  predications  as 
regular patterns that codify syntactically sequences 
of terms, verbal predications and definitions.

3 Searching  analytical  definitions  in  text 
corpora

We have adapted the predicative patterns deduced 
from our syntactic analysis, in order to search and 
find  (semi-)automatically  analytical  definitions 
linked to these patterns. So, we conducted an ex-
periment  of  identification  of  these  definitions  in 
two text corpora:

• Linguistic  Corpus  on  Engineering  (or 
CLI).  The  CLI,  prepared by Medina and 
others (2004), is a collection of technical 
documents in  different  thematic areas  of 
engineering, with an extension of 500,000 
words, approximately.

• Corpus  on  Informatics  for  Spanish  (or 
CIE). This corpus was built under the su-
pervision of L'Homme and Drouin (2006). 
The  CIE  compiles several documents re-
lated to computer science and   informat-
ics. For our experiment we took a portion 
of  CIE,  which contains articles extracted 
from Wikipedia. This portion has an ex-
tension of   500,000 words.

Following to Aguilar et al. (2004) and Sierra et al. 
(2008), we selected a set of verbs that function as 
heads  of  predicative  patterns  in  Spanish,  taking 
into account the distinction between primary and 
secondary predications. 

In the case of primary predication, the analytic-
al  definition is  integrated in  a  sequence  Term + 
Verbal  Predication  +  Definition.  This  definition 
does not refer to possible author(s) of a definition. 
An example is:

(4) [El apartarrayos Term] [es Verbal Predication] [un dis-
positivo Genus Term] [que protege las instalacio-
nes contra sobretensiones de origen atmosfé-
rico Differentia] (Engl. [The lightning conductor 
Term] [is Verbal Predication] [a device Genus Term] [that 

protects electrical systems against surges of 
atmospheric origin Differentia]).

Having in mind this sequence, we propose a gram-
matical description model for this relation:

Table 1: Construction patterns derived from the relation 
between primary predication and analytical definition

Definition Genus Term Differentia

Analytical 
(Primary 

Predication)

NP =  Noun + 
{AdjP/PP}*

CP = Relative Pronoun  + 
IP 

PP = Preposition  + NP

AdjP = Adjective + NP

The verbs that  operate  as  head of  these  predica-
tions are:  referir (to refer to),  representar (to rep-
resent),  ser  (to  be)  and  significar (to  signify/to 
mean). In contrast,  when a secondary predication 
introduces an analytical definition, this predication 
follows   the  sequence  Author  +  Term + Verbal 
Predication + Definition, where the Author is equi-
valent  to  the  primary subject,  the  Term assumes 
the position of secondary subject,  and the defini-
tion is introduced after the Verbal Predication. In 
this  case,  the  adverbial  particle  como (Eng. 
as/like), or the preposition por (Eng. for/by) indic-
ates the place of the definition. An example is:

(5) [Carlos Godino Author] [define Verbal Predication] [la 
arquitectura naval Term]  [como la ciencia que 
se enfoca en la construcción de los buques De-
finition] (Eng. [Carlos Godino Author] [defines 
Verbal Predication] [the naval architecture Term] [as 
the science that focuses on the construction of 
ships Definition])

Thus, the formal description of this sequence is:

Table 2: Construction patterns derived from the relation 
between secondary predication and analytical definition

 Definition Adverb/
Preposition

Genus Term Differentia

Analytical
(Secondary 
Predica-
tion)

Como
Por

NP =  Noun + 
{AdjP /PP}*

CP = Relative Pro-
noun  +  IP
PP = Preposition  + 
NP
AdjP = Adjective + 
NP

The verbs linked to secondary predications are: ca-
racterizar + como/por (Engl. to characterize + 
as/for), comprender + como (Engl. to comprehend 

111



+ as), concebir + como (Engl. to conceive + as), 
conocer + como (Engl. to know + as), considerar  
+ como (Engl. to consider + as), definir + como 
(Engl. to define + as), describir + como (Engl. to 
define + as), entender + como (Engl. to understand 
+ as) , identificar + como (Engl. to identify + as) 
and visualizar + como (Engl. to visualize + as).

In order to recognize these sequences of predic-
ations and analytical definitions, we employed a 
system developed in Python by Rodríguez (2004). 
Broadly speaking, the input for this system is a set 
of previously delimited text fragments. The output 
is a XML table with a list of patterns, the verb used 
for searching these patterns, and the frequency of 
use in both corpora.

4 Results

Once  we  accomplished  the  process  of  searching 
and  extracting  of  fragments  with  sequences  of 
predication  patterns  of  analytical  definitions,  we 
determined values of precision and recall  for the 
CLI and CIE corpora based on the real number of 
analytical DCs in the corpus. This data was deter-
mined by a human expert through an exploration in 
the  corpora  mentioned  above.  In  table  3  we 
showed DC candidates, as well as the real number 
of true DCs extracted from these candidates.     

Thus, from CLI corpora we obtained a total of 
1686 candidates. From these candidates, the human 
expert recognized a set of 111 true DCs to analyti-
cal  definition  linked  to  primary  predication  pat-
terns. Our recall  was 100% because we obtained 
all of the DCs with analytical definitions, but the 
precision achieved was very low (6.6%). 

The main cause about this low precision is due 
to the verb ser (Eng. to be). The verb ser is highly 
productive in Spanish, however, much of the frag-
ments found are not analytical definitions. In con-
trast, from secondary predication patterns, our re-
call was 100% and precision 9.4%. Thus, the CIE 
corpora showed measures of  precision and recall 
higher than those of CLI corpora because most of 
documents  were  extracted  from  resources  as 
Wikipedia. We suppose this factor is related with a 
definition scheme more canonical in scientific and 
technical documents. 

Table 3: Sequence frequencies of predication patterns 
and analytical definitions

Analytical Definitions  CLI CIE

 
Primary Predication

Candidates 1686 494
DCs 111 127

Recall
Precision

100%
6.6%

100%
25.7%

 
 
Secondary Predication

Candidates 701 61
DCs 66 11

Recall
Precision

100%
9.4%

100%
18.0%

We derived a frequency distribution of the verbs 
with type of predication for CLI and CIE corpora. 
The table 4 shows the relative frequency of use of 
each  verb  explored.  Most  of  these  verbs  do  not 
have been considered in automatic extraction tasks 
of hyponymy-hyperonymy relations, e.  g.:  Hearst 
(1992) or Wilks, Slator & Guthrie (1995).

Table 4: Frequency distribution of verbal predicate, and 
its use in analytical definitions

Predication Corpora
CLI CIE

Primary
Referir(a)/To refer 0 0.02
Representar/To represent 0 0.04
Significar/To signify 0 0.03
Ser/To be 1 0.91
Secondary
Caracterizar/To characterize 0.12 0.18
Concebir/To concibe 0.09 0
Conocer/To know 0.17 0
Considerar/To consider 0.21 0.27
Definir/To define 0.27 0.27
Describir/To describe 0.03 0.09
Entender/To understand 0.06 0.18
Identificar/To identify 0.03 0
Visualizar/To visualize 0.02 0

Once  established  this  distribution,  we  have  ana-
lyzed the degree of assurance to find a good candi-
date for analytical definitions. We have applied a 
method of conditional probabilities for primary and 
secondary predications. Our conditional probabili-
ties are formulated by the hypothesis that the prob-
ability (P) of co-occurrence of predications (Pred) 
linked to analytical definition (AD) is high. Thus, 
we  apply  the  following  formula  of  conditional 
probability:

P(AD ∩ Pred)  

P(AD|Pred) =  P(Pred)  

112



Taking into account the formula mentioned above, 
we obtained the following results:

Table 5: Conditional probabilities of co-occurrence 
between predications and analytical definitions

Predication CLI CIE

Primary 
Analytical definitions 93% 100%
Not-analytical definitions 7% 0%

Secondary 
Analytical definitions 95% 100%
Not-analytical definitions 5% 0%

Therefore, we considered that the possibility to 
identify a good candidate of analytical definition is 
high, insofar as we took into account their relation-
ship with primary and secondary predications.

In  addition,  Alarcón,  Bach  &  Sierra  (2007), 
propose a methodology for filtering true DCs from 
a set of candidates to DCs. An important advance 
provided for this work is the application of a filter 
phase that discards those syntactic patterns without 
true analytical definitions. For example, if we find 
a particle as no (Eng. not) or tampoco (Eng. either) 
in the first position before or after of a predication, 
there is a high probability these pattern do not in-
troduce a good analytical definition. In Table 5 we 
showed some results in terms of precision and re-
call reported by authors only for analytical defini-
tion patterns.

Table 6: Precision & recall values 

Verbal pattern Precision Recall
Concebir(como)/To conceive(as) 0.67 0.98
Definir(como)/To define(as) 0.84 0.99
Entender(como)/To understand(as) 0.34 0.94
Identificar(como)/To identify(as) 0.31 0.90
Significar/To signify 0.29 0.98

5 Sketching a method 

In this section, we propose a method for recogniz-
ing lexical relations from the previous extraction of 
DCs. In particular, we assume that a good way to 
reach these relations is to improve the syntactic as-
sociation observed between predications and ana-
lytical definitions inserted into these DCs.

This assumption is in line with the methodology 
proposed by Buitelaar, Cimiano & Magnini (2005) 
for building ontologies based on textual informa-
tion  obtained  from  corpora.  These  three  authors 
conceive a chain of  processes and sub-processes, 
represented with a layer cake scheme: 

Figure 2: Ontology learning layer cake (according to 
Buitelaar, Cimiano & Magnani 2005)

Briefly,  in  this  scheme  Buitelaar,  Cimiano  & 
Magnini establish a sequence of 6 basic tasks for 
developing a possible ontology. Thus, the first task 
is the identification of a set of specific terms to a 
certain knowledge domain (in this case, a medical 
domain). After that, it is necessary to identify syn-
onyms related to these terms (e.g., disease/illness). 
Given both sets of  terms and synonyms, the fol-
lowing task is to determine concepts in a formal 
way.  For  delineating  these  concepts,  in  the  next 
task are deduced lexical relations following lexical 
networks  formulated  by  WordNet  (Fellbaum 
1998). 

Once these lexical relations are established, the 
semantic  relations  are  proposed,  keeping  this  in 
mind,  for  example,  first-order  logic  to  represent 
predicate-arguments  structures.  The  final  process 
of this chain is to derive universal rules for build-
ing concepts, joining lexical and semantic relations 
deduced previously.

Thus, the recognition and extraction of concepts 
is  a  step  towards  the  general  goal  proposed  by 
Buitelaar, Cimiano & Magnini for building ontolo-
gies.  For this particular  phase,  our proposal  con-
sists  on identifying and extracting conceptual  in-
formation through lexical-syntactic patterns as we 
mentioned above.

6 Towards the (semi-)automatic identifica-
tion of lexical relations 

In agreement with the methodology of  Buitelaar, 
Cimiano & Magnini mentioned above, we propose 
to extract lexical relations from analytical defini-
tions for covering the next step about hierarchical 
relations.  Hiponymy/hypernymy  and 
meronym/holonymy relations are considered as re-

113



lations organizing a conceptual space in a hierarch-
ical way (Winston, Chaffin & Herrmann 1987). 

Additionally, our method provides a way to get 
more relations from a domain corpus through the 
application of a bootstrapping technique with the 
genus terms/wholes set as seed set.  

• Hyponymy/hyperonymy relations: We 
consider works such as Hearst (1992), as 
well as Wilks, Slator & Guthrie (1995), 
because  their  methods  allow combining 
linguistic and probabilistic criteria. 

• Part/whole  relations:  In  this  case,  we 
consider  works  such  as  Charniak  & 
Berland (1999),  as well  as those results 
reported  by  Girju,  Badulescu  &  Mod-
olvan (2006). We propose a method ex-
ploiting the pattern with preposition  de, 
due to its use frequency to link parts and 
wholes in Spanish. Table 6 shows exam-
ples about meronymy/holonymy relations 
using  this  pattern  compared  with  other 
patterns worked in the literature.

Table 7: Number of hits returned by the search en-
gine Google

Part Whole X is part 
of Y

Y has 
X

X of the 
Y

Mouse Computer 27360 514 280400
Keyboard Computer 60800 64730 1798000
Screen Computer 58800 64100 556000

• Attribution  relations: Attribution  rela-
tions play an important role in disciplines 
involved  with  conceptual  representation 
as artificial intelligence/knowledge repre-
sentation,  linguistics  and  psychology 
(Poesio  &  Almuhareb,  2005).   So,  we 
consider  the  work  about  the  automatic 
extraction  of  attribution  relations  pro-
posed  by  Poesio  &  Almuhareb (2004). 
They used an approach as that proposed 
by Charniak & Berland (1999) but to ex-
tract  attribution  relations  using  the  pat-
tern:

“the * of the C [is|was]”

Here, * represents a potential attribute for 
the concept C. In Spanish a common pat-
tern to express attribution relations is the 
use of the preposition  de, e.g.:  edad del  

paciente (Eng.  age  of  patient/patient's 
age),  altura del paciente  (Eng. height of 
the patient/ patient's height), and so on.

Summarizing, our methodology to extract lexical 
relations starts with the extraction of hyponymy-
hypernymy relations from analytical DCs. For this 
phase  we  consider  a  lexical-syntactic  approach 
due to the regularity of the definition schemes us-
ing  predication  patterns  as  those  mentioned 
above. 

Additionally,  we  propose  a  bootstrapping 
technique starting with the set of genus terms as a 
seedset  to  extract  more  lexical  relations  from a 
domain corpus. We use the preposition de to link 
genus term and other potential terms due to its im-
portance to produce lexical relations of our inter-
est. 

For example, in a first phase exploring a do-
main corpus, a genus term as dilatación (Eng. di-
lation)  links  with  a  set  of  two elements  {vena,  
pupila} (Eng. {vein, pupil}). In a next phase, the 
element pupila is linked to ojo (Eng. eye), and so 
on. Thus, on the one hand we have two relations 
IS-KIND-OF:  dilatación de la pupila and  dilat-
ación de la vena. On the other hand, we have a 
meronymy-holonymy relation: pupila-ojo.

Integrating the three relations described above, 
we will  implement  a  lexical  network that  allows 
organizing concepts related to terms. An example 
of this possible network is:

Figure 3: Example of a possible lexical network

In the figure, we can distinguish a set of sub−terms 
linked  to  the  main  term  Ojo (Engl.  Eye).  These 

114



sub−terms operate as nodes, and the possible lexic-
al relations are branches connected with the main 
term. Thus, based on a lexical Parth/whole relation, 
we can infer that  córnea  (Eng. cornea), is a con-
stituent  of  eye.  In  contrast,  the  term  enfermedad 
(Engl.  disease) is an attribute of eye. Finally, the 
glaucoma is a type of disease that affects the eyes.

7 Work in progress and possible topics of 
collaborations 

In this paper we proposed a method for recogniz-
ing lexical relations, taking into account the identi-
fication  and  extraction  of  analytical  definitions 
situated into DCs in Spanish. This extraction con-
siders verbal predications associated to these defin-
itions. So, in order to explain this extraction, we 
have showed a formal syntactic analysis, based on 
the idea that  these predications:  (a)  could be de-
scribed in terms of predicative phrases, and (b), the 
association  of  predications  and  analytical  defini-
tions  has  a  high  frequency of  use  in  specialized 
documents. For evaluating this frequency, we have 
exposed the results obtained for an experiment of 
extraction in two technical corpora.

Currently, we are situated in the phase to imple-
ment  and evaluate  a new experiment  oriented to 
the detection of lexical relations between the term 
and the genus term formulated for analytical defin-
itions. In particular, we are interested in discover-
ing three types of relations: hyponym/hyperonymy, 
part-whole and attribution-entity.

We conclude suggesting some topics of collab-
orations for our potential colleges:

I. The construction of specialized texts 
corpora with good candidates of DCs, 
having in mind the basic features for 
identifying a DC.

II. The implementation of new linguistic 
and statistical methods for detecting 
and extracting lexical relations from 
text corpora.

III. The improvement of search systems, 
using these underlying lexical relations 
in electronic documents.

IV. Following to Wilks, Slator & Guthrie 
(1995), the design of lexical-semantic 
tags for recognizing and classifying 
concepts in taxonomies.

Similarly,  according  to  Buitelaar,  Cimiano  & 
Magnini, we can use external lexical resources as 
Spanish WordNet and Spanish FrameNet (Subirats 
2009) for  determining and evaluating our lexical 
networks,  in  order  to  enrich  the  results  that  we 
could generate.

Acknowledgments
This paper was made possible by the financial sup-
port  of  the  Consejo  Nacional  de  Ciencia  y  Tec-
nología, CONACYT, and DGAPA−UNAM. Also, 
we  wish  to  thank  the  anonymous  reviewers  for 
theirs comments and suggestions.

References 
César Aguilar, Rodrigo Alarcón, Carlos Rodríguez and 

Gerardo Sierra. 2004. Reconocimiento y clasificación 
de patrones verbales definitorios en corpus especiali-
zados”. En Cabre T., Estopà R. & Tebé C. (Eds.). La 
terminología en el siglo XXI, IULA-UPF, Barcelona, 
Spain: 259-269.

César Aguilar. 2009. Análisis lingüístico de definiciones  
en contextos definitorios.  Ph. D. Thesis, Department 
of Linguistics, UNAM, Mexico.

Rodrigo  Alarcón,  Gerardo  Sierra  and  Carme  Bach. 
2007. Developing a Definitional Knowledge Extrac-
tion System.  Conference Proceedings of Third Lan-
guage  &  Technology  Conference  LTC'07,  Poznań, 
Poland.

John  Bowers.  1993.  The  Syntax  of  Predication,  Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 24(4): 591-636.

John  Bowers.  2001.  Predication.  In  Baltin,  M.  & 
Collins,  C. (eds.),  The Handbook of  Contemporary  
Syntactic Theory, Blackwell, Oxford, UK: 299-333.

Paul  Buitelaar,  Philipp  Cimiano  and  Bruno  Magnini. 
2005. Ontology learning from text. IOS Press, Ams-
terdam, The Netherlands.

Eugene Charniak and Matthew Berland. 1999. Finding 
parts in very large corpora.  Proceedings of the 37th 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Association  for  Computa-
tional Linguistics: 57-64.

Christiane  Fellbaum.  1998.  WordNet:  An  Electronic 
Lexical Database, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Roxana Girju, Adriana Badulescu and Dan I. Moldovan. 
2006. Automatic Discovery of Part–Whole Relations. 
Computational Linguistics, 32(1): 83-135.

Marti  Hearst.  1992.  Automatic  Acquisition  of 
Hyponyms from Large Text Corpora. Proceedings of  
the Fourteenth International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics, Nantes, France.

Marie-Claude  L’Homme  and  Patrick  Drouin.  2006. 
Corpus de Informática para el español, Groupe Ék-

115



lectick, OLST-Université de Montréal, Montréal, Ca-
nada: http://www.olst.umontreal.ca/. 

Alfonso Medina, Gerardo Sierra, Gabriel Garduño, Car-
los  Méndez  and  Roberto  Saldaña.  2004.  CLI:  An 
Open Linguistic Corpus for Engineering. In De Ita, 
G. Fuentes, O. & Galindo, M. (Eds.) Proceedings of  
IX  Ibero-American  Workshop  on  Artificial  Intelli-
gence, Puebla, BUAP: 203-208.

Massimo Poesio  and  Abdulrahman  Almuhareb.  2004. 
Feature-Based vs. property-based KR: An empirical 
perspective. In  Proceedings of International Confer-
ence  on  Formal  Ontology  in  Information  Systems  
FOIS 2004, Torino, Italy.

Ellen  Riloff  and  Jessica  Shepherd.  1999.  A  corpus-
based  bootstrapping  algorithm for  Semi-Automated 
semantic  lexicon  construction. Journal  of  Natural  
Language Engineering . 5(2): 147-156. 

Carlos Rodríguez. 2004. Metalinguistic Information Ex-
traction  from  specialized  texts  to  enrich  computa-
tional lexicons.  Ph. D. Thesis, Universidad Pompeu 
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Gerardo  Sierra,  Rodrigo  Alarcón  and  César  Aguilar. 
2006.  Extracción  automática  de  contextos  definito-
rios en textos especializados.  In Inchaurralde,  C. & 
Ibarretxe, I. (Eds.). Memorias del XXII Congreso de  
la  Sociedad  Española  para  el  Procesamiento  del  
Lenguaje Natural, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, 
Spain: 351-352.

Gerardo  Sierra,  Rodrigo  Alarcón,  César  Aguilar  and 
Carme Bach. 2008.  Definitional Verbal  Patterns for 
Semantic  Relation Extraction.  In  Auger  A.  & Bar-
rière C. (Eds.), Pattern-based Approaches to Semant-
ic Relation Extraction. Special issue of Terminology, 
14(1): 74–98.

Carlos Subirats (2009). Spanish Framenet: A frame se-
mantic analysis of the Spanish lexicon. In Boas H. 
(Ed.),  Multilingual  FrameNets  in  Computational  
Lexicography. Methods and Applications, Mouton de 
Gruyter, Berlin/New York:  135-162.

Yorick Wilks, Brian Slator and Louise Guthrie.  1996. 
Electric Words. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Morton  E.  Winston, Roger  Chaffin  and  Douglas  Her-
rmann.  1987.  A  taxonomy of  part-whole  relations. 
Cognitive Science, 11(4): 417 – 444.

116


