



















































Interfacing the Lexicon and the Ontology in a Semantic Analyzer


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Ontologies and Lexical Resources (Ontolex 2010), pages 67–76,
Beijing, August 2010

Interfacing the Lexicon and the Ontology in a Semantic Analyzer 
 

Igor Boguslavsky 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 

Institute for Information Transmission 
Problems of the Russian Academy of Sci-

ences 
igor.m.boguslavsky@gmail.com

Leonid Iomdin 
Institute for Information Transmission 

Problems of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences 

iomdin@iitp.ru 

Victor Sizov 
Institute for Information Transmission 

Problems of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences 

sizov@iitp.ru 

Svetlana Timoshenko 
Institute for Information Transmission 

Problems of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences 

nyrestein@gmail.com

 

Abstract 

We discuss the possibility to link the 
lexicon of an NLP system with a for-
mal ontology in an attempt to con-
struct a semantic analyzer of natural 
language texts. The work is carried 
out on the material of sports news 
published in Russian media.  

1 Introduction 
Many Semantic Web applications need a 
much deeper semantic analysis of the text 
than is used today. Not only should the 
ontology elements be extracted from the 
textual data but also it is important to 
interpret the text in terms of the ontology. It 
is essential that IE and QA systems should be 
able to discover semantic similarity between 
the texts if they express the meaning in 
different ways. Cf. synonymous sentences (1) 
– (3):  
(1) Real Madrid and Barcelona will meet in 
the semi-finals on Thursday. 
(2) The semi-final match between Real 
Madrid and Barcelona will take place on 
Thursday. 
(3) The adversary of Real Madrid in the semi-
finals on Thursday will be Barcelona.  

If we wish to extract the meaning from the 
text irrespective of the way it is conveyed, we 

should construct a semantic analyzer capable 
of producing identical semantic structures for 
sentences (1)-(3), or at least semantic 
structures whose equivalence can be easily 
demonstrated. 

The problem becomes much more difficult 
if text understanding includes access to text-
external world knowledge. For example, 
sentences (1)-(3) describe the same situation 
as (4).  
(4) The semi-finals on Thursday will see the 
champion of the UEFA Champions League 
2008-2009 and the team of Manuel Pelle-
grini.  

To account for this synonymy, the system 
should know that it was the football club 
Barcelona who won the UEFA Champions 
League in 2008-2009, and that Manuel Pelle-
grini is the coach of Real Madrid. This im-
plies that linguistic knowledge should be 
linked with ontological resources. The crea-
tion of a semantic analyzer of this type goes 
far beyond the task of assigning ontological 
classes to words occurring in the text. It re-
quires a powerful wide-coverage linguistic 
processor capable of building coherent se-
mantic structures, a knowledge-extensive 
lexicon, which contains different types of 
lexical information, an ontology, which de-
scribes objects in the domain and their prop-
erties, a repository of ground-level facts, and 
an inference engine.  

67



A project NOVOFUT aiming at the devel-
opment of a semantic analyzer of this type for 
Russian texts has started at the Institute for 
Information Transmission Problems of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences. It covers the 
domain of news about football. There are 
several reasons for this choice of domain. 
First, the news texts are written primarily for 
the general public, so that their understanding 
does not require specialized expert knowl-
edge. This is a major advantage since it sig-
nificantly facilitates the acquisition of the 
ontology. Second, the language typical of 
sports journalism is rich enough, which 
makes its interpretation linguistically non-
trivial. Last but not least, sports enjoy enor-
mous public interest. There are many sports 
portals publishing multifarious information 
on the daily (and sometimes hourly) basis and 
visited by a lot of people. Enhanced Ques-
tion-Answering and Information Extraction in 
this domain are likely to attract many users.     

The NOVOFUT semantic analyzer reuses 
many types of resources created or accumu-
lated by the team in previous work. In this 
paper we focus on the static resources used 
by the analyzer – the lexicon and the ontol-
ogy. The plan of the presentation is as fol-
lows. In Section 2 we discuss related work. In 
Section 3 we will briefly describe the linguis-
tic processor we build on and its lexicon. Sec-
tion 4 outlines a small-scale ontology devel-
oped for the project. The correlation between 
natural language words as presented in the 
lexicon and the ontology is the main concern 
of Section 5. In Section 6 the interface be-
tween the ontology and the lexicon is dis-
cussed. Future work is outlined in Section 7.    

2 Related work 
The link between the ontologies and NL texts 
is investigated in two directions – “from the 
ontology towards NL texts” and “from the 
texts towards the ontology”. In the first case 
written texts are used as a means for ontology 
extension and population. To name but a few 
authors, McDowell and Cafarella (2006) start 
from an ontology and specify web searches 
that identify in the texts possible semantic 
instances, relations, and taxonomic informa-
tion. In (Schutz and Buitelaar 2005) an inter-

esting attempt is made to extract ontological 
relations from texts. (Buitelaar et al. 2008, 
Magnini et al. 2006, Maynard & al. 2006) are 
further advances in the direction of ontology 
population.  

Finding NL equivalents to ontological 
elements and be monolingual or multilingual. 
A metamodel for linking conceptual knowl-
edge with its lexicalizations in various lan-
guages is proposed in (Montiel-Ponsoda et al. 
2007).    

The second direction research starts from 
NL texts and tries to interpret them in terms 
of the ontology. In most cases, this takes the 
form of marking the text with ontological 
classes and instances. A typical example is 
(Sanfilippo et al. 2006). One should also 
mention the work based on the Generalized 
Upper Model (GUM), which is meant for in-
terfacing between domain models and NL 
components (Bateman et al. 1995) 

Our work belongs to this second direction, 
but our aim is not limited to finding ontologi-
cal correlates to words. In many aspects we 
were inspired by the ontological semantic 
approach developed in the Mikrokosmos 
framework (cf. Nirenburg and Raskin 2004). 
We share many of its postulates and concrete 
solutions. In particular, semantic analysis of 
the text should be based on both linguistic 
and extra-linguistic knowledge. Linguistic 
knowledge is implemented in language 
grammars and dictionaries, while extra-
linguistic knowledge is comprised in an on-
tology, which enumerates concepts, describes 
their properties and states interrelationships 
between them, and a fact repository which 
accumulates ground-level facts, such as, in 
our case, the data about concrete players, 
teams and matches. To a large extent, the on-
tology serves as the semantic language for 
meaning representation.  

At the same time, there exist some differ-
ences between our approaches determined by 
the linguistic model adopted.  Our work is 
based on the Meaning ⇔ Text theory 
(Mel’čuk 1974, 1996). In particular, we make 
extensive use of lexical functions, which con-
stitute one of the prominent features of this 
theory. Thanks to lexical functions it turns 
out possible to reduce a wider range of syn-
onymous sentences to the same semantic 

68



structure, and in many cases, improve the per-
formance of search engines (see e.g. Apresjan 
et al. 2009). Another difference between the 
Mikrokosmos approach and ours concerns the 
fact that the Mikrokosmos ontology is written 
in a specific in-house formalism. Our empha-
sis is on using as far as possible standard on-
tology languages (OWL, SWRL), in order to 
obtain interoperability with a wide and ever 
growing range of semantic web resources and 
inference engines. 

3 The ETAP-3 Linguistic 
Processor and its Lexicon. 

The multifunctional ETAP-3 linguistic proc-
essor, developed by the Computational Lin-
guistics Laboratory of the Institute for Infor-
mation Transmission Problems, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, (see e.g. 
Apresjan et al. 2003), is the product of dec-
ades of research and development in the field 
of language modelling.  

At the moment, ETAP-3 consists of a 
number of options, including  

1) a rule-based machine translation system 
working both ways between Russian and 
English (plus several prototypes for other 
languages – French, German, Spanish, Ko-
rean and Arabic);  

2) a system of synonymous and quasi-
synonymous paraphrasing of sentences;  

3) an environment for deep annotation of 
text corpora, in which SynTagRus, the only 
corpus of Russian texts tagged morphologi-
cally, syntactically (in the dependency tree 
formalism), and lexically was created, and  

4) a Universal Networking Language 
(UNL) module, responsible for automatic 
translation of natural language text into a  
semantic interlingua, UNL, and the other way 
around.  

The ETAP-3 processor is largely based on 
the general linguistic framework of the Mean-
ing ⇔ Text theory by Mel’čuk. An important 
complement to this theory was furnished by 
the theory of systematic lexicography and 
integrated description of language proposed 
by Jurij Apresjan (2000).  

One of the major resources used in ETAP-
3 is the combinatorial dictionary. It offers 
ample and diverse data for each lexical entry. 

In particular, the entry may list the word’s 
syntactic and semantic features, its subcate-
gorization frames, as well as rules (or refer-
ence to rules) of a dozen types, which make it 
possible to describe peculiar behavior of in-
dividual words and exceptions to general 
rules in a complete and consistent way. Many 
dictionary entries contain information on 
lexical functions, to be discussed below in 
some detail.  

The entry of the combinatorial dictionary 
has a number of zones, one of which provides 
the properties of the word that are manifested 
in the given language, while all the other 
zones contain information on the match be-
tween this word and its equivalent in a par-
ticular language. For example, the EN zone in 
the Russian combinatorial dictionary entry 
contains information on the translational 
equivalents of the respective Russian word 
into English. One field (TRANS) gives the 
default single-word translation (or several 
such translations) of this word in English. 
Other fields contain less trivial translation 
rules, or references to such rules. 

A newly introduced ONTO zone offers in-
formation underlying the match between the 
Russian word and its counterparts in the on-
tology. 

4 Ontology of football. 
The ontology we are working with focuses in 
the first place on football. It contains infor-
mation on teams, players, football field, sport 
events, and their properties. However, we 
want it to be extendable to other sports as 
well. That is why some classes are more gen-
eral than would be needed for football alone. 
For example, instead of having one class 
FootballPlayer, the ontology has a 
more general class Sportsman, of which 
FootballPlayer is a subclass. An 
equivalence restriction states that Foot-
ballPlayer is a Sportsman whose 
SportType is football. In this way, 
sportsmen doing different types of sports can 
be treated by the ontology in a uniform way.  

The football ontology is written in SWRL, 
which is OWL augmented with rules (Hor-
rocks et al. 2004). In compiling it, we used 
some existing ontologies dealing with foot-

69



ball 
(http://www.lgi2p.ema.fr/~ranwezs/ontologie
s/soccerV2.0.daml). As usual, properties of 
classes are inherited by the subclasses. For 
example, the Match class is a subclass of 
SportEvent, which in its turn is a subclass 
of Event. Match inherits from Event the 
properties of having definite Time and 
Place. From SportEvent it inherits the 
fact that its participants should be Sport-
Agents. Its own properties are: the number 
of participants is 2 (as opposed to champion-
ships, which have more) and it has a definite 
sport type (as opposed to Olympics, which 
involve many sport types).  A subclass of 
Match is Derby, in which both participants 
should be from the same city or region. This 
property is implemented by means of a 
SWRL rule (cf. below). Another rule as-
signed to Match states that if its sport type is 
football (or any other team sport), then its 
participants should be teams and not individ-
ual sportsmen, as is the case in tennis or 
chess.  Sportsman is a subclass of two 
classes: Person, from which it inherits the 
property of having a name and a birth date, 
and SportAgent, which includes also 
Team and from which it inherits the property 
of having a definite sport type and a coach.  

 

5 Correlation between the 
words and the elements of the on-
tology.  

As mentioned above, the ontology plays a 
two-fold role. On the one hand, it is a reposi-
tory of domain-specific knowledge, and on 
the other hand, it is a semantic metalanguage 
used for representing the meaning of natural 
language texts. All meaningful natural lan-
guages elements (words, grammatical con-
structions, morphological features) must be 
interpreted in ontological terms. This makes 
the correlation between the lexicon and the 
ontology far from trivial. In this section, we 
will present several typical situations and il-
lustrate them with examples. 

5.1 One-to-one correspondence 
between NL words and ontology 
elements. 

The simplest situation occurs when a word 
directly corresponds to an ontology element – 
a class, an individual, a relation, an attribute 
or its value.  Example:  
(5) Real Madrid pobedil Arsenal so sčetom 
3:1 ‘Real Madrid defeated Arsenal 3 to 1’.  

Here Real Madrid and Arsenal are indi-
viduals – instances of the Team class, the 
verb to defeat corresponds to the WinEvent 
class, and numbers 3 and 1 are values of at-
tributes scoreWinner and scoreLoser, 
respectively. In the semantic structure (SemS) 
classes are represented by instances supplied 
by a unique numeric identifier. SemS for sen-
tence (5) looks as follows: 
hasWinner(WinEvent01, Real-
Madrid)&hasLoser(WinEvent01, 
Arsenal)& scoreWinner 
(WinEvent01,3)& 
scoreLoser(WinEvent01,1) 

5.2 One ontology element – 
several words (“multi-word con-
cepts”). 

This is a very typical situation, especially in 
the area of terminology. For example, in or-
dinary language želtaja kartočka ‘a yellow 
card’ is a free noun phrase that simply de-
notes a card whose colour is yellow. In the 
sports domain, it is a single concept that re-
fers to one of several possible punishments a 
referee can mete out for a rules infraction. 
Therefore, it is represented as one element in 
the ontology. Some other examples of multi-
word sport concepts: uglovoj udar ‘corner’, 
svobodnyj udar ‘free kick’, pravyj po-
luzaščitnik ‘right tackle’. 

5.3 One word – several onto-
logical elements. 

Many words that can be interpreted in terms 
of ontological elements do not correspond to 
any single class, relation or instance. Their 
definition consists in a configuration of these 
elements. Most often, it is a class with some 
of the properties instantiated. In principle, 
often there are two options: one can either 
postulate two different classes (e.g. 

70



Sportsman and FootballPlayer as its 
subclass), or only one class (Sportsman) 
and represent the football player as a 
Sportsman whose SportType property is 
football. There is no general solution to 
this alternative. In general, it is desirable to 
obtain a parsimonious ontology and refrain 
from introducing new classes, if one can de-
fine a concept in terms of existing classes and 
their properties. However, if a concept has 
important properties of its own, it is prefer-
able to present it in the ontology as a separate 
class. In our example, FootballPlayer 
has Specialization which other sports-
men do not have (goalkeeper, for-
ward, back, etc.) For this reason, it is pos-
tulated as a separate class of the ontology, 
with the indication of its equivalence to the 
anonymous class “Sportsman and 
hasSportType football”.  

An interesting and typical case are adjecti-
val modifiers to nouns of the type ispanskij 
‘Spanish’, francuzskij ‘French’, moskovskij 
‘of Moscow’, and the like. Usually, dictionar-
ies provide a very general definition of such 
words. For example, the COBUILD English 
dictionary gives only one meaning for the 
adjective Spanish: ‘belonging or relating to 
Spain, or to its people, language or culture’. 
However, in real life situations this word is 
often interpreted by the speakers in a more 
specific way, according to the context. Onto-
logical description should try, as far as possi-
ble, to take contextual factors into account 
and make explicit the specific interpretation 
of the modifier in each particular case. Some-
times, it can be done by means of rules that 
refer to ontological categories. For example, 
the meaning of the adjective ispanskij ‘Span-
ish’ mentioned above, when applied to geo-
graphical objects (rivers, cities, mountains, 
roads, etc.), narrows down to (hasLoca-
tion Spain). If this adjective modifies a 
noun denoting an industrial or agricultural 
product (car, wine, olive oil, etc.), it is rather 
interpreted as (producedIn Spain). 
We will hardly understand the phrase Spanish 
wine as denoting the wine located in Spain. 
Textual objects (songs, literature, poetry, 
etc.) move the adjective towards denoting the 
Spanish language: (inLanguage Span-

ish). Of course, these rules are not always 
sufficient for disambiguation. If an object 
falls into more than one category, several in-
terpretations are possible. In particular, a 
book is both a textual and a consumer object. 
Therefore, a Spanish book can be interpreted 
as a book written in Spanish, and as a book 
published in Spain.  

In many cases, adjectives serve as argu-
ments of nouns. The semantic role of this ar-
gument may be different for different nouns 
(cf. (6-8)), and even for the same noun (cf. 
(9-11)):  
(6) presidential decree – ‘the president issued 
a decree’:  
hasAgent(decree,president); 
(7) presidential elections – ‘somebody elects 
the president’: hasOb-
ject(elect,president);  
(8) Babylonian invasion – ‘Babylon invaded 
some city or country’: 
hasAgent(invade,Babylon); but not 
‘some city or country invaded Babylon’:  
hasObject(invade,Babylon);  
(9) economic advisor – ‘advises in the area of 
economics’: has-
Topic(advisor,economics);  
(10) American advisor:  hasNational-
ity(advisor,USA);  
(11) presidential advisor – ‘advises to the 
president’: hasAd-
dressee(advisor,president).  

5.4 A word is interpreted in on-
tological terms but does not have any 
fixed ontological equivalent. 

There is a large class of words that denote 
individuals which are in a certain relation to 
other individuals: brother, sister, uncle, wife, 
friend, enemy, classmate, co-author, co-
regent, coeval, adversary, ally, etc. Of 
course, these words can be easily represented 
as ontology properties: has-
Brother(John, Bill), hasSis-
ter(John, Mary). However, such rep-
resentation does not reveal the meaning of the 
concepts. Being a brother of somebody means 
being a male and having common parents 
with this person.  This meaning shares the 
second component (‘having common par-
ents’) with the property of being a sister and 

71



differs from it in the first component (‘being 
a male’). Such a definition of meanings re-
quires the use of variables. This is the point 
where the OWL expressive capacity is insuf-
ficient and one has to recur to SWRL rules:   
Person(?person1)&Gender (?per-
son1,male)&hasParent(?person1, 
?person3) &hasParent (?per-
son2,?person3)→ 
brother(?person1, ?person2)  

Person(?person1)&Gender (?per-
son1,female)&hasParent(?person
1, ?person3)& hasParent (?per-
son2,?person3)→        sis-
ter(?person1,?person2) 

In a similar way one can define the concept 
of adversary (in sports), as used for example 
in sentence (3) above.  Adversary of Z is 
someone different from Z who plays in the 
same match as Z: 
SportAgent(?agent)& 
Match(?match)& hasPartici-
pant(?match,?agent)& hasPar-
ticipant(?match,?z)& differ-
entFrom(?agent,?z) → adver-
sary(?agent,?z)  

Among the words that require variables for 
their ontological definition are not only rela-
tional nouns. There are many other words that 
cannot be translated into ontological catego-
ries without claiming identity (or difference) 
of the properties of some individuals. Here 
are some examples from the football domain.  

A derby is a match whose participants are 
from the same city or region. Our ontology 
defines the concept of derby as follows:   
hasParticipant(?match, ?par-
ticipant1)& hasParticipant 
(?match, ?partici-
pant2)&differentFrom (?par-
ticipant1,?participant2) 
&hasLocation (?participant1, 
?location) &hasLocation (?par-
ticipant2,?location) → 
derby(?match) 

Pobednyj gol (‘decisive goal’) is a goal 
which was scored when both teams had equal 
score and which was the last goal in the 
match. However, since having no subsequent 
goals cannot be expressed in SWRL we will 

convey this idea by saying that the goal 
brought the victory in the match to one of the 
teams. We will need the following classes 
and properties: 
GoalEvent, with the properties: 

hasAgent, atMinute, e.g. on the tenth 
minute, inMatch, hasResult (inher-
ited from the more general class Event).  
SituationInMatch (the score at a 

given moment), with the properties: in-
Match, atMinute, scorePartici-
pant1, scoreParticipant2. 
WinEvent, with the properties: 

hasWinner, hasLoser.  
Team, with the property hasPart, to be 

filled by instances of Sportsman.  
Besides that, we need the property 

timeImmediatelyBefore, inherited by 
moments of time from Time. 

We will describe the situation by means of 
two rules. Rule (12) says that the goal that 
brought a victory can be called a decisive 
goal. Rule (13) complements this description 
by saying that if a goal brings a victory, the 
winner is the team whose player scored it and 
this goal was scored at the moment when 
both teams had equal score.  
 (12) GoalEvent(?goal)&WinEvent 
(?victory)& hasRe-
sult(?goal,?victory)       
decisiveGoal(?goal) 
(13) hasResult(?goal,?victory) 
&hasAgent(?goal,?player)& has-
Part (?team,?player)&atMinute 
(?goal,?min0)&inMatch (?goal, 
?match)& timeImmediatelyBe-
fore(?min1,?min0)& Situation-
InMatch (?situation)&inMatch 
(?situation,?match)& atMinute 
(?situation,?min1)   
hasWinner(?victory,?team) 
&scoreParticipant1(?situation,
?n) &scoreParticipant2(?situa-
tion,?n). 

5.5 Ontology and Lexical Func-
tions. 

A lexical function (LF), in the Meaning ⇔ 
Text theory (Mel'čuk 1996), has the basic 
properties of a multi-value mathematical 

72



function. A prototypical LF is a triple of ele-
ments {R, X, Y}, where R is a certain general 
semantic relation obtaining between the ar-
gument lexeme X (the keyword) and some 
other lexeme Y which is the value of R with 
regard to X (by a lexeme in this context we 
mean either a word in one of its lexical mean-
ings or some other lexical unit, such as a set 
expression). Here are some examples for  the 
Oper1 and Oper2 functions: Oper1 (control) = 
exercise (control), Oper1 (research) = do (re-
search), Oper1 (invitation) = issue (an invita-
tion), Oper1 (doubt) = have (doubts), Op-
er1 (defeat) = suffer (a defeat), Oper1 (victory) 
= gain (a victory), Oper1 (campaign) = wage 
(a campaign), Oper2 (control) = be  under 
(control), Oper2 (analysis) = undergo (an 
analysis), Oper2 (invitation) = receive (an 
invitation), Oper2 (resistance) = encounter 
(resistance), Oper2 (respect) = enjoy (re-
spect), Oper2 (obstacle) = face (an obstacle).  

Y is often represented by a set of synony-
mous lexemes Y1, Y2, …., Yn, all of them 
being the values of the given LF R with re-
gard to X; e. g., Magn (desire) = strong / 
keen / intense / fervent / ardent / overwhelm-
ing. All the LF exponents for each word are 
listed in the lexicon. 

LFs have a strong potential for advanced 
NLP applications. Apresjan et al. (2007) 
shows how LFs can be used in parsing, ma-
chine translation, paraphrasing. In parsing, 
LFs are used to resolve or reduce syntactic 
and lexical ambiguity. The MT system resorts 
to LFs to provide idiomatic target language 
equivalents for source sentences in which 
both the argument and the value of the same 
LF are present. The system of paraphrasing 
automatically produces one or several syn-
onymous transforms for a given sentence or 
phrase by means of universal LF-axioms; for 
example: He respects [X] his teachers – He 
has [Oper1(S0 (X))] respect [S0 (X)] for his 
teachers – He treats [Labor1-2(S0 (X))] his 
teachers with respect – His teachers enjoy 
[Oper2(S0(X))] his respect. It can be used in a 
number of advanced NLP applications rang-
ing from machine translation to authoring and 
text planning. 

In ontologically-oriented semantic analysis 
different LFs are reflected in different ways. 

An LF corresponds to an ontological class. 

Many LFs represent bundles of words that are 
semantically identical or very close and there-
fore can serve as representatives of this com-
mon meaning. We illustrate this with two 
closely related LFs (Apresjan et al. 2008).  

The meaning covered by LiquFunc0 is ‘to 
cause to cease to exist or to be taking place’. 
This concept corresponds, in particular, to the 
following English verbs: to stop (the aggres-
sion), to lift (the blockade), to dispel (the 
clouds), to demolish (the building), to dis-
perse (the crowd), to avert (the danger), to 
cure (the disease), to close (the dispute), to 
break up (the family), to annul (the law), to 
dissolve (the parliament), to denounce (the 
treaty), to bridge (the gap). Another LF of the 
Liqu family – LiquFact0 – refers to a different 
kind of elimination. It means ‘to cause to 
cease functioning according to its destina-
tion’. When somebody closes the eyes, they 
do not cease to exist, they only stop function-
ing. Some more examples: shut down (the 
factory), stop (the car), land (the airplane), 
depose (the king), switch off (the lamp), neu-
tralize (the poison), empty (the bucket).  

These LFs, along with several dozen oth-
ers, play a significant role not only in text 
understanding and generation. They contrib-
ute in an interesting way to one of the crucial 
functions of ontologies – inference of implicit 
knowledge. Important inference rules can be 
easily formulated in terms of LFs: if the 
blockade is lifted (=LiquFunc0), it does not 
exist any more. Another example of the LF-
based inference (this time it is LF Real1): He 
fulfilled (= Real1) the promise to buy a bicycle 
→ He bought a bicycle. 

It should be emphasized that, given a lexi-
con which contains LF data (which is the case 
of our ETAP dictionary), the acquisition of 
this part of the ontology is straightforward.   

An LF generates an ontological relation.  

This case can be illustrated by support verbs 
of the Oper-Func-Labor family that attach 
one of the arguments to the noun. For exam-
ple, in sentence Father gave me an advice the 
subject of the Oper1-support verb to give (fa-
ther) is the Agent of advice, while in The 
proposal received much attention the subject 

73



of the Oper2-support verb to receive (the pro-
posal) is the Object of attention. Other exam-
ples of Oper1 and Oper2 were given in 5.5 
above. Some examples of other LFs of this 
family:  

Func1: (fear) possesses (somebody), (ru-
mour) reaches (somebody), (the blame) falls 
on (somebody) / (the blame) lies with (some-
body), (control) belongs to (somebody), (re-
sponsibility) rests with (somebody). 

Func2: (proposal) consists in (something), 
(criticism) bears upon (something), (revenge) 
falls upon (somebody). 

Labor1-2: keep (something) under (control), 
submit (something) to (analysis), meet (some-
body) with (applause), put (somebody) under 
(arrest), hold (somebody) in (contempt), 
bring (something) into (comparison with 
something), take (something) into (considera-
tion).  

An LF has no ontological correlate. 

This is the case of Func0. This LF neither de-
notes a concept, nor attaches an argument to a 
concept. It only duplicates the meaning of its 
keyword and has no correlate in the SemS. 
For example, in sentence (2) above the phrase 
the match took place (= Func0) is only repre-
sented by the concept Match. Other exam-
ples of Func0: (the snow) falls, (the wind) 
blows, (the danger) exists, (the war) is on, 
(changes) occur. 

6 Lexicon ↔ Ontology in-
terface.  

For the purposes of semantic analysis, the 
Russian dictionary and the ontology are 
linked in the same way as dictionaries of dif-
ferent languages are linked in Machine Trans-
lation options of the ETAP-3 system. As 
noted in Section 2, if the system performs 
translations from language L to language L′, 
all dictionary entries of L contain a special 
zone (ZONE: L′) where all translation vari-
ants of the given word into L′ are recorded. 
The semantic analysis option uses the ONTO 
zone of the Russian dictionary. In this zone, 
two types of information may be written: 
• Default translation. This is a one-
word equivalent of the given word, which is 
used if no translation rule is applicable.  

For example, Russian komanda ‘team’ has 
the Team class as its ontological counterpart. 
This is written in the ontological zone of ko-
manda as follows: 

ZONE: ONTO 
TRANS: Team 
Names of ontological individuals are also 

often translated by default.  

• Translation rules. A rule is written 
every time one needs to carry out an action 
which does not boil down to the default trans-
lation.  

Let us give several examples of translation 
rules written in the ONTO zone of the Rus-
sian lexicon. We will not give their formal 
representation and restrict ourselves to ex-
plaining what they are doing in plain words. 

Pobeditel’ ‘winner’ is a SportAgent (i.e. a 
sportsman or a team) that won some contest: 
SportAgent(?x)&WinEvent(?y)& 
hasWinner(?y,?x). 

Phrases of the type komanda NN ‘team of 
NN’ (where NN is a proper human name in 
the genitive case) are translated in four differ-
ent ways depending on the ontological infor-
mation assigned to NN.  

(a) If NN is the name of a player, the 
phrase is represented as ‘the team of which 
NN is a player’: komanda Arshavina ‘Ar-
shavin’s team’ = Team(?team) 
&hasPart(?team,Arshavin). 

(b) If NN is the name of a coach, the 
phrase is represented as ‘the team of which 
NN is the coach’: komanda Pellegrini ‘Pelle-
grini’s team’ = Team(?team) 
&hasCoach(?team,Pellegrini) 

(c) If NN is the name of a captain, the 
phrase is represented as ‘the team of which 
NN is the captain’: komanda Iraneka ‘Ira-
nek’s team’ = Team(?team)& hasCap-
tain(?team,Iranek) 

(d) If NN is neither a player, nor a coach, 
nor a captain, the phrase is represented as ‘the 
team of which NN is a fan’: komanda Ivana 
‘Ivan’s team’ =  Team(?team)& has-
Fan(?team,Ivan) 

It is well-known that genitive noun phrases 
(or phrases “N1 of N2” in English) are very 
vague semantically, and their interpretation is 
very much dependent on the context. This 
example shows that even within the 

74



part/whole interpretation such a phrase, para-
doxically, has two opposite varieties: either 
N2 is part of N1, as in the team of Ar-
shavin/Arshavin’s team, or N1 is part of N2, 
as in the leg of the table.  

The following examples involve the prop-
erty hasLocation, which characterizes 
both sport events (The match took place in 
Madrid), and sport agents (the Ukrainian 
sportsman, a London club).   

Frequently, a football match is played in a 
location, such that one of the teams is from 
that location while the other is not. This situa-
tion can be represented by the following 
SemS: 
(14) 
Match(?match)&hasLocation(?mat
ch,?place)&hasParticipant 
(?match, ?team1)&hasParicipant 
(?match,?team2)&differentFrom(
?team1,?team2)&hasLocation(?te
am1,?place)&¬hasLocation(?team
2,?place) 

In the natural language this situation can be 
viewed from different angles and denoted by 
different words.  

Xozjaeva ‘home team’ denotes a team that 
plays a match in a place it is from, the adver-
sary being from a different place. Gosti ‘visi-
tors’ is a team that plays a match in a location 
different from the place it is from, the adver-
sary being the home team. Prinimat’ ‘to re-
ceive’ means to play a match being a home 
team, to host it. Igrat’ v gostjax lit.‘to play 
being guests’ means to play a match away.  

Although all these words correspond to the 
same situation (14), their translation rules 
cannot be identical. The rules should not only 
introduce SemS (14), but also assure correct 
amalgamation of this SemS with SemSs of 
other words. In particular, the rule for prini-
mat’ ‘receive’ should guarantee that in (15) 
Real Madrid instantiates variable ?team1 of 
(14), and Barcelona – variable ?team2.     

(15) Real Madrid prinimal Barcelonu ‘Real 
Madrid hosted Barcelona’ 

The rule for gosti ‘visitors’ should see to it 
that in (16) hasWinner property of 
WinEvent be filled by variable ?team2 of 
(14): 

(16) Gosti vyigrali 3:1 ‘the visitors won 3 to 
1’ 

This is assured due to marking ?team2 in 
the gosti ‘visitors’ rule as the head element of 
SemS (14). Naturally, in the xozjaeva ‘home 
team’ rule the same role is assigned to 
?team1. 

7 Future work.  
In the continuation, it is planned to enlarge 

both the ontology and ONTO zone of the 
Russian lexicon. We are investigating the 
possibility of merging our small football on-
tology with some existing larger upper level 
ontology. The difficult task will be to unify 
our semantic rules with the axioms of this 
ontology.  

A second direction of our future activity is 
connected with another component of the se-
mantic analyzer, which we did not touch 
upon in this paper. It is the set of semantic 
rules which are not incorporated into the lexi-
con due to their general character. This com-
ponent also requires significant enhancement.  

An important extension of this work con-
sists in introducing an inference component 
based on the SWRL rules. 

Acknowledgement  
This study has received partial funding from 

the Russian Foundation for Humanities (grant No. 
10-04-00040a), which is gratefully acknowledged.  

References 
Apresjan, Ju. D. Systematic Lexicography. 

Oxford University Press, 2000, XVIII p., 304 p.  

Apresjan, Jury, I. Boguslavsky, L. Iomdin, 
A. Lazursky, V.Sannikov, V.Sizov, L.Tsinman. 
ETAP-3 Linguistic Processor: a Full-Fledged 
NLP Implementation of the MTT // MTT 2003, 
First International Conference on Meaning – 
Text Theory (June 16-18 2003). Paris: Ecole 
Normale Supérieure, 2003. P. 279-288. 

Apresjan, Jury, Igor Boguslavsky, Leonid 
Iomdin and Leonid Tsinman. Lexical Functions 
in Actual NLP Applications // Selected Lexical 
and Grammatical Issues in the Meaning–Text 
Theory. In honour of Igor Mel'čuk. (Ed. by Leo 
Wanner). John Benjamins, Studies in Language 
Companion Series 84. 2007. Р. 199-230.  

75



Apresjan, Ju.D., P.V. Djachenko, A.V. 
Lazursky, L.L. Tsinman. O kompjuternom 
uchebnike russkogо jazyka. [On a computer 
textbook of Russian.] Russkij jazyk v nauchnom 
osveshchenii. 2008, No. 2 (14). P. 48-112.  

Apresjan Ju., I. Boguslavsky, L.Iomdin, 
L.Cinman, S.Timoshenko. Semantic Paraphras-
ing for Information Retrieval and Extraction. 
In: T.Andreasen, R.Yager, H.Bulskov, 
H.Christiansen, H.Legind Larsen (eds.) Flexi-
ble Query Answering Systems. Proceedings, 
8th International Conference, 2009. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science 5822. pp. 512-523 

Bateman J., B. Magnini and G. Fabris. The 
Generalized Upper Model Knowledge Base: 
Organization and Use. In: Towards Very Large 
Knowledge Bases, pp. 60-72, IOS Press. 1995.  

Buitelaar P., Ph. Cimiano, A.Frank, M. Har-
tung, S.Racioppa. (2008). "Ontology-based In-
formation Extraction and Integration from Het-
erogeneous Data Sources." In: International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66(11). 

Horrocks, I., P.F. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, 
S. Tabet, B. Grosof and M. Dean (2004). 
SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Com-
bining OWL and RuleML. // W3C Member 
Submission 21 May 2004.  

Magnini B., Emanuele Pianta, Octavian 
Popescu, and Manuela Speranza. (2006). 
"Ontology Population from Textual Mentions: 
Task Definition and Benchmark." In: Proceed-
ings of the Ontology Population and Learning 
Workshop at ACL/Coling 2006. 

Maynard D., Wim Peters, and Yaoyong Li. 
(2006). "Metrics for Evaluation of Ontology-
based Information Extraction." In: WWW 2006 
Workshop on Evaluation of Ontologies for the 
Web (EON 2006) 

McDowell Luke K.,  Michael Cafarella.  On-
tology-driven Information Extraction with On-
toSyphon. In: Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2006). 
Volume 4273 of LNCS., Athens, GA, Springer 
(2006) 428 – 444 

Mel’čuk, Igor. Opyt teorii lingvisiticheskix 
modelej «Smysl ↔ Text» [The theory of lin-
guistic models of the Meaning ↔ Text type]. 
Moscow, 1974 (2nd edition 1999).  

Mel’čuk, Igor. Lexical Functions: A Tool for 
the Description of Lexical Relations in Lexi-
con. L. Wanner (ed.), Lexical Functions in 

Lexicography and Natural Language Process-
ing. Amsterdam, 1996, 37-102.  

Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Aguado de Cea, G. y 
Gómez-Pérez, A. 2007 "Localizing ontologies 
in OWL. From Text to Knowledge: The Lexi-
con/Ontology Interface. WS 2. The 6th Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference." 

Nirenburg, Sergei, and Victor Raskin. Onto-
logical Semantics. The MIT Press. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. London, England, 2004. 

Sanfilippo A., Tratz S., Gregory M., Chap-
pell A.,  Whitney P., Posse Ch., Paulson P., 
Baddeley B.,  Hohimer R., White A. Automat-
ing Ontological Annotation with WordNet. In: 
Sojka P., Key-Sun Choi, Ch. Fellbaum, P. 
Vossen (Eds.): GWC 2006, Proceedings, pp. 
85–93. 

Schutz, A. and P. Buitelaar. RelExt: A Tool 
for Relation Extraction from Text in Ontology 
Extension. In: Y. Gil et al. (Eds.), ISWC 2005, 
LNCS 3729, pp. 593–606, 2005. 

76


