










































Towards Modeling Social and Content Dynamics in Discussion Forums


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 13–14,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Modeling Social and Content Dynamics in Discussion Forums

Jihie Kim and Aram Galstyan
Information Sciences Institute / Univesity of Southern California

Marina del Rey, CA, USA
{jihie,galstyan}@isi.edu

Extended Abstract

Recent years have witnessed the transformation of
the World Wide Web from an information-gathering
and processing tool into an interactive communica-
tion medium in the form of online discussion fo-
rums, chat–rooms, blogs, and so on. There is strong
evidence suggesting that social networks facilitate
new ways to interact with information in such me-
dia. Understanding the mechanisms and the patterns
of such interactions can be important for many ap-
plications. Currently, there is not much work that
adequately models interaction between social net-
works and information content. From the perspec-
tive of social network analysis, most existing work
is concerned with understanding static topological
properties of social networks represented by such
forums. For instance, Park and Maurer (2009) ap-
plied node clustering to identify consensus and con-
sensus facilitators, while Kang et al. (2009) uses
discussion thread co-participation relations to iden-
tify (static) groups in discussions. On discussion
content analysis research side, there have been ap-
proaches for classifying messages with respect to di-
alogue roles (Carvalho and Cohen, 2005; Ravi and
Kim, 2007), but they often ignore the role and the
impact of underlying social interactions.

Thus, the current static network and content anal-
ysis approaches provide limited support for
• Capturing dynamics of social interactions: the

sequence of communication or who is respond-
ing to whom is important in understanding the
nature of interactions.
• Relating social interactions to content analysis:

the content can give hint on the nature of the in-
teraction and vice versa (e.g., users with more
social interactions are more likely to have com-
mon interests).

To address the above issues, one needs to go
beyond the static analysis approach, and develop
dynamical models that will explicitly account for
the interplay between the content of communication
(topics) and the structure of communications (social
networks). Such framework and corresponding al-
gorithmic base will allow us to infer “polarizing”
topics discussed in forums, identify evolving com-
munities of interests, and examine the link between
social and content dynamics.

To illustrate the advantages and the need for more
fine–grained analysis, we now turn to a concrete ex-
ample. Figure 1(a) provides a sample of discus-
sion co-participation network from an online discus-
sion forum. Each oval node represents a user and
each square shows a discussion thread, while each
arrow represents users participating in the thread.
The numbers on the arrow represent the number of
messages contributed to the thread. Ten discussion
threads with 127 messages from 43 users are cap-
tured. Based on this network, we can identify users
that have similar interests, cluster topics and/or users
according to similarities, and so on. However, this
network is too coarse–grained to get additional in-
formation about the social interactions. For instance,
it does not say anything whether co–participating
users have similar or conflicting views.

We now contrast the above network with a more
fine–grained representation of forum dynamics. We
performed a thorough manual analysis of threads, by
taking into account the sequence of messages to con-
struct response–to graph, and then manually anno-
tating the attitudes of each message towards the one
it was responding to. Figure 1(b) provides a signed
attitude network from the same dataset as the one
used for Figure 1(a). Each node represents a user
and an arrow shows how one replies to the other.

13



 : a thread 

(a)

+ + 

+ 

+ 

- - 

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Thread participation network; (b) Signed
attitude network. In (b), the circles show two triangle
relationships suggested by structural balance theory.

The numbers on the arrow represent the number of
the reply–to occurrences, while the color of the link
represents the attitude. Here we use a very loose
definition of “attitude”. Namely, positive (blue) at-
titude means that the posting user agrees with the
previous comment or message, or expresses friendly
sentiments. And negative attitude means disagree-
ing with the previous message or using outright of-
fensive language. The resulting signed network dif-
ferentiates links between the users (friends or foes).

Clearly, the resulting network is much more infor-
mative about the social interactions among the users.
Remarkably, even for the small manually collected
data-set, the resulting network reproduces some of
the known features of signed networks from social
sciences (Lescovec et. al., 2010; Wassermanc and
Faust, 1994). For instance, the highlighted ovals
show balanced triads: two friends with a common
enemy and three mutual friends. This with struc-
tural balance theory, which suggests that in signed
network particular triads with odd number of posi-
tive links (three mutual friends or two friends with a

common enemy) are more plausible than other cases
(e.g. three mutual foes). As we add more data, we
expect more occurrences of such triads.

Our current research focuses on automating
the above process of network construction and
analysis. To this end, we have been developing
approaches based on Dynamic Bayesian Networks
where the nodes correspond to participating users
and messages, and the edges encode probabilistic
dependence between message content and user
attitudes. In this framework, the content of a
message depends on the previous message as
well as on the attitude of the posting user to-
wards both the content and the other user. The
observables in this model are the messages (and
in some cases, some user–attributes such as age,
location etc). And the unobservables such as
users’ attitudes and social preferences are modeled
through latent variables that need to be inferred.
To be more specific, let u1 and u2 denote the
variables describing the users, and m1,m2, ...
denote the message sequence. Within the proposed
generative framework, the goal is to calculate
the posterior probability P (u1, u2|m1,m2, ...) ∝
π(u1)π(u2)π(m1|u1)

∏K
t=2 P (mt|mt−1, ui=1,2).

Here π(.) are the priors, and P (mt|mt−1, ui) is a
probability of seeing a particular response by the
user ui to a message mt−1, which will be estimated
using annotated data and further refined through
EM–type approach.

References
Carvalho, V. and Cohen, W., On the collective classifica-

tion of email speech acts. Proc. of SIGIR (2005).
Kang, J., Kim, J. and Shaw, E., Profiling Student Groups

in Online Discussion with Network Analysis, Proc. of
K-CAP wsp on Analyzing Social Media (2009).

Leskovec, J. Huttenlocher, D. Kleinberg. J. Signed Net-
works in Social Media. ACM SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (2010).

Park, S. Maurer F. A. Network Analysis of Stakeholders
in Tool Visioning Process for Story Test Driven De-
velopment, Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. on Engineering of
Complex Computer Systems, (2009)

Ravi, S., Kim, J., Profiling Student Interactions in
Threaded Discussions with Speech Act Classifiers.
Proc. AI in Education (2007).

Wasserman, S. and Faust. K. Social Network Analysis:
Methods and Applications. Camb. U. Press, (1994).

14


