










































Towards an Inventory of English Verb Argument Constructions


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Extracting and Using Constructions in Computational Linguistics, pages 9–16,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards an Inventory of English Verb Argument Constructions 
 
 

Matthew Brook O’Donnell Nick Ellis 
University of Michigan University of Michigan 
500 E. Washington St. 500 E. Washington St. 

Ann Arbor, MI 48104, USA Ann Arbor, MI 48104, USA 
mbod@umich.edu ncellis@umich.edu 

Abstract 

This paper outlines and pilots our approach to-
wards developing an inventory of verb-argument 
constructions based upon English form, function, 
and usage. We search a tagged and dependency-
parsed BNC (a 100-million word corpus of Eng-
lish) for Verb-Argument Constructions (VACs) in-
cluding those previously identified in the pattern 
grammar resulting from the COBUILD project. 
This generates (1) a list of verb types that occupy 
each construction. We next tally the frequency pro-
files of these verbs to produce (2) a frequency 
ranked type-token distribution for these verbs, and 
we determine the degree to which this is Zipfian. 
Since some verbs are faithful to one construction 
while others are more promiscuous, we next pro-
duce (3) a contingency-weighted list reflecting 
their statistical association. To test whether each of 
these measures is a step towards increasing the 
learnability of VACs as categories, following prin-
ciples of associative learning, we examine 20 verbs 
from each distribution. Here we explore whether 
there is an increase in the semantic cohesion of the 
verbs occupying each construction using semantic 
similarity measures. From inspection, this seems to 
be so. We are developing measures of this using 
network measures of clustering in the verb-space 
defined by WordNet and Roget’s Thesaurus.  

1 Construction grammar and Usage 

Constructions are form-meaning mappings, 
conventionalized in the speech community, and 
entrenched as language knowledge in the learner’s 
mind. They are the symbolic units of language re-
lating the defining properties of their morphologi-
cal, lexical, and syntactic form with particular se-
mantic, pragmatic, and discourse functions 
(Goldberg, 2006). Construction Grammar argues 
that all grammatical phenomena can be understood 
as learned pairings of form (from morphemes, 
words, idioms, to partially lexically filled and fully 

general phrasal patterns) and their associated se-
mantic or discourse functions: “the network of 
constructions captures our grammatical knowledge 
in toto, i.e. It’s constructions all the way down” 
(Goldberg, 2006, p. 18). Such beliefs, increasingly 
influential in the study of child language acquisi-
tion, have turned upside down generative assump-
tions of innate language acquisition devices, the 
continuity hypothesis, and top-down, rule-
governed, processing, bringing back data-driven, 
emergent accounts of linguistic systematicities.  

Frequency, learning, and language come to-
gether in usage-based approaches which hold that 
we learn linguistic constructions while engaging in 
communication. The last 50 years of psycholin-
guistic research provides the evidence of usage-
based acquisition in its demonstrations that lan-
guage processing is exquisitely sensitive to usage 
frequency at all levels of language representation 
from phonology, through lexis and syntax, to sen-
tence processing (Ellis, 2002). Language knowl-
edge involves statistical knowledge, so humans 
learn more easily and process more fluently high 
frequency forms and ‘regular’ patterns which are 
exemplified by many types and which have few 
competitors. Psycholinguistic perspectives thus 
hold that language learning is the associative learn-
ing of representations that reflect the probabilities 
of occurrence of form-function mappings. Fre-
quency is a key determinant of acquisition because 
‘rules’ of language, at all levels of analysis from 
phonology, through syntax, to discourse, are struc-
tural regularities which emerge from learners’ life-
time unconscious analysis of the distributional 
characteristics of the language input.  

If constructions as form-function mappings are 
the units of language, then language acquisition 
involves inducing these associations from experi-
ence of language usage. Constructionist accounts 
of language acquisition thus involve the distribu-
tional analysis of the language stream and the par-
allel analysis of contingent perceptuo-motor activ-

9



ity, with abstract constructions being learned as 
categories from the conspiracy of concrete exem-
plars of usage following statistical learning mecha-
nisms (Bod, Hay, & Jannedy, 2003; Bybee & 
Hopper, 2001; Ellis, 2002) relating input and 
learner cognition. Psychological analyses of the 
learning of constructions as form-meaning pairs is 
informed by the literature on the associative learn-
ing of cue-outcome contingencies where the usual 
determinants include: (1) input frequency (type-
token frequency, Zipfian distribution, recency), (2) 
form (salience and perception), (3) function (proto-
typicality of meaning, importance of form for mes-
sage comprehension, redundancy), and (4) interac-
tions between these (contingency of form-function 
mapping) (Ellis & Cadierno, 2009). 

2 Determinants of construction learning 

In natural language, Zipf’s law (Zipf, 1935) de-
scribes how a handful of the highest frequency 
words account for the most linguistic tokens. 
Zipf’s law states that the frequency of words de-
creases as a power function of their rank in the fre-
quency table. If pf is the proportion of words whose 
frequency rank in a given language sample is f, 
then pf ~ f -b, with b ≈ 1. Zipf showed this scaling 
relation holds across a wide variety of language 
samples. Subsequent research provides support for 
this law as a linguistic universal: many language 
events (e.g., frequencies of phoneme and letter 
strings, of words, of grammatical constructs, of 
formulaic phrases, etc.) across scales of analysis 
follow this law (Solé, Murtra, Valverde, & Steels, 
2005). 

Goldberg, Casenhiser & Sethuraman (2004) 
demonstrated that in samples of child language 
acquisition, for a variety of verb-argument con-
structions (VACs), there is a strong tendency for 
one single verb to occur with very high frequency 
in comparison to other verbs used, a profile which 
closely mirrors that of the mothers’ speech to these 
children. Goldberg et al. (2004) show that Zipf’s 
law applies within VACs too, and they argue that 
this promotes acquisition: tokens of one particular 
verb account for the lion’s share of instances of 
each particular argument frame; this pathbreaking 
verb also is the one with the prototypical meaning 
from which the construction is derived (see also 
Ninio, 1999).  

Ellis and Ferreira-Junior (2009) investigate ef-
fects upon naturalistic second language acquisition 
of type/token distributions in three English verb-
argument constructions. They show that VAC verb 
type/token distribution in the input is Zipfian and 
that learners first acquire the most frequent, proto-
typical and generic exemplar. (e.g. put in VOL 
[verb-object-locative], give in VOO [verb-object-
object], etc.). Acquisition is affected by the fre-
quency distribution of exemplars within each is-
land of the construction, by their prototypicality, 
and, using a variety of psychological (Shanks, 
1995) and corpus linguistic association metrics 
(Gries & Stefanowitsch, 2004), by their contin-
gency of form-function mapping. This fundamental 
claim that Zipfian distributional properties of lan-
guage usage helps to make language learnable has 
thus begun to be explored for these three VACs, at 
least. It remains an important research agenda to 
explore its generality across a wide range of con-
structions (i.e. the constructicon). 

The primary motivation of construction gram-
mar is that we must bring together linguistic form, 
learner cognition, and usage. An important conse-
quence is that constructions cannot be defined 
purely on the basis of linguistic form, or semantics, 
or frequency of usage alone. All three factors are 
necessary in their operationalization and measure-
ment. Our research aims to do this. We hope to 
describe the verbal grammar of English, to analyze 
the way VACs map form and meaning, and to pro-
vide an inventory of the verbs that exemplify con-
structions and their frequency. This last step is 
necessary because the type-token frequency distri-
bution of their verbs determines VAC acquisition 
as abstract schematic constructions, and because 
usage frequency determines their entrenchment 
and processing. 

This paper describes and pilots our approach. 
We focus on just two constructions for illustration 
here (V across n, and V Obj Obj) although our 
procedures are principled, generic and applicable 
to all VACs. We search a tagged and dependency-
parsed British National Corpus (a 100-million 
word corpus of English) for VACs including those 
previously identified in the COBUILD pattern 
grammar project. This generates (1) a list of verb 
types that occupy each construction. We next tally 
the frequency profiles of these verbs to produce (2) 
a frequency ranked type-token distribution for 
these verbs, and we determine the degree to which 

10



this is Zipfian. Since some verbs are faithful to one 
construction while others are more promiscuous, 
we next produce (3) a contingency-weighted list 
which reflects their statistical association.  

3 Method 

As a starting point, we considered several of the 
major theories and datasets of construction gram-
mar such as FrameNet (Fillmore, Johnson, & 
Petruck, 2003). However, because our research 
aims to empirically determine the semantic asso-
ciations of particular linguistic forms, it is impor-
tant that such forms are initially defined by bot-
tom-up means that are semantics-free. There is no 
one in corpus linguistics who ‘trusts the text’ more 
than Sinclair (2004). Therefore we chose the Pat-
tern Grammar (Francis et al. 1996) definition of 
Verb constructions  that arose out of his Cobuild 
project. 
 
3.1 Construction inventory: COBUILD Verb 
Patterns 
 
The form-based patterns described in the CO-
BUILD Verb Patterns volume (Francis et al. 1996) 
take the form of word class and lexis combina-
tions, such as V across n, V into n and V n n. For 
each of these patterns the resource provides infor-
mation as to the structural configurations and func-
tional/meaning groups found around these patterns 
through detailed concordance analysis of the Bank 
of English corpus during the construction of the 
COBUILD dictionary. For instance, the following 
is provided for the V across n pattern (Francis, et 
al., 1996, p. 150): 
 

The verb is followed by a prepositional phrase 
which consists of across and a noun group.  
 
This pattern has one structure: 
* Verb with Adjunct. 
   I cut across the field. 

 
Further example sentences are provided drawn 
from the corpus and a list of verbs found in the 
pattern and that are semantically typical are given. 
For this pattern these are: brush, cut, fall, flicker, 
flit plane, skim, sweep. No indication is given as to 
how frequent each of these types are or how com-
prehensive the list is. Further structural (syntacti-
cal) characteristics of the pattern are sometimes 

provided, such as the fact that for V across n the 
prepositional phrase is an adjunct and that the verb 
is never passive. 

For some construction patterns with a gener-
ally fixed order it may be sufficient just to specify 
combinations of word and part-of-speech se-
quences. For example, a main verb followed by 
across within 1 to 3 words (to allow for adverbial 
elements), followed by a noun or pronoun within a 
few words. To such constraints a number excep-
tions of what should not occur within the specified 
spans must be added. The variation and potential 
complexity of English noun phrases presents chal-
lenges for this approach. On the other hand a 
multi-level constituent parse tree provides more 
than needed. A dependency parse with word-to-
word relations is well suited for the task.  
 
3.2 Corpus: BNC XML Parsed 
 
The analysis of verb type-token distribution in the 
kinds of construction patterns described in the pre-
vious section should ideally be carried out using a 
range of corpora in the magnitude of the tens or 
hundreds of millions of words as the original work 
is derived from the Bank of English (a growing 
monitor corpus of over 400 million words). These 
corpora should, at the least, be part-of-speech 
tagged to search for the pattern as specified. Fur-
ther some kind of partial parsing and chunking is 
necessary to apply the structural constraints (see 
Mason & Hunston, 2004 for exploratory 
methodology). We chose to use the 100 million 
word British National Corpus (BNC) on account of 
its size, the breadth of genres it contains and con-
sistent lemmatization and part-of-speech tagging. 
Andersen et al. (2008) parsed the XML version of 
the BNC using the RASP parser (Briscoe, Carroll, 
& Watson, 2006). RASP is a statistical feature-
based parser that produces  a probabilistically or-
dered set of parse trees for a given sentence and 
additionally a set of grammatical relations (GRs) 
that capture “those aspects of predicate-argument 
structure that the system is able to recover and is 
the most stable and grammar independent repre-
sentation available” (Briscoe, et al., 2006, p. 79). 
The GRs are organized into a hierarchy of depend-
ency relations, including distinctions between 
modifiers and arguments and within arguments 
between subject (sub) and complements (comp).  
Figure 1 shows the GRs assigned by RASP for the 

11



sentence: The kitchen light skids across the lawn 
(BNC A0U).  The main verb skids has two argu-
ments, a subject (ncsubj) and indirect object (iobj), 
and the preposition one argument (dobj).  
 

Figure 1. Example of RASP GRs 
 
The RASP GR hierarchy does not include catego-
ries such as prepositional complement or adjunct. 
Figure 2 shows the GRs for another sentence con-
taining across which is not an example of the V 
across n pattern. Alternate analyses might attach 
across directly to the main verb threw, but at least 
from examining BNC examples containing across, 
it appears RASP tends to favor local attachments 
(also for towards in this case).  
 

 

Figure 2. Example of RASP GRs 
 
The GRs from RASP have been incorporated into 
the XML for each BNC sentence thereby preserv-
ing the token, part-of-speech and lemma informa-
tion in the corpus.  
 

3.3 Searching construction patterns 
 
Our search algorithm works as follows: 
 

1. Process each sentence in turn testing 
against an XPath expression to identify 
components in construction patterns, e.g. 
.//w[@lem="across"][@pos="PREP"]/ 
preceding-sibling::w[position()<3] 
[@pos="VERB"][1] finds a verb followed by 
across within 2 words.  

2. Create a list of the grammatical relations 
where this verb functions as the head.  
i. This finds the ncsubj and iobj rela-

tions for the example sentence.  
ii. Also find GRs involving other components 

of pattern (e.g. across). 
3. Check these GRs against a constraint list, 

e.g. make sure that 

i. only one relation where the dependent 
word comes after the verb (excluding 
verbs with both dobj and iobj or obj2) 

ii. the dependent of the second component 
matches a specific part-of-speech (e.g. 
across as head and noun as dependent). 

4. For matching sentences record verb 
lemma. 

 
Here we report on just two construction patterns: 1. 
V across n and 2. V n n or V Obj Obj (where n 
includes both nouns and pronouns). We have also 
run a range of similar V Prep n patterns from CO-
BUILD, such as V into n, V after n, V as n. We 
have still to carry out a systematic precision-recall 
analysis, but ad hoc examination suggests that the 
strict constraints using the dependency relations 
provides a reasonable precision and the size of the 
corpus results in a large enough number of tokens 
to carry out distributional analysis (see Table 1).  
 

Construction Types Tokens TTR 
V across n 799 4889 16.34 
V Obj Obj 663 9183 7.22 

 
Table 1. Type-Token data for V across n and V Obj Obj 
constructions 

3.4  Identifying the meaning of verb types occu-
pying the constructions 

We considered several ways of analyzing the 
semantics the resulting verb distributions. It is im-
portant that the semantic measures we employ are 
defined in a way that is free of linguistic distribu-
tional information, otherwise we would be building 
in circularity. Therefore methods such as LSA are 
not applicable here. Instead, our research utilizes 
two distribution-free semantic databases: (1) Ro-
get’s thesaurus, a classic lexical resource of long-
standing proven utility, based on Roget’s guided 
introspections, as implemented in the Open Ro-
get’s Project (Kennedy, 2009). This provides vari-
ous algorithms for measuring the semantic similar-
ity between terms and between sentences. (2) 
WordNet, based upon psycholinguistic theory and 
in development since 1985 (Miller, 2009). Word-
Net classes words into a hierarchical network. At 
the top level, the hierarchy for verbs is organized 
into 15 base types (such as move1 expressing trans-
lational movement and move2 movement without 
displacement, communicate, etc.) which then split 
into over 11,500 verb synonym sets or synsets. 

12



Verbs are linked in the hierarchy according to rela-
tions such as hypernym (to move is an hypernym 
of to walk), and troponym, the term used for hypo-
nymic relations in the verb component of WordNet 
(to lisp is a troponym of to talk). There are various 
algorithms to determine the semantic similarity 
between synsets in WordNet which consider the 
distance between the conceptual categories of 
words, as well as considering the hierarchical 
structure of the WordNet (Pedersen et al. 2004). 

3.5 Determining the contingency between 
construction form and function 

Some verbs are closely tied to a particular con-
struction (for example, give is highly indicative of 
the ditransitive construction, whereas leave, al-
though it can form a ditransitive, is more often as-
sociated with other constructions such as the sim-
ple transitive or intransitive). The more reliable the 
contingency between a cue and an outcome, the 
more readily an association between them can be 
learned (Shanks, 1995), so constructions with 
more faithful verb members are more transparent 
and thus should be more readily acquired. Ellis and 
Ferreira-Junior (2009) use ΔP and collostructional 
analysis measures (Stefanowitsch & Gries, 2003) 
to show effects of form-function contingency upon 
L2 VAC acquisition. Others use conditional prob-
abilities to investigate contingency effects in VAC 
acquisition. This is still an active area of inquiry, 
and more research is required before we know 
which statistical measures of form-function con-
tingency are more predictive of acquisition and 
processing. Meanwhile, the simplest usable meas-
ure is one of faithfulness – the proportion of tokens 
of total verb usage as a whole that appear in this 
particular construction. For illustration, the faith-
fulness of give to the ditransitive is approximately 
0.40; that for leave is 0.01.  

4 Results 

4.1 Evaluating the verb distribution 
 
For the V across n pattern the procedure outlined 
in the previous section results in the following list: 
 

come 483     
walk 203 ...    
cut 199 veer 4   
run 175 whirl 4 ...  

spread 146 slice 4 discharge 1 
...  clamber 4 navigate 1 
  ...  scythe 1 
    scroll 1 

Figure 3. Verb type distribution for V across n 
 
At first glance this distribution does appear to be 
Zipfian, exhibiting the characteristic long-tailed 
distribution in a plot of rank against frequency. 
Dorogovstev & Mendes (2003, pp. 222-223) out-
line the commonly used methods for measuring 
power-law distributions: 1. a simple log-log plot 
(rank/frequency), 2. log-log plot of cumulative 
probability against frequency and 3. the use of 
logarithmic binning over the distribution for a log-
log plot as in 2. Linear regression can be applied to 
the resulting plots and goodness of fit (R2) and the 
slope (γ) recorded.  

Figure 3 shows such a plot for verb type fre-
quency of the V across n construction pattern ex-
tracted from the parsed BNC XML corpus follow-
ing the third plotting method. Verb types are 
grouped into 20 logarithmic bins according to their 
frequency (x-axis) against the logarithm of the cu-
mulative probability of a verb occurring with or 
above this frequency (y-axis). Each point repre-
sents one bin and a verb from each group is ran-

13



domly selected to label the point with its token fre-
quency in parentheses. For example, the type look 
occurs 102 times in the V across n pattern and is 
placed into the 15th bin with the types go, lie and 
lean. Points towards the lower right of the plot in-
dicate high-frequency low-type groupings and 
those towards the top left low-frequency high-type 
groupings, that is the fat- or long-tail of the distri-
bution. Looking at the verbs given as examples of 
the pattern in COBUILD volume we find all but 
plane represented in our corpus search V across n: 
brush (12 tokens, group 9), cut (199 tokens, group 
18), fall (57, g14), flicker (21, g10), flit (15, g9), 
plane (0), skim (9, g8), sweep (34, g12).  

Figure 4. Verb type distribution for V Obj Obj 
 
Figure 4 shows the plot for verb type frequency of 
the ditransitive V Obj Obj construction pattern ex-
tracted and binned in the same way. Both distribu-
tions can be fitted with a straight regression line 
(R2=0.993). Thus we conclude that the type-token 
frequency distributions for these constructions are 
Zipfian. (In future we will investigate the other 
plot and fitting methods to ensure we have not 
smoothed the data too much through binning.) In-
spection of the construction verb types, from most 
frequent down, also suggests that, as in prior re-
search (Ellis & Ferreira-Junior, 2009; Goldberg et 

al., 2004; Ninio, 1999), the most frequent items are 
prototypical of the construction and more generic 
in their action semantics. 
 
 

4.2 Evaluating the roles of frequency distribu-
tion and faithfulness in semantic cohesion 
 
The second step in evaluating the verb distribu-
tions from the construction patterns is to compare a 
small set of types selected on the basis of a flat 
type distribution, the (Zipfian) token frequency 
distribution and a distribution that represents the 
degree to which a verb is attracted to the particular 
construction. First we select the top 200 types from 
the two VACs, ordered by token frequency. Then 
we sample 20 verbs from this list at random. This 
is the ‘types list’. Next we take the top 20 types as 
the ‘tokens list’. Finally, we calculate the token-
ized faithfulness score for each type by dividing 
the verb’s frequency in the construction by its 
overall frequency in the whole BNC. For example, 
spread occurs 146 times in the V across n pattern 
and 5503 times in total. So its faithfulness is 
146/5503*100 = 2.65%, i.e. 1 in 38, of the in-
stances of spread occur as spread across n. The 
tokenized faithfulness score for spread is then 
simply (146/5503) * 146 = 3.87, which tempers the 
tendency for low frequency types such as scud, 
skitter and emblazon to rise to the top of the list 
and is our initial attempt to combine the effects of 
token frequency and construction contingency. We 
reorder the 200 types by this figure and take the 
top twenty for the ‘faithfulness list’. Tables 2 and 3 
contain these lists for the two constructions. An 
intuitive reading of these lists suggests that the to-
kens list captures the most general and prototypical 
senses (walk, move etc. for V across n and give, 
make, tell, offer for V Obj Obj), while the list or-
dered by tokenized faith highlights some quite 
construction specific (and low frequency) items, 
such as scud, flit and flicker for V across n. 
 The final component is to quantify the seman-
tic coherence or ‘clumpiness’ of the verbs ex-
tracted in the previous steps. For this we use 
WordNet and Roget’s. Pedersen et al. (2004) out-
line six measures in their Perl WordNet::Similarity 
package, three (path, lch and wup) based on the 
path length between concepts in WordNet Synsets 
and three (res, jcn and lin) that incorporate a  
measure called ‘information content’ related to 
concept specificity. Tables 4 and 5 show the simi-

14



larity scores that result from taking the 20 types in 
each of the lists in Tables 2 and 3 and generating a 
20 by 20 distance matrix. 
 

 types (sample) tokens faithfulness 
1 scuttle come spread 
2 ride walk scud 
3 paddle cut sprawl 
4 communicate run cut 
5 rise spread walk 
6 stare move come 
7 drift look stride 
8 stride go lean 
9 face lie flit 
10 dart lean stretch 
11 flee stretch run 
12 skid fall scatter 
13 print get skitter 
14 shout pass flicker 
15 use reach slant 
16 stamp travel scuttle 
17 look fly stumble 
18 splash stride sling 
19 conduct scatter skid 
20 scud sweep flash 

Table 2. Top 20 types for V across n ordered by types, 
tokens and construction tokenized faithfulness 
 

 types (sample) tokens faithfulness 
1  eat give give 
2  attend make call 
3  feel call offer 
4  receive tell make 
5  miss do send 
6  choose offer tell 
7  affect send hand 
8  come show show 
9  mean find earn 
10  provide get owe 
11  cut bring cost 
12  strike ask lend 
13  prove take bring 
14  teach pay do 
15  refuse allow find 
16  spare buy ask 
17  leave see pay 
18  wonder hand allow 
19  permit cost buy 
20  force set teach 

Table 3. Top 20 types for V Obj Obj ordered by types, 
tokens and construction faithfulness 
 
The figures are the mean of the values in each ma-
trix. Path and lin values range between 0 and 1, 
Open Roget between 4 and 16 and the others are 

on varying scales where larger values indicate 
greater similarity. These tables show that the token 
distribution sample of verb types increases the se-
mantic cohesion of the construction over a flat 
verbs list. 
 

Similarity 
measure 

Types 
(sampled) 

Tokens 
(top 20) 

Faithfulness 
(top 20) 

WordNet    
path 0.163 0.387 0.245 
lch 0.941 1.976 1.385 
wup 0.312 0.653 0.453 
res 2.473 4.673 3.748 
jcn 1.033 0.383 0.190 
lin  0.259 0.583 0.372 

Open Roget 5.190 11.737 6.232 
Table 4. Semantic similarity measures for V across n 
by types, tokens and construction faithfulness 
 

Similarity 
measure 

Types 
(sampled) 

Tokens 
(top 20) 

Faithfulness 
(top 20) 

WordNet    
path 0.175 0.316 0.241 
lch 1.008 1.654 1.299 
wup 0.345 0.579 0.457 
res 2.470 3.942 2.973 
jcn 0.199 0.435 0.313 
lin 0.308 0.558 0.406 

Open Roget 7.863 13.011 10.768 
Table 5. Semantic similarity measures for V Obj Obj by 
types, tokens and construction faithfulness 
 
Sampling the items on the basis of their token fre-
quency weighted for faithfulness also improves 
semantic homogeneity, although it does not here 
offer any improvement over a tokenized distribu-
tion alone. We not entirely satisfied with these 
measures. WordNet verb hierarchies are much flat-
ter and bushier than those for nouns, where these 
measures are more successful. For verbs, distance 
down a synset is less telling than distance across. 
As a result, we are exploring other measures of the 
semantic similarity of verbs informed by network 
science. We are also exploring the use of word 
sense disambiguation techniques to reduce prob-
lems introduced by the rich polysemy of verbs in 
WordNet (e.g. give is assigned to 44 different syn-
sets) and also in Roget’s. 

Future work  
We plan to apply these methods to the full range of 
English VACs as described in Francis et al (1996) 

15



and other construction grammars too. We are par-
ticularly interested in whether the inventory repre-
sents an optimal partitioning of verb semantics, 
starting with basic categories of action semantics 
and proceeding to greater specificity via Zipfian 
mapping. We are also interested in extending these 
approaches to learner language to investigate 
whether first and second language learners’ acqui-
sition follows the construction distributional pro-
files and whether the factors outlined in Goldberg 
et al. (2004) facilitate acquisition.  

There have been suggestions that Zipfian type-
token frequency distributions are essentially unin-
teresting artifacts. For each motivated construction 
identified along the lines described in 3.3, we have 
begun to make matching random control distribu-
tions generated as a random selection of verb types 
of comparable n types and tokens (yoked ersatz-
controls). For each of our outcome measures, we 
will compare the various scores for VAC verb-
types gathered on the principled basis of construc-
tion-grammar against those for their controls. 

Conclusions 

Meanwhile, these pilot studies show some promise 
in these methods towards an English verb grammar 
operationalized as an inventory of VACs, their 
verb membership and their type-token frequency 
distributions, their contingency of mapping, and 
their semantic motivations. 

References  
Andersen, Ø. E., Nioche, J., Briscoe, T., & Carroll, J. 

(2008). The BNC Parsed with RASP4UIMA. 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC08), 28-30. 

Bod, R., Hay, J., & Jannedy, S. (eds.). (2003). 
Probabilistic linguistics. Cambridge,MA: MIT Press. 

Briscoe, E., Carroll, J., & Watson, R. (2006). The 
Second Release of the RASP System. Proceedings of 
the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation 
Sessions, Sydney, Australia. 

Bybee, J., & Hopper, P. (Eds.). (2001). Frequency and 
the emergence of linguistic structure. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. 

Dorogovstev, S.N., & Mendes, J.F.F. (2003). Evolution 
of Networks: From Biological Nets to the Internet 
and WWW. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Ellis, N.C. (2002). Frequency effects in language 
processing: A review with implications for theories 

of implicit and explicit language acquisition. Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition, 24 (2), 143-188. 

Ellis, N.C., & Cadierno, T. (2009). Constructing a 
second language. Annual Review of Cognitive 
Linguistics, 7 (Special section). 

Ellis, N.C., & Ferreira-Junior, F. (2009). Constructions 
and their acquisition: Islands and the distinctiveness 
of their occupancy. Annual Review of Cognitive 
Linguistics, 111-139. 

Fillmore, C. J., Johnson, C. R., & Petruck, M. R. L. 
(2003). Background to Framenet. International 
Journal of Lexicography, 16, 235-250. 

Francis, G., Hunston, S., & Manning, E. (Eds.). (1996). 
Grammar Patterns 1: Verbs. The COBUILD Series. 
London: Harper Collins. 

Goldberg, A.E. (2006). Constructions at work: The 
nature of generalization in language. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Goldberg, A.E., Casenhiser, D.M., & Sethuraman, N. 
(2004). Learning argument structure generalizations. 
Cognitive Linguistics, 15, 289–316. 

Gries, S.T., & Stefanowitsch, A. (2004). Extending 
collostructional analysis: a corpus-based perspective 
on ‘alternations’. International Journal of Corpus 
Linguistics, 9, 97-129. 

Kennedy, A. (2009). The Open Roget’s Project: 
Electronic lexical knowledge base. Retr. 1st March, 
2010: http://rogets.site.uottawa.ca/index.shtml 

Mason, O., & Hunston, S. (2004). The automatic 
recognition of verb patterns: A feasibility study. 
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 9, 253-
270. 

Miller, G. A. (2009). WordNet - About us. Retrieved 
March 1, 2010, from http://wordnet.princeton.edu 

Ninio, A. (1999). Pathbreaking verbs in syntactic 
development and the question of prototypical 
transitivity. Journal of Child Language, 26, 619-653. 

Pedersen, T., Patwardhan, S., & Michelizzi, J. (2004). 
WordNet::Similarity – Measuring the Relatedness of 
Concepts. Proceedings of Fifth Annual Meeting of 
the North American Chapter of the Association of 
Computational Linguistics (NAACL 2004). 

Shanks, D. R. (1995). The psychology of associative 
learning. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Sinclair, J. (2004). Trust the text: Language, corpus and 
discourse. London: Routledge. 

Solé, R. V., Murtra, B., Valverde, S., & Steels, L. 
(2005). Language Networks: their structure, function 
and evolution. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12. 

Stefanowitsch, A., & Gries, S.T. (2003). 
Collostructions: Investigating the interaction between 
words and constructions. International Journal of 
Corpus Linguistics, 8, 209-243. 

Zipf, G. K. (1935). The psycho-biology of language: An 
introduction to dynamic philology. Cambridge, MA: 
The M.I.T. Press. 

16


