










































Annotating Korean Demonstratives


Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 162–165,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating Korean Demonstratives 

    
 

Sun-Hee Lee 
Wellesley College 
Wellesley, USA 

slee6@wellesley.edu 

Jae-young Song 
Yonsei University 

Seoul, Korea 
jysong@yonsei.ac.kr 

  
 
 

Abstract 

This paper presents preliminary work on a 
corpus-based study of Korean demonstratives. 
Through the development of an annotation 
scheme and the use of spoken and written 
corpora, we aim to determine different func-
tions of demonstratives and to examine their 
distributional properties. Our corpus study 
adopts similar features of annotation used in 
Botley and McEnery (2001) and provides 
some linguistic hypotheses on grammatical 
functions of Korean demonstratives to be fur-
ther explored.  

1 Introduction 
Korean demonstratives are known to have two 
different functions: anaphoric and deictic refer-
ence. Anaphoric demonstratives refer to objects, 
individuals, events, situations, or propositions in 
the given linguistic context. Deictic demonstra-
tives refer to physical objects, individuals, or 
positions (or regions) in the given situational 
context. Deictic variations commonly signal the 
speaker’s physical distance from specified items. 
Previous literature on Korean demonstratives has 
focused on deictic functions in spoken Korean, 
but a comprehensive approach to their diverse 
linguistic functions is still lacking. This study 
examines distinct usages of Korean demonstra-
tives in a spoken and a written corpus through 
the annotation of relevant linguistic features. Our 
annotation scheme and features are expected to 
help clarify grammatical functions of Korean 
demonstratives, as well as other anaphoric ex-
pressions.    
  English demonstratives show a binary distinc-
tion that depends on physical distance; there is a 
distinction between proximal forms (this, these, 
this N, these Ns) and distal forms (that, those, 
that N, those Ns). In contrast, demonstratives in 

languages like Korean and Japanese show a 
three-way distinction: proximal forms, speaker-
centered distal forms, and speaker- and hearer-
centered distal forms. For example, deictic de-
monstrative i refers to a proximal object relative 
to the speaker, ku refers to a distant object that is 
close to the hearer, and ce refers to a distant ob-
ject that is far from both the speaker and the 
hearer. Thus, distinct usage of ce and ku is asso-
ciated with how the speaker allocates the deictic 
center and contextual space, i.e., the speaker-
centered space vs. the speaker- and the hearer–
centered space. In contrast with deictic usage, 
previous studies (Chang, 1980; Chang, 1984) 
assumed that anaphoric demonstratives show 
only a two-way distinction between proximal 
forms i and distal forms ku. However, it is still 
controversial as to whether the boundaries be-
tween anaphora and deixis are clear cut. With 
our annotation scheme, we aim to capture the 
linguistic properties contributing to interpreta-
tions of demonstratives in Korean. In particular, 
we aim to determine whether different registers 
or genres contribute to different functions of de-
monstratives by comparing their usage in a spo-
ken corpus and a written corpus.   

In consideration of a future comparative anal-
ysis with English demonstratives, we have de-
signed our annotation scheme by adopting Botley 
and McEnery’s (2001) paradigmatic set of dis-
tinctive features for English demonstratives. 
However, the detailed annotation features have 
been revised according to language specific fea-
tures of Korean.  

2 Corpus Study 
For data extraction, we used two Sejong tagged 
corpora including a 20,343 eojeol spoken corpus 
and 21,023 eojeol written corpus.1 Each corpus is 
                                                 
1 The term eojeol refers to a unit set off by spaces and cor-
responds to a word unit in English. 

162



composed of four conversations/texts with ap-
proximately 5000 eojeol. The subcorpora of the 
spoken corpus are everyday conversations with-
out assigned topics and those of the written cor-
pus are three newspaper articles and part of a 
novel.    

Compared to English, Korean demonstratives 
include more complex grammatical categories 
with morphological relations. The demonstrative 
forms i, ku, and ce combine with other words or 
morphemes and form complex words including 
nominals (e.g., i-kes: this+thing ‘this’), adverbs 
(e.g., ce-lehkey: that+way ‘that way’), adjectives 
(e.g., ku-lehata: it+is ‘is so’) and other lexical 
categories. Thus, it is difficult to determine if 
they all belong to the same category of demon-
stratives in Korean. In this study, demonstratives 
are restricted to words that contain i, ku, and ce 
maintaining a distinct referentialfunction of 
pointing. The selected demonstratives include 
adnouns ( i N ‘this N’,  ku N ‘that N’, ce ‘that 
N’), pronouns ( i-es/i-ke ‘this’, ku-kes/ ku-ke ‘it’, 
ce-kes/ceke ‘that’, i-tul ‘these’, ku-tul ‘they’ ce-
tul), and locative pronouns ( yeki ‘here’, keki 
‘there’, ceki ‘over there’). Although those forms 
have different lexical categories, strong similari-
ties exist within the same morphological families, 
which we will refer to as i type, ku type, and ce 
type demonstratives. Our annotation work aims 
to extract a generalization of the fundamental 
usage of the three different types and to use that 
generalization for developing further research on 
various morphological variants containing i, ku, 
and ce.  

2.1 The Annotation Scheme 
In order to mark referential functions of Korean 
demonstratives, we first adopt Halliday and Ha-
san’s (1976) classification of the different refer-
ence functions of demonstratives: exophoric vs. 
endophoric usage. We further divide exophora 
into deixis and background. While the former 
refers to a physical object or an individual (or 
location) in the situational context, the latter re-
fers to certain shared information between the 
speaker and the hearer.   

    
(1)      Reference 

 
situational (exophoric)  textual (endophoric)  

 
 deictic      background     anaphoric   cataphoric  
           (shared knowledge)       
 

Six distinct features include “Lexical Category of 
a Demonstrative”, “Endophoricity”, “Exopho-
ricity”, “Syntactic Category of an Antecedent”, 
“Phoric Type”, and “Semantic Function of an 
Antecedent”. The first five features are adopted 
from five features in Botley and McEnery’s 
(2001) annotation work on English demonstra-
tives.2  The last feature (semantic function) has 
been added for future work annotating semantic 
information that facilitates anaphor resolution 
processes.   

Lexical categories of Korean demonstratives 
in this study include four parts of speech: adnoun, 
pronoun, locative pronoun (functioning also as 
an adverb), and exclamatory expressions. While 
the first three categories show referential func-
tions, the exclamatory expressions do not have 
reference. Instead, they are used as expressions 
conveying the speaker’s emotion or state, e.g., 
embarrassment, confusion, hedging. We do not, 
however, exclude the possibility of linguistic 
connectivity between demonstrative and excla-
matory forms. For instance, the distal demonstra-
tive form ce tends to be used as a hedging ex-
pression in Korean. Our study includes exclama-
tory usage as an annotation feature.  

Endophoricity refers to two different func-
tions: anaphoric vs. cataphoric. Exophoricity re-
fers to context based vs. deixis. According to 
Halliday and Hasan’s classification in (1), de-
monstratives with referential function show two 
major usages: endophoric and exophoric. The 
first type takes its antecedent within the given 
text; the latter, within the given situation. Dis-
tinction between an anaphor and a cataphor de-
pends on the position of the antecedent. When an 
endophor follows its antecedent, it is an anaphor; 
the other case is a cataphor. Demonstratives may 
have different types of antecedents syntactically. 
The corresponding values include nominals (in-
cluding N or NP), clausals (including V, A, VP, 
                                                 
2  As one of the reviewers pointed out, our study has some 
limitations as it only refers to two previous studies, Halliday 
and Hasan (1976) and Botley and McEnery (2001). Al-
though we are aware of the other fundamental work includ-
ing demonstratives in a broader range of referential expres-
sions such as Gundel et al. (1993), Prince (1981), Nissim et 
al. (2004), etc., we choose to focus on Korean demonstra-
tives because their exact grammatical functions have not 
been comprehensively studied in existing literature. In addi-
tion, developing a broader classification system for referen-
tial expressions in Korean is a challenging task from both 
theoretical and empirical perspectives; linguistic analyses of 
Korean nominal expressions must deal with controversial 
issues such as definiteness without articles, zero elements 
functioning as anaphors, unsystematic morphological mark-
ing of plurality and genericity, etc.     

163



AP, etc.), and sentential elements (S or Ss for 
more than two sentences).3  

The feature semantic function of an antece-
dent includes values of nominal entities, events, 
and propositions. This feature will be expanded 
into specified values such as event, process, state, 
and circumstances in our future study. Phoric 
type has been adopted from Botley and McEnery 
(2001) and refers to two distinct relations: refer-
ence and substitution. According to Halliday and 
Hasan, substitution is a relation between linguis-
tic forms, whereas reference is a relation between 
meanings. The values of phoric type also include 
non-phoric such as exophora whose antecedents 
exist outside the text.  

 The annotation features and values we use 
are summarized in Table 1.  

Feature Value1  Value2 Value 3 Value4 

Lexical  
Category (L) 

AN 
(adnoun) 

PR 
(Pronoun) 

LPR 
(Locative 
pronoun) 

EX 
(Excla-
mation) 

Endophorici-
ty (O) 

A 
(anaphor) 

C 
(cataphor) 

 
 

 
 

Exophoricity 
(X) 

T 
(situation-
al) 

D 
(deictic)  

 
 

Syntactic 
Function (F)  

NO 
(nominals) 

CL 
(clausal) 

S 
(sentential) 

 
 

Semantic 
Function (M) 

N 
(entities) E (event) 

P  
(proposi-
tions) 

 

Phoric Type 
(H) 

R 
(reference) 

U 
(Substitu-
tion) 

K 
(non-phoric)  

Table 1 Annotation Features and Possible Values 
 
The initial results of inter-annotator agreement 
between two trained annotators are promising.  
Cohen’s Kappa is 0.76 for the average agreement 
of six high level categories and it increases fol-
lowing a discussion period (K = 0.83, K=2)4. 

3 Results 

We identified 1,235 demonstratives in our pilot 
study. The distributions of demonstratives were 
significantly different between the spoken and 

                                                 
3 Although the syntactic category of an antecedent can be 
differentiated in a more sophisticated way using phrasal 
categories such as NP, VP, AdvP, etc. (as well as lexical 
categories), this will render the annotation process nearly 
impossible unless one uses a corpus with syntactic annota-
tion, such as treebanks. Thus, we use simplified syntactic 
information such as nominal, clausal, and sentential.  
4  The agreement rate was calculated for each six high level 
categories separately and then averaged. The syntactic func-
tion has the lowest agreement rate even after the discussion 
(K=0.76). This is due to complex properties of Korean de-
monstratives with unclear boundaries between exclamatory 
expressions and other lexical categories.   

the written corpora. Table 2 shows the raw fre-
quencies in the spoken and the written corpora 
for each combination of feature and value out-
lined in Table 1. The raw frequencies are sup-
plemented with the log likelihood in order to 
show the significance for frequency differences 
in the two corpora in Table 2. Each demonstra-
tive is followed by a two-character code sepa-
rated by underscore. The first character denotes 
the feature and the second the value. For exam-
ple, the first item kulen ‘that (kind of)’ whose 
lexical category (L) is adnoun (AN) mostly ap-
peared in the spoken corpus and not in the writ-
ten corpus.5 

 
Feature                      S            W             LL 
kulen_L_AN 183 14 177.7  
kulen_H_R 178 14 171.3  
kulen_O_A 163 14 152.4  
kuke(s)_L_PR         202 38 128.5  
kuke(s)_H_R 187 38 112.5  
ku_L_EX   114 9 109.6  
i_O_A  6 105 104.0  
kuke(s)_O_A 172 38 97.0  
kulen_F_NO 69 2 82.4  
ike(s)_H_K 68 3 75.7 
ike(s)_X_D 63 2 74.3   
Table 2 Frequency of Demonstrative Features  

 
Whereas 931 demonstratives appeared in the 

spoken corpus, only 304 appeared in the written 
corpus. The distributions of three different types 
of demonstratives are listed in Table 3. 

 

Types Total Frequency 
Written Spoken 
Freq. % Freq. % 

i  398 176 56 222 44 
ku  773 128 17 645 83 
ce  64 0 0 64 100 
Total 1235 304 25 931 75 

Table 3 Distribution of Three Demonstrative Types 
 
The spoken corpus and the written corpus show 
different preferences for i, ku, and ce types.  

 
Written: i  (58%)  > ku (42%)  > ce (0%) 
Spoken: ku (69%) > i (24%)  > ce (7%) 

 
Whereas ku demonstratives are preferred to cor-
responding i demonstratives in the spoken corpus, 
i demonstratives are preferred in the written cor-
                                                 
5 In Table 2, the log likelihood scores show that the usage of 
kulen is significantly different in the spoken and the written 
corpus. The log-likelihood scores in Table 2 are significant 
at a 99 percent confidence level with 1 degree of freedom if 
they are greater than 6.6. We only show a partial frequency 
list here due to the space limitations.  
 

164



pus. This fact is associated with the linguistic 
function of ku that represents a speaker’s desire 
to anchor interpersonal involvement with the 
hearer by actively inviting the hearer’s voluntary 
understanding of the target referent. In contrast, i 
demonstratives imply that the speaker (writer) 
intends to incorporate the hearer (reader) within 
the proximal cognitive distance. In terms of an-
notation features, our findings are summarized as 
follows.   

Lexical category: In both the written and 
spoken corpora, adnominal demonstratives are 
more frequently used than pronouns or locative 
pronouns. Demonstrative forms used as intensifi-
ers, hedges, or personal habitual noise have been 
marked as exclamatives. Annotators have found 
that it is often difficult to clearly distinguish 
them from adnominal demonstratives.   

Endophoricity: Our written corpus does not 
include any cataphors, whereas the spoken cor-
pus shows 61 cases (cf. 523 anaphors). This fact 
seems to be related to the speaker’s discourse 
strategy of intending to call the discourse partici-
pants’ attention by placing an endophoric ele-
ment before its antecedent.  

Exophoricity: Exophoric usage of demonstr-
atives in the written corpus is very limited. Only 
17 cases were found (6 deixis vs. 11 context-
based). In the spoken corpus, exophoric usages 
occur more frequently across three types of de-
monstratives. The deictic usage dominates the 
context-based usage (151 deixis vs. 79 context-
based). As noted in previous literature, ce de-
monstratives mainly appear in deictic context, 
where its antecedent is visible or exists in the 
given situation. There seems to be a constraint of 
deictic usage of ce involving physical existence 
or visibility (or cognitive awareness) of an entity 
in addition to distance. This hypothesis needs to 
be further investigated with additional data.  

Syntactic and Semantic Function: All three 
types of i, ku, and ce demonstratives refer to no-
minal entities as their antecedents. Although i 
and ku demonstratives are also used to refer to 
clausals and sentential elements, only a few ex-
amples of ce replace clausal or sentential ele-
ments. Another notable point is that i and ku de-
monstratives refer to clausal or sentential ele-
ments (corresponding to events or propositions) 
more frequently than nominal entities in both 
spoken and written corpora. 59% of the antece-
dents of i demonstratives (56% for ku type) in 
the written corpus are clausals or sentential ele-
ments, whereas 53% of the antecedents of i type 
(69% for ku type) are in the spoken corpus. This 

result needs to be tested on a larger corpus in our 
future study.  

Phoric Type: In our annotated corpus, we 
only found referential examples, not substitu-
tional cases. Exophoric examples are marked as 
non-phoric. In the written corpus, referential de-
monstratives are predominant (285 cases) and a 
small number of non-phoric cases are observed 
(18 cases). In the spoken corpus, referential de-
monstratives are more frequent (590 cases), whe-
reas non-phoric cases have been more observed 
than in the written corpus (198 cases).  

3 Conclusion 
In this paper we presented a corpus-based study 
on Korean demonstratives. Six annotation fea-
tures were used to mark complex linguistic func-
tions of demonstratives. Using spoken and writ-
ten corpora, we compared different usages of 
Korean demonstratives and showed that their 
usages are different depending on the registers of 
spoken and written Korean.    

In spite of the deictic functions of demonstra-
tives highlighted in previous research, our study 
indicates that endophoric usage is more predo-
minant. This hypothesis, as well as others in this 
study, will be tested with a large corpus in our 
future work. We also plan to incorporate more 
sophisticated exploitation on semantic types of 
antecedents. This information will be useful for 
resolving the meaning of anaphoric demonstra-
tives. 

References 
Botley, Simon and Tony McEnery. 2001. Demonstra-

tives in English. Journal of English Linguistics, 
29(1): 7-33. 

Chang, Kyung-Hee. 1980. Semantic Analysis of De-
monstrative i, ku, ce. Ehakyenku,16(2):167-0184.  

Chang, Seok-Jin 1984. Cisiwa Coung. Hangul, 186: 
115-149.  

Gundel, Jaeanette, Nancy Hedberg, and Ron Zachars-
ki. 1993. Cognitive Status and the Form of Re-
ferring Expressions in Discourse. Language, 
69(2):274-307.  

Halliday, M.A.K. and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohe-
sion in English. London: Longman.  

Min, Kyung Mo. 2008. A Study on Reference Items in 
Korean. Ph.D. Dissertation. Yonsei University.  

Poesio, Massimo. 2004. The MATE/GNOME 
Scheme for Anaphoric Annotation, Revisited. In 
Proceedings of SIGDIAL. Boston.   

Prince, Ellen. 1981. Toward a Taxonomy of Given-
New Information. Radical Pragmatics: 223-255. 
Academic Press. New York.  

165


