



















































Towards multi-lingual summarization: A comparative analysis of sentence extraction methods on English and Hebrew corpora


Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Cross Lingual Information Access at COLING 2010, pages 61–69,
Beijing, August 2010

Towards multi-lingual summarization: A comparative analysis of
sentence extraction methods on English and Hebrew corpora

Marina Litvak and Hagay Lipman and Assaf Ben Gur and Mark Last
Ben Gurion University of the Negev

{litvakm, lipmanh, bengura, mlast}@bgu.ac.il

Slava Kisilevich and Daniel Keim
University of Konstanz

slaks@dbvis.inf.uni-konstanz.de
Daniel.Keim@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract

The trend toward the growing multi-
linguality of the Internet requires text
summarization techniques that work
equally well in multiple languages. Only
some of the automated summarization
methods proposed in the literature, how-
ever, can be defined as “language-
independent”, as they are not based on
any morphological analysis of the sum-
marized text. In this paper, we per-
form an in-depth comparative analysis of
language-independent sentence scoring
methods for extractive single-document
summarization. We evaluate 15 pub-
lished summarization methods proposed
in the literature and 16 methods intro-
duced in (Litvak et al., 2010). The eval-
uation is performed on English and He-
brew corpora. The results suggest that
the performance ranking of the com-
pared methods is quite similar in both
languages. The top ten bilingual scoring
methods include six methods introduced
in (Litvak et al., 2010).

1 Introduction

Automatically generated summaries can signif-
icantly reduce the information overload on pro-
fessionals in a variety of fields, could prove ben-
eficial for the automated classification and fil-
tering of documents, the search for information
over the Internet and applications that utilize
large textual databases.

Document summarization methodologies in-
clude statistic-based, using either the classic vec-
tor space model or a graph representation, and
semantic-based, using ontologies and language-
specific knowledge (Mani & Maybury, 1999).
Although the use of language-specific knowl-
edge can potentially improve the quality of auto-
mated summaries generated in a particular lan-
guage, its language specificity ultimately re-
stricts the use of such a summarizer to a sin-
gle language. Only systems that perform equally
well on different languages in the absence of any
language-specific knowledge can be considered
language-independent summarizers.

As the number of languages used on the In-
ternet increases continiously (there are at least
75 different languages according to a estimate
performed by A. Gulli and A. Signorini1 in the
end of January 2005), there is a growing need
for language-independent statistical summariza-
tion techniques that can be readily applied to text
in any language without using language-specific
morphological tools.

In this work, we perform an in-depth com-
parative analysis of 16 methods for language-
independent extractive summarization intro-
duced in (Litvak et al., 2010) that utilize ei-
ther vector or graph-based representations of text
documents computed from word segmentation
and 15 state-of-the art language-independent
scoring methods. The main goal of the eval-
uation experiments, which focused on English
and Hebrew corpora, is to find the most efficient
language-independent sentence scoring methods

1http://www.cs.uiowa.edu/ asignori/web-size/

61



in terms of summarization accuracy and com-
putational complexity across two different lan-
guages.

This paper is organized as follows. The
next section describes related work in extrac-
tive summarization. Section 3 reviews the evalu-
ated language-independent sentence scoring ap-
proaches. Section 4 contains our experimental
results on English and Hebrew corpora. The last
section comprises conclusions and future work.

2 Related Work

Extractive summarization is aimed at the selec-
tion of a subset of the most relevant fragments,
which can be paragraphs, sentences, keyphrases,
or keywords from a given source text. The ex-
tractive summarization process usually involves
ranking, such that each fragment of a summa-
rized text gets a relevance score, and extraction,
during which the top-ranked fragments are ex-
tracted and arranged in a summary in the same
order they appeared in the original text. Statisti-
cal methods for calculating the relevance score
of each fragment can rely on such informa-
tion as: fragment position inside the document,
its length, whether it contains keywords or title
words.

Research by Luhn (1958), in which the sig-
nificance factor of a sentence is based on the
frequency and the relative position of significant
words within that sentence, is considered the first
on automated text summarization. Luhn’s work
was followed shortly thereafter by that of Ed-
mundson (1969) and some time later by stud-
ies from Radev et al. (2001) and Saggion et al.
(2003), all of who applied linear combinations
of multiple statistical methods to rank sentences
using the vector space model as a text representa-
tion. In (Litvak et al., 2010) we improve the sum-
marization quality by identifying the best linear
combination of the metrics evaluated in this pa-
per.

Several information retrieval and machine
learning techniques have been proposed for de-
termining sentence importance (Kupiec et al.,
1995; Wong et al., 2008). Gong and Liu (2001)

and Steinberger and Jezek (2004) showed that
singular value decomposition (SVD) can be ap-
plied to generate extracts.

Among text representation models, graph-
based text representations have gained popular-
ity in automated summarization, as they enable
the model to be enriched with syntactic and se-
mantic relations. Salton et al. (1997) were
among the first to attempt graph-based ranking
methods for single document extractive summa-
rization by generating similarity links between
document paragraphs. The important paragraphs
of a text were extracted using degree scores.
Erkan and Radev (2004) and Mihalcea (2005) in-
troduced approaches for unsupervised extractive
summarization that rely on the application of it-
erative graph based ranking algorithms. In their
approaches, each document is represented as a
graph of sentences interconnected by similarity
relations.

3 Language-Independent Scoring
Methods for Sentence Extraction

Various language dependent and independent
sentence scoring methods have been introduced
in the literature. We selected the 15 most promi-
nent language independent methods for evalua-
tion. Most of them can be categorized as fre-
quency, position, length, or title-based, and they
utilize vector representation. TextRank (ML TR)
is the only method that is based on graph repre-
sentation, but there are also position and length-
based methods that calculate scores using the
overall structure of a document. We have also
considered 16 methods proposed in (Litvak et al.,
2010), including 13 based on the graph-theoretic
representation (Section 3.1).

Figure 1 (Litvak et al., 2010) shows the taxon-
omy of the 31 methods considered in our work.
All methods introduced in (Litvak et al., 2010)
are denoted by an asterisk (*). Methods requir-
ing a threshold value t ∈ [0, 1] that specifies the
portion of the top rated terms considered signifi-
cant are marked by a cross in Figure 1 and listed
in Table 1 along with the optimal average thresh-
old values obtained after evaluating the methods

62



Table 1: Selected thresholds for threshold-based
scoring methods

Method Threshold
LUHN 0.9
LUHN DEG 0.9
LUHN PR 0.0
KEY [0.8, 1.0]
KEY DEG [0.8, 1.0]
KEY PR [0.1, 1.0]
COV 0.9
COV DEG [0.7, 0.9]
COV PR 0.1

on English and Hebrew documents (Litvak et al.,
2010).

The methods are divided into three main cat-
egories: structure-, vector-, and graph-based
methods, and each category also contains an
internal taxonomy. Sections 3.2, 3.3, and
3.4 present structure-, vector-, and graph-based
methods, respectively. With each description, a
reference to the original work where the method
was proposed for extractive summarization is in-
cluded. We denote sentence by S and text docu-
ment by D.

3.1 Text Representation Models

The vector-based scoring methods listed below
use tf or tf-idf term weights to evaluate sen-
tence importance while that used by the graph-
based methods (except for TextRank) is based
on the word-based graph representation model
presented in Schenker et al. (2004). We repre-
sent each document by a directed, labeled, un-
weighted graph in which nodes represent unique
terms (distinct normalized words) and edges rep-
resent order-relationships between two terms.
Each edge is labeled with the IDs of sentences
that contain both words in the specified order.

3.2 Structure-based Scoring Methods

In this section, we describe the existing
structure-based methods for multilingual sen-
tence scoring. These methods do not require any
text representation and are based on its structure.

– Position (Baxendale, 1958):
POS L Closeness to the end of the document:
score(Si) = i, where i is a sequential number of
a sentence in a document;
POS F Closeness to the beginning of the docu-
ment: score(Si) = 1i ;

POS B Closeness to the borders of the docu-
ment: score(Si) = max(1i ,

1
n−i+1), where n is

the total number of sentences in D.
– Length (Satoshi et al., 2001):
LEN W Number of words in a sentence;
LEN CH Number of characters in a sentence.

3.3 Vector-based Scoring Methods

In this section, we describe the vector-based
methods for multilingual sentence scoring, that
are based on the vector space model for text rep-
resentation.

– Frequency-based:
LUHN (Luhn, 1958)
score(S) = maxci∈{clusters(S)}{csi}, where
clusters are portions of a sentence brack-
eted by keywords2 and csi =

|keywords(ci)|2
|ci| .

KEY (Edmundson, 1969) Sum of the keyword
frequencies: score(S) =

∑
i∈{keywords(S)} tfi,

where tfi is term in-document frequency of
keyword i.
COV (Kallel et al., 2004) Ratio of keyword
numbers (Coverage): score(S) = |keywords(S)||keywords(D)|
TF (Vanderwende et al., 2007) Average term
frequency for all sentence words:

score(S) =

∑
i∈{words(S)} tfi

|S| .
TFISF (Neto et al., 2000) Average term
frequency inverted sentence frequency
for all sentence words: score(S) =∑

i∈{words(S)} tfi × isfi,
where isfi = 1− log(ni)log(n) , where n is the number
of sentences in a document and ni is the number
of sentences containing word i.
SVD (Steinberger & Jezek, 2004) score(S)
is equal to the length of a sentence vector
in Σ2V T after computing the Singular Value
Decomposition of a term by sentence matrix
A = UΣV T

– Title (Edmundson, 1969) similarity3 to the
title, score(S) = sim(S, T ):
TITLE O using overlap similarity: |S∩T |min{|S|,|T |}
TITLE J using Jaccard similarity: |S∩T ||S∪T |

2Luhn’s experiments suggest an optimal limit of 4 or 5
non-significant words between keywords.

3Due to multilingual focus of our work, exact word
matching was used in all similarity-based methods.

63



Multilingual sentence
scoringmethods

Structure-
based

Vector-
based

Graph-
based

Position Length Frequency Similarity Degree SimilarityPagerank

Title Document
POS_F
POS_L
POS_B

LEN_W
LEN_CH

LUHN†
KEY †
COV †

TF
TFIISF
SVD

TITLE_O
TITLE_J
TITLE_C

D_COV_O*
D_COV_J*
D_COV_C*

LUHN_DEG † *
KEY_DEG † *
COV_DEG † *

DEG*
GRASE*

LUHN_PR † *
KEY_PR † *
COV_PR † *

PR*
ML_TR

Title Document

TITLE_E_O*
TITLE_E_J*

D_COV_E_O*
D_COV_E_J*

Figure 1: Taxonomy of statistical language-independent sentence scoring methods (Litvak et al.,
2010)

TITLE C using cosine similarity:
sim(~S, ~T ) = cos(~S, ~T ) =

~S×~T
|~S|×|~T |

– Document Coverage (Litvak et al., 2010).
These methods score a sentence according to
its similarity to the rest of the sentences in
the document (D − S) based on the following
intuition: the more document content is covered
by a sentence, the more important the sentence is
to a summary. Redundant sentences containing
repetitive information are removed using a
similarity filter. score(S) = sim(S,D − S):
D COV O using Overlap similarity:

|S∩T |
min{|S|,|D−S|}
D COV J using Jaccard similarity: |S∩T ||S∪D−S|
D COV C using Cosine similarity:
cos(~S, ~D − S) = ~S× ~D−S|~S|×| ~D−S|

3.4 Graph-based Scoring Methods

In this section, we describe the methods for mul-
tilingual sentence scoring using the graph text
representation based on sentence (ML TR) or
word (all except ML TR) segmentation.

ML TR Multilingual version of Tex-
tRank (Mihalcea, 2005) without morphological
analysis. Each document is represented as a
directed graph of nodes that stand for sen-
tences interconnected by similarity (overlap)
relationship. To each edge connecting two

vertices the weight is assigned and equal to
the similarity value between the corresponding
sentences. We used backward links, as it was
the most successful according to the reported
results in (Mihalcea, 2005). score(S) is equal
to PageRank (Brin & Page, 1998) of its node,
according to the formula adapted to the weights
assigned to edges.

– Degree-based (Litvak et al., 2010):4

LUHN DEG A graph-based extension of the
LUHN measure, in which a node degree is
used instead of a word frequency: words are
considered significant if they are represented
by nodes of a higher degree than a predefined
threshold (see Table 1).
KEY DEG Graph-based extension of KEY
measure.
COV DEG Graph-based extension of COV
measure.
DEG Average degree for all sentence nodes:

score(S) =

∑
i∈{words(S)} Degi

|S| .
GRASE(GRaph-based Automated Sentence
Extractor) Modification of Salton’s algo-
rithm (Salton et al., 1997) using the graph

4All proposed here degree-based methods, except for
GRASE, use undirected graphs and degree of nodes as a
predictive feature. The methods based on the directed word
graphs and distinguishing between in- and out-links were
outperformed in our preliminary experiments by the undi-
rected approach.

64



representation defined in Section 3.1 above.
In our graph representation, all sentences are
represented by paths, completely or partially.
To identify the relevant sentences, we search
for the bushy paths and extract from them the
sentences that appear the most frequently. Each
sentence in the bushy path gets a domination
score that is the number of edges with its label
in the path normalized by the sentence length.
The relevance score for a sentence is calculated
as a sum of its domination scores over all paths.
– PageRank-based:5

LUHN PR A graph-based extension of the
LUHN measure in which the node PageRank
value is used instead of the word frequency:
keywords are those words represented by nodes
with a PageRank score higher than a predefined
threshold (see Table 1).
KEY PR Graph-based extension of KEY mea-
sure.
COV PR Graph-based extension of COV mea-
sure.
PR Average PageRank for all sentence nodes:

score(S) =

∑
i∈{words(S)} PRi

|S| .
– Similarity-based. Edge matching techniques
similar to those of Nastase and Szpakowicz
(2006) are used. Edge matching is an alternative
approach to measure the similarity between
graphs based on the number of common edges:
TITLE E O Graph-based extension of TI-
TLE O – Overlap-based edge matching between
title and sentence graphs.
TITLE E J Graph-based extension of TITLE J
– Jaccard-based edge matching between title
and sentence graphs.
D COV E O Graph-based extension of
D COV O – Overlap-based edge matching
between sentence and document complement
(the rest of a document sentences) graphs.
D COV E J Graph-based extension of
D COV J – Jaccard-based edge matching

5Using undirected word graphs with PageRank does not
make sense, since for an undirected graph a node pagerank
score is known to be proportional to its degree. Revers-
ing links will result in hub scores instead authority. The
methods distinguishing between authority and hub scores
were outperformed in our preliminary experiments by the
degree-based approach.

between sentence and document complement
graphs.

4 Experiments

4.1 Overview

The quality of the above-mentioned sentence
ranking methods was evaluated through a com-
parative experiment on corpora of English and
Hebrew texts. These two languages, which
belong to different language families (Indo-
European and Semitic languages, respectively),
were intentionally chosen for this experiment to
increase the generality of our evaluation. The
main difference between these languages, is that
Hebrew morphology allows morphemes to be
combined systematically into complex word-
forms. In different contexts, the same morpheme
can appear as a separate word-form, while in oth-
ers it appears agglutinated as a suffix or prefix to
another word-form (Adler, 2009).

The goals of the experiment were as follows:
- To evaluate the performance of different ap-
proaches for extractive single-document summa-
rization using graph and vector representations.
- To compare the quality of the multilingual sum-
marization methods proposed in our previous
work (Litvak et al., 2010) to the state-of-the-art
approaches.
- To identify sentence ranking methods that work
equally well on both languages.

4.2 Text Preprocessing

Extractive summarization relies critically on
proper sentence segmentation to insure the qual-
ity of the summarization results. We used a sen-
tence splitter provided with the MEAD summa-
rizer (Radev et al., 2001) for English and a sim-
ple splitter for Hebrew splitting the text at every
period, exclamation point, or question mark.6

4.3 Experimental Data

For English texts, we used the corpus of sum-
marized documents provided for the single doc-

6Although the same set of splitting rules may be used
for both languages, separate splitters were used since the
MEAD splitter is restricted to European languages.

65



ument summarization task at the Document
Understanding Conference 2002 (DUC, 2002).
This benchmark dataset contains 533 news arti-
cles, each of which is at least ten sentences long
and has two to three human-generated abstracts
of approximately 100 words apiece.

However, to the best of our knowledge, no
summarization benchmarks exist for the Hebrew
language texts. To collect summarized texts in
Hebrew, we set up an experiment7 in which 50
news articles of 250 to 830 words each from the
Haaretz8 newspaper internet site were summa-
rized by human assessors by extracting the most
salient sentences. In total, 70 undergraduate stu-
dents from the Department of Information Sys-
tems Engineering, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev participated in the experiment. Ten doc-
uments were randomly assigned to each of the
70 study participants who were instructed (1)
To dedicate at least five minutes to each doc-
ument, (2) To ignore dialogs and citations, (3)
To read the whole document before starting sen-
tence extraction, (4) To ignore redundant, repet-
itive, or overly detailed information, (5) To obey
the minimal and maximal summary constraints
of 95 and 100 words, respectively. Summaries
were assessed for quality by procedure described
in (Litvak et al., 2010).

4.4 Experimental Results

We evaluated English and Hebrew summaries
using the ROUGE-1, 2, 3, 4, L, SU and W met-
rics9, described in Lin (2004). Our results were
not statistically distinguishable and matched the
conclusion of Lin (2004). However, because
ROUGE-1 showed the largest variation across
the methods, all results in the following com-
parisons are presented in terms of ROUGE-1
metric. Similar to the approach described
in Dang (2006), we performed multiple com-
parisons between the sentence scoring methods.
The Friedman test was used to reject the null hy-

7The software enabling easy selection and storage of
sentences to be included in the document extract, can be
provided upon request.

8http://www.haaretz.co.il
9ROUGE toolkit was adapted to Hebrew by specifying

“token” using Hebrew alphabet

Table 2: English: Multiple comparisons of sen-
tence ranking approaches using the Bonferroni-
Dunn test of ROUGE-1 Recall

Approach ROUGE-1
COV DEG∗ 0.436 A
KEY DEG∗ 0.433 A B
KEY 0.429 A B C
COV PR∗ 0.428 A B C D
COV 0.428 A B C D
D COV C∗ 0.428 A B C D
D COV J∗ 0.425 B C D E
KEY PR∗ 0.424 B C D E
LUHN DEG∗ 0.422 C D E F
POS F 0.419 E F G
LEN CH 0.418 C D E F G
LUHN 0.418 D E F G
LUHN PR∗ 0.418 E F G H
LEN W 0.416 D E F G H
ML TR 0.414 E F G H
TITLE E J∗ 0.413 F G H I
TITLE E O∗ 0.413 F G H I
D COV E J∗ 0.410 F G H I
D COV O∗ 0.405 G H I J
TFISF 0.405 G H I J
DEG∗ 0.403 G H I J
D COV E O∗ 0.401 H I J K
PR∗ 0.400 G H I J K
TITLE J 0.399 I J K
TF 0.397 I J K
TITLE O 0.396 J K
SVD 0.395 I J K
TITLE C 0.395 J K
POS B 0.392 K L
GRASE∗ 0.372 L
POS L 0.339 M

pothesis (all methods perform the same) at the
0.0001 significance level, after which we ran the
Bonferroni-Dunn test (Demsar, 2006) for pair-
wise comparisons. Tables 2 and 3 show the re-
sults of multiple comparisons and are arranged
in descending order with the best approaches
on top. Methods not sharing any common let-
ter were significantly different at the 95% confi-
dence level.

The Pearson correlation between methods
ranking in English and Hebrew was 0.775, which
was larger than zero at a significance level of
0.0001. In other words, most of the methods
were ranked in nearly the same relative positions
in both corpora, and the top ranked methods per-
formed equally well in both languages. The dif-
ferences in ranking were caused by morphologi-
cal differences between two languages.

To determine which approaches performed
best in both languages, we analyzed the cluster-
ing results of the methods in both corpora and
found the intersection of the top clusters from
the two clustering results. For each language,
a document-method matrix of ROUGE scores
was created with methods represented by vec-
tors of their ROUGE scores for each document
in a corpora. Since most scores are not normally

66



Table 3: Hebrew: Multiple comparisons of sen-
tence ranking approaches using the Bonferroni-
Dunn test of ROUGE-1 Recall

Approach ROUGE-1
D COV J∗ 0.574 A
KEY 0.570 A B
COV DEG∗ 0.568 A B
POS F 0.567 A B
COV 0.567 A B
TITLE J 0.567 A B
POS B 0.565 A B
LUHN PR∗ 0.560 A B C
LUHN DEG∗ 0.560 A B C
D COV E J∗ 0.559 A B C
LUHN 0.559 A B C
TITLE E J∗ 0.556 A B C
TITLE E O∗ 0.556 A B C
KEY DEG∗ 0.555 A B C
LEN W 0.555 A B C
LEN CH 0.553 A B C
KEY PR∗ 0.546 A B C
COV PR∗ 0.546 A B C
TITLE O 0.545 A B C
D COV C∗ 0.543 A B C
TITLE C 0.541 A B C
ML TR 0.519 A B C D
TFISF 0.514 A B C D
D COV E O∗ 0.498 A B C D
SVD 0.498 A B C D
D COV O∗ 0.466 B C D
TF 0.427 C D E
DEG∗ 0.399 D E F
PR∗ 0.331 E F
GRASE∗ 0.243 F
POS L 0.237 F

Table 4: English: Correlation between sentence
ranking approaches using Pearson

Approach Correlated With
POS F (LUHN PR, 0.973), (TITLE E J, 0.902), (TITLE E O, 0.902)
TITLE O (TITLE J, 0.950)
LEN W (LEN CH, 0.909)
KEY PR (COV PR, 0.944)
TITLE E O (TITLE E J, 0.997)

distributed, we chose the K-means algorithm,
which does not assume normal distribution of
data, for clustering. We ran the algorithm with
different numbers of clusters (2 ≤ K ≤ 10),
and for each K, we measured two parameters:
the minimal distance between neighboring clus-
ters in the clustered data for each language and
the level of similarity between the clustering re-
sults for the two languages. For both param-
eters, we used the regular Euclidean distance.
For K ≥ 6, the clusters were highly similar
for each language, and the distance between En-
glish and Hebrew clustering data was maximal.
Based on the obtained results, we left results
only for 2 ≤ K ≤ 5 for each corpus. Then,
we ordered the clusters by the average ROUGE
score of each cluster’s instances (methods) and
identified the methods appearing in the top clus-
ters for all K values in both corpora. Table 6
shows the resulting top ten scoring methods with
their rank in each corpus. Six methods intro-

Table 5: Hebrew: Correlation between sentence
ranking approaches using Pearson

Approach Correlated With
KEY (KEY DEG, 0.930)
COV (D COV J, 0.911)
POS F (POS B, 0.945), (LUHN DEG, 0.959), (LUHN PR, 0.958)
POS B (LUHN DEG, 0.927), (LUHN PR, 0.925)
TITLE O (TITLE E J, 0.920), (TITLE E O, 0.920)
TITLE J (TITLE E J, 0.942), (TITLE E O, 0.942)
LEN W (LEN CH, 0.954), (KEY PR, 0.912)
LEN CH (KEY PR, 0.936), (KEY DEG, 0.915), (COV DEG, 0.901)
LUHN DEG (LUHN PR, 0.998)
KEY DEG (COV DEG, 0.904)

Table 6: Ranking of the best bilingual scores
Scoring Rank in Rank in Text
method English corpus Hebrew corpus Representation
KEY 3 2 vector
COV 4 4 vector
KEY DEG 2 10 graph
COV DEG 1 3 graph
KEY PR 6 12 graph
COV PR 4 12 graph
D COV C 4 14 vector
D COV J 5 1 vector
LEN W 10 10 structure
LEN CH 9 11 structure

duced in this paper, such as Document Cover-
age (D COV C/J) and graph adaptations of Cov-
erage (COV DEG/PR) and Key (KEY DEG/PR),
are among these top ten bilingual methods.

Neither vector- nor graph-based text represen-
tation models, however, can claim ultimate supe-
riority, as methods based on both models promi-
nently in the top-evaluated cluster. Moreover,
highly-correlated methods (see Tables 4 and 5
for highly-correlated pairs of methods in English
and Hebrew corpora, respectively) appear in the
same cluster in most cases. As a result, some
pairs from among the top ten methods are highly-
correlated in at least one language, and only one
from each pair can be considered. For example,
LEN W and LEN CH have high correlation coef-
ficients (0.909 and 0.954 in English and Hebrew,
respectively). Since LEN CH is more appropri-
ate for multilingual processing due to variations
in the rules of tokenization between languages
(e.g., English vs. German), it may be considered
a preferable multilingual metric.

In terms of summarization quality and com-
putational complexity, all scoring functions pre-
sented in Table 6 can be considered to perform
equally well for bilingual extractive summariza-
tion. Assuming their efficient implementation,
all methods have a linear computational com-
plexity, O(n), relative to the total number of
words in a document. KEY PR and COV PR re-

67



quire additional O(c(|E|+|V |)) time for running
PageRank, where c is the number of iterations it
needs to converge, |E| is the number of edges,
and |V | is the number of nodes (distinct words)
in a document graph. Since neither |E| nor |V | in
our graph representation can be as large as n, the
total computation time for KEY PR and COV PR
metrics is also linear relative to the document
size.

In terms of implementation complexity,
LEN W and LEN CH are simpliest, since they
even do not require any preprocessing and repre-
sentation building; KEY and COV require key-
words identification; D COV C, and D COV J
require vector space model building; KEY DEG
and COV DEG need graphs building (order of
words); whereas KEY PR and COV PR, in ad-
dition, require PageRank implementation.

5 Conclusion and Future Research

In this paper, we conducted in-depth, compar-
ative evaluations of 31 existing (16 of which
are mostly graph-based modifications of exist-
ing state-of-the-art methods, introduced in (Lit-
vak et al., 2010)) scoring methods10 using En-
glish and Hebrew language texts.

The experimental results suggest that the rel-
ative ranking of methods performance is quite
similar in both languages. We identified meth-
ods that performed significantly better in only
one of the languages and those that performed
equally well in both languages. Moreover, al-
though vector and graph-based approaches were
among the top ranked methods for bilingual ap-
plication, no text representation model presented
itself as markedly superior to the other.

Our future research will extend the evaluations
of language-independent sentence ranking met-
rics to a range of other languages such as Ger-
man, Arabic, Greek, and Russian. We will adapt
similarity-based metrics to multilingual applica-
tion by implementing them via n-gram matching
instead of exact word matching. We will fur-
ther improve the summarization quality by ap-

10We will provide the code for our summarizer upon re-
quest.

plying machine learning on described features.
We will use additional techniques for summary
evaluation and study the impact of morpholog-
ical analysis on the top ranked bilingual scores
using part-of-speech (POS) tagging11, anaphora
resolution, named entity recognition, and taking
word sense into account.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Michael Elhadad and Galina
Volk for providing the ROUGE toolkit adapted
to Hebrew alphabet.

References

Adler, M. (2009). Hebrew morphological
disambiguation: An unsupervised stochas-
tic word-based approach. Dissertation.
http://www.cs.bgu.ac.il/ adlerm/dat/thesis.pdf.

Baxendale, P. (1958). Machine-made index for
technical literature-an experiment. IBM Jour-
nal of Research and Development, 2, 354–361.

Brin, S., & Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of
a large-scale hypertextual web search engine.
Computer networks and ISDN systems, 30,
107–117.

Dang, H. T. (2006). Overview of DUC 2006.
Proceedings of the Document Understanding
Conference.

Demsar, J. (2006). Statistical comparisons of
classifiers over multiple data sets. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 7, 1–30.

DUC (2002). Document understanding confer-
ence. http://duc.nist.gov.

Edmundson, H. P. (1969). New methods in auto-
matic extracting. J. ACM, 16.

Erkan, G., & Radev, D. R. (2004). LexRank:
Graph-based lexical centrality as salience in
text summarization. Journal of Artificial In-
telligence Research, 22, 457–479.
11Our experiments have shown that syntactic filters,

which select only lexical units of a certain part of speech,
do not significantly improve the performance of the evalu-
ated bilingual scoring methods.

68



Gong, Y., & Liu, X. (2001). Generic text summa-
rization using relevance measure and latent se-
mantic analysis. Proceedings of the 24th ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval (pp. 19–25).

Kallel, F. J., Jaoua, M., Hadrich, L. B., &
Hamadou, A. B. (2004). Summarization at
LARIS laboratory. Proceedings of the Doc-
ument Understanding Conference.

Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J., & Chen, F. (1995). A
trainable document summarizer. Proceedings
of the 18th annual international ACM SIGIR
conference (pp. 68–73).

Lin, C.-Y. (2004). ROUGE: A package for au-
tomatic evaluation of summaries. Proceedings
of the ACL’04 Workshop: Text Summarization
Branches Out (pp. 74–81).

Litvak, M., Last, M., & Friedman, M. (2010). A
new approach to improving multilingual sum-
marization using a genetic algorithm. Pro-
ceedings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) 2010. Uppsala, Sweden.

Luhn, H. P. (1958). The automatic creation of
literature abstracts. IBM Journal of Research
and Development, 2, 159–165.

Mani, I., & Maybury, M. (1999). Advances in
automatic text summarization.

Mihalcea, R. (2005). Language independent ex-
tractive summarization. AAAI’05: Proceed-
ings of the 20th national conference on Artifi-
cial intelligence (pp. 1688–1689).

Nastase, V., & Szpakowicz, S. (2006). A study
of two graph algorithms in topic-driven sum-
marization. Proceedings of the Workshop
on Graph-based Algorithms for Natural Lan-
guage.

Neto, J., Santos, A., Kaestner, C., & Freitas, A.
(2000). Generating text summaries through
the relative importance of topics. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 300–309.

Radev, D., Blair-Goldensohn, S., & Zhang, Z.
(2001). Experiments in single and multidocu-
ment summarization using MEAD. First Doc-
ument Understanding Conference.

Saggion, H., Bontcheva, K., & Cunningham, H.
(2003). Robust generic and query-based sum-
marisation. EACL ’03: Proceedings of the
tenth conference on European chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Salton, G., Singhal, A., Mitra, M., & Buckley, C.
(1997). Automatic text structuring and sum-
marization. Information Processing and Man-
agement, 33, 193–207.

Satoshi, C. N., Satoshi, S., Murata, M., Uchi-
moto, K., Utiyama, M., & Isahara, H. (2001).
Sentence extraction system assembling mul-
tiple evidence. Proceedings of 2nd NTCIR
Workshop (pp. 319–324).

Schenker, A., Bunke, H., Last, M., & Kandel,
A. (2004). Classification of web documents
using graph matching. International Journal
of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelli-
gence, 18, 475–496.

Steinberger, J., & Jezek, K. (2004). Text sum-
marization and singular value decomposition.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 245–254.

Vanderwende, L., Suzuki, H., Brockett, C., &
Nenkova, A. (2007). Beyond SumBasic: Task-
focused summarization with sentence simplifi-
cation and lexical expansion. Information pro-
cessing and management, 43, 1606–1618.

Wong, K., Wu, M., & Li, W. (2008). Ex-
tractive summarization using supervised and
semi-supervised learning. Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (pp. 985–992).

69


