



















































Manipuri-English Bidirectional Statistical Machine Translation Systems using Morphology and Dependency Relations


Proceedings of SSST-4, Fourth Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 83–91,
COLING 2010, Beijing, August 2010.

Manipuri-English Bidirectional Statistical Machine  

Translation Systems using Morphology and Dependency Relations 

Thoudam Doren Singh 

Department of Computer Science and  

Engineering 
Jadavpur University  

thoudam.doren@gmail.com 

Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 

Department of Computer Science and  

Engineering 
Jadavpur University 

sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 

 
 

 

Abstract 

The present work reports the develop-
ment of Manipuri-English bidirectional 
statistical machine translation systems. In 
the English-Manipuri statistical machine 
translation system, the role of the suffixes 
and dependency relations on the source 
side and case markers on the target side 
are identified as important translation 
factors. A parallel corpus of 10350 sen-
tences from news domain is used for 
training and the system is tested with 500 
sentences. Using the proposed translation 
factors, the output of the translation qual-
ity is improved as indicated by baseline 
BLEU score of 13.045 and factored 
BLEU score of 16.873 respectively. Si-
milarly, for the Manipuri English system, 
the role of case markers and POS tags in-
formation at the source side and suffixes 
and dependency relations at the target 
side are identified as useful translation 
factors. The case markers and suffixes 
are not only responsible to determine the 
word classes but also to determine the 
dependency relations. Using these trans-
lation factors, the output of the transla-
tion quality is improved as indicated by 
baseline BLEU score of 13.452 and fac-
tored BLEU score of 17.573 respectively. 
Further, the subjective evaluation indi-
cates the improvement in the fluency and 
adequacy of both the factored SMT out-
puts over the respective baseline systems. 

 

1 Introduction 

Manipuri has little resource for NLP related re-
search and development activities. Manipuri is a 
less privileged Tibeto-Burman language spoken 
by approximately three million people mainly in 
the state of Manipur in India as well as its neigh-
boring states and in the countries of Myanmar 
and Bangladesh. Some of the unique features of 
this language are tone, the agglutinative verb 
morphology and predominance of aspect than 
tense, lack of grammatical gender, number and 
person. Other features are verb final word order 
in a sentence i.e., Subject Object Verb (SOV) 
order, extensive suffix with more limited prefixa-
tion. In Manipuri, identification of most of the 
word classes and sentence types are based on the 
markers. All sentences, except interrogatives end 
with one of these mood markers, which may or 
may not be followed by an enclitic. Basic sen-
tence types in Manipuri are determined through 
illocutionary mood markers, all of which are 
verbal inflectional suffixes, with the exception of 
the interrogatives that end with an enclitic. Two 
important problems in applying statistical ma-
chine translation (SMT) techniques to English-
Manipuri bidirectional MT systems are: (a) the 
wide syntactic divergence between the language 
pairs, and (b) the richer morphology and case 
marking of Manipuri compared to English. The 
first problem manifests itself in poor word-order 
in the output translations, while the second one 
leads to incorrect inflections and case marking. 
The output Manipuri sentences in case of Eng-
lish-Manipuri system suffer badly when mor-
phology and case markers are incorrect in this 
free word order and morphologically rich lan-
guage. 

83



The parallel corpora used is in news domain 
which have been collected, cleaned and aligned 
(Singh et al. , 2010b) from the Sangai Express 
newspaper website www.thesangaiexpress.com 
available in both Manipuri and English. A daily 
basis collection was done covering the period 
from May 2008 to November 2008 since there is 
no repository. 

2 Related Works  

Koehn and Hoang (2007) developed a frame-
work for statistical translation models that tightly 
integrates additional morphological, syntactic, or 
semantic information. Statistical Machine Trans-
lation with scarce resources using morpho-
syntactic information is discussed in (Nieβen and 
Ney, 2004). It introduces sentence level restruc-
turing transformations that aim at the assimila-
tion of word order in related sentences and 
exploitation of the bilingual training data by ex-
plicitly taking into account the interdependencies 
of related inflected forms thereby improving the 
translation quality. Popovic and Ney (2006) dis-
cussed SMT with a small amount of bilingual 
training data. Case markers and morphology are 
used to address the crux of fluency in the Eng-
lish-Hindi SMT system (Ramanathan et al., 
2009). Work on translating from rich to poor 
morphology using factored model is reported in 
(Avramidis and Koehn, 2008). In this method of 
enriching input, the case agreement for nouns, 
adjectives and articles are mainly defined by the 
syntactic role of each phrase. Resolution of verb 
conjugation is done by identifying the person of 
a verb and using the linguistic information tag. 
Manipuri to English Example Based Machine 
Translation system is reported in (Singh and 
Bandyopadhyay, 2010a) on news domain. For 
this, POS tagging, morphological analysis, NER 
and chunking are applied on the parallel corpus 
for phrase level alignment. Chunks are aligned 
using a dynamic programming “edit-distance 
style” alignment algorithm. The translation 
process initially looks for an exact match in the 
parallel example base and returns the retrieved 
target output. Otherwise, the maximal match 
source sentence is identified. For word level 
mismatch, the unmatched words in the input are 
either translated from the lexicon or translite-
rated. Unmatched phrases are looked into the 
phrase level parallel example base; the target 

phrase translations are identified and then re-
combined with the retrieved output. English-
Manipuri SMT system using morpho-syntactic 
and semantic information is reported in (Singh 
and Bandyopadhyay, 2010c). In this system, the 
role of the suffixes and dependency relations on 
the source side and case markers on the target 
side are identified as important translation fac-
tors. 

3 Syntactic Reordering 

This is a preprocessing step applied to the in-
put English sentences for English-Manipuri SMT 
system. The program for syntactic reordering 
uses the parse trees generated by Stanford parser

1
 

and applies a handful of reordering rules written 
using perl module Parse::RecDescent. By doing 
this, the SVO order of English is changed to 
SOV order for Manipuri, and post modifiers are 
converted to pre-modifiers. The basic difference 
of Manipuri phrase order compared to English is 
handled by reordering the input sentence follow-
ing the rule (Rao et al., 2000): 
 

SSmV VmOOmCm  C'mS'mS'O'mO'V'mV'  
where,    S: Subject 
O: Object 
V : Verb 
Cm: Clause modifier 
X': Corresponding constituent in Manipuri, 
where X is S, O, or V 
Xm: modifier of X 

 
There are two reasons why the syntactic reor-

dering approach improves over the baseline 
phrase-based SMT system (Wang et al., 2007). 
One obvious benefit is that the word order of the 
transformed source sentence is much closer to 
the target sentence, which reduces the reliance on 
the distortion model to perform reordering during 
decoding. Another potential benefit is that the 
alignment between the two sides will be of high-
er quality because of fewer “distortions” between 
the source and the target, so that the resulting 
phrase table of the reordered system would be 
better. However, a counter argument is that the 
reordering is very error prone, so that the added 
noise in the reordered data actually hurts the 
alignments and hence the phrase tables. 

                                                                 
1 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml 

84



4 Morphology 

The affixes are the determining factor of the 
word class in Manipuri. In this agglutinative lan-
guage the number of verbal suffixes is more than 
that of nominal suffixes. Works on Manipuri 
morphology are found in (Singh and Bandyo-
padhyay, 2006) and (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 
2008). In this language, a verb must minimally 
consist of a verb root and an inflectional suffix. 
A noun may be optionally affixed by derivational 
morphemes indicating gender, number and quan-
tity. Further, a noun may be prefixed by a pro-
nominal prefix which indicates its possessor. 
Words in Manipuri consist of stems or bound 
roots with suffixes (from one to ten suffixes), 
prefixes (only one per word) and/or enclitics.  

(a) ইব োমচো-না  ব োল-দ ু      কোওই 
Ibomcha-na  Ball-du  kao-i 
Ibomcha-nom Ball-distal kick 
Ibomcha kicks the ball.   

(b) ব োল-দ ু  ইব োমচো-না  কোওই 
Ball-du  Ibomcha-na kao-i 
Ball-distal Ibomcha-nom kick 
Ibomcha kicks the ball.   

The identification of subject and object in both 
the sentences are done by the suffixes না (na) and 
দ ু(du) as given by the examples (a) and (b). The 
case markers convey the right meaning during 
translation though the most acceptable order of 
Manipuri sentence is SOV. In order to produce a 
good translation output all the morphological 
forms of a word and its translations should be 
available in the training data and every word has 
to appear with every possible suffixes. This will 
require a large training data. By learning the gen-
eral rules of morphology, the amount of training 
data could be reduced. Separating lemma and 
suffix allows the system to learn more about the 
different possible word formations.  

 

Manipuri  Gloss English Meaning 
ব োম্নো Tom-na by Tom 
ব োমদগী Tom-dagi from Tom 
ব োমস ু Tom-su Tom also 
ব োমগী Tom-gi of Tom 
ব োমগো Tom-ga with Tom 

Table 1: Some of the inflected forms of names in 

Manipuri and its corresponding English meaning 

 

Table 1 gives some examples of the inflected 
forms of a person name and its corresponding 
English meaning. The Manipuri stemmer sepa-
rates the case markers such as –নো (-na), -দগী (-
dagi), -স ু (-su), -গী (-gi), -গো (-ga) etc. from 
surface forms so that “ব োম” (Tom) from Manipu-
ri side matches with “Tom” at English side help-
ing to overcome the data sparseness. Enclitics in 
Manipuri fall into six categories: determiners, 
case markers, the copula, mood markers, inclu-
sive / exclusive and pragmatic peak markers and 
attitude markers. The role of the enclitics used 
and its meaning differs based on the context. 

5  Factored Model of Translation 

Using factored approach, a tighter integration of 
linguistic information into the translation model 
is done for two reasons

2
: 

 Translation models that operate on more 
general representations, such as lemma in-
stead of surface forms of words, can draw on 
richer statistics and overcome the data 
sparseness problem caused by limited train-
ing data. 

 Many aspects of translation can be best ex-
plained at a morphological, syntactic or se-
mantic level. Having such information 
available to the translation model allows the 
direct modeling of these aspects. For in-
stance, reordering at the sentence level is 
mostly driven by general syntactic principles, 
local agreement constraints that show up in 
morphology, etc.  

5.1 Combination of Components in Fac-
tored Model 

Factored translation model is the combination of 
several components including language model, 
reordering model, translation steps and genera-
tion steps in a log-linear model

3
: 

Z is a normalization constant that is ignored in 
practice. To compute the probability of a transla-
tion e given an input sentence f, we have to eva-
luate each feature function hi. The feature weight 

                                                                 
2http://www.statmt.org/moses/?n=Moses.FactoredModels 
3http://www.statmt.org/moses/?n=Moses.FactoredModels 

 

    

      (1 ) 

85



λi in the log linear model is determined by using 
minimum error rate training method (Och, 2003). 

For a translation step component, each feature 
function ht is defined over the phrase pairs (f j,ej) 
given a scoring function τ:  

 

   

  (2) 

For the generation step component, each fea-
ture function hg given a scoring function γ is de-
fined over the output words ek only: 

 

 

 (3) 

  

5.2 Stanford Dependency Parser  

The dependency relations used in the experiment 
are generated by the Stanford dependency parser 
(Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Manning, 
2008). This parser uses 55 relations to express 
the dependencies among the various words in a 
sentence. The dependencies are all binary rela-
tions: a grammatical relation holds between a 
governor and a dependent. These relations form a 
hierarchical structure with the most general rela-
tion at the root.  

 
Figure 1. Dependency relation graph of the sen-
tence “Sources said that Tom was shot by police” 
generated by Stanford Parser 

There are various argument relations like sub-
ject, object, objects of prepositions and clausal 
complements, modifier relations like adjectival, 
adverbial, participial, infinitival modifiers and 
other relations like coordination, conjunct, exple-
tive and punctuation. Let us consider an example 
“Sources said that Tom was shot by police”. 
Stanford parser produces the dependency rela-

tions, nsubj(said, sources) and agent (shot, po-
lice) . Thus, sources|nsubj and police|agent are 
the factors used. “Tom was shot by police” forms 
the object of the verb “said”. The Stanford parser 
represents these dependencies with the help of a 
clausal complement relation which links “said” 
with “shot” and uses the complementizer relation 
to introduce the subordination conjunction. Fig-
ure 1 shows the dependency relation graph of the 
sentence “Sources said that Tom was shot by po-
lice”. 

5.3 Factorization approach of English-
Manipuri SMT system 

Manipuri case markers are decided by dependen-
cy relation and aspect information of English. 
Figure 2 shows the translation factors used in the 
translation between English and Manipuri.  

 
(i) Tomba drives the car. 

   ত াম্বনা কারদু ত ৌই 
     Tomba-na car-du thou-i 

    (Tomba)  (the car)  (drives) 

Tomba|empty|nsubj drive|s|empty the|empty|det 
car|empty|dobj 

A subject requires a case marker in a clause 
with a perfective form such as –না (na). It can be 

represented as, 
suffix+ dependency relation  case marker  
    s|empty  + empty|dobj  না (na) 

 

(ii) Birds are flying. 

   উচেকশিং পাইশর  
      ucheksing payri 

     (birds are)  (flying) 

      Bird|s|nsubj are|empty|aux fly|ing|empty 
 
Thus, English-Manipuri factorization consists of  
 
 a lemma to lemma translation factor [i.e., 

Bird  উচেক (uchek) ] 
 a suffix + dependency relation  suffix [i.e.,  

s + nsubj  শিং (sing)] 
 a lemma + suffix  surface form generation 

factor  
[i.e., উচেক (uchek) + শিং (sing)  উচেকশিং 
(ucheksing)] 

said 

source

s 
shot 

that 

Tom was 

Police 

nsubj 
ccomp  

complm 

nsubjpass auxpass 

agent 

86



 
Figure 2. English to Manipuri translation factors 

5.4 Factorization approach of Manipuri-
English SMT system 

Manipuri case markers are responsible to identify 
dependency relation and aspect information of 
English. Figure 3 shows the translation factors 
used in the translation between Manipuri and 
English. The Manipuri- English factorization 
consists of: 

 
 Translation factor: lemma to lemma  

[e.g., উচেক (uchek)  Bird] 
 Translation factor: suffix + POS  depen-

dency relation + POS + suffix  
[e.g., শিং (sing) + NN  nsubj + NN + s] 

 Generation factor: lemma + POS + depen-
dency Relation +suffix  surface form gen-
eration factor  
[e.g., উচেক (uchek) + NN  + nsubj + শিং (sing) 
  উচেকশিং (ucheksing ] 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Figure 3. The Manipuri-English translation factors 

5.5 Syntactically enriched output 

High-order sequence models (just like n-gram 
language models over words) are used in order to 
support syntactic coherence of the output (Koehn 
and Hoang, 2007).  

                 Input             Output 
 
          word                                word 
 
 
                3-gram                       Parts-of-speech 
                
                7-gram 

Figure 4. By generating additional linguistic factors 

on the output side, high-order sequence models over 

these factors support syntactical coherence of the out-

put. 

Adding part-of-speech factor on the output 
side and exploiting them with 7-gram sequence 
models (as shown in Figure 4) results in minor 
improvements in BLEU score. 

6 Experimental Setup 

A number of experiments have been carried out 
using factored translation framework and incor-
porating linguistic information. The toolkits used 
in the experiment are: 

 Stanford Dependency Parser4 was used to (i) 
generate the dependency relations and (ii) 
syntactic reordering of the input English sen-
tences using Parse::RecDescent module. 

 Moses
5
 toolkit (Koehn, 2007) was used for 

training with GIZA++
6
, decoding and mini-

mum error rate training (Och, 2003) for tun-
ing. 

 SRILM
7
 toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) was used to 

build language models with 10350 Manipuri 
sentences for English-Manipuri system and 
four and a half million English wordforms 
collected from the news domain for Manipu-
ri-English system. 

 English morphological analyzer morpha 8 
(Minnen et al., 2001) was used and the 

                                                                 
4 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml 
5 http://www.statmt.org/moses/ 
6 http://www.fjoch.com/GIZA++.html 
7 http://www.speech.sri.com/projects/srilm 
8  
ftp://ftp.informatics.susx.ac.uk/pub/users/johnca/morph.tar.

gz 

Word 

 

 

Lemma 

 

 

 

Suffix  

 

 

Dependency 

Relation 

Word 

 

 

 

Lemma 

 

 

 

 

Case 

Marker 

 

  Input              Output 

Word 
 
 

Lemma 
 
 
 

POS 
 
 

Suffix/ 
Case 

Marker 

Word 
 
 
Lemma 
 
 
 
POS 
 
 
Dependen-
cy Relation  
 
Suffix 
 

87



stemmer from Manipuri Morphological ana-
lyzer (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2006) was 
used for the Manipuri side.  

 Manipuri POS tagger (Singh et. al., 2008) is 
used to tag the POS (Parts of speech) factors 
of the input Manipuri sentences. 

7 Evaluation 

7.1 English-Manipuri SMT System 

The evaluation of the machine translation sys-
tems developed in the present work is done in 
two approaches using automatic scoring with 
reference translation and subjective evaluation as 
discussed in (Ramanathan et al., 2009). 

Evaluation Metrics: 

 NIST (Doddington, 2002): A high score 
means a better translation by measuring the 
precision of n-gram. 

 BLEU (Papineni et al, 2002): This metric 
gives the precision of n-gram with respect to 
the reference translation but with a brevity 
penalty.  

 

 No of sentences No of words 
Training 10350 296728 

Development 600 16520 
Test 500 15204 

Table 2. Train ing, development and testing corpus 

statistics 

 

Table 2 shows the corpus statistics used in the 
experiment. The corpus is annotated with the 
proposed factors. The following models are de-
veloped for the experiment. 

Baseline: 

The model is developed using the default setting 
values in MOSES.  

Lemma +Suffix: 

It uses lemma and suffix factors on the source 
side, lemma and suffix on the target side for 
lemma to lemma and suffix to suffix translations 
with generation step of lemma plus suffix to sur-
face form. 

Lemma + Suffix + Dependency Relation: 

Lemma, suffix and dependency relations are used 
on the source side.  The translation steps are (a) 
lemma to lemma (b) suffix + dependency rela-
tion to suffix and generation step is lemma + suf-

fix to surface form. Table 3 shows the BLEU and 
NIST scores of the system using these factors. 

Table 4 shows the BLEU and NIST scores of 
the English-Manipuri SMT systems using lexica-
lized and syntactic reordering.  
 

Model BLEU NIST 

Baseline (surface) 13.045 4.25 

Lemma + Suffix 15.237 4.79 

Lemma + Suffix + De-
pendency Relation 

16.873 5.10 

Table 3. Evaluation Scores of English - Manipuri 

SMT System using various translation factors 

 

Model Reordering BLEU NIST 

Baseline 
(surface) 

 13.045 4.25 

Surface Lexicalized 13.501 4.32 
Surface Syntactic 14.142 4.47 

Table 4. Evaluation Scores of English-Manipuri SMT 

system using Lexicalized and Syntactic Reordering  

 

Input/Output of English-Manipuri SMT: 

 
(1a) Input: Going to school is obligatory for stu-
dents. 

   সু্কল  েত্পা  ছাত্রশিংগী ত ৌদ য়াদ্রবা মচ ৌশন | 
    School chatpa shatra-sing-gi touda ya     

    draba mathouni. 

 Baseline output:  সু্কল মচ ৌ েত্পা ওই ছাত্র 
              school mathou chatpa oy shatra 
     gloss : school duty going is student. 
 Syntactic Reorder output: ছাত্র সু্কল েত্পা ত ৌদ য়াদ্রবা 
                 shatra school chatpa touda yadraba 
     gloss: Student school going compulsory.  
 Dependency output: ছাত্রশিং সু্কল েত্পা মচ ৌশন 
     shatrasing schoolda chatpa mathouni 
     gloss: Students going to the school is duty. 
 
(1b) Input: Krishna has a flute in his hand.  
           কৃষ্ণগী     খুত্তা    ত ৌশদ্র   অমা লল | 
                 Krishna-gi khut-ta toudri ama lei. 
 Syntactic Reorder output:  কৃষ্ণ লল খুত্ অমা ত ৌশদ্র  
                           Krishna lei khut ama toudri 
      gloss : Krishna has a hand flute 
 Dependency output: কৃষ্ণগী লল ত ৌশদ্র অমা খুত্তা  
                           krishnagi lei toudri ama  khutta   
      gloss : Krishna has a flute in his hand 

88



One of the main aspects required for the fluen-
cy of a sentence is agreement. Certain words 
have to match in gender, case, number, person 
etc. within a sentence. The rules of agreement are 
language dependent and are closely linked to the 
morphological structure of language. Subjective 
evaluations on 100 sentences have been per-
formed for fluency and adequacy by two judges. 
The fluency measures how well formed the sen-
tences are at the output and adequacy measures 
the closeness of the output sentence with the ref-
erence translation. The Table 5 and Table 6 show 
the adequacy and fluency scales used for evalua-
tion and Table 7 shows the scores of the evalua-
tion. 

 

Level Interpretation 

4 Full meaning is conveyed 

3 Most of the meaning is conveyed 

2 Poor meaning is conveyed 

1 No meaning is conveyed 

Table 5. Adequacy scale 

 

Level Interpretation 

4 Flawless with no grammatical error  

3 Good output with minor errors 
2 Disfluent ungrammatical with correct 

phrase 

1 Incomprehensible 

Table 6. Fluency scale 

 

 Sentence 

length 

Fluency Adequacy 

Baseline <=15 
words 

1.95 2.24 

>15 words 1.49 1.75 

Reordered <=15 
words 

2.58 2.75 

>15 words 1.82 1.96 

Dependency 

Relation 

<=15 
words 

2.83 2.91 

>15 words 1.94 2.10 

Table 7. Scale o f Fluency and Adequacy on sentence 

length basis of English-Manipuri SMT system 

7.2 Manipuri-English SMT System 

The system uses the corpus statistics shown in 
Table 2. The corpus is annotated with the pro-
posed factors. The following models are devel-
oped for the experiment. The baseline and 

lemma+suffix systems follow same factors as 
English-Manipuri.  

Lemma + Suffix + POS: 
Lemma, suffix and POS are used on the source 
side.  The translation steps are (a) lemma to 
lemma (b) suffix + POS to POS + suffix + de-
pendency relation and generation step is lemma 
+ suffix + POS + dependency relation to surface 
form. 

 

Model BLUE NIST 

Baseline (surface) 13.452 4.31 
Lemma + Suffix 16.137 4.89 

Lemma + Suffix + POS 17.573 5.15 
Table 8. Evaluation Scores of Manipuri-English SMT 

system using various translation factors 

 

Table 8 shows the BLEU and NIST scores of 
the Manipuri-English systems using the different 
factors. Table 9 shows the scores of using lexica-
lized reordering and POS language model. 

 

Model BLUE NIST 

Baseline + POS LM 14.341 4.52 
Baseline + Lexicalized 13.743 4.46 

Baseline + Lexicalized 
+POS LM 

14.843 4.71 

Table 9. Evaluation Scores of Manipuri-English SMT 

system using Lexicalized reordering and POS Lan-

guage Model 

 

Input/Output of Manipuri-English SMT: 

 
 (2a) Input: সু্কল েত্পা ছাত্রশিংগী ত ৌদ য়াদ্রবা মচ ৌশন | 
     gloss: School chatpa shatra-sing-gi touda 
yadraba mathouni. 
     Going to school is obligatory for students. 
Baseline output: school going to the students 
important 
Lexicalized Reordered output: school going 
important to the students 

Lemma+Suffix+POS+lexicalized reordered 
output: School going important to the students 
 
(2b) Input: কৃষ্ণগী খুত্তা ত ৌশদ্র অমা লল | 
     gloss: Krishna-gi khut-ta toudri ama lei. 
     Krishna has a flute in his hand.  
 Baseline output: Krishna is flute and hand  
Lexicalized Reordered output: Krishna flute 
has his hand  

89



Lemma+Suffix+POS+lexicalized reordered 
output: Krishna has flute his hand 

By considering the lemma along with suffix 
and POS factors, the fluency and adequacy of the 
output is better addressed as given by the sample 
input and output (2a) and (2b) over the baseline 
system. Using the Manipuri stemmer, the case 
markers and suffixes are taken into account for 
different possible word forms thereby helping to 
overcome the data sparseness problem. Table 10 
shows the scores of adequacy and fluency of the 
evaluation. 

 

 Sentence 
length 

Fluency Adequacy 

Baseline <=15 
words 

1.93 2.31 

>15 words 1.51 1.76 

Reordered <=15 
words 

2.48 2.85 

>15 words 1.83 1.97 

Lemma + 
Suffix  

+ POS 

<=15 
words 

2.86 2.92 

>15 words 2.01 2.11 

Table 10. Scale of Fluency and Adequacy on sen-

tence length basis of Manipuri-English SMT system 

Subjective evaluations on 100 sentences have 
been performed for fluency and adequacy. In the 
process of subjective evaluation, sentences were 
judged on fluency, adequacy and the number of 
errors in case marking/morphology. It is ob-
served that poor word-order makes the baseline 
output almost incomprehensible, while lexica-
lized reordering solves the problem correctly 
along with parts-of-speech language model (POS 
LM). Statistical significant test is performed to 
judge if a change in score that comes from a 
change in the system reflects a change in overall 
translation quality. It is found that all the differ-
ences are significant at the 99% level. 

8 Discussion 

The factored approach using the proposed factors 
show improved fluency and adequacy at the Ma-
nipuri output for English-Manipuri system as 
shown in the Table 6. Using the Stanford gener-
ated relations shows an improvement in terms of 
fluency and adequacy for shorter sentences than 
the longer ones.  

Input : Khamba pushed the stone with a lever. 
       খম্বনো জম্ফত্নো নংু অদ ুইল্লম্মী | 
Outputs: 
Syntactic Reordered: খম্ব নংু জম্ফত্  অদ ুইল্লল্ল | 
 Khamba nung jamfat adu illi 
gloss:  Khamba stone the lever push 
Dependency: খম্বনো নংু অদ ুজম্ফত্নো ইল্লল্ল | 
 Khambana nung adu jamfatna illi 
gloss: Khamba the stone pushed with lever 
 

By the use of semantic relation, নো (na) is at-
tached to খম্ব (Khamba), which makes the mean-
ing খম্বনো  “by Khamba”  instead of  just খম্ব 
“Khamba”. 
Input : Suddenly the woman burst into tears. 
       খঙব ৌদনো বমৌ অদনুো মল্লি ল্লিন্থরকই | 
Outputs: 
Syntactic Reordered: নিুী থনুো ল্লিরোংগো কপ্পী | 
 Nupi thuna pirang-ga kappi 
gloss: woman soon tears cry 
Dependency:  অথ ুদো নিুীদ ুকপ্লম্মী | 
 Athubada nupidu kaplammi 
gloss: suddenly the woman cried 
 

Here, in this example, the নিুী (nupi) is suf-
fixed by the দু (du), to produce নিুীদ ু“the wom-
an” instead of just নিুী “woman”. 

The factored approach of Manipuri-English 
SMT system also shows improved BLEU and 
NIST scores using the proposed factors as shown 
in Table 8 not only gain in fluency and adequacy 
scores as shown in Table 10.  

9 Conclusion 

A framework for Manipuri and English bidirec-
tional SMT system using factored model is expe-
rimented with a goal to improve the translation 
output and reduce the amount of training data. 
The output of the translation is improved by in-
corporating morphological information and se-
mantic relations by tighter integration. The 
systems are evaluated using automatic scoring 
techniques BLEU and NIST. The subjective 
evaluation of the systems is done to find out the 
fluency and adequacy. The fluency and adequacy 
are also addressed better for the shorter sentences 
than the longer ones using semantic relations. 
The improvement is statistically significant. 
 

90



References  

Avramidis, E. and Koehn, P. 2008. Enriching mor-

phologically poor languages for Statistical Machine 

Translation, Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT 

 

Callison-Burch, Chris., Osborne, M. and Koehn, P. 

2006. Re-evaluating the Role of Bleu in Machine 

Translation Research" In Proceedings of EACL-

2006 

 

Doddington, G. 2002. Automat ic evaluation of Ma-

chine Translation quality using n-gram co-

occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of HLT 2002, 

San Diego, CA. 

 

Koehn. P., and Hoang, H. 2007.  Factored Translation 

Models, In Proceedings of EMNLP-2007 

 

Koehn, P., Hieu, H., Alexandra, B., Chris, C., Marcel-

lo, F., Nicola, B., Brooke, C., Wade, S., Christine, 

M., Richard, Z., Chris, D., Ondrej, B., A lexandra, 

C., Evan, H. 2007. Moses: Open Source Toolkit  for 

Statistical Machine Translation, Proceedings of the 

ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177–

180, Prague. 

 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Manning, C. 2008.  

Stanford Typed Dependency Manual 

 

Minnen, G., Carro ll, J., and Pearce, D. 2001. Applied 

Morphological Processing of English, Natural 

Language Engineering, 7(3), pages 207-223 

 

Nieβen, S., and Ney, H. 2004. Statistical Machine 

Translation with Scarce Resources Using Morpho-

syntactic Information, Computational Linguistics, 

30(2), pages 181-204 

 

Och, F. 2003. Minimum error rate train ing in Statis-

tical Machine Translation , Proceedings of ACL 

 

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W. 

2002. BLEU: a method for automat ic evaluation of 

machine translation. In Proceedings of 40th  ACL, 

Philadelphia, PA 

 

Popovic, M., and Ney, H. 2006.  Statistical Machine 

Translation with a s mall amount of bilingual train-

ing data, 5th LREC SALTMIL Workshop on Minor-

ity Languages 

Ramanathan, A., Choudhury, H., Ghosh, A., and 

Bhattacharyya, P. 2009. Case markers and Mor-

phology: Addressing the crux of the fluency prob-

lem in  English-Hindi SMT, Proceedings of the 

Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the 

ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on 

Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP: Vo-

lume 2, pages: 800-808  

 

Rao, D., Mohanraj, K., Hegde, J., Mehta, V. and Ma-

hadane, P. 2000. A practical framework for syntac-

tic transfer of compound-complex sentences for 

English-Hindi Machine Translation, Proceedings 

of KBCS 2000, pages 343-354 

 

Singh, Thoudam D., and Bandyopadhyay, S. 2006. 

Word Class and Sentence Type Identification in  

Manipuri Morphological Analyzer, Proceeding of 

Modeling and Shallow Parsing of Indian Languag-

es(MSPIL) 2006, IIT Bombay, pages 11-17, Mum-

bai, India  

 

Singh, Thoudam D., and Bandyopadhyay, S. 2008. 

Morphology Driven Manipuri POS Tagger,  In pro-

ceedings International Joint Conference on Natu-

ral Language Processing (IJCNLP-08) Workshop 

on Natural Language Processing of Less Privi-

leged Languages (NLPLPL) 2008, pages 91-98, 

Hyderabad, India  

 

Singh, Thoudam D., and Bandyopadhyay, S. 2010a. 

Manipuri-English Example Based Machine Trans-

lation System, International Journal of Computa-

tional Linguistics and Applications (IJCLA), ISSN 

0976-0962, pages 147-158 

 

Singh, Thoudam D., Singh, Yengkhom R. and Ban-

dyopadhyay, S., 2010b. Manipuri-English Semi 

Automatic Parallel Corpora Extraction from Web, 

In proceedings of 23rd International Conference 

on the Computer Processing of Oriental Languag-

es (ICCPOL 2010) - New Generation in Asian In-

formation Processing , San Francisco Bay, CA, 

USA, Pages 45-48 

Singh, Thoudam D. and Bandyopadhyay, S., 2010c. 

Statistical Machine Translation of English-

Manipuri using Morpho-Syntactic and Semantic 

Information, In  the proceedings of Ninth Confe-

rence  of the Association for Machine Translation 

in Americas (AMTA 2010), Denver, Colorado, 

USA. (To appear) 

Stolcke. A. 2002. SRILM - An Extensible Language 

Modeling Toolkit. In  Proc. Intl. Conf. Spoken Lan-

guage Processing, Denver, Colorado, September.  

 

Wang, C., Collin,  M., and Koehn, P. 2007. Ch inese 

syntactic reordering for statistical machine transla-

tion, Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL 

91


