










































Building Webcorpora of Academic Prose with BootCaT


Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Sixth Web as Corpus Workshop, pages 26–31,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building  Webcorpora of Academic Prose with BootCaT

George L. Dillon
University of Washington

PO Box 354330
Seattle, Washington, USA

dillon@u.washington.edu

Abstract

A procedure is described to gather corpora of aca-
demic writing from the web using BootCaT. The 
procedure uses terms distinctive of different regis-
ters and disciplines in COCA to locate and gather 
web pages containing them.

1 Introduction

This is  a preliminary report of the results of a new 
procedure  for  building a  webcorpus of  academic 
writing  using  BootCaT  seeded  searches  (Baroni 
and Bernardini,  2004).  The procedure inverts the 
usual one of finding text-internal traits that corre-
late with externally defined corpora and subcorpo-
ra (Lee, 2001).  Instead, we seek words and lexical 
bundles  so  distinctive  of  a  text-type  (“register”) 
that they will induce BootCaT to download texts of 
that type and no other.  In the initial phase, a list of 
search seed terms is developed to download aca-
demic texts; in the second phase, this procedure is 
refined to increase its resolution, developing search 
seeds that can bring in texts belonging to sub-types 
such as Science and Technology, Arts and Human-
ities, History and Political Science, and so on. 

One might object that this is a solution to a non-
problem:  that  all  that  is  necessary  is  to  limit 
searches  to  the  .edu and  .ac.uk domains  to 
search for academic web texts, at least for US and 
UK academics.   It will become clear, however, that 
quite a number of qualifying texts can be found else-

where in other web domains such as .org, .gov, 
and even .com.  

2 Definitions

2.1 Academic writing:

Academic  writing  is  very  much  a  commonsense 
(or “folk”) category. There is considerable agree-
ment that it has research articles and books for dis-
ciplinary audiences at its core, but how much more 
beyond that is in question. This study will draw on 
three corpus-based studies:
• Coxhead's  Academic Word List  (AWL; 2000) 

is drawn from a corpus of 3.5 million words of 
running text in 441 samples. It is sorted into four 
equally  represented domains  (Arts,  Commerce, 
Law, and Science). AWL gives lists of key aca-
demic words and word families stratified by fre-
quency in the corpus.  

• Biber et al.'s (1999) reference corpus for their 
lists of academic lexical bundles is a 5.5 million 
word corpus of articles and sections from books 
(in equal  halves)  with a few textbooks for  lay 
readers included. This they further divide into 13 
disciplines. Academic is one of four main parti-
tions (which they call 'registers')1

• Davies'  Corpus  of  Contemporary  American 
English (COCA) (n.d.).  which divides contem-
porary English into five meta-types, with Aca-
demic as one of the five (80 million words)2.  It 

1The others are Conversation, Fiction, and News.
2The others are Spoken, Fiction, (popular) Magazines, News-
paper and Academic.

26



is made up entirely of articles in specialist jour-
nals and in a few high-brow general interest pe-
riodicals  (American  Scholar,  Raritan  Review,  
Literary  Review,  Cato  Journal).   It  includes 
more disciplines (Religion, Fisheries, Photogra-
phy, Military Science, Agriculture) and is sorted 
by Library of Congress top headings (A=Gener-
al Works, B=Philosophy, Psychology, Religion, 
etc.)  consolidated into eight  groupings:  Educa-
tion,  History,  Geog/SocSci,  Law/PolSci,  Hu-
manities,  Phil/Rel,  Sci/Tech,  Medicine,  Misc 
(=LC A+Z).  These eight parts are searchable, so 
that  we  can  determine  for  any  expression  not 
just  whether  it  is  distinctively  academic,  but 
what subtype or types it is distinctive of.  

COCA is thus built along principles very similar to 
those of AWL  and Biber et al.'s reference corpus, 
though it is 2 orders of magnitude larger than ei-
ther.  We would expect AWL words and Biber et 
al.'s distinctively academic lexical bundles also to 
be distinctively academic in COCA.

 2.2 “Distinctive of”

Here are two lists of  words and bundles that we 
can check for distinctiveness in COCA:

AWL LGSWE

hypothesis as we have seen

empirical extent to which

constrain has been shown 

a priori has been suggested that

ideology interesting to note

bias in the development of

concurrent no significant difference

intrinsic presence or absence of

whereas was found that

qualitative
Table 1: Academic Key Words (starter set)

Each of these expressions occurs over four times 
more frequently in the COCA Academic register 
than any other and twice as frequently there as in 
all the others combined.  Let that be the working 
definition  of  “distinctive.”   So  for  example,  the 
presence or absence of  occurs 3.72 times per mil-
lion  words  in  the  COCA  Academic  subcorpus, 
0.35 times  per million in the Magazines, and neg-

ligibly in Spoken,  Fiction,  and Newspapers.  It  is 
thus 10 times more frequent in the Academic sub-
corpus than in Magazines and passes the 4 times or 
more  criterion  for  distinctiveness.  In  addition, 
some frequent AWL words were checked for com-
bining in bigrams, which have the potential of be-
ing even more specific for domain/genre than indi-
vidual words.   These indeed prove to be more dis-
tinctive  than  the  individual  words  (though  of 
course less frequent). In the first column of Table 2 
are  the  frequencies  per  million  words  of  these 
words, phrases, and bigrams in COCA. 

Table 2: Frequency/Million of Seeds in COCA, 
Wikipedia,3 and  the  Collected Web Corpora

The next three columns give the frequencies/mil-
lion words of these distinctive terms in each of the 
three corpora collected from the Web with words, 
bundles,  and bigrams for  seeds.  (The x's  replace 
the frequencies of the seed terms in the respective 

3from Corpuseye's 115M word Wikipedia A, B, C corpus at 
http://corp.hum.sdu.dk/cqp.en.html

words seeds COCA words bundl bigram wikiped
hypothesis 74 x 145 140 23
empirical 58 x 30 189 8
constrain 5.5 x 3 10 1
a priori 7 x 3 15 1
ideology 58 x 6 12 16
bias 46 x 41 45 13
concurrent 11 x 10 20 5
intrinsic* 27 x 43 * 6
whereas 105 x 237 114 46
qualitative 38 x 22 109 3

402 498 655 122
acad_bundle
as we have seen 6 9 x 2 0
extent to which 37 40 x 47 3
has been shown 9 11 x 30 4
has been suggested that 3 4 x 3 6
It is interesting to note 5 5 x 4 3
in the development of 19 16 x 30 10
no significant difference 8 4 x 6 0
presence or absence of 4 4 x 7 1
it was found that 5 2 x 9 2

96 95 137 29
bigrams
face validity 2 5 1 x 0
these data 18 16 98 x 1
important implications 5 4 5 x 0
basic concepts 2 4 0 x 1
theoretical framework 5 5 1 x 0
intrinsic motivation 6 * 3 x 0
these findings 32 19 75 x 1
this interpretation 6 13 4 x 3
previous work 3 3 11 x 1
indicative of 11 7 15 x 3

89 75 214 10

Total (minus  intrinsic)

Total  

Total (minus  intrinsic)

27



corpora  made  with  them—the  numbers  are  of 
course very high.)  These frequencies track those 
of  the  terms  in  the  COCA Academic  subcorpus 
quite  closely,  especially  the  'words'  corpus,  with 
the  'bundle'  and  'bigram'  corpora  following  the 
same pattern but at somewhat higher (i.e., 'richer') 
levels. 

The Wikipedia figures  are  included for compari-
son. The low frequency of these marker words and 
phrases  suggests  that  Wikipedia  is  not  very aca-
demic in its style, which is perhaps not surprising 
since Wikipedia authors are not allowed to report 
their own research or argue positions.

 Most of these putative marker terms are well rep-
resented  across  the  eight  academic  domains  (the 
“spread” is good).  A word that occurs only in one 
domain will  appear  to  be  distinctively academic, 
but that is a misleading impression.  Stent,  for ex-
ample,  occurs  only  in  the  Medical  domain  in 
COCA (along with many other terms: stenosis, mi-
tral—the list is very long).  Even when the match 
of word and domain is not so clear cut, there are 
words and phrases that are found preponderantly in 
a discipline or group of disciplines (a “division” in 
university parlance) such as  the text itself and ear-
ly modern, both Art/Humanities terms, and similar-
ly of the nature of,  which scarcely occurs in Sci-
ence or Medicine and only infrequently in Geogra-
phy  and  Social  Science.  The  next  phase  of  this 
project will take up the question of increasing the 
resolution down to the level of a subdomain where 
a particular set of terms is distinctive. 

3 Details of Constructing the Web Corpora

These  three  groups  of  seed  terms  were  used  to 
make BootCaT tuples (3) and to find URLs of files 
which contained all three terms of a tuple (with 20 
tuples each) and 40 documents for each tuple. Each 
list of URLs was downloaded and cleaned of CSS 
style sheets: duplicates and dead-end (e. g., pass-
worded)  sites  were  removed,  along  with  uncon-
verted .pdf files. (Yahoo! rather than Google was 
used  because  Yahoo!  filtered  out  most  of  the 
.pdfs and .doc files.  BootCaT was not too suc-
cessful converting .pdf files: a number of them 
seemed non-standard or corrupt).
At 3.4 million words, the 'single word' corpus was 
the largest  and had the most  pages;  the 'bundles' 

corpus was  intermediate in word count but had the 
fewest  pages.  The  corpus made  with the  bigram 
seeds was notably shorter (2.2 million words), but 
it was very efficient at bringing in occurrences of 
seed terms from the other  sets.   The seed terms 
from all sets were used to cross-check (probe) for 
occurrence in the other two corpora.  These results 
are given in Table 2 in the second and third col-
umns.  There was no overlap of files (i. e., no files 
in common) in the three downloaded Web corpora 
and only one overlap between probe term (intrin-
sic) and file seed  (intrinsic motivation).   

A further set of  lexical bundles (not used as seeds) 
were run as probes and produced the same pattern 
(See  Table  3).   Most  of  these  are  it-impersonal 
constructions,  and  it  is  not  news  that  academic 
writing cultivates  the  impersonal  (though it  does 
allow a little  we  plural first person to slip in);  in 
fact, at this proof-of-concept stage, expected find-
ings  are  confirmation  that  the  collected  corpora 
have  the  properties  of  academic  writing  as  we 
know it  across  many  distinctive  lexical  bundles, 
not just the ones used as seeds.

Table 3: Further probes of the 3 Collected Web Corpora
Again, the three web corpora track COCA very 
closely, with the 'bigram' corpus as the most effi-
cient.

4 Analysis of Web Corpora

4.1  Top-level domains

Table 4 shows that these corpora draw from sever-
al web top-level domains, with .com either first or 
second in rank for the three corpora. (The top four 
domains  account  for  a  little  over  90%  of  the 
pages.)

lexical bundlesCOCA 20words40/M20bun40/Mbigram4/M
it should be noted 13 14 16 19
It is possible that 16 22 49 13
it is necessary to 11 16 9 13
it is important to 39 39 30 55
as we shall see 4 1 5 1
it can be seen that 1 1 2 1
in the context of  44 49 28 70
the degree to which 19 16 15 27
of the nature of 7 13 7 12
in this paper 14 27 24 53
Total 188 198 182 264

28



Table 4: Size of Corpora and Range of Domains
(Estimated Domain Counts)

The  domain  counts  are  estimated,  since  a  grep 
search over-counts by including URLs referred to 
on the page as well as that of the page itself.  These 
figures  are  estimated  from  the  URLs  in  the 
“cleaned_urls_list”  that  is  used  to  download  the 
pages.  Clearly  the  .edu top-level  domain is  not 
the  only  or  even  the  most  productive  source  of 
pages containing the search key words. If these are 
indeed pages of academic writing, then quite a lot 
of academic writing on the web would get filtered 
out by using an .edu domain filter and a great deal 
filtered out using ac.uk.

4.2 Types of sites

The  1656  downloaded  pages  came  from a  wide 
range of sites. 281 URLs had words such as  arti-
cle, journal, paper, research, publication, or other 
term that identified the contents as scholarly arti-
cles.  On the other hand, there were 26 entries from 
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/; 17  pages  had  the 
word   blog in  their  URL  and  17  had  the  word 
courses,  the latter being teaching sites with hand-
outs. There were nine pages of customer reviews 
from  www.amazon.com/review and  15 pages 
from  plato.stanford.edu/entries  which 
is an encyclopedia of philosophy.  All of these sites 
might be said to be academic in a looser sense, the 
Amazon reviews being the most distant. 

5.0 The Next Phase: Increasing Resolution

It is probably only a minority of 'academic' terms 
that are commonly used across the board in all dis-
ciplines (or groups of disciplines).  All disciplines 

use have argued,  presumably because argument is 
at the core of academic endeavor and because the 
present perfect is just right for summarizing other 
people's  claims and your own. And similarly,  all 
disciplines have, or agree they should have, a theo-
retical framework.  But one does NOT write I ar-
gue in Medicine, or so COCA records, nor has the 
word interpretive any use in Medicine, though it is 
widely used in all  the  other  disciplines.   On the 
other hand, Medicine has its own distinctive bun-
dles  including  it  is  known that,  and  it  has  been 
shown/suggested that (Oakey, 2002)4. 

It is fairly easy to gather terms that appear to be 
distinctive of a certain discipline, or group of disci-
plines, to use them to build web corpora like the 
ones  illustrated  here,  and  to  take  frequent  terms 
from  the  gathered  corpora  to  do  another  search 
within the discipline/domain, and so to build larger 
and  more  differentiated  corpora  that  match  the 
COCA/Library  of  Congress  groupings  of  disci-
plines  much as  has  been reported here  for  'Aca-
demic' writing as such.  'Distinctive'  can be less 
stringently  defined  in  this  application:  a  term  is 
distinctive  in  an academic subdomain when it  is 
distinctively academic and is at least twice as fre-
quent in the subdomain as in the Academic domain 
as a whole. The terms still have a strong selective 
effect because when used in triplets, their selective 
weights are as it were multiplied.

For example, the left column of Table 5 has a set 
of  search  seed  terms  distinctive  of  texts  in  the 
COCA 'Phil/Rel'  subcorpus  (LC:  B).5  The  right 
column  gives a set of search seeds selected from 
the first 100-300 most frequent words in the corpus 
made with the initial set of seeds. (Very frequent 
terms were checked as possible bigram members 
and the bigram used instead in the actual download 
of the second corpus.) 

4Oakey's model study is based on data from the BNC. Some of 
his discipline-distinctive patterns scarcely occur in the much 
larger COCA (e. g, it is found/concluded that). 
5It actually includes Philosophy, Religion, and Psychology.

3 Webcorpora 20word40 20bun40 bigrams4
CURRENT URL 636 464 556

tokens 3.4M 2.8M 2.23M

tokens/url 5346 6034 4011

.org/ 182 245 127

.edu/ 174 36 163

.com/ 197 113 176

.gov/ 27 32 46

.net/ 35 13 18

.ca/ 19 4 15

.de/ 19 13 11

.ac.uk/ 6 3 7

.ca/ 23 5 18

29



Initial set of seeds Second, derived set of seeds 

this interpretation phenomenal consciousness

incomprehensible methodology

dialectic scientific theories 

situational  reductionist

hermeneutics incoherent

intelligible in this sense

materialism in principle

means that
Table 5: First and Second Seed Sets for Phil/Rel

The two resulting lists of  URLs overlapped only 
slightly.  By using each corpus as reference for a 
keyword search of the other,  the terms most dis-
tinctive of each (vis-a-vis the other) were extract-
ed.   These terms fall  into fairly distinct  clusters: 
The first  corpus leans toward hermeneutics/inter-
pretation  and  toward  marxism (via  dialectic and 
materialism)—in  short,  a  course  in  Continental 
philosophy  (sample  key  words:  historical  con-
sciousness,  Marx,  Gadamer,  bourgeois,  class  
struggle,  Scripture,  exegesis).   The  second  has 
Dennett and  falsifiable  as keys and leans toward 
Anglo-American  philosophy  of  science  and  of 
mind  (other  key  words:  qualia,  representational  
contents, mental states, argument for/against, sen-
sory experience, physicalism).   Here we begin to 
tap into key terms and themes of various schools of 
thought within and overlapping disciplines. 

It is possible to determine which of the seed tuplets 
brought  in  the key phrases;  i.  e.,  the  strength of 
particular seeds as attractors of other terms.  It can 
also be determined when a particular web page is 
causing a term to spike, which happens fairly often 
in academic writing, since it favors frequent repeti-
tion of the key concepts of the article.

These  clusters  reflect  dependencies  (or  co-loca-
tions) within texts rather than within local 'frames' 
of contiguous words—which is to say registers of 
the particular disciplines/subdisciplines.  Proceed-
ing  in  this  way,  specific  lists  of  terms  and  also 
turns of phrase for these disciplines can be extract-
ed. This phase of the project is nearing completion.

The power of BootCaT tuplet search to collect cor-
pora rich in the features of academic registers is re-
markable, and its potential uses are many.

References 

M. Baroni and S. Bernardini. 2004.   BootCaT:  Boot-
strapping corpora and terms from the web. Proceed-
ings of LREC 2004.

D.  Biber, S. Johansson, G. Leech, S. Conrad,  and E. 
Finegan. Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written 
English.  Longman, 1999.

A.  Coxhead.  2000.  A  New  Academic  Word  List. 
TESOL Quarterly, 34(2): 213-238.

______,  n.d.  On-line  AWL  lists.  http://www.victori-
a.ac.nz/lals/resources/academicwordlist/sublists.aspx

M. Davies. n.d.  Corpus of Contemporary American 
English (COCA) www.americancorpus.org.

D. YW. Lee. 2001.  Genres, Registers, Text Types, Do  
mains, and Styles: Clarifying the Concepts and Nav
igating a Path Through the BNC Jungle. Language  
Learning & Technology 5(3): 37-72.

D. Oakey. 2004. Formulaic Language in English Aca-
demic Writing. in R. Reppen, S. M. Fitzmaurice, and 
Douglas Biber, eds. Using Corpora to Explore Lin-
guistic Variation. John Benjamins. 2004.

30



31


