



















































Multilinguization and Personalization of NL-based Systems


Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Cross Lingual Information Access at COLING 2010, pages 79–87,
Beijing, August 2010

Multilinguization and Personalization of NL-based Systems 

Najeh Hajlaoui 
GETALP, LIG, UJF 

385 rue de la Bibliothèque, BP n° 53 
38041 Grenoble, cedex 9, France 
Najeh.Hajlaoui@imag.fr 

Christian Boitet 
GETALP, LIG, UJF 

385 rue de la Bibliothèque, BP n° 53 
38041 Grenoble, cedex 9, France 
Christian.Boitet@imag.fr 

 

Abstract 

Linguistic porting of content manage-
ment services processing spontaneous ut-
terances in natural language has become 
important. In most situations, such utter-
ances are noisy, but are constrained by 
the situation, thus constituting a restricted 
sublangage. In previous papers, we have 
presented three methods to port such sys-
tems to other languages. In this paper, we 
study how to also personalize them by 
making them capable of automatic per-
ception adaptation, using fuzzy evalu-
ation functions. We have reengineered 
IMRS, a music retrieval NL-based sys-
tem, to implement that idea, and ported it 
to French, English and Arabic using an 
enhanced version of our external porting 
method, building a unique content extrac-
tor for these three languages. More than 
30 persons participated in a preliminary 
on-line qualitative evaluation of the sys-
tem.  

1 Introduction 
Multilingualizing systems handling content ex-
pressed in spontaneous natural language is an 
important but difficult problem, and very few 
multilingual services are available today.  The 
choice of a particular multilingualization process 
depends on the translational situation: types and 
levels of possible accesses, available resources, 
and linguistic competences of participants in-
volved in the multilingualization task. Three 
main strategies are possible in principle for 
multilingualization, by translation, and by inter-
nal or external adaptation.  We consider here the 

subproblem of linguistic porting, where the con-
tent is adapted to another language, but not ne-
cessarily to a different cultural environment. We 
also try to add some level of personalization, by 
automatic perception adaptation, based on the 
use of fuzzy evaluation functions. We use the 
example of IMRS, an Impression-based Music-
Retrieval System (Kumamoto, 2004), with a na-
tive interface in Japanese, which we have reengi-
neered and ported to French, English and Arabic.   
The context and objectives of our work are pre-
sented in the second section. The third section 
presents the IMRS original prototype and the 
possible strategies to achieve porting and person-
alization. In the fourth section, we give detailed 
specifications of our reengineered music retrieval 
system, IMRS-g. In the fifth section, we present 
the implementation of five music retrieval 
modes. Finally, we report on the multilingual 
porting of this system. 

2 Methods for porting NL-based con-
tent processing systems 

The choice of a method for multilingualizing e-
commerce services based on content extraction 
from spontaneous texts depends on two aspects 
of the translational situation: 
• The level of access to resources of the initial 

application. Four cases are possible: complete 
access to the source code, access limited to 
the internal representation, access limited to 
the dictionary, and no access. In the case of 
IMRS, the access was limited to the internal 
representation, visible as a non-linguistic 
interface in the original prototype (a set of 10 
impressions manipulate by a set of 7 check-
box).  

• The linguistic qualification level of the per-
sons involved in the process (level of know-

79



ledge of the source language, competence in 
NLP) and the resources (corpora, dictionaries) 
available for the new language(s), in particu-
lar for the sublanguages at hand. 
We concentrate on NLP-based systems that 

perform specific tasks in restricted domains. 
Figure 1 shows the general structure of these sys-
tems. Examples of such applications and services 
are: categorization of various documents such as 
AFP (Agence France Presse) flash reports or cus-
tomer messages on an ASS (After Sale Service) 
server, and information extraction to feed or con-
sult a database (e.g. classified ads, FAQ, auto-
mated hotlines). 

 
Figure 1: general structure of an NLP-based CMS  
We first studied linguistic porting of e-

commerce systems handling spontaneous utter-
ances in natural languages, that are often noisy, 
but constrained by the situation, and constitute a 
more or less restricted sub-language (Kittredge, 
1982), (Harris, 1968) (Grishman and Kittredge, 
1986). 

This kind of system uses a specific content 
representation on which the functional kernel 
works. In most cases, this content representation 
is generated from the native language L1 by a 
content extractor. In our PhD, we have identified 
three possible methods of linguistic porting, and 
have illustrated them by porting to French CATS 
(Daoud, 2006), a Classified Ads Transaction 
System in SMS (Arabic) deployed in Amman on 
Fastlink, as well as IMRS, mentioned above. The 
three possible strategies for linguistic porting are 
internal porting, external porting and porting by 
machine translation. Figure 2 shows an example 
of the car domain with the output of the content 
extractor (CRL-CATS).  

In CRL-CATS (Content Representation Lan-
guage for CATS), a posted SMS is represented 
as a set of binary relations between objects. It is 
a kind of semantic graph with a UNL-like syntax 
(Uchida and Zhu 2005-2006). There are no vari-

ables, but the dictionary is used as a type lattice 
allowing specialization and generalization. 

 
;Selling Renault Megane m 2000 
[S] 
sal(saloon:00,sale:00) 
mak(saloon:00,RENAULT(country<France, 
county<europe):07) 
mod(saloon:00,Megane(country<France, 
country <europe,make<RENAULT):0C) 
yea(saloon:00,2000:0K) 
[/S] 

Figure 2: Example of SMS  

2.1 Internal porting 
The first possibility consists in adapting the ori-
ginal content extractor of the application from L1 
to the target language L2 (see Figure 3); but that 
is viable only if : 
• the developers agree to open their code and 

tools,  
• the code and tools are relatively easy to un-

derstand, 
• the resources are not too heavy to create (in 

particular the dictionary).  
That method requires of course training the lo-

calization team with the tools and methods used. 
Under these conditions, adaptation can be 

done at a very reasonable cost, and further main-
tenance. 

 
Figure 3: internal porting 

We have previously experimented this method 
(Hajlaoui, 2008) by porting CATS from Arabic to 
French: for that, we adapted its native Arabic 
content extractor, written in EnCo1 (Uchida and 
Zhu 1999), by translating its dictionary, and 
modifying a few analysis rules. 

                                                 
1 EnCo is a tool based on rules and dictionaries used 
for content extraction in original version of CATS 
system. 

80



2.2 External porting 
If there is access only to the internal content rep-
resentation, the solution consists in adapting an 
available content extractor for L2 to the sublan-
guage at hand, and to compile its results into the 
original content representation (see Figure 4). 

For a company wanting to offer multilinguali-
zation services, it would indeed be an ideal situa-
tion to have a generic content extractor, and to 
adapt it to each situation (language, sublanguage, 
domain, content representation, task, other con-
straints).  However, there is still no known ge-
neric content extractor of that power, and not 
even a generic content extractor for particular 
languages, so that this approach cannot be con-
sidered at present. Our approach is then to adapt 
an existing content extractor, developed for L2 
and a different domain/task, or for another lan-
guage and the same domain/task.  

We also applied this method to port CATS 
from Arabic to French, and experimentation are 
described in (Hajlaoui, 2008). 

 
Figure 4: external porting 

2.3 Porting by machine translation 
If there is no access to the code, dictionary, and 
internal content representation of the original 
application, the only possible approach to port it 
from L1 to L2 is to develop an MT system to 
automatically translate its (spontaneous) inputs 
from L2 into L1 (see Figure 5).   

Porting CATS from Arabic to French by stat-
istical translation gave a very good performance, 
and that with a very small training corpus (less 
than 10 000 words). This proves that, in the case 
of very small sub-languages, statistical transla-
tion may be of sufficient quality, starting from a 
corpus 100 to 500 smaller than for the general 
language. 

 
Figure 5: porting by machine translation 

2.4 Results and evaluation  
We translated manually the evaluation corpus 
used for the evaluation of CATS Arabic version. 
It contains 200 real SMS (100 SMS to buy + 100 
SMS to sale) posted by real users in Jordan.  

We spent 289 mn to translate the 200 Arabic 
SMS (2082 words is equivalent to 10 
words/SMS, approximately 8 standard pages2) 
into a French translation, or about 35 mn per 
page, and 10 mn per standard page to pass from 
raw translation to functional translation.  

We obtained 200 French SMS considered to 
be functional (1361 words, or about 6,8 
words/SMS, approximately 5 standard pages). 
We then computed the recall R, the precision P 
and the F-measure F for each most important 
property (action “sale or buy”, “make”, “model”, 
“year”, “price”). 

P = |correct entities identified by the system| / 
|entities identified by the system|;  

R = |correct entities identified by the system| / 
|entities identified by the human|;  

F-measure = 2PR/(P+R) 
Table 1 summarizes the percentage (F-

measure ratio) of the Arabic-French porting of 
CATS and shows details in (Hajlaoui, 2008). 
Properties having numbers as values, like price 
and year, lower the percentage of porting by ex-
ternal porting, but the advantage is that method 
requires only accessing the internal representa-
tion of the application. 
 Minimum Average Maximum 
Internal porting 95% 98% 100% 
External porting 46% 77% 99% 
Porting by statis-
tical translation 

85% 93% 98% 

Table 1: evaluation of three methods used for 
porting CATS_Cars from Arabic to French. 
                                                 
2 Standard page = 250 words 

81



In the third part of this article, we describe the 
multilinguization of IMRS, IMRS-g, which in-
cludes a module of queries management, where 
the queries are expressed either in a natural lan-
guage or in a graphical interface showing 10 vec-
tors corresponding to the internal content repre-
sentation. In response to a query, the user re-
ceives a set of music pieces that correspond to 
her/his desired selection criteria.  

In addition to the original design, where the 
NL expressions of the 10 measures are mapped 
in a fixed way to the integers in the real interval 
[1, 7], we have tried to apply a small part of the 
theory of fuzzy sets to improve the representa-
tion and evaluation of human perceptions. 

3 Multilinguization of IMRS 

To port IMRS to several languages, we used the 
external porting method and we built a new con-
tent extractor, which treats simple utterances re-
lated to the music domain. 

3.1 IMRS 
IMRS (Kumamoto and Ohta, 2003) is a non-
deployed Web service prototype, developed as 
an experimental base for a PhD. It allows to re-
trieve music pieces either by using Japanese 
queries, or by manipulating a graphical interface 
with 10 criteria settable by knobs (speed, noise, 
rhythm...), and showing remarkable values (inte-
gers between 1 and 7) expressed by English la-
bels. In IMRS, an utterance processed by the sys-
tem is a spontaneous sentence or fragment of a 
sentence. The content extractor transforms it into 
a vector of 10 real numbers in the interval [1, 7]. 
The symbol nil means don’t care.  

The 10 components are called Noisy-Quiet, 
Calm-Agitated, Bright-Dark, Refreshing-
Depressing, Solemn-Flippant, Leisurely-
Restricted, Pretty-unattractive, Happy-Sad, Re-
laxed-Aroused, The mind is restored-The mind is 
vulnerable. Each has associated grades (inter-
preted as "concepts" below). For example, the 
component Happy-Sad is characterized by the 
seven grades: very happy, happy, a little happy, 
medium, a little sad, sad and very sad. In the ori-
ginal IMRS, these values always correspond to 
the integers in the [1, 7] interval, respectively 
7.0, 6.0, 5.0, 4.0, 3.0, 2.0 and 1.0.  

A request to find a piece of music that gives a 
happy impression (happy) corresponds to the 10-
dimensional vector as follows: (nil nil nil nil nil 
nil nil 6.0 nil nil) (Kumamoto, 2007), but the 
music pieces can be described by vectors having 
non-integer components.  

Although we had a quite precise description of 
the internal representation used by IMRS. We 
could not find information on the rest of the sys-
tem. Hence, we recreated it to emulate the func-
tions described in the original publications. That 
includes the system architecture, the design and 
implementation of the database, the management 
of requests, and the programming of actually 
much more than the originally proposed service. 

By definition, linguistic porting consists in 
making an application existing in some language 
L1 available in another language L2, within the 
same context. Evaluation of the linguistic porting 
of a content management application can be done 
at two levels.  
• Evaluation at the internal representation 

level. It is an evaluation at the level of com-
ponents.  

• Evaluation at the task level. It is an end-to-
end evaluation of the new version (in L2) of 
the application.   
To make an end-to-end evaluation of IMRS, 

an IMRS Web-based simulator was developed. It 
makes it possible to evaluate in context the result 
of linguistic porting (Japanese ! French, Arabic, 
English). A real database with real music pieces, 
characterized by 10-dimensional vectors as in 
IMRS, was also created.  

The aim of the multilinguization was however 
not to develop an application strictly equivalent 
to IMRS, with the addition of being able to han-
dle queries expressed in French, English and 
Arabic, but to develop an upward compatible, 
extended application. In particular, we wanted to 
add other dimensions corresponding to the type 
of music, the composer, the period of compo-
sition, the instruments used, etc. We also wanted 
to experiment the possibility to associate to each 
impression such as happy a fuzzy set over [1,7] 
expressed by a membership function (into [0,1]). 
More details are given below. 

3.2 Our IMRS-g system  
With the help of a Master student in computer 
science, Xiang Yin, we have programmed in 

82



PHP/MySQL a Web service called IMRS-g, re-
implementing as accurately as possible the sys-
tem IMRS, and generalizing it. 

Not having sufficient expertise in Japanese, 
we replaced Japanese by French. We also ad-
apted the NLP part to English and Arabic, using 
the same strategy to handle the three languages. 

We then generalized the internal representa-
tion by adding other search criteria (such as the 
type of music, the composer, the period of com-
position, and the instruments used), and using 
fuzzy sets. 

A large set of music pieces was loaded into the 
database, and labelled by vectors in a collabor-
ative way. An evaluation of the French version 
was then conducted as part of a realistic use, with 
students listening to music. 

The first part of the linguistic porting has been 
very rapid, since it consisted only in translating 
into French and Arabic the NL labels expressing 
impressions (Noisy/Quiet, Calm/Agitated, 
Sad/Happy, etc.), by associating them the same 
values as in IMRS. 

The content extractor processes simple utter-
ances and extracts from them a 10-dimensional 
IMRS vector, and the additional information in 
the form (lists of) of items. 

As in IMRS, a request for a music piece can 
be made either by typing a query in natural lan-
guage, or through a graphical interface allowing 
to manipulate a 10-dimensional vector, and to fill 
fields for the other types of information.  

In response, the user receives a list of links to 
music pieces corresponding to its selection cri-
teria. Clicking on a link starts the playing of the 
corresponding music piece. 

3.3 Generalization by fuzzying the interpre-
tation of the NL labels  

The original representation of IMRS seems too 
rigid to express utterances like quite calm or to 
change the current request using an utterance like 
a little slower. Even if we agree that each term 
corresponds to an interval of length 1 centred on 
its reference value, e.g. [5.5, 6.5[ for happy, [6.5, 
7.5] for very happy, etc., there are problems at 
the extremities. Therefore we studied the possi-
bility of better modelling and better processing 
the requests by using fuzzy logic (Zadeh, 1965).  

In order to reason from imperfect knowledge, 
in contrast to classical logic, fuzzy logic pro-

poses to replace the Boolean variables used in 
classical logic by fuzzy variables, and the classi-
cal crisp sets by fuzzy sets.  

Let U be a universe of elements. A fuzzy set A 
over U is defined by its membership function 
(fA). An element x of U is in A with a degree of 
membership fA(x) " [0, 1]. If fA(x) " {0, 1}, A 
reduces to a classic set, where x " A if fA(x)=1 
and x # A if fA(x)=0 (fA is then simply the char-
acteristic function of A).  

In a fuzzy set, an element x more or less be-
longs to the concept associated to A, or to the 
concept attached to A (such as happy). A fuzzy 
set is defined by all values of its membership 
function on its definition domain (which may be 
discrete or continuous). 

For example, the concept young might be de-
fined over the universe U of possible (integer) 
ages U = [0, 120] by the discrete fuzzy set A = 
((10 1), (20 0.8), (30 0.6), (40 0.2), (50, 0.1), (60 
0), (70 0), (80 0)). The first pair means that a 10-
year old is 100% young, and the fifth that a 50-
year old is 10% young.  

Using fuzzy logic, we could say that a piece of 
music is 100% rapid if its tempo is 100 (100 
crotchets (quarter notes) per minute), with a bell-
shaped curve for the membership function, rising 
from 0 to 1 and then falling, in the range [84, 
112]. Then, rapid might be understood as im-
pression of rapidity. As the impression of ra-
pidity may differ from person to person, that 
curve may differ accordingly. 

 

 
Figure 6. Representation of the rapidity impression  
We propose to incorporate the possibility to 

move from the perceptions to digital measure-
ments and to personalize the system by learning 
parameters of each curve of this type for each 
user. Such a curve can be characterized by a 
small number of significant points, such as the 
maximum, 2 points at the 10% below the maxi-
mum, 2 minima on each side, and 2 points at 
10% above the global minimum.  

 rapide 

 

0  40 60 84 100 112 140 160 176 

1 
 
 
0 

83



To find the criteria for each piece of music, we 
have developed a website to ask a group of peo-
ple to listen to music pieces and to give their 
opinions in terms of impressions, knowing that 
they will not have the same taste and the same 
perception. For example, for the same piece, a 
first listener will say that it is rapid, and a second 
will find it very rapid. The question here is how 
to merge these different views into a single im-
pression. We propose two solutions: (1) con-
struct a fuzzy set which is the average of those of 
annotators, possibly by giving greater weight to 
the annotations of confirmed annotators, (2) 
build several perception types, i.e. several fuzzy 
sets corresponding to subgroups of users with 
similar perceptions. We know that the Japanese 
persons find only slow pieces of music that Wes-
terners find very slow. 

In this work, we have taken into account pre-
vious queries of users or the history of users. For 
example, if a user requests a piece a little less 
noisy, or a little more calm, we should be able to 
use the information saved in his history, and cal-
culate the new request taking into account the 
perceptions associated to the last piece of music 
listened to.  

4 Specification and implementation 

We specified and implemented a multimedia 
database for storing music pieces, as well as in-
formation representing the impressions of each 
piece. As said above, we added to the 10 features 
of IMRS other information types:  singer, poet, 
composer, genre, album and duration, for each 
music piece. Moreover, to evaluate music, we 
stored the values of the impressions recorded by 
contributing users for each piece. These values 
were used to produce the final values stored in 
the database. To analyze the impressions of 
users, we requested further information from 
each user, as gender and age. 

We loaded our database with a set of 354 
pieces (89 Western, 265 Eastern) and all infor-
mation related to each piece (artist, album, 
genre...). The duration of individual pieces varies 
between 48 seconds and 22 minutes. 

The website has a login page that allows a se-
cured access for each user. For a first connection, 
the user must register and fill some information 
from which we compute and store a profile.  

If the connection is successful, a list of pieces 
is displayed. For each piece, a link allows listen-
ing to the music and also opens a new page pro-
viding an adapted evaluation interface appropri-
ate to the evaluation task.  

In the evaluation phase, the user can listen to 
the selected piece and evaluate it according to the 
10 IMRS basic criteria (soft, calm, happy...). For 
each criterion, we offer a range of values and the 
user can move a cursor and put it on the value 
that represents its perception. Next, we propose 
several ways to search for music pieces. 

The cost of multilinguization of the IMRS sys-
tem was 3 man-months. To this cost, we add 1 
man-month for the development and integration 
task of the content extractor for the three lan-
guages (French, Arabic, English). 

5 Music retrieval modes  

After registering and connecting, users listen to 
and evaluate music. The evaluation information 
is recorded directly in the database.  

For each dimension, we compute the average 
of the obtained values. This phase is temporary 
pending further evaluations to draw the curves 
associated to each dimension and to each piece. 

We defined and implemented five possibilities 
to search music: by user profile, by impressions, 
by selecting criteria, by input utterances, and by 
history. 

5.1 Search by user profile  
We propose to users music adapted to their pre-
ferences recorded in their profiles. The method 
follows the following steps:  
• Find the user profile (ten values that represent 

his basic impressions) in the database.  
• Compute the Euclidean distance between the 

two vectors formed by the 10 values of profile 
and the 10 values of each music piece (see ex-
ample below).  

• Sort pieces by distances in ascending order.  
• View the nearest 10 pieces.  

Here is an example: 
User profile: impressions vector  
Profile = (Nil 6  3 Nil 2  1  3  5 Nil Nil)  
Piece impressions (existing impressions vector):  
Piece1 =  
(3.5 Nil 2.3 5.0 3.2 Nil 2.6 Nil 6.0  1.4) 
 

84



Euclidian distance (d):  
d= ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )2222222222 4.1464456.23412.32543.23465.34 !+!+!+!+!+!+!+!+!+!   
=> d = 5.3,  
Note: if  value = “Nil”, we put value :=  4. 

5.2 Search by impressions 
We ask the user to place the cursors on the 
values that represent his perception. We can limit 
ourselves to a particular type of music (Western 
music, Eastern music or light music). The search 
method has the following steps:  
• Choose the kind of music (Western music, 

Eastern music or light music).  
• Place one or more cursors on the values that 

represent user’s perception.  
• Compute the Euclidean distance between the 

two vectors formed by the 10 values of search 
and the 10 values of each piece. 

• Sort pieces by distances in ascending order. 
• View the nearest 10 pieces.  

Here is an example: we search a noisy (fort) 
and somewhat calm (assez calme) piece (see 
Figure 7).  

 

 
Figure 7. Example of search by impressions 

 
The result of the previous request is a set of 10 

music pieces. 

5.3 Search by selection criteria  
We offer four search criteria: artist, album, genre 
and creation date. The search methods for each 
of these criteria are similar.  

For example, the search by artist follows the 
following steps:  
• Search all artists (singers) existing in the 

database.  
• Choose an artist from this list.  
• Search all pieces performed by this artist and 

show them (by links). 

5.4 Search by input utterances  
The content extractor works for French, Arabic 
and English, and handles simple utterances re-
lated to the music domain. This program takes as 
input a corpus of music pieces and gives as out-
put a file containing the corresponding vector 
representations.  

The search method has the following steps:  
• Enter an utterance in natural language repre-

senting impressions of music search.  
• Call a content extractor. The result, which 

contains a vector representing the desired per-
ceptions, is stored in a text file.  

• Extract the vector from the text file.  
• For each value of the vector (Vv), if one of 

the symbols (+, + +, -, --,¬) appears, then we 
extract the value of the last search of the con-
cerned user (Vo: old value) from the database 
to compute the new value of search (Vn: new 
value).  

Here are some examples of utterances that cor-
respond to the precedent symbols. +: more noisy, 
++: still more noisy, -: less noisy, --: still less 
noisy, ¬: not noisy.  
We treat these symbols with the following rules:  
If (Vv == ‘+’) {Vn = Vo + $ ;} 
If (Vv == ‘++’) {Vn = Vo + 2$ ;} 
If (Vv == ‘-’) {Vn = Vo - $ ;} 
If (Vv == ‘--’) {Vn = Vo - 2$ ;} 
If (Vv == ‘¬x’) {Vn = 7 - x ;} 
If (Vn > 7) {Vn = 7 ;} 
• Compute the Euclidean distance between the 

two vectors formed by the 10 desired values 
and the 10 values of each piece. 

• Sort music by distances in ascending order. 
• View the nearest 10 pieces. 

5.5 Search by history 
We extract from the history of each user five 
types of information:  (a) the kind of desired 
pieces, (b) their creation date, (c) the artists (per-
formers), (d) the liked albums, (e) the favourite 
impressions.  

The search method has the following steps:  
• Search the user’s history in the database and 

check if the user has already searched with the 
five previous conditions. 

•  If the user has searched for condition (a) or 
(b) or (c) or (d), we extract the last value of 
found for each of them. 4 values are obtained. 

85



 If the user searches by impressions (condition 
(e)), we compute for each dimension the aver-
age that represents the history of the searches.  

• Search for music using the values obtained at 
step 2.   
If (e) is verified, we compute the Euclidean 
distance between the average of impressions 
representing the history and impressions exist-
ing in the database.  
If (e) is not verified, we look for pieces, using 
only the 4 values obtained by the conditions 
((a), (b), (c), (d)).  
Here an example of a history of one user. For 

condition (a), the latest search value is “Pop”. 
For condition (b), there is no value, i.e. the user 
did not search by creation date. For condition (c), 
the latest search value is “1” (number of the ar-
tist). For condition (d), the latest search value is 
“2” (number of the album). For condition (e), 
there are 3 vectors in the search history: 

V1=(2 5 Nil 3 Nil 2 7 1 Nil Nil) 
V2=(3 Nil 4.5 2.5 Nil 3.1 6.4 Nil 5 2) 
V3=(3.5 4.3 Nil 2.1 Nil Nil Nil 3 Nil Nil) 
 
We compute the average of the history, Vm:  
Vm=(2.83 4.65 4.5 2.53 Nil 2.55 6.7 2 5 2) 
 
We search for pieces that verify the complex 

condition: (Kind of music = 'Pop') AND (Num-
ber of the artist ='1') AND (Album ID ='2') AND 
(Impressions vector is closest to Vm according to 
the Euclidean distance). 

If the search is successful, then the result is 
optimal. Otherwise, we search pieces that corres-
pond to the second condition: ((Kind of music = 
'Pop') OR (Number of the artist ='1') OR (Album 
ID ='2')) AND (Impressions vector is closest to 
Vm according to the Euclidean distance). 

We refined this search through other combina-
tions formed by the conditions (a), (b), (c), (d) 
and (e) and differentiated by the OR and AND 
operators. 

6 Multilingual porting 

To build our content extractor, we started from a 
content extractor for French we had previously 
develop for the same domain, integrated it into 
IMRS-g, and extended it as explained above 
(more information type, and fuzzy sets). We then 
ported it to English and to Arabic, using the sec-

ond technique of external porting (when one has 
access to the internal representation). 

Seeing the large percentage of common code 
to the 3 content extractors obtained, we factor-
ised it and obtained a unique content extractor 
handling input utterances in the music domain in 
our 3 target languages: French, English and Ara-
bic. This technique is perhaps not generalizable, 
but it works for this sub-language, which is very 
small, and for the simple task of extracting in-
formation representable in very small textual 
fragments. 

Here are some examples of results for Arabic, 
French and English: 
Exemple_Ar 1 : //je veux un 
morceau de musique très calme 
Musique_Ar 1: musique-spec=(nil 7,0 nil nil 
nil nil nil nil nil nil) 

Exemple_Ar 2 : //je veux 
un morceau de musique un peu bruité 
Musique_Ar 2: musique-spec=(3,0 nil nil nil 
nil nil nil nil nil nil) 
Exemple_Fr 1:je veux un morceau de musique 
calme et très solennel 
Musique_Fr 1: musique-spec=(nil 6,0 nil nil 
7,0 nil nil nil nil nil) 
Exemple_Fr 2:je veux un morceau de musique 
assez fort et clair 
Musique_Fr 2: musique-spec=(3,0 nil nil 6,0 
nil nil nil nil nil nil) 
Exemple_En 1:I want a calm and very solemn 
music 
Musique_En 1: music-spec=(nil 6,0 nil nil 7,0 
nil nil nil nil nil) 
Exemple_En 2:I want a little noisy and bright 
music 
Musique_En 2: music-spec=(3,0 nil nil 6,0 nil 
nil nil nil nil nil) 

Tableau 1: Examples of results of IMRS-g for Arabic, 
French and English 

Conclusion 
We have presented several possible methods for 
"porting" applications based on handling the con-
tent of spontaneous NL messages in a "native" 
language L1 into another language, L2.  In a pre-
vious paper, we described experiments and 
evaluations of these methods. 

We tried to do an “end-to-end” evaluation of 
porting IMRS by building a website that pro-
poses to engage people in evaluation of a set of 
music pieces, thereby offering them to search for 

86



music in different possible modes. To that effect, 
we have produced a functional Web site  
(http://www-
clips.imag.fr/geta/User/najeh.hajlaoui/Musique/). 
To date, the evaluation has been done only for 
French. More than 30 users have participated, 
perhaps because they were rewarded in a sense: 
as a kind of compensation, each user could listen 
to appropriate music adapted to his way of per-
ception and taste. The use of fuzzy logic proved 
useful and was perhaps even necessary to give 
some freedom of choice of impressions to users. 

Acknowledgments  
We thank Yin Xiang, who dedicated his TER 
internship during his master in CS to the study 
and implemention of the IMRS-g system. 

We would also like to thank our reviewers, 
who made many constructive remarks and sug-
gestions, which we gladly incorporated in this 
new version of the paper. 

References  
Daoud, D. M. (2006). It is necessary and possible to 

build (multilingual) NL-based restricted e-
commerce systems with mixed sublanguage and 
contend-oriented methods. Thèse. Université Jo-
seph Fourier. Grenoble, France. September 23, 
2006. 296 p. 

Grishman, R. and R. Kittredge. (1986). Analyzing 
language in restricted domains. Hillsdale NJ. Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates. 248 p.  

Hajlaoui, N. (2008) Multilinguïsation de systèmes de 
e-commerce traitant des énoncés spontanés en 
langue naturelle. Thèse. Université Joseph Fourier. 
Grenoble. 25 septembre 2008. 318 p. 

Harris, Z. (1968). Mathematical structures of lan-
guage. in The Mathematical Gazette. Vol. 54(388): 
pp. 173-174. May, 1970. 

Kittredge, R. (1978). Textual cohesion within sublan-
guages: implications for automatic analysis and 
synthesis. Proc. Coling-78. Bergen, Norvège. Au-
gust 14-18, 1978. Vol. 1/1.  

Kittredge, R. (1982). Variation and Homogeneity of 
Sublanguages. in Sublanguage - Studies of Lan-
guage in Restricted Semantic Domains. Walter de 
Gruyter. Berlin / New York. 20 p.   

Kittredge, R. (1993). Sublanguage Analysis for Natu-
ral Language Processing. Proc. First Symposium 

on Natural Language Processing. Thailand, Bang-
kok pp. 69-83.  

Kittredge, R. and J. Lehrberger (1982a). Sublanguage 
- Studies of language in restricted semantic do-
main. Walter de Gruyter. Berlin / New York. 

Kumamoto, T. (2004). Design and Implementation of 
Natural Language Interface for Impression-based 
Music-Retrieval Systems. Knowledge-Based Intel-
ligent Information and Engineering Systems. 
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg. October 14, 2004. 
Vol. 3214/2004:  pp. 139-147.  

Kumamoto, T. (2007). A Natural Language Dialogue 
System for Impression-based Music-Retrieval.  
Proc. CICLING-07 (Computational Linguistics and 
Intelligent Text Processing). Mexico. February 12-
24, 2007. 12 p.  

Kumamoto, T. and K. Ohta (2003). Design and De-
velopment of Natural Language Interface for an 
Impression-based Music Retrieval System. in Joho 
Shori Gakkai Kenkyu Hokoku. Vol. 4(NL-153): 
pp. 97-104. 

Kurohashi, S. and M. Nagao (1999) Manual for Japa-
nese Morphological Analysis System JUMAN. Rap. 
Language Media Lab. School of Informatics, 
Kyoto University. Kyoto, Japan. November 1999. 

Uchida, H., M. Zhu, et al. (2005-2006). Universal 
Networking Language 10 2-8399-0128-5. 218 p. 

Uchida, H. and M. Zhu (1999). Enconverter 
Specifications, UNU/IAS UNL Center, 33 p. 

Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Con-
trol 8: pp. 338-353. 

87


