










































Temporal Expressions Extraction in SMS messages


Proceedings of the Workshop on Information Extraction and Knowledge Acquisition, pages 41–44,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011.

Temporal Expressions Extraction in SMS messages

Stéphanie Weiser Louise-Amélie Cougnon
CENTAL - Institut Langage et Communication - UCLouvain

1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
{stephanie.weiser, louise-amelie.cougnon, patrick.watrin}@uclouvain.be

Patrick Watrin

Abstract

This paper presents a tool for extracting
and normalizing temporal expressions in
SMS messages in order to automatically
fill in an electronic calendar. The ex-
traction process is based on a library of
finite-state transducers that identify tem-
poral structures and annotate the compo-
nents needed for the time normalization
task. An initial evaluation puts recall at
0.659 and precision at 0.795.

1 Introduction

In this study, the extraction of temporal informa-
tion in SMS messages is regarded as a precondi-
tion to the development of an application for the
construction of a calendar. This application in-
cludes the automatic analysis of meetings and the
pre-filling of calendar events. We consider the lan-
guage of temporal expression in SMS messages as
a sublanguage which forms a finite subset of the
whole language at the syntactic and lexical levels
(Harris, 1968).

Most of the recent studies (Beaufort et al., 2010;
Kobus et al., 2008; Aw et al., 2006) do not process
SMS messages directly. They use a heavy pre-
processing step in order to standardize the SMS
script. We do not deny the relevance of the translit-
eration process for complex applications such as
SMS messages vocalisation. However, within the
framework of our project, we show that, for the ex-
traction of temporal expressions, a normalization
phase is not needed, as we tend to simply iden-
tify the boundaries of precise and particular sur-
face structures.

Before exploring the extraction task (Section 3),
we briefly introduce the corpus used (Section 2).
The results of the evaluation we performed are
outlined in Section 4, while Section 5 shows the
prospects that emerge from this preliminary work.

2 SMS Corpus

2.1 Corpus-based study
The data used for this study is a corpus of
30,000 SMS messages (Fairon et al., 2006a) that
were gathered following the strict sms4science
collection methodology (Fairon et al., 2006b).
sms4science is an international project that pro-
motes the study of a substantial corpus of spon-
taneous text messages: users are asked to send a
copy of text messages that they have already sent
to a real addressee in a genuine communication
situation. The 30,000 SMS messages corpus that
constitutes the raw material for this study was col-
lected in 2004 in the French-speaking part of Bel-
gium; it was semi automatically anonymized and
manually normalized1 at the Université catholique
de Louvain.

2.2 SMS Script Characteristics
We prefer not to talk about SMS language but
about SMS script as it is not a new type of lan-
guage but a new written practice through a new
communication medium (Cougnon and Ledegen,
2010). This new practice shows various speci-
ficities, notably it seems to inhibit fear-related
behaviour in writing — it erases traditional so-
cial, professional and academic demands. The
addressee’s physical absence, in addition to the
delayed character of the media, encourages SMS
users to play with language and to move away
from standard language2. At a syntactical level,
one would identify some similarities with French
oral syntax such as the recurrent lack of ne nega-
tion marker and the absence of pronouns at the
beginning of sentences. We follow a more nu-
anced path: it appears that these characteristics

1“SMS normalization consists in rewriting an SMS text
using a more conventional spelling, in order to make it more
readable for a human or for a machine” (Yvon, 2008).

2Standard language can be understood as a graphic and
syntactic demand and/or as a register standard.

41



are not related to the communication medium
(oral/written) but to the communication situation
(formal/casual) and are more related to register, in
a Koch and Österreicher (1985) manner. Inspired
by the theory of these authors, we consider there is
a continuum between intimacy (Nähesprache) and
distance (Distanzsprache) in the SMS communi-
cation model (Cougnon and Ledegen, 2010).

In addition to these variations to the norm, SMS
script is also strongly influenced by social and re-
gional features which increase the linguistic dis-
parity (as in On va au ciné à soir/au soir/ce soir
(in Canada/Belgium/France) - “We’re going to the
movies tonight”). Even though these variations are
versatile, they form a finite set which can be for-
malised within a grammar.

3 Extraction of Temporal Expressions

In natural language processing, and particularly in
the field of information retrieval and extraction,
temporal expressions have been widely studied.
The annotation (Pustejovsky et al., 2010; Bittar,
2010) as well as the extraction process (Weiser,
2010; Kevers, 2011) have often been addressed.
Indeed, both are needed if we want to compute
a date representation from the textual information
(Pan and Hobbs, 2006).

These studies offer a wide range of solutions
to automatically process temporal information, al-
though they limit their experiments to standard
language and don’t take into account language
variation. Nevertheless, some texts that could
benefit from temporal analysis do not follow the
norms of a standard language, notably an impor-
tant part of CMC (Computer Mediated Commu-
nication) like e-mails, chats, social networks. . . In
this study, we intend to determine if the methods
used for standard language can be applied to more
informal languages with specific characteristics,
such as SMS script.

3.1 Typology of Temporal Expression
For an information extraction system, the typol-
ogy of the data to be extracted is very important.
We based this study on the typology developed by
Kevers (2011) on standard language in which we
selected the categories that are useful for our SMS
temporal extraction purpose.

3.1.1 Existing Typology
Kevers (2011) classifies temporal information fol-
lowing four criteria that combine to give 16 cate-

gories: punctual or durative, absolute or relative,
precise or fuzzy, unique or repetitive. For exam-
ple, Le 22 octobre 2010 is an expression which
is punctual, absolute, precise and unique, whereas
Le 22 octobre 2010 vers 20h (that has a differ-
ent granularity) is punctual, absolute, fuzzy and
unique.

This typology is very rich as it includes all
types of temporal expressions found in standard
(French) written language like dates, durations (du
20 juin au 30 juillet - “from June the 20th to July
the 30th ”), relative data (le jour d’avant “the pre-
vious day”), etc. However, not everything is useful
for SMS temporal extraction.

3.1.2 Temporal Expressions to be Extracted
for our Application

Our aim is to build an application to identify tem-
poral information related to meetings or events in
SMS messages. We do not need to extract past in-
formation (like hier - “yesterday” or la semaine
dernière - “last week” or other information like
dors bien cette nuit - “sleep well tonight”). More
than that, as these expressions will serve as trig-
gers for event extraction, the recognition of irrel-
evant sequences could lead to the identification of
“false” candidates.

The information fundamental to this research
and this application concerns meetings or events
that can take place in an agenda. This is the only
criterion that we used to determine the temporal
expressions to extract (we call it the “calendar cri-
terion”). The temporal expressions to be extracted
can be:

• a time: à 18h - “at 6:00”; de 14h à 18h - “from 2 to 6”
• a date: le 22 octobre - “on October the 22nd”
• a relative moment (day, part of day): aujourd’hui

- “today”; maintenant - “now”; mardi - “Tuesday”;
mardi prochain - “next Tuesday”; ce soir - “tonight”;
dans 5 minutes - “in 5 minutes”

• an implicit expression: à mardi - “see you on Tues-
day”; à demain - “see you tomorrow”.

According to the Kevers (2011) classification,
the categories that are concerned by SMS mes-
sages events planning are PRPU (punctual, rela-
tive, precise, unique), DRPU (durative, relative,
precise, unique) and PRFU (punctual, relative,
fuzzy, unique). 13 categories from the original
typology are not taken into account. We created
a new category to deal with expressions such as
à demain - “see you tomorrow” which imply that
“something” will happen the next day. These ex-
pressions, which are typical of the dialogues found

42



in SMS messages, were not dealt with by Kevers
as the corpus he studied did not contain dialogues.

3.2 Sublanguage of Temporal Expressions in
SMS

The study of Temporal Expressions in SMS mes-
sages has lead us to the observation that grammars
which have been created for standard language can
be applied to a specific sublanguage, at least for
the temporal expressions in SMS messages.

3.2.1 Comparison with SMS Script
In order to compare temporal expressions in stan-
dard language with those in SMS script, we ap-
plied the temporal grammars developed by Kev-
ers (2011) for standard French to the normalized
version of an extract of the SMS corpus (1,000
SMS messages) and compared the original SMS
form and the normalized form. We found that the
syntax remains the same and that only the lexicon
changes. A lot of variations are introduced in SMS
script, but, concerning the sublanguage of tempo-
ral expressions, they only affect the form of the
words and not the word order, the syntax or the
semantics.

3.2.2 Adaptation of Existing Grammars -
Lexical Characteristics

As we have just mentioned, the adaptation of ex-
isting grammars to extract temporal information in
SMS concerns the lexical level. As SMS messages
are well known for their lexical productivity, most
of the common words are subject to variation. For
example demain (tomorrow) is usually invariable
but can take many forms in SMS: 2m1, dem1, dm1,
dmain . . . In order to solve this problem we built a
specialized lexicon in which each variation (2m1)
is linked to a standard lemma (demain), a POS tag
(ADV for adverb) and, in some cases, some seman-
tic features (Time): {2m1,demain.ADV+Time}.

One may expect the lexicon to require constant
updating, as it is intended to capture phenomena
that rely on human linguistic creativity, which is
potentially boundless. However, this theoretical
assumption is refuted by our experiments which
show that even if these forms vary consequently,
they form a finite lexical set, respecting the clo-
sure property of sublanguages (Harris, 1968).

3.2.3 Resources Creation
Using the extracted expressions in normalized
SMS messages, we have listed all the forms for

all the words that appear in a temporal expres-
sion. This has lead to a preliminary dictionary
composed of 177 forms, for 55 lemmas. This dic-
tionary still needs to be extended but covers the
main temporal expressions variants.

The grammar developed for standard French
has been adapted: the invariable words have been
lemmatized in order to match the variations listed
in our dictionary, the sub-graphs that need to be
applied have been selected and new sub-graphs
have been created to cover the temporal expres-
sions that are specific to SMS and do not appear in
the original grammar (à demain - “see you tomor-
row”).

4 Evaluation

We performed an evaluation for the task of tempo-
ral expression extraction. We built an evaluation
corpus and manually annotated the temporal ex-
pressions. Results in terms of precison and recall
are provided in Section 4.2.

4.1 Evaluation Corpus

The evaluation corpus is composed of 442 SMS
messages containing temporal expressions, fol-
lowing the “calendar criterion”. Some SMS mes-
sages contain more than one temporal expression
so the total number of temporal expressions is 666.

4.2 Results

For the task of temporal expression extrac-
tion, we obtained a recall of 0.659 and a pre-
cision of 0.795. Examples of well recog-
nized expressions are, following the classifi-
cation presented in Section 3.1.2 : N’oubliez
pas: ciné Pi {ce soir,.ADV+Time+PRPU} {à
20H,.ADV+Time+PRPU} aux locaux! - “Don’t
forget: movie Pi tonight at 8:00 at the of-
fice!” (PRPU), cela arrangeait pierre de venir
voir asseliane {demain,.ADV+Time+PRPU} {en-
tre 11h et midi,.ADV+Time+DRPU} - “it would
suit pierre to come and see asseliane tomorrow
between 11:00 and noon” (DRPU), on sera à la
maison {vers cinq h trente,.ADV+Time+PRFU} -
“we’ll be home around 5:30” (PRFU), à demain -
“see you tomorrow”(new category). The reasons
behind missing expressions or incomplete annota-
tions are of three types. (i) The format of the ex-
pressions was not predicted and is not taken into
account by the grammar, e.g. à 8.30 - 9.00; (ii) the
variant of a word is missing from the dictionary,

43



e.g. dimanci for dimanche - “Sunday”; (iii) there
is a “mistake” in the SMS, e.g. un peu près 15
minutes instead of à peu près 15 minutes - “about
15 minutes”. The results can easily be improved
by working on the first two sources of errors (by
extending grammars and dictionaries), while the
third source of errors is more problematic, because
they are really unpredictable.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

This preliminary study shows that the linguistic
specificities of the SMS sublanguage of temporal
expressions can be structured in order to eliminate
the need for a transliteration process which can
lead to errors that are difficult to deal with dur-
ing the extraction process itself. This study points
to numerous opportunities for future work as in-
formal texts, such as informal texts such as SMS
but also Tweets, chats, e-mails and Facebook sta-
tus updates, become increasingly present and con-
tain a lot of information that could be automati-
cally processed.

We intend to apply this research to a calendar
application that would find in an SMS all the data
about events and time in order to open the calendar
on the right date and help the user to fill it in. This
approach suggests two complementary steps that
we are currently working on:

• Extracting the event itself: it implies find-
ing the subject (activity, event), the actants
(in SMS, it is mostly the sender and the ad-
dressee), the time and place. On a linguistic
level, we will try to find out if the properties
of the sublanguage (a finite list of graphic and
syntactic variations that can be formalized)
can also be applied to the different items of
events (place, subject, actants).

• Importing the event in a calendar: the im-
portant task in filling a calendar is to open it
on the right date (and time). In order to do
this, temporal expressions extracted from the
SMS needs to be standardized and formalized
in “calendar information” format.

References
AiTi Aw, Min Zhang, Juan Xiao, and Jian Su. 2006. A

phrase-based statistical model for sms text normal-
ization. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006,
COLING-ACL ’06, pages 33–40, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Richard Beaufort, Sophie Roekhaut, Louise-Amélie
Cougnon, and Cédrick Fairon. 2010. A hybrid

rule/model-based finite-state framework for normal-
izing SMS messages. In Proceedings of ACL 2010,
pages 770–779.

André Bittar. 2010. Building a TimeBank for French:
A Reference Corpus Annotated According to the
ISO-TimeML Standard. Ph.D. thesis, Université
Paris Diderot (Paris 7).

Louise-Amélie Cougnon and Gudrun Ledegen. 2010.
C’est écrire comme je parle. Une étude compara-
tiste de variétés de français dans l’écrit sms. In
M. Abecassis et G. Ledegen, editor, Les voix des
Français, volume 2, Modern French Identities, 94,
pages 39–57. Peter Lang.

Cédrick Fairon, Jean-René Klein, and Sébastien Pau-
mier. 2006a. Le corpus SMS pour la science. Base
de données de 30.000 SMS et logiciels de consul-
tation. CD-Rom, Louvain-la-Neuve, P.U.Louvain,
Cahiers du Cental, 3.2.

Cédrick Fairon, Jean-René Klein, and Sébastien Pau-
mier. 2006b. Le langage SMS. Louvain-la-Neuve,
P.U.Louvain, Cahiers du Cental, 3.1.

Zellig S. Harris. 1968. Mathematical Structures of
Language. Wiley-Interscience.

Laurent Kevers. 2011. Accès sémantique
aux bases de données documentaires. Techniques
symboliques de traitement automatique du lan-
gage pour l’indexation thématique et l’extraction
d’informations temporelles. Ph.D. thesis, Université
Catholique de Louvain.

C. Kobus, F. Yvon, and G. Damnati. 2008. Normaliz-
ing SMS : are two metaphors better than one ? In
Proceedings of COLING 2008, pages 441–448.

Peter Koch and Wulf Österreicher. 1985. Sprache
der Nähe – Sprache der Distanz. Mündlichkeit und
Schriftlichkeit im Spannungsfeld von Sprachtheorie
und Sprachgeschichte. Romanistisches Jahrbuch,
36:15–43.

Feng Pan and Jerry R. Hobbs. 2006. Temporal arith-
metic mixing months and days. In In Proceedings of
the 13th International Symposium on Temporal Rep-
resentation and Reasoning (TIME), pages 212–217.
IEEE Computer Society.

James Pustejovsky, Kiyong Lee, Harry Bunt, and Lau-
rent Romary. 2010. ISO-TimeML: An International
Standard for Semantic Annotation. In LREC 2010,
Malta.

Stéphanie Weiser. 2010. Repérage et typage
d’expressions temporelles pour l’annotation séman-
tique automatique de pages Web - Application au e-
tourisme. Ph.D. thesis, Université Paris Ouest Nan-
terre la Défense.

François Yvon. 2008. Reorthography of SMS
messages. Technical report, IMSI/CNRS, Orsay,
France.

44


