










































Analysis of the Hindi Proposition Bank using Dependency Structure


Proceedings of the Fifth Law Workshop (LAW V), pages 21–29,
Portland, Oregon, 23-24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Analysis of the Hindi Proposition Bank using Dependency Structure

Ashwini Vaidya Jinho D. Choi Martha Palmer Bhuvana Narasimhan
Institute of Cognitive Science

University of Colorado at Boulder
{vaidyaa,choijd,mpalmer,narasimb}@colorado.edu

Abstract

This paper makes two contributions. First, we
describe the Hindi Proposition Bank that con-
tains annotations of predicate argument struc-
tures of verb predicates. Unlike PropBanks
in most other languages, the Hind PropBank
is annotated on top of dependency structure,
the Hindi Dependency Treebank. We explore
the similarities between dependency and pred-
icate argument structures, so the PropBank an-
notation can be faster and more accurate. Sec-
ond, we present a probabilistic rule-based sys-
tem that maps syntactic dependents to seman-
tic arguments. With simple rules, we classify
about 47% of the entire PropBank arguments
with over 90% confidence. These preliminary
results are promising; they show how well
these two frameworks are correlated. This can
also be used to speed up our annotations.

1 Introduction

Proposition Bank (from now on, PropBank) is a cor-
pus in which the arguments of each verb predicate
are annotated with their semantic roles (Palmer et
al., 2005). PropBank annotation has been carried
out in several languages; most of them are annotated
on top of Penn Treebank style phrase structure (Xue
and Palmer, 2003; Palmer et al., 2008). However, a
different grammatical analysis has been used for the
Hindi PropBank annotation, dependency structure,
which may be particularly suited for the analysis of
flexible word order languages such as Hindi.

As a syntactic corpus, we use the Hindi Depen-
dency Treebank (Bhatt et al., 2009). Using de-
pendency structure has some advantages. First, se-

mantic arguments1 can be marked explicitly on the
syntactic trees, so annotations of the predicate ar-
gument structure can be more consistent with the
dependency structure. Second, the Hindi Depen-
dency Treebank provides a rich set of dependency
relations that capture the syntactic-semantic infor-
mation. This facilitates mappings between syntac-
tic dependents and semantic arguments. A success-
ful mapping would reduce the annotation effort, im-
prove the inter-annotator agreement, and guide a full
fledged semantic role labeling task.

In this paper, we briefly describe our annotation
work on the Hindi PropBank, and suggest mappings
between syntactic and semantic arguments based on
linguistic intuitions. We also present a probabilistic
rule-based system that uses three types of rules to
arrive at mappings between syntactic and semantic
arguments. Our experiments show some promising
results; these mappings illustrate how well those two
frameworks are correlated, and can also be used to
speed up the PropBank annotation.

2 Description of the Hindi PropBank

2.1 Background

The Hindi PropBank is part of a multi-dimensional
and multi-layered resource creation effort for the
Hindi-Urdu language (Bhatt et al., 2009). This
multi-layered corpus includes both dependency an-
notation as well as lexical semantic information in
the form of PropBank. The corpus also produces
phrase structure representations in addition to de-

1The term ’semantic argument’ is used to indicate all num-
bered arguments as well as modifiers in PropBank.

21



pendency structure. The Hindi Dependency Tree-
bank has created an annotation scheme for Hindi
by adapting labels from Panini’s Sanskrit gram-
mar (also known as CPG: Computational Paninian
Grammar; see Begum et al. (2008)). Previous work
has demonstrated that the English PropBank tagset
is quite similar to English dependency trees anno-
tated with the Paninian labels (Vaidya et al., 2009).
PropBank has also been mapped to other depen-
dency schemes such as Functional Generative De-
scription (Cinkova, 2006).

2.2 Hindi Dependency Treebank

The Hindi Dependency Treebank (HDT) includes
morphological, part-of-speech and chunking infor-
mation as well as dependency relations. These are
represented in the Shakti Standard Format (SSF; see
Bharati et al. (2007)). The dependency labels de-
pict relations between chunks, which are “minimal
phrases consisting of correlated, inseparable enti-
ties” (Bharati et al., 2006), so they are not neces-
sarily individual words. The annotation of chunks
also assumes that intra-chunk dependencies can be
extracted automatically (Husain et al., 2010).

The dependency tagset consists of about 43 labels,
which can be grouped into three categories: depen-
dency relation labels, modifier labels, and labels for
non-dependencies (Bharati et al., 2009). PropBank
is mainly concerned with those labels depicting de-
pendencies in the domain of locality of verb predi-
cates. The dependency relation labels are based on
the notion of ‘karaka’, defined as “the role played by
a participant in an action”. The karaka labels, k1-5,
are centered around the verb’s meaning. There are
other labels such as rt (purpose) or k7t (location)
that are independent of the verb’s meaning.

2.3 Annotating the Hindi PropBank

The Hindi PropBank (HPB) contains the labeling of
semantic roles, which are defined on a verb-by-verb
basis. The description at the verb-specific level is
fine-grained; e.g., ‘hitter’ and ‘hittee’. These verb-
specific roles are then grouped into broader cate-
gories using numbered arguments (ARG#). Each
verb can also have modifiers not specific to the verb
(ARGM*). The annotation process takes place in two
stages: the creation of frameset files for individual
verb types, and the annotation of predicate argu-

ment structures for each verb instance. As annota-
tion tools, we use Cornerstone and Jubilee (Choi et
al., 2010a; Choi et al., 2010b). The annotation is
done on the HDT; following the dependency anno-
tation, PropBank annotates each verb’s syntactic de-
pendents as their semantic arguments at the chunk
level. Chunked trees are conveniently displayed for
annotators in Jubilee. PropBank annotations gener-
ated in Jubilee can also be easily projected onto the
SSF format of the original dependency trees.

The HPB currently consists of 24 labels including
both numbered arguments and modifiers (Table 1).
In certain respects, the HPB labels make some dis-
tinctions that are not made in some other language
such as English. For instance, ARG2 is subdivided
into labels with function tags, in order to avoid
ARG2 from being semantically overloaded (Yi,
2007). ARGC and ARGAmark the arguments of mor-
phological causatives in Hindi, which is different
from the ARG0 notion of ‘causer’. We also intro-
duce two labels to represent the complex predicate
constructions: ARGM-VLV and ARGM-PRX.

Label Description
ARG0 agent, causer, experiencer
ARG1 patient, theme, undergoer
ARG2 beneficiary
ARG3 instrument
ARG2-ATR attribute ARG2-GOL goal
ARG2-LOC location ARG2-SOU source
ARGC causer
ARGA secondary causer
ARGM-VLV verb-verb construction
ARGM-PRX noun-verb construction2

ARGM-ADV adverb ARGM-CAU cause
ARGM-DIR direction ARGM-DIS discourse
ARGM-EXT extent ARGM-LOC location
ARGM-MNR manner ARGM-MNS means
ARGM-MOD modal ARGM-NEG negation
ARGM-PRP purpose ARGM-TMP temporal

Table 1: Hindi PropBank labels.

2.4 Empty arguments in the Hindi PropBank

The HDT and HPB layers have different ways of
handling empty categories (Bhatia et al., 2010).
HPB inserts empty arguments such as PRO (empty
subject of a non-finite clause), RELPRO (empty

22



relative pronoun), pro (pro-drop argument), and
gap-pro (gapped argument). HPB annotates syn-
tactic relations between its semantic roles, notably
co-indexation of the empty argument PRO as well as
gap-pro. The example in Figure 1 shows that Mo-
han and PRO are co-indexed; thus, Mohan becomes
ARG0 of read via the empty argument PRO. There is
no dependency link between PRO and read because
PRO is inserted only in the PropBank layer.

Mohan wanted to read a book

मोहन_% PRO क' ताब चाही
Mohan_ERG

k1
vmod

ARG1
ARG0
ARG0

पढ़नी
PRO book read want

k2

ARG1

Figure 1: Empty argument example. The upper and lower
edges indicate HDT and HPB labels, respectively.

3 Comparisons between syntactic and
semantic arguments

In this section, we describe the mappings between
HDT and HPB labels based on our linguistic intu-
itions. We show that there are several broad similar-
ities between two tagsets. These mappings form the
basis for our linguistically motivated rules in Sec-
tion 4.2.3. In section 5.5, we analyze whether the
intuitions discussed in this section are borne out by
the results of our probabilistic rule-based system.

3.1 Numbered arguments

The numbered arguments correspond to ARG0-3,
including function tags associated with ARG2. In
PropBank, ARG0 and ARG1 are conceived as
framework-independent labels, closely associated
with Dowty’s Proto-roles (Palmer et al., 2010). For
instance, ARG0 corresponds to the agent, causer, or
experiencer, whether it is realized as the subject of
an active construction or as the object of an adjunct
(by phrase) of the corresponding passive. In this re-
spect, ARG0 and ARG1 are very similar to k1 and
k2 in HDT, which are annotated based on their se-
mantic roles, not their grammatical relation. On the
other hand, HDT treats the following sentences sim-
ilarly, whereas PropBank does not:

• The boy broke the window.
• The window broke.

The boy and the window are both considered k1 for
HDT, whereas PropBank labels the boy as ARG0 and
The window as ARG1. The window is not consid-
ered a primary causer as the verb is unaccusative for
Propbank. For HDT, the notion of unaccusativity is
not taken into consideration. This is an important
distinction that needs to be considered while carry-
ing out the mapping. k1 is thus ambiguous between
ARG0 and ARG1. Also, HDT makes a distinction
between Experiencer subjects of certain verbs, label-
ing them as k4a. As PropBank does not make such
a distinction, k4a maps to ARG0. The Experiencer
subject information is included in the corresponding
frameset files of the verbs. The mappings to ARG0
and ARG1 would be accurate only if they make use
of specific verb information. The mappings for other
numbered arguments as well as ARGC and ARGA are
given in Table 2.

HDT label HPB label
k1 (karta); k4a (experiencer) Arg0
k2 (karma) Arg1
k4 (beneficiary) Arg2
k1s (attribute) Arg2-ATR
k5 (source) Arg2-SOU
k2p (goal) Arg2-GOL
k3 (instrument) Arg3
mk1 (causer) ArgC
pk1 (secondary causer) ArgA

Table 2: Mappings to the HPB numbered arguments.

Note that in HDT annotation practice, k3 and k5
tend to be interpreted in a broad fashion such that
they map not only to ARG3 and ARG2-SOU, but also
to ARGM-MNS and ARGM-LOC (Vaidya and Husain,
2011). Hence, a one-to-one mapping for these la-
bels is not possible. Furthermore, the occurrence of
morphological causatives (ARGC and ARGA) is fairly
low so that we may not be able to test the accuracy
of these mappings with the current data.

3.2 Modifiers
The modifiers in PropBank are quite similar in their
definitions to certain HDT labels. We expect a fairly
high mapping accuracy, especially as these are not
verb-specific. Table 3 shows mappings between

23



HDT labels and HPB modifiers. A problematic map-
ping could be ARGM-MNR, which is quite coarse-
grained in PropBank, applying not only to adverbs
of manner, but also to infinitival adjunct clauses.

HDT label HPB label
sent-adv (epistemic adv) ArgM-ADV
rh (cause/reason) ArgM-CAU
rd (direction) ArgM-DIR
rad (discourse) ArgM-DIS
k7p (location) ArgM-LOC
adv (manner adv) ArgM-MNR
rt (purpose) ArgM-PRP
k7t (time) ArgM-TMP

Table 3: Mappings to the HPB modifiers.

3.3 Simple and complex predicates
HPB distinguishes annotations between simple and
complex predicates. Simple predicates consist of
only a single verb whereas complex predicates con-
sist of a light verb and a pre-verbal element. The
complex predicates are identified with a special label
ARGM-PRX (ARGument-PRedicating eXpresstion),
which is being used for all light verb annotations
in PropBank (Hwang et al., 2010). Figure 2 shows
an example of the predicating noun mention anno-
tated as ARGM-PRX, used with come. The predicat-
ing noun also has its own argument, matter of, in-
dicated with the HDT label r6-k1. The HDT has
two labels, r6-k1 and r6-k2, for the arguments of
the predicating noun. Hence, the argument span for
complex predicates includes not only direct depen-
dents of the verb but also dependents of the noun.

स"नवाई_'_दौरान ब"धवार_को माम0_का जि 3_भी
hearing_of_during Wed._of matter_of mention_to

k7t
k7t

pof

ARGM-PRX
ARG1

ARGM-TMP

come
आया

r6-k1

ARGM-TMP

During the hearing on Wednesday, the matter was mentioned

Figure 2: Complex predicate example.

The ARGM-PRX label usually overlaps with the
HDT label pof, indicating a ‘part of units’ as pre-

verbal elements in complex predicates. However, in
certain cases, HPB has its own analysis for noun-
verb complex predicates. Hence, not all the nom-
inals labeled pof are labeled as ARGM-PRX. In
the example in Figure 3, the noun chunk important
progress is not considered to be an ARGM-PRX by
HPB (in this example, we have pragati hona; (lit)
progess be; to progress). The nominal for PropBank
is in fact ARG1 of the verb be, rather than a com-
posite on the verb. Additional evidence for this is
that neither the nominal nor the light verb seem to
project arguments of their own.

Important progress has been made in this work

इस_काम_& 'ई_)

k7p
pof

ARG1
ARGM-LOC

मह+वप. /ण_1ग त4
this_work_LOC important_progress be_PRES

Figure 3: HDT vs. HPB on complex predicates.

4 Automatic mapping of HDT to HPB

Mapping between syntactic and semantic structures
has been attempted in other languages. The Penn
English and Chinese Treebanks consist of several se-
mantic roles (e.g., locative, temporal) annotated on
top of Penn Treebank style phrase structure (Marcus
et al., 1994; Xue and Palmer, 2009). The Chinese
PropBank specifies mappings between syntactic and
semantic arguments in frameset files (e.g., SBJ →
ARG0) that can be used for automatic mapping (Xue
and Palmer, 2003). However, these Chinese map-
pings are limited to certain types of syntactic argu-
ments (mostly subjects and objects). Moreover, se-
mantic annotations on the Treebanks are done inde-
pendently from PropBank annotations, which causes
disagreement between the two structures.

Dependency structure transparently encodes rela-
tions between predicates and their arguments, which
facilitates mappings between syntactic and seman-
tic arguments. Hajičová and Kučerová (2002) tried
to project PropBank semantic roles onto the Prague
Dependency Treebank, and showed that the projec-
tion is not trivial. The same may be true to our case;
however, our goal is not to achieve complete map-
pings between syntactic and semantic arguments,

24



but to find a useful set of mappings that can speed
up our annotation. These mappings will be applied
to our future data as a pre-annotation stage, so that
annotators do not need to annotate arguments that
have already been automatically labeled by our sys-
tem. Thus, it is important to find mappings with high
precision and reasonably good recall.

In this section, we present a probabilistic rule-
based system that identifies and classifies semantic
arguments in the HPB using syntactic dependents in
the HDT. This is still preliminary work; our system
is expected to improve as we annotate more data and
do more error analysis.

4.1 Argument identification

Identifying semantic arguments of each verb pred-
icate is relatively easy given the dependency Tree-
bank. For each verb predicate, we consider all syn-
tactic dependents of the predicate as its semantic
arguments (Figure 4). For complex predicates, we
consider the syntactic dependents of both the verb
and the predicating noun (cf. Section 3.3).

क" शोरी ह र" (ार_ * द" ,ली आई_ थी
Kishori Haridwar_from Delhi come_be

k1
k5

k2p

ARG2-GOL
ARG2-SOU

ARG0

Kishori came from Haridwar to Delhi

Figure 4: Simple predicate example.

With our heuristics, we get a precision of 99.11%,
a recall of 95.50%, and an F1-score of 97.27% for
argument identification. Such a high precision is
expected as the annotation guidelines for HDT and
HPB generally follow the same principles of iden-
tifying syntactic and semantic arguments of a verb.
About 4.5% of semantic arguments are not identi-
fied by our method. Table 4 shows distributions of
the most frequent non-identified arguments.

Label Dist. Label Dist. Label Dist.
ARG0 3.21 ARG1 0.90 ARG2∗ 0.09

Table 4: Distributions of non-identified arguments caused
by PropBank empty categories (in %).

Most of the non-identified argument are antecedents
of PropBank empty arguments. As shown in Fig-
ure 1, the PropBank empty argument has no depen-
dency link to the verb predicate. Identifying such
arguments requires a task of empty category reso-
lution, which will be explored as future work. Fur-
thermore, we do not try to identify PropBank empty
arguments for now, which will also be explored later.

4.2 Argument classification

Given the identified semantic arguments, we classify
their semantic roles. Argument classification is done
by using three types of rules. Deterministic rules are
heuristics that are straightforward given dependency
structure. Empirically-derived rules are generated
by measuring statistics of dependency features in as-
sociation with semantic roles. Finally, linguistically-
motivated rules are derived from our linguistic intu-
itions. Each type of rule has its own strength; how
to combine them is the art we need to explore.

4.2.1 Deterministic rule
Only one deterministic rule is used in our system.
When an identified argument has a pof dependency
relation with its predicate, we classify the argu-
ment as ARGM-PRX. This emphasizes the advan-
tage of using our dependency structure: classifying
ARGM-PRX cannot be done automatically in most
other languages where there is no information pro-
vided for light verb constructions. This determin-
istic rule is applied before any other type of rule.
Therefore, we do not generate further rules to clas-
sify the ARGM-PRX label.

4.2.2 Empirically-derived rules
Three kinds of features are used for the generation of
empirically-derived rules: predicate ID, predicate’s
voice type, and argument’s dependency label. The
predicate ID is either the lemma or the roleset ID
of the predicate. Predicate lemmas are already pro-
vided in HDT. When we use predicate lemmas, we
assume no manual annotation of PropBank. Thus,
rules generated from predicate lemmas can be ap-
plied to any future data without modification. When
we use roleset ID’s, we assume that sense annota-
tions are already done. PropBank includes anno-
tations of coarse verb senses, called roleset ID’s,
that differentiate each verb predicate with different

25



senses (Palmer et al., 2005). A verb predicate can
form several argument structures with respect to dif-
ferent senses. Using roleset ID’s, we generate more
fine-grained rules that are specific to those senses.

The predicate’s voice type is either ‘active’ or
‘passive’, also provided in HDT. There are not many
instances of passive construction in our current data,
which makes it difficult to generate rules general
enough for future data. However, even with the lack
of training instances, we find some advantage of us-
ing the voice feature in our experiments. Finally, the
argument’s dependency label is the dependency la-
bel of an identified argument with respect to its pred-
icate. This feature is straightforward for the case of
simple predicates. For complex predicates, we use
the dependency labels of arguments with respect to
their syntactic heads, which can be pre-verbal ele-
ments. Note that rules generated with complex pred-
icates contain slightly different features for predicate
lemmas as well; instead of using predicate lemmas,
we use joined tags of the predicate lemmas and the
lemmas of pre-verbal elements.

ID V Drel PBrel #
come a k1 ARG0 1
come a k5 ARG2-SOU 1
come a k2p ARG2-GOL 1
come mention a k7t ARGM-TMP 2
come mention a r6-k1 ARG1 1

Table 5: Rules generated by the examples in Figures 4 and
2. The ID, V, and Drel columns show predicate ID, predicate’s
voice type, and argument’s dependency label. The PBrel col-
umn shows the PropBank label of each argument. The # column
shows the total count of each feature tuple being associated with
the PropBank label. ‘a’ stands for active voice.

Table 5 shows a set of rules generated by the exam-
ples in Figures 4 (come) and 2 (come mention). No
rule is generated for ARGM-PRX because the label
is already covered by our deterministic rule (Sec-
tion 4.2.1). When roleset ID’s are used in place of
the predicate ID, come and come mention are re-
placed with A.03 and A.01, respectively. These
rules can be formulated as a function rule such that:

rule(id, v, drel) = arg max i P (pbreli)

where P (pbreli) is a probability of the predicted
PropBank label pbreli, given a tuple of features

(id, v, drel). The probability is measured by es-
timating a maximum likelihood of each PropBank
label being associated with the feature tuple. For
example, a feature tuple (come, active, k1) can be
associated with two PropBank labels, ARG0 and
ARG1, with counts of 8 and 2, respectively. In this
case, the maximum likelihoods of ARG0 and ARG1
being associated with the feature tuple is 0.8 and 0.2;
thus rule(come, active, k1) = ARG0.

Since we do not want to apply rules with low con-
fidence, we set a threshold to P (pbrel), so predic-
tions with low probabilities can be filtered out. Find-
ing the right threshold is a task of handling the pre-
cision/recall trade-off. For our experiments, we ran
10-fold cross-validation to find the best threshold.

4.2.3 Linguistically-motivated rules
Linguistically-motivated rules are applied to argu-
ments that the deterministic rule and empirically-
derived rules cannot classify. These rules capture
general correlations between syntactic and seman-
tic arguments for each predicate, so they are not as
fine-grained as empirically-derived rules, but can be
helpful for predicates not seen in the training data.
The rules are manually generated by our annota-
tors and specified in frameset files. Table 6 shows
linguistically-motivated rules for the predicate ‘A
(come)’, specified in the frameset file, ‘A-v.xml’.3

Roleset Usage Rule

A.01 to come
k1 → ARG1
k2p → ARG2-GOL

A.03 to arrive
k1 → ARG1
k2p → ARG2-GOL
k5 → ARG2-SOU

A.02 light verb No rule provided

Table 6: Rules for the predicate ‘A (come)’.

The predicate ‘A’ has three verb senses and each
sense specifies a different set of rules. For instance,
the first rule of A.01 maps a syntactic dependent
with the dependency label k1 to a semantic ar-
gument with the semantic label ARG1. Note that
frameset files include rules only for numbered ar-
guments. Most of these rules should already be in-
cluded in the empirically-derived rules as we gain

3See Choi et al. (2010a) for details about frameset files.

26



more training data; however, for an early stage of
annotation, these rules provide useful information.

5 Experiments

5.1 Corpus

All our experiments use a subset of the Hindi Depen-
dency Treebank, distributed by the ICON’10 con-
test (Husain et al., 2010). Our corpus contains about
32,300 word tokens and 2,005 verb predicates, in
which 546 of them are complex predicates. Each
verb predicate is annotated with a verse sense speci-
fied in its corresponding frameset file. There are 160
frameset files created for the verb predicates. The
number may seem small compared to the number
of verb predicates. This is because we do not cre-
ate separate frameset files for light verb construc-
tions, which comprise about 27% of the predicate
instances (see the example in Table 6).

All verb predicates are annotated with argument
structures using PropBank labels. A total of 5,375
arguments are annotated. Since there is a relatively
small set of data, we do not make a separate set for
evaluations. Instead, we run 10-fold cross-validation
to evaluate our rule-based system.

5.2 Evaluation of deterministic rule

First, we evaluate how well our deterministic rule
classifies the ARGM-PRX label. Using the determin-
istic rule, we get a 94.46% precision and a 100%
recall on ARGM-PRX. The 100% recall is expected;
the precision implies that about 5.5% of the time,
light verb annotations in the HPB do not agree with
the complex predicate annotations (pof relation) in
the HDT (cf. Section 3.3). More analysis needs to
be done to improve the precision of this rule.

5.3 Evaluation of empirically-derived rules

Next, we evaluate our empirically-derived rules with
respect to the different thresholds set for P (pbreli).
In general, the higher the threshold is, the higher
and lower the precision and recall become, respec-
tively. Figure 5 shows comparisons between preci-
sion and recall with respect to different thresholds.
Notice that a threshold of 1.0, meaning that using
only rules with 100% confidence, does not give the
highest precision. This is because the model with
this high of a threshold overfits to the training data.

Rules that work well in the training data do not nec-
essarily work as well on the test data.

   0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

   

   
30

40

50

60

70

80

Threshold

Ac
cu

ra
cy

 (i
n 

%)

R

F1

P

0.93

Figure 5: Accuracies achieved by the empirically derived
rules using (lemma, voice, label) features. P, R, and F1
stand for precisions, recalls, and F1-scores, respectively.

We need to find a threshold that gives a high preci-
sion (so annotators do not get confused by the au-
tomatic output) while maintaining a good recall (so
annotations can go faster). With a threshold of 0.93
using features (lemma, voice, dependency label), we
get a precision of 90.37%, a recall of 44.52%, and
an F1-score of 59.65%. Table 7 shows accuracies
for all PropBank labels achieved by a threshold of
0.92 using roleset ID’s instead of predicate’s lem-
mas. Although the overall precision stays about the
same, we get a noticeable improvement in the over-
all recall using roleset ID’s. Note that some labels
are missing in Table 7. This is because either they
do not occur in our current data (ARGC and ARGA)
or we have not started annotating them properly yet
(ARGM-MOD and ARGM-NEG).

5.4 Evaluation of linguistically-motivated rules

Finally, we evaluate the impact of the linguistically-
motivated rules. Table 8 shows accuracies achieved
by the linguistically motivated rules applied after the
empirically derived rules. As expected, the linguis-
tically motivated rules improve the recall of ARGN
significantly, but bring a slight decrease in the pre-
cision. This shows that our linguistic intuitions are
generally on the right track. We may combine some
of the empirically derived rules with linguistically
motivated rules together in the frameset files so an-
notators can take advantage of both kinds of rules in
the future.

27



Dist. P R F1
ALL 100.00 90.59 47.92 62.69
ARG0 17.50 95.83 67.27 79.05
ARG1 27.28 94.47 61.62 74.59
ARG2 3.42 81.48 37.93 51.76
ARG2-ATR 2.54 94.55 40.31 56.52
ARG2-GOL 1.61 64.29 21.95 32.73
ARG2-LOC 0.87 90.91 22.73 36.36
ARG2-SOU 0.83 78.26 42.86 55.38
ARG3 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00
ARGM-ADV 3.50 31.82 3.93 7.00
ARGM-CAU 1.44 50.00 5.48 9.88
ARGM-DIR 0.43 100.00 18.18 30.77
ARGM-DIS 1.63 26.67 4.82 8.16
ARGM-EXT 1.42 0.00 0.00 0.00
ARGM-LOC 10.77 83.80 27.42 41.32
ARGM-MNR 6.00 57.14 9.18 15.82
ARGM-MNS 0.79 77.78 17.50 28.57
ARGM-PRP 2.15 65.52 17.43 27.54
ARGM-PRX 10.75 94.46 100.00 97.15
ARGM-TMP 7.01 74.63 14.04 23.64

Table 7: Labeling accuracies achieved by the empirically de-
rived rules using (roleset ID, voice, label) features and a thresh-
old of 0.92. The accuracy for ARGM-PRX is achieved by the
deterministic rule. The Dist. column shows a distribution of
each label.

Dist. P R F1
ALL 100.00 89.80 55.28 68.44
ARGN 54.12 91.87 72.36 80.96
ARGM 45.88 85.31 35.14 49.77
ARGN w/o LM 93.63 58.76 72.21

Table 8: Labeling accuracies achieved by the linguistically
motivated rules. The ARGN and ARGM rows show statistics of
all numbered arguments and modifiers combined, respectively.
The ‘ARGN w/o LM’ row shows accuracies of ARGN achieved
only by the empirically derived rules.

5.5 Error anlaysis

The precision and recall results for ARG0 and ARG1,
are better than expected, despite the complexity of
the mapping (Section 3.1). This is because they oc-
cur most often in the corpus, so enough rules can
be extracted. The other numbered arguments are
closely related to particular types of verbs (e.g., mo-
tion verbs for ARG2-GOL|SOU). Our linguistically
motivated rules are more effective for these types
of HPB labels. We would expect the modifiers to

be mapped independently of the verb, but our ex-
periments show that the presence of the verb lemma
feature enhances the performance of modifiers. Al-
though section 3.2 expects one-to-one mappings for
modifiers, it is not the case in practice.

We observe that the interpretation of labels in an-
notation practice is important. For example, our sys-
tem performs poorly for ARGM-ADV because the la-
bel is used for various sentential modifiers and can
be mapped to as many as four HDT labels. On the
other hand, HPB makes some fine-grained distinc-
tions. For instance, means and causes are distin-
guished using ARGM-CAU and ARGM-MNS labels, a
distinction that HDT does not make. In the example
in Figure 6, we find that aptitude with is assigned to
ARGM-MNS, but gets the cause label rh in HDT.

Rajyapal can call upon any party with his aptitude

रा#यपाल
Rajyapal

अप(
his

व* +क_ -
aptitude_with

क* सी_ भी
any_EMPH

पाट2_ को
party_DAT

ब5ला_ सकता_ 7
call_can_be

Figure 6: Means vs. cause example.

6 Conclusion and future work

We provide an analysis of the Hindi PropBank anno-
tated on the Hindi Dependency Treebank. There is
an interesting correlation between dependency and
predicate argument structures. By analyzing the
similarities between the two structures, we find rules
that can be used for automatic mapping of syntactic
and semantic arguments, and achieve over 90% con-
fidence for almost half of the data. These rules will
be applied to our future data, which will make the
annotation faster and possibly more accurate.

We plan to use different sets of rules generated by
different thresholds to see which rule set leads to the
most effective annotation. We also plan to develop
a statistical semantic role labeling system in Hindi,
once we have enough training data. In addition, we
will explore the possibility of using existing lexical
resource such as WordNet (Narayan et al., 2002) to
improve our system.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by NSF grants CNS- 0751089, CNS-
0751171, CNS-0751202, and CNS-0751213. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation.

28



References
Rafiya Begum, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Dipti Misra

Sharma, Lakshmi Bai, and Rajeev Sangal. 2008. De-
pendency annotation scheme for indian languages. In
In Proceedings of the 3rd International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing, IJCNLP’08.

Akshar Bharati, Dipti Misra Sharma, Lakshmi Bai, and
Rajeev Sangal. 2006. AnnCorra: Guidelines for POS
and Chunk Annotation for Indian Languages. Techni-
cal report, IIIT Hyderabad.

Akshar Bharati, Rajeev Sangal, and Dipti Misra Sharma.
2007. Ssf: Shakti standard format guide. Technical
report, IIIT Hyderabad.

Akshara Bharati, Dipti Misra Sharma, Samar Husain,
Lakshmi Bai, Rafiya Begam, and Rajeev Sangal.
2009. Anncorra : Treebanks for indian languages,
guidelines for annotating hindi treebank. Technical re-
port, IIIT Hyderabad.

Archna Bhatia, Rajesh Bhatt, Bhuvana Narasimhan,
Martha Palmer, Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma,
Michael Tepper, Ashwini Vaidya, and Fei Xia. 2010.
Empty categories in a hindi treebank. In Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’10), pages 1863–1870.

Rajesh Bhatt, Bhuvana Narasimhan, Martha Palmer,
Owen Rambow, Dipti Sharma, and Fei Xia. 2009. A
Multi-Representational and Multi-Layered Treebank
for Hindi/Urdu. In In the Proceedings of the Third Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop held in conjunction with
ACL-IJCNLP 2009.

Jinho D. Choi, Claire Bonial, and Martha Palmer. 2010a.
Propbank frameset annotation guidelines using a ded-
icated editor, cornerstone. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, LREC’10, pages 3650–3653.

Jinho D. Choi, Claire Bonial, and Martha Palmer. 2010b.
Propbank instance annotation guidelines using a ded-
icated editor, jubilee. In Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, LREC’10, pages 1871–1875.

Silvie Cinkova. 2006. From PropBank to EngVALLEX:
Adapting PropBank-Lexicon to the Valency Theory of
Functional Generative Description. In Proceedings
of the fifth International conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), Genova, Italy.

Eva Hajičová and Ivona Kučerová. 2002. Argu-
ment/valency structure in propbank, lcs database and
prague dependency treebank: A comparative pi-
lot study. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
LREC’02, pages 846–851.

Samar Husain, Prashanth Mannem, Bharat Ram Ambati,
and Phani Gadde. 2010. The ICON-2010 tools contest

on Indian language dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of ICON-2010 Tools Contest on Indian Language
Dependency Parsing, ICON’10, pages 1–8.

Jena D. Hwang, Archna Bhatia, Claire Bonial, Aous
Mansouri, Ashwini Vaidya, Nianwen Xue, and Martha
Palmer. 2010. PropBank Annotation of Multilingual
Light Verb Constructions. In Proceedings of the Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop at ACL 2010.

Mitchell Marcus, Grace Kim, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz,
Robert Macintyre, Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen
Katz, and Britta Schasberger. 1994. The penn tree-
bank: Annotating predicate argument structure. In
ARPA Human Language Technology Workshop, pages
114–119.

Dipak Narayan, Debasri Chakrabarti, Prabhakar Pande,
and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2002. An experience
in building the indo wordnet - a wordnet for hindi.
In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Global WordNet.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–
106.

Martha Palmer, Olga Babko-Malaya, Ann Bies, Mona
Diab, Mohamed Maamouri, Aous Mansouri, and Wa-
jdi Zaghouani. 2008. A pilot arabic propbank. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Language Resources
and Evaluation, LREC’08, pages 28–30.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Nianwen Xue. 2010.
Semantic role labeling. In Graeme Hirst, editor, Syn-
thesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies.
Morgan and Claypool.

Ashwini Vaidya and Samar Husain. 2011. A classifica-
tion of dependencies in the Hindi/Urdu Treebank. In
Presented at the Workshop on South Asian Syntax and
Semantics, Amherst, MA.

Ashwini Vaidya, Samar Husain, and Prashanth Mannem.
2009. A karaka based dependency scheme for En-
glish. In Proceedings of the CICLing-2009, Mexico
City, Mexico.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2003. Annotating the
propositions in the penn chinese treebank. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd SIGHAN workshop on Chinese lan-
guage processing, SIGHAN’03, pages 47–54.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2009. Adding seman-
tic roles to the chinese treebank. Natural Language
Engineering, 15(1):143–172.

Szu-Ting Yi. 2007. Automatic Semantic Role Labeling.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.

29


