



















































Federated Operation Model for the Language Grid


Proceedings of Workshop on Language Resources, Technology and Services in the Sharing Paradigm, pages 59–66,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12, 2011.

Federated Operation Model for the Language Grid 

 
 

Toru Ishida1, Yohei Murakami2, Yoko Kubota1, Rieko Inaba1 
1Department of Social Informatics, Kyoto University 

2National Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
ishida@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, yohei@nict.go.jp,  

{yoko, inaba}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp 
 

  
 

Abstract 

The concept of collective intelligence is con-
tributing significantly to knowledge creation 
on the Web. While current knowledge creation 
activities tend to be founded on the approach 
of assembling content such as texts, images 
and videos, we propose here the service-
oriented approach. We use the term service 
grid to refer to a framework of collective intel-
ligence based on Web services. This paper 
provides an institutional design mainly for 
non-profit service grids that are open to the 
public. In particular, we deepen the discussion 
of 1) intellectual property rights, 2) application 
systems, and 3) federated operations from the 
perspective of the following stakeholders: ser-
vice providers, service users and service grid 
operators respectively. The Language Grid 
has been operating, based on the proposed in-
stitutional framework, since December 2007. 

1 Introduction 
Based on scalable computing environments, we 
propose a service-oriented approach to develop-
ing collective intelligence. This approach re-
quires institutional design to share services 
among participants. In this paper, we call the in-
frastructure to form service-oriented collective 
intelligence the service grid1. The service grid 
has three stakeholders: service providers, service 
users and service grid operators. For the institu-
tional design, we should consider the following 
issues related to each stakeholder: 

                                                
1 Service grid is a generic term meaning a framework 
where “services are composed to meet the require-
ments of a user community within constraints speci-
fied by the resource provider” (Furmento et al., 2002) 
(Krauter et al., 2002). 

 How to protect intellectual property rights of 
service providers and to motivate them to 
provide services to the service grid. To this 
end, service providers should be allowed to 
define for what purpose or purposes their ser-
vices can be used and to define usage rights 
accordingly. 

 How to encourage a wide variety of activities 
of service users to increase their use of the 
provided services. To this end, service users 
should be allowed to run application systems 
that employ the services permitted for such 
use.  

 How to reduce the load on service grid opera-
tors, while allowing them to globally extend 
their service grids. To this end, federated op-
eration should be facilitated, where several 
operators collaboratively operate their service 
grids by connecting them in a peer-to-peer 
fashion. 

In this paper, we describe our institutional 
design for a public service grid typically operat-
ed by non-profit organizations such as universi-
ties and research institutes. Based on this discus-
sion, we have already developed the service grid 
server software and started the Language Grid 
that focuses on language services (Ishida, 2006). 
The rest of this paper describes the concept of 
service-oriented collective intelligence, the insti-
tutional design considering stakeholders includ-
ing service providers, service users and service 
grid operators, and our experience in operating 
the Language Grid. 

2 Stakeholders  
To simplify the following discussions in this pa-
per, the main stakeholders are classified into 
three groups: 

59



 Service provider provides all kinds of ser-
vices to the service grid. 

 Service user invokes and uses the services 
provided to the service grid. 

 Service grid operator is provided with 
services from the service providers, and al-
lows the service users to invoke and use 
the provided services. 

Service providers and service users are col-
lectively called service grid users. A service grid 
user can act as a service provider as well as a 
service user. The role of the service grid operator 
is to stand between service grid users (typically 
between a service provider and a service user) 
and support their provision and use of the ser-
vices. In the following sections, we discuss insti-
tutional design in terms of the contracts between 
a service grid operator and a service grid user. 

Note that Web services are classified into 
atomic services and composite services. An 
atomic service means a Web service that enables 
service users to access the provided resources. 
Such provided resources include data, software, 
and human resources that are shared in the ser-
vice grid as atomic services. On the other hand, a 
composite service means a Web service that is 
realized by a procedure called workflow that in-
vokes atomic services.  

To handle the intellectual properties present 
in the services and resources, the service grid 
operator may propose a unified license (GPL, 
Creative Commons etc.) to the service providers 
to register their services with the service grid. 
While a unified license will simplify the opera-
tion and promote the use of the service grid, it 
could cause the service providers to lose some or 
all of their incentives. Therefore, to better sup-
port the service providers, the institutional design 
of the service grid will not be based on the prem-
ise of a unified license. 

The operation of the service grid discussed in 
the rest of this paper assumes that it is operated 
publicly mainly by non-profit organizations such 
as universities and research institutes. It does not 
assume the case of the service grid in a business 
firm, where service grid operators can com-
pletely or partially control the incentives of ser-
vice grid users. 

3 Service Provider 
3.1 Purpose of the Service Use 
From the service provider’s standpoint, any dis-
cussion of the protection of their intellectual 
property must address the purpose intended in 

using their services. In fact, many research insti-
tutes and public organizations clearly specify that 
their services are for non-profit or research use 
only. To reflect such service providers’ concerns, 
we classify the purpose of service use into the 
following three categories and allow each service 
provider to permit one or more of the categories: 

 Non-profit use means 1) use by public in-
stitutions and non-profit organizations for 
their main activities, or 2) use by compa-
nies and organizations other than public 
institutions and non-profit organizations 
for their corporate social responsibility ac-
tivities. 

 Research use means the use for research 
that does not directly contribute to com-
mercial profit. 

 Commercial use means the use for purpos-
es intended to directly or indirectly con-
tribute to commercial profit. 

The above classification can be applied to or-
ganizational use as well as personal use. Howev-
er, when personal use only means private use, 
personal use can be classified as non-profit use. 
Note that activities by public institutions and 
non-profit organizations other than their main 
activities are excluded, aiming to prohibit service 
use to obtain funding. Meanwhile, corporate so-
cial responsibility activities are included in non-
profit use because such activities are often oper-
ated in collaboration with public institutions or 
non-profit organizations. 

If a service provider is already selling its ser-
vice to organizations like local governments, it 
may not wish to allow non-profit use through the 
service grid. If service users want to use services, 
the specified purpose of service use must comply 
with the terms of use specified by the service 
provider.  

3.2 Control of Service Use 
When service providers register their services in 
the service grid, they are required to provide in-
formation on copyright and other intellectual 
property rights of the resources included in their 
services. In the event that the service provider 
has been granted a license to the resource by a 
third party, such information shall also be in-
cluded. The service provider is required to own 
the resources or the authority to allow third 
parties to use the resources. This prevents the 
service users from accidentally violating the third 
party’s intellectual property rights. 

Now, who should register and manage the 
services in the service grid? If we stand on the 

60



premise that the collective intelligence is auton-
omously formed by the service providers, the 
service providers should be responsible for the 
maintenance of their resources, and the process 
of developing the resources into an atomic ser-
vice, which we call wrapping. The service pro-
viders also have to maintain their services and 
the connection between the services and the ser-
vice grid. On the other hand, to guarantee the 
service’s quality and safety, the registration and 
maintenance of services should be done by the 
operator or with the operator’s approval. There-
fore, the decision about who should register and 
manage the services needs to be made consider-
ing the trade-off between stimulating the auton-
omous activities of the service provider and en-
suring the quality and safety of the service grid. 
Likewise, we need to consider whether to leave 
the service deregistration process to the service 
provider or the operator. When focusing on the 
quality and the safety of the service grid, at least 
to cover the case of emergencies, the operator 
needs to be able to deregister a service. 

For the service provider, it is desirable that 
there be flexibility in setting out the terms of use 
of their services. For example, the possible con-
ditions are as follows: 

 Restrictions on the service users who may 
be licensed to use the services; 

 Restrictions on the purpose for which the 
services may be used; 

 Restrictions on the application systems 
that use the services; 

 Restrictions on the number of times that 
the services may be accessed and the 
amount of data that may be downloaded 
from the services. 

By setting out conditions of their services em-
ploying the same resource, the service provider 
can provide their services under dual license. For 
example, one is provided to every user under 
several restrictions on access counts and data 
transfer size without any charge. Meanwhile, the 
other is provided to the users who pay a fee 
without any restrictions. 

In general, when the service grid allows the 
terms of use to be set in detail, it will increase the 
service provider’s satisfaction, while forcing 
greater overhead on the service users to comply 
with the detailed terms of use. Moreover, when 
the service users use a composite service, they 
need to satisfy all terms of use of every atomic 
service in the composite service. If we try to as-
sure that automatically, the operator must provi-
de technical measures to ensure that the service 

users will not violate the terms of use. Therefore, 
we must trade the service provider’s flexibility 
off against the service user’s convenience and 
the operator’s cost. 

4 Service User 
4.1 Service Use through Application System 
When service users use the service grid for pur-
poses other than personal use, many of them 
provide an application system using services to 
other users. Here application system means, as 
shown in Fig. 1, a system that is provided by a 
service user and that allows users of the system 
to indirectly access the service grid without be-
ing personally authorized by the service grid. In 
this case, the service user is responsible for en-
suring that the application system users comply 
with the terms of use of each service that is used 
through the application system. 
 

Application	  
System

Application	  
System

Atomic	  
ServiceAtomic	  ServiceService

Service	  Grid

Resource

Application	  
System

provide

use

operate

operate

operate
Service	  Grid
Operator

Application	  System	  User

Service	  User

Service	  Provider

 
Fig. 1. Service Use through Application System 

 

4.2 Control of Application System 
A service user may operate different types of 
application systems; for example, one provides 
an application system to the general public 
through the Web, and another provides an appli-
cation system through a particular terminal in a 
certain location like a reception counter. This 
paper focuses on how an application system can 
be controlled by the service user and classifies 
the control of application systems into two types: 
under client control and under server control. 

 Under client control means the status 
where the users of an application system 
are under the control of the service user 
who provides the application system. 

61



More specifically, it means the status 
where the terminals of application system 
users are under the control of the service 
user or where the service user is able to 
identify each application system user. In 
all cases, the service user who provides the 
application system must be able to fully 
grasp at any time the status of use of the 
application system at each terminal and/or 
by each user, and have the technical and 
legal authority to suspend use as neces-
sary. 

 Under server control means the status 
where the server on which the application 
system runs is under the control of the ser-
vice user, while application system users 
are not under the control of the service us-
er. In this case, the service user must be 
able to fully grasp at any time the status of 
use of the application system server and 
have the technical and legal authority to 
suspend the server as necessary. 

Two examples of the operation of an applica-
tion system are shown in Fig. 2. When an appli-
cation system provided through the Web can be 
accessed by users from home without authentica-
tion, the status is not under client control; how-
ever, if the service user controls the Web server, 
the status is under server control. When an ap-
plication system is provided through a terminal 
at a reception counter and the terminal is under 
the control of the service user, the operation is 
classified as under client control. 
 

Application 
System

Application System Users

Service Grid

Terminal Terminal

Service User

operate

control

identify

Application 
System

Application System Users

Service Grid

Terminal Terminal

operate

control

Service User

 
(1) Client Control               (2) Server Control 

Fig. 2. Service Use through Application System 
 
The classification aims to allow service users 

to develop their own application system and se-
lect properly the range of the application system 
to be offered. Furthermore, the service provider 
can limit the range of application system users by 
specifying which type of application system con-
trol the provided service must adopt. For exam-
ple, when a service provider sells a service to 

local governments, the service provider may 
agree to provide the service to patients at a re-
ception counter in a hospital (under client con-
trol) but may refuse to provide the service to the 
public through a local government’s Web server 
(under server control).  

4.3 Return for Service Providers 
Where is the service provider’s incentive for 
providing their services? When the service pro-
viders provide their services for free, the service 
grid operator is required to provide statistical 
information on the use of the services to the ser-
vice providers. The statistical information shows 
who used or is using which service and to what 
extent. Such information stimulates the interac-
tion between the service providers and the ser-
vice users. However, the statistical information 
should not include any transferred data or per-
sonal information regarding the senders of data. 
In case the service providers wish to obtain in-
formation on the use of the services other than 
statistics, the provider should conclude an 
agreement that establishes the provision of such 
information with the service user. The service 
grid operator is not involved in such an agree-
ment.  

When service providers provide their services 
for profit, they will receive fees from the service 
users by concluding a contract for the payment of 
such fees. Again, the operator is not involved in 
such contracts. 

5 Service Grid Operator  
To globally disseminate the service grid, which 
is centered on non-profit organizations like uni-
versities and research institutes, multiple opera-
tor organizations need to create/join an affiliation. 
We call this federated operation. The reasons 
driving federated operation include not only the 
limited number of users that a single operator can 
handle, but also the locality caused by geograph-
ical conditions and application domains. 

There are two types of federated operation. 
One is centralized affiliation, where the opera-
tors form a federal association to control the 
terms of affiliation based on mutual agreement. 
This yields flexibility in deciding affiliation style, 
but incurs a lot of cost in maintaining the federal 
association. The other is decentralized affiliation, 
which allows a service grid user to create and 
become the operator of a new service grid that 
reuses the agreements set by the first service grid. 
This type of operation promotes forming peer-to-

62



peer networks by the operators. The type of affil-
iation is defined by reuse of agreements, but the 
formation of the peer-to-peer network by the op-
erators is flexible and no maintenance cost is 
necessary. In the following section, we further 
discuss decentralized affiliation since it suits 
non-profit organizations like universities and 
research institutes. 

Let an affiliated operator be a service grid us-
er who operates its own service grid that reuses 
the agreements of the original service grid. Let 
an affiliated user be a user who is licensed to use 
the affiliated operator’s service grid. In such a 
case, as shown in Fig. 3, the affiliated user can 
use the original service grid, in which the affili-
ated operator takes the role of a service grid user. 
That is the key idea of the peer-to-peer federated 
operation. Even in such case, service providers 
still have the right to choose whether to allow the 
affiliated user to use their services or not.  

 

Atomic 
Service
Atomic 
ServiceService

Service Grid

Resource

provide

provide

operate

operate

Service Grid
Operator

Application 
System

Application 
System
Application 

System

Application System User

Service Grid

Affiliated
Operator operate

Affiliated
User

use

operate
Service User

Service Provider

 
Fig. 3. Federated operation of service grid 

 
Two service grids in equal partnership are 

likely to establish a bidirectional affiliation, 
where both operators become users of the other 
service grid.  Unidirectional affiliation is also 
possible. For example, if one service grid pro-
vides only basic services and the other provides 
only applied services, the latter can be a user of 
the former service grid. 

Sometimes it is impossible for different ser-
vice grids to use exactly the same agreements. A 
typical problem is the governing law. For inter-
national affiliation, a possible idea is to adopt a 
common law like New York State law, but oper-
ators may wish to adopt the governing law of 
their own locations. In such a case, operators will 

use the same agreements except for the govern-
ing law. In that case, the service providers would 
need to accept the use of the different governing 
law to handle the affiliated users in that location. 

6 Operation of the Language Grid 
6.1 Language Grid Service Manager 
The Language Grid is a service grid for language 
resources. Its concept was developed in 2005, 
and the project was launched in April 2006 
(Ishida, 2006). The fundamental software form-
ing the service grid was developed and has been 
released by the National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology (NICT).  

In designing the Language Grid system, it 
was important to deal with service providers, 
who had various incentives. For example, some 
language services may already be sold for profit. 
If the service grid failed to allow the service pro-
vider to receive fees for their services, it would 
be hard to realize a service grid that truly satis-
fied service users. Furthermore, since each of the 
existing dictionaries and language processing 
software had various types of licenses, the opera-
tor could not unify those licenses. Many research 
institutes that develop language resources can 
provide their resources as long as they are used 
only for research. However, if they are used by 
non-profit organizations for their activities, the 
research institutes may need to know by who, 
when, and how much their resources are being 
used. Such various incentives and conditions 
form the background of our institutional design 
prioritizing the intellectual property rights of the 
service providers. In our operation model (Ishida 
et al., 2008), language service providers can fully 
control access to their language services using 
the Language Grid. Language service providers 
can select users, restrict the total number of ac-
cesses per year/month/day, and set the maximum 
volume of data transfer per access. Providers can 
set those conditions via the Language Grid Ser-
vice Manager (see Fig. 4). This software pro-
vides the registration of services, measurement 
of service usage frequency, access control of ser-
vices, and always monitors the Language Grid.  

On the other hand, service users wish to use the 
provided language resources in their various activities. 
At a school with multi-national students, teachers and 
parents as well as students will use language services. 
To allow a large number of people to use the services, 
the school is required to identify their registered users 
properly. At the reception counter of a hospital, how-
ever, it is difficult to ask patients to register them-
selves to the reception support system. It is more real- 

63



 
Fig. 4. Language Grid Service Manager 

 
istic to identify the terminals to permit service 
access. In this way, the system must be designed 
to allow many application system users to use 
language services in their different environments. 
To avoid the fraudulent usage of language ser-
vices, however, service users should not allow 
the application system users to discover the ID 
and password of the Language Grid. For example, 
in the case of an NPO offering medical inter-
preter services to foreign patients, the NPO is 
required to enter their Language Grid ID and 
password in such a way that they do not become 
public; one solution is to embed the ID and 
password in their patient support systems. 

6.2 Centralized Operation 
The service grid server software has been devel-
oped and released as open source software. Us-
ing this source code, universities and research 
institutes can operate any kind of service grid. 
The Department of Social Informatics of Kyoto 
University started operation of the Language 
Grid for nonprofit purposes in December 2007. 
As of June 2011, 139 groups in 17 countries had 
joined the Language Grid: research institutes in-
clude Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Na-
tional Research Council (CNR), German Re-
search Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), 
and National Institute of Informatics (NII), uni-
versities include Stuttgart University, Princeton 
University, Tsinghua University and a number of 
Japanese universities, NPO/NGOs and public 
sector bodies. Companies have also joined: Nip-
pon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation 
(NTT), Toshiba, Oki and Google are providing 
their services without any charge.  

We first expected that NPO, NGO and public 
sectors would become the major users, but uni-

versities are using the Language Grid more in-
tensively at this moment; researchers and stu-
dents who are working on Web analyses, CSCW, 
and multicultural issues are using language ser-
vices for attaining their research goals. This trend 
is natural in the early stage of introducing a new 
Internet technology. Fig. 5 shows the recent sta-
tistics of member organizations.  

Research institutes, universities, and compa-
nies are providing atomic language services such 
as dictionaries and machine translators. The 
number of shared language resources now totals 
67. Organizations that provided language re-
sources include Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Stuttgart, Princeton, Kookmin, and Kyoto Uni-
versities, NICT, NII, NTT, Google, Toshiba, Oki, 
Kodensha, Asian Disaster Reduction Center and 
a number of public sector groups and 
NPO/NGOs. When providing atomic language 
services, providers specify copyright notices and 
license information in the profiles of the re-
sources. To create composite services that in-
volve the combination of atomic services, many 
workflows are being written and released. Cur-
rently more than 100 services are registered in 
the Language Grid.  

The operation model designed by the authors 
reflects the intentions of user groups around the 
world like research institutes and non-profit or-
ganizations (Ishida et al. 2008). We were only 
able to attract such participants because we de-
veloped the Language Grid with a strong bias 
towards formalizing the obligations of all parties. 
Design of the operation model was conducted in 
parallel with development of the service grid 
server software. It took more than six months to 
achieve consensus on the model. It is probably 
fair to say that the software was written to realize 
the operation model.  
 

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

Universities

Research Organizaitons

Research Projects

NPOs and NGOs

Public Organizations

Companies

Others

 
Fig. 5. Number of participant organizations 
 

64



6.3 Federated Operation 
From operating the Language Grid over two 
years, we have gained many insights. One of 
them is the importance of federated operation. 
Since the operation center in Kyoto cannot reach 
local organizations in other countries, over 70 
percent of participating organizations are in Ja-
pan. Since we need global collaboration, even for 
solving language issues in local communities, 
this imbalance should be overcome: the Lan-
guage Grid operators need to be dispersed into 
different organizations globally and to collabo-
rate with each other. The federated operation 
model was invented to realize such collaboration. 
In fact, the National Electronics and Computer 
Technology Center (NECTEC) in Thailand 
launched the Bangkok Operation Center in Octo-
ber 2010, and is now federated with the Kyoto 
Operation Center. The Bangkok Operation Cen-
ter has a plan to provide a collection of atomic 
services for language processing i.e. LEXiTRON 
for a Thai-English dictionary, Parsit for English 
to Thai machine translation, Vaja for Thai text to 
speech conversion, and morphological analysis 
utilities. Those services can be accessed by users 
of the Kyoto Operation Center. 

So far, we have described the federated opera-
tion of the same kind of service grids. In fact, we 
had an opportunity to realize the collaboration of 
different kinds of service grids. The joint re-
search between Tsinghua University’s Smart 
Classroom and the Language Grid is a typical 
achievement (Suo et al., 2009). We rebuilt 
Tsinghua University’s Smart Classroom as a col-
lection of pervasive computing services. That 
allowed easier connection between the Smart 
Classroom and the Language Grid to develop 
Open Smart Classroom, which connects class-
rooms in different countries. NECTEC also 
needs the collaboration of different kinds of ser-
vice grids provided by neighboring interest 
groups. These services will soon be extended to 
cover other media resulting from NECTEC's ini-
tiative called the Digitized Thailand Project.  

7 Conclusion  
In this paper, we named an infrastructure that 
forms collective intelligence based on Web ser-
vices a service grid, and designed an institutional 
framework for a public service grid operated by 
non-profit organizations such as universities and 
research institutes. From a consideration of the 
different standpoints of service providers, service 
users and service grid operators, which consti-

tute the service grid, we proposed the following 
framework: 

 To protect the intellectual property rights 
of service providers, the purposes of ser-
vice use are classified into non-profit use, 
research use, and commercial use. The 
service providers can set the terms of ser-
vice use for each purpose. 

 The type of control employed by applica-
tion systems are classified into client con-
trol and server control. This flexibility al-
lows service users to employ different 
types of application systems to support 
their activities. 

 To decrease the cost of service grid opera-
tors and extend service grid operation 
globally, the framework allows service 
grid operators to conduct federated opera-
tion. The collaboration is realized in a 
peer-to-peer fashion by introducing the 
concepts of affiliated operators and affili-
ated users. 

The institutional design discussed in this paper 
is based on our three-year experience of operat-
ing the Language Grid. We hope that our experi-
ences will promote the accumulation of knowl-
edge about designing institutional frameworks 
and contribute to the development of service-
oriented collective intelligence. 
 
Acknowledgments 

We acknowledge the considerable support of 
National Institute of Information and Communi-
cations Technology, and Department of Social 
Informatics, Kyoto University. A part of this 
work was supported by Strategic Information and 
Communications R&D Promotion Programme 
from Ministry of Internal Affairs, a Grant-in-Aid 
for Scientific Research (A) (21240014, 2009-
2011) from Japan Society for the Promotion of 
Science (JSPS), and Kyoto University Global 
COE Program: Informatics Education and Re-
search Center for Knowledge-Circulating Society. 
 

References 
Nathalie Furmento, William Lee, Anthony Mayer, 

Steven Newhouse, John Darlington. 2002. ICENI: 
an open grid service architecture implemented with 
Jini. International Conference on High Performan-
ce Networking and Computing:1-10. 

Toru Ishida. 2006. Language Grid: an infrastructure 
for intercultural collaboration. 2006 IEEE/IPSJ 
Symposium on Applications and the Internet 
(SAINT-06): 96-100. 

65



Toru Ishida, Akiyo Nadamoto, Yohei Murakami, 
Rieko Inaba, Tomohiro Shigenobu, Shigeo 
Matsubara, Hiromitsu Hattori, Yoko Kubota, Ta-
kao Nakaguchi, Eri Tsunokawa. 2008. A non-profit 
operation model for the language grid. Interna-
tional Conference on Global Interoperability for 
Language Resources: 114-121. 

Klaus Krauter, Rajkumar Buyya, Muthucumaru Ma-
heswaran. 2002. A taxonomy and survey of grid 
resource management systems for distributed com-
puting. Software: Practice & Experience 32(2): 
135-164. 

Paul P. Maglio, Savitha Srinivasan, Jeffrey T. Kreu-
len, Jim Spohrer. 2006. Service systems, service 
scientists, SSME, and innovation. Communications 
of the ACM 49(7): 81-85. 

Yue Suo, Naoki Miyata, Hiroki Morikawa, Toru 
Ishida, Yuanchun Shi. 2009. Open smart class-
room: extensible and scalable learning system in 
smart space using web service technology. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
21(6):  814-828 

 

66


