




















The Formal Patterns of the Lithuanian Verb Forms

Loïc Boizou
Centre of Computational Linguistics (http://donelaitis.vdu.lt)

Vytautas Magnus University
Kaunas, Lithuania

l.boizou@hmf.vdu.lt

Abstract

This paper describes the formal struc-
ture of the Lithuanian verbs, emphasiz-
ing the difference between two kinds of
formal patterns called primary and sec-
ondary. This short outline attemps to high-
light some salient aspects of different de-
scriptive levels (traditionnal model, for-
malized model and implemented model).

1 Introduction

In Lithuanian, morphology plays a considerable
role in both domains of inflection and derivation.
This property is obvious for both nouns and verbs.
Although Lithuanian verbal morphology in gen-
eral is quite thoroughly described, automatic pro-
cessing gives some opportunities to consider the
question somehow differently.

The aim of this study is to describe the formal
patterns of Lithuanian verbs from the perspective
of the written language. The study is restricted to
the conjugated forms, putting the main emphasis
on the word forms instead of lexemes. It covers
only the question of analysis and interpretation :
the problem of lemmatization is left beyond the
scope.

This paper gives a short theoretical account
of the question, it raises some problematic is-
sues concerning the formal interpretation of ver-
bal word forms and outlines a possible implemen-
tation of verbal formal patterns using the analyzer
ALeksas.

2 Primary vs secondary verb forms

According to Stankiewicz (Stankiewicz, 1999),
verbs tend to be formally simpler than nouns.
Lithuanian seems to conform to this remark, as, in
spite of the complexity of the Lithuanian conjuga-
tion, verbs forms follow a limited set of patterns.
There are two families of patterns, the primary and

simple mixed complex
present perk-a mieg-a auk-oj-a
preterit pirk-o mieg-oj-o auk-oj-o
infinitive pirk-ti mieg-o-ti auk-o-ti

Table 1: Types of verbal lexemes

the secondary ones, which differ in many respects.
It must be emphasized that these patterns describe
verbal word forms, not verbal lexemes. Indeed,
while verbal word forms are either primary or sec-
ondary, verbal lexemes may have

• only primary forms (simple verbs)

• only secondary forms (complex verbs) or

• a combination of primary and secondary
forms (mixed).

These three categories, well known in the Lithua-
nian grammatical tradition (ex: DLKG, (Am-
brazas (red.), 1996), are shown in the table 1
(primary verb forms in italics, secondary ones in
bold). The given forms are the usual ones in the
Lithuanian lexicographic tradition, present tense,
preterit, infinitive, called by Hoskovec (Hoskovec,
2009) the lemmatic root triplet.

Furthermore, all the verb forms in the past itera-
tive tense are secondary ones, since there are made
with the suffix dav-, ex. dainuodavome ’we used
to sing, we often sang’, šokdavo ’used to dance,
often danced’.

2.1 The primary verbs forms

The number of verbs with primary verb forms
reaches few thousands item, but this list seems
to be a closed set. From a lexematic perspective,
these verbs often show complex models of inflex-
ion, with vowel alteration, infixation, inflexional
suffixes. In general, they offer a large panel of
paradigmatic variety.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 50–57



2.1.1 Formal structure
Primary forms follow quite a simple pattern1 (with
optional elements in brackets):

(ModPfx+) (Pfx+) (Refl+) Root’ (+Enlargement)
+Ending2

Each element of the structure may appear only
once.

The root The root is in fact a lexically actualized
root (hence the notation Root’), where the vocal-
ism is fully specified. In some cases, actualized
roots contain an infix -n-, or -m- in prelabial con-
text, (randa3 vs rado, tampa vs tapo).

All the primary verb roots are monosyllabic,
with the exception of GĄLANDA ’to sharpen’ (at
least in a synchronic perspective). They match the
following pattern (Ambrazas (red.), 1996), where
all consonant parts are optional :

Spir + Occl + Son + V + Son + Occl + Spir

The root may be extended by optional elements,
enlargements and prefixes.

Enlargements Enlargements (the term used by
Hoskovec (2009) is taken from Benveniste) make
up a small group of consonant suffixes appearing
only after the root (this principle excluding the
possibility of iteration). The list includes -st- (tirp-
sta ’melt’), -d- (pildo ’fill’), -s- (linksi ’to nod’
from LINKSI).

Prefixes Primary verb forms may include one
prefix. Proper prefixes, which are mainly of prepo-
sitional origin, belong to a narrow set : ap(i)-,
at(i)-, į-, iš-, nu-, pa-, par-, per-, pra-, pri-, su-
, už-. As a rule, prefixation does not modify the
inflection of the base verb.

Beside the proper prefixes, some modal prefixes
(in fact prefixed particles) can be added to prefixed
or unprefixed verb forms : ne- (negation), be- (du-
ration), te- (restriction) and the combinations tebe-
(continuation), nebe- (interruption). These modal
prefixes appear at the absolute beginning, before
proper prefixes.

The status of the particle ne- is specific, since it
can also be used like a proper prefix, for example

1The present outline is quite brief, for a more complete
description, see (Hoskovec, 2009), which largely inspired this
presentation.

2ModPfx: modal prefix, Pfx: (non modal) prefix, Refl:
reflexive marker.

3The paper follows the notational convention of Matthews
(1991): small capitals for lexemes, italic for word forms.

NERIMSTA ’to worry’. Besides, the related verb
SUNERIMSTA deviates from the normal pattern.

Paradigms and desinences Lithuanian is char-
acterized by the coexistence of several verbal
desinential systems (for the description of the for-
mal structure of the desinences, see (Chicouène
and Skūpas, 1998) and (Hoskovec, 2009)) pre-
sented in the table 2. The form of desinences may
change before the reflexive clitic.

From a lexematic point of view, the present
tense (-a, -ia, -o or -i) and the preterit (-o or -
ė) show a concurrence between desinential sys-
tem, while other tenses and moods have a unique
paradigm (future -i’, imperative -i”). All con-
current systems appear with some primary verb
forms, for example:

• -a : tinka, verda (present)
• -ia : keikia, taria (present)
• -i : nori, žiūri (present)
• -o : šaudo, sako (present), tirpo (preterit)
• -ė : liepė, valdė (preterit)
Possible combinations of present and preterit

desinential systems draw a set of eight theorically
conjugation paradigms, seven being eventually
used by the system (numbers indicate conjuga-
tion class and subclass in the Grammar of the con-
temporary Lithuanian(Ambrazas (red.), 1996)), as
shown in the table 3.

The quantitative weigth of each model greatly
varies from one isolated verb (I-IV) to some sev-
eral hundreds (I-I, taking in account primary verbs
only). Furthermore, a full description of the
paradigms needs to integrate enlargements and
root alterations, but given the present approach fo-
cused on the words forms and not on the lexemes,
this question will not be further discussed.

The split description of the reflexive clitic In
Lithuanian, the reflexive clitic (-si) may appear
in two different positions: if the verb is prefixed
(even by a modal prefix), the reflexive clitic is be-
tween the prefix(es) and the root, ex. ne-at-si-kelė
’did not wake up’; else, the clitic is at the end of
the word (possibly with a formal alteration of the
desinence), ex. džiaugia-si ’is/are delighted’.

Taking in account the efficiency of the imple-
mentation, the traditionnal unified description of
the of the clitic was abandoned. Thus, the model
includes

51

The Formal Patterns of the Lithuanian Verb Forms

51



a ia o ė i i’ i” ė’
1sg renku šaukiu sakau liepiau žiūriu kviesiu × imčiau
2sg renki šauki sakai liepei žiūri kviesi lauk imtum(ei)
3 renka šaukia sako liepė žiūri kvies × imtų
1pl renkame šaukiame sakome liepėme žiūrime kviesime laukime imtumėme
2pl renkate šaukiate sakote liepėte žiūrite kviesite laukite imtumėt(e)

Remark the paradigm of the conditionnal (ė’) is made of two components, a suffixal segment -tum- and a desinence of type ė.
Nonetheless, given the lack of stability of both components, the whole structure is considered in the present model as a
specific desinential system.

Table 2: Verb desinential systems

preterit
pres o ė

a I-I I-II
ia I-IV I-III
o III-II III-I
i II ×

Table 3: Verbal paradigms

1. a reflexive prefix (unable to take the initial
position) ;

2. a set of reflexive endings;

3. a rule of incompatibility between them.

It allows to give a simpler formalization of the
morphological expression of reflexivity in Lithua-
nian, since the split avoids to handle a single mor-
phological unit with two different positions in the
morphematic structure.

2.2 The secondary verb forms

The set of secondary verbs is an open collection,
insofar as it includes verbal derivatives and bor-
rowed verbs.

2.2.1 Formal structure
The pattern of secondary verbs is made of an arbi-
trarily complex morphological structure contain-
ing an actualized root, followed by a verb suf-
fixe and a desinence. That is, suffixes may follow
an already suffixed base (mok-y-toj-auja ’work(s)
as a teacher’), a prefixed one (nebe-žiūrės ’won’t
look any more’, ne-už-ant-spauduoja ’do(es) not
stamp’) or even a compound one (šun-uodegavo
’toadied’, su-daikta-vardėjo ’became a noun’). It
results from the derivational role of suffixes.

The set of verbal suffixes is quite restricted : -o-
, -ė-, -au-, -uo-, -av-, -i-, -y-, -in-, -en-. There are
some cases of combined suffixes : -st-y-, -d-in-

Before Before present Before preterit
consonant (paradigm -a) (paradigm -o)

-in-, -en-
-o-, -ė-, -y- -oj-, -ėj-, -ij-
-au-, -uo- -auj-, -uoj- -av-

Table 4: Compatibility of the verbal suffixes

(both with enlargement), -in-ė-, -tel-ė-. Besides,
Lithuanian shows several examples of formal vari-
ants (although most of them are not productive any
more) with different initial segments : ex. -dė-, -
sė-, -ė-; -dy-, -sy-, -y-. It seems to confirm the
remark of Kuryłowicz (Kuryłowicz, 1936) about
the trend of initial segments in complex suffixes to
lose their individual function, the whole combina-
tion becoming a free variant of the second suffix
used separately.

Contrary to primary verb forms, which show
a great variety of paradigms, secondary forms
are compatible only with the -a paradigm for the
present and with the -o paradigm for the preterit
(as type I-I). Given the compatibility of suffixes
with endings, different groups of suffixes may be
recognized (see table number 4).

The prefixes -en- and -in- may appear before all
types of ending (-a, -o and consonant4). The suf-
fixes -oj-, -ėj- and -ij- appear before vowels, -o-,
-ė- and -y- before consonant. The suffixes -auj-
and -uoj- appear only before the present and -au-
/-uo- before consonants, while -av- appears only
before past endings.

The remarks concerning primary verbs about
modal prefixes and reflexive clitic are shared by
secondary verbs.

4All tenses other than the present and the preterit, that is,
future, conditional, past iterative, imperative, are made with
a consonantic onset.

52

Loı̈c Boizou

52



noun verbal derivative
-as (auksas ’gold’) -uo-j-a (auksuoja ’to gild’)
-a (auka ’sacrifice’) -o-j-a (aukoja ’to sacrifice’)
-ė (dėmė ’stain’) -ė-j-a (dėmėja ’to stain’)
-is (dalis ’part’) -i-j-a (dalija ’to share’)

Table 5: Reactulisation of the noun desinential
base

2.2.2 General features of the suffixation
The weak specification of verbal suffixes It
must be emphasized that most of the Lithuanian
proper suffixes and enlargements are not specific
to either derivation or inflexion. That is, they are
general morphological devices. In fact, many mor-
phological markers (prefixes, suffixes, endings)
are obviously multi-functional in Lithuanian.

For example, the enlargement -st- can be used
as an inflexion marker indicating the present5

(dingsta ’disappear(s)’ vs dingo ’disappeared’) or
as a derivation marker indicating the repetition of
the process (PJAUNA ’cut (once)’ vs. PJAUSTO
’cut (repeating the process several times)’).

It is possible to give a similar example with
the suffix -ė(j)-, in (rare) derivational use, cf
ČIULPĖJA ’to touch several times’ vs. ČIULPA ’to
touch’, and in inflexional use, kalbėjo ’talked’ vs.
kalba ’talk(s), is/are talking’.

Desinential traces The semantic typology of the
denominal verbal suffixes given in the Grammar
of the Contemporary Lithuanian (Ambrazas (red.),
1996) proved to be in many respects inaccurate.
Indeed, this description offers a widespread syn-
onymy and homonymy rising doubt on the rele-
vancy of the classification.

In fact, despite their formal identity, some mor-
phological elements are not suffixes, but a re-
maining part of the desinential vocalic base of
the base lexeme. Selected allomorphs depend on
the paradigms of declension of the base noun, as
shown in the table 5.

Desinential traces are only formal elements
bereft of semantic motivation, and thus, invalidat-
ing the semantic categorization. The formal con-
cordance between traces and suffixes must be em-
phasized : it accounts to a large extent for the
shortcomings in the presentation of verbal suffixes
in the Lithuanian tradition. The description of the

5In fact, it might be better described as a co-marker,
whose value results from the combination of the enlargement
and the desinence.

desinential traces explains some essential features
of the morphological system. From a historical
perspective, it must be noticed that, although such
cases are not exceptional, it concerns old deriva-
tives, remaining as a legacy. As a general feature
in morphology (Kerleroux, 2005), not all the sys-
tem is semantically motivated

Main semantic values The core semantic sys-
tem is made of the suffixes -in-, -ė-, -uo-, -au-,
-av- (counterpart to -uo- and -au- in the preterit),
-telė-.

By comparing some verbs like GELTONUOJA
’to appear green’, GELTONĖJA ’to become green’
and GELTONINA ’to make sth green’, it seems pos-
sible to state that -uo- is intransitive and static, -ė-
intransitive dynamic and -in- transitive dynamic.
That’s why -in- (and some other related suffixes
-din-, -y-, -dy-) is used for causative verbs, since
they also involve a transitive dynamic process.
Thus, -in- may derive verbs from nouns (RUSINA
’to russify s.o.’ from RUSAS ’Russian’) as well as
from verbs (TALPINA ’to make sth fit into’ from
TELPA ’to fit into’)

The suffix -au- expresses activity
(MOKYTOJAUJA ’to work as/be a teacher
(MOKYTOJAS)’, UOGAUJA ’to pick berries
(UOGOS)’).

The suffix -telė- (deverbal verbal suffix) ex-
presses a very short process (ŽVELGIA ’to look’,
ŽVILGTELĖJA ’to glance’).

Borrowed verbs Some borrowed verbs follow
the semantic system, ex. BROKERIAUJA (un-
conventional) ’to deal’, SPORTUOJA ’to practice
sport’, EUROPINA ’to europeanize s.o./sth’, EU-
ROPĖJA ’to europeanize, to acquire european fea-
tures’, but for most of them the question of the
present productivity is open.

Contemporary loanwords seem to use the suf-
fixes -uo- (and its allomorphs -uoj- / -au-) or
-in- as general integrators (Corbin, 1986) into
the verb class, ex. SKENUOJA ’to scan’, DE-
VALVUOJA ’to devaluate’, SINCHRONIZUOJA ’to
synchronize’, GUGLINTI (unconventional) ’to use
Google’, TVITINTI (unconventional) ’to use Twit-
ter’. Although in such cases the suffix seems to
be unspecified regarding semantic value and tran-
sitivity, the couple FORMUOJA ’to form sth’ / FOR-
MUOJASI ’to form (intr)’ is an (older) example
where opposition is renewed by resort to the cate-
gory of reflexivity.

53

The Formal Patterns of the Lithuanian Verb Forms

53



After this brief general presentation, it must be
dealt with the more practical aspects of recogni-
tion and interpretation of the verbal word forms.

3 Interpretation of the word forms

In a perspective of NLP, we consider the descrip-
tion of the verb structures as a way to extract or
analyse some word forms in a symbolic frame-
work.

3.1 Recognition of the verb forms
The recognition of verb forms without lexicon is
not an easy task. The main problem is that primary
verb forms are highly ambiguous (it is general
tendency in Lithuanian, (Rimkutė and Grigonytė,
2006)). Different factors explain this situation:

• formal simplicity : nouns can be formally
more complex than verbs, but they can also
be as simple as primary verbs ;

• ambiguity of endings : desinences tend to
be short segments often a vowel or a vowel
and a consonant (although some Lithuanian
desinence may be dissyllabic), leading to
a widespread homonymy, increased by the
high number of inflexion categories and the
concurrence of multiple paradigms ;

• prosodic deficiency : the written language
does not mark prosody, which conveys very
useful grammatical information in the spoken
language;

• extended conversion : the same root can be
easily actualized according to different parts
of speech : ex. kalbos ’languages’, kalbu ’I
speak’, kalbus ’loquacious’.

As a consequence, analysis without dictionary
frequently generates multiple interpretations. For
example, formally rauda, teka and gera are all
possible verbs (candidate verbs), but while teka
is really a verb (’flows’), gera is an adjective
(’good’), and rauda might be either a verb (’cries’)
or a noun (’lamentation’).

It is yet possible to recognize few well marked
verb forms. Thus, some prefixes are specific to the
verb category : pri-, nu-, su-, api-, ati-. With few
exceptions, words with monosyllabic roots com-
bined with these prefixes are all verb forms. There
are two systematic exceptions concerning some
deverbal noun forms :

• words with the element -t-, which seems to be
a general mark of deverbalization in Lithua-
nian. It appears in the infinitive forms (ex.
TARTI ’to pronounce, to utter’), in the so
called past passive participle (ex. LAUKTAS
’waited’) and in some other deverbal nouns
(TARTIS ’pronunciation’, to be compared to
infinitive, NAŠTA ’burden’6)). Such deriva-
tives may all present the given prefixes, there-
fore bases ended with -t- are ambiguous in
almost all cases;

• verbal adjective derived by conversion, ex.
NUMANUS, PRIVALUS.

In such cases, the recognition must rely on some
unambiguous desinences.

Furthermore, the frequency of the conversion
strongly limits the possibility to use marked forms
to tag less marked ones. For example given a form
tebekalba, which is obviously a verb to the 3rd
person present, it does not imply that kalba (with-
out the modal particle) is always a verb (kalba
’speaks’), since it can also be a noun (kalba ’lan-
guage’). Nevertheless, it may be possible to rec-
ognize some verbo-nominal roots. This idea given
by Patrice Pognan (oral communication) comes
from the Semitic tradition and would lead to a
distinction between verbo-nominal roots (SKUBA
’to hurry’, SKUBA ’haste’, SKUBUS ’urgent’) and
purely nominal ones (MEDIS ’tree’, ŠUO ’dog’).

It is usually easier to deal with secondary forms,
since longer forms are usually more marked.
Nonetheless, there are some systematic interfer-
ences which stem from noun suffixes such as -
ija (collective suffix), -ėjas and -tojas (agent suf-
fixes), ex. genitive masc. sg. kėpėjo ’backer’s’ vs.
girdėjo ’heard’.

3.2 Grammatical interpretation
Once a word form is recognized as verbal the next
step is to interpret its grammatical features.

As for recognition, secondary forms are eas-
ier to interpret. Given the strict limitation of
paradigms, their grammatical interpretation is un-
ambiguous. The only exception concerns the in-
ference between the preterit forms of some deriva-
tives in -avo and the past iterative tense (in -davo).
It arises when the suffixal variant -av- is preceded

6The same element appears in many deverbal compound
suffixes (ĮKURTUVĖS, LENKTYNĖS, SPAUSTUVĖ, KASTU-
VAS, JUNGTUKAS, DEGTINĖ, TEIKTINAS), but in such cases
word forms are not monosyllabic any more.

54

Loı̈c Boizou

54



by -d, for example pret. maldavo ’begged’ (cf.
pres. maldauja, past iter. maldaudavo) vs past iter.
maldavo ’used to grind’ (cf. pres. mala ’grinds’).

For primary forms, problems mainly arise from
the tenses using enlargement, which can be :

• future (enlargement -s, allomorph -š) : kep-s-
iu fut. ’I will cook’ (pres. kep-u) vs juos-iu
pres. ’I wear a belt’ (fut. juos-ė-s-iu)

• imperative (enlargement -k) : tar-k-ime im-
per. ’let’s say’ (pres. tar-iame) vs. tik-ime
pres. ’we believe’ (imper. tik-ė-k-ime);

• the 1st pers. of the conditional : dirb-č-iau
cond. (pret. dirb-au) vs kvieč-iau pret. (cond.
kvies-čiau)

The previous examples involved the category of
tense and mood, but the -i paradigm imply a sys-
tematic ambiguity between the 2nd pers. sg. and
the 3rd pers. (ex. nori)

From the point of view of the implementation,
all these formal interferences require either a lexi-
con and/or the handling of multiple interpretations
(possibly solvable by a following syntactic or se-
mantic disambiguation).

4 Formal approach

The present section gives a short account of a pos-
sible formalization of the verbal lexical structure.
This is a complementary approach to lexicon-
based analysis, since it allows to provide interpre-
tations for verbal word forms absent from a given
lexical database, be it neologisms, rare verbs or
occasionalisms.

4.1 Patterns

The verbal patterns may be expressed by regular
expressions.

Conventions Conjunction is indicated by direct
concatenation (ex. αβ), disjunction by a vertical
stroke (α|β). Generic symbols are indicated by
upper case letters (for morphological classes) or
by Greek letters (for phonological classes, more
precisely from a phonographic point of view).

Generic symbols:

X base of arbitrary morphological complexity
A desinences of type -a
C desinences of the conditional
Ė desinences of type -ė
I desinences of type -i
I’ desinences of type -i’
I” desinences of type -i”
’A desinences of type -ia
O desinences of type -o
T A | ’A | O | Ė | I
T’ sI’ | kI” | C
V T | T’

Σ syllable
Σα syllable ending in α
Σ−α syllable ending by coda

other than α
σ′ s | š | ž
σ s | š
δ′ t | d | s
δ t | d
γ k | g

Primary verbal patterns

ΣdO|Ė (ex. įvykdė)
ΣstA|’A|O|Ė (ex. tirpsta)
Σσ

′
t|A|O|Ė (ex. klysta, laužta, pjaustė + niežti)

ΣσI’ (ex. kvies)
ΣkI” (ex bėk)
ΣV

Remark: all the preceding patterns may be preceded by
(M)(P)(si), where M is a modal prefix and P a proper prefix.

In fact, some patterns are slightly more strict
than ΣV. For example, ΣsI’ (implied by ΣV)
should be defined as Σ−δ

′
sI’ (and similarly Σ−δ′C

and Σ−γkI”). It is a consequence of some mor-
phophonological alternations (t+s→ s, d+s→ s,
s+s → s). But since such configurations are im-
possible in Lithuanian, the approximation ΣsI’ is
sufficient.

Secondary verbal patterns

XinA|O|T’
XenA|O|T’
XėjA|O
XojA|O
XijA|O
XėT’
XoT’
XyT’
XuoT’
XuojA
XaujA
XavO
XdavO (past iterative tense)

4.2 The analyzer formalism

The model is implemented with ALeksas (Boizou,
2009), a morphological analyzer of the Lithuanian
language, based on a structural description of the
lexicon by formal patterns expressed by finite state

55

The Formal Patterns of the Lithuanian Verb Forms

55



automata. The data are given in quite a rough for-
mat, with a numerical input state, a numerical out-
put state and a transition symbol.

Ex. (1, 2, "pri").

However, the formalism is extended by some
features which give to the description a more nat-
ural linguistic expression:

• complex symbols

• generic symbols and inheritance

• grammatical values recording

Besides, ALeksas allows recursive structures: a
transition by an automaton is possible. Thus, the
automaton representing the root (made of charac-
ters) is nested in the automaton of the lexical struc-
ture (made of morphological elements). The aim
is to avoid the mixing of different levels of descrip-
tion (morphemic vs graphematic).

Complex symbols In the first example, the sym-
bol was a simple string (“pri”), but ALeksas al-
lows complex symbols made of a string, a set of
grammatical values and a set of operations on the
grammatical context (see Value recording).

Ex. (250, 30, { "is"; TM(DSN),
CAS(NOM), GNR(M), NB(SG) ; }).

The three mentioned parts of symbol are sepa-
rated by semi-colons (in the previous example, the
last part is empty). Features encoding grammati-
cal information are made of a name of feature and
a corresponding value in brackets. The number of
features bound to a symbol is free.

Generic symbols and inheritance With the aim
of minimizing redundancy in automata, ALeksas
allows the use of generic symbols. For example,
instead of listing all the prefixes as transitions, it is
possible to declare a transition by a generic sym-
bol (written without quotes) :

Ex. (1, 2, Pfx).

All generic symbols must be defined in the
header of the file :

Ex. PFX = "pri" | "su" | "nu" |
... .

Generic symbols may be recursive, that is, a
generic symbol (ex. ExtSfxXV) may derived an-
other one (ex. SfxV).

Ex. SfxV = ExtSfxXV | { "d" ;
SEMT(fact) } | { "st" ;

SEMT(fact) }.

Generic symbols can also be associated to
grammatical features shared by derived symbols.
This property is very close to the concept of inher-
itance in object-oriented programming. For exam-
ple, all the symbols derived from the generic sym-
bol Pfx may inherit the value prefix (PFX) for the
feature morphological type (MT) :

Ex. (5, 5, { Pfx ; MT(PFX) ;
[>PFX] }).

The last component of the complex symbol, op-
erations on the context, is described in the next
paragraph.

Value recording ALeksas is also extended by
a grammatical recording device, which allows
to carry relevant grammatical informations while
progressing in the automaton. Such data are
recorded in a register expressing the grammatical
context. The register of ALeksas presents many
similarities both in design and in purpose with the
registers of Cohen-Sygal and Wintner (2006).

ALeksas defines four operations which may be
carried on the register, two mutators and two ac-
cessors :

>X : adds the symbol X

<X : suppresses the symbol X

+X : asserts the presence of the symbol X

-X : asserts the absence of the symbol X

All these operations, which can be combined by
&, appear in the third part of the complex transi-
tion symbol.

Ex. (5, 5, "si" ; REFL ;
[+PFX&-REFL&>REFL] ).

The purposes of the register are :

1. to insure of more natural expression of some
relations between morphological units;

2. to transfer information between the different
levels (root automaton↔ lexical automaton);

3. to minimize the automaton, especially in case
of distant grammatical dependencies.

56

Loı̈c Boizou

56



Figure 1: Sketch of an automaton

Figure 2: Corresponding compressed automaton

A characteristic example of the third point is
given by the reflexive clitic. With a usual automa-
ton, the structure (with a small illustrative subset)
would be as in figure 1. The upper part of the
figure describes unprefixed word forms, in which
desinences can be either reflexive or not, while the
lower part describes the prefixed verbal forms, re-
flexive or not, in which desinences cannot be re-
flexive. Obviously, the structure is partially dou-
ble.

The use of the register and the mechanism of ex-
tended symbols, which are able to encode a part of
the grammatical information, allows a significant
reduction of the automaton, as shown in figure 2
(the rule of incompatibility between two elements
with a REFL feature avoiding the conflict between
a reflexive prefix and a reflexive ending).

However, such an enhancement from the point
of view of expressivity involves a higher degree
of complexity in processing and an increase in the
time of execution.

5 Conclusion

Despite strong restrictions on the verbal patterns,
which belong to two very different subsets, recog-
nition and analysis of verb forms raise many

problems. The challenge mostly arise from the
fact that the simplest formal patterns are, to a
great extent, shared by verbs and nouns and from
multi-functional nature of many morphological el-
ements.

The model has to be tested, in order to deter-
mine more precisely possible gaps in the descrip-
tion and to evaluate the efficiency of the proposed
approach, especially by comparison with lexicon-
based and statistical methods.

In further works, the question of lemmatization
or, alternatively, the recognition of paradigmati-
cally related verb forms, has to be addressed, so as
to set the connections between word forms, which
are essentially syntactic units, and lexemes, that is,
lexical units.

References
Vytautas Ambrazas (red.). 1996. Dabartinės lietuvių

kalbos gramatika. Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidykla,
Vilnius.

Loïc Boizou. 2009. Analyse lexicale automatique
du lituanien. Master’s thesis, Institut national des
langues et civilisations orientales, Paris.

Michel Chicouène and Laurynas-Algimantas Skūpas.
1998. Parlons lituanien. L’Harmattan, Paris.

Yael Cohen-Sygal and Shuly Wintner. 2006. Fi-
nite state registered automata and their uses in natu-
ral languages. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 43–54.

Danièle Corbin. 1986. Morphologie dérivationnelle et
structuration du lexique. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen.

Tomáš Hoskovec. 2009. Formální morfologie
litevštiny ve funkčním popisu jazyka. Slovanská ús-
tav, Praha.

Françoise Kerleroux. 2005. Morpho-logie : la forme
et l’intelligible. Langage, 152:12–32.

Jerzy Kuryłowicz. 1936. Dérivation lexicale et dériva-
tion syntaxique. Bulletin de la société linguistique
de Paris, 37:79–92.

Peter Matthews. 1991. Morphology. Cambridge uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.

Erika Rimkutė and Gintarė Grigonytė. 2006. Au-
tomatizuotas lietuvių kalbos morfologinio daugia-
reikšmingumo ribojimas. Kalbų Studijos, 9:: 30–37.

Edward Stankiewicz. 1999. Grammatical categories
and their formal patterns. Travaux du Cercle lin-
guistique de Prague, (3):71–90.

57

The Formal Patterns of the Lithuanian Verb Forms

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


