










































Effect of Word Complexity on L2 Vocabulary Learning


Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 76–80,
Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Effect of Word Complexity on L2 Vocabulary Learning 

 

 

Kevin Dela Rosa 

Language Technologies Institute 

Carnegie Mellon University 

5000 Forbes Ave. Pittsburgh, PA 

kdelaros@cs.cmu.edu 

Maxine Eskenazi 

Language Technologies Institute 

Carnegie Mellon University 

5000 Forbes Ave. Pittsburgh, PA 

max@cs.cmu.edu 

 

 

Abstract 

Research has shown that a number of 

factors, such as maturational constraints, 

previous language background, and 

attention, can have an effect on L2 

acquisition. One related issue that remains 

to be explored is what factors make an 

individual word more easily learned. In 

this study we propose that word 

complexity, on both the phonetic and 

semantic levels, affect L2 vocabulary 

learning. Two studies showed that words 

with simple grapheme-to-phoneme ratios 

were easier to learn than more 

phonetically complex words, and that 

words with two or fewer word senses 

were easier to learn that those with three 

or more.  

1 Introduction 

There is much computer-assisted language learning 

(CALL) literature that explores effective methods 

of teaching vocabulary. In recent studies conducted 

using the REAP system, which finds documents 

from the internet to teach vocabulary, we have 

shown that speech synthesis reinforces written text 

for learning in reading activities (Dela Rosa et al., 

2010), and we have also shown that context-

sensitive dictionary definitions afford better 

vocabulary learning for L2 language students (Dela 

Rosa and Eskenazi, 2011).  

One issue that remains to be explored in this 

context: determining what factors make an 

individual word easier to learn. We propose that 

word complexity, on both the phonetic and 

semantic levels, can affect how easily an L2 

vocabulary word can be learned.  

In this paper we first discuss past work on 

factors that impact vocabulary acquisition in 

intelligent tutoring environments, and then explore 

work on defining the complexity of a word with 

respect to vocabulary learning. Next we describe 

two classroom studies we conducted with ESL 

college students to test the effect of word 

complexity on L2 vocabulary learning. Finally we 

examine our results and suggest future research 

directions. 

2 Background 

Many studies have been conducted to investigate 

the relationship between different variables and 

second language learning. For example, the age of 

the foreign language learner is often pointed to as a 

major factor in determining whether an individual 

will be successful in learning a new language 

(Marinova-Todd, 2000).  

In the domain of L2 vocabulary instruction, 

researchers have shown that factors such as 

maturational constraints, attention, previous 

language background, and order of acquisition, can 

all affect L2 vocabulary acquisition (Oxford and 

Scarcella, 1994). Additionally, another factor that 

affects L2 vocabulary learning is the number of 

exposures of a practice item that a student receives 

during learning activities. In a study on the effects 

of spacing and retention of vocabulary pairs, 

Pavlik and Anderson (2005) showed that each time 

an item is practiced, it receives an increment of 

76



strength, but these increments decay as a power 

function of time. Furthermore, it is generally 

accepted that reading is beneficial to vocabulary 

acquisition (Perfetti, 2010).  

One group of factors in foreign language 

vocabulary instruction that has often been 

overlooked is at the level of the individual word, 

such as word complexity. In sections 3.2 and 3.3, 

we describe two simple measures of phonetic and 

semantic word complexity that were examined 

during our classroom studies. There have been 

work on defining the complexity of a word, such as 

Jakielski’s (1998) Index of Phonetic Complexity, 

but we do not know of work that measures the 

effect of word complexity on L2 vocabulary 

learning. 

3 Classroom Study Setup 

In order to determine the effect that word 

complexity, in both the phonetic and semantic 

levels, have on L2 language learners, we 

conducted two in-vivo studies with ESL students at 

the English Language Institute of the University of 

Pittsburgh. The first study focused on the effect of 

phonetic word complexity on vocabulary learning. 

The second study explored the effect of semantic 

word complexity, in the form of the number of 

senses a word has, on vocabulary learning. Both 

studies and the tutoring system that was used are 

described in the next sections. 

3.1 Overview of the Tutoring System 

The tutoring system, REAP, is a web-based 

language tutor developed at Carnegie Mellon that 

harvests documents from the internet for L2 

vocabulary learning and reading comprehension 

(Heilman et al., 2006). It has been used as a testing 

platform for cognitive science studies. This system 

has the ability to provide reader-specific passages 

by consulting profiles that model a reader’s 

reading level, topic interests, and vocabulary goals. 

The system’s interface has several features that 

enhance a student’s learning experience. One key 

feature is that it provides users with the ability to 

listen to the spoken version of any word that 

appears in a document, making use of the Cepstral 

Text-to-Speech system (2001) to synthesize words 

on the fly when clicked on. Additionally, students 

can look up the definition of any of the words they 

encounter while reading the documents using an 

embedded electronic dictionary. The system also 

automatically highlights focus words, i.e. the 

words targeted for vocabulary learning in a 

particular reading. 

3.2 Study 1: Phonetic Complexity 

In Study 1, we looked at the effect that phonetic 

complexity, one measure of a word’s complexity, 

has on learning a word, and whether this 

complexity causes a word to be learned more 

easily when multimodal input is provided in the 

form of written text accompanied by spoken text 

generated through speech synthesis. To measure a 

word’s phonetic complexity, we used the ratio of a 

word’s graphemes to phonemes, where words with 

a ratio closer to 1 were simpler than those with a 

ratio much greater or less than 1. Note that for this 

study, simple letters have been used as the 

grapheme units. 

For example, the word cat has a simple one-to-

one mapping between its graphemes and phonemes 

(C A T vs. K AE T), while other words like 

borough and index have a more complex 

relationship (B O R O U G H vs. B ER OW, and I 

N D E X vs. IH N D EH K S), with grapheme-to-

phoneme ratios greater than 1 and less than 1 

respectively. 

For this study, there were 21 intermediate-level 
ESL college students at the University of Pittsburgh’s 

English Language Institute whose native languages 

included Arabic, Chinese and Spanish. Weekly 

group readings were given as class activities, 

centered on a total of 18 focus words, followed by 

practice closed cloze questions (multiple-choice 

fill-in-the-blank with 5 answer choices provided, 

and distractors coming from the Academic Word 

List or words that are similar but do not fit the 

blank properly) on the focus words that appeared 

in the particular reading. The focus words used in 

this study were taken evenly from the following 

word groups: 

 Words with grapheme-to–phoneme ratio 
equal to 1 [6 words] 

 Words with grapheme-to–phoneme ratio 
greater than 1 [6 words] 

 Words with grapheme-to–phoneme ratio 
less than 1 [6 words] 

A pre-test was administered at the beginning of 

the study, consisting of closed cloze questions 

about the focus words. A similar set of questions 

77



was presented to the students during the post-test, 

which occurred one week after the last reading 

activity. Between the pre-test and post-test, 6 

reading activities were administered, one per week, 

each focused on a single document. This activity 

typically took students 20-30 minutes to complete.  

3.3 Study 2: Semantic Complexity 

In Study 2, we investigated the effect that multiple 

word-senses, another measure of word complexity, 

have on learning a word. There were 21 
intermediate-level ESL college students at the 

University of Pittsburgh’s English Language Institute, 

whose native languages included Arabic, Chinese, 

Korean, and Spanish. As in Study 1 there was a 

pre-test, a post-test, and a series of weekly 

documents to be read featuring the focus words. In 

total there were 26 focus words, all of which were 

taken from the Academic Word List and 7 weekly 

reading activities.  

 

 
 

With respect to word complexity, the focus 

words were divided into the following groups: 

 Words with 1 sense [8 words] 

 Words with 2 senses [10 words] 

 Words with 3 or more senses [8 words] 

4 Results 

The results of both of our studies showed that the 

use of the tutoring system significantly helped 

students improve their performance on the 

vocabulary tests, as made evident by the average 

overall gains between the pre-test and post-test (p 

< 0.001). Note that the error bars shown in this 

section show the standard error. Also note that 

normalized gain, the measurement being used to 

describe improvement in both studies, is given the 

by the following:  

 

If the post-test score is greater than the pre-test 

score, then 
 

Normalized gain = (post-test score – pre-test 

score) / (maximum-possible-score – pre-test score) 
 

Otherwise, 
 

Normalized gain = (post-test score – pre-test 

score) / (pre-test score) 
 

In Study 1, the average normalized gain 

between the pre-test and post-test was 0.2563 (± 

0.0466). Figure 1 illustrates the differences in 

vocabulary gain when the gains are separated by 

word condition type. The average gains per 

condition are 0.2222, 0.1270, and 0.1191 for the 

conditions of grapheme-to-phoneme ratio = 1, 

grapheme-to-phoneme ratio > 1, and grapheme-to-

phoneme ratio < 1 respectively. 

In Study 2, the average normalized gain 

between the pre-test and post-test was 0.5323 (± 

0.0833). Figure 2 illustrates the impact of word 

sense complexity on vocabulary gains. With 

respect to word sense complexity, the average 

gains per condition are 0.2495, 0.4163, and 0.1699 

for the 1-sense, 2-senses, and 3-or-more senses 

conditions respectively. 

5 Discussion  

The results of both studies tend to confirm our 

initial hypotheses and suggest that word 

complexity, in the forms of phonetic complexity 

and the number of word senses a word has, does 

make a significant difference in how easily an L2 

vocabulary word is learned.  

 
Figure 2: Impact of word sense complexity on the 

improvement between pre-test & post-test in Study 2 

 
Figure 1: Impact of phonetic complexity on the 

improvement between pre-test & post-test in Study 1 

78



In Study 1, we see that the ‘simple’ words 

(those with grapheme-to-phoneme ratios equal to 

1), afford more learning than the more ‘complex’ 

words, as made evident by the difference in gains 

between the pre-test and post-test (p < 0.04) shown 

in Figure 1. This result suggests that the phonetic 

complexity of a word may play a role in learning 

that word in an intelligent tutoring environment. 

In Study 2, the words with many senses (3 or 

more) have significantly lower gains than words 

with 1 or 2 senses (p < 0.05). There was no 

significant difference in gains between words with 

1 word sense and words with 2 word senses, as 

shown in Figure 2. This result seems to suggest 

that words with 2 or fewer word senses are 

generally easier for L2 students to learn than those 

with 3 or more word senses. This could be because 

a student has a harder time choosing the correct 

meaning of a word amongst many choices. Fewer 

choices seem to afford more learning than showing 

just the right one, which may indicate that by 

comparing two meanings with the meaning in the 

document, the student is actively constructing her 

knowledge of the word. Dela Rosa and Eskenazi 

(2011) found that giving students only the correct 

meaning of a polysemous word afforded less 

learning than giving them several meanings in a 

ranked order. 

6 Conclusion and Future Directions 

This paper demonstrates that word complexity can 

affect how easily an L2 vocabulary word can be 

learned. We proposed two dimensions of word 

complexity, one based on the complexity of a 

word’s grapheme to phoneme ratio, and another 

based on the number of meanings a word has. Two 

in-vivo studies were conducted with ESL college 

students to test our hypothesis. Our results suggest 

that word complexity on both the phonetic and 

semantic level does have an effect on L2 

vocabulary learning.  

A future research direction that this work 

suggests is the search for other measures of word 

complexity, such as a more complex measure of 

grapheme to phoneme ratio, for example taking 

into account the ambiguity of a particular 

grapheme, or more complex measures of semantic 

complexity, like one that may take the average 

number of synonyms a word sense has, to 

determine their effect on learning using an 

intelligent tutoring system. This information could 

help define different ways to teach different words, 

providing more scaffolding for harder words, for 

example. 

We would also like to investigate whether the 

average aggregate vocabulary learning trends of 

different native language groups correlates with 

different measures of word complexity, and thus 

might reveal a relation between the structure of L1 

and difficulties in L2 vocabulary learning. 

Finally we would like to investigate whether 

providing examples of focus word usage prior to or 

following a reading activity is beneficial to 

vocabulary learning.  

Acknowledgments 

This project is supported through the Pittsburgh 

Science of Learning Center which is funded by the 

US National Science Foundation under grant 

number SBE-0836012. Any opinions, findings, and 

conclusions or recommendations expressed in this 

material are those of the authors and do not 

necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.  

The authors would like to thank Betsy Davis, 

Gregory Mizera, Dawn McCormick, Chris Ortiz, 

Tamar Bernfeld, and Kimberly Rehak at the 

University of Pittsburgh’s English Language 

Institute for their participation and input in the 

classroom studies.  

References 

Cepstral Text-to-Speech. 2001. http://www.cepstral.com 
 

Kevin Dela Rosa, Gabriel Parent, and Maxine Eskenazi. 

2010. Multimodal learning of words: A study on the 

use of speech synthesis to reinforce written text in L2 

language learning. Proceedings of the 2010 ISCA 

Workshop on Speech and Language Technology in 

Education. 
 

Kevin Dela Rosa and Maxine Eskenazi. 2011. Impact of 

Word Sense Disambiguation on Ordering Dictionary 

Definitions in Vocabulary Learning Tutors. 

Proceedings of the 24th Florida Artificial Intelligence 

Research Society Conference. 

 

Michael Heilman, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Jamie 

Callan, and Maxine Eskenazi. 2006. Classroom 

success of an Intelligent Tutoring System for lexical 

practice and reading comprehension. Proceedings of 

the 9th International Conference on Spoken 

Language. 
 

79



Kathy Jakiellski. 1998. Motor Organization in the 

Acquisition of Consonant Clusters. PhD Thesis, 

University of Texas at Austin. 
 

Stefka Marinova-Todd, D. Bradford Marshall, And 

Catherine Snow. 2000. Three Misconceptions About 

Age and L2 Learning. TESOL Quarterly, 34(1): 9-

34. 
 

Rebecca Oxford and Robin Scarcella. 1994. Second 

Language Vocabulary Learning Among Adults: State 

Of The Art In Vocabulary Instruction. System, 22(2): 

231-243. 
 

Philip Pavlik and John Anderson. 2005. Practice and 

forgetting effects on vocabulary memory: An 

activation-based model of the spacing effect. 

Cognitive Science, 29 (4): 559-586. 
 

Charles Perfetti. 2010. Decoding, Vocabulary, and 

Comprehension: The Golden Triangle of Reading 

Skill. In Bringing Reading Researchers to Life, 

Margret McKeown & Linda Kucan (editors). 

Guilford Press, New York, US.  

Appendix A. Words Used in Studies 

Words from Study 1: condominium, exotic, 

boost, escapism, yearning, asylum, blatant, 

denizens, partisan, expats, influx, levy, taxes, 

lucrative, sector, ostracism, taunts, withdrawal 
 

Words from Study 2: established, incorporated, 

intervention, coherent, facilitate, induce, relax, 

designed, flexible, inspected, registered, category, 

enforce, illustrations, accumulate, hypothesis, 

period, qualitative, simulations, conducted, debate, 

domestic, found, concentrate, depression, register 

80


