










































Extending the tool, or how to annotate historical language varieties


Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 1–9,
Portland, OR, USA, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extending the tool,
or how to annotate historical language varieties

Cristina Sánchez-Marco
Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Barcelona, Spain
cristina.sanchezm@upf.edu

Gemma Boleda, Lluı́s Padró
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

Barcelona, Spain
{gboleda,padro}@lsi.upc.edu

Abstract

We present a general and simple method to
adapt an existing NLP tool in order to enable
it to deal with historical varieties of languages.
This approach consists basically in expanding
the dictionary with the old word variants and
in retraining the tagger with a small training
corpus. We implement this approach for Old
Spanish.

The results of a thorough evaluation over the
extended tool show that using this method
an almost state-of-the-art performance is ob-
tained, adequate to carry out quantitative stud-
ies in the humanities: 94.5% accuracy for the
main part of speech and 92.6% for lemma. To
our knowledge, this is the first time that such
a strategy is adopted to annotate historical lan-
guage varieties and we believe that it could be
used as well to deal with other non-standard
varieties of languages.

1 Introduction

In the last few years, there has been a growing in-
terest in all disciplines of the humanities to study
historical varieties of languages using quantitative
methods (Sagi et al., 2009; Lüdeling et al., to ap-
pear). Large corpora are necessary to conduct this
type of studies, so as to smooth the great data sparse-
ness problem affecting non-standard varieties of lan-
guages, and thus guarantee the validity of the gener-
alizations based on these data.

Historical language varieties bear similarities to
standard varieties, but they also exhibit remarkable
differences in a number of respects, such as their

morphology, syntax, and semantics. In addition, as
orthographic rules were not established until later
centuries, a great amount of graphemic variation is
found in historical texts, such that one word can
be written using many different graphemic variants.
This variation increases considerably the number of
different words and therefore the lexicon of the cor-
responding language variety. For instance, searching
for the infinitival verb form haber ’have’ in a histor-
ical corpus for Spanish can be a difficult task if there
are, say, 5 variants of the same word (auer, aver,
hauer, haver, haber) and the corpus does not con-
tain any other linguistic information, such as lemma
and part of speech (PoS).

In this paper we propose a strategy to automati-
cally enrich texts from historical language varieties
with linguistic information, namely to expand a pre-
existing NLP tool for standard varieties of a lan-
guage. To our knowledge, it is the first time that such
an approach is proposed and evaluated. In particular,
we describe the method followed to extend a library
(FreeLing1) for the linguistic analysis of Standard
Spanish to enable it to deal with Old Spanish2.

This general approach has four main advantages
over the state-of-the-art strategies (described in sec-
tion 2). First, the resulting tool can be reused (with
the consequent saving of resources). Second, the
tool can be further improved by other researchers.
Third, it is the tool that is adapted, instead of forc-

1http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling. The tool
for Old Spanish is available in the development version 3.0-
devel, accessible via SVN.

2As it is considered by most scholars, we consider Old Span-
ish the period from the 12th to the 16th century.

1



ing standardisation on the original texts (see section
2). Also, the strategy can be used to extend other
existing tools.

The specific case study in this paper presents ad-
ditional advantages. On the one hand, FreeLing is an
open source resource that is well documented and
actively maintained. In addition, due to the modu-
larity of this tool, it is relatively easy to adapt. On
the other hand, the result of the extension is a tool
for Old Spanish across different centuries, that is to
say, the tool can be used to accurately tag not only
Spanish from a particular century but also to tag the
language over a long period of time (from the 12th
to the 16th century). The resulting tool achieves al-
most state-of-the-art performance for PoS-taggers:
a tagging accuracy of 94.5% on the part of speech,
92.6% on lemmas, and 89.9% on the complete mor-
phological tag including detailed information such
as gender or number for nouns and tense and person
for verbs.

Plan of the paper. In Section 2 we review the
state of the art. In Sections 3 through 5 we describe
FreeLing and the data and methodology used for its
adaptation to Old Spanish. Then the results of the
evaluation and error analysis are presented (Sections
6 and 7). We conclude with some discussion and
suggestions for future work (Section 8).

2 Related work

Up to now, three main approaches have been fol-
lowed to automatically enrich historical corpora
with linguistic information: (i) automatic tagging
using existing tools followed by human correction,
(ii) standardisation of the words followed by auto-
matic tagging with existing tools, and (ii) re-training
of a tagger on historical texts.

The first approach has been adopted in projects
such as the Penn Historical Corpora3 , The York-
Toronto-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of Old English
Prose (Taylor, 2007), and the Corpus of Early
English Correspondence or CEEEC (Raumolin-
Brunberg and Nevalainen, 2007). The second strat-
egy, namely, to standardize the corpora prior to
their annotation with NLP tools, has also been fol-
lowed by other scholars (Rayson et al., 2007; Ernst-
Gerlach and Fuhr, 2007; Baron and Rayson, 2008).

3http://www.ling.upenn.edu/hist-corpora.

In this approach, graphemic variants in Old English
and German texts are identified and subsequently
mapped onto their modern equivalents (i.e., the stan-
dardized forms). This approach is adequate for
tasks such as information retrieval (Ernst-Gerlach
and Fuhr, 2007), but not quite so for quantitative
research for historical variants. For example, there
are many words in historical varieties of languages
for which a corresponding standard variant does not
exist (e.g., maguer ‘although’ in Old Spanish). As
reported in Rayson et al. (2007) the PoS tagging ac-
curacy obtained with this method in texts from the
Early Modern English period is around 85%.

Recently there have been some experiments with
morphosyntactic tagging of historical data by train-
ing a model on old texts (Rögnvaldsson and Hel-
gadóttir, 2008; Dipper, 2010). For example,
Rögnvaldsson and Helgadóttir (2008) use this ap-
proach to tag Old Norse texts (sagas from the 13th
and 14th century) yielding 92.7% accuracy on the
tag, almost 3 points higher than that obtained in our
case.

Our approach is similar in spirit to the latter, as
we also train a tagger using an annotated historical
corpus. However, it differs in that we consistently
extend the whole resource (not only the tagger, but
also the dictionary and other modules such as the to-
kenization). Thus, we build a complete set of tools to
handle Old Spanish. Also, our work covers a larger
time span, and it is able to tag texts from a wide vari-
ety of genres (hence the difference in accuracy with
respect to Rögnvaldsson and Helgadóttir (2008)).

As noted in the Introduction, in comparison to
state-of-the-art approaches the strategy proposed in
this paper requires fewer resources, it is easily
portable and reusable for other corpora and lan-
guages and yields a satisfactory accuracy.

3 The analyzer

FreeLing is a developer-oriented library providing a
number of language analysis services, such as mor-
phosyntactic tagging, sense annotation or depen-
dency parsing (Padró et al., 2010). As mentioned
in the Introduction, this tool, being open source, ac-
tively developed and maintained, and highly mod-
ular, is particularly well suited for our purposes.
In addition, it provides an application programming

2



interface (API) which allows the desired language
analyses to be integrated into a more complex pro-
cessing. In its current version (2.2), this resource
provides services (to different extents) for the fol-
lowing languages: English, Spanish, Portuguese,
Italian, Galician, Catalan, Asturian, and Welsh. In
this paper we have focused on the adaptation of the
resources for morphosyntactic tagging, but the syn-
tactic and semantic modules can also be customized.
The FreeLing processing pipeline for morphosyn-
tactic tagging is illustrated in Figure 1. As shown
in the figure, a set of texts is submitted to the an-
alyzer, which processes and enriches the texts with
linguistic information using the different modules:
tokenization, dictionary, affixation, probability as-
signment and unknown-word guesser4, and PoS tag-
ger.

The tagset used by this tool is based on the EA-
GLES standard5. The first letter of each tag indi-
cates the morphological class of the word. The re-
maining letters (up to 6) specify more fine-grained
morphosyntactic and semantic information, such as
the gender and number of nouns or the tense, mode
and type (main or auxiliary) of verbs.

4 The Data

4.1 Old Spanish Corpus

In order to adapt the tool, we have worked with
the electronic texts compiled, transcribed and edited
by the Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies
(HSMS).6 We will refer to the set of texts used to
adapt the tool as Old Spanish Corpus. These texts,
all critical editions of the original manuscripts, com-
prise a variety of genres (fiction and non-fiction)
from the 12th until the 16th century and consist
of more than 20 million tokens and 470 thousand
types. The original texts in these compilations ren-
der the copy very closely (diplomatic transcriptions)

4This module has two functions: first, it assigns an a priori
probability to each analysis of each word. Second, if a word has
no analysis (none of the previously applied modules succeeded
to analyze it), a statistical guesser is used to find out the most
likely PoS tags, based on the word ending.

5Expert Advisory Group on Language Engineering Stan-
dards (http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES96/home.
html).

6Corfis et al. (1997), Herrera and de Fauve (1997), Kasten
et al. (1997), Nitti and Kasten (1997), O’Neill (1999).

raw text

tokenizer

probabilities

affixation

dictionarymorphological
analysis

ANALYZER

TAGGER

tagged
corpus

Figure 1: Processing pipeline in FreeLing.

and contain annotations encoding paleographic in-
formation, for instance about the physical charac-
teristics of the manuscript or marks and notes by
different scribes. These annotations were removed,
and the original transcription of the words has been
mantained preserving the similarity to the original
copies.

As is the case for most languages keeping data
from historical varieties, the number and type or
genre of texts which have been preserved for each
century varies. From this perspective, the Old Span-
ish Corpus used to extend the tool is representative
of the language, since it covers the language of the
Middle Age period, containing samples of most gen-
res and centuries from the 12th century up to the
16th century. As shown in the first row of Table 1,
the corpus contains a much lower number of tokens
for the 12th century compared to the remaining cen-
turies, as only one document from this century is in-
cluded in the corpus. The 13th to 15th centuries are
fairly well represented, while comparably less to-
kens are available for the 16th century, due to the de-
sign of the HSMS collections. To get an impression
on the types of texts covered in the Old Spanish Cor-
pus, the documents have been classified according
to their genre or topic in CORDE7. 8 types of genres
or topics have been considered: fiction (including

7CORDE is a reference corpus of diachronic Spanish con-
taining texts from the 8th century up to 1975 (http://www.
rae.es).

3



novels and also other narrative books), law, didac-
tics (treatises, sapiential literature), history (chroni-
cles, letters and other historical documentation), so-
ciety (hunting, fashion), poetry, science (medicine,
astrology, astronomy), and religion (Bible). Fig-
ure 2 illustrates the distribution of texts according to
their genre or topic in each century. The width and
height of rows represent the proportion of texts of
each genre-topic for each century. Each box corre-
sponds to a particular type of text. On the x-axis the
centuries are represented, from the 13th to the 16th
century.8 As can be seen from the size of the corre-
sponding boxes, there is a higher number of fiction
books in the later centuries. In contrast, the propor-
tion of law and religion books decreases in time. All
in all, the corpus contains a fair variety of genres
and topics present in Old Spanish literature, so the
language used in these types of documents is repre-
sented in the expanded tool as well.

13 14 15 16
didactics

fiction

history

law

poetry
religion
science
society

Figure 2: Distribution of genres in the Old Spanish Cor-
pus from 13th to 16th century.

4.2 Gold Standard Corpus
A Gold Standard Corpus has been created in order to
retrain the tagger and to carry out the evaluation and
the error analysis. This corpus consists of 30,000 to-
kens which have been pre-annotated with the Stan-
dard Spanish tagger and manually corrected. Texts

8The document in the 12th century data, belonging to poetry,
is not represented in this graph because of its small size.

composing the Gold Standard Corpus have been se-
lected from the Old Spanish Corpus so as to mir-
ror the data in the whole corpus as far as possible.
The token distribution of the Gold Standard Corpus
is shown in the second row of Table 1, and the dis-
tribution of text types in the second row of Table 2.

4.3 Standard Spanish Corpus
A Standard Spanish Corpus has been used to estab-
lish a baseline performance for the tagger, namely,
the LexEsp corpus (Sebastián et al., 2000), consist-
ing of texts from 1975 to 1995 and totalling more
than 5 million words. The corpus comprises a repre-
sentative sample of the Spanish written variety in the
20th century (40% of the tokens in this corpus cor-
respond to fiction, 20% science and didactics, and
40% different classes of press –sports, weekly mag-
azines, and newspapers).

5 Method

The method proposed consists in using the exist-
ing Standard Spanish tool as a basis to create an
Old Spanish processor to automatically enrich Old
Spanish texts with lemma and morphosyntactic tag
information. The adaptation of the existing Standard
Spanish tool involves the expansion of the dictio-
nary (section 5.1), the modification of other modules
which are part of the library, such as the tokenization
and the affixation modules (section 5.2), and the re-
training of the tagger (section 5.3).

5.1 Dictionary expansion
Data. The Standard Spanish dictionary contains
556,210 words. This dictionary has been expanded
with 32,015 new word forms, totalling more than
55,000 lemma-tag pairs, and thus increasing the
number of word forms in the dictionary to 588,225.
For example, the word form y in the expanded dic-
tionary has 4 different lemma-tag pairs, correspond-
ing to a coordinate conjunction, a noun, a pronoun,
and an adverb, whereas in the Standard Spanish dic-
tionary it has only 2 lemma-tag pairs, corresponding
to the coordinate conjunction and noun uses. Table 3
illustrates the distribution of the categories of words
which have been added to the dictionary. As could
be expected from the general distribution of words
across PoS categories, verbs and nouns account for
more than half of the words added.

4



Corpus 12th c. 13th c. 14th c. 15th c. 16th c. Total
Old Spanish 0.1 32.2 21.5 31.6 14.6 22,805,699
Gold Standard 4.5 31.3 35.1 20.5 8.6 30,000

Table 1: Size of the Old Spanish and the Gold Standard Corpus, respectively, in tokens (percentages over the Total
column).

Corpus Fiction Law Didactics History Society Poetry Science Religion Total
Old Spanish 22.4 21.8 18.5 17.5 6.3 6.6 3.6 3.3 22,805,699
Gold Standard 39.9 13.0 13.0 13.0 0.0 8.7 8.7 4.3 30,000

Table 2: Text type distribution in the Old Spanish and the Gold Standard Corpus, respectively, in tokens (percentages
over the Total column).

Verbs 48.8% Adverbs 0.4%
Nouns 20.8% Determiners 0.3%
Adjectives 7.0% Conjunctions 0.3%
Pronouns 0.6% Interjections 0.2%
Prepositions 0.5% Numbers 0.2%

Punctuation 0.01%

Table 3: Distribution of words added to the dictionary.

Method. Two different types of mapping rules
have been used in order to automatically generate
the types of words to be added to the dictionary:
substring rules and word rules. Substring rules map
54 sequences of characters from an old variant onto
the corresponding standard variant. These mapping
rules are based on the observed regularities in the
spelling of Old Spanish texts (Sánchez-Prieto, 2005;
Sánchez-Marco et al., 2010). These rules are inde-
pendent of the morphophonological context, except
that 18% of them are restricted to the beginning or
the end of a word. Table 4 shows some examples
of these rules. 81.4% of the types added to the dic-
tionary have been generated using these rules. All
words generated by this method are added to the dic-
tionary if and only if they are contained in the cor-
pus. This avoids the automatic generation of a very
high number of variants.

Old Modern Example
euo evo nueuo → nuevo ’new’
uio vio uio → vio ’saw’

Table 4: Examples of the substring rules.

The remaining 18.5% of the types incorporated
into the dictionary have been created using word
rules. These are mappings from an old variant of
a word to its corresponding standard variant (cre-
ated manually), to deal with the most frequent types
not covered by the substring rules, such as for in-
stance words without an accent (consul → cónsul
’consul’), or other graphemic variants (yglesia →
iglesia ’church’, catholica → católica ’catholic’).

5.2 Adapting other modules

The tokenization of some symbols has been cus-
tomized, in order to deal with the particular charac-
teristics of the original data, for instance to account
for the fact that in most cases the letter ç is written in
the texts of the HSMS as c’, and ñ as n˜ (yac’e ’lay’,
cin˜o ’adhered’). Also, FreeLing analyzes forms not
found in the dictionary through an affixation mod-
ule that checks whether they are derived forms, such
as adverbs ending in -mente or clitic pronouns (-lo,
-la) attached to verbs. This module has also been
adapted, incorporating Old Spanish clitics (-gela, -
li) and other variants of derivation affixes (adverbs
in -mientre or -mjentre).

5.3 Retraining the tagger

FreeLing includes 2 different modules able to per-
form PoS tagging: a hybrid tagger (relax), integrat-
ing statistical and hand-coded grammatical rules,
and a Hidden Markov Model tagger (hmm), which
is a classical trigram markovian tagger, based on
TnT (Brants, 2000). As mentioned in Section 4,
the tagger for Standard Spanish has been used to
pre-annotate the Gold Standard Corpus, which has

5



subsequently been corrected to be able to carry out
the retraining. The effort of correcting the corpus
is much lower compared to annotating from scratch.
In this paper we present the evaluation of the per-
formance of the extended resource using the hmm
tagger with the probabilities generated automatically
from the trigrams in the Gold Standard Corpus.

6 Evaluation

In this section we evaluate the dictionary (Section
6.1) and present the overall tagging results (Section
6.2). The resources for Standard Spanish have been
used as a baseline.

6.1 Dictionary

In order to evaluate the expanded dictionary, we use
three different measures: ambiguity, coverage, and
accuracy and recall of automatically generated en-
tries.

Ambiguity measures the average number of
lemma-tag pairs per word form. To compute average
ambiguity, each word form is assigned a score cor-
responding to the number of lemma-tag pairs in its
dictionary entry. We have checked ambiguity in two
different ways: (i) in the dictionary (type-based),
(ii) in the corpus (token-based). Coverage measures
the percentage of tokens in the corpus which are
analysed by the dictionary. Uncovered or unknown
words are those forms which are not included in the
dictionary or analysed by the affixation module. We
also evaluated the precision and recall of automati-
cally generated entries, that is the percentage of cor-
rect words among those added to the dictionary by
the substring rules,9 and the percentage of the ex-
pected lemmas for those words actually added by the
rules. Both measures have been obtained by check-
ing a random sample of 512 types (corresponding
to 2% of the types added with the substring rules).
As only the words added to the dictionary are being
evaluated, these measures have been obtained only
over the Old Spanish dictionary.

The results of the evaluation are summarised in
Table 5. As can be seen in this table, the Old Spanish
Corpus is more ambiguous than the Standard Span-
ish Corpus, despite the fact that the dictionary is not

9The word rules and manual mappings have not been evalu-
ated, as they have been manually created.

(note that the 32,000 entries added are only a 5.8%
increase in the Standard dictionary). The higher am-
biguity in the corpus is probably due to the fact that
many function words, such as the word y mentioned
in section 5.1, have more entries in the expanded dic-
tionary than in the Standard Spanish dictionary. The
increase in ambiguity is also due to the large time
span covered by the dictionary, as for instance forms
that in the 13th century were lexical verbs and later
changed to auxiliaries will bear both the old and the
new morphosyntactic tag (haber changed its mean-
ing from ’possess’ or ’hold’ to be the auxiliary in
perfect tenses). Due to this increase in ambiguity, we
can expect a higher number of errors due to ambigu-
ity in Old Spanish than in Standard Spanish texts, as
the tagger has more options to disambiguate in con-
text and thus the overall error probability increases.
As for coverage, 99.4% of the words in the Standard
Spanish Corpus are covered by the Standard Span-
ish dictionary and affixation module. In contrast,
92.6% of the words in the Old Spanish Corpus are
covered. If a word has no analysis, the probability
assignment module tries to guess which are its pos-
sible PoS tags, based on the word ending. This also
means that the adapted tool needs to guess the tag of
a word more often, therefore increasing the number
of potential errors.

As for precision, the lemmas and tags which have
been automatically generated using substring rules
and added to the dictionary achieve 99.2%. Only
0.8% of the lemmas and tags are incorrect. These
are mostly cases either of Latin words (sedeat) or
proper nouns (maaçe, lameth), which in any case are
words not easily treated with automatic rules. Also
in this evaluation sample, there are some incomplete
entries, lacking 1 or more lemmas and tags. Cases
of entries lacking some lemma (1.4% of the evalua-
tion sample, yielding 98.6% recall) are proper nouns
(valenc’ia, thesis), Latin words (mjlites, euocat), al-
ready incomplete entries in the Standard Spanish
dictionary (escanpado ’cleared up’), and lemma-tag
pairs not generated by any of the rules (baiassen
’went down’). Entries lacking some tags (5.3% of
the evaluation sample, yielding 94.7% recall) are
mostly cases of some verbal tenses, for example
words in which the tag for the future or simple past
is not included (pessara ’he will regret’, affronto ’he
faced’). The old variant typically lacks the diacritics,

6



Old Spanish Standard Spanish
Type-based Token-based Type-based Token-based

Ambiguity 1.21 1.85 1.20 1.68
Coverage 92.6% 99.4%
Precision 99.2%
Recall 98.6% (lemmas), 95% (PoS)

Table 5: Evaluation of the dictionary.

so the morphosyntactic tag for the accented variants
is not generated.

6.2 Tagging

In order to evaluate the performance of the tagger,
the accuracy in the tagging of lemmas, PoS-1 (the
whole label, containing detailed morphosyntactic in-
formation; 6 characters of the tag in total), and PoS-
2 (word class; 1 character in total) has been checked.
In all cases, this measure has been obtained as a
result of a 5-fold cross-validation. As described in
Section 5, the method proposed involves (a) adapt-
ing the dictionary and other modules, (b) retraining
the tagger with Old Spanish texts. To assess the rel-
ative impact of these two adaptations, we report the
results of evaluating the tagging under several con-
ditions. To assess (a), we report two scores obtained
using: (C0) original tools for Standard Spanish, and
(C1) the expanded dictionary and other modules
combined with the Standard Spanish tagger. To as-
sess (b), and, specifically, the impact of the size of
the tagger retraining corpus, we report the results of
retraining the tagger with: (C2) 10,000-token, (C3)
20,000-token, and (C4) 30,000-token subsets of the
Gold Standard Corpus, always using the expanded
dictionary and other modules.

The accuracy scores obtained on the Gold Stan-
dard Corpus are summarised in Table 6. This table
shows that in each of the conditions, the accuracy
increases. As can be seen in Table 7, most of the im-
provements are significant at a 99% confidence level
(χ2 test, 1 d.f.). Exceptions are the lemma when
comparing C2 and C1, and the lemma and tag when
comparing C4 and C3, which do not obtain a signif-
icant improvement (not even at the 95% level).

The results indicate that both adapting the dic-
tionary and other modules and retraining the tag-
ger have a positive impact on the overall perfor-

Lemma PoS-1 PoS-2
C0 72.4 70.9 77.4
C1 90.7 86.0 91.0
C2 91.2 87.5 91.9
C3 92.3 89.5 93.7
C4 92.6 89.9 94.5
SS 99.1 94.0 97.6

Table 6: Accuracy obtained for lemma, PoS-1, and PoS-2
in the 5-fold cross-validation for the Old Spanish tagger
on the Gold Standard Corpus (rows C0 to C4) and for
Standard Spanish (row SS).

Condition C0 C1 C2 C3
C1 l, p1, p2
C2 l, p1, p2 p1, p2
C3 l, p1, p2 l, p1, p2 l, p1, p2
C4 l, p1, p2 l, p1, p2 l, p1, p2 p2

Table 7: Statistical significance in the tagging with the
different conditions. If there is a statistically significant
difference at a 99% confidence degree according to a χ2

test with 1 d.f., l (for lemma), p1 (for PoS-1), and p2 (for
PoS-2) are written.

mance of the extended tool on Old Spanish texts.
The factor that has the highest impact is the dictio-
nary expansion (together with the adaptation of the
tokenization and affixation modules), with improve-
ments ranging from 13.6% for PoS-2 to 18.3% for
lemma. However, retraining the tagger, even if it is
with a small corpus, also pays off in terms of preci-
sion: With 30,000 words, the performance on PoS-
identification increases from 91.0% to 94.5%. The
best result with the full set of tags (PoS-1) is 89.0%
and 94.5% for the main PoS.

To compare the Old Spanish and Standard Span-
ish taggers on the same basis, we retrained the
FreeLing Standard Spanish tagger on a 30,000-token

7



fragment of the LexEsp corpus. The results for Stan-
dard Spanish, shown in the last row of Table 6, are
still significantly higher (χ2 test, 1 d.f., 99% conf.
level) than those for the Old Spanish tagger: The
accuracy over PoS-2 is 97.6%, 3 points higher than
the 94.5% obtained for Old Spanish. The error anal-
ysis presented below shows the causes of these er-
rors, giving clues as to how this performance could
be improved.

7 Error analysis

The analysis of errors has been conducted over the
100 most frequent errors in tagging obtained with
the Old Spanish tagger under condition C4. This
analysis shows that most of the errors in the tag-
ging are due to the ambiguity in the dictionary, as
could be expected given the discussion in the previ-
ous section. Specifically, 90% of the errors corre-
sponds to words for which the correct tag is avail-
able in the dictionary, but the tagger has not selected
it. More than half of these errors (57.8%) are due
to types which are also ambiguous in the Standard
Spanish dictionary. The most frequent errors involve
(i) function words such as determiner vs. clitic read-
ings of la, las ’the/it’ and relative pronoun vs. subor-
dinating conjunction readings of que ’that’, (ii) first
and third person singular of verbal forms, which are
homographs in Old Spanish (queria ’I|he wanted’,
podia ’I|he could’). The remaining 42.2% of the
errors due to ambiguity are mostly words lacking
the accent in Old Spanish. These are ambiguous
verbal forms of the present and simple past (llego
’arrive|arrived’ ), pronouns ( que ’what|that’), and
adverbs (mas ’more|but’ ). Other errors correspond
to types which were more ambiguous in Old Span-
ish, such as the already mentioned ambiguity for the
coordinating conjunction (y ’and’). The 10% errors
that are not due to ambiguity correspond to words
which were not added by any of the methods used
to expand the dictionary, mostly proper nouns (pier-
res, antolinez), but also other words not covered by
any rule (ovo ’had’, coita ’wish’). This low per-
centage shows that the dictionary expansion is quite
thorough.

8 Discussion and future work

In this paper we have presented a method to extend
an existing NLP tool in order to enable it to deal with
historical varieties of a language. To our knowledge,
this is the first time that such an strategy is pursued
to automatically enrich Spanish historical texts with
linguistic information. The modules for Standard
Spanish of an existing tool, especially the dictionary
and affixation modules, have been adapted using ev-
idence from a large and representative Old Spanish
corpus. Also the tagger has been retrained, using a
30,000-token Gold Standard Corpus. Thus, the tool
for Standard Spanish has been extended, profiting
from the similarity between the historical and stan-
dard varieties of Spanish, such that constructing a
resource for Old Spanish required a relatively mod-
est effort (around 6 person-months). As a result, we
have obtained a reusable tool, which can be used to
tag other corpora and be maintained and improved
by other scholars.

The quality of the tagging is quite good: The
tagger is able to correctly identify word lemmas in
92.6% of the cases, and in 94.5% the main PoS.
The performance is still below the state-of-the-art
for standard varieties of languages, and below the
performance on a Corpus of Standard Spanish, but it
is good enough to carry out quantitative analyses of
historical data. We have shown that the lower perfor-
mance is due to two factors: First, the increased am-
biguity in the dictionary due to the large time span
considered (the tool is able to tag texts from the 12th
to the 16th centuries). Second, the small size of the
training corpus. It is expected that the performance
could improve by using the same methods to deal
with PoS-disambiguation using context information
in state-of-the-art tools. For instance, adding manual
rules to the hybrid tagger included in FreeLing may
improve the performance. Also, a spelling corrector
could help solving the 10% of the errors which are
not due to ambiguity but to orthographic variation.

The approach proposed could be followed to deal
not only with historical varieties of languages, but
also with other non-standard varieties, such as di-
alects or texts found in chats, blogs, or SMS texts.
In the future, we will test it with so-called “Spanish
2.0”.

8



Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the Ministry of Ed-
ucation and the Ministry of Science and Tech-
nology of Spain under contracts AP2006-03547
(FPU), FFI2010-15006 (OntoSem 2), TIN2009-
14715-C04-04 (KNOW-II), and JCI2007-57-1479,
and by the European Union via the EU PASCAL2
Network of Excellence (FP7-ICT-216886).

References
Alistair Baron and Paul Rayson. 2008. Vard 2: A tool for

dealing with spelling variation in historical corpora. In
Proceedings of the Postgraduate Conference in Cor-
pus Linguistics, Birmingham, UK. Aston University.

Thorsten Brants. 2000. Tnt - a statistical part-of-speech
tagger. In Proceedings of the Sixth Applied Natural
Language Processing Conference ANLP-2000, Seat-
tle, WA.

Ivy A. Corfis, John O’Neill, and Jr. Theodore S. Beards-
ley. 1997. Early Celestina Electronic Texts and Con-
cordances. Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies,
Ltd. Madison, Wisconsin.

Stefanie Dipper. 2010. Pos-tagging of historical lan-
guage data: First experiments. In emantic Approaches
in Natural Language Processing: Proceedings of the
Conference on Natural Language Processing (KON-
VENS 2010).

Andrea Ernst-Gerlach and Norbert Fuhr. 2007. Re-
trieval in text collections with historic spelling using
linguistic and spelling variants. In Proceedings of the
7th ACM IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries
(JCDL), Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Marı́a Teresa Herrera and Marı́a Estela González
de Fauve. 1997. Concordancias Electrónicos del Cor-
pus Médico Español. Hispanic Seminary of Medieval
Studies, Ltd. Madison, Wisconsin.

Llyod Kasten, John Nitti, and Wilhemina Jonxis-
Henkemens. 1997. The Electronic Texts and Concor-
dances of the Prose Works of Alfonso X, El Sabio. His-
panic Seminary of Medieval Studies, Ltd. Madison,
Wisconsin.

Anke Lüdeling, Hagen Hirschmann, and Amir Zeldes.
to appear. Variationism and underuse statistics in the
analysis of the development of relative clauses in ger-
man. In Yuji Kawaguchi, Makoto Minegishi, and
Wolfgang Viereck, editors, Corpus Analysis and Di-
achronic Linguistics. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.

John Nitti and Lloyd Kasten. 1997. The Electronic Texts
and Concordances of Medieval Navarro-Aragonese
Manuscripts. Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies,
Ltd. Madison, Wisconsin.

John O’Neill. 1999. Electronic Texts and Concordances
of the Madison Corpus of Early Spanish Manuscripts
and Printings. Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Stud-
ies, Ltd. Madison, Wisconsin.

Lluı́s Padró, Miquel Collado, Samuel Reese, Marina
Lloberes, and Irene Castellón. 2010. Freeling 2.1:
Five years of open-source language processing tools.
In Proceedings of 7th Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference (LREC 2010), ELRA, La Valletta,
Malta, May 2010.

Helena Raumolin-Brunberg and Terttu Nevalainen.
2007. The York-Toronto-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of
Old English Prose. In J.C. Beal, K. P. Corrigan, and
H. L. Moisl, editors, Creating and Digitizing Lan-
guage Corpora. Volume 2: Diachronic Databases,
pages 148–171. Palgrave Macmillan, Hampshire.

P. Rayson, D. Archer, A. Baron, and N. Smith. 2007.
Tagging historical corpora - the problem of spelling
variation. In Proceedings of Digital Historical Cor-
pora, Dagstuhl-Seminar 06491, International Con-
ference and Research Center for Computer Science,
Schloss Dagstuhl, Wadern, Germany, 3rd-8th Decem-
ber 2006.

Eirı́kur Rögnvaldsson and Sigrún Helgadóttir. 2008.
Morphological tagging of old norse texts and its use in
studying syntactic variation and change. In 2nd Work-
shop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage
Data, LREC 2008 workshop, Marrakech.

Eyal Sagi, Stefan Kaufmann, and Brady Clark. 2009.
Semantic density analysis: Comparing word meaning
across time and phonetic space. In Roberto Basili
and Marco Pennacchiotti, editors, Proceedings of the
EACL 2009 Workshop on GEMS: GEometrical Mod-
els of Natural Language Semantics, Athens.

Cristina Sánchez-Marco, Gemma Boleda, Josep Maria
Fontana, and Judith Domingo. 2010. Annotation and
representation of a diachronic corpus of spanish. In
Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Malta, May 2010.

Pedro Sánchez-Prieto. 2005. La normalización del
castellano escrito en el siglo xiii. Los caracteres de
la lengua: grafı́as y fonemas. In Rafael Cano, editor,
Historia de la lengua española, pages 199–213. Ariel,
Barcelona.

Núria Sebastián, M. Antònia Martı́, Manuel Francisco
Carreiras, and Fernando Cuetos. 2000. Léxico in-
formatizado del español. Edicions Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona.

Ann Taylor. 2007. The York-Toronto-Helsinki Parsed
Corpus of Old English Prose. In J.C. Beal, K. P. Corri-
gan, and H. L. Moisl, editors, Creating and Digitizing
Language Corpora. Volume 2: Diachronic Databases,
pages 196–227. Palgrave Macmillan, Hampshire.

9


