










































Utilizing Target-Side Semantic Role Labels to Assist Hierarchical Phrase-based Machine Translation


Proceedings of SSST-5, Fifth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 107–115,
ACL HLT 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Utilizing Target-Side Semantic Role Labels to Assist Hierarchical
Phrase-based Machine Translation

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

{qing, stephan.vogel}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

In this paper we present a novel approach
of utilizing Semantic Role Labeling (SRL)
information to improve Hierarchical Phrase-
based Machine Translation. We propose an
algorithm to extract SRL-aware Synchronous
Context-Free Grammar (SCFG) rules. Con-
ventional Hiero-style SCFG rules will also be
extracted in the same framework. Special con-
version rules are applied to ensure that when
SRL-aware SCFG rules are used in deriva-
tion, the decoder only generates hypotheses
with complete semantic structures. We per-
form machine translation experiments using 9
different Chinese-English test-sets. Our ap-
proach achieved an average BLEU score im-
provement of 0.49 as well as 1.21 point reduc-
tion in TER.

1 Introduction

Syntax-based Machine Translation methods have
achieved comparable performance to Phrase-based
systems. Hierarchical Phrase-based Machine Trans-
lation, proposed by Chiang (Chiang, 2007), uses a
general non-terminal label X but does not use lin-
guistic information from the source or the target lan-
guage. There have been efforts to include linguis-
tic information into machine translation. Liu et al
(2006) experimented with tree-to-string translation
models that utilize source side parse trees, and later
improved the method by using the Packed Forest
data structure to reduce the impact of parsing errors
(Liu and Huang, 2010). The string-to-tree (Galley
et al, 2006) and tree-to-tree (Chiang, 2010) meth-
ods have also been the subject of experimentation, as

well as other formalisms such as Dependency Trees
(Shen et al., 2008).

One problem that arises by using full syntactic la-
bels is that they require an exact match of the con-
stituents in extracted phrases, so it faces the risk
of losing coverage of the rules. SAMT (Zollmann
and Venugopal, 2006) and Tree Sequence Align-
ment (Zhang et al., 2008) are proposed to amend this
problem by allowing non-constituent phrases to be
extracted. The reported results show that while uti-
lizing linguistic information helps, the coverage is
more important (Chiang, 2010). When dealing with
formalisms such as semantic role labeling, the cov-
erage problem is also critical. In this paper we fol-
low Chiang’s observation and use SRL labels to aug-
ment the extraction of SCFG rules. I.e., the formal-
ism provides additional information and more rules
instead of restrictions that remove existing rules.
This preserves the coverage of rules.

Recently there has been increased attention to use
semantic information in machine translation. Liu
and Gildea (2008; 2010) proposed using Semantic
Role Labels (SRL) in their tree-to-string machine
translation system and demonstrated improvement
over conventional tree-to-string methods. Wu and
Fung (2009) developed a framework to reorder the
output using information from both the source and
the target SRL labels. In this paper, we explore an
approach of using the target side SRL information
in addition to a Hierarchical Phrase-based Machine
Translation framework. The proposed method ex-
tracts initial phrases with two different heuristics:
The first heuristic is used to extract rules that have
a general left-hand-side (LHS) non-terminal tag X ,

107



Second we must build a flood prevention system , strengthen pre-flood inspections and implement flood prevention measures 

arg0 mod 
arg0 mod 

arg0 mod 

pred 

pred arg1 

arg1 
pred arg1 

Figure 1: Example of predicate-argument structure in a sentence

i.e., Hiero rules. The second will extract phrases that
contain information of SRL structures. The pred-
icate and arguments that the phrase covers will be
represented in the LHS non-terminal tags. After
that, we obtain rules from the initial phrases in the
same way as the Hiero extraction algorithm, which
replaces nesting phrases with their corresponding
non-terminals.

By applying this scheme, we will obtain rules that
contain SRL information, without sacrificing the
coverage of rules. In this paper, we call such rules
SRL-aware SCFG rules. During decoding, both the
conventional Hiero-style SCFG rules with general
tag X and SRL-aware SCFG rules are used in a syn-
chronous Chart Parsing algorithm. Special conver-
sion rules are introduced to ensure that whenever
SRL-aware SCFG rules are used in the derivation,
a complete predicate-argument structure is built.

The main contributions are:

1. an algorithm to extract SRL-aware SCFG rules
using target side SRL information.

2. an approach to use Hiero rules side-by-side
with information-rich SRL-aware SCFG rules,
which improves the quality of translation re-
sults.

In section 2 we briefly review SCFG-based ma-
chine translation and SRL. In section 3, we describe
the SRL-aware SCFG rules. Section 4 provides
the detail of the rule extraction algorithm. Section
5 presents two alternative methods how to utilize
the SRL information. The experimental results are
given in Section 6, followed by analysis and conclu-
sion in Section 7.

2 Background

2.1 Hierarchical Phrase-based Machine
Translation

Proposed by Chiang (2005), the Hierarchical
Phrase-based Machine Translation model (com-

monly known as the Hiero model) has achieved re-
sults comparable, if not superior, to conventional
Phrase-based approaches. The basic idea is to treat
the translation as a synchronous parsing problem.
Using the source side terminals as input, the decoder
tries to build a parse tree and synchronously generate
target side terminals. The rules that generates such
synchronous parse trees are in the following form:

X → (f1 X1 f2 X2 f3, e1 X2 e2 X1 e3)

where X1 and X2 are non-terminals, and the sub-
scripts represents the correspondence between the
non-terminals. In Chiang’s Hiero model all non-
terminals will have the same tag, i.e. X . The formal-
ism, known as Synchronous Context-Free Grammar
(SCFG) does not require the non-terminals to have a
unique tag name. Instead, they may have tags with
syntactic or semantic meanings, such as NP or V P .

2.2 Semantic Role Labeling and Machine
Translation

The task of semantic role labeling is to label the se-
mantic relationships between predicates and argu-
ments. This relationship can be treated as a depen-
dency structure called “Predicate-Argument Struc-
ture” (PA structure for short). Figure 1 depicts ex-
amples of multiple PA structures in a sentence. The
lines indicate the span of the predicates and argu-
ments of each PA structure, and the tags attached to
these lines show their role labels.

Despite the similarity between PA structure and
dependency trees, SRL offers a structure that posses
better granularity. Instead of trying to analyze all
links between words in the sentences, PA structure
only deals with the relationships between verbs and
constituents that are arguments of the predicates.
This information is useful in preserving the mean-
ing of the sentence during the translation process.

However, using semantic role representation in
machine translation has its own set of problems.

108



First, we face the coverage problem. Some sen-
tences might not have semantic structure at all, if,
for instance they consist of single noun phrases or
contain only rare predicates that are not covered by
the semantic role labeler. Moreover, the PA struc-
tures are not guaranteed to cover the whole sentence.
This is especially true when two or more predicates
are presented in a coordinated structure. In this case,
the arguments of other predicates will not be covered
in the PA structure of the predicate.

The second problem is that the SRL labels are
only on the constituents of predicate and arguments.
There is no analysis conducted inside the augments.
That is different from syntactic parsing or depen-
dency parsing, which both provide a complete tree
from the sentence to every individual word. As
we can see in Figure 1, words such as “Second”
and “and” are not covered. Inside the NPs such
as “a flood prevention system”, SRL will not pro-
vide more information. Therefore it is hard to build
a self-contained formalization based only on SRL
labels. Most work on SRL labels is built upon
or assisted by other formalisms. For instance, Liu
and Gildea (2010) integrated SRL label into a tree-
to-string translation system. Wu and Fung (2009)
used SRL labels for reordering the n-best output of
phrase-based translation systems. Similarly, in our
work we also adopt the methodology of using SRL
information to assist existing formalism. The dif-
ference of our method from Wu and Fung is that
we embed the SRL information directly into the de-
code, instead of doing two-pass decoding. Also, our
method is different from Liu and Gildea (2010) that
we utilize target side SRL information instead of the
source side.

As we will see in section 3, we define a mapping
function from the SRL structures that a phrase cov-
ers to a non-terminal tag before extracting the SCFG
rules. The tags will restrict the derivation of the tar-
get side parse tree to accept only SRL structures we
have seen in the training corpus. The mapping from
SRL structures to non-terminal tags can be defined
according to the SRL annotation set.

In this paper we adopt the PropBank (Palmer et
al., 2005) annotation set of semantic labels, because
the annotation set is relatively simple and easy to
parse. The small set of argument tags also makes
the number of LHS non-terminal tags small, which

alleviates the problem of data scarcity. However the
methodology of this paper is not limited to Prop-
Bank tags. By defining appropriate mapping, it is
also possible to use other annotation sets, such as
FrameNet (Baker et al., 2002).

3 SRL-aware SCFG Rules

The SRL-aware SCFG rules are SCFG rules. They
contain at least one non-terminal label with infor-
mation about the PA structure that is covered by the
non-terminal. The labels are called SRL-aware la-
bels, and the non-terminal itself is called SRL-aware
non-terminal. The non-terminal can be on the left
hand side or right hand side or the rule, and we do
not require all the non-terminals in the rules be SRL-
aware, thus, the general tag X can also be used. In
this paper, we assign SRL-aware labels based on the
SRL structure they cover. The label contains the fol-
lowing components:

1. The predicate frame; that is the predicate whose
predicate argument structure belongs to the
SRL-aware non-terminal.

2. The set of complete arguments the SRL-aware
non-terminal covers.

In practice, the predicates are stemmed. For ex-
ample, if we have a target side phrase: She beats
eggs today, where She will be labeled as ARG0 of the
predicate beat, and eggs will be labeled as ARG1, to-
day will be labeled as ARG-TMP, respectively. The
SRL-aware label that covers this phrase is:

#beat/0 1 TMP

There are two notes for the definition. Firstly,
the order of arguments is not important in the la-
bel. #beat/0 1 TMP is treated identically to
#beat/0 TMP 1. Secondly, as we always require
the predicate to be represented, an SRL-aware non-
terminal should always cover the predicate. This
property will be re-emphasized when we discuss
the rule extraction algorithm in Section 3. Figure
2 shows some examples of the SRL-aware SCFG
rules.

When the RHS non-terminal is an SRL-aware
non-terminal, we define the rule as a conversion rule.
A conversion rule is only generated when the right

109



Xinjiang ‘s Yili holds propaganda drive

新疆 伊犁 大规模 开展 面对面 宣讲 活动

[#Hold/1]

[#Hold/0_1]

[#Hold/0]

[#Hold][X]

[X] [X]

[X]

[X] [X]

Some SRL-aware Rules :  
[#Hold/0_1]  ( [#Hold/0] 面对面 宣讲 活动, [#Hold/0] propaganda drive)
[#Hold/0_1]  ( 新疆 伊犁 大规模 [#Hold/1], Xinjiang’s Yili [#Hold/1])
[#Hold/0_1]  ( 新疆 [X1]大规模 [#Hold/1], Xinjiang’s [X1 ] [#Hold/1])
[#Hold/0_1]  ( [X1]hold [X2], [X1] hold [X2])
[#Hold/1] ([#Hold] 面对面宣讲活动, [#Hold] propaganda drive)
[#Hold/0]  (新疆 伊犁 大规模 [#Hold], Xinjiang’s Yili [#Hold])
[#Hold]  (开展 , holds)

Special SRL-aware conversion rule:  [X]  [#Hold/0_1]

Figure 2: Example SRL structure with word alignment

hand side is a complete SRL structure. For exam-
ple, #hold/0 is not a complete SRL structure in
Figure 2, because it lacks of a required argument,
while #hold/0 1 is a complete SRL structure. In
this case, the conversion rule X → #hold/0 1
will be extracted from the example shown in Fig-
ure 2, but not the other. Together with the glue
rules that commonly used in Hiero decoder, i.e.
S → (S X1, S X1) and S → (X1, X1), the conver-
sion rules ensures that whenever SRL-aware SCFG
rules are used in parsing, the output parse tree con-
tains only complete SRL structures. This is because
only complete SRL structures that we have observed
in the training data can be converted back to the gen-
eral tag X .

After we have extracted the SRL-aware SCFG
rules, derivation can be done on the input of source
sentence. For example, the sentence 新疆 大规模
开展面对面宣讲活动 1 can generate the parse tree
and translation in Figure 3a) using the rules shown
in Figure 2. Also, we can see in Figure 3b) that in-
complete SRL structures cannot be generated due to
the absence of a proper conversion rule.

1The translation is Xinjiang’s Yili holds propaganda drive
and the Pinyin transliteration is Xinjiang daguimo kaizhan
mianduimian xuanjiang huodong

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

a) Sample of valid derivation 

b) Sample of invalid derivation 

Figure 3: Example of a derivations of sentence

We can see from the example in Figure 3a), that
the SRL-aware SCFG rules fit perfectly in the SCFG
framework. Therefore no modification need to be
made on a decoder, such as MosesChart decoder,for
instance (Hoang and Koehn, 2008). The main prob-
lem is how to extract the SRL-aware SCFG rules
from the corpus and estimate the feature values so
that it works together with the conventional Hiero
rules. In the next two sections we will present the
rule extraction algorithm and two alternative meth-
ods for comparison.

4 Rule Extraction Algorithm

The Hiero rule extraction algorithm uses the follow-
ing steps:

1. Extract the initial phrases with the commonly
used alignment template heuristics. To reduce
the number of phrases extracted, an additional
restriction is applied that the boundary words
must be aligned on both sides. Also, the maxi-
mum length of initial phrases is fixed, and usu-
ally set to 10.

110



2. If an initial phrase pair contains another phrase
pair, then we can replace the embedded phrase
pairs with non-terminal X . Restrictions also
apply in this stage. Firstly the source side
phrase can only contain two or less non-
terminals. Secondly, two source side non-
terminals must not be next to each other. And
finally, after the substitution, at least one re-
maining terminal in the source side should have
alignment links to the target side terminals.

It is easy to see this scheme is not able to han-
dle the extraction of SRL-aware SCFG rules. The
length of initial phrases is limited and it may not be
able to cover a complete predicate-argument struc-
ture. In the meantime, the restrictions on unaligned
words on the boundaries will cause a large number
of SRL-aware SCFG rules to be excluded. There-
fore, a modified algorithm is proposed to handle ex-
traction of SRL-aware SCFG rules.

One sentence may have multiple verbs and, there-
fore, multiple PA structures. Different PA structures
may be nested within each other. However we do not
want to complicate the representation by attempting
to build a tree structure from multiple structures. In-
stead, we treat them independently.

For each word-aligned sentence pair, if there is no
PA structure given, we run the general Hiero extrac-
tion algorithm. Otherwise, for each PA structure, we
apply the algorithm for SRL-aware rule extraction,
which takes two steps, extracting the initial SRL-
aware phrases and extracting the SRL-aware SCFG
rules.

4.1 Extraction of Initial SRL-aware Phrases
First, a different heuristics is used to extract initial
SRL-aware phrases. These phrases have the follow-
ing properties:

1. On the target side, the phrase covers at least one
complete constituent in the PA structure, which
must include the predicate. The phrase pair can
include words that are not part of any argument;
however it cannot include partial arguments. In
Figure 4b), the phrase pair is not included in the
initial SRL-aware phrases because it includes a
word A from argument ARG2. However, in
Figure 4a), inclusion of the first target word A,
which is not part of any argument, is allowed.

A A

ARG0 PRED ARG1 ARG2 ARG0 PRED ARG1 ARG2

a) Words (A) that are not part of any b) Words (A) in other argumentsa) Words (A) that are not part of any 
argument are allowed.

b) Words (A) in other arguments 
(ARG2) are not allowed 

B C

A

ARG0 PRED ARG1 ARG2 ARG0 PRED ARG1 ARG2

) U li d d (A) th d) U li d d (B C) thc) Unaligned words (A) on the 
boundaries of arguments (ARG1)  
are allowed

d) Unaligned words (B,C) on the 
boundaries of  source side  phrases 
are not allowed

Figure 4: Demonstration of restrictions of whether or not
a rule is included in initial SRL-aware phrases. The sub-
figures a) and c) show two cases that unaligned words
or words not in any arguments are allowed in extracted
phrases and sub-figures b) and d) show two cases that the
phrases are excluded from the phrase table. The shaded
blocks indicate the range of candidate phrases.

2. At least one word pair between the source and
the target side phrase is aligned, and no words
in the source or the target side phrase align
to words outside the phrase pair. These are
the standard heuristics used in the hierarchical
phrase extraction algorithm.

3. For the target side, unaligned words on the
boundaries are allowed only if the word is
found inside one of the arguments. On the
source side, however, unaligned words are not
allowed on the boundaries. The idea is demon-
strated in Figure 4c) and 4d). In Figure 4c), the
unaligned boundary word A is included in the
target side phrase because it is part of an argu-
ment. In Figure 4d), unaligned words B and C
are not allowed to be included in the proposed
phrase.

Given a PA structure of the sentence, we applied
following algorithm:

1. Extract all possible target side phrases that con-
tain the predicate and any number of argu-
ments.

2. For each of the extracted target side phrases
T , find the minimum span of the source side
phrase S that contains all the words aligned to

111



the target side phrase. This can be done by sim-
ply calculating the minimum and maximum in-
dex of the source side words aligned to the tar-
get side phrase.

3. Find the minimum span of target side phrase
T1 that are aligned to the source side phrase S.
If the minimum span is already covered by the
target side phrase extracted in the previous step,
i.e. T1 = T , we add the phrase pair (S, T ) to
the pool of initial phrases. If the newly obtained
target side phrase is larger than the original one,
then we need to decide whether the new span
contains a word in another arguments. If so,
then we do not add the phrase pair, return to
step 2 and continue with the next target side
phrase. Otherwise, we update T := T1 and go
back to step 2.

The readers may notice that although in several
steps we need to determine whether there are links
outside the phrase pairs, the information is easy
to compute. We only need to keep track of the
maximum and minimum indices of words that each
source and target word aligns to. With the indices
pre-computed, in the worst case scenario we only
need to calculate M times for the maximum and
minimum indices, where M is the total number of
words in the source and the target side, before we
can determine the validity of the largest target side
SRL-aware phrase. The worst case complexity of
the algorithm is O(N ∗M), where N is the num-
ber of arguments in the segmentation. This is only
a rough upper bound for the time complexity; the
average case will be much better.

4.2 Extracting SRL-aware SCFG Rules
Before we generate rules from the extracted initial
phrases, we first need to assign non-terminal la-
bels to the initial SRL-aware phrases. We define a
map from the SRL structures to non-terminal tags
of SCFG rules. An SRL-aware non-terminal label
is a combination of the predicate label and the ar-
gument labels. The predicate label is the stemmed
predicate. We can eliminate the morphology to al-
leviate the problem of the data scarcity. In addition,
the argument labels represent all the arguments that
the current SRL-aware rule covers. The mapping is
trivial given the initial SRL-aware phrase extraction

algorithm, and it can be determined directly in the
first step.

The initial phrases already are SCFG rules. To
extract rules with non-terminals we will replace the
sub-phrases with non-terminals if the sub-phrase is
embedded in another phrase pair. The algorithm is
similar to that described by Chiang (2005). However
we apply new restrictions because we now have two
sets of different initial phrases. If the outer rule is
SRL-aware, we allow both sets of the initial phrases
to be candidates of embedded phrases. However
if the outer rule is X , we do not allow a replace-
ment of SRL-aware SCFG rules within it. There-
fore we will have rules where LHS non-terminals
are SRL-aware, and some RHS non-terminals are X ,
but not vice versa. The reason for the restriction is
to prevent the conversion of incomplete predicate-
argument structures back to X . As we mentioned
before, one of the design goals of our algorithm is to
ensure that once SRL-aware SCFG rules are used in
the derivation, a complete PA structure must be gen-
erated before it can be converted back. The only way
of converting SRL-aware tags back to X is through
special conversion rules, whose LHS is the X and
the RHS is a complete SRL-aware tag. Extracting
such conversion rules is trivial given the SRL labels.

The extracted rules are subject to filtering by the
same restrictions as conventional Hiero rules. The
filtering criteria include:

1. Two non-terminals on the source side should
not be adjacent.

2. We allow up to two non-terminals on the RHS.

3. The source side rule contains no more than five
tokens including terminals and non-terminals.

5 Decoder Integration

The extracted SCFG rules, both SRL-aware and X ,
will go through the feature estimation process to
produce the rule table. Integrated with the con-
version rules, most chart-based decoders such as
MosesChart (Hoang and Koehn, 2008), cdec (Dyer
et al, 2010) and Joshua (Li et al, 2009) can use these
rules in decoding. We applied MosesChart for tun-
ing and decoding.

While the SRL-aware SCFG rules are used to con-
strain the search space and derivation, we do not in-

112



mt02 mt03 mt04 mt05 mt08 bl-nw bl-wb dv-nw dv-wb avg

BLEU 29.56 27.02 30.28 26.80 21.16 21.96 20.10 24.26 20.13 n/a
Baseline TER 68.87 70.19 67.18 70.60 69.93 64.44 64.74 63.21 66.61 n/a

(T-B)/2 19.66 21.59 18.45 21.90 24.39 21.24 22.32 19.48 23.24 n/a
BLEU +0.33 −0.50 +0.20 +0.47 −0.16 +1.24 +1.13 +0.39 +1.35 +0.49

SRL TER −1.58 −1.77 −1.93 −1.68 −0.71 −0.29 −0.22 −1.36 −1.34 −1.21
(T-B)/2 −0.95 −0.63 −1.07 −1.08 −0.28 −0.76 −0.68 −0.88 −1.35 −0.85

Table 1: Experiment results on Chinese-English translation tasks, bl-nw and bl-wb are newswire and weblog parts for
DEV07-blind, dv-nw and dv-wb are newswire and weblog parts for DEV07-dev. We present the BLEU scores, TER
scores and (TER-BLEU)/2.

troduce new features into the system. The features
we used in the decoder are commonly used, includ-
ing source and target rule translation probabilities,
the lexical translation probabilities, and the language
model probability. The feature values are calculated
by MLE estimation.

Besides the expanded rule table and conversion
rules, the decoder does not need to be modified. We
incorporate MERT to tune the feature weights. The
minimum modifications for the decoder make the
proposed method an easy replacement for Hiero rule
extractors.

6 Experiments and discussion

We performed experiments on Chinese to English
translation tasks. The data set we used in the exper-
iments is a subset of the FBIS corpus. We filter the
corpus with maximum sentence length be 30. The
corpus has 2.5 million words in Chinese side and
3.1 million on English side.

We adopted the ASSERT semantic role labeler
(Pradhan et al., 2004) to label the English side sen-
tences. The parallel sentences are aligned using
MGIZA++ (Gao and Vogel, 2008) and then the
proposed rule extraction algorithm was used in ex-
tracting the SRL-aware SCFG rules. We used the
MosesChart decoder (Hoang and Koehn, 2008) and
the Moses toolkit (Koehn et al, 2007) for tuning and
decoding. The language model is a trigram language
model trained on English GIGAWord corpus (V1-
V3) using the SRILM toolkit.

We used the NIST MT06 test set for tuning, and
experimented with an additional 9 test sets, includ-
ing MT02, 03, 04, 05, 08, and GALE test sets
DEV07-dev and DEV07-blind. DEV07-dev and
DEV07-blind are further divided into newswire and

weblog parts.
We experimented with the proposed method and

the alternative methods presented in section 4, and
the results of nine test sets are listed in Table 1. As
we can observe from the results, the largest improve-
ment we discovered from our proposed method is
more than 1 BLEU point, and a significant drop is
only observed on one test set, MT03, where we lose
0.5 BLEU points. Averaged across all the test sets,
the improvement is 0.49 BLEU points on the small
training set. When TER is also taken into account,
all of the nine test sets showed consistent improve-
ment. The (TER-BLEU)/2 score, which we used
as the primary evaluation metric, improved by 0.85
across nine test sets.

As we expected, the coverage of SRL-aware
SCFG rules is not as good as the Hiero rules. We
analyzed the top-best derivation of the results. Only
1836 out of 7235 sentences in the test sets used SRL-
aware SCFG rules. However, the BLEU scores on
the 1836 sentences improved from 27.98 in the base-
line system to 28.80, while the remaining 5399 sen-
tences only improved from 30.13 to 30.22. The ob-
servation suggests the potential for further improve-
ment if we can increase the coverage by using more
data or by modifying the mapping from tags to the
structures to make rules more general.

We display the hypothesis of a sentence in Fig-
ure 5 to demonstrate a concrete example of improve-
ments obtained by using the method,. As this figure
demonstrate, the SRL-aware SCFG rules enable the
system to pick the correct structure and reordering
for the verbs trigger and enter.

Given the results presented in the paper, the ques-
tion arises as to whether it is prudent to integrate
multiple formalisms or labeling systems, such as

113



Ukraine because of the chaos triggered by the presidential election has entered the third week 

Ukraine today because of the chaos triggered in the third week of the presidential election  

The chaos caused by Ukraine's presidential election has entered its third week.  
The turmoil in Ukraine triggered by the presidential election entered the third week 
The chaos sparked off by the presidential election in Ukraine has entered its third week.  
Ukraine heads into a third week of turmoil caused by the presidential election 

SRLTag 

Baseline 

Source 

References 

Figure 5: An example of improvement caused by better attachment of verbs and its arguments

syntactic parsing or SRL labeling. Hierarchical
phrase-based machine translation is often criticized
for not explicitly incorporating linguistic knowl-
edge. On the other hand, fully syntactic-based ma-
chine translation suffers from low coverage of rules.
The methodology in this paper, in contrast, intro-
duces linguistic information to assist a formalism
that does not incorporate linguistic information. The
merits of doing so are obvious. While most parts of
the system are not changed, a portion of the system
is considerably improved. Also, the system encodes
the information in the non-terminal tags, which is
widely used in other methods such as SAMT. How-
ever, it is not necessary an optimal solution. Huang
et al in a very recent work (Huang et al., 2010) pro-
posed using vector space to represent similarity be-
tween the syntactic structures. This is also an inter-
esting possible direction to explore in the near fu-
ture.

7 Conclusion and future work

In this paper we presented a method of utilizing the
target side predicate-argument structure to assist Hi-
erarchical Phrase-based Machine Translation. With
a hybrid rule extraction algorithm, we can extract
SRL-aware SCFG rules together with conventional
Hiero rules. Additional conversion rules ensure the
generated predicate-argument structures are com-
plete when SRL-aware SCFG rules are used in the
decoding procedure. Experimental results showed
improvement on BLEU and TER metrics with 9
test sets, and even larger improvements are observed
when only considering the sentences in which SRL-
aware SCFG rules are used for the top-best deriva-
tion.

We are currently following three directions for
the future work. The first focuses on improving the
quality of the rules and feature estimation. We are
investigating different labeling systems other than
the relatively simple PropBank labeling system, and
plan to experiment with different methods of map-
ping structure to the SRL-aware labels.

Recent advances in vector space representations
on the syntactic structures, which may be able to
work with, or replace the SRL-aware non-terminal
labels, inspire the second direction.

Finally, the third direction is to incorporate source
side semantic role labeling information into the
framework. Currently our method can only use tar-
get side SRL information, but the source side in-
formation is also valuable. Exploring how to build
models to represent SRL information from both
sides into one complete framework is a promising
research direction to follow.

References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and Beau Cronin.

2002. The structure of the framenet database. Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):281–296.

David Chiang. 2005. A hierachical phrase-based model
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 43rd Annual Meeting of Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 263–270.

David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 33(2):201–228.

David Chiang. 2010. Learning to translate with source
and target syntax. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1443–1452.

Chris Dyer et al. 2010. cdec: A decoder, alignment,
and learning framework for finite-state and context-

114



free translation models. In Proceedings of the ACL
2010 System Demonstrations, ACLDemos ’10, pages
7–12.

Michel Galley et al. 2006. Scalable inference and train-
ing of context-rich syntactic translation models. In
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and the 44th annual meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 961–968.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Parallel implemen-
tations of word alignment tool. In Software Engi-
neering, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural
Language Processing, pages 49–57, Columbus, Ohio,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Hieu Hoang and Philipp Koehn. 2008. Design of the
moses decoder for statistical machine translation. In
Software Engineering, Testing, and Quality Assurance
for Natural Language Processing, SETQA-NLP ’08,
pages 58–65, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Zhongqiang Huang, Martin Cmejrek, and Bowen Zhou.
2010. Soft syntactic constraints for hierarchical
phrase-based translation using latent syntactic distri-
butions. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 138–147, Cambridge, MA, October. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn et al. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics Companion Volume Proceed-
ings of the Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177–180,
Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Zhifei Li et al. 2009. Joshua: an open source toolkit for
parsing-based machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, StatMT ’09, pages 135–139.

Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. 2008. Improved tree-to-
string transducers for machine translation. In ACL
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation (ACL08-
SMT), pages 62–69.

Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. 2010. Semantic role fea-
tures for machine translation. In Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING-10).

Yang Liu and Liang Huang. 2010. Tree-based and forest-
based translation. In Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2010,
page 2, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Yang Liu, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2006. Tree-to-
string alignment template for statistical machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 21st International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th

annual meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 609–616.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–
106, Mar.

Sameer S. Pradhan, Wayne Ward, Kadri Hacioglu,
James H. Martin, and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004. Shal-
low semantic parsing using support vector machines.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference/North American chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics annual meeting
(HLT/NAACL-2004).

Libin Shen, Jinxi Xu, and Ralph Weischedel. 2008. A
new string-to-dependency machine translation algo-
rithm with a target dependency language model. In
Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 577–585, Colum-
bus, Ohio, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Dekai Wu and Pascale Fung. 2009. Semantic roles for
smt: a hybrid two-pass model. In Proceedings of The
2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Companion Volume: Short Papers, pages 13–16.

Min Zhang, Hongfei Jiang, Aiti Aw, Haizhou Li,
Chew Lim Tang, and Sheng Li. 2008. A tree se-
quence alignment-based tree-to-tree translation model.
In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-08 HLT),
pages 559–567.

Andreas Zollmann and Ashish Venugopal. 2006. Syntax
augmented machine translation via chart parsing. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 138–141.

115


