



















































E-Dictionaries and Finite-State Automata for the Recognition of Named Entities


Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Finite State Methods and Natural Language Processing, pages 48–56,
Blois (France), July 12-15, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

E-Dictionaries and Finite-State Automata
for the Recognition of Named Entities

Cvetana Krstev
Faculty of Philology,

University of Belgrade

Duško Vitas
Faculty of Mathematics,
University of Belgrade

Ivan Obradović
Faculty of Mining

and Geology,
University of Belgrade

Miloš Utvić
Faculty of Philology,

University of Belgrade

Abstract

In this paper we present a system for named
entity recognition and tagging in Serbian that
relies on large-scale lexical resources and
finite-state transducers. Our system recog-
nizes several types of name, temporal and nu-
merical expressions. Finite-state automata are
used to describe the context of named enti-
ties, thus improving the precision of recog-
nition. The widest context was used for per-
sonal names and it included the recognition
of nominal phrases describing a person’s po-
sition. For the evaluation of the named entity
recognition system we used a corpus of 2,300
short agency news. Through manual evalua-
tion we precisely identified all omissions and
incorrect recognitions which enabled the com-
putation of recall and precision. The overall
recall R = 0.84 for types and R = 0.93 for to-
kens, and overall precision P = 0.95 for types
and P = 0.98 for tokens show that our system
gives priority to precision.

1 Introduction

Recognition of named entities (NER) has been a hot
topic in Natural Language Processing community
for more than fifteen years. Ever since their in-
troduction in the scope of the Sixth Message Un-
derstanding Conference (Grishman and Sundheim,
1996) they have not ceased to arouse interest of de-
velopers of various NLP applications. The nature of
proper names, as a sub-class of named entities, for
Serbian was analyzed in (Vitas et al., 2007) espe-
cially in connection with its inflectional and deriva-
tional richness. However, to the best of our knowl-

edge, beside some small-scale experiments, no ef-
fective NER system was yet produced for Serbian. In
this paper we present a working system for recogni-
tion of various named entities in Serbian newspaper
texts, as well as results of the evaluation of this sys-
tem on a corpus of short agency news.

2 General Resources

The primary resources that we have used for the
NER task are Serbian morphological e-dictionaries.
The development of our e-dictionaries follows the
methodology and format known as DELA presented
for French in (Courtois and Silberztein, 1990). The
system of Serbian e-dictionaries covers both general
lexica and proper names, as simple words and com-
pounds, and their level of development is presented
in Table 1. It is obvious from the given data that
dictionaries of compounds are still of a modest size
and need to be further developed. On the other hand,
they comprise not only entries collected from tradi-
tional sources, like dictionaries, but also entries ex-
tracted from processed texts, which enhances their
usability.

Our e-dictionaries provide for a word form with
possible values of grammatical categories (case,
number, gender, etc.), as well as its lemma (or reg-
ular form) together with various additional mark-
ers that specify the derivational, syntactic, seman-
tic or usage features of the lemma. The exam-
ple Grka,Grk.N+NProp+Hum+Inh+GR:ms2v illus-
trates this approach: Grka ‘a native or inhabitant
of Greece’ is a form of a noun (N) Grk, which is
a proper name (+NProp), used for humans (+Hum)
inhabiting a certain place (+Inh) in Greece (+GR)

48



Simple words Compounds
lemmas forms lemmas forms

General lexica 89,965 3,843,261 4,531 99,682
Geopolitical proper names 7,873 212,809 720 7,049
Serbian personal names 20,758 275,088
Foreign proper names 6,673 47,087

Total 125,269 4,378,245 5,251 106,731

Table 1: The system of Serbian e-dictionaries

Values of grammatical categories further state that it
is a masculine gender (m) animate noun (v) in the
singular from (s) in the genitive case (2).

The rich set of semantic markers is particularly
useful in the NER tasks. We will discuss these mark-
ers in more detail in section 3. A full list of gram-
matical categories used in Serbian e-dictionaries and
their values as well as an extensive but not exhaus-
tive list of markers is given in chapter 1 of (Krstev,
2008). For proper names, the system of markers re-
lies on (Grass et al., 2002).

Among general resources used are also dictionary
graphs in the form of FSTs that recognize and gram-
matically tag certain classes of simple words and
compounds that are generally not to be found in dic-
tionaries because it is not possible to produce a finite
list of their canonic forms. They cover simple words
such as Roman numerals, interjections with repeti-
tion of one or more graphemes (e.g. jaooo ‘ouuu-
uch’) and acronyms which are not generally known
and regularly used. Dictionary graphs are also used
to correctly tag numerals written with several dig-
its, words or their combination (e.g. 18 milijardi i
800 miliona ‘18 billions and 800 millions’), com-
pound nouns or adjectives starting with digits (e.g.
21-godišnji ‘21 years old’), and ‘inflected’ forms of
acronyms (e.g. MOK-a ‘the genitive case of MOK
— International Olympics Committee’) as well as
their ‘derivational’ forms (e.g. DSS-ovac ‘a member
of DSS (political party)’). The core set of dictio-
nary graphs for Serbian is described in chapter 7 of
(Krstev, 2008).

3 The Selection of Named Entities

The number of named entity types targeted in a NER
task can vary from just a few to quite a number of
them. For instance, in the MUC-6 task only three

tags were introduced: ENAMEX, TIMEX, NUMEX,
each with just a few attributes for further refine-
ment (Chinchor, 1995). On the other hand, Sekine
and Nobata (Sekine and Nobata, 2004) proposed
a named entity hierarchy which included as many
as 200 different categories and which refined ‘stan-
dard’ categories by introducing subcategories, as for
example MEASUREMENT for NUMEX, but also in-
troduced many new categories, such as PRODUCT,
FACILITY, EVENT, etc. A detailed multilevel tax-
onomy is incorporated in the Prolex multilingual
database (Maurel, 2008). Detailed guidelines about
how to tag named entities in texts are given in chap-
ter 13 of TEI Guidelines P5 (Burnard and Bauman,
2008). The guidelines provide tags and attributes for
names, dates, people and places that enable a very
refined description of these basic classes of named
entities; no indications are given, however, as to
how the named entity tagging is to be preformed. A
more detailed discussion on named entities is given
in (Nadeau and Sekine, 2009).

In (Savary et al., 2010) the authors describe the
tools and methods used to produce a linguistic re-
source, within the National Corpus of Polish, in
which named entities are tagged in full detail and
with high accuracy. However, our main objective
was not to build a similar resource, minutely tagged
with named entities in Serbian, that could be used as
a kind of a gold standard in the future, but rather to
develop a comprehensive, working and useful tool
for NER in Serbian newspaper texts. Thus, we chose
to tag entities that are considered as basic and hence
included in most NER systems. In selecting the set of
named entities to be recognized and tagged we also
considered the lexical coverage of our electronic dic-
tionaries, as well as the set of semantic markers
used.

49



3.1 Numerical expressions

We considered two types of numerical expressions:
money expressions and measurement expressions.
By a money or measurement expressions we con-
sider an expression consisting of a numeral (written
using digits, words or their combination) followed
by a currency or a measurement unit. The major-
ity of currencies in use today are in our dictionary
(marked with +Cur), as well as major measurement
units (marked with +Mes). Besides their full names,
currencies and measurement units in numerical ex-
pressions can be expressed by acronyms (e.g. USD),
abbreviations (e.g. kg) and special symbols (e.g. e).

3.2 Temporal expressions

Two types of temporal expressions were considered:
dates and times. In both cases, we distinguished ex-
pressions that represent a moment (however vaguely
expressed) from those that represent a period (od
1968. godine do danas ‘from the year 1968 until to-
day’, od 11 do 13 sati ‘from 11 to 13’). As for dates,
we were not looking only for precisely determined
dates as in 13. decembra 2005. ‘on December 13th,
2005’ but also for less formal expressions in which
the year is omitted and the current year is presumed
(23. novembra ‘on November 23rd’), or the year can
be inferred (15. avgusta prošle godine ‘last year on
August 15th’). We were also looking for expres-
sions in which an exact day is not mentioned but the
year is explicitly given (u martu 1999. g. ‘in March
1999’), the year can be inferred (u aprilu sledeće go-
dine ‘in April next year’), or the current year is pre-
sumed (za početak novembra ‘for the beginning of
November’). Finally, we were looking also for ex-
pressions in which only the year is mentioned; how-
ever, in that case the word godina ‘year’ must also
appear in full or abbreviated form (za 2004. godinu
‘for the year 2004’). The names of days were rec-
ognized if they were related to a date (u ponedeljak
2. januara ‘on Monday, January 2nd’), but not if they
appeared on their own. Formal expressions of date
and time were also recognized, such as 17. IV 2006
or 10:01h.

3.3 Name expressions

We considered two types of name expressions:
geopolitical names and personal names. In rec-

ognizing geopolitical names we distinguished four
types: names of settlements (Njujork ‘New York’),
names of states (Nemačka ‘Germany’), hydronyms
(Dunav ‘Danube’, Atlantski okean ‘Atlantic’), and
oronyms (Alpi ‘Alpes’). In recognizing names of
states we were looking for both formal names (Nar-
odna republika Kina ‘Peoples Republic of China’)
and names in daily use (Kina ‘China’). Some fre-
quently used acronyms of states were also recog-
nized (SAD ‘USA’). Recognition of these geopolit-
ical names was based on semantic markers in our
e-dictionaries: besides the +Top marker, given to
all geopolitical names, additional markers are as-
signed to settlements +Gr, states +Dr, bodies of wa-
ter +Hyd, and elevations +Oro.

Recognition of personal names was also based
on semantic markers in our e-dictionaries: namely,
the markers +First, +Last, and +Nick are assigned
to first names, surnames, and nicknames respec-
tively. In order to avoid the ambiguity related to
personal names in Serbian we recognized only full
names, that is, names consisting of a first name and
at least one surname. We do not see that as a se-
rious drawback because in newspaper texts all per-
sons, apart from those very prominent — like Tito
and Milošević at their time — are referred to at
least once by their full name. Various titles were
also recognized when related to a person’s full name
(prof. dr Kata Lazović). Although a person’s func-
tion, profession or role in the society is usually not
considered as a named entity, we nevertheless rec-
ognized them when they directly preceded or fol-
lowed a personal name, thus forming a nominal
phrase: prof. dr Slavica Ðukić-Dejanović, direktor
Kliničko-bolničkog centra ‘Prof. Dr. Slavica Ðukić-
Dejanović, director of the Hospital Medical Center’
and Predsednik Odbora za poljoprivredu u Vladi Re-
publike Srbije Jela Veselić ‘the president of the Agri-
cultural Committee in the Government of the Re-
public of Serbia Jela Veselić’. We think that this
adds a significant value to the already recognized
personal name.

4 Development of Local Grammars

Although our NER system strongly relies on e-
dictionaries of simple words and compounds, the us-
age of dictionaries without additional resources can

50



not result in a successful system due to a high level
of ambiguity of both word forms and lemmas. There
is an example that illustrates well the nature of this
problem. In Serbian, po is a very frequently used
preposition. The same string with the upper-case ini-
tial, Po, can represent four different proper names:
the Italian river Po, the French commune Pau (on
the northern edge of the Pyrenees), part of a personal
name as in Edgar Allan Poe, and finally the chemi-
cal symbol for Polonium1. This and many other sim-
ilar examples suggest that agreement and contextual
constraints have to be taken into consideration if we
want to obtain results with high recall and precision.

4.1 Personal Names
Due to the complexity and ambiguity of personal
names in Serbian a simple lexical pattern consist-
ing of a first name and surname, written in Uni-
tex formalism (Paumier, 2008) as <N+Hum+First>
<N+Hum+Last> would recognize full personal
names with a very low precision (this is explained in
full detail in chapter 6 of (Krstev, 2008)). However,
precision can be significantly improved without
any adverse effect on recall if case-number-gender
agreement conditions are taken into account. Thus,
for example, the pattern <N+Hum+First:ms2>
<N+Hum+Last:ms2> recognizes masculine names
(m) in the genitive case (2) while the pattern
<N+Hum+First:fs2> <N+Hum+Last:s1> recog-
nizes feminine names (f ) in the genitive case. Note
that the patterns for masculine and feminine names
differ since surname parts in Serbian feminine full
names do not inflect. However, Unitex FSTs that
we used for recognition of personal names are more
complex than these simple patterns since they take
into account additional features of personal names,
such as the optional use of titles, nicknames, an ad-
ditional surname for women, middle name or initial,
as well as the order in which the first name and the
surname appear, etc.

Special graphs were produced for recognizing a
person’s position in the society that precedes or fol-
lows a personal name forming thus a nominal phrase
(Figure 1). Such graphs recognize following basic
forms of phrases:

1It should be noted that all foreign names in Serbian texts
are transcribed, regardless of whether they are written in Latin
or Cyrillic alphabet.

1. generalni sekretar (udruženja pravnika Sr-
bije)gen.phrase — Secretary General of the
Lawyers Association of Serbia;

2. šef službe (za mala i srednja preduzeća)FOR-
prep-phrase — Head of service for small and
medium enterprises;

3. direktor (i većinski vlasnik)AND-conj-phrase — Di-
rector and majority shareholder;

4. ministar (omladine (i sporta)AND-conj-
phrase)gen.phrase — Minister of Youth and
Sports;

5. ministar prosvete (u vladi Republike Srbije)IN-
prep-phrase — Minister of Education in the gov-
ernment of the Republic of Serbia;

6. izvršni direktor (Beogradske banke
ADabb)gen.phrase — Executive Director of
Belgrade Bank AD.

These basic structures can be combined in various
ways to recognize more complex phrases as demon-
strated by the example Mirjana Dragaš, predsednik
Upravnog odbora Republičkog zavoda za tržište
rada i zamenik saveznog ministra za rad i socijalna
pitanja ‘Mirjana Dragaš, Chairman of the Steering
Committee of the Republic Institute for Labour Mar-
ket and Deputy Federal Minister of Labour and So-
cial Affairs’.

We already explained how we used graphs in or-
der to improve precision in recognition of personal
names. These graphs perform well on names that
are in our e-dictionaries, but fail to recognize a full
name if one or more of its constituents are unknown.
Our e-dictionaries of personal names cover Serbian
and English names and only a small number of
other foreign names transcribed into Serbian. Con-
sequently, if our graphs relied on e-dictionaries only,
they would fail to recognize most foreign names in
Serbian texts, except common English names. For
that reason we developed additional graphs that im-
prove recall of recognition of personal names. These
graphs rely on already developed graphs that rec-
ognize a person’s position in the society. Basically
they function like this: if a phrase recognized as a
(potential) person’s position is preceded or followed
by two unknown words both with upper-case initial

51



Figure 1: The graph recognizing functions, professions and roles preceding or following a personal name in the
genitive case

or one personal name and one unknown word with
upper-case initial then these two words are consid-
ered to form a full personal name (Figure 2).

Two examples of the recognition of personal
names that were not in our e-dictionaries are: Mini-
star odbrane Rumunije Teodor Atanasiu ‘Romanian
Defence Minister Teodor Atanasiu’ (only surname
unknown) and Gerasimov Ivanovič, član kolegijuma
saveta med̄unarodnog saveza pravnika ‘Gerasimov
Ivanovich, a member of the Collegium of the Coun-
cil of the International Lawyers Association’ (both
first name and surname unknown). We developed
148 graphs that recognize personal names and their
positions.

4.2 Geopolitical Names

Geopolitical names are ambiguous by themselves,
namely, the same name can represent two or more
different entities: a city and a state (e.g. Luksem-
burg ‘Luxembourg’), mountain and a region (e.g.
Balkan), etc., but they can also be ambiguous with
other proper names or even common words. Thus,
as in the case of personal names, tagging of geopolit-
ical names cannot rely on e-dictionaries only. An ad-
ditional problem in Serbian arises from the fact that
the names of a number of countries coincide with the
feminine gender relational adjectives derived from
these names: e.g. Francuska ‘France’ can also mean
‘French’. Thus, various constraints have to be used
in order to keep the precision high.

Graphs for geopolitical names make intensive use
of positive and negative right and left contexts im-

plemented in Unitex (section 6.3 (Paumier, 2008)).
We will illustrate how these graphs function on the
example of the set of graphs recognizing names of
states, which consists of four sub-graphs:

1. The basic graph recognizes all compound state
names, all abbreviated states names, but only
those simple word state names that are not
ambiguous with any other proper or common
name. To that end we use negative right con-
text (Figure 3).

2. For ambiguous simple word state names that
appear in a text in the genitive case we use
a graph that recognizes such a name if some
trigger noun appears before it, e.g. predsednik
‘president’, skupština ‘parliament’, etc. To that
end we use the left context (the second part of
Figure 3).

3. For simple word state names that are ambigu-
ous with relational adjectives we use a graph
that recognizes such a name if it is not fol-
lowed by a common noun (thus preventing
false recognitions in noun phrases like Fran-
cuska banka ‘French bank’) or if it is fol-
lowed by an auxiliary verb (thus allowing cor-
rect recognitions in phrases like Francuska je
odlučila ‘France has decided’). To that end we
use both positive and negative right contexts
(third part of Figure 3).

4. Finally, we recognize as a state name every am-
biguous simple word state name that appears in

52



Figure 2: The graph that recognizes and tags a partially unknown personal name in the genitive case if followed by a
person’s position also in the genitive case

some kind of a list with other state names, pro-
vided that this list contains at least one unam-
biguous state name. At the bottom of Figure 3
is represented the path in a graph that matches
a list of names in which the first state name is
unambiguous, which is established by a basic
graph described in item 1. This path will recog-
nize two state names in Srbija i Hrvatska ‘Ser-
bia and Croatia’, because the first name is un-
ambiguous.

A similar approach is implemented for other types
of geographic names. We developed 23 graphs for
recognition of geopolitical names.

4.3 Other Named Entities

Recognition of money and measurement expres-
sions also requires intensive use of graphs, partic-
ularly for the recognition of the numerical part of
the expressions. For that, however, no special graphs
were produced, since 40 dictionary graphs for recog-
nition of multi-word numerals were already avail-
able and are in regular use for text processing, as
described in section 2. Graphs for numerical ex-
pressions rely on information from e-dictionaries,
and syntactic structures they have to cover are rather
simple. We developed 12 graphs for recognition of
measurement expressions and 10 for recognition of
money expressions.

A collection of graphs was also produced for
recognition of temporal expressions. These graphs,
similar to the graphs for numerical expressions, use
available dictionary graphs for multi-word numer-
als. As opposed to graphs for all other named en-
tities, they use information from e-dictionaries to a
much lesser degree. However, the expressions they
have to recognize come in various different syntac-
tic forms, which makes these graphs rather complex.
We developed 29 graphs for recognition of date ex-
pressions and 14 for recognition of time expressions.

5 The Experiment and Evaluation

To evaluate the results produced by our graphs we
used a collection of 2,300 short agency news dated
from May 2005 to December 2006. The size of
this corpus is approximately 117,000 simple word
forms, and 4,273 sentences. Thus, an average news
item consists of a little less than 2 sentences (1.86),
and 51 simple word forms. This collection of news
pertains to Serbian politics, both internal and exter-
nal.

The graphs were applied to the corpus in the fol-
lowing order: measurement expressions, money ex-
pressions, dates, personal names and roles, time of
day, geopolitical names. This order is the sim-
ple consequence of the fact that the graphs were
applied in the order in which they were actually
produced. The tagged texts where then handed
to students who read them carefully and checked
all the inserted tags2. The students also inserted
a new attribute (PROVERA, ‘check’) into every tag
with the value ‘OK’ if the named entity was cor-
rectly recognized and tagged, or ‘NOK’ if this was
not the case or if it was only partially recognized.
If the named entity was totally missed, the stu-
dents inserted the appropriate tag with the value
‘MISS’ in the check attribute. One such exam-
ple is: . . . od <RS PROVERA=‘MISS’>generalnog
sekretara NATO <IME PROVERA=‘MISS’>Jap de
Hop Shefera </IME></RS>. . . ‘by NATO Secre-
tary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer. . . ’.3

It was not always easy to decide which value
for the check attribute PROVERA is the most appro-
priate. We at present neglected the fuzzy nature
of some named entities and always treated as cor-
rect, for instance, geographic place tags, although

2This task was accomplished by students of Library and In-
formation Sciences at the Faculty of Philology, University Bel-
grade within the scope of the course ‘Information Retrieval’
during academic years 2009/2010 and 2010/2011.

3The tag IME (name) is embedded in the tag RS (reference
string) which is used for tagging a position in the society.

53



Figure 3: Simplified sub-graphs for recognition of state names

their actual usage could belong to another category,
like organization. Also, it is clear that in razgo-
vori Beograda i Prištine ‘talks between Belgrade
and Priština’, Belgrade and Priština represent gov-
ernment institutions rather than locations. The au-
thors in (Martineau et al., 2007) describe the NER
approach for French which use the wider context to
resolve such ambiguities. Their approach relies on a
thorough description of phrasal verbs that does not
yet exist for Serbian.

The results of our experiment are summarized in
Table 2. The sample we used contained 9,677 NE
tokens and 2,844 NE types, hence 3.4 tokens per
type. At the top of the list of most frequent to-
kens are names of countries (TOP-C) followed by
personal names (NAME), 3,115 and 3,056, respec-
tively, accounting for 32.2% and 31.6% of the total
number of tokens. Names of settlement (TOP-S) fol-
low closely with 28.9%, and these three categories
account for 92.7% of the total number of NE tokens.
As for NE types, half of them represent personal
names, another 20.5% are settlements followed by
10.9% for countries, reaching all together 81.4% of
total NE types. The highest token/type ratio is 10.0
for names of countries and the lowest, one token per
type, for temporal expressions representing date pe-
riods (DATE-P), which does not come as a surprise.

If we look at NE tokens only, the precision of our
NER system is 0.98 whereas its recall is 0.93, yield-
ing an overall F-measure of 0.95. The highest preci-
sion of 1.0 was reached for date periods, followed
by names of countries, and names of settlements,
both with a precision of 0.99. On the other hand,
the lowest precision of 0.76 was achieved for names
of water bodies (TOP-W), followed by 0.83 for tem-
poral expressions representing time periods (TIME-
P). However, names of water bodies have a recall of
1.0, hence an overall F-measure of 0.87. The low-
est recall of only 0.56 for NE representing measures
can be explained by an oversight in the construction
of relevant graphs. Namely, we failed to include the
units for time in the graphs, and since these units ap-
pear quite often in newspaper texts the graphs con-
sequently failed to recognize them. This flaw will,
of course, be removed in the future. Named enti-
ties representing measures have also the lowest F-
measure of 0.71 followed by time periods with 0.77.
On the other end are names of countries, which have
an F-measure of as much as 0.99.

If we look at NE types, the results do not differ
very much. The overall precision is 0.95, the recall
0.84, and the F-measure 0.89. The highest possi-
ble precision of 1.0 goes once again to date periods,
but this time closely followed by currencies (CURR)

54



OK NOK MISS Token/ Precision Recall F-measure
Token Type Token Type Token Type Type Token Type Token Type Token Type

TOP-C 3,088 292 32 13 27 18 10.0 0.99 0.96 0.99 0.94 0.99 0.95

TOP-S 2,675 497 30 18 125 87 4.8 0.99 0.97 0.96 0.85 0.97 0.90

CURR 184 138 5 4 14 11 1.3 0.97 0.97 0.93 0.93 0.95 0.95

DATE-M 348 247 31 26 20 18 1.4 0.92 0.90 0.95 0.93 0.93 0.92

NAME 2,558 1,135 85 58 498 287 2.1 0.97 0.95 0.84 0.80 0.90 0.87

TIME-M 29 27 3 3 6 3 1.2 0.91 0.90 0.83 0.90 0.87 0.90

TOP-W 13 9 4 4 0 0 1.4 0.76 0.69 1.00 1.00 0.87 0.82

TOP-H 19 10 1 1 5 3 1.8 0.95 0.91 0.79 0.77 0.86 0.83

DATE-P 12 12 0 0 6 6 1.0 1.00 1.00 0.67 0.67 0.80 0.80

TIME-P 5 4 1 1 2 2 1.2 0.83 0.80 0.71 0.67 0.77 0.73

MEASURE 24 21 1 1 19 17 1.1 0.96 0.95 0.56 0.55 0.71 0.70

TOTAL 8,955 2,392 193 129 722 452 3.4 0.98 0.95 0.93 0.84 0.95 0.89

Table 2: Results of the experiment

and settlements, both at 0.97. Water bodies are once
again at the bottom of the precision list with a score
of 0.69, but due to a recall of 1.0, their F-measure is
0.82. Named entities representing measures have the
lowest recall of 0.55 as well as the lowest F-measure
of 0.70. The top of the F-measure list is a tie be-
tween names of countries and currencies, both with
0.95.

Finally, we would like to mention also the suc-
cess rate of the recognition of a person’s position in
the society (RS). As these are not usually consid-
ered as NEs, we did not include them in the gen-
eral overview table. However, for 2,991 tokens and
1,129 types related to such expressions, the preci-
sion was 0.88 and 0.94 respectively, with a recall of
0.84 for tokens and 0.78 for types, thus making their
F-measure almost equal (0.86 vs. 0.85). Given the
complexity and variety of such expressions this can
be perceived as a very successful outcome.

The analysis of the obtained results showed that
the causes of omissions and incorrect tagging were
various and can be classified as follows:

• Typographic errors in the source text;
• Absence of a name in e-dictionaries;
• Oversights and minor deficiencies in the con-

struction of graphs;

• Failure of a graph to cover all syntactic con-
structions.

Not much can be done in case of the first cause
but our experiment proved very useful in detecting

omissions and deficiencies in our e-dictionaries and
graphs. Reducing the errors and omissions result-
ing from the fourth cause listed is most demanding
in the case of graphs that recognize a person’s posi-
tions, and it will ask for either production of addi-
tional graphs or substantial reconstruction of some
of the existing ones. We will here only mention the
most frequent cases.

• . . . predsednik makedonske Komisije za
odnose sa verskim zajednicama Cane Mo-
janovski. . . ‘. . . President of the Macedonian
Commission for Relations with Religious
Communities Cane Mojanovski. . . ’ — the
graph describing the position of a person
(Figure 1) does not allow the preposition
phrase sa ‘with’ within the preposition phrase
za ‘for’. The question is how much would be
lost in precision by enhancing this graph to
encompass such structures.

• Our graphs failed in many cases when the text
contained a list of personal names with their
positions, due to a lack of a straightforward link
between the name and the position. One ex-
ample is: Predsednici Bugarske i Srbije Georgi
Parvanov i Boris Tadić ‘Presidents of Bulgaria
and Serbia Georgi Parvanov and Boris Tadić’.

• Our graphs failed in cases of nested structures
as such cases were not envisaged, e.g. portparol
glavnog tužioca Haškog tribunala Karle del
Ponte Florans Artman ‘spokesman for Chief

55



Prosecutor of Hague Tribunal Carla del Ponte,
Florence Hartmann’.

6 Future Work

Although we see the evaluation results of our NER
system as promising, there is still much to be done.
Besides improving the existing system on the ba-
sis of the evaluation results, our future work will
concentrate on enhancing NER system to recognize
more NE categories. The classical entity-type still
missing is organization, but in addition to that, exist-
ing e-dictionaries of Serbian support recognition of
many other categories, such as inhabitants, events,
urban proper names etc. We also plan to improve
the performance of the NER system by organiz-
ing graphs in cascades, as suggested for French in
(Friburger and Maurel, 2004) and by recognizing
nested NE, especially recursive embedding of nomi-
nal phrases (see (Finkel and Manning, 2009)). After
achieving these tasks we will move from NE recog-
nition to information extraction by tackling the prob-
lem of normalizing the recognized NEs.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank MSc and PhD students at
the Faculty of Philology, University of Belgrade for
their help in producing some of the graphs used in
the NER system for Serbian: Sandra Gucul Milo-
jević, Vanja Radulović and Jelena Jaćimović.

This research was supported by the Serbian Min-
istry of Education and Science under the grant #III
47003.

References

Lou Burnard and Syd Bauman. 2008. TEI P5: Guide-
lines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.

Nancy Chinchor. 1995. MUC-6 Named Entity Task Def-
inition (Version 2.1).

B. Courtois and M. Silberztein. 1990. Dictionnaires
électroniques du français. Larousse, Paris.

Jenny Rose Finkel and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
Nested Named Entity Recognition. In EMNLP, pages
141–150. ACL.

Nathalie Friburger and Denis Maurel. 2004. Finite-
state Transducer Cascades to Extract Named Entities
in Texts. Theor. Comput. Sci., 313(1):93–104.

Thierry Grass, Denis Maurel, and Odile Piton. 2002. De-
scription of a multilingual database of proper names.
In Elisabete Ranchod and Nuno J. Mamede, editors,
PorTAL, volume 2389 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 137–140. Springer.

Ralph Grishman and Beth Sundheim. 1996. Message
Understanding Conference-6: A Brief History. In
COLING, volume 1, pages 466–471, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Cvetana Krstev. 2008. Processing of Serbian - Au-
tomata, Texts and Electronic Dictionaries. Faculty of
Philology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade.

Claude Martineau, Elsa Tolone, and Stavroula Voyatzi.
2007. Les Entités Nommées : usage et degrés de
précision et de désambiguı̈sation. In Catherine Ca-
mugli Gallardo, Matthieu Constant, and Anne Dister,
editors, Actes du 26ème Colloque international sur le
Lexique et la Grammaire (LGC’07), pages 105–112,
Bonifacio, France, October.

Denis Maurel. 2008. Prolexbase: a Multilingual Rela-
tional Lexical Database of Proper Names. In LREC.
European Language Resources Association.

David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2009. A Sur-
vey of Named Entity Recognition and Classifica-
tion. In Satoshi Sekine and Elisabete Ranchhod, ed-
itors, Named Entities: Recognition, Classification and
Use, pages 3–28. John Benjamins Pub. Co., Amster-
dam/Philadelphia.

Sébastien Paumier, 2008. Unitex 2.1
User Manual. http://www-igm.univ-
mlv.fr/unitex/UnitexManual2.1.pdf.

Agata Savary, Jakub Waszczuk, and Adam
Przepiórkowski. 2010. Towards the Annotation
of Named Entities in the National Corpus of Polish. In
Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike
Rosner, and Daniel Tapias, editors, LREC. European
Language Resources Association.

S. Sekine and C. Nobata. 2004. Definition, Dictionaries
and Tagger for Extended Named Entity Hierarchy. In
LREC, Lisbon, Portugal.

Duško Vitas, Cvetana Krstev, and Denis Maurel. 2007.
A Note on the Semantic and Morphological Properties
of Proper Names in the Prolex Project. Linguisticae
Investigationes, 30(1):115–133, January.

56


