



















































The Language Library: Many Layers, More Knowledge


Proceedings of Workshop on Language Resources, Technology and Services in the Sharing Paradigm, pages 93–97,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12, 2011.

The Language Library: Many Layers, More Knowledge

Nicoletta Calzolari, Riccardo Del Gratta, Francesca Frontini, Irene Russo
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale “A. Zampolli”, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche

Via Moruzzi 1 56126 Pisa, Italy
{name.surname}@ilc.cnr.it

Abstract
In this paper we outline the general con-
cept of the Language Library, a new initia-
tive that has the purpose of building a huge
archive of structured colletion of linguis-
tic information. The Language Library
is conceived as a community built repos-
itory and as an environment that allows
language specialists to share multidimen-
sional and multi-level annotated/processed
resources. The first steps towards its im-
plementation are briefly sketched.

1 Introduction

In Natural Language Processing technologies even
small amounts of annotated data can contribute
to improve the performance of complex systems
(Palmer and Xue, 2010). This evidence has led
to the creation of many annotation schemes that
encode our knowledge of syntactic, semantic and
pragmatic features of every language.

Annotation is at the core of training and testing
systems, i.e. at the core of NLP. Relations among
phenomena at different linguistic levels are at the
essence of language properties but we are cur-
rently over-simplifying annotation tasks, focusing
mostly on one specific linguistic layer at a time,
without (having the possibility of) paying atten-
tion to the relations among the different layers.
At the same time our efforts are too much scat-
tered and dispersed without much possibility of
exploitation of others’ achievements.

Today we have enough capability and resources
for addressing the complexities hidden in multi-
layer interrelations. Moreover, we can exploit to-
day’s trend towards sharing for initiating a collec-
tive movement that works towards creating syn-
ergies and harmonisation among different annota-
tion efforts that are now dispersed.

In this paper we present the Language Library,
an initiative which is conceived as a facility for

gathering and making available through simple
functionalities all the linguistic knowledge the
field is able to produce, putting in place new ways
of collaboration within the LRT community.

The rationale behind the Language Library ini-
tiative is that accumulation of massive amounts of
(high-quality) multi-dimensional data about lan-
guage is the key to foster advancement in our
knowledge about language and its mechanisms, in
particular for finding previously unnoticed inter-
relations between linguistic levels. The Language
Library must be community built, with the entire
LRT community providing data about language re-
sources and annotated/encoded language data and
freely using them.

With the Language Library we thus want also
to enable/promote a more global approach to lan-
guage studies and start a movement aimed at −
and providing the facilities to − collecting all pos-
sible annotations at all possible levels.

Given the state of the art of linguistic annota-
tion, we can certainly hope to gather tens of dif-
ferent annotation layers and types on the same
data; once this is obtained, it will allow for a bet-
ter analysis and exploitation of language phenom-
ena that we tend to disregard today. In particu-
lar, interesting interrelations are likely to become
visible among levels that are not often considered
together, thus leading to improved computability
(e.g. a coreference annotation on top of simpler
annotation layers would improve machine trans-
lation performance). Part of this multi-layer and
multi-language annotation should be performed on
parallel (or at least comparable) texts, so as to fos-
ter comparability of new achievements and equal-
ity among languages.

Even if the Language Library will contain all
kinds of processed linguistic data, in this paper we
concentrate on the frequent case of annotated data.

93



2 Outline/General Concept

The Language Library is conceived as open and
accessible repository where the language technol-
ogy community can access and share corpora en-
riched with several layers of linguistic annotation.
The Library is going to be:

− open, in that its content will be accessible to
the community without restrictions;

− multilingual and multi-domain;

− multi-user and community oriented;

− multi-dimensional, containing multiple lay-
ers of annotation of the same text, possibly
by multiple contributors;

− collaborative, in the sense of collaboration
among experts, and also academics and NLP
companies;

− reuse-oriented, promoting the reuse of anno-
tated resources and annotation schemes;

− maintainable, endorsing the use of annotation
standards;

− scalable, starting with a demo version with
a limited number of texts and then progres-
sively adding new features.

In order to reach this goal, a first population
round of the Language Library will start around
a core of parallel/comparable texts that will be an-
notated over and over again by several contribu-
tors submitting a paper for LREC2012. Hopefully
the selected texts will be annotated with different
tools and annotation schemes. The more this core
grows, the more new contributors will be encour-
aged to participate by the possibility of building on
existing layers of annotation to develop their own,
which will be in turn added to the resource and be-
come available to the NLP community. Notice that
the Library should also be seen as a space where
the theoretical and the applied linguistics commu-
nities could meet, in that the provided annotation
can be both manually and automatically produced.

It is possible to envisage a scenario where an
annotation layer (e.g. a human made annotation of
coreferences on a portion of the texts from the Li-
brary) is first submitted by one author/researcher,
used by another as a training set to tag a larger
amount of the available texts, and then finally re-
submitted enriched in size to be (at least partially)

human checked again. By recursively doing so the
Language Library could come to contain a great
number of human checked sections, alongside in-
creasingly accurate machine tagged ones.

In later stages the Library will grow both verti-
cally by adding annotation layers and horizontally,
by adding languages, domains, and by increasing
the size of the corpora. At this point the possibil-
ity of comparing and cross-examining information
from several annotation layers at a large scale will
start to show its benefits both theoretically and in
an NLP perspective.

In its mature stages the Library will consolidate
by focusing on the enhancement of interoperabil-
ity, by encouraging the use of common standards
and schemes of annotation. It has to be under-
lined that the Language Library is conceived as a
theory-neutral space which will allow for several
annotation philosophies to coexist. The interop-
erability effort should not be seen as a superim-
position of standards but rather as the promotion
of a series of best practices that might help other
contributors to better access and easily reuse the
annotation layers provided.

In this sense encouraging the use of a represen-
tation format such as GrAF (Ide and Suderman,
2007) in a second stage might be helpful. On
the one hand the stand-off approach of keeping
each layer of annotation separated from the oth-
ers and from the raw data seems particularly suit-
able for the Library; on the other hand GrAF en-
ables a soft approach to interoperability, in that it
can be used to uniformly represent formats that
are both syntactically and semantically different
and this could make it easier for the contributors
to recognize compatible layers without forcing the
adoption of a rigid standard. GraF converters from
some known formats are currently under develop-
ment and might be made available in the Language
Library.

2.1 Building a community

As witnessed in the evolution of other collabora-
tive resources, in order to attract the contribution
of the community it is necessary to bring the Lan-
guage Library to a level where the burden and the
relative cost of sharing the resources is paid back
by the possibility of accessing the resources re-
leased/produced by other researchers. In order to
facilitate this the project will be built around exist-
ing frameworks of language resource sharing and

94



around their existing communities.
A number of ongoing initiatives (FLaReNet,

META-SHARE and CLARIN among others) have
already attracted around themselves a growing
LRT community that requires consolidation of its
foundations and steady increase of its major as-
sets, minimising dispersion of efforts and enabling
synergies based on common knowledge and col-
laborative initiatives.

The Language Library initiative will build upon
the large experience gathered and the best prac-
tices and tools developed in these projects, both
in terms of documentation and of collection and
storage of the resources. While these initiatives
have concentrated so far on language resources
and tools, with the Language Library - started as
a FLaReNet1 initiative - focus will shift mostly on
linguistic knowledge.

Most specifically the Language Library will be
strictly connected with the following initiatives:

− The LRE Map (Calzolari et al., 2010), started
at LREC 2010, collecting metadata about
Language Resource and Technology;

− META-SHARE (Piperidis et al., 2011), an
open platform providing an open, distributed,
secure, and interoperable infrastructure for
the Language Technology domain.

Both these initiatives rest on the assumption that
availability is not enough: resources must be vis-
ible and easily retrievable. The Language Library
will be made visible through META-SHARE,
where a complete set of Metadata is already avail-
able for language resources and it can be immedi-
ately applied to describe and catalog the first nu-
cleus of the Language Library.

2.2 Comparison with other initiatives
Recently other initiatives that share some points
of similarity with the Language Library here de-
scribed have been launched, proving the fact that
the community is currently oriented towards simi-
lar goals.

The Manually Annotated Sub-Corpus (MASC)2

of the American National Corpus (ANC)3 is an
open and downloadable corpus that that shares
with the Language Library the idea of collecting

1www.flarenet.eu
2www.americannationalcorpus.org/MASC/Home.html

(Ide et al., 2010)
3http://americannationalcorpus.org/

as many annotation layers for a single text collec-
tion as possible. However, it is not conceived as a
multilingual project and is more strictly limited to
one corpus.

The Human Language Project (Abney and Bird,
2010) on the other hand is a multilingual project,
that aims to build a Universal Corpus of the
world’s languages. In this case the immediate
goal is to reach horizontal completeness (docu-
ment as many languages as possible, with a spe-
cial attention to endangered ones) and the project
is specifically geared towards the Machine Trans-
lation community.

The Language Commons4 finally is an online
archive for the collection of written and spoken
corpora in the open domain. The Language Li-
brary idea bears similarities to this experience, but
it will dramatically shift the focus on the vertical
dimension, in that it focuses also on gathering as
many annotation levels for the same texts as pos-
sible.

3 First Experiment

After the success of the LRE Map5 introduced
for LREC 2010 and now used in many confer-
ences as a normal step in the submission pro-
cedure (EMNLP and COLING among others),
LREC 2012 will be the occasion to launch the
LREC Language Library, that will constitute the
first building block of the Language Library.

Because of the huge amount of data about re-
sources provided for the LRE Map, we believe
that times are ripe for the promotion of such col-
laborative enterprise of the LREC Community that
will constitute a first step towards the creation of
this very broad, community-built, open resource
infrastructure.

Together with ELRA we will prepare as a first
step an LREC Repository, part of the META-
SHARE network, hosting a number of raw data
on all modalities (speech, text, images, etc.) in
as many languages as possible. When submit-
ting a paper, authors will be invited to process
selected texts, in the appropriate language(s), in
one or more of the possible dimensions that their
submission addresses (e.g. POS-tag the data, ex-
tract/annotate named entities, annotate temporal
information, disambiguate word senses, transcribe
audio, etc.) and put the processed data back in the

4www.archive.org/details/LanguageCommons
5www.resourcebook.eu

95



LREC Repository.
The processed data will be made available to all

the LREC participants before the conference, to
be compared and analyzed, and at LREC some/an
event around them will be organized.

This collaborative work on annota-
tion/transcription/extraction/... over the same
data and on a large number of processing dimen-
sions will set the ground for the future Language
Library, linked to the LRE Map for the description
of the data, where everyone can deposit/create
processed data of any sort all our “knowledge”
about language.

3.1 A case study: Annotation Resources at
LREC2010

With the aim to highlight the feasibility of the
LREC Repository for the Language Library, we
propose a brief analysis of the annotation guide-
lines/tools inserted by authors as resources in the
LREC2010 Map during the submission process.
This will enable us to make, at this prelimi-
nary stage, an educated guess on the number and
variability (with respect to languages, modalities,
uses) of annotated texts that will be part of the core
of the Language Library.

Amongst over 1990 resources, 62 are
listed as “Representation-Annotation Formal-
ism/Guidelines” (“R-A F/G” in Tables 1 and 2)
while 136 are described as Annotation Tool (“AT”
in Tables 1 and 2). Not every submission that
report on the usage of an annotation tool provided
also description for an annotation formalism,
therefore its possible that more annotation
schemes have been used.

As expected, the vast majority of annotation
tools (see Table 1) are listed/described as language
independent (82/136), while among Representa-
tionAnnotation Formalism/Guidelines 10/62 have
been developed for English, 20/62 are language in-
dependent and 12/62 have been applied in multi-
lingual resources.

R-A F/G AT
Language independent 20/62 82/136
English 10/62 18/136
Multilingual 12/62 11/136

Table 1: Most frequent values with respect to the
language

Concerning modality, very few formalisms have

been proposed for modalities other than Writ-
ten (6/62), but among annotation tools 25/136 re-
sulted useful for Multimodal/Multimedia modal-
ity, 8/136 for Sign Language and 7/136 for Speech
modality.

The range of resource uses (see Table 2) is
quite wide, with a prevalence of Knowledge Dis-
covery/Representation (8/62, 6/136), Information
Extraction, Information Retrieval (7/62, 13/136),
Machine Translation, Speech To Speech Trans-
lation (6/62, 8/136). For Annotation Tool, Dis-
course, Acquisition and Dialogue are the other
most frequent uses.

R-A F/G AT
Knowledge
Discovery/Representation

8/62 6/136

Information Extraction,
Information Retrieval

7/62 13/136

Machine Translation,
Speech to Speech
Translation

6/62 8/136

Table 2: Most frequent with respect to the uses

This information relative to a small subsets of
the resources described by LREC2010 authors
shows how in the starting phase the Language Li-
brary will be easily enriched with texts annotated
on the basis of guidelines elaborated by scholars
for a wide range of uses. Even if the incidence
of languages other than English and of modalities
other than Written is not so high, the existence of
guidelines/formalisms focusing on more than one
language represents an interesting chance to en-
rich the Language Library with more annotated
data.

Finally, 40/62 Representation-Annotation For-
malism/Guidelines have been listed as Newly
created-in progress or Newly created-finished, a
figure that shows how the Language Library can
foster the knowledge about brand new annotation
formalisms.

3.2 Future developments

In the initial phases of the project the main chal-
lenge will be to motivate the large parts of the
community to join in the enterprise; subsequently
more steps will be taken in order to enhance in-
teroperability and avoid the proliferation of vari-
ous, slightly different but incompatible annotation
schemes.

96



In order to improve this the platform should
make annotation schemes and tools available to
the users, in such a way as to encourage the shar-
ing and use of already existing standards. Ideally
the platform could at some stage enable the host-
ing of on-line annotation tools, thus becoming a
virtual environment for the recruitment of anno-
tating workforce in a crowd-sourcing modality.

Also the dimensions and the modality of anno-
tated data will have to be taken into account: we
hope that not just small written corpora will be an-
notated and that the efficient management of audio
and video files will be allowed in the platform.

4 Conclusions

It has been recognized that Natural Language Pro-
cessing is a data-intensive discipline, so the LR
community must now be coherent and take con-
crete actions leading to the coordinated gathering
− in a shared effort − of as many (annotated-
encoded) language data as it is able to produce.

In doing this a positive inspiration can be drawn
from the success of similar experiences in other
disciplines, e.g. astronomy/astrophysics, where
the scientific communities cooperate in accumu-
late huge amounts of observation data for bet-
ter understanding the universe. The most sig-
nificant model is the recent successful effort for
the mapping of human genome. The Language
Library could be considered as a sort of big
Genome project for languages, where the commu-
nity will collectively deposit/create increasingly
rich and mutilayered linguistic resources, enabling
a deeper understanding of the complex relations
between different annotation layers.

Acknowledgments

We thank the META-NET project (FP7-ICT-4
249119: T4ME-NET) for supporting this work.
The Language Library started as an initiative
within FLaReNet - Fostering Language Resources
Network (Grant Agreement No. ECP-2007-
LANG-617001).
The Language Library has been discussed, among
others, with Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Olivier Hamon, Joseph Mariani, Stelios Piperidis.

References
Steven Abney and Steven Bird. 2010. The human lan-

guage project: Building a universal corpus of the
world’s languages. In Proceedings of the 48th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 88–97, Uppsala, Sweden, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nicoletta Calzolari, Claudia Soria, Riccardo Del
Gratta, Sara Goggi, Valeria Quochi, Irene Russo,
Khalid Choukri, Joseph Mariani, and Stelios
Piperidis. 2010. The LREC Map of Language
Resources and Technologies. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Ros-
ner, and Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the
Seventh conference on International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta,
May. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Nancy Ide and Keith Suderman. 2007. GrAF: A
Graph-based Format for Linguistic Annotations. In
Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2007, pages
1–8, Prague.

Nancy Ide, Christiane Fellbaum, Collin Baker, and Re-
becca Passonneau. 2010. Masc: The manually an-
notated sub-corpus: A community resource for and
by the people. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Con-
ference Short Papers, pages 68–73. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Martha Palmer and Nianwen Xue. 2010. Linguistic
annotation. In The Handbook of Computational Lin-
guistics and Natural Language Processing, Black-
well Handbooks in Linguistics, pages 238–270.
John Wiley & Sons.

Stelios Piperidis, Calzolari Nicoletta, and Maria Kout-
sombogera. 2011. META-SHARE: Design and
Governance (Deliverable D6.2.1). Technical report,
METANET, January. Dissemination Level: Re-
stricted.

97


