










































Annotating Events, Temporal Expressions and Relations in Italian: the It-Timeml Experience for the Ita-TimeBank


Proceedings of the Fifth Law Workshop (LAW V), pages 143–151,
Portland, Oregon, 23-24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating Events, Temporal Expressions and Relations in Italian: 

the It-TimeML Experience for the Ita-TimeBank 
 
 

Tommaso Caselli Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi Rachele Sprugnoli 

ILC “A.Zampolli” - CNR  

Via G. Moruzzi, 1  

56124 Pisa 

CELCT 

Via della Cascata 56/c  

38123 Povo (TN) 

CELCT 

Via della Cascata 56/c  

38123 Povo (TN) 

caselli@ilc.cnt.it bartalesi@celct.it sprugnoli@celct.it 

Emanuele Pianta Irina Prodanof 

CELCT 

Via della Cascata 56/c  

38123 Povo (TN) 

ILC “A.Zampolli” - CNR  

Via G. Moruzzi, 1  

56124 Pisa 

pianta@fbk.eu prodanof@ilc.cnr.it 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents the annotation 

guidelines and specifications which have 

been developed for the creation of the 

Italian TimeBank, a language resource 

composed of two corpora manually 

annotated with temporal and event 

information. In particular, the adaptation 

of the TimeML scheme to Italian is 

described, and a special attention is 

given to the methodology used for the 

realization of the annotation 

specifications, which are strategic in 

order to create good quality annotated 

resources and to justify the annotated 

items. The reliability of the It-TimeML 

guidelines and specifications is 

evaluated on the basis of the results of 

the inter-coder agreement performed 

during the annotation of the two corpora. 

 Introduction 

In recent years a renewed interest in temporal 

processing has spread in the NLP community, 

thanks to the success of the TimeML annotation 

scheme (Pustejovsky et al., 2003a) and to the 

availability of annotated resources, such as the 

English and French TimeBanks (Pustejovsky et 

al., 2003b; Bittar, 2010) and the TempEval 

corpora (Verhagen et al., 2010). 

The ISO TC 37 / SC 4 initiative 

(“Terminology and other language and content 

resources”) and the TempEval-2 contest have 

contributed to the development of TimeML-

compliant annotation schemes in languages 

other than English, namely Spanish, Korean, 

Chinese, French and Italian. Once the 

corresponding corpora will be completed and 

made available, the NLP community will benefit 

from having access to different language 

resources with a common layer of annotation 

which could boost studies in multilingual 

temporal processing and improve the 

performance of complex multilingual NLP 

systems, such as Question-Answering and 

Textual Entailment. 
This paper focuses on the annotation 

guidelines and specifications which have been 

developed for the creation of the Italian 

TimeBank (hereafter, Ita-TimeBank). The 

distinction between annotation guidelines and 

annotation specifications is of utmost 

importance in order to distinguish between the 

abstract, formal definition of an annotation 

scheme and the actual realization of the 

annotated language resource. In addition to this, 

documenting the annotation specification 

facilitates the reduplication of annotations and 

justify the annotated items. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 

will describe in detail specific issues related to 

the temporal annotation of Italian for the two 

main tags of the TimeML annotation scheme, 

143



namely <EVENT> and <TIMEX3>. Section 3 

will present the realization of the annotation 

specifications and will document them. Section 

4 focuses on the evaluation of the annotation 

scheme on the Ita-TimeBank, formed by two 

corpora independently realized by applying the 

annotation specifications. Finally, in Section 5 

conclusions and extensions to the current 

annotation effort will be reported. 
Notice that, for clarity's sake, in this paper the 

examples will focus only on the tag (or attribute 

or link) under discussion. 

 It-TimeML: Extensions and 

Language Specific Issues 

Applying an annotation scheme to a language 

other than the one for which it was initially 

developed, requires a careful study of the 

language specific issues related to the linguistic 

phenomena taken into account (Im et al., 2009; 

Bittar, 2008). 

TimeML focuses on Events (i.e. actions, 

states, and processes - <EVENT> tag), 

Temporal Expressions (i.e. durations, calendar 

dates, times of day and sets of time - 

<TIMEX3> tag), Signals (e.g. temporal 

prepositions and subordinators - <SIGNAL> 

tag) and various kind of dependencies between 

Events and/or Temporal Expressions (i.e. 

temporal, aspectual and subordination relations - 

<TLINK>, <ALINK> and <SLINK> tags 

respectively). 

An ISO language-independent specification 

of TimeML is under development but it is still 

in the enquiry stage
1
. For this reason, in the 

following subsections we will mostly compare 

the Italian annotation guidelines with the latest 

version of the English annotation guidelines 

(TimeML Working group, 2010), focusing on 

the two main tags, i.e <EVENT> and 

<TIMEX3>, in Italian. 

2.1 The <EVENT> tag 

The <EVENT> tag is used to mark-up instances 

of eventualities (Bach, 1986). This category 

comprises all types of actions (punctual or 

durative) and states as well. With respect to 

                                                           
1
http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalog

ue_detail.htm?csnumber=37331 

previous annotations schemes (Katz and Arosio, 

2001, Filatova and Hovy, 2001, Setzer and 

Gaizauskas, 2001 among other), TimeML 

allows for annotating as Events not only verbs 

but also nouns, adjectives and prepositional 

phrases. 

In the adaptation to Italian, two annotation 

principles adopted for English, that is an 

orientation towards surface linguistic 

phenomena and the notion of minimal chunk for 

the tag extent, have been preserved without 

major modifications. The main differences with 

respect to the English version rely i.) in the 

attribute list; and ii.) in the attributes values. 

In Italian 12 core attributes apply with respect 

to the 10 attributes in English. The newly 

introduced attributes are MOOD and VFORM 

which capture key distinctions of the Tense-

Mood-Aspect (TMA) system of the Italian 

language. These two attributes are common to 

other languages, such as Spanish, Catalan, 

French and Korean. 

The MOOD attribute captures the contrastive 

grammatical expression of different modalities 

of presentation of an Event when realized by a 

verb. Annotating this attribute is important since 

grammatical modality has an impact on the 

identification of temporal and subordinating 

relations, and on the assessment of 

veridicity/factivity values. Mood in Italian is 

expressed as part of the verb morphology and 

not by means of modal auxiliary verbs as in 

English (e.g. through the auxiliary “would”),. 

Thus, the solution to deal with this phenomenon 

adopted for English TimeML (where the main 

verb is annotated with the attribute 

MODALITY=”would”, see below) is not 

applicable in Italian unless relevant information 

is lost. The values of the MOOD attribute, as 

listed below, have been adapted to Italian and 

extended with respect to those proposed in the 

ISO-TimeML specification: 
 

 NONE: it is used as the default value and 
corresponds to the Indicative mood: 

(1.) Le forze dell’ordine hanno <EVENT 

… mood="NONE"> schierato </EVENT> 

3.000 agenti. [The police has deployed 

3,000 agents.] 
 

144



 CONDITIONAL: it signals the conditional 
mood which is used to speak of an Event 

whose realization is dependent on a certain 

condition, or to signal the future-in-the-

past: 

(2.) <EVENT ... mood="COND"> 

Mangerei </EVENT> del pesce. [I would 

eat fish.] 
  

 SUBJUNCTIVE: it has several uses in 
independent clauses and is required for 

certain types of dependent clauses. 

(3.) Voglio che tu te ne <EVENT … 

mood="SUBJUNCTIVE">vada</EVENT> 

[I want you to go.] 
  

 IMPERATIVE: it is used to express direct 
commands or requests, to signal a 

prohibition, permission or any other kind of 

exhortation. 

 

The attribute VFORM is responsible for 

distinguishing between non-finite and finite 

forms of verbal Events. Its values are: 
 

 NONE: it is the default value and signals 
finite verb forms: 

(4.) Le forze dell’ordine hanno <EVENT 

… vForm="NONE">schierato</EVENT> 

3.000 agenti. [The police has deployed 

3,000 agents.] 
 

 INFINITIVE: for infinitive verb forms: 
(5.) Non è possibile <EVENT … 

vForm=''INFINITIVE''>viaggiare</EVEN

T>. [It’s not possible to travel.] 
 

 GERUND: for gerundive verb forms: 
(6.) Ha evitato l'incidente <EVENT … 

vForm=''GERUND''> andando </EVENT> 

piano. [Driving slowly, he avoided the 

incident.] 
 

 PARTICIPLE: for participle verb forms: 
(7.) <EVENT … vForm=“PARTICIPLE”> 

Vista </EVENT> Maria, se ne andò. 

[Having seen Maria, he left.] 

 

As for attribute values, the most important 

changes introduced for Italian in comparison 

with the English TimeML, are related to the 

ASPECT and MODALITY attributes. 

The ASPECT attribute captures standard 

distinctions in the grammatical category of 

aspect or Event viewpoint (Smith, 1991). In 

English TimeML it has the following values: i.) 

PROGRESSIVE; ii.) PERFECTIVE; iii.) 

PERFECTIVE_PROGRESSIVE, or iv.) NONE. 

The main differences with respect to the English 

guidelines concern the following points:  

i.) the absence of the value 

PERFECTIVE_PROGRESSIVE and  

ii.) the presence of the value 

IMPERFECTIVE, which is part of the ISO 

TimeML current definition.  

These differences are due to language specific 

phenomena related to the expression of the 

grammatical aspect in Italian and English and to 

the application of the TimeML surface oriented 

annotation philosophy. In particular, the 

assignment of the aspectual values is strictly 

determined by the verb surface forms. For 

instance, in English the verb form “is teaching” 

requires the PROGRESSIVE value. On the 

other hand, the Italian counterpart of “is 

teaching” can be realized in two ways: either by 

means of the simple present (insegna [s/he 

teaches]) or by means of a specific verbal 

periphrasis (sta insegnando [s/he is teaching]). 

In order to distinguish between these two verb 

forms, and to account also for other typical 

Romance languages tense forms, such as the 

Italian Imperfetto, the use of the additional 

IMPERFECTIVE value is necessary. Thus, 

insegna [s/he teaches], as well as the Imperfetto 

insegnava [s/he was teaching] are annotated as 

IMPERFECTIVE, whereas sta insegnando [s/he 

is teaching] is annotated as PROGRESSIVE. On 

the other hand, the absence of the 

PERFECTIVE_PROGRESSIVE value, used for 

English tense forms of the kind “he has been 

teaching”, is due to the lack of Italian verb 

surface forms which may require its use. 

In English, modal verbs are not annotated as 

Events and the MODALITY attribute is 

associated to the main verb (the value of the 

attribute is the token corresponding to the modal 

verb). Unlike English modals, Italian modal 

verbs, such as potere [can/could; may/might], 

volere [want; will/would] and dovere 

[must/have to; ought to; shall/should], are to be 

145



considered similar to other lexical verbs in that 

it is possible to assign them values for tense and 

aspect. Consequently, each instance of Italian 

modal verbs will be annotated with the tag 

<EVENT>. The value of the MODALITY 

attribute is the lemma of the verb (e.g. dovere). 

A further language specific aspect concerns 

the annotation of verbal periphrases, that is 

special constructions with at least two verbs 

(and sometimes other words) that behave as a 

group like a single verb would. In Italian, it is 

possible to identify different instances of verbal 

periphrases, namely: 
 

 aspectual periphrases (example 8 below), 
which encode progressive or habitual 

aspect; 

 modal periphrases (example 9), which 
encode modality not realized by proper 

modal verbs;  

 phasal periphrases (example 10), which 
encode information on a particular phase in 

the description of an Event. 
 

Following Bertinetto (1991), in the last two 

cases, i.e. modal periphrases and phasal 

periphrases, both verbal elements involved 

should be annotated, while in the case of the 

aspectual periphrasis only the main verb (verb 

head) has to be marked; e.g.: 

(8.) Maria stava <EVENT … 

ASPECT=“PROGRESSIVE”> mangiando. 

[Maria was eating] 

(9.) Il compito di matematica <EVENT ... 

MODALITY=“ANDARE”> va </EVENT> 

<EVENT ... > svolto </EVENT> per domani. 

[Maths exercises must be done for tomorrow]  

(10.) I contestatori hanno <EVENT ... 

CLASS=“ASPECTUAL”> iniziato </EVENT> 

a <EVENT> lanciare </EVENT> pietre. 

[Demonstrators started to throw stones.] 

Similarly to what proposed for English, in 

presence of multi-tokens realization of Events, 

two main annotation strategies have been 

followed: 
 

 in case the multi-token Event expression 
corresponds to an instance of a collocation 

or of an idiomatic expression, then only the 

head (verbal, nominal or other) of the 

expression is marked up;  

 in case the multi-token Event is realized by 
light verb expressions, then two separate 

<EVENT> tags are to be created both for 

the verb and the nominal/prepositional 

complement.  

2.2 The <TIMEX3> tag  

The TIMEX3 tag relies on and is as much 

compliant as possible with the TIDES TIMEX2 

annotation. The Italian adaptation of this 

annotation scheme is presented in Magnini et al. 

(2006). The only difference concerns the 

annotation of articulated prepositions which are 

annotated as signals, while in the TIMEX2 

specifications they are considered as part of the 

textual realization of Temporal Expressions: 

(11a.) <TIMEX2 …> nel 2011 </TIMEX2> 

[in 2011] 

(11b.) <SIGNAL …> nel </SIGNAL> 

<TIMEX3…>2011</TIMEX3> [in 2011] 

On the other hand, with respect to the 

TIMEX3 annotation of other languages such as 

English, we decided to follow the TIMEX2 

specification by annotating many adjectives as 

Temporal Expressions (e.g. recente [recent], ex 

[former]) and including modifiers like che 

rimane in l’anno che rimane [the remaining 

year] into the extent of the TIMEX3 tag since it 

is essential for the normalization of temporal 

expressions. 

3 From Annotation Guidelines to 

Specifications 

As already stated, the annotation guidelines 

represent an abstract, formal level of description 

which, in this case, is mainly based on a detailed 

study of the relevant linguistic levels. Once the 

guidelines are applied to real language data, 

further issues arise and need to be tackled. This 

section focuses on a method for developing 

annotation specifications. Annotation 

specifications are to be seen as the actual 

realization of the annotation guidelines. The 

identification and distinction of annotation 

guidelines from annotation specification is of 

major importance as it is to be conceived as a 

new level of Best Practice for the creation of 

146



semantically annotated Language Resources 

(Calzolari and Caselli, 2009). 

The process of realization of the annotation 

specifications is strategic both to realize good 

quality annotated resources and to justify why 

certain textual items have to be annotated. As 

for the It-TimeML experience we will illustrate 

this process by making reference and reporting 

examples for two tags, namely for the 

<EVENT> and the <TLINK> tags. 

As a general procedure for the development 

of the annotation specifications, we have taken 

inspiration from the DAMSL Manual (Core and 

Allen, 1997). Different decision trees have been 

created for each task. For instance, for the 

annotation of the <EVENT> tag, four different 

decision trees have been designed for each POS 

(i.e. nouns, verbs, adjectives and prepositional 

phrases) which could be involved in the 

realization of an Event. In particular, the most 

complex decision tree is that developed for noun 

annotation. The identification of the eventive 

reading of nouns has been formalized into a 

discrimination process of different properties: 

firstly superficial properties are taken into 

consideration, i.e. whether a morphologically 

related verb exists or not, and whether the noun 

co-occurs with special verb predicates (for 

instance aspectual verbs such as iniziare [to 

start] or light verbs such as fare [to do]); then, 

deeper semantic properties are analyzed, which 

involve other levels such as word sense 

disambiguation and noun classification (e.g. 

whether the noun is a functional or an 

incremental one). 

Other decision trees have been improved to 

avoid inconsistencies in Event classification. 

For instance, the identification of Reporting 

Events showed to be problematic because of the 

vague definition adopted in the guidelines. A 

Reporting Event is a giving information speech 

act in which a communicator conveys a message 

to an addressee. To help annotators in deciding 

whether an event is a Reporting one, the 

annotation specifications suggest to rely on 

FrameNet as a starting point (Baker, et al. 

1998). More specifically, an Italian lexical unit 

has been classified as Reporting if it is the 

translation equivalent of one of the lexical units 

assigned to the Communication frame, which 

has Message as a core element. Among the 

frames using and inherited from the 

Communication frame, only the ones having the 

Message as a core element and conveying a 

giving information speech act have been 

selected and the lexical units belonging to them 

have been classified as Reporting Events: e.g. 

urlare [to scream] from the 

Communication_noise frame, sottolineare [to 

stress] from the Convey_importance frame, 

dichiarare [to declare] from the Statement 

frame. 

Similarly, for the identification of TLINKs, a 

set of decision trees has been developed to 

identify the conditions under which a temporal 

relation is to be annotated and a method to 

decide the value of the reltype attribute. For 

instance, the annotation of temporal relations 

between nominal Events and Temporal 

Expressions in the same sentence is allowed 

only when the Temporal Expression is realized 

either by an adjective or a prepositional phrase 

of the form ''di (of) + TEMPORAL 

EXPRESSION'' e.g.: 

(12.) La <EVENT eid=''e1'' ... > riunione 

</EVENT> <SIGNAL sid=''s1'' ... > di 

</SIGNAL> <TIMEX3 tid=''t1'' ... > ieri 

</TIMEX3> [yesterday meeting] 

<TLINK lid=''l1'' eventInstanceID=''e01'' 

relatedToTime=''t01'' signalID="s1" 

relType=''IS_INCLUDED''/> 

In addition, decision trees based on the idea 

that signals provide useful information to 

TLINK classification have been used to assign 

the reltype value to TLINKs holding between a 

duration and an Event. For example, the pattern 

“EVENT + tra (in) + DURATION” identifies 

the value AFTER, while the pattern “EVENT + 

per (for) + DURATION” is associated with the 

value MEASURE. 

(13.) Il pacco <EVENT eid=''e1'' ... >arriverà 

</EVENT> <SIGNAL sid=''s1'' ... > tra 

</SIGNAL> <TIMEX3 tid=''t1'' ... > due giorni 

</TIMEX3> [the package will arrive in two 

days] 

<TLINK lid=''l1'' eventInstanceID=''e1'' 

relatedToTime=''t1'' signalID="s1" 

relType=''AFTER”/> 

(14.) Sono stati <EVENT eid=''e1'' ... > 

sposati </EVENT> <SIGNAL sid=''s1'' ... > per 

</SIGNAL> <TIMEX3 tid=''t1'' ... > dieci anni 

147



</TIMEX3> [they have been married for ten 

years] 

<TLINK lid=''l1'' eventInstanceID=''e1'' 

relatedToTime=''t1'' signalID="s1" 

relType=''MEASURE”/> 

The advantages of this formalization are 

many. The impact of the annotators' subjectivity 

is limited, thus reducing the risk of 

disagreement. Moreover, trees can then be 

easily used either as features for the 

development of a automatic learner or as 

instructions in a rule-based automatic annotation 

system. 

 Evaluating Annotations 

Two corpora have been developed in parallel 

following the It-TimeML annotation scheme, 

namely the CELCT corpus and the ILC corpus. 

Once these two corpora will be completed and 

released, they will form the Italian TimeBank 

providing the NLP community with the largest 

resource annotated with temporal and event 

information (more than 150K tokens). 

In this section, the two corpora are briefly 

described and the results of the inter-coder 

agreement (Artstein and Poesio, 2008) achieved 

during their annotation are compared in order to 

evaluate the quality of the guidelines and of the 

resources. 

The CELCT corpus has been created within 

the LiveMemories project
2 and it consists of 

news stories taken from the Italian Content 

Annotation Bank (I-CAB, Magnini et al., 

2006). More than 180,000 tokens have been 

annotated with Temporal Expressions and 

more than 90,000 tokens have been annotated 

also with Events, Signals and Links. The 

Brandeis Annotation Tool
3
 (BAT) has been 

used for the pilot annotation and for the 

automatic computation of the inter-coder 

agreement on the extent and the attributes of 

Temporal Expressions, Events and Signals. 

After the pilot annotation, the first prototype of 

the CELCT Annotation Tool (CAT) has been 

used to perform the annotation and to compute 

the inter-coder agreement on Links. For what 

concern the annotation effort, the work on 

                                                           
2
 http://www.livememories.org 

3
 http://www.timeml.org/site/bat/ 

Temporal Expressions, Events and Signals 

involved 2 annotators while 3 annotators have 

been engaged in the annotation of Links. The 

annotation started in January 2010 and required 

a total of 1.3 person/years. Table 1 shows the 

total number of annotated markables together 

with the results of the inter-coder agreement on 

tag extent performed by two annotators on a 

subset of the corpus of about four thousand 

tokens. For the annotation of Event and Signal 

extents, statistics include average precision and 

recall and Cohen’ kappa, while the Dice 

Coefficient has been computed for the extent of 

Links and Temporal Expressions. 
 

Markable # Agreement 

TIMEX3 4,852 Dice=0.94 

EVENT 17,554 K=0.93 P&R=0.94 

SIGNAL 2,045 K=0.88 P&R=0.88  

TLINK 3,373 Dice=0.86 

SLINK 3,985 Dice=0.93 

ALINK 238 Dice=0.90 

Table 1: Annotated markables and results of 

the inter-coder agreement on tag extent
4
 

 

Table 2 provides the value of Fleiss’ kappa 

computed for the annotation of Temporal 

Expression, Event and Link attributes. 

 

Tag and attribute Agreement-Kappa 

TIMEX3.type  1.00 

TIMEX3.value 0.92 

TIMEX3.mod 0.89 

EVENT.aspect  0.96  

EVENT.class  0.87  

EVENT.modality  1.00  

EVENT.mood  0.90  

EVENT.polarity  1.00  

EVENT.pos  1.00  

EVENT.tense  0.94  

EVENT.vform  0.98  

TLINK.relType 0.88 

SLINK.relType 0.93 

ALINK.relType 1.00 

Table 2: Inter-coder agreement on 

attributes 

                                                           
4
 Please note that the number of annotated Temporal 

Expressions is calculated on a total of 180,000 tokens, 

while the number of Events, Signals and Links is 

calculated on more than 90,000 tokens. 

148



The ILC corpus is composed of 171 

newspaper stories collected from the Italian 

Syntactic-Semantic Treebank, the PAROLE 

corpus and the web for a total of 68,000 

tokens (40,398 tokens are freely available, the 

remaining are available with restrictions). The 

news reports were selected to be comparable 

in content and size to the English TimeBank 

and they are mainly about international and 

national affairs, political and financial subject. 

The annotation of Temporal Expressions, 

Event extents and Signals has been completed 

while the annotation of Event attributes and 

LINKs is a work in progress. A subset of the 

corpus has been used as data set in the 

TempEval-2 evaluation campaign organized 

within SemEval-2 in 2010. So far the 

annotation has been performed thanks to eight 

voluntary students under the supervision of 

two judges using BAT. The annotation started 

in March 2009 and is requiring a total of 3 

person/years. Table 3 reports the total number 

of Temporal Expressions, Events, Signals and 

TLINKs together with the results of the inter-

coder agreement on tag extent performed on 

about 30,000 tokens. To measure the 

agreement on tag extents, average precision 

and recall and Cohen’ kappa have been 

calculated. The annotation of Temporal Links 

has been divided into three subtasks: the first 

subtask is the relation between two Temporal 

Expressions, the second is the relation 

between an Event and a Temporal Expression, 

the third regards the relation between two 

Events. 
 

Markable # Agreement 

TIMEX3 2,314 K=0.95 P&R= 0.95 

EVENT 10,633 K=0.87 P&R= 0.86 

SIGNAL 1,704 K=0.83 P&R= 0.84 
 

T

L

I

N

K 

TIMEX3–

TIMEX3 

353 K=0.95 

EVENT–

TIMEX3 

512 K=0.87 

EVENT–

EVENT 

1,014 in progress 

Table 3: Annotated markables and results of 

the inter-coder agreement on tag extent 

 

The values of Fleiss’ kappa computed for 

the assignment of attribute values are 

illustrated in Table 4. 
 

Tag and attribute Agreement – Kappa 

TIMEX3.type  0.96 

TIMEX3.value 0.96 

TIMEX3.mod 0.97 

EVENT.aspect  0.93  

EVENT.class  0.82  

EVENT.modality  0.92  

EVENT.mood  0.89  

EVENT.polarity  0.75  

EVENT.pos  0.95  

EVENT.tense  0.97  

EVENT.vform  0.94  

TLINK.relType in progress 

Table 4: Annotated TLINKs and results of the 

inter-coder agreement 
 

Given the data reported in the above tables, 

it is possible to claim that the results of the 

inter-coder agreement are good and 

comparable beyond the different annotation 

method used to develop the two corpora. So 

far, the ILC corpus has been annotated 

without time constraints by several annotators 

with varying backgrounds in linguistics using 

BAT. With this web-based tool, each file has 

been assigned to many annotators and an 

adjudication phase on discrepancies has been 

performed by an expert judge. As required by 

BAT, the annotation has been divided into 

many annotation layers so each annotator 

focused only on a specific set of It-TimeML 

tags. On the other hand, few expert annotators 

have been involved in the development of the 

CELCT corpus interacting and negotiating 

common solutions to controversial 

annotations. With respect to BAT, the CELCT 

Annotation Tool is stand-alone and it does not 

require neither the parallel annotation of the 

same text, nor the decomposition of 

annotation tasks allowing to have flexibility in 

the annotation process and a unitary view of 

all annotation layers. These features are 

helpful when working with strict project 

deadlines. 
A comparison with the inter-coder agreement 

achieved during the annotation of the English 

TimeBank 1.2 (Pustejovsky et al., 2006a), 

shows that the scores obtained for the CELCT 

149



and the ILC corpora are substantially higher in 

the following results: (i) average precision and 

recall on the identification of tag extent (e.g. 

0.83 vs. 0.95 of ILC Corpus and 0.94 of CELCT 

Corpus for TIMEX3; 0.78 vs. 0.87 of ILC 

Corpus and 0.93 of CECLT Corpus); (ii) kappa 

score on Event classification (0.67 vs. 0.82 of 

ILC Corpus and 0.87 of the CELCT Corpus); 

(iii) kappa score on TLINK classification (0.77 

vs. 0.86 of CELCT Corpus). 
The similarity of the agreement results among 

the three resources and the improvement of the 

scores obtained on the CELCT and the ILC 

corpora with respect to the English TimeBank 

1.2, can be taken as an indication of the quality 

and coverage of the It-TimeML annotation 

guidelines and specifications. Annotators 

showed to perform consistently demonstrating 

the reliability of the annotation scheme. 

 Conclusions and Future Works 

This paper reports on the creation of a new 

semantic resource for Italian which has been 

developed independently but with a joint effort 

between two different research institutions. The 

Ita-TimeBank will represent a large corpus 

annotated with information for temporal 

processing which can boost the multilingual 

research in this field and represent a case study 

for the creation of semantic annotated resources. 

One of the most interesting point of this work 

is represented by the methodology followed for 

the development of the corpora: in addition to 

the guidelines, annotation specifications have 

been created in order to report in detail the 

actual choices done during the annotation. This 

element should be pushed forward in the 

community as a new best practice for the 

creation of good quality semantically annotated 

resources. 
The results obtained show the reliability of 

the adaptation of the annotation guidelines to 

Italian and of the methodology used for the 

creation of the resources. 
Future works will concentrate in different 

directions, mainly due to the research interests 

of the two groups which have taken part to this 

effort but they will be coordinated. 

An interesting aspect which could be 

investigated is the annotation of the anaphoric 

relations between Events. This effort could be 

done in a more reliable way since the primary 

linguistic items have been already annotated. 

Moreover, this should boost research in the 

development of annotation schemes which could 

be easily integrated with each other without 

losing descriptive and representational 

information for other language phenomena. 
Another topic to deepen regards the definition 

of the appropriate argument structure in It-

TimeML in order to annotate relations between 

entities (e.g. persons and organizations) and 

Events in which they are involved (Pustejovsky 

et al., 2006b). 

As regards the distribution of the Ita-

TimeBank, the resource will soon be available 

in an in-line format. In order to integrate the 

temporal annotation with other linguistic 

annotations, a standoff version of the Ita-

TimeBank needs to be developed. When this is 

made available, we plan to merge the manual 

annotation of temporal and event information 

with other types of linguistic stand-off 

annotations (i.e. tokenization, lemma, PoS, 

multi-words, various kinds of named entities) 

which are already available for the I-CAB 

corpus.  

In order to encourage research on systems 

capable of temporal inference and event-based 

reasoning, the Ita-TimeBank could be used as 

gold standard within specific evaluation 

campaigns as the next TempEval initiative. 

Finally, the use of crowdsourcing will be 

explored to reduce annotation effort in terms of 

financial cost and time. The most difficult 

challenge to face will be the splitting of a 

complicated annotation scheme as It-TimeML 

into simple tasks which can be effectively 

performed by not expert contributors. 

Acknowledgments 

The development of the CELCT corpus has 

been supported by the LiveMemories project 

(Active Digital Memories of Collective Life), 

funded by the Autonomous Province of Trento 

under the Major Projects 2006 research 

program. We would like to thank Alessandro 

Marchetti, Giovanni Moretti and Marc 

Verhagen who collaborated with us in 

processing and annotating the CELCT corpus. 

150



References 

André Bittar. 2008. Annotation des informations 

temporelles dans des textes en français,. In 

Proceedings of RECITAL 2008, Avignon, France. 

André Bittar. 2010. Building a TimeBank for French: 

A Reference Corpus Annotated According to the 

ISO-TimeML Standard. PhD Thesis. 

Andrea Setzer and Robert Gaizauskas.2001. A Pilot 

Study On Annotating Temporal Relations In Text. 

In: Proceedings of the ACL 2001 Workshop on 

Temporal and Spatial Information Processing. 

Bernardo Magnini, Emanuele Pianta, Christian 

Girardi, Matteo Negri, Lorenza Romano, Manuela 

Speranza, Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi and Rachele 

Sprugnoli. 2006. I-CAB: the Italian Content 

Annotation Bank. In Proceedings of LREC 2006, 

Genova, Italy. 

Bernardo Magnini, Matteo Negri, Emanuele Pianta, 

Manuela Speranza, Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi, and 

Rachele Sprugnoli. 2006. Italian Content 

Annotation Bank (I-CAB): Temporal Expressions 

(V.2.0). Technical Report, FBK-irst. 

Carlota S. Smith. 1991. The Parameter of Aspect. 

Kluwer, Dordrecht. 

Collin F., Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. 

Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In: 

Proceedings of the COLING-ACL, pages 86-90. 

Montreal, Canada. 

Elena Filatova and Eduard Hovy. 2001. Assigning 

Time-Stamps To Event-Clauses. In: Proceedings 

of the ACL 2001 Workshop on Temporal and 

Spatial Information Processing. 

Emmon Bach. 1986. The algebra of events. 

Linguistics and Philosophy, 9, 5–16. 

Graham Katz and Fabrizio Arosio. 2001. The 

Annotation Of Temporal Information In Natural 

Language Sentences. In: Proceedings of the ACL 

2001 Workshop on Temporal and Spatial 

Information Processing. 

ISO: Language Resource Management – Semantic 

Annotation Framework (SemAF) - Part 1: Time 

and Events. Secretariat KATS, August 2007. ISO 

Report ISO/TC37/SC4 N269 version 19 (ISO/WD 

24617-1). 

James Pustejovsky, Jessica Littman and Roser Saurí. 

2006b. Argument Structure in TimeML. In: 

Graham Katz, James Pustejovsky and Frank 

Schilder (eds.) Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings. 

Internationales Begegnungs- und 

Forschungszentrum (IB-FI), Schloss Dagstuhl, 

Germany. 

James Pustejovsky, Jessica Littman, Roser Saurí, and 

Marc Verhagen. 2006a. TimeBank 1.2 

Documentation. 

http://timeml.org/site/timebank/documentation-

1.2.html 

James Pustejovsky, José Castaño, Robert Ingria, 

Roser Saurí, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer 

and Graham Katz. 2003a. TimeML: Robust 

Specification of Event and Temporal Expressions 

in Text. In: Proceedings of IWCS-5, Fifth 

International Workshop on Computational 

Semantics. 

James Pustejovsky, Patrick Hanks, Roser, Saurì, 

Andrew See, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, 

Dragomir Radev, Beth Sundheim, David Day,Lisa 

Ferro, and Marcia Lazo. 2003b. The TIMEBANK 

corpus. In: Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 

2003, pages 647-656. 

Marc Verhagen, Roser Saurí, Tommaso Caselli and 

James Pustejovsky. 2010. SemEval-2010 Task 13: 

TempEval-2. In: Proceedings of the 5th 

International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation. 

Mark G. Core and James F. Allen. 1997. Coding 

Dialogs with the DAMSL Annotation Scheme. In: 

Working Notes of AAAI Fall Symposium on 

Communicative Action in Humans and Machines. 

Nicoletta Calzolari, and Tommaso Caselli 2009. 

Short Report on the FLaReNet / SILT Workshop 

and Panel on Semantic Annotation, TR-ILC-CNR. 

Pier Marco Bertinetto. 1991. Il verbo. In: R. L. and 

G. Salvi (eds.) Grande Grammatica Italiana di 

Consultazione, volume II, pages 13-161. Il 

Mulino. 

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. Inter-coder 

agreement for computational linguistics. 

Computational Linguistics, pages 555–596, 2008. 

Seohyun Im, Hyunjo You, Hayun Jang, Seungho 

Nam, and Hyopil Shin. 2009. KTimeML: 

Specification of Temporal and Event Expressions 

in Korean Text. In: Proceedings of the 7th 

workshop on Asian Language Resources in 

conjunction with ACL-IJCNLP 2009, Suntec City, 

Singapore. 

TimeML Working Group. 2010. TimeML 

Annotation Guidelines version 1.3.Manuscript, 

Brandeis University. 

151


