










































Historical Event Extraction from Text


Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 39–43,
Portland, OR, USA, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Historical Event Extraction from Text 
 

Agata Cybulska Piek Vossen 
VU University Amsterdam VU University Amsterdam 

De Boelelaan 1105 De Boelelaan 1105 
1081 HV Amsterdam 1081 HV Amsterdam 

ak.cybulska@let.vu.nl p.vossen@let.vu.nl 

 
 

 
 

Abstract 

In this paper, we report on how historical 
events are extracted from text within the Se-
mantics of History research project. The project 
aims at the creation of resources for a historical 
information retrieval system that can handle the 
time-based dynamics and varying perspectives 
of Dutch historical archives. The historical 
event extraction module will be used for mu-
seum collections, allowing users to search for 
exhibits related to particular historical events or 
actors within time periods and geographic 
areas, extracted from accompanying text. We 
present here the methodology and tools used for 
the purpose of historical event extraction along-
side with the first evaluation results. 

1 Introduction 
The research project Semantics of History1 is con-
cerned with the development of a historical ontol-
ogy and a lexicon that will be used in a new type of 
information retrieval system. In historical texts the 
reality changes over time (Ide & Woolner, 2007). 
Furthermore, historical realities can be seen diffe-
rently depending on the subjective view of the 
writer. In the design of our search system, we will 
take into consideration the change of reality and 
the diverse attitudes of writers towards historical 
events so that they both can be used for the pur-
pose of historical information retrieval. 

In the first phase of the project we researched 
how descriptions of historical events are realized in 
different types of text and what the implications 

                                                        
1 The Semantics of History is funded by the Interfaculty Re-
search Institute CAMeRA at the Free University Amsterdam 
as a collaboration of the Faculties of Arts and Exact Science: 
http://www2.let.vu.nl/oz/cltl/semhis/index.html. 

are for historical information retrieval. Different 
historical perspectives of writers correspond with 
genre distinctions and correlate with variation in 
language use. Texts, written shortly after an event 
happened, use more specific and uniquely occur-
ring event descriptions than texts describing the 
same events but written from a longer time pers-
pective. Statistical analysis performed within the 
first phase of the project confirmed this hypothe-
sis2. To capture differences between event repre-
sentations and to identify relations between 
historical events, we defined a historical event 
model which consists of 4 slots: a location slot, 
time, participant and an action slot (see also Van 
Hage et al 2011 for the formal SEM model). 

After arriving at an understanding of how to 
model historical events, we moved on to actually 
extracting events from text. In this paper we report 
on our approach into historical event extraction 
from textual data about the Srebrenica Massacre 
from July 19953. There are two problems that had 
to be tackled for the purpose of this task: 1) extrac-
tion of event actions with their participants, loca-
tions and time markers and 2) filtering of events 
lacking historical value from all events extracted 
by the system. We believe that event actions and 
their participants, locations and time markers can 
be extracted based on some syntactic clues, PoS, 
lemma and combinatory information together with 
semantic class definition and exclusion by means 
of Wordnet. Historical filtering can be performed 
through semantic classification of event actions. 

                                                        
2 For details see Cybulska, Vossen, LREC 2010. 
3 The Srebrenica corpus consists of 78 Dutch texts. For more 
information on the design of the corpus see Cybulska, Vossen 
(2010). 

39



We tested this hypothesis within the KYOTO 
framework4.   

2 Related Work 
Two other projects concerned with extraction of 
historical information are the FDR/Pearl Harbor 
project and the New Web Portal. The latter5 aimed 
at creation of a digital archive of historical news-
papers of the National Library of Finland6. Within 
the project a semantic search system for historical 
texts was created using a common ontology with 
semantically annotated cultural objects (Ahonen 
and Hyv¨onen, 2009). Related content is being 
linked through semantic annotation of historical 
texts based on ontology labels which presupposes 
that only high level historical events from text 
were annotated. The Pearl Harbor project aimed at 
facilitating enhanced search and retrieval from a 
set of documents from the FDRL library by utiliz-
ing a series of multiple temporally contextualized 
snapshot ontologies determined by the occurrence 
of key historical events (Ide & Woolner, 2007). 
We did not manage to find evaluation results for 
any of the two projects. Traditional approaches to 
event extraction that do report evaluation results 
use models that severely restrict the relations. They 
achieve high precision but poorly represent the text 
as a whole. E.g., Xu et. al. (2006) report over 80% 
precision for prize award extraction and Tanev et. 
al. (2008) 74% precision for violent events and 
disasters. Our approach models more events in a 
text and events of a broader scope, more compara-
ble to Wunderwald (2011), who extracts partici-
pants and roles from news in general, reporting 50-
60% precision. Wunderwald uses a machine-
learning approach, while our method is know-
ledge-based. Furthermore, Wunderwald does not 
distinguish historical from non-historical events. 

3 Historical Event Extraction 

3.1 Generic Event Extraction by means of 
KYOTO 

KYOTO tools were specifically designed to extract 
events from text. This pipeline-architecture of lin-
                                                        
4 For more information about the KYOTO - project 
(www.kyoto-project.eu) see Vossen et al (2008a). 
5 The New Web Portal is part of the National Semantic Web 
2.0 (FinnONTO 2.0) project. 
6 http://digi.lib.helsinki.fi/sanomalehti/secure/main.html 

guistic processors generates a uniform semantic 
representation of text in the so-called Kyoto Anno-
tation Format (KAF)7. KAF is a stand-off format 
that distinguishes separate layers for text tokens, 
text terms, constituents and dependencies. It can be 
used to represent event actions with their partici-
pants, locations and time markers. For the purpose 
of this research, the Srebrenica corpus was 
processed by means of the KYOTO – architecture. 
First, the corpus was tagged with PoS- informa-
tion; it was lemmatized and syntactically parsed by 
means of a dependency parser for Dutch - Alpino8. 
Next, word sense disambiguation was performed9 
and the corpus was semantically annotated with 
labels from the Dutch Wordnet10 and ontological 
classes. Generic event information stored in the 
KAF – format can be extracted within KYOTO by 
means of Kybot-profiles which are stored in the 
XML format11. These profiles define patterns over 
different layers in KAF and create a semantic out-
put layer for matches over these layers. 

3.2 Semantic Tagging of Historical Events 
To extract historical events we developed ‘histori-
cal’ Kybot-profiles which define appropriate con-
structions and semantic classes of historical actions 
and their participants, locations and time markers. 
In these profiles, the semantic action classes are 
used to distinguish historical from non-historical 
events. The semantic type specification was de-
rived from manual tagging of historical event slots 
by means of the KAF-annotator12 in 5 development 
texts from the Srebrenica corpus 13 . Manually 
tagged historical event actions as well as partici-
pants, locations and time markers were automati-
cally mapped with corresponding Wordnet synsets. 
In case of multiple senses assigned per word the 
appropriate Wordnet ID was manually chosen. 

Historical event tagging with Wordnet ID’s re-
vealed a few problematic issues. For a number of 
                                                        
7 Kyoto Annotation Format is described in Bosma et al (2009). 
8 http://www.let.rug.nl/vannoord/alp/Alpino/ 
9 For word sense disambiguation the UKB system 
(http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/ukb/) was used. For more information the 
reader is referred to Agirre & Soroa (2009). 
10 For more information see Vossen et al (2008b). 
11 For more information see KYOTO deliverable 5.4 at 
http://www.kyoto-project.eu/. 
12 See tools at http://www.kyoto-project.eu/. 
13 The development set contains one Wikipedia entry, two 
educational texts and two newspaper articles written a few 
years after the Srebrenica massacre happened. 

40



locations, time markers, participants and actions 
there were no Wordnet synsets automatically as-
signed. No WN-concepts were found for geograph-
ical names as Srebrenica or Zagreb. Also person 
and organization names (Mladic, Dutchbat III, 
NIOD) and dates would not get any synsets as-
signed. The same applies to compounds (moslim-
mannen ‘Muslim men’, VN-militairen ‘UN sol-
diers’), pronoun participants and loanwords: (such 
as safe haven in a Dutch text). Furthermore there 
were some historical senses missing in the Dutch 
Wordnet (such as vredesoperatie ‘peacekeeping 
operation’, oorlogspad ‘warpath’). To be able to 
handle proper names we used a named entity rec-
ognition module. By means of NER we added 
dates and geographical names to KAF so that we 
could further use them for the extraction of time 
markers and locations. In the future, we will look 
into compound splitting and we are also going to 
add the missing historical senses to the Wordnet 
database. 

After identifying historical WN-synsets, we au-
tomatically determined the most informative 
hypernyms of the seed terms per historical label. 
Based on the chosen hypernyms (and their hypo-
nyms), we manually selected a number of semantic 
classes to be able to identify event locations, time 
markers, participants and historical actions in his-
torical texts. We defined six semantic classes de-
noting: human participants, time periods, moments 
in time, places, historical and motion actions. Fur-
thermore we specified six more action classes to 
filter out non historical and potential events: ac-
tions indicating modality, polarity, intention, sub-
jectivity, cognitive (also rarely of historical 
importance) and contentless actions. Next, we de-
rived a table that assigns one of the ontological 
classes to every synset in Wordnet on the basis of 
the relations to the labeled hypernyms. All KAF-
files were then annotated with the twelve semantic 
classes, on the basis of the Wordnet synsets as-
signed by the WSD module and this mapping ta-
ble. 

4 Kybot Profiles 
Kyoto-Kybot extracts events from KAF by means 
of Kybot profiles. Based on event descriptions 
from the development set 402 profiles were de-
fined, using semantic and constructional informa-
tion and specifically PoS, lemma, compositional 

and semantic restrictions with regards to locations, 
time expressions, event actions and participants. 

The current version of the system uses 22 pro-
files to extract historical actions, based on semantic 
tagging by means of Wordnet and the specification 
of some compositional properties. Historical ac-
tions are the most significant part of historical 
event extraction. They serve to distinguish histori-
cal actions from the non-historical ones and to 
identify parts of the same historical event. The pro-
files extract both, verbal actions (such as deport, 
murder, occupy) and nominal ones (such as fight, 
war and offensive) as well as actions with a syntac-
tic object (sign a treaty, start the offensive etc). 
Next to the semantic class of historical actions also 
motion actions (often occurring with a goal or re-
sult phrase as transport into a location) are ex-
tracted as potential historical event actions. The 
action profiles exclude from the output the non-
historical semantic action classes and by that the 
non historical events are filtered out. 

For the extraction of historical participants we 
now use 314 profiles. The variation within histori-
cal participant descriptions of the development set 
was, as expected, much higher than the diversity of 
formulations denoting other event parts. Participant 
profiles specify noun phrases (also proper names) 
organized around the semantic class of human par-
ticipants14. It is a relatively common phenomenon 
in historical event descriptions that geographical 
proper names are used for referral to participants. 
So we also created some profiles identifying coun-
try and city names occurring in the subject position 
of active sentences. 

To extract historical event time we specified 43 
temporal profiles. Thanks to the named entity rec-
ognition module of Kyoto we are able to retrieve 
dates and, based on Wordnet, the system can rec-
ognize temporal expressions which refer to week-
days or months and more general and relative time 
markers (such as now or two weeks later). 

Furthermore, 23 location profiles are utilized to 
extract geographical proper names and other loca-
tive expressions based on the Wordnet class of 
places (as street, city, country etc). 
                                                        
14 For now we focused on human animate participants and 
those referred to by personal pronouns. In the future we will 
also look into extracting participants indirectly named through 
word combinations consisting of geo adjectives preceding 
words denoting weapons and transportation vehicles (such as 
Serbian tanks). 

41



5 Evaluation 
For the evaluation purposes we used the KYOTO 
triplet representation of historical events, which is 
a generic event representation format. A triplet 
consists of a historical action, mapped with its 
nearby occurring participant, location or time ex-
pression together with a label indicating the event 
slot type. In the evaluation the gold standard trip-
lets will be compared with triplets generated by the 
system. A set of five texts from the Srebrenica cor-
pus, written some years after the massacre, was 
tagged manually with historical events by two in-
dependent annotators. We obtained a very high 
inter-annotator agreement of 94% (0.91 Kappa). 

As a baseline, we generated triplets from all 
constituent heads in a sentence. Each constituent 
head is once treated as an action while all the oth-
ers are seen as participants. Applying the default 
relation – historical participant – the baseline 
achieved an average of 66% recall and a (unders-
tandably) low precision of less than 0.01%. Tables 
1 and 2 present the performance of the system on 
the evaluation set. The abbreviations in the tables 
stand for: T. Nr – Token Number, G. Trp – Gold 
Triplets, S. Trp – System Triplets, C.S. Trp – Cor-
rect System Triplets, R – Recall, P. – Precision, F – 
F-measure. 
 

         Counts   
File 

T. 
Nr 

G.  
Trp 

S.  
Trp 

C.S.  
Trp 

R. 
% 

P. 
% 

F 

File 1 243 5 4 1 20 25 0.22 
File 2 440 32 25 18 56 72 0.63 
File 3 647 58 68 32 55 47 0.51 
File 4 429 32 22 17 53 77 0.63 
File 5 209 19 19 12 63 63 0.63 
Micro Average - - - - 49 57 0.53 

 
Table 1. Evaluation results per file (micro average). 

 
     Counts     
Relation 

G. 
Trp 

S. 
Trp 

C.S. 
Trp 

R. 
% 

P. 
% 

F 

Participants 98 95 57 58 60 0.59 
Time 17 20 13 76 65 0.70 
Location 31 23 10 32 43 0.37 

 
Table 2. Evaluation results per relation (macro average) 
 

The system reached an overall recall of 49% and 
a precision of 57%. The low scores for file 1 can 
be explained by the fact that in this text some so 
called ‘political events’ were described such as 

responsibility issues and an investigation w. r. t. 
events in Srebrenica that was performed in the 
Netherlands few years after the massacre. Current-
ly the system is not prepared to handle any other 
events than the conflict related ones. 

Historical actions, evaluated in a separate non 
triplet evaluation cycle, were extracted with a re-
call of 67.94% and a precision of 51.96%. We ex-
tracted time expressions with the highest precision 
of 65% and also the highest recall of 76%. The 
lower recall and precision measures reached for the 
extraction of participants and especially locations 
can be explained by the type shift of the semantic 
class of locations used for referral to event partici-
pants. As mentioned before, so far we only are able 
to identify these if occurring in subject position; in 
the future we will add deeper syntactic dependency 
information into KAF and by that we will improve 
the recognition of locations used as participants. 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper we showed that historical events can 
successfully be extracted from text, based on con-
structional clues and semantic type specification.  
To extract events we used a generic fact mining 
system KYOTO; we specified language structures 
and Wordnet concepts denoting event actions, par-
ticipants, locations and time markers and we iden-
tified the historical events through recognition of 
historical actions. The evaluation results confirm 
that historical events can be extracted from histori-
cal texts by means of this approach with a relative-
ly high recall of almost 50% and a precision of 
57%, (comparable to the results of Wunderwald, 
2011). In our future work we are going to increase 
the performance of the system by utilizing in the 
profiles more specific syntactic information and 
the grammatical tense. We will also look into other 
possibilities of distinguishing between historical 
events and events lacking historical value, also in 
non historical genres. In the next stage of the 
project we will make an attempt to automatically 
determine relations between historical events over 
textual data. We will also apply the system to other 
historical descriptions that are connected to mu-
seum collections. Because of the generic design of 
the extraction module, we expect that the extrac-
tion of conflict events can be applied to other pe-
riods and events with little adaptation. 

42



Acknowledgments 
This research was funded by the interfaculty re-
search institute CAMeRA (Center for Advanced 
Media Research) of the VU University of Amster-
dam: http://camera.vu.nl. 

References  
Agirre, Eneko and Aitor Soroa, 2009, “Personalizing 

PageRank for Word Sense Disambiguation”, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 12th conference of the European 
chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, (EACL-2009), Athens, Greece. 

Ahonen, Eeva and Eero Hyv¨onen, 2009, “Publishing 
Historical Texts on the Semantic Web -A Case 
Study” [online] available: 
http://www.seco.tkk.fi/publications/2009/ahonen-
hyvonen-historical-texts-2009.pdf 

Bosma, Wauter, Vossen, Piek, Soroa, Aitor, Rigau, 
German, Tesconi, Maurizio, Marchetti, Andrea, Mo-
nachini, Monica, and Carlo Aliprandi, 2009 “KAF: a 
generic semantic annotation format.”, in Proceedings 
of the GL2009 Workshop on Semantic Annotation, 
Pisa, Italy, Sept 17-19, 2009. 

Bosma, Wauter and Piek Vossen, 2010, "Bootstrapping 
language neutral term extraction", in: Proceedings of 
the 7th international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, (LREC2010), Valletta, Mal-
ta, May 17-23, 2010. 

Cybulska, Agata and Piek Vossen, “Event models for 
Historical Perspectives: Determining Relations be-
tween High and Low Level Events in Text, Based on 
the Classification of Time, Location and Partici-
pants”, in Proceedings of LREC 2010, Valletta, Mal-
ta, May 17-23, 2010 

Ide, Nancy and David Woolner, 2007, “Historical On-
tologies”, in: Ahmad, Khurshid, Brewster, Christo-
pher, and Mark Stevenson (eds.), Words and 
Intelligence II: Essays in Honor of Yorick Wilks, 
Springer, 137-152. 

Tanev, Hristo, Piskorski, Jakub and Martin Atkinson, 
“Real-Time News Event Extraction for Global Crisis 
Monitoring”, in NLDB 2008: Kapetanios, Epami-
nondas, Sugumaran, Vijayan, Spiliopoulou, Myra 
(eds.) Proceedings of the 13th International Confe-
rence on Applications of Natural Language to Infor-
mation Systems, 2008, Springer: LNCS, vol. 5039, 
pp. 207-218.  

Van Hage, Willem, Malaisé, Veronique, Segers, Rox-
ane, Hollink, Laura (fc), Design and use of the Sim-

ple Event Model (SEM), the Journal of Web Seman-
tics, Elsevier 

Vossen, Piek, Agirre, Eneko, Calzolari, Nicoletta, Fell-
baum, Christiane, Hsieh, Shu-kai, Huang, Chu-Ren, 
Isahara, Hitoshi, Kanzaki, Kyoko, Marchetti, Andrea, 
Monachini, Monica, Neri, Federico, Raffaelli, Remo, 
Rigau, German, Tescon, Maurizio, 2008a, "KYOTO: 
A system for Mining, Structuring and Distributing 
Knowledge Across Languages and Cultures", in: 
Proceedings of LREC 2008, Marrakech, Morocco, 
May 28-30, 2008. 

Vossen, Piek, Bosma, Wauter, Agirre, Eneko, Rigau, 
German and Aitor Soroa, 2010, "A full Knowledge 
Cycle for Semantic Interoperability", in: Proceedings 
of the 5th Joint ISO-ACL/SIGSEM Workshop on In-
teroperable Semantic Annotation, in conjunction with 
the Second International Conference on Global Inte-
roperability for Language Resources, (ICGL 2010), 
Hong Kong, January 15-17, 2010. 

Wunderwald, Martin, 2011, “NewsX Event Extraction 
from News Articles”, diploma thesis, Dresden Uni-
versity of Technology, Dresden, Germany, URL: 
http://www.rn.inf.tu-
dres-
den.de/uploads/Studentische_Arbeiten/Diplomarbeit_
Wunderwald_Martin.pdf 

Xu, Feiyu, Uszkoreit, Hans, Li, Hong, 2006. “Automat-
ic Event and Relation Detection with Seeds of Vary-
ing Complexity”, in: Proceedings of the AAAI 2006 
Workshop Event Extraction and Synthesis, Boston, 
491-498. 

43


