










































Desperately Seeking Implicit Arguments in Text


Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Workshop on Relational Models of Semantics (RELMS 2011), pages 54–62,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Desperately Seeking Implicit Arguments in Text

Sara Tonelli
Fondazione Bruno Kessler / Trento, Italy

satonelli@fbk.eu

Rodolfo Delmonte
Universit Ca’ Foscari / Venezia, Italy

delmont@unive.it

Abstract

In this paper, we address the issue of automat-
ically identifying null instantiated arguments
in text. We refer to Fillmore’s theory of prag-
matically controlled zero anaphora (Fillmore,
1986), which accounts for the phenomenon of
omissible arguments using a lexically-based
approach, and we propose a strategy for iden-
tifying implicit arguments in a text and finding
their antecedents, given the overtly expressed
semantic roles in the form of frame elements.
To this purpose, we primarily rely on linguis-
tic knowledge enriched with role frequency
information collected from a training corpus.
We evaluate our approach using the test set
developed for the SemEval task 10 and we
highlight some issues of our approach. Be-
sides, we also point out some open problems
related to the task definition and to the general
phenomenon of null instantiated arguments,
which needs to be better investigated and de-
scribed in order to be captured from a compu-
tational point of view.

1 Introduction

In natural language, lexically unexpressed linguistic
items are very frequent and indirectly weaken any
attempt at computing the meaning of a text or dis-
course. However, the need to address semantic in-
terpretation is strongly felt in current advanced NLP
tasks, in particular, the issue of transforming a text
or discourse into a set of explicitly interconnected
predicate-argument/adjunct structures (hence PAS).
The aim of this task would be to unambiguously
identify events and participants and their association

to spatiotemporal locations. However, in order to do
that, symbolic and statistical approaches should be
based on the output representation of a deep parser,
which is currently almost never the case. Current
NLP technologies usually address the surface level
linguistic information with good approximation in
dependency or constituency structures, but miss im-
plicit entities (IEs) altogether. The difficulties to
deal with lexically unexpressed items or implicit en-
tities are related on the one hand to recall problems,
i.e. the problem of deciding whether an item is im-
plicit or not, and on the other hand to precision prob-
lems, i.e. if an implicit entity is accessible to the
reader from the discourse or its context, an appropri-
ate antecedent has to be found. However, a system
able to derive the presence of IEs may be a deter-
mining factor in improving performance of QA sys-
tems and, in general, in Informations Retrieval and
Extraction systems.

The current computational scene has witnessed an
increased interest in the creation and use of semanti-
cally annotated computational lexica and their asso-
ciated annotated corpora, like PropBank (Palmer et
al., 2005), FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) and Nom-
Bank (Meyers, 2007), where the proposed annota-
tion scheme has been applied in real contexts. In all
these cases, what has been addressed is a basic se-
mantic issue, i.e. labeling PAS associated to seman-
tic predicates like adjectives, verbs and nouns. How-
ever, what these corpora have not made available is
information related to IEs. For example, in the case
of eventive deverbal nominals, information about the
subject/object of the nominal predicate is often im-
plicit and has to be understood from the previous

54



discourse or text, e.g. “the development of a pro-
totype [→ implicit subject]”. As reported by Gerber
and Chai (2010), introducing implicit arguments to
nominal predicates in NomBank would increase the
resource coverage of 65%.

Other IEs can be found in agentless passive con-
structions ( e.g.“Our little problem will soon be
solved ∅ [→ unexpressed Agent ]”1) or as unex-
pressed arguments such as addressee with verbs of
commitment, for example “I can promise ∅ that one
of you will be troubled [→ unexpressed Addressee]”
and “I dare swear ∅ that before tomorrow night he
will be fluttering in our net [→ unexpressed Ad-
dressee]”.

In this paper we discuss the issues related to the
identification of implicit entities in text, focussing in
particular on omissions of core arguments of pred-
icates. We investigate the topic from the perspec-
tive proposed by (Fillmore, 1986) and base our ob-
servations on null instantiated arguments annotated
for the SemEval 2010 Task 10, ‘Linking Events and
Their Participants in Discourse’ (Ruppenhofer et al.,
2010)2. The paper is structured as follows: in Sec-
tion 2 we detail the task of identifying null instan-
tiated arguments from a theoretical perspective and
describe related work. In Section 3 we briefly in-
troduce the SemEval task 10 for identifying implicit
arguments in text, while in Section 4 we detail our
proposal for NI identification and binding. In Sec-
tion 5 we give a thorough description of the types of
null instantiations annotated in the SemEval data set
and we explain the behavior of our algorithm w.r.t.
such cases. We also compare our results with the
output of the systems participating to the SemEval
task. Finally, we draw some conclusions in Section
6.

2 Related work

In this work, we focus on null complements, also
called pragmatically controlled zero anaphora (Fill-
more, 1986), understood arguments or linguistically

1Unless otherwise specified, the following examples are
taken from the data sets made available in the SemEval 2010
task ‘Linking Events and Their Participants in Discourse’.
Some of them have been slightly simplified for purposes of ex-
position.

2http://semeval2.fbk.eu/semeval2.php?
location=tasks&taskid=9

unrealized arguments. We focus on Fillmore’s the-
ory because his approach represents the backbone of
the FrameNet project, which in turn inspired the Se-
mEval task we will describe below. Fillmore (1986)
shows that in English and many other languages
some verbs allow null complements and some oth-
ers don’t. The latter require that, when they ap-
pear in a sentence, all core semantic roles related
to the predicate are expressed. For example, sen-
tences like “Mary locked ∗∗” or “John guaranteed
∗∗” are not grammatically well-formed, because they
both require two mandatory linguistically inherent
participants. Fillmore tries to explain why seman-
tic roles can sometimes be left unspoken and what
constraints help the interpreter recover the missing
roles. He introduces different factors that can in-
fluence the licensing of null complements. These
can be lexically-based, (semantically close predi-
cates like ‘promise’ and ‘guarantee’ can license the
omission of the theme argument in different cases),
motivated by the interpretation of the predicate (“I
was eating ∅” licenses a null object because it has
an existential interpretation) and depending on the
context (see for example the use of impress in an
episodic context like “She impressed the audience”,
where the null complement is not allowed, compared
to “She impresses ∅ every time” in habitual interpre-
tation; examples from Ruppenhofer and Michaelis
(2009)).

The fact that Fillmore explains the phenomenon
of omissible arguments with a lexically-based ap-
proach implies that from his perspective neither a
purely pragmatic nor a purely semantic approach
can account for the behavior of omissible arguments.
For example, he argues that some verbs, such as to
lock will never license a null complement, no matter
in which pragmatic context they are used. Besides,
there are synonymous verbs which behave differ-
ently as regards null complementation, which Fill-
more sees as evidence against a purely semantic ex-
planation of implicit arguments.

Another relevant distinction drawn in Fillmore
(1986) is the typology of omitted arguments, which
depends on the type of licensor and on the interpre-
tation of the null complement. Fillmore claims that
with some verbs the missing complement can be re-
trieved from the context, i.e. it is possible to find a
referent previously mentioned in the text / discourse

55



and bearing a definite, precise meaning. These cases
are labeled as definite null complements or instantia-
tions (DNI) and are lexically specific in that they ap-
ply only to some predicates. We report an example
of DNI in (1), taken from the SemEval task 10 data
set (see Section 3). The predicate ‘waiting’ has an
omitted object, which we understand from the dis-
course context to refer to ‘I’.

(1) I saw him rejoin his guest, and I crept quietly
back to where my companions were waiting ∅
to tell them what I had seen.

DNIs can also occur with nominal predicates, as
reported in (2), where the person having a thought,
the baronet, is mentioned in the preceding sentence:

(2) Stapleton was talking with animation, but the
baronet looked pale and distrait. Perhaps the
thought of that lonely walk across the
ill-omened moor was weighing heavily upon
his mind.

In contrast to DNIs, Fillmore claims that with
some verbs and in some interpretations, a core ar-
gument can be omitted without having a referent
expressing the meaning of the null argument. The
identity of the missing argument can be left un-
known or indefinite. These cases are labeled as in-
definite null complements or instantiations (INI) and
are constructionally licensed in that they apply to
any predicate in a particular grammatical construc-
tion. See for example the following cases, where the
omission of the agent is licensed by the passive con-
struction:

(3) One of them was suddenly shut off ∅.

(4) I am reckoned fleet of foot ∅.

Cases of INI were annotated by the organizers of
the SemEval task 10 also with nominal predicates,
as shown in the example below, where the perceiver
of the odour is left unspecified:

(5) Rank reeds and lush, slimy water-plants sent
an odour ∅ of decay and a heavy miasmatic
vapour.

Few attempts have been done so far to automati-
cally deal with the recovery of implicit information

in text. One of the earliest systems for identifying
extra-sentential arguments is PUNDIT by Palmer et
al. (1986). This Prolog-based system comprises a
syntactic component for parsing, a semantic compo-
nent, which decomposes predicates into component
meanings and fills their semantic roles with syntactic
constituents based on a domain-specific model, and
a reference resolution component, which is called
both for explicit constituents and for obligatory im-
plicit constituents. The reference resolution process
is based on a focus list with all potential pronominal
referents identified by the semantic component. The
approach, however, has not been evaluated on a data
set, so we cannot directly compare its performance
with other approaches. Furthermore, it is strongly
domain-dependent.

In a case study, Burchardt et al. (2005) propose
to identify implicit arguments exploiting contex-
tual relations from deep-parsing and lexico-semantic
frame relations encoded in FrameNet. In particu-
lar, they suggest converting a text into a network of
lexico-semantic predicate-argument relations con-
nected through frame-to-frame relations and recur-
rent anaphoric linking patterns. However, the au-
thors do not implement and evaluate this approach.

Most recently, Gerber and Chai (2010) have pre-
sented a supervised classification model for the re-
covery of implicit arguments of nominal predicates
in NomBank. The model features are quite different
from those usually considered in standard SRL tasks
and include among others information from Verb-
Net classes, pointwise mutual information between
semantic arguments, collocation and frequency in-
formation about the predicates, information about
parent nodes and siblings of the predicates and dis-
course information. The authors show the feasibility
of their approach, which however relies on a selected
group of nominal predicates with a large number of
annotated instances.

The first attempt to evaluate implicit argument
identification over a common test set and consider-
ing different kinds of predicates was made by Rup-
penhofer et al. (2010). Further details are given in
the following section.

56



Data set Sentences Frame inst. Frame types Overt FEs DNIs (resolved) INIs
Train 438 1,370 317 2,526 303 (245) 277
Test 525 1,703 452 3,141 349 (259) 361

Table 1: Data set statistics from SemEval task 10

3 SemEval 2010 task 10

The SemEval-2010 task for linking events and their
participants in discourse (Ruppenhofer et al., 2010)
introduced a new issue w.r.t. the SemEval-2007
task ‘Frame Semantic Structure Extraction’ (Baker
et al., 2007), in that it focused on linking local se-
mantic argument structures across sentence bound-
aries. Specifically, the task included first the identi-
fication of frames and frame elements in a text fol-
lowing the FrameNet paradigm (Baker et al., 1998),
then the identification of locally uninstantiated roles
(NIs). If these roles are indefinite (INI), they have
to be marked as such and no antecedent has to be
found. On the contrary, if they are definite (DNI),
their coreferents have to be found in the wider dis-
course context. The challenge comprised two tasks,
namely the full task (semantic role recognition and
labeling + NI linking) and the NIs only task, i.e. the
identification of null instantiations and their refer-
ents given a test set with gold standard local seman-
tic argument structure. In this work, we focus on the
latter task.

The data provided to the participants included a
training and a test set. The training data comprised
438 sentences from Arthur Conan Doyle’s novel
‘The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge’, manually an-
notated with frame and INI/DNI information. The
test set included 2 chapters of the Sherlock Holmes
story ‘The Hound of Baskervilles’ with a total of
525 sentences, provided with gold standard frame
information. The participants had to i) assess if a lo-
cal argument is implicit; ii) decide whether it is an
INI or a DNI and iii) in the second case, find the
antecedent of the implicit argument. We report in
Table 1 some statistics about the provided data sets
from Ruppenhofer et al. (2010). Note that overt FEs
are the explicit frame elements annotated in the data
set.

Although 26 teams downloaded the data sets,
there were only two submissions, probably depend-
ing on the intrinsic difficulties of the task (see dis-

cussion in Section 5). The best performing system
(Chen et al., 2010) is based on a supervised learn-
ing approach using, among others, distributional se-
mantic similarity between the heads of candidate
referents and role fillers in the training data, but
its performance is strongly affected by data sparse-
ness. Indeed, only 438 sentences with annotated
NIs were made available in the training set, which
is clearly insufficient to capture such a multifaceted
phenomenon with a supervised approach. The sec-
ond system participating in the task (Tonelli and
Delmonte, 2010) was an adaptation of an exist-
ing LFG-based system for deep semantic analysis
(Delmonte, 2009), whose output was mapped to
FrameNet-style annotation. In this case, the major
challenge was to cope with the classification of some
NI phenomena which are very much dependent on
frame specific information, and can hardly be gener-
alized in the LFG framework.

4 A linguistically motivated proposal for
NI identification and binding

In this section, we describe our proposal for dealing
with INI/DNI identification and evaluate our output
against SemEval gold standard data. As discussed in
the previous section, existing systems dealing with
this task suffer on the one hand from a lack of train-
ing data and on the other hand from the dependence
of the task on frame annotation, which makes it diffi-
cult to adapt existing unsupervised approaches. We
show that, given this state of the art, better results
can be achieved in the task by simply developing an
algorithm that reflects as much as possible the lin-
guistic motivations behind NI identification in the
FrameNet paradigm. Our approach is divided into
two subtasks: i) identify INIs/DNIs and ii) for each
DNI, find the corresponding referent in text.

We develop an algorithm that incorporates the fol-
lowing linguistic information:

FE coreness status Null instantiated arguments as
defined in FrameNet are always core arguments, i.e.

57



they are central to the meaning of a frame. Since
the coreness status of the arguments is encoded in
FrameNet, we limit our search for an NI only if a
core frame element is not overtly expressed in the
text.

Incorporated FEs Although all lexical units be-
longing to the same frame in the FrameNet database
are characterized by the same set of core FEs, a fur-
ther distinction should be introduced when dealing
with NIs identification. For example, in PERCEP-
TION ACTIVE, several predicates are listed, which
however have a different behavior w.r.t. the core
Body part FE. ‘Feel.v’, for instance, is underspec-
ified as regards the body part perceiving the sensa-
tion, so we can assume that when it is not overtly
expressed, we have a case of null instantiation. For
other verbs in the same frame, such as ‘glance.v’ or
‘listen.v’, the coreness status of Body part seems to
be more questionable, because the perceiving organ
is already implied by the verb meaning. For this rea-
son, we argue that if Body part is not expressed with
‘glance.v’ or ‘listen.v’, it is not a case of null instan-
tiation. Such FEs are defined as incorporated in the
lexical unit and are encoded as such in FrameNet.

Excludes and Includes relation In FrameNet,
some information about the relationship between
certain FEs is encoded. In particular, some FEs are
connected by the Excludes relation, which means
that they cannot occur together, and others by the
Requires relation, which means that if a given FE
is present, then also the other must be overtly or
implicitly present. An example of Excludes is the
relationship between the FE Entity 1 / Entity 2 and
Entities, because if Entity 1 and Entity 2 are both
present in a sentence, then Entities cannot be co-
present. Conversely, Entity 1 and Entity 2 stand in a
Requires relationship, because the first cannot occur
without the second. This kind of information can
clearly be helpful in case we have to automatically
decide whether an argument is implicit or is just not
present because it is not required.

INI/DNI preference Ruppenhofer and Michaelis
(2009) suggest that omissible arguments in particu-
lar frames tend to be always interpreted as definite or
indefinite. For example, they report that in a sample
from the British National Corpus, the interpretation

for a null instantiated Goal argument is definite in
97.5% of the observed cases. We take this feature
into account by considering the frequency of an im-
plicit argument being annotated as definite/indefinite
in the training set.

The algorithm incorporating all this linguistic in-
formation is detailed in the following subsection.

4.1 INI/DNI identification
In a preliminary step, we collect for each frame the
list of arguments being annotated as DNI/INI with
the corresponding frequency in the training set. For
example, in the CALENDRIC UNIT frame, the Whole
argument has been annotated 11 times as INI and
5 times as DNI. Some implicit frame elements oc-
cur only as INI or DNI, for example Goal, which is
annotated 14 times as DNI and never as INI in the
ARRIVING frame. This frequency list (FreqList)
is collected in order to decide if candidate null in-
stantiations have to be classified as DNI or INI.

We consider each sentence in the test data pro-
vided with FrameNet annotation, and for each pred-
icate p annotated with a set of overt frame elements
FEs, we run the first module for DNI/INI identi-
fication. The steps followed are reported in Algo-
rithm 1. We first check if the annotated FEs con-
tain all core frame elements C listed in FrameNet for
p. If the two sets are identical, we conclude that no
core frame element can be implicit and we return an
empty set both for DNI and INI . For example, in
the test sentence (6), the BODY MOVEMENT frame
appears in the sentence with its two core frame el-
ements, i.e. Body part and Agent. Therefore, no
implicit argument can be postulated.

(6) Finally [she]Agent openedBODY MOVEMENT [her
eyes]Body part again.

If the core FEs in C are not all overtly expressed
in FEs, we run two routines to check if the miss-
ing FEs CandNIs are likely to be null instantiated
elements. First, we discard all candidate NIs that ap-
pear as incorporated FEs for the given p. Second, we
discard as well candidate NIs if they are excluded by
the overtly annotated FEs.

The last steps of the algorithm are devoted to de-
ciding if the candidate null instantiation is definite
or indefinite. For this step, we rely on the observa-
tions collected in FreqList. In particular, for each

58



candidate c we check if it was already present as INI
or DNI in the training set. If yes, we label c accord-
ingly. In case c was observed both as INI and as
DNI, the most probable label is assigned based on
its frequency in the training set.

Input: TestSet with annotated core FEs;
FreqList

Output: INI and DNI for p
foreach p ∈ TestSet do

extract annotated core FEs;
extract set C of core FEs for p in FrameNet;
if C ⊆ FEs then

DNI = ∅;
INI = ∅;

else
C \ FEs = CandNIs;
foreach c ∈ CandNIs do

if c is incorporated FE of p then
delete c

foreach fe ∈ FEs do
if fe excludes c then

delete c
end
foreach nip ∈ FreqListp do

if c = nip then
if nip is only dnip then

c ∈ DNI
if nip is only inip then

c ∈ INI
if nip is inip and nip is dnip
then

if Freq(inip) >
Freq(dnip) then

c ∈ INI
else

c ∈ DNI
end

end
return(INI);
return(DNI);

end
Algorithm 1: DNI/INI identification

4.2 DNI binding
Given that both the supervised approach exploited
by Chen et al. (2010) and the methodology pro-
posed in Tonelli and Delmonte (2010) based on

deep-semantic parsing achieved quite poor results
in the DNI-binding task, we devise a third approach
that relies on the observed heads of each FE in the
training set and assigns a relevance score to each
candidate antecedent.

We first collect for each FE the list of heads
Htrain assigned to FE in the training set, and we ex-
tract for each head htrain ∈ Htrain the correspond-
ing frequency fhtrain . Then, for each dni ∈ DNI
identified with Algorithm 1 in the test set, we collect
all nominal heads Htest occurring in a window of
(plus/minus) 5 sentences and we assign to each can-
didate head htest ∈ Htest a relevance score relhtest
w.r.t. dni computed as follows:

relhtest =
fhtrain

dist(sentdni, senthtest)
(7)

where fhtrain is the number of times h has been
observed in the training set with a FE label, and
dist(sentdni, senthtest) is the distance between the
sentence where the dni has been detected and the
sentence where the candidate head htest occurs (0 ≤
dist(sentdni, senthtest) ≤ 5).

The best candidate head for dni is the one with
the highest relhtest , given that it is (higher) than 0.
The way we compute the relevance score is based on
the intuition that, if a head was frequently observed
for FE in the training set, it is likely that it is a good
candidate. However, the more distant it occurs from
dni, then less probable it is as antecedent.

5 Evaluation and error analysis

We present here an evaluation of the system output
on test data. We further comment on some difficult
aspects of the task and suggest some solutions.

5.1 Results
Evaluation consists of different layers, which we
consider separately. The first task was to decide
whether an argument is implicit or not. We were
able to identify 53.8% of all null instantiated ar-
guments in text, which is lower than the recall of
63.4% achieved by SEMAFOR (Chen et al., 2010),
the best performing system in the challenge. How-
ever, in the following subtask of deciding whether an
implicit argument is an INI or a DNI, we achieved
an accuracy of 74.6% (vs. 54.7% of SEMAFOR,

59



even if our result is based on fewer proposed clas-
sifications). Note that the majority-class accuracy
reported by Ruppenhofer et al. (2010) is 50.8%.

In Table 2 we further report precision, recall and
F1 scores computed separately on all DNIs and all
INIs automatically detected. Precision corresponds
to the percentage of null instantiations found (either
INI or DNI) that are correctly labeled as such, while
recall indicates the amount of INI or DNI that were
correctly identified compared to the gold standard
ones. Our approach does not show significant dif-
ferences between the result obtained with INIs and
DNIs, while the evaluation of SEMAFOR (between
parenthesis) shows that its performance suffers from
low recall as regards DNIs and low precision as re-
gards INIs.

P R F1
DNI 0.39 (0.57) 0.43 (0.03) 0.41 (0.06)
INI 0.46 (0.20) 0.38 (0.61) 0.42 (0.30)

Table 2: Evaluation of INI/DNI identification.
SEMAFOR performance between parenthesis.

Another evaluation step concerns the binding of
DNIs with the corresponding antecedents by apply-
ing the equation reported in Section 4.2. Results are
shown in Table 3:

P R F1
DNI 0.13 (0.25) 0.06 (0.01) 0.08 (0.02)

Table 3: Evaluation of DNI resolution. SEMAFOR per-
formance between parenthesis.

Although the binding quality still needs to be im-
proved, two main factors have a negative impact on
our performance, which do not depend on our al-
gorithm: first, 9% of the DNIs we bound to an an-
tecedent don’t have a referent in the gold standard.
Second, 26% of the wrong assignments concern an-
tecedents found for the Topic frame element in test
sentences where the STATEMENT frame has been
annotated together with the overtly expressed core
FE Message. In all these gold cases, Topic is not
considered null instantiated if the Message FE is ex-
plicit in the clause. Therefore, we can conclude that
the mistake done by our algorithm depends on the
missing Excludes relation between Topic and Mes-

sage, i.e. a rule should be introduced saying that
one of the two roles is redundant (and not null in-
stantiated) if the other is overtly expressed.

5.2 Open issues related to our approach
Even if with a small set of rules our approach
achieved state-of-the-art results in the SemEval task,
our performance clearly requires further improve-
ments. Indeed, we currently rely only on the back-
ground knowledge about core FEs from FrameNet,
combined with statistical observations about role
fillers acquired from the training set. Additional
morphological, syntactic, semantic and discourse in-
formation could be exploited in different ways. For
example, since the passive voice of a verb can con-
structionally license INIs, this kind of information
would greatly improve our performance with verbal
predicates (i.e. 46% of all annotated predicates in
the test set).

As for nominal predicates, consider for example
sentence (8) extracted from the test set:

(8) ‘Excuse the admirationJUDGMENT [of a
connoisseur]Evaluee,’ said [he]Cognizer.

In this case, ‘admiration’ is a nominal predicate
with two explicit FEs, namely Evaluee and Cog-
nizer. The JUDGMENT frame includes also the Rea-
son core FE, which can be a candidate for a null in-
stantiation. In fact, it is annotated as INI in the gold
standard data, because in the previous sentences a
reason for such admiration is not mentioned. How-
ever, this could have been annotated as DNI as well,
if only some specific quality of the person had been
previously introduced. This shows that the current
sentence does not present any inherent characteris-
tic motivating the presence of a definite instantia-
tion. In this case, a strategy based on some kind of
history list may be very helpful. This could con-
tain, for example, all subjects and direct objects pre-
viously mentioned in text and selected according to
some relevance criteria, as in (Tonelli and Delmonte,
2010). A further improvement may derive from the
integration of an anaphora resolution step, as first
proposed by Palmer et al. (1986) and more recently
by Gerber and Chai (2010).

60



5.3 Open issues related to the task
Other open issues are related to the specification of
the task and to the nature of implicit entities, which
make it difficult to account for this phenomenon
from a computational point of view. We report be-
low the main issues that need to be tackled:

INI Linking: Table 1 shows that 28% of DNIs
in the test set are not linked to any referent. This
puts into question one of the main assumptions of
the task, that is the connection between a definite
instantiation and a referent. In the test set, there are
also 14 cases of indefinite null instantiations (out of
361) that are provided with a referent. Consider for
example the following sentence with gold standard
annotation, in which the INI label Path is actually
instantiated and refers to ‘we’:

(9) (We)Path allowed [him]Theme to passTRAVERSING
before we had recovered our nerve.

This again may be a controversial annotation choice,
since the annotation guidelines of the task reported
that ‘in cases of indefinite omission, there need not
be any overt mention of an indefinite NP in the lin-
guistic context nor does there have to be a referent
of the kind denoted by the omitted argument in the
physical discourse setting’ (Ruppenhofer, 2010).

Position of referent: Although we suggested that
the History List may represent a good starting point
for finding antecedents to DNIs, searching only in
the context preceding the current predicate is not
enough because the referent can occur after such
predicate. Also, the predicate with a DNI and the
referent can be divided by a very large text span. In
the test data, 38% of the DNIs referent occur in the
same sentence of the predicate, while 14% are men-
tioned after that (in a text span of max. 4 sentences).
Another 38% of DNIs are resolved in a text span
preceding the current predicate of max. 5 sentences,
while the rest has a very far antecedent (up to 116
sentences before the current predicate). The notion
of context where the antecedent should be searched
for is clearly lacking an appropriate definition.

Diversity of lexical fillers: In general, it is pos-
sible to successfully obtain information about the
likely fillers of a missing FE from annotated data
sets only in case all FE labels are semantically well
identifiable: in fact many FE labels are devoid of

any specific associated meaning. Furthermore, lex-
ical fillers of a given semantic role in the FrameNet
data sets can be as diverse as possible. For exam-
ple, a complete search in the FrameNet database for
the FE Charges will reveal heads like ‘possession,
innocent, actions’, where the significant portion of
text addressed by the FE would be in the specifica-
tion - i.e. ‘possession of a gun’ etc. Only in case of
highly specialized FEs there will be some help in the
semantic characterization of a possible antecedent.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we have described the phenomenon
of null instantiated arguments according to the
FrameNet paradigm and we have proposed a strat-
egy for identifying implicit arguments and find-
ing their antecedents, if any, using a linguistically-
motivated approach. We have evaluated our system
using the test set developed for the SemEval task
10 and we have discussed some problems in our ap-
proach affecting its performance. Besides, we have
also pointed out some issues related to the task defi-
nition and to the general phenomenon of null instan-
tiated arguments that make the identification task
challenging from a computational point of view. We
have shed some light on the syntactic, semantic and
discourse information that we believe are necessary
to successfully handle the task.

In the future, we plan to improve on our binding
approach by making our model more flexible. More
specifically, we currently treat DNI referents occur-
ring before and after the sentence containing the
predicate as equally probable. Instead, we should
penalize less those preceding the predicate because
they are more frequent in the training set. For this
reason, the number of observations for the candi-
date head and the distance should be represented
as different weighted features. Another direction to
explore is to extend the training set to the whole
FrameNet resource and not just to the SemEval
data set. However, our approach based on the ob-
servations of lexical fillers is very much domain-
dependent, and a larger training set may introduce
too much variability in the heads. An approach ex-
ploiting some kind of generalization, for example by
linking the fillers to WordNet synsets as proposed by
(Gerber and Chai, 2010), may be more appropriate.

61



References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and J. B. Lowe.

1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In Proceed-
ings of Coling/ACL, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

C. F. Baker, M. Ellsworth, and K. Erk. 2007. Semeval-
2007 task 10: Frame semantic structure extraction. In
Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 99–104,
Prague, CZ, June.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Annette Frank, and Manfred Pinkal.
2005. Building text meaning representations from
contextually related frames - a case study. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth International Workshop on Computa-
tional Semantics, Tilburg, NL.

Desai Chen, Nathan Schneider, Dipanjan Das, and
Noah A. Smith. 2010. SEMAFOR: Frame Argument
Resolution with Log-Linear Models. In Proceedings
of SemEval-2010: 5th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations, pages 264–267, Uppsala, Swe-
den. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rodolfo Delmonte. 2009. Understanding Implicit Enti-
ties and Events with Getaruns. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Semantic Comput-
ing, pages 25–32, Berkeley, California.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1986. Pragmatically Controlled
Zero Anaphora. In V. Nikiforidou, M. Vanllay,
M. Niepokuj, and D. Felder, editors, Proceedings of
the XII Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics So-
ciety, Berkeley, California. BLS.

Matthew Gerber and Joyce Y. Chai. 2010. Beyond Nom-
Bank: A Study of Implicit Arguments for Nominal
Predicates. In Proceedings of the 48th annual meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL-10), pages 1583–1592, Uppsala, Sweden. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Adam Meyers. 2007. Annotation guidelines for Nom-
Bank - noun argument structure for PropBank. Tech-
nical report, New York University.

M. Palmer, D. Dahl, R. Passonneau, L. Hirschman,
M. Linebarger, and J. Dowding. 1986. Recovering im-
plicit information. In Proceedings of ACL 1986, pages
96–113.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus
of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 31.

Josef Ruppenhofer and Laura A. Michaelis. 2009.
Frames predict the interpretation of lexical omissions.
Submitted.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Caroline Sporleder, Roser Morante,
Collin F. Baker, and Martha Palmer. 2010. SemEval-
2010 Task 10: Linking Events and Their Participants
in Discourse. In Proceedings of SemEval-2010: 5th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations.

Josef Ruppenhofer, 2010. Annotation guidelines used for
Semeval task 10 - Linking Events and Their Partici-
pants in Discourse. (manuscript).

Sara Tonelli and Rodolfo Delmonte. 2010. VENSES++:
Adapting a deep semantic processing system to the
identification of null instantiations. In Proceedings
of SemEval-2010: 5th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations, Uppsala, Sweden.

62


