










































Extractive Multi-Document Summaries Should Explicitly Not Contain Document Specific Content


Proceedings of the Workshop on Automatic Summarization for Different Genres, Media, and Languages, pages 49–54,
Portland, Oregon, June 23, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extractive Multi-Document Summaries Should Explicitly Not Contain
Document-Specific Content

Rebecca Mason and Eugene Charniak
Brown Laboratory for Linguistic Information Processing (BLLIP)

Brown University
Providence, RI 02912

{rebecca,ec}@cs.brown.edu

Abstract

Unsupervised approaches to multi-document
summarization consist of two steps: find-
ing a content model of the documents to be
summarized, and then generating a summary
that best represents the most salient informa-
tion of the documents. In this paper, we
present a sentence selection objective for ex-
tractive summarization in which sentences are
penalized for containing content that is spe-
cific to the documents they were extracted
from. We modify an existing system, HIER-
SUM (Haghighi & Vanderwende, 2009), to use
our objective, which significantly outperforms
the original HIERSUM in pairwise user eval-
uation. Additionally, our ROUGE scores ad-
vance the current state-of-the-art for both su-
pervised and unsupervised systems with sta-
tistical significance.

1 Introduction

Multi-document summarization is the task of gener-
ating a single summary from a set of documents that
are related to a single topic. Summaries should con-
tain information that is relevant to the main ideas of
the entire document set, and should not contain in-
formation that is too specific to any one document.
For example, a summary of multiple news articles
about the Star Wars movies could contain the words
“Lucas ”and “Jedi”, but should not contain the name
of a fan who was interviewed in one article. Most
approaches to this problem generate summaries ex-
tractively, selecting whole or partial sentences from
the original text, then attempting to piece them to-
gether in a coherent manner. Extracted text is se-

lected based on its relevance to the main ideas of the
document set. Summaries can be evaluated manu-
ally, or with automatic metrics such as ROUGE (Lin,
2004).

The use of structured probabilistic topic models
has made it possible to represent document set con-
tent with increasing complexity (Daumé & Marcu,
2006; Tang et al., 2009; Celikyilmaz & Hakkani-
Tur, 2010). Haghighi and Vanderwende (2009)
demonstrated that these models can improve the
quality of generic multi-document summaries over
simpler surface models. Their most complex hier-
archial model improves summary content by teasing
out the words that are not general enough to repre-
sent the document set as a whole. Once those words
are no longer included in the content word distri-
bution, they are implicitly less likely to appear in
the extracted summary as well. But this objective
does not sufficiently keep document-specific content
from appearing in multi-document summaries.

In this paper, we present a selection objective that
explicitly excludes document-specific content. We
re-implement the HIERSUM system from Haghighi
and Vanderwende (2009), and show that using our
objective dramatically improves the content of ex-
tracted summaries.

2 Modeling Content

The easiest way to model document content is to find
a probability distribution of all unigrams that appear
in the original documents. The highest frequency
words (after removing stop words) have a high like-
lihood of appearing in human-authored summaries
(Nenkova & Vanderwende, 2005). However, the raw

49



Figure 1: The graphical model for HIERSUM (Haghighi
& Vanderwende, 2009).

unigram distribution may contain words that appear
frequently in one document, but do not reflect the
content of the document set as a whole.

Probabilistic topic models provide a more prin-
cipled approach to finding a distribution of content
words. This idea was first presented by Daumé
and Marcu (2006) for their BAYESUM system for
query-focused summarization, and later adapted for
non-query summarization in the TOPICSUM system
by Haghighi and Vanderwende (2009). 1 In these
systems, each word from the original documents is
drawn from one of three vocabulary distributions.
The first, φb, is the background distribution of gen-
eral English words. The second, φd, contains vo-
cabulary that is specific to that one document. And
the third, φc, is the distribution of content words for
that document set, and contains relevant words that
should appear in the generated summary.

HIERSUM (Haghighi & Vanderwende, 2009)
adds more structure to TOPICSUM by further split-
ting the content distribution into multiple sub-topics.
The content words in each sentence can be gener-
ated by either the general content topic or the con-
tent sub-topic for that sentence, and the words from
the general content distribution are considered when
building the summary.

1The original BAYESUM can also be used without a query,
in which case, BAYESUM and TOPICSUM are the exact same
model.

3 KL Selection

The KL-divergence between two unigram word dis-
tributions P and Q is given by KL(P ||Q) =∑

w P (w) log
P (w)
Q(w) . This quantity is used for sum-

mary sentence selection in several systems includ-
ing Lerman and McDonald (2009) and Haghighi
and Vanderwende (2009), and was used as a feature
in the discrimitive sentence ranking of Daumé and
Marcu (2006).

TOPICSUM and HIERSUM use the following KL
objective, which finds S∗, the summary that min-
imizes the KL-divergence between the estimated
content distribution φc and the summary word dis-
tribution PS:

S∗ = min
S:|S|≤L

KL(φc||PS)

A greedy approximation is used to find S∗. Start-
ing with an empty summary, sentences are greedily
added to the summary one at a time until the sum-
mary has reached the maximum word limit, L. The
values of PS are smoothed uniformly in order to en-
sure finite values of KL(φc||PS).

4 Why Document-Specific Words are a
Problem

The KL selection objective effectively ensures the
presence of highly weighted content words in the
generated summary. But it is asymmetric in that it
allows a high proportion of words in the summary
to be words that appear infrequently, or not at all,
in the content word distribution. This asymmetry
is the reason why the KL selection metric does not
sufficiently keep document-specific words out of the
generated summary.

Consider what happens when a document-specific
word is included in summary S. Assume that the
word wi does not appear (has zero probability) in
the content word distribution φc, but does appear in
the document-specific distribution φd for document
d. Then wi appearing in S has very little impact
on KL(φc||PS) =

∑
j φc(wj) log

φc(wj)
PS(wj)

because
φc(wi) = 0. There will be a slight impact because
the presence of the wordwi in S will cause the prob-
ability of other words in the summary to be sligntly
smaller. But in a summary of length 250 words (the

50



length used for the DUC summarization task) the
difference is negligible.

The reason why we do not simply substitute
a symmetrical metric for comparing distributions
(e.g., Information Radius) is because we want the se-
lection objective to disprefer only document-specific
words. Specifically, the selection objective should
not disprefer background English vocabulary.

5 KL(c)-KL(d) Selection

In contrast to the KL selection objective, our ob-
jective measures the similarity of both content and
document-specific word distributions to the ex-
tracted summary sentences. We combine these mea-
sures linearly:

S∗ = min
S:|S|≤L

KL(φc||PS)−KL(φd||PS)

Our objective can be understood in comparison
to the MMR criterion by (Carbonell & Goldstein,
1998), which also utilizes a linear metric in order to
maximize informativeness of summaries while min-
imizing some unwanted quality of the extracted sen-
tences (in their case, redundancy). In contrast, our
criterion utilizes information about what kind of in-
formation should not be included in the summary,
which to our knowledge has not been done in previ-
ous summarization systems.2

For comparison to the previous KL objective, we
also use a greedy approximation for S∗. However,
because we are extracting sentences from many doc-
uments, the distribution φd is actually several distri-
butions, a separate distribution for each document
in the document set. The implementation we used
in our experiments is that, as we consider a sen-
tence s to be added to the previously selected sen-
tences S, we set φd to be the document-specific
distribution of the document that s has been ex-
tracted from. So each time we add a sentence to
the summary, we find the sentence that minimizes
KL(φc||PS∪s)−KL(φd(s)||PS∪s). Another imple-
mentation we tried was combining all of the φd dis-
tributions into one distribution, but we did not notice
any difference in the extracted summaries.

2A few anonymous reviewers asked if we tried to optimize
the value of λ for KL(φc||PS) − λKL(φd||PS). The answer
is yes, but optimizing λ to maximize ROUGE results in sum-
maries that are perceptibly worse, and manually tuning λ did
not seem to produce any benefit.

6 Evaluation

6.1 Data

We developed our sentence selection objective us-
ing data from the Document Understanding Con-
ference3 (DUC) 2006 summarization task, and used
data from DUC 2007 task for evaluations. In these
tasks, the system is given a set of 25 news arti-
cles related to an event or topic, and needs to gen-
erate a summary of under 250 words from those
documents.4 For each document set, four human-
authored summaries are provided for use with eval-
uations. The DUC 2006 data has 50 document sets,
and the DUC 2007 data has 45 document sets.

6.2 Automatic Evaluation

Systems are automatically evalatued using ROUGE
(Lin, 2004), which has good correlation with hu-
man judgments of summary content. ROUGE com-
pares n-gram recall between system-generated sum-
maries, and human-authored reference summaries.
The first two metrics we compare are unigram and
bigram recall, R-1 and R-2, respectively. The last
metric, R-SU4, measures recall of skip-4 bigrams,
which may skip one or two words in between the
two words to be measured. We set ROUGE to stem
both the system and reference summaries, scale our
results by 102 and present scores with and without
stopwords removed.

The ROUGE scores of the original HIERSUM sys-
tem are given in the first row of table 1, followed
by the scores of HIERSUM using our KL(c-d) se-
lection. The KL(c-d) selection outperforms the KL
selection in each of the ROUGE metrics shown. In
fact, these results are statistically significant over
the baseline KL selection for all but the unigram
metrics (R-1 with and without stopwords). These
results show that our KL(c-d) selection yields sig-
nificant improvements in terms of ROUGE perfor-
mance, since having fewer irrelevant words in the
summaries leaves room for words that are more rel-
evant to the content topic, and therefore more likely
to appear in the reference summaries.

The last two rows of table 1 show the scores
of two recent state-of-the-art multi-document sum-

3http://duc.nist.gov/
4Some DUC summarization tasks also provide a query or

focus for the summary, but we ignore these in this work.

51



System ROUGE w/o stopwords ROUGE w/ stopwords
R-1 R-2 R-SU4 R-1 R-2 R-SU4

HIERSUM w/ KL 34.6 7.3 10.4 43.1 9.7 15.3
HIERSUM w/ KL(c)-KL(d) 35.6 9.9 12.8 43.2 11.6 16.6
PYTHY 35.7 8.9 12.1 42.6 11.9 16.8
HYBHSUM 35.1 8.3 11.8 45.6 11.4 17.2

Table 1: ROUGE scores on the DUC 2007 document sets. The first two rows compare the results of the unigram
HIERSUM system with its original and our improved selection metrics. Bolded scores represent where our system has
a significant improvement over the orignal HIERSUM. For further comparison, the last two rows show the ROUGE
scores of two other state-of-the-art multi-document summarization systems (Toutanova et al., 2007; Celikyilmaz &
Hakkani-Tur, 2010). See section 6.2 for more details.

marization systems. Both of these systems se-
lect sentences discriminatively on many features
in order to maximize ROUGE scores. The first,
PYTHY (Toutanova et al., 2007), trains on dozens
of sentence-level features, such as n-gram and skip-
gram frequency, named entities, sentence length and
position, and also utilizes sentence compression.
The second, HYBHSUM (Celikyilmaz & Hakkani-
Tur, 2010), uses a nested Chinese restaurant process
(Blei et al., 2004) to model a hierarchical content
distribution with more complexity than HIERSUM,
and uses a regression model to predict scores for new
sentences.

For both of these systems, our summaries are sig-
nificantly better for R-2 and R-SU4 without stop-
words, and comparable in all other metrics.5 These
results show that our selection objective can make
a simple unsupervised model competitive with more
complicated supervised models.

6.3 Manual Evaluation

For manual evaluation, we performed a pairwise
comparison of summaries generated by HIERSUM
with both the original and our modified sentence se-
lection objective. Users were given the two sum-
maries to compare, plus a human-generated refer-
ence summary. The order that the summaries ap-
peared in was random. We asked users to select
which summary was better for the following ques-

5Haghighi and Vanderwende (2009) presented a version of
HIERSUM that models documents as a bag of bigrams, and pro-
vides results comparable to PYTHY. However, the bigram HI-
ERSUM model does not find consistent bags of bigrams.

System Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
HIERSUM w/ KL 29 36 31 36
. . . w/ KL(c)-KL(d) 58 51 56 51

Table 2: Results of manual evaluation. Our criterion out-
performs the original HIERSUM for all attributes, and is
significantly better for Q1 and Q3. See section 6.3 for
details.

tions:6

Q1 Which was better in terms of overall content?

Q2 Which summary had less repetition?

Q3 Which summary was more coherent?

Q4 Which summary had better focus?

We took 87 pairwise preferences from participants
over Mechanical Turk.7 The results of our evalu-
ation are shown in table 2. For all attributes, our
criterion performs better than the original HIERSUM
selection criterion, and our results for Q1 and Q3 are
significantly better as determined by Fisher sign test
(two-tailed P value < 0.01).

These results confirm that our objective noticably
improves the content of extractive summaries by se-
lecting sentences that contain less document-specific

6These are based on the manual evaluation questions from
DUC 2007, and are the same questions asked in Haghighi and
Vanderwende (2009).

7In order to ensure quality results, we asked participants to
write a sentence on why they selected their preference for each
question. We also monitored the time taken to complete each
comparison. Overall, we rejected about 25% of responses we
received, which is similar to the percentage of responses re-
jected by Gillick and Liu (2010).

52



information. This leaves more room in the summary
for content that is relevant to the main idea of the
document set (Q1) and keeps out content that is not
relevant (Q4). Additionally, although neither crite-
rion explicitly addresses coherence, we found that a
significant proportion of users found our summaries
to be more coherent (Q3). We believe this may be
the case because the presence of document-specific
information can distract from the main ideas of the
summary, and make it less likely that the extracted
sentences will flow together.

There is no immediate explanation for why users
found our our summaries less repetitive (Q2), since
if anything the narrowing of topics due to the neg-
ative KL(φd||PS) term should make for more rep-
etition. We currently hypothesize that the improved
score is simply a spillover from the general improve-
ment in document quality.

7 Conclusion

We have described a new objective for sentence se-
lection in extractive multi-document summarization,
which is different in that it explicitly gives negative
weight to sentences that contain document-specific
words. Our objective significantly improves the per-
formance of an existing summarization system, and
improves on current best ROUGE scores with sig-
nificance.

We have observed that while the content in our
extracted summaries is often comparable to the con-
tent in human-written summaries, the extracted sum-
maries are still far weaker in terms of coherence and
repetition. Even though our objective significantly
improves coherence, more sophisticated methods of
decoding are still needed to produce readable sum-
maries. These problems could be addressed through
further refinement of the selection objective, through
simplification or compression of selected sentences,
and through improving the coherence of generated
summaries.

References

Blei, D. M., Griffiths, T. L., Jordan, M. I., & Tenen-
baum, J. B. (2004). Hierarchical topic models and
the nested chinese restaurant process. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems.

Carbonell, J., & Goldstein, J. (1998). The use

of mmr, diversity-based reranking for reordering
documents and producing summaries. Proceed-
ings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in infor-
mation retrieval (pp. 335–336). New York, NY,
USA: ACM.

Celikyilmaz, A., & Hakkani-Tur, D. (2010). A hy-
brid hierarchical model for multi-document sum-
marization. Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (pp. 815–824). Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Daumé, III, H., & Marcu, D. (2006). Bayesian
query-focused summarization. ACL-44: Proceed-
ings of the 21st International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics and the 44th annual meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (pp. 305–312). Morristown, NJ, USA: Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Gillick, D., & Liu, Y. (2010). Non-expert evaluation
of summarization systems is risky. Proceedings
of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating
Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk (pp. 148–151). Stroudsburg, PA,
USA: Association for Computational Linguistics.

Haghighi, A., & Vanderwende, L. (2009). Exploring
content models for multi-document summariza-
tion. Proceedings of Human Language Technolo-
gies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (pp. 362–370). Boulder, Col-
orado: Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Lerman, K., & McDonald, R. (2009). Contrastive
summarization: an experiment with consumer re-
views. Proceedings of Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Companion Volume:
Short Papers (pp. 113–116). Stroudsburg, PA,
USA: Association for Computational Linguistics.

Lin, C.-Y. (2004). Rouge: a package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. Proceedings of

53



the Workshop on Text Summarization Branches
Out (WAS 2004). Barcelona, Spain.

Nenkova, A., & Vanderwende, L. (2005). The im-
pact of frequency on summarization (Technical
Report). Microsoft Research.

Tang, J., Yao, L., & Chen, D. (2009). Multi-topic
based query-oriented summarization. SDM’09
(pp. 1147–1158).

Toutanova, K., Brockett, C., Gamon, M., Jagarla-
mudi, J., Suzuki, H., & Vanderwende, L. (2007).
The PYTHY Summarization System: Microsoft
Research at DUC 2007. Proc. of DUC.

54


