










































Crowdsourcing syntactic relatedness judgements for opinion mining in the study of information technology adoption


Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 69–77,
Portland, OR, USA, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Crowdsourcing syntactic relatedness judgements for opinion mining in the
study of information technology adoption

Asad B. Sayeed, Bryan Rusk, Martin Petrov,
Hieu C. Nguyen, Timothy J. Meyer

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland

College Park, MD 20742 USA
asayeed@cs.umd.edu,brusk@umd.edu,

martin@martinpetrov.com,
{hcnguyen88,tmeyer88}@gmail.com

Amy Weinberg
Center for the Advanced

Study of Language
and Department of Linguistics

University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 USA
aweinberg@casl.umd.edu

Abstract

We present an end-to-end pipeline including
a user interface for the production of word-
level annotations for an opinion-mining task
in the information technology (IT) domain.
Our pre-annotation pipeline selects candidate
sentences for annotation using results from a
small amount of trained annotation to bias the
random selection over a large corpus. Our
user interface reduces the need for the user to
understand the “meaning” of opinion in our
domain context, which is related to commu-
nity reaction. It acts as a preliminary buffer
against low-quality annotators. Finally, our
post-annotation pipeline aggregates responses
and applies a more aggressive quality filter.

We present positive results using two differ-
ent evaluation philosophies and discuss how
our design decisions enabled the collection of
high-quality annotations under subjective and
fine-grained conditions.

1 Introduction

Crowdsourcing permits us to use a bank of anony-
mous workers with unknown skill levels to perform
complex tasks given a simple breakdown of these
tasks with user interface design that hides the full
task complexity. Use of these techniques is growing
in the areas of computational linguistics and infor-
mation retrieval, particularly since these fields now
rely on the collection of large datasets for use in ma-
chine learning. Considering the variety of applica-
tions, a variety of datasets is needed, but trained,
known workers are an expense in principle that must

be furnished for each one. Consequently, crowd-
sourcing offers a way to collect this data cheaply and
quickly (Snow et al., 2008; Sayeed et al., 2010a).

We applied crowdsourcing to perform the fine-
grained annotation of a domain-specific corpus. Our
user interface design and our annotator quality con-
trol process allows these anonymous workers to per-
form a highly subjective task in a manner that cor-
relates their collective understanding of the task to
our own expert judgements about it. The path to
success provides some illustration of the pitfalls in-
herent in opinion annotation. Our task is: domain
and application-specific sentiment classification at
the sub-sentence level—at the word level.

1.1 Opinions

For our purposes, we define opinion mining (some-
times known as sentiment analysis) to be the re-
trieval of a triple {source, target, opinion} (Sayeed
et al., 2010b; Pang and Lee, 2008; Kim and Hovy,
2006) in which the source is the entity that origi-
nated the opinionated language, the target is a men-
tion of the entity or concept that is the opinion’s
topic, and the opinion is a value (possibly a struc-
ture) that reflects some kind of emotional orientation
expressed by the source towards the target.

In much of the recent literature on automatic
opinion mining, opinion is at best a gradient be-
tween positive and negative or a binary classifica-
tion thereof; further complexity affects the reliability
of machine-learning techniques (Koppel and Schler,
2006).

We call opinion mining “fine-grained” when we
are attempting to retrieve potentially many different

69



{source, target, opinion} triples per document. This
is particularly challenging when there are multiple
triples even at a sentence level.

1.2 Corpus-based social science
Our work is part of a larger collaboration with social
scientists to study the diffusion of information tech-
nology (IT) innovations through society by identify-
ing opinion leaders and IT-relevant opinionated lan-
guage (Rogers, 2003). A key hypothesis is that the
language used by opinion leaders causes groups of
others to encourage the spread of the given IT con-
cept in the market.

Since the goal of our exercise is to ascertain the
correlation between the source’s behaviour and that
of others, then it may be more appropriate to look
at opinion analysis with the view that what we are
attempting to discover are the views of an aggregate
reader who may otherwise have an interest in the IT
concept in question. We thus define an expression of
opinion in the following manner:

A expresses opinion about B if an in-
terested third party C’s actions towards B
may be affected by A’s textually recorded
actions, in a context where actions have
positive or negative weight.

This perspective runs counter to a widespread view
(Ruppenhofer et al., 2008) which has assumed a
treatment of opinionated language as an observation
of a latent “private state” held by the source. This
definition reflects the relationship of sentiment and
opinion with the study of social impact and market
prediction. We return to the question of how to de-
fine opinion in section 6.2.

1.3 Crowdsourcing in sentiment analysis
Paid crowdsourcing is a relatively new trend in com-
putational linguistics. Work exists at the paragraph
and document level, and it exists for the Twitter and
blog genres (Hsueh et al., 2009).

A key problem in crowdsourcing sentiment analy-
sis is the matter of quality control. A crowdsourced
opinion mining task is an attempt to use untrained
annotators over a task that is inherently very subjec-
tive. It is doubly difficult for specialized domains,
since crowdsourcing platforms have no way of di-
rectly recruiting domain experts.

Hsueh et al. (2009) present results in quality con-
trol over snippets of political blog posts in a task
classifying them by sentiment and political align-
ment. They find that they can use a measurement of
annotator noise to eliminate low-quality annotations
at this coarse level by reweighting snippet ambigu-
ity scores with noise scores. We demonstrate that we
can use a similar annotator quality measure alone to
eliminate low-quality annotations on a much finer-
grained task.

1.4 Syntactic relatedness
We have a downstream application for this annota-
tion task which involves acquiring patterns in the
distribution of opinion-bearing words and targets us-
ing machine learning (ML) techniques. In partic-
ular, we want to acquire the syntactic relationships
between opinion-bearing words and within-sentence
targets. Supervised ML techniques require gold
standard data annotated in advance.

The Multi-Perspective Question-Answering
(MPQA) newswire corpus (Wilson and Wiebe,
2005) and the J. D. Power & Associates (JDPA)
automotive review blog post (Kessler et al., 2010)
corpus are appropriate because both contain sub-
sentence annotations of sentiment-bearing language
as text spans. In some cases, they also include links
to within-sentence targets. This is an example of an
MPQA annotation:

That was the moment at which the fabric
of compassion tore, and worlds cracked
apart; when the contrast and conflict of
civilisational values became so great as
to remove any sense of common ground -
even on which to do battle.

The italicized portion is intended to reflect a negative
sentiment about the bolded portion. However, while
it is the case that the whole italicized phrase repre-
sents a negative sentiment, “remove” appears to rep-
resent far more of the negativity than “common” and
“ground”. While there are techniques that depend
on access to entire phrases, our project is to identify
sentiment spans at the length of a single word.

2 Data source

Our corpus for this task is a collection of arti-
cles from the IT professional magazine, Information

70



Week, from the years 1991 to 2008. This consists
of 33K articles of varying lengths including news
bulletins, full-length magazine features, and opin-
ion columns. We obtained the articles via an institu-
tional subscription, and reformatted them in XML1.

Certain IT concepts are particularly significant in
the context of the social science application. Our tar-
get list consists of 59 IT innovations and concepts.
The list includes plurals, common variations, and
abbreviations. Examples of IT concepts include “en-
terprise resource planning” and “customer relation-
ship management”. To avoid introducing confound-
ing factors into our results, we only include explicit
mentions and omit pronominal coreference.

3 User interface

Our user interface (figure 1) uses a drag-and-drop
process through which workers make decisions
about whether particular highlighted words within
a given sentence reflect an opinion about a particu-
lar mentioned IT concept or innovation. The user
is presented with a sentence from the corpus sur-
rounded by some before and after context. Under-
neath the text are four boxes: “No effect on opin-
ion” (none), “Affects opinion positively” (postive),
“Affects opinion negatively” (negative), and “Can’t
tell” (ambiguous).

The worker must drag each highlighted word in
the sentence into one of the boxes, as appropriate. If
the worker cannot determine the appropriate box for
a particular word, she is expected to drag this to the
ambiguous box. The worker is presented with de-
tailed instructions which also remind her that most
of words in the sentence are not actually likely to be
involved in the expression of an opinion about the
relevant IT concept2. The worker is not permitted
to submit the task without dragging all of the high-
lighted words to one of the boxes. When a word
is dragged to a box, the word in context changes
colour; the worker can change her mind by clicking
an X next to the word in the box.

1We will likely be able to provide a sample of sentence data
annotated by our process as a resource once we work out docu-
mentation and distribution issues.

2We discovered when testing the interface that workers can
feel obliged to find a opinion about the selected IT concept. We
reduced it by explicitly reminding them that most words do not
express a relevant opinion and by placing the none box first.

We used CrowdFlower to manage the task with
Amazon Mechanical Turk as its distribution chan-
nel. We set CrowdFlower to present three sentences
at a time to users. Only users with USA-based IP
addresses were permitted to perform the final task.

4 Procedure

In this section, we discuss the data processing
pipeline (figure 3) through which we select candi-
dates for annotations and the crowdsourcing inter-
face we present to the end user for classifying indi-
vidual words into categories that reflect the effect of
the word on the worker.

4.1 Data preparation

4.1.1 Initial annotation
Two social science undergraduate students were

hired to do annotations on Information Week with
the original intention of doing all the annotations
this way. There was a training period where they an-
notated about 60 documents in sets of 20 in iterative
consultation with one of the authors. Then they were
given 142 documents to annotate simultaneously in
order to assess their agreement after training.

Annotation was performed in Atlas.ti, an anno-
tation tool popular with social science researchers.
It was chosen for its familiarity to the social sci-
entists involved in our project and because of their
stated preference for using tools that would allow
them to share annotations with colleagues. Atlas.ti
has limitations, including the inability to create hier-
archical annotations. We overcame these limitations
using a special notation to connect related annota-
tions. An annotator highlights a sentence that she
believes contains an opinion about a mentioned tar-
get on one of the lists. She then highlights the men-
tion of the target and, furthermore, highlights the in-
dividual words that express the opinion about the tar-
get, using the notation to connect related highlights.

4.1.2 Candidate selection
While the use of trained annotators did not pro-

duce reliable results (section 6.2) in acceptable time
frames, we decided to use the annotations in a pro-
cess for selecting candidate sentences for crowd-
sourcing. All 219 sentences that the annotators se-
lected as having opinions about within-sentence IT

71



Figure 1: A work unit presented in grayscale. “E-business” is the IT concept and would be highlighted in blue. The
words in question are highlighted in gray background and turn red after they are dragged to the boxes.

concepts were concatenated into a single string and
converted into a TFIDF unit vector.

We then selected all the sentences that contain
IT concept mentions from the entire Information
Week corpus using an OpenNLP 1.4.3 model as
our sentence-splitter. This produced approximately
77K sentences. Every sentence was converted into a
TFIDF unit vector, and we took the cosine similar-
ity of each sentence with the TFIDF vector. We then
ranked the sentences by cosine similarity.

4.1.3 Selecting highlighted words

We ran every sentence through the Stanford
part-of-speech tagger. Words that belonged to
open classes such as adjectives and verbs were se-
lected along with certain closed-class words such as
modals and negation words. These candidate words
were highlighted in the worker interface.

We did not want to force workers to classify every
single word in a sentence, because this would be too
tedious. So we instead randomly grouped the high-
lighted words into non-overlapping sets of six. (Re-
mainders less than five were dropped from the task.)
We call these combinations of sentence, six words,
and target IT concept a “highlight group” (figure 2).

Each highlight group represents a task unit which
we present to the worker in our crowdsourcing ap-
plication. We generated 1000 highlight groups from

The amount of industry attention paid to this
new class of integration software speaks volumes
about the need to extend the reach of ERP systems.

The amount of industry attention paid to this
new class of integration software speaks volumes
about the need to extend the reach of ERP systems.

Figure 2: Two highlight groups consisting of the
same sentence and concept (ERP) but different non-
overlapping sets of candidate words.

the top-ranked sentences.

4.2 Crowdsourced annotation

4.2.1 Training gold
We used CrowdFlower partly because of its au-

tomated quality control process. The bedrock of
this process is the annotation of a small amount of
gold standard data by the task designers. Crowd-
Flower randomly selects gold-annotated tasks and
presents them to workers amidst other unannotated
tasks. Workers are evaluated by the percentage of
gold-annotated tasks they perform correctly. The re-
sult of a worker performing a task unit is called a
“judgement.”

Workers are initially presented their gold-
annotated tasks without knowing that they are an-
swering a test question. If they get the question
wrong, CrowdFlower presents the correct answer to

72



them along with a reason why their answer was an
error. They are permitted to write back to the task
designer if they disagree with the gold judgement.

This process functions in a manner analogous to
the training of a machine-learning system. Further-
more, it permits CrowdFlower to exclude or reject
low-quality results. Judgements from a worker who
slips below 65% correctness are rated as untrustwor-
thy and not included in the CrowdFlower’s results.

We created training gold in the manner recom-
mended by CrowdFlower. We randomly selected
50 highlight groups from the 1000 mentioned in the
previous section. We ran these examples through
CrowdFlower using the interface we discuss in the
next section. Then we used the CrowdFlower gold
editor to select 30 highlight groups that contained
clear classification decisions where it appeared that
the workers were in relative consensus and where we
agreed with their decision. Of these, we designated
only the clearest-cut classifications as gold, leav-
ing more ambiguous-seeming ones up to the users.
For example, in the second highlight group in 2, we
would designate software and systems as none and
extend as positive in the training gold and the re-
mainder as up to the workers. That would be a “min-
imum effort” to indicate that the worker understands
the task the way we do.

Unfortunately, CrowdFlower has some limita-
tions in the way it processes the responses to gold—
it is not possible to define a minimum effort pre-
cisely. CrowdFlower’s setting either allow us to pass
workers based on getting at least one item in each
class correct or by placing all items in their correct
classes. The latter is too strict a criterion for an in-
herently subjective task. So we accepted the former.
We instead applied our minimum effort criterion in
some of our experiments as described in section 4.3.

4.2.2 Full run
We randomly selected another 200 highlight

groups and posted them at 12 US cents for each set
of three highlight groups, with at least three Me-
chanical Turk workers seeing each highlight group.
The 30 training gold highlight groups were posted
along with them. Including CrowdFlower and Ama-
zon fees, the total cost was approximately 60 USD.
We permitted only USA-based workers to access the
task. Once initiated, the entire task took approxi-

Figure 3: Schematic view of pipeline.

mately 24 hours to complete.

4.3 Post-processing

4.3.1 Aggregation
Each individual worker’s ambiguous annotations

are converted to none annotations, as the ambigu-
ous box is intended as an outlet for a worker’s un-
certainty, but we choose to interpret anything that
a worker considers too uncertain to be classified
as positive or negative as something that is not
strongly opinionated under our definitions.

Aggregation is performed by majority vote of the
annotators on each word in each highlight group. If
no classification obtains more than 50% for a given
word, the word is dropped as too ambiguous to be
accepted either way as a result. This aggregation
has the effect of smoothing out individual annotator
differences.

4.3.2 Extended quality control
While CrowdFlower provides a first-pass quality

control system for selecting annotators who are do-
ing the task in good faith and with some understand-
ing of the instructions, we wanted particularly to
select annotators who would be more likely to be
consistent on the most obvious cases without overly
constraining them. Even with the same general idea
of our intentions, some amount of variation among
the annotators is unavoidable; how do we then reject
annotations from those workers who pass Crowd-
Flower’s liberal criteria but still do not have an idea
of annotation close enough to ours?

73



Our solution was to score the annotators post hoc
by their accuracy on our minimum-effort training
gold data. Then we progressively dropped the worst
n annotators starting from n = 0 and measured the
quality of the aggregated annotations as per the fol-
lowing section.

5 Results

This task can be interpreted in two different ways:
as an annotation task and as a retrieval system. An-
notator reliability is an issue insofar as it is impor-
tant that the annotations themselves conform to a
predetermined standard. However, for the machine
learning task that is downstream in our processing
pipeline, obtaining a consistent pattern is more im-
portant than conformance to an explicit definition.
We can thus interpret the results as being the out-
put of a system whose computational hardware hap-
pens to be a crowd of humans rather than silicon,
considering that the time of the “run” is compara-
ble to many automated systems; Amazon Mechani-
cal Turk’s slogan is “artificial artificial intelligence”
for a reason.

Nevertheless, we evaluated our procedure under
both interpretations by comparing against our own
annotations in order to assess the quality of our col-
lection, aggregation, and filtering process:

1. As an annotation task: we use Cohen’s κ
between the aggregated and filtered data vs.
our annotations in the belief that higher above-
chance agreement would imply that the aggre-
gate annotation reflected collective understand-
ing of our definition of sentiment. Consider-
ing the inherently subjective nature of this task
and the interdependencies inherent in within-
sentence judgements, Cohen’s κ is not a defini-
tive proof of success or failure.

2. As a retrieval task: Relative to our own an-
notations, we use the standard information re-
trieval measures of precision, recall, and F-
measure (harmonic mean) as well as accuracy.
We merge positive and negative annotations
into a single opinion-bearing class and measure
whether we can retrieve opinion-bearing words
while minimizing words that are, in context,
not opinion-bearing relative to the given target.

(We do not merge the classes for agreement-
based evaluation as there was not much over-
lap between positive and negative classifica-
tions.) The particular relative difference be-
tween precision and recall will suggest whether
the workers had a consistent collective under-
standing of the task.

It should be noted that the MPQA and the JDPA do
not report Cohen’s κ for subjective text spans partly
for the reason we suggest above: the difficulty of as-
sessing objective agreement on a task in which sub-
jectivity is inherent and desirable. There is also a
large class imbalance problem. Both these efforts
substitute retrieval-based measures into their assess-
ment of agreement.

We annotated a randomly-selected 30 of the 200
highlight groups on our own. Those 30 had 169
annotated words of which 117 were annotated as
none, 35 as positive, and 17 as negative. The re-
sults of our process are summarized in table 1.

In the 30 highlight groups, there were 155 total
words for which a majority consensus (>50%) was
reached. 48 words were determined by us in our
own annotation to have opinion weight (positive or
negative). There are only 22 annotators who passed
CrowdFlower’s quality control.

The stringent filter on workers based on their ac-
curacy on our minimum-effort gold annotations has
a remarkable effect on the results. As we exclude
workers, the F-measure and the Cohen’s κ appear
to rise, up to a point. By definition, each exclu-
sion raises the threshold score for acceptance. As
we cross the 80% threshold, the performance of the
system drops noticeably, as the smoothing effect of
voting is lost. Opinion-bearing words also reduce
in number as the threshold rises as some highlight
groups simply have no one voting for them. We
achieve our best result in terms of Cohen’s κ on
dropping the 7 lowest workers. We achieve our high-
est precision and accuracy after dropping the 10 low-
est workers.

Between the 7th and 10th underperforming an-
notator, we find that precision starts to exceed re-
call, possibly due to the loss of retrievable words as
some highlight groups lose all their annotators. Lost
words can be recovered in another round of annota-
tion.

74



Workers excluded No. of words lost (of 48) Prec/Rec/F Acc Cohen’s κ Score threshold
(prior polarity) N/A 0.87 / 0.38 / 0.53 0.79 -0.26 N/A

0 0 0.64 / 0.71 / 0.67 0.79 0.48 0.333
1 0 0.64 / 0.71 / 0.67 0.79 0.48 0.476
3 0 0.66 / 0.73 / 0.69 0.80 0.51 0.560
5 0 0.69 / 0.73 / 0.71 0.81 0.53 0.674
7 2 0.81 / 0.76 / 0.79 0.86 0.65 0.714
10 9 0.85 / 0.74 / 0.79 0.88 0.54 0.776
12 11 0.68 / 0.68 / 0.68 0.82 0.20 0.820

Table 1: Results by number of workers excluded from the task. The prior polarity baseline comes from a lexicon by
Wilson et al. (2005) that is not specific to the IT domain.

6 Discussion

We have been able to show that crowdsourcing a
very fine-grained, domain-specific sentiment analy-
sis task with a nonstandard, application-specific def-
inition of sentiment is possible with careful user in-
terface design and mutliple layers of quality control.
Our techniques succeed on two different interpreta-
tions of the evaluation measure, and we can reclaim
any lost words by re-running the task. We used an
elaborate processing pipeline before and after anno-
tation in order to accomplish this. In this section, we
discuss some aspects of the pipeline that led to the
success of this technique.

6.1 Quality

There are three major aspects of our procedure that
directly affect the quality of our results: the first-
pass quality control in CrowdFlower, the majority-
vote aggregation, and the stringent post hoc filtering
of workers. These interact in particular ways.

The first-pass quality control interacts with the
stringent filter in that even if it were possible to
have run the stringent filter on CrowdFlower itself,
it would probably not have been a good idea. Al-
though we intended the stringent filter to be a min-
imum effort, it would have rejected workers too
quickly. It is technically possible to implement the
stringent filtering directly without the CrowdFlower
built-in control, but that would have entailed spend-
ing an unpredictable amount more money paying for
additional unwanted annotations from workers.

Furthermore, the majority-vote aggregation re-
quires that there not be too few annotators; our re-
sults show that filtering the workers too aggressively
harms the aggregation’s smoothing effect. The les-
son we take from this is that it can be beneficial to

accept some amount of “bad” with the “good” in im-
plementing a very subjective crowdsourcing task.

6.2 Design decisions
Our successful technique for identifying opinionated
words was developed after multiple iterations using
other approaches which did not succeed in them-
selves but produced outputs that were amenable to
refinement, and so these techniques became part of
a larger pipeline. However, the reasons why they did
not succeed on their own are illustrative of some of
the challenges in both fine-grained domain-specific
opinion annotation and in annotation via crowd-
sourcing under highly subjective conditions.

6.2.1 Direct annotation
We originally intended to stop with the trained an-

notation we described in 4.1.1, but collecting opin-
ionated sentences in this corpus turned out to be very
slow. Despite repeated training rounds, the annota-
tors had a tendency to miss a large number of sen-
tences that the authors found to be relevant. On dis-
cussion with the annotators, it turned out that the
variable length of the articles made it easy to miss
relevant sentences, particularly in the long feature
articles likely to contain opinionated language—a
kind of “needle-in-a-haystack” problem.

Even worse, however, the annotators were vari-
ably conservative about what constituted an opinion.
One annotator produced far fewer annotations than
the other one—but the majority of her annotations
were also annotated by the other one. Discussion
with the annotators revealed that one of them simply
had a tighter definition of what constituted an opin-
ion. Attempts to define opinion explicitly for them
still led to a situations in which one was far more
conservative than the other.

75



6.2.2 Cascaded crowdsourcing technique

Insofar as we were looking for training data for
use in downstream machine learning techniques,
getting uniform sentence-by-sentence coverage of
the corpus was not necessary. There are 77K sen-
tences in this corpus which mention the relevant IT
concepts; even if only a fraction of them mention the
IT concepts with opinionated language, we would
still have a potentially rich source of training data.

Nevertheless the direct annotation with trained
annotators provided data for selecting candidate sen-
tences for a more rapid annotation. We used the
process in section 4.1.2 and chose the top-ranked
sentences. Then we constructed a task design that
divided the annotation into two phases. In the first
phase, for each candidate sentence, we ask the anno-
tator whether or not the sentence contains opinion-
ated language about the mentioned IT concept. (We
permit “unsure” answers.)

In the second phase, for each candidate sentence
for which a majority vote of annotators decided that
the sentence contained a relevant opinion, we run
a second task asking whether particular words (se-
lected as per section 4.1.3) were words directly in-
volved in the expression of the opinion.

We tested this process with the 90 top-ranked
sentences. Four individuals in our laboratory an-
swered the “yes/no/unsure” question of the first
phase. However, when we took their pairwise Co-
hen’s κ score, no two got more than approximately
0.4. We also took majority votes of each subset of
three annotators and found the Cohen’s κ between
them and the fourth. The highest score was 0.7, but
the score was not stable, and we could not trust the
results enough to move onto the second phase.

We also ran this first phase through Amazon Me-
chanical Turk. It turned out that it was far too easy
to cheat on this yes/no question, and some workers
simply answered “yes” or “no” all the time. Agree-
ment scores of a Turker majority vote vs. one of the
authors turned out to yield a Cohen’s κ of 0.05—
completely unacceptable.

Discussion with the in-laboratory annotators sug-
gested the roots of the problem: it was the same
problem as with the direct Atlas.ti annotation we re-
ported in the previous section. It was very difficult
for them to agree on what it meant for a sentence to

contain an opinion expressed about a particular con-
cept. Opinions about the nature of opinion ranged
from very “conservative” to very “liberal.” Even
explicit definition with examples led annotators to
reach very different conclusions. Furthermore, the
longer the annotators thought about it, the more con-
fused and uncertain they were about the criterion.

What is an opinion can itself be a matter of opin-
ion. It became clear that without very tight review
of annotation and careful task design, asking users
an explicit yes/no question about whether a particu-
lar concept has a particular opinion mentioned in a
particular sentence has the potential to induce over-
thinking by annotators, despite our variations on the
task. The difficulty may also lead to a tendency to
cheat. Crowdsourcing allows us to make use of non-
expert labour on difficult tasks if we can break the
tasks down into simple questions and aggregate non-
expert responses, but we needed a somewhat more
complex task design in order to eliminate the diffi-
culty of the task and the tendency to cheat.

7 Future work

Foremost among the avenues for future work is ex-
perimentation with other vote aggregration and post
hoc filtering schemes. For example, one type of ex-
periment could be the reweighting of votes by an-
notator quality rather than the wholesale dropping
of annotators. Another could involve the use of
general-purpose sentiment analysis lexica to bias the
vote aggregation in the manner of work in sentiment
domain transfer (Tan et al., 2007).

This work also points to the potential for crowd-
sourcing in computational linguistics applications
beyond opinion mining. Our task is a sentiment-
specific instance of a large class of syntactic relat-
edness problems that may suitable for crowdsourc-
ing. One practical application would be in obtaining
training data for coreference detection. Another one
may be in the establishment of empirical support for
theories about syntactic structure.

Acknowledgements

This paper is based on work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under grant IIS-0729459.

76



References
Pei-Yun Hsueh, Prem Melville, and Vikas Sindhwani.

2009. Data quality from crowdsourcing: a study of
annotation selection criteria. In Proceedings of the
NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop on Active Learning for
Natural Language Processing, HLT ’09, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jason S. Kessler, Miriam Eckert, Lyndsay Clark, and
Nicolas Nicolov. 2010. The 2010 ICWSM JDPA sent-
ment corpus for the automotive domain. In 4th Int’l
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media Data
Workshop Challenge (ICWSM-DWC 2010).

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2006. Extracting opin-
ions, opinion holders, and topics expressed in online
news media text. In SST ’06: Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text, pages 1–8,
Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Moshe Koppel and Jonathan Schler. 2006. The im-
portance of neutral examples for learning sentiment.
Computational Intelligence, 22(2).

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 2(1-2).

Everett M. Rogers. 2003. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th
Edition. Free Press.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Swapna Somasundaran, and Janyce
Wiebe. 2008. Finding the sources and targets of
subjective expressions. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid
Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odjik,
Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceed-
ings of the Sixth International Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’08), Marrakech, Morocco. Eu-
ropean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Asad B. Sayeed, Timothy J. Meyer, Hieu C. Nguyen,
Olivia Buzek, and Amy Weinberg. 2010a. Crowd-
sourcing the evaluation of a domain-adapted named
entity recognition system. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Asad B. Sayeed, Hieu C. Nguyen, Timothy J. Meyer, and
Amy Weinberg. 2010b. Expresses-an-opinion-about:
using corpus statistics in an information extraction ap-
proach to opinion mining. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, COLING ’10.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and An-
drew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast—but is it good?:
evaluating non-expert annotations for natural language
tasks. In EMNLP 2008.

Songbo Tan, Gaowei Wu, Huifeng Tang, and Xueqi
Cheng. 2007. A novel scheme for domain-transfer

problem in the context of sentiment analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference on Con-
ference on information and knowledge management,
CIKM ’07, New York, NY, USA.

Theresa Wilson and Janyce Wiebe. 2005. Annotating
attributions and private states. In CorpusAnno ’05:
Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus
Annotations II, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In HLT/EMNLP.

77


