










































Framework for Abstractive Summarization using Text-to-Text Generation


Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Generation, pages 64–73,

Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 64–73,
Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Framework for Abstractive Summarization using Text-to-Text Generation

Pierre-Etienne Genest, Guy Lapalme
RALI-DIRO

Université de Montréal
P.O. Box 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville

Montréal, Québec
Canada, H3C 3J7

{genestpe,lapalme}@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract

We propose a new, ambitious framework for
abstractive summarization, which aims at se-
lecting the content of a summary not from sen-
tences, but from an abstract representation of
the source documents. This abstract repre-
sentation relies on the concept of Information
Items (INIT), which we define as the smallest
element of coherent information in a text or a
sentence. Our framework differs from previ-
ous abstractive summarization models in re-
quiring a semantic analysis of the text. We
present a first attempt made at developing a
system from this framework, along with eval-
uation results for it from TAC 2010. We also
present related work, both from within and
outside of the automatic summarization do-
main.

1 Introduction

Summarization approaches can generally be cate-
gorized as extractive or abstractive (Mani, 2001).
Most systems developped for the main international
conference on text summarization, the Text Analy-
sis Conference (TAC) (Owczarzak and Dang, 2010),
predominantly use sentence extraction, including all
the top-ranked systems, which make only minor
post-editing of extracted sentences (Conroy et al.,
2010) (Gillick et al., 2009) (Genest et al., 2008)
(Chen et al., 2008).

Abstractive methods require a deeper analysis of
the text and the ability to generate new sentences,
which provide an obvious advantage in improving
the focus of a summary, reducing its redundancy

and keeping a good compression rate. According
to a recent study (Genest et al., 2009b), there is an
empirical limit intrinsic to pure extraction, as com-
pared to abstraction. For these reasons, as well as for
the technical and theoretical challenges involved, we
were motivated to come up with an abstractive sum-
marization model.

Recent abstractive approaches, such as sentence
compression (Knight and Marcu, 2000) (Cohn and
Lapata, 2009) and sentence fusion (Barzilay and
McKeown, 2005) or revision (Tanaka et al., 2009)
have focused on rewriting techniques, without con-
sideration for a complete model which would in-
clude a transition to an abstract representation for
content selection. We believe that a “fully abstrac-
tive” approach requires a separate process for the
analysis of the text that serves as an intermediate
step before the generation of sentences. This way,
content selection can be applied to an abstract repre-
sentation rather than to original sentences or gener-
ated sentences.

We propose the concept of Information Items
(INIT) to help define the abstract representation. An
INIT is the smallest element of coherent informa-
tion in a text or a sentence. It can be something as
simple as some entity’s property or as complex as a
whole description of an event or action. We believe
that such a representation could eventually allow for
directly answering queries or guided topic aspects,
by generating sentences targeted to address specific
information needs.

Figure 1 compares the workflow of our approach
with other possibilities. Extractive summarization
consists of selecting sentences directly from the

64



Source
Documents Summary

Information Items
(       )

Short
Sentences

Summary
 Items

Compressed
Sentences Themes

InIt Selection

Sentence
Selection

Compression

InIt
Retrieval Generation

Sentence Compression Sentence Fusion

Abstractive
Summarization

Extractive
Summarization

Fusion

InItN T

InItN T

InItN T

Figure 1: Workflow diagram of our suggested approach for abstractive summarization, compared to pure extractive
summarization, sentence compression, and sentence fusion for summarization. The dashed line represents the simpli-
fied framework used in our first attempt at abstractive summarization (see section 2.4).

source documents and generating a summary from
them. Sentence compression first compresses the
sentences and chooses from those and the source
documents’ sentences to form a summary; it may
also be completed in the reverse order, which is
to select sentences from the source documents and
then compress them for the summary. Sentence
fusion first identifies themes (clusters of similar
sentences) from the source documents and selects
which themes are important for the summary (a pro-
cess similar to the sentence selection of centroid-
based extractive summarization methods (Radev et
al., 2004)) and then generates a representative sen-
tence for each theme by sentence fusion.

Our proposed abstractive summarization ap-
proach is fundamentally different because the selec-

tion of content is on Information Items rather than on
sentences. The text-to-text generation aspect is also
changed. Instead of purely going from whole sen-
tences to generated sentences directly, there is now
a text planning phase that occurs at the conceptual
level, like in Natural Language Generation (NLG).

This approach has the advantage of generating
typically short, information-focused sentences to
produce a coherent, information rich, and less re-
dundant summary. However, the difficulties are
great: it is difficult for a machine to properly extract
information from sentences at an abstract level, and
text generated from noisy data will often be flawed.
Generating sentences that do not all sound similar
and generic is an additional challenge that we have
for now circumvented by re-using the original sen-

65



tence structure to a large extent, which is a type of
text-to-text generation. Even considering those diffi-
culties, we believe that efforts in abstractive summa-
rization constitute the future of summarization re-
search, and thus that it is worthwhile to work to-
wards that end.

In this paper, we present our new abstractive sum-
marization framework in section 2. Section 3 de-
scribes and analyses our first attempt at using this
framework, for the TAC 2010 multi-document news
summarization task, followed by the competition’s
results in section 4. In this first attempt, we simpli-
fied the framework of section 2 to obtain early re-
sults which can help us as we move forward in this
project. Related work is discussed in section 5, and
we conclude in section 6.

2 Abstractive Summarization Framework

Our proposed framework for fully abstractive sum-
marization is illustrated in figure 1. This section dis-
cusses how each step could be accomplished.

2.1 INIT Retrieval
An Information Item is the smallest element of co-
herent information in a text or a sentence. This in-
tentionally vague definition leaves the implementa-
tion details to be decided based on resources avail-
able. The goal is to identify all entities in the text,
their properties, predicates between them, and char-
acteristics of the predicates. This seemingly un-
reachable goal, equivalent to machine reading, can
be limited to the extent that we only need INITs to
be precise and accurate enough to generate a sum-
mary from them.

The implementation of INITs is critical, as every-
thing will depend on the abstract information avail-
able. Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) and predicate-
logic analysis of text are two potential candidates for
developing INIT Retrieval. Word-sense disambigua-
tion, co-reference resolution and an analysis of word
similarity seem important as well to complement the
semantic analysis of the text.

2.2 INIT Selection
Given an analysis of the source documents that leads
to a list of INITs, we may now proceed to select
content for the summary. Frequency-based mod-
els, such as those used for extractive summarization,

could be applied to INIT selection instead of sen-
tence selection. This would result in favoring the
most frequently occurring entities, predicates, and
properties.

INIT selection could also easily be applied to
tasks such as query-driven or guided summariza-
tion, in which the user information need is known
and the summarization system attempts to address it.
With smaller building blocks (INITs rather than sen-
tences), it would be much easier to tailor summaries
so that they include only relevant information.

2.3 Generation
Planning, summary planning in our case, provides
the structure of the generated text. Most INITs do not
lead to full sentences, and need to be combined into
a sentence structure before being realized as text.
Global decisions of the INIT selection step now lead
to local decisions as to how to present the informa-
tion to the reader, and in what order.

Text generation patterns can be used, based on
some knowledge about the topic or the information
needs of the user. One could use heuristic rules with
different priority levels or pre-generated summary
scenarios, to help decide how to structure sentences
and order the summary. We believe that machine
learning could be used to learn good summary struc-
tures as well.

Once the detailed planning is completed, the sum-
mary is realized with coherent syntax and punctu-
ation. This phase may involve text-to-text genera-
tion, since the source documents’ sentences provide
a good starting point to generate sentences with var-
ied and complex structures. The work of (Barzilay
and McKeown, 2005) on sentence fusion shows an
example of re-using the same syntactical structure of
a source sentence to create a new one with a slightly
different meaning.

2.4 First Attempt at Abstractive
Summarization

The three-step plan that we laid down is very hard,
and instead of tackling it head on, we decided to fo-
cus on certain aspects of it for now. We followed
a simplified version of our framework, illustrated
by the dashed line in Figure 1. It defers the con-
tent selection step to the selection of generated short
sentences, rather than actually doing it abstractly as

66



Original Sentence The Cypriot airliner that crashed in Greece may have suffered a sudden loss of cabin
pressure at high altitude, causing temperatures and oxygen levels to plummet and leaving everyone
aboard suffocating and freezing to death, experts said Monday.

Information Items
1. airliner – crash – null (Greece, August 15, 2005)
2. airliner – suffer – loss (Greece, August 15, 2005)
3. loss – cause – null (Greece, August 15, 2005)
4. loss – leave – null (Greece, August 15, 2005)

Generated Sentences
1. A Cypriot airliner crashed.
2. A Cypriot airliner may have suffered a sudden loss of cabin pressure at high altitude.
3. A sudden loss of cabin pressure at high altitude caused temperatures and oxygen levels to plum-

met.
4. A sudden loss of cabin pressure at high altitude left everyone aboard suffocating and freezing to

death.

Selected Generated Sentence as it appears in the summary
1. On August 15, 2005, a Cypriot airliner crashed in Greece.

Original Sentence At least 25 bears died in the greater Yellowstone area last year, including eight breeding-
age females killed by people.

Information Items
1. bear – die – null (greater Yellowstone area, last year)
2. person – kill – female (greater Yellowstone area, last year)

Generated Sentences
1. 25 bears died.
2. Some people killed eight breeding-age females.

Selected Generated Sentence as it appears in the summary
1. Last year, 25 bears died in greater Yellowstone area.

Figure 2: Two example sentences and their processing by our 2010 system. In the summary, the date and location
associated with an INIT are added to its generated sentence.

planned. The summary planning has to occur after
generation and selection, in a Summary Generation
step not shown explicitly on the workflow.

We have restricted our implementation of INITs to
dated and located subject–verb–object(SVO) triples,
thus relying purely on syntactical knowledge, rather
than including the semantics required for our frame-

work. Dates and locations receive a special treat-
ment because we were interested in news summa-
rization for this first attempt, and news articles are
factual and give a lot of importance to date and lo-
cation.

We did not try to combine more than one INIT in
the same sentence, relying instead on short, to-the-

67



point sentences, with one INIT each. Figure 2 shows
two examples of sentences that were generated from
a source document sentence using the simplified ab-
stractive summarization framework.

At first glance, the simplified version of our ap-
proach for generating sentences may seem similar
to sentence compression. However, it differs in
three important ways from the definition of the task
of compression usually cited (Knight and Marcu,
2000):

• Our generated sentences intend to cover only
one item of information and not all the impor-
tant information of the original sentence.
• An input sentence may have several generated

sentences associated to it, one for each of its
INITs, where it normally has only one com-
pressed sentence.
• Generated sentences sometimes include words

that do not appear in the original sentence (like
’some’ in the second example), whereas sen-
tence compression is usually limited to word
deletion.

3 Abstractive Summarization at TAC 2010

Our first attempt at full abstractive summarization
took place in the context of the TAC 2010 multi-
document news summarization task. This section
describes briefly each module of our system, while
(Genest and Lapalme, 2010) provides the implemen-
tation details.

3.1 INIT Retrieval
An INIT is defined as a dated and located subject–
verb–object triple, relying mostly on syntactical
analyses from the MINIPAR parser (Lin, 1998) and
linguistic annotations from the GATE information
extraction engine (Cunningham et al., 2002).

Every verb encountered forms the basis of a can-
didate INIT. The verb’s subject and object are ex-
tracted, if they exist, from the parse tree. Each INIT
is also tagged with a date and a location, if appropri-
ate.

Many candidate INITs are rejected, for various
reasons: the difficulty of generating a grammatical
and meaningful sentence from them, the observed
unreliability of parses that include them, or because
it would lead to incorrect INITs most of the time.

The rejection rules were created manually and cover
a number of syntactical situations. Cases in which
bad sentences can be generated remain, of course,
even though about half the candidates are rejected.
Examples of rejected Inits include those with verbs
in infinitive form and those that are part of a con-
ditional clause. Discarding a lot of available infor-
mation is a significant limitation of this first attempt,
which we will address as the first priority in the fu-
ture.

3.2 Generation
From each INIT retrieved, we directly generate a
new sentence, instead of first selecting INITs and
planning the summary. This is accomplished using
the original parse tree of the sentence from which
the INIT is taken, and the NLG realizer SimpleNLG
(Gatt and Reiter, 2009) to generate an actual sen-
tence. Sample generated sentences are illustrated in
Figure 2.

This process – a type of text-to-text generation –
can be described as translating the parts that we want
to keep from the dependency tree provided by the
parser, into a format that the realizer understands.
This way we keep track of what words play what
role in the generated sentence and we select directly
which parts of a sentence appear in a generated sen-
tence for the summary. All of this is driven by the
previous identification of INITs. We do not include
any words identified as a date or a location in the
sentence generation process, they will be generated
if needed at the summary generation step, section
3.4.

Sentence generation follows the following steps:

• Generate a Noun Phrase (NP) to represent the
subject if present
• Generate a NP to represent the object if present
• Generate a NP to represent the indirect object

if present
• Generate a complement for the verb if one is

present and only if there was no object
• Generate the Verb Phrase (VP) and link all the

components together, ignoring anything else
present in the original sentence

NP Generation
Noun phrase generation is based on the subtree of

its head word in the dependency parse tree. The head

68



in the subtree becomes the head of the NP and chil-
dren in its parse subtree are added based on manual
rules that determine which children are realized and
how.

Verb Complement Generation
When an INIT has no object, then we attempt to

find another complement instead, in case the verb
would have no interesting meaning without a com-
plement. The first verb modifier that follows it in the
sentence order is used, including for example prepo-
sitional phrases and infinitive clauses.

VP Generation
Finally, the verb phrases are generated from each

verb and some of its children. The NPs generated for
the subject, object and indirect object are added, as
well as the verb complement if it was generated. If
there is an object but no subject, the VP is set to pas-
sive, otherwise the active form is always used. The
tense (past or present) of the VP is set to the tense of
the verb in the original sentence, and most modifiers
like auxiliaries and negation are conserved.

3.3 Sentence Selection

To determine which of the generated sentences
should be used in the summary, we would have liked
to choose from among the INITs directly. For exam-
ple, selecting the most frequent INIT, or INITs con-
taining the most frequent subject-verb pair seem rea-
sonable at first. However, during development, no
such naive implementation of selecting INITs pro-
vided satisfactory results, because of the low fre-
quency of those constructs, and the difficulty to
compare them semantically in our current level of
abstraction. Thus this critical content selection step
occurs after the sentence generation process. Only
the generated sentences are considered for the sen-
tence selection process; original sentences from the
source documents are ignored.

We compute a score based on the frequencies of
the terms in the sentences generated from the INITs
and select sentences that way. Document frequency
(DF) – the number of documents that include an en-
tity in its original text – of the lemmas included in
the generated sentence is the main scoring criterion.
This criterion is commonly used for summaries of
groups of similar documents. The generated sen-

tences are ranked based on their average DF (the
sum of the DF of all the unique lemmas in the sen-
tence, divided by the total number of words in the
sentence). Lemmas in a stop list and lemmas that are
included in a sentence already selected in the sum-
mary have their DF reduced to 0, to avoid favoring
frequent empty words, and to diminish redundancy
in the summary.

3.4 Summary Generation

A final summary generation step is required in this
first attempt, to account for the planning stage and
to incorporate dates and locations for the generated
sentences.

Sentence selection provides a ranking of the gen-
erated sentences and a number of sentences inten-
tionally in excess of the size limit of the summary
is first selected. Those sentences are ordered by the
date of their INIT when it can be determined. Oth-
erwise, the day before the date of publication of the
article that included the INIT is used instead. All
generated sentences with the same known date are
grouped in a single coordinated sentence. The date
is included directly as a pre-modifier “On date,” at
the beginning of the coordination.

Each INIT with a known location has its generated
sentence appended with a post-modifier “in loca-
tion”, except if that location has already been men-
tioned in a previous INIT of the summary.

At the end of this process, the size of the summary
is always above the size limit. We remove the least
relevant generated sentence and restart the summary
generation process. We keep taking away the least
relevant generated sentence in a greedy way, until
the length of the summary is under the size limit.
This naive solution to never exceed the limit was
chosen because we originally believed that our INITs
always lead to short generated sentences. However,
it turns out that some of the generated summaries
are a bit too short because some sentences that were
removed last were quite long.

4 Results and Discussion

Here, we present and discuss the results obtained by
our system in the TAC 2010 summarization system
evaluation. We only show results for the evaluation
of standard multi-document summaries; there was

69



also an update task, but we did not develop a spe-
cific module for it. After ranking at or near the top
with extractive approaches in past years (Genest et
al., 2008) (Genest et al., 2009a), we expected a large
drop in our evaluation results with our first attempt
at abstractive summarization. In general, they are
indeed on the low side, but mostly with regards to
linguistic quality.

As shown in Table 1, the linguistic quality of our
summaries was very low, in the bottom 5 of 43 par-
ticipating automatic systems. This low linguistic
score is understandable, because this was our first
try at text generation and abstractive summarization,
whereas the other systems that year used sentence
extraction, with at most minor modifications made
to the extracted sentences.

The cause of this low score is mostly our method
for text generation, which still needs to be refined
in several ways. The way we identify INITs, as we
have already discussed, is not yet developped fully.
Even in the context of the methodology outlined in
section 3, and specifically 3.2, many improvements
can still be made. Errors specific to the current state
of our approach came from two major sources: in-
correct parses, and insufficiently detailed and some-
times inappropriate rules for “translating” a part of
a parse into generated text. A better parser would
be helpful here and we will try other alternatives for
dependency parsing in future work.

Pyr. Ling. Q. Overall R.
AS 0.315 2.174 2.304
Avg 0.309 2.820 2.576
Best 0.425 3.457 3.174
Models 0.785 4.910 4.760
AS Rank 29 39 29

Table 1: Scores of pyramid, linguistic quality and overall
responsiveness for our Abstractive Summarization (AS)
system, the average of automatic systems (Avg), the best
score of any automatic system (Best), and the average
of the human-written models (Models). The rank is com-
puted from amongst the 43 automatic summarization sys-
tems that participated in TAC 2010.

Although the linguistic quality was very low,
our approach was given relatively good Pyramid
(Nenkova et al., 2007) (a content metric) and overall
responsiveness scores, near the average of automatic

!"#"$%&'&()"* $%+,-'
./"#"$%0'&0

$%$$$

$%'$$

+%$$$

+%'$$

,%$$$

,%'$$

(%$$$

(%'$$

$%$$$ $%'$$ +%$$$ +%'$$ ,%$$$ ,%'$$ (%$$$ (%'$$ 1%$$$

!
"#
$%
&&'
(#

)*
+,

)-
"#
,#

))

.-,/0-)1-2'30%&-14

AS'
AS

!"#"$%&''()"*"+%,'-
./"#"0%-+-1

0%000

0%,00

+%000

+%,00

1%000

1%,00

$%000

$%,00

(%000

0%000 0%0,0 0%+00 0%+,0 0%100 0%1,0 0%$00 0%$,0 0%(00 0%(,0
!"
#$
%"
&'
"(
)*
%+

,"'
-

.-/+0"1

AS AS'

Figure 3: Scatter plots of overall responsiveness with re-
spect to linguistic quality (top) and pyramid score with
respect to linguistic quality (bottom), for all the systems
competing in TAC 2010. The two runs identified with
an arrow, AS and AS’, were two similar versions of our
abstractive summarization approach.

systems. This indicates that, even in a rough first try
where content selection was not the main focus, our
method is capable of producing summaries with rea-
sonably good content and of reasonably good over-
all quality. There is a correlation between linguis-
tic quality and the other two manual scores for most
runs, but, as we can see in Figure 3, the two runs
that we submitted stand out, even though linguistic
quality plays a large role in establishing the overall
responsiveness scores. We believe this to be rep-
resentative of the great difference of our approach
compared to extraction. By extension, following the
trend, we hope that increasing the linguistic quality
of our approach to the level of the top systems would
yield content and overall scores above their current
ones.

The type of summaries that our approach pro-
duces might also explain why it receives good con-
tent and overall scores, even with poor linguistic

70



quality. The generated sentences tend to be short,
and although some few may have bad grammar or
even little meaning, the fact that we can pack a lot of
them shows that INITs give a lot more flexibility to
the content selection module than whole sentences,
that only few can fit in a small size limit such as
100 words. Large improvements are to be expected,
since this system was developped over only a few
months, and we haven’t implemented the full scale
of our framework described in section 2.

5 Related Work

We have already discussed alternative approaches to
abstractive summarization in the introduction. This
section focuses on other work dealing with the tech-
niques we used.

Subject–Verb–Object (SVO) extraction is not
new. Previous work by (Rusu et al., 2007) deals
specifically with what the authors call triplet extrac-
tion, which is the same as SVO extraction. They
have tried a variety of parsers, including MINIPAR,
and they build parse trees to extract SVOs simi-
larly to us. They applied this technique to extrac-
tive summarization in (Rusu et al., 2009) by building
what the authors call semantic graphs, derived from
triplets, and then using said graphs to identify the
most interesting sentences for the summary. This
purpose is not the same as ours, and triplet extrac-
tion was conducted quite superficially (and thus in-
cluded a lot of noise), whereas we used several rules
to clean up the SVOs that would serve as INITs.

Rewriting sentences one idea at a time, as we
have done in this work, is also related to the field
of text simplification. Text simplification has been
associated with techniques that deal not only with
helping readers with reading disabilities, but also to
help NLP systems (Chandrasekar et al., 1996). The
work of (Beigman Klebanov et al., 2004) simplifies
sentences by using MINIPAR parses as a starting
point, in a process similar to ours, for the purpose
of helping information-seeking applications in their
own task. (Vickrey and Koller, 2008) applies similar
techniques, using a sequence of rule-based simpli-
fications of sentences, to preprocess documents for
Semantic Role Labeling. (Siddharthan et al., 2004)
uses shallow techniques for syntactical simplifica-
tion of text by removing relative clauses and apposi-

tives, before running a sentence clustering algorithm
for multi-document summarization.

The kind of text-to-text generation involved in our
work is related to approaches in paraphrasing (An-
droutsopoulos and Malakasiotis, 2010). Paraphrase
generation produces sentences with similar mean-
ings, but paraphrase extraction from texts requires
a certain level of analysis. In our case, we are in-
terested both in reformulating specific aspects of a
sentence, but also in identifying parts of sentences
(INITs) with similar meanings, for content selection.
We believe that there will be more and more similar-
ities between our work and the field of paraphrasing
as we improve on our model and techniques.

6 Conclusion

We have proposed an ambitious new way of look-
ing at abstractive summarization, with our proposed
framework. We believe that this framework aims at
the real goals of automatic summarization – control-
ling the content and structure of the summary. This
requires both an ability to correctly analyze text, and
an ability to generate text. We have described a first
attempt at fully abstractive summarization that relies
on text-to-text generation.

We find the early results of TAC 2010 quite sat-
isfactory. Receiving a low linguistic quality score
was expected, and we are satisfied with average per-
formance in content and in overall responsiveness.
It means that our text-to-text generation was good
enough to produce understandable summaries.

Our next step will be to go deeper into the analysis
of sentences. Generating sentences should rely less
on the original sentence structure and more on the
information meant to be transmitted. Thus, we want
to move away from the current way we generate sen-
tences, which is too similar to rule-based sentence
compression. At the core of moving toward full ab-
straction, we need to redefine INITs so that they can
be manipulated (compared, grouped, realized as sen-
tences, etc.) more effectively. We intend to use tools
and techniques that will enable us to find words and
phrases of similar meanings, and to allow the gener-
ation of a sentence that is an aggregate of informa-
tion found in several source sentences. In this way,
we would be moving away from purely syntactical
analysis and toward the use of semantics.

71



References

Ion Androutsopoulos and Prodromos Malakasiotis.
2010. A survey of paraphrasing and textual entailment
methods. J. Artif. Int. Res., 38:135–187, May.

Regina Barzilay and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2005. Sen-
tence fusion for multidocument news summarization.
Computational Linguistics, 31(3):297–328.

Beata Beigman Klebanov, Kevin Knight, and Daniel
Marcu. 2004. Text simplification for information-
seeking applications. In Robert Meersman and Zahir
Tari, editors, Proceedings of Ontologies, Dabases, and
Applications of Semantics (ODBASE) International
Conference, volume 3290 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 735–747, Agia Napa, Cyprus,
October. Springer.

R. Chandrasekar, Christine Doran, and B. Srinivas. 1996.
Motivations and methods for text simplification. In
Proceedings of the 16th conference on Computational
linguistics - Volume 2, COLING ’96, pages 1041–
1044, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Shouyuan Chen, Yuanming Yu, Chong Long, Feng Jin,
Lijing Qin, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan Zhu. 2008.
Tsinghua University at the Summarization Track of
TAC 2008. In Proceedings of the First Text Analysis
Conference, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA. National
Institute of Standards and Technology.

Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Sentence
compression as tree transduction. J. Artif. Int. Res.,
34(1):637–674.

John M. Conroy, Judith D. Schlesinger, Peter A. Rankel,
and Dianne P. O’Leary. 2010. CLASSY 2010: Sum-
marization and metrics. In Proceedings of the Third
Text Analysis Conference, Gaithersburg, Maryland,
USA. National Institute of Standards and Technology.

Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. GATE:
A framework and graphical development environment
for robust NLP tools and applications. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: a Re-
alisation Engine for Practical Applications. In ENLG
’09: Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation, pages 90–93, Morris-
town, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Pierre-Etienne Genest and Guy Lapalme. 2010. Text
generation for abstractive summarization. In Proceed-
ings of the Third Text Analysis Conference, Gaithers-
burg, Maryland, USA. National Institute of Standards
and Technology.

Pierre-Etienne Genest, Guy Lapalme, Luka Nerima, and
Eric Wehrli. 2008. A Symbolic Summarizer for the
Update Task of TAC 2008. In Proceedings of the
First Text Analysis Conference, Gaithersburg, Mary-
land, USA. National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology.

Pierre-Etienne Genest, Guy Lapalme, Luka Nerima, and
Eric Wehrli. 2009a. A symbolic summarizer with 2
steps of sentence selection for TAC 2009. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Text Analysis Conference, Gaithers-
burg, Maryland, USA. National Institute of Standards
and Technology.

Pierre-Etienne Genest, Guy Lapalme, and Mehdi Yousfi-
Monod. 2009b. HexTac: the Creation of a Manual
Extractive Run. In Proceedings of the Second Text
Analysis Conference, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
National Institute of Standards and Technology.

David Gillick, Benoit Favre, Dilek-Hakkani Tür, Berndt
Bohnet, Yang Liu, and Shasha Xie. 2009. The
ICSI/UTD Summarization System at TAC 2009. In
Proceedings of the Second Text Analysis Conference,
Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA. National Institute of
Standards and Technology.

Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2000. Statistics-
based summarization - step one: Sentence compres-
sion. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth National Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence and Twelfth Confer-
ence on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 703–710. AAAI Press.

Dekang Lin. 1998. Dependency-based evaluation of
minipar. In Proc. Workshop on the Evaluation of Pars-
ing Systems, Granada.

Inderjeet Mani. 2001. Automatic Summarization, vol-
ume 3 of Natural Language Processing. John Ben-
jamins Publishing Company.

Ani Nenkova, Rebecca Passonneau, and Kathleen McK-
eown. 2007. The pyramid method: Incorporating hu-
man content selection variation in summarization eval-
uation. ACM Trans. Speech Lang. Process., 4, May.

Karolina Owczarzak and Hoa Trang Dang. 2010.
Overview of the TAC 2009 summarization
track. In Proceedings of the Third Text Analy-
sis Conference, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
National Institute of Standards and Technology.
http://www.nist.gov/tac/publications/.

Dragomir R. Radev, Hongyan Jing, Malgorzata Stys, and
Daniel Tam. 2004. Centroid-based summarization
of multiple documents. Information Processing and
Management, 40(6):919–938.

Delia Rusu, Lorand Dali, Blaz Fortuna, Marko Gro-
belnik, and Dunja Mladenic. 2007. Triplet extrac-
tion from sentences. Proceedings of the 10th Inter-
national Multiconference “Information Society – IS
2007”, A:218–222, October.

72



Delia Rusu, Blaz Fortuna, Marko Grobelnik, and Dunja
Mladenic. 2009. Semantic graphs derived from
triplets with application in document summarization.
Informatica, 33, October.

Advaith Siddharthan, Ani Nenkova, and Kathleen McK-
eown. 2004. Syntactic simplification for improving
content selection in multi-document summarization.
In Proceedings of the 20th international conference
on Computational Linguistics, COLING ’04, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Hideki Tanaka, Akinori Kinoshita, Takeshi Kobayakawa,
Tadashi Kumano, and Naoto Kato. 2009. Syntax-
driven sentence revision for broadcast news summa-
rization. In Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Lan-
guage Generation and Summarisation, UCNLG+Sum
’09, pages 39–47, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

David Vickrey and Daphne Koller. 2008. Sentence
Simplification for Semantic Role Labeling. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 344–352, Columbus,
Ohio, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

73


