



















































Towards a Data Model for the Universal Corpus


Towards a Data Model for the Universal Corpus

Steven Abney
University of Michigan
abney@umich.edu

Steven Bird
University of Melbourne and
University of Pennsylvania
sbird@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

We describe the design of a comparable cor-
pus that spans all of the world’s languages and
facilitates large-scale cross-linguistic process-
ing. This Universal Corpus consists of text
collections aligned at the document and sen-
tence level, multilingual wordlists, and a small
set of morphological, lexical, and syntactic an-
notations. The design encompasses submis-
sion, storage, and access. Submission pre-
serves the integrity of the work, allows asyn-
chronous updates, and facilitates scholarly ci-
tation. Storage employs a cloud-hosted file-
store containing normalized source data to-
gether with a database of texts and annota-
tions. Access is permitted to the filestore, the
database, and an application programming in-
terface. All aspects of the Universal Corpus
are open, and we invite community participa-
tion in its design and implementation, and in
supplying and using its data.

1 Introduction

We have previously proposed a community dataset
of annotated text spanning a very large number of
languages, with consistent annotation and format
that enables automatic cross-linguistic processing
on an unprecedented scale (Abney and Bird, 2010).
Here we set out the data model in detail, and invite
members of the computational linguistics commu-
nity to begin work on the first version of the dataset.

The targeted annotation generalizes over three
widely-used kinds of data: (1) simple bitexts, that
is, tokenized texts and their translations, which are

widely used for training machine translation sys-
tems; (2) interlinear glossed text (IGT), which adds
lemmas, morphological features and parts of speech,
and is the de facto standard in the documentary lin-
guistics literature; and (3) dependency parses, which
add a head pointer and relation name for each word,
and are gaining popularity as representations of syn-
tactic structure. We do not expect all texts to have
equal richness of annotation; rather, these are the
degrees of annotation we wish to explicitly accom-
modate. Keeping the annotation lightweight is a pri-
mary desideratum.

We strive for inclusion of as many languages as
possible. We are especially interested in languages
outside of the group of 30 or so for which there
already exist non-trivial electronic resources. Op-
timistically, we aim for a universal corpus, in the
sense of one that covers a widely representative set
of the world’s languages and supports inquiry into
universal linguistics and development of language
technologies with universal applicability.

We emphasize, however, that even if completely
successful, it will be a universal corpus and not the
universal corpus. The term “universal” should em-
phatically not be understood in the sense of encom-
passing all language annotation efforts. We are not
proposing a standard or a philosophy of language
documentation, but rather a design for one partic-
ular resource. Though the goals with regard to lan-
guage coverage are unusually ambitious, for the sake
of achievability we keep the targeted annotation as
simple as possible. The result is intended to be a sin-
gle, coherent dataset that is very broad in language
coverage, but very thin in complexity of annotation.

120

Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 120–127,
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,

Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics



Finally, the development of the corpus is an un-
funded, all-volunteer effort. It will only come about
if it wins community buy-in, in the spirit of collab-
orative efforts like Project Gutenberg. We formulate
it as a cooperation among data providers and host-
ing services to provide data in a manner that creates
a single, seamless dataset from the user perspective.
This paper is a first draft of a “cooperative agree-
ment” that could achieve that goal.

2 A lightweight model for multilingual text

2.1 Media and annotation

In documentary linguistics, a distinction is made
between language documentation, whose concern
is the collection of primary documentation such as
speech recordings and indigenous written works,
and language description, whose concern is the an-
notation and organization of the primary material
(Himmelmann, 1998). We make a similar distinc-
tion between media files and annotation, where “an-
notation” is understood broadly to include all pro-
cessing steps that make the linguistic contents more
explicit, including plain text rendering, sentence
segmentation, and alignment of translations.

The Corpus consists of annotated documents, in
the sense of primary documents with accompany-
ing annotation. There are many efforts at collecting
documentation for a broad range of languages; what
makes this Corpus distinct is its focus on annotation.
Accordingly, we assume that media files and anno-
tation are handled separately.

For media, the Language Commons collection in
the Internet Archive is a recently-established repos-
itory for redistributable language data that we view
as the primary host.1 For the annotation database, a
primary data host remains to be established, but we
have identified some options. For example, Amazon
Web Services and the Talis Connected Commons
have free hosting services for public data sets.

2.2 The data model in brief

In order to keep the barriers to participation as low as
possible, we have made our target for annotation as
simple as possible. The data model is summarized
in Figure 1. We distinguish between aligned texts

1http://www.archive.org/details/
LanguageCommons

(or parallel texts) and analyzed texts (comparable
texts).

Semantically, the entire collection of aligned texts
constitutes a matrix whose columns are languages
and whose rows are texts. We limit attention to three
levels of granularity: document, sentence, and word.
Each cell is occupied by a string, the typical length
of the string varying with the granularity. We expect
the matrix to be quite sparse: most cells are empty.

The collection of analyzed texts consists, semanti-
cally, of one table per language. The rows represent
words and the columns are properties of the words.
The words may either be tokens in a sentence anal-
ysis, as suggested by the examples, or types repre-
senting dictionary information. The tables are com-
parable, in the sense that they have a common format
and are conducive to language-independent process-
ing, but they are not parallel: the i-th word in the
German table has nothing to do with the i-th word
in the Spanish table.

The tables in Figure 1 constitute the bulk of the
data model. In addition, we assume some auxiliary
information (not depicted) that is primarily organi-
zational. It includes an association between docu-
ments and sentences, the location of documents and
sentences within media files (if applicable), a group-
ing of table rows into “files,” and a grouping of files
into “works.” Metadata such as revision information
is attached to files and works. We return below to
the characterization of this auxiliary information.

In contrast to current standard practice, we wish
to emphasize the status of aligned and analyzed text
as annotation of primary documents represented by
media files such as speech recordings or page im-
ages, and we wish to maintain explicit connections
between annotations and primary documents. We
do not insist that the underlying media files be avail-
able in all cases, but we hope to identify them when
possible. However, we focus on storage of the anno-
tation; we assume that media files are in a separate
store, and referenced by external URIs.

2.3 Two implementations: filestore and
database

The data model is abstract, and is implemented in a
couple of ways for different purposes. For distribu-
tion on physical medium or by download, it is most
convenient to implement the data model as actual

121



Aligned Texts Analyzed Texts

deu spa fra eng . . .
d1 sie.. ella.. elle.. she..
d2
...
s1
s2
...
w1
w2
...

deu
sent form lemma morph pos gloss head rel

w1 s1 Kühe Kuh PL N cow 2 SBJ
w2 s1 sind sein PL V be 0 ROOT
...

spa
sent form lemma morph pos gloss head rel

w1 s2 estas este F.PL D this 2 SPC
w2 s2 floras flora F.PL N flower 3 SBJ
...

...

Figure 1: An overview of the targeted annotation: Aligned Texts in a single matrix having three levels of granularity
(document, sentence, word), and Analyzed Texts grouped by language and annotated down to the word level with
morphological, lexical and syntactic information.

files. Each file contains information corresponding
to some slice of a table, and the structure of the table
is encoded in the file format. On the other hand,
web services are often implemented as databases,
making an implementation of the abstract model as
a database desirable.

A file-based implementation is most familiar, and
most existing resources are available as file collec-
tions. However, even when different existing re-
sources have similar semantics, such as different
parallel text collections, there is considerable variety
in the organization and representation of the infor-
mation. In order to work with multiple such sources,
a substantial amount of housekeeping is required.
One can view our proposed filestore as a normal-
ized form that removes the diversity that only gets in
the way of efficient cross-language processing. In-
deed, our proposed format for analyzed text hews
intentionally close to the format used in the CoNLL
dependency-parsing shared tasks, which provided
a normal form into which data from multiple tree-
banks was mapped (Buchholz et al., 2006).

When an existing resource is included in the Cor-
pus, we assume that it remains externally available
in its original form, but a copy is imported into the
Corpus filestore in which every file has been pre-
processed into one of a set of simple file formats
implementing the model of Figure 1, following a
consistent scheme for filenames, with utf8 charac-

ter encoding, and capturing any available alignment
information in an auxiliary table. Distribution of the
Corpus via physical media or download simply in-
volves copying the filestore.

The filestore is organized around material pro-
vided by individual data providers, or “authors,” and
maintains the identity of a data provider’s contribu-
tion as a distinct intellectual “work.” Works provide
an appropriate unit to which to attach edition and
rights metadata.

In addition to the filestore, the texts and align-
ments are imported into a collection of database ta-
bles that can be queried efficiently.

In section 3 we describe a simple file-based im-
plementation of the data model, and show the variety
of familiar file types that find a natural place in the
model. In section 4 we describe the tabular storage
model.

3 Filestore implementation

Despite the simplicity of the data model, it captures
a substantial, even surprising, variety of commonly-
used textual data file types.

Document-aligned text. Parallel corpora are most
commonly aligned at the document level. Typically,
each translation of a document is contained in a file,
and there is some way of indicating which files are
mutual translations of the same document. The con-

122



tents of a file, as a single string, represents one cell
in the Aligned Text matrix in Figure 1 (at the “doc-
ument” level of granularity). A document, compris-
ing a collection of mutual translations, corresponds
to a row of the matrix.

As normal form, we propose the convention of
using filenames that incorporate a language iden-
tifier and a document identifier. For example,
1001-eng.txt and 1001-deu.txt are the En-
glish and German files representing mutual transla-
tions of some hypothetical document 1001.

Language identifiers are ISO 639-3 language
code, supplemented by the Linguist List local-use
codes and subgroup and dialect identifiers.

Sentence-aligned text. At a finer grain, paral-
lel corpora may be aligned at the sentence level.
Each file contains the translation of one document,
segmented into one sentence per line. Our nor-
mal form uses the same filename convention as
for document-aligned text, to indicate which files
are mutual translations. We use the file suffix
“.snt” to indicate a file with one sentence per
line. This incidentally indicates which document
a set of sentences came from, since the filenames
share a document identifier. For example, the file
1001-deu.snt contains the sentence-segmented
version of 1001-deu.txt.

In the canonical case, each file in a group of
aligned files contains the same number of sentences,
and the sentences line up one-to-one. The group
of aligned files corresponds to a set of rows in the
Aligned Text matrix, at the “sentence” level of gran-
ularity.

There are cases in which the sentence alignment
between documents is not one-to-one. Even in this
case, we can view the alignment as consisting of a
sequence of “beads” that sometimes contain multi-
ple sentences in one language. If we normalize the
file to one in which the group of sentences belong-
ing to a single bead are concatenated together as a
“translational unit,” we reduce this case to the one-
to-one case, though we do lose the information about
orthographic sentence boundaries internal to a bead.

Preserving the original sentences would necessi-
tate an extension to the data model. A typical ap-
proach is to store the alignments in a table, where
n-way alignments are indicated using n-tuples of in-

tegers. We leave this as a point for future consider-
ation. We also put aside consideration of word-level
document alignment.

Translation dictionaries. A translation dictionary
contains word translations in multiple languages.
One representation looks just like sentence-aligned
text, except that each file contains one entry per line
instead of one sentence per line. Each file in an
aligned set contains the same number of entries, and
the entries line up one-to-one across files. This is
the representation we take as our normal form. We
also use the same filename convention, but with suf-
fix .tdi for translation dictionary.

A translation dictionary corresponds to a set of
rows in the Aligned Text matrix, at the “word” level
of granularity. A translation dictionary would typ-
ically be derived from a large number of text doc-
uments, so each translation dictionary will typically
have a unique document identifier, and will not align
with files at the sentence or document granularity.

Transcriptions and segmentations. When one
begins with a sound recording or with page images
from a print volume that has been scanned, a first
step is conversion to plain text. We will call this a
“transcription” both for the case where the original
was a sound file and for the case where the origi-
nal was a page image. Transcriptions fit into our
data model as the special case of “document-aligned
text” in which only one language is involved. We
assume that the Aligned Text matrix is sparse, and
this is the extreme case in which only one cell in a
row is occupied. The connection between the tran-
script’s document identifier and the original media
file is recorded in an auxiliary metadata file.

After transcription, the next step in processing is
to identify the parts of the text that are natural lan-
guage (as opposed to markup or tables or the like),
and to segment the natural language portion into
sentences. The result is sentence-segmented text.
Again, we treat this as the special case of sentence-
aligned text in which only one language is involved.

Analyzed text. A variety of different text file types
can be grouped together under the heading of an-
alyzed text. The richest example we consider is
dependency parse structure. One widely-used file
representation has one word token per line. Each

123



line consists of tab-separated fields containing at-
tributes of the word token. There is some varia-
tion in the attributes that are specified, but the ones
used in the Analyzed Text tables of our data model
are typical, namely: sentence identifier, wordform,
lemma, morphological form, gloss, part of speech,
head (also called governor), and relation (also called
role). Sentence boundaries are not represented as to-
kens; rather, tokens belonging to the same sentence
share the same value for sentence identifier. We con-
tinue with the same filename convention as before;
for Analyzed Text files, the suffix is .tab.

Many different linguistic annotations are natu-
rally represented as special cases of Analyzed Text.

• Tokenized text in “vertical format” is the spe-
cial case in which the only column is the word-
form column. We include the sentence ID col-
umn as well, in lieu of sentence-boundary to-
kens.

• POS-tagged text adds the part of speech col-
umn.

• The information in the word-by-word part of
interlinear glossed text (IGT) typically includes
the wordform, lemma, morph, and gloss; again
we also include the sentence ID column.

• A dependency parse, as already indicated, is the
case in which all columns are present.

In addition, the format accommodates a variety
of monolingual and multilingual lexical resources.
Such lexical resources are essential, whether manu-
ally curated or automatically extracted.

• A basic dictionary consists of a sequence of en-
tries, each of which contains a lemma, part of
speech, and gloss. Hence a dictionary is nat-
urally represented as analyzed text containing
just those three columns. The entries in a dic-
tionary are word types rather than word tokens,
so the wordform and sentence ID columns are
absent.

• If two or more lexicons use the same glosses,
the lexicons are implicitly aligned by virtue of
the glosses and there is no need for overt align-
ment information. This is a more flexible repre-
sentation than a translation dictionary: unlike a
translation dictionary, it permits multiple words
to have the same gloss (synonyms), and it adds
parts of speech.

4 Database implementation

An alternative implementation, appropriate for de-
ployment of the Corpus as a web service, is as a
normalized, multi-table database. In this section
we drill down and consider the kinds of tables and
records that would be required in order to represent
our abstract data model. We will proceed by way
of example, for each of the kinds of data we would
like to accommodate. Each example is displayed as
a record consisting of a series of named fields.

Note that we make no firm commitment as to the
physical format of these records. They could be se-
rialized as XML when the database is implemented
as a web service. Equally, they could be represented
using dictionaries or tuples when the database is ac-
cessed via an application program interface (API).
We will return to this later.

4.1 The Aligned Text matrix

The Aligned Text matrix is extremely sparse. We
use the more flexible representation in which each
matrix cell is stored using a separate record, where
the record specifies (index, column) pairs. For ex-
ample, the matrix row

deu spa fra
d1 Sie... Ella...
d2 Mein... Mon...

is represented as

Document Table
DID LANG TEXT

1 deu Sie...
1 spa Ella...
2 deu Mein...
2 fra Mon...

(The ellipses are intended to indicate that each cell
contains the entire text of a document.) We have also
added an explicit document ID.

When we consider entries at the sentence and
word levels, we require both a document ID and sen-
tence or word IDs within the document. Figure 2
shows an example of two sentences from the same
document, translated into two languages. Note that
we can think of DID + LANG as an identifier for a
monolingual document instance, and DID + LANG +
SID identifies a particular sentence in a monolingual
document.

124



DID LANG SID TEXT

1 deu 1 Der Hund bellte.
1 eng 1 the dog barked.
1 deu 2 Mein Vater ist Augenarzt.
1 eng 2 My father is an optometrist.

Figure 2: Two sentences with two translations. These are
sentence table records.

In short, we implement the Aligned Text matrix as
three database tables. All three tables have columns
DID, LANG, and TEXT. The sentence table adds SID,
and the word table adds WID instead of SID. (The
words are types, not tokens, hence are not associated
with any particular sentence.)

4.2 The Analyzed Text tables

The implementation of the Analyzed Text tables is
straightforward. We add a column for the document
ID, and we assume that sentence ID is relative to
the document. We also represent the word token ID
explicitly, and take it to be relative to the sentence.
Finally, we add a column for LANG, so that we have
a single table rather than one per language.

The first record from the German table in Figure 1
is implemented as in Figure 3. This is a record from
a dependency parse. Other varieties of analyzed text
leave some of the columns empty, as discussed in the
previous section.

There is a subtlety to note. In the sentence table,
the entry with DID 1, SID 1, and LANG “deu” is un-
derstood to be a translation of the entry with DID 1,
SID 1, and LANG “eng.” That is not the case with
records in the analyzed-text table. Word 1 in the En-
glish sentence 1 of document 1 is not necessarily a
translation of word 1 in the German sentence 1 of
document 1.

A few comments are in order about the meanings
of the columns. The wordform is the attested, in-
flected form of the word token. The LEMMA pro-
vides the lexical form, which is the headword un-
der which one would find the word in a dictionary.
The MORPH field provides a symbolic indicator of
the relationship between the lemma and the word-
form. For example, “Kühe” is the PL form of the
lemma “Kuh.”

This approach encompasses arbitrary morpholog-
ical processes. For example, Hebrew lomedet may

be represented as the PRESPTC.FEM.SG form of
lmd, (“to learn”).

When we represent dictionaries, the records are
word types rather than word tokens. We assign a
document ID to the dictionary as a whole, but by
convention take the SID to be uniformly 0.

Ultimately, the POS and GLOSS fields are in-
tended to contain symbols from controlled vocab-
ularies. For the present, the choice of controlled
vocabulary is up to the annotator. For the GLOSS
field, an option that has the benefit of simplicity is
to use the corresponding word from a reference lan-
guage, but one might equally well use synset identi-
fiers from WordNet, or concepts in some ontology.

4.3 The auxiliary tables

The auxiliary tables were not shown in the abstract
data model as depicted in Figure 1. They primar-
ily include metadata. We assume a table that asso-
ciates each document ID with a work, and a table
that provides metadata for each work. The Corpus
as a whole is the sum of the works.

In the spirit of not duplicating existing efforts, we
“outsource” the bulk of the metadata to OLAC (Si-
mons and Bird, 2003). If a work has an OLAC entry,
we only need to associate the internal document ID
to the OLAC identifier.

There is some metadata information that we
would like to include for which we cannot refer to
OLAC.

• Provenance: how the annotation was con-
structed, e.g., who the annotator was, or what
software was used if it was automatically cre-
ated.

• Rights: copyright holder, license category cho-
sen from a small set of interoperable licenses.

• Standards: allows the annotator to indicate
which code sets are used for the MORPH, POS,
and GLOSS fields. We would like to be able
to specify a standard code set for each, in the
same way that we have specified ISO 639-3 for
language codes. Consensus has not yet crystal-
lized around any one standard, however.

The auxiliary tables also associate documents
with media files. We assume a table associating
document IDs with a media files, represented by

125



DID LANG SID WID FORM LEMMA MORPH POS GLOSS HEAD REL

123 deu 1 1 Kühe Kuh PL N cow 2 SBJ

Figure 3: A single word from a dependency parse. This is a record from the analyzed-text table.

their URLs, and a table associating sentences (DID
+ SID) with locations in media files.

Note that, as we have defined the file and tabu-
lar implementations, there is no need for an explicit
mapping between document IDs and filenames. A
filename is always of the form did-lang.suffix,
where the suffix is .txt for the document table,
.snt for the sentence table, .tdi for the word ta-
ble, and .tab for the analyzed-text table. Each file
corresponds to a set of records in one of the tables.

5 Cloud Storage and Interface

A third interface to the Corpus is via an applica-
tion programming interface. We illustrate a possi-
ble Python API using Amazon SimpleDB, a cloud-
hosted tuple store accessed via a web services in-
terface.2 An “item” is a collection of attribute-
value pairs, and is stored in a “domain.” Items,
attributes, and domains are roughly equivalent to
records, fields, and tables in a relational database.
Unlike relational databases, new attributes and do-
mains can be added at any time.

Boto is a Python interface to Amazon Web Ser-
vices that includes support for SimpleDB.3 The fol-
lowing code shows an interactive session in which a
connection is established and a domain is created:
>>> import boto
>>> sdb = boto.connect_sdb(PUBLIC_KEY, PRIVATE_KEY)
>>> domain = sdb.create_domain(’analyzed_text’)

We can create a new item, then use Python’s dic-
tionary syntax to create attribute-value pairs, before
saving it:
>>> item = domain.new_item(’123’)
>>> item[’DID’] = ’123’
>>> item[’LANG’] = ’deu’
>>> item[’FORM’] = ’Kühe’
>>> item[’GLOSS’] = ’cow’
>>> item[’HEAD’] = ’2’
>>> item.save()

Finally, we can retrieve an item by name, or submit
a query using SQL-like syntax.

2http://aws.amazon.com/simpledb/
3http://code.google.com/p/boto/

>>> sdb.get_attributes(domain, ’123’)
’LANG’: ’deu’, ’HEAD’: ’2’, ’DID’: ’123’,
’FORM’: ’Kühe’, ’GLOSS’: ’cow’
>>> sdb.select(domain,
... ’select DID, FORM from analyzed_text
... where LANG = "deu"’)
[’DID’: ’123’, ’FORM’: ’Kühe’]

We have developed an NLTK “corpus reader”
which understands the Giza and NAACL03 formats
for bilingual texts, and creates a series of records for
insertion into SimpleDB using the Boto interface.
Other formats will be added over time.

Beyond the loading of corpora, a range of query
and report generation functions are needed, as illus-
trated in the following (non-exhaustive) list:

• lookup(lang=ENG, rev="1.2b3", ...): find all
items which have the specified attribute val-
ues, returning a list of dictionaries; following
Python syntax, we indicate this variable num-
ber of keyword arguments with **kwargs.

• extract(type=SENT, lang=[ENG, FRA, DEU],
**kwargs): extract all aligned sentences involv-
ing English, French, and German, which meet
any further constraints specified in the keyword
arguments. (When called extract(type=SENT)
this will extract all sentence alignments across
all 7,000 languages, cf Figure 1.)

• dump(type=SENT, format="giza", lang=[ENG,
FRA], **kwargs): dump English-French bitext
in Giza format.

• extract(type=LEX, lang=[ENG, FRA, ...],
**kwargs): produce a comparative wordlist for
the specified languages.

• dump(type=LEX, format="csv", lang=[ENG,
FRA, ...], **kwargs): produce the wordlist in
comma-separated values format.

Additional functions will be required for discov-
ery (which annotations exist for an item?), naviga-
tion (which file does an item come from?), citation
(which publications should be cited in connection
with these items?), and report generation (what type
and quantity of material exists for each language?).

126



Further functionality could support annotation.
We do not wish to enable direct modification of
database fields, since everything in the Corpus
comes from contributed corpora. Instead, we could
foster user input and encourage crowdsourcing of
annotations by developing software clients that ac-
cess the Corpus using methods such as the ones al-
ready described, and which save any new annota-
tions as just another work to be added to the Corpus.

6 Further design considerations

Versioning. When a work is contributed, it comes
with (or is assigned) a version, or “edition.” Multi-
ple editions of a work may coexist in the Corpus, and
each edition will have distinct filenames and identi-
fiers to avoid risk of collision. Now, it may hap-
pen that works reference each other, as when a base
text from one work is POS-tagged in another. For
this reason, we treat editions as immutable. Modi-
fications to a work are accumulated and released as
a new edition. When a new edition of a base text
is released, stand-off annotations of that text (such
as the POS-tagging in our example) will need to be
updated in turn, a task that should be largely auto-
mated. A new edition of the annotation, anchored to
the new edition of the base text, is then released. The
old editions remain unchanged, though they may be
flagged as obsolete and may eventually be deleted.

Licensing. Many corpora come with license con-
ditions that prevent them from being included. In
some cases, this is due to license fees that are paid
by institutional subscription. Here, we need to ex-
plore a new subscription model based on access. In
some cases, corpus redistribution is not permitted,
simply in order to ensure that all downloads occur
from one site (and can be counted as evidence of
impact), and so that users agree to cite the scholarly
publication about the corpus. Here we can offer data
providers a credible alternative: anonymized usage
tracking, and an automatic way for authors to iden-
tify the publications associated with any slice of the
Corpus, facilitating comprehensive citation.

Publication. The Corpus will be an online publi-
cation, with downloadable dated snapshots, evolv-
ing continually as new works and editions are added.
An editorial process will be required, to ensure that

contributions are appropriate, and to avoid spam-
ming. A separate staging area would facilitate
checking of incoming materials prior to release.

7 Conclusion

We have described the design and implementation
of a Universal Corpus containing aligned and anno-
tated text collections for the world’s languages. We
follow the same principles we set out earlier (Abney
and Bird, 2010, 2.2), promoting a community-level
effort to collect bilingual texts and lexicons for as
many languages as possible, in a consistent format
that facilitates machine processing across languages.
We have proposed a normalized filestore model that
integrates with current practice on the supply side,
where corpora are freestanding works in a variety
of formats and multiple editions. We have also de-
vised a normalized database model which encom-
passes the desired range of linguistic objects, align-
ments, and annotations. Finally, we have argued that
this model scales, and enables a view of the Univer-
sal Corpus as a vast matrix of aligned and analyzed
texts spanning the world’s languages, a radical de-
parture from existing resource creation efforts in lan-
guage documentation and machine translation.

We invite participation by the community in elab-
orating the design, implementing the storage model,
and populating it with data. Furthermore, we seek
collaboration in using such data as the basis for
large-scale cross-linguistic analysis and modeling,
and in facilitating the creation of easily accessible
language resources for the world’s languages.

References
Steven Abney and Steven Bird. 2010. The Human

Language Project: building a universal corpus of the
world’s languages. In Proc. 48th ACL, pages 88–97.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sabine Buchholz, Erwin Marsi, Yuval Krymolowski, and
Amit Dubey. 2006. CoNLL-X shared task: Multi-
lingual dependency parsing. http://ilk.uvt.
nl/conll/. Accessed May 2011.

Nikolaus P. Himmelmann. 1998. Documentary and de-
scriptive linguistics. Linguistics, 36:161–195.

Gary Simons and Steven Bird. 2003. The Open Lan-
guage Archives Community: An infrastructure for dis-
tributed archiving of language resources. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 18:117–128.

127


