










































MAISE: A Flexible, Configurable, Extensible Open Source Package for Mass AI System Evaluation


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 130–134,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

MAISE: A Flexible, Configurable, Extensible Open Source Package for
Mass AI System Evaluation

Omar F. Zaidan
Dept. of Computer Science

and
The Center for Language and Speech Processing

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
ozaidan@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract

The past few years have seen an increasing
interest in using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
for purposes of collecting data and perform-
ing annotation tasks. One such task is the
mass evaluation of system output in a variety
of tasks. In this paper, we present MAISE,
a package that allows researchers to evalu-
ate the output of their AI system(s) using hu-
man judgments collected via Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk, greatly streamlining the pro-
cess. MAISE is open source, easy to run, and
platform-independent. The core of MAISE’s
codebase was used for the manual evaluation
of WMT10, and the completed package is be-
ing used again in the current evaluation for
WMT11. In this paper, we describe the main
features, functionality, and usage of MAISE,
which is now available for download and use.

1 Introduction

The ability to evaluate system output is one of the
most important aspects of system development. A
properly designed evaluation paradigm could help
researchers test and illustrate the effectiveness, or
lack thereof, of any changes made to their system.
The use of an automatic metric, whether it is a sim-
ple one such as classification accuracy, or a more
task-specific metric such as BLEU and TER for ma-
chine translation, has become a standard part of any
evaluation of empricial methods. There is also ex-
tensive interest in exploring manual evaluation of
system outputs, and in making such a process fea-
sible and efficient, time- and cost-wise. Such human
feedback would also be valuable because it would
help identify systematic errors and guide future sys-
tem development.

Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) is a virtual
marketplace that allows anyone to create and post
tasks to be completed by human workers around the
globe. Each instance of those tasks, called a Human
Intelligence Task (HIT) in MTurk lingo, typically
requires human understanding and perception that
machines are yet to achieve, hence making MTurk
an example of “artificial artificial intelligence,” as
the developers of MTurk aptly put it. Arguably, the
most attractive feature of MTurk is the low cost asso-
ciated with completing HITs and the speed at which
they are completed.

Having discovered this venue, many researchers
in the fields of artificial intelligence and machine
learning see MTurk as a valuable and effective
source of annotations, labels, and data, namely the
kind requiring human knowledge.

One such kind of data is indeed human evalua-
tion of system outputs. For instance, if you construct
several speech recognition systems, and would like
to know how well each of the systems performs,
you could create HITs on MTurk that ‘showcase’ the
transcriptions obtained by the different systems, and
ask annotators to indicate which systems are supe-
rior and which ones are inferior. The same can be
applied to a variety of tasks, such as machine trans-
lation, object recognition, emotion detection, etc.

The aim of the MAISE package is to stream-
line the process of creating those evaluation tasks
and uploading the relevant content to MTurk to be
judged, without having to familiarize and involve
oneself with the mechanics, if you will, of Mechan-
ical Turk. This would allow you to spend more
time worrying about improving your system rather
than dealing with file input and output and MTurk’s
sometimes finicky interface.

130



2 Overview

MAISE is a collection of tools for Mass AI System
Evaluation. MAISE allows you to evaluate the out-
put of different systems (and/or different variations
of a system) using the workforce of Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk (MTurk). MAISE can be used to com-
pare two simple variants of the same system, work-
ing with a couple of variations of your task, or it can
be used to perform complete evaluation campaigns
involving tens of systems and many variations.

The core of MAISE’s codebase was written to
run the manual component of WMT10’s evaluation
campaign. In the manual evaluation, various MT
systems are directly compared to each other, by an-
notators who indicate which systems produce better
outputs (i.e. better translations). Starting in 2010,
the evaluation moved from using a locally hosted
web server, and onto MTurk, taking advantage of
MTurk’s existing infrastructure, and making avail-
able the option to collect data from a large pool of
annotators, if desired, rather than relying solely on
recruited volunteers. That evaluation campaign in-
volved around 170 submissions over eight different
language pairs. In 2011, the number increased to
190 submissions over ten language pairs.

We note here that although MAISE was written
with MT in mind, it can be used for other ML/AI
tasks as well. Some of the supported features are
meant to make MT evaluation easier (e.g. MAISE is
aware of which language is being translated to and
from), but those could simply be ignored for other
tasks. As long as the task has some concept of ‘in-
put’ and some concept of ‘output’ (e.g. a foreign
sentence and a machine translation), then MAISE is
appropriate.

Given this paper’s venue of publication, the re-
mainder of the paper assumes the task at hand is ma-
chine translation.

3 The Mechanics of MAISE

The components of MAISE have been designed to
completely eliminate the need to write any data
processing code, and to minimize the need for the
user to perform any manual tasks on MTurk’s inter-
face, since MAISE facilitates communication with
MTurk. Whenever MAISE needs to communicate
with MTurk, it will rely on MTurk’s Java SDK,

which is already included in the MAISE release
(allowed under the SDK’s license, Apache License
V2.0).

Once you create your evaluation tasks and upload
the necessary content to MTurk, workers will begin
to complete the corresponding HITs. On a regular
(e.g. daily) basis, you will tell MAISE to retrieve the
new judgments that workers provided since the last
time MAISE checked. The process continues until
either all your tasks are completed, or you decide
you have enough judgments.

You can use MAISE with any evaluation setup
you like, as long as you design the user interface
for it. Currently, MAISE comes with existing sup-
port for a particular evaluation setup that asks anno-
tators to rank the outputs of different systems rela-
tive to each other. When we say “existing support”
we mean the user interface is included, and so is an
analysis tool that can make sense of the judgments.
This way, you don’t need to do anything extra to ob-
tain rankings of the systems. You can read more
about this evaluation setup in the overview papers
of the Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT) for the past two years.

3.1 Requirements and Setup
MAISE is quite easy to use. Beyond compiling
a few Java programs, there is no need to install
anything, modify environment variables, etc. Fur-
thermore, since it is Java-based, it is completely
platform-independent.

To use MAISE, you will need:

• Java 6

• Apache Ant

• A hosting location (where you place certain
HTML files)

• An MTurk Requester account

You will also need an active Internet connection
whenever new tasks need to be uploaded to MTurk,
and whenever judgments need to be collected from
MTurk. The setup details are beyond the scope
of this paper, but are straightforward, and can be
found in MAISE’s documentation, including guid-
ance with all the MTurk-related administrative is-
sues (e.g. the last point in the above list).

131



3.2 Essential Files

MAISE will assume that the user has a certain set of
“essential files” that contain all the needed informa-
tion to perform an evaluation. These files are:

1) The system outputs should be in plain
text format, one file per system. The
filenames should follow the pattern
PROJECT.xx-yy.sysname, where
PROJECT is any identifying string cho-
sen by the user, xx is a short name for the
source language, and yy is a short name for
the the target language.

2) The source files should be in plain text
as well, one file per language pair. The
source filenames should follow the pattern
PROJECT.xx-yy.src, where PROJECT
matches the identifying string used in the sub-
mission filenames. (The contents of such a file
are in the xx language.)

3) The reference files, also one per language pair,
with filenames PROJECT.xx-yy.ref. (The
contents of such a file are in the yy language.)

4) A specification file that contains values for var-
ious parameters about the project (e.g. the lo-
cation of the above files).

5) A batch details file that contains information
about the desired number of MTurk tasks and
their particular properties.

As one could see, the user need only provide the
bare minimum to get their evaluation started. More
details about items (4) and (5) are provided in the
documentation. Essentially, they are easily readable
and editable files, and all the user needs to do to cre-
ate them is to fill out the provided templates.

3.3 The Components of MAISE

There are three main steps necessary to perform an
evaluation on MTurk: create the evaluation tasks,
upload them to MTurk, and retrieve answers for
them. Each of those three steps corresponds to a
single component in MAISE.

3.3.1 The BatchCreator
The first step is to create some input files for

MTurk: the files that contain actual instantiations of
our tasks, with actual sentences. This will be the first
step that requires you to make some real executive
decisions regarding your tasks. Among other things,
you will decide how many judgments to collect and
who to allow to give you those judgments.

Each batch corresponds to a single task on
MTurk. Typically, each batch corresponds to a sin-
gle language pair. So, if you are performing a
full evaluation campaign, you would be creating as
many batches as there are language pairs. If you are
merely comparing several variants of the same sys-
tem, say, for Arabic-English, you would probably
have just one batch.

That said, you may have more than one batch for
the same language pair, that nonetheless differ in
other properties. In fact, each batch has a number
of settings that need to be specified, including:

1) what language pair does this batch involve?

2) how many HITs does this batch include?

3) how many times should each HIT be com-
pleted?

4) what is the reward per assignment?

5) what are the qualifications necessary for an an-
notator to be allowed to perform the task (e.g.
location, approval rating)?

Those settings are all specified in a single file,
the abovementioned batch details file. The user
them simply runs the BatchCreator component,
which processes all this information and creates the
necessary files for each batch.

3.3.2 The Uploader
After the BatchCreator creates the different

files for the different batches, those files must be
uploaded to MTurk in order to create the various
batches. There will be a single file, called the up-
load info file, that contains the locations of the files
to be uploaded. The upload info file is created au-
tomatically, and all the user needs to do is pass it
as a parameter to the next MAISE component, the
Uploader.

132



The Uploader communicates with MTurk via
a web connection. Once it has completed execution,
HITs for your tasks will start to appear on the MTurk
website, available for MTurk’s workers to view and
complete them.

3.3.3 The Retriever
At this point, you would be waiting for Turkers to

find your task and start accepting HITs and complet-
ing them. You can retrieve those answers by using
another MAISE component that communicates with
MTurk called the Retriever. It can be instructed
to retrieve all answers for your HITs or only a subset
of them. It retrieves all the answers for those HITs,
and appends those answers to an answer log file.

Note that the Retriever does not necessarily
approve any of the newly submitted assignments. It
can be instructed to explicitly retrieve those answers
without approving them, giving you the chance to
first review them for quality. Alternatively, it can be
instructed to approve the assignments as it retrieves
them, and also to reject certain assignments or cer-
tain annotators that you have identified as being of
sub-par quality. All this information is placed in
plain text files, easy to create and maintain.

When you use MAISE to perform an actual eval-
uation on MTurk, you should run the Retriever
fairly regularly, perhaps once every day or two.
Each time, review the retrieved results, and rerun
the Retriever in “decision mode” enabled, to
aprove/reject the pending submissions.

4 Analyzing the Results: An Example

Once the tasks have been completed, all the an-
swers will have been written into an answers log file.
The log file is in plain format, and contains exten-
sive information about each HIT completed, includ-
ing a worker ID, time required to complete, and, of
course, the answers themselves. Naturally, analyz-
ing the results of the evaluation depends on what the
task was, and what the interface you designed looks
like. You can write your own code to read the log
file and make sense out of them.

MAISE already comes equipped with an analy-
sis tool for one particular task: the ranking task. In
this setup, the annotator evaluates system outputs by
ranking them from best to worst. The rank labels
are interpreted as pairwise comparisons (e.g. 5 rank

labels correspond to
(
5
2

)
= 10 pairwise compar-

isons), and each system is assigned a score reflect-
ing how often it wins those pairwise comparisons.
This is the setup used in the evaluation campaigns
of WMT10 and WMT11.

The analysis tool takes as input the answers log
file as is, and extracts from it all the rank labels.
Each system’s score is computed, and the tool pro-
duces a table for each language pair displaying the
participating systems, in descending order of their
scores. It also creates an additional head-to-head ta-
ble, that summarizes for a specific pair of systems
how often each system outranked the other. The out-
put is created in HTML format, for easy viewing in
a browser.

Furthermore, the tool produces a detailed worker
profile table. Each row in this table corresponds to
one worker, identified by their Amazon worker ID,
and includes certain measures that can help guide
you identify bad workers, who are either clicking
randomly, or perhaps simply not doing the task prop-
erly. Those measures include:

• Average time required per HIT: a suspi-
ciously fast annotator might not be performing
the task diligently.

• The reference preference rate (RPR): how of-
ten did the annotator correctly prefer an em-
bedded reference translation; a low RPR almost
certainly indicates random clicking, with typi-
cal good values at 0.97 and up.

• Prevalence of tied rank labels: an overly high
percentage of tied comparisons indicates an
overly ‘conservative’ worker, hesitant to distin-
guish between outputs.

• The annotator’s intra-annotator agreement:
i.e. the annotator’s consistency with them-
selves, based on how often they repeated the
same judgment when comparing the same sys-
tem pair.

To appreciate the tool’s output, the reader is en-
couraged to view the results of a real-life evaluation
campaign at http://bit.ly/jJYzkO. These
are results of analyzing 85,000+ rank labels in an
evaluation campaign of 40+ MT systems over six
language pairs.

133



5 Download and Licensing

MAISE can be obtained from the author’s webpage:
http://cs.jhu.edu/˜ozaidan/maise/.
The release includes MAISE’s source code, in-
structions, documentation, and a tutorial. MAISE
is an open-source tool, licensed under the terms of
the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL).
Therefore, it is free for personal and scientific use
by individuals and/or research groups. It may not
be modified or redistributed, publicly or privately,
unless the licensing terms are observed. If in doubt,
contact the author for clarification and/or an explicit
permission. The distribution also includes the
MTurk Java SDK v1.2.2, which is licensed under
the terms of the Apache License V2.0.

Acknowledgments

I developed MAISE while I was funded by DARPA’s
GALE Program, and in part by the EuroMatrixPlus
Project. I would like to thank Chris Callison-Burch,
Ondřej Bojar, and everybody who gave feedback
during the WMT10 evaluation campaign. More
importantly, much thanks goes to Josh Schroeder,
the author of the previous implementation used pre-
2010, who helped me navigate his code when I first
started reimplementing the data processing compo-
nents.

References
Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,

Kay Peterson, Mark Przybocki, and Omar Zaidan.
2010. Findings of the 2010 joint workshop on sta-
tistical machine translation and metrics for machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR,
pages 17–53, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

134


