










































Lagrangian Relaxation for Inference in Natural Language Processing


Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Parsing Technologies, page 150,
October 5-7, 2011, Dublin City University. c© 2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lagrangian Relaxation for Inference in Natural Language Processing

Michael Collins
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
mcollins@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

There has been a long history in combinatorial optimization of methods that exploit structure in
complex problems, using methods such as dual decomposition or Lagrangian relaxation. These
methods leverage the observation that complex inference problems can often be decomposed
into efficiently solvable sub-problems. Thus far, however, these methods are not widely used
in NLP.

In this talk I will describe recent work on inference algorithms for NLP based on Lagrangian
relaxation. In the first part of the talk I will describe work on non-projective parsing. In the
second part of the talk I will describe an exact decoding algorithm for syntax-based statistical
translation. If time permits, I will also briefly describe algorithms for dynamic programming
intersections (e.g., the intersection of a PCFG and an HMM), and for phrase-based translation.

For all of the problems that we consider, the resulting algorithms produce exact solutions, with
certificates of optimality, on the vast majority of examples; the algorithms are efficient for
problems that are either NP-hard (as is the case for non-projective parsing, or for phrase-based
translation), or for problems that are solvable in polynomial time using dynamic programming,
but where the traditional exact algorithms are far too expensive to be practical.

While the focus of this talk is on NLP problems, there are close connections to inference
methods, in particular belief propagation, for graphical models. Our work was inspired by
recent work that has used dual decomposition as an alternative to belief propagation in Markov
random fields.

This is joint work with Yin-Wen Chang, Tommi Jaakkola, Terry Koo, Sasha Rush, and David
Sontag.

150


