










































Topic Modeling on Historical Newspapers


Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 96–104,
Portland, OR, USA, 24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Topic Modeling on Historical Newspapers

Tze-I Yang
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Eng.
University of North Texas

tze-iyang@my.unt.edu

Andrew J. Torget
Dept. of History

University of North Texas
andrew.torget@unt.edu

Rada Mihalcea
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Eng.
University of North Texas
rada@cs.unt.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we explore the task of automatic
text processing applied to collections of his-
torical newspapers, with the aim of assisting
historical research. In particular, in this first
stage of our project, we experiment with the
use of topical models as a means to identify
potential issues of interest for historians.

1 Newspapers in Historical Research

Surviving newspapers are among the richest sources
of information available to scholars studying peo-
ples and cultures of the past 250 years, particularly
for research on the history of the United States.
Throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
newspapers served as the central venues for nearly
all substantive discussions and debates in American
society. By the mid-nineteenth century, nearly every
community (no matter how small) boasted at least
one newspaper. Within these pages, Americans ar-
gued with one another over politics, advertised and
conducted economic business, and published arti-
cles and commentary on virtually all aspects of so-
ciety and daily life. Only here can scholars find edi-
torials from the 1870s on the latest political contro-
versies, advertisements for the latest fashions, arti-
cles on the latest sporting events, and languid poetry
from a local artist, all within one source. Newspa-
pers, in short, document more completely the full
range of the human experience than nearly any other
source available to modern scholars, providing win-
dows into the past available nowhere else.

Despite their remarkable value, newspapers have
long remained among the most underutilized histor-

ical resources. The reason for this paradox is quite
simple: the sheer volume and breadth of informa-
tion available in historical newspapers has, ironi-
cally, made it extremely difficult for historians to
go through them page-by-page for a given research
project. A historian, for example, might need to
wade through tens of thousands of newspaper pages
in order to answer a single research question (with
no guarantee of stumbling onto the necessary infor-
mation).

Recently, both the research potential and prob-
lem of scale associated with historical newspapers
has expanded greatly due to the rapid digitization of
these sources. The National Endowment for the Hu-
manities (NEH) and the Library of Congress (LOC),
for example, are sponsoring a nationwide historical
digitization project, Chronicling America, geared to-
ward digitizing all surviving historical newspapers
in the United States, from 1836 to the present. This
project recently digitized its one millionth page (and
they project to have more than 20 million pages
within a few years), opening a vast wealth of his-
torical newspapers in digital form.

While projects such as Chronicling America have
indeed increased access to these important sources,
they have also increased the problem of scale that
have long prevent scholars from using these sources
in meaningful ways. Indeed, without tools and
methods capable of handling such large datasets –
and thus sifting out meaningful patterns embedded
within them – scholars find themselves confined to
performing only basic word searches across enor-
mous collections. These simple searches can, in-
deed, find stray information scattered in unlikely

96



places. Such rudimentary search tools, however,
become increasingly less useful to researchers as
datasets continue to grow in size. If a search for a
particular term yields 4,000,000 results, even those
search results produce a dataset far too large for any
single scholar to analyze in a meaningful way us-
ing traditional methods. The age of abundance, it
turns out, can simply overwhelm historical scholars,
as the sheer volume of available digitized historical
newspapers is beginning to do.

In this paper, we explore the use of topic mod-
eling, in an attempt to identify the most important
and potentially interesting topics over a given pe-
riod of time. Thus, instead of asking a historian
to look through thousands of newspapers to identify
what may be interesting topics, we take a reverse
approach, where we first automatically cluster the
data into topics, and then provide these automati-
cally identified topics to the historian so she can nar-
row her scope to focus on the individual patterns in
the dataset that are most applicable to her research.
Of more utility would be where the modeling would
reveal unexpected topics that point towards unusual
patterns previously unknown, thus help shaping a
scholar’s subsequent research.

The topic modeling can be done for any periods
of time, which can consist of individual years or can
cover several years at a time. In this way, we can
see the changes in the discussions and topics of in-
terest over the years. Moreover, pre-filters can also
be applied to the data prior to the topic modeling.
For instance, since research being done in the His-
tory department at our institution is concerned with
the “U. S. cotton economy,” we can use the same ap-
proach to identify the interesting topics mentioned in
the news articles that talk about the issue of “cotton.”

2 Topic Modeling

Topic models have been used by
Newman and Block (2006) and Nelson (2010)1

on newspaper corpora to discover topics and trends
over time. The former used the probabilistic latent
semantic analysis (pLSA) model, and the latter
used the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) model, a
method introduced by Blei et al. (2003). LDA has
also been used by Griffiths and Steyvers (2004) to

1http://americanpast.richmond.edu/dispatch/

find research topic trends by looking at abstracts of
scientific papers. Hall et al. (2008) have similarly
applied LDA to discover trends in the computational
linguistics field. Both pLSA and LDA models are
probabilistic models that look at each document as
a mixture of multinomials or topics. The models
decompose the document collection into groups of
words representing the main topics. See for instance
Table 1, which shows two topics extracted from our
collection.

Topic
worth price black white goods yard silk made ladies
wool lot inch week sale prices pair suits fine quality
state states bill united people men general law gov-
ernment party made president today washington war
committee country public york

Table 1: Example of two topic groups

Boyd-Graber et al. (2009) compared several topic
models, including LDA, correlated topic model
(CTM), and probabilistic latent semantic indexing
(pLSI), and found that LDA generally worked com-
parably well or better than the other two at pre-
dicting topics that match topics picked by the hu-
man annotators. We therefore chose to use a par-
allel threaded SparseLDA implementation to con-
duct the topic modeling, namely UMass Amherst’s
MAchine Learning for LanguagE Toolkit (MAL-
LET)2 (McCallum, 2002). MALLET’s topic mod-
eling toolkit has been used by Walker et al. (2010)
to test the effects of noisy optical character recog-
nition (OCR) data on LDA. It has been used by
Nelson (2010) to mine topics from the Civil War
era newspaper Dispatch, and it has also been used
by Blevins (2010) to examine general topics and to
identify emotional moments from Martha Ballards
Diary.3

3 Dataset

Our sample data comes from a collection of digi-
tized historical newspapers, consisting of newspa-
pers published in Texas from 1829 to 2008. Issues
are segmented by pages with continuous text con-
taining articles and advertisements. Table 2 provides
more information about the dataset.

2http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/
3http://historying.org/2010/04/01/

97



Property
Number of titles 114
Number of years 180
Number of issues 32,745
Number of pages 232,567
Number of tokens 816,190,453

Table 2: Properties of the newspaper collection

3.1 Sample Years and Categories

From the wide range available, we sampled sev-
eral historically significant dates in order to evaluate
topic modeling. These dates were chosen for their
unique characteristics (detailed below), which made
it possible for a professional historian to examine
and evaluate the relevancy of the results.

These are the subcategories we chose as samples:

• Newspapers from 1865-1901: During this pe-
riod, Texans rebuilt their society in the after-
math of the American Civil War. With the abo-
lition of slavery in 1865, Texans (both black
and white) looked to rebuild their post-war
economy by investing heavily in cotton pro-
duction throughout the state. Cotton was con-
sidered a safe investment, and so Texans pro-
duced enough during this period to make Texas
the largest cotton producer in the United States
by 1901. Yet overproduction during that same
period impoverished Texas farmers by driving
down the market price for cotton, and thus a
large percentage went bankrupt and lost their
lands (over 50 percent by 1900). As a re-
sult, angry cotton farmers in Texas during the
1890s joined a new political party, the Pop-
ulists, whose goal was to use the national gov-
ernment to improve the economic conditions of
farmers. This effort failed by 1896, although it
represented one of the largest third-party polit-
ical revolts in American history.

This period, then, was dominated by the rise
of cotton as the foundation of the Texas econ-
omy, the financial failures of Texas farmers,
and their unsuccessful political protests of the
1890s as cotton bankrupted people across the
state. These are the issues we would expect to
emerge as important topics from newspapers in
this category. This dataset consists of 52,555

pages over 5,902 issues.

• Newspapers from 1892: This was the year of
the formation of the Populist Party, which a
large portion of Texas farmers joined for the
U. S. presidential election of 1892. The Pop-
ulists sought to have the U. S. federal gov-
ernment become actively involved in regulat-
ing the economy in places like Texas (some-
thing never done before) in order to prevent
cotton farmers from going further into debt. In
the 1892 election, the Populists did surprisingly
well (garnering about 10 percent of the vote na-
tionally) and won a full 23 percent of the vote
in Texas. This dataset consists of 1,303 pages
over 223 issues.

• Newspapers from 1893: A major economic
depression hit the United States in 1893, dev-
astating the economy in every state, including
Texas. This exacerbated the problem of cotton
within the states economy, and heightened the
efforts of the Populists within Texas to push for
major political reforms to address these prob-
lems. What we see in 1893, then, is a great deal
of stress that should exacerbate trends within
Texas society of that year (and thus the con-
tent of the newspapers). This dataset consists
of 3,490 pages over 494 issues.

• Newspapers from 1929-1930: These years
represented the beginning and initial onset in
the United States of the Great Depression. The
United States economy began collapsing in Oc-
tober 1929, when the stock market crashed and
began a series of economic failures that soon
brought down nearly the entire U. S. econ-
omy. Texas, with its already shaky economic
dependence on cotton, was as devastated as any
other state. As such, this period was marked
by discussions about how to save both the cot-
ton economy of Texas and about possible gov-
ernment intervention into the economy to pre-
vent catastrophe. This dataset consists of 6,590
pages over 973 issues.

Throughout this era, scholars have long recog-
nized that cotton and the economy were the domi-
nating issues. Related to that was the rise and fall

98



load
documents

spelling
correction

named
entity
tagger

stemmer

topic
modeling

topic
modeling

topic
modeling

Figure 1: Work flow

of the Populist Party during the 1890s, as farmers
sought to use the political system as a means of
dealing with their economic problems. As such, we
would expect to see these concerns as major (per-
haps dominating) topics in the newspapers from the
time.

3.1.1 “Cotton” data

Within the date ranges listed above, we also se-
lect all mentions of the topic “cotton” – as pertain-
ing to possible discussion relevant to the “U. S. cot-
ton economy.” Cotton was the dominating economic
force in Texas throughout this period, and historians
have long recognized that issues related to the crop
wielded tremendous influence on the political, so-
cial, and economic development of the state during
this era. Problems related to cotton, for example,
bankrupted half of all Texas farmers between 1865
and 1900, and those financial challenges pushed
farmers to create a major new political party during
the 1890s.

3.2 Data Processing

Before applying topic modeling on our data, some
pre-processing steps were applied. Some challenges
in processing the dataset come from errors intro-
duced by the OCR processing, missing punctua-
tions, and unclear separation between different ar-
ticles on the same page. Multi-stage pre-processing
of the dataset was performed to reduce these errors,
as illustrated in Figure 1.

The first phase to reduce errors starts with spelling
correction, which replaces words using the As-

pell dictionary and de-hyphenates words split across
lines. Suggested replacements are used if they are
within the length normalized edit distance of the
originals. An extra dictionary list of location names
is used with Aspell.

Next, the spelling corrected dataset is run through
the Stanford Named Entity Recognizer (NER).4

Stanford NER system first detects sentences in the
data then labels four classes of named entities: PER-
SON, ORGANIZATION, LOCATION, and MIS-
CELLANEOUS (Finkel et al., 2005). The model
used in conjunction with the tagger is provided by
the software and was trained on the CoNLL 2003
training data using distributional similarity features.
The output is then massaged so that entities with
multiple words would stay together in the topic mod-
eling phase.

Property # of Unique # of Total
LOC entities 1,508,432 8,620,856
ORG entities 6,497,111 14,263,391
PER entities 2,846,906 12,260,535
MISC entities 1,182,845 3,594,916
Named entities 12,035,294 38,739,698

Table 3: Properties of the newspaper collection after
named entity recognition

Lastly, the words that are not tagged as named
entities pass through an English stemmer while the
named entities stay unchanged. We are using the
Snowball stemmer.5

At the end of each of the pre-processing stage, we
extract subsets from the data corresponding to the
sample years mentioned earlier (1865-1901, 1892,
1893, and 1929-1930), which are then used for fur-
ther processing in the topic modeling phase.

We made cursory comparisons of the outputs
of the topic modeling at each of the three stages
(spelling correction, NER, stemming). Table 4
shows sample topic groups generated at the three
stages. We found that skipping the named entity
tagging and stemming phases still gives compara-
ble results. While the named entity tags may give us
additional information (“dallas” and “texas” are lo-
cations), tagging the entire corpus takes up a large
slice of processing time. Stemming after tagging

4http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
5http://snowball.tartarus.org

99



Topic: spell
worth fort city texas county gazette tex special state
company dallas time made yesterday night business
line railroad louis

Topic: spell + NER
city county texas location company yesterday night
time today worth made state morning fort special
business court tex dallas location meeting

Topic: spell + NER + stemmer
state counti citi texas location year ani time made
worth fort peopl good line special tex land busi work
compani

Table 4: Comparison of the three topic output stages:
Each entry contains the top terms for a single topic

may collapse multiple versions of a word together,
but we found that the stemmed words are very hard
to understand such as the case of “business” becom-
ing “busi”. In future work, we may explore using
a less aggressive stemmer that only collapses plu-
rals, but so far the first stage output seems to give
fairly good terms already. Thus, the rest of the pa-
per will discuss using the results of topic modeling
at the spelling correction stage.

4 Historical Topics and Trends

We are interested in automatically discovering gen-
eral topics that appear in a large newspaper corpus.
MALLET is run on each period of interest to find
the top one general topic groups. We use 1000 it-
erations with stopword removal. An extra stopword
list was essential to remove stopwords with errors
introduced by the OCR process. Additionally, we
run MALLET on the 1865-1901 dataset to find the
top ten topic groups using 250 iterations.

In addition, we also find the topics more strongly
associated with “cotton.” The “cotton” examples are
found by extracting each line that contains an in-
stance of “cotton” along with a window of five lines
on either side. MALLET is then run on these “cot-
ton” examples to find the top general topic groups
over 1000 iterations with stopword removal.

5 Evaluation and Discussion

The topic modeling output was evaluated by a histo-
rian (the second author of this paper), who special-
izes in the U.S.-Mexican borderlands in Texas and

is an expert in the historical chronology, events, and
language patterns of our newspaper collection. The
evaluator looked at the output, and determined for
each topic if it was relevant to the period of time un-
der consideration.

The opinion from our expert is that the topic mod-
eling yielded highly useful results. Throughout the
general topics identified for our samples, there is a
consistent theme that a historian would expect from
these newspapers: a heavy emphasis on the eco-
nomics of cotton. For example, we often see words
like “good,” “middling,” and “ordinary,” which were
terms for evaluating the quality of a cotton crop be-
fore it went to market. Other common terms, such as
“crop,” “bale,” “market,” and “closed” (which sug-
gests something like “the price closed at X”) evoke
other topics of discussion of aspects of the buying
and selling of cotton crops.

Throughout the topics, market-oriented language
is the overwhelming and dominate theme through-
out, which is exactly what our expert expected as a
historian of this region and era. You can see, for ex-
ample, that much of the cotton economy was geared
toward supplies the industrial mills in England. The
word “Liverpool,” the name of the main English port
to where Texas cotton was shipped, appears quite
frequently throughout the samples. As such, these
results suggest a high degree of accuracy in identi-
fying dominate and important themes in the corpus.

Within the subsets of these topics, we find more
fine-grained patterns that support this trend, which
lend more credence to the results.

Table 5 summarizes the results for each of
the three analyzes, with accuracy calculated as
follows: Accuracy(topics) = # of relevant topicstotal # of topics
Accuracy(terms) = # of relevant terms in all topicstotal # of terms in all topics . Ta-
bles 6, 7 and 8 show the actual analyzes.

5.1 Interesting Finding

Our historian expert found the topic containing
“houston april general hero san” for the 1865-1901
general results particularly interesting and hypoth-
esized that they may be referring to the Battle of
San Jacinto. The Battle of San Jacinto was the fi-
nal fight in the Texas Revolution of 1836, as Texas
sought to free themselves from Mexican rule. On
April 21, 1836, General Sam Houston led about 900

100



Topics Explanation
black* price* worth* white* goods* yard* silk*
made* lot* week ladies wool* inch* ladles* sale*
prices* pair* suits* fine*

Reflects discussion of the market and sales of goods, with
some words that relate to cotton and others that reflect
other goods being sold alongside cotton (such as wool).

state* people* states* bill* law* made united* party*
men* country* government* county* public* presi-
dent* money* committee* general* great question*

Political language associated with the political debates
that dominated much of newspaper content during this
era. The association of the topic “money” is particularly
telling, as economic and fiscal policy were particularly
important discussion during the era.

clio worth mid city alie fort lino law lour lug thou hut
fur court dally county anil tort iron

Noise and words with no clear association with one an-
other.

tin inn mid tint mill* till oil* ills hit hint lull win hut
ilia til ion lot lii foi

Mostly noise, with a few words associated with cotton
milling and cotton seed.

texas* street* address* good wanted houston* office*
work city* sale main* house* apply man county* av-
enue* room* rooms* land*

These topics appear to reflect geography. The inclusion
of Houston may either reflect the city’s importance as a
cotton market or (more likely) the large number of news-
papers from the collection that came from Houston.

worth* city* fort* texas* county* gazette tex* com-
pany* dallas* miss special yesterday night time john
state made today louis*

These topics appear to reflect geography in north Texas,
likely in relation to Fort Worth and Dallas (which appear
as topics) and probably as a reflection that a large portion
of the corpus of the collection came from the Dallas/Ft.
Worth area.

houston* texas* today city* company post* hero*
general* night morning york men* john held war*
april* left san* meeting

These topics appear to an unlikely subject identified by
the modeling. The words Houston, hero, general,
april and san (perhaps part of San Jacinto) all fit
together for a historian to suggest a sustained discussion
in the newspapers of the April 1836 Battle of San Jac-
into, when General Sam Houston defeated Santa Anna of
Mexico in the Texas Revolution. This is entirely unex-
pected, but the topics appear to fit together closely. That
this would rank so highly within all topics is, too, a sur-
prise. (Most historians, for example, have argued that few
Texans spent much time memorializing such events until
after 1901. This would be quite a discovery if they were
talking about it in such detail before 1901.)

man time great good men years life world long made
people make young water woman back found women
work

Not sure what the connections are here, although the top-
ics clearly all fit together in discussion of the lives of
women and men.

market* cotton* york* good* steady* closed* prices*
corn* texas* wheat* fair* stock* choice* year*
lower* receipts* ton* crop* higher*

All these topics reflect market-driven language related to
the buying and selling cotton and, to a much smaller ex-
tent, other crops such as corn.

tube tie alie time thaw art ton ion aid ant ore end hat
ire aad lour thee con til

Noise with no clear connections.

Table 6: 10 topic groups found for the 1865-1901 main set. Asterisks denote meaningful topic terms.

101



Period Topics Explanation
1865-1901 texas* city* worth* houston* good*

county* fort* state* man* time*
made* street* men* work* york today
company great people

These keywords appear to be related to three things:
(1) geography (reflected in both specific places like
Houston and Fort Worth and more general places
like county, street, and city), (2) discussions of
people (men and man) and (3) time (time and today).

1892 texas* worth* gazette* city* tex*
fort* county* state* good* march*
man* special* made* people* time*
york men days feb

As with the 1865-1901 set, these keywords also appear to
be related to three things: (1) geography, (2) discussions
of people and (3) time.

1893 worth* texas* tin* city* tube* clio*
time* alie* man* good* fort* work*
made street year men county state tex

As with the 1865-1901 set, these keywords also appear to
be related to three things: (1) geography, (2) discussions
of people and (3) time.

1929-1930 tin* texas* today* county* year*
school* good* time* home* city* oil*
man* men* made* work* phone night
week sunday

As with the 1865-1901 set, these keywords also appear to
be related to three things: (1) geography, (2) discussions
of people and (3) time. The time discussion here appears
to be heightened, and the appearance of economic issues
for Texas (oil) makes sense in the context of the onset
of the Great Depression in 1929-30.

Table 7: Main topics for years of interest for the main set

Period Topics Explanation

1865-1901 cotton* texas* good* crop* bales*
county* york* houston* spot mid-
dling* year* corn* market* worth*
oil* closed* special* ordinary* today

All market-oriented language that reflects all aspects of
the cotton market, in particular the evaluation of cotton
quality. The geography of New York (york) and Hous-
ton could reflect their importance in the cotton market or
(just as important) sources of news and information (with
Houston being a central producer of the newspapers in
our corpus).

1892 cotton* bales* spot gazette* special*
march middling* ordinary* steady*
closed* futures* lots* good* texas*
sales* feb low* ton* oil*

Market-oriented language that reflects, in particular, the
buying and selling of cotton on the open market. The
inclusion of February and March 1892, in the context of
these other words associated with the selling of cotton,
suggest those were important months in the marketing of
the crop for 1892.

1893 cotton* ordinary* texas* worth* belt
middling* closed* year bales* good*
route* crop* city* cents* spot oil*
corn* low* return*

Market-oriented language focused on the buying and sell-
ing of cotton.

1929-1930 cotton* texas* county crop* year
good* today* york* points* oil* mar-
ket* farm* made* seed* state* price*
tin bales* july*

Market-oriented language concerning cotton. What is
interesting here is the inclusion of words like state,
market, and price, which did not show up in the pre-
vious sets. The market-language here is more broadly as-
sociated with the macro-economic situation (with explicit
references to the market and price, which seems to
reflect the heightened concern at that time about the fu-
ture of the cotton market with the onset of the Great De-
pression and what role the state would play in that.

Table 8: Main topics for the cotton subset

102



Accuracy
Topic Groups Topics Terms

G
en

er
al

Ten for 1865-1901 60% 45.79% (74.56%)
One for 1865-1901 100% 73.68%
One for 1892 100% 78.95%
One for 1893 100% 63.16%
One for 1929-1930 100% 78.95%

C
ot

to
n One for 1865-1901 100% 89.47%

One for 1892 100% 84.21%
One for 1893 100% 84.21%
One for 1929-1930 100% 84.21%

Table 5: Accuracy of topic modeling: In parenthesis is
the term accuracy calculated using relevant topics only.

Texans against Mexican general Antonio Lopez de
Santa Anna. Over the course of an eighteen minute
battle, Houston’s forces routed Santa Anna’s army.
The victory at San Jacinto secured the independence
of Texas from Mexico and became a day of celebra-
tion in Texas during the years that followed.

Most historians have argued that Texas paid little
attention to remembering the Battle of San Jacinto
until the early twentieth century. These topic mod-
eling results, however, suggest that far more atten-
tion was paid to this battle in Texas newspapers than
scholars had previously thought.

We extracted all the examples from the corpus for
the years 1865-1901 that contain ten or more of the
top terms in the topic and also contain the word “jac-
into”. Out of a total of 220 snippets that contain
“jacinto”, 125 were directly related to the battle and
its memory. 95 were related to other things. The ma-
jority of these snippets came from newspapers pub-
lished in Houston, which is located near San Jacinto,
with a surge of interest in the remembrance of the
battle around the Aprils of 1897-1899.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we explored the use of topical models
applied on historical newspapers to assist historical
research. We have found that we can automatically
generate topics that are generally good, however we
found that once we generated a set of topics, we can-
not decide if it is mundane or interesting without an
expert and, for example, would have been oblivious
to the significance of the San Jacinto topic. We agree
with Block (2006) that “topic simulation is only a
tool” and have come to the conclusion that it is es-

sential that an expert in the field contextualize these
topics and evaluate them for relevancy.

We also found that although our corpus contains
noise from OCR errors, it may not need expen-
sive error correction processing to provide good re-
sults when using topic models. We may explore
combining the named entity tagged data with a less
aggressive stemmer and, additionally, evaluate the
usefulness of not discarding the unstemmed words
but maintaining their association with their stemmed
counterpart.

Acknowledgment

We would like to thank Jon Christensen and
Cameron Blevins from Stanford, who have been
working with us on the larger project, “Mapping
Historical Texts: Combining Text-Mining and Geo-
Visualization to Unlock the Research Potential of
Historical Newspapers”, which subsumes the work
we have presented in this paper. This work has
been partly supported by the NEH under Digital
Humanities Start-Up Grant (HD-51188-10). Any
views, findings, conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this publication do not necessarily rep-
resent those of the National Endowment for the Hu-
manities.

References

[Blei et al.2003] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and
Michael I. Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation.
The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:993–
1022.

[Blevins2010] Cameron Blevins. 2010. Topic Modeling
Martha Ballard’s Diary.

[Block2006] Sharon Block. 2006. Doing More with Dig-
itization: An Introduction to Topic Modeling of Early
American Sources. Common-Place, 6(2), January.

[Boyd-Graber et al.2009] Jonathan Boyd-Graber, Jordan
Chang, Sean Gerrish, Chong Wang, and David M.
Blei. 2009. Reading tea leaves: How humans interpret
topic models. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems.

[Finkel et al.2005] Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager,
and Christopher Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-
local information into information extraction systems
by gibbs sampling. In Proceedings of the 43nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL 2005), pages 363–370.

103



[Griffiths and Steyvers2004] Thomas L. Griffiths and
Mark Steyvers. 2004. Finding scientific topics. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 101(Suppl 1):5228.

[Hall et al.2008] David Hall, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Christopher Manning. 2008. Studying the History of
Ideas Using Topic Models. In Proceedings from the
EMNLP 2008: Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, October.

[McCallum2002] Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002.
MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit.

[Nelson2010] Robert K. Nelson. 2010. Mining the Dis-
patch.

[Newman and Block2006] David J. Newman and Sharon
Block. 2006. Probabilistic topic decomposition of
an eighteenth-century American newspaper. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 57(6):753–767.

[Walker et al.2010] Daniel D. Walker, William B. Lund,
and Eric K. Ringger. 2010. Evaluating models of
latent document semantics in the presence of OCR
errors. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 240–250. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

104


