










































Improving a Method for Quantifying Readers' Impressions of News Articles with a Regression Equation


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 87–95,
24 June, 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Improving a Method for Quantifying Readers’ Impressions of News Articles
with a Regression Equation

Tadahiko Kumamoto
Chiba Institute of Technology

2-17-1, Tsudanuma, Narashino,
Chiba 275-0016, Japan

kumamoto@net.it-chiba.ac.jp

Yukiko Kawai
Kyoto Sangyo University
Motoyama, Kamigamo,

Kita-Ku, Kyoto 603-8555,
Japan

Katsumi Tanaka
Kyoto University

Yoshida-Honmachi,
Sakyo-Ku, Kyoto 606-8501,

Japan

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on the impressions that
people gain from reading articles in Japanese
newspapers, and we propose a method for
extracting and quantifying these impressions
in real numbers. The target impressions are
limited to those represented by three bipo-
lar scales, “Happy – Sad,” “Glad – Angry,”
and “Peaceful – Strained,” and the strength of
each impression is computed as a real num-
ber between 1 and 7. First, we implement a
method for computing impression values of
articles using an impression lexicon. This
lexicon represents a correlation between the
words appearing in articles and the influence
of these words on the readers’ impressions,
and is created from a newspaper database us-
ing a word co-occurrence based method. We
considered that some gaps would occur be-
tween values computed by such an unsuper-
vised method and those judged by the readers,
and we conducted experiments with 900 sub-
jects to identify what gaps actually occurred.
Consequently, we propose a new approach
that uses regression equations to correct im-
pression values computed by the method. Our
investigation shows that accuracy is improved
by a range of 23.2% to 42.7% by using regres-
sion equations.

1 Introduction

In recent years, many researchers have been at-
tempting to model the role of emotion in interac-
tions between people or between people and com-
puters, and to establish how to make computers rec-
ognize and express emotions (Picard, 1997; Mas-

saro, 1998; Bartneck, 2001). However, there have
not been many studies that have extracted the im-
pressions that people form after seeing or listening
to text and multimedia content. For multimedia con-
tent such as music and images, several impression-
based retrieval methods have been proposed for lo-
cating paintings and pieces of music that convey im-
pressions similar to those registered by users (Sato
et al., 2000; Kumamoto, 2005; Takayama et al.,
2005). By comparison, there are only a few studies
that have extracted the readers’ impressions gained
from text such as news articles, novels, and poems
(Kiyoki et al., 1994; Kumamoto and Tanaka, 2005;
Lin et al., 2008).

In this paper, we focus on the impressions that
people gain from reading articles in Japanese news-
papers, and we propose a method for extracting and
quantifying these impressions in real numbers. The
target impressions are limited to those represented
by three bipolar scales, “Happy – Sad,” “Glad – An-
gry,” and “Peaceful – Strained,” and the strength
of each impression is computed as a real number
between 1 and 7 denoting a position on the corre-
sponding scale. Then, interpretation of the position
is grounded based on a seven-point scale. For exam-
ple, on the scale “Happy – Sad,” the score 1 equals
“Happy,” the middle score 4 denotes “Neither happy
nor sad,” and the score 7 equals “Sad.” If the impres-
sion value of an article is 2.5, then the average reader
will experience an intermediate impression between
“Comparatively happy (2)” and “A little happy (3)”
from reading the article.

First, we assumed that words causing a certain im-
pression from articles co-occur often with impres-

87



sion words that express that impression, and do not
co-occur very often with impression words that ex-
press the opposite impression. Proceeding with this
assumption, we implemented a method for analyz-
ing co-occurrence relationships between words in
every article extracted from a newspaper database.
We then created an impression lexicon. This lexicon
represents a correlation between the words appear-
ing in articles and the influence of these words on
the readers’ impressions. We then implemented a
method that computes impression values of articles
using the lexicon. We considered that some gaps
occur between values computed by such an unsu-
pervised method and those judged by the readers,
and we conducted experiments with 900 subjects to
identify what gaps actually occurred. In these exper-
iments, each subject read ten news articles and esti-
mated her/his impressions of each article using the
three bipolar scales. Thereafter, for each scale, we
drew a scatter diagram to identify the potential cor-
respondence relationships between the values com-
puted by the method and those judged by the sub-
jects. As a result, we found that the correspondence
relationships could be approximately represented by
cubic and quintic regression equations. We, there-
fore, propose a new approach that uses regression
equations to correct impression values computed by
the method.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we present related work. In Section 3,
we present the design of the three bipolar scales, a
method for the automated construction of an impres-
sion lexicon, and a method for computing impres-
sion values of articles using this lexicon. In Section
4, we analyze the correspondence relationships be-
tween values computed using the lexicon and those
judged by the readers, and based on the results of
this analysis, we propose a method of using regres-
sion equations to correct impression values com-
puted using the lexicon. In Section 5, we investi-
gate how far accuracy can be improved by using the
regression equations. Finally, in Section 6, we con-
clude the paper.

2 Related Work

There are many studies that identify information
givers’ emotions from some sort of information that

they have transmitted (Cowie et al., 2001; Forbes-
Riley and Litman, 2004; Kleinsmith and Bianchi-
Berthouze, 2007). On the other hand, there are only
a few studies that have extracted the impressions
which information receivers gain from the text that
they have received (Kiyoki et al., 1994; Kumamoto
and Tanaka, 2005; Lin et al., 2008).

Kiyoki et al. (1994) have proposed a mathemat-
ical model of meanings, and this model allows a
semantic relation to be established between words
according to a given context. Their method uses a
mathematical model and creates a semantic space
for selecting the impression words that appropriately
express impressions of text according to a given con-
text. In other words, this method does not quantify
impressions of text, but just selects one or more im-
pression words expressing the impressions. Thus,
their aim differs from ours.

Lin et al. (2008) have proposed a method for clas-
sifying news articles into emotion categories from
the reader’s perspective. They have adopted a ma-
chine learning approach to build a classifier for the
method. That is, they obtained Chinese news ar-
ticles from a specific news site on the web which
allows a user to cast a vote for one of eight emo-
tions, “happy,” “sad,” “angry,” “surprising,” “bor-
ing,” “heartwarming,” “awesome,” and “useful.”
They collected 37,416 news articles along with their
voting statistics, and developed a support vector
machine-based classifier using 25,975 of them as
training data. However, their method just classifies
articles into emotion classes and does not quantify
the reader’s emotions. Thus, their aim also differs
from ours.

Kumamoto and Tanaka (2005) have proposed a
word co-occurrence-based method for quantifying
readers’ impressions of news articles in real num-
bers. However, this method is similar to Turney’s
method (Turney, 2002), and it is considered to be a
Japanese version of this method in the broad sense.
Turney’s method is one for classifying various gen-
res of written reviews into “recommended” or “not
recommended.” His method extracts phrases with
specific patterns from text, and calculates pointwise
mutual information PMI(i, “excellent”) between a
phrase i and the reference word “excellent,” and
PMI(i, “poor”) between the same phrase i and the
reference word “poor.” Then, PMI(i, w) is calcu-

88



lated based on a co-occurrence relationship between
i and w. Next, the semantic orientation (SO) of the
phrase i is obtained by calculating the difference be-
tween PMI(i, “excellent”) and PMI(i, “poor”). Fi-
nally, SO of the text is determined by averaging
the SO of all the phrases. In contrast, Kumamoto
et al.’s method quantifies impressions in real num-
bers, and it can deal with impressions represented
by two bipolar scales, “Sad – Glad” and “Angry –
Pleased.” For that purpose, reference words are se-
lected for each scale. Since all the reference words
are Japanese, Kumamoto et al,’s method extracts
readers’ impressions from Japanese articles only.
Also, conditional probabilities are used instead of
PMI. Since these methods fit our assumption that
words causing a certain impression of articles co-
occur often with the impression words that express
that impression, and do not co-occur very often with
impression words that express the opposite impres-
sion, we decided to implement a new method based
on Kumamoto et al.’s method.

3 Computing impression values of news
articles using an impression lexicon

3.1 Determining target impressions

Kumamoto (2010) has designed six bipolar scales
suitable for representing impressions of news arti-
cles: “Happy – Sad,” “Glad – Angry,” “Interesting –
Uninteresting,” “Optimistic – Pessimistic,” “Peace-
ful – Strained,” and “Surprising – Common.” First,
he conducted nine experiments, in each of which
100 subjects read ten news articles and estimated
their impressions on a scale from 1 to 5 for each of
42 impression words. These 42 impression words
were manually selected from a Japanese thesaurus
(Ohno and Hamanishi, 1986) as words that can ex-
press impressions of news articles. Next, factor anal-
ysis was applied to the data obtained in the experi-
ments, and consequently the 42 words were divided
into four groups: negative words, positive words,
two words that were “uninteresting” and “common,”
and two words that were “surprising” and “unex-
pected.” In the meantime, after cluster analysis of
the data, the 42 words were divided into ten groups.
Based on the results of both analyses, the author cre-
ated the six bipolar scales presented above. How-
ever, he showed that impressions on the “Surpris-

ing – Common” scale differed greatly among indi-
viduals in terms of their perspective. In addition,
he insisted that processing according to the back-
ground knowledge, interest, and character of indi-
viduals was required to deal with the impressions
represented by the two scales “Interesting – Unin-
teresting” and “Optimistic – Pessimistic.” There-
fore, we decided not to use these three scales at
the present stage, and adopted the remaining three
scales, “Happy – Sad,” “Glad – Angry,” and “Peace-
ful – Strained.”

3.2 Constructing an impression lexicon

An impression lexicon plays an important role in
computing impressions of news articles. In this pa-
per, we describe the implementation of a method
for automatically constructing an impression lexicon
based on Kumamoto et al.’s method as described ear-
lier.

First, while two contrasting reference words are
used for each scale in their method, two contrasting
sets, each consisting of multiple reference words, are
used in this paper.

Next, let the set of reference words which ex-
presses an impression at the left of a scale be SL,
and let the set of reference words which expresses
an impression at the right of the scale be SR. Arti-
cles including one or more reference words in SL or
SR are all extracted from a newspaper database, and
the number of reference words belonging to each
set is counted in each article. For this we used the
2002 to 2006 editions of the Yomiuri Newspaper
Text Database as the newspaper database. Then, let
the articles in each of which the number of refer-
ence words belonging to SL is larger than the num-
ber of reference words belonging to SR be AL, and
let the number of articles in AL be NL. Let the arti-
cles in each of which the number of reference words
belonging to SL is smaller than the number of ref-
erence words belonging to SR be AR, and let the
number of articles in AR be NR. Next, all words are
extracted from each of AL and AR except for par-
ticles, adnominal words1, and demonstratives, and
the document frequency of each word is measured.
Then, let the document frequency in AL of a word w

1This part of speech exists only in Japanese, not in English.
For example, “that,” “so called,” and “of no particular distinc-
tion” are dealt with as adnominal words in Japanese.

89



Table 1: Specifications of our impression lexicon.

Scales # of entries WL WR
Happy – Sad 387,428 4.90 3.80
Glad – Angry 350,388 4.76 3.82
Peaceful – Strained 324,590 3.91 4.67

be NL(w), and let the document frequency in AR of
a word w be NR(w). The revised conditional prob-
abilities of a word w are defined as follows.

PL(w) =
NL(w)

NL
, PR(w) =

NR(w)
NR

These formula are slightly different from the condi-
tional probabilities used in their method, and only
articles that satisfy the assumptions described above
are used in order to calculate PL(w) and PR(w).

Finally, the impression value v(w) of a word w is
calculated using these PL(w) and PR(w) as follows.

v(w) =
PL(w) ∗WL

PL(w) ∗WL + PR(w) ∗WR

WL = log10 NL, WR = log10 NR

That is, a weighted interior division ratio v(w) of
PL(w) and PR(w) is calculated using these formu-
las, and stored as an impression value of w in the
scale “SL – SR” in an impression lexicon. Note that
WL and WR denote weights, and the larger NL and
NR are, the heavier WL and WR are.

The numbers of entries in the impression lexicon
constructed as above are shown in Table 1 together
with the values of WL and WR obtained. Further,
the two contrasting sets of reference words2, which
were used in creating the impression lexicon, are
enumerated in Table 2 for each scale. These words
were determined after a few of trial and error and
are based on two criteria, namely (i) it is a verb or
adjective that expresses either of two contrasting im-
pressions represented by a scale, and (ii) as far as
possible, it does not suggest other types of impres-
sions.

2These words were translated into English by the authors.

Table 2: Reference words prepared for each scale.

Scales Reference words
Happy tanoshii (happy), tanoshimu (en-

joy), tanosimida (look forward to),
tanoshigeda (joyous)

– Sad kanashii (sad), kanashimu (suffer
sadness), kanashimida (feel sad),
kanashigeda (look sad)

Glad ureshii (glad), yorokobashii
(blessed), yorokobu (feel delight)

– Angry ikaru/okoru (get angry), ikidooru
(become irate), gekidosuru (get en-
raged)

Peaceful nodokada (peaceful), nagoyakada
(friendly), sobokuda (simple), an-
shinda (feel easy)

– Strained kinpakusuru (strained), bukimida
(scared), fuanda (be anxious), os-
oreru (fear)

3.3 Computing impression values of articles

For each scale, the impression value of an article
is calculated as follows. First, the article is seg-
mented into words using “Juman” (Kurohashi et al.,
1994)3, one of the most powerful Japanese morpho-
logical analysis systems, and an impression value
for each word is obtained by consulting the impres-
sion lexicon constructed as described in 3.2. Sev-
enteen rules that we designed are then applied to
the Juman output. For example, there is a rule
that a phrase of a negative form like “sakujo-shi-
nai (do not erase)” should not be divided into a verb
“shi (do),” a suffix “nai (not),” and an action noun
“sakujo (erasion)” but should be treated as a single
verb “sakujo-shi-nai (do-not-erase).” There is also a
rule that an assertive phrase such as “hoomuran-da
(is a home run)” should not be divided into a cop-
ula “da (is)” and a noun “hoomuran (a home run)”
but should form a single copula “hoomuran-da (is-
a-home-run).” Further, there is a rule that a phrase
with a prefix, such as “sai-charenji (re-challenge)”
should not be divided into a prefix “sai (re)” and an

3Since there are no boundary markers between words in
Japanese, word segmentation is needed to identify individual
words.

90



action noun “charenji (challenge)” but should form a
single action noun “sai-charenji (re-challenge).” All
the rules are applied to the Juman output in creating
an impression lexicon and computing the impression
values of news articles. Finally, an average of the
impression values obtained for all the words except
for particles, adnominal words, and demonstratives
is calculated and presented as an impression value
of the article.

4 Correcting computed impression values

4.1 Analyzing a correspondence relationship
between computed and manually rated
values

We considered that some gaps would occur be-
tween impression values computed by an unsuper-
vised method such as the one we used and those of
the readers. We, therefore, conducted experiments
in which a total of 900 people participated as sub-
jects, and identified what gaps actually occurred.

First, we conducted experiments with 900 sub-
jects, and obtained data that described correspon-
dence relationships between news articles and im-
pressions to be extracted from the articles. That is,
the 900 subjects were randomly divided into nine
equal groups, each group consisting of 50 males and
50 females, and 90 articles which were selected from
the 2002 edition of the Mainichi Newspaper Text
Database4 were randomly divided into nine equal
parts. Then, each subject was asked to read the ten
articles presented in a random order and rate each
of them using three seven-point bipolar scales pre-
sented in a random order. The scales we used were
“Happy – Sad,” “Glad – Angry,” and “Peaceful –
Strained,” and the subjects were asked to assess, on
a scale of 1 to 7, the intensity of each impression,
represented by each scale, from reading a target ar-
ticle. For example, on the scale “Happy – Sad,” the
score 1 equaled “Happy,” the middle score 4 denoted
“Neither happy nor sad,” and the score 7 equaled
“Sad.” After the experiments, for each scale, we cal-
culated an average of the 100 values rated for every
article. We regarded this average as the impression
value to be extracted from the article. Note that, in
these experiments, we presented only the first para-

4This database is different from the Yomiuri newspaper
database we used in creating an impression lexicon.

graphs of the original news articles to the subjects.
This procedure was derived from the fact that people
can understand the outline of a news article by just
reading the first paragraph of the article, as well as
the fact that impressions of an article may change in
every paragraph. Development of a method for fol-
lowing the change of impressions in an article will
be a future project.

Next, impression values for the first paragraphs
of the 90 articles were computed by the method we
implemented in 3.3, where the first paragraphs were
identical to those presented to the subjects in the ex-
periments. Note that, according to the definition of
our equations, these impression values are close to
1 when impressions on the left of a scale are felt
strongly, and are close to 0 when impressions on the
right of a scale are felt strongly. We therefore used
the following formula and converted the computed
value into a value between 1.0 and 7.0.

Converted = (1− Computed) ∗ 6 + 1

Next, for each scale, we drew a scatter diagram
to identify the potential correspondence relationship
between these converted values and the averages ob-
tained in the experiments, as illustrated in Figure 1.
We can see from any of the scatter diagrams that the
impression values manually rated by the subjects are
positively correlated with those automatically com-
puted by the method we implemented. In fact, their
coefficients of correlation are 0.76, 0.84, and 0.78
from the case at the top of the figure, which are all
high. This not only means that, as an overall trend,
the underlying assumption of this paper is satisfied,
but also indicates that the correspondence relation-
ships can be represented by regression equations.

4.2 Correcting computed impression values
with regression equations

Next, we applied regression analysis to the con-
verted values and the averages, where the converted
values were used as the explanatory variable, and the
averages were used as the objective variable. In this
regression analysis, various regression models (Kan,
2000) such as linear function, logarithmic function,
logistic curve, quadratic function, cubic function,
quartic function, and quintic function were used on

91



2.0

3.0

4.0

5.0

6.0

2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 

Converted Values

M
a
n
u
a
lly

 r
a
te

d

(a) In the case of “Happy – Sad”

2.0

3.0

4.0

5.0

6.0

2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 

Converted Values

M
a
n
u
a
lly

 r
a
te

d

(b) In the case of “Glad – Angry”

2.0

3.0

4.0

5.0

6.0

2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 

Converted Values

M
a
n
u
a
lly

 r
a
te

d

(c) In the case of “Peaceful – Strained”

Figure 1: Scatter diagrams and regression equations.

a trial basis. As a result, the regression equation,
which had the highest coefficient of determination,
was determined as an optimal function denoting the
correspondence relationship between the converted
values and the averages in each scale. This means
that, for each scale, the impression value of an ar-
ticle was more accurately obtained by correcting a
value computed by the method we implemented us-
ing the corresponding regression equation.

The regression equations obtained here were
“−1.636x3 +18.972x2−70.686x+88.515” for the
“Happy – Sad,” “2.385x5−46.872x4+363.660x3−
1391.589x2 +2627.063x−1955.306” for the “Glad
– Angry,” and “−1.714x3 + 21.942x2 − 90.792x +
124.822” for the “Peaceful –Strained,” and they are

Table 3: Change of the Euclidean distance by using re-
gression equations.

Scales DBefore DAfter Rate1
Happy – Sad 0.94 0.67 29.0%
Glad – Angry 0.83 0.47 42.7%
Peaceful 0.82 0.63 23.2%

– Strained

already illustrated on the corresponding scatter dia-
grams in Figure 1. Their coefficients of determina-
tion were 0.63, 0.81, 0.64, respectively, which were
higher than 0.5 in all scales. This means that the
results of regression analysis were good. In addi-
tion, we can see from Figure 1 that each regression
equation fits the shape of the corresponding scatter
diagram.

5 Performance Evaluation

First, we estimated the accuracy of the proposed
method for learned data. For that, we used the data
obtained in the experiments described in 4.1, and in-
vestigated how far gaps between the computed val-
ues and the averages of the manually rated values
were reduced by using the regression equations. The
results are shown in Table 3. In this table, DBefore de-
notes the Euclidean distance between the computed
values without correction and the averages for the 90
articles, and DAfter denotes the Euclidean distance
between the values corrected with the correspond-
ing regression equation and the averages for the 90
articles. Then Rate1 was calculated as an improve-
ment rate by the following formula:

Rate1 =
DBefore −DAfter

DBefore
× 100

Table 3 shows fairly high improvement rates in all
the scales, and hence we find that accuracy is im-
proved by using the regression equations. In partic-
ular, DAfter for the scale “Glad – Angry” is less than
0.5 or a half of a step and is sufficiently small.

Next, we calculated the accuracy of the method
(Kumamoto and Tanaka, 2005) on which the pro-
posed method is based, and compared it with that of
the proposed method. The results are shown in Ta-
ble 4. In this table, DBaseline denotes the Euclidean

92



Table 4: Comparison with a baseline method.

Scales DBaseline DProposed Rate2
Happy – Sad 0.99 0.67 32.3%
Glad – Angry 0.82 0.47 42.7%
Peaceful 1.00 0.63 37.0%

– Strained

distance between the values computed by the base-
line method and the averages for the 90 articles, and
DProposed is equivalent to DAfter in Table 3. Then
Rate2 is calculated as an improvement rate by the
following formula:

Rate2 =
DBaseline −DProposed

DBaseline
× 100

Table 4 also shows that fairly high improvement
rates were obtained in all the scales. Note that the
baseline method was implemented in the following
way. First, a pair of reference words was prepared
for each scale. Actually, the pair “tanoshii (happy)”
and “kanashii (sad)” was used for the scale “Happy
– Sad”; the pair “ureshii (glad)” and “ikaru/okoru
(get angry)” for the scale “Glad – Angry”; and
“nodokada (peaceful)” and “kinpakusuru (strained)”
for the scale “Peaceful – Strained.” Next, an impres-
sion lexicon for the baseline method was constructed
from the news articles which were used to construct
our impression lexicon.

The results shown in Tables 3 and 4 prove that the
proposed method has a high level of accuracy for the
articles used in obtaining the regression equations.

As the next step, we estimated the accuracy of the
proposed method for unlearned data. For that, we
performed five-fold cross-validation using the data
obtained in 4.1. First, the data were randomly di-
vided into five equal parts, each part consisting of
data for 18 articles. Next, a learned data set was cre-
ated arbitrarily from four of the five parts, or data
for 72 articles, and an unlearned data set was cre-
ated from the remaining part, or data for 18 arti-
cles. Regression analysis was then applied to the
learned data set. As a result, an optimal regres-
sion equation that expressed a correspondence rela-
tionship between the computed values and the av-
erages of the manually rated values in the learned

Table 5: Estimation of overall accuracy based on five-fold
cross-validation.

Scales DMean DMax DMin
Happy – Sad 0.69 0.78 0.57
Glad – Angry 0.49 0.58 0.42
Peaceful – Strained 0.64 0.81 0.50

Table 6: Influence of size of target newspaper database to
Euclidean distance.

Editions
Scales 2002-2006 2005-2006 2006
Happy – Sad 0.67 0.69 0.73
Glad – Angry 0.47 0.50 0.54
Peaceful 0.63 0.65 0.69

– Strained

data set was obtained for each scale. Next, we cal-
culated the Euclidean distance between the averages
for 18 articles in the unlearned data set and the val-
ues which were computed from the 18 articles them-
selves and corrected with the corresponding optimal
regression equation. The results are shown in Ta-
ble 5. In this table, DMean, DMax, and DMin de-
note the mean, maximum, and minimum values of
the five Euclidean distances calculated from a total
of five unlearned data sets, respectively. Comparing
DProposed in Table 4 and DMean in Table 5, we find
that they are almost equivalent. This means that the
proposed method is also effective for unlearned data.

Finally, we investigated how the accuracy of the
proposed method was influenced by the size of the
newspaper database used in constructing an impres-
sion lexicon. First, using each of the 2002 to 2006
editions, the 2005 to 2006 editions, and the 2006
edition only, impression lexicons were constructed.
Three regression equations were then obtained for
each lexicon in the same way. Next, for each scale,
we calculated the Euclidean distance between the
values which were computed from all the 90 arti-
cles using each lexicon and corrected with the corre-
sponding regression equation, and the averages ob-
tained in 4.1. The results are shown in Table 6. Table
6 shows that the accuracy of the proposed method is
reduced slightly as the size of newspaper database

93



becomes smaller. Conversely, this suggests that the
accuracy of the proposed method can be improved as
the size of newspaper database increases. We would
like to verify this suggestion in the near future.

6 Conclusion

This paper has proposed a method for quantitatively
identifying the impressions that people gain from
reading Japanese news articles. The key element
of the proposed method lies in a new approach that
uses regression equations to correct impression val-
ues computed from news articles by an unsuper-
vised method. Our investigation has shown that ac-
curacy for learned data is improved by a range of
23.2% to 42.7% by using regression equations, and
that accuracy for unlearned data is almost equiva-
lent to the accuracy for learned data. Note that, in
this paper, the target impressions are limited to those
represented by three bipolar scales, “Happy – Sad,”
“Glad – Angry,” and “Peaceful – Strained,” and the
strength of each impression is computed as a real
number between 1 and 7 denoting a position on the
corresponding scale.

Our main future work is described below. Since
the proposed method uses a word co-occurrence
based method to construct an impression lexicon, it
may not be effective for other types of scale. We
therefore need to examine and consider what kinds
of scales are suitable for the proposed method. Per-
sonal adaptation is important in methods dealing
with impressions created by such artworks as music
and paintings. In order to develop a method for more
accurately quantifying readers’ impressions of news
articles, we will also tackle this personal adaptation
problem. Further, we plan to integrate the proposed
method into a search engine, a recommendation sys-
tem, and an electronic book reader, and to verify the
effectiveness of readers’ impressions of news arti-
cles in creating a ranking index for information re-
trieval and recommendation, or in determining the
type of emotional speech used in reading an e-paper.

Acknowledgments

A part of this work was sponsored by National In-
stitute of Information and Communications Tech-
nology (NICT), Japan, and was achieved under the
project named “Evaluating Credibility of Web Infor-

mation.”

References

Christoph Bartneck. 2001. How convincing is Mr. Data’s
smile: Affective expressions of machines. User Mod-
eling and User-Adapted Interaction, 11:279–295.

R. Cowie, E. Douglas-Cowie, N. Tsapatsoulis, G. Votsis,
S. Kollias, W. Fellenz, and J. G. Taylor. 2001. Emo-
tion recognition in human-computer interaction. IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, 18:32–80.

Kate Forbes-Riley and Diane J. Litman. 2004. Predict-
ing emotion in spoken dialogue from multiple knowl-
edge sources. In Proc. of Human Language Technol-
ogy Conf. of the NAACL, pages 201–208.

Tamio Kan. 2000. Multivariate Statistical Analysis.
Gendai-Sugakusha, Kyoto, Japan.

Yasushi Kiyoki, Takashi Kitagawa, and Takanari
Hayama. 1994. A metadatabase system for seman-
tic image search by a mathematical model of meaning.
SIGMOD Rec., 23:34–41.

Andrea Kleinsmith and Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze. 2007.
Recognizing affective dimensions from body posture.
In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Affective Computing and
Intelligent Interaction, volume LNCS 4738, pages 48–
58, September.

Tadahiko Kumamoto and Katsumi Tanaka. 2005. Pro-
posal of impression mining from news articles. In
Proc. of Int. Conf. on Knowledge-Based Intelligent
Information and Engineering Systems, volume LNAI
3681, pages 901–910. Springer.

Tadahiko Kumamoto. 2005. Design and evaluation of
a music retrieval scheme that adapts to the user’s im-
pressions. In Proc. of Int. Conf. on User Modeling,
volume LNAI 3538, pages 287–296. Springer.

Tadahiko Kumamoto. 2010. Design of impression scales
for assessing impressions of news articles. In Proc. of
DASFAA Workshop on Social Networks and Social
Media Mining on the Web, volume LNCS 6193, pages
285–295.

Sadao Kurohashi, Toshihisa Nakamura, Yuji Matsumoto,
and Makoto Nagao. 1994. Improvements of Japanese
morphological analyzer JUMAN. In Proc. of the
Int. Workshop on Sharable Natural Language Re-
sources, pages 22–28, Nara, Japan.

Kevin Hsin-Yih Lin, Changhua Yang, and Hsin-Hsi
Chen. 2008. Emotion classification of online news
articles from the reader’s perspective. In Proc. of the
IEEE/WIC/ACM Int. Conf. on Web Intelligence and In-
telligent Agent Technology, pages 220–226, Washing-
ton, DC, USA. IEEE Computer Society.

Dominic W. Massaro. 1998. Perceiving Talking Faces:
From Speech Perception to a Behavioral Principle.
MIT Press, USA.

94



Susumu Ohno and Masando Hamanishi, editors. 1986.
Ruigo-Kokugo-Jiten. Kadokawa Shoten Publishing
Co.,Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.

Rosalind W. Picard. 1997. Affective Computing. MIT
Press.

Akira Sato, Jun Ogawa, and Hajime Kitakami. 2000. An
impression-based retrieval system of music collection.
In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Knowledge-Based Intelli-
gent Information Engineering Systems & Allied Tech-
nologies, volume 2, pages 856–859, Brighton, UK.

Tsuyoshi Takayama, Hirotaka Sasaki, and Shigeyuki
Kuroda. 2005. Personalization by relevance ranking
feedback in impression-based retrieval for multimedia
database. Journal of Systematics, Cybernetics and In-
formatics, 3(2):85–89.

Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?
semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifi-
cation of reviews. In Proc. of the Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
417–424, Philadelphia, USA.

95


