










































Subword and Spatiotemporal Models for Identifying Actionable Information in Haitian Kreyol


Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pages 68–77,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23–24 June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Subword and spatiotemporal models for identifying actionable information
in Haitian Kreyol

Robert Munro
Department of Linguistics

Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305

rmunro@stanford.edu

Abstract

Crisis-affected populations are often able to
maintain digital communications but in a
sudden-onset crisis any aid organizations will
have the least free resources to process such
communications. Information that aid agen-
cies can actually act on, ‘actionable’ informa-
tion, will be sparse so there is great poten-
tial to (semi)automatically identify actionable
communications. However, there are hurdles
as the languages spoken will often be under-
resourced, have orthographic variation, and
the precise definition of ‘actionable’ will be
response-specific and evolving. We present
a novel system that addresses this, drawing
on 40,000 emergency text messages sent in
Haiti following the January 12, 2010 earth-
quake, predominantly in Haitian Kreyol. We
show that keyword/ngram-based models us-
ing streaming MaxEnt achieve up to F=0.21
accuracy. Further, we find current state-of-
the-art subword models increase this substan-
tially to F=0.33 accuracy, while modeling the
spatial, temporal, topic and source contexts of
the messages can increase this to a very ac-
curate F=0.86 over direct text messages and
F=0.90-0.97 over social media, making it a vi-
able strategy for message prioritization.

1 Introduction

The recent proliferation of cellphone technologies
has resulted in rapid increases in the volume of in-
formation coming out of crisis-affected regions. In
the wake of the January 12, 2010 earthquake in
Haiti local emergency response services were inop-
erable but 70-80% of cell-towers were quickly re-

stored. With 83%/67% of men/women possessing
a cellphone, the nation remained largely connected.
People within Haiti were texting, calling and inter-
acting with social media, but aid agencies were not
equipped to process so much information. This is
because in any sudden onset crisis, this flood of in-
formation out of the region coincides with crisis-
response organizations already working at capacity
as they move in. The problem definition is clear:
how can we filter this information to identify action-
able intelligence to support relief efforts?

The solution is complicated. There may be
few resources for the language(s) of the crisis-
affected population and the ratio of actionable to
non-actionable information will often be very large,
especially when reported through social-media and
other non-official channels. In the absence of ex-
isting electronic resources models must be built on-
the-fly and account for substantial spelling varia-
tions. The definition of what constitutes action-
able intelligence will often be context-specific and
changing, too. In the data used here ‘actionable’
changed quickly from Search and Rescue to any
medical emergency and then to include clusters of
requests for food and water. The models will there-
fore need to be time-sensitive or otherwise adaptive.

The system presented here attempts to address
these problems, finding that the accurate identifica-
tion of actionable information can be achieved with
subword models, the automatic identification of top-
ics (categories), and spatiotemporal clustering, all
within a streaming architecture. It is evaluated us-
ing 40,811 emergency text messages sent in Haiti
following the January 12, 2010 earthquake.

68



2 Evaluation data

Three sets of short-messages are used, all from be-
tween January 12 and May 12, 2010:

1. Mission 4636. 40,811 text-messages sent to a
free number, ‘4636’, in Haiti.

2. Radio Station. 7,528 text-messages sent to a
Haitian radio station.

3. Twitter. 63,195 Haiti-related tweets.

The Mission 4636 messages were translated, ge-
olocated and categorized by a volunteer online
crowdsourced workforce, predominantly from the
Haitian diaspora, and by paid workers within Haiti
(Munro, 2010). English-speaking crisis-mappers
identified actionable messages and refined the coor-
dinates and categories. The categories are a standard
set of UN-defined emergency categories with some
additions (48 total). The definition of an ‘actionable’
message was defined by the main responders to the
messages, the US Coast Guard and the US Marines
working with Southern Command, and included any
messages with an identifiable location that contained
a request for medical assistance, Search and Rescue,
water-shortages, clusters of requests for food in ar-
eas not known to aid workers, security, and reports
of unaccompanied minors.

The radio station and Twitter messages are not
structured or geolocated. They are used here as po-
tential false-positives in a needle-in-a-haystack sce-
nario where the majority of messages are irrelevant.
A recent Red Cross survey (2010) found that nearly
half the respondents would use social media to re-
port emergencies, so this is a realistic scenario.

3 Streaming models

Supervised streaming-models attempt to classify an
incoming stream of unlabeled items by building up
training-data on past items (Aggarwal, 2006; Hul-
ten et al., 2001; Babcock et al., 2002). The mod-
els are often time-sensitive with training data either
weighted towards or exclusively consisting of more
recently seem items, especially in the context of con-
cept drift or bounded memory (Zhang et al., 2008).

There is a penalty for applying GOLD labels to
past items for training: either only a subset can be
labeled or there is a time-delay. When only a subset

can be labeled the scenario is similar to that of active
learning (Cohn et al., 1996; Tong and Koller, 2002).
When there is a delay not all past items are imme-
diately available, meaning that short-term concept
drifts might not be adapted to. In both cases, accu-
racy is continually evaluated over incoming items.

Here, the time-delay penalty was used for all Mis-
sion 4636 messages as it is closer to the actual sce-
nario where each potential emergency message is ul-
timately read by a person but with potential delays
from sudden bursts and backlogs.

The messages were divided into 100 temporally
ordered sets. Each set belongs to one epoch i in
the streaming architecture, R, such that Ri is eval-
uated on R0, . . . , Ri−1 (R1 is evaluated on a model
trained on R0; R2 is evaluated on a model trained
on {R0, R1}; R3 is evaluated on a model trained on
{R0, R1, R2}, etc.). The accuracy is therefore cal-
culated over R1, . . . , R99 (all but the first set).

The results here report a system using a MaxEnt
learning algorithm with Quasi-Newton optimization
and a convergence tolerance of 10−4. Changing pa-
rameter settings or swapping out the learning algo-
rithm with linear and quadratic kernel SVMs made
little difference in accuracy (see discussion of other
models below).

4 Features (F )

G : Words and ngrams.
W : Subword patterns (extended definition below).
P : Source of the message (phone number).
T : Time received.
C : Categories (c0,...,47).
L : Location (longitude and latitude).
L∃ : Has-location (there is an identifiable location

within the message).

G, W , P and T were calculated directly from the
messages. C and L∃ were predicted using indepen-
dent streaming models and L was clustered through
tiling (see below).

4.1 Hierarchical streaming models for
has-location (L∃) and category (C)

The SMS protocol does not encode locations or cate-
gories. The streaming model was extended to a two-
level hierarchical architecture so that we could use
(predicted) locations and categories as features.

69



Nou tigwav,nou pa gen manje nou pa gen kay. m.
‘We are Petit Goave, we don’t have food, we don’t have a house. Thanks.
Actionable -72.86537, 18.43264 1/22/2010 16:59 2a. Food Shortage, 2b. Water shortage

Lopital Sacre-Coeur ki nan vil Milot, 14 km nan sid vil Okap, pre pou li resevwa moun malad e l’ap
mande pou moun ki malad yo ale la.
‘Sacre-Coeur Hospital which located in this village Milot 14 km south of Oakp is ready to receive those
who are injured. Therefore, we are asking those who are sick to report to that hospital.’
Actionable -72.21272, 19.60869 2/13/2010 22:33 4a. Health services

Mwen se [FIRST NAME] [LAST NAME] depi jeremi mwen ta renmen jwenm travay.
‘My name is [FIRST NAME] [LAST NAME], I’m in Jeremi and I would like to find work.’
Not Actionable -74.1179, 18.6423 1/22/2010 18:29 5. Other

Rue Casseus no 9 gen yon sant kap bay swen ak moun ki blese e moun ki brile.
‘Street Casseus no 9, there is a center that helps people that are wounded or burnt.’
Actionable -72.32857,18.53019 1/19/2010 11:21 4a. Health services

Paket moun delmas 32 ki forme organisation kap mache pran manje sou non pep yo ankesel lakay
‘People in Delmas 32 formed an association that takes food in the name of everyone in the neighborhood’
Not Actionable -72.30815,18.54414 2/4/2010 1:21 5. Other

Table 1: Examples of messages, with translation, actionable flag, location, timestamp and categories. The final two
were a consistent false negative and false positive respectively. The former likely because of sparsity - places offering
services were rare - and the latter because reports of possible corruption were not, unfortunately, considered actionable.

A set S, of 49 base streaming models predicted
the has-location, L∃, feature and categories, c0,...,47.
That is, unlike the main model, R, which predicts
the ‘Actionable’/‘Not Actionable’ division, each
model S predicts either the existence of a location
within the text or binary per-category membership.
The predictions for each message were added to the
final model as feature confidence values per-label.
This is richer than simply using the best-guess labels
for each model S and it was clear in early processing
that confidence features produced consistently more
accurate final models than binary predicted labels.
In fact, using model confidence features for L∃ ac-
tually outperforms an oracle binary has-location fea-
ture, O(L∃) (see results).

The same G, W , P and T features were used for
the S and R models.

As the final model R requires the outputs from S
for training, and S are themselves predictive models,
the L∃ and C features are not included until the sec-
ond training epoch R1. In the context of machine-
learning for sudden onset humanitarian information
processing any delay could be significant. One sim-

ple solution is starting with smaller epoch sizes.

4.2 Subword features

A typical former creole, Haitian Kreyol has very
simple morphology but the text message-language
produces many compounds and reductions (‘my
family’: fanmi mwen, fanmwen, fanmi m, fanmi’m,
fanmim’, fanmim), so it requires segmentation.
There is also substantial variation due to lack of
spelling conventions, geographic variation, varying
literacy, more-or-less French spellings for cognates,
and character sets/accents (‘thank you’: mesi, mési,
méci meci, merci). See Table 2 for further examples
and common subword patterns that were discovered
across very different surface forms.

The approach here builds on the earlier work of
Munro and Manning (2010), adapted from Gold-
water et al. (2009), where unsupervised methods
were used to segment and phonologically normalize
the words. For example, the process might turn all
variants of ‘thank you’ into ‘mesi’ and all variants
of ‘my family’ into ‘fan mwen’. This regulariza-
tion allows a model to generalize over the different

70



Abbrev. Full Form Pattern Meaning

s’on se yon sVn is a
avèn avèknou VvVn with us
relem rele mwen relem call me
wap ouap uVp you are
map mwen ap map I will be
zanmim zanmi mwen zanmim my friend
lavel lave li lavel to wash (it)

Table 2: Abbreviations and full forms of words, showing
substantial variation but common subword patterns and
character alternations (V=any vowel).

forms even in the event of singleton word variants.
Here we incorporated the segmentation into the su-
pervised learning task rather than model the phono-
logical/orthographic variation as a pre-learning nor-
malization step, as in Munro and Manning. A set
of candidate segmentations and normalizations were
added to our final model as features representing
both the pre and post-normalization, allowing the
model to arrive at the optimal training weights be-
tween the unnormalized/unsegmented and normal-
ized/segmented variants.

This meant that rather than optimizing the sub-
word segmentation according to a Gaussian prior
over unlabeled data we optimized the segmentation
according to the predictive ability of a given seg-
mentation per model. This is further from the lin-
guistic reality of the segments than our earlier ap-
proach but the richer feature space led to an increase
in accuracy in all test cases here.

The subword models were only applied to the
original messages. The English translations were
not included among the features as it is not realis-
tic to assume manual translation of every message
before the less labor-intensive task of identifying ac-
tionable items.

4.3 Oracle features

While the SMS protocol does not encode the
geographical origin of the message, other proto-
cols/systems do, especially those used by smart-
phones. Similarly, cell-tower granularity of loca-
tions might be available, phone numbers might be a
priori associated with locations, or locations could
be formalized within the text using methods like

‘Tweak the Tweet’ (Starbird and Stamberger, 2010).
Therefore, it is reasonable to also simulate a scenario
where the messages come pre-geocoded. We com-
pared our results to models also containing the ora-
cle longitude and latitude of the messages, O(L) (no
attempt was made to predict L, the precise longitude
and latitude - a challenging but interesting task) and
the oracle existence of a location O(L∃).

It is less likely that messages come pre-
categorized but oracle features for the categories
were also evaluated to compare the performance for
models containing the predictive categories to ones
containing the actual categories, O(c0,...,47).

4.4 Spatial clustering

In addition to identifying locations, we also used the
latitude and longitude to geographically cluster mes-
sages. This was to capture two phenomena:

1. Hot spots: some areas were in greater need of
aid than others.

2. Clustered food requests: the definition of ‘ac-
tionable’ extended to clustered requests for
food, but not requests from lone individuals.

Figure 1 shows a Port-au-Prince (Pótoprens)
neighborhood with incident reports from the text
messages. The x, y axes (latitude, longitude) show
the clusters given by the Ushahidi map and the z axis
shows the temporal distribution of messages over a
two month period. Both the spatial and temporal
distributions clearly show a high frequency of both
clusters and outliers.

The most accurate clustering divided the mes-
sages by longitude and latitude into tiles approxi-
mating 100m2, 1km2 and 10km2. At each gran-
ularity, tiling was repeated with an offset by half
on each dimension to partially smooth the arbitrari-
ness of tile boundaries. This resulted in each geo-
located messages being a member of 12 tiles in to-
tal, which were included as 12 features L. We were
not able to find an unsupervised spatial clustering al-
gorithm that improved the results beyond this brute-
force method of multiple tiles at different granulari-
ties (see discussion of other models tested below).

4.5 Temporal modeling and discounting

It is common to calculate a discounting function
over training epochs in streaming models (Aggar-

71



Figure 1: Map of a Port-au-Prince neighborhood with in-
cident reports from text messages, with spatial clusters on
the latitudinal and longitudinal axes and temporal distri-
butions on the time axis, showing both spatial and tem-
poral clustering, with frequent outliers.

wal, 2006; Hulten et al., 2001; Babcock et al., 2002).
We used a slightly different method here where

the time-stamp feature, T , performs this function,
arriving at the relative probability for a given time
period t in the final model, R (Zhang et al., 2008).
It has several advantages over a simple weighted
discounting function. First, t is calculated incre-
mentally, not per training epoch, meaning that the
weight θ for t is calculated until the most recently
seen items. Second, it frees T to cluster accord-
ing to temporal divisions other than the (arbitrary)
divisions of training epochs. Finally, it allows un-
constrained weights for different temporal clusters,
permitting the final distribution of weights over dif-
ferent ts to define complex and possibly nonmono-
tonic discounting functions. Modeling time as a fea-
ture rather than a discounting function also made
it simpler to combine temporal and spatial cluster-
ing. The feature T consisted of multiple buckets
of time-stamps per message and also composite fea-
tures with the O(L) tiles when present.

4.6 Other models tested

Several other machine-learning methods were tested
but ultimately not reported here.

Intuitively, SVMs with non-linear kernels could
more accurately model geographic divisions in
the latitude and longitude dimensions and dis-
cover different combinations of features like has-
location=true and category=emergency. However,
we were not able to find a combination of kernels

and parameter settings that demonstrated this. It is
possible that we could not avoid over-fitting or that
the composite features had already sufficiently cap-
tured the combinations.

Munro and Manning (2010) also found gains us-
ing supervised LDA (Ramage et al., 2009), which
has also previously been used for disaster response
clustering (Kireyev et al., 2009). We implemented
supervised LDA and unsupervised LDA topic mod-
els, but they showed modest improvements over the
baseline model only. We presume that this is be-
cause when we add the predicted categories from
our (supervised) category learning task, they already
contained enough information about topic divisions.

We looked at several methods for spatio-temporal
clustering including cliques (Zhang et al., 2004), k-
means (Wagstaff et al., 2001), and targeted low fre-
quency clusters (Huang et al., 2003). The change in
accuracy was negligible but the exploration of meth-
ods was by no means exhaustive. One exception
was using nearest-neighbor spatiotemporal cluster-
ing, however the gains were predominantly repeated
messages from the same person and thus already
captured by the source feature, P .

Several systems have been built by humanitar-
ian organizations for filtering/prioritizing messages,
mostly keyword and memory-based. All are cur-
rently less accurate than the baseline system here
and their predicted outputs gave no gains as features.
The SwiftRiver system built on NLTK library (Bird
et al., 2009) was the most promising, only underper-
forming the baseline by F=0.01.

5 Results

The results in Table 3 show that a combination of
streaming models with subword models improves
the accuracy of identifying actionable messages. All
increases in accuracy are significant relative to the
baseline.

The temporal feature, T , alone gives F=0.045 in-
crease in accuracy indicating that there is substantial
concept drift and an adaptive model is necessary for
accurate classification.

The subword models, W , increase the gain to
0.119 showing that despite Kreyol being a morpho-
logically simple language the variation in spellings
and compounds is significant.

72



Model Precision Recall F-value F-Gain

Words/Ngrams (G) 0.622 0.124 0.207 n/a
Temporal feature (G,T ) 0.716 0.153 0.252 0.045
Subwords and Source (G,T,W,P ) 0.548 0.233 0.326 0.119
Categories (predicted: G,T,C, P ) 0.464 0.240 0.316 0.109
Location (predicted: G,T,L∃, P ) 0.572 0.212 0.310 0.103
Categories (oracle: G,T,O(C), P ) 0.565 0.225 0.322 0.115
Location (oracle: G,T,O(L∃), P ) 0.746 0.168 0.274 0.067
Spatial clusters (L) 0.896 0.653 0.756 0.549
All non-oracle and spatial clusters 0.872 0.840 0.855 0.648

Pre-filtered spatial clusters 0.613 0.328 0.428 0.221

Radio station 0.961 0.854 0.904 n/a
Twitter 0.950 0.989 0.969 n/a

Table 3: The final results for the different models. The first three and Location (oracle) contain only single streaming
models. The others use a hierarchical streaming model combining features with the outputs from the base streaming
models S. The model combining all features is the most accurate at F=0.855, 0.648 above the baseline model optimized
over words and word sequences (ngrams). The Pre-filtered spatial clusters contains the same architecture/features as
the most accurate model, but with those messages not containing an identifiable location (and therefore automatically
non-actionable) stripped from the training and test data. The final Radio station and Twitter models used the messages
sent to a radio station and Twitter as the non-actionable items, using the same training model as All non-oracle and
spatial clusters.

5.1 Oracle vs predicted outputs

Comparing the oracle values and predicted outputs
from the categories and the identification of mes-
sages containing locations, O(C), O(L∃), C, L∃, we
see that the predictive model for categories only
slightly underperforms the oracle, but the predictive
model for locations outperforms the oracle model.
We suspect that this is because the predictions are
probabilities, not binary indicators of the existence
of a location. Therefore, the richer real-valued
feature space led to greater information for the fi-
nal model despite any predictive errors in this base
model. Another reason can be clearly seen in the
precision, 0.746 for the O(L) model, one of the
highest precision-to-recall ratios. The final model
is clearly giving too much weight to the existence
of a location as a predictor of an actionable la-
bel. Smoothing O(L) makes little difference as it
is a high-frequency binary feature, but the greater
range of probability values in L are necessarily more
sparse and therefore more de-weighted by smooth-
ing.

Identifying locations is one area that could be ex-

panded on greatly. Initial experiments with named-
entity recognition were abandoned when it was clear
that the data was too sparse and too different from
existing data sets, but perhaps text-message-specific
named-entity recognition methods could lead to
even more accurate results for identifying locations.

5.2 Spatial clustering

By adding spatial clusters we get the greatest leap in
accuracy: F=0.756, a substantial F=0.549 over the
baseline. This is strong evidence in favor of extend-
ing text-only messaging to location-aware messag-
ing. As with the prediction of locations, it is likely
that methods for spatial clustering other than brute-
force bucketing could lead to more accurate results,
but as stated earlier we were not able to identify any.

Combining the base streaming model outputs
with all features leads to the most accurate model. It
is expected that this would produce the best results,
but at F=0.855 we have a very significant gain over
any of the models implementing only single-stream
learning, or without the full feature space.

73



5.3 Pre-filtering

Somewhat counterintuitively, pre-filtering messages
without known locations (in both training and test
data) decreased the accuracy to F=0.428. Oracle fil-
tering of true-negative test items will not change re-
call and can only increase precision, so clearly there
is ‘signal’ in the ‘noise’ here. Analysis of the mes-
sages showed that many non-actionable messages
were not related to emergencies at all (general ques-
tions, requests for work, etc), as were many mes-
sages without identifiable locations. That is, people
who tended to not send actionable information also
tended to not include locations. Because of this cor-
relation, the content of messages without locations
becomes useful information for the model.

A careful analysis of the training models con-
firms this: the word and subword features for non-
actionable messages with no locations had non-zero
weights. Pre-filtering them therefore resulted in an
impoverished training set.

It is standard practice in the humanitarian indus-
try to pre-filter messages that are easily identified
as non-actionable (for obvious reasons: it reduces
the manual processing), which is what occurred in
Haiti - only about 5% of messages were treated as
‘actionable’ candidates. The results here indicate
that if manual processing is extended to automated
or semi-automated processing this strategy needs to
change, with all potential training items included in
the models.

5.4 Comparison to non-emergency messages

For the social media scenarios where we combined
the actionable test items with the messages sent to
a radio station and Twitter the accuracy was highest
of all. This is a promising result for seeking action-
able information in non-traditional sources. The ra-
dio station is particularly promising as almost all the
messages where in Haitian Kreyol and spoke about
the same locations as the 4636 messages.

While the Twitter messages were extremely ac-
curate at F=0.969, the majority of the tweets were
in English or French from people outside of Haiti,
so this model was at least in part about language
identification, a much simpler task and less novel
from a research perspective. Nonetheless, while at
least part of the accuracy is easily explained this was

the most sparse test set with only 0.025% actionable
items, so the application scenario is very promising.

5.5 Prioritization

Applying ROC analysis, the methods here could
speed up the prioritization of actionable messages
by a factor of 10 to 1 based on content alone. That
is, on average an actionable message falls within the
90th percentile for probability of being actionable.
By including spatial clustering this becomes the 98th
percentile. There is great potential for improvements
but the methods reported here could already be used
to efficiently prioritize the triage of the most impor-
tant messages within a semi-automated system.

6 Related Work

6.1 trillion text messages were sent in 2010 - more
than emails and social network communications
combined (ITU, 2010), especially in areas of great
linguistic diversity (Maffi, 2005). This easily makes
it the least well-studied method for digital commu-
nication relative to the amount digital information
being generated.

The lack of research is probably due to obstacles
in obtaining data. By contrast Twitter’s API has led
to much recent research, primarily in sentiment anal-
ysis (O’Connor et al., 2010; Alexander Pak, 2010;
Sriram et al., 2010) and unsupervised event detec-
tion (Petrović et al., 2010). The task of identifying
sentiment is different to filtering actionable intelli-
gence, we were not training on tweets, and Twitter-
language is reportedly different from text-message-
language (Krishnamurthy et al., 2008). However,
there are similarities relating to problems of mes-
sage brevity and the ability to extend the feature-
space. For example, Sriram et al. (2010) also found
that modeling the source of a message improved ac-
curacy. Eisenstein et al. (Eisenstein et al., 2010)
show promising results in identifying an author’s
geographic location from micro-blogs, but the lo-
cations are course-grained and rely on a substantial
message history per-source.

In recent work with medical text messages in the
Chichewa language, we compared the accuracy of
rule-based and unsupervised phonological normal-
ization and morphological segmentation when ap-
plied to a classification task over medical labels,

74



showing substantial gains from subword models
(Munro and Manning, 2010).

A cluster of earlier work looked at SMS-SPAM in
English (Healy et al., 2005; Hidalgo et al., 2006;
Cormack et al., 2007) and Beaufort et al. (2010)
used a similar preprocessing method for normaliz-
ing text-messages in French, combining rule-based
models with a finite-state framework. The accuracy
was calculated relative to BLEU scores for ‘correct’
French, not as a classification task.

Machine-translation into a more well-spoken lan-
guage can extend the potential workforce. Early
results are promising (Lewis, 2010) but still leave
some latency in deployment.

For streaming architectures, Zhang et al. (2008)
proposed a similar method for calculating per epoch
weights as an alternative to a discounting function
with significant gains. Wang et al. (2007) also
looked at multiple parallel streams of text from dif-
ferent newspapers reporting the same events but we
couldn’t apply their method here as there were few
instances of the same pairs of people independently
reporting two distinct events. The two-tiered archi-
tecture used here is similar to a hierarchical model,
the main difference being epoch-based retraining
and the temporal offset of the base models feed-
ing into the final one. Joint learning over hierarchi-
cal models has been successful in NLP (Finkel and
Manning, 2010) but to our best knowledge no one
has published work on joint learning over hierarchi-
cal streaming models, in NLP or otherwise.

7 Conclusions

From models optimized over words and ngrams
to one including temporal clustering and subword
models the accuracy rises from F=0.207 to F=0.326.
Clearly, the words that someone has chosen to ex-
press a message is just one small aspect of the
context in which that message is understood and
by combining different learning models with richer
features we can prioritize actionable reports with
some accuracy. With spatial clustering this rises to
F=0.885, indicating that geographic location was the
single most important factor for prioritizing action-
able messages.

These results are only a first step as there is great
potential for research identifying more accurate and

efficient learning paradigms. A growing number of
our communications are real-time text with frequent
spelling variants and a spatial component (tweets,
location-based ‘check-ins’, instant messaging, etc)
so there will be increasingly more data available in
an increasing variety of languages.

It is easy to imagine many humanitarian applica-
tions for classifying text-messages with spatiotem-
poral information. Social development organiza-
tions are already using text messaging to support
health (Leach-Lemens, 2009), banking (Peevers et
al., 2008), access to market information (Jagun et al.,
2008), literacy (Isbrandt, 2009), and there is the po-
tential to aid many of them. Even more importantly,
this work can contribute to information processing
strategies in future crises. Had a system like the one
presented here been in place for Haiti then the iden-
tification of actionable messages could have been
expedited considerably and a greater volume pro-
cessed. I coordinated the Mission 4636 volunteers
who were translating and mapping the messages in
real-time, so this research is partially motivated by
the need to see what I could have done better, with a
view to being better prepared for future crises.

The results for social media are especially promis-
ing. In total, the tweets contained 1,178,444 words
- the size of approximately 10 novels - but if there
was just one real emergency among them, there was
a 97% chance it would rise to the top when ordered
by actionable confidence.

Acknowledgments

With thanks to the volunteers of Mission 4636.
Their work translating, categorizing and mapping
communications showed the humanitarian commu-
nity the benefits of crowdsourcing/microtasking and
is now also helping us prepare for higher-volume
semi-automated systems. Thanks also to the volun-
teers and workers of Samasource/FATEM in Haiti,
Ushahidi Haiti in Boston, and to the engineers at
CrowdFlower and Ushahidi who built the platforms
we used for translation and mapping.

This work was supported by a Stanford Grad-
uate Fellowship and owes thanks to collaborative
work and conversations with Chris Manning and
colleagues in the Stanford NLP Research Group.

75



References

Charu C. Aggarwal. 2006. Data Streams: Mod-
els and Algorithms (Advances in Database Systems).
Springer-Verlag, New York.

Patrick Paroubek Alexander Pak. 2010. Twitter as a cor-
pus for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In Pro-
ceeding of the 2010 International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010).

Brian Babcock, Shivnath Babu, Mayur Datar, Rajeev
Motwani, and Jennifer Widom. 2002. Models and
issues in data stream systems. In Proceedings of the
twenty-first ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART sympo-
sium on Principles of database systems, pages 1–16.
ACM.

Richard Beaufort, Sophie Roekhaut, Louise-Amélie
Cougnon, and Cédrick Fairon. 2010. A hybrid
rule/model-based finite-state framework for normaliz-
ing sms messages. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics ACL 2010.

BSteven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009.
Natural language processing with Python. Oreilly &
Associates Inc.

David A. Cohn, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Michael Jor-
dan. 1996. Active learning with statistical models.
Arxiv preprint cs/9603104.

Gordon V. Cormack, José Mara Gómez Hidalgo, and En-
rique Puertas Sánz. 2007. Feature engineering for
mobile (SMS) spam filtering. In The 30th annual in-
ternational ACM SIGIR conference on research and
development in information retrieval.

The American Red Cross. 2010. Social media in disas-
ters and emergencies. Presentation.

Jacob Eisenstein, Brendan O’Connor, Noah A. Smith,
and Eric P. Xing. 2010. A latent variable model for ge-
ographic lexical variation. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP 2010).

Jenny Rose Finkel and Christopher D. Manning. 2010.
Hierarchical joint learning: Improving joint parsing
and named entity recognition with non-jointly labeled
data. In Annual Conference of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL 2010).

Sharon Goldwater, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Mark John-
son. 2009. A bayesian framework for word segmen-
tation: Exploring the effects of context. Cognition,
112(1):21–54.

Matt Healy, Sarah Jane Delany, and Anton Zamolotskikh.
2005. An assessment of case-based reasoning for
Short Text Message Classification. In The 16th Irish
Conference on Artificial Intelligence & Cognitive Sci-
ence.

José Mara Gómez Hidalgo, Guillermo Cajigas Bringas,
Enrique Puertas Sánz, and Francisco Carrero Garca.
2006. Content based SMS spam filtering. In ACM
symposium on Document engineering.

Yan Huang, Hui Xiong, Shashi Shekhar, and Jian Pei.
2003. Mining confident co-location rules without a
support threshold. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM
symposium on Applied computing.

Geoff Hulten, Laurie Spencer, and Pedro Domingos.
2001. Mining time-changing data streams. In Pro-
ceedings of the seventh ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining.
ACM.

Scott Isbrandt. 2009. Cell Phones in West Africa: im-
proving literacy and agricultural market information
systems in Niger. White paper: Projet Alphabétisation
de Base par Cellulaire.

ITU. 2010. The world in 2010: ICT facts and figures.
International Telecommunication Union.

Abi Jagun, Richard Heeks, and Jason Whalley. 2008.
The impact of mobile telephony on developing country
micro-enterprise: A Nigerian case study. Information
Technologies and International Development, 4.

Kirill Kireyev, Leysia Palen, and Kenneth M. Ander-
son. 2009. Applications of topics models to analy-
sis of disaster-related Twitter data. In Proceedings of
the NIPS Workshop on Applications for Topic Models:
Text and Beyond.

Balachander Krishnamurthy, Phillipa Gill, and Martin
Arlitt. 2008. A few chirps about Twitter. In Proceed-
ings of the first workshop on Online social networks,
New York.

Carole Leach-Lemens. 2009. Using mobile phones in
HIV care and prevention. HIV and AIDS Treatment in
Practice, 137.

Will Lewis. 2010. Haitian Creole: How to Build and
Ship an MT Engine from Scratch in 4 days, 17 hours,
& 30 minutes. In 14th Annual Conference of the Eu-
ropean Association for Machine Translation.

Luisa Maffi. 2005. Linguistic, cultural, and biological
diversity. Annual Review of Anthropology, 34:599–
617.

Robert Munro and Christopher D. Manning. 2010. Sub-
word variation in text message classification. In Pro-
ceedings of the Annual Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (NAACL 2010).

Robert Munro. 2010. Crowdsourced translation for
emergency response in Haiti: the global collaboration
of local knowledge. In AMTA Workshop on Collabo-
rative Crowdsourcing for Translation.

Brendan O’Connor, Ramnath Balasubramanyan,
Bryan R. Routledge, and Noah A. Smith. 2010.

76



From tweets to polls: Linking text sentiment to public
opinion time series. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media.

Gareth Peevers, Gary Douglas, and Mervyn A. Jack.
2008. A usability comparison of three alternative mes-
sage formats for an SMS banking service. Interna-
tional Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66.

Sasa Petrović, Miles Osborne, and Victor Lavrenko.
2010. Streaming first story detection with application
to twitter. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL 2010).

Daniel Ramage, David Hall, Ramesh Nallapati, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2009. Labeled LDA: A
supervised topic model for credit attribution in multi-
labeled corpora. In Proceedings of the 2009 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, Singapore.

Bharath Sriram, Dave Fuhry, Engin Demir, Hakan Fer-
hatosmanoglu, and Murat Demirbas. 2010. Short text
classification in twitter to improve information filter-
ing. In Proceeding of the 33rd international ACM SI-
GIR conference on research and development in infor-
mation retrieval.

Kate Starbird and Jeannie Stamberger. 2010. Tweak the
Tweet: Leveraging Microblogging Proliferation with a
Prescriptive Syntax to Support Citizen Reporting. In
Proceedings of the 7th International ISCRAM Confer-
ence.

Simon Tong and Daphne Koller. 2002. Support vec-
tor machine active learning with applications to text
classification. The Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 2:45–66.

Kiri Wagstaff, Claire Cardie, Seth Rogers, and Stefan
Schr
”odl. 2001. Constrained k-means clustering with
background knowledge. In Proceedings of the Eigh-
teenth International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 577, page 584. Citeseer.

Xuanhui Wang, Cheng Xiang Zhai, Xiao Hu, and Richard
Sproat. 2007. Mining correlated bursty topic pat-
terns from coordinated text streams. In Proceedings
of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining.

Xin Zhang, Nikos Mamoulis, David W. Cheung, and Yu-
tao Shou. 2004. Fast mining of spatial collocations.
In Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, pages 384–393. ACM.

Peng Zhang, Xingquan Zhu, and Yong Shi. 2008. Cate-
gorizing and mining concept drifting data streams. In
Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining.

77


