
























Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 74–82,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c�2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying and Analyzing
Brazilian Portuguese Complex Predicates

Magali Sanches Duran♥ Carlos Ramisch♠ ♦ Sandra Maria Aluı́sio♥ Aline Villavicencio♠

♥ Center of Computational Linguistics (NILC), ICMC, University of São Paulo, Brazil
♠ Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil

♦ GETALP – LIG, University of Grenoble, France
magali.duran@uol.com.br ceramisch@inf.ufrgs.br
sandra@icmc.usp.br avillavicencio@inf.ufrgs.br

Abstract

Semantic Role Labeling annotation task de-
pends on the correct identification of pred-
icates, before identifying arguments and as-
signing them role labels. However, most pred-
icates are not constituted only by a verb: they
constitute Complex Predicates (CPs) not yet
available in a computational lexicon. In order
to create a dictionary of CPs, this study em-
ploys a corpus-based methodology. Searches
are guided by POS tags instead of a limited list
of verbs or nouns, in contrast to similar stud-
ies. Results include (but are not limited to)
light and support verb constructions. These
CPs are classified into idiomatic and less id-
iomatic. This paper presents an in-depth anal-
ysis of this phenomenon, as well as an original
resource containing a set of 773 annotated ex-
pressions. Both constitute an original and rich
contribution for NLP tools in Brazilian Por-
tuguese that perform tasks involving seman-
tics.

1 Introduction

Semantic Role Labeling (SRL), independently of
the approach adopted, comprehends two steps be-
fore the assignment of role labels: (a) the delimita-
tion of argument takers and (b) the delimitation of
arguments. If the argument taker is not correctly
identified, the argument identification will propa-
gate the error and SRL will fail. Argument tak-
ers are predicates, frequently represented only by a
verb and occasionally by Complex Predicates (CPs),
that is, “predicates which are multi-headed: they are
composed of more than one grammatical element”
(Alsina et al., 1997, p. 1), like give a try, take care,
take a shower. In SRL, the verbal phrases (VPs)

identified by a parser are usually used to automat-
ically identify argument takers, but do no suffice.
A lexicon of CPs, as well as the knowledge about
verbal chains composition, would complete a fully
automatic identification of argument takers. Con-
sequently, the possibility of disagreement between
SRL annotators would rely only on the assignment
of role labels to arguments. This paper reports the
investigation of such multi-word units, in order to
meet the needs arisen from an SRL annotation task
in a corpus of Brazilian Portuguese1.

To stress the importance of these CPs for SRL,
consider the sentence John takes care of his business
in three alternatives of annotation:

The first annotation shows care of his business as
a unique argument, masking the fact that this seg-
ment is constituted of a predicative noun, care, and
its internal argument, of his business. The second
annotation shows care and of his business as argu-
ments of take, which is incorrect because of his busi-
ness is clearly an argument of care. The third an-
notation is the best for SRL purposes: as a unique
predicate — take care, take shares its external argu-

1CPs constituted by verbal chains (e.g. have been working)
are not focused here.

74



ment with care and care shares its internal argument
with take.
The goal of this paper is twofold: first, we briefly

describe our computer-aided corpus-based method
used to build a comprehensive machine-readable
dictionary of such expressions. Second and most
important, we analyze these expressions and their
behavior in order to shed some light on the most ad-
equate lexical representation for further integration
of our resource into an SRL annotation task. The re-
sult is a database of 773 annotated CPs, that can be
used to inform SRL and other NLP applications.
In this study we classify CPs into two groups: id-

iomatic CPs and less idiomatic CPs. Idiomatic CPs
are those whose sense may not be inferred from their
parts. Examples in Portuguese are fazer questão
(make a point), ir embora (go away), dar o fora (get
out), tomar conta (take care), dar para trás (give
up), dar de ombros (shrug), passar mal (get sick).
On the other hand, we use “less idiomatic CPs” to
refer to those CPs that vary in a continuum of differ-
ent levels of compositionality, from fully composi-
tional to semi-compositional sense, that is, at least
one of their lexical components may be litterally
understood and/or translated. Examples of less id-
iomatic CPs in Portuguese are: dar instrução (give
instructions), fazer menção (make mention), tomar
banho (take a shower), tirar foto (take a photo), en-
trar em depressão (get depressed), ficar triste (be-
come sad).
Less idiomatic CPs headed by a predicative noun

have been called in the literature “light verb con-
structions” (LVC) or “support verb constructions”
(SVC). Although both terms have been employed as
synonyms, “light verb” is, in fact, a semantic con-
cept and “support verb” is a syntactic concept. The
term “light verb” is attributed to Jespersen (1965)
and the term “support verb” was already used by
Gross in 1981. A light verb is the use of a poly-
semous verb in a non prototypical sense or “with a
subset of their [its] full semantic features”, North
(2005). On the other hand, a support verb is the
verb that combines with a noun to enable it to fully
predicate, given that some nouns and adjectives may
evoke internal arguments, but need to be associated
with a verb to evoke the external argument, that is,
the subject. As the function of support verb is almost
always performed by a light verb, attributes of LVCs

and SVCs have been merged, making them near syn-
onyms. Against this tendency, this study will show
cases of SVCs without light verbs (trazer prejuı́zo =
damage, lit. bring damage) and cases of LVCs with-
out support verbs (dar certo = work well, lit. give
correct).

To the best of our knowledge, to date, there is no
similar study regarding these complex predicates in
Brazilian Portuguese, focusing on the development
of a lexical resource for NLP tasks, such as SRL.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
in §2 we discuss related work, in §3 we present the
corpus and the details about our methodology, in §4
we present and discuss the resulting lists of candi-
dates, in §5 we envisage further work and draw our
conclusions.

2 Related Work

Part of the CPs focused on here are represented by
LVCs and SVCs. These CPs have been studied in
several languages from different points of view: di-
acronic (Ranchhod, 1999; Marchello-Nizia, 1996),
language contrastive (Danlos and Samvelian, 1992;
Athayde, 2001), descriptive (Butt, 2003; Langer,
2004; Langer, 2005) and for NLP purposes (Salkoff,
1990; Stevenson et al., 2004; Barreiro and Cabral,
2009; Hwang et al., 2010). Closer to our study,
Hendrickx et al. (2010) annotated a Treebank of 1M
tokens of European Portuguese with almost 2,000
CPs, which include LVCs and verbal chains. This
lexicon is relevant for many NLP applications, no-
tably for automatic translation, since in any task in-
volving language generation they confer fluency and
naturalness to the output of the system.

Work focusing on the automatic extraction of
LVCs or SVCs often take as starting point a list of re-
current light verbs (Hendrickx et al., 2010) or a list
of nominalizations (Teufel and Grefenstette, 1995;
Dras, 1995; Hwang et al., 2010). These approaches
are not adopted here because our goal is precisely
to identify which are the verbs, the nouns and other
lexical elements that take part in CPs.

Similar motivation to study LVCs/SVCs (for
SRL) is found within the scope of Framenet (Atkins
et al., 2003) and Propbank (Hwang et al., 2010).
These projects have taken different decisions on how
to annotate such constructions. Framenet annotates

75



the head of the construction (noun or adjective) as
argument taker (or frame evoker) and the light verb
separately; Propbank, on its turn, first annotates sep-
arately light verbs and the predicative nouns (as
ARG-PRX) and then merges them, annotating the
whole construction as an argument taker.
We found studies regarding Portuguese

LVCs/SVCs in both European (Athayde, 2001;
Rio-Torto, 2006; Barreiro and Cabral, 2009; Duarte
et al., 2010) and Brazilian Portuguese (Moura
Neves, 1996; Conejo, 2008; Flores Silva, 2009;
Batista Abreu, 2011). In addition to the variations
due to dialectal aspects, a brief comparison between
these papers enabled us to verify differences in
combination patterns of both variants. In addition,
Brazilian Portuguese studies do not aim at providing
data for NLP applications, whereas in European
Portuguese there are at least two studies focusing on
NLP applications: Barreiro and Cabral (2009), for
automatic translation and Hendrickx et al. (2010)
for corpus annotation.

3 Corpus, Extraction Tool and Methods

We employ a corpus-based methodology in order to
create a dictionary of CPs. After a first step in which
we use a computer software to automatically extract
candidate n-grams from a corpus, the candidate lists
have been analyzed by a linguist to distinguish CPs
from fully compositional word sequences.
For the automatic extraction, the PLN-BR-FULL2

corpus was used, consisting of news texts from
Folha de São Paulo from 1994 to 2005, with
29,014,089 tokens. The corpus was first prepro-
cessed for sentence splitting, case homogeniza-
tion, lemmatization and POS tagging using the
PALAVRAS parser (Bick, 2000).
Differently from the studies referred to in Sec-

tion 2, we did not presume any closed list of light
verbs or nouns as starting point to our searches. The
search criteria we used contain seven POS patterns
observed in examples collected during previous cor-
pus annotation tasks3:

1. V + N + PRP: abrir mão de (give up, lit. open
hand of );

2www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/plnbr
3V = VERB, N = NOUN, PRP = PREPOSITION, DET =

DETERMINER, ADV = ADVERB, ADJ = ADJECTIVE.

2. V + PRP + N: deixar de lado (ignore, lit. leave
at side);

3. V + DET + N + PRP: virar as costas para
(ignore, lit. turn the back to);

4. V + DET + ADV: dar o fora (get out, lit. give
the out);

5. V + ADV: ir atrás (follow, lit. go behind);

6. V + PRP + ADV: dar para trás (give up, lit.
give to back);

7. V + ADJ: dar duro (work hard, lit. give hard).

This strategy is suitable to extract occurrences
from active sentences, both affirmative and negative.
Cases which present intervening material between
the verb and the other element of the CP are not cap-
tured, but this is not a serious problem considering
the size of our corpus, although it influences the fre-
quencies used in candidate selection. In order to fa-
cilitate human analysis of candidate lists, we used
the mwetoolkit4: a tool that has been developed
specifically to extract MWEs from corpora, which
encompasses candidate extraction through pattern
matching, candidate filtering (e.g. through associa-
tion measures) and evaluation tools (Ramisch et al.,
2010). After generating separate lists of candidates
for each pattern, we filtered out all those occurring
less than 10 times in the corpus. The entries re-
sulting of automatic identification were classified by
their frequency and their annotation is discussed in
the following section.

4 Discussion

Each pattern of POS tags returned a large number
of candidates. Our expectation was to identify CPs
among the most frequent candidates. First we an-
notated “interesting” candidates and then, in a deep
analysis, we judged their idiomaticity. In the Table
1, we show the total number of candidates extracted
before applying any threshold, the number of an-
alyzed candidates using a threshold of 10 and the
number of CPs by pattern divided into two columns:
idiomatic and less idiomatic CPs. Additionally, each
CP was annotated with one or more single-verb

4www.sf.net/projects/mwetoolkit

76



Pattern Extracted Analyzed Less idiomatic Idiomatic

V + N + PRP 69,264 2,140 327 8
V + PRP + N 74,086 1,238 77 8

V + DET + N + PRP 178,956 3,187 131 4
V + DET + ADV 1,537 32 0 0

V + ADV 51,552 3,626 19 41
V + PREP + ADV 5,916 182 0 2

V + ADJ 25,703 2,140 145 11

Total 407,014 12,545 699 74

Table 1: Statistics for the Patterns.

paraphrases. Sometimes it is not a simple task to
decide whether a candidate constitutes a CP, spe-
cially when the verb is a very polysemous one and
is often used as support verb. For example, fazer
exame em/de alguém/alguma coisa (lit. make exam
in/of something/somebody) is a CP corresponding to
examinar (exam). But fazer exame in another use is
not a CP and means to submit oneself to someone
else’s exam or to perform a test to pass examina-
tions (take an exam). In the following sections, we
comment the results of our analysis of each of the
patterns.

4.1 VERB + NOUN + PREPOSITION

The pattern V + N is very productive, as every com-
plement of a transitive verb not introduced by prepo-
sition takes this form. For this reason, we restricted
the pattern, adding a preposition after the noun with
the aim of capturing only nouns that have their own
complements.

We identified 335 complex predicates, including
both idiomatic and less idiomatic ones. For exam-
ple, bater papo (shoot the breeze, lit. hit chat) or
bater boca (have an argument, lit. hit mouth) are
idiomatic, as their sense is not compositional. On
the other side, tomar consciência (become aware, lit.
take conscience) and tirar proveito (take advantage)
are less idiomatic, because their sense is more com-
positional. The candidates selected with the pattern
V + N + PRP presented 29 different verbs, as shown
in Figure 15.

Sometimes, causative verbs, like causar (cause)

5We provide one possible (most frequent sense) English
translation for each Portuguese verb.

and provocar (provoke) give origin to constructions
paraphrasable by a single verb. In spite of taking
them into consideration, we cannot call them LVCs,
as they are used in their full sense. Examples:

• provocar alteração (provoke alteration)= al-
terar (alter);

• causar tumulto (cause riot) = tumultuar (riot).

Some of the candidates returned by this pattern
take a deverbal noun, that is, a noun created from
the verb, as stated by most works on LVCs and
SVCs; but the opposite may also occur: some con-
structions present denominal verbs as paraphrases,
like ter simpatia por (have sympathy for) = simpati-
zar com (sympathize with) and fazer visita (lit. make
visit) = visitar (visit). These results oppose the idea
about LVCs resulting only from the combination of a
deverbal noun and a light verb. In addition, we have
identified idiomatic LVCs that are not paraphrasable
by verbs of the same word root, like fazer jus a (lit.
make right to) = merecer (deserve).
Moreover, we have found some constructions

that have no correspondent paraphrases, like fazer
sucesso (lit. make success) and abrir exceção (lit.
open exception). These findings evidence that, the
most used test to identify LVCs and SVC — the ex-
istence of a paraphrase formed by a single verb, has
several exceptions.
We have also observed that, when the CP has a

paraphrase by a single verb, the prepositions that in-
troduce the arguments may change or even be sup-
pressed, like in:

• Dar apoio a alguém = apoiar alguém (give sup-
port to somebody = support somebody);

77



Figure 1: Distribution of verbs involved in CPs, consid-
ering the pattern V + N + PRP.

• Dar cabo de alguém ou de alguma coisa =
acabar com alguém ou com alguma coisa (give
end of somebody or of something = end with
somebody or with something).

Finally, some constructions are polysemic, like:

• Dar satisfação a alguém (lit. give satisfaction
to somebody) = make somebody happy or pro-
vide explanations to somebody;

• Chamar atenção de alguém (lit. call the at-
tention of somebody) = attract the attention of
somebody or reprehend somebody.

4.2 VERB + PREPOSITION + NOUN

The results of this pattern have too much noise, as
many transitive verbs share with this CP class the
same POS tags sequence. We found constructions
with 12 verbs, as shown in Figure 2. We classi-
fied seven of these constructions as idiomatic CPs:
dar de ombro (shrug), deixar de lado (ignore), pôr
de lado (put aside), estar de olho (be alert), ficar
de olho (stay alert), sair de férias (go out on vaca-
tion). The later example is very interesting, as sair
de férias is synonym of entrar em férias (enter on
vacation), that is, two antonym verbs are used to ex-
press the same idea, with the same syntactic frame.
In the remaining constructions, the more frequent

Figure 2: Distribution of verbs involved in CPs, consid-
ering the pattern V + PRP + N.

Figure 3: Distribution of verbs involved in CPs, consid-
ering the pattern V + DET + N + PRP.

verbs are used to give an aspectual meaning to the
noun: cair em, entrar em, colocar em, pôr em (fall
in, enter in, put in) have inchoative meaning, that is,
indicate an action starting, while chegar a (arrive at)
has a resultative meaning.

4.3 VERB + DETERMINER + NOUN +
PREPOSITION

This pattern gave us results very similar to the pat-
tern V + N + PRP, evidencing that it is possible
to have determiners as intervening material between
the verb and the noun in less idiomatic CPs. The
verbs involved in the candidates validated for this
pattern are presented in Figure 3.

The verbs ser (be) and ter (have) are special cases.
Some ter expressions are paraphrasable by an ex-
pression with ser + ADJ, for example:

• Ter a responsabilidade por = ser responsável
por (have the responsibility for = be responsi-
ble for);

• Ter a fama de = ser famoso por (have the fame
of = be famous for);

78



• Ter a garantia de = ser garantido por (have the
guarantee of = be guaranteed for).

Some ter expressions may be paraphrased by a
single verb:

• Ter a esperança de = esperar (have the hope of
= hope);

• Ter a intenção de = tencionar (have the inten-
tion of = intend);

• Ter a duração de = durar (have the duration of
= last).

Most of the ser expressions may be paraphrased
by a single verb, as in ser uma homenagem para =
homenagear (be a homage to = pay homage to). The
verb ser, in these cases, seems to mean “to consti-
tute”. These remarks indicate that the patterns ser +
DET + N and ter + DET + N deserve further anal-
ysis, given that they are less compositional than they
are usually assumed in Portuguese.

4.4 VERB + DETERMINER + ADVERB

We have not identified any CP following this pattern.
It was inspired by the complex predicate dar o fora
(escape, lit. give the out). Probably this is typical in
spoken language and has no similar occurrences in
our newspaper corpus.

4.5 VERB + ADVERB

This pattern is the only one that returned more id-
iomatic than less idiomatic CPs, for instance:

• Vir abaixo = desmoronar (lit. come down =
crumble);

• Cair bem = ser adequado (lit. fall well = be
suitable);

• Pegar mal = não ser socialmente adequado (lit.
pick up bad = be inadequate);

• Estar de pé6 = estar em vigor (lit. be on foot =
be in effect);

• Ir atrás (de alguém) = perseguir (lit. go behind
(somebody) = pursue);

6The POS tagger classifies de pé as ADV.

• Partir para cima (de alguém) = agredir (lit.
leave upwards = attack);

• Dar-se bem = ter sucesso (lit. give oneself well
= succeed);

• Dar-se mal = fracassar (lit. give oneself bad =
fail).

In addition, some CPs identified through this pat-
tern present a pragmatic meaning: olhar lá (look
there), ver lá (see there), saber lá (know there), ver
só (see only), olhar só (look only), provided they are
employed in restricted situations. The adverbials in
these expressions are expletives, not contributing to
the meaning, exception made for saber lá, (lit. know
there) which is only used in present tense and in first
and third persons. When somebody says “Eu sei lá”
the meaning is “I don’t know”.

4.6 VERB + PREPOSITION + ADVERB

This is not a productive pattern, but revealed two
verbal expressions: deixar para lá (put aside) and
achar por bem (decide).

4.7 VERB + ADJECTIVE

Here we identified three interesting clusters:

1. Verbs of double object, that is, an object
and an attribute assigned to the object. These
verbs are: achar (find), considerar (con-
sider), deixar (let/leave), julgar (judge), man-
ter (keep), tornar (make) as in: Ele acha você
inteligente (lit. He finds you intelligent = He
considers you intelligent). For SRL annotation,
we will consider them as full verbs with two in-
ternal arguments. The adjective, in these cases,
will be labeled as an argument. However, con-
structions with the verbs fazer and tornar fol-
lowed by adjectives may give origin to some
deadjectival verbs, like possibilitar = tornar
possı́vel (possibilitate = make possible). Other
examples of the same type are: celebrizar
(make famous), esclarecer (make clear), evi-
denciar (make evident), inviabilizar (make un-
feasible), popularizar (make popular), respon-
sabilizar (hold responsible), viabilizar (make
feasible).

79



2. Expressions involving predicative adjectives,
in which the verb performs a functional role, in
the same way as support verbs do in relation to
nouns. In contrast to predicative nouns, pred-
icative adjectives do not select their “support”
verbs: they combine with any verb of a restrict
set of verbs called copula. Examples of copula
verbs are: acabar (finish), andar (walk), con-
tinuar (continue), estar (be), ficar (stay), pare-
cer (seem), permanecer (remain), sair (go out),
ser (be), tornar-se (become), viver (live). Some
of these verbs add an aspect to the predica-
tive adjective: durative (andar, continuar, es-
tar, permanecer, viver) and resultative (acabar,
ficar, tornar-se, sair).

• The resultative aspect may be expressed
by an infix, substituting the combina-
tion of V + ADJ by a full verb: ficar
triste = entristecer (become sad) or by
the verbalization of the adjective in reflex-
ive form: ficar tranquilo = tranquilizar-se
(calm down); estar incluı́do = incluir-se
(be included).

• In most cases, adjectives preceded by cop-
ula verbs are formed by past participles
and inherit the argument structure of the
verb: estar arrependido de = arrepender-
se de (lit. be regretful of = regret).

3. Idiomatic CPs, like dar duro (lit. give hard =
make an effort), dar errado (lit. give wrong =
go wrong), fazer bonito (lit. make beautiful =
do well), fazer feio (make ugly = fail), pegar
leve (lit. pick up light = go easy), sair errado
(lit. go out wrong = go wrong), dar certo (lit.
give correct = work well).

4.8 Summary

We identified a total of 699 less idiomatic CPs
and observed the following recurrent pairs of para-
phrases:

• V = V + DEVERBAL N, e.g. tratar = dar trata-
mento (treat = give treatment);

• DENOMINAL V = V + N, e.g. amedrontar =
dar medo (frighten = give fear);

Figure 4: Distribution of verbs involved in CPs, consid-
ering the total number of CPs (i.e. all patterns).

• DEADJECTIVAL V = V + ADJ, e.g. res-
ponsabilizar = tornar responsável (lit. respon-
sibilize = hold responsible).

This will help our further surveys, as we may
search for denominal and deadjectival verbs (which
may be automatically recognized through infix and
suffix rules) to manually identify corresponding
CPs. Moreover, the large set of verbs involved in the
analyzed CPs, summarized in Figure 4, shows that
any study based on a closed set of light verbs will
be limited, as it cannot capture common exceptions
and non-prototypical constructions.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

This study revealed a large number of CPs and pro-
vided us insights into how to capture themwith more
precision. Our approach proved to be very useful to
identify verbal MWEs, notably with POS tag pat-

80



terns that have not been explored by other studies
(patterns not used to identify LVCs/SVCs). How-
ever, due to the onus of manual annotation, we as-
sume an arbitrary threshold of 10 occurrences that
removes potentially interesting candidates. Our hy-
pothesis is that, in a machine-readable dictionary,
as well as in traditional lexicography, rare entries
are more useful than common ones, and we would
like to explore two alternatives to address this is-
sue. First, it would be straightforward to apply more
sophisticated filtering techniques like lexical asso-
ciation measures to our candidates. Second, we
strongly believe that our patterns are sensitive to
corpus genre, because the CPs identified are typical
of colloquial register. Therefore, the same patterns
should be applied on a corpus of spoken Brazilian
Portuguese, as well as other written genres like web-
crawled corpora. Due to its size and availability, the
latter would also allow us to obtain better frequency
estimators.
We underline, however, that we should not un-

derestimate the value of our original corpus, as it
contains a large amount of unexplored material. We
observed that only the context can tell us whether
a given verb is being used as a full verb or as a
light and/or support verb7. As a consequence, it
is not possible to build a comprehensive lexicon of
light and support verbs, because there are full verbs
that function as light and/or support verbs in spe-
cific constructions, like correr (run) in correr risco
(run risk). As we discarded a considerable number
of infrequent lexical items, it is possible that other
unusual verbs participate in similar CPs which have
not been identified by our study.
For the moment, it is difficult to assess a quan-

titative measure for the quality and usefulness of
our resource, as no similar work exists for Por-
tuguese. Moreover, the lexical resource presented
here is not complete. Productive patterns, the ones
involving nouns, must be further explored to enlarge
the aimed lexicon. A standard resource for English
like DANTE8, for example, contains 497 support
verb constructions involving a fixed set of 5 support
verbs, and was evaluated extrinsically with regard
to its contribution in complementing the FrameNet

7A verb is not light or support in the lexicon, it is light and/or
support depending on the combinations in which it participates.

8www.webdante.com

data (Atkins, 2010). Likewise, we intend to evalu-
ate our resource in the context of SRL annotation, to
measure its contribution in automatic argument taker
identification. The selected CPs will be employed in
an SRL project and, as soon as we receive feedback
from this experience, we will be able to report how
many CPs have been annotated as argument takers,
which will represent an improvement in relation to
the present heuristic based only on parsed VPs.

Our final goal is to build a broad-coverage lexicon
of CPs in Brazilian Portuguese that may contribute
to different NLP applications, in addition to SRL.
We believe that computer-assisted language learning
systems and other Portuguese as second language
learning material may take great profit from it. Anal-
ysis systems like automatic textual entailment may
use the relationship between CPs and paraphrases to
infer equivalences between propositions. Computa-
tional language generation systems may also want
to choose the most natural verbal construction to use
when generating texts in Portuguese. Finally, we be-
lieve that, in the future, it will be possible to enhance
our resource by adding more languages and by link-
ing the entries in each language, thus developing a
valuable resource for automatic machine translation.

Acknowledgements

We thank the Brazilian research foundation FAPESP
for financial support. This work was partly funded
by the CAMELEON project (CAPES–COFECUB
707-11).

References

Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells. 1997. Com-
plex Predicates. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA,
USA.

Maria Francisca Athayde. 2001. Construções com
verbo-suporte (funktionsverbgefüge) do português e
do alemão. Number 1 in Cadernos do CIEG Centro
Interuniversitário de Estudos Germanı́sticos. Universi-
dade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.

Sue Atkins, Charles Fillmore, and Christopher R. John-
son. 2003. Lexicographic relevance: Selecting infor-
mation from corpus evidence. International Journal
of Lexicography, 16(3):251–280.

Sue Atkins, 2010. The DANTE Database: Its Contribu-
tion to English Lexical Research, and in Particular to

81



Complementing the FrameNet Data. Menha Publish-
ers, Kampala, Uganda.

Anabela Barreiro and Luı́s Miguel Cabral. 2009. ReE-
screve: a translator-friendly multi-purpose paraphras-
ing software tool. In Proceedings of the Workshop Be-
yond Translation Memories: New Tools for Transla-
tors, The Twelfth Machine Translation Summit, pages
1–8, Ottawa, Canada, Aug.

Débora Taı́s Batista Abreu. 2011. A semântica
de construções com verbos-suporte e o paradigma
Framenet. Master’s thesis, São Leopoldo, RS, Brazil.

Eckhard Bick. 2000. The parsing system Palavras.
Aarhus University Press. 411 p.

Miriam Butt. 2003. The light verb jungle. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Multi-Verb Constructions,
pages 243–246, Trondheim, Norway.

Cássia Rita Conejo. 2008. O verbo-suporte fazer na
lı́ngua portuguesa: um exercı́cio de análise de base
funcionalista. Master’s thesis, Maringá, PR, Brazil.

Laurence Danlos and Pollet Samvelian. 1992. Transla-
tion of the predicative element of a sentence: category
switching, aspect and diathesis. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Theoretical and
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation (TMI),
pages 21–34, Montréal, Canada.

Mark Dras. 1995. Automatic identification of support
verbs: A step towards a definition of semantic weight.
In Proceedings of the Eighth Australian Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pages 451–458, Can-
berra, Australia. World Scientific Press.

Inês Duarte, Anabela Gonçalves, Matilde Miguel,
Amália Mendes, Iris Hendrickx, Fátima Oliveira,
Luı́s Filipe Cunha, Fátima Silva, and Purificação Sil-
vano. 2010. Light verbs features in European Por-
tuguese. In Proceedings of the Interdisciplinary Work-
shop on Verbs: The Identification and Representation
of Verb Features (Verb 2010), Pisa, Italy, Nov.

Hilda Monetto Flores Silva. 2009. Verbos-suporte ou
expressões cristalizadas? Soletras, 9(17):175–182.

Iris Hendrickx, Amália Mendes, Sı́lvia Pereira, Anabela
Gonçalves, and Inês Duarte. 2010. Complex predi-
cates annotation in a corpus of Portuguese. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2010 Fourth Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop, pages 100–108, Uppsala, Sweden.

Jena D. Hwang, Archna Bhatia, Claire Bonial, Aous
Mansouri, Ashwini Vaidya, Yuping Zhou, Nianwen
Xue, and Martha Palmer. 2010. Propbank annota-
tion of multilingual light verb constructions. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2010 Fourth Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop, pages 82–90, Uppsala, Sweden.

Otto Jespersen. 1965. A Modern English Grammar on
Historical Principles. George Allen and Unwin Ltd.,
London, UK.

Stefan Langer. 2004. A linguistic test battery for sup-
port verb constructions. Special issue of Linguisticae
Investigationes, 27(2):171–184.

Stefan Langer, 2005. Semantik im Lexikon, chapter
A formal specification of support verb constructions,
pages 179–202. Gunter Naar Verlag, Tübingen, Ger-
many.

Christiane Marchello-Nizia. 1996. A diachronic survey
of support verbs: the case of old French. Langages,
30(121):91–98.

Maria Helena Moura Neves, 1996. Gramática do por-
tuguês falado VI: Desenvolvimentos, chapter Estudo
das construções com verbos-suporte em português,
pages 201–231. Unicamp FAPESP, Campinas, SP,
Brazil.

Ryan North. 2005. Computational measures of the ac-
ceptability of light verb constructions. Master’s thesis,
Toronto, Canada.

Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010. Multiword expressions in the wild? the
mwetoolkit comes in handy. In , Proc. of the 23rd
COLING (COLING 2010) — Demonstrations, pages
57–60, Beijing, China, Aug. The Coling 2010 Orga-
nizing Committee.

Elisabete Ranchhod, 1999. Lindley Cintra. Home-
nagem ao Homem, ao Mestre e ao Cidadão, chap-
ter Construções com Nomes Predicativos na Crónica
Geral de Espanha de 1344, pages 667–682. Cosmos,
Lisbon, Portugal.

Graça Rio-Torto. 2006. O Léxico: semântica e
gramática das unidades lexicais. In Estudos sobre
léxico e gramática, pages 11–34, Coimbra, Portugal.
CIEG/FLUL.

Morris Salkoff. 1990. Automatic translation of sup-
port verb constructions. In Proc. of the 13th COLING
(COLING 1990), pages 243–246, Helsinki, Finland,
Aug.

Suzanne Stevenson, Afsaneh Fazly, and Ryan North.
2004. Statistical measures of the semi-productivity of
light verb constructions. In , Proc. of the ACL Work-
shop on MWEs: Integrating Processing (MWE 2004),
pages 1–8, Barcelona, Spain, Jul. ACL.

Simone Teufel and Gregory Grefenstette. 1995. Corpus-
based method for automatic identification of support
verbs for nominalizations. In Proc. of the 7th Conf.
of the EACL (EACL 1995), pages 98–103, Dublin, Ire-
land, Mar. ACL.

82


