










































A Framework for Improved Access to Museum Databases in the Semantic Web


Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Workshop, pages 3–10,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011.

A Framework for Improved Access to Museum Databases
in the Semantic Web

Dana Dannélls
Department of Swedish Language

University of Gothenburg
SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden

dana.dannells@svenska.gu.se

Mariana Damova
Ontotext

Sofia 1784, Bulgaria
mariana.damova@ontotext.com

Ramona Enache
Department of Computer Science and Engineering

GU and Chalmers University of Technology
SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden

ramona.enache@chalmers.se

Milen Chechev
Ontotext

Sofia 1784, Bulgaria
milen.chechev@ontotext.com

Abstract

Digital museum databases have extremely
heterogeneous data structures which re-
quire advanced mapping and vocabulary
integration for them to benefit from the
interoperability enabled by semantic tech-
nologies. In addition to establishing ways
of extracting and manipulating digitally
encoded cultural material, there exists a
need to make this material available and
accessible to human users in different
forms and languages that are available to
them. In this paper we describe a method
to manage and access museum data by in-
tegrating it within a series of interlinked
ontological models. The method allows
querying and generation of query results in
natural language. We report on the results
of applying this method from experiments
we have been pursuing.

1 Introduction

During the past few years several projects have
been undertaken to digitize cultural heritage ma-
terials (Clough et al., 2008; Dekkers et al., 2009)
through the use of Semantic Technologies such
as RDF (Brickley and Guha, 2004) and OWL
(Berners-Lee, 2004). Today there exist large num-
ber of digital collections and applications provid-
ing direct access to cultural heritage content.1

However, digitization is a labour intensive pro-
cess and is long from being complete. Because
of the heterogeneous data structures different mu-
seums have, digitally encoded cultural material

1http://www.europeana.eu/portal/

stored in internal museum databases requires ad-
vanced mapping and vocabulary integration for it
to be accessible for Semantic Web applications.
In addition to establishing ways for managing
various vocabularies, and for exploiting semantic
alignments across them automatically (van der
Meij et al., 2010), computer engineers also need
to investigate automatic methods to make this in-
formation available to computer users in different
forms and languages that are available to them.

Our work is a step towards this direction. It is
about an automatic workflow of sharing data in-
frastructures that is explicitly targeted towards the
Semantic Web. We have developed a method to
manage and access museum data by integrating
it within a series of interlinked ontological mod-
els. The method allows querying and generation of
query results in natural language using the Gram-
matical Framework (GF). We have been experi-
menting with data collections from the Gothen-
burg City Museum that we made available for
querying in the Museum Reason-able View loaded
in the triple store OWLIM.

In the remainder of this paper we present the
ontologies that were merged including CIDOC-
CRM,2 PROTON,3, the Painting ontology and the
data that we have been experimenting with (Sec-
tion 2). We describe the creation of the Museum
Reason-able View with structured query examples
(Section 3). In Section 4, we introduce the Gram-
matical Framework and demonstrate the mecha-
nisms of interfacing between the structured data
and natural language. We provide an overview of
related work (Section 5) and end with conclusions.

2The Conceptual Reference Model (CRM): http://
cidoc.ics.forth.gr/

3http://proton.semanticweb.org/

3



2 The Ontologies and Museum Data

2.1 The CIDOC-CRM

The International Committee for Documentation
Conceptual Reference Model (CIDOC CRM) that
was accepted by ISO in 2006 as ISO21127 (Crofts
et al., 2008), is one of a widely used standards
that has been developed to facilitate the integra-
tion, mediation and interchange of heterogeneous
cultural heritage information.

The CIDOC CRM, independent of any specific
application, is primarily defined as an interchange
model for integrating information in the cultural
heritage sector. Although it declares rich common
semantics of metadata elements, many of the con-
cepts that are utilized for describing objects are not
directly available in this model. To arrive at the
point where information that is available in mu-
seum databases about paintings could be recorded
using this model, we developed the painting on-
tology that integrates the CIDOC-CRM with more
specific schemata.

2.2 The Swedish Open Cultural Heritage
(SOCH)

The Swedish Open Cultural Heritage (SOCH) is a
web service used to search and fetch data from any
organization that holds information related to the
Swedish cultural heritage.4

The idea behind SOCH is to harvest any data
format and structure that is used in the museum
sector in Sweden and map it into SOCH’s catego-
rization structure. The data model used by SOCH
is an uniform data representation which is avail-
able in an RDF compatible form.

The schema provided by SOCH helps to inter-
mediate data between museums in Sweden and the
Europeana portal. More than 20 museums in Swe-
den have already made their collections available
through this service. By integrating the SOCH
data schema in the ontological framework we gain
automatic access to these collections in a semanti-
cally interoperable way.

2.3 The Painting Ontology

The painting ontology is a domain specific on-
tology. It is designed to support integration
and interoperability of the CIDOC-CRM ontology
with other schemata. The main reference model
of the painting ontology is the OWL 2 imple-

4http://www.ksamsok.se/in-english/

mentation of the CRM.5 The additional models
that are correctly integrated in the ontology are:
SOCH, Time Ontology,6 SUMO and Mid-Level-
Ontology.7 The painting ontology was constructed
manually using the Protégé editing tool.8

Integration of the ontology concepts are accom-
plished by using the OWL construct: intersec-
tionOf as specified below:
<owl:Class rdf:about="&painting;Painting">
<owl:equivalentClass>
<owl:Class>

<owl:intersectionOf rdf:parseType="Collection">
<rdf:Description rdf:about="&ksasok;item"/>
<rdf:Description rdf:about="&milo;PaintedPicture"/>
</owl:intersectionOf>

</owl:Class>
</owl:equivalentClass>

<rdfs:subClassOf rdf:resource="&core;E22_Man-Made_Object"/>
</owl:Class>

The schemata that are stated in the above ex-
ample are denoted with the following prefixes:
painting ontology (&painting), SOCH (&ksam-
sok), Mid-Level-Ontology (&milo) and CIDOC-
CRM ontology (&core). In this example, the class
Painting is defined in the painting ontology as a
subclass of E22 Man-Made Object class from the
CIDOC-CRM ontology and is an intersection of
two classes, i.e. item from the SOCH schema and
PaintedPicture from the Mid-Level Ontology.

The painting ontology contains 184 classes and
92 properties of which 24 classes are equivalent to
classes from CIDOC-CRM and 17 properties are
sub-properties of CIDOC-CRM properties.

2.4 Proton
PROTON (Terziev et al., 2005) is a light weight
upper level ontology, which was originally built
with a basic subsumption hierarchy comprising
about 250 classes and 100 properties providing
coverage of most of the upper-level concepts nec-
essary for semantic annotation, indexing, and re-
trieval. Its modular architecture allows for great
flexibility of usage, extension, integration and re-
modeling. It is domain independent and com-
plies with the most popular metadata standards
like DOLCE,9 Cyc,10 Dublin Core.11

PROTON is encoded in OWL Lite, and contains
a minimal set of custom entailment rules (axioms).
It is interlinked with CIDOC CRM, and is used in

5http://purl.org/NET/cidoc-crm/core
6http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/
7http://www.ontologyportal.org/
8http://protege.stanford.edu/
9http://www.loa-cnr.it/DOLCE.html

10http://www.ontotext.com/downloads/
cycmdb

11http://www.cs.umd.edu/projects/plus/
SHOE/onts/dublin.html

4



the data integration model to provide access to the
Linked Open Data (LOD) for Cultural Heritage
(Damova and Dannélls, 2011).

2.5 The Gothenburg City Museum Database

The Gothenburg City Museum (GCM) preserves
8900 museum objects described in two of the mu-
seum database tables. These two tables corre-
spond to two of the museum collections, i.e. GSM
and GIM. Each of these tables contains 39 prop-
erties for describing museum objects. Table 1
shows 20 of these properties, including the object
type, its material, measurements, location, etc. All
properties and object values stored in the database
are given in Swedish.

Field name Value
Field nr. 4063
Prefix GIM
Object nr. 8364
Search word painting
Class 1 353532
Class 2 Gothenburg portrait
Amount 1
Producer E.Glud
Produced year 1984
Length cm 106
Width cm 78
Description oilpainting represents a studio indoors
History Up to 1986 belonged to Datema AB, Flöjelbergsg 8, Gbg
Material oil colour
Current keeper 2
Location Polstjärnegatan 4
Package nr. 299
Registration date 19930831
Signature BI
Search field BO:BU Bilder:TAVLOR PICT:GIM

Table 1: A painting object representation in the
GCM database.

The Gothenburg City Museum’s data that is
used as our experimental data follows the struc-
ture of the CIDOC-CRM but it contains many con-
cepts that are not available in CIDOC-CRM. So, in
order to be able to fully integrate the Gothenburg
City Museum data into a semantic view it was nec-
essary to make use of concepts and relationships
from the remaining ontologies.

Figure 1 shows how elements from the
Goethenburg city museum are represented with
elements from different schemata, e.g. CIDOC-
CRM, PROTON, SOCH and the Painting ontol-
ogy.

2.6 DBpedia

DBpedia (Auer et al., 2007) is the RDF-ized ver-
sion of Wikipedia, comprising the information
from Wikipedia infoboxes, designed and devel-
oped to provide as full as possible coverage of
the factual knowledge that can be extracted from
Wikipedia with a high level of precision. DBpedia

describes more than 3.5 million things and cov-
ers 97 languages. 1.67 million of DBpedia things
are classified in a consistent ontology, including
364,000 persons, 462,000 places, and 99,000 mu-
sic albums. The DBpedia knowledge base has over
672 million RDF triples out of which 286 million
extracted from the English edition of Wikipedia
and 386 million extracted from other language edi-
tions.

DBpedia is used as an additional source of
data, which can enrich the information about the
Gothenburg museum data. For example, their lo-
cation identified with the DBpedia resource refer-
ring to the city of Gothenburg.

3 Integrating and Accessing Museum
Data

3.1 Integration for flexible computing
Integrating datasets into linked data in RDF usu-
ally takes place by indicating that two instances
from two datasets are the same by using the built
in OWL predicate: owl:sameAs.12 However,
recent research (Damova, 2011; Damova et al.,
2011; Jain et al., 2011) has shown that interlinking
the models according to which the datasets are de-
scribed is a more powerful mechanism of dealing
with large amounts of data in RDF, as it exploits
inference and class assignment.

We have adopted this approach when creating
the infrastructure for the museum linked data, in-
cluding several layers of upper-level ontologies.
They provide a connection to different sets of
linked data, for example PROTON for the LOD
cloud. They also provide an extended pool of con-
cepts that can be referred to in museum linked data
that do not directly pertain to the expert descrip-
tions of the museum objects, and the strictly ex-
pert museum knowledge is left to CIDOC-CRM.
This model of interlinked ontologies offers a flex-
ible access to the data with different conceptual
access points. This approach is implemented as a
Reason-able View of the web of data (Kiryakov et
al., 2009).

3.2 The Museum Reason-able View
Using linked data techniques (Berners-Lee, 2006)
for data management is considered to have great
potential in view of the transformation of the web
of data into a giant global graph. Still there are
challenges related to them that have to be handled

12http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/

5



Figure 1: Dataset interconnectedness in the Museum Reason-able View.

to make this possible. Kiryakov et al. (2009) dis-
cuss these challenges and present an approach for
reasoning with and management of linked data. In
summary, a Reason-able View is an assembly of
independent datasets, which can be used as a sin-
gle body of knowledge with respect to reasoning
and query evaluation. Each Reason-able View is
aiming at lowering the cost and the risks of us-
ing specific linked datasets for specific purposes.
We followed this approach when constructing the
Museum Reason-able View with the data from the
Gothenburg City Museum, DBpedia, Geonames
and the ontologies listed in Section 2.13

Figure 2: Integration of Gothenburg city museum
data into the Museum Reason-able View.

The process of Gothenburg city museum data
integration into the Museum Reason-able View
consists in transforming the information from the
museum database into RDF triples on the on-
tologies described in the previous section. Fig-
ure 2 shows the architecture of the Museum

13Geonames website: http://www.geonames.org/

Reason-able View, which includes interconnected
schemata and links to external to the Gothenburg
museum data, such as DBpedia. The knowledge
base contains close to 10K museum artifacts from
the Gothenburg city museum, and the entire DB-
pedia.

3.3 Accessing Museum Linked Data
The Museum Reason-able View is loaded in
OWLIM (Bishop et al., 2011) and its data are ac-
cessible via a SPARQL (Eric and Andy, 2008) end
point and keywords.14 The queries can be for-
mulated by combining predicates from different
datasets and ontologies in a single SPARQL query,
retrieving results from all different datasets that
are part of the Reason-able View.

A query example about the location, address,
description and time of paintings by Carl Larsson
is given below.

PREFIX crm: <http://purl.org/NET/cidoc-crm/core#>
PREFIX ptop: <http://proton.semanticweb.org/protontop#>
PREFIX painting:<http://spraakbanken.gu.se/rdf/owl/painting#>
PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
PREFIX pext: <http://proton.semanticweb.org/protonext#>

select * where
{
?museumObject crm:P55_has_current_location ?location .
?museumObject painting:hasCategory [rdfs:label "teckning"@sv].
?museumObject pext:authorOf [rdfs:label "Carl Larsson"@sv].
?museumObject crm:P55_has_current_location ?location .
OPTIONAL {
?museumObject pext:hasAddress [rdfs:label ?address].}
?museumObject crm:P62_depicts ?description .
?museumObject crm:P92_brought_into_existence
[ crm:P4_has_time-span [ rdfs:label ?time ] ].
}

14The data is available at: http://museum.
ontotext.com

6



Figure 3: The results from a SPARQL query.

The above query returns the results that are de-
picted in Figure 3. Note that the returned location
is the DBpedia resource about the city of Gothen-
burg. The results also show that museum items
from the two collections – GIM and GSM – are
harvested, which means that the data from the
collections are integrated together and accessible
from a single query point.

Other queries can be asked about the types of art
work preserved in the museum, their material, or
about artwork from a certain period of time, etc.
Below follows another query example about the
address, the time of paintings and the collection
they are coming from.

select ?museumObject ?location ?collection
?address ?description ?time where
{
?museumObject crm:P55_has_current_location ?location ;
ptop:partOf [ rdfs:label ?collection ] ;
painting:hasCategory [ rdfs:label "teckning"@sv ] ;
crm:P62_depicts ?description .
OPTIONAL {?museumObject pext:hasAddress
[ rdfs:label ?address ] .}
OPTIONAL {?museumObject crm:P92_brought_into_existence
[ crm:P4_has_time-span [ rdfs:label ?time ] ] .}

}

The Reason-able View is accessible with
SPARQL queries, which require intimate knowl-
edge of the schemata describing the data, and tech-
nical expertise in SPARQL. Moreover, the results
from SPARQL are not always easy to understand,
in particular if the retrieved information is given
in a language other than English. This is why the
results are send forward to the NLP component to
verbalize the ontology links.

4 Ontologies Verbalization

4.1 The Grammatical Framework (GF)
The Grammatical Framework GF (Ranta, 2004)
is a grammar formalism, based on Martin-Löf’s

type theory (Martin-Löf, 1982). Its key feature is
the division of a grammar in the abstract syntax-
which acts as a semantic interlingua and the con-
crete syntaxes-representing verbalizations in vari-
ous target languages (natural or formal).

GF comes with a resource library (Ranta, 2009),
where the abstract syntax describes the most com-
mon grammatical constructions allowing text gen-
eration, which are further mapped to concrete syn-
taxes corresponding to 18 languages.15 The re-
source library aids the development of new gram-
mars for specific domains by providing the op-
erations for basic grammatical constructions, and
thus making it possible for users without linguistic
background to generate syntactically correct natu-
ral language.

To verbalize the data that is stored in the Mu-
seum Reason-able View, we utilize GF. The ad-
vantages of using GF for verbalization is three
fold: it provides mechanisms for type checking, by
validating coercions between the basic class of an
instance and the class required by the definition of
the relation that uses it; the framework offers sup-
port of direct verbalization which makes it easier
to generate text from the ontology and so to create
natural language applications using it without the
aid of external tools; GF has a resource library that
cover the syntax for 18 languages.

4.2 Translation of the Museum Reason-able
View to GF

The capabilities of GF as a host-language for
ontologies were already investigated in Enache
and Angelov (2010), where SUMO, the largest
open-source ontology was translated to GF. It
was shown that the type system provides a robust

15www.grammaticalframework.com

7



framework for encoding classes, instances and re-
lations. The same basic implementation design
that was used for encoding SUMO in GF is applied
in this work for representing the Museum Reason-
able View.

The classes form a hierarchy modelled by
an inheritance relation, which is the reflexive-
transitive closure of the subclass relation
rdfs:subClassOf from the ontology, are
encoded as functions in the GF grammar. Other
information stated in the ontology, is encoded in
GF as axioms, external to the grammar. These are
used for verbalization as in the following example
from the OWL entry corresponding to the painting
Big Garden:
<owl:NamedIndividual

rdf:about="&painting; BigGardenObj">
<rdf:type
rdf:resource="&painting;Painting"/>

<isPaintedOn
rdf:resource="&painting;Canvas"/>

<createdBy
rdf:resource="&painting;CarlLarsson"/>

<hasCreationDate rdf:resource=
"&painting;Year1937"/>

</owl:NamedIndividual>

A representation of the instance BigGardenObj
is defined as follows:

fun BigGardenObj : Ind Painting ;

Where the Painting was defined previously as a
class. The remaining information about Big Gar-
den from the ontology is encoded as a set of ax-
ioms with the following syntax:
isPaintedOn (el BigGradenObj) (el Canvas)

createdBy (el BigGardenObj)(el CarlLarsson)

hasCreationDate (el BigGardenObj) (el (year 1937))

A couple of clarifying remarks about the GF
encoding are needed in order to understand bet-
ter the representation of the ontology: the depen-
dent type Ind is used to encode class information
of instances, and the wrapper function el is used
to make the above-mentioned coercion, where the
two types, along with the inheritance object that
represents the proof that the coercion is valid are
not visible here, since GF features implicit argu-
ments.

In GF, the natural language generation is based
on composeable templates. We obtain the ver-
balization of classes and templates automatically,
mainly based on their Camel-Case representation.
For the relations, more work is needed, since a
grammatically correct verbalization is not possible
based only on the ontology information.

Below follow a few English sentence examples
that we are able to generate:

• Big Garden is a painting

• Big Garden is painted on canvas

• Big Garden is painted by Carl Larsson

• Big Garden was created in 1937

Below we provide examples for ontology rela-
tions in the shape of O1 is painted by O2 and feed
these to the GF parser which will build an abstract
syntax tree, from which we abstract over the place-
holders O1 and O2, replacing them with function
arguments.

For example, the relation
hasCurrentLocation and
hasCreationDate have the following
abstract syntax representation:

fun hasCurrentLocation : El Painting
-> El Place -> Formula ;

fun Painting_hasCreationDate :
El Painting_Artwork
-> El Painting_TimePeriod -> Formula ;

Their English representation in the concrete
syntax is:

lin hasCurrentLocation o1 o2 =
mkPolSent (mkCl o1
(mkVP (passiveVP locate_V2)

(mkAdv at_Prep o2))) ;

lin Painting_hasCreationDate o1 o2 =
mkPolSentPast (S.mkCl o1 (S.mkVP
(S.passiveVP create_V2)
(S.mkAdv in_Prep o2))) ;

Since the parser uses the resource library gram-
mars, the result sentence will be syntactically
correct, regardless of the arguments we use it
with. Also, one does not need extensive knowl-
edge of the GF library or GF programming in or-
der to build verbalization. This might not make
a difference for English, which is morphologi-
cally simple, but future work involves building
such a representation for French, German, Finnish
and Swedish, where it would be more difficult to
achieve correct agreement, without grammatical
tools.

Below follows an example of how the construct
owl:intersectionOf is represented in the GF ab-
stract syntax:

8



Equiv_TimePeriod = Equivalent TimePeriod
(both E52_TimeSpan Sumo.YearDuration) ;

Equivalent Class Class is a dependent type that
encodes type equivalence.

5 Related Work

Museum Data Integration with semantic technolo-
gies as proposed in this paper is intended to enable
efficient sharing of museum and cultural heritage
information. Initiatives for developing such shar-
ing museum data infrastructures have emerged in
the recent years. Only a few of them rely on se-
mantic technologies.

The Museum Data Exchange 2010 project has
developed a metadata publishing tool to extract
data in XML.16 Brugman et al. (2008) have devel-
oped an Annotation Meta Model providing a way
of defining annotation values and anchors in an an-
notation for multimedia resources. The difference
between these approaches and our approach is that
we chose to reuse many of the concepts and the re-
lationships that are already defined in the standard
model CIDOC-CRM.

Other related initiatives in the Web of structured
data is the Amsterdam Museum Linked Open
Data project,17 aiming at producing Linked Data
within the Europeana data model (Dekkers et al.,
2009; Haslhofer and Isaac, 2011), and the Na-
tional Database Project of Norwegian University
Museums (Ore, 2001) who developed a unified in-
terface for digitalizing cultural material.18

In Sweden, as well as other countries, seman-
tic technologies enter the cultural heritage field in-
creasingly and there have been some suggestions
describing the tools and techniques that should
be applied to digitalize the Swedish Union Cat-
alogue (Malmsten, 2008). Following these ideas
and experiences from experimenting with museum
data (Bryne, 2009) who have shown that con-
version of museum databases is best approached
through integration of existing models, we decided
to invest in a manual design step to built a frame-
work that captures specific characteristics of mu-
seum databases.

16http://www.oclc.org/research/
activities/museumdata/default.htm

17http://www.europeana.eu/portal/
thoughtlab_linkedopendata.html

18http://www.muspro.uio.no/engelsk-omM.
shtml

To our knowledge, we made the first attempt
of using CIDOC-CRM to produce museum linked
data with connections to external sources like DB-
pedia. Our attempt to generate natural language
sentences from ontologies, and more precisely
from the structured results of SPARQL queries are
the novelty of the work presented in this paper.

6 Conclusions

We presented a framework for integrating and ac-
cessing museum linked data, and a method to
present this data using natural language generation
technology.

A series of upper-level and domain specific
ontologies have been used to transform Gothen-
burg museum data from a relational database into
RDF and build a Museum Reason-able View. We
showed how federated results to SPARQL queries
using predicates from multiple ontologies can be
obtained. Consequently, we demonstrated how
templates are automatically obtained in GF to gen-
erate the query results in natural language.

Future work includes extending the museum
data in the Museum Reason-able View, running
several queries, and increasing the coverage of the
GF grammar. We intend to have a grammatical
coverage for at least five languages. Other direc-
tions for future work, also include fluent discourse
generation from the ontology axioms, as well as
paraphrasing of the existing patterns for verbaliza-
tion.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by MOLTO Euro-
pean Union Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement FP7-ICT-
247914.

References

Sören Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens
Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives.
2007. DBpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), vol-
ume 4825, pages 722–735.

Tim Berners-Lee. 2004. OWL Web Ontology Lan-
guage reference, February. W3C Recommendation.

T. Berners-Lee. 2006. Design is-
sues: Linked data. Retrieved from
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html.

9



B. Bishop, A. Kiryakov, D. Ognyanoff, I. Peikov, Z. Ta-
shev, and R. Velkov. 2011. OWLIM: A family
of scalable semantic repositories. Semantic Web
Journal, Special Issue: Real-World Applications of
OWL.

Dan Brickley and R.V. Guha, 2004. RDF Vocabulary
Description Language 1.0: RDF Schema. W3C.
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/.

Hennie Brugman, Véronique Malaisé, and Laura
Hollink. 2008. A common multimedia annotation
framework for cross linking cultural heritage digi-
tal collections. In International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC).

Kate Bryne. 2009. Putting hybrid cultural data on
the semantic web. Journal of Digital Information
(JoDI), 10(6). Eds. Martha Larson, Kate Fernie,
John Oomen.

Paul Clough, Jennifer Marlow, and Neil Ireson. 2008.
Enabling semantic access to cultural heritage: A
case study of tate online. In Proceedings of the
ECDL. Workshop on Information Access to Cultural
Heritage, ISBN 978-90-813489-1-1, Aarhus, Den-
mark, September.

Nick Crofts, Martin Doerr, Tony Gill, Stephen Stead,
and Matthew Stiff, 2008. Definition of the CIDOC
Conceptual Reference Model.

Mariana Damova and Dana Dannélls. 2011. Reason-
able view of linked data for cultural heritage. In
Proceedings of the third International Conference
on Software, Services and Semantic Technologies
(S3T).

Mariana Damova, Atanas Kiryakov, Maurice Grinberg,
Michael K. Bergman, Frederik Giasson, and Kiril
Simov. 2011. Creation and integration of reference
ontologies for efficient lod management. In Semi-
Automatic Ontology Development: Processes and
Resources, IGI Global, Hershey PA, USA.

Mariana Damova, 2011. Data Models and Alignment,
May. Deliverable 4.2. MOLTO FP7-ICT-247914.

Makx Dekkers, Stefan Gradmann, and Carlo Meghini,
2009. Europeana Outline Functional Specification
For development of an operational European Digital
Library. Europeana Thematic Network Deliverable
2.5.

Ramona Enache and Krasimir Angelov. 2010. Type-
ful ontologies with direct multilingual verbalization.
Workshop on Controlled Natural Languages (CNL)
2010.

Prud’hommeaux Eric and Seaborne Andy. 2008.
SPARQL. the query language for RDF, January.
W3C Recommendation.

Bernhard Haslhofer and Antoine Isaac. 2011.
data.europeana.eu the europeana linked open data
pilot. In Proceedings of the Intl. Conf. on Dublin
Core and Metadata Applications.

Prateek Jain, Peter Z. Yeh, Kunal Verma, Reymonrod
G., Mariana Damova, Vasquez Pascal Hitzler, and
Amit P. Sheth. 2011. Contextual ontology align-
ment of lod with an upper ontology: A case study
with proton. In Proceedings of 8th ESWC, Extended
Semantic Web Conference, Heraklion, Greece, May.

A. Kiryakov, D. Ognyanoff, R. Velkov, Z. Tashev, and
I. Peikov. 2009. LDSR: Materialized reason-able
view to the web of linked data. In Proceedings of
OWL: Experiences and Directions (OWLED) 2009,
Chantilly, USA.

Martin Malmsten. 2008. Making a library catalogue
part of the semantic web. In Proceedings of the Intl.
Conf. on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications,
Berlin, German.

Per Martin-Löf. 1982. Constructive mathematics
and computer programming. In Cohen, Los, Pfeif-
fer, and Podewski, editors, Logic, Methodology and
Philosophy of Science VI, pages 153–175. North-
Holland, Amsterdam.

Christian-Emil Smith Ore. 2001. The norwegian mu-
seum project, access to and interconnection between
various resources of cultural and natural history. In
European Conference on Research and Advanced
Technology for Digital Libraries ECDL.

Aarne Ranta. 2004. Grammatical framework, a type-
theoretical grammar formalism. Journal of Func-
tional Programming, 14(2):145–189.

Aarne Ranta. 2009. The GF resource grammar library.
Linguistic Issues in Language Technology, 2(2).

I. Terziev, A. Kiryakov, , and D. Manov, 2005. D.1.8.1
Base upper-level ontology (BULO) Guidance. De-
liverable of EU-IST Project IST.

Lourens van der Meij, Antoine Isaac, and Claus Zinn.
2010. A web-based repository service for vocab-
ularies and alignments in the cultural heritage do-
main. In Proceedings of the 7th Extended Semantic
Web Conference, (ESWC 2010).

10


