




















Identification of Context Markers for Russian Nouns 

 
 

Anastasia Shimorina 
St. Petersburg State University 

St. Petersburg, Russia 
shinas@yandex.ru 

Maria Grachkova 
St. Petersburg State University 

St. Petersburg, Russia 
maaag86@mail.ru 

 
  

 

Abstract 

 

The research project presented in this paper 
aims at identification of context markers for 
Russian nouns and their use in construction 
identification. The body of contexts has been 
extracted from the Russian National Corpus 
(RNC). The context processing procedure 
takes into account the lexical and semantic in-
formation represented in the corpus annota-
tion. Merged meaning of words are taken into 
consideration. The reported results contribute 
to task of building a comprehensive lexico-
graphic resource — the Index of Russian lexi-
cal constructions.1 

1 Introduction 

The importance of corpus data is now widely 
recognised. The corpus shows functioning of 
language units in their natural domain of occur-
rence and it serves for various linguistic tasks 
(e.g., (Rakhilina et al., 2006)). This research pro-
ject uses the Russian National Corpus (RNC, 
http://www.ruscorpora.ru/) as a resource provid-
ing context markers of word meanings. Context 
marker of a target word is a linguistic unit occur-
ring in one context with this word and specifying 
its particular meaning. RNC has a multilevel an-
notation, it includes lexical (lemma) tags (lex), 
morphological (grammatical) tags (gr), and se-
mantic (taxonomy) tags (sem). These tags should 
be taken into account when operating with con-
text markers. Context markers find an applica-
tion in construction identification and word sense 
disambiguation (WSD) (e.g., (Agirre and Ed-
monds, 2007; Navigli, 2009; Mihalcea and 
Pedersen, 2009; Proceedings of the NAACL 

                                                
1 This work was funded by the Russian Foundation for Ba-
sic Research (grant No 10-06-00586-а). 

HLT Workshop… 2010; Sahlgren and Knutsson, 
2009), etc.). Corpus-based WSD implies extrac-
tion and statistical processing of word colloca-
tions, which makes it possible to distinguish 
separate meanings of lexical items in context 
(e.g., (Kobricov et al., 2005; Lashevskaja and 
Mitrofanova, 2009; Pedersen, 2002; Schütze, 
1998), etc.). 

2 Linguistic data and experiments 

Four Russian polysemous words were subjected 
to analysis: organ ‘institution, part of the body, 
musical instrument, etc.’, luk ‘onion, bow’, glava 
‘head, chief, cupola, chapter, etc.’, and dom 
‘building, private space, family, etc.’. Sets of 
contexts were extracted from the RNC, the larg-
est annotated corpus of Russian texts containing 
about 400 M tokens. We deal with the disam-
biguated portion of the RNC where morphologi-
cal and semantic ambiguity is resolved. The size 
of context set for each noun ranges from 1000 to 
3500. The texts are supplied with three core 
types of annotation: (1) lemmas — lexical mark-
ers (canonical, dictionary forms of inflected 
words); (2) grammatical markers (morphosyntac-
tic tagsets referring to POS and other inflectional 
grammatical features like case, gender, tense, 
etc.); (3) taxonomy markers (semantic tagsets 
referring to lexical-semantic classes). Taxonomy 
markers are available for the most frequent 
nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs and adverbs 
and represent a rather coarse-grained cross-
classification of the lexicon (e.g. ‘concrete’, 
‘human’, ‘animal’, ‘space’, ‘construction’, ‘tool’, 
‘container’, ‘substance’, ‘movement’, ‘part’, 
‘diminutive’, ‘causative’, ‘verbal noun’, and 
other lexical-semantic classes, cf. 
http://www.ruscorpora.ru/en/corpora-sem.html). 
Each word sense is formalized with a set of tax-
onomy markers, cf. dom ‘house’: ‘concrete’ + 
‘construction’ + ‘container’. A list of contexts is 
made for each meaning of considered words. 

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 344–347



Further, we extract automatically from these con-
texts the lexical-semantic and statistical informa-
tion about words that are to the left (right) of the 
analyzed noun. This information is presented as a 
set of semantic tags. The semantic tagsets are 
arranged by their frequency of occurrence, then 
we consider only the statistically significant sets. 
The frequency tagsets are analyzed in terms of 
what lexical units are behind the semantic 
tagsets. These lexemes are most probably the 
context markers of the considered words. 

A Python-based WSD and Construction Iden-
tification toolkit (Lyashevskaya et al., in press) 
was used in order to extract and analyze context 
markers. The toolkit makes it possible to carry 
out linguistic and statistical analysis of contexts 
for polysemous words in various modes. It per-
forms (1) generation of context classes corre-
sponding to particular meanings of a target word; 
and (2) generation of lists of the most frequent 
constructions where a particular meaning of a 
target word occurs. 

3 Identification of context markers 

Context markers were determined for each mean-
ing of the words listed above. The markers can 
be of various nature, e.g. they may represent dif-
ferent parts of speech. Much attention was paid 
to lexical-semantic tags of context markers. For 
example, the target word glava ‘chief’ frequently 
co-occurs with the following lexemes forming its 
right context: gosudarstvo (‘state’ <r:concr 
t:space>), federacija (‘federation’ <r:concr 
t:space>), region (‘region’ <r:concr t:space 
pt:part pc:space>), gorod (‘city’ <r:concr t:space 
sc:constr>), fond (‘fund’ <r:concr t:space pt:set 
sc:money>). These context markers can be com-
bined to form a group of concrete nouns identify-
ing space and place (<r:concr t:space>). To take 
another example, the target word luk ‘onion’ 
regularly co-occurs with such nouns as ogurec 
(‘cucumber’ <r:concr t:fruit t:food>), orekh 
(‘nut’ <r:concr t:fruit t:food pt:part pc:plant>), 
and kartoška (‘potato’ <r:concr t:fruit t:food 
pt:aggr sc:fruit>). These nouns may be referred 
to as a group of concrete nouns denoting food. 
These examples show that the identification of 
context markers can be carried out not in terms 
of particular lexemes, but in terms of the lexical-
semantic classes they belong to. 

Context markers may differ not only in type, 
but also in the position they occupy with respect 
to a target word. Therefore, the right and left 
contexts of target words were examined sepa-

rately. For instance, semantic tags indicating ab-
stract nouns of perception (<r:abstr t:perc>) 
regularly occur in the right context of the target 
word organ (‘part of a body’). This fact allows 
us to consider them as context markers for the 
word in question. But when we explored the left 
context of the same word in the same meaning, 
we found out that other lexemes often serve as its 
context markers: e.g., adjectives, such as čelove-
českij ‘human’, donorskij ‘donor’ (<dt:hum>), 
nouns zabolevanije, bolezn’ ‘disease’ 
(<t:disease>), etc. The context markers men-
tioned above are not to be found in any occur-
rences of the word organ in other meanings. The 
combinations of target words and identified con-
text markers are considered as constructions. The 
characteristic features of construction are stabil-
ity and frequency of occurrence. 

In order to prove the stability of obtained con-
structions we adopt a statistical approach. A lex-
eme under consideration and its context marker 
act as a bigram. Bigram search service 
(http://www.aot.ru/) provides the necessary in-
formation about the stability of bigrams. These 
statistical data show that the collocations have a 
high Mutual Information (MI), cf. Table 1. 

Table 1: Statistical results for the word organ ‘institu-
tion’. 

4 Problem of merged meanings 
In automatic text processing, dictionary compil-
ing, WSD procedure etc. linguists often have to 
deal with polysemous words with merged mean-
ings. These meanings represent combinations of 
two or more independent meanings which are 
almost indistinguishable in certain contexts. In 
NLP tasks mentioned above such polysemous 
words which reveal both independent and 
merged meanings represent a special problem. It 
is hardly possible to provide unambiguous analy-
sis of such words. 

A few attempts were made in computational 
linguistics to solve the problem of merged mean-
ings. For instance, the so-called “Shishkebab” 

Left context MI Right context MI 
pra-
voohranitelnyj 
‘law-
enforcement’ 

13.61 gosbezopasnost ‘a 
state security’ 

11.23 

ispolnitelnyj 
‘executive’ 

10.79 pravoporyadok 
‘law and order’ 

10.68 

zakonodatelnyj 
‘legislative’ 

10.39 samoupravlenie 
‘self-government’ 

9.19 

predstavitelnyj 
‘representa-
tive’ 

9.33 zdravoohranenie 
‘public health’ 

8.76 

345

Identification of context markers for Russian nouns

345



approach (Philpot et al., 2003) is used in formal 
ontology Omega (http://omega.isi.edu/). This 
method implies simultaneous attribution of two 
or more meanings combined in particular context 
to the same lexeme (e.g., Library IS_A Build-
ing&Institution&Location). About 400 patterns 
for merged meanings (e.g., X IS_A Coun-
try&Nation&Government; X IS_A Com-
pany&Product&Stock; etc.) were described in 
(Hovy, 2005). 

This section presents the results of context 
markers identification experiments carried out 
for a noun dom (‘house’). In the semantic struc-
ture of this polysemous noun besides six inde-
pendent meanings (‘building’, ‘private space’, 
‘family’, ‘common space’, ‘institution’, ‘dy-
nasty’) there are five merged meanings formed 
by pairs (‘building & private space’, ‘building & 
institution’, ‘private space & family’) and triples 
(‘building & private space & institution’, ‘build-
ing & private space & family’) of independent 
ones. In the experiments we analyzed 3000 con-
texts for the considered noun, which were ex-
tracted from the RNC. Of the total number of 
contexts there are 842 contexts where the noun in 
question reveals merged meanings (cf. Table 2). 

All occurrences of the target word found in 
RNC were analyzed with the exception of con-
texts for rare meanings found in less than 10 con-
texts (such as dom ‘common place’ or dom ‘dy-
nasty’). 

In the experiments we extracted lexical mark-
ers of the noun dom on the basis of the most fre-
quent semantic annotation of the words adjacent 
to dom. The lexical markers of merged meanings 
were compared with the ones of independent 
meanings to decide whether additional statistical 
patterns should be introduced in further experi-
ments. As the consequence of such comparison 
we managed to find out certain regularities in 
occurrence of context markers. 

Some context markers allow to predict the oc-
currence of merged meaning with high precision. 
For example, context markers of merged mean-
ing ‘building & institution’ are found in such 
pairs as destkij dom (‘orphan's home’), invalidnyj 
dom (‘home for disabled people’), rodil’nyj dom 
(‘maternity hospital’), dom otdyha (‘holiday cen-
ter’), dom kino (‘film theatre’), etc. The context 
marker which obviously indicates the meaning 
‘building & private space & family’ can be found 
in such phrase as hozjain doma (‘host’). How-
ever, there are context markers which indicate 
purely independent meanings. For example, noun 
žitel’ (‘tenant’) in žiteli doma points out to mean-

ing ‘building’. In many cases such as rodnoj dom 
(‘home’), roditel’skij dom (‘one’s parent’s 
home’) the merged meaning ‘building & private 
space’ is more frequent than independent. It 
should be noted that in the most cases we ob-
serve tendency of intersection between context 
markers for merged and independent meanings. 
For example, such adjectives as derevjannyj 
(‘wooden’), kirpičnyj (‘made of brick’), novyj 
(‘new’), sosednij (‘neighbouring’), etc. may indi-
cate both independent meaning ‘building’ and 
merged meaning ‘building & institution’. 

Word meanings Semantic annotation 
Number of 
contexts in 

RNC 
dom  3,000 (to-

tal) 
dom ‘building’ <r:concr t:constr 

top:contain> 
1,694 

dom ‘private 
space’ 

<r:concr t:space> 95 

dom ‘family’ <r:concr t:group pt:set 
sc:hum> 

72 

dom ‘common 
space’ 

<r:concr t:space der:shift 
der:metaph> 

4 

dom ‘institu-
tion’ 

<r:concr t:org> 292 

dom ‘dynasty’ <r:concr pt:set sc:hum> 1 
dom (merged 
meanings) 

 842 

dom ‘building 
& private 
space’ 

<r:concr t:constr 
top:contain | r:concr 
t:space> 

501 

dom ‘building 
& institution’ 

<r:concr t:constr 
top:contain | r:concr t:org> 

250 

dom ‘private 
space & family’ 

r:concr t:space | r:concr 
t:group pt:set sc:hum 

10 

dom ‘building 
& private space 
& institution’ 

<r:concr t:constr 
top:contain | r:concr t:space 
| r:concr t:org> 

36 

dom ‘building 
& private space 
& family’ 

<r:concr t:constr 
top:contain | r:concr t:space 
| r:concr t:group pt:set 
sc:hum> 

45 

Table 2: Russian noun dom: semantic annotation and 
frequencies of meanings (number of contexts in 

RNC). 
 

5 Conclusion 
A set of experiments on context markers identifi-
cation were successfully carried out for contexts 
of polysemous Russian nouns which had been 
extracted from RNC. Different types of context 
markers were described. 

The work demonstrates application of the ob-
tained context markers in construction identifica-
tion task. The results of experiments also reveal 
the necessity of special treatment of words with 
merged meanings and introduction of additional 

346

Anastasia Shimorina and Maria Grachkova

346



statistical patterns corresponding to these mean-
ing in different construction identification sys-
tems. Further work implies the application of the 
data as filters for context preprocessing and for 
statistical WSD. 

 

References 
Agirre E., Edmonds Ph. (eds.). 2007. Word Sense 

Disambiguation: Algorithms and Applications. 
Text, Speech and Language Technology, vol. 33. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 

Hovy E. 2005. Ontologies (Series of Lectures). 
Vilem Mathesius Lecture Series. Prague. 

Kobricov B., Lashevskaja O., and Shemanajeva O. 
2005. Sn’atije leksiko-semanticheskoj omoni-
mii v novostnyh i gazteno-zhurnal’nyh tekstah: 
poverhnostnyje fil’try i statisticheskaja 
ocenka. Internet–matematika 2005: Avtomati-
českaja obrabotka webdannyh. Moscow.             
pp. 38–57. 

Lashevskaja O., Mitrofanova O. 2009. Disambigua-
tion of Taxonomy Markers in Context: Russian 
Nouns. Jokinen, K., Bick, E. (eds.) NODALIDA 
2009. NEALT Proceedings Series, volume 4, 
pp. 111–117. 

Lyashevskaya O., Mitrofanova O., Grachkova M., 
Romanov S., Shimorina A., and Shurygina A. 
Automatic Word Sense Disambiguation and 
Construction Identification Based on Corpus 
Multilevel Annotation. [in press]. 

Mihalcea R., Pedersen T. 2009. Word Sense Disam-
biguation Tutorial. URL: 
http://www.d.umn.edu/~tpederse/WSDTutorial.html 

Navigli R. 2009. Word Sense Disambiguation: a 
Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 41(2), 
pp. 1–69. 

Pedersen T. 2002. A Baseline Methodology for 
Word Sense Disambiguation. Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference on Intelligent Text 
Processing and Computational Linguistics, Febru-
ary 17–23, 2002, Mexico City. pp. 126–135. 

Philpot A., Fleischman M., Hovy E. 2003. Semi-
Automatic Construction of a General Purpose 
Ontology. Proceedings of the International Lisp 
Conference. New York, NY. 

Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Ex-
tracting and Using Constructions in Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 25–31. Los Angeles, CA. 2010. 

Rahilina E., Kobricov B., Kustova G., Lashev-
skaja O., and Shemanajeva O. 2006. Mnogo-
znachnost’ kak prikladnaja problema: leksiko-
semanticheskaja razmetka v Nacional’nom 
korpuse russkogo jazyka. Kompjuternaja ling-
vistika i intellektual’nyje tehnologii: Trudy 
mezhdunarodnoj konferencii Dialog 2006. Mos-
cow. pp. 445–450. 

Sahlgren M., Knutsson O. 2009. Workshop on Ex-
tracting and Using Constructions in NLP. 
NODALIDA 2009. SICS Technical Report 
T2009:10. 

Schütze H. 1998. Automatic Word Sense Dis-
crimination. Computational Linguistics, 24(1), 
pp. 97–123. 

347

Identification of context markers for Russian nouns

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


