















































On Using Twitter to Monitor Political Sentiment and Predict Election Results


Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets Psychology (SAAIP), IJCNLP 2011, pages 2–10,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 13, 2011.

On Using Twitter to Monitor Political Sentiment
and Predict Election Results

Adam Bermingham and Alan F. Smeaton
CLARITY: Centre for Sensor Web Technologies

School of Computing
Dublin City University

{abermingham,asmeaton}@computing.dcu.ie

Abstract

The body of content available on Twit-
ter undoubtedly contains a diverse range
of political insight and commentary. But,
to what extent is this representative of an
electorate? Can we model political senti-
ment effectively enough to capture the vot-
ing intentions of a nation during an elec-
tion capaign? We use the recent Irish Gen-
eral Election as a case study for investigat-
ing the potential to model political senti-
ment through mining of social media. Our
approach combines sentiment analysis us-
ing supervised learning and volume-based
measures. We evaluate against the conven-
tional election polls and the final election
result. We find that social analytics us-
ing both volume-based measures and sen-
timent analysis are predictive and we make
a number of observations related to the
task of monitoring public sentiment dur-
ing an election campaign, including exam-
ining a variety of sample sizes, time pe-
riods as well as methods for qualitatively
exploring the underlying content.

1 Introduction

For years, standard methodologies such as polls
have been used by market researchers to measure
the beliefs and intentions of populations of indi-
viduals. These have a number of disadvantages in-
cluding the human effort involved and they can be
costly and time-consuming. With the advent of so-
cial media, there is now an abundance of online in-
formation wherein people express their sentiment
with respect to wide variety of topics. An open
research question is how might we analyse this
data to produce results that approximate what can
be achieved through traditional market research.
An automated solution would mean that we could
“poll” a population on demand, and at low cost.

This is a challenging task however. How can we
ensure that our sample has a representative distri-
bution? How much confidence do we put in noisy
signals such as sentiment analysis? The wisdom
of crowds teaches us that sufficient scale should
at least somewhat mitigate these problems. In this
paper we review a live system we developed for
the Irish General Election, 2011. Our system used
a variety of techniques to provide a live real-time
interface into Twitter during the election. Using
the volume and sentiment data from this system
we review a number of sampling approaches and
methods of modelling political sentiment, replicat-
ing work of others as well as introducing novel
measures. We evaluate the error with respect to
polls, as well as with respect to the election result
itself.

In the next section we review related research.
This is followed in Section 3 by a description of
our methodology. We present our results in Sec-
tion 4, followed by discussion in Section 5, and
we conclude in Section 6.

2 Related Work

There appears to be three research areas emerging
in terms of using online sentiment to monitor real
world political sentiment. First is event monitor-
ing, where the aim is to monitor reactionary con-
tent in social media during a specified event. In the
political area this would typically be a speech, or
a TV debate. An example is work by Diakopou-
los and Shamma who characterised the 2008 US
presidential debate in terms of Twitter sentiment
(Diakopoulos and Shamma, 2010). Previously
Shamma et al. examined a variety of aspects of
debate modelling using Twitter, beyond individ-
ual politician performance (Shamma et al., 2009).
In these studies, Twitter proved to be an effective
source of data for identifying important topics and
associated public reaction.

A second area which has received attention is

2



modelling continuous sentiment functions for pre-
dicting other real-world continuous values, for ex-
ample to predict stock market values. Bollen et al.
have focused on modeling public mood on a vari-
ety of axes to correlate with socio-economic fac-
tors (Bollen et al., 2009) and to predict the Dow
Jones Industrial Average (Bollen et al., 2010).
They report a number of interesting observations
such as changes in tension and anxiety around
important events and find a significant improve-
ment in predicting the Dow Jones Industrial Av-
erage when incorporating sentiment. This work
is echoed by preliminary work from Zhang et
al. who also focus on emotive concepts, in this
case “hope” and “fear”, and correlate with a num-
ber of market indicators (Zhang et al., 2010). It
is noteworthy that the emphasis in these studies
is on emotive sentiment (mood states, emotions),
rather than polar sentiment (positivity, negativity)
which is popular in other applications. O’Connor
et al. also observe leading signals in Twitter sen-
timent, but with respect to political opinion polls
(O’Connor et al., 2010). They offer the caveat,
“text sentiment is volatile ... it is best used to de-
tect long-term trends”.

A third, related area, is result forecasting. A
classic example of this is predicting election re-
sults, the focus of this paper. In result forecast-
ing, it is the final result which is used to judge
the accuracy of a particular forecasting measure,
rather than a continuous series. Asur and Huber-
man (Asur and Huberman, 2010) used Twitter vol-
ume and sentiment to predict box office takings for
movies, bettering other market indicators. They
find volume to be a strong predictor and sentiment
to be a useful, yet weaker predictor. They also
propose a general model for linear regression so-
cial media prediction which serves as a basis for
our model.

More directly, related to elections is Tumasjan
et al.’s work on the German federal election in
2009 (Tumasjan et al., 2010). They found that that
the share of volume on Twitter accurately reflected
the distribution of votes in the election between the
six main parties. It is difficult to draw general con-
clusions from this single result however. A focus
of our study is to replicate and extend these exper-
iments with respect to the Irish General Election.
Noteworthy also is an earlier study which mined
content from a political prediction website and
in identifying author-party valence, trained clas-

Figure 1: A screen shot of the sentiment portion
of the #GE11 Real-time Twitter Tracker

sifiers with lexical features to identify “predictive
sentiment” with promising results for predicting
Canadian district elections (Kim and Hovy, 2007).

The concerns around using Twitter as the basis
for a prediction mechanism have been voiced by
Gayo-Avello et al. who state, “we argue that one
should not be accepting predictions about events
using social media data as a black box.” (Gayo-
Avello et al., 2011) They cite the two primary
caveats with using social media to inform predic-
tive models as selection bias (inability to deter-
mine a representative sample) and potential for
deliberate influence of results (through gaming
and spamming for example). This is echoed by
(Jungherr et al., 2011) who argue that methods
of prediction using social media analytics are fre-
quently contingent on somewhat arbitrary experi-
mental variables.

Thus we see that predictive systems which
utilise social media are both promising and chal-
lenging. The contention of our research is that
the development of techniques for political pub-
lic sentiment monitoring and election prediction is
a promising direction requires more research work
before we fully understand the limitations and ca-
pabilities of such an approach.

3 Methodology

The system we developed to evaluate our research
idea was completed in collaboration with an in-

3



dustrial partner, an online news company1. The
purpose of the “#GE11 Twitter Tracker” was to
allow users, and our partner’s journalists, to tap
into the content on Twitter pertaining to the elec-
tion, through an accessible dashboard-style inter-
face. To that end, the “Twitter Tracker” featured
a number of abstractive and extractive summariza-
tion approaches as well as a visualisation of vol-
ume and sentiment over time (see Figure 1).

The Irish General Election took place on 25th
February, 2011. Between the 8th of February and
the 25th we collected 32,578 tweets relevant to
the five main parties: Fianna Fáil (FF), the Green
Party, Labour, Fine Gael (FG) and Sinn Féin (SF).
We identified relevant tweets by searching for the
party names and their abbreviations, along with
the election hashtag, #ge11. For the purposes of
the analysis presented here, we do not consider the
independent candidates or the minority parties2.
Tweets reporting poll results were also filtered out.

3.1 Election Polls

The standard measure of error in predictive fore-
casting is Mean Absolute Error (MAE), defined as
the average of the errors in each forecast:

MAE =
1

n

n∑

i=1

|ei| (1)

where n is the number of forecasts (in our case 5)
and ei is the difference in actual result and pre-
dicted result for the ith forecast. MAE measures
the degree to which a set of predicted values de-
viate from the actual values. We use MAE to
compare Twitter-based predictions with polls as
well as with the results of the election. To pro-
vide a reference point for our analysis, we use
nine polls which were commissioned during the
election. These polls guarantee accuracy to within
a margin of 3% and in comparison to the final
election results, had an average MAE of 1.61%
with respect to the five main parties. There have
been varying reports for Twitter-based predictions
in the literature where the observed error can vary
from very low (1.65%) (Tumasjan et al., 2010)
to much higher (17.1% using volume, 7.6% using
sentiment) (Gayo-Avello et al., 2011).

1http://www.thejournal.ie
2There is a difficulty with the minority parties and inde-

pendent candidates for this election in that many of the of-
ficial parties were more commonly referred to by their party
alliance. This made relevance difficult to determine and such
an exercise is outside the scope of this work

3.2 Predictive Measures

It is reasonable to assume that the percentage of
votes that a party receives is related to the vol-
ume of related content in social media. Larger par-
ties will have more members, more candidates and
will attract more attention during the election cam-
paign. Smaller parties likewise will have a much
smaller presence. However, is this enough to re-
flect a popularity at a particular point in time, or
in a given campaign? Is measuring volume sus-
ceptible to disproportionate influence from say a
few prominent news stories or deliberate gaming
or spamming? We define our volume-based mea-
sure as the proportional share of party mentions in
a set of tweets for a given time period:

SoV (x) =
|Rel(x)|∑n
i=1 |Rel(i)|

(2)

where SoV (x) is the share of volume for a given
party x in a system of n parties and |Rel(i)| is the
number of tweets relevant to party i. This formula
has the advantage that the score for the parties are
proportions summing to 1 and are easily compared
with poll percentages. The sets of documents we
use are:

• Time-based: Most recent 24 hours, 3 days, 7
days

• Sample size-based: Most recent 1000, 2000,
5000 or 10000 tweets

• Cumulative: All of the tweets from 8th
February 2011 to relevant time

• Manual: Manually labelled tweets from pre-
8th February 2011

When we draw comparison with a poll from a
given date, we assume that tweets up until mid-
night the night before the date of the poll may
be used. The volume of party mentions was
approximately consistent in the approach to the
election, meaning the cumulative volume function
over time is linear and monotonically increasing.

3.3 Sentiment Analysis

Our previous research has shown that supervised
learning provides more accurate sentiment analy-
sis than can be provided by unsupervised meth-
ods such as using sentiment lexicons (Berming-
ham and Smeaton, 2010). We therefore decided to
use classifiers specifically trained on data for this

4



Positive Negative Neutral Mixed Total
Week 1 255 1,248 1,218 47 2,768
Week 2 629 1,289 2,411 106 4,435
Total 884 2,537 3,629 153 7,203

Table 1: Annotation counts

election. On two days, a week apart before the
8th of February 2011, we trained nine annotators
to annotate sentiment in tweets related to parties
and candidates for the election. The tweets in each
annotation session were taken from different time
periods in order to develop as diverse a training
corpus as possible.

We provided the annotators with detailed guide-
lines and examples of sentiment. Prior to com-
mencing anntoation, annotators answered a short
set of sample annotations. We then provided the
gold standard for these annotations (determined
by the authors) and each answer was discussed
in a group session. We instructed annotators not
to consider reporting of positive or negative fact
as sentiment but that sentiment be one of emo-
tion, opinion, evaluation or speculation towards
the target topic. Our annotation categories con-
sisted of three sentiment classes (positive, nega-
tive, mixed), one non-sentiment class (neutral) and
the 3 other classes (unannotatable, non-relevant,
unclear). This is in line with the definition of sen-
timent proposed in (Wilson et al., 2005).

We disregard unannotatable, non-relevant and
unclear annotations. A small subset (3.5%) of
the documents were doubly-annotated. The inter-
annotator agreement for the four relevant classes
is 0.478 according to Krippendorff’s Alpha, a
standard measure of inter-annotator agreement for
many annotators (Hayes and Krippendorff, 2007).
We then remove duplicate and contradictory an-
notations leaving 7,203 document-topic pairs (see
Table 1). Approximately half of the annotations
contained sentiment of some kind.

The low level of positive sentiment we observe
is striking, representing just 12% of the document-
topic pairs. During this election, Ireland was in
a period of economic crisis and negative political
sentiment dominated the media and public mood.
This presents a difficulty for supervised learning.
With few training examples, it is difficult for the
learner to identify minority classes. To mitigate
this effect, when choosing our machine learning
algorithm we optimise for F-measure which bal-
ances precision and recall across the classes. We

Recall
classifier accuracy pos neg neu F-score
trivial 50.19 0 0 1 0.335
MNB 62.94 0.007 0.561 0.832 0.584
ADA-MNB 65.09 0.334 0.689 0.7 0.645
SVM 64.82 0.201 0.634 0.768 0.631
ADA-SVM 64.28 0.362 0.623 0.726 0.638

Table 2: Accuracy for 3-class sentiment classifica-
tion

disregard the mixed annotations as they are few in
number and ambiguous in nature.

Our feature vector consists of unigrams which
occur in two or more documents in the training
set. The tokenizer we use (Laboreiro et al., 2010)
is optimised for user-generated content so all soci-
olinguistic features such as emoticons (“:-)”) and
unconventional punctuation (“!!!!”) are preserved.
These features are often used to add tone to text
and thus likely to contain sentiment information.
We remove all topic terms, usernames and URLs
to prevent any bias being learned towards these.

Unsatisfied with the recall from either Support
Vector Machines (SVM) or Multinomial Naive
Bayes (MNB) classifiers, we evaluated a boosting
approach which, through iterative learning, up-
weights training examples from minority classes,
thus improving recall for these classes. We used
Freund and Schapire’s Adaboost M1 method with
10 training iterations as implemented in the Weka
toolkit3 (Freund and Schapire, 1996). Following
from this, we use an Adaboost MNB classifier
which achieves 65.09% classification accuracy in
10-fold cross-validation for 3 classes (see Table 2).

3.4 Incorporating Sentiment

It is difficult to say how best to incorporate senti-
ment. On the one hand, sentiment distribution in
the tweets relevant to a single party is indicative
of the sentiment towards that party. For example,
if the majority of the mentions of a party contain
negative sentiment, it is reasonable to assume that
people are in general negatively disposed towards
that party. However, this only considers a party in
isolation. If this negative majority holds true for
all parties, how do we differentiate public opinion
towards them? In a closed system like an election,
relative sentiment between the parties perhaps has
as much of an influence.

To address the above issues, we use two novel
measures of sentiment in this study. For inter-

3http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/

5



party sentiment, we modify our volume-based
measure, SoV , to represent the share of posi-
tive volume, SoVp, and share of negative volume,
SoVn:

SoVp(x) =
|Pos(x)|∑n
i=1 |Pos(i)|

(3)

SoVn(x) =
|Neg(x)|∑n
i=1 |Neg(i)|

(4)

For intra-party sentiment, we use a log ratio of
sentiment:

Sent(x) = log10
|Pos(x)|+ 1
|Neg(x)| + 1 (5)

This gives a single value for representing how pos-
itive or negative a set of documents are for a given
topic. Values for Sent(x) are positive when there
are more positive than negative documents, and
negative when there are more negative than pos-
itive for a given party. 1 is added to the posi-
tive and negative volumes to prevent a division by
zero. The inter-party share of sentiment is a pro-
portional distribution and thus prediction error can
be easily measured with MAE. Also, as it is non-
parametric it can be applied without any tuning.

We fit a regression to our inter-party and intra-
party measures, trained on poll data. This takes
the form:

y(x) = βvSoV (x) + βpSoVp(x) + βnSoVn(x)

+βsSent(x) + ε

This builds on the general model for sentiment
proposed in (Asur and Huberman, 2010). The pur-
pose of fitting this regression is threefold. Firstly,
we wish to identify which measures are the most
predictive and confirm our assumption that both
sentiment and proportion of volume have predic-
tive qualities. Secondly, we want to compare the
predictive capabilities of our two sentiment mea-
sures. Lastly, we want to identify under optimum
conditions how a Twitter-model for political senti-
ment could predict our election results.

For many applications there is little to be gained
from measuring sentiment without being able to
explain the observed values. We conclude our
study with a suggestion for how such sentiment
data may be used to explore Twitter data qualita-
tively during an election.

4 Results

Comparing our non-parametric inter-topic mea-
sures with the election result, our lowest error

MAE
Dataset SoV SoVp SoVn
cumulative 0.0558 0.0576 0.0658
1 day 0.0841 0.0574 0.1248
3 days 0.0920 0.0805 0.1203
7 days 0.0790 0.0718 0.0982
last 1000 0.0805 0.0857 0.1088
last 2000 0.0795 0.0663 0.1335
last 5000 0.0723 0.0701 0.1066
last 10000 0.0926 0.0808 0.1206
manually labelled 0.0968 0.1037 0.1128

Table 3: Mean absolute error for non-parametric
measures compared to election result

Figure 2: Mean absolute error for cumulative and
last 1000 sample data for SoV and SoVp

comes for when we use all available data, with
volume performing marginally better (5.58%) than
the share of positive volume. Interestingly, in
many of the other data sets, the share of posi-
tive volume outperforms the share of volume in
terms of result prediction. Unsurprisingly, share
of negative volume performs worst in all cases.
Also interesting is the fact that among the worst-
performing is the more accurate manually labelled
data. Perhaps this is due to the gap in time be-
tween when the documents were labelled and the
election. See Table 3 for the MAE for result pre-
diction for our data sets.

To understand better how each of these predic-
tive measures is performing, we look closer at two
of our datasets: cumulative and last 1000. We
choose cumulative as it performs best out of all our
datasets and we choose last 1000 as this sample
size is easy to reproduce and a number frequently
used in polling for sufficient sample size. This also
allows us to compare a cumulative data set with a
fixed volume dataset.

In Figure 2 we can see that broadly the error
for the cumulative datasets improves compared to
each successive poll over time. The performance
of the positive share of volume and overall volume
are strongly positively correlated. For the most
recent 1000 document samples however, we see

6



Features MAE MAE
cumulative last 1000

s 0.0996 0.1029
n 0.071 0.0661
n,s 0.0448 0.0645
p 0.0471 0.066
p,s 0.04 0.064
p,n 0.04 0.0594
p,n,s 0.0388 0.0608
v 0.0551 0.0573
v,s 0.0403 0.0547
v,n 0.0434 0.0533
v,n,s 0.0377 0.0502
v,p 0.0466 0.0538
v,p,s 0.0399 0.0542
v,p,n 0.0383 0.0486
v,p,n,s 0.0367 0.0486

Table 4: Error for regressions, trained and tested
on poll data v = SoV, p = SoVp, n = SoVn, s =
Sent

MAE
Regression (cumulative) 0.0585
Regression (last 1000) 0.0804
Exit poll 0.0108

Table 6: Error for regressions, trained on poll data
and official exit poll, compared to election results

the error for share of positive volume vary wildly,
likely due to the low volume of tweets classified as
positive. This does appear to lessen as the election
draws nearer, eventually reaching the same level
as the overall share of volume in the recent 1000
documents. After the initial polls however, the cu-
mulative scores give a much lower error.

Using intra-party sentiment in Figure 3 we see
that in the weeks before the election, it is diffi-
cult to discern any salient pattern. The party sen-
timent values all seem to be relatively close, with
an average sentiment score of 0.75, approximately
equal to a ratio of 1 positive document for every
6 negative documents. In the days before polling
day however we observe a divergence of sentiment
which continues through polling day and beyond,
showing overall positive sentiment for Labour and
Sinn Féin, both of whom won a record number of
seats in the parliament. This trend continues for a
few days after the election but by a week later has
returned to values similar to those observed earlier
in the campaign.

Looking at the results of the regressions which
were fitted to the poll results, we see a low er-
ror, particularly for the cumulative data which has
an MAE of 3.67%. In Table 5 we can see how
the regression has weighted each of the factors.

(a) Regression: Cumulative data

(b) Regression: Last 1000

(c) Exit poll

Figure 4: Exit poll, election results and election
predictions for regression trained on poll data us-
ing all features

For both datasets, the regression has placed a high
weight on share of volume. Intuitively, the share
of positive volume receives a positive weight and
the share of negative volume receives a negative
weight. Each of the sentiment scores are weighted
higher for the cumulative data. In Table 4, we can
see that adding in more features improves the re-
gression accuracy but taking just two features (for
example SoVp and SoVn) we can approach similar
accuracy. In terms of the final election results, the
cumulative regression outperforms the 1000 sam-
ple regression significantly with an MAE of 5.85%
(see Table 6 and Figure 4).

In order to explore the content according to sen-
timent we define Sentiment TF-IDF. In this mea-
sure, we consider the entire set of documents to be
the tweets relevant to a topic and thus the docu-
ment frequency for a term is the number of rele-
vant documents in which a term appears. To cal-
culate the term frequencies for a topic-sentiment
class we then concatenate all documents of that
class into a single document and calculate word
frequencies. Doing this for the positive and neg-
ative classes for each party provides us with the
ranked terms list in Table 7. These terms may be
thought of as those terms that most characterise

7



Figure 3: Daily sentiment: each data point is average of the daily Sent score for a party over the previous
three days

SoV SoVp SoVn Sent ε MAE Correlation Coefficient
Cumulative 1.3444 0.6516 -1.0019 0.2193 0.1801 0.0367 0.9524
Last 1000 1.3339 0.2125 -0.6708 -0.0075 0.0196 0.0486 0.896

Table 5: Linear regression coefficients, error and correlation coefficient for regression fitted to poll data

the sentiment-bearing documents for that party.

5 Discussion

Overall, the best non-parametric method for pre-
dicting the result of the first preference votes in
the election is the share of volume of tweets that a
given party received in total over the time period
we study. This is followed closely by the share of
positive volume for the same time period which,
despite considering only a fraction of the docu-
ments considered by share of volume, approaches
the same error. Either overall share of volume or
share of positive volume performs best for each
dataset. As expected, negative share of voice con-
sistently performs worst, though in some cases ri-
vals the other measures. This is likely due to a
correlation with the overall share of volume.

The error compared with the individual polls is
telling as we see a downward trend for the cumu-
lative data as more data is available. This pat-
tern does not appear in the last 1000 sample vol-
ume data so this is likely linked to quantity of
data rather than temporal proximity to election
day. The share of positive volume for the last 1000
sample is much more erratic than we observe for
the cumulative data suggesting that 1000 is per-
haps too small to rely on metrics derived from sub-
sets of the data.

Perhaps the most intriguing results is the sen-

timent pattern over the course of the election. In
Figure 3 we see that there is a dramatic change
in sentiment towards the parties for the days af-
ter polling day but that this sentiment shift had al-
ready begun before polling day. This period, from
a few days before the election to approximately a
week afterwards, is a period where public senti-
ment appears to have settled at a range of values
for the parties. Outside of this time period it is
difficult to separate the parties in terms of senti-
ment. Perhaps this is a case of Twitter users be-
ing more honest and considered with the vote and
results imminent, rather than simply reactionary.
The fact that this sentiment appears to be leading
makes for an interesting avenue to pursue in future
studies.

We achieved an MAE of 3.67% using our re-
gressions compared to the poll results, although
naturally this was overfitted, since the regressions
had originally been fitted to the poll data. For that
reason the error is much higher when we test with
the actual result at 5.85%. It is noteworthy that
this is in fact slightly worse that the best perform-
ing non-parametric measure. In both cases, the er-
ror is significantly higher than that achieved by the
tradition polls.

Both the intra-party and inter-party sentiment
measures appear to improve upon volume-based
measures and the weights the regression assigns

8



to them reflects this. However it is difficult to con-
clude that intra-party sentiment is important when
inter-party sentiment is considered. In a closed
system, the actual distribution of sentiment in con-
tent relevant to a given party may only matter rel-
ative to that for the other parties. Considering
the regression results, it seems that capturing the
share of positive volume and the share of nega-
tive volume is sufficient, particularly where a large
amount of data is available. With all features for
cumulative data, the coefficient for intra-party sen-
timent score is assigned a weight of just -0.0075
suggesting that this factor is effectively ignored by
the regression.

Examining the errors, we see that our meth-
ods have particular trouble forecasting the result
for the Green Party (too high) and Fianna Fáil
(too low). In the former case, we suspect this
is due to the selection bias in sampling Twitter.
Green party members, and their supporters, tend to
be more tech-savvy and have a disproportionately
large presence in social media. In the latter case
we speculate that although Fianna Fáil attracted
low volume and plenty of negativity, they are how-
ever traditionally the largest Irish party and thus
enjoyed a degree of brand loyalty.

In opinion measurement and social media an-
alytics it is limiting to simply measure without
providing means to explain measurements. Using
Sentiment TF-IDF we can identify terms that pro-
vide a path to qualitatively exploring the dataset.
We suggest using Sentiment TF-IDF to identify
terms which can be used to identify important,
sentiment-bearing documents. Doing this we were
able to use the words in Table 7 to determine that
people were discussing Fine Gael negatively with
respect to planting a member of the audience in
a popular current affairs television show. We also
saw a negative reaction to the Green Party’s pro-
posal for a citizens’ assembly. This shows that
there may be further value in terms of qualitative
analysis which Twitter may offer during an elec-
tion.

6 Conclusion

Overall, we conclude that Twitter does appear to
display a predictive quality which is marginally
augmented by the inclusion of sentiment analysis.
We derive two different methods for monitoring
topic sentiment, intra-party and inter-party. Fitting
our features to a regression we observe that vol-

ume is the single biggest predictive variable fol-
lowed by inter-party sentiment. Given sufficient
data, intra-party sentiment appears to be less valu-
able as a predictive measure. Our speculation is
that the relative success of the inter-party senti-
ment is due to the closed nature of the system.

Our approach however has demonstrated an er-
ror which is not competitive with the traditional
polling methods. A next step is to conduct a failure
analysis to discern whether there is a further aspect
of the content that we may able to model, or a bias
we may be able to correct for which can reduce
this error. We also observe a dramatic sentiment
shift in the two days before polling day which hint
at the election outcome. It is perhaps a deeper
analysis of the sentiment distribution during this
period which will produce the most beneficial ap-
plication of sentiment analysis in the context of an
election campaign.

There are perhaps two reasons that volume is an
altogether stronger indicator than sentiment. The
first is that volume may simply be a reasonable in-
dicator of popularity in a population of people, and
in this case, voting intention. The other is that sen-
timent in comparison is reactive and it is difficult
to discriminate between sentiment which reflects
the inner preferences of people, and that which is
reflecting an immediate response to a given news
story or event. We do see cases where sentiment
is necessary. For example, the Green Party in this
election had a relatively high volume, but a closer
look at the content reveals that this was because
people were commenting on low levels of support,
an aspect not adequately captured by our senti-
ment analysis.

At this stage it is unclear whether confining our-
selves to sentiment and volume data will allow us
to approach levels of acceptable accuracy for re-
liable measurement. Improvement in sentiment
analysis techniques and increased availability of
data will likely increase performance, however the
research community must address the issues of
representativeness and potential for adversarial ac-
tivity before these methods can be used in a credi-
ble way.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by Science Foundation Ire-
land under grant 07/CE/I1147. The authors would
like to thank the reviewers for their helpful feed-
back and comments.

9



The Green Party Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Sinn Féin Labour
pos neg pos neg pos neg pos neg pos neg

1 vote happen lesson vinb vote vote election vinb vote tv3ld
2 mid election unparalleled tv3ld team vinb luck plan north vinb
3 flyer happening failure bad children ha fought point cllr tv3news
4 dublin made interesting vote bucket voting candidates vote dublin vote
5 west citizens wake tv3news bearable don seat job central baby
6 rx assembly east country day gay vote creation prefs lost
7 oireachtas proposal record voting giving tv3news constituency banks donegal bunch
8 candidate hard flyer anglo picture twitter hard playing fair eating
9 welcomes final education door bebo facebook rain blinder running communists
10 preference obliterated smacking telling yellow planted biased disgraceful great opportunity
11 urban poor election things hope audience helping don good major
12 man week b4 screwed red answering campaign racist today posters
13 guidelines idea seats anarchist plan twolicy poised vincent west back
14 achieved ireland brilliant day roses script tonight money 2nd won
15 statutory hoax ad friend equality priceless today tonight govt advising

Table 7: The most positive and negative terms for each party according to Sentiment TF-IDF

References

Sitaram Asur and Bernardo A. Huberman. 2010. Pre-
dicting the future with social media. Computing Re-
search Repository.

Adam Bermingham and Alan F. Smeaton. 2010. Clas-
sifying sentiment in microblogs: is brevity an advan-
tage? In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international
conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment, CIKM ’10, pages 1833–1836, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Johan Bollen, Alberto Pepe, and Huina Mao. 2009.
Modeling public mood and emotion: Twitter sen-
timent and socio-economic phenomena. CoRR,
abs/0911.1583.

Johan Bollen, Huina Mao, and Xiao-Jun Zeng. 2010.
Twitter mood predicts the stock market. CoRR,
abs/1010.3003.

Nicholas A. Diakopoulos and David A. Shamma.
2010. Characterizing debate performance via aggre-
gated Twitter sentiment. In Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2010).

Yoav Freund and Robert E. Schapire. 1996. Experi-
ments with a New Boosting Algorithm. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, pages 148–
156.

Daniel Gayo-Avello, Panagiotis T. Metaxas, and Eni
Mustafaraj. 2011. Limits of electoral predictions
using twitter. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM)
2011, July 17-21, 2011.

A. F. Hayes and K. Krippendorff. 2007. Answering
the call for a standard reliability measure for coding
data. In Communication Methods and Measures.

Andreas Jungherr, Pascal Jrgens, and Harald Schoen.
2011. Why the Pirate Party Won the German Elec-
tion of 2009 or The Trouble With Predictions: A Re-
sponse to Tumasjan, A., Sprenger, T. O., Sander, P.
G., & Welpe, I. M. Predicting Elections With Twit-
ter: What 140 Characters Reveal About Political
Sentiment. Social Science Computer Review.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2007. Crystal: Ana-
lyzing Predictive Opinions on the Web. In Proceed-
ings of the Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL).

Gustavo Laboreiro, Luı́s Sarmento, Jorge Teixeira,
and Eugénio Oliveira. 2010. Tokenizing micro-
blogging messages using a text classification ap-
proach. In AND ’10: Proceedings of The Fourth
Workshop on Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text
Data, New York, NY, USA, October. ACM.

Brendan O’Connor, Ramnath Balasubramanyan,
Bryan R. Routledge, and Noah A. Smith. 2010.
From Tweets to Polls: Linking Text Sentiment to
Public Opinion Time Series. In Proceedings of the
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media.

David A. Shamma, Lyndon Kennedy, and Elizabeth F.
Churchill. 2009. Tweet the debates: understanding
community annotation of uncollected sources. In
Proceedings of the first SIGMM workshop on Social
media, WSM ’09, pages 3–10, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Andranik Tumasjan, Timm Sprenger, Philipp Sandner,
and Isabell Welpe. 2010. Predicting Elections with
Twitter: What 140 Characters Reveal about Politi-
cal Sentiment. In International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media 2010.

T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann. 2005. Rec-
ognizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-Level Sen-
timent Analysis. Proceedings of the 2005 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 347–354.

Xue Zhang, Hauke Fuehres, and Peter A Gloor. 2010.
Predicting Stock Market Indicators Through Twitter
I hope it is not as bad as I fear. In Collaborative
Innovations Networks Conference (COINs).

10


