










































Indian Language Screen Readers and Syllable Based Festival Text-to-Speech Synthesis System


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 63–72,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Indian Language Screen Readers and Syllable Based Festival Text-to-Speech
Synthesis System

Anila Susan Kurian, Badri Narayan, Nagarajan Madasamy, Ashwin Bellur,
Raghava Krishnan, Kasthuri G., Vinodh M.V., Hema A. Murthy

IIT-Madras, India
{anila,badri,nagarajan,ashwin,raghav,kasthuri,vinodh}@lantana.tenet.res.in

hema@cse.iitm.ac.in

Kishore Prahallad
IIIT-Hyderabad, India

kishore@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

This paper describes the integration of com-
monly used screen readers, namely, NVDA
[[NVDA 2011]] and ORCA [[ORCA 2011]] with
Text to Speech (TTS) systems for Indian lan-
guages. A participatory design approach was
followed in the development of the integrated
system to ensure that the expectations of vi-
sually challenged people are met. Given that
India is a multilingual country (22 official lan-
guages), a uniform framework for an inte-
grated text-to-speech synthesis systems with
screen readers across six Indian languages are
developed, which can be easily extended to
other languages as well. Since Indian lan-
guages are syllable centred, syllable-based
concatenative speech synthesizers are built.

This paper describes the development and
evaluation of syllable-based Indian lan-
guage Text-To-Speech (TTS) synthesis sys-
tem (around festival TTS) with ORCA and
NVDA, for Linux and Windows environments
respectively. TTS systems for six Indian Lan-
guages, namely, Hindi, Tamil, Marathi, Ben-
gali, Malayalam and Telugu were built. Us-
ability studies of the screen readers were per-
formed. The system usability was evaluated
by a group of visually challenged people based
on a questionnaire provided to them. And
a Mean Opinion Score(MoS) of 62.27% was
achieved.

1 Introduction

India is home to the world’s largest number of vi-
sually challenged (VC) population [[Chetna India
2010]]. No longer do VC persons need to depend

on others to access common information that oth-
ers take for granted, such as newspapers, bank state-
ments, and scholastic transcripts. Assistive tech-
nologies (AT), enable physically challenged persons
to become part of the mainstream in the society.
A screen reader is an assistive technology poten-
tially useful to people who are visually challenged,
visually impaired, illiterate or learning disabled,
to use/access standard computer software, such as
Word Processors, Spreadsheets, Email and the Inter-
net.

Over the last three years, Indian Institute of Tech-
nology, Madras (IIT Madras) [[Training for VC,
IITM 2008 ]], has been conducting a training pro-
gramme for visually challenged people, to enable
them to use the computer using a screen reader. The
screen reader used was JAWS [[JAWS 2011]], with
English as the language. Although, the VC persons
have benefited from this programme, most of them
felt that:

• The English accent was difficult to understand.

• Most students would have preferred a reader in
their native language.

• They would prefer English spoken in Indian ac-
cent.

• The price for the individual purchase of JAWS
was very high.

Although some Indian languages have been incor-
porated with screen readers like JAWS and NVDA,
no concerted effort has been made to test the efficacy

63



of the screen readers. Some screen readers, read In-
dian languages using a non native phone set [[acharya
2007]]. The candidates were forced to learn by-heart
the sounds and their correspondence to Indian lan-
guages. It has therefore been a dream for VC peo-
ple to have screen readers that read using the native
tongue using a keyboard of their choice.

Given this feedback and the large VC popula-
tion (≈ 15%) (amongst 6% physically challenged)
in India, a consortium consisting of five institutions
were formed to work on building TTS for six In-
dian languages namely Hindi, Telugu, Tamil, Ben-
gali, Marathi and Malayalam. This led to the de-
velopment of screen readers that support Indian lan-
guages, one that can be made freely available to the
community.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 ex-
plains the selection of a speech engine, details of
speech corpus, selection of screen readers and the
typing tools for Indian languages. Section 3 dis-
cusses the integration of screen readers with Indian
language festival TTS voices. Although the integra-
tion is quite easy, a number of issues had to be ad-
dressed to make the screen reader user-friendly. To
do this, a participatory design [[Participatory Design
Conference 2011]], approach was followed in the de-
velopment of the system. Section 4 summarises the
participation of the user community in the design of
the system. To evaluate the TTS system, different
tests over and above the conventional MOS [[ITU-T
Rec, P.85 1994]], [[ITU-T Rec, P.800 1996]] were per-
formed. Section 4 also describes different quality at-
tributes that were used in the design of the tests. Sec-
tion 5 provides the results of the System Usability
Test. Section 6 provides details of the MOS evalu-
ation conducted for the visually challenged commu-
nity. Section 7 describes the future work and Section
8 concludes the paper.

2 Primary components in the proposed
TTS framework

2.1 Selection of Speech Engine

One of the most widely used speech engine is eS-
peak [[espeak speech synthesis2011]]. eSpeak uses
”formant synthesis” method, which allows many
languages to be provided with a small footprint.
The speech synthesized is intelligible, and provides

quick responses, but lacks naturalness. As discussed
in Section 1 the demand is for a high quality natural
sounding TTS system.

We have used festival speech synthesis system de-
veloped at The Centre for Speech Technology Re-
search, University of Edinburgh, which provides a
framework for building speech synthesis systems
and offers full text to speech support through a num-
ber of APIs [[Festival 1998]]. A large corpus based
unit selection paradigm has been employed. This
paradigm is known to produce [[Kishore and Black
2003]], [[Rao et al. 2005]] intelligible natural sound-
ing speech output, but has a larger foot print.

2.2 Details of Speech Corpus

As part of the consortium project, we recorded a
speech corpus of about 10 hours per language, which
was used to develop TTS systems for the selected six
Indian languages. The speech corpus was recorded
in a noise free studio environment, rendered by a
professional speaker. The sentences and words that
were used for recording were optimized to achieve
maximal syllable coverage. Table 1 shows the sylla-
ble coverage attained by the recorded speech corpus
for different languages. The syllable level database
units that will be used for concatenative synthesis,
are stored in the form of indexed files, under the fes-
tival framework.

Language Hours No.Syll Covered
Malayalam 13 6543
Marathi 14 8136
Hindi 9 7963
Tamil 9 6807
Telugu 34 2770
Bengali 14 4374

Table 1: Syllable coverage for six languages.

2.3 Selection of Screen Readers

The role of a screen reader is to identify and inter-
pret what is being displayed on the screen and trans-
fer it to the speech engine for synthesis. JAWS is
the most popular screen reader used worldwide for
Microsoft Windows based systems. But the main
drawback of this software is its high cost, approx-
imately 1300 USD, whereas the average per capita

64



income in India is 1045 USD [[per capita Income of
India 2011]]

Different open source screen readers are freely
available. We chose ORCA for Linux based systems
and NVDA for Windows based systems. ORCA is
a flexible screen reader that provides access to the
graphical desktop via user-customizable combina-
tions of speech, braille and magnification. ORCA
supports the Festival GNOME speech synthesizer
and comes bundled with popular Linux distibutions
like Ubuntu and Fedora.

NVDA is a free screen reader which enables vi-
sion impaired people to access computers running
Windows. NVDA is popular among the members
of the AccessIndia community. AccessIndia is a
mailing list which provides an opportunity for vi-
sually impaired computer users in India to exchange
information as well as conduct discussions related
to assistive technology and other accessibility issues
[[Access India 2011]]. NVDA has already been inter-
gated with Festival speech Engine by Olga Yakovl-
eva [[NVDA 2011]]

2.4 Selection of typing tool for Indian
Languages

The typing tools map the qwerty keyboard to In-
dian language characters. Widely used tools to input
data in Indian languages are Smart Common Input
Method(SCIM) [[SCIM Input method 2009]] and in-
built InScript keyboard, for Linux and Windows sys-
tems respectively. Same has been used for our TTS
systems, as well.

3 Integration of Festival TTS with Screen
readers

ORCA and NVDA were integrated with six Indian
language Festival TTS systems. Preliminary adapta-
tions to the system for Indian languages are as fol-
lows.

• Though syllable based systems produce good
quality speech output for syllabic Indian lan-
guages, syllables being larger units, require a
large speech corpus to maximize syllable cov-
erage. This means a larger footprint.

• In the paradigm being used, text processing
modules are required to provide the syllable

Figure 1: Mapping of vowel modifiers

or phoneme sequence for the word to be syn-
thesized. With input text for Indian languages
being UTF-8 encoded, Indian language festi-
val TTS systems have to be modified to ac-
cept UTF-8 input. A module was included in
festival to parse the input text and give the ap-
propriate syllable sequence. With grapheme to
phoneme conversion being non-trivial, a set of
grapheme to phoneme rules were included as
part of the module.

• Indian languages have a special representation
for vowel modifiers, which do not have a sound
unit as opposed to that in Latin script lan-
guages. Hence, to deal with such characters
while typing, they were mapped to sound units
of their corresponding full vowels. An example
in Hindi is shown in Figure 1.

To enable the newly built voice to be listed in
the list of festival voices under ORCA preferences
menu, it has to be proclaimed as UTF-8 encoding
in the lexicon scheme file of the voice [[Nepali TTS
2008]].

To integrate festival UTF-8 voice with NVDA,
the existing driver, Festival synthDriver for NVDA
by Olga Yakovleva was used [[NVDA festival driver
2008]]. To implement the rules for syllabifying In-
dian language text, a new C module was added to
festival. Hence, festival [[Festival compilation in
Windows 2011]] and synthDriver had to be recom-
piled [[Compilation of NVDA Synthdriver 2011]], for
the new voice to be completely integrated with fes-
tival and usable under NVDA.

4 Participatory design

The design of the TTS system was arrived at, by ac-
tive participation of visually challenged people, who

65



Figure 2: Flow of Development process

are the end users of the system. An educationally
qualified visually challenged person was employed
to test the integrated TTS system. The person is
well versed in using JAWS screen reader on Win-
dows. The quality attributes tested, were irrespective
of languages. Hence, as a study, these tests were ex-
clusively conducted on Tamil festival voice for both
NVDA and ORCA.

When a new version of the system was released,
it was provided to the in-house tester for evaluation.
The suggestions and issues reported were then in-
corporated in the next release of the system. This
process was done on an iterative basis. This helped
in enhancing the system to meet the expectations
of visually challenged people. Finally, the overall
system performance was evaluated by conducting a
Mean Opinion Score(MOS) test by visually chal-
lenged people, which is explained in detail in Sec-
tions 6. Figure 2 describes this development pro-
cess.

The various quality attributes tested for, are :

• Usability of the TTS system

– Adaptability of users to the new system
– Navigation through desktop and web

pages

• Availability of the TTS system

• Performance of the TTS system

– Loading of voices
– Response time for typing and reading

4.1 Usability of the TTS system

• Adaptability of users to the new system

As the common screenreader used among the
visually challenged community is JAWS, a
study was conducted to find out the ease of
adaptability for the user to the new system.
Since the front end for the system are screen
readers, the parameter used in this testing was
primarily the learning involved in switching
from JAWS to ORCA or NVDA. As JAWS and
NVDA are Windows based screen readers, all
the keystokes and shortcut keys are the same.
A computer literate who has used JAWS, will
learn NVDA quicker than others. As ORCA
is a Linux based screen reader, the shortcut
keys, key strokes and navigation through the
system are different compared to that of JAWS.
It takes more time for a JAWS user to famil-
iarize with the Linux operating system, ORCA
settings and keystokes.

• Navigation of desktop and web pages using
the screen reader

When default English locale is selected for
Windows and Linux systems, all the program
menus and navigational keys are in English.
The initial version of the TTS system was not
able to parse these English words. As a solu-
tion, switching of voices between English and
the selected Indian language was tried. The
system was made to switch between Festival’s
English Kal diphone voice and one of the In-
dian language voices. When an English word
is given as input, the English voice would be
loaded and when an Indian language word is
given as input, it switches to the respective In-
dian language, loads the voice and speaks the
word. This frequent switching of voices de-
graded the performance of the system and hear-
ing two different voices, without continuity was
annoying to the listener. This led to the devel-
opment of a bilingual voice.

Bilingual Voice: Each Indian language voice is
provided with an English pronunciation dictio-

66



nary, so that when an English word is provided
to the system, speech is synthesized using the
Indian language voice itself. Following are the
enhancements made to better the TTS system.

– Pronunciation Dictionary for English
words in native sound units
The English dictionary from Carnegie
Mellon University(CMU) with phone pro-
nunciation was used to create English
to Native language pronounciation dictio-
nary. An entry in the CMU dictionary :
(”abolish” ax b aa l ih sh). These English
phones were mapped to phones in native
language. An example mapping from En-
glish to Hindi language :
ax=a , b=b̂ , aa=aA, l=l̂ , ih=i , sh=ш̂.
For all the English words in the dictio-
nary, the native language representation
was created, abolish = abAElш̂. The
pronunciation dictionary was then created
by breaking these words down into sylla-
bles and phone sequences present in the
database.
(”abolish”a bA Elш̂)
All such English words that are required
to navigate through a desktop(including
special keys) and web, were collected and
added to the pronunciation dictionary. The
drawback of this method is that if an En-
glish word which is not present in the pro-
nunciation dictionary, is provided as input,
the TTS system cannot synthesize it. In
order to overcome this, English Letter To
Sound (LTS) rules were implemented.

– Implementation of English LTS Rules
Inputs can be in English or the native lan-
guage. In the case of a word being ab-
sent in the pronunciation dictionary, LTS
rules should supplement. LTS rules have
been developed for English in festival us-
ing a pronunciation dictionary of around
100000 words as the training set [[Black
et al. 1998]]. These LTS rules generate a
sequence of phones for the English word.
By mapping the English phones to phones
in the native language, one can provide a

Figure 3: CART for letter d

phone sequence in terms of the Indian lan-
guage, for an English word. For exam-

ple, a part of the Classification and Re-
gression Tree(CART) for letter ’d’ in a
word, by looking at the context in which
it is occuring is shown in Figure 3. The
first part of the figure is a partial tree in
English. The second part of the figure is
the corresponding entry for the Indian lan-
guage. If ’d’ is followed by another ’d’, no
sound(’epsilon;) is assigned. If it is fol-
lowed by ’i’ and ’r’ ’phone d’ is assigned
for English, whereas ’phone d’ is mapped
to X for Hindi language.

– Recording of Common English words
Most of the English words when spoken
in the Indian language voice did not sound
intelligible enough. This is because, many
English sounds were not available in In-
dian languages. Hence frequently seen
English words while navigating a Win-
dows/Linux desktop were recorded. In-
stead of concatenating Indian phones to
synthesize the English word, the naturally
uttered English word is spoken. This in-
creased the usability of the system.

4.2 Availability of the TTS system

The system was tested to check if it responded to
each and every input provided to it. Words, sen-

67



tences and paragraphs were provided as input to
the system using commonly used applications like
notepad, word processor and browser. The system
was able to read the words whose syllables were
present in the database. The testing was done ex-
tensively for each language which resulted in some
words not being spoken, which helped in the identi-
fication of those syllables which need to be included
in the database. Some of the major issues identified
during this test were:

• Issues during typing

The evaluator tested the system by typing us-
ing SCIM in Linux systems and the inbuilt In-
Script keyboard in Windows systems. As it is
unit selection based synthesis, the sound units
for the corresponding characters that are picked
up from the database may not be clear or audi-
ble. Also, the prosody of these individual char-
acters, when taken from different contexts will
vary. While typing, flat and prosodically neu-
tral sounds are preffered. This led to recording
of all aksharas (alphabets) in all six languages,
in a prosodically neutral flat tone. It was also
observed that the system was not reading vowel
modifiers. This issue was solved by adding en-
tries for vowel modifiers in the pronunciation
dictionary. The vowel modifiers were mapped
to the corresponding vowel pronunciation.

• Issues during reading web pages

The system was tested for reading content from
web pages. It was found that when a line
with any special character(for example <,>,’)
is given as input, the system would fail to read
the entire line. This led to the handling of spe-
cial characters in the Indian language voice. If
anything outside the unicode range of the lan-
guage is provided to the system, it is ignored.
In this way, even if some special or junk char-
acters are present in a line, the system will read
the whole line ignoring these characters.

4.3 Performance of the TTS system

The evaluator noted the response time of the system
while loading the voice, typing, navigation through
desktop and web pages.

• Loading of voices

In the unit selection paradigm, we have a large
repository of multiple realizations of a unit
(syllables) in different contexts. The text to be
spoken is broken down into these units. Sylla-
ble speech units are then indexed with their lin-
guistic and phonetic features using clustering
techniques (CART) to capture the context in
which they are uttered. With many realizations
of the same syllable being present, CART are
used to select a smaller set of candidate units
for the syllable to be spoken. These CART built
as part of the voice building process, attempt to
predict the acoustic properties of the unit using
its phonetic and linguistic features at the time
of synthesis [[Black and Taylor 1997]].

When the festival engine loads a voice, al-
though the speech waveforms are saved on the
hard disk, the CART gets loaded into the heap
memory. As the size of this tree file exceeds
the default heap size set in the festival frame-
work, the initial version of the Indian language
TTS voices failed to load. Hence, a larger heap
size was provided as a runtime argument for the
festival synthesizer.

• Response time for typing and reading

The user expects the system to respond in a
reasonable amount of time (approx 125 mil-
liseconds). For the initial system, the response
time for a sentence with 5 to 10 words was 1
to 2 seconds. To improve the response time
of the system, the voice(s) had to be pruned.
In the case of unit selection paradigm, a large
database with multiple realizations is used to
produce natural speech. Around 300000 units
with multiple realizations of syllables including
the ’silence’ unit are present in the database. In
the cluster unit framework [[Black and Taylor
1997]], these syllables are clustered into simi-
lar sounding groups and form the leaves of the
CART built. This resulted in a large CART file
which in turn slowed down the system.

With around 300000 realizations of syllables
being present, it is seen that there are far too
many realizations of frequently occuring syl-
lables. So it was vital to prune the CART

68



built. To effectively capture prosody for syl-
lables, after experimenting heuristically with
various cluster sizes, a leaf size of eight was
used, i.e syllables are clustered into groups of
eight. To prune the tree using the tools avail-
able within festival [[Black and Lenzo 2000]],
within each cluster only two units closest to
the centroid were retained and the rest were re-
moved, hence reducing the tree size. Even after
pruning the voice, it was seen that there were
still a very large number (around 20000) of si-
lence units, which are used to annotate phrase
and sentence boundaries, in the speech corpus.
It was seen that the silence units could be quan-
tized into two units, one to denote end of phrase
and another for end of sentence, without affect-
ing the performance. Hence silence trees were
removed from the CART retaining just the two
quantized units, further pruning the tree and
improving the speed. After pruning, the size of
the tree for Tamil language was reduced from
an 8 MB file to 1.7 MB file. The response time
for sentences having word rate between 5 to
10 for the pruned system was 200milliseconds
to 900 milliseconds. On an average there was
61% improvement in the response time.

5 System Usability Rating

For comparing the overall usability of the TTS sys-
tem, before and after carrying out all the modifica-
tions listed in Section 4, a Usability test was con-
ducted using screen readers by a group of visually
challenged people. The System Usability Scale de-
veloped by John Brooke [[Brooke 1996]], which uses
the Likert scale for providing a global view of sub-
jective assessments of usability was used. The eval-
uators were provided with a questionnaire for which
they have to provide Likert scale ratings. Table 2
shows the Likert scale used for the evaluation.

Questionnaire used for evaluation.

1. I found the system easy to use.

2. I need the support of a technical/non visually
challenged person to be able to use the system.

3. I am able to navigate through Desktop and in-
ternet using the system without any help.

Scores Scales
5 Strongly agree
4 Agree
3 Neither agree nor disagree
2 Disagree
1 Strongly disagree

Table 2: Likert Scales.

4. System is not able to clearly read each and ev-
ery character I type.

5. Availability of the system is more than 90%.
i.e. the system provides appropriate response
to more than 90% of the input given to it.

6. Response time of the system is good and is
within my tolerable limits.

7. I feel that most of the visually challenged peo-
ple, having basic knowledge on computers, can
learn this system quickly.

8. The system is not natural sounding.

9. The overall understanding/comprehensibility
of the content read out by the system is high.

10. The system is very useful for the VC commu-
nity.

The rating of the system was calculated as fol-
lows [[Brooke 1996]]. First, the score contributions
from each item were summed up. Each item’s score
contribution will range from 0 to 4. The score con-
tribution for positive questions 1,3,5,6,7,9 and 10 is
the scale position minus 1. The score contribution
for negative questions 2,4 and 8 is 5 minus the scale
position. Multiply the sum of the scores by 2.5 to ob-
tain the overall value of System Usability out of 100.
A group of visually challenged people evaluated the
initial and final system based on the questionnaire.
The average System Usability score for the initial
system was 35.63 and that of the final system was
89.38. Thus an improvement of around 50% in Sys-
tem Usability scores were seen due to the changes
made in Section 4.

69



6 MOS Evaluation

MOS( [[ITU-T Rec, P.85 1994]], [[ITU-T Rec, P.800
1996]]) and Degradation MOS (DMOS) tests were
conducted for six Indian languages, across various
centers in India. Synthesized speech files were
played to the evaluators. Sentences belonging to dif-
ferent domains were chosen for quality evaluation,
in order to test the performance of TTS system(s)
upon receiving input text from varied domains.

The various factors that were considered, while
administering the quality evaluation tests were:

• The MOS evaluators were chosen, such that
they should not have participated in any listen-
ing quality test for synthetic speech, at least for
the last 6 months and are well versed with the
language.

• The tests were done up to a maximum of 30-40
minutes, in order to avoid listener fatigue.

• A reasonable number of MOS evaluators (a
minimum of 20) were involved for evaluating
the quality.

• The tests were conducted in a quiet room and
the content to be evaluated was played through
a good quality speaker.

• For MOS tests, the sentences belonging to vari-
ous domains were grouped into various sets and
the order of these sets were randomized in or-
der to avoid any learning effects.

• Randomized sentences were played one after
the other, with a brief pause for listeners to pro-
vide the quality score, based on the scales pro-
vided in Table 3.

• In the case of DMOS tests, a natural sen-
tence followed by its synthesized counterpart is
played after a brief pause and the listeners have
to rate the amount of degradation in the synthe-
sized sentence, relative to the natural sentence.
This rating is based on the scales provided in
Table 3.

• DMOS tests were conducted first, so that the
participants get a feeling of how natural and
synthesized sentences sound.

Figure 4: Active discussion among Visually Challenged
candidates, during a training session

• 40 sentences were used to conduct the MOS
test and 10 sentences for DMOS test.

The MOS and DMOS scores for the six Indian
languages are provided in Table 4. Overall compre-
hension was also considered important, as the pri-
mary goal or aim of the TTS system was to be able
to communicate information to the user. Thus, a pre-
liminary comprehension based MOS test was con-
ducted, which involved playing out a paragraph to
the MOS evaluators and testing their level of com-
prehension.

Scores
Quality scales

MOS DMOS
5 Excellent Imperceptible
4 Good Perceptible but

not annoying
3 Fair Slightly annoying
2 Poor Annoying
1 Bad Very annoying

Table 3: MOS and DMOS Scales.

7 Future Work

As a second phase of the project, we plan to carry
out the following tasks

• To improve the prosody of synthetic speech.

• Enable the system to synthesize emotional
speech.

70



Language No. of Mos
evaluators

News Natural Sports InDomain Science DMOS Overall
MOS

Hindi 40 2.64 4.48 - 2.63 2.99 2.9 2.75
Bengali 8 3.31 - 2.91 3.18 2.85 3.14 3.06
Marathi 26 - 4.73 3.25 3.03 3.03 3.06 3.1
Telugu 23 - 4.66 2.46 2.89 2.83 3.68 2.73
Malayalam 27 3.95 4.13 3.73 3.77 - 3.91 3.82
Tamil 22 3.13 - - 3.54 3.2 2.81 3.22

Table 4: Mos scores for six Indian languages.

• Build a small footprint TTS system, so that it
can be used in applications for mobile, PDA,
ATM etc.

• Evaluate the TTS system by conducting objec-
tive tests for intelligibility and naturalness, us-
ing different measures including the Semanti-
cally Unpredictable Sentence (SUS) test.

• To extend this effort to other Indian languages.

• To develop full-fledged Bilingual voices. In the
current system we use the Indian language cor-
pus to synthesize English words. The complete
bilingual voice would have an English corpus
recorded in the same voice as the Indian lan-
guage, so that the same speech quality can be
provided to both English and Indian language
input.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we have briefly discussed the efforts
taken towards integrating TTS systems in six Indian
languages, with screen readers ORCA and NVDA.
We have also described the issues that were faced
while testing the system and the solutions to improve
the system. Further, results of the subjective listen-
ing tests (MOS and DMOS evaluation) and System
Usability tests conducted were discussed.

With the completion of this project, training pro-
gramme in IIT Madras, can be conducted for vi-
sually challenged community, using screen readers
NVDA and ORCA for Indian Languages, instead of
JAWS. Figure 4 shows an active discussion among
visually challenged candidates during the computer
training using screen readers at IIT Madras.

9 Acknowledgement

The authors would like to acknowledge the contri-
butions of the Consortium members, namely IIIT
hyderabad, IIT Kharagpur, CDAC Thiruvanantha-
puram and CDAC Mumbai, towards the project.

This project has been supported by the Depart-
ment of Information Technology, India. (Project
number - CSE0809107DITXHEMA).

References

S.P. Kishore and A.W. Black 2003.
Unit size in unit selection speech synthesis, proceed-
ings of EUROSPEECH, pp. 1317-1320, 2003

A.W. Black and P. Taylor 1997
Automatically clustering similar units for unit se-
lection in speech synthesis Eurospeech97 (Rhodes,
Greece, 1997), vol. 2, pp. 601-604

M. Nageshwara Rao,S. Thomas, T. Nagarajan and Hema
A. Murthy 2005
Text-to-speech synthesis using syllable like units, pro-
ceedings of National Conference on Communication
(NCC) 2005, pp. 227-280, IIT Kharagpur, India, Jan
2005.

ITU-T Rec, P.85 1997
Method for Subjective Performance Assessment of the
Quality of Speech Voice Output Devices, ITU-T Rec,
P.85, 1994, Int. Telecom. Union

ITU-T Rec, P.800 1996
Methods for subjective determination of transmission
quality, ITU-T Rec, P.800, 1996, Int. Telecom. Union

A. Black and K. Lenzo 2000 Building voices in the Fes-
tival speech synthesis system
http://festvox.org/bsv/

A. Black, P. Taylor, and R. Caley 1998 The Festival
speech synthesis system
http://festvox.org/festival

71



Festival Speech Synthesis System
http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/
festival/

ORCA Screen reader.
http://live.gnome.org/Orca

NVDA Screen reader.
http://www.nvda-project.org/

Festival synthDriver for NVDA by Olga Yakovleva:
http://www.box.net/shared/jcnnzz7xu6

SCIM Input method.
http://apps.sourceforge.net/
mediawiki/scim/index.php
https://help.Ubuntu.com/community/
SCIM

Festival compilation in Windows.
http://www.eguidedog.net/doc_build_
win_festival.php

Participatory Design Conference
http://www.publicsphereproject.org/
drupal/node/235

J. Brooke 1996 “SUS: a ”quick and dirty” usability
scale”. In P. W. Jordan, B. Thomas, B. A. Weerd-
meester, A. L. McClelland. Usability Evaluation in
Industry.
http://hell.meiert.org/core/pdf/sus.
pdf

Nepali TTS User Manual. 2008.
http://www.bhashasanchar.org/
textspeech_intro.php

JAWS Screen reader.
http://www.freedomscientific.com/
jaws-hq.asp

espeak speech synthesis
http://espeak.sourceforge.net/

Training for Visually Challenged by IIT Madras
http://www.lantana.tenet.res.in/
TTSconsortiumWiki/doku.php?id=start/

Acharya Multilingual Computing for literacy and educa-
tion
http://acharya.iitm.ac.in/ Last updated
on 2007-03-19

Chetna India
http://chetnaindia.org/our_values.
htm

Per capita Income of India, 2011
http://www.financialexpress.com/
news/Per-capita-income-in-India-is-Rs-46-492/
744155/

Access India mailing list
http://accessindia.org.in/mailman/
listinfo/accessindia_accessindia.
org.in

Compilation of NVDA Synthdriver
http://www.lantana.tenet.res.in/
TTSconsortiumWiki/doku.php?id=start

72


