










































Plans Toward Automated Chat Summarization


Proceedings of the Workshop on Automatic Summarization for Different Genres, Media, and Languages, pages 1–7,
Portland, Oregon, June 23, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Plans Toward Automated Chat Summarization

David C. Uthus
NRC/NRL Postdoctoral Fellow

Washington, DC 20375
david.uthus.ctr@nrl.navy.mil

David W. Aha
Naval Research Laboratory (Code 5514)

Washington, DC 20375
david.aha@nrl.navy.mil

Abstract

We describe the beginning stages of our work
on summarizing chat, which is motivated by
our observations concerning the information
overload of US Navy watchstanders. We de-
scribe the challenges of summarizing chat and
focus on two chat-specific types of summa-
rizations we are interested in: thread sum-
maries and temporal summaries. We then dis-
cuss our plans for addressing these challenges
and evaluation issues.

1 Introduction

We are investigating methods to summarize real-
time chat room messages to address a problem in
the United States military: information overload
and the need for automated techniques to analyze
chat messages (Budlong et al., 2009). Chat has be-
come a popular mode of communications in the mil-
itary (Duffy, 2008; Eovito, 2006). On US Navy
ships, watchstanders (i.e., personnel who continu-
ously monitor and respond to situation updates dur-
ing a ship’s operation, Stavridis and Girrier (2007))
are responsible for numerous duties including mon-
itoring multiple chat rooms. When a watchstander
reports to duty or returns from an interruption, they
have to familiarize themselves with the current sit-
uation, including what is taking place in the chat
rooms. This is difficult with the multiple chat rooms
opened simultaneously and new messages continu-
ously arriving. Similarly, Boiney et al. (2008) ob-
served that with US Air Force operators, when they
returned to duty from an interruption, another oper-
ator in the same room verbally updates them with

a summary of what had recently taken place in the
chat rooms and where they can find the important in-
formation. Both of these situations are motivations
for chat summarization, since watchstanders and
operators could use automatically generated sum-
maries to quickly orient themselves with the current
situation.

While our motivation is from a military perspec-
tive, chat summarization is also applicable to other
domains. For example, chat is used for communica-
tion in multinational companies (Handel and Herb-
sleb, 2002), open source meetings (Shihab et al.,
2009; Zhou and Hovy, 2005), and distance learning
(Osman and Herring, 2007). Summarization could
aid people who missed meetings or students who
wish to study past material in a summarized format.

Even though chat summarization has many poten-
tial uses, there has been little research on this topic
(Section 3). One possible reason for this is that chat
is a difficult medium to analyze: its characteristics
make it difficult to apply traditional NLP techniques.
It has uncommon features such as frequent use of ab-
breviations, acronyms, deletion of subject pronouns,
use of emoticons, abbreviation of nicknames, and
stripping of vowels from words to reduce number of
keystrokes (Werry, 1996). Chat is also characterized
by conversation threads becoming entangled due to
multiple conversations taking place simultaneously
in multiparticipant chat, i.e., chat composed of three
or more users within the same chat room (Herring,
1999; Herring, 2010). The interwoven threads then
make it more difficult to comprehend individual con-
versations.

The rest of this paper describes our challenges

1



Thread
Summarizer

Thread
Summary

<TheKirk> Scotty...I need more power!

<Rplee> Bish0p, how much time?

<SoLo> Where did you dig up that old fossil?

<SkyWlkr> Ben is a great man.

<Bish0p> Plenty, 26 minutes!

<SoLo> Yeah, great at getting us into trouble.

<Rplee> We’re not leaving!

<Bish0p> We’re not?

<Scott> I’m giving her all she’s got captain!

Temporal
Summarizer

Temporal
Summary

Figure 1: Process for generating thread and temporal summaries from a chat log.

in chat summarization. We define two chat-related
types of summarizations we are investigating (Sec-
tion 2) and describe related work (Section 3). Fur-
thermore, we give an overview of our planned ap-
proach to these challenges (Section 4) and also ad-
dress relevant evaluation issues (Section 5).

2 Our Summarization Challenge

Our research goal is to summarize chat in real-time.
Summaries need to be updated with every new chat
message that arrives, which can be difficult in high-
tempo situations. For these summarizations, we
seek an abstract, compact format, allowing watch-
standers to quickly situate themselves with the cur-
rent situation.

We are investigating two types of summarization:
thread summaries and temporal summaries. These
allow a user to actively decide how much summa-
rization they need. This can be useful when a user
needs a summary of a long, important conversation,
or when they need a summary of what has taken
place since they stopped monitoring a chat room.

2.1 Thread Summarization

The first type of summarization we are investigating
is a thread summary. This level of summarization
targets individual conversation threads. An exam-
ple of this is shown in Figure 1, where a summary
would be generated of the messages highlighted in
green, which all belong to the same conversation.
An example output summary may then be:

SoLo and SkyWlkr are talking about
Ben. SkyWlkr thinks he’s great, SoLo
thinks he causes trouble.

As shown, this will allow for a summarization to
focus solely on messages within a conversation be-
tween users. A good summary for thread summa-
rization will answer three questions: who is con-
versing, what they are conversing about, and what is
the result of their conversation. With our example,
the summary answers all three questions: it identi-
fies the two speakers SoLo and SkyWlkr, it identifies
that they are talking about Ben, and that the result is
SkyWlkr thinks Ben is great while SoLo thinks Ben
causes trouble.

The key challenge to thread summarization will
be finding, extracting, and summarizing the individ-
ual conversation threads. This requires the ability
to detect and extract threads, which has become of
great interest in recent research (Duchon and Jack-
son, 2010; Elsner and Charniak, 2010; Elsner and
Schudy, 2009; Ramachandran et al., 2010; Wang
and Oard, 2009). Thread disentanglement and sum-
marization will have to be done online, with conver-
sation threads being updated every time a new mes-
sage appears. Another challenge will be processing
incomplete conversations, since some messages may
be incorrectly classified into the wrong conversation
threads. These issues will need to be addressed as
this research progresses.

2.2 Temporal Summarization

The other form of summarization we seek is a tem-
poral summary. We want to allow users to dynami-
cally specify the temporal interval of summarization
needed. In addition, a user will be able to specify
the level of detail of the summary, which will be ex-
plained further later in this section. An example of
a user selecting a temporal summary can be seen in

2



Figure 1. A summary will be generated of only the
text that the user selected, which is shaded in blue.
An example output summary may then be:

Rplee and Bish0p disagree if there is
enough time to stay. SoLo and SkyWlkr
are talking about Ben.

A good summary for this task will answer the
following question: what conversations have taken
place within the specified temporal interval. In
some cases depending on the user’s preference, not
all conversations will be included in the summary.
When not all conversations are included, then a good
summary will consist of the most important conver-
sations and exclude those which are deemed less im-
portant. The amount of detail to be presented for
each individual conversation will be determined by
the temporal interval and the level of detail requested
by the user, which is discussed later in this section.

The summaries will need to be generated after a
user selects the temporal interval. To aid in this, we
envision that the summarizer will leverage the thread
summaries. Conversations threads, along with their
abstracts, will be stored in memory, and these will
be updated every time a new message is received.
The temporal summarizer can then use the thread
summaries to generate the temporal summaries.

A user will also be able to specify the level of
detail in the summary in addition to the temporal
interval. When generating a temporal summary, a
higher level of detail will result in a longer summary,
with the highest level of detail resulting in a sum-
mary consisting of all the thread summaries within
the temporal interval. In the case of a lower level of
detail, the summarizer will have to determine which
threads are important to include, and further abstract
them to create a smaller summary. The benefit of al-
lowing the user to specify the level of detail is so that
they can determine how much detail they need based
on personal requirements. For example, if someone
only has a short amount of time to read a summary,
then they can specify a low level of detail to quickly
understand the important points discussed within the
temporal interval they want covered.

Temporal summaries present additional chal-
lenges to address. The primary one is determining
which conversation threads to include in the sum-
mary, which require a ranking metric. Additionally,

there is an issue of whether to include a conversation
thread if all messages do not all fall within the tem-
poral interval. For example, if there is a long conver-
sation composed of many messages, and only one
message falls within the temporal interval, should it
then be included or discarded? These issues will also
need to be addressed as this research progresses.

2.3 Chat Corpora

An additional challenge of this work is finding a
suitable chat corpus that can be used for testing and
evaluating summarization applications. Most chat
corpora do not have any summaries associated with
them to use for a gold standard, making evaluations
difficult. This evaluation difficulty is described fur-
ther in Section 5.

Currently, we are aware of two publicly available
chat logs with associated summaries. One of these is
the GNUe Traffic archive1, which contains human-
created summaries in the form of a newsletter based
primarily on Internet Relay Chat (IRC) logs. Work-
ing with these chat logs requires abstractive (i.e.,
summaries consisting of system-generated text) and
extractive (i.e., summaries consisting of text copied
from source material) applications (Lin, 2009), as
the summaries are composed of both human narra-
tion and quotes from the chat logs.

The other corpus is composed of chat logs and
summaries of a group of users roleplaying a fantasy
game over IRC.2 The summaries are of an abstrac-
tive form. Creating summaries for these logs is more
difficult since the summaries take on different styles.
Some summarize the events of each character (e.g.,
their actions during a battle), while others are more
elaborate in describing the chat events using a strong
fantasy style.

3 Related Work

Summarization has been applied to many different
media (Lin, 2009; Spärck Jones, 2007), but only
Zhou and Hovy (2005) have worked on summariz-
ing chat. They investigated summarizing chat logs in
order to create summaries comparable to the human-
made GNUe Traffic digests, which were described
in Section 2.3. Their approach clustered partial mes-

1http://kt.earth.li/GNUe/index.html
2http://www.bluearch.net/night/history.html

3



sages under identified topics, then created a collec-
tion of summaries, with one summary for each topic.
In their work, they were using an extractive form
of summarization. For evaluation, they rewrote the
GNUe Traffic digests to partition the summaries into
summaries for each topic, making it easier to com-
pare with their system-produced summaries. Their
approach performed well, outperforming a baseline
approach and achieving an F-score of 0.52.

There has also been work on summarization of
media which share some similarities to chat. For
example, Zechner (2002) examined summarization
of multiparty dialogues and Murray et al. (2005) ex-
amined summarization of meeting recordings. Both
of these media share in common with chat the dif-
ficulty of summarizing conversations with multiple
participants. A difference with chat is that both of
these publications focused on one conversation se-
quentially while chat is characterized by multiple,
unrelated conversations taking place simultaneously.
Newman and Blitzer (2003) described the beginning
stages of their work on summarizing archived dis-
cussions of newsgroups and mailing lists. This has
some similarity with conversations, but a difference
is that newsgroups and mailing lists have metadata
to help differentiate the threaded conversations. Ad-
ditional differences between chat and these other
media can be seen in the unusual features not found
in other forms of written texts, as described earlier
in Section 1.

4 Planned Approach

We envision taking a three step approach to achieve
our goals for this research. We will abstract this to a
non-military domain, so that it is more accessible to
the research community.

4.1 Foundation

The first step is to focus on improving techniques for
summarizing chat logs in general to create a founda-
tion for future extensions. With the only approach
so far having been by Zhou and Hovy (2005), it is
unknown whether this is the best path for chat sum-
marization, nor is it known how well it would work
for real-time chat. Also, since its publication, new
techniques for analyzing multiparticipant chat have
been introduced, particularly in thread disentangle-

ment, which could improve chat summarization.
We hypothesize that constructing an approach that

incorporates new techniques and ideas, while ad-
dressing lessons learned by Zhou and Hovy (2005),
can result in a more robust chat summarizer that can
generate summaries online. A part of this process
will include examining other techniques for summa-
rization, drawing on ideas from related work dis-
cussed in Section 3, such as leveraging latent se-
mantic analysis (Murray et al., 2005). Furthermore,
we will incorporate past work on dialogue act tag-
ging in chat (Wu et al., 2005) to both improve sum-
marization and create a framework for the next two
steps. However, there is one limitation with their
work: the templates used for tagging were manually
created, which is both time-intensive and fragile. To
overcome this, we plan to use an unsupervised learn-
ing approach to discover dialogue acts (Ritter et al.,
2010).

4.2 Thread Extension

The second step will be to extend summarization
to thread summaries. This will require leveraging
thread disentanglement techniques, with the possi-
bility of using multiple techniques to improve the ca-
pability of finding whole conversation threads. For
the summary generations, we will first create extrac-
tive summaries before extending the summarizer to
generate abstractive summaries. In addition, we will
address the problem of incomplete conversations for
the cases when not all messages can be extracted
correctly, or when not all the messages of a conver-
sation are available due to joining a chat room in the
middle of a conversation.

Another task will be the creation of a suitable cor-
pus for this work. As discussed in Section 2.3, there
are only two known corpora with associated sum-
maries. Neither of these corpora are well suited
for thread summarization since the summaries are
not targeted towards answering specific questions
(see Section 2.1), making evaluations difficult. We
plan on creating a corpus by extending an exist-
ing thread disentanglement corpus (Elsner and Char-
niak, 2010). This corpus consists of technical chat
on IRC related to Linux, and has been annotated by
humans for conversation threads. We will expand
this corpus to include both extractive and abstractive
summaries for each of the threads. The advantage

4



of using this corpus, beyond the annotations, is that
it is topic-focused, which is a closer match of what
one would expect to see in the military domain com-
pared to social chat.

4.3 Temporal Extension

The third and final step will be to extend summa-
rization to temporal summaries. The key point of
this will be to extend the summarization capability
so that a user can specify the level of detail within
the summary, which will then determine the length
of the summary and how much to include from the
thread summaries. This will then involve creating a
ranking metric for the different conversations. Un-
like the thread extension, no additional abstraction
will be needed. Instead, the temporal extension
will reuse the thread summaries, and reduce their
length by ranking the sentences within the individ-
ual summaries as done with traditional text summa-
rization. Additionally, the problem of conversation
threads containing messages both inside and outside
the temporal interval will need to be addressed.

As with the thread extension, a corpora will need
to be created for this work. We expect that this will
build on the corpora used for the thread extension.
This will then require additional summaries to be
created for different levels of temporal intervals and
detail. To make this task feasible, we will restrict the
number of possible temporal intervals and levels of
detail to only a few options.

5 Evaluation Issues

A major issue in summarization is evaluation
(Spärck Jones, 2007), which is also a concern for
this work. One problem for evaluation is the lack of
suitable gold standards, as described in Section 2.3.
Another problem is that we plan on working with
abstractive forms in the future.

For the foundation step, we can follow the same
procedures as Zhou and Hovy (2005), which would
allow us to compare our results with theirs. This
would restrict the work to only an extractive form
for comparisons, though it is possible to extend to
abstract comparisons due to the gold standards being
composed of both extractive and abstractive means.

Evaluation for the thread and temporal extensions
will require additional work due to both the lack

of suitable gold standards and our need for abstrac-
tive summaries instead of extractive summaries. The
evaluations will include both intrinsic (i.e., how well
the summarizer is able to meet its objectives) and
extrinsic evaluations (i.e., how well the summaries
allow the user to perform their task, Spärck Jones
(2007)). For the intrinsic evaluations, we will use
both automated techniques (e.g., ROUGE3) and hu-
man assessors for evaluating both the thread and
temporal summarizations. Some concerns for evalu-
ation is that with the thread summaries, evaluation
will be impacted by how accurately conversation
threads can be extracted. With the temporal sum-
maries, the temporal intervals and the level of detail
determines the length and detail of the summary.

For the extrinsic evaluations, this research will
be evaluated as part of a larger project, which will
include human subject studies. Subjects will be
situated in a simulated watchstander environment,
must monitor three computer monitors simultane-
ously (one of which will contain live chat) while
also listening to radio communications. Testing of
our chat summarization methods will be done in col-
laboration with testing on 3D audio cueing to inves-
tigate and evaluate whether these technologies can
help watchstanders combat information overload.

6 Conclusion

We have presented the challenges we face in chat
summarization. Our goal for this research is that it
will result in a robust chat summarizer which is able
to generate abstract summaries in real-time. This is
a difficult, exciting domain, with many possible ap-
plications. We have shown that the difficulties are
due to the chat medium itself, lack of suitable data,
and difficulties of evaluation.

Acknowledgements

Thanks to NRL for funding this research and to the
reviewers for their valuable feedback. David Uthus
performed this work while an NRC postdoctoral fel-
low located at the Naval Research Laboratory. The
views and opinions contained in this paper are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as rep-
resenting the official views or policies, either ex-
pressed or implied, of NRL or the DoD.

3http://berouge.com/default.aspx

5



References

Lindsley G. Boiney, Bradley Goodman, Robert Gaimari,
Jeffrey Zarrella, Christopher Berube, and Janet Hitze-
man. 2008. Taming multiple chat room collaboration:
Real-time visual cues to social networks and emerg-
ing threads. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
ISCRAM Conference, pages 660–668. ISCRAM.

Emily R. Budlong, Sharon M. Walter, and Ozgur Yil-
mazel. 2009. Recognizing connotative meaning in
military chat communications. In Proceedings of Evo-
lutionary and Bio-Inspired Computation: Theory and
Applications III. SPIE.

Andrew Duchon and Cullen Jackson. 2010. Chat anal-
ysis for after action review. In Proceedings of the In-
terservice/Industry Training, Simulation & Education
Conference. I/ITSEC.

LorRaine T. Duffy. 2008. DoD collaboration and chat
systems: Current status and way ahead. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Semantic
Computing, pages 573–576. IEEE Computer Society.

Micha Elsner and Eugene Charniak. 2010. Disentan-
gling chat. Computational Linguistics, 36(3):389–
409.

Micha Elsner and Warren Schudy. 2009. Bounding and
comparing methods for correlation clustering beyond
ILP. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Integer Lin-
ear Programming for Natural Language Processing,
pages 19–27. ACL.

Bryan A. Eovito. 2006. The impact of synchronous text-
based chat on military command and control. In Pro-
ceedings of the Command and Control Research and
Technology Symposium. CCRP.

Mark Handel and James D. Herbsleb. 2002. What is chat
doing in the workplace? In Proceedings of the 2002
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work, pages 1–10. ACM.

Susan C. Herring. 1999. Interactional coherence in
CMC. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
IEEE Computer Society.

Susan C. Herring. 2010. Computer-mediated conversa-
tion: Introduction and overview. Language@Internet,
7. Article 2.

Jimmy Lin. 2009. Summarization. In M. Tamer Özsu
and Ling Liu, editors, Encyclopedia of Database Sys-
tems. Springer.

Gabriel Murray, Steve Renals, Jean Carletta, and Johanna
Moore. 2005. Evaluating automatic summaries of
meeting recordings. In Proceedings of the ACL Work-
shop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures
for Machine Translation and/or Summarization, pages
33–40. ACL.

Paula S. Newman and John C. Blitzer. 2003. Summariz-
ing archived discussions: A beginning. In Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces, pages 273–276. ACM.

Gihan Osman and Susan C. Herring. 2007. Interaction,
facilitation, and deep learning in cross-cultural chat:
A case study. The Internet and Higher Education,
10(2):125–141.

Sowmya Ramachandran, Randy Jensen, Oscar Bascara,
Todd Denning, and Shaun Sucillon. 2010. Automated
chat thread analysis: Untangling the web. In Proceed-
ings of the Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation
& Education Conference. I/ITSEC.

Alan Ritter, Colin Cherry, and Bill Dolan. 2010. Unsu-
pervised modeling of Twitter conversations. In Pro-
ceedings of Human Language Technologies: The 11th
Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
172–180. ACL.

Emad Shihab, Zhen Ming Jiang, and Ahmed E. Hassan.
2009. Studying the use of developer IRC meetings
in open source projects. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Software Maintenance,
pages 147–156. IEEE Computer Society.

Karen Spärck Jones. 2007. Automatic summarising: The
state of the art. Information Processing & Manage-
ment, 43(6):1449–1481.

James Stavridis and Robert Girrier. 2007. Watch Offi-
cer’s Guide: A Handbook for All Deck Watch Officers.
Naval Institute Press, fifteenth edition.

Lidan Wang and Douglas W. Oard. 2009. Context-
based message expansion for disentanglement of inter-
leaved text conversations. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 200–208. ACL.

Christopher C. Werry. 1996. Linguistic and interactional
features of Internet Relay Chat. In Susan C. Herring,
editor, Computer-Mediated Communication: Linguis-
tic, Social and Cross-Cultural Perspectives, pages 47–
64. John Benjamins.

Tianhao Wu, Faisal M. Khan, Todd A. Fisher, Lori A.
Shuler, and William M. Pottenger. 2005. Posting act
tagging using transformation-based learning. In Tsau
Young Lin, Setsuo Ohsuga, Churn-Jung Liau, Xiao-
hua Hu, and Shusaku Tsumoto, editors, Foundations
of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, volume 6
of Studies in Computational Intelligence, pages 321–
331. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.

Klaus Zechner. 2002. Automatic summarization of
open-domain multiparty dialogues in diverse genres.
Computational Linguistics, 28(4):447–485.

6



Liang Zhou and Eduard Hovy. 2005. Digesting virtual
“geek” culture: The summarization of technical In-
ternet Relay Chats. In Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 298–305. ACL.

7


