










































Tracking Sentiment in Mail: How Genders Differ on Emotional Axes


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 70–79,
24 June, 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tracking Sentiment in Mail:
How Genders Differ on Emotional Axes

Saif M. Mohammad† and Tony (Wenda) Yang†?
Institute for Information Technology, National Research Council Canada†.

Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A 0R6.
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University?

Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6.
saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca, wenday@sfu.ca

Abstract

With the widespread use of email, we now
have access to unprecedented amounts of text
that we ourselves have written. In this pa-
per, we show how sentiment analysis can be
used in tandem with effective visualizations to
quantify and track emotions in many types of
mail. We create a large word–emotion associ-
ation lexicon by crowdsourcing, and use it to
compare emotions in love letters, hate mail,
and suicide notes. We show that there are
marked differences across genders in how they
use emotion words in work-place email. For
example, women use many words from the
joy–sadness axis, whereas men prefer terms
from the fear–trust axis. Finally, we show vi-
sualizations that can help people track emo-
tions in their emails.

1 Introduction

Emotions are central to our well-being, yet it is hard
to be objective of one’s own emotional state. Letters
have long been a channel to convey emotions, ex-
plicitly and implicitly, and now with the widespread
usage of email, people have access to unprecedented
amounts of text that they themselves have written
and received. In this paper, we show how sentiment
analysis can be used in tandem with effective visu-
alizations to track emotions in letters and emails.

Automatic analysis and tracking of emotions in
emails has a number of benefits including:

1. Determining risk of repeat attempts by analyz-
ing suicide notes (Osgood and Walker, 1959;

Matykiewicz et al., 2009; Pestian et al., 2008).1

2. Understanding how genders communicate
through work-place and personal email
(Boneva et al., 2001).

3. Tracking emotions towards people and entities,
over time. For example, did a certain manage-
rial course bring about a measurable change in
one’s inter-personal communication?

4. Determining if there is a correlation between
the emotional content of letters and changes
in a person’s social, economic, or physiologi-
cal state. Sudden and persistent changes in the
amount of emotion words in mail may be a sign
of psychological disorder.

5. Enabling affect-based search. For example, ef-
forts to improve customer satisfaction can ben-
efit by searching the received mail for snippets
expressing anger (Dı́az and Ruz, 2002; Dubé
and Maute, 1996).

6. Assisting in writing emails that convey only
the desired emotion, and avoiding misinterpre-
tation (Liu et al., 2003).

7. Analyzing emotion words and their role in per-
suasion in communications by fervent letter
writers such as Francois-Marie Arouet Voltaire
and Karl Marx (Voltaire, 1973; Marx, 1982).2

In this paper, we describe how we created a large
word–emotion association lexicon by crowdsourc-
ing with effective quality control measures (Section

1The 2011 Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bed-
side (i2b2) challenge by the National Center for Biomedical
Computing is on detecting emotions in suicide notes.

2Voltaire: http://www.whitman.edu/VSA/letters
Marx: http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/date

70



3). In Section 4, we show comparative analyses of
emotion words in love letters, hate mail, and sui-
cide notes. This is done: (a) To determine the dis-
tribution of emotion words in these types of mail,
as a first step towards more sophisticated emotion
analysis (for example, in developing a depression–
happiness scale for Application 1), and (b) To use
these corpora as a testbed to establish that the emo-
tion lexicon and the visualizations we propose help
interpret the emotions in text. In Section 5, we ana-
lyze how men and women differ in the kinds of emo-
tion words they use in work-place email (Applica-
tion 2). Finally, in Section 6, we show how emotion
analysis can be integrated with email services such
as Gmail to help people track emotions in the emails
they send and receive (Application 3).

The emotion analyzer recognizes words with pos-
itive polarity (expressing a favorable sentiment to-
wards an entity), negative polarity (expressing an
unfavorable sentiment towards an entity), and no po-
larity (neutral). It also associates words with joy,
sadness, anger, fear, trust, disgust, surprise, antici-
pation, which are argued to be the eight basic and
prototypical emotions (Plutchik, 1980).

2 Related work

Over the last decade, there has been considerable
work in sentiment analysis, especially in determin-
ing whether a term has a positive or negative polar-
ity (Lehrer, 1974; Turney and Littman, 2003; Mo-
hammad et al., 2009). There is also work in more
sophisticated aspects of sentiment, for example, in
detecting emotions such as anger, joy, sadness, fear,
surprise, and disgust (Bellegarda, 2010; Mohammad
and Turney, 2010; Alm et al., 2005; Alm et al.,
2005). The technology is still developing and it can
be unpredictable when dealing with short sentences,
but it has been shown to be reliable when drawing
conclusions from large amounts of text (Dodds and
Danforth, 2010; Pang and Lee, 2008).

Automatically analyzing affect in emails has pri-
marily been done for automatic gender identifica-
tion (Cheng et al., 2009; Corney et al., 2002), but
it has relied on mostly on surface features such
as exclamations and very small emotion lexicons.
The WordNet Affect Lexicon (WAL) (Strapparava
and Valitutti, 2004) has a few hundred words anno-

tated with associations to a number of affect cate-
gories including the six Ekman emotions (joy, sad-
ness, anger, fear, disgust, and surprise).3 General
Inquirer (GI) (Stone et al., 1966) has 11,788 words
labeled with 182 categories of word tags, includ-
ing positive and negative polarity.4 Affective Norms
for English Words (ANEW) has pleasure (happy–
unhappy), arousal (excited–calm), and dominance
(controlled–in control) ratings for 1034 words.5 Mo-
hammad and Turney (2010) compiled emotion an-
notations for about 4000 words with eight emotions
(six of Ekman, trust, and anticipation).

3 Emotion Analysis

3.1 Emotion Lexicon

We created a large word–emotion association lex-
icon by crowdsourcing to Amazon’s mechanical
Turk.6 We follow the method outlined in Mo-
hammad and Turney (2010). Unlike Mohammad
and Turney, who used the Macquarie Thesaurus
(Bernard, 1986), we use the Roget Thesaurus as the
source for target terms.7 Since the 1911 US edition
of Roget’s is available freely in the public domain, it
allows us to distribute our emotion lexicon without
the burden of restrictive licenses. We annotated only
those words that occurred more than 120,000 times
in the Google n-gram corpus.8

The Roget’s Thesaurus groups related words into
about a thousand categories, which can be thought of
as coarse senses or concepts (Yarowsky, 1992). If a
word is ambiguous, then it is listed in more than one
category. Since a word may have different emotion
associations when used in different senses, we ob-
tained annotations at word-sense level by first ask-
ing an automatically generated word-choice ques-
tion pertaining to the target:

Q1. Which word is closest in meaning to shark (target)?
• car • tree • fish • olive

The near-synonym is taken from the thesaurus, and
the distractors are randomly chosen words. This

3WAL: http://wndomains.fbk.eu/wnaffect.html
4GI: http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/∼inquirer
5ANEW: http://csea.phhp.ufl.edu/media/anewmessage.html
6Mechanical Turk: www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome
7Macquarie Thesaurus: www.macquarieonline.com.au
Roget’s Thesaurus: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10681

8The Google n-gram corpus is available through the LDC.

71



question guides the annotator to the desired sense
of the target word. It is followed by ten questions
asking if the target is associated with positive senti-
ment, negative sentiment, anger, fear, joy, sadness,
disgust, surprise, trust, and anticipation. The ques-
tions are phrased exactly as described in Mohammad
and Turney (2010).

If an annotator answers Q1 incorrectly, then we
discard information obtained from the remaining
questions. Thus, even though we do not have cor-
rect answers to the emotion association questions,
likely incorrect annotations are filtered out. About
10% of the annotations were discarded because of
an incorrect response to Q1.

Each term is annotated by 5 different people. For
74.4% of the instances, all five annotators agreed on
whether a term is associated with a particular emo-
tion or not. For 16.9% of the instances four out of
five people agreed with each other. The informa-
tion from multiple annotators for a particular term
is combined by taking the majority vote. The lexi-
con has entries for about 24,200 word–sense pairs.
The information from different senses of a word is
combined by taking the union of all emotions asso-
ciated with the different senses of the word. This
resulted in a word-level emotion association lexicon
for about 14,200 word types. These files are to-
gether referred to as the NRC Emotion Lexicon ver-
sion 0.92.

3.2 Text Analysis

Given a target text, the system determines which of
the words exist in our emotion lexicon and calculates
ratios such as the number of words associated with
an emotion to the total number of emotion words in
the text. This simple approach may not be reliable
in determining if a particular sentence is expressing
a certain emotion, but it is reliable in determining
if a large piece of text has more emotional expres-
sions compared to others in a corpus. Example ap-
plications include detecting spikes in anger words
in close proximity to mentions of a target product
in a twitter stream (Dı́az and Ruz, 2002; Dubé and
Maute, 1996), and literary analyses of text, for ex-
ample, how novels and fairy tales differ in the use of
emotion words (Mohammad, 2011b).

4 Love letters, hate mail, and suicide notes

In this section, we quantitatively compare the emo-
tion words in love letters, hate mail, and suicide
notes. We compiled a love letters corpus (LLC) v 0.1
by extracting 348 postings from lovingyou.com.9

We created a hate mail corpus (HMC) v 0.1 by col-
lecting 279 pieces of hate mail sent to the Millenium
Project.10 The suicide notes corpus (SNC) v 0.1 has
21 notes taken from Art Kleiner’s website.11 We will
continue to add more data to these corpora as we find
them, and all three corpora are freely available.

Figures 1, 2, and 3 show the percentages of pos-
itive and negative words in the love letters corpus,
hate mail corpus, and the suicide notes corpus. Fig-
ures 5, 6, and 7 show the percentages of differ-
ent emotion words in the three corpora. Emotions
are represented by colours as per a study on word–
colour associations (Mohammad, 2011a). Figure 4
is a bar graph showing the difference of emotion per-
centages in love letters and hate mail. Observe that
as expected, love letters have many more joy and
trust words, whereas hate mail has many more fear,
sadness, disgust, and anger.

The bar graph is effective at conveying the extent
to which one emotion is more prominent in one text
than another, but it does not convey the source of
these emotions. Therefore, we calculate the rela-
tive salience of an emotion word w across two target
texts T1 and T2:

RelativeSalience(w|T1, T2) =
f1
N1
− f2

N2
(1)

Where, f1 and f2 are the frequencies of w in T1 and
T2, respectively. N1 and N2 are the total number
of word tokens in T1 and T2. Figure 8 depicts a
relative-salience word cloud of joy words in the love
letters corpus with respect to the hate mail corpus.
As expected, love letters, much more than hate mail,
have terms such as loving, baby, beautiful, feeling,
and smile. This is a nice sanity check of the man-
ually created emotion lexicon. We used Google’s
freely available software to create the word clouds
shown in this paper.12

9LLC: http://www.lovingyou.com/content/inspiration/
loveletters-topic.php?ID=loveyou

10HMC: http://www.ratbags.com
11SNC: http://www.well.com/ art/suicidenotes.html?w
12Google WordCloud: http://visapi-gadgets.googlecode.com

/svn/trunk/wordcloud/doc.html

72



Figure 1: Percentage of positive and negative words in
the love letters corpus.

Figure 2: Percentage of positive and negative words in
the hate mail corpus.

Figure 3: Percentage of positive and negative words in
the suicide notes corpus.

Figure 4: Difference in percentages of emotion words in
the love letters corpus and the hate mail corpus. The
relative-salience word cloud for the joy bar is shown in
the figure to the right (Figure 8).

Figure 5: Percentage of emotion words in the love letters
corpus.

Figure 6: Percentage of emotion words in the hate mail
corpus.

Figure 7: Percentage of emotion words in the suicide
notes corpus.

Figure 8: Love letters corpus - hate mail corpus: relative-
salience word cloud for joy.

73



Figure 9: Difference in percentages of emotion words in
the love letters corpus and the suicide notes corpus.

Figure 10: Difference in percentages of emotion words in
the suicide notes corpus and the hate mail corpus.

Figure 9 is a bar graph showing the difference in
percentages of emotion words in love letters and sui-
cide notes. The most salient fear words in the suicide
notes with respect to love letters, in decreasing or-
der, were: hell, kill, broke, worship, sorrow, afraid,
loneliness, endless, shaking, and devil.

Figure 10 is a similar bar graph, but for suicide
notes and hate mail. Figure 11 depicts a relative-
salience word cloud of disgust words in the hate mail
corpus with respect to the suicide notes corpus. The
cloud shows many words that seem expected, for
example ignorant, quack, fraudulent, illegal, lying,
and damage. Words such as cancer and disease are
prominent in this hate mail corpus because the Mil-
lenium Project denigrates various alternative treat-
ment websites for cancer and other diseases, and
consequently receives angry emails from some can-
cer patients and physicians.

5 Emotions in email: men vs. women

There is a large amount of work at the intersection of
gender and language (see bibliographies compiled
by Schiffman (2002) and Sunderland et al. (2002)).
It is widely believed that men and women use lan-
guage differently, and this is true even in computer
mediated communications such as email (Boneva et
al., 2001). It is claimed that women tend to foster

Figure 11: Suicide notes - hate mail: relative-salience
word cloud for disgust.

personal relations (Deaux and Major, 1987; Eagly
and Steffen, 1984) whereas men communicate for
social position (Tannen, 1991). Women tend to share
concerns and support others (Boneva et al., 2001)
whereas men prefer to talk about activities (Caldwell
and Peplau, 1982; Davidson and Duberman, 1982).
There are also claims that men tend to be more con-
frontational and challenging than women.13

Otterbacher (2010) investigated stylistic differ-
ences in how men and women write product re-
views. Thelwall et al. (2010) examine how men and
women communicate over social networks such as
MySpace. Here, for the first time using an emotion
lexicon of more than 14,000 words, we investigate
if there are gender differences in the use of emo-
tion words in work-place communications, and if so,
whether they support some of the claims mentioned
in the above paragraph. The analysis shown here,
does not prove the propositions; however, it provides
empirical support to the claim that men and women
use emotion words to different degrees.

We chose the Enron email corpus (Klimt and
Yang, 2004)14 as the source of work-place commu-
nications because it remains the only large publicly
available collection of emails. It consists of more
than 200,000 emails sent between October 1998 and
June 2002 by 150 people in senior managerial posi-

13http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/
howaboutthat/6272105/Why-men-write-short-email-and-
women-write-emotional-messages.html

14The Enron email corpus is available at http://www-
2.cs.cmu.edu/ enron

74



Figure 12: Difference in percentages of emotion words in
emails sent by women and emails sent by men.

Figure 13: Emails by women - emails by men: relative-
salience word cloud of trust.

tions at the Enron Corporation, a former American
energy, commodities, and services company. The
emails largely pertain to official business but also
contain personal communication.

In addition to the body of the email, the corpus
provides meta-information such as the time stamp
and the email addresses of the sender and receiver.
Just as in Cheng et al. (2009), (1) we removed emails
whose body had fewer than 50 words or more than
200 words, (2) the authors manually identified the
gender of each of the 150 people solely from their
names. If the name was not a clear indicator of
gender, then the person was marked as “gender-
untagged”. This process resulted in tagging 41 em-
ployees as female and 89 as male; 20 were left
gender-untagged. Emails sent from and to gender-
untagged employees were removed from all further
analysis, leaving 32,045 mails (19,920 mails sent
by men and 12,125 mails sent by women). We
then determined the number of emotion words in
emails written by men, in emails written by women,
in emails written by men to women, men to men,
women to men, and women to women.

Figure 14: Difference in percentages of emotion words in
emails sent to women and emails sent to men.

Figure 15: Emails to women - emails to men: relative-
salience word cloud of joy.

5.1 Analysis

Figure 12 shows the difference in percentages of
emotion words in emails sent by men from the per-
centage of emotion words in emails sent by women.
Observe the marked difference is in the percentage
of trust words. The men used many more trust words
than women. Figure 13 shows the relative-salience
word cloud of these trust words.

Figure 14 shows the difference in percentages of
emotion words in emails sent to women and the per-
centage of emotion words in emails sent to men. Ob-
serve the marked difference once again in the per-
centage of trust words and joy words. The men re-
ceive emails with more trust words, whereas women
receive emails with more joy words. Figure 15
shows the relative-salience word cloud of joy.

Figure 16 shows the difference in emotion words
in emails sent by men to women and the emotions in
mails sent by men to men. Apart from trust words,
there is a marked difference in the percentage of an-
ticipation words. The men used many more antic-
ipation words when writing to women, than when
writing to other men. Figure 17 shows the relative-

75



Figure 16: Difference in percentages of emotion words in
emails sent by men to women and by men to men.

Figure 17: Emails by men to women - email by men to
men: relative-salience word cloud of anticipation.

salience word cloud of these anticipation words.
Figures 18, 19, 20, and 21 show difference bar

graphs and relative-salience word clouds analyzing
some other possible pairs of correspondences.

5.2 Discussion

Figures 14, 16, 18, and 20 support the claim that
when writing to women, both men and women use
more joyous and cheerful words than when writing
to men. Figures 14, 16 and 18 show that both men
and women use lots of trust words when writing to
men. Figures 12, 18, and 20 are consistent with
the notion that women use more cheerful words in
emails than men. The sadness values in these fig-
ures are consistent with the claim that women tend
to share their worries with other women more of-
ten than men with other men, men with women, and
women with men. The fear values in the Figures 16
and 20 suggest that men prefer to use a lot of fear
words, especially when communicating with other
men. Thus, women communicate relatively more on
the joy–sadness axis, whereas men have a preference
for the trust–fear axis. It is interesting how there is a
markedly higher percentage of anticipation words in
cross-gender communication than in same-sex com-
munication (Figures 16, 18, and 20).

Figure 18: Difference in percentages of emotion words in
emails sent by women to women and by women to men.

Figure 19: Emails by women to women - emails by
women to men: relative-salience word cloud of sadness.

6 Tracking Sentiment in Personal Email

In the previous section, we showed analyses of sets
of emails that were sent across a network of individ-
uals. In this section, we show visualizations catered
toward individuals—who in most cases have access
to only the emails they send and receive. We are us-
ing Google Apps API to develop an application that
integrates with Gmail (Google’s email service), to
provide users with the ability to track their emotions
towards people they correspond with.15 Below we
show some of these visualizations by selecting John
Arnold, a former employee at Enron, as a stand-in
for the actual user.

Figure 22 shows the percentage of positive and
negative words in emails sent by John Arnold to his
colleagues. John can select any of the bars in the fig-
ure to reveal the difference in percentages of emo-
tion words in emails sent to that particular person
and all the emails sent out. Figure 23 shows the
graph pertaining to Andy Zipper. Figure 24 shows
the percentage of positive and negative words in
each of the emails sent by John to Andy.

In the future, we will make a public call for vol-

15Google Apps API: http://code.google.com/googleapps/docs

76



Figure 20: Difference in percentages of emotion words in
emails sent by men to men and by women to women.

unteers interested in our Gmail emotion application,
and we will request access to numbers of emotion
words in their emails for a large-scale analysis of
emotion words in personal email. The application
will protect the privacy of the users by passing emo-
tion word frequencies, gender, and age, but no text,
names, or email ids.

7 Conclusions

We have created a large word–emotion association
lexicon by crowdsourcing, and used it to analyze and
track the distribution of emotion words in mail.16

We compared emotion words in love letters, hate
mail, and suicide notes. We analyzed work-place
email and showed that women use and receive a
relatively larger number of joy and sadness words,
whereas men use and receive a relatively larger num-
ber of trust and fear words. We also found that
there is a markedly higher percentage of anticipa-
tion words in cross-gender communication (men to
women and women to men) than in same-sex com-
munication. We showed how different visualizations
and word clouds can be used to effectively inter-
pret the results of the emotion analysis. Finally, we
showed additional visualizations and a Gmail appli-
cation that can help people track emotion words in
the emails they send and receive.

Acknowledgments
Grateful thanks to Peter Turney and Tara Small for
many wonderful ideas. Thanks to the thousands of
people who answered the emotion survey with dili-
gence and care. This research was funded by Na-
tional Research Council Canada.

16Please send an e-mail to saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
to obtain the latest version of the NRC Emotion Lexicon, sui-
cide notes corpus, hate mail corpus, love letters corpus, or the
Enron gender-specific emails.

Figure 21: Emails by men to men - emails by women to
women: relative-salience word cloud of fear.

Figure 22: Emails sent by John Arnold.

Figure 23: Difference in percentages of emotion words
in emails sent by John Arnold to Andy Zipper and emails
sent by John to all.

Figure 24: Emails sent by John Arnold to Andy Zipper.

77



References

Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Dan Roth, and Richard Sproat.
2005. Emotions from text: Machine learning for text-
based emotion prediction. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference on HLT–EMNLP, Vancouver, Canada.

Jerome Bellegarda. 2010. Emotion analysis using la-
tent affective folding and embedding. In Proceedings
of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in
Text, Los Angeles, California.

J.R.L. Bernard, editor. 1986. The Macquarie Thesaurus.
Macquarie Library, Sydney, Australia.

Bonka Boneva, Robert Kraut, and David Frohlich. 2001.
Using e-mail for personal relationships. American Be-
havioral Scientist, 45(3):530–549.

Mayta A. Caldwell and Letitia A. Peplau. 1982. Sex
differences in same-sex friendships. Sex Roles, 8:721–
732.

Na Cheng, Xiaoling Chen, R. Chandramouli, and K.P.
Subbalakshmi. 2009. Gender identification from e-
mails. In Computational Intelligence and Data Min-
ing, 2009. CIDM ’09. IEEE Symposium on, pages 154
–158.

Malcolm Corney, Olivier de Vel, Alison Anderson, and
George Mohay. 2002. Gender-preferential text min-
ing of e-mail discourse. Computer Security Applica-
tions Conference, Annual, 0:282–289.

Lynne R. Davidson and Lucile Duberman. 1982.
Friendship: Communication and interactional pat-
terns in same-sex dyads. Sex Roles, 8:809–822.
10.1007/BF00287852.

Kay Deaux and Brenda Major. 1987. Putting gender
into context: An interactive model of gender-related
behavior. Psychological Review, 94(3):369–389.

Ana B. Casado Dı́az and Francisco J. Más Ruz. 2002.
The consumers reaction to delays in service. In-
ternational Journal of Service Industry Management,
13(2):118–140.

Peter Dodds and Christopher Danforth. 2010. Measuring
the happiness of large-scale written expression: Songs,
blogs, and presidents. Journal of Happiness Studies,
11:441–456. 10.1007/s10902-009-9150-9.

Laurette Dubé and Manfred F. Maute. 1996. The an-
tecedents of brand switching, brand loyalty and ver-
bal responses to service failure. Advances in Services
Marketing and Management, 5:127–151.

Alice H. Eagly and Valerie J. Steffen. 1984. Gender
stereotypes stem from the distribution of women and
men into social roles. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 46(4):735–754.

Bryan Klimt and Yiming Yang. 2004. Introducing the
enron corpus. In CEAS.

Adrienne Lehrer. 1974. Semantic fields and lexical
structure. North-Holland, American Elsevier, Ams-
terdam, NY.

Hugo Liu, Henry Lieberman, and Ted Selker. 2003.
A model of textual affect sensing using real-world
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 8th international
conference on Intelligent user interfaces, IUI ’03,
pages 125–132, New York, NY. ACM.

Karl Marx. 1982. The Letters of Karl Marx. Prentice
Hall.

Pawel Matykiewicz, Wlodzislaw Duch, and John P. Pes-
tian. 2009. Clustering semantic spaces of suicide
notes and newsgroups articles. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical Natural
Language Processing, BioNLP ’09, pages 179–184,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2010. Emo-
tions evoked by common words and phrases: Using
mechanical turk to create an emotion lexicon. In Pro-
ceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Analysis and Generation of
Emotion in Text, LA, California.

Saif Mohammad, Cody Dunne, and Bonnie Dorr. 2009.
Generating high-coverage semantic orientation lexi-
cons from overtly marked words and a thesaurus. In
Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-2009), pages 599–608,
Singapore.

Saif M. Mohammad. 2011a. Even the abstract have
colour: Consensus in wordcolour associations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Portland, OR, USA.

Saif M. Mohammad. 2011b. From once upon a time to
happily ever after: Tracking emotions in novels and
fairy tales. In Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Work-
shop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage,
Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH), Portland,
OR, USA.

Charles E. Osgood and Evelyn G. Walker. 1959. Mo-
tivation and language behavior: A content analysis of
suicide notes. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psy-
chology, 59(1):58–67.

Jahna Otterbacher. 2010. Inferring gender of movie re-
viewers: exploiting writing style, content and meta-
data. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international
conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment, CIKM ’10, pages 369–378, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in Infor-
mation Retrieval, 2(1–2):1–135.

78



John P. Pestian, Pawel Matykiewicz, and Jacqueline
Grupp-Phelan. 2008. Using natural language pro-
cessing to classify suicide notes. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical Natu-
ral Language Processing, BioNLP ’08, pages 96–97,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Robert Plutchik. 1980. A general psychoevolutionary
theory of emotion. Emotion: Theory, research, and
experience, 1(3):3–33.

Harold Schiffman. 2002. Bibliography of gender and
language. In http://www.sas.upenn.edu/∼haroldfs/
popcult/bibliogs/gender/genbib.htm.

Philip Stone, Dexter C. Dunphy, Marshall S. Smith,
Daniel M. Ogilvie, and associates. 1966. The General
Inquirer: A Computer Approach to Content Analysis.
The MIT Press.

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004.
Wordnet-Affect: An affective extension of WordNet.
In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2004),
pages 1083–1086, Lisbon, Portugal.

Jane Sunderland, Ren-Feng Duann, and Paul Baker.
2002. Gender and genre bibliography. In
http://www.ling.lancs.ac.uk/pubs/clsl/clsl122.pdf.

Deborah Tannen. 1991. You just don’t understand :
women and men in conversation. Random House.

Mike Thelwall, David Wilkinson, and Sukhvinder Uppal.
2010. Data mining emotion in social network commu-
nication: Gender differences in myspace. J. Am. Soc.
Inf. Sci. Technol., 61:190–199, January.

Peter Turney and Michael Littman. 2003. Measuring
praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orientation
from association. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems (TOIS), 21(4):315–346.

Francois-Marie Arouet Voltaire. 1973. The selected
letters of Voltaire. New York University Press, New
York.

David Yarowsky. 1992. Word-sense disambiguation us-
ing statistical models of Roget’s categories trained on
large corpora. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-
92), pages 454–460, Nantes, France.

79


