










































Bulgarian-English Parallel Treebank: Word and Semantic Level Alignment


Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, pages 29–38,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12-14 September 2011.

Bulgarian-English Parallel Treebank:
Word and Semantic Level Alignment

Kiril Simov
LMD, IICT-BAS

kivs@bultreebank.org

Petya Osenova
LMD, IICT-BAS

petya@bultreebank.org

Laska Laskova
LMD, IICT-BAS

laska@bultreebank.org

Aleksandar Savkov
LMD, IICT-BAS

savkov@bultreebank.org

Stanislava Kancheva
LMD, IICT-BAS

stanislava@bultreebank.org

Abstract

The paper describes the basic strategies behind 
the word and semantic level alignment in the 
Bulgarian-English  treebank.  The  word  level 
alignment has taken into consideration the ex-
perience within other NLP groups in the con-
text  of  the  Bulgarian  language  specific  fea-
tures. The semantic level alignment builds on 
the word level alignment and is represented in 
the framework of the Minimal Recursion Se-
mantics.

1 Introduction

Manually created aligned bi- or multilingual cor-
pora have proven to be useful resources in vari-
ety of tasks, e.g. for the development of automat-
ic  alignment  tools,  but  also for  lexicon extrac-
tion, word sense disambiguation, machine trans-
lation, annotation transfer and others.

In this paper we describe the word level align-
ment  of  the  Bulgarian-English  Parallel  HPSG 
Treebank (BulEngTreebank)  and its  connection 
to the semantic level alignment. The aim of con-
structing such a treebank is to use it as a source 
for learning of statistical transfer rules for Bul-
garian-English  machine  translation  along  the 
lines of (Bond et al. 2011 to appear). The transfer 
rules in this framework are rewriting rules over 
MRS (Minimal Recursion Semantics) structures. 
The basic format of the transfer rules is:

[C:] I [!F] → O
where I is the input of the rule, O is the output. 

C determines the context and F is the filter of the 
rule. C selects positive context and F selects neg-

ative context  for  the  application of  a  rule.  For 
more details on the transfer rules consult (Oepen 
2008).  This  type  of  rules  allows  for  the  ex-
tremely flexible transfer of factual and linguistic 
knowledge between the source and the target lan-
guages. Thus the treebank has to contain parallel 
sentences, their syntactic and semantic analyses 
and correspondences on the level of MRS.

In the development of such a parallel treebank 
we rely on the Bulgarian HPSG resource gram-
mar  BURGER,  and  on  a  dependency  parser 
(Malt Parser – Nivre et al. 2006), trained on the 
BulTreeBank data. Both parsers produce semant-
ic representations in terms of MRS. The treebank 
is a parallel resource aligned first on a sentence 
level. Then the alignment is done on the level of 
MRS.  This  level  of  abstraction makes  possible 
the usage of different tools for producing these 
alignments, since MRS is meant to be compatible 
with various syntactic  frameworks.  The chosen 
procedure is as follows: first, the Bulgarian sen-
tences are parsed with BURGER. If it succeeds, 
then the produced MRSes are used for the align-
ment. In case BURGER fails, the sentences are 
parsed  with  Malt  Parser,  and  then  MRSes  are 
constructed on the base of the dependency ana-
lysis.  The latter MRSes are created via a set of 
transfer rules (see Simov and Osenova 2011). In 
both cases we keep the syntactic analyses for the 
parallel sentences.

With respect to the MRS alignments,  a very 
pragmatic approach has been adopted – namely, 
the  MRS alignments  originated  from the  word 
level  alignment.  This approach is  based on the 
following observations and requirements:

29



• Both approaches for generation of MRS over 
the sentences are lexicalized;

• Non-experts in linguistics can do the align-
ments successfully on word level;

• Different rules for generation/testing are pos-
sible.

Both  parsers  (for  Bulgarian  and  English), 
which we use for the creation of MRSes, are lex-
icalized  in  their  nature.  Thus,  they first  assign 
elementary predicates to the lexical elements in 
the sentences, and then, on the base of the syn-
tactic  analysis,  these  elementary  predicates  are 
composed  into  MRSes  for  the  corresponding 
phrases, and finally of the whole sentence.

Our belief is that having alignments on word 
level, syntactic analyses and the rules for com-
position of MRS, we will  be able to determine 
correspondences  between  bigger  MRSes  than 
only  lexical  level  MRSes,  using  the  ideas  of 
(Tinsley  et  al,  2009).  They  first  establish  the 
mapping on word level (automatically), then for 
candidate phrases they calculate the rank of the 
correspondences  on the base of  the  word level 
alignment. Thus, our idea is to score the corres-
pondences between two MRSes on the base of 
involved  elementary  predicates  as  well  as  the 
syntactic structure of the parallel sentences.

As it was mentioned, the alignment on word 
level  allows us  to  do more  reliable  alignments 
using annotators who are non-experts in linguist-
ics.  Currently,  the  inter-annotator  agreement  is 
92 %. Also this kind of alignment does not re-
quire any initial knowledge of MRS from the an-
notators.  Another  advantage  is  that  the  result 
might  be  used  for  training  tools  for  automatic 
word alignment, and thus automatic extension of 
the treebank can be performed. Additionally, the 
word level alignment might  be done before the 
actual  analysis  of  the  sentences.  This  is  espe-
cially  useful  in  case  of  Bulgarian,  where  the 
BURGER grammar  is  underdeveloped in  com-
parison with the English grammar.
The paper is structured as follows: the next sec-
tion discusses the related works on word align-
ment  strategies.  Section 3 focuses on the basic 
principles  behind  the  word  alignment  between 
Bulgarian and English.  Section 4 describes  the 
level of MRS alignments. Section 5 outlines the 
conclusions.

2 Previous  Work  on  Word  Level 
Alignment

The annotation guidelines for Bulgarian-English 
word alignment, presented here, gained from the 

tradition  established  by  the  guidelines  used  in 
similar projects, aiming at the creation of golden 
standards for different language pairs, such as the 
Blinker  project  for  English-French  alignment 
(Melamed  1998),  the  alignment  task  for  the 
Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank 1.0 
(Kruijff-Korbayová et al. 2006), the Dutch paral-
lel Corpus project (Macken 2010), among others. 

As Lambert et al. (2006) point out, the align-
ment decisions presented in the guidelines reflect 
different  tasks.  There are projects such as AR-
CADE (Vèronis, 2000) and PLUG (Ahrenberg et 
al., 2000), which aim at building a reference cor-
pora with word, not sentence pairs,  and have a 
different annotation strategy in contrast to those 
that focus on sentence level. Different linguistic 
theoretical  backgrounds  appear  to  be  another 
source  of  divergence  that  affects  the  rules  of 
phrase alignments as well as the specific gram-
matical techniques. This holds especially in cor-
respondences  between synsemantic  words  (like 
prepositions,  determiners,  particles,  auxiliary 
verbs)  and  synsemantic  and/or  autosemantic 
words (Macken 2010).  In addition, some tools 
for manual word alignment, e.g. HandAlign1, al-
low the user to link both phrases and their ele-
ments with different kind of links, which might 
be simulated in other tools, which are more re-
strictive. Finally, the use of the so called possible 
(also ambiguous, fuzzy or weak) links that signal 
correspondence  between  semantically  and/or 
structurally  nonequivalent  words  or  phrases  is 
also a matter of dispute. While some argue that 
alignment with possible links should be determ-
ined by unambiguous rules, formulated with con-
sideration of  inter-annotation agreement,  others 
(Lambert  et  al.  2006)  allow  for  different  de-
cisions to be kept, which is true to the role ori-
ginally ascribed to  this  kind of  links:  “P (pos-
sible)  alignment  which  is  used  for  alignments 
which might or might not exist” (Och and Ney 
2000).

3 Word Level Alignment

The  word  level  alignment  was  performed  by 
the WordAligner2 – a web-based tool for word 
alignment, built on top of the word alignment in-
terface developed by C. Callison-Burch. It allows 
the user to provide parallel input of non-aligned 
text through the interface or to upload file(s) with 
sentence level aligned texts. Editing and/or com-
pletion of alignments is also supported. Each pair 

1 Available at http://www.cs.utah.edu/~hal/HandAlign/ 
2 http://www.bultreebank.bas.bg/aligner/index.php

30



of sentences is represented as a grid of squares 
(Fig. 1).  For convenience English is considered 
to be the source and Bulgarian – the  target lan-
guage, but that has no implications for the trans-
lation  direction.  Correspondence  between  two 
tokens is marked by clicking on a square – once 
(black square) or twice (dark grey square). Ori-
ginally, the two colours were introduced to allow 
the annotator to mark his/her degree of certainty 
about the alignment decision:  sure link (S link, 
black) or  possible link (P link, dark grey). It is 
worth noting that  in an alignment  there can be 
only  one  type  of  link  between  two  tokens  or, 
more  precisely,  there  is  no distinction between 
phrase and word levels.

Fig 1.  Aligner interface. Mapping is done by  
clicking on the squares.

Subsequently the colours were used to distin-
guish  between  strong and  weak alignment 
(Kruijff-Korbayová et al. 2006), thus P link (dark 
grey)  represents  either  weak alignment,  or  that 
the annotator is  uncertain about the pairing,  or 
both.  S  link  (black)  represents  either  strong 
alignment, or that the annotator is  certain about 
the pairing, or both.

General rules
We adopt the general rules that have proven to 

be shared by the different annotation tasks and 
alignment strategies. The number of correspond-
ing tokens to be aligned can be estimated by fol-
lowing  these  two  rules  (Veronis  1998,  Merkel 
1999, Macken 2010):
1. Mark  as  many  tokens  as  necessary  in  the 

source and in the target sentence to ensure a 
two-way equivalence.

2. Mark as few tokens as possible in the source 
and in the target sentence, but preserve the 
two-way equivalence.

If  a token or a phrase has no corresponding 
counterpart  in the other language and bears no 
structural and/or semantic significance, it should 
be left unlinked (NULL link, square with no fill) 
(Melamed 1998). 

Idioms and free translations present a special 
case. If two autosemantic words or phrases refer 
to  the  same  object,  but  do  not  share  the  same 
meaning, they are aligned with a P link, e.g.:
(1) this animal

това куче [‘this dog’]

The same rule  holds  when there  is  a  synse-
mantic – autosemantic correspondence:
(2) Ivan 's mother called.

Неговата майка  се  oбади. [‘His  mother 
called.’]

P link: Ivan 's ~ Неговата
P link is  used  when  a lexical item is  para-

phrased in the other language: 
(3) these non-Serbs

тези лица от несръбски произход [‘persons 
from a non-Serbian origin’]

P link:  non-Serbs ~  лица  от  несръбски 
произход

Idioms are linked with an S link; each token 
from the idiom in the source sentence is aligned 
with each token from the idiom in the target sen-
tence.
(4)   She'll marry him when pigs begin to fly.

Тя ще се омъжи за него на куково лято.

31



S link:  when pigs  begin  to  fly  ~  на куково 
лято

Specific rules
These  rules  are  primarily  language  specific 

and  their  subjects  are  predominantly  function 
words (prepositions, determiners, auxiliary verbs 
and the like). We give preference to the semantic 
equivalence where possible.

Noun phrases
Determiners.  Articles,  demonstratives  and 

possessive pronouns
а) English determiners like a(n) or the corres-

pond either to Bulgarian determiners  един [one] 
(always in preposition, see example (7), or bare 
NP (5), or to the so called full/short definite art-
icle (6).  In both languages they are attached to 
the first modifier of the NP, if there is one, re-
gardless of its position3.
(5) I live in a house.

Живея в къща.

S link: a house ~ къща
(6) Look at the house!

Виж къщата!

S link: the house ~ къщата

3 There are some exceptions in Bulgarian, e.g. хубави  
едни дечица (‘pretty  ones  children’  –  some  pretty 
children). In this case едни and some should be surely 
aligned.

(7) I saw a house at the hill.
Видях една къща на хълма.

S link: a ~ една  
S link: house ~ къща 
b)  Usually  if  one  of  the  two  corresponding 

NPs has no modifier, the determiner and the head 
of the phrase are aligned together to the head of 
the other phrase (compare for example the rules 
presented in Kruijff-Korbayová 2006 or Macken 
2010). Since in Bulgarian the article could be a 
morpheme attached to the first modifier (8), we 
decided to link both the article and the modifier 
from the English sentence to the corresponding 
Bulgarian modifier with an S link.
(8) the lovely old house 

хубавата стара къща

S link: the lovely ~ хубавата
S link: house ~ къща 
c)  We  follow  (Kruijff-Korbayová 2006)  in 

linking determiners from different word classes, 
based on the similarity in their function. Thus the 
correspondence  between  indefinite  articles  and 
indefinite pronouns is marked with an S link (9).
(9) a girl

някакво момиче 

S link: a ~ някакво
S link: girl ~ момиче
d)  English  definite  articles  and  Bulgarian 

demonstrative pronouns are also aligned with an 
S link (10). 
(10) the man

този човек

32



S link: the ~ този
S link:  man ~ човек
e)  We  use  P  link  to  align  the with  definite 

forms of full  possessive pronouns (11) because 
the possesive.
(11) I heard the words,
 Чух техните думи.

P link: the ~ техните
S link:  words ~ думи
Substitution with one(s)
Both  lexical  substitution  and  nominalization 

with the  numeral  one(s),  which are  typical  for 
English, have no structural and semantic analogy 
in Bulgarian. They should be aligned to the Bul-
garian lexical unit that correspond to the premod-
ifier of one (12), or, if there isn’t any, to the core-
ferential Bulgarian pronoun (13). 
(12)  the little ones

      малките

(13)  the ones that we love
 онези, които обичаме

Prepositional phrases
а) Very often English noun premodifiers are 

translated into prepositional phrases in Bulgarian 
(14). If that is the case, the preposition is aligned 
with a P link to the head noun, for example:
(14)   Justice Minister Cemil Cicek

Министърът  на  правосъдието 
Джемил Чичек

S link:  Justice ~ правосъдието
P link:   Justice ~ на
b)  English  possessive  noun  forms  are  trans-

lated into Bulgarian either with на prepositional 
phrase (John’s –  на Иван), or with an adjective 
that has possessive meaning (John’s – Иванов). 
In case of PP translation, the preposition itself is 
aligned to  the  possessive  ’s (for  singular)  or  ’ 
(for plural) marker with an P link to reflect the 
fact that the two possessive markers are morpho-
syntactically different (15). 
(15) JNA’s 1st Guards Motorised Brigade

Първа  гвардейска  моторизирана  
бригада на ЮНА

S link:  JNA ~ ЮНА
P link:  ’s ~ на
Verb forms
We follow the rules as they were first formu-

lated in (Melamed 1998): link main verb to main 
verb and auxiliary verb(s) to auxiliary verb(s) if 
possible.  Whenever  the  auxiliary  form  is  not 
present or different in the source or target phrase, 
it should be aligned to the main verb (see for ex-
ample (19), weakly or the two verb forms should 
be phrase aligned (21).

Expletive subject and pro-drop
a)  Expletive subjects (it,  there)  usually have 

no  correspondence  in  Bulgarian  sentences,  but 
they are obligatory for English. That is why we 
decided to link them with an S link to all Bul-

33



garian verb components,  i.e.  to the whole verb 
complex.
(16) It is raining.

Вали.

S link:  It ~ Вали
(17) there are many things

има много неща

S link:  there are ~ има
b) Bulgarian language is a pro-drop language. 

If the subject is unexpressed (18, 19, 20), then 
the English subject should be linked with a P link 
to  all  Bulgarian  verb  components  that  express 
one of the agreement categories: person, gender, 
number, and the main verb form itself. This de-
cision  is  similar  to  the  decision  described  in 
(Lambert et al. 2006) concerning the correspond-
ences between English and Spanish verb phrases 
with omitted subjects. 
(18) He knows 

Знае

P link: He ~ Знае
(19) She was not crying.

Не плачеше.

P link: She ~ плачеше
(20) They would not dare.

Не биха посмели.

P link: They ~ биха 
P link: They ~ посмели 
Reflexive pronouns in a verb complex
а) Reflexive Bulgarian се and си particles may 

be part of the verb lemma (21, 22). If that is the 
case, they should be aligned with an S link to the 
non-reflexive English verb form.
(21) had met earlier

бяхме се срещнали по-рано

S link:  met ~ се срещнали
b) In contrast to the rules construed for Czech-

English alignments (Kruijff-Korbayová 2006), if 
the reflexive particle is  used to form a passive 
voice  construction,  it  is  aligned to  the  English 
verb phrase as a whole with a P link. The differ-
ence is due to the fact that although we also align 
the verb forms as phrases, we try to mark separ-
ately  the  correspondence  between  the  main 
verbs.
(22) the house is being built

къщата се строи

S link:  is being ~ се
S link:  built ~ строи
Тo and да particles
а) The correspondence between  to  and  да is 

usually pretty straightforward.
(23) the decision to stay

решението да остана

34



S link:  to ~ да
b) In the case  when  to is  not  present  in  the 

source sentence,  да should be linked with a P 
link to the English verb that is aligned to the Bul-
garian verb following the particle.  Not surpris-
ingly  this  rule  resembles  the  rule  for  aligning 
Dutch  (om)…te constructions  (Macken  2010) 
with English full infinitive or -ing forms – as a 
infinitival particle Bulgarian да occupies similar 
syntactic positions and has similar functions.
(24) they stopped yelling

те спряха да викат 

P link:  yelling ~ да
S link:  yelling ~  викат 

(25) they may go
те може да тръгват

P link:  go ~ да 
S link:  go ~  тръгват

 (26) You will not perish. 
Ти няма да загинеш.

P link:  perish ~ да
S link:  perish ~  загинеш
Double negation 
а) Double negation is  typical  for  Slavic lan-

guages  like  Czech  and  Bulgarian,  but  not  for 
English. In Czech the verb itself has a morpholo-
gically  marked  negative  form  that  is  weakly 
aligned  with  the  positive  form  in  English 
(Kruijff-Korbayová 2006). In Bulgarian the neg-
ative marker  is not  a morpheme,  but a particle 
(не, 27) or an auxiliary verb with negative mean-
ing (няма, нямаше 28). Often it is the case that 
one or more negative pronouns from the Bulgari-
an sentence correspond to indefinite English pro-
nouns  (27).  They should  be  mapped  with  a  P 
link.
(27) I couldn't see anything.

Не можах да видя нищо.

S link: could’nt ~ не можах
S link:  anything ~ нищо

(28) I wouldn't come.
Нямаше да дойда.

S link: would n’t ~ Нямаше
If it is the English verb, that doesn’t have neg-

ative form, then we use a P link to align the Bul-
garian negative particle to the English word that 
bares negative meaning.
(29) I felt nothing.

Нищо не почувствах.

35



S link:  nothing ~ Нищо
P link:  nothing ~ не
Numerals
Cardinal and ordinal multiword numerals are 

treated  as  compound  nouns  and  thus  they  are 
aligned as a block within which one-to-one cor-
respondences are sure aligned (see for alternative 
decision Graça et al. 2008). 
(30) one hundred and twenty two men

сто двайсет и двама мъже

4 MRS Level Alignment

As  it  was  mentioned  above,  we  use  the  word 
level  alignment  in  order  to  establish alignment 
on  the  level  of  MRS.  For  both  languages  the 
phrases  are  assigned  an  MRS  structure  which 
represents the semantic  value of the phrase (in 
the case of dependency parse this MRS incorpor-
ates  the  semantic  values  of  all  dependent  ele-
ments). The intuition behind our approach is that 
the lexical data of each structure in the syntactic 
analysis  for  a  pair  of  sentences  are  aligned on 
word  level.  Then  we  assume  that  their  MRS 
structures are equivalent modulo the meaning of 
the language specific elementary predicates. We 
exploit this intuition in constructing the semantic 
alignment in our treebank.

MRS is  introduced  as  an  underspecified  se-
mantic formalism (Copestake et al,  2005). It  is 
used to support semantic analyses in HPSG Eng-
lish grammar – ERG (Copestake and Flickinger, 
2000), but also in other grammar formalisms like 
LFG. The main idea is the formalism to rule out 
spurious analyses resulting from the representa-
tion of logical operators and the scope of quanti-
fiers. Here we will present only basic definitions 
from  (Copestake et  al,  2005).  For more  details 

the  cited  publication  should  be  consulted.  An 
MRS structure is a tuple <GT,  R,  C>, where GT 
is the top handle, R is a bag of EPs (elementary 
predicates) and C is a bag of handle constraints, 
such that there is no handle h that outscopes GT. 
Each  elementary  predication  contains  exactly 
four components: (1) a handle which is the label 
of the EP; (2) a relation; (3) a list of zero or more 
ordinary variable arguments of the relation; and 
(4) a list of zero or more handles corresponding 
to scopal arguments of the relation (i.e., holes). 
Here is an example of an MRS structure for the 
sentence “Every dog chases some white cat.”

<h0,  {h1:  every(x,h2,h3),  h2:  dog(x),  h4: 
chase(x, y), h5: some(y,h6,h7), h6: white(y), 
h6: cat(y)}, {}>
The top handle is  h0. The two quantifiers are 

represented  as  relations  every(x,  y,  z) and 
some(x, y, z) where x is the bound variable, y and 
z are handles determining the restriction and the 
body of the quantifier. The conjunction of two or 
more relations is represented by sharing the same 
handle  (h6 above).  The  outscope  relation  is 
defined as a transitive closure of the immediate 
outscope  relation  between two elementary pre-
dications – EP immediately outscopes EP' iff one 
of the scopal arguments of EP is the label of EP'. 
In this example the set of handle constraints is 
empty,  which  means  that  the  representation  is 
underspecified with respect to the scope of both 
quantifiers. Here we finish with the brief intro-
duction of the MRS formalism.

First we establish correspondences on lexical 
level. Each two lexical items in the correspond-
ing analyses are made equivalent on the basis of 
word alignment. Special attention is paid to the 
analytical verb forms and clitics. The next step is 
to  traverse  the  trees  in  bottom-up manner.  For 
each phrase or head for which the components 
are aligned, a correspondence on the MRS level 
is established. It should be explicitly noted that a 
correspondence on a sentence level is also estab-
lished. Here we present an example:

Let us consider the following pair of sentences 
from the English Resource Grammar datasets:

      Kucheto       na Braun lae.
      Dog-the(neut) of  Browne barks.
      Browne's dog barks.
The word level alignment is:
      (Kucheto = dog)
      (na = 's)
      (na Braun = Browne 's)
      (lae = barks)
      (Braun = Browne)

36



Here are the MRS structures assigned to both 
sentences by ERG and BURGER. Some details 
are hidden for readability:

ERG:
<h1, { h3: proper_q_rel(x3,h4,h6), 
          h7: named_rel(x5,"Browne"), 

h8: def_explicit_q_rel(x10, h9, h11), 
h12: poss_rel(e13,x10,x5), 
h12: dog_n_1_rel(x10), 
h14: bark_v_1_rel(e2,x10)}, 
{ h4 qeq h7    h9 qeq h12 }>

BURGER:
<h1, { h3:   kuche_n_1_rel(x4), 
          h3:   na_p_1_rel(e5,x4,x6), 

h7:   named_rel(x6, "Braun"), 
h8:   exist_q_rel (x6, h9, h10), 
h11: exist_q_rel (x4, h12, h13), 
h1:   laya_v_rel (e2,x4)}, 
{ h12 qeq h3    h9 qeq h7 }>

The result  of correspondences between MRS 
on the basis of word level establishes the follow-
ing mappings of elementary predicates lists:
(m1)
(Braun = Browne)
    {  h3: proper_q_rel(x5, h4, h6), 
        h7: named_rel(x5, "Browne") }
to
    {  h7: named_rel(x6, "Braun"),
        h8: exist_q_rel(x6, h9, h10) }
(m2)
(na = 's)
    { h12: poss_rel(e13, x10, x5) }
to
    { h3: na_p_1_rel(e5, x4, x6)  }
(m3)
(na Braun = Browne 's)
    { h3:   proper_q_rel(x5, h4, h6),
       h7:   named_rel(x5, "Browne"),
       h8:   def_explicit_q_rel(x10, h9, h11),
       h12: poss_rel(e13, x10, x5) }
to
    { h3: na_p_1_rel(e5, x4, x6),
       h7: named_rel(x6, "Braun"),
       h8: exist_q_rel(x6, h9, h10) }
(m4)
(Kucheto = dog)
    { h12: dog_n_1_rel(x10) }
to
     { h3:   kuche_n_1_rel(x4),
        h11: exist_q_rel(x4, h12, h13) }
(m5)
(lae = barks)
    { h14: bark_v_1_rel(e2, x10) }
to
    { h1: laya_v_rel(e2, x4) }

As we mentioned above, our goal is to have 
MRS alignment not just on word level, but also 
on phrase level in the sentence. Thus, using the 
correspondences  described  in  the  previous  sec-
tion and the syntactic analyses of both sentences 
we can infer the following mapping:
(m6)
(Kucheto na Braun = Browne 's dog)
     { h3: proper_q_rel(x5, h4, h6),
        h7: named_rel(x5, "Browne"),
        h8: def_explicit_q_rel(x10, h9, h11),
        h12: poss_rel(e13, x10, x5),
        h12: dog_n_1_rel(x10) }
to
    { h3: na_p_1_rel(e5, x4, x6),
         h7: named_rel(x6, "Braun"),
         h8: exist_q_rel(x6, h9, h10),
         h3: kuche_n_1_rel(x4),
         h11: exist_q_rel(x4, h12, h13) }

Additionally,  such correspondences might  be 
equipped with similarity scores on the basis of 
word  alignment  types  involved  in  the  corres-
ponding phrase, as well as the type of the phrase 
itself. For example, if the word alignment of two 
corresponding phrases involves only sure links, 
then the MRS alignment for these phrases also is 
assumed  to  be  sure.  Respectively,  if  on  word 
level there are unsure links, then the MRS align-
ment could be assumed to be unsure. This idea 
could be developed further depending on the ap-
plication.  Also,  in  some  cases  the  MRS  level 
alignment could be assumed to be sure, although 
it includes some unsure links on word level. For 
example, in case of analytical verb forms many 
elements will be aligned only by possible links, 
but the whole forms are linked as a sure corres-
pondence.  We  believe  that  such  pairs  of  sen-
tences  with  appropriate  syntactic  and  semantic 
analyses  and  word  alignment  are  a  valuable 
source for construction of alignments on semant-
ic level.

In  our  project,  the  mappings  (explicit  or  in-
ferred) are used for definition of a procedure for 
generating transfer rules as outlined in the intro-
ductory section. 

5 Conclusion

In  this  paper  we  presented  the  alignment 
strategies  behind the Bulgarian-English parallel 
treebank. The focus was on word and MRS level. 
On the base of each word alignment,  an MRS 
alignment is produced together with the corres-
ponding elementary predicates.

37



Although  the  current  interannotator  agreement 
on the word level is promising - 92 %, we will 
continue with the development of the guidelines 
in parallel to the alignment process. 

The  language  specific  features,  which  are 
likely  to  influence  the  transfer  of  information 
from Bulgarian to English, are as follows:
• Similarly to English and in contrast to other 

Slavic languages,  Bulgarian is analytic  lan-
guage with a well-developed temporal  sys-
tem;

• Unlike English and similarly to other Slavic 
languages,  Bulgarian  has  a  relatively  free 
word order and is a pro-drop language;

• Like other Slavic languages, Bulgarian verbs 
encode the aspect lexically;

• Being part  of the Balkan Sprachbund, Bul-
garian has clitics and clitic reduplication;

• Like other Slavic languages, Bulgarian has a 
double negation mechanism;

• Bulgarian polar questions are formed with a 
special question particle, which has also a fo-
culizing role;

• Like  other  Slavic  languages,  the  modifica-
tion is mostly done by the adjectives (garden 
dog (EN) vs. gradinsko kuche (BG, ‘garden-
adjective dog’)).

We hope that the MRS alignment in the tree-
bank provides a good abstraction over the lan-
guage specific features of Bulgarian as well as 
adequate  equivalences  to  the  English  linguistic 
phenomena.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the European 
project EuroMatrixPlus (IST-231720).

References
Ahrenberg L.,  Merkel  M.,  Hein A.S.,  Tiedemann J. 

2000.  Evaluation of Word Alignment Systems. In: 
Proc. of the 2nd International Conference on Lin-
guistic Resources and Evaluation (LREC). Athens, 
Greece, Vol. III: pp. 1255–1261.

Bond F., Oepen S., Nichols E., Flickinger D., Velldal 
E. and Haugereid P. 2011 (to appear). Deep open 
source machine translation. In Machine Translation 
Journal.

Copestake A.,  Flickinger  D.,  Pollard  C.,  and Sag I. 
2005. Minimal Recursion Semantics: An Introduc-
tion. Research  on  Language  and  Computation, 
3(4), pp. 281–332.

Copestake A.  and Flickinger  D. 2000.  Open source 
grammar development environment and broad-cov-

erage English grammar using HPSG. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd International  Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, pp. 591–598.

Graça, J., Pardal J. P.,  Coheur L., Caserio D.  2008. 
Multi-Language  Word  Alignments  Annotation  
Guidelines  (version  0.9). Spoken  Language  Sys-
tems  Laboratory  (L2F).   May  25,  2008. 
http://www.inesc-
id.pt/pt/indicadores/Ficheiros/4734.pdf 

Kruijff-Korbayová I., Chvátalová K., and Postolache 
O. 2006. Annotation Guidelines for Czech-English  
Word Alignment. In: Proceedings of the Fifth Lan-
guage  Resources  and  Evaluation  Conference 
(LREC).  http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/~korbay/ 
Publications/lrec06align.pdf

Lambert P., De Gispert A., Banchs R., and Mariño, J. 
B.  2006.  Guidelines  for  Word  Alignment  Evalu-
ation  and  Manual  Alignment.  In:  Language 
Resources  and  Evaluation  39:  267–285. 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/dg2x3279404
42t12/

Macken,  L.  2010.  Annotation  Guidelines  for  
DutchEnglish  Word  Alignment.  Version  1.0.  TR, 
Language and Translation Technology Team, Fac-
ulty  of  Translation  Studies,  University  College 
Ghent.  http://webs.hogent.be/~lmac139/public-
aties/SubsententialAnnotationGuidelines.pdf

Melamed,  D.  1998.  Annotation Style  Guide  for  the  
Blinker  Project.   Version   1.0.4.   Philadelphia. 
http://repository.upenn.edu/ircs_reports/53/

Merkel,  M. 1999.  Annotation  Style  Guide  for  the  
PLUG  Link  Annotator.  http://www.ida.liu.se/~ 
magme/publications/pluglinkannot.pdf 

Nivre J., Hall J., Nilsson J. 2006. MaltParser: A data-
driven  parser-generator  for  dependency  parsing. 
In Proc. of LREC-2006, pp. 2216-2219.

Och F.J., Ney H. 2000.  A Comparison of Alignment  
Models  for  Statistical  Machine  Translation.  In: 
Proc. of the 18th Int. Conf. on Computational Lin-
guistics. Saarbrucken, Germany, pp. 1086–1090.

Oepen,  S.  2008.  The  Transfer  Formalism.  General  
Purpose  MRS  Rewriting.  Technical  Report  LO-
GON Project. University of Oslo.

Simov, K. and Osenova, P. 2011.  Towards Minimal 
Recursion  Semantics  over  Bulgarian  Dependency 
Parsing. In Proceedings of RANLP 2011.

Tinsley, J., Hearne, M. and Way, A. 2009. Exploiting 
Parallel Treebanks to Improve Phrase-Based Stat-
istical Machine Translation.CICLing'09. 318-331.

Vèronis,  J.  1998.  Arcade.  Tagging  guidelines  for  
word  alignment.  Version  1.0.  http://aune.lpl.uni-
v-aix.fr/projects/arcade/2nd/word/guide/index.html 

38


