










































Combining statistical and semantic approaches to the translation of ontologies and taxonomies


Proceedings of SSST-5, Fifth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 116–125,
ACL HLT 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Combining statistical and semantic approaches to the translation of
ontologies and taxonomies

John McCrae
AG Semantic Computing

Universität Bielefeld
Bielefeld, Germany

jmccrae@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de

Mauricio Espinoza
Universidad de Cuenca

Cuenca, Ecuador
mauricio.espinoza@ucuenca.edu.ec

Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, Guadalupe Aguado-de-Cea
Ontology Engineering Group

Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
Madrid, Spain

{emontiel, lupe}@fi.upm.es

Philipp Cimiano
AG Semantic Computing

Universität Bielefeld
Bielefeld, Germany

cimiano@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract

Ontologies and taxonomies are widely used to
organize concepts providing the basis for ac-
tivities such as indexing, and as background
knowledge for NLP tasks. As such, trans-
lation of these resources would prove use-
ful to adapt these systems to new languages.
However, we show that the nature of these
resources is significantly different from the
“free-text” paradigm used to train most sta-
tistical machine translation systems. In par-
ticular, we see significant differences in the
linguistic nature of these resources and such
resources have rich additional semantics. We
demonstrate that as a result of these linguistic
differences, standard SMT methods, in partic-
ular evaluation metrics, can produce poor per-
formance. We then look to the task of leverag-
ing these semantics for translation, which we
approach in three ways: by adapting the trans-
lation system to the domain of the resource;
by examining if semantics can help to predict
the syntactic structure used in translation; and
by evaluating if we can use existing translated
taxonomies to disambiguate translations. We
present some early results from these experi-
ments, which shed light on the degree of suc-
cess we may have with each approach.

1 Introduction

Taxonomies and ontologies are data structures that
organise conceptual information by establishing re-
lations among concepts, hierarchical and partitive
relations being the most important ones. Nowadays,
ontologies have a wide range of uses in many do-
mains, for example, finance (International Account-

ing Standards Board, 2007), bio-medicine (Col-
lier et al., 2008) (Ashburner et al., 2000) and li-
braries (Mischo, 1982). These resources normally
attach labels in natural language to the concepts and
relations that define their structure, and these la-
bels can be used for a number of purposes, such
as providing user interface localization (McCrae et
al., 2010), multilingual data access (Declerck et al.,
2010), information extraction (Müller et al., 2004)
and natural language generation (Bontcheva, 2005).
It seems natural that for applications that use such
ontologies and taxonomies, translation of the natu-
ral language descriptions associated with them is re-
quired in order to adapt these methods to new lan-
guages. Currently, there has been some work on
this in the context of ontology localisation, such
as Espinoza et al. (2008) and (2009), Cimiano et
al. (2010), Fu et al. (2010) and Navigli and Pen-
zetto (2010). However, this work has focused on the
case in which exact or partial translations are found
in other similar resources such as bilingual lexica.
Instead, in this paper we look at how we may gain an
adequate translation using statistical machine trans-
lation approaches that also utilise the semantic in-
formation beyond the label or term describing the
concept, that is relations among the concepts in the
ontology, as well as the attributes or properties that
describe concepts, as will be explained in more de-
tail in section 2.

Current work in machine translation has shown
that word sense disambiguation can play an im-
portant role by using the surrounding words as
context to disambiguate terms (Carpuat and Wu,
2007) (Apidianaki, 2009). Such techniques have

116



been extrapolated to the translation of taxonomies
and ontologies, in which the “context” of a taxon-
omy or ontology label corresponds to the ontology
structure that surrounds the label in question. This
structure, which is made up of the lexical informa-
tion provided by labels and the semantic informa-
tion provided by the ontology structure, defines the
sense of the concept and can be exploited in the dis-
ambiguation process (Espinoza et al., 2008).

2 Definition of Taxonomy and Ontology
Translation

2.1 Formal Definition
We define a taxonomy as a set of concepts, C, with
equivalence (synonymy) links, S, subsumption (hy-
pernymy) links, H , and a labelling function l that
maps each concept to a single label from a language
Σ∗. Formally we define a taxonomy, T , as a set of
tuples (C, S, H, l) such that S ⊆ P(C × C) and
H ⊆ P(C × C) and l is a function in C → Σ∗. We
also require that S is a transitive, symmetric and re-
flexive relation, and H is transitive. While we note
here that this abstraction does not come close to cap-
turing the full expressive power of many ontologies
(or even taxonomies), it is sufficient for this paper to
focus on the use of only equivalence and subsump-
tion relationships for translation.

2.2 Analysis of ontology labels
Another important issue to note here is that the
kind of language used within ontologies and tax-
onomies is significantly different from that found
within free text. In particular, we observe that the
terms used to designate concepts are frequently just
noun phrases and are significantly shorter than a
usual sentence. In the case of the relations between
concepts (dubbed object properties) and attributes
of concepts (data type properties), these are occa-
sionally labelled by means of verbal phrases. We
demonstrate this by looking at three widely used on-
tologies/taxonomies.

1. Friend of a friend: The Friend of a Friend
(FOAF) ontology is used to describe social
networks on the Semantic Web (Brickley and
Miller, 2010). It is a small taxonomy with very
short labels. Labels for concepts are compound
words made up of up to three words.

2. Gene Ontology: The Gene Ontology (Ash-
burner et al., 2000) is a very large database of
terminology related to genetics. We note that
while some of the terms are technical and do
not require translation, e.g., ESCRT-I, the ma-
jority do, e.g., cytokinesis by cell plate forma-
tion.

3. IFRS 2009: The IFRS taxonomy (International
Accounting Standards Board, 2007) is used for
providing electronic financial reports for audit-
ing. The terms contained within this taxon-
omy are frequently long and are entirely noun
phrases.

We applied tokenization and manual phrase anal-
ysis to the labels in these resources and the results
are summarized in table 1. As can be observed,
the variety of types of labels we may come across
when linguistically analysing and translating ontol-
ogy and taxonomy labels is quite large. We can
identify the two following properties that may influ-
ence the translation process of taxonomy and ontol-
ogy labels. Firstly, the length of terms ranges from
single words to highly complex compound phrases,
but is still generally shorter than a sentence. Sec-
ondly, terms are frequently about highly specialized
domains of knowledge.

For properties in the ontology we also identify
terms which consist of:

• Noun phrases identifying concepts.

• Verbal phrases that are only made up of the
verb with an optional preposition.

• Complex verbal phrases that include the predi-
cate.

• Noun phrases that indicate possession of a par-
ticular characteristic (e.g., interest meaning X
has an interest in Y).

3 Creation of a corpus for taxonomy and
ontology translation

For the purpose of training systems to work on the
translation of ontologies and taxonomies, it is nec-
essary to create a corpus that has similar linguistic
structure to that found in ontologies and taxonomies.
We used the titles of Wikipedia1 for the following

1http://www.wikipedia.org

117



Size Mean tokens per label Noun Phrases Verb Phrases
FOAF 79 1.57 94.9% 8.9%
Gene Ontology 33795 4.45 100.0% 0.0%
IFRS 2009 2757 8.39 100.0% 0.0%

Table 1: Lexical Analysis of labels

Link Direct Fragment Broken
German 487372 484314 1735 1323
Spanish 347953 346941 330 682

Table 2: Number of translation for pages in Wikipedia

reasons:

• Links to articles in different languages can be
viewed as translations of the page titles.

• The titles of articles have similar properties to
the ontologies labels mentioned above with an
average of 2.46 tokens.

• There are a very large number of labels. In fact
we found that there were 5,941,8902 articles of
which 3,515,640 were content pages (i.e., not
special pages such as category pages)

We included non-content pages (in particular, cat-
egory pages) in the corpus as they were generally
useful for translation, especially the titles of cat-
egory pages. In table 2 we see the number of
translations, which we further grouped according to
whether they actually corresponded to pages in the
other languages, as it is also possible that the trans-
lations links pointed to subsections of an article or
to missing pages.

Wikipedia also includes redirect links that allow
for alternative titles to be mapped to a given con-
cept. These can be useful as they contain synonyms,
but also introduce a lot more noise into the corpus
as they also include misspelled and foreign terms.
To evaluate the effectiveness of including these data
for creating a machine translation corpus, we took
a random sample of 100 pages which at least one
page redirects to (there are 1,244,647 of these pages
in total). We found that these pages had a total
of 242 extra titles from the redirect page of which

2All statistics are based on the dump on 17th March 2011

204 (84.3%) where true synonyms, 19 (7.9%) were
misspellings, 8 (3.3%) were foreign names for con-
cepts (e.g., the French name for “Zeebrugge”), and
11 (4.5%) were unrelated. As such, we conclude
that these extra titles were useful for constructing the
corpus, increasing the size of the corpus by approx-
imately 50% across all languages. There are sev-
eral advantages to deriving a corpus from Wikipedia,
for example it is possible to provide some hierarchi-
cal links by the use of the category that a page be-
longs to, such as has been performed by the DBpedia
project (Auer et al., 2007).

4 Evaluation metrics for taxonomy and
ontology translation

Given the linguistic differences in taxonomy and
ontology labels, it seems necessary to investigate
the effectiveness of various metrics for the evalua-
tion of translation quality. There are a number of
metrics that are widely used for evaluating trans-
lation. Here we will focus on some of the most
widely used, namely BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002),
NIST (Doddington, 2002), METEOR (Banerjee and
Lavie, 2005) and WER (McCowan et al., 2004).
However, it is not clear which of these methods cor-
relate best with human evaluation, particularly for
the ontologies with short labels. To evaluate this
we collected a mixture of ontologies with short la-
bels on the topics of human diseases, agriculture,
geometry and project management, producing 437
labels. These were translated with web transla-
tion services from English to Spanish, in particu-
lar Google Translate3, Yahoo! BabelFish4 and SDL
FreeTranslation5. Having obtained translations for
each label in the ontology we calculated the evalua-
tion scores using the four metrics mentioned above.
We found that the source ontologies had an average

3http://translate.google.com
4http://babelfish.yahoo.com
5http://www.freetranslation.com

118



BLEU NIST METEOR WER
Evaluator 1,
Fluency 0.108 0.036 0.134 0.122

Evaluator 1,
Adequacy 0.209 0.214 0.303 0.169

Evaluator 2,
Fluency 0.183 0.062 0.266 0.164

Evaluator 2,
Adequacy 0.177 0.111 0.251 0.194

Evaluator 3,
Fluency 0.151 0.067 0.210 0.204

Evaluator 3,
Adequacy 0.143 0.129 0.221 0.120

Table 3: Correlation between manual evaluation results
and automatic evaluation scores

label length of 2.45 tokens and the translations gen-
erated had an average length of 2.16 tokens. We then
created a data set by mixing the translations from the
web translation services with a number of transla-
tions from the source ontologies, to act as a control.
We then gave these translations to 3 evaluators, who
scored them for adequacy and fluency as described
in Koehn (2010). Finally, we calculated the Pearson
correlation coefficient between the automatic scores
and the manual scores obtained. These are presented
in table 3 and figure 1.

As we can see from these results, one metric,
namely METEOR, seems to perform best in evaluat-
ing the quality of the translations. In fact this is not
surprising as there is a clear mathematical deficiency
that both NIST and BLEU have for evaluating trans-
lations for very short labels like the ones we have
here. To illustrate this, we recall the formulation of
BLEU as given in (Papineni et al., 2002):

BLEU = BP · exp(
N∑

n=1

wn log pn)

Where BP is a brevity penalty, wn a weight value
and pn represents the n-gram precision, indicating
how many times a particular n-gram in the source
text is found among the target translations. We note,
however, that for very short labels it is highly likely
that pn will be zero. This creates a significant issue,
as from the equation above, if any of the values of pn
are zero, the overall score, BLEU, will also be zero.

Figure 1: Correlation between manual evaluation results
and automatic evaluation scores

For the results above we chose N = 2, and cor-
rected for single-word labels. However, the scores
were still significantly worse, similar problems af-
fect the NIST metric. As such, for the taxonomy
and ontology translation task we do not recommend
using BLEU or NIST as an evaluation metric. We
note that METEOR is a more sophisticated method
than WER and, as expected, performs better.

5 Approaches for taxonomy and ontology
translation

5.1 Domain adaptation

It is generally the case that many ontologies and tax-
onomies focus on only a very specific domain, thus
it seems likely that adaptation of translation systems
by use of an in-domain corpus may improve trans-
lation quality. This is particularly valid in the case
of ontologies which frequently contain “subject” an-
notations6 for not only the whole data structure but
often individual elements. To demonstrate this we
tried to translate the IFRS 2009 taxonomy using
the Moses Decoder (Koehn et al., 2007), which we
trained on the EuroParl corpus (Koehn, 2005), trans-
lating from Spanish to English. As the IFRS taxon-
omy is on the topic of finance and accounting, we

6For example from the Dublin Core vocabulary: see http:
//dublincore.org/

119



Baseline With domain adaptation
WER∗ 0.135 0.138
METEOR 0.324 0.335
NIST 1.229 1.278
BLEU 0.090 0.116

Table 4: Results of domain-adapted translation. ∗Lower
WER scores are better

chose all terms from our Wikipedia corpus which
belonged to categories containing the words: “fi-
nance”, “financial”, “accounting”, “accountancy”,
“bank”, “banking”, “economy”, “economic”, “in-
vestment”, “insurance”and “actuarial” and as such
we had a domain corpus of approximately 5000
terms. We then proceeded to recompute the phrase
table using the methodology as described in Wu et
al, (2008), computing the probabilities as follows for
some weighting factor 0 < λ < 1:

p(e|f) = λp1(e|f) + (1− λ)pd(e|f)

Where p1 is the EuroParl trained probability and pd
the scores on our domain subset. The evaluation for
these metrics is given in table 4. As can be seen
with the exception of the WER metric, the domain
adaption does seem to help in translation, which cor-
roborates the results obtained by other authors.

5.2 Syntactic Analysis
One key question to figure out is: if we have a se-
mantic model can this be used to predict the syntac-
tic structure of the translation to a significant degree?
As an example of this we consider the taxonomic
term “statement”, which is translated by Google
Translate7 to German as “Erklärung”, whereas the
term “annual statement” is translated as “Jahresab-
schluss”. However, if the taxonomy contains a sub-
sumption (hypernymy) relationship between these
terms we can deduce that the translation “Erklärung”
is not correct and the translation “Abschluss” should
be preferred. We chose to evaluate this idea on the
IFRS taxonomy as the labels it contains are much
longer and more structured than some of the other
resources. Furthermore, in this taxonomy the origi-
nal English labels have been translated into ten lan-
guages, so that it is already a multilingual resource

7Translations results obtained 8th March 2011

P (syn|s) P (syn|p) P (syn|n)
English 0.147 0.012 0.001
Dutch 0.137 0.011 0.001
German 0.125 0.007 0.001
Spanish 0.126 0.012 0.001

Table 5: Probability of syntactic relationship given a se-
mantic relationship in IFRS labels

that can be used as gold standard. Regarding the
syntax of labels, it is often the case that one term is
derived from another by addition of a complemen-
tary phrase. For example the following terms all ex-
ist in the taxonomy:

1. Minimum finance lease payments receivable

2. Minimum finance lease payments receivable, at
present value

3. Minimum finance lease payments receivable, at
present value, end of period not later than one
year

4. Minimum finance lease payments receivable, at
present value, end of period later than one year
and not later than five years

A high-quality translation of these terms would
ideally preserve this same syntactic structure in the
target language.We attempt to answer how useful
ontological structure is by trying to deduce if there
is a semantic relationship between terms then is it
more likely that there is a syntactic relationship. We
started by simplifying the idea of syntactic depen-
dency to the following: we say that two terms are
syntactically related if one label is a sub-string of
another, so that in the example above the first label
is syntactically related to the other three and the sec-
ond is related to the last two. For English, we found
that there were 3744 syntactically related terms ac-
cording to this criteria, corresponding to 0.1% of all
label pairs within the taxonomy, for all languages.
For ontology structure we used the number of rela-
tions indicated in the taxonomy, of which there are
1070 indicating a subsumption relationship and 987
indicating a partitive relationship8. This means that

8IFRS includes links for calculating certain values, i.e., that
“Total Assets” is a sum of values such as “Total Assets in Prop-

120



e → f P (synf |syne, s) P (synf |syne, p) P (synf |syne, n)
English → Spanish 0.813 ± 0.059 0.750 ± 0.205 0.835 ± 0.013
English → German 0.835 ± 0.062 0.417 ± 0.212 0.790 ± 0.013
English → Dutch 0.875 ± 0.063 0.833 ± 0.226 0.898 ± 0.013
Average 0.841 ± 0.035 0.665 ± 0.101 0.841 ± 0.008

Table 6: Probability of cross-lingual preservation of syntax given semantic relationship in IFRS. Note here s refers to
the source language and t to the target language. Error values are 95% of standard deviation.

0.08% of label pairs were semantically related. We
then examined if the semantic relation could predict
whether there was a syntactic relationship between
the terms in a single language. We define Ns as the
number of label pairs with a subsumption relation-
ship and similarly define Np, Nn and Nsyn for parti-
tive, semantically unrelated and syntactically related
pairs. We also define Ns∧syn, Np∧syn and Nn∧syn
for label pairs with both subsumption, partitive or no
semantic relation and a syntactic relationships. As
such we define the following values

P (syn|s) = Ns∧syn
Ns

Similarly we define P (syn|p) and P (syn|n) and
present these values in table 5 for four languages.

As we can see from these results, it seems that
both subsumption and partitive relationships are
strongly indicative of syntactic relationships as we
might expect. The second question is: is it more
likely that we see a syntactic dependency in trans-
lation if we have a semantic relationship, i.e., is the
syntax more likely to be preserved if these terms are
semantically related. We define Nsyne as the value
of Nsyn for a language e, e.g., Nsynen is the num-
ber of syntactically related English label pairs in the
taxonomy. As each label has exactly one transla-
tion we can also define Nsyne∧synf∧s as the number
of concepts whose labels are syntactically related in
both language e and f and are semantically related
by a subsumption relationship; similarly we define
Nsyne∧synf∧p and Nsyne∧synf∧n. Hence we can de-
fine

P (synf |syne, s) =
Nsynf∧syne∧s

Nsyne∧s

erty, Plant and Equipment”, we view such a relationship as se-
mantically indicative that one term is part of another, i.e., as
partitive or meronymic

And similarly define P (synf |syne, p) and
P (synf |syne, n). We calculated these values on
the IFRS taxonomies, the results of which are
represented in table 6.

The partitive data was very sparse, due to the fact
that only 15 concepts in the source taxonomy had a
partitive relationship and were syntactically related,
so we cannot draw any strong conclusions from it.
For the subsumption relationship we have a clearer
result and in fact averaged across all language pairs
we found that the likelihood of the syntax being pre-
served in the translation was nearly exactly the same
for semantically related and semantically unrelated
concepts. From this result we can conclude that
the probability of syntax given either subsumptive or
partitive relationship is not very large, at least from
the reduced syntactic model we used here. While
our model reduces syntax to n-gram overlap, we
believe that if there was a stronger correlation us-
ing a more sophisticated syntactic model, we would
still see some noticable effect here as we did mono-
lingually. We also note that we applied this to only
one taxonomy and it is possible that the result may
be different in a different resource. Furthermore,
we note there is a strong relationship between se-
mantics and syntax in a mono-lingual context and
as such adaption of a language model to incorporate
this bias may improve the translation of ontologies
and taxonomies.

5.3 Comparison of ontology structure

Our third intuition in approaching ontology trans-
lation is that the comparison of ontology or taxon-
omy structures containing source and target labels
may help in the disambiguation process of transla-
tion candidates. A prerequisite in this sense is the
availability of equivalent (or similar) ontology struc-
tures to be compared.

121



Figure 2: Two approaches to translate ontology labels.

From a technical point of view, we consider the
translation task as a word sense disambiguation task.
We identify two methods for comparing ontology
structures, which are illustrated in Figure 2.

The first method relies on a multilingual resource,
i.e., a multilingual ontology or taxonomy. The on-
tology represented on the left-hand side of the fig-
ure consists of several monolingual conceptualiza-
tions related to each other by means of an inter-
lingual index, as is the case in the EuroWordNet lex-
icon (Vossen, 1999). For example, if the original
label is chair for seat in English, several translations
for it are obtained in Spanish such as: silla (for seat),
cátedra (for university position), presidente (for per-
son leading a meeting). Each of these correspond
to a sense in the English WordNet, and hence each
translation selects a hierachical structure with En-
glish labels. The next step is to compare the input
structure of the original ontology containing chair
against the three different structures in English rep-
resenting the several senses of chair and obtain the
corresponding label in Spanish.

The second method relies on a monolingual re-
source, i.e., on monolingual ontologies in the tar-
get language, which means that we need to compare

structures documented with labels in different lan-
guages. As such we obtain a separate translated on-
tologies for each combination of label translations
suggested by the baseline system. Selecting the cor-
rect translations is then clearly a hard optimization
problem.

For the time being, we have only experimented
with the first approach using EuroWordNet. Sev-
eral solutions have been proposed in the context of
ontology matching in a monolingual scenario (see
(Shvaiko and Euzenat, 2005) or (Giunchiglia et al.,
2006)). The ranking method we use to compare
structures relies on an equivalence probability mea-
sure between two candidate structures, as proposed
in (Trillo et al., 2007).

We assume that we have a taxonomy or ontology
entity o1 and we wish to deduce if it is similar to
another taxonomy or ontology entity o2 from a ref-
erence taxonomy or ontology (i.e., EuroWordNet) in
the same language. We shall make a simplifying as-
sumption that each ontology entity is associated with
a unique label, e.g., lo1 . As such we wish to deduce
if o1 represents the same concept as o2 and hence if
lo2 is a translation for lo1 . Our model relies on the
Vector Space Model (Raghavan and Wong, 1986)
to calculate the similarity between different labels,
which essentially involves calculating a vector from
the bag of words contained within each labels and
then calculating the cosine similarity between these
vectors. We shall denotes this as v(o1, o2). We then
use four main features in the calculation of the sim-
ilarity

• The VSM-similarity between the labels of enti-
ties, o1, o2.

• The VSM-similarity between any glosses (de-
scriptions) that may exist in the source or refer-
ence taxonomy/ontology.

• The hypernym similarity given to a fixed depth
d, given that set of hypernyms of an entity oi is
given as a set

hO(oi) = {h|(oi, h) ∈ H}

Then we calculate the similarity for d > 1 re-
cursively as

122



sh(o1, o2, d) =

∑
h1∈hO(o1),h2∈hO(o2) σ(h1, h2, d)

|hO(o1)||hO(o2)|
σ(h1, h2, d) = αv(h1, h2)+(1−α)sh(h1, h2, d−1)

And for d = 1 it is given as

sh(o1, o2, 1) =

∑
h1∈hO(o1),h2∈hO(o2) v(h1, h2)

|hO(o1)||hO(o2)|

• The hyponym similarity, calculated as the hy-
pernym similarity but using the hyponym set
given by

HO(oi) = {h|(h, oi) ∈ H}

We then incorporate these factors into a vector x
and calculate the similarity of two entities as

s(o1, o2) = w
Tx

Where w is a weight vector of non-negative reals
and satisfies ||w|| = 1, which we set manually.

We then applied this to the FOAF ontol-
ogy (Brickley and Miller, 2010), which was manu-
ally translated to give us a reference translation. Af-
ter that, we collected a set of candidate translations
obtained by using the web translation resources ref-
erenced in section 3, along with additional candi-
dates found in our multilingual resource. Finally,
we used EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1999) as the refer-
ence taxonomy and ranked the translations accord-
ing to the score given by the metric above. In table
7, we present the results where our system selected
the candidate translation with the highest similarity
to our source ontology entity. In the case that we
could not find a reference translation we split the la-
bel into tokens and found the translation by select-
ing the best token. We compared these results to a
baseline method that selected one of the reference
translations at random.

These results are in all cases significantly stronger
than the baseline results showing that by compar-
ing the structure of ontology elements it is possible
to significantly improve the quality of translation.
These results are encouraging and we believe that
more research is needed in this sense. In particular,
we would like to investigate the benefits of perform-
ing a cross-lingual ontology alignment in which we
measure the semantic similarity of terms in different
languages.

Baseline Best Translation
WER∗ 0.725 0.617
METEOR 0.089 0.157
NIST 0.070 0.139
BLEU 0.103 0.187

Table 7: Results of selecting translation by structural
comparison. ∗Lower WER scores are better

6 Conclusion

In this paper we presented the problem of ontology
and taxonomy translation as a special case of ma-
chine translation that has certain extra characteris-
tics. Our examination of the problem showed that
the main two differences are the presence of struc-
tured semantics and shorter, hence more ambiguous,
labels. We demonstrated that as a result of this lin-
guistic nature, some machine translation metrics do
not perform as well as they do in free-text trans-
lations. We then presented the results of early in-
vestigations into how we may use the special fea-
tures of taxonomy and ontology translation to im-
prove quality of translation. The first of these was
domain adaptation, which in line with other authors
is useful for texts in a particular domain. We also in-
vestigated the possibility of using the link between
syntactic similarity and semantic similarity to help,
however although we find that mono-lingually there
was a strong correspondence between syntax and se-
mantics, this result did not seem to extend well to a
cross-lingual setting. As such we believe there may
only be slight benefits of using techniques, however
further investigation is needed. Finally, we looked at
using word sense disambiguation by comparing the
structure of the input ontology to that of an already
translated reference ontology. We found this method
to be very effective in choosing the best translations.
However it is dependent on the existence of a mul-
tilingual resource that already has such terms. As
such, we view the topic of taxonomy and ontology
translation as an interesting sub-problem of machine
translation and believe there is still much fruitful
work to be done to obtain a system that can cor-
rectly leverage the semantics present in these data
structures in a way that improves translation quality.

123



References
Marianna Apidianaki. 2009. Data-driven semantic anal-

ysis for multilingual WSD and lexical selection in
translation. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (EACL).

Michael Ashburner, Catherine Ball, Judith Blake, David
Botstein, Heather Butler, J. Michael Cherry, Allan
Davis, et al. 2000. Gene ontology: tool for the uni-
fication of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium.
Nature genetics, 25(1):25–29.

Sören Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens
Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives. 2007.
Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. The Se-
mantic Web, 4825:722–735.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. Intrinsic and Ex-
trinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation
and/or Summarization, page 65.

Kalina Bontcheva. 2005. Generating tailored textual
summaries from ontologies. In The Semantic Web:
Research and Applications, pages 531–545. Springer.

Dan Brickley and Libby Miller, 2010. FOAF Vocabulary
Specification 0.98. Accessed 3 December 2010.

Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving Sta-
tistical Machine Translation using Word Sense Disam-
biguation. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Computational Natural Language Learn-
ing (EMNLP-CoNLL 2007).

Philipp Cimiano, Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, Paul Buite-
laar, Mauricio Espinoza, and Asunción Gómez-Pérez.
2010. A note on ontology localization. Journal of Ap-
plied Ontology (JAO), 5:127–137.

Nigel Collier, Son Doan, Ai Kawazoe, Reiko Matsuda
Goodwin, Mike Conway, Yoshio Tateno, Quoc-Hung
Ngo, Dinh Dien, Asanee Kawtrakul, Koichi Takeuchi,
Mika Shigematsu, and Kiyosu Taniguchi. 2008. Bio-
Caster: detecting public health rumors with a Web-
based text mining system. Oxford Bioinformatics,
24(24):2940–2941.

Thierry Declerck, Hans-Ullrich Krieger, Susan Marie
Thomas, Paul Buitelaar, Sean O’Riain, Tobias Wun-
ner, Gilles Maguet, John McCrae, Dennis Spohr, and
Elena Montiel-Ponsoda. 2010. Ontology-based Mul-
tilingual Access to Financial Reports for Sharing Busi-
ness Knowledge across Europe. In József Roóz and
János Ivanyos, editors, Internal Financial Control As-
sessment Applying Multilingual Ontology Framework,
pages 67–76. HVG Press Kft.

George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation quality using n-gram co-occurrence

statistics. In Proceedings of the second interna-
tional conference on Human Language Technology
Research, pages 138–145. Morgan Kaufmann Publish-
ers Inc.

Mauricio Espinoza, Asunción Gómez-Pérez, and Ed-
uardo Mena. 2008. Enriching an Ontology with
Multilingual Information. In Proceedings of the 5th
Annual of the European Semantic Web Conference
(ESWC08), pages 333–347.

Mauricio Espinoza, Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, and
Asunción Gómez-Pérez. 2009. Ontology Local-
ization. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Knowledge Capture (KCAP09), pages
33–40.

Bo Fu, Rob Brennan, and Declan O’Sullivan. 2010.
Cross-Lingual Ontology Mapping and Its Use on the
Multilingual Semantic Web. In Proceedings of the
1st Workshop on the Multilingual Semantic Web, at
the 19th International World Wide Web Conference
(WWW 2010).

Fausto Giunchiglia, Pavel Shvaiko, and Mikalai Yatske-
vich. 2006. Discovering missing background knowl-
edge in ontology matching. In Proceeding of the 17th
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
382–386.

International Accounting Standards Board, 2007. Inter-
national Financial Reporting Standards 2007 (includ-
ing International Accounting Standards (IAS) and In-
terpretations as at 1 January 2007).

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interactive Poster and
Demonstration Sessions, pages 177–180.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Machine Translation Summit.

Philipp Koehn. 2010. Statistical Machine Translation.
Cambridge University Press.

Iain McCowan, Darren Moore, John Dines, Daniel
Gatica-Perez, Mike Flynn, Pierre Wellner, and Hervé
Bourlard. 2004. On the use of information retrieval
measures for speech recognition evaluation. Technical
report, IDIAP.

John McCrae, Jesús Campana, and Philipp Cimiano.
2010. CLOVA: An Architecture for Cross-Language
Semantic Data Querying. In Proceedings of the First
Mutlilingual Semantic Web Workshop.

William Mischo. 1982. Library of Congress Subject
Headings. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly,
1(2):105–124.

124



Hans-Michael Müller, Eimear E Kenny, and Paul W
Sternberg. 2004. Textpresso: An ontology-based in-
formation retrieval and extraction system for biologi-
cal literature. PLoS Biol, 2(11):e309.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2010. Ba-
belnet: Building a very large multilingual semantic
network. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 216–225.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting on association for computational
linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

V.Vijay Raghavan and S.K.M. Wong. 1986. A criti-
cal analysis of vector space model for information re-
trieval. Journal of the American Society for Informa-
tion Science, 37(5):279–287.

Pavel Shvaiko and Jerome Euzenat. 2005. A survey of
schema-based matching approaches. Journal on Data
Semantics IV, pages 146–171.

Fabian Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard Weikum.
2007. Yago: a core of semantic knowledge. In Pro-
ceedings of the 16th international conference on World
Wide Web, pages 697–706.

Raquel Trillo, Jorge Gracia, Mauricio Espinoza, and Ed-
uardo Mena. 2007. Discovering the semantics of user
keywords. Journal of Universal Computer Science,
13(12):1908–1935.

Piek Vossen. 1999. EuroWordNet a multilingual
database with lexical semantic networks. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 25(4).

Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, and Chengqing Zong. 2008.
Domain adaptation for statistical machine translation
with domain dictionary and monolingual corpora. In
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 993–
1000. Association for Computational Linguistics.

125


