










































The UZH System Combination System for WMT 2011


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 166–170,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

The UZH System Combination System for WMT 2011

Rico Sennrich
Institute of Computational Linguistics

University of Zurich
Binzmühlestr. 14
CH-8050 Zürich

sennrich@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract
This paper describes the UZH system that was
used for the WMT 2011 system combination
shared task submission. We participated in
the system combination task for the translation
directions DE–EN and EN–DE. The system
uses Moses as a backbone, with the outputs
of the 2–3 best individual systems being inte-
grated through additional phrase tables. The
system compares well to other system com-
bination submissions, with no other submis-
sion being significantly better. A BLEU-based
comparison to the individual systems, how-
ever, indicates that it achieves no significant
gains over the best individual system.

1 Introduction

For our submission to the WMT 2011 shared task,
we built a system with the multi-engine MT ap-
proach described in (Sennrich, 2011), which builds
on the idea by (Chen et al., 2007). A Moses SMT
system (Koehn et al., 2007) is used as a backbone,
trained on the WMT 2011 training data. Translation
hypotheses by other systems are integrated through
a second phrase table. In this second phrase ta-
ble, the phrase translation probabilities and lexical
weights are computed based on the word and phrase
frequencies in both the translation hypotheses and a
parallel training corpus. On the evaluation data in
(Sennrich, 2011), this system significantly outper-
formed MEMT (Heafield and Lavie, 2010), which
was among the best-performing system combination
tools at WMT 2010 (Callison-Burch et al., 2010).

In this paper, we apply the same approach to a dif-
ferent translation scenario, namely the WMT 2011

shared task. We fail to significantly outperform the
best individual system in terms of BLEU score. In
section 2, we describe our system combination ap-
proach. In section 3, we present the results, and dis-
cuss possible reasons why the system fails to show
the same performance gains as in the translation task
on which it was evaluated initially.

2 System Description

We participated in the system combination task DE–
EN and EN–DE. Since the combination is achieved
by integrating translation hypotheses into an existing
Moses system, which we will call the primary sys-
tem, we first describe the methods and data used for
training this primary system. Then, we describe how
the translation hypotheses are selected out of the in-
dividual system submissions and integrated into the
Moses system.

2.1 Primary System
For the training of the primary systems, we mostly
followed the baseline instructions for the transla-
tion task1. We use news-commentary and Europarl
as parallel training data. The language models are
a linear interpolation of the news-commentary, Eu-
roparl and news corpora, optimized for minimal
cross-entropy on the newstest2008 data sets in the
respective target language.

Additionally, we prune the primary phrase table
using statistical significance tests, as described by
(Johnson et al., 2007). For the translation direction
DE–EN, the German source text is reordered based

1described at http://www.statmt.org/wmt11/
baseline.html

166



on syntactic parsing with Pro3GresDE (Sennrich et
al., 2009), and reordering rules similar to those de-
scribed by (Collins et al., 2005).

The Moses phrase table consists of five fea-
tures: phrase translation probabilities in both trans-
lation directions (p(t|s) and p(s|t)), lexical weights
(lex(t|s) and lex(s|t)), and a constant phrase
penalty (Koehn et al., 2003). The computation of the
phrase translation probabilities and lexical weights
is based on the word, phrase and word/phrase pair
frequencies that are extracted from the parallel cor-
pus. We modified the Moses training scripts to col-
lect and store these frequencies for later re-use.

We did not submit the primary system outputs to
the Machine Translation shared task, since we did
not experiment with new techniques. Instead, the
primary system forms the backbone of the system
combination system.

2.2 Integrating Secondary Phrase Tables

To combine the output of several systems, we train a
second phrase table on the translation hypotheses of
these systems. For this, we create a parallel corpus
consisting of n translation hypotheses and n copies
of the corresponding source text, both lowercased
and detokenized.2

We compute the word alignment with MGIZA++
(Gao and Vogel, 2008), based on the word alignment
model from the primary corpus that we have previ-
ously saved to disk.

After training a phrase table from the word-
aligned corpus with Moses, the lexical weights and
translation probabilities are rescored, using the suffi-
cient statistics (i.e. the word, phrase and word/phrase
pair counts) of both the primary and the secondary
corpus. This rescoring step has been shown to
markedly improve performance in (Sennrich, 2011).
We will discuss its effects in section 3.1. The re-
scored phrase table is integrated into the primary
Moses system as an alternative decoding path, and
tuned for maximal BLEU score on newssyscomb-
tune2011 with MERT.

2For convenience and speed, we combined the
translation hypotheses for newssyscombtune2011 and
newssyscombtest2011 into a single corpus. In principle,
we could train separate phrase tables for each data set, or even
for arbitrarily low numbers of sentences, without significant
loss in performance (see (Sennrich, 2011)).

System BLEU
Primary 21.11
Best individual 24.16
Submission 24.44
Vanilla scoring 24.42

Table 1: DE–EN results. Case-insensitive BLEU scores.

2.3 Hypothesis Selection

For the secondary phrase table, we chose to se-
lect the n best individual systems according to their
BLEU score on the tuning set. We determined the
optimal n empirically by trying different n, measur-
ing each system’s BLEU score on the tuning set and
selecting the highest-scoring one. For the DE–EN
translation task, n = 2 turned out to be optimal, for
EN–DE, n = 3.

Chen et al. (2009) propose additional, tunable fea-
tures in the phrase table to indicate the origin of
phrase translations. For better comparability with
the results described in (Sennrich, 2011), we did
not add such features. This means that there are
no a priori weights that bias the phrase selection
for or against certain systems, but that decoding
is purely driven by the usual Moses features: two
phrase tables – the primary one and the re-scored,
secondary one – the language model, the primary
reordering model, and the corresponding parameters
established through MERT.

3 Results

In the manual evaluation, the system combination
submissions are only compared to each other, not
to the individual systems. According to the manual
evaluation, no other system combination submission
outperforms ours by a statistically significant mar-
gin. In a comparison to individual systems, however,
BLEU scores indicate that our system fails to yield a
significant performance gain over the best individual
system in this translation scenario.

In tables 1 and 2, we present case-insensitive
BLEU scores (Papineni et al., 2002). As statisti-
cal significance test, we applied bootstrap resam-
pling (Riezler and Maxwell, 2005). Tables 1 and
2 show the BLEU scores for the translation direc-
tions DE–EN and EN–DE, respectively. Systems in-
cluded are the primary translation system described

167



System BLEU
Primary 14.99
Best individual 17.44
Submission 17.51
Vanilla scoring 17.32

Table 2: EN–DE results. Case insensitive BLEU scores.

in section 2.1, the best individual system (online-B
in both cases) and the submitted combination sys-
tem. In terms of BLEU score, we achieved no sta-
tistically significant improvement over the best indi-
vidual system.

As contrastive systems, we trained systems with-
out the rescoring step described in section 2.2; we
found no statistically significant difference from the
submission system. In this translation task, the
statistics from the parallel corpus seem to be inef-
fective at improving decoding, contrary to our find-
ings in (Sennrich, 2011), where rescoring the phrase
table improved BLEU scores by 0.7 points. We will
address possible reasons for this discrepancy in the
following section.

3.1 Interpretation

The main characteristic that sets our approach apart
from other system combination software such as
MANY (Barrault, 2010) and MEMT (Heafield and
Lavie, 2010) is its reliance on word and phrase fre-
quencies in a parallel corpus to guide decoding,
whereas MANY and MEMT operate purely on the
target side, without requiring/exploiting the source
text or parallel data. We integrate the information
from a parallel corpus into the decoding process by
extracting phrase translations from the translation
hypotheses and scoring these phrase translations on
the basis of the frequencies from the parallel corpus.

The properties of this re-scored phrase table
proved attractive for the translation task in (Sen-
nrich, 2011), but less so for the WMT 2011 trans-
lation task. To explain why, let us look at p(t|s),
i.e. the probability of a target phrase given a source
phrase, as an example. It is computed as follows,
cprim and csec being the phrase count in the primary
and secondary corpus, respectively.

p(t|s) = cprim(s, t) + csec(s, t)
cprim(s) + csec(s)

(1)

We can assume that csec(s) and csec(s, t) are
mostly fixed, having values between 1 and the num-
ber of translation hypotheses.3 If cprim(s) is high,
the phrase translation probabilities in the secondary
phrase table will only be marginally different from
those in the primary phrase table (e.g. 5001000 = 0.5 vs.
500+2
1000+2 = 0.501), whereas the secondary corpus has
a stronger effect for phrases that are rare or unseen in
the primary corpus (e.g. 13 = 0.333 vs.

1+2
3+2 = 0.6).

Analogously, the same reasoning applies to p(s|t),
lex(t|s) and lex(s|t).45

In short: the more frequent the phrases and phrase
pairs in the primary corpus, the less effect does the
secondary corpus have on the final feature values.
This is a desirable behaviour if we can “trust” the
phrase pairs extracted from the primary corpus. In
(Sennrich, 2011), the primary corpus consisted of
in-domain texts, whereas the translation hypothe-
ses came from an out-of-domain SMT system and a
rule-based one. There, it proved an effective strategy
to only consider those translation hypotheses that ei-
ther agreed with the data from the primary corpus, or
for which the primary corpus had insufficient data,
i.e. unknown or rare source words. With a primary
system achieving a BLEU score of 17.18 and two
translation hypotheses, scoring 13.29 and 12.94, we
obtained a BLEU score of 20.06 for the combined
system.

In the WMT 2011 system combination task, the
statistics from the primary corpus failed to effec-
tively improve translation quality. We offer these
explanations based on an analysis of the results.

First, the 2–3 systems whose translation hypothe-
ses we combine obtain higher scores than the pri-
mary system. This casts doubt on whether we should
trust the scores from the primary system more than
the translation hypotheses. And in fact, the results
in table 1 and 2 show that the submission system

3Strictly speaking, this is only true if we build separate
phrase tables for each sentence that is translated, and if there
are no repeated phrases. This slight simplification serves illus-
trative purposes.

4For long phrases, phrase counts are typically low. Still, the
primary corpus plays an important role in the computation of
the lexical weights, which are computed from word frequencies,
and thus typically less sparse than phrase frequencies.

5Rare target words may obtain a undesirably high probabil-
ity, but are penalized in the language model. We set the LM
log-probability of unknown words to -100.

168



(whose phrase table features take into account the
primary corpus) is not better than a contrastive com-
bination system with vanilla scoring, i.e. one that
is solely based on the secondary corpus. We can
also show why the primary corpus does not improve
decoding by way of example. The German phrase
Bei der Wahl [der Matratze] (English: In the choice
[of a mattress]), is translated by the three systems
as in the selection, when choosing and in the elec-
tion. In this context, the last translation hypothesis
is the least correct, but since the political domain
is strongly represented in the training data, it is the
most frequent one in the primary corpus, and the one
being chosen by both the primary and the combined
system.

Second, there seems to be a significant overlap in
training data between the systems that we combine
and our primary system6. We only saw few cases
in which a system produced a translation against
which there was evidence in our primary corpus.
One instance is the German word Kindergarten (En-
glish: kindergarten; nursery), which is translated
as children’s garden by one system. In the com-
bined system, this translation is dispreferred. (Chen
et al., 2009) argue that a combination of dissimi-
lar systems might yield better results. Rule-based
systems could fulfill this role; they are also an at-
tractive choice given their high quality (as judged by
human evaluators) in earlier evaluations (e.g. WMT
2009 (Callison-Burch et al., 2009)). We did not pur-
sue this idea, since we optimized for highest BLEU
score, both during MERT and for the selection of the
submission system, a scoring method that has been
shown to undervalue rule-based systems (Callison-
Burch et al., 2006).

The failure to outperform the individual best sys-
tem in this translation task does not invalidate our
approach. It merely highlights that different con-
ditions call for different tools. Our approach re-
lies strongly on parallel training data, in contrast
to system combination tools such as MANY (Bar-
rault, 2010) and MEMT (Heafield and Lavie, 2010).
In this setting, this brought no benefit. However,
when developing a SMT system for a specific do-
main and when combining an in-domain primary

6This is especially true for all shared task participants build-
ing constrained systems. The amount of overlap between the
anonymous online systems is unknown.

system with out-of-domain translation hypotheses,
we expect that this strong dependence on the pri-
mary SMT system becomes an advantage. It allows
the system to discriminate between source phrases
that are well-documented in the primary training
data, which will give other systems’ hypotheses lit-
tle effect, and those that occur rarely or not at all in
the primary data, for which other systems may still
produce a useful translation.

4 Conclusion

We described the UZH system combination submis-
sion to the Workshop of Machine Translation 2011.
It uses the Moses architecture and includes transla-
tion hypotheses through a second phrase table. Its
central characteristic is the extraction of phrase pairs
from translations hypotheses and the scoring thereof
on the basis of another parallel corpus. We find
that, in the WMT 2011 system combination shared
task, this approach fails to result in a significant im-
provement over the best individual system in terms
of BLEU score. However, we argue that it is well
suited for other translation tasks, such as the one de-
scribed in (Sennrich, 2011).

Acknowledgments

This research was funded by the Swiss National Sci-
ence Foundation under grant 105215 126999.

References

Loı̈c Barrault. 2010. MANY: Open source MT sys-
tem combination at WMT’10. In Proceedings of the
Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation and MetricsMATR, pages 277–281, Uppsala,
Sweden, July. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

C. Callison-Burch, M. Osborne, and P. Koehn. 2006.
Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in machine transla-
tion research. In Proceedings the Eleventh Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 249–256, Trento, Italy.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
and Josh Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009 work-
shop on statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pages 1–28, Athens, Greece, March. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

169



Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Kay Peterson, Mark Przybocki, and Omar Zaidan.
2010. Findings of the 2010 joint workshop on sta-
tistical machine translation and metrics for machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR,
pages 17–53, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics. Revised August 2010.

Yu Chen, Andreas Eisele, Christian Federmann, Eva
Hasler, Michael Jellinghaus, and Silke Theison. 2007.
Multi-engine machine translation with an open-source
decoder for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, StatMT ’07, pages 193–196, Mor-
ristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Yu Chen, Michael Jellinghaus, Andreas Eisele, Yi Zhang,
Sabine Hunsicker, Silke Theison, Christian Feder-
mann, and Hans Uszkoreit. 2009. Combining multi-
engine translations with Moses. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
StatMT ’09, pages 42–46, Morristown, NJ, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kučerová.
2005. Clause restructuring for statistical machine
translation. In ACL ’05: Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 531–540, Morristown, NJ, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Parallel implemen-
tations of word alignment tool. In Software Engi-
neering, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural
Language Processing, pages 49–57, Columbus, Ohio,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kenneth Heafield and Alon Lavie. 2010. CMU multi-
engine machine translation for WMT 2010. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation and MetricsMATR, WMT ’10,
pages 301–306, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Howard Johnson, Joel Martin, George Foster, and Roland
Kuhn. 2007. Improving translation quality by dis-
carding most of the phrasetable. In Proceedings of the
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 967–
975, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In NAACL
’03: Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology,

pages 48–54, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL 2007, pages 177–180, Prague, Czech
Republic, June.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In ACL ’02: Pro-
ceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318, Mor-
ristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Stefan Riezler and John T. Maxwell. 2005. On some
pitfalls in automatic evaluation and significance test-
ing for MT. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Ma-
chine Translation and/or Summarization, pages 57–
64, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Rico Sennrich, Gerold Schneider, Martin Volk, and Mar-
tin Warin. 2009. A New Hybrid Dependency Parser
for German. In Proceedings of the German Society for
Computational Linguistics and Language Technology
2009 (GSCL 2009), Potsdam, Germany.

Rico Sennrich. 2011. Combining multi-engine ma-
chine translation and online learning through dynamic
phrase tables. In 15th Annual Conference of the Eu-
ropean Association for Machine Translation (EAMT
2011), Leuven, Belgium.

170


