




















Disambiguation of English Contractions
for Machine Translation of TV Subtitles

Martin Volk and Rico Sennrich
University of Zurich, Institute of Computational Linguistics

Zurich, Switzerland
{volk|sennrich}@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract

This paper presents a disambiguation
method for English apostrophe+s contrac-
tions. They occur frequently in subtitles
and pose special difficulties for Machine
Translation. We propose to disambiguate
these contractions in a pre-processing step
and show that this leads to improved trans-
lation quality.

1 Introduction

Ideally, film and TV subtitles are created for each
language independently, but for efficiency rea-
sons they are often translated from a source lan-
guage to one or more target languages. To support
the efficient translation we have teamed up with
a Scandinavian subtitling company to build Ma-
chine Translation (MT) systems. The systems are
in extensive practical use today. Because of the
established language sequence in the company we
have first built translation systems from Swedish
to Danish and to Norwegian. After the successful
deployment of these two systems, we have worked
on other language pairs including English, Ger-
man and Swedish.

When dealing with English as source language,
we have noticed an interesting phenomenon. En-
glish subtitles contain a high percentage of con-
tractions. In particular, contractions comprise the
short forms of auxiliary and modal verbs: are and
were → ’re, shall and will → ’ll, had and would →
’d. By far the most prominent are the apostrophe+s
contractions is, was and has → ’s, which also in-
clude contractions of the pronoun us (as in let’s
do it) all of which are homographic with the pos-
sessive marker. The following table lists the most
frequent apostrophe-letter sequences in our corpus
of 1 million English subtitles. Note that the last
two are dialectal contractions that lead to strange

“words” when tokenized at the apostrophe.1

172,571 cases of ’s is,has,us, possessive
117,869 cases of ’t not as in don’t, won’t
53,587 cases of ’m am as in I’m
50,219 cases of ’re are, were
36,245 cases of ’ll shall, will
22,743 cases of ’ve have
16,576 cases of ’d had, should, would
1,335 cases of ’am ma’am

749 cases of ’all y’all

In this paper we will only be concerned with
apostrophe+s contractions because they are the
most frequent and the most ambiguous contrac-
tions.

Contracted forms are popular in subtitles for
several reasons. They are closer to the spoken lan-
guage of the video, and they are shorter, thus sav-
ing precious character space on the screen. Unfor-
tunately, these contractions introduce additional
ambiguities into the subtitles which make auto-
matic translation more difficult. We have noticed
cases like the following where the English posses-
sive marker ’s is mistaken by the MT system for
the copula verb is and therefore mistranslated into
Swedish and German.

(1) Oh my gosh, Nicole’s dad is the coolest.
SV: Herregud, Nicole är pappa är coolast.
DE: Mein Gott, Nicole ist Papa ist der
coolste.

We have therefore developed a method to dis-
ambiguate English apostrophe+s contractions be-
fore training the Statistical MT (SMT) system.
This paper describes the method and presents the
disambiguation results. But first we set the scene

1Note that these numbers were computed before lower-
casing. The corpus contains also capitalized subtitles like
CLEOPATRA’S BEAUTY SALON which we have not
counted here.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 238–245



by describing some related disambiguation work
and then our MT systems for subtitles.

2 Related Work on Word Sense
Disambiguation for MT

Our approach can be seen as a special type of word
sense disambiguation (WSD) for MT. Many re-
searchers have worked on this topic before with
varying success. For example, (Carpuat and Wu,
2005) reported that they could not find “significant
better translations” when using Chinese WSD in
Chinese-English MT. But two years later the same
authors (Carpuat and Wu, 2007) come to the con-
clusion that the incorporation of WSD within a
typical SMT system “consistently improves trans-
lation quality” for Chinese-English. They claim
that a disambiguation of phrasal units rather than
words leads to these improvements. They report
on gains of up to 0.5 BLEU points. These find-
ings are in line with (Chan et al., 2007) who have
also shown WSD to be beneficial for Chinese to
English translation.

Basic research on WSD for MT is presented
in various papers. For example (Specia et al.,
2005) work with automatically derived rules for
WSD of seven highly ambiguous verbs in English-
Portuguese MT. (Apidianaki, 2009) questions the
sense inventory which is frequently used in WSD
and argues for a semantic analysis based on paral-
lel corpora Greek-English in order to better tailor
the sense inventory to MT. (Vickrey et al., 2005)
investigate WSD for word translation French-
English.

Our work is also similar to other preprocessing
suggestions such as (El-Kahlout and Yvon, 2010).
They work on the opposite translation direction
and prepare the German input text before training
and translation to English. When testing various
normalization steps, they obtained the biggest im-
provements on compound splitting.

3 Our MT Systems for TV Subtitles

MT systems for subtitles date back to the work
by Popowich et al. (2000) on English to Spanish
translation. We have built Machine Translation
systems for translating film and TV subtitles from
English to Swedish and from Swedish to Danish
and Norwegian in a commercial setting. Some of
this work has been described earlier by Volk and
Harder (2007) and Volk (2008).

Most films are originally in English and re-
ceive English or Swedish subtitles in a first manual
step. The subtitler uses the English video and au-
dio (sometimes accompanied by an English tran-
script).

The target language translator subsequently has
access to the original English video and audio but
also to the source language subtitles and the time
codes. In most cases the translator will reuse the
time codes and insert the target language subtitle.
She can, on occasion, change the time codes if she
deems them inappropriate for the target language
text.

We have built SMT systems that produce Dan-
ish, Norwegian and Swedish draft translations to
speed up the translators’ work. This project bene-
fited from three favorable conditions:

1. Subtitles are short textual units with little in-
ternal complexity.

2. We are dealing with closely related lan-
guages. The grammars are similar, how-
ever orthography differs considerably, word
order differs somewhat and, of course, one
language avoids some constructions that the
other language prefers.

3. We have access to large numbers of subtitles
in multiple languages. The cross-language
correspondences can easily be established via
the time codes which leads to an alignment
on the subtitle level.

There are other aspects of the task that are less
favorable. Subtitles are not transcriptions, but
written representations of spoken language. As a
result the linguistic structure of subtitles is closer
to written language than the original (English)
speech, and the original spoken content usually
has to be condensed by the subtitler.

The task of translating subtitles also differs
from most other machine translation applications
in that we are dealing with creative language, and
thus we are closer to literary translation than tech-
nical translation. This is obvious in cases where
rhyming song-lyrics or puns are involved, but
also when the subtitler applies his linguistic intu-
itions to achieve a natural and appropriate word-
ing which blends into the video without stand-
ing out. Finally, the language of subtitling cov-
ers a broad variety of domains from educational

239

Disambiguation of English Contractions for Machine Translation of TV Subtitles

239



programs on any conceivable topic to exaggerated
modern youth language.

We have built SMT systems in order to shorten
the development time (compared to a rule-based
system) and in order to best exploit the existing
translations. We have trained our SMT systems by
using standard open source SMT software.

Our corpus consists of TV subtitles from soap
operas (like daily hospital series), detective se-
ries, animation series, comedies, documentaries,
feature films etc. For example, for the Swedish-
Danish system we had more than 14,000 subti-
tle files (= single TV programmes) in each lan-
guage, corresponding to more than 5 million sub-
titles (equaling more than 50 million words).

When we compiled our corpus we included only
subtitles with matching time codes. If the source
and target language time codes differed more than
a threshold of 15 TV-frames (0.6 seconds) in either
start or end-time, we suspected that they were not
good translation equivalents and excluded them
from the subtitle corpus. In this way we were
able to avoid complicated alignment techniques.
Most of the resulting subtitle pairs are high-quality
translations thanks to the controlled workflow in
the commercial setting. Note that we are not align-
ing sentences. We work with aligned subtitles
which can consist of one or two or three short sen-
tences. Sometimes a subtitle holds only the first
part of a sentence which is finished in the follow-
ing subtitle.

We split our subtitle corpus into training and
test set in the usual way. Before the training step
we tokenized the subtitles (e.g. separating punctu-
ation symbols from words), converting all upper-
case words into lower case, and normalizing punc-
tuation symbols, numbers and hyphenated words.

This resulted, for instance, in BLEU scores
of over 50 for the Swedish-Danish system. To
better appreciate the translation quality we also
calculated exact matches and character-based
Levenshtein-5 matches, i.e. subtitles that differ
from the human translation by 5 keystrokes or
less. We obtained 9% exact matches and 30%
Levenstein-5 matches when comparing against a
prior human translation. We also ran a num-
ber of experiments with post-editors. They got
our system output, and we asked them to cor-
rect this translation draft into a production-quality
subtitle file. When we averaged over 6 post-
editors we computed 22% exact matches and 43%

Levenstein-5 matches.
In (Volk et al., 2010) we describe the results in

more detail. We also present the lessons learned
in the process of building the MT systems and in-
tegrating them into the workflow of the subtitle
company. The systems for Swedish-Danish and
Swedish-Norwegian have been in productive use
since early 2008 and translate large volumes of
subtitles every day. Subsequently we have built
a system for English-Swedish translation which
went into production in 2010. It was during this
latter development that we ran into the problem of
contraction ambiguities.

4 The Contraction Ambiguity

In our English-Swedish MT system we observed
errors like in example 1 (in the introductory sec-
tion) which pointed to the problem of translat-
ing the various alternatives of apostrophe+s con-
tractions. We started our investigation by manu-
ally classifying the occurrences of s-contractions
in our subtitle corpus. We identified the following
seven variants. An apostrophe+s can be
1. the possessive marker. This case is character-
ized by the ’s following a name or a noun and oc-
curring in the beginning of a noun phrase in the ar-
ticle position (i.e. typically in front of a noun or an
adjective plus noun; it hardly ever occurs in front
of a name). There are rare cases when ’s follows
an indefinite pronoun.

(2) I’m gonna buy Buzzy’s store.
You wouldn’t say that if we were going after
the world’s hottest guy.
You even finish each other’s sentences.

2. an abbreviation for the copula ‘is’ (or ‘was’).
This is the most frequent case. It mostly occurs
in front of a noun phrase or an adjective (phrase).
The distinction between present tense ‘is’ and the
past tense ‘was’ is only possible in rare sentences
with multiple verbs.

(3) Hey, what’s your dream, sweetie?
When’s the last time you left this place?
-Anything under 60’s really slutty.

3. an abbreviation for the auxiliary ‘is’ (or ‘was’).
This case can be identified by a following verb in
present participle form, with perhaps a ‘not’ or an
adverb intervening.

(4) He’s trying to find a job.

240

Martin Volk and Rico Sennrich

240



Michael’s thinking about changing his hair.
He’s not kidding.
The CIA’s still trying to download Dasha...

4. an abbreviation for the auxiliary ‘has’. This
variant occurs in front of a past participle verb
form, with perhaps a ‘not’ or an adverb interven-
ing.

(5) The guy’s been really depressed.
For some reason it’s lost its magic.

5. an abbreviation for the auxiliary ‘does’ This
case is characterized by a question and a verb that
is neither a present participle nor a past participle.
It is so rare that we do not deal with it.

(6) -What the hell’s it look like?

6. an abbreviation for the pronoun ‘us’. This oc-
curs only after ‘let’ and can thus trivially be iden-
tified.

(7) Let’s not rush into this, okay?

7. the plural marker for abbreviations, acronyms
and numbers.

(8) I take AP classes and I get all straight A’s.
Let me hear those ABC’s I taught you.
-With two E’s or E-A? -Two E’s.
I tolerate them no better on the bench in my
40’s.
You know how many number 12’s there are
on Cold Street?

This plural marker case is difficult to identify.
There are many instances of upper-case word plus
apostrophe+s or number plus apostrophe+s that do
not fall in this category.

(9) Who do you know in the DA’s office?
CHP’s the last place I belong.
Flight 52’s position report is overdue.
Air Traffic Control, flight 52’s coming in.

We found that a reliable distinction for
acronyms and abbreviations plus apostrophe+s is
only possible if they follow a number (two, three,
...) or plural indicator like all or many, or if it oc-
curs at the end of the sentence. For numbers plus
apostrophe+s the best indicator is also sentence-
final position.

Given these heuristics we identified 131 apos-
trophe+s occurrences as plural markers after

acronyms (upper-case words) and another 546
cases of upper-case word plus apostrophe+s which
classify as one of the above alternatives 1-4. For
numbers plus apostrophe+s we identified only 15
plural marker cases and 47 others. Since the num-
ber of occurrences of both variants is relatively
small, we do not handle these cases in our disam-
biguation.

The most frequent and most difficult ambigu-
ities are between the possessive marker and the
copula ’is/was’. The distribution in both cases
is similar, and a parse of the sentence would be
needed for a precise distinction. All other cases
can be disambiguated based on local context and
Part-of-Speech (PoS) tags.

5 Disambiguation Method

Since we need PoS information for the disam-
biguation, we tested different English PoS taggers.
It turned out that they do not reliably distinguish
the kinds of contractions we are after. For exam-
ple, the TreeTagger2 distinguishes between pos-
sessive marker (POS), 3rd person singular of the
verbs to be (VBZ) and to have (VHZ),3 but it never
tags apostrophe+s as a pronoun or a plural marker
(there isn’t even a tag for this). Unfortunately, the
TreeTagger does not reliably assign the three tags.
For example, it tends to tag apostrophe+s as VBZ
(a form of be) instead of VHZ when there is an ad-
verb between the contraction and the past partici-
ple (see example 10). This is explicable because
of the tagger’s limited context window. But sur-
prisingly it sometimes also tags the apostrophe+s
immediately after the personal pronouns it and he
as possessive markers which can never be correct.

(10) That ’s/VBZ always/RB been/VBN a dream
of mine.
It/PP ’s/POS Sunday morning, ...

Therefore we have developed the following ap-
proach:

1. Run a PoS tagger over the subtitles. We used
the TreeTagger with the standard English lan-
guage model.

2. Run a correction script over the tagged sub-
titles that fixes the apostrophe+s contractions

2www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/
3The TreeTagger distinction between VBZ and VHZ is a

refinement of the Penn Treebank tag set, which has only one
tag for the 3rd person singular form of all verbs.

241

Disambiguation of English Contractions for Machine Translation of TV Subtitles

241



according to the rules which we sketched in
the previous section in the listing of the seven
interpretations.

For example, the correction script will turn the
apostrophe+s into is when it is followed by a word
that has been tagged as present participle (-ing
form). Alternatively it will convert the apostro-
phe+s into has when it is followed by a word that
has been tagged as past participle (-ed form). Ev-
ery apostrophe+s that follows let is turned into the
pronoun us. Example 11 shows a subtitle with a
copula and a possessive marker before and after
disambiguation.

(11) It’s always about someone’s mother.
It is always about someone’s mother.

6 Evaluation of the Disambiguation
Module

We have tested our disambiguation method on
both English-Swedish and English-German SMT
systems with similar results. Here we report on
our experiments for English-German. For these
experiments we obtained 1 million subtitle pairs
English-German from our subtitle partner com-
pany. The subtitles are of high quality and per-
fectly aligned on the basis of the time codes. As
a first step we tokenized the subtitles by separat-
ing punctuation symbols from the words, and by
removing the tags for italics and line breaks. This
means we do not split or join the subtitles into sen-
tences, instead we regard each subtitle as a transla-
tion unit. All subtitles were lower-cased. After to-
kenization we have 10.3 million tokens in the En-
glish subtitles and 8.2 million tokens on the Ger-
man side.

We checked how many of the English tokens are
apostrophe+s tokens. We found a total of 172,571
occurrences of such tokens in 158,328 subtitles.
This means around 15% of all subtitles have at
least one occurrence of apostrophe+s. These oc-
currences account for 1.8% of all tokens. After
PoS tagging the distribution is as follows. Even if
we account for a certain error rate in PoS tagging,
it becomes clear that the vast majority of cases are
not possessive markers but contractions of auxil-
iaries and the pronoun us (which happens to be
tagged as VBZ most of the time).

28,529 tagged as possessive marker (POS)
138,754 tagged as 3rd singular of be (VBZ)

5,288 tagged as 3rd sing. of have (VHZ)
172,571 Total

In order to appreciate this distribution we com-
pare it to the Penn Treebank. The differences are
striking. The Wall Street Journal sections (0-24)
of the Penn Treebank have a total of 1.2 million
tokens out of which 11,538 are apostrophe+s to-
kens (0.9% compared to 1.8% in the subtitle cor-
pus). But out of the 49,206 sentences in this tree-
bank, 21% (10,134 sentences) contain such a to-
ken. The distribution of their functions is very dif-
ferent from our subtitle corpus. The vast majority
(87%) are cases of possessive markers.4

10,025 marked as possessive marker (POS)
1,490 marked as 3rd sing. of be or have

11 marked as personal pronoun (PRP)
12 marked with miscellaneous tags

11,538 Total

From our subtitle corpus we extracted a test set
and a development set, around 6500 subtitles each,
from across the corpus. The rest (around 990,000
subtitles) was taken as the training set.

Using Moses, we built two SMT systems for
English → German translation. The first system
was trained on the original subtitles, and the sec-
ond system was trained on the disambiguated En-
glish subtitles and the same German subtitles as
before. The disambiguation step changed the En-
glish subtitles in the following way:

9493 cases of let’s → let us
270 cases of pronoun + ’s → has

3644 cases of pronoun + ’s → is
1196 cases of other + ’s → has
618 cases of other + ’s → is

This means, a total of 15,221 PoS tags for apos-
trophe+s tokens (around 9% of all such tokens)
were changed, so that we have the following dis-
tribution in our subtitle corpus after correction.

23,540 tagged as possessive marker (POS)
132,788 tagged as 3rd singular of be (VBZ)

6,750 tagged as 3rd sing. of have (VHZ)
9,493 tagged as personal pronoun (PP)

172,571 Total

In the disambiguation step all occurrences of
apostrophe+s that are not tagged as possessive
marker (POS) are turned into is, has, or us.
Thus our disambiguation substitutes 149,031 oc-

4One might wonder whether there are no apostrophe+s
occurrences functioning as plural markers in the Penn Tree-
bank. In fact these have been marked with POS, too.

242

Martin Volk and Rico Sennrich

242



currences (86%) and reduces the apostrophe+s oc-
currences to the 23,540 possessive markers. Re-
member that we ignore the apostrophe+s plural
markers because they are rare.

Automatic evaluation of both our systems (be-
fore and after disambiguation) against the test set
of 6510 subtitles resulted in BLEU scores of 28.9.
Obviously, BLEU has its limits when tracking
small changes in translation. This finding is in line
with observations by (Callison-Burch et al., 2006).

Therefore we performed a manual evaluation of
the relevant subtitles. Out of the 6510 subtitles in
the test set, 1024 subtitles contained apostrophe+s
in the original English subtitle. Of these 1024
subtitles our disambiguation module changed 902.
This means, in these 902 subtitles an apostrophe+s
was turned into is, has or us. But only 224 of these
1024 subtitles have resulted in a different trans-
lation than before. We have examined these 224
subtitles in detail and checked whether the transla-
tion of the sentences after disambiguation is better
than before.

In the following example tables, EN marks the
original English subtitle, DE-REF indicates the
human-created German reference translation, DE-
MT is the output of our MT system before disam-
biguation. EN-DIS marks the disambiguated En-
glish subtitle and DE-DIS-MT the resulting sys-
tem output.

We found clear cases of improvement as in ex-
ample table 1. Interestingly, the improvement in
this example does not show at the changed copula-
apostrophe+s but at the possessive. This is prob-
ably due to the fact that the original English sub-
titles lead to a high translation probability of the
apostrophe+s with German ist (prob(ist|′s) =
0.605), as this is by far the most frequent transla-
tion correspondence. This results in the erroneous
translation of the apostrophe+s with the German
copula ist. After disambiguation the probability
of apostrophe+s (= possessive marker) with ist is
much lower (0.319), thus paving the way for the
correct German translation with the genitive form
of the indefinite pronoun jemand.

There are other cases of improvement that are
directly related to the disambiguation. Example
table 2 shows an improvement for the transla-
tion of ’s been after it has been turned into has
been. The sentence is still not perfectly translated
(mainly because the English word block needs to
be translated differently in this context), but the

translation of the copula verb and the subsequent
word order are clearly better.

There are other examples that show worse trans-
lations. In particular we find worse translations in
connection with let’s (as in example table 3). We
suspect that let’s is so idiomatic that a split will
give too much significance to the pronoun us and
“disturb” the translation probabilities.

It is also striking that sometimes the disam-
biguation leads to translations that are different but
as good (or bad) as before. Obviously the disam-
biguation step leads to slight shifts in the trans-
lation probabilities that result in changed prefer-
ences for one translation over the other. Exam-
ple 4 is such a case in point with a good idiomatic
translation both before and after the disambigua-
tion. Note that the latter translation will receive
much higher BLEU scores because of its almost
perfect overlap with the reference translation.

Table 5 contains the numerical results of the
manual evaluation. Almost 26% of the examined
subtitles show an improved translation in relation
to apostrophe+s. This stands against about 6% that
show a worse translation. So this is a net improve-
ment for 20% of the examined subtitles (which ac-
count only for 22% of the subtitles with apostro-
phe+s in the test set).

Interestingly, we also find translation improve-
ments that are seemingly unrelated to the apostro-
phe+s in the subtitle since they appear in a differ-
ent part of the subtitle. We identified 16.5% im-
provements versus 12% degradations in this class.
This adds to the positive overall effect of the dis-
ambiguation. The remaining 39% of the subtitles
have resulted in translations that are different than
before but are judged as being of equal quality (as
in example table 4).

These numbers refer only to those 22% of the
apostrophe+s-containing subtitles whose MT out-
put had changed after the disambiguation. But the
apostrophe+s disambiguation influences also the
translation of subtitles without apostrophe+s be-
cause of differing word alignments. In order to see
how the disambiguation step influences those sub-
titles, we also manually checked 224 subtitles with
changed MT output in this class. There we found
no statistically significant difference in translation
quality before and after disambiguation.

243

Disambiguation of English Contractions for Machine Translation of TV Subtitles

243



EN: it ’s always about someone ’s mother .
DE-REF: es hat immer mit der mutter zu tun .
DE-MT: es geht immer nur um jemand ist mutter .
EN-DIS: it is always about someone ’s mother .
DE-DIS-MT: es geht immer nur um jemandes mutter .

Table 1: Example of improved MT for the possessive marker

EN: this car ’s been on my block for a week .
DE-REF: seit einer woche steht ein auto in meiner straße.
DE-MT: das auto ist auf mich block für eine woche .
EN-DIS: this car has been on my block for a week .
DE-DIS-MT: das auto war auf dem block für eine woche .

Table 2: Example of improved MT for ’s been → has been

EN: now , let ’s step into the bar .
DE-REF: treten sie ein .
DE-MT: also , gehen wir in die bar .
EN-DIS: now , let us step into the bar .
DE-DIS-MT: lass uns in der bar .

Table 3: Example of worse MT for let’s → let us

EN: he ’s out of his mind .
DE-REF: er hat wohl den verstand verloren .
DE-MT: er ist durchgeknallt .
EN-DIS: he is out of his mind .
DE-DIS-MT: er hat den verstand verloren .

Table 4: Example of equally good MT for an idiomatic expression

subtitles percent human judgement
58 25.9% better translation related to apostrophe+s
14 6.3% worse translation related to apostrophe+s
37 16.5% better translation but not related to apostrophe+s
27 12.1% worse translation but not related to apostrophe+s
88 39.3% translation is different, but as good or as bad as before

Table 5: Results of the manual evaluation of 224 subtitles

244

Martin Volk and Rico Sennrich

244



7 Conclusion

We have shown that film and TV subtitles in gen-
eral are well suited for MT. But they also have spe-
cific properties that make MT more difficult than
for other genres. As an example of this, we have
investigated apostrophe+s contractions in English
that are frequent in subtitles and introduce addi-
tional ambiguities.

We have presented a method that disambiguates
these contractions based on PoS tags assigned by
a general-purpose PoS tagger. We found that this
disambiguation has a positive impact on the trans-
lation quality of the respective subtitles (although
this impact is not visible in the BLEU scores).

On the practical side we plan to investigate
whether we can train a PoS tagger to reliably
classify the apostrophe+s contractions directly so
that we no longer need a separate disambiguation
module. One option would be to train a special-
purpose PoS tagger on the automatically corrected
output of the general-purpose PoS tagger.

In a broader perspective our work reopens the
question of whether other disambiguation steps in
pre-processing (e.g. for other contraction types)
will be similarly beneficial for MT.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Nicole Michel for help in
assessing the MT output quality.

References
Marianna Apidianaki. 2009. Data-driven semantic

analysis for multilingual WSD and lexical selection
in translation. In Proceedings of the 12th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (EACL), pages 77–
85, Athens.

Christopher Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and
Philipp Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of
BLEU in machine translation research. In Proceed-
ings of the Thirteenth Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Trento.

Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2005. Word sense dis-
ambiguation vs. statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL,
pages 387–394, Ann Arbor.

Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving sta-
tistical machine translation using word sense disam-
biguation. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language

Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 61–72, Prague.

Yee Seng Chan, Hwee Tou Ng, and David Chiang.
2007. Word sense disambiguation improves sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL-07), pages 33–40, Prague.

Ilknur Durgar El-Kahlout and Francois Yvon. 2010.
The pay-offs of preprocessing for German-English
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 7th International Workshop on Spoken Language
Translation, Paris.

Fred Popowich, Paul McFetridge, Davide Turcato, and
Janine Toole. 2000. Machine translation of closed
captions. Machine Translation, 15:311–341.

Lucia Specia, Maria das Graças V. Nunes, and Mark
Stevenson. 2005. Exploiting rules for word sense
disambiguation in machine translation. Proce-
samiento del Lenguaje Natural, (35):171–178.

David Vickrey, Luke Biewald, Marc Teyssier, and
Daphne Koller. 2005. Word-sense disambiguation
for machine translation. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology Conference and Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 771–778, Vancouver.

Martin Volk and Søren Harder. 2007. Evaluating MT
with translations or translators. What is the differ-
ence? In Proceedings of Machine Translation Sum-
mit XI, Copenhagen.

Martin Volk, Rico Sennrich, Christian Hardmeier, and
Frida Tidström. 2010. Machine translation of TV
subtitles for large scale production. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Joint EM+/CNGL Workshop on
”Bringing MT to the User: Research on Integrating
MT in the Translation Industry”, pages 53–62, Den-
ver.

Martin Volk. 2008. The automatic translation of film
subtitles. A machine translation success story? In
Joakim Nivre, Mats Dahllöf, and Beáta Megyesi, ed-
itors, Resourceful Language Technology: Festschrift
in Honor of Anna Sågvall Hein, volume 7 of Stu-
dia Linguistica Upsaliensia, pages 202–214. Upp-
sala University, Humanistisk-samhällsvetenskapliga
vetenskapsområdet, Faculty of Languages.

245

Disambiguation of English Contractions for Machine Translation of TV Subtitles

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


