















































Participation in Language Resource Development and Sharing


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, page 1,
Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12 and 13, 2011.

Participation in Language Resource Development and Sharing 

 

 

Virach Sornlertlamvanich 

National Electronics and Computer Technology Center  

Pathumthani, Thailand 

virach.sornlertlamvanich@nectec.or.th 

 

  

 

Abstract 

 

Language resources are really much required for understanding and modeling the language in the present 

approaches. The language that has a rich language resource gains a big benefit in making a big advance 

in language processing. On the other hand, the less resource language is struggling with preparing a large 

enough language resource such as raw text or annotated corpora. It is a labor intensive and time consum-

ing task. Moreover, computerization of the text is another non-trivial effort. There needs a supportive 

computing environment in inputting, encoding, retrieving, analysis, etc.. Learning from the rich resource 

languages, we gradually collecting the resource and preparing the necessary tools. Through many efforts 

in the recent years, we can see some significant outcomes from PAN localization project (2004-2007, 

2007-2101, http://www.panl10n.net/), ADD (2006-2010, http://www.tcllab.org/), Asian WordNet 

(http://asianwordnet.org/), Hindi WordNet (http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/wordnet/webhwn/), BEST (since 

2009, Thai Word Segmentation Software Contest, http://thailang.nectec.or.th/ 

best/) and many NLP summer schools. The activities gain a big potential in leveraging the NLP tools de-

velopment and research personnel development. It results in a big growth of Asian language resource de-

velopment and research. With the spirit of sharing on social networking, the resources can efficiently be 

developed to a satisfied amount in a reasonable time scale. Asian WordNet is an example of developing a 

set of 13 languages of Wordnet connected via Princeton WordNet. Thai WordNet is open for online col-

laborative development. About 70K synsets and 80K words of Thai WordNet are available online. Thai-

Lao conversion is an approach to exhibit the advantage in utilization of language similarity to increase 

the other language resource. Lao WordNet is created by converting from Thai WordNet by using the 

phoneme transfer approach. Taking the advantage of language similarity, the language corpus can be ob-

tained by a quick conversion rule. In this case, the study of direct transfer is much more efficient than 

creating from the scratch. Currently, most of the above mentioned results are open to public for at least 

research purpose. However, more and more language resources are still needed to improve the language 

processing. The possible of online collaborative development and sharing is a key factor in the language 

resource development. 

 

1


