










































Endangered Uralic Languages and Language Technologies


Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Workshop, pages 1–2,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011.

Endangered Uralic Languages and Language Technologies

Gábor Prószéky
MorphoLogic & Pázmány University, Budapest, Hungary

proszeky@morphologic.hu

Language  tools  and  resources  for  analysis  of 
less-elaborated languages are in the focus of our 
workshop. There are still research tracks which 
still  do  not  sufficiently  and  effectively  exploit 
language  technology  solutions,  and  there  are 
many languages for which the available tools and 
resources still have to be developed to serve as a 
basis of further applications.

The presentation introduces a set of morpholo-
gical tools for small and endangered Uralic lan-
guages. Various Hungarian research groups spe-

cialized  in  Finno-Ugric  linguistics  and  a  Hun-
garian language technology company (Morpho-
Logic) have initiated a project with the goal of 
producing annotated electronic corpora and com-
putational  morphological  tools for  small  Uralic 
languages,  like  Mordvin,  Udmurt  (Votyak), 
Komi  (Zyryan),  Mansi  (Vogul),  Khanty 
(Ostyak), Nenets (Yurak) and Nganasan (Tavgi). 
Altogether  around  a  dozen  Uralic  languages 
totaling some 3.3 million live as scattered minor-
ities in Russia, as shown by the map below:

The morphologies of these languages are com-
plex enough, thus the implementation of the mor-
phological tools was a real challenge. The sub-
projects  concerning  the  individual  languages 
slightly differed, depending on the special prob-
lems  these  languages  raise  (how  precisely  the 
languages have been  described  so  far,  whether 
there is a standard dialect, what kinds of texts are 
available, etc.). In the project, we used the mor-
phological analyzer engine called Humor ('High 

speed  Unification  MORphology')  developed  at 
MorphoLogic,  which was first  successfully ap-
plied to another Finno-Ugric language, Hungari-
an. We supplemented the analyzer with two addi-
tional  tools:  a  lemmatizer  and a morphological 
generator.  Creating  analyzers  for  the  Samoyed 
languages involved in the project turned out to be 
a great  challenge.  Nganasan from the Northern 
Samoyed branch is a language on the verge of 
extinction (the number of native speakers is be-

1



low 500 by now, most of them are middle-aged 
or  old),  so  its  documentation  is  an  urgent  sci-
entific  task.  Nganasan  morphology  and  espe-
cially  its  phonology  is  very  complex  and  the 
available linguistic data and their  linguistic de-
scriptions  proved  to  be  incomplete  and  partly 
contradictory. Thus, using the Humor formalism, 
which we successfully applied to other languages 
involved in the project, was not to be feasible in 
the case of one of the chosen languages, Nganas-
an. The Humor formalism uses an 'item-and-ar-
rangement' model of morphology where feature-
based  allomorph  adjacency  restrictions  are  the 
primary device for constraining word structure. 
Gradation in Nganasan is difficult to formalize as 
a set of allomorph adjacency restrictions because 
the  segments  involved  in  determining  the  out-
come of the process may belong to non-adjacent 
morphemes.  For  Nganasan,  we  used  therefore 
another  tool  (xfst  of  Xerox),  mainly  because 
gradation is just a small part of the complicated 
system of dozens of interacting productive and 
lexicalized  morpho-phonological  and  phonolo-
gical alternations.

Besides  the  annotated  corpora  and  the  mor-
phological  analyzers,  a  website  was  also  de-
veloped where all  of  the tools described above 
are available for a wider public.

Acknowledgments

The projects have been funded by the Hungarian 
Scientific  Research Fund (OTKA) and the Na-
tional  Research  and  Development  Programme 
(NKFP):  A Complex  Uralic  linguistic  database 
(NKFP-5/135/01),  Linguistic  databases  for 
Permic languages (OTKA T 048309), Develop-
ment of a morphological analyzer for Nganasan 
(OTKA K 60807), Ob Ugric morphological ana-
lyzers and corpora (OTKA 71707).

2


