










































Multilingual Annotation and Disambiguation of Discourse Connectives for Machine Translation


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 194–203,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multilingual Annotation and Disambiguation of Discourse Connectives for
Machine Translation

Thomas Meyer and Andrei Popescu-Belis
Idiap Research Institute

Rue Marconi 19, 1920 Martigny, Switzerland
Thomas.Meyer@idiap.ch, Andrei.Popescu-Belis@idiap.ch

Sandrine Zufferey and Bruno Cartoni
Department of Linguistics, University of Geneva
Rue de Candolle 2, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland

Sandrine.Zufferey@unige.ch, Bruno.Cartoni@unige.ch

Abstract

Many discourse connectives can signal several
types of relations between sentences. Their
automatic disambiguation, i.e. the labeling of
the correct sense of each occurrence, is impor-
tant for discourse parsing, but could also be
helpful to machine translation. We describe
new approaches for improving the accuracy
of manual annotation of three discourse con-
nectives (two English, one French) by using
parallel corpora. An appropriate set of labels
for each connective can be found using infor-
mation from their translations. Our results for
automatic disambiguation are state-of-the-art,
at up to 85% accuracy using surface features.
Using feature analysis, contextual features are
shown to be useful across languages and con-
nectives.

1 Introduction

Discourse connectives are generally considered as
indicators of discourse structure, relating two sen-
tences of a written or spoken text, and making ex-
plicit the rhetorical or coherence relation between
them. Leaving aside the cases when connectives are
only implicit, the presence of a connective does not
unambiguously signal a specific discourse relation.
In fact, many connectives can indicate several types
of relations between sentences, i.e. they have several
possible “senses” in context.

This paper studies the manual and automated dis-
ambiguation of three ambiguous connectives in two
languages: alors que in French, since and while in
English. We will show how the multilingual per-

spective helps to improve the accuracy of annota-
tion, and how it helps to find appropriate labels for
automated processing and MT. Results from auto-
matic annotation experiments, which are close to the
state of the art, as well as feature analysis, help to as-
sess the usefulness of the proposed labels.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 ex-
plains the motivation of our experiments, and of-
fers a wider perspective on our research goals, illus-
trating them with examples of translation problems
which arise from ambiguous discourse connectives.
Current resources and methods for discourse anno-
tation are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 analyzes
our experiments in manual annotation and in partic-
ular the influence of the set of labels on the reliability
of annotation. The automatic disambiguation exper-
iments, the features used, the results and the analysis
of features are described in Section 5. Section 6 con-
cludes the paper and outlines future work.

2 Explicit Connectives and their
Translation

2.1 Three Multi-functional Connectives

Discourse connectives form a functional category of
lexical items that are used to mark coherence rela-
tions such as Cause or Contrast between units of
discourse. Along with other function words, many
connectives appear among the most frequent words,
as shown for instance by counts (Cartoni et al.,
2011) over the Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005). The
Penn Discourse Treebank (Prasad et al., 2008) (see
Section 3.1 below) includes around 100 connective
types, but the exact number varies across studies,

194



depending on the discourse theory used to classify
them. Among these types, Pitler et al.(2008) have
shown that most of them are unambiguous and easy
to identify, but others, especially temporal ones, of-
ten signal multiple senses depending on their con-
text.

Following the terminology of Petukhova and
Bunt (2009, Section 2), we are interested here in
“sequential” multi-functionality, i.e. the fact that the
same connective can signal different relations in dif-
ferent contexts. We do not deal with “simultane-
ous” multi-functionality, i.e. the possibility for a
single occurrence to signal several relations, which
has been less frequently studied for connectives (see
Petukhova and Bunt (2009) for the discourse usage
of and).

We identified the two English connectives while
and since, along with the French connective alors
que, as being particularly problematic because they
are highly multi-functional, i.e. they can signal mul-
tiple senses. For alors que, a French database of
connectives (LexConn (Roze et al., 2010), see Sec-
tion 3 below) contains examples of sentences where
alors que expresses either a Background or a Con-
trast relation. For the English connective since,
Miltsakaki et al. (2005) identified three possible
meanings: Temporal, Causal, and simultaneously
Temporal/Causal. For while, even more senses are
observed: Comparison, Contrast, Concession, and
Opposition. In fact, in the Penn Discourse Tree-
bank, the connective while is annotated with more
than twenty different senses.

2.2 Wider Research Objectives
Our long-term goal is to identify automatically the
senses of connectives for an application to machine
translation (MT). Going beyond the labels provided
by discourse theories, the goal is thus to find the
most appropriate labels in a new multilingual, em-
pirical approach that makes use of parallel corpora to
annotate and then learn the various senses of connec-
tives. The disambiguation of such connectives in a
source text is crucial for its translation, because each
sense may be translated by a different connective
and/or syntactical construct in the target language.

More specifically, we hypothesize that correctly
labeled connectives are easier to learn and to trans-
late by statistical MT systems than unlabeled ones.

To support this hypothesis, we set up an experiment
(Meyer, 2011) in which we constrained the transla-
tion of the three senses of the discourse connective
while that were previously annotated as Temporal,
Contrast and Concession. The system was forced to
use predefined French translations known to be cor-
rect, by directly modifying the phrase table of the
trained MT system. This modification noticeably
helped to improve translation quality and rose the
BLEU score by 0.8 for a preliminary test set of 20
sentences.

2.3 Illustration of Mistranslations

Among the connectives that we plan to process in or-
der to improve MT, the three connectives we focus
on in this paper are frequent, ambiguous and there-
fore difficult to translate correctly by MT systems,
as illustrated in the following examples.

A first reason why machine translation of connec-
tives can be difficult is that there may be no direct
lexical correspondence for the explicit source lan-
guage connective in the target language, as shown
in the reference translation of the first example in
Table 1, taken from the Europarl corpus (Koehn,
2005).

EN It is also important that we should not leave these indica-
tors floating in the air while congratulating ourselves on
the fact that we have produced them.

FR Il est également important de ne pas laisser ces indicateurs
flotter, en nous félicitant de les avoir instaurés.

EN Finally, and in conclusion, Mr President, with the expiry of
the ECSC Treaty, the regulations will have to be reviewed
since [causal] I think that the aid system will have to con-
tinue beyond 2002 . . .

FR *Enfin, et en conclusion, Monsieur le président, à
l’expiration du traité ceca, la réglementation devra être
revu depuis que [temporal] je pense que le système d’aides
devront continuer au-delà de 2002 . . .

FR Oui, bien entendu, sauf que le développement ne se négocie
pas, alors que [contrast] le commerce, lui, se négocie.

EN *Yes, of course, but development cannot be negotiated, so
[causal] that trade can.

EN Between 1998 and 1999, loyalists assaulted and shot 123
people, while [contrast] republicans assaulted and shot 93
people.

FR *Entre 1998 et 1999, les loyalistes ont attaqué et abattu
123 personnes, φ 93 pour les républicains.

Table 1: Translation examples from Europarl. Discourse
connectives, their translations, and their senses are indi-
cated in bold. The first example is a reference transla-
tion from EN into FR, while the others are wrong transla-
tions generated by MT (EN/FR and respectively FR/EN),
hence marked with an asterisk.

195



When an ambiguous connective is explicitly
translated by another connective, the incorrect ren-
dering of its sense can lead to erroneous translations,
as in the second and third examples in Table 1, which
are translated by the Moses SMT decoder (Koehn et
al., 2007) trained on the Europarl corpus. The ref-
erence translation for the second example uses the
French connective car with a correct causal sense,
instead of the wrong depuis que generated by SMT,
which expresses a temporal relation. In the third ex-
ample, the French connective alors que, in its con-
trastive usage, is wrongly translated into the English
connective so, which has a causal meaning (the ref-
erence translation uses whereas to express contrast).
It may even occur that the system fails to translate a
connective at all, as in the fourth example where the
discourse information provided by while, namely a
Contrast relation, is lost in the French translation,
which is hardly coherent any longer.

3 Related Work

3.1 Annotated Resources

One of the very few available discourse annotated
corpora is the Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) in
English (Prasad et al., 2008). For this resource, one
hundred types of explicit discourse connectives were
manually annotated, as well as implicit relations not
signaled by a connective. The sense hierarchy used
for annotation consists of three levels, from four top-
level senses (Temporal, Contingency, Comparison,
and Expansion), to 16 subsenses on the second level,
and 23 further ones on the third level. The annota-
tors were allowed to assign more than one sense to
each occurrence, so 129 simple or complex labels
are observed, over more than 18,000 explicit con-
nectives. For French, the ANNODIS project (Péry-
Woodley et al., 2009) will provide annotation of dis-
course on an original corpus. Resources for Czech
are also becoming available (Zikánová et al., 2010).

For German, a lexicon of discourse markers
named DiMLex exists since the 1990s (Stede and
Umbach, 1998). An equivalent, more recent
database for French is the LexConn lexicon of con-
nectives (Roze et al., 2010) containing a list of 328
explicit connectives. For each of them, LexConn
indicates and exemplifies the possible senses, cho-
sen from a list of 30 labels inspired from Rhetorical

Structure Theory (Mann and Thompson, 1988).

3.2 Automatic Disambiguation of Connectives

The release of the PDTB had quite an impact on
automatic disambiguation experiments. The state-
of-the-art for recognizing all types of explicit con-
nectives in English is therefore already high, at
97% accuracy for disambiguating discourse vs. non-
discourse uses (Lin et al., 2010) and 94% for disam-
biguating the four main senses from the PDTB hier-
archy (Pitler and Nenkova, 2009). Lin et al. (2010)
recently built the first end-to-end PDTB discourse
parser, which is able to parse unrestricted text with
an F1 score of 38.18% for senses on the second level
of the PDTB hierarchy. Other important contribu-
tions to automatic discourse connective classifica-
tion and feature analysis has been provided by Well-
ner et al. (2006) and Elwell and Baldrige (2008).

Fewer studies focus on the detailed analysis of
specific discourse connectives. In Section 5.3, we
will compare our results to Miltsakaki et al. (2005)
who report classification results for the connectives
since, while and when. In their study, as in the
present one, the goal is to disambiguate senses from
the second level of the PDTB hierarchy, a level
which, as we will show, is appropriate for the trans-
lation of these connectives as well.

4 Connective Annotation in Parallel
Corpora

The resources mentioned above are either monolin-
gual only (PDTB, LexConn) and/or not yet publicly
available (ANNODIS, DiMLex). Moreover, our
overall goal is related to multilingualism and trans-
lation, as explained in Section 2.2 above. There-
fore, we performed manual annotation of connec-
tives in a multilingual, aligned resource: the Eu-
roparl corpus (Koehn, 2005). We extracted from Eu-
roparl two subcorpora for each translation direction,
EN/FR and FR/EN, to take into account the varying
distribution of connectives in translated vs. original
language, as explained in Cartoni et al. (2011).

As the full PDTB hierarchy seemed too fine-
grained given current capabilities for automatic la-
beling and the needs for translating connectives,
we defined a simplified set of labels for the senses
of connectives, by considering their usefulness and

196



granularity with respect to translation, focusing on
those that may lead to different connectives or syn-
tactical constructs in the target language.

4.1 Method

There are two major ways to annotate explicit dis-
course connectives. The first approach is to label
each occurrence of a connective with a label for
its sense, similar to the PDTB or LexConn hierar-
chies of senses. However, as shown among others
by Zikanova et al. (2010), this is a difficult and time-
consuming task even when the annotators are trained
over a long period of time. This is confirmed by the
rather low kappa scores resulting from the manual
sense annotations as can be seen for each connective
in detail below.

The second approach to annotation, which is the
one put forward in this paper, is based on translation
spotting. In a first step, human annotators work on
bilingual sentence pairs, and annotate the translation
of each connective in the target language. The trans-
lations are either a target language connective (sig-
naling in principle the same sense(s) as the source
one), or a reformulation, or a construct with no con-
nective at all. In a second step of the annotation,
all translations of a connective are manually clus-
tered by the experimenters to derive sense labels, by
grouping together similar translations.

As demonstrated in the following subsections, for
the three connectives under study, the second ap-
proach to connective annotation not only facilitates
the annotation task, but also helps to derive the ap-
propriate level of granularity for the sense labels.

4.2 Annotation of alors que

This first manual annotation involved two experi-
enced annotators who annotated alors que in 423
original French sentences. The two main senses
identified for alors que are Background (labeled B)
Contrast (labeled C), as in the LexConn database.
Annotators were also allowed to use the J label if
they did not know which label to assign, and a
D label for discarded sentences – due to a non-
connective use of the two words which could not be
filtered out automatically (e.g. Alors, que fera-t-on?
). The annotators found 20 sentences labeled with
D, which were removed from the data. 15 sentences
were labeled with J by one annotator (but none by

both), and it was decided to assign to them the label
(either B or C) provided by the other annotator.

The inter-annotator agreement on the B vs. C la-
bels was quite low, showing the difficulty of the task:
kappa reached 0.43, quite below the 0.7 mark often
considered as indicating reliability. The following
example from Europarl illustrates the difficulty of
choosing between B and C. In particular, the refer-
ence translation into English also uses an ambiguous
connective, namely while.

FR La monnaie unique va entrer en vigueur au milieu
de la tourmente financière, alors que de nombreux
compléments, logiques, mais que les États ne sem-
blaient pas avoir prévus, n’ont pas encore été ap-
portés.

EN The single currency is going to come into force in the
midst of financial turmoil, while a great many ad-
ditional factors which were only to be expected, but
which the states do not seem to have anticipated, have
not been taken into consideration.

Two methods were applied to deal with diverg-
ing manual annotations. To prepare the datasets for
the automated disambiguation experiments, one so-
lution (named A1, see Table 2) is to use the double-
sense label B/C for sentences labeled differently by
annotators (B vs. C). This label reflects the diffi-
culty of manual annotation and preserves the am-
biguity which might be genuinely present in each
occurrence. The relevance of the B/C label is also
supported by results from automatic labeling in Sec-
tion 5.3 below.

For comparison purposes, a second dataset named
A2 was derived from translation spotting on the
same French sentences aligned to English ones, as
explained in Section 4.1. Alors que appeared to be
mainly translated by the following English equiv-
alents and constructs: although, whereas, while,
whilst, when, at a time when. Through this opera-
tion, inter-annotator disagreement can sometimes be
solved: when the translation is a clearly contrastive
English connective (whereas or although), then the
C label was assigned instead of B/C. Conversely,
when the English translation was still ambiguous
(while, whilst, or when), the experimenters made a
decision in favor of either B or C by re-examining
source and target sentences.

4.3 Annotation of since
For since, 30 sentences were annotated by four ex-
perimenters in a preliminary round, with a kappa

197



ID Connective Sent. Labels (nb. of occ.)
A1 alors que 403 B (92), C (191), B/C (120)
A2 alors que 403 B (126), C (277)
B1 since 727 T (375), C (341), T/C (11)
B2 since 727 T (375), C (352)
C1 while 299 T/C (92), CONC (134), C (43)

T/CAUSAL (19), T/DUR (7)
T/PUNCT (4)

C2 while 299 T (30), C (135), CONC (134)

Table 2: The six datasets resulting from the manual anno-
tation of the three connectives, with total number of sen-
tences, possible labels and their number of occurrences.
The explanations of the labels are given in Sections 4.2
through 4.4.

score of 0.77, indicating good agreement. Then,
each half of the entire dataset (727 sentences) was
annotated by another person with three possible
sense labels: T for Temporal, C for Causal and
T/C for a simultaneously Temporal/Causal meaning.
Two datasets were again derived from this manual
annotation. To study the effects of a supplementary
label, we kept the label T/C for dataset B1, but con-
densed it under label C in dataset B2, as shown in
Table 2.

4.4 Annotation of while

The English connective while is highly ambiguous.
In the PDTB, occurrences of while are annotated
with no less than 21 possible senses, ranging from
Conjunction to Contrast, Concession, or Synchrony.

We performed a pilot annotation of 30 sentences
containing while with five different experimenters,
resulting in a quite low inter-annotator agreement,
κ = 0.56. We therefore decided to perform a
translation spotting task only, with two experienced
annotators fluent in English and French. The ob-
served translations into French confirm the ambigu-
ity of while, as they include several connectives and
constructs, quite evenly distributed in terms of fre-
quency: alors que, gerundive reformulations, other
reformulations, si, tandis que, même si, bien que,
etc.

The translations were manually clustered to de-
rive senses for while, in an empirical manner.
For example, alors que signals Temporal/Contrast,
which is also true for tandis que. Similarly, même si
and bien que are clustered under the label Conces-

sion, and so forth. The translation spotting shows
that at least Contrast, Concession, and several tem-
poral senses are necessary to account for a correct
translation. These distinctions are comparable to the
semantic granularity of the second PDTB hierarchy
level.

To generate training sets for automated classifica-
tion out of a total of 500 sentences, we discarded 201
sentences labeled by annotators with G (gerundive
constructions), P (reformulations) or Z (no transla-
tion at all) – these cases could be reconsidered in fur-
ther work, as they represent valid translation prob-
lems. For the remaining 299 sentences, we created
the following six labels by clustering the spotted
translations: T/C (Temporal/Contrast), T/PUNCT
(Temporal/Punctual), T/DUR (Temporal/Duration),
T/CAUSAL (Temporal/Causal), CONC (Conces-
sion) and C (Contrast). These were used to tag the
remaining 299 sentences, forming dataset C1. A
second dataset (C2) with fewer senses was obtained
from C1 by merging T/C to C (Contrast only) and
all T/x to T (Temporal only).

5 Disambiguation Experiments

The features for connective classification, the re-
sults obtained and a detailed feature analysis are dis-
cussed in this section. We show that an automated
disambiguation system can be used to determine the
most appropriate set of labels, and thus to corrob-
orate the selection we made using translation spot-
ting.

5.1 Features

For feature extraction, all the datasets described in
Section 4 were processed as follows. The English
texts were parsed and POS-tagged by Charniak and
Johnson’s (2005) reranking parser. The French texts
were POS-tagged with the MElt tagger (Denis and
Sagot, 2009) and parsed with MaltParser (Nivre,
2003). As the English parser provides constituency
trees, and the parser for French generates depen-
dency trees, the features are slightly different in the
two languages. The other features below were ex-
tracted using elementary pre-processing of the sen-
tences.

For English sentences, we used the following fea-
tures: the sentence-initial character of the connec-

198



tive (yes/no); the POS tag of the first verb in the
sentence; the type of first auxiliary verb in the sen-
tence (if any); the word preceding the connective;
the word following the connective; the POS tag of
the first verb following the connective; the type of
the first auxiliary verb after the connective (if any).

For French sentences, the features were the fol-
lowing: the sentence-initial character of the connec-
tive (yes/no); the dependency tag of the connective;
the first verb in the sentence; its dependency tag; the
word preceding the connective; its POS tag; its de-
pendency tag; the word following the connective; its
POS tag; its dependency tag; the first verb after the
connective; its dependency tag.

The cased connective word forms from the cor-
pus were not lower-cased, thus keeping the implicit
indication of the sentence-initial character of the oc-
currence, i.e. whether it starts a sentence or not. The
output of the POS taggers was used for neighboring
words, but not for the connectives, which almost al-
ways received the same tag. Charniak’s parser for
English provides POS tags which differentiate the
verb tenses, such as VBD (past), VBG (gerund), and
so on. These were considered for the verb directly
preceding and the one directly following the connec-
tive. Tense was believed to be potentially relevant
because since and while can have temporal mean-
ings.

The occurrence of auxiliary verbs (be, have, do,
or need) may give additional indications about tem-
poral relations in the sentence. We therefore used
the types of auxiliary verbs as features, including
the elementary conjugations, represented for to be
as: be present, be past, be part, be inf, be gerund
– and similarly for the other auxiliary verbs, as in
(Miltsakaki et al., 2005).

As shown by Lin et al. (2010), duVerle and
Prendinger (2009) or Wellner et al. (2006), the con-
text of a connective is very important. We there-
fore extracted the words preceding and following
each connective, the verbs and the first and the last
word of the sentences. These may include numbers,
sometimes indicating a numerical comparison, time
expressions, or antonyms, which could indicate con-
trastive relations, such as rise vs. fall (e.g. It is inter-
esting to see the fundamental stock pickers scream
”foul” on program trading when the markets de-
cline, while hailing the great values still abounding

as the markets rise.).
For French, we likewise extracted the words im-

mediately preceding and following each connective,
supplemented by their POS tags. In contrast to con-
stituents, dependency structures contain information
about the grammatical function of each word (heads)
and link the dependents belonging to the same head.
However, as the dependency parser provides no dif-
ferentiated verb tags, we extracted the verb word
forms themselves and added their dependency tags.
The same applies to the connective itself, and pre-
ceding and following words and their dependency
tags.

The dependency tag of the non-connectives varies
between subj (subject), det (determiner), mod (mod-
ifier) and obj (object). The first verb in the sentence
often belongs to the root dependency while the verb
following the connective most often belongs to the
obj dependency. For alors que, the most frequent
dependency tags were mod mod and mod obj, indi-
cating the connective’s main function as a modifier
of its argument.

5.2 Experimental Setting
Our classification experiments made use of the
WEKA machine learning toolkit (Hall et al., 2009)
to run and compare several classification algorithms:
Random Forest (sets of decision trees), Naive Bayes,
and Support Vector Machine. The results are re-
ported with 10-fold cross validation on the entire
data for each connective, using all features.

Table 3 lists for each method – including the ma-
jority classifier as a baseline – the percentage of cor-
rectly classified instances (or accuracy, noted Acc.),
and the kappa values. Significance above the base-
line is computed using paired t-tests at 95% confi-
dence. When a score is significantly above the base-
line, it is shown in italics in Table 3. The best scores
for each dataset, across classifiers, are indicated in
boldface. When these scores were not significantly
above the baseline, at least they were never signifi-
cantly below either.

5.3 Results and Discussion
Overall, the SVM classifier performed best, which
may be due to the large number of textual features
(3 for EN data and 5 for FR data), as SVMs are
known to handle them well (Joachims, 1998; du-

199



ID Connective # Labels Baseline R. Forest N. Bayes SVM
Acc. Acc. κ Acc. κ Acc. κ

A1 alors que 403 B, C, B/C 46.9 53.1 0.2 55.7 0.3 54.2 0.3
A2 alors que B, C 68.7 69.2 0.1 68.3 0.2 64.7 0.1
B1 since 727 T, C, T/C 51.6 79.8 0.6 82.3 0.7 85.4 0.7
B2 since T, C 51.6 80.7 0.6 84.0 0.7 85.7 0.7
C1 while 299 T/C, T/PUNCT, T/DUR,

T/CAUSAL, CONC, C
44.8 43.2 0.1 49.9 0.2 52.2 0.2

C2 while T, C, CONC 43.5 60.5 0.3 59.9 0.3 60.9 0.3

Table 3: Disambiguation scores for three connectives (number of occurrences in the training sets), with two sets of
labels each, for various classification algorithms. Accuracy (Acc.) is in percentage (%), and kappa is zero for the
baseline method (majority class). The best scores for each data set are in boldface, and scores significantly above the
baseline (95% t-test) are in italics.

Verle and Prendinger, 2009). The maximum accu-
racy for alors que is 55.7%, for since it is 85.7%, and
for while it is 60.9%. While close to other reported
values, there is still potential for improvement in the
future.

The analysis of results for each data sets leads
to observations that are specific to each connective.
The high improvement of over the baseline for A1,
as opposed to no improvement for A2, confirms the
usefulness of the double-sense B/C label for alors
que, showing that in this case the three-way classi-
fication is probably better adapted to the linguistic
properties of alors que than a two-way classifica-
tion. Indeed, alors que, just as its frequently spot-
ted translation while, is linguistically ambiguous in
some contexts (see for instance the example in Sec-
tion 4.2), in which the temporal and the contrastive
meaning are likely to co-exist. In the case of A2,
where the labels were forced to B or C only, auto-
matic classifiers do not significantly outperform the
baseline. While more elaborate features might help,
these low scores can be related to the difficulties of
human annotators (Section 4.2), and make a strong
case against using a two-label schema for alors que.

The features used so far lead to high scores for
since in datasets B1 and B2. The results are com-
parable to those from Miltsakaki et al. (2005), who
used similar features and labels, though with a Max-
imum Entropy classifier. Moreover, they provide re-
sults for individual connectives, and not, as most of
the related work for the PDTB, on the whole set
of ca. 100 discourse connective types. However,

Miltsakaki et al. (2005) used their own datasets for
each connective, which are different from the PDTB,
because the PDTB was not available at that time.
Our SVM classifier outperforms considerably the
Maximum Entropy classifier on the three-way clas-
sification task (with T, C, T/C), with an accuracy
of 85.4% vs. 75.5%, obtained however on differ-
ent datasets. For the two-way classification (T, C),
again on different datasets, our accuracy of 85.7% is
slightly lower than the 89.5% given in Miltsakaki et
al. (2005).1

For while, when comparing C1 to C2, it appears
that reducing the number of labels from six to three
increases accuracy by 8-10%. This is probably
due to the small number of training instances for
the labels T/PUNCT and T/DUR in C1 for exam-
ple. However, even for the larger set of labels, the
scores are significantly above baseline (52.2% vs.
44.8%), which indicates that such a classifier might
still be useful as input to an MT system, possibly
improved thanks to a larger training set. The perfor-
mance obtained by Miltsakaki et al. (2005) on while
is markedly better than ours, with an accuracy of
71.8% compared to ours of 60.9% with three labels.

5.4 Feature Analysis

The relevance of features can be measured using
WEKA by computing the information gain (IG)
brought by each feature to the classification task,

1In another experiment (Meyer, 2011), we also applied our
classifiers to the PDTB data, with less features however. The
results were in the same range as those from Miltsakaki et
al. (2005), i.e. 75.3% accuracy for since and 59.6% for while.

200



R Feature IG
A1 A2

1 preceding word 1.12 0.64
2 following verb 0.81 0.51
3 first verb 0.74 0.42
4 following word 0.68 0.23
5 preceding word’s POS tag 0.15 0.05
5 first verb’s dep. tag 0.14 0.06
5 following word’s POS tag 0.19 0.03
8 preceding word’s dep. tag 0.10 0.03
8 connective’s dep. tag 0.09 0.04
10 following word’s dep. tag 0.13 0.013
10 following verb’s dep. tag 0.04 0.03
12 sentence initial 0.05 0.001

Table 4: Information gain (IG) of features for French con-
nective alors que, ordered by decreasing average ranking
(R) in experiments A1 and A2. Features 1–4 are consid-
erably more relevant than the following ones.

R Feature IG
B1 B2

1 preceding word 0.83 0.75
2 following word 0.56 0.52
3 following verb’s POS tag 0.24 0.21
4 type of following aux. verb 0.13 0.12
5 type of first aux. verb 0.11 0.11
6 first verb’s POS tag 0.02 0.01
7 sentence initial 0.00 0.00

Table 5: Information gain (IG) of features for EN con-
nective since, ordered by decreasing average ranking (R)
in experiments B1 and B2.

i.e. the reduction in entropy with respect to desired
classes (Hall et al., 2009) – the higher the IG, the
more relevant the feature. Features can be ranked
by decreasing IG, as shown in Tables 4, 5 and 6, in
which ranks were averaged over the first and the sec-
ond data set in each series.

The tables show that across all three connectives
and the two languages, the contextual features are
always in the first positions, thus confirming the im-
portance of the context of a connective. Following
these are verbal features, which are, for these con-
nectives, of importance because the temporal mean-
ings are additionally established by verbal tenses.
POS and dependency features seem the least help-

R Feature IG
C1 C2

1 preceding word 1.02 0.65
2 following word 0.83 0.55
3 type of first aux. verb 0.12 0.07
4 following verb’s POS tag 0.16 0.04
5 first verb’s POS tag 0.07 0.09
5 type of following aux. verb 0.12 0.05
7 sentence initial 0.08 0.07

Table 6: Information gain (IG) of features for EN con-
nective while, ordered by decreasing average ranking (R)
in experiments C1 and C2. The first two features are con-
siderably more relevant than the remaining ones.

ful for disambiguation.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We have described a translation-oriented approach
to the manual and automatic annotation of discourse
connectives, with the goal of identifying their senses
automatically, prior to machine translation. The
manual annotation of the senses of connectives has
been enhanced through parallel corpora and transla-
tion spotting. This has lead to tag sets that improved
both inter-annotator agreement and automatic label-
ing, which reached state-of-the-art scores. The ana-
lysis of relevant features has shown the utility of
contextual information.

To improve over these initial results, we will use
more semantic information, such as relations found
in WordNet between words in the neighborhood of
connectives – e.g. word similarity measures and se-
mantic relations such as antonymy. To generate
more training instances of the labels found, man-
ual annotation will continue in order to see whether
the senses found through translation spotting can im-
prove automatic disambiguation of many more con-
nectives. The annotation of a large parallel corpus
will then help to train disambiguation tools along
with statistical MT systems that use their output.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful for the funding of this work by the
Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under
the COMTIS Sinergia Project, n. CRSI22 127510
(see www.idiap.ch/comtis/).

201



References
Bruno Cartoni, Sandrine Zufferey, Thomas Meyer, and

Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2011. How comparable are
parallel corpora? Measuring the distribution of gen-
eral vocabulary and connectives. In Proceedings of 4th
Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Cor-
pora, Portland, OR.

Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-to-
fine n-best parsing and maxent discriminative rerank-
ing. In Proceedings of ACL 2005 (43rd Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL), pages 173–180, Ann Arbor, MI.

Pascal Denis and Benoı̂t Sagot. 2009. Coupling an anno-
tated corpus and a morphosyntactic lexicon for state-
of-the-art POS tagging with less human effort. In
Proceedings of PACLIC 2009 (23rd Pacific Asia Con-
ference on Language, Information and Computation),
pages 110–119, Hong Kong, China.

David duVerle and Helmut Prendinger. 2009. A novel
discourse parser based on support vector machine clas-
sification. In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2009 (47th
Annual Meeting of the ACL and 4th International Joint
Conference on NLP of the AFNLP), pages 665–673,
Singapore.

Robert Elwell and Jason Baldridge. 2008. Discourse
connective argument identification with connective
specific rankers. In Proceedings of ICSC 2008 (2nd
IEEE International Conference on Semantic Comput-
ing), pages 198–205, Santa Clara, CA.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: An update.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 11:10–18.

Thorsten Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with sup-
port vector machines: Learning with many relevant
features. In Proceedings of ECML 1998 (10th Euro-
pean Conference on Machine Learning), pages 137–
142, Chemnitz, Germany.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
stantin, and Evan Herbs. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL 2007 (45th Annual Meeting of the
ACL), Demonstration Session, pages 177–180, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of MT
Summit X, pages 79–86, Phuket, Thailand.

Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan. 2010. A
PDTB-styled end-to-end discourse parser. Technical
Report TRB8/10, School of Computing, National Uni-
versity of Singapore, Singapore.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: towards a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Thomas Meyer. 2011. Disambiguating temporal-
contrastive discourse connectives for machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT 2011 (49th Annual
Meeting of the ACL: Human Language Technologies),
Student Session, Portland, OR.

Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind
Joshi, and Bonnie Webber. 2005. Experiments on
sense annotations and sense disambiguation of dis-
course connectives. In Proceedings of the TLT 2005
(4th Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories),
Barcelona, Spain.

Joakim Nivre. 2003. An efficient algorithm for pro-
jective dependency parsing. In Proceedings of IWPT
2008 (8th International Workshop on Parsing Tech-
nologies), pages 149–160, Tokyo, Japan.

Marie-Paule Péry-Woodley, Nicholas Asher, Patrice
Enjalbert, Farah Benamara, Myriam Bras, Cécile
Fabre, Stéphane Ferrari, Lydia-Mai Ho-Dac, Anne
Le Draoulec, Yann Mathet, Philippe Muller, Laurent
Prévot, Josette Rebeyrolle, Ludovic Tanguy, Marianne
Vergez-Couret, Laure Vieu, and Antoine Widlöcher.
2009. Annodis: une approche outillée de l’annotation
de structures discursives. In Proceedings of TALN
2009 (16ème Conférence sur le Traitement Automa-
tique des Langues Naturelles), Paris, France.

Volha Petukhova and Harry Bunt. 2009. Towards a
multidimensional semantics of discourse markers in
spoken dialogue. In Proceedings of IWCS-8 (8th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Semantics),
pages 157–168, Tilburg, The Netherlands.

Emily Pitler and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Using syntax to
disambiguate explicit discourse connectives in text. In
Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2009 (47th Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL and 4th International Joint Conference
on NLP of the AFNLP), Short Papers, pages 13–16,
Singapore.

Emily Pitler, Mridhula Raghupathy, Hena Mehta, Ani
Nenkova, Alan Lee, and Aravind Joshi. 2008. Eas-
ily identifiable discourse relations. In Proceedings of
Coling 2008 (22nd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics), Companion Volume: Posters,
pages 87–90, Manchester, UK.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0. In
Proceedings of LREC 2008 (6th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation), pages
2961–2968, Marrakech, Morocco.

Charlotte Roze, Laurence Danlos, and Phillippe Muller.
2010. LEXCONN: a French lexicon of discourse con-
nectives. In Proceedings of MAD 2010 (Multidis-

202



ciplinary Approaches to Discourse), pages 114–125,
Moissac, France.

Manfred Stede and Carla Umbach. 1998. DiMLex: a
lexicon of discourse markers for text generation and
understanding. In Proceedings of ACL 1998 (36th An-
nual Meeting of the ACL), pages 1238–1242, Mon-
treal, Canada.

Ben Wellner, James Pustejovsky, Catherine Havasi,
Roser Sauri, and Anna Rumshisky. 2006. Classifica-
tion of discourse coherence relations: An exploratory
study using multiple knowledge sources. In Proceed-
ings of 7th SIGDIAL Workshop on Discourse and Di-
alogue, pages 117–125, Sydney, Australia.

Sárka Zikánová, Lucie Mladová, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, and
Pavlina Jı́nová. 2010. Typical cases of annotators’
disagreement in discourse annotations in Prague De-
pendency Treebank. In Proceedings of LREC 2010
(7th International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation), pages 2002–2006, Valletta, Malta.

203


