




















Automatic Question Generation from Swedish Documents as a Tool 

for Information Extraction  

Kenneth Wilhelmsson 

Swedish School of Library and Information Science 

University of Borås 
kenneth.wilhelmsson@hb.se 

  

 

Abstract 

An implementation of automatic question gen-

eration (QG) from raw Swedish text is pre-

sented. QG is here chosen as an alternative to 

natural query systems where any query can be 

posed and no indication is given of whether 

the current text database includes the informa-

tion sought for. The program builds on parsing 

with grammatical functions from which cor-

responding questions are generated and it in-

corporates the article database of Swedish Wi-

kipedia. The pilot system is meant to work 

with a text shown in the GUI and auto-

completes user input to help find available 

questions. The act of question generation is 

here described together with early test results 

regarding the current produced questions. 

1 Introduction 

Question generation has been the focus of sever-

al recent international workshops where the field 

has been defined as including sub-fields like tu-

torial dialogue and FAQ generation. In this pa-

per, the focus is on the Text-to-Question subtask. 

Rus and Graesser (2009) define the task as fol-

lows: “given a text, the goal of a QG system 

performing the Text-to-Question Question 

Generation task would be to exhaustively create 

a set of Text-Question pairs, such that every 

possible question that could be generated would 

be included in the set”, see Table 1.  

The formulation thus includes the notion of all 

possible questions to which a text can be said to 

provide answers. This can for example mean all 

the questions from the explicit propositions but 

also facts deduced using various algorithms for 

inference, anaphora resolution etc. This is a 

complicating factor as this set is hard to estimate 

and will make it impossible to compute the rela-

tive coverage of the set of questions produced. 

It is not clear what counts as one unique ques-

tion, and whether producing various formulations 

of the same question is advantageous. In a prac-

tical user scenario, there can be benefits to gene-

rating variations of the same question (using e.g. 

substitution of synonymous words) to help the 

user find at least one way of expressing the query 

in a large question set produced by a natural 

query system. 

 

 

Given:  

 Text T  

 

Create:  

 Text-Questions pairs {P1…Pn} each 
represented as a (Ki , Qi) pair, where 

Ki , the target text, indicates which 

text segment from T represents the 

answer and the Qi represents a ques-

tion that would elicit Ki 

 
 

Table 1: The Text-to-Question task as characte-

rized by Rus and Graesser (2009) 

 

The situation described in this paper is the use 

of a natural language query system which expli-

citly generates a set of questions per text as an 

alternative to the functionality of several systems 

which permits a user to pose queries in question 

form freely, but which never guarantee that these 

are answered by the current database. If the sys-

tem uses a black-box algorithm for finding the 

answers and/or uses a database that is unknown 

or vast (like the entire Internet), this can be par-

ticularly striking. An example is PowerSet 

(Converse et al 2008) which will rank text seg-

ments of all of English Wikipedia using a collec-

tion of different techniques, when a question is 

formulated in natural language. The proposed 

answers (text segments) will be presented to the 

user according to best match ranking given the 

question. That approach, like that of Harabagiu 

et al (2000), mixes the task of information re-

trieval (search for documents) with that of in-

formation extraction. From the user perspective, 

it may be unknown whether a (formulation of a) 

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 323–326



question is in fact answered at all by the data-

base in these types of systems where any ques-

tion string can be formulated.  

This paper deals with an implementation of 

automated question generation from raw text in 

Swedish. The focus here is on the actual question 

generation task by syntactic means, the user in-

terface and some preliminary tests of the current 

state of the implementation. The system incorpo-

rates the Swedish Wikipedia article data-base and 

generates questions for one text article, or other 

input text, at a time. This means that the current 

text subject (the available information) is some-

what known to the user. In fact, the text source is 

visible in the user interface, shown in Figure 1, 

and the questions produced will mark and scroll 

the corresponding answer into view when a ques-

tion is selected. 

 

 
 

Figure 1: The GUI of the program 
 

1) Autocompleting input form for choice of 
question 

2) The text source in which the suggested ques-
tions will mark and scroll to the correspond-

ing section with answers 

3) Forms for choice of Wikipedia article or arbi-
trary text input  

4) Statusbox displaying various information 
during a run 

 

2 The Initial Steps: Text Pre-processing 
and Syntactic Parsing 

The first steps of the text-to-question task in-

cludes sentence splitting, tokenization, POS tag-

ging and syntactic parsing with mark-up of 

grammatical functions on the main clause level. 

In the process, the text is tagged, whereafter it is 

parsed and questions are finally extracted.  

A trigram-based Hidden Markov Model POS 

tagger is used to provide input for the syntactic 

parsing. The parsing of Swedish free text is car-

ried out using a heuristic algorithm based on the 

sentence schema for Nordic languages, originally 

introduced for Danish by Diderichsen (1946). 

The parser, which is described by Wilhelmsson 

(2010), makes use of the sentence schema by 

avoiding identification of multi-word constitu-

ents (unbounded constituents) by explicit match-

ing, resulting in a format shown in Example 1.  

 
<subjekt>Ni som frågar</subjekt> 

<pfv>hade</pfv> 

<adverbial>nog</adverbial> 

<adverbial>ändå</adverbial> 

<piv>kunnat</piv> 

<piv>köpa</piv> 

<objekt>en vän</objekt> 

<objekt>en present</objekt> 

<tom>.</tom> 

 

Example 1: The XML output format from the 

parser for the Swedish sentence „You, who ask, 

would anyway probably have been able to buy a 

friend a present’ includes labels pfv (primary 

finite verb), piv (primary non-finite verb) and 

tom (empty). 

3 Swedish Question Generation from 
Parses with Grammatical Functions 

The question generation of this project primarily 

involves questions corresponding to the un-

bounded constituents which fall into two main 

groups. The nominal ones are subjects, ob-

jects/predicatives and the rest are the various 

types of adverbials, of which certain kinds like 

sentence adverbials, are not considered here. The 

approach here particularly aims at a high preci-

sion value, i.e. the share of correct answers for 

the generated questions. On the other hand, the 

system presented does not attempt to make an 

exhaustive coverage of all questions (recall). The 

input to the question generation is a separate 

main clause. A construction with coordinated 

finite VPs on the main clause level similarly will 

produce a main clause of the second VP by inhe-

riting the most recent main clause level subject in 

the sentence (Halley's Comet is the best-known 

of the short-period comets, and is visible from 

Earth every 75 to 76 years. → Halley's Comet is 

the best-known of the short-period comets, Hal-

ley's Comet is visible from Earth every 75 to 76 

years). 

1 

3 

2 

4 

324

Kenneth Wilhelmsson

324



3.1 The Process of Question Generation 

The question types considered are similar in that 

all these questions are built up using a three-step 

procedure of syntactic fronting of the unbounded 

constituents and substitution of suitable question 

elements with wh-words or similar. The proce-

dure is shown in Figure 2. First, the currently 

fronted element is placed in the canonical (non-

fronted) position. This V1 form will in general 

be the corresponding yes/no-question. V1 ques-

tions are considered to be of slightly less interest 

than the others since they generally just confirm 

facts (the existence of such a question – ‘Is Hal-

ley's Comet the best-known of the short-period 

comets?’ – just indicates the validity of that fact). 

The second step is fronting of each unbounded 

constituent from this arrangement, producing that 

number of paraphrases which are grammatical in 

Swedish. Finally, each fronted element is re-

placed by e.g. the corresponding wh-word to 

form a question which is collected. 

 
 

 

 

[ - ] Kartlade Rutherford atomen på institutet? 

 

Basic V1 form (Was the atom surveyed at the 

institute by Rutherford?) is the first step 
 

 

 

Rutherford kartlade [ - ] atomen på institutet. 

 

 
Vem kartlade atomen på institutet? 

Who surveyed the atom at the institute?  
 

 

 

 

Atomen kartlade Rutherford [ - ] på institutet. 

 

 
Vad kartlade Rutherford på insitutet? 

(Lit:) What surveyed Rutherford at the institute? 
 

 

 

På institutet kartlade Rutherford atomen [ - ]. 

 

 
Var kartlade Rutherford atomen? 

(Lit:) Where surveyed Rutherford the atom? 

 
 

Figure 2: The basic procedure for question gen-

eration from declarative sentences 

 

The number of questions produced can be 

lower than the number of unbounded constituents 

present in the sentence due to incomplete parses, 

as a general result of the method‟s focus on pro-

ducing correct questions safely and rule-based 

with this transformation-like technique. 

3.2 Questions Regarding Nominal Gram-
matical Categories 

The nominal constituents correspond to a small 

set of Swedish wh-words corresponding to what, 

which and who/whom. The system currently 

works by determining the head word if it is an 

NP. If this is a personal pronoun or otherwise 

corresponds to an animate reference, e.g. a per-

sonal name or animate noun, who is used, whe-

reas vad/what is the default. What-questions are 

currently the most common type of question and 

typically constitute half of the generated ques-

tions to a text.  

3.3 Questions Regarding Adverbials 

Question generation for adverbials is interesting 

as the choice of corresponding fronted initial part 

is more complicated than for nominals. Adver-

bials are structurally prepositional phrases, ad-

verb phrases, noun phrases with a head from a 

particular group of nouns (denna gång/this time) 

and a subset of sub clauses. Whereas many of the 

members of the groups have clearly correspond-

ing question words, the major PP type is particu-

larly large in Swedish (133 different prepositions 

are currently covered) and have correspondences 

that often are determined by the head of the pre-

positional complement, rather than the preposi-

tion. This is particularly the case, as in English, 

for some of the most common prepositions: i/in 

på/on etc. Current adverbial questions considered 

are: 

 

 NP adverbials (denna gång/this time), 
which predominantly refer to time and 

are replaced by när/when. 

 PP adverbials. Swedish is particularly 
rich in prepositions since adverb + pre-

position compounds (inifrån/”from-

within”) are frequent. 

 The subset of sub clause types which 
corresponds to adverbials (efter-

som/since). 

 

Particularly in the case of prepositional objects 

a pied piping question (Till vad/To what) is most-

ly preferred as a question form. 

325

Automatic Question Generation from Swedish Documents as a Tool for Information Extraction

325



4 Results and Possible Improvements 

Aspects examined in evaluation of QG systems 

have e.g. been represented by the following cate-

gories of errors from Heilman and Smith (2009), 

which can be overlapping: “Ungrammatical”, 

“Does not make sense”, “Vague”, “Obvious an-

swer”, “Missing answer”, “Wrong wh-word”, 

“Formatting” and “Other”. The lack of formal 

definitions of these terms has not encouraged 

such evaluations at this early point.  

4.1 Preliminary Tests 

In a minor test with the current system, ten ran-

dom Wikipedia articles were used, including 78 

sentences. The system produced 309 questions 

(in average about 4.0 per sentence) in 6.3 

seconds. Grammatical correctness of the ques-

tions is currently not very high according to ma-

nual tests. Higher correctness is however likely 

to be achieved after further work with rules for 

choice of question words. Since the approach is 

essentially manual and few sentences are deemed 

as impossible to analyze, or to generate questions 

from, the potential correctness of the approach is 

seen as high. At present, no similar system seems 

to exist for Swedish text that could be used for 

comparisons. 

The idea of producing all possible questions 

for an input text is far from realized here. Future 

work may concern other “safe” conclusions, 

yielding new questions, such as propositions of 

on sub-clause levels in constructions with factual 

verbs (She knows it will work → it will work) or 

questions regarding grammatical modifiers (They 

sold the new boat → Which boat did they sell?). 

4.2 Expanding the Set of Formulations of 
Questions 

Ideally, the question set produced consists entire-

ly of questions that are correctly answered by the 

text. The user of this type of system however 

faces a different task: finding a formulation of a 

question she has in mind that corresponds to the 

text. To help the user find information, it has 

been assumed that creating additional alternative 

formulations of questions will generally be help-

ful. The main difficulty with expanding the ques-

tion set using synonym substitution (What auto-

mobile/What car) is that few word pairs qualify 

as true substitutes. Earlier tests have been carried 

out testing substituting present base form words 

with synonyms according to the Swedish Word-

Net (Viberg et al 2002) and Folkets synonymor-

dlista (Kann and Rosell 2005). The proportion of 

truly substitutable word pairs in Wikipedia texts 

was about 50-60 percent for these sources, con-

sidering all suggestions without any word sense 

disambiguation. In Folkets Synonymordlista, 

there is however a great potential advantage in 

the fact that each pair of suggested synonyms are 

judged with a numerical scale up to 5.0. Setting a 

high threshold score, like 4.5, will leave a small-

er number of synonym pairs but increase the ap-

propriateness of the substitution. 

 
 

References  

Converse, Tim, Ronald M Kaplan, Barney Pell, Scott 

Prevost, Lorenzo Thione, and Chad Walters. 

”Powerset‟s Natural Language Wikipedia Search 

Engine.” Wikipedia and Artificial Intelligence: An 

Evolving Synergy. Papers from the 2008 AAAI 

Workshop. Chicago, USA: AAAI Press, 2008. 67. 

Diderichsen, Paul. Elementær Dansk Grammatik. 

Köpenhamn: Gyldendahl, 1946. 

Ejerhed, Eva, Gunnel Källgren, and Benny Brodda. 

Stockholm-Umeå corpus version 2.0. Institutionen 

för Lingvistik, Stockholms universitet, 

Institutionen för Lingvistik, Umeå universitet, 

2006. 

Harabagiu, Sanda M, Marius A Paşca, and Steven J 

Maiorano. ”Experiments with Open-Domain 

Textual Question Answering.” Proceedings of the 

18th conference on Computational linguistics - 

Volume 1. Saarbrücken: International Conference 

On Computational Linguistics, 2000. 292 - 298. 

Heilman, Michael, and Noah A Smith. ”Ranking 

Automatically Generated Questions as a Shared 

Task.” Proceedings of the AIED Workshop on 

Question Generation. Brighton, UK, 2009. 30-37. 

Kann, Viggo, and Magnus Rosell. ”Free Construction 

of a Free Swedish Dictionary of Synonyms.” 

Proceedings of 15th Nordic Conference on 

Computational Linguistics – (NODALIDA 05). 

Joensuu, 2005. 

Rus, Vasile, and Arthur C Graesser. The Question 

Generation Shared Task and Evaluation 

Challenge. Workshop Report, Memphis, USA: The 

University of Memphis, 2009. 

Viberg, Åke, Kerstin Lindmark, Ann Lindvall, and 

Ingmarie Mellenius. ”The Swedish WordNet 

Project.” Proceedings of Euralex 2002. 

Köpenhamn, 2002. 407-412. 

Wilhelmsson, Kenneth. Heuristisk analys med 

Diderichsens satsschema - tillämpningar för 

svensk text. Gothenburg, Sweden: Department of 

Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science, 

2010. 

4 

326

Kenneth Wilhelmsson

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


