










































An Incremental Model for the Coreference Resolution Task of BioNLP 2011


Proceedings of BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages 151–152,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 24 June, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Incremental Model for the Coreference Resolution Task of BioNLP 2011

Don Tuggener, Manfred Klenner, Gerold Schneider, Simon Clematide, Fabio Rinaldi
Institute of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich, Switzerland

{tuggener,klenner,gschneid,siclemat,rinaldi}@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract

We introduce our incremental coreference res-
olution system for the BioNLP 2011 Shared
Task on Protein/Gene interaction. The benefits
of an incremental architecture over a mention-
pair model are: a reduction of the number
of candidate pairs, a means to overcome the
problem of underspecified items in pair-wise
classification and the natural integration of
global constraints such as transitivity. A fil-
tering system takes into account specific fea-
tures of different anaphora types. We do not
apply Machine Learning, instead the system
classifies with an empirically derived salience
measure based on the dependency labels of the
true mentions. The OntoGene pipeline is used
for preprocessing.

1 Introduction
The Coreference Resolution task of BioNLP fo-
cused on finding anaphoric references to proteins
and genes. Only antecedent-anaphora pairs are con-
sidered in evaluation and not full coreference sets.
Although it might not seem to be necessary to gen-
erate full coreference sets, anaphora resolution still
benefits from their establishment. Our incremental
approach (Klenner et al., 2010) naturally enforces
transitivity constraints and thereby reduces the num-
ber of potential antecedent candidates. The system
achieved good results in the BioNLP 2011 shared
task (Fig. 1)

Team R P F1
A 22.18 73.26 34.05
Our model 21.48 55.45 30.96
B 19.37 63.22 29.65
C 14.44 67.21 23.77
D 3.17 3.47 3.31
E 0.70 0.25 0.37

Figure 1: Protein/Gene Coreference Task

2 Preprocessing: The OntoGene Pipeline
OntoGene’s text mining system is based on an
internally-developed fast, broad-coverage, deep-

syntactic parsing system (Schneider, 2008). The
parser is wrapped into a pipeline which uses a num-
ber of other NLP tools. The parser is a key compo-
nent in a pipeline of NLP tools (Rinaldi et al., 2010),
used to process input documents. First, in a pre-
processing stage, the input text is transformed into
a custom XML format, and sentences and tokens
boundaries are identified. The OntoGene pipeline
also includes a step of term annotation and disam-
biguation, which are not used for the BioNLP shared
task, since relevant terms are already provided in
both the training and test corpora. The pipeline also
includes part-of-speech taggers, a lemmatizer and a
syntactic chunker.

When the pipeline finishes, each input sentence
has been annotated with additional information,
which can be briefly summarized as follows: sen-
tences are tokenized and their borders are detected;
each sentence and each token has been assigned an
ID; each token is lemmatized; tokens which be-
long to terms are grouped; each term is assigned a
normal-form and a semantic type; tokens and terms
are then grouped into chunks; each chunk has a
type (NP or VP) and a head token; each sentence
is described as a syntactic dependency structure. All
this information is represented as a set of predicates
and stored into the Knowledge Base of the system,
which can then be used by different applications,
such as the OntoGene Relation Miner (Rinaldi et al.,
2006) and the OntoGene Protein-Protein Interaction
discovery tool (Rinaldi et al., 2008).

3 Our Incremental Model for Coreference
Resolution

1 for i=1 to length(I)
2 for j=1 to length(C)
3 rj := virtual prototype of coreference set Cj
4 Cand := Cand ⊕ rj if compatible(rj , mi)
5 for k= length(B) to 1
6 bk:= the k-th licensed buffer element
7 Cand := Cand ⊕ bk if compatible(bk, mi)
8 if Cand = {} then B := B ⊕mi
9 if Cand 6= {} then
10 antei := most salient element of Cand
11 C := augment(C,antei,mi)

Figure 2: Incremental model: base algorithm

151



Fig. 2 shows the base algorithm. Let I be the
chronologically ordered list of NPs, C be the set
of coreference sets and B a buffer, where NPs are
stored, if they are not anaphoric (but might be valid
antecedents). Furthermore mi is the current NP and
⊕ means concatenation of a list and a single item.
The algorithm proceeds as follows: a set of an-
tecedent candidates is determined for each NP mi
(steps 1 to 7) from the coreference sets (rj) and the
buffer (bk). A valid candidate rj or bk must be com-
patible with mi. The definition of compatibility de-
pends on the POS tags of the anaphor-antecedent
pair. The most salient available candidate is selected
as antecedent for mi.

3.1 Restricted Accessibility of Antecedent
Candidates

In order to reduce underspecification, mi is com-
pared to a virtual prototype of each coreference set
(similar to e.g. (Luo et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2004;
Rahman and Ng, 2009)). The virtual prototype bears
morphologic and semantic information accumulated
from all elements of the coreference set. Access to
coreference sets is restricted to the virtual prototype.
This reduces the number of considered pairs (from
the cardinality of a set to 1).

3.2 Filtering based on Anaphora Type
Potentionally co-refering NPs are extracted from the
OntoGene pipeline based on POS tags. We then ap-
ply filtering based on anaphora type: Reflexive pro-
nouns must be bound to a NP that is governed by the
same verb. Relative pronouns are bound to the clos-
est NP in the left context. Personal and possessive
pronouns are licensed to bind to morphologically
compatible antecedent candidates within a window
of two sentences. Demonstrative NPs containing the
lemmata ’protein’ or ’gene’ are licensed to bind to
name containing mentions. Demonstrative NPs not
containing the trigger lemmata can be resolved to
string matching NPs preceding them1.

3.3 Binding Theory as a Filter
We know through binding theory that ’modulator’
and ’it’ cannot be coreferent in the sentence ”Over-
expression of protein inhibited stimulus-mediated
transcription, whereas modulator enhanced it”.
Thus, the pair ’modulator’-’it’ need not be consid-
ered at all. We have not yet implemented a full-

1As we do not perform anaphoricity determination of nom-
inal NPs, we do not consider bridging anaphora (anaphoric
nouns that are connected to their antecedents through seman-
tic relations and cannot be identified by string matching).

blown binding theory. Instead, we check if the an-
tecedent and the anaphor are governed by the same
verb.

4 An Empirically-based Salience Measure

Our salience measure is a partial adaption of the
measure from (Lappin and Leass, 1994). The
salience of a NP is solely defined by the salience
of the dependency label it bears. The salience of a
dependency label, D, is estimated by the number of
true mentions (i.e. co-refering NPs) that bear D (i.e.
are connected to their heads with D), divided by the
total number of true mentions (bearing any D). The
salience of the label subject is thus calculated by:

Number of true mentions bearing subject

Total number of truementions

We get a hierarchical ordering of the dependency la-
bels (subject > object > pobject > ...) according to
which antecedents are ranked and selected.

References
Manfred Klenner, Don Tuggener, and Angela Fahrni. 2010. Inkre-

mentelle koreferenzanalyse für das deutsche. In Proceedings der
10. Konferenz zur Verarbeitung Natürlicher Sprache.

Shalom Lappin and Herbert J Leass. 1994. An algorithm for pronomi-
nal anaphora resolution. Computational Linguistics, 20:P. 535–561.

Xiaoqiang Luo, Abe Ittycheriah, Hongyan Jing, Nanda Kambhatla, and
Salim Roukos. 2004. A mention-synchronous coreference resolu-
tion algorithm based on the bell tree. In Proceedings of the 42nd
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics.

Altaf Rahman and Vincent Ng. 2009. Supervised models for corefer-
ence resolution. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume 2 - Volume
2, EMNLP ’09, pages 968–977, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Fabio Rinaldi, Gerold Schneider, Kaarel Kaljurand, Michael Hess, and
Martin Romacker. 2006. An Environment for Relation Mining over
Richly Annotated Corpora: the case of GENIA. BMC Bioinformat-
ics, 7(Suppl 3):S3.

Fabio Rinaldi, Thomas Kappeler, Kaarel Kaljurand, Gerold Schnei-
der, Manfred Klenner, Simon Clematide, Michael Hess, Jean-Marc
von Allmen, Pierre Parisot, Martin Romacker, and Therese Vachon.
2008. OntoGene in BioCreative II. Genome Biology, 9(Suppl
2):S13.

Fabio Rinaldi, Gerold Schneider, Kaarel Kaljurand, Simon Clematide,
Therese Vachon, and Martin Romacker. 2010. OntoGene in
BioCreative II.5. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Bi-
ology and Bioinformatics, 7(3):472–480.

Gerold Schneider. 2008. Hybrid Long-Distance Functional Depen-
dency Parsing. Doctoral Thesis, Institute of Computational Linguis-
tics, University of Zurich.

Xiaofeng Yang, Jian Su, Guodong Zhou, and Chew Lim Tan. 2004. An
np-cluster based approach to coreference resolution. In Proceedings
of the 20th international conference on Computational Linguistics.

152


