










































Architecture and Systems for Monitoring Hospital Acquired Infections inside Hospital Information Workflows


Proceedings of the Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 43–48,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 15 September 2011.

Architecture and Systems for Monitoring Hospital Acquired Infec-

tions inside a Hospital Information Workflow  

 

 

Denys Proux
1
, Caroline Hagège

1
, Quentin Gicquel

2
, Suzanne Pereira

3
, Stefan Darmoni

4
, 

Frédérique Segond
1
, Marie-Hélène Metzger

2
 

(1) XRCE, 6 Chemin de Maupertuis, 38240 Meylan, France 
(2) UCBL-CNRS, UMR 5558 Lyon, France  

(3) CISMEF, Rouen, France  

(4) VIDAL, Issy les Moulineaux, France  
Denys.Proux@xrce.xerox.com, Caroline.Hagege@xrce.xerox.com,   

Quentin.Gicquel@chu-lyon.fr, Suzanne.Pereira@vidal.fr,  

Stefan.Darmoni@cismef.fr, Frederique.Segond@xrce.xerox.com,  

Marie-Helene.Metzger@chu-lyon.fr 

 

Abstract 

 

This paper describes the latest developments 

in the design of a tool to monitor Patient Dis-

charge Summaries to detected pieces of evi-

dences related to Hospital Acquired Infections. 

Anonymization, Named Entity detection, 

Temporal Expressions analysis and Causality 

detection methods have been developed and 

evaluated. They are embedded in a tool de-

signed to work in a Hospital Information 

Workflow. 

 

1 Information and Communication 
Technologies  to Improve Patient 

Safety 

Managing information related to Patient Records 

(PR) is something complex. Treating a patient is 

not like fixing a tire; it is a long process that in-

volves many medical disciplines.  For each anal-

ysis, each treatment, each diagnosis, fragmented 

information is produced by different people, dif-

ferent medical units. Information and Communi-

cation Technologies (ICT) appears to be a good 

opportunity to make use of this information to 

offer monitoring and alert services which contri-

bute in the end to patient safety. Among these 

opportunities Hospital Acquired Infections is a 

domain where ICT can bring a lot to help ex-

perts.    

1.1 The problem 

Hospital Acquired Infections (HAI) can be de-

fined as: An infection occurring in a patient in a 

hospital or other health care facility in whom the 

infection was not present or incubating at the 

time of admission. This includes infections ac-

quired in the hospital but appearing after dis-

charge, and also occupational infections among 

staff of the facility. (Garner 1988). This problem 

occurs because hospitals are special places con-

centrating both weak people and various types of 

diseases and infections. Not all HAI have the 

same effect but they all jeopardize patient safety 

and increase the time spent in hospitals. 

1.2 Attempt to address the problem  

In order to address this issue several efforts have 

been made mainly through the creation of a strict 

health protocol for the medical staff and appro-

priate training provided to this staff. Furthermore 

experts have been appointed to monitor these 

risks and a strict reporting process has been se-

tup. However these efforts are not completely 

successful or at least could be improved. This is 

mainly due to both the way information is ma-

naged inside hospitals, and the inherent complex-

ity of HAI. 

To perform their analysis experts need to 

have access to many data / reports to make a de-

cision about the causality of an infection. This is 

difficult to obtain for experts not only because 

information is spread out into various databases 

but also because, as they are dealing with con-

stantly evolving information. Therefore they 

need a tool to automate report monitoring. Such 

tool does not exist as one of the major issues is 

43



that information, most of the time, remains in an 

unstructured free text format.  

 This conclusion has pushed for the develop-

ment of a research project bringing together HAI 

experts, medical terminology experts and Natural 

Language Processing experts to design a moni-

toring tool for patient records. The ultimate goal 

is to automate detection of HAI events from pa-

tient records. 

 

2 A Natural Language Processing Ap-
proach to Monitor Patient Records  

This 3 year project, started in January 2009, is 

conducted in collaboration with 3 University 

hospitals providing 1500 patient discharge sum-

maries (half of them dealing with HAI). These 

reports have been manually analyzed 3 times by 

3 different HAI experts to identify and annotate 

all pertinent elements. These elements have been 

indexed using a custom made tool connected 

with the FMTI multi-terminology server pro-

vided by project partners. These annotated doc-

uments are spitted into 3 sets used for designing 

the HAI detection rules, and to serve as a gold 

standard for 2 rounds of evaluation   

2.1 Terminologies 

Based on discussions between HAI experts and 

Terminology experts it has been decided (Metz-

ger 2009) that only the following terminologies 

are necessary to reach our objective which is the 

detection of HAI events from reports:  

- symptoms/diagnosis: CIM10, 
SNOMED3.5, MeSH 

- bacteriological exams : SNOMED3.5, 
MeSH 

- type of microorganisms : SNOMED3.5 
- biological exams : SNOMED3.5, MeSH 
- radiological exams : SNOMED 3.5, MeSH, 

CCAM 

- Antibiotics : ATC, MeSH 
- Type of surgical intervention: CCAM, 

MeSH 

 

These terminologies are used to index perti-

nent named entities inside input reports. Howev-

er after a first set of experiments we came to the 

conclusion that using as it is all the vocabulary 

contained in these terminologies generate noise 

and ambiguities for the detection of very specific 

information. Indeed, indexing is designed to 

maximize recall, but in our case we need to max-

imize precision. Therefore, based on the result of 

the annotation step we have decided to build our 

own HAI terminology which is a sub-part of 

these terminologies.   

2.2 Event detection 

The heart of this project is an Incremental Parser 

(XIP), which performs text mining. This parser is 

robust that is to say it has already been used in 

various projects to process large collections of 

unrestricted documents (web pages, news, encyc-

lopedias, etc.) It has been designed to follow 

strict incremental strategies when applying pars-

ing rules. The system never backtracks on rules 

to avoid falling into combinational explosion 

traps which makes it very appropriate to parse 

real long sentences from scientific texts for ex-

ample (Aït-Mokhtar 1997). The analysis is rely-

ing on three processing layers which are: Part of 

Speech Disambiguation, Dependency Extractions 

between words on the basis of sub-tree patterns 

over chunk sequences, and a combination of 

those dependencies with Boolean operators to 

generate new dependencies or to modify or de-

lete existing dependencies.  

Named Entity detection and Event detection is 

performed using a standard French grammar that 

have been customized for medical language. As 

introduced in the previous section the issue with 

the scope of all selected terminologies forced us 

to develop and new terminology dedicated to 

HAI. To be more specific the system focuses on 

some very specific Named Entities and Events to 

perform the analysis. These elements are the fol-

lowing: 

- Infectious germ: Bacteria, Virus, Yeast, 
- Antiseptic : products used to clean or kill 

infectious germs 

- Temperature : elements that indicate a 
fever or an abnormal change in body 

temperature 

- Invasive devices: to perform measure or 
to cure. These devices can be an open 

gate for infectious germs.  

- Exams: Such as bacteriologic, radiologic 
that could be the indication of a problem 

- Treatments: all possible treatment that 
can be related or lead to an HAI (e.g. 

surgery)  

- Diagnostic can also be used to take a de-
cision (e.g. if it is explicitly said that an 

HAI occurred). 

 

Furthermore, negation is also something to be 

taken into account for appropriate decision mak-

ing. For example “no evolution on patient tem-

44



perature” is a completely different statement 

compared to “the patient gets fever”. Therefore 

appropriate negation management rules related to 

pertinent medical terms have been added to 

enrich the level of information extracted by the 

parser.  

2.3 Temporality 

HAI detection in Patient Discharge Summary 

(PDS) requires also an additional level of infor-

mation to allow an accurate decision making 

process: temporality. HAI is not just about de-

tecting isolated elements inside a report, it is also 

about matching the occurrence of these events 

with respect to a scenario. Detecting the right 

time stamp for these events is crucial as accord-

ing to the time lap between two events (e.g. a 

knee surgery and an unexpected fever) is crucial 

to valid a possible HAI hypothesis. 

Time detection rules have been designed and 

added to the parser. Time stamps are computed 

according to a reference date T0. The algorithm 

used for temporal indexing is detailed in (Hagège 

et. al., 2010).   

2.4 Causality and decision heuristics 

Among all challenges to detect an HAI event 

inside patient discharge summaries one of the 

most prominent is the fact that, most of the time, 

it does not appear explicitly inside texts. The on-

ly clue is a sequence of events occurring in a 

given time frame. This can be compared to a 

criminal investigation collecting pieces of evi-

dence, searching for specific links between 

events, evaluating alibi, etc. Furthermore gener-

ally only few elements, separated in the text are 

present in the patient discharge summaries (Ho-

ran et al. 2008).   

Therefore several discussions have brought 

together HAI experts and linguists to define 

which elements are necessary and what kind of 

relations are mandatory to come to a decision. 

There is a subtle difference between the official 

HAI definition and the type of information ap-

pearing in a patient record (PR).  

A 1
st
 set of heuristics have been designed to 

evaluate the ability of our system to detect HAI 

events inside patient records. These heuristics 

have been designed to maximize the recall. This 

means that not all the official rules have been 

encoded. These heuristics have therefore been 

created based on both formal definition and an 

empirical approach based on  annotated samples.  

To summarize this work, what is considered as 

a “smoking gun” in a patient records is: 

- For Intensive Care Unit (ICU) at least 
one of the following criteria should be 

valid:  

o If there is an explicit sentence 
speaking of a HAI 

o If in close sentences we have at 
least 1 occurrence of both an Infec-

tion (e.g. germ) and an Antibiotic 

drug with time stamps at least equal 

to 2 days after T0 (T0+2), and no 

Infection event is described before 

T0 and the patient is alive. 

o If the patient is already infected at 
T0 or if he has died during his stay 

and if at least 2 occurrences of ei-

ther Infection, Antibiotic drug, 

Temperature, or an Invasive Device 

can be found with time stamps supe-

rior or equal to T0+2  

- For a stay in an Surgery Unit at least one 
of the following criteria should be valid: 

o If there is an explicit sentence 
speaking of a Surgery Site Infection 

o If 1 of the following event can be 
detected with a time stamp superior 

to T0 : Infection, Antibiotic, Anti-

septic, Germ, Bacteriological Exam. 

 

These heuristics have been evaluated to esti-

mate the level of improvement necessary to 

reach performance objectives expected by medi-

cal experts. 

 

3 First Results 

A preliminary experiment has been performed 

by our medical experts on 205 patient records. 

Results are presented in (Berrouane et al., 2011). 

The goal of this 1
st
 experiment was to evaluate 

the efficiency and more specifically the recall of 

our heuristics to separate patient discharge sum-

maries that deal with HAI and those that don’t. 

On the evaluation corpus 128 patient records 

over 205 was dealing about HAI. The following 

table shows a brief overview of the results (de-

tails about the protocol are presented in (Hagege 

et al, 2011)).  Here the recall is computed as True 

positive / (True Positive + False Negative), and 

Specificity is computed as True negative / (True 

Negative + False Positive).  

For this experiment we compute Specificity 

instead of Precision (True Positive/(True Positive 

+ False Positive))  as the distribution of the 

available corpus do not reflect the reality. In our 

45



corpus the number of positive and negative doc-

ument are equal and the number of document per 

medical unit (Intensive Care  Stomach Unit, Sur-

gery, Orthopedic Surgery, Neuro-surgery) also 

do not reflect the same exact distribution as in a 

hospital.  

 
 Patient 

Discharge 

Summaries 

Recall Specificity 

All 205 87.6 % 97.4 % 

ICU 29 
62,5% 92.3% 

Stomach 

Surgery 

67 
89,7% 100% 

Orthopedic 

Surgery 

21 
87,5% 80% 

Neuro-

Surgery 

88 
93,1% 100% 

 
Table 1: 1

st
 results for automatic HAI detection 

 

 These results give only a flavor of the poten-

tial efficiency of the system. However this gives 

us good hope for the overall efficiency of the 

system as the global recall on our evaluation set 

reach 87.6 % with a Specificity of 97.4% before 

any improvement.  

After some improvement a new experiment 

will take place at the end of 2011 on a final set of 

800 Patient Discharge Summaries. But the suc-

cess of this first evaluation campaign as pushed 

us to start developing an evolution of the proto-

type to plug it directly in a hospital information 

workflow for live evaluation.  

   

4 Architecture for a Deployment in a 
real Hospital Information Workflow 

The result of this 1
st
 evaluation has demonstrated 

the potential of the detection system, however 

several assumptions have been made in the con-

text of the research project and the evaluation is 

done on a set of ad-hoc documents prepared by 

medical experts participating to the project.  

Therefore medical experts have asked for a 

special version of the system that could be direct-

ly plugged inside the hospital workflow to eva-

luate its performance in real life. Discussions 

have taken place to define the specifications and 

to prepare the delivery of such tool.  

4.1 The patient record 

After discussions it appears that the way infor-

mation is managed inside an hospital information 

workflow is much more complex than simple 

collections of coherent patient discharge summa-

ries. In fact in our case, each medical unit inside 

the hospital generates its own set of data when a 

treatment/analysis is performed. This informa-

tion is both structured (for parts that can be struc-

tured) and unstructured (for free text comments, 

diagnosis, or summaries). However, even in a 

free text format, this information is always stored 

in text fields inside a database.  

Furthermore patient information is very frag-

mented inside the database. Indeed, a patient can 

enter and leave the hospital several times in a 

given time frame, for different pathologies, and 

can travel across different medical units. This 

means that the global patient record evolve in 

time. So several questions have to be addressed: 

- When  the HAI detection system should 
be applied ? 

- How to regroup coherent information re-
lated to a given patient (e.g. a left knee 

surgery, then 1 month later a right knee 

surgery, then after a new right knee sur-

gery, etc) 

- When can we decide that it is no more 
necessary to process new information? 

 

In order to solve these questions we have de-

fined with people managing the information sys-

tem inside the hospital a specific architecture and 

HAI monitoring process for our system.  

4.2 Architecture 

It has been decided not to plug the HAI monitor-

ing system directly inside the hospital informa-

tion system (HIS) but rather to set it aside and to 

develop an ad-hoc standardization interface to 

allow further compatibility with potentially dif-

ferent types of hospital information systems. The 

process that is developed consists in: 

 

- Each time new data is recorded inside 
the HIS for a given patient then a specif-

ic module is activated to gather all pre-

vious data recorded over a given time 

frame (currently over 1 year). 

- A Custom Patient Record (CPR) is gen-
erated by the Data Gathering Module 

(DGM). This custom patient record is an 

XML document. Its structure is detailed 

in the next section. This document is 

pushed into a predefined temporary input 

repository. 

- The HAI monitoring system browses the 
input repository and parses the content of 

46



all custom patient records that are 

dropped in. 

- If a HAI event is detected then related 
information is recorded in a specific da-

tabase dedicated to HAI. This database 

allows expert to go back to the patient 

and to all documents they need to ana-

lyze the problem.  

 

This architecture is designed so that it could 

easily fit with any other hospital information sys-

tem infrastructure and organization. To do so a 

data gathering and formatting module (DGM) 

has to be designed to capture each new update of 

the patient record. 

4.3 A Custom Patient Record for HAI mon-
itoring 

The initial research project to create a HAI detec-

tion system has made some assumptions with 

respect to the input format of the documents to 

be parsed among which we can notice: amony-

mization, time standardization, content cohe-

rence, etc. However the organization of data ex-

tracted from the hospital information system by 

the ad-hoc data gathering module is not so 

“clean”.   Therefore the gathering module has to 

generate a Custom Patient Record (CPR) com-

patible with what is expected by our HAI moni-

toring prototype.  

This means that for one patient several collec-

tions of data are grouped together in one single 

custom patient record. This structure has the ad-

vantage to allow an analysis with specific con-

tent parsing rules and decisions rules for each 

type of treatment. Indeed elements presented in 

section “3.4 Causality” and “4 Results” show 

that there are differences between reports pro-

duced by different medical units.  

The structure proposed for the custom patient 

records is the following: 

 
- Patient ID 
- Patient birth date 
- List of files (coherent set of data for one spe-

cific treatment) 

o File ID 
o Date T0H provided by the hospital 
o Date T0D detected from texts 
o Reference Date T0 
o List of Documents 

 Document ID 
 Document type (e.g. medial unit) 

 Document Content (text)  
 

4.4 Date of the origin  

Another problem to be addressed is the proper 

detection of the reference date: T0.  This is im-

portant as temporality management and reason-

ing for hypothesis validation is based on this ref-

erence date.  

One solution could be to use the recording date 

that is associated with all information pushed in 

the hospital information system. However, after 

discussions it seems that this date cannot be 

trusted as a report is not immediately written and 

recorded after a given treatment. Therefore we 

have decided identify automatically the date of 

origin T0. For a given file (coherent set of data 

for one specific treatment for a given patient): 

- A date T0H is provided by the data ga-
thering module (DGM). This date is ei-

ther the date of the main treatment (e.g. 

the surgery) if it is recorded in the hos-

pital database, or the date when these 

documents have been recorded in the 

system. 

- A date T0D is provided by an evolution 
of the anonymization tool designed for 

the research project. This tool parses the 

text content of the CPR to detect all 

dates or time reference. A date T0 is de-

fined either through the detection of an 

explicit link between an event and a date 

(e.g. “… a knee surgery has been done 

on patient Mr X on June 6
th
 2011…”) or 

through the comparison between the 

document redaction date and the closest 

date mentioned in the document. 

- Then a separated decision module assign 
to the patient file the reference date T0. 

The decision can be taken according to 

the level of confidence assigned to each 

T0H and T0D date.  

 

The decision algorithm should be tuned ac-

cording to experiments performed on real patient 

records from the hospital information system.   

4.5 Scalability and workflow 

Another factor to be considered when deliver-

ing a monitoring system in a real hospital infor-

mation workflow is the amount of information to 

be processed, the capacity of the system to han-

dle the flow, and the amount of result data gener-

ated.  

After discussions with people managing the 

hospital information system, we can anticipate a 

workload of 300 patient records updated per day 

47



with an average size of 30 KB per patient record. 

This makes approximately 9 to 10 MB of data to 

be processed per day. This can be easily 

processed by our system which is able to parse 

more than 2000 words per second, and even if it 

was not the case, the process is easily paralleliz-

able. Therefore scalability is not an issue. 

4.6 The decision module 

The final aspect to be considered is the evolu-

tion of the monitoring system in a live environ-

ment. Decision heuristics have already been de-

fined and evaluated on our research project. 

These rules are currently being improved to face 

the second and final evaluation. However this is 

done to cover the requirements of our initial 

project (orthopedic and surgery reports). In the 

context of a deployment in a real hospital the 

system should be customizable enough to allow 

its modification to address new types of bacteria, 

or new antibiotic drugs or even a modification of 

HAI classification criteria, but it raises some 

problems.  

Terminologies can be easily updated if added 

expressions remain at the level of simple words. 

As soon as more complex expressions are con-

cerned it implies a more important modification 

of the Part of Speech tagger that requires the ex-

pertise of a linguist. Furthermore adding new 

entity types will implies modification of the de-

cision rules and a good understanding of their 

structure to avoid unpleasant side effects. 

Finally modifying decision rules implies that 

results can change with respect to previous anal-

ysis. It is important to evaluate and control the 

impact. 

 

5 Conclusion and Next Steps 

We have presented in this paper the latest 

achievements on a research work to develop a 

Hospital Acquired Infection detection system 

from patient discharge summaries. Results of the 

1
st
 real evaluation of the system have demon-

strated very interesting performances which has 

conducted us to consider an evolution of the sys-

tem to plug it inside a real hospital information 

workflow.  

This is a great opportunity to prove that an 

NLP based monitoring system can be used inside 

a hospital information workflow to improve pa-

tient safety. 

 

 

Acknowledgments 

The work presented in this paper comes from a 3 

year project (ALADIN) started in 2009 and 

funded by the French Agence Nationale de la 

Recherche (National Research Agency - ANR) in 

the context TecSan program (Technologies pour 

la Santé et l’Autonomie). 

References  

Aït-Mokhtar S.,  Chanod J.P., (1997)  Incremental 

Finite-State Parsing. In Proceedings of the Fifth 

Conference on Applied Natural Language 

Processing (ANLP'97), Washington March 31
st
 to 

April 3
rd

, 1997, pp.72-79 

 

Berrouane Y, Hagège C, Gicquel Q, Kergoulay I, 

Pereira S, Proux D, Darmoni S, Segond F, Metz-

ger MH. Preliminary evaluation of an automated 

detection tool for healthcare-associated infec-

tions, based on screening natural language medi-

cal reports. Poster at the 21st European Congress 

of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 

and the 27th International Congress of Chemo-

therapy. Milan from 7 - 10 May 2011. 

 

Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG et al. CDC defini-

tions for nosocomial infections,1988. Am J in-

fect Control 1988;16 : 128-40 

 

Hagège C; Marchal P; Gicquel, Q; Darmoni, S; 

Pereira S, Metzger MH. Linguistic and Tempor-

al Processing for Discovering Hospital Acquired 

Infection from Patient Records. In the 2nd Inter-

national Workshop on Knowledge Representa-

tion for Health Care (KR4HC-2010) - Workshop 

ECAI 2010, Lisbon, Portugal, August, 2010 

 

Hagège C; Proux D; Gicquel, Q; Darmoni, S; Pereira 

S, Segond F. Metzger MH. Développement d’un 

système de détection des infections associées aux 

soins à partir de l analyse de comptes-rendus 

d’hospitalisation. In Proceedings of TALN, 

Montpellier, France, June 27-July 1, 2011. 

 

H, S. E. Humphreys. Prevalence surveys of health-

care-associated infections : what do they tell us, 

if anything? Clin Microbiol Infect 2006; 12: 2-4 

 

Marie-Hélène Metzger, Quentin Gicquel, Denys 

Proux, Suzanne Pereira, Ivan Kergourlay, Elisa-

beth Serrot, Frédérique Segond, Stéphan Dar-

moni. Development of an Automated Detection 

Tool for Healthcare-Associated Infections Based 

on Screening Natural Language Medical Re-

ports. In American Medical Informatics Asso-

ciation conference, San Francisco CA, Novem-

ber 2009. 

48


