




















Experiments on Lithuanian Term Extraction

Gintarė Grigonytė, Erika Rimkutė, Andrius Utka and Loic Boizou
Centre of Computational Linguistics (http://donelaitis.vdu.lt)

Vytautas Magnus University
Kaunas, Lithuania

{g.grigonyte, e.rimkute, a.utka, l.boizou}@hmf.vdu.lt

Abstract

This paper explores the problem of ex-
tracting domain specific terminology in
the field of science and education from
Lithuanian texts. Four different term ex-
traction approaches have been applied and
evaluated.

1 Introduction

Term extraction nowadays is becoming automated
and a well defined process that contains phases
of NLP in the levels of morphology, syntax, and
sometimes semantics (Sager, 1990; Cabre, 1992).
Even though NLP tools have never reached very
high reliability, there is a wide choice of term
extraction applications for widely spread Indo-
European languages like English (Pantel and Lin,
2001), French (Daille, 1994), Polish (Piskorski
et al., 2004), and Russian (Mitrofanova and Za-
kharov, 2009).

The research strategies of term extraction can be
divided into statistically-based and linguistically-
based1 (Cabre et al., 2001). Rarer languages of-
ten do not have the luxury of linguistic tools for
automatic text processing. One can argue that a
possible solution could be statistically-based tools,
which are claimed to be language independent.
However, there is a lack of evaluation of such tools
for rare languages.

Even though there are some rapid advances in
Lithuania’s HLT2, automatic term extraction is
still quite a new and unexplored field. First at-
tempts of using commercial term extraction tools
for Lithuanian were described by Zeller (2005).

The present paper deals with the automatic ex-
traction of Lithuanian domain specific terminol-
ogy in the field of education and science. In the

1Hybrid approaches combine both strategies: usually lin-
guistic analysis followed by statistical filtering.

2More about Lithuanian HLT in Marcinkevičienė and
Vitkutė-Adžgauskienė (2010).

following subsections we will describe the termi-
nology situation in Lithuania and several Lithua-
nian language specific pitfalls that are relevant for
linguistically or statistically based term extraction
systems.

1.1 Terminology Situation in Lithuania

The main volume of Lithuanian terminology is
available at the Lithuanian Terminology bank3.

The Terminology bank is being run and con-
stantly updated by the Commission of the Lithua-
nian Language4 together with the Office of Lithua-
nian Seimas5. Presently, the bank keeps records
of 150 thousand terms and their definitions of var-
ious domains, e.g. machinery, computer science,
medicine, etc. Naturally, there is a large number
of domain specific databases and dictionaries in
various institutions that do not always include of-
ficially accepted terms.

In Lithuania until now terms have been com-
posed, chosen and approbated on the basis of in-
considerable amount of texts, intuition, and the
norms of the Lithuanian language. This is a tradi-
tional prescriptive way of term definition that does
not satisfy contemporary needs of the language.

However, there is a great urge for changes in
the Lithuanian terminology, as now there is a con-
stant lack of terms and a large number of incor-
rectly translated terms. Furthermore, new variants
of terms occur much faster than the definition of
a term. Quite often the standardized terms are not
willingly accepted by the society.

Obviously this paper takes the descriptive path,
as it is an attempt to find an efficient and robust
way to extract a domain specific terminology with-
out any prescriptive judgment.

3http://terminai.vlkk.lt:10001/pls/tb/tb.search
4http://vlkk.lt/
5http://www.lrs.lt/

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Gunta Nešpore and Inguna Skadiņa (Eds.)
NODALIDA 2011 Conference Proceedings, pp. 82–89



1.2 The Language Related Problem

Lithuanian is a highly inflective language. For ex-
ample, Lithuanian nouns, adjectives and particles
typically have 7 cases in singular and 7 in plural,
which makes 14 different wordforms of a single-
word. Additionally some Lithuanian nouns, adjec-
tives, participles, pronouns, and numerals can be
used in three different genders (feminine, mascu-
line, and neuter), which again adds to a variety of
forms. This proliferation of inflections makes the
statistical automatic identification of terms more
complicated, as distinct wordforms of terms ap-
pear very infrequently.

The solution for this is the morphological tag-
ging, which again is complicated due to many
morphological categories and morphological am-
biguity, which exists in Lithuanian in spite of rich
variety of wordforms. Unlike in other languages
like for instance Malay morphological categories
do not necessarily resolve ambiguity as ambigu-
ity is present within lemmas, e.g., "laiko" (noun
"time" and verb "hold"), and within wordforms,
e.g. "prekės" (sing. noun gen. and pl. noun nom.).

Besides, the linguistic approach needs an an-
swer to the question, which of grammatical cat-
egories are necessary for the successful extraction
of term candidates and which can be ignored. One
thing is obvious that the part-of-speech category is
not enough for Lithuanian.

The categories of gender and number are not
very helpful in distinguishing between terms and
non-terms. For example, if we consider the most
productive two-word term combination N + N
in Lithuanian, then in the terms like dėstytojų
kompetencija (competence of teachers), studentų
atstovybė (students’ organization) the first noun
should have plural Genitive form, while in the
terms like fakulteto taryba (faculty board), univer-
siteto autonomija (autonomy of the university) the
first noun should have singular Genitive form.

In other cases the second noun needs to be either
in plural (akademiniai įgūdžiai (academic skills),
auditorinės darbo valandos (class hours)) or in
singular (bendrasis priėmimas (common enroll-
ment), mokslinis leidinys (scientific publication)).
The category of gender may not be a distinguish-
ing feature either, as each constituent of a term can
potentially be in feminine or masculine gender.

It seems that the only useful additional feature
in the N + N combination is the Genitive case
of the first constituent, as it remains stable across

many variants.

Additional complications arise with three-word
or longer terms. For example, if we take the
term mokslinių tyrimų įstaigos atestacija (certifi-
cation of institution of scientific researches), then
its structure is

A pl. Gen + N pl. Gen + N sg. Gen + N sg.
Nom

Such long terms often consist of several combi-
nations of words, where their syntactic relations
might differ. For example, in the term nefor-
maliojo suaugusiųjų švietimo įstatymas (law of in-
formal education of adults) with a structure of A
sg. G. + N pl. G. + N sg. G. + N sg. N syntactic
relations are spread as follows: (figures indicate
the elements of word combinations):

1←− 3
2←− 3
[123]←− 4
Beside language related problems, there are

some universal terminology identification prob-
lems typical to all languages. One of such prob-
lems is determining term boundaries. For exam-
ple, the word combination dėstytojų ir mokslininkų
kvalifikacijos bei kompetencijos atitiktis (corre-
spondence of qualification and competence of
teachers and scientists) may give birth to one
term or several terms: 1) dėstytojų kvalifikaci-
jos bei kompetencijos atitiktis (correspondence
of qualification and competence of teachers), 2)
mokslininkų kvalifikacijos bei kompetencijos ati-
tiktis (correspondence of qualification and com-
petence of scientists), 3) dėstytojų ir mokslininkų
kvalifikacijos atitiktis (correspondence of quali-
fication of teachers and scientists), 4) dėstytojų
ir mokslininkų kompetencijos atitiktis (correspon-
dence of competence of teachers and scientists)
(more combinations of possible terms (concerning
their boundaries) are possible).

Finally, the question, whether a particular stable
word combination is a term or not, is faced by both
human experts and computer programs. However,
even if a word combination is a term, yet another
judgment on its specificity, i.e. domain term vs.
general term, is required. The solution of such
problem is possible only with the help of an ex-
pert.

83

Experiments on Lithuanian Term Extraction

83



!"##$%

&'(#)%

*#+($"),-)$#./*01$),-)(#+#.'2)$#./1*01$),-)#34#.$5'44.,6#7)$#./1 *#+($"),-)$#./*01$),-)(#+#.'2)$#./1

% 8%9 9: % %;<;
: %=>? >;9 : >;<9
? 8:; ?:> ? :@<?

> :%@ %:A > 8<A
= 8: ?> = :

8 :; :% 8 @<;
9 9 ? 9 @<:
A : % A @<%

; 8 = ; @<:
%@ % @ %@ @

% : ? > = 8 9 A ; %@

@

:@@

>@@

8@@

A@@

%@@@

%:@@

%>@@

%8@@

%A@@

*01$),-)
(#+#.'2)
$#./1

*01$),-)
#34#.$5
'44.,6#7)
$#./1

*#+($"),-)$#./1

B
#
./
)C
,
D
+
$

%

:

?

>

=

8

9

A

;

%@

@ %@ :@ ?@ >@ =@ 8@

%;<;

>;<9

:@<?

8<A

:

@<;

@<:

@<%

@<:

@

8<8

>=<A

:;<;

%%<A

?<%

%<;

@<?

@<%

@<=

@

*01$),-)
(#+#.'2)
$#./1

*01$),-)
#34#.$5
'44.,6#7)
$#./1

B#./)701$.0ED$0,+F)G

*
#
+
(
$"
),
-)
$#
./
1

Figure 1: Absolute frequency distribution (1st part) and relative frequency distribution (2nd part) of term lengths.

2 Experimental Settings

2.1 The Corpus

An experimental 103,893 token corpus of educa-
tion and science has been compiled specifically for
term extraction experiments. This corpus consists
of laws, orders, regulations, resolutions, mem-
oranda, descriptions, overviews, notes, reports,
newsletters, programmes, summaries, and stan-
dards. The texts mainly encompass the follow-
ing topics: high education policy, research policy,
continuous education, and professional education
policy. Two reference lists have been manually
created for the analysis of terms and evaluation
purposes: the first one is a larger list of all gen-
eral terms, and the second one is the special list of
terms in the field of education and science.

Firstly, 5 linguists have identified a list of gen-
eral terms (in total 3,106 lemmas). Problem cases
and disagreements have been solved by consulta-
tion between the linguists. Then this provisional
list has been further reviewed by the education ex-
pert, who has identified the terms of science and
education. As a result of this review, the list has
shrank to 1,085 terms. The expert mostly removed
general administrative terms and terms that are not
related to the previously mentioned topics.

The analysis of distribution of term lengths in
the reference lists has been performed, as term
length is very important characteristic to many
term extraction methods. The analysis of term
types has shown that the term length can vary from
one to ten words (see Figure 1). Although two-

word terms are by far most frequent (49.7 % of
the total number of terms), they cover only a half
of all terminology.

In the expert list, the part of single and two-
word terms has significantly decreased, while the
part of three and four-word terms has significantly
increased. The distribution of term lengths shows
that terms with lengths from 1 to 4 words make up
96.7% of all terms in the general list and 94.1%
in the expert list. Many extraction methods typi-
cally leave out single-word and four-word terms,
although it is evident from this analysis that they
are quite important in the overall coverage of ter-
minology.

2.2 Statistical Approaches

Statistically-based term extraction aims at detect-
ing syntagmatic collocations or keywords, which
are relevant for the domain6. Many statistic
measures can be applied for term extraction task
starting with frequency rank, Mutual Informa-
tion (Church and Hanks, 1989), Dice coefficient
(Smadja et al., 1996), T-score (Church et al.,
1991), Log-likelihood (Dunning, 1993), C-value
(Frantzi and Ananiadou, 1996), and others.

A major advantage of statistical TE systems is
that they do not require huge databases with term
patterns constructed by humans and also do not re-
quire running through language analysis pipelines.
The assumption in using statistical models in TE is
that words which tend to co-occur together are re-
lated and therefore they are likely term candidates.

6These features are referred as unithood and termhood.

84

Gintarė Grigonytė, Erika Rimkutė, Andrius Utka and Loı̈c Boizou

84



In this section, we will deal with three statisti-
cal approaches, namely keyword cluster identifi-
cation, keyword extraction with machine learning,
and collocation extraction.

2.2.1 Keyword Clusters

When analysing abilities of extracting terms by the
linguistic program WordSmith Tools (Scott, 2008),
the idea of extracting keyword clusters as termi-
nology candidates has emerged. The idea is based
on the assumption that the most frequent clusters
of keywords in a given text may also point to ter-
minology.

Keywords are identified by comparing a given
text’s frequency list to the frequency list of a
large reference corpus by using Ted Dunning’s
(Dunning, 1993) log likelihood test. The final step
is calculating keyword clusters that are two or
more words, which are found repeatedly near each
other (1-3 intervening words may be present).
Below is the list of 10 most frequent keyword
clusters and their frequencies:

mokslo [.] studijų (studies of science) 524
švietimo [.] mokslo (education science) 522
aukštojo mokslo (higher education) 474
mokslinių tyrimų (scientific research) 390
suagusiųjų švietimo (adult education) 292
lietuvos respublikos (lithuanian republic) 284
protų nutekėjimo (brain drain) 228
švietimo ministerija (ministery of education) 220
profesinio mokymo (professional teaching) 184
neformaliojo [.] švietimo (non-formal education) 164

Even though the resulting list seems very
promising, the comparison in terms of precision
and recall with the reference lists has not shown
good results. The best result with the whole key-
word list has produced 9.7% of recall and 1.8% of
precision when compared to the expert’s list and
7.5% of recall and 3.7% of precision when com-
pared to the list of general terms (see Table 2 for
all results).

2.2.2 Machine Learning: KEA

Many NLP tools require a process of machine
learning, which allows the system to improve the
quality of results by its own experience or the su-
pervision of a human.

The keyword extractor KEA7 implements such
methods. The core of the KEA system is a
statistically-based algorithm with a machine learn-
ing system generating an extraction model. The

7http://www.nzdl.org/Kea/

multi-featured algorithm rates keywords taking in
account four components:

• degree of specificity;
• position in the text;
• length of the phrase;
• node degree.

The learning process, which is based on Naive
Baysian Method using the software WEKA8, re-
quires a manual extraction of keywords from a
training corpus. A clear overview of the whole
system may be found in Medelyan (2005). Be-
sides, the core may be extended by language spe-
cific Java components as a stop-words list and a
stemmer.

From a terminological perspective, it must be
noticed that a keyword is not the same as a term.
However, in a corpus made of specialized texts,
we may expect a significant matching between the
set of keywords and the set of terms.

The task of machine learning has been based on
a subset of the test corpus consisting of four texts,
representing approximately 22,000 words, about
1/5 of the whole experimental corpus. The man-
ually selected keywords have been the terms ap-
pearing in the sub-corpus. Given the highly in-
flected nature of the Lithuanian language, two at-
tempts of machine learning have been carried out.
In the first case, the list of manually extracted key-
words has included only the main nominal forms
(Nominative, Accusative and Genitive, if relevant
singular and plural). In the second case, the list has
been restricted to the base forms (lemma). The ex-
traction results have been identical for both meth-
ods.

Once the extraction model has been built, three
different approaches have been tested : 1) with no
extension, 2) with a stop-words list and 3) with
both a stop-words list and a stemmer. The first ap-
proach has produced results of insufficient qual-
ity with such terms as mokslo ir (science and).
This has led to the conclusion that a stop-word
list would enhance the quality. On the basis of
the results given by the rough extraction, a list of
more than one hundred stop-words has been com-
piled. In order to avoid an artificial ad hoc cor-
rection of the results, only words of some specific
groups have been included in the stop-words list:

• grammatical words such as prepositions, con-
8http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/

85

Experiments on Lithuanian Term Extraction

85



junctions, particles, some adverbs and fre-
quent forms of pronouns;
• some expressions of quantity;
• main abbreviations;
• some general verb forms (to be, to show,

modal verbs).

The use of this restricted stop-word list obvi-
ously has improved the results, avoiding some
common mistakes of highly improbable termino-
logical combinations.

Besides, the third variant adding a stemmer has
also been tested, but the quality of the results has
been the worst of all three. The Lithuanian re-
sults have appeared as a confirmation of a state-
ment in the documentation of KEA’s source code
- "We have obtained better results for Spanish and
French with NoStemmer".

Given the preliminary results of the different
methods, the term candidates have been extracted
on the basis of the second variant, that is, with
a stop-words list only. Subsets of different sizes
have been extracted (10,000, 5,000, 1000, 500
forms of term candidates).

2.2.3 Collocation Extraction Methods
Collocations and terminology are related con-
cepts, but this relationship is not a synonymic or a
simple one. It is a well known fact that the term of
collocation is very broadly understood, and there-
fore it is important at the very start to define which
notion of collocation is used in the current pa-
per. In this paper we will deal only with statisti-
cal collocations, that is with sequences of words
that co-occur more often than would be expected
by chance.

Automatically extracted collocations have been
used for terminology extraction process many
times (e.g., Daille, 1996, Azé et al., 2005 etc.).
As a rule, collocation extraction methods are used
as the first step in creating a terminology candidate
list, which is then further processed by ranking and
extracting the relevant items. However, there are
at least two problems associated with these meth-
ods. The first problem is that there is quite a large
number of statistical collocation extraction meth-
ods (e.g. Azé et al., 2005 deal with 13 methods),
and it is not a trivial task to choose the best one
for the terminology extraction task. The second
problem is that the majority of collocation extrac-
tion methods are limited to extracting two to three
word collocations, while the range of term lengths,

as our analysis has shown, is rather more broad.
The latter statement can be supported by the

analysis of term lengths in 103,893 word experi-
mental corpus (see Figure 1).

Due to these reasons, it has been decided to
try only the tools and methods that extract col-
locations of variant length, i.e. LICE (Gravity
Counts)9, and leave out other tools that extract
fixed length collocations.

Gravity counts (Daudaravičius and Marcinke-
vičienė, 2004) is a method for determining bor-
ders or collocations. It is based on the idea that all
words in a text are more or less tied, that is, the de-
gree of attraction between them may be stronger or
weaker. Gravity count G for two words x and y in
this order is calculated according to the formula:

G(x, y) = log
(
f(x, y) · r(x)

f(x)

)
+ log

(
f(x, y) · l(y)

f(y)

)

(1)

where f(x) is the frequency of x, f(y) the fre-
quency of y, f(x,y) the frequency of the two word
co-occurring in this order, r(x) the number of dif-
ferent words to the right of x and l(y) the number
of different words to the left of y.

The software LICE, which is designed to imple-
ment the gravity counts, has been used to collect
collocations with the aim of comparing them with
the set of terms manually extracted. It must be
emphasized that LICE does not extract only multi-
word expressions, since the program is designed to
indicate the limits of collocations. Thus, if a group
of consecutive words shows a significant degree of
attraction, they appear as a collocation, but words
which are loosely tied to others appears separately
in the results given by LICE.

The result given by LICE has been processed in
order to extract the multiword expressions. Then,
in order to improve the result in the same way
it has been done for KEA, a stop-words list (the
same as prepared for KEA) has been used as a
second filter. It must be emphasized that even af-
ter the filtration the number of expressions remains
very high (more than 16,000 terms).

2.3 Linguistically-based Approach
The process of linguistically-based term extrac-
tion is a pipeline that may include morpholog-
ical analysis, syntactic parsing, and a module
of linguistic rules (patterns) that describes terms.

9LICE is an experimental piece of software used for inter-
nal research at CCL VMU.

86

Gintarė Grigonytė, Erika Rimkutė, Andrius Utka and Loı̈c Boizou

86



N Gen N Nom 638
A Nom N Nom 610
N Nom 484
A Gen N Gen N Nom 168
N Gen N Gen N Nom 145
A Nom N Gen N Nom 73
PART Nom N Nom 66
A Nom A Nom N Nom 42
A Gen N Gen N Gen N Nom 37
V inf 31

Table 1: Morphological patterns in the general list of terms
(where N - noun, A - adj, PART - participle, Nom - Nomina-
tive, Gen - Genitive).

The approach is language dependent as terms in
different languages have different morphological
patterns. Morphological patterns may include
part-of-speech categories for analytic languages
(e.g. English), or additional grammatical cate-
gories such as cases for synthetic languages (e.g.
Lithuanian), or syntactic categories (e.g. noun
phrases).

Typically this approach requires an annotated
corpus, which needs to have an appropriate anno-
tation scheme (e.g. POS, POS+case, or syntax).
The term extraction tools simply extract all occur-
rences of required patterns from the annotated cor-
pus and produce a list of term candidates that can
be manually reviewed, statistically processed, or
filtered with the help of stop-word lists.

Linguistic rules can be coded as regular ex-
pressions and directly used for identifying term
candidates. An example of such a rule for a
single-word term is [noun], for two-word terms -
[noun]+[noun] and [adjective]+[noun]. Morpho-
logical patterns that have not been coded into a
term extractor will produce low recall, while non-
terms that coincide with the programmed patterns
will reduce precision. Lopes et al. (2010) have
shown that linguistic approaches produce better
results than statistical ones, besides they also em-
phasize the fact that linguistic approaches are
more complicated in comparison to easy adaptable
statistical methods.

For the present study, the manually extracted
terminological list has been morphologically
tagged10 and a frequency list of morphological
patterns has been built. In order to avoid unnec-
essary diversity of the patterns, only categories

10The tagging has been performed using the morphologi-
cal analyzer developed at CCL VMU. Rimkutė and Daudar-
avičius (2007) have established that the precision of the tag-
ger is 94% for establishing grammatical categories and 99%
for lemmatisation.

of part-of-speech and case have been considered.
The list of top ten grammatical patterns with fre-
quencies of occurrence in the lemmatized list of
general terms is given in Table 1.

A set of 27 morphological patterns has been se-
lected for the extraction of term candidates from
the annotated experimental corpus. The list of pat-
terns includes mostly combinations of nouns and
adjectives, sometimes with the intervening con-
junction ir ’and’. In order to limit the noise, only
multiword patterns have been considered. The
maximal length of morphological patterns is five
words. A Haskell function has been specially de-
veloped for this goal. Some deficiencies of this ap-
proach result from the tagging process which can
give inaccurate analysis or fail to analyse an un-
known word.

2.4 Evaluation

The evaluation of a term extraction system can be
addressed with measuring against the gold stan-
dard. Two term reference lists have been set (see
section 2.1) for the purpose of evaluating the four
different term extraction approaches.

The quality performance of the term extraction
system can be evaluated in terms of precision and
recall. Which are the equivalent of inverted mea-
sures of silence and noise proposed by (Cabre et
al., 2001).

2.5 Results

All the test results of the above tested methods and
tools are summarized in the Table 2.

Concerning the recall, there are several objec-
tive reasons, which have negatively influenced the
results. In case of KEA and the linguistic ap-
proach, candidate terms longer than 5 words have
not been extracted, while these patterns represent
between 1.4% and 2.8% of the manually extracted
terms. Similarly, the linguistic, keyword clusters
approach and LICE, have not taken into account
single word terms, which represent between 6.6%
and 19.9%.

Moreover, some discrepancy comes from terms
in the expert’s reference list, that actually have not
been present the experimental corpus. The ex-
pert’s reference list includes 158 items absent from
the corpus, which represents 14.5% of the list and
has a strong influence on the recall rates. Except
for few direct additions, for example akademikas

87

Experiments on Lithuanian Term Extraction

87



Method Tools Reference Candidates Lemmas Match* Recall Precision

Keyword clusters WSmith

General list

10777 5959 219 7.5 3.68
5000 3096 186 6.4 6
1000 734 105 3.6 14.3
500 397 69 2.4 17.4

Expert list

10777 5959 105 9.7 1.8
5000 3096 88 8.1 2.8
1000 734 53 8.1 7.2
500 397 35 3.2 8.8

Keywords KEA

General list

10000 6398 865 29.7 13.5
5000 3165 629 21.6 19.9
1000 703 238 8.2 33.9
500 381 157 5.4 41.2

Expert list

10000 6398 269 24.8 4.2
5000 3165 197 18.2 6.2
1000 703 77 7.1 11
500 381 51 4.7 13.4

Gravity Count LICE General list 16593 14627 1124 38.6 7.7Expert list 16593 14627 388 35.8 2.7

Linguistic approach Tagger, scripts General list 25058 18990 1801 61.8 9.5Expert list 25058 18990 713 65.7 3.8
*number of automatically extracted terms that match terms in reference lists.

Table 2: Evaluation of Terminology Extraction Tools.

’academician’, it is mainly due to a significant pro-
cess of normalization of terms occurring in the
corpus by operations on the syntactic structure
by the expert. For example, the terms docento
pedagoginis vardas ’pedagogical title of docent’,
vakariniai kursai ’evening courses’ and priėmimas
į universitetą ’enrollment in university’ appear re-
spectively in the expressions docento ir profesori-
aus pedagoginiai vardai ’pedagogical titles of do-
cent and Professor’, kursai (dieniniai, vakariniai,
tęstiniai, trumpalaikiai ir kt.) ’courses (full-time,
evening, continuing, short)’ and priėmimo į VU
’enrollment in UV’ (or priėmimo į valstybines
aukštąsias mokyklas ’enrollment in public high
schools’). None of these examples could be found
by any of the tested extraction methods.

The number of extracted candidate terms has
a strong influence on the level of precision. For
example, with LICE and the linguistic approach,
the number of extracted patterns is very high, with
more than 15,000 lemmatized expressions, which
has generated mechanically much noise in com-
parison with the manually extracted reference lists
consisting of 1,085 and 3,106 terms. Besides,
term candidates have not been rated by both of the
methods, which does not allow to extract a mean-
ingful subset of comparable number.

We are aware that results could be further eval-
uated, taking into account measures for partial
matches, however the lack of necessary tools has
not allowed us to include in the present paper.

The overall analysis of the results shows that

the linguistic approach that extracts term candi-
dates on the basis of morphological patterns has
appeared to be quite reliable and most promis-
ing according to the measure of recall (61.8% and
65.7%). While in terms of precision, the keyword
approach with machine learning has produced bet-
ter results. Both these methods may be considered
as the most perspective, as the linguistic approach
could identify a thousand more correct terms than
the keyword approach, and the keyword approach
has picked up the smallest number of non-terms.

3 Conclusions

We have looked at the term extraction task for
Lithuanian from the perspective of existing term
extraction tools. Four different methods, i.e., three
statistical and one linguistic, have been applied
and evaluated against manually constructed refer-
ence lists.

The evaluation of term extraction methodology
has lead to the following conclusions:

- Most of Lithuanian domain specific terms are
two-word or three-word noun phrases.

- The majority of the Lithuanian terms are very
rare.

- The best performing methods in terms of recall
pick up low precision.

- The statistical modeling for term detection
on such a tiny corpus is not very reliable. Thus
linguistically based term candidate detection ap-
peared to perform better, i.e. the combined recall
and precision levels have been the highest with this

88

Gintarė Grigonytė, Erika Rimkutė, Andrius Utka and Loı̈c Boizou

88



method.
- The analysis has shown that all the methods

have problems in extracting both multiword and
single-word terms, as well as determining which
terms are domain specific and which ones are gen-
eral. The possible solution would be the combina-
tion of several methods for each of these tasks.

- Domain specificity of a term has not been anal-
ysed is this paper. A possible approach would be a
statistical measure of specificity that expresses the
difference of usage of a term between a general
corpus and a domain specific corpus.

- An increased quality, i.e. increased precision,
may be obtained by improving the linguistic filter-
ing of noisy candidate term lists in order to extract
only expressions matching the usual structure of
Lithuanian terms.

- A significant improvement of the results may
be expected for the machine learning method
(KEA) with a more extensive learning process and
a processing of each file of the corpus separately.

- Hybrid approaches have not been analysed in
this paper, however they may turn out to be very
useful in reducing the noise produced by the lin-
guistic approach.

Acknowledgments

The presented research is funded by a grant (No.
LIT-2-44) from the Research Council of Lithuania
in the framework of the project “Švietimo ir mok-
slo terminų automatinis identifikavimas – ŠIMTAI
2” (Automatic Identification of Education and Sci-
ence Terms). The authors would like to thank
anonymous reviewers for their comments.

References
Azé J., Roche M, Kodratoff M., and Sebag M. 2005.

Preference Learning in Terminology Extraction:
a ROC-based Approach, Proceedings of Applied
Stochastic Models and Data Analysis. p. 209-219.

Cabre T., Estopa R., and Vivaldi J. 2001. Automatic
term detection. Recent advances in computational
terminology. p. 53-88.

Cabre T. 1992. Terminology: theory, methods and ap-
plications. John Benjamins.

Church K.W., and Hanks P. 1989. Word Association
Norms, Mutual Information and Lexicography. In
Proc: ACL’89, p. 76-83.

Daille B. 1994. Towards Automatic Extraction of
Monolingual and Bilingual Terminology. In Proc:
COLING’94, p. 515-524.

Daille B., Habert B., Jacquemin C., and Royaut J.
1996. Empirical observation of term variations
and principles for their description. Terminology,
3(2):197-258.

Daudaravičius V., and Marcinkevičienė R. 2005.
Gravity counts for the boundaries of collocations.
Corpus Linguistics, 9(2):321-348.

Dunning T. 1993. Accurate Methods for the Statistics
of Surprise and Coincidence. Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(1): 61-74.

Frantzi K., and Ananiadou S. 1996. Extracting Nested
Collocations. In Proc: COLING’96, p. 41-46.

Lopes L., de Oliveira L. H. M., and Vieira R. 2010.
Portuguese Term Extraction Methods: Comparing
Linguistic and Statistical Approaches. In Proc: 9th
Int. Conf. on Computational Processing of the Por-
tuguese Language.

Marcinkevičienė R., and Vitkutė-Adžgauskienė D.
2010. Developing the Human Language Technol-
ogy Infrastructure in Lithuania. In Proc: 4th Int.
Conf. Human Language Technologies - The Baltic
Perspective. IOS Press.

Medelyan O. 2005. Automatic Keyphrase Indexing
with a Domain-Specific Thesaurus. Master Thesis.
University of Freiburg, Germany.

Mitrofanova O., and Zakharov V. 2009. Automatic
Analysis of Terminology in the Russian Corpus on
Corpus Linguistics. In Proc: 5th Int. Conf. NLP,
Corpus Linguistics, Corpus Based Grammar Re-
search.

Pantel P., and Lin D. 2001. A Statistical Corpus-
Based Term Extractor. In Proc: 14th conf. Advances
in Artificial Intelligence, E. Stroulia and S. Matwin
(Eds.). Springer-Verlag, London, p. 36-46.

Piskorski J., Homola P., Marciniak M.,
Mykowiecka A., Przepiorkowski A., and Wolin-
ski M. 2004. Information Extraction for Polish
Using the SProUT Platform. In Proc. of Intelligent
Information Systems 2004. Springer Verlag.

Rimkutė E, and Daudaravičius V. 2007. Morfologinis
dabartinės lietuvių kalbos tekstyno anotavimas. In
Kalbų studijos, 11:30-35.

Sager J. 1990. A Practical Course in Terminology Pro-
cessing. John Benjamins.

Scott M. 2008. WordSmith Tools version 5. Liverpool:
Lexical Analysis Software.

Smadja F., McKeown K., and Hatzivassiloglou V.
1996. Translating collocations for bilingual lexi-
cons: a statistical approach. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(1):1-38.

Zeller I. 2005. Automatinis terminų atpažinimas ir
apdorojimas. PhD thesis, VMU, Lithuania.

89

Experiments on Lithuanian Term Extraction

ISSN 1736-6305 Vol. 11
http://hdl.handle.net/10062/16955


